 
Improving Right Ventricular Function in Y oung A dults B orn 
Preterm : A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
08/30/2018  
  
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
1 
 Protocol Title:  
Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_617709]:   
2018 -0796  
 
National Clinical Trial Identified Number:   
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Principal Investigator:   
[INVESTIGATOR_617710], MD  
 
Sponsor:  
Kara Goss, MD  
 
Funded by:   
[CONTACT_617725]:   
V1, Aug 30 2018  
 
 
 
Statement of Compliance:  
 
The trial will be conducted in accordance with International Conference on Harmonisation Good 
Clinical Practice (ICH GCP), appl icable [LOCATION_002] (US) Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), 
and the Sponsor  Terms and Conditions of Award. The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_218942], or changes to the protocol will take place without prior agreement from the 
Investigational New Drug (IND) or Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) sponsor, fun ding 
agency and documented approval from the Institutional Review Board (IRB), except where 
necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard(s) to the trial participants. All personnel involved in 
the conduct of this study have completed Human Subjects Protectio n and ICH GCP Training.  
 
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all participant materials will 
be submitted to the IRB for review and approval. Approval of both the protocol and the consent 
form must be obtained before any participant is enrolled. Any amendment to the protocol will 
require review and approval by [CONTACT_3484]. All 
changes to the consent form will be IRB approved; a determination will be made regarding 
whether a new c onsent needs to be obtained from participants who provided consent, using a 
previously approved consent form.  
 
  
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
2 
 Table of Contents  
1. PROTOCOL SUMMARY  5 
1.1 Synopsis  5 
1.2 Schema  6 
2. INTRODUCTION  8 
2.1 Study Rationale:  8 
2.2 Background:  8 
2.3 Risk/benefit Assessment:  8 
2.3.1 Known Potential Risks:  8 
2.3.2 Known Potentia l Benefits:  10 
2.3.3 Assessment of Potential Risks and Benefits:  11 
3. OBJECTIVES AND EN DPOINTS  11 
4. STUDY DESIGN  11 
4.1 Overall Design  11 
4.2 Scientific Rationale for Study Design  12 
4.3 Justification for Dose  12 
4.4 End of Study Definition  12 
5. STUDY POPULATION  13 
5.1 Inclusion Criteria  13 
5.2 Exclusion Criteria  13 
5.3 Lifestyle Considerations  13 
5.4 Screen Failures  14 
6. STUDY INTERVENTIO N 15 
6.1 Study Intervention(s) Administration  15 
6.1.1 Study Intervention Description  15 
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
3 
 6.1.2 Dosing and Administration  15 
6.2 Preparation/Handling/Storage/Accountability  [ADDRESS_820410] Storage and Stability  15 
6.2.4 Preparation  16 
6.4 Study Intervention Compliance  16 
6.5 Concomitant Therapy  16 
6.5.1 Rescue Medicine: not applicable  16 
7. STUDY INTERVENTIO N DISCONTINUATION AN D PARTICIPANT DISCON TINUATION/WITHDRAWAL
 16 
7.1 Discontinuation of Study Intervention  16 
7.2 Participant Discontinuation/Withdrawal from the Study  [ADDRESS_820411] to Follow Up  17 
8. STUDY ASSESSMENTS  AND PROCE DURES  17 
8.1 Efficacy Assessments  17 
8.2 Safety and Other Assessments  18 
8.3 Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events  19 
8.3.1 Definition of Adverse Events (AE)  19 
8.3.2 Definition of Serious Adverse Events (SAE)  19 
8.3.3 Classification of an Adverse Event  20 
[IP_ADDRESS] Severity of Event  20 
[IP_ADDRESS] Relationship to Study Intervention  20 
[IP_ADDRESS] Expectedness  [ADDRESS_820412]  22 
8.3.9 Reporting of Pregnancy  22 
8.4 Unanticipated Problems  22 
8.4.1 Definition of Unanticipated Problems (UP)  22 
8.4.2 Unanticipated Problem Reporting  22 
8.4.3 Reporting Unanticipated Problems to Participants  23 
9. STATISTICAL CONSI DERATIONS  23 
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
4 
 9.1 Statistical Hypothesis  23 
9.2 Sample Size Determination  23 
9.3 Populations for Analyses  23 
9.4 Statistical Analyses  23 
9.4.1 General Approach  23 
9.4.2 Analysis of the Primary Efficacy Endpoint  23 
9.4.3 Analysis of the Secondary Endpoint(s)  24 
9.4.4 Safety Analyses  24 
9.4.5 Baseline Descriptive Statistics  24 
9.4.6 Planned Interim Analysis  24 
9.4.7 Sub -group Analysis  24 
9.4.8 Tabulation of Individual Participant Data  24 
10. SUPPORTING DOCUM ENTATION AND OPERATI ONAL CONSIDERATIONS  24 
10.1 R egulatory, Ethical and Study Oversight Considerations  24 
10.1.1 Informed Consent Process  24 
[IP_ADDRESS] Consent/Assent and Other Informational Documents Provided to Participants  24 
[IP_ADDRESS] Consent Procedures and Documentation  24 
10.1.2 Study Discontinuation and Closure  25 
10.1.3 Confidentiality and Privacy  26 
10.1.5 Key Roles and Study Governance  26 
10.1.6 Safety Oversight  27 
10.1.7 Clinical Monitoring - Not applicable: internal safety and data oversight  [ADDRESS_820413] Keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  27 
[IP_ADDRESS] Data Collection and Management Responsibilities  27 
[IP_ADDRESS] Study Records Retention  [ADDRESS_820414] Policy  28 
10.2 Additional Considerations  29 
11. REFERENCES  29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
5 
 1. Protocol Summary  
 
1.1 Synopsis  
 
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_617711]: Adults born premature have smaller, less efficient hearts as demonstrated 
by [CONTACT_617726] (CMR) imaging. The goal of this proposal is to assess the 
impact of pharmacologic reduction of right ventricular (RV) afterload and resting heart  rate on RV 
energetic inefficiency in young adults born premature using novel 4D flow CMR imaging.  
 
Objectives:  
 
Aim 1:  Evaluate the effect of acute right ventricular (RV) afterload reduction with sildenafil 
on RV function and energetic efficiency in young adults born premature. In addition to being a 
potent pulmonary vasodilator, several studies suggest that sildenafil ma y have direct inotropic 
and/or lusitropic effects on the RV. We hypothesize that sildenafil will reduce afterload and 
improve RV diastolic function, thereby [CONTACT_617727], as 
assessed by [CONTACT_566757]  (CMR)  with 4D flow.  
 
Aim 2: Assess the effect of acute beta blockade with metoprolol on RV function and 
energetic efficiency in young adults born premature. We have recently identified that adolescents 
and adults born premature have increased resting heart rates and autonomic dys function. We 
hypothesize that beta blockade with metoprolol will improve RV filling time and therefore improve 
function and energetic efficiency, as assessed by [CONTACT_617728] 4D flow.  
 
Endpoints:  
 
Primary endpoint:  RV energetic efficiency. Energetic efficiency is defined as the kinetic 
energy (work) required for a given stroke volume in the heart, expressed as mL/mJ. Kinetic 
energy is measured using novel 4D flow imaging to assess flow velocities through the heart, 
which are then summed across the cardiac cycle.  Stroke volume is calculated based on the end 
diastolic volume minus the end systolic volume.  
 
Secondary endpoints:  LV energetic efficiency , RV ejection fraction, stroke volume, and 
end systolic/diastolic volumes , LV ejection fraction, stroke volume, and end systolic/diastolic 
volumes . 
 
The same endpoints will be used in both therapeutic interventions above , with 
comparison of efficacy of each intervention .  
 
Study population:  
 
Preterm subjects will be recruited from the Newborn Lung Project or the local population. 
Those identified from the Newborn Lung Project (NLP) cohort were born preterm from 1988 -
1991, birth weight <1500g, average gestational age [ADDRESS_820415] been prospectively 
followed since enrollment. Preterm subjects recruited outside the N LP will be aged 18 -35, with a 
birth weight <1500 g OR gestational age of 32 weeks or less. Birth history for non -NLP subjects 
will be confirmed from health records.  
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
6 
 Recruitment will include both male and female subjects of any race/ethnicity. Subjects 
must  not be pregnant or lactating and may not be prescribed any other cardiac medications  that 
would interact with the proposed therapeutic interventions (i.e. nitrates contraindicated with 
sildenafil, nodal -blocking agents  contraindicated with metoprolol). Pr oposed sample size for pi[INVESTIGATOR_395878] 10 subjects.  
 
Phase:  2 
 
Description of sites/facilities:  University of Wisconsin  
 
Description of study intervention:   
 
Subjects will present for two imaging  visits, with a single drug administered during each 
study day . Subjects will undergo CMR scanning with acquisition of standard measures of cardiac 
function sequences as well as 4D flow before and after therapeutic dosing, as described below 
(see Figure 1  for overall study design). Order of drug dosing may be reverse d.  
During study visit #1, young adults born preterm will complete two CMR with 4D flow 
scans. Subjects will be monitored with continuous EKG and pulse oximetry during scanning, with 
blood pressure measures taken at least every [ADDRESS_820416] resting 
scan with image acquisition as described above, subjects will be administered metoprolol IV. 
Dosing will be titrated (1 -5 mg Q2 min) to achieve a resting heart rate of 55 -65. For subjects with 
a resting heart rate already within range , a 10 -15% reduction in heart rate will be targeted. 
Subjects will then undergo a second CMR with 4D flow. Subjects will be monitored for side effects 
from metoprolol, including bradycardia, dizziness, and hypotension.  
During study visit #2, young adults b orn preterm will complete two CMR with 4D flow 
scans. Subjects will be monitored with continuous EKG and pulse oximetry during scanning, with 
blood pressure measures taken at least every [ADDRESS_820417] this medication to be well tolerated.  
Blood and urine will be obtain ed during the initial visit for biobanking. The blood sample 
will be less than 80 mL. Biobanking is not optional for the study. Samples will be coded so that 
they can be linked back to data obtained in the study, including MRI data, pulmonary function 
data, and birth records. Samples will be stored in a locked laboratory and used exclusively for 
research purposes to learn more about the effects of premature birth on heart and lung function. 
Samples will be  used primarily by [CONTACT_617729] b e shared with researchers 
outside of the University of Wisconsin. The identify code s not be shared beyond the investigators 
in this study. Participants  will not receive results of any research tests using banked samples.  
 
Study duration: 18 months  
 
Participant duration: Each visit is estimated to take 2 -3 hours.  
 
1.2 Schema  
 
 
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
7 
  
 
1.3 Schedule of activities  
 
 
Procedures  
Phone Screening  
 
Enrollment/Baseline ^  
(may be combined with 
study visit 1 procedures)  
Study Visit 1 ^  
(administration of metoprolol 
or sildenafil)  
Study Visit 2 
(administration of metoprolol 
or sildenafil)  
Review study requirements and eligibility  X    
Informed consent   X   
Demographics   X   
Medical history   X   
Vitals   X  AN 
Height   X  AN 
Weight   X  AN 
EKG   X   
Pulmonary function   X   
Pregnancy test (*women only)   X   
Urine collection for biobanking   X   
Blood for biobanking (*obtained at time of IV placement)    X* X* 
Baseline cardiac MRI with 4D flow    X X 
Medication administration    X X 
Post -intervention cardiac MRI with 4D flow    X X 
     
 
AN Vitals, Height, and Weight will be repeated if Visit 2 occurs >7 days after Visit 1  
* Blood for biobanking will be obtained either at Visit 1 or Visit 2, but not both.  
^ Enrollment/Baseline and Visit [ADDRESS_820418] likely occ ur on the same day/visit. However, subjects can 
choose to complete these visits on separate days.  

Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
8 
  
2. Introduction  
 
2.1 Study Rationale:  
 
Moderate to extreme preterm birth is associated with a [ADDRESS_820419] of pharmacologic reduction of right ventricular (RV) afterload 
and resting heart rate on RV energetic inefficiency in young adults born premature using novel 
4D flow cardiac magnetic resonance imagin g. 
 
2.2 Background:  
 
Preterm birth, defined as less than [ADDRESS_820420] 
biventricular hypertrophy, though the right ventricle (RV) is disproportionat ely affected, with 
functional impairments in RV but not left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction in early adulthood.9-[ADDRESS_820421] 
(NLP).16-[ADDRESS_820422] also 
demonstrated early pulmonary vascular disease yet ‘out -of-proportion’ RV dysfunction that 
emerges when animals are aged to [ADDRESS_820423] of pharmacologic reduction of RV afterload and 
resting heart rate on RV energetic inefficiency in young adults born premature using novel 4D 
flow cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging.  
 
2.3 Risk/benefit Assessment:  
 
 2.3.1 Known Potential Risks:  
 
MRI: The standard risks associated MRI involve persons with certain metallic implants 
and devices (eg. pacemakers), and claustrophobia. Those patients eligible for study participation 
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   [ADDRESS_820424] operation of these devices. The magnetic field of the MR system exerts a force 
on ferromagnetic objects within the field. This force can cause a ferromagnetic implant, such as 
an aneurysm clip, surgical clip, or prosthesis, to move or be displaced and cause injury or death. 
If the implant is large, sufficient currents can be induced in the metal by [CONTACT_277518] (eddy 
currents are induced by [CONTACT_617730]) to cause heating of the implant. It is possible that 
subtle genetic or molecular changes could be caused by [CONTACT_617731]. To date, however, no harmful biological effects have been demonstr ated at the magnetic 
field strengths and exposure times utilized by [CONTACT_617732]. At the present time, the likelihood 
of any significant biomagnetic effect is considered to be very low. The magnetic field near the MR 
system is strong enough to attract fer romagnetic objects with great force. Near the magnet this 
force can be strong enough to pull objects in and cause them to fly down the axis of the magnet. 
Such objects become projectiles that can cause injury or death.  
 
Pulmonary function testing : Risks as sociated with the pulmonary function testing include 
shortness of breath, dizziness, and cough. If they occur, they are expected to resolve after 
completion of testing.  
 
EKG : Risks associated with EKG include discomfort or contact [CONTACT_617733].  
 
Venipuncture : Risks associated with venipuncture are limited to slight pain, bleeding, 
bruising, and swelling at the puncture site. Some subjects may feel lightheaded during the 
procedure. IV catheter placement: may cause p ain, bruising, fainting or infection. Topi[INVESTIGATOR_617712].  With placement of the IV catheter, there is a 
rare risk (less than 1 out of 100 people) of bleeding, or infection associated with placement of the 
plastic tube in the vein.  
 
Fasting : Risks associated with an overnight fast (minimum 8 hour) fast are minimal. 
Subjects  may feel weak, lightheaded, or lethargic. Individuals  accustomed to drinking caffeinated 
beverages  may experience headache s. Subjects  will be encoura ged to drink plenty of water 
during this time and  to notify a study team member if they need to stop the fast.  
 
Metoprol ol: Reported adverse reactions include  (2-15% in chronic dosing) : bradycardia, 
hypotension, heart block, heart failure, hypertension, angina, fatigue, dizziness, shortness of 
breath, bronchospasm, hypersensitivity reactions, diarrhea. Effects of acute one -time dosing are 
expected to be limited to hemodynamic effects. S ubjects will be monitored with continuous EKG, 
continuous pulse oximetry, and cycled blood pressure (every 10 minutes) to minimize potential 
for adverse reaction. Furthermore, dose of metoprolol will be titrated to desired effect (goal heart 
rate 55 -65 or 10-15% reduction in heart rate). Full prescribing information from package insert 
can be found at:  
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/ 2008/017963s062,018704s021lbl.pdf .  
 
Sildenafil : Reported adverse reactions include  (2-46% in chronic dosing) : headache, 
flushing, upset stomach, diarrhea, shortness of breath, runny nose/sinus congestion . Rare 
adverse events (<2% in chronic dosing) includ e visual disturbances  and prolonged erection  in 
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
10 
 males .  Effects of acute one -time dosing are expected to be minimal. Subjects will be monitored 
with continuous EKG, continuous pulse oximetry, and cycled blood pressure (every 10 minutes) 
to minimize potential for adverse reaction. Full prescribing information  from package insert can 
be found at: https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2010/020895s033lbl.pdf .  
 
Risk of Embarrassment: Persistent erection is a  potential side effect of sildenafil, although 
occurring in <2% of males. If a male subject experiences this side effect, it’s possible they could 
feel uncomfortable or embarrassed.  
 
Questionnaires:  Risks associated with questionnaires include subject fat igue and feeling 
uncomfortable.  
 
Breach  of confidentiality : There is a risk of breach of confidentiality. In order to protect 
against this risk, all data will be stored on a secure, password protected network. All data will be 
identified using unique ident ification numbers, not names, date of birth, or other identifiable 
information. In files where identifiable information is linked to the unique ID number, only staff 
members who specifically use this information for contact[CONTACT_220379], etc. will have access.  
All CMR scans performed for research purposes only will be given a unique study number that 
cannot be linked to the patients’ hospi[INVESTIGATOR_617713]. CMR research images will 
be stored on PACS (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_617714]) under this study number only.  
Study data will be managed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_6254] -investigators.  
 
Recruitment database: Participants may opt -in or opt -out for participation in a recruitment 
database. Study data will be included as part of this database, and participants may be 
recontact[CONTACT_617734]. T his data may include 
information from the phone screen, study visits & procedures, and NLP or neonatal records. Only 
research staff will have access to the information . There is a very small chance or breach of 
confidentiality (see above). This database wi ll be maintained by [CONTACT_978], and stored using the same 
confidentiality protections described throughout the study.  
 
Biobanking : Blood and urine will be obtained during the initial visit for biobanking. 
TSamples will be coded so that they can be linked back to data obtained in the study, including 
MRI data, pulmonary function data, and birth records. Samples will be stored in a locked 
laboratory and used exclusively for research purposes to learn more about the effects of 
premature birth on heart and lung fun ction. Samples will be used primarily by [CONTACT_617735]. The 
identify codes not be shared beyond the investigators in this study. Participants will not receive 
results of an y research tests using banked samples.  
 
Possible future genetic research : Future work with biobanked samples may include 
genetic research. Subjects may opt -in or opt -out of future genetic research, though biobanking 
is not optional. Future research involvi ng large -scale genomic data may be subject to the NIH 
Genomic Data Sharing policy, and will comply with all applicable current regulatory 
requirements. This will be addressed as (1) part of any future protocols that involved large -scale 
genomic research us ing specimens collected on this study, or (2) a change of protocol under 
the current study to address GDS policy requirements on behalf of the researchers who conduct 
genetic analysis.  
 
  
2.3.2 Known Potential Benefits:  
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   [ADDRESS_820425] on our understanding of treatment needs for both individual 
participants as well as individuals with a history of premature birth at large.  
 
 2.3.3 Assessment of Potential Risks and Benefits:  
 
 Overall,  the study procedures are noninvasive aside from placement of an intravenous 
catheter. The study medications have a long history of tolerability in both healthy subjects as 
well as patients with even advanced heart failure and are expected to be well toler ated for acute 
dosing in this population. Subjects will be monitored closely for development of treatment -
associated adverse events.  
 
3. Objectives and Endpoints  
 
Objectives  Endpoints  Justification  
Primary    
Improve RV function  RV kinetic energy efficiency*  RV energy efficiency is reduced in 
preterm -born subjects, and is 
suspected to be an early marker of 
heart failure; improvement in RV 
energy efficiency may decrease heart 
failure risk  
Secondary    
Improve LV function  LV kinetic energy efficiency*  To be most effective, a therapeutic 
intervention needs to improve both 
RV and LV efficiency/function  
Assess standard 
measures of RV 
function  RV ejection fraction, stroke 
volume, and end 
systolic/diastolic volumes  These are standard measures of  
cardiac function, but change later 
than energy efficiency measures  
Assess standard 
measures of LV 
function  LV ejection fraction, stroke 
volume, and end 
systolic/diastolic volumes  These are standard measures of 
cardiac function, but change later 
than energy efficiency measures  
 
* Energetic efficiency is defined as the kinetic energy (work) required for a given stroke volume 
in the heart, expressed as mL/mJ. Kinetic energy is measured using novel 4D flow imaging to 
assess flow velocities through the he art, which are then summed across the cardiac cycle. 
Stroke volume is calculated based on the end diastolic volume minus the end systolic volume.  
 
4. Study Design  
 
4.1 Overall Design  
 
Hypothesis:   
 
1. Sildenafil will reduce afterload and improve RV diastolic  function, thereby [CONTACT_617736], as assessed by [CONTACT_617737] 4D flow  
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
12 
 2. Beta blockade with metoprolol will improve RV filling time and therefore improve function 
and energetic efficiency, as assessed by [CONTACT_617728] 4D flow  
 
Phase:   2 
 
Type of trial: Cross -over design  pi[INVESTIGATOR_617715]: To minimize bias, we will utilize clearly defined outcomes (i.e. RV 
energy efficiency as primary). Eligibility, including history of preterm birth, will be confirmed in all 
subjects.  The study will be registered at clinicaltrials.gov . 
 
Study groups:  All subjects will be adults born premature. Subjects will participate in a cross -
over design study, where their responses to two therapeutic interventions are compared.  
 
Site(s):  Univers ity of Wisconsin  
 
Study Interventions:  sildenafil, metoprolol  
 
4.2 Scientific Rationale for Study Design  
  
This study will utilize a cross -over design to study the acute effects of two different 
classes of cardiac medications on cardiac performance. Premat urity associated cardiomyopathy 
is a newly described cardiomyopathy characterized by [CONTACT_617738], children, and adults born premature. Our preliminary work 
demonstrates a biventricular impairment in c ardiac energy efficiency, as well as elevations in 
pulmonary pressures. The biventricular dysfunction mandates added therapeutic considerations 
given that drugs targeting LV dysfunction may be harmful to the RV and vice versa. Here, we 
will utilize two tre atment strategies – pulmonary vasodilation to reduce RV afterload and beta -
blockade to improve filling time to assess the effects on biventricular function using 4D flow 
CMR imaging protocols.  
 
4.[ADDRESS_820426] of slowed heart rate. Subjects 
will be administered metoprolol IV. Dosing will be titrated (1 -5 mg Q2 min) to achieve a resting 
heart rate of 55 -65. For subjects with a r esting heart rate already within range, a 10 -15% 
reduction in heart rate will be targeted, with the goal of improving cardiac filling time which may 
lead to improved cardiac filling time and cardiac energy efficiency.  
 
4.[ADDRESS_820427] completed the study if he or she completed all 
phases of the study including the final scheduled visit/procedure shown in the Schedule of 
Activities. The end of the study is defined as completion of the last visit or procedure shown in 
the Schedule of Activities in the trial globally.  
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   [ADDRESS_820428] meet all of the 
following criteria:  
1. Provision of signed and dated informed consent form  
2. Male or female aged 18 -35 
3. History of preterm birth:  
a. Participant in the Newborn Lung Project (birth year 1988 -1991, birth 
weight <1500 g)  
b. Non-NLP participant, with birth weight <1500 g and gestational age 32 
weeks or less, verified by [CONTACT_115645] r ecords  
 
5.2 Exclusion Criteria  
 
 An individual who meets any of the following criteria will be excluded from participation in 
the study:  
 
1. Pregnant or lactating  
2. Use of prescribed medications that would interfere with study medications  
a. Sildenafil: Use of p hosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (sildenafil, 
tadalafil, vardenafil), nitrates, soluble guanylate cyclase inhibitor 
(riociguat)  within 48 hours of study visit  
b. Metoprolol: Use of nodal blocking agents including beta blockers, non -
dihydropyridine calcium c hannel blockers (i.e. diltiazem), and anti -
arrhythmics (i.e. amiodarone)  
3. Presence of known comorbidities for which these therapeutic interventions 
would be contraindicated:  
a. Moderate to severe heart failure  
b. Severe bradycardia (heart rate <45), or second or third-degree heart 
block  
c. Systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg  or >[ADDRESS_820429] unsafe or 
inappropriate for study participation.  
 
5.3 Lifestyle Considerations  
 
 During this study, participants are asked to:  
 
 Abstain from caffeine  and alcohol for 24 hours prior to each imaging study.  
 Avoid grapefruit consumption for 48 hours prior to imaging study  
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
14 
  Fast for a minimum of 8 hours prior to the study visit involving  lab draw for 
biobanking . 
 Fast for a minimum of [ADDRESS_820430] 
their visits rescheduled for a different time when they can better meet the restrictions 
(investigator discretion).   
 
5.4 Screen Failures  
 
Screen failures are defined as participants who consent to participate in the clinical trial 
but are not subsequently entered into the study. A minimal set of screen failure information is 
required to ensure transparent reporting of  screen failure participants, to meet the Consolidated 
Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) publishing requirements and to respond to queries 
from regulatory authorities. Minimal information includes demography, screen failure details, 
eligibility crite ria, and any serious adverse event (SAE). Individuals who do not meet the criteria 
for participation in this trial (screen failure) because of a specific modifiable factor may be 
rescreened. Rescreened participants should be assigned the same participant n umber as for 
the initial screening.  
 
5.5 Strategies for Recruitment and Retention  
 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_617716] : 10 completed subjects (not including screen failures)  
 
Anticipated accrual rate : [ADDRESS_820431] per month  
 
Number of sites : 1 
 
Source of participa nts:  
 
 Newborn Lung Project.  
 General public with verified history of premature birth.  
 
Subject identification and recruitment :  
 
Preterm subjects who have previously participated in research conducted in the Eldridge 
laboratory  or by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Kara Goss  (IRB 2009 -0212 , 2013 -1523 , and 2017 -0238 ) and who have 
previously given consent for contact [CONTACT_617739]. We have mailing addresses, 
email addresses, and phone numbers for these members of the NLP cohort. Using contact 
[CONTACT_3031] p rovided by [CONTACT_617740] -contact, potential subjects from the NLP cohort will 
receive a recruitment email, letter, or phone call, asking if they would like to be part of the study. 
Subjects will not be contact[CONTACT_617741] 3 times total by [CONTACT_617742]'t receive a 
response. Messages left on phones will not include health information. If the subject is not 
reached, the message will give our contact [CONTACT_617743].  
Recruitment of non -NLP preterm subjects from the general public will be done via:  
 Mass mailing (ie through UW email)  
 Posting local flyers (ie UW Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_617717]) or via 
paid newspaper advertisements  
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
15 
  Through internet posting (ie posting on social media sites, UW Facebook Rese arch 
pages, Jobcenter board, or Craiglist Madison).  
Interested individuals will contact [CONTACT_9137].  Women and minorities will be recruited, 
with a goal to have equal distribution of sexes. Given the small initial study size, minority ethnic 
groups will not be directly targeted but will be welcomed.  
 
Compensation :  
 
$450 for completion of all study visits. Parking validation and travel expenses (ie mileage) will be 
provided for research subjects. C ompensation may be prorated  at $5 0/hr if a subjec t is unable to 
complete the visit.  
 
6. Study Intervention  
 
6.1 Study Intervention(s) Administration  
   
 6.1.1 Study Intervention Description  
 
Both study drugs (sildenafil and metoprolol) are commercially available and will be used 
in accordance with approv ed labeling.  
Metoprolol: 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2008/017963s062,018704s021lbl.pdf .  
Sildenafil:  
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2010/020895s033lbl.pdf .  
 
 6.1.2 Dosing and Administration  
 
Metoprolol: IV, dose titrated 1 -5 mg every 2 minutes to achieve goal heart rate of 55 -65 
beats per minute, or for subjects with a resting heart rate already at goal, titrated to achieve a 
10-15% reduction in heart rate.  
  
Sildenafil: 50 mg oral once  
 
6.2 Preparation/Handling/Storage/Accountability  
 
 6.2.1 Ac quisition and Accountability  
 
 Study medications will be acquired from the University of Wisconsin Pharmaceutical 
Research Center (PRC). All unused medications will be returned to the PRC.  
 
  6.2.[ADDRESS_820432] clinical packaging , concentration of 5 mg/5ml .  
 
 6.2.[ADDRESS_820433] Storage and Stability  
 
 Medications will be retained in original packaging/carton until time of use, and protected 
from light.  
 
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
16 
  6.2.4 Preparation  
 
 Metoprolol will be drawn into a syringe for administration by [CONTACT_617744] (RN or MD) by [CONTACT_27927]. Saline flush will be administered after each 
dose.  
 No special preparation concerns for sildenafil.  
 
 6.3 Measures to Minimize B ias 
 
 Study interventions are not blinded. There will be a minimum period of 12 hours between 
drug interventions to ensure adequate drug wash -out. 
 
6.4 Study Intervention Compliance  
 
All study medications will be administered  in a clinical setting to ensur e compliance.  
  
6.5 Concomitant Therapy  
 
Use of concomitant medications will be assessed at the baseline visit. Medications to be 
reported in the Case Report Form are concomitant prescription medications, over -the-counter 
medications, and supplements.  
 
 6.5.1 Rescue Medicine: not applicable  
 
7. Study Intervention Discontinuation and Participant Discontinuation/Withdrawal  
   
7.1 Discontinuation of Study Intervention  
 
  Participants may withdraw voluntarily from the study or the PI [INVESTIGATOR_147140] a 
participant from the study. The UW IRB approved consent form will state that subjects may 
withdraw from this study at any time without any change in the quality of their medic al care or 
loss of benefits.  
 
7.2 Participant Discontinuation/Withdrawal from the Study  
 
Participants are free to withdraw from participation in the study at any time upon request.  
An investigator may discontinue or withdraw a participant from the study for the following 
reasons:  
• Pregnancy  
• If any clinical adverse event (AE), laboratory abnormality, or other medical condition or 
situation occurs such that continued participation in the study would not be in the best interest of 
the participant  
• If the participant meets an exclusion criterion (either newly developed or not previously 
recognized) that precludes further study participation  
• Participant unable to receive the study intervention  
The reason for participant discontinuation or withdrawal from the study will be recorded on the 
Case Report Form (CRF). Subjects who sign the informed consent form and are enrolled but do 
not receive the study intervention may be replaced. Subjects who sign the informed consent 
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   [ADDRESS_820434] be taken if a 
participant fails to return to the clinic for a required study visit:  
• The site will attempt to contact [CONTACT_617745]/or should continue in the study.  
• Before a participant is deemed lost to follow -up, the investigator or designee will make 
every effort to regain contact [CONTACT_6635] (where possible, 3 telephone calls and, if 
necessary, a cer tified letter to the participant’s last known mailing address or local equivalent 
methods). These contact [CONTACT_13140]’s medical record or 
study file.  
• Should the participant continue to be unreachable, he or she will be considered to have 
withdrawn from the study with a primary reason of lost to follow -up. 
 
8. Study Assessments and Procedures  
 
8.1 Efficacy Assessments  
 
Cardiac Imaging:  CMR will be performed on a 3T scanner (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, 
WI). The CMR protocol, including sequences and analyses, is summarized in Table 1 . 
Multiplanar, cardiac gated, cine balanced steady -state free precession (bSSFP) series will be 
acquired throu gh the heart for assessment of heart size and function. Flow through the tricuspid 
and mitral valves will be assessed with cardiac gated, cine two -dimensional (2D) flow -sensitive 
sequences. Four -dimensional flow sensitive magnetic resonance imaging (4D flo w MRI) will be 
performed with a radial undersampled acquisition, Phase Contrast with Vastly undersampled 
Isotropic Projection Reconstruction (PC VIPR).32-34 CMR sequence parameters will be individually 
adapte d to each participant’s anatomy to optimize scan time and temporal resolution as 
recommended by [CONTACT_617746].35 
Cardiac MRI Analysis:  Standard CMR images will be analyzed per published 
recommendations.36 Analysis will be conducted by [CONTACT_617747] -Image Analysis Core. Outcomes determined will include me asures of RV and 
LV cardiac systolic and diastolic function (Table 1 ). Assessment of systolic function will include 
quantification of RV and LV end -diastolic volume index, end systolic volume index, stroke volume 
index, ejection fraction, cardiac output, a nd cardiac index. Peak filling rate and time to peak filling 
rate, indices of diastolic function, will be determined by [CONTACT_617748]. Diastolic function will also be evaluated by [CONTACT_617749] (E -wave velocity) and atrial 
contraction (A -wave velocity), as well as their ratio (E/A).  
4D Flow Analysis:  Ventricular kinetic energy (KE), main pulmonary artery (MPA) flow and 
ascending  aorta flow will be quantified from the 4D flow MRI data using previously published 
algorithms developed at our institution.33,34 Briefly, the heart and thoracic vasculature will be 
segmented from the complex difference angiographic images using commercial image 
processing software (Mimics, Materialise, Leuven, Belgium) and exported as a mask to be 
combined with the time -resolved th ree-directional velocity data within a visualization software 
package (Ensight, CEI Inc., Apex, NC). Flow in the MPA and ascending aorta will be measured 
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
18 
 from planes 2  cm from the annulus. RV and LV KE is determined by [CONTACT_617750] -averaged PC VIPR magnitude images in Mimics. A mask is 
applied to the time -resolved velocity images, and the kinetic energy across the cardiac cycle is 
computed using the formula: KE total=frame  voxel∑1  ½ mv2, where  m=mass  and v=veloci ty. To 
characterize energy efficiency, the total KE across the cardiac cycle is normalized to the flow 
through the MPA (Q P) and aorta (Q S).   
 
Table 1. CMR protocol for assessment of RV and LV systolic and diastolic function, 
efficiency and fibrosis.  
Ventricle Assessment  MRI sequence(s)  Measurements  
RV Systolic function  Axial cine bSSFP  EDVi, ESVi, SVi, EF, CO, CI  
Diastolic function  Axial cine bSSFP  
2D flow (tricuspid valve)  PFR, TTPFR  
E, A, E/A  
Efficiency  4D flow MRI  KE, MPA flow  
LV Systolic function  Short axis cine bSSFP  EDVi, ESVi, SVi, EF, CO, CI  
Diastolic function  Short axis cine bSSFP  
2D flow (mitral valve)  IVRT  
E, A, E/A  
Efficiency  4D flow MRI  KE, aorta flow  
Abbreviations – bSSFP, balanced steady state free precession; 2D, two-dimensional; 4D, four -
dimensional; EDVi, end -diastolic volume index; ESVi, end -systolic volume index; SVi; stroke 
volume index; EF, ejection fraction; CO, cardiac output; CI, cardiac index; PFR, peak filling rate; 
TTPFR, time to peak filling rate; E, p eak flow velocity during ventricular relaxation; A, peak flow 
velocity during atrial contraction; KE, kinetic energy; MPA, main pulmonary artery.  
 
8.2 Safety and Other Assessments  
 
Screening : Study coordinators will conduct a phone screen to determine eli gibility.  
 
Verification of medical records : General information regarding birth history will be asked 
of all subjects (i.e. gestational age, birth weight). This history will be verified and additional birth 
history will be collected from Newborn Lung Proj ect medical records , records  from previous 
studies  that collected NLP data  (IRB 2009 -0212, 2013 -1523, and /or 2017 -0238 ), or birth 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600], where available. This information will include prenatal characteristics (including but not 
limited to: maternal age , demographics, gravidity, comorbidities such as diabetes, hypertension, 
asthma, tobacco use, alcohol use, antenatal steroid use), birth and postnatal characteristics 
(including but not limited to: gestational age, anthropometric data, delivery type, and d ata 
regarding neonatal comorbidities such as bronchopulmonary dysplasia, intracardiac shunts, 
sepsis, respi[INVESTIGATOR_1399], nutrition), and childhood characteristics (including but not limited to: 
anthropometric data, history of early wheezing, cigarette ex posure, treatment for respi[INVESTIGATOR_617718], and serial pulmonary function 
testing).  
 
Baseline measures : Study coordinators will verify demographic and medical history data 
with subjects. An MRI metal screening  sheet will be completed in accordance with standard 
clinical practice. Anthropometric measures  (height, weight)  and vital signs  (heart rate, 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], pulse ox, blood pressure)  will be obtained in accordance with standard clinical 
practice. If the CMR imaging visits are separated by >7 days, anthropometric and vital sign 
measures will be repeated.  
 
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
19 
 Pregnancy testing : All female participants will complete a urine pregnancy test. If the 
CMR imaging visits are separated by >[ADDRESS_820435] will be required.  
 
EKG : All subjects will undergo a resting EKG for screening purposes to verify absence of 
severe bradycardia or heart block prior to proceeding to imaging. EKGs will be reviewed by a 
qualified study personnel at the time they  are completed. Abnormal findings that would exclude 
participation will be discussed with the study participant immediately. Devices are non -
investigational.  
 
Pulmonary function testing : Subjects will undergo non -invasive pulmonary function testing 
including spi[INVESTIGATOR_038], plethysmography (for lung volumes) and diffusion capacity, according to 
standard clinical testing. All procedures are performed according to standard clinical practice an d 
all devices are non -investigational.  
 
Venous cannulation : One intravenous (IV) line will be placed by [CONTACT_9260]. 
Lidocaine or topi[INVESTIGATOR_617719] a local anesthetic.  
 
Biospecimens for biobanking : Blood for biobanking will be collected at the time of IV 
placement. Blood volume sampled will be less than 80 ml total.  Urine samples will be collected 
for biobanking  at the baseline visit .   
 
Health questionnaires : The subjects will answers health questionnaires, a  Pre-Session 
Questionnaire and Symptom Questionnaire.  
 
Monitoring during CMR : Subjects will be monitored with continuous EKG and pulse 
oximetry during scanning, with blood pressure measures taken at least every 10 minutes.  
Subjects will be assessed for adv erse events during and after therapeutic intervention.  
 
Incidental Findings : Testing that excludes a subject from study participation (i.e. positive 
pregnancy test, second or third -degree heart block) will be disclosed immediately. EKG and 
pulmonary function testing will be reviewed by [CONTACT_3476], and any potentially clinically 
significant abnormal findings will be discussed with subjects by a qualified RN or MD on the study 
team.  Clinically significant  non-investigational  CMR findings will be dis cussed with subjects by a 
qualified MD on the study team.  
 
8.3 Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events  
 
 8.3.1 Definition of Adverse Events (AE)  
 
Adverse event means any untoward medical occurrence associated with the use of an 
intervention in humans, wh ether or not considered intervention -related (21 CFR 312.32 (a)). 
Anticipated day -to-day fluctuations of the disease under study that do not represent a clinically 
significant exacerbation or worsening do not need to be considered an adverse event, unless 
they:  
 1. fulfill the definition of a serious adverse event, or  
 2. have worsened and are clinically significant requiring medical intervention other than the 
use of the rescue medication, or  
 3. result in discontinuation of subject from the study.  
  
 8.3.2 Definition of Serious Adverse Events (SAE)  
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
20 
  
An adverse event (AE) or suspected adverse reaction is considered "serious" if, in the 
view of the PI , it results in any of the following outcomes: death, a life -threatening adverse 
event, inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081], a persistent or 
significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct normal life functions, or a 
congenital anomaly/birth defect. Important medical events that may not resul t in death, be life -
threatening, or require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_708], based upon appropriate 
medical judgment, they may jeopardize the participant and may require medical or surgical 
intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition. Examples of such medical 
events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at 
home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or the 
development of drug dep endency or drug abuse  
 
 8.3.3 Classification of an Adverse Event  
 
   [IP_ADDRESS] Severity of Event  
 
Mild – Events require minimal or no treatment and do not interfere with the participant’s 
daily activities.  
Moderate – Events result in a low level of inconven ience or concern with the therapeutic 
measures. Moderate events may cause some interference with functioning.  
Severe – Events interrupt a participant’s usual daily activity and may require systemic 
drug therapy or other treatment. Severe events are usuall y potentially life -threatening or 
incapacitating. Of note, the term “severe” does not necessarily equate to “serious”.  
 
   [IP_ADDRESS] Relationship to Study Intervention  
 
All adverse events (AEs) must have their relationship to study intervention assessed by 
[CONTACT_166210]/her clinical judgment. The degree of certainty about causality will be graded using the 
categories below. In a clinical trial, the study product must always be suspect.  
Related – The AE is known to occur with the study intervention, there is a reasonable 
possibility that the study intervention caused the AE, or there is a temporal relationship between 
the study intervention and event. Reasonable possibility means that there is ev idence to 
suggest a causal relationship between the study intervention and the AE.  
Not Related – There is not a reasonable possibility that the administration of the study 
intervention caused the event, there is no temporal relationship between the study intervention 
and event onset, or an alternate etiology has been established.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS] Expectedness  
 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_21190] (AE) is expected or 
unexpected. An AE will be considered unexpected if the nature, seve rity, or frequency of the 
event is not consistent with the risk information previously described for the study i ntervention.  
 
 8.3.4 Time Period and Frequency for Event Assessment and Follow Up  
 
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
21 
 The occurrence of an adverse event (AE) or serious adverse ev ent (SAE) may come to 
the attention of study personnel during study visits and interviews of a study participant 
presenting for medical care, or upon review by a study monitor.  
All AEs including local and systemic reactions not meeting the criteria for SA Es will be 
captured on the appropriate case report form (CRF). Information to be collected includes event 
description, time of onset, clinician’s assessment of severity, relationship to study product 
(assessed only by [CONTACT_8703] a diagnosis), and time of 
resolution/stabilization of the event. All AEs occurring while on study must be documented 
appropriately regardless of relationship. All AEs will be followed to adequate resolution.  
Any medical condition that is present a t the time that the participant is screened will be 
considered as baseline and not reported as an AE. However, if the study participant’s condition 
deteriorates at any time during the study, it will be recorded as an AE.  
Changes in the severity of an AE w ill be documented to allow an assessment of the 
duration of the event at each level of severity to be performed. AEs characterized as intermittent 
require documentation of onset and duration of each epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865].  
A study coordinator will record all reportable e vents with start dates occurring any time 
after informed consent is obtained until 7 (for non -serious AEs) or 30 days (for SAEs) after the 
last day of study participation. At each study visit, the investigator will inquire about the 
occurrence of AE/SAEs s ince the last visit. Events will be followed for outcome information until 
resolution or stabilization.  
  
 8.3.[ADDRESS_820436] be 
reported in accordance with the protocol unless there is evidence suggesting a causal 
relationship between the study intervention and the event (e.g., death from anaphylaxis). In that 
case,  the investigator must immediately report the event.  
All serious adverse events (SAEs) will be followed until satisfactory resolution or until the site 
investigator deems the event to be chronic or the participant is stable.  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_548816] r notifying the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of any 
unexpected fatal or life -threatening suspected adverse reaction as soon as possible, but in no 
case later than 7 calendar days after the PI's initial receipt of the information. In addition, the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_617720] (IND) safety 
report of potential serious risks, from clinical trials or any other source, as soon as possible, but 
in no case later than 15 calendar days after the PI [INVESTIGATOR_617721].  
 
 8.3.7 Reporting Events to Participants  
 
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   [ADDRESS_820437].  
 
8.4 Unanticipated Problems  
 
 8.4.1 Definition of Unanticipated Problems (UP)  
 
The Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) considers unanticipated problems 
involving risks to participants or others to include, in general, any incident, experience, or 
outcome that meets all of the following criteria:  
• Unexpected in terms of nat ure, severity, or frequency given (a) the research 
procedures that are described in the protocol -related documents, such as the Institutional 
Review Board (IRB) -approved research protocol and informed consent document; and (b) the 
characteristics of the pa rticipant population being studied;  
• Related or possibly related to participation in the research (“possibly related” means 
there is a reasonable possibility that the incident, experience, or outcome may have been 
caused by [CONTACT_319290]); and  
• Suggests that the research places participants or others at a greater risk of harm 
(including physical, psychological, economic, or social harm) than was previously known or 
recognized.  
 
 8.4.2 Unanticipated Problem Reporting  
 
The inves tigator will report unanticipated problems (UPs) to the reviewing Institutional 
Review Board (IRB). The UP report will include the following information:  
• Protocol identifying information: protocol title and number, PI’s name, and the IRB 
project number;   
• A detailed description of the event, incident, experience, or outcome;  
• An explanation of the basis for determining that the event, incident, experience, or 
outcome represents an UP;  
• A description of any changes to the protocol or other corrective  actions that have been 
taken or are proposed in response to the UP.  
 
To satisfy the requirement for prompt reporting, UPs will be reported using the following 
timeline:  
• UPs that are serious adverse events (SAEs) will be reported to the IRB within 72 hours 
of the investigator becoming aware of the event.  
• Any other UP will be reported to the IRB 7 days of the investigator becoming aware of 
the problem.  
• All UPs should be reported to appropriate institutional officials (as required by [CONTACT_8706]’s written reporting procedures), the supporting agency head (or designee), and the 
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
23 
 Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) within 7 days of the IRB’s re ceipt of the report 
of the problem from the investigator.  
 
 8.4.3 Reporting Unanticipated Problems to Participants  
 
 Participants will be informed about UPs on an aggregate level as needed.  
 
9. Statistical Considerations  
 
9.1 Statistical Hypothesis  
 
Silden afil: We expect sildenafil will improve RV energetic efficiency, systolic, and diastolic 
function. LV measures will be included in all subjects to ensure absence of worsening LV function 
(energy efficiency, systolic, and diastolic function) with RV afterlo ad reduction. We expect that LV 
function will improve with sildenafil as well.  
Metoprolol : We expect metoprolol to improve cardiac filling times, resulting in an improved 
RV and LV energetic efficiency.  
  
9.2 Sample Size Determination  
 
 As a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], w e propose enrolling and completing 10 subjects. Our prior study (n=9) 
demonstrates an RV energy efficiency of 1.09±0.26 mL/mJ, and thus we estimate that [ADDRESS_820438] a 30% improvement in RV energy efficiency (alpha 0.05, beta 0.8) 
for either drug intervention.  
 
9.[ADDRESS_820439] biventricular measures of RV 
and LV function (Table 1). All measures will be assessed by [CONTACT_617751], and results will be summarized as means +/ - standard error. Data analysis will be 
quantitative, with differences among means c ompared using Wilcoxon Rank Sum tests for each 
therapeutic intervention. Comparisons between interventions will be with ANOVA. All p values 
will be two -sided, with p<0.05 used to define statistical significance.  
 
 9.4.2 Analysis of the Primary Efficacy End point  
 
To determine RV kinetic energy, a mask is applied to the time -resolved velocity images, 
and the kinetic energy across the cardiac cycle is computed using the formula: KE total=frame  voxel∑1  
½ mv2, where  m=mass  and v=velocity.  To characterize energy efficiency, the total KE across 
the cardiac cycle is normalized to the flow through the MPA (Q P) and aorta (Q S). Analysis will be 
completed in blinded fashion. RV energy efficiency measures will be compared using Wilcoxon 
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
24 
 Rank Sum tests for each individual  after each intervention. All p values will be two -sided, with 
p<0.05 used to define statistical significance. Comparison between intervention will be with 
ANOVA.  
 
 9.4.3 Analysis of the Secondary Endpoint(s)  
 
LV kinetic energy efficiency will be determin ed similar to RV kinetic energy efficiency , 
and may not be dependent of the primary endpoint. Measures will be compared using Wilcoxon 
Rank Sum tests for each individual after each intervention. All p values will be two -sided, with 
p<0.[ADDRESS_820440] morphometric analysis (ventricular volumes, ejection fractions) will be 
compared similarly.  
 
 9.4.[ADDRESS_820441] will serve as 
his/her pre -post comparison for each intervention.  
 
 9.4.6 Planned Interim Analysis  
 
 Not applicable.  
 
 9.4.7 Sub -group Analysis  
 
 Not applicable.  
 
 9.4.8 Tabulation of Individual Participant Data  
 
 Not applicable.  
 
10. Supporting Documentation and Operational Considerations  
 
10.1 Regulatory, Ethical and Study Oversight Considerations  
 
 10.1.1 Informed Consent Process  
 
[IP_ADDRESS] Consent/Assent and Other Informational D ocuments 
Provided to Participants  
 
 Consent forms describing in detail the study intervention, study procedures, and risks 
are given to the participant and written documentation of informed consent is required prior to 
starting intervention/administering s tudy intervention. See consent materials.  
 
   [IP_ADDRESS] Consent Procedures and Documentation  
 
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
25 
  Informed consent is a process that is initiated prior to the individual’s agreeing to 
participate in the study and continues throughout the individual’s study participation. Consent 
forms will be Institutional Review Board (IRB) -approved and the participant will be asked to read 
and review the document. The investigator or delegate will explain the research study to the 
participant and answer any questions that may arise. A verbal explanation will be provided in 
terms suited to the participant’s comprehension of the purposes, procedures, and potential risks 
of the study and of their rights as research participants. Participants will have the opportunity to 
carefu lly review the written consent form and ask questions prior to signing. The participants 
should have the opportunity to discuss the study with their family or surrogates or think about it 
prior to agreeing to participate. The participant will sign the info rmed consent document prior to 
any procedures being done specifically for the study. Participants must be informed that 
participation is voluntary and that they may withdraw from the study at any time, without 
prejudice. A copy of the informed consent docu ment will be given to the participants for their 
records. The informed consent process will be conducted and documented in the source 
document (including the date), and the form signed, before the participant undergoes any study -
specific procedures. The ri ghts and welfare of the participants will be protected by [CONTACT_200876].  
 
Prior to providing written informed consent, subjects will pr ovide oral consent to fast and abstain 
from caffeine, alcohol, and consuming grapefruit prior to their study visits (part of the phone 
eligibility screen). Subjects will also provide oral permission  to receive a copy of the consent 
form via email or post -mail. Subjects born premature that are not part of the NLP Cohort will 
provide oral consent for the release of their neonatal records, which will be used to confirm 
eligibility.  If a Non -NLP subject incorrectly reports meeting the stud y inclusion/exclusion criteria 
(based on their neonatal records ), they will be contact[CONTACT_426] a member of the study team and 
any scheduled study visits  will be cancelled . Additionally, their neonatal information/records will 
be destroyed.  
 
 10.1.2 Study Discontinuation and Closu re 
 
This study may be temporarily suspended or prematurely terminated if there is sufficient 
reasonable cause. Written notification, documenting the reason for study suspension or 
termination, will be provided by [CONTACT_617752] . If the study is prematurely terminated or suspended, the Principal 
Investigator (PI) will promptly inform study participants, the Institutional Review Board (IRB), 
and PI [INVESTIGATOR_617722](s) for the termina tion or suspension. Study participants will be 
contact[INVESTIGATOR_530], as applicable, and be informed of changes to study visit schedule.  
Circumstances that may warrant termination or suspension include, but are not limited 
to:  
• Determination of unexpected, signific ant, or unacceptable risk to participants  
• Demonstration of efficacy that would warrant stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  
• Insufficient compliance to protocol requirements  
• Data that are not sufficiently complete and/or evaluable  
• Determination that the primary endpoint ha s been met  
• Determination of futility  
Study may resume once concerns about safety, protocol compliance, and data quality are 
addressed, and satisfy the PI, IRB and/or Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  
  
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   [ADDRESS_820442] by [CONTACT_279319]. This confidentiality is extended to cover testing of biological 
samples and future genetic tests  (from biobanked samples)  in addition to the clinical information 
relating to participants. Therefore, the study protocol, documentation, data, and all other 
information generated will be held in strict confidence. No information concerning the study,  or 
the data will be released to any unauthorized third party without prior written approval of the PI. 
All research activities will be conducted in as private a setting as possible.  
The study monitor, other authorized representatives of the PI, representatives of the 
Institutional Re view Board (IRB), regulatory agencies or pharmaceutical company supplying 
study product may inspect all documents and records required to be maintained by [CONTACT_1275], including but not limited to, medical records (office, clinic, or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]) and 
pharmacy records for the participants in this study. The clinical study site will permit access to 
such records.  
The study participant’s contact [CONTACT_65246]. At the end of the st udy, all records will continue to be kept in a 
secure location for as long a period as dictated by [CONTACT_3488], Institutional policies, or PI 
[CONTACT_225135].  
Study participant research data, which is for purposes of statistical analysis and scientific 
reporting, will be stored on secure servers or in locked file cabinets. This will not include the 
participant’s contact [CONTACT_1290]. Rather, indivi dual participants and their research 
data will be identified by a unique study identification number. The study data entry and study 
management systems used by [CONTACT_617753]. At the end of the s tudy, all study databases will be d e-identified and archived . 
 
  10.1.4 Future Use of Stored Specimens and Data  
 
Data collected for this study will be analyzed and stored at the University of Wisconsin. 
After the study is completed, the de -identified, arch ived data may be  be transmitted to and 
stored at the University of Wisconsin, for use by [CONTACT_142323]. Permission to transmit data to future  Data Repositor ies will be included in the informed 
consent.  
With the participant’s approval and as approved by [CONTACT_141238] 
(IRBs), de -identified biological samples will be stored in a biobank (in the PI’s lab) at the 
University of Wisconsin. These samples could be used to research the causes o f prematurity 
associated cardiomyopathy, its complications and other conditions for which individuals with a 
history of premature birth are at increased risk, and to improve treatment.  
During informed consent , subjects will be informed that biobank storage  of their blood 
and urine samples for future research is not optional. . However, subjects can choose if they 
want their samples to be used in future genetics research . Subjects can withdrawal consent by 
[CONTACT_617754].  
When the study is complete d, access to study data and/or samples will be provided through the 
NLP Repository.  
 
 10.1.5 Key Roles and Study Governance  
 
Principal Investigator:  
[INVESTIGATOR_617710], MD  
Assistant Professor of Medicine and Pediatrics  
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   [ADDRESS_820443] CSC H4/[ADDRESS_820444] of the study  procedures on the  proposed  primary and secondary outcomes, noting a 
direction of improvement, stagnation, or exacerbation. Any adverse and serious adverse events 
will be reviewed both cumulatively and individually to assess the continuing safety of the tr ial. 
The investigator will compare/contrast AEs/SAEs occurring after Sildenafil administration with 
those of Metoprolol.  Findings from these assessments/evaluations will be used collectively to 
determine the continuing risk/benefit ratio of the study. Base d on the risk/benefit ratio, t he 
investigator may choose to continue the study under the current protocol specifications, 
continue the study with an altered design, or terminate the study.  
 
 10.1.7 Clinical Monitoring  - Not applicable : internal safety and  data oversight  
 
10.1.[ADDRESS_820445], data and biological specimen collection, documentation and 
completion. Quality control (QC) procedures will be implemented beginning with the data entry 
system , and data QC checks that will be run on the d atabase will be generated. Any missing 
data or data anomalies will be communicated to PI [INVESTIGATOR_265824]/resolution.  
 
 10.1.[ADDRESS_820446] Keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  
 
   [IP_ADDRESS] Data Collection and Management Responsibilities  
 
Data collection is the responsib ility of the clinical trial staff at the site under the 
supervision of the site investigator. The investigator is responsible for ensuring the accuracy, 
completeness, legibility, and timeliness of the data reported. All source documents should be 
completed  in a neat, legible manner to ensure accurate interpretation of data. Hardcopi[INVESTIGATOR_617723]. Data recorded in the electr onic case report form 
(eCRF) derived from source documents should be consistent with the data recorded on the 
source documents.  
Clinical data (including adverse events (AEs), concomitant medications, and expected 
adverse reactions data) and clinical labor atory data will be entered into RedCap, a [ADDRESS_820447] protection and internal quality checks, such as 
automatic range checks,  to identify data that appear inconsistent, incomplete, or inaccurate. 
Clinical data will be entered directly from the source documents.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS] Study Records Retention  
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
28 
  
Study records will be retained for a minimum of three years after study completion 
(including the completion of data analyses) and funding expi[INVESTIGATOR_1516] . These documents should be 
retained for a longer period, however, if required by [CONTACT_427]. No records will be 
destroyed without the written consent of the PI, if applicable.  
 
10.1.10 Protocol Deviations  
 
A protocol deviation is any noncompliance with the clinical trial protocol, International 
Conference on Harmonisation Good Clinical Practice (ICH GCP), or Manual of Procedures 
(MOP) requirements. The noncompliance may be either  on the part of the participant, the 
investigator, or the study site staff. As a result of deviations, corrective actions are to be 
developed by [CONTACT_3483].  Protocol d eviations meeting the following 
criteria will be reported to the I RB within 7 days of the PI’s awareness of the event unless more 
immediate reporting is required:  
 
 The deviation affected or had the potential to affect the subject’s rights, safety or 
welfare*;  
 The deviation resulted in a change to the participant’s clinic al or emotional condition or 
status;  
 The deviation affected the integrity, accuracy and/or reliability of the research data; and  
 The deviation resulted from willful or knowing misconduct on the part of the study team.  
 
*The IRB considers all study drug dos ing errors (under - or over -dosing) to meet this 
criteria; therefore, all dosing errors require reporting to the IRB.  
 
10.1.11 Publication and Data Sharing Policy  
 
This study will be conducted in accordance with the following publication and data 
sharing po licies and regulations:  
National Institutes of Health (NIH) Public Access Policy, which ensures that the public 
has access to the published results of NIH funded research. It requires scientists to submit final 
peer-reviewed journal manuscripts that arise  from NIH funds to the digital archive PubMed 
Central upon acceptance for publication.  
This study will comply with the NIH Data Sharing Policy and Policy on the Dissemination 
of NIH -Funded Clinical Trial Information and the Clinical Trials Registration an d Results 
Information Submission rule. As such, this trial will be registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, and 
results information from this trial will be submitted to ClinicalTrials.gov. In addition, every 
attempt will be made to publish results in peer -reviewe d journals. Data from this study may be 
requested from other researchers [ADDRESS_820448] of this trial.  
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
29 
  
10.2 A dditional Consideration s 
 
None.  
 
11. References  
 
1. Jackson G, Benjamin N, Jackson N, Allen MJ. Effects of sildenafil citrate on human 
hemodynamics. Am J Cardiol. 1999;83(5a):13c -20c. 
2. Cheitlin MD, Hutter AM, Jr., Brindis RG, et al. ACC/AHA expert consensus document. 
Use of sildenafil (Viagra) in patients with cardiovascular disease. American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999;33(1):273 -282. 
3. Ferre C, Callaghan W, Olson C, Sharma A, Barfield W. Effects of Maternal Age and 
Age-Specific Preterm Birth Rates on Overall Preterm Birth Rates - [LOCATION_002], 2007 
and 2014. MMWR Morbidity and mortality weekly report. 2016;65(43):[ADDRESS_820449] AS, Blaisdell CJ, Moxey -Mims M, Saigal S. Adults born preterm: a 
review of general health and system -specific outcomes. Acta paediatrica (Oslo, Norway : 
1992). 2017;106(9):[ADDRESS_820450] S. Long -Term 
Healthcare Outcomes of Preterm Birth: An Executive Summary of a Conference 
Sponsored by [CONTACT_7681]. J Pediatr. 2017;181:309 -318.e301.  
6. Naumburg E, Axelsson I, Huber D, Soderstrom L. Some neonatal risk factors for adult  
pulmonary arterial hypertension remain unknown. Acta paediatrica (Oslo, Norway : 
1992). 2015;104(11):1104 -1108.  
7. Carr H, Cnattingius S, Granath F, Ludvigsson JF, Edstedt Bonamy A -K. Preterm Birth 
and Risk of Heart Failure Up  to Early Adulthood. J Am Col l Cardiol. 2017;69(21):[ADDRESS_820451] J. Risk of Hypertension Among Young 
Adults Who Were Born Preterm: A Swedish National Study of 636,000 Births. American 
journal of epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. 2011;173(7):797 -803. 
9. Levy P T, Diodena B, Holland MR, et al. Right Ventricular Function in Preterm and Term 
Neonates: Reference Values for Right Ventricle Areas and Fractional Area of Change. 
Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography : official publication of the 
American S ociety of Echocardiography. 2015;28(5):559 -569. 
10. Aye CYL, Lewandowski AJ, Lamata P, et al. Disproportionate cardiac hypertrophy during 
early postnatal development in infants born preterm. Pediatr Res. 2017;82(1):36 -46. 
11. Lewandowski AJ, Augustine D, L amata P, et al. Preterm heart in adult life: 
cardiovascular magnetic resonance reveals distinct differences in left ventricular mass, 
geometry, and function. Circulation. 2013;127(2):197 -206. 
12. Lewandowski AJ, Bradlow WM, Augustine D, et al. Right ventri cular systolic dysfunction 
in young adults born preterm. Circulation. 2013;128(7):713 -720. 
13. Kawut SM, Barr RG, Lima JAC, et al. Right Ventricular Structure is Associated with the 
Risk of Heart Failure and Cardiovascular Death: The MESA -Right Ventricle S tudy. 
Circulation. 2012;126(14):1681 -1688.  
14. Bleasdale RA, Frenneaux MP. Prognostic importance of right ventricular dysfunction. 
Heart (British Cardiac Society). 2002;88(4):323 -324. 
15. Vonk -Noordegraaf A, Haddad F, Chin KM, et al. Right heart adaptation  to pulmonary 
arterial hypertension: physiology and pathobiology. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62([ADDRESS_820452]):D22 -33. 
Title: Improving Right Ventricular Function in Young Adults Born Preterm: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_88340]: Kara Goss, MD  
Protocol version date: V1   8 -30-2018  
 
30 
 16. Palta M, Gabbert D, Weinstein MR, Peters ME, Newborn Lung P. Multivariate 
assessment of traditional risk factors for chronic lung disease in very low birth weight 
neonates. The Journal of Pediatrics. 1991;119(2):285 -292. 
17. Palta M, Sadek -Badawi M, Evans M, Weinstein MR, McGuinness G, for the Newborn 
Lung P. Functional assessment of a multicenter very low -birth-weight cohort at age 5 
years. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine. 2000;154(1):23 -30. 
18. Palta M, Sadek -Badawi M, Madden K, Green C. Pulmonary testing using peak flow 
meters of very low birth weight children born in the perisurfactant era and school controls 
at age 10 years. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2007;42(9):819 -828. 
19. Farrell ET, Bates ML, Pegelow DF, et al. Pulmonary Gas Exchange and Exercise 
Capacity in Adults Born Preterm. Annals of the American Thoracic Society. 
2015;12(8):1130 -1137.  
20. Goss KN, Kumari S, Tetri LH, et al. P ostnatal Hyperoxia Exposure Durably Impairs Right 
Ventricular Function and Mitochondrial Biogenesis. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 
2017;56(5):609 -619. 
21. Goss KN, Tepper RS, Lahm T, Ahlfeld SK. Increased Cardiac Output and Preserved 
Gas Exchange Despi[INVESTIGATOR_617724]. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2015;53(6):902 -906. 
22. Goss KN, Cucci AR, Fisher AJ, et al. Neonatal hyperoxic lung injury favorably alters 
adult right ventricular remodeling response to chronic hypoxia exposure. Am J Physiol 
Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2015;308(8):L797 -806. 
 