PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
1 
  
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE : 
SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom Management 
in Oncology Practice . 
 
Sponsor and Coordinating Center:  
Dana -Farber/Harvard Cancer Center (DF/HCC)  
Department of Medical Oncology  
Coordinating Center PI [INVESTIGATOR_706311]: Michael Hassett  
Dana -Farber Cancer Institute  
[LOCATION_011], MA [ZIP_CODE]  
Email Address: [EMAIL_13544]   
Telephone Number: 617 -632-4587  
 
CO-STUDY CHAIRS : 
 
Deborah Schrag MD, MPH  
Chair, Department of Medicine  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center  
[LOCATION_001] City, NY [ADDRESS_959686] Memorial Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706312], Tennessee [ZIP_CODE]  
  
Sandra Wong MD  
Chair, Department of Surgery  
Dartmouth College  
Lebanon, NH [ZIP_CODE]  
 
 
VERSION NUMBER:  
Version  9 
 
DATE:  
Version date: August 4 , 202 3 
 
FUNDING:  
National Cancer Institute, UM1CA233080 . 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
2 
  
 
ACRONYMS USED THROUGHOUT PROTOCOL:  
eSyM  Electronic symptom management system  
ePRO  Electronic patient -reported outcomes  
EHR  Electronic health record  
eSyM+  Assigned to use eSyM  
eSyM - Assigned not to use eSyM  
Gyn Gynecologic  
GI Gastrointestinal  
SOP Standard operating procedure  
FTP File transfer protocol  
SASS  Research questionnaire  
SIV Site initiation visit  
CTMS  Clinical trial management system  
DF/HCC  Dana -Farber/Harvard Cancer Center  
ODQ  DF/HCC Office of Data Quality  
QI Quality Improvement  
NHSR  Not Human Subjects Research  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/[ADDRESS_959687] the Privacy Interests of Subjects  ................................ ......................  49 
23.0  Compensation for Research -Related Injury  ................................ ................................ ....... 49 
24.0  Economic Burden to Subjects  ................................ ................................ ............................  49 
25.0  Consent Process  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  49 
26.0  Appendices  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  50 
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
4 
 1.0 Schema  
 
  Activity 1  (Waiver of consent) : Obtain stakeholder feedback to 
inform eSyM finalization and implementation from:  
• patient advisory council s  
• health system leaders  
• clinicians, clinic support staff /administration , and 
IT/Informatics  staff  
Activity 2 (NHSR) : Build and deploy eSyM  and finalize 
training materials  based on findings from stakeholder 
engagement  
Activity 3:  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_706313]  
• Activity 3a (NHSR/QI):  eSyM usage  
• Activity 3b (Waiver of documentation of consent):  
User acceptability testing  
• Activity 3c (Waiver of consent):  Medical record 
abstraction  
Activity 4:  Pragmatic stepped -wedge cluster randomized study   
• Activity 4 a (NHSR/QI):  eSyM usage  
• Activity 4 b (Waiver of documentation of consent):  
SASS questionnaire  
• Activity 4 c (Waiver of consent):  Medical record 
abstraction  
• Activity 4d (Written Consent):  Patient qualitative 
interviews  Constant 
refinement of  
eSyM   
based on 
findings from 
each activity  
Evaluation of the 
Implementation 
will occur 
throughout the 
entire 
implementati on 
process, not just 
at the end  
Activity 5  (Exempt) : Integration of eSyM Data - Develop 
algorithms to estimate the risk of experiencing an outcome  
among cancer patients   
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
5 
 2.0 Background  
 
Deficits in management of common symptoms cause substantial morbidity for cancer 
patients. In the [LOCATION_002], nearly 1.74 million people will be diagnosed with cancer in 2018.1  
While there will be approximately 600,000 cancer deaths, better treatment has contributed to 
lower mortality rates. However, the morbidity toll of cancer treatment remains immense.1-5 Poor 
symptom control decreases quality of life, increases the need for emergency care,6-8 and even 
deters some patients from receiving effective therapy.9,10 For patients with cancer receiving 
chemotherapy, adverse symptoms add to distress. For surgical patients, poorly managed 
symptoms delay recovery and interfere with timely receipt of adjuvant treatments11-13 and the 
return to usual activity levels. Patients are reluctant to “complain” or perceive that symptoms are 
unavoidable.[ADDRESS_959688] experience with 
symptom management, but they are often preoccupi[INVESTIGATOR_706314].17 In some settings, palliative care physicians, rehabilitation specialists, and 
social workers partner with oncologists to support patients, or there are resources to teach self -
management skills. However, in many centers, these resources are constrained or  unavailable.   
  
Growth in Internet access and proliferation of smartphones has created an opportunity to 
re-engineer cancer care delivery.  Eighty -eight percent  of adults in the US had web access and 
77% had a smartphone in 2016. Although adoption is lower in the elderly and the poor, use is 
rising, and many use the internet to manage their health.20,21 Mobile phones in general, and web 
access more generally, extend capacity for patient -clinician communication to optimize symptom 
management beyond the confines of 
a face -to-face encounter.22 Patient 
engagement has been called the 
“blockbuster” drug23,[ADDRESS_959689] improved well -being and 
consistently achieve better health  Smartphone18 Web access19 
Population  2010  2016  2010  2016  
All adults  33% 77% 76% 88% 
Age 65+  17% 54% 43% 64% 
Rural  26% 67% 69% 81% 
<$30,000 income  24% 64% 61% 79% 
Black  29% 72% 68% 85% 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
6 
 outcomes.25,26 Strong theoretical foundations from social cognitive theories of self -efficacy27,28 
and the chronic care model29 support the importance of patient engagement30-34 as a strategy to 
minimize the morbidity of cancer treatment.  
 
Electronic symptom tracking and feedback is a promising strategy to improve symptom 
control.  Electronic patient reported outcome (ePRO) monitoring of cancer symptoms has been 
shown to decrease symptom burden,[ADDRESS_959690], 
systematic reporting may activate patients to be more knowledgeable and effective at self -
management.38 This aligns with self -efficacy theory. Second, systematic reporting can trigger 
between -visit clinician actions that improve symptom control. This enhanced communication, 
facilitated by [CONTACT_79152], could make health care more responsive to patient needs.39,40  
 
Critical knowledge gaps will prevent successful implementation of ePRO systems in 
oncology practice.  The NCI has invested in the development of measurement tools to facilitate 
symptom reporting such as the PRO -CTCAE (Patient -Reported Outcomes version of the 
Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events), a patient -reported outcome measurement 
system to capture symptomatic adverse events in cancer patients.41-[ADDRESS_959691] created a context that is ripe fo r scaling a more proactive approach to cancer care 
delivery such as ePRO tracking. However, 4 critical knowledge gaps remain that will prevent 
successful implementation of ePROs to improve symptom management. They are:  
 
1. The ePRO effectiveness evidence base is limited to major cancer centers.  Evidence 
supporting the efficacy of ePRO symptom management stems largely from clinical trials and 
effectiveness studies conducted in large well -resourced cancer centers.44,[ADDRESS_959692] not leveraged demonstrably effective symptom coaching strategies. 
Early ePRO research focused on feasibility, metric development and overcoming 
technological and regulatory obstacles. The efferent limb of the ePRO feedback loop has 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/[ADDRESS_959693] because of insufficient attention to implementation.53-55 ePRO 
systems require a shift in the traditional orientation of clinicians which typi[INVESTIGATOR_706315]. There is inadequate knowledge about the 
implementation strategies that are facilitators of successful ePRO system s. How much 
training do patients require to engage in self -reporting? How much reinforcement is 
necessary? What level of training do clinic support staff, nurses, and clinicians require? What 
is the optimal design of dashboards to facilitate review of and acting on ePRO symptom 
reports? Established implementation science frameworks exist but have not been applied to 
ePRO systems.  
 
A multi -disciplinary team of investigators from [ADDRESS_959694] formed the  Symptom 
Management IMplementation of Patient Reported  Outcomes in  Oncology  (SIMPRO) Research 
Center. SIMPRO will use functioning ePRO prototypes to create and refine the electronic  
symptom management system eSyM. eSyM is the name [CONTACT_706398], 
integrate, implement,  and evaluate. eSyM addresses each of the 4 evidence gaps noted above by:  
1. Implementing eSyM in cancer centers in small, rural,  or community -based systems.  
2. Integrating  eSyM into the EHR of the predominant vendor used nationwide.  
3. Leveraging  evidence -based tools, patient engagement, and population management.  
4. Executing  this work using the Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research 
(CFIR , see figure below )56 across all phases to maximize the chances that eSyM and 
similar systems achieve their intended goals and decrease the morbidity of cancer 
treatment at a population level.  
 
 
Using CFIR a s a guide, we will utilize the plan-engage -execute -evaluate cycles across all aims.   

PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
8 
 3.0 Objectives  
 
Overall Research Goals are: (1) to create and refine eSyM, a reporting and management 
system that integrates ePROs with the EHR; (2) to evaluate the impact of eSyM on 
patient outcomes, treatment delivery, and healthcare system utilization using a pragmatic 
cluster randomized study design; and (3) to undertake a systematic, deliberative approach 
to implementation to allow for the identification of barriers and facilitato rs that contribute 
to the adoption and sustainability of eSyM in routine oncology care.  
 
Aim 1:  Adapt existing ePRO symptom management systems and integrate them into the 
EHR and routine clinical workflow at six health systems. Specifically:  
Aim 1a. Obtain patient, clinician, staff,  and leadership input on ePRO form and 
function  
Aim 1b. Refine the content and algorithms for self -management, alerts, and feedback   
Aim 1c. Develop ePRO training materials for patients, clinicians , and staff  
Aim 1d. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_706316] 2:  Determine the effectiveness of an EHR -integrated ePRO symptom management 
system on health outcomes. Specifically:  
Aim 2a. Healthcare utilization, measured by [CONTACT_706373] 2b. Impact on cancer care delivery, specifically chemotherapy treatment duration 
and delays  
Aim 2c. Patients’ outcomes, indicated by [CONTACT_706374] -efficacy and symptom burden  
Aim 2d. Patients’ satisfaction with their cancer care  
 
Aim 3:  Evaluate the facilitators and barriers to implementation of an EHR -integrated 
ePRO symptom management system from the patient, clinician,  and organizational 
perspectives. Specifically:  
Aim 3a. Patient adoption  (including program feedback and experiences via qualitative 
interviews) , clinician utilization, and their perspectives on appropriateness and 
acceptability  
Aim 3b. The sustainability of ePRO symptom management within a health system  
Aim 3c. Penetration and scalability of ePROs for symptom management  
Aim 3d. Extent of adaptation of ePRO systems over the course of the implementation 
process  
 
 
3.[ADDRESS_959695] ive stewards of their 
own care and enable their clinicians to anticipate problems and intervene to manage symptoms 
before they escalate . 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
9 
  
4.0 Inclusion  and Exclusion Criteria  or Activity Population  
 
The eligibility criteria /activity population  vary for each activity.  See section 5.0 for details.  
 
 
5.0 Protocol Activities  
 
There are 5 protocol activities, each detailed in section 5.0. 
• Activity 1:  Obtain stakeholder feedback from patient advisory councils, health system 
leaders, clinicians, clinic support staff/administration, and IT/Informatics  
• Activity 2 : Build and deploy eSyM  and finalize training materials  based on findings from 
stakeholder engagement  
• Activity 3: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_706317]   
o Activity 3a: eSyM usage  
o Activity 3 b: User acceptability testing  
o Activity 3 c: Medical record abstraction  
• Activity 4: Pragmatic stepped -wedge cluster randomized trial  
o Activity 4 a: eSyM usage  
o Activity 4 b: SASS questionnaire  
o Activity 4 c: Medical record abstraction  
o Activity 4d: Patient qualitative interviews   
• Activity 5:  Integration of eSyM data to develop algorithms to estimate the risk of 
experiencing an outcome, including, but not limited to, ED usage and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706318]: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
10 
 Activity 1: Obtain stakeholder feedback from  stakeholders, including (but not required)  
patient advisory councils, health system leaders, clinicians, clinic support 
staff/administration, and IT/Informatics   
 
Brief description of activity:  Before eSyM go -live, study team members  from each site will 
solicit input via emailed survey, remote meetings and/or in -person meeting on the  use of ePROs 
in oncology from stakeholders to obtain input regarding adaptation, anticipated challenges,  and 
implementation (questions will be selected from the CFIR, AIM/IAM, NOMAD and CSAT 
Question Banks – see Appendix A G, J, and Y) and follow -up probes. The study team may adapt 
or create de novo questions as needed.    
 
At least [ADDRESS_959696] (and/or  local cancer registry) reviews (see activities 
3c and 4c), eSyM usage reports (see activities 3a and 4a), SASS questionnaire responses (see 
activity 4b), and feedback from emailed surveys and /or discussions with health system 
leadership, clinicians, clinic support staff, and informatics/IT staff (activity  1). Stakeholder 
questions will be selected from the CFIR, AIM/IAM, NOMAD and CSAT Question Banks – see 
Appendix A G, J, and Y) and follow -up probes. The study team may adapt or create de novo 
questions as needed.    
 
Human Subjects Research Category (NHSR, exempt, ex pedited, full review):  Exempt  
because the stakeholders  at each site are acting in their normal business capacity and this is a 
negligible risk activity.  
 
Informed Consent: Waiver of informed consent . Because eSyM  will be implemented at each 
site for use in routine clinical care  and because this is a quality improvement (QI) activity , it is 
necessary to consult each site’s stakeholders during  ePRO design and implementation.  This 
activity is negligible risk.  
 
Activity 1 Population : 
• Age ≥ 18 years  
• The potential stakeholders  are patient advisory council members, health system leaders, 
clinicians, clinic support staff/administration, and IT/Informatics staff.  
 
Number of subjects (per site and overall):   
• Approximately 5-25 patient advisory council participants per site (30-150 patient 
advisory council participants overall)  
• Approximately 4 -10 health system leaders per site (24 -60 health system leaders overall)  
• Approximately 60 clinicians, clinic support staff/administration, and IT/Informatics staff 
per site.  (360 clinicians, clinic support staff/administration, and IT/Informatics staff 
overall)  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
11 
 • We anticipate sending emailed surveys and/or presenting 2 separate times at 
approximately 6 meetings per si te (a thoracic surgery , thoracic med ical oncology , 
gynecological  surgery , gyn ecological  medical oncology , GI surgery , and GI medical 
oncology  meeting).  If [ADDRESS_959697] data 
from approximately 120 people per site which totals 720 participants study -wide.   
 
**Total number  of stakeholder participants through surveys and meetings  can be larger 
or smaller depending on availability . 
 
When, where, and how potential subjects will be recruited:  The study PI [INVESTIGATOR_706319]/her designee will send email surveys and/or meet with stakeholders  individually, will get on 
upcoming meeting agenda s, and/or will convene ad hoc meeting (s).   
 
Materials that will be used to recruit subjects: See sample email in Appendix  K and/or L.  
Each site may modify to meet their needs . 
 
Duration of subject’s participation in the study:  If done via emailed survey (REDCap): The 
emailed survey will take approximately 15 minutes to complete.  If interviewed in-person  or 
remotely:  Approximately 1  hour, the length of a meeting.  
 
Duration anticipated to enroll all study subjects:  We anticipate that it will take approximately 
three months  prior to the go -live at each site to complete all initial  stakeholder engagement . 
Implementation evaluation will occur throughout the five-year project period  with a designated 
1-year post -implementation survey/interview conducted at all sites.  
 
Study design:  Discussion guides and/or question slide decks will be used to facilitate 
stakeholder engagement.  
 
Description of all research procedures being performed:  The study PI (or designee) at each 
site will obtain feedback from the stakeholders at their site; feedback will be collected via 
emailed survey, and a meeting to be held one-on-one, in group settings, or remotely via writing, 
discussion, or handheld polling devices. All sites will be responsible for maintaining a list of 
stakeholders who will be invited to provide feedback.  
 
The eSyM stakeholder interview guide (see appendix Y) may include selected items from CFIR, 
AIM, NOMAD , and CSAT  (see appendices A, G, J , and Y). The eSyM questionnaire may 
include selected items from CFIR, AIM, NOMAD , and CSAT and will be sent stakeholders  to be 
completed in REDCap. The study team may adapt or create de novo questions as needed.  
 
In person and/or remote follow -up meetings will be conducted in group or one -on-one settings.  
Before any meetings may be conducted, all discussion facilitators must be trained by [CONTACT_706375] [INVESTIGATOR_706320] ; facilitators will be taught how 
to ask questions in a non -leading manner, how to respond to answers in a non -biased fashion, 
and how to ask appropriate follow up probe questions as/if needed. All discussion facilitators 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/[ADDRESS_959698] feedback from stakeholders during larger 
group meetings. Feedback will also be ascertained through email and one -on-one discussions; 
written notes will be categorized and summarized for study analysis purposes.  
 
All feedback  collected will be submitted via REDCap  or email ed to the coordinating center 
(Dana -Farber) for synthesis , summarization , and transcription as needed . Feedback may be 
collected in an identifiable fashion.  For example, the CIO’s comments may be attributed to “the 
CIO. ” 
 
Monitor subjects for safety or minimize risks: Not applicable.  
 
What data will be collected and how:  Feedback  and demographic information will be collected 
from stakeholders  at each site regarding stakeholder views on adaptation, anticipated challenges,  
and implementation  of ePRO (electronic patient reported outcomes) .  
 
Long -term follow -up: Stakeholders  will be consulted and kept informed throughout the study 
period.  
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
13 
 Activity 2: Build and deploy eSyM  and finalize training materials  
 
Brief description of activity:  Using all of the feedback  collected during pervious activities , the 
study team will finalize the content and build the eSyM system.  
 
Human Subjects Research Category (NHSR, exempt, ex pedited, full review):  Not Human 
Subjects Research.  
 
Informed Consent: Not applicable . 
 
Tasks that will be completed by [CONTACT_3476]:  
• Finalize eSyM ’s specifications :  
o prompt patients to report symp toms at user -defined intervals  
o track symptom pro files over time in via graphs  
o trigger delivery of symptom coaching in respons e to symptoms  
o alert patients to contact [CONTACT_706376]   
o alert clinician about patients with severe sympto ms 
o enable creation of dashboards that facilitate symptom burden monitoring of user -
defined patient cohorts  
o use MyChart/Epic to securely access patient data  
o allow a proxy to report on behalf of a patient  
o eSyM will be integrated in the EHR and patient portal so that clinicians can 
expediently review and respond to ePROs with access to complete health records 
including medications, labs and visit notes with minimal disruption to workflow 
and with reliable record keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  
• Finalize the algorithms that control what eSyM does in response to user inputs.  
• Finalize eSyM ’s patient -facing content . 
• Finalize eSyM ’s clinician -facing content.  
• Obtain necessary permissions or licensing agreements.  
• The informatic team will finalize the eSyM  build based on the specs provided by [CONTACT_58860].  
• Each site may customize where allowed (example, where permissible, sites may brand 
their instance of eSyM  with their own logos).  
• Finalize eSyM  training materials  (see appendices AA through KK):  
o Patient -facing training materials (when and how to use eSyM ). 
o Clinician -facing training materials (when and how to use eSyM ). 
o Clinical staff -facing training materials (how to teach a patient to use eSyM ). 
• Depending on initial data and eSyM adoption rates, the study team (or a designee) may 
text, call, portal message and/or email patients to remind them to use eSyM.  
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
14 
 Here is a sample of what the specifications for the build will look like:  
 
Example of the Component Tools that Support eSyM for Diarrhea.  
MODIFIED PRO -CTCAE SURVEY QUESTION  
In the last [ADDRESS_959699] LOOSE OR WATERY STOOLS (DIARRHEA)?  
 0: Never  1: Rarely  2: Occasionally  3: Frequently  4: Almost constantly  
DEPLOYMENT RULES & ADAPTATIONS  
  MEDICAL ONOCLOGY  SURGERY  
Starting point  1 day after chemo start  1 day after discharge  
Frequency  2/week x 24 weeks  3/week x 2 weeks then 2/week  x 2 weeks then 
1/week x  4-8 weeks  
SYMPTOM CLASSIFICATION (threshold for action – will depend on the symptom)  
ACTION  FREQUENCY RESPONSE  
No intervention IF:  = 0  
Symptom management advice IF:  = 1 or 2 or 3  
Alert clinical team  via InBasket  IF: = 4 
 
SYMPTOM EDUCATION FOR PATIENTS (selected examples)  
Eat small meals that are easy to digest. Eat [ADDRESS_959700], oatmeal, peanut butter, boiled potatoes, and 
rice. 
Drink more each day. Drinking more won’t stop the diarrhea, but it will help replace fluids you are losing to prevent 
dehydration. Most people who have diarrhea need 8 to 12 cups a day. Clear broth, water, tea, oral rehydration/electrolyte 
drinks (e.g., Pedialyte®), juice, and  soda are good choices.  
Take medications your team may have prescribed such as Imodium or Lomotil.  
Avoid these foods: Some foods can make diarrhea worse.  Don’t have dairy, such as milk, cheese, and sour cream. Try 
“lactose -free” products instead. Don’t eat spi[INVESTIGATOR_70329], greasy, or fried foods.  
Call your cancer team if: You feel lightheaded, dizzy, or faint. These are symptoms of dehydration. You develop a fever of 
100.5 F or higher. Your stool looks black or bloody. You are experiencing diarrhea that wakes you up from sleep at night.  
SYMPTOM MANAGEMENT SUPPORT  FOR CLINICIANS (selected examples)  
Alert the clinician  whenever a severe symptom is reported  via InBasket . 
Add the patient to a  color -coded  report  of patients reporting symptoms in the last 7 days.  
Symptom responses visible in patient EHR  (e.g., snapshot report).   
 
For a full list of symptoms, see the PRO -CTCAE bank (Appendi ces H & I); we will prioritize the 
symptoms below . PRO -CTCAE items may be modified, as needed ( e.g., symptom lookback 
period) : 
 
eSyM Questionnaire Items  
 Required  Optional  
All Patients: Medical Oncology and 
Surgery  Anxiety  
Constipation  
Fatigue  
Pain  
Poor Appetite  
Nausea  
Shortness of Breath  
Trouble Drinking Fluids  
Vomiting  Bleeding  
Coughing  
Difficulty Concentrating  
Difficulty Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_706321]: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
15 
 Overall Wellbeing  
Physical Function  Hand -Foot Syndrome  
Headache  
Heart Palpi[INVESTIGATOR_706322]/Throat Sores  
Swelling  
Wheezing  
Medical Oncology  Diarrhea  
Numbness and Tingling  
Rash  Painful Urination  
Surgery  Painful Urination  
Wound Discharge  
Wound Redness  Diarrhea  
Numbness and Tingling  
Rash  
 
Here is a sample of what a patient -facing eSyM screen might look like:  
 
 
Here is a summary of the eSyM functionalities that will be designed and built:  
 
The main patient -facing tools will include the following (accessed via computer or app):  
1. Alerts  → Reminders about when to complete PRO reporting  
2. Symptom Reporting  → Surveys that will allow patients to report outcomes for  modified  
PRO -CTCAE items  
3. Visualizations  → Display previously reported PROs  
4. Education  → Evidence -based symptom management tools (see appendix T)  
 
The main clinician/staff -facing tools will include (accessed via computer or app):  
1. Messaging → Message notifying when critical  PROs have been reported  
2. Visualizations  → Display previously reported PROs for a given patient , highlighting 
critical symptoms  
3. Reports → Display patients who are enrolled in the program, view results of multiple 
patients, and identify patients who did not report PROs on schedule  
 
Activity 3: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] t est eSyM   
 
Brief description of activity:  eSyM  will be UAT/ pi[INVESTIGATOR_706323]  6 sites.  The primary 
purpose of  UAT/ pi[INVESTIGATOR_706324] , clinicians, and staff 
interact ing with the new system, identify challenges, and iteratively refine the system, training 
materials, or clinic workflow prior to the launch of the full -scale pragmatic stepped -wedge 
cluster randomized trial.  

PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
16 
  
SIV (Site Initiation Visit): The SIV , protocol, and eSyM  training is critically important to the 
success of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  All involved staff (on the research team and clinical teams) will be 
required to complete training  using the materials and methods developed via Activity 2.  
Training activities include:  
• Training clinicians and clinic staff at each site on new clinic workflow SOPs.  
• Training clinicians and clinic staff on how to get a patient set up with eSyM.  
• Training each user audience (clinicians and patients) how to use their eSyM interface.  
• Training informatics/IT staff at each site how to support and maintain eSyM.  
** See appendices AA through LL for study resources. Please note – training materials and 
project resources will be routinely updated and branded to meet site needs.  
 
Activity 3  Population : 
• Age ≥ 18 years  
• Priority population will be patients who meet one of the following:  
o Suspect ed thoracic cancer AND is inpatient following thoracic surgery.  
o Suspect ed gastrointestinal cancer AND is inpatient following gastrointestinal 
surgery.  
o Suspect ed gynecologic cancer AND is inpatient following gynecologic surgery.  
o Diagnosis of thoracic cancer AND scheduled to start a new treatment plan  for 
thoracic cancer.  
o Diagnosis of gastrointestinal cancer AND scheduled to start a new treatment plan  
for gastrointestinal cancer.  
o Diagnosis of gynecologic cancer AND scheduled to start a new treatment plan  for 
gynecologic cancer.  
• Total population allowed to use eSyM:  
o Any patient at any participating site.  
**Please note – Patients undergoing thoracic, gynecologic, or gastrointestinal surgery 
may not be diagnosed with cancer. These patients are still eligible for eSyM usage, 
questionnaire completion, and medical record abstraction.  
 
Activity 3 population will be operationalized as follows:  
• To determine if a patient has a diagnosis of one of the above  cancer types, use ICD -10 
diagnosis codes: 15.0 -16.99 (esophago -gastric) C17.0 -C21.9 (small int. colorectal) 
C22.0 -24.9 (hepatobiliary) C23 -C25.9 (pancreas), C34 -34.9: lung, C53.0 -53.9 (cervix) 
C54-54.9 (uterine) and/or C56 -57.9 (ovarian).  When it comes t ime to execute, this list 
may be modified . CPT and procedure codes and EPIC’s OPTIME operating room 
scheduling module will be used to determine if a patient is scheduled for a  priority  
surgery.  
 
Mode of Participation:  Patients will have a choice  of their preferred mode of eSyM 
participation and switching can be accommodated. Patients with a smart phone will be offered 
that approach first. Alternatives include participation in eSyM via any web -enabled device 
(laptop/tablet/desktop). Patients may d esignate a caregiver willing to elicit their symptoms and 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
17 
 report responses on their behalf (proxy reporting). This flexibility facilitates the intervention’s 
reach to frail patients who may be those most likely to benefit. As needed, patients will also be 
offered eSyM training through in -person, phone, and/or virtual visits.  
 
Number of subjects (per site and overall):  For Activity 3, user acceptability testing (UAT) will 
be done with up to 390 patients from up to 6 participating sites. At the lead site (Dana -Farber), 
we anticipate conducting UAT with 90 participants distributed as follows: 15 patients from each 
cancer/type modality combination  (15 thoracic surgical, 15 gyn ecologic  surgical, 15 GI surgical, 
15 thoracic medical oncology , 15 gyn ecologic  medical oncology , and 15 GI medical oncology ). 
We anticipate that at each of th e [ADDRESS_959701] UAT with 
up to 60 participants distributed as follows: 10 patients from each cancer/type modality 
combination  (10 thoracic surgical, 10 gyn ecologic  surgical, 10 GI surgical, 10 thoracic medical 
oncology , 10 gyn ecologic  medical oncology , and 10 GI medical oncology ).  Protocol does not 
mandate equal distr ibution of participants among participating sites.  If a site is running behind 
or facing lower than anticipated accrual to the activity, then the oth er sites may enroll additional 
participants to make up the difference until  the study wide  UAT  goal has been reached.  The 
numbers referenced above are meant to serve as an estimate and sites may suspend or continue 
UAT as needed . 
 
Materials that will be used to recruit subjects: None.  
 
Duration anticipated to enroll all study subjects:  We anticipate that it will take three months 
prior to eSyM launch at each site to enroll all UAT/ pi[INVESTIGATOR_142334] s, but the actual duration may 
vary.  
 
Monitor subjects for safety or minimize risks: The risk to participants is minimal with the 
primary risk being loss of confidentiality/privacy. To monitor the risk of loss of 
confidentiality/privacy, the informatics/IT team will routinely monitor eSyM and investigate 
inquiries from study teams. Furthermore, patients who report severe symptoms will be prompted 
to call their clinic immediately, and clinicians will receive in -basket notifications in the Epic 
EHR of the severe symptom report.  
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
18 
 Activity 3 a: eSyM Usage  
 
Human Subjects Research Category (NHSR, exempt, expedited, full review):  NHSR /QI 
Because eSyM will be implemented at each site for use in routine clinical care  and because this 
is a quality improvement (QI) activity, this is not human subjects research .  
 
Informed Consent: Waiver of consent . When a patient becomes eligible for eSyM, he/she /they  
will receive an automated welcome message, which includes an  electronic disclaimer  that 
contains important information about the purpose of eSyM , how/when it should be used, and 
what it does and does not communicate to their care team  (see Appendi ces N &  Q).   
 
Methods that will be  used to identify potential subjects: Access to eSyM  will be automated.   
EPIC will automatically deliver the invitation to use eSyM to all patients defined above (See 
Section: “ Activity 3 population will be operationalized  as follows”).   
 
Duration of subject’s participation in the study:  Per protocol, eSyM usage  continues for up to 
60-180 days from their trigger event  (i.e., new chemotherapy treatment plan and/or surgery) , but 
extended use of eSyM is at the discretion of the site  and each patient participant.  
 
What data will be collected and how:  
• Participant responses to the symptom reporting questions within eSyM will be collected . 
• Clinician responses to symptom reports will be collected.  
• Data on eSyM usage by [CONTACT_706377].  
 
Long -term follow -up: We will follow patients for 1 -year after the trigger event (i.e., new 
chemotherapy treatment plan and/or surgery) for outcomes data  captured via medical record 
abstraction . 
 
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
19 
 Activity 3 b: User Acceptability Testing (UAT)   
 
Informed Consent: Waiver of documentation of consent . Before observing the patient using 
eSyM, the patient will be provided  with a letter (see appendix O) with the elements of informed 
consent, as well as the option not to be observed. They will be notified that participation is 
completely voluntary and can be stopped at any time for any reason. This activity is minimal 
risk.  
 
Methods that will be  used to identify potential subjects: Under a HIPAA waiver, study staff 
will look in the scheduling views of the electronic medical record and scheduling systems to 
identify potential participants.  Study staff may also query Epic, administrative/operations/billing 
databases, order entry databases, and/or cancer registry databases to identify potential 
participants.  Study staff may also accept potential patient referrals from site clinicians.  
Purposive sampling based on data from the electronic medical rec ord (e.g., demographics, cancer 
stage, number of recent hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], number of prescription drugs) will be used to ensure 
that perspectives of diverse patients are included.  Ideally, sites will use the developed eSyM 
reporting workbench reports in Epic to automatically pull a patient list  for UAT .  
 
When, where, and how potential subjects will be recruited:  The clinical/study staff will 
approach the patient to see if they would be interested in participating in UAT.  If a patient is 
interested in participating, the site will present the participant with a study letter and then begin 
observations.  Patients may be approached in -person, via phone, via email or through a virtual 
visit.  
 
Description  of procedures being performed  for UAT : Surgical patients will be set up to use 
eSyM at the time of surgical discharge  (or at the site’s discretion) .  Medical oncology  patients 
will be set up to use eSyM at the time of their first chemotherapy dose visit (or at the site’s 
discretion) . The study staff will observe the patient accessing eSyM , the patient being trained on 
how to use eSyM, the patient using eSyM to do their first symptom reporting session.    
 
Duration of subject’s participation in the study:  Per protocol, UAT observation will last 
approximately 30 minutes  or less .  
 
What data will be collected and how: The study staff will write down their observations as 
well as staff/patient feedback  (see appendix  P).  
 
Study design:  User acceptability testing.    
 
Long -term follow -up: None. UAT is a one -time 30-minute session . 
 
Activity 3 c: Medical record abstraction  
 
Informed Consent: Waiver of consent  to conduct  medical record (and/or local cancer registry) 
reviews/Epic queries on all patients in the UAT/pi[INVESTIGATOR_706325].  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
20 
  
Methods that will be  used to identify potential subjects: Automated and/or manual medical 
record (and/or local cancer registry) review will be done on all UAT/pi[INVESTIGATOR_63839].  
 
When, where, and how potential subjects will be recruited:  All participants in the UAT/pi[INVESTIGATOR_706326] (and/or local cancer registry) reviews.  The medical record (and/or 
local cancer registry) reviews will be accomplished using both automated data extraction and 
manual data abstraction.  
 
What data will be collected and how:  
• Study -related health information and outcomes will be collected via medical record 
(and/or local cancer registry) review (automated and manual).  
• Data will be submitted to the coordinating site (Dana -Farber) via REDCap or SFTP.  
 
Study design:  Medical record abstraction  (both manual and automated) .   
 
Long -term follow -up: The patients’ medical record may be reviewed for outcomes for up to 1 -
year after the trigger event  (i.e., new chemotherapy treatment plan and/or surgery) .  
 
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
21 
 Activity 4: Pragmatic stepped -wedge cluster randomized trial  
 
Brief description of activity:  A multisite, pragmatic stepped -wedge cluster randomized trial 
will be conducted in order to determine the effectiveness of eSyM on health outcomes including:  
healthcare utilization, measured by [CONTACT_706378]; impact on cancer care 
delivery, specifically chemotherapy treatment duration and delays; patients’ outcomes, indicated 
by [CONTACT_706374] -efficacy and symptom burden; and  patients’ satisfaction with their cancer care.    
 
The trial involves patients in five ways:  
1) Patients assigned to eSyM (eSyM+) will report their symptoms via the eSyM 
questionnaires delivered through MyChart. Patients are strongly encouraged to report 
their symptoms at home/between clinic visits with eSyM. Study teams and clinicians may 
elect to a sk eSyM -eligible patients to complete eSyM questionnaires in the clinic via a 
table, computer, and/or mobile device if patients have difficulties reporting or decline to 
report at home. Site study teams should consult the central study team before they ini tiate 
this workflow.  
 
2) A subset of eSyM+ p atients will be asked to complete a  research questionnaire called  the 
“SASS Questionnaire (eSyM+ or eSyM+ Non -Responder version)” asking about their 
Self-efficacy, Attainment of information needs, Symptom burden, and Satisfaction with 
care (see PROMIS, CAHPS, IAM/AIM question banks – Appendices C through G ).  The 
eSyM+ version is for patients who were assigned to eSyM and completed at least one 
eSyM questionnaire. The eSyM+ Non -Responder version is for patients who were 
assigned to eSyM but never completed an eSyM questionnaire. The questionnaire s will 
stop being administered once a minimum of 1,[ADDRESS_959702] been received in 
accordance with the  following breakdown:  
SASS Questionnaire  accrual numbers  
 Surgery  Medical Oncology  Totals  
 eSyM+ 
Version  eSyM - 
Version  eSyM+ 
Non-
Responder 
Version  eSyM+ 
Version  eSyM - 
Version  eSyM+ 
Non- 
Responder 
Version   
Site 1  75 75 15 75 75 15 330 
Site 2  75 75 15 75 75 15 330 
Site 3  75 75 15 75 75 15 330 
Site 4  75 75 15 75 75 15 330 
Site 5  75 75 15 75 75 15 330 
Site 6  75 75 15 75 75 15 330 
Totals  450 450 90 450 450 90 1,980  
 
3) Select p atients NOT assigned to eSyM (control group, eSyM -) will also be asked to 
complete the “SASS Questionnaire (eSyM - version)” (see Appendices U -X). Both Drug 
Therapy and Surgical Recover Experience eSyM - versions will not ask questions 
evaluating eSyM as the cohort will not be exposed t o eSyM at the time of the survey. The 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/[ADDRESS_959703] 
been received in accordance with the above breakdown. ** Total number of SASS 
participants through surveys can be larger or smaller depending on availability.  
 
4) A small subset of eSyM - and eSyM+ patients will be invited to take part in follow -up 
qualitative interview s. See table below for recommended recruitment  accrual . The 
interviews will be conducted following a developed interview guide (Appendix RR). 
Patients may or may not have previously completed SASS or eSyM questionnaires . 
Interviews will continue until thematic saturation is reach ed, or until [ADDRESS_959704]. No more 
than 100 interviews will be conducted study -wide. Protocol does not mandate equal distribution 
of participants among sites .  
 
5) Regardless of whether a patient is assigned to eSyM+ , eSyM -, or eSyM+ Non -
Responder,  and regardless of whether a patient completes the SASS Q uestionnaire or not, 
we are requesting a waiver of consent  and HIPAA waiver  to conduct medical record 
(and/or local cancer registry) rev iews/Epic data queries  on all patients  in the denominator 
(for the definition of “denominator”, please see the section “h ow to  operationalize the 
denominator” below) t o ascertain demographics and outcomes.   Because eSyM has QI 
implications and is part of routine clinical care, we must be able to co mpare responders 
with non -responders and eSyM+ with eSyM - and the combinations thereof to inform 
implementation beyond this initiative . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
23 
 Informed Consent:     
 
Activity 4a: eSyM Usage  (eSyM+) : NHSR/QI .  
Because eSyM will be implemented at each site for use in routine clinical care  and because this 
is a quality improvement (QI) activity, using eSyM is not human subjects research, and therefore 
does not require consent. When a patient becomes eligible for eSyM, he/she /they  will receive an 
automated welcome message  with a disclaimer that  contains important information about the 
purpose of eSyM , how/when it should be used, and what it does and does not communicate to 
their care team  (see Appendi ces N &  Q).   
 
Activity 4b: SASS QUESTIONNAIRE PARTICIPANTS (eSyM+ , eSyM -, and eSyM+ 
Non-Responder ): Waiver of documentation of consent .   
Eligible patients will receive a study letter in-person, by [CONTACT_6968] , and/or by [CONTACT_706379] a questionnaire that asks about their self -efficacy, attainment of 
information needs, symptom burden, and satisfaction with care  (see Appendix Z) .  This 
invitation will include the elements of informed consent  (see Appendix  R). The study letter will 
notify participants that the questionnaire is completely voluntary and can be stopped at any time 
for any reason.  The letter will be sent from the health system where the patient receives care and 
signed by [CONTACT_7880]. F or example, a patient at Dartmouth will receive a letter/email inviting 
participation from Dartmouth signed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Sandra Wong and a patient from West Virginia 
University will receive  a letter/email inviting participation from [CONTACT_97848] h Hazard. The letter 
includes a statement that survey completion has no influence or impact on a patient’s medical 
care. This activity is minimal risk.   
 
Activity 4c: MEDICAL RECORD REVIEW: Waiver of consent .  
Waiver of consent to conduct medical record (and/or local cancer registry) rev iews/Epic queries  
on all patients in the “denominator” to ascertain demographics and outcomes regardless of 
whether a patient is assigned to eSyM+ or eSyM - and regardless of whether a patient completes 
the questionnaire or not.  Because eSyM has QI implications and is part of routine clinical care, 
we must be able to compare responders with non -responders and eSyM+ with eSyM - and the 
combinations thereof to inform implementation b eyond this trial.  The medical record review 
meets all the conditions to obtain a waiver of consent ( i.e., not FDA -regulated, involves no more 
than minimal risk, waiver will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the subjects, and 
activity could not be practicably carried out without a waiver).  
 
Activity 4d: PATIENT QUALITATIVE INTERVIEWS: Written informed co nsent.  
Eligible patients will receive a study letter in -person, by [CONTACT_6968],  by [CONTACT_706380],  
and/or by [CONTACT_706381] e in a qualitative interview that asks about their 
experiences with and feedback about the eSyM program  and/or their care experience .  This 
invitation will include a written  consent form (see Appendi ces QQ & SS ), which will be signed 
by [CONTACT_2299] . Informed consent can be obtained through wet ink (returned in -person or via 
snail mail) or e -consent through R EDCap. The provided study letter  and consent form w ill notify 
participants that the interview  is completely voluntary and can be stopped at any time for any 
reason . The consent form will also request patient approval  for their contact [CONTACT_3031] (name, 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
24 
 email, address, and phone number) to be shared with the coordinating center  (Dana -Farber 
Cancer Institute) for the purposes of conduct ing the interviews. All patient qualitative interviews 
will be conducted by [CONTACT_10112] t he coordinating center , who will  reach out to the patient 
once the signed consent form is received. The study letter and consent form will be sent from the 
health system where the patient receives care and signed by [CONTACT_7880]. For example, a patient at 
Dartmouth will receive a let ter/email inviting participation from Dartmouth signed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Sandra 
Wong and a patient from West Virginia University will receive  a letter/email inviting 
participation from [CONTACT_97848] h Hazard -Jenkins . The letter includes a statement that survey 
completion has no influence or impact on a patient’s medical care. This activity is minimal risk.  
 
Methods that will be used to identify potential subjects:  The denominator will be identified 
algorithmically; eSyM/MyChart/REDCap will be programmed so that the correct patients will 
automatically receive an invitation to use eSyM . When manual support is needed, u nder a 
HIPAA waiver, study staff will run reports in Epic, administrative/operations/billing databases, 
order entry databases, and/or cancer registry databases .  
 
Under a HIPAA waiver, study staff will run reports in Epic as part of the eSyM registry and/or to 
identify patients meeting eSyM registry criteria to identify medical and surgical patients for 
eSyM +, eSyM -, eSyM+ Non -Responder SASS  questionnaires , and patient qualitative interviews . 
Select eSyM - patients will be identified and surveyed before eSyM’s launch at their site but after 
the registry has been created, ensuring that they have never been exposed to the program but 
would have been eligible to use it. Patients eligible to complete the eSyM - questionnaire will be 
identified using the patient registry and/or a site -developed Epic report to identify patients who 
had a qualifying surgery or new chemo start within the last 6 months. Patients eligible to 
comp lete the eSyM+ and eSyM+ Non -Responder questionnaire s will be identified using the 
registry after eSyM has been launched at their site and 30 -60 days after their surgery or new 
chemotherapy.  The eSyM+ SASS questionnaire will be distributed to patients who were assigned 
to eSyM and completed  at least one eSyM questionnaire. The eSyM+ Non - Responder SASS 
questionnaire  will be distributed to patients who were assigned to the eSyM program but never 
completed  an eSyM questionnaire. Sites may begin distributing eSyM+ and eSyM+ Non - 
Responder questionnaires as soon as they are able to do so after go -live and will continue until a 
minimum of 75 eSyM+ surveys and a minimum of 15 eSyM+ Non -Responder surveys have been 
collected  for the medical oncology and surgery vers ions.  Patients eligible to participate in the 
qualitative interviews will be identified using Epic reports and invitations will be sent to patients 
meeting eSyM program eligibility . Patients may or may not have previously completed SASS or 
eSyM questionnaires. Interviews will be conducted un til thematic saturation is reached, or until 
[ADDRESS_959705] .  
 
In addition, under a HIPAA waiver, email and postal addresses will be obtained for all eSyM +, 
eSyM -, eSyM+ Non -Responder  and qualitative interview  patients. Email and postal addresses 
will be utilized to share the SASS questionnaire invitation through REDCap and/or mailing (see 
Appendix Z) and to send the interview invitations  and consent forms  via email and/or mailing 
(see Appendix SS and QQ ).  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
25 
 Activity 4 Population:  
• Age ≥ 18 years  
• Priority population will be patients who meet one of the following:  
o Suspected thoracic cancer AND is undergoing  thoracic surgery.  
o Suspected gastrointestinal cancer AND is undergoing  gastrointestinal surgery.  
o Suspected  gynecologic cancer AND is undergoing  gynecologic surgery.  
o Diagnosis of thoracic cancer AND scheduled to start a new treatment plan for 
thoracic cancer.  
o Diagnosis of gastrointestinal cancer AND scheduled to start a new treatment plan 
for gastrointestinal cancer.  
o Diagnosis of gynecologic cancer AND scheduled to start a new treatment plan for 
gynecologic cancer.  
• Total population allowed to use eSyM:  
o Any patient at any participating site.  
**Please note – Patients undergoing thoracic, gynecologic, or gastrointestinal surgery 
may not be diagnosed with cancer. These patients are still eligible for eSyM usage, 
questionnaire completion, and medical record abstraction.  
 
Defining and operationalizing  the denominator : 
• To determine if a patient has a diagnosis of one of the priority  cancer types, use ICD -10 
diagnosis codes: 15.0 -16.99 (esophago -gastric) C17.0 -C21.9 (small int. colorectal) 
C22.0 -24.9 (hepatobiliary) C23 -C25.9 (pancreas), C34 -34.9: lung, C53.0 -53.9 (cervix) 
C54-54.9 (uterine) and/or C56 -57.9 (ovarian).  When it comes ti me to execute, this list 
may be modified .  CPT and procedure codes as well as EPIC operating room scheduling 
lists will be used to determine if a patient is scheduled for a  priority  surgery.  
• Participants assigned to eSyM+ may be trained to use eSyM by [CONTACT_706382]/study 
staff.  Surgical patients may be trained  to use eSyM at the time of surgical discharge  (or 
at the site’s discretion  patients may receive training in how to use eSyM at a preoperative 
visit).  Med Onc  patients may be trained  to use eSyM at the time of their first 
chemotherapy dose visit  or at the time of a pre -treatment visit for chemotherapy teaching 
(at the site’s discretion) . Epic reports may also be used to identify eli gible patients who 
are assigned or will be assigned to eSyM so that training of the eligible patients can be 
done by [CONTACT_706383].  
• Participants in the eSyM - cohort will meet priority population criteria and be seen at a 
participating site between 1/1/2018 and the site’s eSyM go -live date. Participants in the 
eSyM+ cohort will meet priority population criteria and be seen at a particip ating site 
after their eSyM go -live date through March 31, 2024.  
 
Mode of Participation:  Patients will have a choice  of their preferred mode of eSyM 
participation and switching can be accommodated. Patients with a smart phone will be offered 
that approach first , however all patient s will be notified that access to eSyM is available as long 
as they can access the secure patient portal (MyChart). eSyM can be accessed securely through 
the MyChart portal on any web -enabled device . Alternatives to smart phone reporting include 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
26 
 participation in eSyM via any web -enabled device (laptop/tablet/desktop). Patients may 
designate a caregiver willing to elicit their symptoms and report responses on their behalf (proxy 
reporting). This flexibility facilitates the intervention’s reach to frail patients who may be those 
most likely to benefit. The influence of mode of participation and reliance on self - versus proxy -
reporting will be  analyzed in multivariable models.  
 
The denominator is defined above. Automated and/or manual m edical record (and/or local 
cancer registry) rev iew will be done on all patients in the denominator . 
Number of subjects (per site and overall):  For Activity 4, there will be a minimum  of 6,048  
eSyM + patient users . Prespecified eSyM - accrual numbers can be found in Appendix TT (SAP). 
eSyM users  and control patients can be from any of the [ADDRESS_959706]  a minimum  of 900 patients . Protocol 
does not mandate equal distribution of participants among participating sites.   The entire 
statistical analysis section is predicated on a minimum  N=[ADDRESS_959707].  
 
When, where, and how potential subjects will be recruited:  Once the population definition 
has been p rogrammed into eSyM/ MyChart , the system will automatically deliver the invitation 
to use eSyM to the patients in the eSyM+ group (see randomization schedule figure below under 
the title “stepped wedge rollout”) . eSyM - patients will be identified using Epic query reports. 
Study staff will deliver the invitation to participate in the SASS  Questionnaire to all patients in 
the denominator (eSyM+ , eSyM -, and eSyM + Non - Responder ) using the registry before and 
after eSyM launch  until at least 1,[ADDRESS_959708] participated. Because different patients are reachable 
by [CONTACT_294179], p atients may be contact[CONTACT_706384], postal mail , by [CONTACT_648], or in clinic 
inviting them to use eSyM and/or participate in the SASS Questionnaire.  
 
There are six versions of the SASS Questionnaire : surgical experience eSyM +, eSyM -, and 
eSyM+ Non -Responder and drug therapy eSyM+ , eSyM -, and eSyM+ Non -Responder . All 
version s contai n validated PRO items (including PROMIS and CAHPs) and validated computer 
and internet use items from PEW. The eSyM+ version s contain additional items to evaluate 
usability and satisfaction with eSyM. The eSyM+ Non -Responder versions include additional 
questions to evaluate why eligible eSyM patients did not respond to the eSyM questionnaires. 
The SASS Q uestionnaire may be administered through REDCap, by [CONTACT_648], email, postal mail, 
or in clinic . Multiple methods of collection are allowed in order to minimize barriers to 
participation . As needed, patients will also be offered eSyM training through in -person, phone, 
and/or virtual visits.  
 
The patient qualitative interviews will follow the interview guide in Appendix RR. The interview 
will ask question s regarding patient s’ overall experience with the program, suggested 
improvements they would make to the eSyM symptom questionnaire  or the overall program , and 
any potential or real barriers to accessi ng or using the program. The interviews may take place  
by [CONTACT_648], via Zoom /video conference,  or in-person . Multiple methods of collection are allowed 
to minimize barriers to participation.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
27 
  
Materials that will be used to recruit subjects: See Appendices  M and N for the message that 
will be sent to patients inviting them to participate  in the questionnaire and/or eSyM , 
respectively . As a reminder, participating in the SASS questionnaire or eSyM survey will not 
influence  a patient’s medical care in any manner. The purpose  of these questionnaires is to help 
care teams learn about the best way to help patients cope with symptoms between visits (for 
medical oncology) and after surgery (for surgical patients ).  
 
See Appendices SS and QQ  for the message and consent form that will be sent to patients 
inviting them to participate in the qualitative interview. Participating in the qualitative interview 
will not influence a patient’s medical are in any manner. The purpose of these interviews is t o 
gather direct patient feedback for study research staff about eSyM to inform future optimizations 
to the program.  
 
Duration of subject’s participation in the study:   
1) Per protocol , eSyM usage  continues for  up to 60 -180 days but can continue indefinitely at 
the site’s discretion .   
2) The SASS Q uestionnaire is a one-time, 20-minute survey  administered [ADDRESS_959709] dose of chemotherapy .   
3) The patient qualitative interview (s) will last approximately 30 (but no more than 120)  
minute s; they will be  administered any time after eSyM assignment  at a time that is 
convenient for the subject .  
4) All eSyM - control and eSyM+ intervention  patient s will be followed for outcomes for up 
to 1-year after the trigger event (i.e., new chemotherapy treatment plan and/or surgery) . 
 
Duration anticipated to enroll all study subjects:  We anticipate that it will take five years  to 
complete this activity . 
 
Study design:  Hybrid effectiveness -implementation stepped -wedge cluster randomized  trial.  
 
Description  of all research procedures being performed:  
a) Epic, administrative/operations/billing databases, order entry databases, and/or cancer 
registry databases may be queried to identify denominator patients  under a HIPPA 
waiver.  
b) Patients  assigned to eSyM+ will be set up to use eSyM by [CONTACT_706382]/study staff.  
Surgical patients will be set up to use eSyM at the time of surgical discharge (or at the 
site’s discretion).  Medical oncology  patients will be set up to use eSyM at the time of 
their first chemotherapy dose visit (or at the site’s discretion).  
c) Select  eligible participants will receive a message inviting them to participate in the 
SASS questionnaire  30-days after surgery or first chemo dose  (Appendix  Z). 
d) Participants who participate in the SASS  questionnaire and indicate that they wish to 
receive a gift card will receive $[ADDRESS_959710] . Gift cards will be mailed or emailed 
according to patient preference. Please note, emailed gift cards will come directly from 
Amazon.com  or sent by a study research staff member . 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
28 
 e) Participants who participate in the qualitative interviews and indicate that they wish to 
receive a gift card will receive a $[ADDRESS_959711].  Gift cards will be mailed or emailed 
according to patient preference. Please note, emailed gift cards will come directly from 
Amazon.com or sent by a study research staff member.  
f) All denominator patients  (eSyM - control and eSyM+ intervention)  will undergo medical 
record (and/or local cancer registry) rev iews.  The medical record (and/or local cancer 
registry) rev iews will be accomplished using both automated data extraction and manual 
data abstraction  under a HIPAA waiver.  
 
Monitor subjects for safety or minimize risks: The risk to participants is minimal with the 
primary risk being loss of confidentiality/privacy. To monitor the risk of loss of 
confidentiality/privacy, the informatics  team will routinely monitor eSyM  reports and data 
extracts  and investigate inquiries from study teams . Furthermore, patients who report severe 
symptoms will be prompted to call their care team immediately, and clinicians will receive in -
basket notifications in the Epic EHR  of the severe symptom report.  All interview participants 
from outside of Dana -Farber Cancer Institute will provide written consent to have their 
information shared with the Dana -Farber research staff members who will contact [CONTACT_706385].  
 
What data will be collected and how:   
• Participant responses to the symptom reporting questions within eSyM  will be collected.  
• Patient and clinician eSyM usage reports will be collected . 
• Patient -reported self -efficacy, attainment of information needs, symptom burden, and 
satisfaction with care will be collected via the SASS  Questionnaire.  
• Patient feedback on the eSyM program  and experiences with care team and symptom 
management  via qualitative interviews.  
• Study -related health  information  and outcomes  will be collected via medical record 
(and/or local cancer registry) rev iew (automated and manual) .  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]/clinic characteristics will be collected.  
• All data collected for this study will be submitted to the coordinating center (Dana -Farber 
Cancer Institute) .  
 
Long -term follow -up: The patient’s medical record may be reviewed for outcomes for up to 1-
year after the trigger event (i.e., new chemotherapy treatment plan and/or surgery) . 
 
Activity 5:  Integration of eSyM  data to develop algorithms to estimate outcomes, including 
the risk of ED usage and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] , among patients  with suspected or confirmed 
cancer  
 
Brief description of activity:  Patients receiving treatment for metastatic cancer have high 
symptom burdens and high rates of adverse events, including emergency department (ED) use 
and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_614] , which can impact patients’ quality of lif e.57,[ADDRESS_959712] improve our ability to prospectively identify the patients 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/[ADDRESS_959713] adverse events which are actionable in the near-term. Existing risk -prediction models 
are susceptible to racial biases ; little research has evaluated whether these models’ calibrations 
may have racial biases.[ADDRESS_959714] risk for undesirable 
outcomes, including hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706327]. These predictions will lay the foundation for 
future work to develop targeted interventions to intensify outpatient care and reduce preventable 
adverse events. Specifically, w e will use SIMPRO data  (including demographics, conditions, 
medications, encounters, ePROS, etc.)  to develop predictive models  that are built suing machine 
learning clinical risk prediction techniques . Through these efforts, we seek to address a number 
of important questions, including how ePRO  data affect model performance ; how clinic al risk 
scores  perform relative machine learning algorithms ; and whether there are differences in model 
performance among  different patient subgroups (to determine  whether predictive model 
calibrations based on EHR data may be  intrinsically  biased ). 
 
Using data from six health systems will allow us to evaluate algorithms to predict adverse events 
in diverse clinical settings  
 
Specific Aims : 
1. Develop algorithms to estimate the risk of adverse events, including ED usage and 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] , among patients with suspected or confirmed cancer who are treated in 
community settings.  
2. Assess whether inclusion of ePROs improves algorithm performance and how predictions 
from clinical risk scores compare to predictions from computationally intensive machine 
learning approaches  
3. Assess model performance among historically under -represented populations, including 
Black patients , and assess for evidence of racial bias in model calibration.  
 
Human Subjects Research Category (NHSR, exempt, expedited, full review):  Exempt   
 
Informed Consent: Waiver of consent (retrospective data review).   
 
Activity 5 Population : All patient -level data collected in Activity 4 will be utilized. To date, the 
SIMPRO consortium has collected more than 50,000 survey responses and EHR data for more 
than 13,000 medical oncology and surgical oncology patients across these systems. These data 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/[ADDRESS_959715] adverse events in patients 
receiving care  for a suspected or confirmed cancer .  
 
Number of subjects (per site and overall):  All patient -level data collected in Activity 4 will be 
utilized.  
 
When, where, and how potential subjects will be recruited:  Not applicable. Only previously 
collected patient -level data will be utilized.  
 
Materials that will be used to recruit subjects: Not applicable. Only previously collected 
patient -level data will be utilized.  
 
Duration of subject’s participation in the study:  Not applicable.  
 
Duration anticipated to enroll all study subjects : Not applicable.  
 
Study design:  Retrospective data analysis project.  
 
Description of all research procedures being performed:  We will use data previously 
collected for the SIMPRO project to develop  and evaluate the performance of predictive models  
for adverse events among patients with suspected or confirmed malignancy. The only new 
procedures will include novel analyses of existing data.  
 
Monitor subjects for safety or minimize risks: Not applicable, only deidentified datasets will 
be utilized for predictive modeling work.   
 
What data will be collected and how:  Not applicable, previously collected data will be utilized.  
 
Long -term follow -up: Not applicable.  
 
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
31 
 6.0 Study -Wide Number of Subjects  
 
 Activity 1 – Stakeholder Engagement  
 Activity 2  Activity 3 - 
Patient 
Engagement  Activity 4 - Patient 
Engagement  Activity 5 – 
Predictive 
Modeling 
Algorithms  
 Patient 
Advisory 
Council  Health 
system 
leaders  Clinicians 
and staff  Follow -
up Build 
eSyM  UAT/Pi[INVESTIGATOR_706328] -
wedge cluster 
randomized trial  Integration of 
eSyM  data 
 Exempt, waiver of consent  
 NHSR  3a) NHSR  
3b) Waiver of 
documentation 
of consent  
3c) Waiver of 
consent  4a) NHSR  
4b) Waiver of 
documentation of 
consent  
4c) Waiver of 
consent  
4d) Written consent  Exempt, 
waiver of 
consent  
Study -
Wide 
Accrual  30-150a 24-60a 360a 720a n/a 390 6,048 ( minimum )d 
[1,980 of whom will 
complete the SASS 
Questionnaire and 48 
patient interviews]  n/a 
Accrual 
per site  5-25a,c 4-10a,c 60a,c 120a,c n/a 90c at Dana -
Farber, and  
60c at each of the 
other 
participating 
sites.  1,008c (minimum )d 
at each of the six 
participating sites  
[330 of whom will 
complete the SASS 
Questionnaire and 8 
taking part in patient 
interviews]  n/a 
 GRAND TOTAL MAXIMUM ACCRUAL ACROSS ALL STUDY ACTIVITIES PER SITE = 5,000  
GRAND TOTAL MAXIMUM ACCRUAL ACROSS ALL STUDY ACTIVITIES STUDY -WIDE = 30,000  
a Number can be larger or smaller depending on meeting attendance and availability of staff. 
b Interviews /surveys  will continue until thematic saturation is reached . 
c Protocol does not mandate equal distribution of participant s among participating sites.  
dThe entire statistical analysis section is predicated on minimum  N = [ADDRESS_959716].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/[ADDRESS_959717]. Deborah Schrag MD MPH ( Co-
Grant PI [INVESTIGATOR_706329])  and [CONTACT_706399] MD MPH ( Co-Grant PI [INVESTIGATOR_706330]) . All participating sites are required to adhere to the Data 
Safety and Monitoring Plan (DSMP) for this study (see A ppendix  S). 
 
9.[ADDRESS_959718]’s participation in the study and the duration 
anticipated to enroll all study subjects varies by [CONTACT_21398] .  See section 5.[ADDRESS_959719] to change.   
10.0 Study Endpoints  and Statistical Analyses  
The detailed protocol statistical analysis plan (SAP) can be found in Appendix TT.   
 
Analysis of a ctivit y 1 (stakeholder engagement) :  
Quantitative interviews will be scored using their established scoring metrics:  
• The NOMAD instrument is a 23 -item survey that measures implementation processes 
from the perspective of professionals directly involved in the work of implementing 
complex interventions in healthcare. [Appendix J]  
• The AIM (Acceptability of Intervention Measure), IAM (Intervention Appropriateness 
Measure), and FIM (Feasibility of Intervention Measure) instruments are four -item 
measures of implementation outcomes that are often considered “leading indicators” of 
imple mentation success. [ Appendix  G]  
• The CSAT (Clinical Sustainability Assessment Tool) instrument is a 49 -item survey with 
7 domains used be evaluators and researchers to determine the extent to which a practice 
is being implemented effectively. (Appendix Y) 
• The ORCA (Organizational Readiness to Change Assessment) instrument is a [ADDRESS_959720], and will be 
scored according to Helfrich et al.'s (2009). [Appendix B]  
• The OCM (Organizational Change Manager) instrument is a [ADDRESS_959721], and will be scored according 
to Gustafson et al.’s (2003). [Appendix B2]  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
33 
 Qualitative interviews (audio recordings and notes) will be evalutated for common themes. 
Results from the qualitative and quantitiative interviews and surveys will be used to inform 
eSyM , its content, its rollout, and the training materials.  
 
Analysis of Activity 3 (UAT/P ilot study):  
Study staff will observe patient/proxy , clinician and clinical support staff action steps and 
interactions with the system .  Observations will be recorded and used to refine  eSyM , its rollout, 
and the training materials.  
 
Any patient data collected will be analyzed as per the analysis plan for the stepped -wedge cluster 
randomized trial described below.  
 
Analysis of Activity 4 (stepped -wedge trial):  
 
Additional details can be found in Appendix TT.  Please reference Appendix TT for the most 
updated SAP.    
 
Study Design:   Type I I Hybrid Effectiveness -Implementation Stepped Wedge Cluster 
Randomized Trial.  The research team will partner with software developers at Epic to adapt 
working ePRO symptom management systems, one in surgical and one in medical oncology, and 
fully integrate them into the EHR at [ADDRESS_959722] a 
pragmatic stepped wedge cluster randomized trial to measure the effectiveness of the ePRO 
system on outcomes that matter to patients and clinicians. Throughout, we will evaluate  the 
implementation process to optimize sustainability and generate actionable knowledge that 
facilitates scaling to other settings. The proposed study is a hybrid effectiveness -implementation 
type I trial according to the Curran schema.131 The study meets PRECIS -2 criteria for pragmatic 
trials based on scores of 4 or higher in each domain.132 Reports will adhere to the revised Criteria 
for Reporting the Development and Evaluation of Complex Interventions in healthcare 
(CReDECI2),133 the CONSORT PRO134 and cluster randomized extensions,135  and the stepped 
wedge reporting guidelines proposed by [CONTACT_706386].136 
 
The PI[INVESTIGATOR_706331] .63   
Populations  1) Adult patients with GI, GYN, or Thoracic  cancer having  a new treatment plan   
2) Adult patients with suspected GI, GYN, or thoracic cancer having a priority surgery  
 
**Patients were seen at the participating sites between January 1, [ADDRESS_959723] to change .** 
Intervention  eSyM : A multi -component ePRO Symptom Management system based on PRO -CTCAE  
with:  
1. Patient -facing components:  
• Prompts for between -clinic visit symptom reporting and the ability to view profiles 
over time  
• Evidenced -based education for self -management in response to symptom reports  
• Alerts to contact [CONTACT_706387]: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
34 
 2. Clinician -facing components:  
• View patient profiles in EHR flowsheet, accessible between or during visits, easily 
added to notes  
• Receive alerts for severe symptoms in the EHR, same as for abnormal lab tests  
• Dashboard functionality to track symptoms for groups of patients    
Control  No eSyM symptom reporting  
Outcomes  Emergency department visits culminating in discharge, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], symptom burden, 
care satisfaction  
Timing  4-year study of surgical and medical oncology patients each followed for up to 1 year after 
the trigger event (i.e. new chemotherapy treatment plan and/or surgery)  
Setting  Six health care systems, all small cancer centers. All use an Epic EHR.  
Design  A hybrid Type I I effectiveness -implementation pragmatic cluster randomized trial, with 
stepped wedge rollout (6 steps), patient as the unit of analysis and closed (cross -sectional) 
cohort design  
 
Randomization :  
 
We will conduct a stepped wedge cluster randomized trial to determine whether ePROs are 
clinically effective. This stepped wedge design has 6 steps , and we randomize 6 sites (Table) to 
the steps.  
 
Table: Six participating sites and region  
Site Region  
WVU  Southern  Baptist  
Dartmouth  Northern  Maine  
DFCI/BWH/ MGH  Urban  Lifespan  
 
To ensure that two sites with the same attribution will not be assigned to the same rollout step  
group (early MO/late surgery  or late MO/early surgery ), we employ a stratified  randomization  by 
[CONTACT_11338] . As a result, each of the two groups has a site from each of the three regions (Northern, 
Southern, and Metropolitan). The stepped wedge design includes seven time -periods, including a 
run-in period  (Figure). .  
 
Figure: Study design  
Group  Step Run-in Period 1  Period 2  Period 3  Period 4  Period 5  Period 6  
Early MO  
/late surgery  group  Step 1   MO MO MO MO MO MO 
 Surgery  
Step 2   MO MO MO MO MO 
 Surgery  Surgery  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
35 
 Step 3   MO MO MO MO 
 Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  
Late MO  
/early surgery  
group  Step 4   MO MO MO 
 Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  
Step 5   MO MO 
 Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  
Step 6   MO 
 Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  
MO: Medical oncology  
Surgery : Surgical patients   
 
The sites were randomized on 11/6/18 as follows:  
 
Group  Step Run-in Period 1  Period 2  Period 3  Period 4  Period 5  Period 6  
Early MO  
/late surgery  group  Baptist   MO MO MO MO MO MO 
 Surgery  
Maine   MO MO MO MO MO 
 Surgery  Surgery  
Dana -
Farber/BWH   MO MO MO MO 
 Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  
Late MO  
/early surgery  
group  Lifespan   MO MO MO 
 Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  
Dartmouth   MO MO 
 Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  
WVU   MO 
 Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  Surgery  
 
 
Analysis of Activity 4d (Patient qualitative interviews):  
Qualitative interviews (audio recordings and notes) will be evalutated for common themes using 
NVIVO. Results from the qualitative interviews will be used to inform eSyM  enhancements, 
program content, program rollout, and implementation strategies . 
 
Analysis of Activity 5:  
 
We will extract structured data from the six health systems participating in SIMPRO. These data  
include ePROs, demographics, diagnoses, treatment plans, medications, and inpatient and 
outpatient encounters. We will develop risk prediction models for adverse events, especially 
including, but not limited to hospi[INVESTIGATOR_37205]. Planned 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706332] A) admissions within 24 hours of the 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
36 
 triggering surgery among surgical patients; and B) admissions associated with curative -intent 
surgeries among medical oncology patients with early -stage cancers. For models incorporating 
ePROs  as predictors , the analytic cohort will include patients who completed at least one survey . 
For models excluding ePROs  as predictors , the analytic cohort will include all patients in the 
database.  
 
Data from at least one health system will be removed from the dataset to serve as an external test 
set. Among the remaining health systems, the population will be split at the patient level with 
70% randomly assigned to a training cohort, 15% assigned a validation cohort and  15% assigned 
to an internal test set. To account for differences in clinical practice and demographics across 
health systems, randomization will be stratified by [CONTACT_57501]. The same cohorts will be used to train 
and test all algorithms.  
 
To determine the optimal machine learning model, we will evaluate multiple types of 
architectures, including logistic regression, random forests, gradient boosted machines, extreme 
gradient boosting, neural networks, and ensemble models. Hyperparameters wi ll be tuned using 
the validation cohort and models iteratively trained until a final candidate model is identified. 
This model will then be evaluated on the held-out internal test set  and the external test cohort, 
after which no further model training will  be performed. These steps will be performed 
separately for the e PRO -responding cohort and the total cohort . 
 
To develop clinical risk scores, we will select approximately 20 independent variables that can 
be easily abstracted from a patient’s medical chart, such as diagnosis, treatment, comorbid 
conditions, recent hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602] , and demographics. Within the training cohort, we plan to use 
logistic regression with L1 regularization to select variables for inclusion and define the 
prediction model. The amount of regularization will be tuned using the validation cohort and 
models will be iteratively trained until a final candidate model is identified. Like above, these 
steps will be completed separately for the  ePRO -responding and total cohort s. The area under the 
receiver operator characteristic curve (AUC -ROC) will be used to compare the performance (i.e., 
predictive ability) of different models.  
 
11.0 Procedures Involved  
The study design, study procedures and safety monitoring vary by [CONTACT_21398].  See section 
5.0 for details.  
12.0 Data Management  and Confidentiality  
 
DF/HCC uses a clinical trial management system (CTMS) called OnCore, which is managed by 
[CONTACT_52483] (ODQ).  
• Activity [ADDRESS_959724] each 
participant’s initials and  date of birth .  We will enter summary/batch accrual 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
37 
 information into Dana -Farber’s CTMS OnCore for Activity 1 . Individual 
registration is not feasible as OnCore mandates DOB.  
• Activity 2 is NHSR; registration in OnCore is not applicable.  
• Activities 3 and 4 will be largely automated.  Epic will be programmed to identify 
and/or push eSyM out to applicable patient recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]. This is an implementation/QI 
study, not a traditional research study, so the consent/registration/intervention 
paradigm does not fit activities 3, 4a, 4b, and 4c. Activity 4d will include patient 
consent. Furthermore, activity 4 will accrue a minimum  of 6048 participants .  For 
these reasons, manual registration of each participant into OnCore before exposure 
to eSyM and/o r the SASS questionnaire is not possible.  I nitials, date of birth, 
gender, race and ethnicity  will be collected, and we will work with ODQ  to provide 
ODQ with this data for all participants from all sites so that it can be imported into 
OnCore.  
• Activity 5  will involve a retrospective review of data collected in Activity 4. 
Registration in OnCore is not applicable.  
 
Data security: PHI data will be collected using multiple applications: REDCap,  
eSyM/MyChart , Epic.  
 
REDCap:  For this study, data will be collected using the Partners instance of REDCap 
(redcap.partners.org ). Consent for Activity 4D will also be collected using REDCap.  In 
collaboration with the Harvard Catalyst | The Harvard Clinical and Translational Science 
Center, REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) is a free, secure, HIPAA compliant 
web-based application hosted by [CONTACT_378459], Enterpr ise 
Research Infrastructure & Services (ERIS).  Vanderbilt University, with collaboration 
from a consortium of academic and non -profit institutional partners, develops this 
software application for electronic collection and management of research and clinical 
study data. Data collection is customized for each study or clinical trial by [CONTACT_39292] h 
team with guidance from ERIS REDCap administrators.   REDCap is built around HIPAA 
guidelines and is 21 CFR Part 11 capable.   
 
eSyM (which will be built into Epic):  Epic a pplications employ a variety of technical 
safeguards to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of personal 
information including supporting Transport Layer Security (TLS)/Secure Sockets Layer 
(SSL) certificate technology and encryption.  
 
To maximize data security, both REDCap and eSyM/Epic employ : 
 
User Privileges.  To ensure that users have access only to data and information that they 
are supposed to have  within the application, user privileges are utilized within the 
software. Each user has their own account,  and their user account will only have access to 
information  that they themselves have created or to  which administrators  have granted 
them access.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/[ADDRESS_959725] -protection & A uthentication . Both systems are password protected and 
implement  authentication to validate the identity of end -users that log in to the system . 
 
Auto-logout setting  will automatically log a user out of the system if they have not had 
any activity ( e.g., typi[INVESTIGATOR_007], moving the mouse) on their current web page for the set amount 
of time. This prevents someone else from accessing their account and their data if they 
leave a workstation without properly logging out or closing their browser window . 
 
Logging and Audit Trail.  Both systems maintain  built-in audit trail s that log  all user 
activity and all pages viewed by [CONTACT_362877].  
 
 
Study specific procedure to maximize data security:  
 
Controlled access:  The REDCap administrator at the coordinating site (Dana -Farber) will 
set up all user accounts so that each user only has access to their own site’s data.  
 
Use of unique study ID numbers:  REDCap automatically assigns unique study ID 
numbers to each new case.   
 
Extensive training:  All personnel involved in this study are required to complete and 
document completion of extensive protocol training.  Furthermore, all project 
investigators and staff  are required to have valid certification of human subjects’  research 
training.  
 
Quality control: The staff at the coordinating center (Dana -Farber) will be responsible for 
monitoring the data for completion, accuracy, and compliance.  
 
SFA storage : All study files will be maintained on a MGB HIPPA -compliant SFA. 
Backup copi[INVESTIGATOR_706333]. The study PI [INVESTIGATOR_706334].  
 
 
Data collection and submission process es: 
 
At each local site:  Hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_706335] ( i.e., printed SASS questionnaires, 
qualitative interview consent forms, etc.) will be kept in local study files  in locked cabinets .  
Local copi[INVESTIGATOR_706336] 5 -years after the primary completion date or at 
the discretion of the local site PI [INVESTIGATOR_706337].  NOTE: Prior to conducting any patient 
qualitative interviews, the coordinating center will request that a copy of the signed patient ICF 
be transmitted to DFCI. See below for data transmission methods. As appropriate, electronic ICF 
may also be obtained using R EDCap.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
39 
  
Data submission to the central coordinating site:   Local sites will transmit data to the central 
coordinating site using multiple methods: (1) study data will be submitted via REDCap ; for this 
study, we will use the Partners Healthcare instance of REDCap available here: 
https://redcap.partners.org/redcap/ .  Sites will log into REDCap, fill out CRFs and upload source 
documentation and other files, and submit .  (2) data downloads from eSyM/ Epic will be 
transmitted to the central site using secure file transfe r protocol (FTP).  We will use a secure FTP 
managed by [CONTACT_706388]’s Healthcare secure FTP available here: 
https://transfer.partners.org/courier/web/1000@/wmLogin.html  or the Partners automated 
Diplomat SFTP platform.   (3) When appropriate, sites may transmit data via email.  When 
appropriate, the email can be encrypted by [CONTACT_11017][INVESTIGATOR_007] “Send Secure” in the email subject line.  (4) 
Epic may share site -specific data reports with the coordinating center (5) Due to the size and 
complexity of this project, other methods may be used if they are preapproved by [CONTACT_262968] -
Farber PI [INVESTIGATOR_706338].   
 
Please note:  All sites will transmit a limited data set to the coordinating center in accordance 
with the SIMPRO -developed Data Use Agreement, which has been agreed upon by [CONTACT_706389].  
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
40 
 Summary of data collection:  
 
Data Sources & Representative Data Elements  
Epic Data  Patient 
survey  Collection/ 
abstraction  Derived data  Patient 
interview  
Entered 
by [CONTACT_706390] a 
clinician  Recorded 
processes     
 
PROs, 
medical 
history  Medical 
problems; 
chemo 
regimens  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_124021]; 
proportion of 
surveys 
completed  Quality of 
life; 
symptoms, 
self-efficacy  Cancer stage; 
disease status  
 
Provider/hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706339] & volume  Number of 
urgent clinic 
visits for 
symptom 
management;  
Comorbidity  Feedback 
on eSyM 
experiences 
(to be 
recorded 
and 
transcribed)  
 
Data Levels, Descriptions & Representative Data Elements  
Patient -
encounter  Patient  Population  Healthcare system  
Patient features 
that could 
change/recur 
over time  Patient features that 
do not change over 
time Feature of multiple 
patients  Feature of a site or 
provider  
PROs  
Disease status  
Urgent clinic 
encounters  
ED encounters  
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706340]/age  
Race/ethnicity  
Cancer type  
Cancer diagnosis 
date 
Surgery type and 
date Proportion of 
patients reporting a 
serious (i.e., high 
grade) symptom  
Proportion of 
patients responding 
to a survey  Urban/rural setting  
Medical/surgical 
provider  
High/low volume 
facility  
Teaching hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706341]: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
41 
  
 
Data collection from EPIC:  
 
 
 
 
Summary of Data Sharing:  
 
Each Data Provider, including DFCI/BWH/MGH, will provide the following DATA SET to 
DFCI  on a quarterly basis : 
 
Activity 1 (Stakeholder Feedback):  Stakeholders include physicians, nurses, allied health care 
professionals, practice administrators, information technology support staff and administrators  
• Email addresses for stakeholder participants (for REDCap administration ONLY)  
• Basic demographic information from stakeholders (including # of years working for their 
organization, professional job category, gender, racial background, ethnicity, age group) 
collected via Clicker questions, REDCap, and/or email  
• Audio recordings from UM1 focus groups and/or individual qualitative interviews  
• Transcripts from UM1 focus groups and/or qualitative interviews  
o Meeting minutes from UM1 focus groups. Feedback may be collected in an 
identifiable fashion. For example, the CIO’s comments may be attributed to “the 
CIO.”  
• Clicker -question responses from UM1 focus groups ( i.e., NOMAD, CFIR, AIM items 
etc.) 
• REDCap survey responses ( i.e., NOMAD, CFIR, AIM Items, etc.)  
 
Activity 2 (Build & deploy eSyM)  
• NO data transfer required  
 

PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
42 
 Activity 3a (eSyM App Usage)  
• Participant responses to the symptom reporting questions within eSyM (collected via 
Epic/MyChart)  
• Participant MyChart activity including login dates, mode of usage, and number of 
messages sent to the care team  
• Clinician responses to symptom reports (collected via Epic) including # of documented 
eSyM encounters and InBasket message responses  
• Data on eSyM usage by [CONTACT_706391] (collected via Epic/MyChart)  
 
Activity 3b (eSyM User Acceptability Testing)  
• Notes and observations taken during user acceptability testing   
**No PHI will be collected during UAT  
 
Activity 3c (Medical Record Abstraction):  This activity is necessary to understand how exposure 
to eSyM influences rates of acute care visits.  
• Patient identifier - study ID # which may be an encrypted MRN (collected via Epic and 
encrypted as needed by [CONTACT_706392]). Study teams at each site will encrypt actual MRNs 
and provide a study ID#. Suggested algorithms and code will be provided but thi s must be 
done at each site. Each site must separately store the “master key” that links real MRN to 
study ID#. Actual MRNs will not be released to the DFCI or shared with the NCI.  
• Patient study site – identifying which hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706342] a patient is seen at 
for those hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706343].  
• Patient zip code of residence (collected via Epic)  
• Patient DOB – This may be encrypted.  The year of birth is required. However, sites can elect 
to encrypt birth date and month. For example, a site may encrypt through an algorithm that: 
a) adds 4 months and 11 days to all birth dates that are in even numbe r calendar years and 
subtracts 3 months and 16 days from all birth dates that are in odd number years. Each site is 
responsible for developi[INVESTIGATOR_706344].  
• Patient vital status  
• Patient demographic information, including sex, race, ethnicity, language, marital status, 
employment status, and education level  
• Patient eSyM inclusion information, including cancer diagnosis data and/or procedure data  
o Cancer diagnosis code (ICD -10 codes), date and description  
o Complete Epic problem list  
o Procedure code (CPT code), date, description, and goal  
o Cancer staging code  
o Treatment plan information, including start date, end date, intention  
o Medications list  
• Patient dates of service including surgery, chemo administration, follow -up appointments, 
etc. (collected via Epic)  
• Study -outcomes collected via Epic including:  
o Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706345] 90 days for surgical patients  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
43 
 ▪ Information will include visit dates, discharge diagnosis codes  
o Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706346] 90 days of chemotherapy for medical oncology 
patients.  
▪ Information will include visit dates, discharge diagnosis codes  
o Emergency department visits (including those that culminate in admission versus 
those that culminate in discharge) for surgical and medical oncology patients  
▪ Information will include visit dates, discharge diagnosis codes  
o Dates of chemotherapy administration  
 
**Please note – Additional medical record data and outcomes will be collected via Epic as 
determined by [CONTACT_706393]. All requested items will still fall within the parameters 
of a limited data set**  
 
Activity 4a (eSyM App Usage)  
• Participant MyChart activity including login dates, mode of usage, and number of 
messages sent to the care team  
• Data on eSyM usage by [CONTACT_706391]  
• Clinician responses to symptom reports (collected via Epic) including # of documented 
eSyM encounters and InBasket message responses  
 
Activity 4b (SASS Questionnaire)  
• Patient contact [CONTACT_3031] (email address and/or postal address) to be inputted into 
Partners REDCap for survey administration ONLY. There is no other use of patient 
emails as part of this study.  
• Patient -reported self -efficacy, attainment of information needs, symptom burden, and 
satisfaction with care using validated metrics.  
 
Activity 4c (Medical Record Abstraction)  
• Patient identifier for all patients in the denominator cohort (eSyM users and non -users) - 
study ID # and/or encrypted MRN (collected via Epic and encrypted as needed by [CONTACT_706394])  
• Patient study site ID for all patients in the denominator cohort (eSyM users and non -users)   
• Patient zip code of residence (collected from Epic registration field)  
• Patient DOB for all patients in the denominator cohort (eSyM users and non -users) – DOB 
can have encrypted birth month and day as described above under activity 3c.  
• Patient vital status  
• Patient demographic information, including sex, race, ethnicity, language, marital status, 
employment status, and education level  
• Patient eSyM inclusion information, including cancer diagnosis data and/or procedure data  
o Cancer diagnosis code (ICD -10 codes), date and description  
o Complete Epic problem list  
o Procedure code (CPT code), date, description, and goal  
o Cancer staging code  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/[ADDRESS_959726]  
• Patient dates of service including surgery, chemo administration, follow -up appointments 
(collected via Epic) for all patients in the denominator cohort (eSyM users and non -users) 
Please see detail under Activity 3c.  
• Study -outcomes collected via Epic including:  
o Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706345] 90 days for surgical patients  
▪ Information will include visit dates, discharge diagnosis codes  
o Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706346] 90 days of chemotherapy for medical oncology 
patients.  
▪ Information will include visit dates, discharge diagnosis codes  
o Emergency department visits (including those that culminate in admission versus 
those that culminate in discharge) for surgical and medical oncology patients  
▪ Information will include visit dates, discharge diagnosis codes  
o Dates of chemotherapy administration  
 
Activity 4 d (Patient Interviews )** 
• Name, phone number, and e mail addresses for consented patient  participants (for 
interview scheduling purposes )  
• Basic demographic  and diagnosis information as well as eSyM history will be collected 
directly from patients  
• Audio recordings from qualitative interviews  
• Transcripts from qualitative interviews  
o Transcripts will be deidentified (e.g. names, treatment location, state, etc)  
 
**NOTE: As Activity 4d is a consented protocol activity, identifiable information will be shared 
with the coordinating center. During the consenting process, enrolling participants will be made 
aware and attest through their written consent that their contac t information will be shared with 
the coordinating center and that interviews will be conducted directly by [CONTACT_434], 
not the local study team. Participants will have the option to opt out at any time. After consent 
and upon completion of the qualitative interviews, audio recordings will be transcribed  and 
interview transcripts will be deidentified prior to analyses, publications, or future data sharing 
activities  
 
Please note – Additional medical record data and outcomes will be collected via Epic as 
determined by [CONTACT_706393]. All requested items will still fall within the parameters 
of a limited data set . 
 
Please note:  All data stored at the Dana Farber Cancer Institute (SIMPRO Coordinating 
Center) is kept under double password protected servers that routinely have audits to examine 
access.  
Investigators at all SIMPRO Data Provider institutions will have access to the full compi[INVESTIGATOR_706347] ( e.g., all data explicitly listed above as well as any other data 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
45 
 collected and shared through this limited data set agreement). In addition, this complete 
data set will be shared with the designated study chair and team at Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center.  
 
DFCI will provide the following limited dataset  to the National Cancer Institute  (IMS) : 
• Stakeholder Data  
o Aggregate site participation #’s  
o Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706348] (as available)  
o Transcripts from UM1 focus groups and/or qualitative interviews  
▪ Meeting minutes from UM1 focus groups. Feedback may be collected in 
an identifiable fashion. For example, the CIO’s comments may be 
attributed to “the CIO.”  
o Stakeholder clicker -question responses from UM1 focus groups ( i.e., NOMAD, 
CFIR, AIM items etc.)  
o Stakeholder REDCap survey responses ( i.e., NOMAD, CFIR, AIM Items, etc.)  
• Patient Data  
o Study ID for SASS survey respondents  
o Responses for each survey respondent  
o Patient demographics  
▪ Patient zip code  
▪ Age (interval linked to anchor date)  
▪ Sex, race, ethnicity, language, marital status, employment status, state of 
residence and education level  
o Enrollment  
▪ Procedure type and category  
▪ Tx plan and type  
o Clinical encounters and appointments  
▪ Encrypted date of procedure  
▪ Interval between surgery and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2345]  
▪ Interval between hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706349]  
▪ Interval between hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706350]  
▪ Interval between hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706351]  
▪ Encrypted date of new chemo and treatment administrations  
▪ Interval between new chemo and eSyM reports  
▪ Interval between new chemo and ED visits  
▪ Interval between new chemo and rehospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]  
▪ Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706352] 30 and 90 days of 
chemo/surgery  
o Cancer diagnoses  
o Comorbid condition diagnoses  
o Procedures performed during encounters  
▪ Laboratory data with encrypted date fields ( i.e., intervals based on anchor 
date)   
o Cancer -directed medication administrations and/or orders  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
46 
 ▪ Medication list with encrypted date fields ( i.e., intervals based on anchor 
date)  
o Symptom -directed medication administrations and/or orders  
o Vital signs data (body mass index (BMI) measurements only)  
 
**Please note – Additional medical record data and outcomes will be collected via Epic as 
determined by [CONTACT_706395]. All requested items will 
still fall within the parameters of a limited data set**  
 
Please note:  
• Deidentified, patient level data will be compi[INVESTIGATOR_706353] ( Dana -
Farber Cancer Institute, Maine Health, Dartmouth -Hitchcock Memorial Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], 
Baptist Memorial Health Care Corporation, Lifespan Cancer Institute/Rhode Island 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], West Virginia University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600], Inc.)  
• The PI [INVESTIGATOR_706354] 6 SIMPRO sites will review all data to be 
shared with the NCI.  
 
13.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety  of Subjects  
 
Please see the  Data Safety and Monitoring Plan (Appendix S). 
 
14.0 Future Use of Data  
 
This study does not involve any specimen collection/ banking of any kind.  
Personal health information will be collected as part of this study.  
 
All d ata collected during this study will be stored and used for future research.   Any personal 
identifiers will be removed so that the information cannot be linked back to a patient. Details on 
data use cases can be found below:  
 
1) Local site investigators utilizing SIMPRO data collected at their home institution 
(one site) – Investigators should receive local site PI [INVESTIGATOR_706355]. IRB approval should be obtained locally as needed.   
2) SIMPRO investigators utilizing SIMPRO data – All analyses are covered through this 
protocol.  No additional approvals are needed.   
3) Investigators at SIMPRO sites utilizing SIMPRO data outside of the scope of the 
original grant - Investigators, including those from collaborating institutions, can request 
the data collected from this study for new research.   Requests must be sent to the 
Coordinating Center Site PI (Michael Hassett MD, MPH). All data requests and analysis 
plans must be approved by [CONTACT_706396] (WIRB) and local site IRBs, as 
required, through this protocol or stand -alone protocols.  
4) NCI and IMPACT collaborators utilizing SIMPRO data - Per the SIMPRO -
developed data use agreement, a limited data set will be shared with the National 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
47 
 Institutes of Health (National Cancer Institute) and IMPACT consortium member sites in 
accordance with funding requirements. Publications and presentations resulting from 
analyses using SIMPRO data will include appropriate credits and authorship as agreed to 
with SIMPRO investigators.  
5) External collaborators utilizing SIMPRO data  – Data  may also be shared with outside 
non-profit academic investigators as well as with for -profit pharmaceutical investigators 
or commercial entities with whom Dana -Farber collaborates.   Requests must be sent to 
the Coordinating Center Site PI (Michael Hassett MD, MPH). All data requests and 
analysis plans must be approved by [CONTACT_706397].  
 
The study letters  infor m the participant that data collected for this study may be used in the 
future.  Participants will not be asked to provide additional informed consent for the use of de -
identified information in future research.   
 
There is no scheduled date on which the information and data that is being used or shared 
for this research will be destroyed, because research is an ongoing process.  The eventual 
goal is to make deidentified SIMPRO data publicly available through collaborations with 
the NCI.  
 
 
15.0 Withdrawal of Subjects  
 
Symptom reporting via eSyM per protocol will continue for 60-180-days; after this period , the 
local site may decide whether to continue having the patient report symptoms via eSyM or not.  
Observational follow -up will continue for [ADDRESS_959727] in writing to be 
removed from eSyM, then their local site will deactivate  their account.  Any data collected up to 
that point will be kept and included in analyses.  Patient status [ denominator group , eSyM active 
in 60-90-day window, eSyM ac tive beyond  60-90-day window, written request of withdrawal, [ADDRESS_959728] -1-year observational window] will be captured via eSyM and 
REDCap CRF.  
 
 
16.[ADDRESS_959729] practices, rules, and 
regulations surrounding privacy and confidentiality, collecting research data using unique study 
ID numbers instead of names or other identif ying information, and use of data collection systems 
that meet the NIH’s data security standards.  
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/[ADDRESS_959730] help patients, caregivers, and 
their care team work together during and between visits to achieve better symptom management 
in cancer patients . 
 
 
18.0 Vulnerable Populations  
 
This protocol  does not involve vulnerable populations  of prisoners  and children . 
Prisoners  and children are excluded . 
Cognitively impaired adults may participate  because the risk is negligible. This protocol 
only involves questionnaires, opi[INVESTIGATOR_706356] (MyChart). Additionally, cognitive status is not reliably captured in the EHR 
and, as this project involves autom ated identification of patients, we will not be able to 
exclude patients prior to eSyM assignment based on cognitive status.  
Pregnant women may participate because the risk to the woman and her fetus is 
negligible. This protocol only involves questionnaires, opi[INVESTIGATOR_706357]  (MyChart) . 
 
19.[ADDRESS_959731] at 6 sites  in the US. Dana -Farber will serve as the 
coordinating site.  
 
 
21.0 Resources Available  
 
The feasibility of this study  is based on estimates obtained from the 2016 analytic cases of the 
tumor registrar at each of the participating sites. Although there is some heterogeneity based on 
tumor type, there are more than adequate new cancer cases at each participating site to meet the 
study minimum accrual goals of 144 surgical and 144 medical oncology patients per year. The 
entire statistical analysis section is predicated on minimum accrual targets. Because the goal is 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/[ADDRESS_959732] s may be responsible for  because of  participation in the research:  
Subjects participating in this study will be asked to complete online surveys and/or report 
their symptoms from home using an internet -enabled device.  Participants will have to 
use their own hardware (e.g., smartphone, table t, computer) and their own Wi-Fi or Data 
Plan which may cost them money; subjects are responsible for these costs.  Devices 
and/or data plans will not be provided by [CONTACT_1758].  
 
 Patients who participate in  the SASS  questionnaire and/or patient qualitative interviews 
will each be offered a $15.[ADDRESS_959733] as a thank you.   
 
 
25.0 Consent Process  
 
Each activity utilizes different consent  methods.  See section 5.0 for details . 
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
50 
  
 
26.0 Appendice s 
**All appendices may be branded with site -specific logos as needed; wherever applicable, the 
Dana -Farber Cancer Institute logo may be removed and replaced with the applicable site logo . 
In addition, all materials will regularly be reviewed and updated as eSyM content is revised  
 
Question Banks:  
Appendix A:  CFIR Qualitative Question Bank  
Appendix B:  ORCA Quantitative Question Bank  
Appendix B2:  OCM Quantitative Question Bank  
Appendix B3:  eHIQ Quantitative Interview Question Bank  
Appendix C:  CAHPS Question Bank for cancer surgery  
Appendix D:  CAHPS Question Bank for cancer drugs  
Appendix E:  CAHPS Question Bank supplemental questions  
Appendix F:  PROMIS Question Bank  
Appendix G:  AIM/IAM Question Bank  
Appendix H:  PROCTCAE Question Bank – English  
Appendix I:  PROCTCAE Question Bank – Spanish  
Appendix J:  NOMAD Question Bank  
 
Recruitment /Consent  Materials:  
Appendix K: Stakeholder recruitment email 1 (informing development)  
Appendix L: Stakeholder recruitment email 2 (evaluating implementation)  
Appendix M: Patient Invitation to participate in research questionnaire  
Appendix N: Patient Invitation to use eSyM  
Appendix O: Model Study Letter for Activity 3b ( UAT ) (waiver of documentation of consent)  
Appendix P:  UAT Observation Guide  
Appendix Q:  eSyM Disclaimer ( NHSR ) 
Appendix R:  Model Study Letter for Activity 4b (SASS Questionnaire) (waiver of 
documentation of consent)  
Appendix S: DSMP  
 
Study References:  
Appendix T 1: eSyM Medical Oncology Patient -Facing Tip Sheets  
Appendix T2: eSyM Surgical Patient -Facing Tip Sheets  
Appendix U1: Patient -Facing SASS Questionnaire – MO eSyM+ Version  
Appendix U2: Patient -Facing SASS Questionnaire – MO eSyM+ Non -Responder Version  
Appendix V: Patient -Facing SASS Questionnaire – MO eSyM - Version  
Appendix W1: Patient -Facing SASS Questionnaire – SO eSyM+ Version  
Appendix W2  : Patient -Facing SASS Questionnaire – SO eSyM+ Non -Responder Version  
Appendix X: Patient -Facing SASS Questionnaire – SO eSyM - Version  
Appendix Y: Stakeholder  Interview Guide  
Appendix Z: Patient -Facing SASS Questionnaire Cover Letter  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
51 
  
eSyM Training & Marketing Materials:  
Appendix AA: eSyM Clinician User Guide  
Appendix BB: Clinician -Facing eSyM Flyer  
Appendix CC: Clinician -Facing FAQs Page  
Appendix DD: Patient -Facing eSyM Flyer  
Appendix EE: Patient -Facing eSyM Pamphlet  
Appendix FF: Patient -Facing eSyM User Guide  
Appendix GG: Patient -Facing FAQs Page  
Appendix HH: Patient -Facing FAQs Page for eSyM Home Page  
Appendix II: Site Staff eSyM User Guide  
Appendix JJ: Patient eSyM Promo Video  
Appendix KK: Provider  eSyM Promo Video   
Appendix LL: Project Website  
Appendix MM: Other Resources Medical Oncology  
Appendix NN: Other Resources Surgical  
Appendix OO: Patient -Facing eSyM Additional Questions (Activity Level & Overall Wellbeing)  
Appendix PP: Training Flipbooks (Patient & Staff -Facing)  
 
Additional Appendices:  
Appendix QQ: Model Informed Consent Form for Activity 4d  
Appendix RR: Qualitative Patient Interview Guide  
Appendix SS: Qualitative Patient Interview Intro Letter  
Appendix TT: Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP)  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
52 
  
 
 
27.0 References  
 
1. Cancer Statistics. National Cancer Institute. https://www.cancer.gov/about -
cancer/understanding/statistics . Published 2017. Accessed Accessed on 1/2/18.  
2. Cleeland CS. Symptom burden: multiple symptoms and their impact as patient -reported 
outcomes. Journal of the National Cancer Institute Monographs. 2007(37):16 -21. 
3. Hofman M, Ryan JL, Figueroa -Moseley CD, Jean -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_11958] P, Morrow GR. Cancer -related 
fatigue: the scale of the problem. Oncologist. 2007;[ADDRESS_959734] 1:[ADDRESS_959735] EE, de Graeff A. Symptom 
prevalence in patients with incurable cancer: a systematic review. Journal of pain and 
symptom management. 2007;34(1):94 -104. 
5. Temel JS, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_24127], Lynch TJ. Comprehensive symptom management in patients with 
advanced -stage non -small -cell lung cancer. Clin Lung Cancer. 2006;7(4):241 -249. 
6. Mayer DK, Travers D, Wyss A, Leak A, Waller A. Why do patients with cancer visit 
emergency departments? Results of a 2008 population study in North Carolina. Journal 
of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 
2011;29(19):2683 -2688.  
7. Brooks GA, Abrams TA, Meyerhardt JA, et al. Identification of potentially avoidable 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706358]. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal 
of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2014;32(6):496 -503. 
8. Barbera LT, C; Dudgeon, D. Why do patients with cancer visit the emergency department 
near the end of life? CMAJ. 2010.  
9. Berry DL, Blonquist TM, Hong F, Halpenny B, Partridge AH. Self -reported adherence to 
oral cancer therapy: relationships with symptom distress, depression, and personal 
characteristics. Patient Prefer Adherence. 2015;9:[ADDRESS_959736] I, Ettridge K, Grunfeld EA, Wilson C. Psychosocial factors that 
influence men's help -seeking for cancer symptoms: a systematic synthesis of mixed 
methods research. Psycho -oncology. 2015.  
11. Nathan H, Yin H, Wong SL. Postoperative Complications and Long -Term Survival After 
Complex Cancer Resection. Annals of surgical oncology. 2017;24(3):638 -644. 
12. Hendren S, Birkmeyer JD, Yin H, Banerjee M, Sonnenday C, Morris AM. Surgical 
complications are associated with omission of chemotherapy for stage III colorectal 
cancer. Dis Colon Rectum. 2010;53(12):1587 -1593.  
13. Tevis SE, Kohlnhofer BM, Stringfield S, et al. Postoperative complications in patients 
with rectal cancer are associated with delays in chemotherapy that lead to worse disease -
free and overall survival. Dis Colon Rectum. 2013;56(12):1339 -1348.  
14. Anderson KO, Richman SP, Hurley J, et al. Cancer pain management among underserved 
minority outpatients: perceived needs and barriers to optimal control. Cancer. 
2002;94(8):2295 -2304.  
15. Kwon JH. Overcoming barriers in cancer pain management. Journal of clinical oncology 
: official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2014;32(16):1727 -1733.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
53 
 16. Cohen E, Botti M. Cancer Patients' Perceptions of the Barriers and Facilitators to Patient 
Participation in Symptom Management During an Epi[INVESTIGATOR_706359]. Cancer Nurs. 
2015;38(6):458 -465. 
17. Bainbridge D, Seow H, Sussman J, et al. Multidisciplinary health care professionals' 
perceptions of the use and utility of a symptom assessment system for oncology patients. 
Journal of oncology practice. 2011;7(1):[ADDRESS_959737] Sheet. Pew Research Center Internet and Technology. 
http://www.pewinternet.org/fact -sheet/mobile/ . Published 2017. Accessed Accessed on 
1/4/18.  
19. Internet/Broadband Fact Sheet. Pew Research Center Internet and Technology. 
http://www.pewinternet.org/fact -sheet/internet -broadband/ . Published 2017. Accessed 
Accessed on 1/4/18.  
20. Birkhoff SD, Smeltzer SC. Perceptions of Smartphone User -Centered Mobile Health 
Tracking Apps Across Various Chronic Illness Populations: An Integrative Review. J 
Nurs Scholarsh. 2017;49(4):371 -378. 
21. Carroll JK, Moorhead A, Bond R, LeBlanc WG, Petrella RJ, Fiscella K. Who Uses 
Mobile Phone Health Apps and Does Use Matter? A Secondary Data Analytics 
Approach. Journal of medical Internet research. 2017;19(4):e125.  
22. Ernsting C, Dombrowski SU, Oedekoven M, et al. Using Smartphones and Health Apps 
to Change and Manage Health Behaviors: A Population -Based Survey. Journal of 
medical Internet research. 2017;19(4):e101.  
23. Koh HK, Brach C, Harris LM, Parchman ML. A proposed 'health literate care model' 
would constitute a systems approach to improving patients' engagement in care. Health 
affairs (Project Hope). 2013;32(2):357 -367. 
24. Carman KL, Dardess P, Maurer M, et al. Patient and family engagement: a framework for 
understanding the elements and developi[INVESTIGATOR_185913]. Health affairs 
(Project Hope). 2013;32(2):[ADDRESS_959738] a theory of patient and consumer activation. Patient 
Educ Couns. 2010;78(3):377 -381. 
26. Coulter A, Ellins J. Effectiveness of strategies for informing, educating, and involving 
patients. BMJ (Clinical research ed). 2007;335(7609):24 -27. 
27. Bandura A. Self -efficacy mechanism in human agency. American Psychological 
Association. 1982; 37(2), 122 -147. 
28. Strecher VJ, DeVellis BM, Becker MH, Rosenstock IM. The role of self -efficacy in 
achieving health behavior change. Health Educ Q. 1986;13(1):73 -92. 
29. Coleman K, Austin BT, Brach C, Wagner EH. Evidence on the Chronic Care Model in 
the new millennium. Health affairs (Project Hope). 2009;28(1):75 -85. 
30. Survey Snapshot: Health Care Providers on the Problems of Patient Engagement Design. 
NEJM Catalyst. https://catalyst.nejm.org/problems -patient -engagement -design/ . 
Published 2017. Accessed Accessed on 1/4/18.  
31. Manary MP, Boulding W, Staelin R, Glickman SW. The patient experience and health 
outcomes. The New England journal of medicine. 2013;368(3):201 -203. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/[ADDRESS_959739] Rev. 
2017;5:CD011425.  
33. Posadzki P, Mastellos N, Ryan R, et al. Automated telephone communication systems for 
preventive healthcare and management of long -term conditions. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2016;12:CD009921.  
34. Basch E, Deal AM, Kris MG, et al. Symptom Monitoring With Patient -Reported 
Outcomes During Routine Cancer Treatment: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Journal of 
clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 
2016;34(6):[ADDRESS_959740] AL, Aaronson NK, et al. Can patient -reported outcome measures 
identify cancer patients' most bothersome issues? J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(9):1216 -1220.  
36. Abelson JS, Symer M, Peters A, Charlson M, Yeo H. Mobile health apps and recovery 
after surgery: What are patients willing to do? Am J Surg. 2017;214(4):616 -622. 
37. Basch E, Deal AM, Dueck AC, et al. Overall Survival Results of a Trial Assessing 
Patient -Reported Outcomes for Symptom Monitoring During Routine Cancer Treatment. 
Jama. 2017;318(2):197 -198. 
38. McCorkle R, Ercolano E, Lazenby M, et al. Self -management: Enabling and empowering 
patients living with cancer as a chronic illness. CA: a cancer journal for clinicians. 
2011;61(1):50 -62. 
39. Fisch MJ, Chung AE, Accordino MK. Using Technology to Improve Cancer Care: Social 
Media, Wearables, and Electronic Health Records. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book. 
2016;35:200 -208. 
40. Mobasheri MH, Johnston M, Syed UM, King D, Darzi A. The uses of smartphones and 
tablet devices in surgery: A systematic review of the literature. Surgery. 
2015;158(5):1352 -1371.  
41. Basch E, Iasonos A, McDonough T, et al. Patient versus clinician symptom reporting 
using the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events: 
results of a questionnaire -based study. The Lancet Oncology. 2006;7(11):903 -909. 
42. Dueck AC, Mendoza TR, Mitchell SA, et al. Validity and Reliability of the US National 
Cancer Institute's Patient -Reported Outcomes Version of the Common Terminology 
Criteria for Adverse Events (PRO -CTCAE). JAMA oncology. 2015;1(8):1051 -1059.  
43. Basch E, Reeve BB, Mitchell SA, et al. Development of the National Cancer Institute's 
patient -reported outcomes version of the common terminology criteria for adverse events 
(PRO -CTCAE). Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 2014;106(9).  
44. Basch E, Snyder C, McNiff K, et al. Patient -reported outcome performance measures in 
oncology. Journal of oncology practice. 2014;10(3):209 -211. 
45. Snyder CF. Using patient -reported outcomes in clinical practice: a promising approach? 
Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical 
Oncology. 2014;32(11):1099 -1100.  
46. Basch E, Snyder C. Overcoming barriers to integrating patient -reported outcomes in 
clinical practice and electronic health records. Annals of oncology : official journal of the 
European Society for Medical Oncology. 2017;28(10):2332 -2333.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
55 
 47. Snyder CF, Herman JM, White SM, et al. When using patient -reported outcomes in 
clinical practice, the measure matters: a randomized controlled trial. Journal of oncology 
practice. 2014;10(5):e299 -306. 
48. Roess A. The Promise, Growth, and Reality of Mobile Health - Another Data -free Zone. 
The New England journal of medicine. 2017;377(21):2010 -2011.  
49. Jensen RE, Snyder CF. PRO -cision Medicine: Personalizing Patient Care Using Patient -
Reported Outcomes. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American 
Society of Clinical Oncology. 2016;34(6):527 -529. 
50. Hughes EF, Wu AW, Carducci MA, Snyder CF. What can I do? Recommendations for 
responding to issues identified by [CONTACT_4676] -reported outcomes assessments used in clinical 
practice. The journal of supportive oncology. 2012;10(4):143 -148. 
51. Cortez NG, Cohen IG, Kesselheim AS. FDA regulation of mobile health technologies. 
The New England journal of medicine. 2014;371(4):[ADDRESS_959741] A, Tolbert E, et al. Presenting comparative study PRO results to 
clinicians and researchers: beyond the eye of the beholder. Quality of life research : an 
international journal of quality of life aspects of treatment, care and rehabilitation. 2017.  
53. O'Connor S, Hanlon P, O'Donnell CA, Garcia S, Glanville J, Mair FS. Barriers and 
facilitators to patient and public engagement and recruitment to digital health 
interventions: protocol of a systematic review of qualitative studies. BMJ Open. 
2016;6(9):e010895.  
54. Snyder CF, Smith KC, Bantug ET, et al. What do these scores mean? Presenting patient -
reported outcomes data to patients and clinicians to improve interpretability. Cancer. 
2017;123(10):1848 -1859.  
55. Jensen RE, Snyder CF, Basch E, Frank L, Wu AW. All together now: findings from a 
PCORI workshop to align patient -reported outcomes in the electronic health record. J 
Comp Eff Res. 2016;5(6):561 -567. 
56. Damschroder LJ, Aron DC, Keith RE, Kirsh SR, Alexander JA, Lowery JC. Fostering 
implementation of health services research findings into practice: a consolidated 
framework for advancing implementation science. Implement Sci. 2009;4:50.  
57. Halpern MT, Zhang F, Enewold L. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706360]: National 
values for frequency, duration, and charges. Journal of Clinical Oncology. 
2020;38(15_suppl):[ADDRESS_959742] of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706361]. European Respi[INVESTIGATOR_21107]. 2015;46(suppl 
59):PA3547.  
59. Parikh RB, Manz C, Chivers C, et al. Machine Learning Approaches to Predict 6 -Month 
Mortality Among Patients With Cancer. JAMA Netw Open. 2019;2(10):e1915997.  
60. Sahni N, Simon G, Arora R. Development and Validation of Machine Learning Models 
for Prediction of [ADDRESS_959743] Data Available at 
the End of Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706362]: a Proof -of-Concept Study. J Gen 
Intern Med. 2018;33(6):921 -928. 
61. Obermeyer Z, Powers B, Vogeli C, Mullainathan S. Dissecting racial bias in an algorithm 
used to manage the health of populations. Science. 2019;366(6464):447 -453. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/[ADDRESS_959744] 
mortality using patient -reported outcomes in oncology. Journal of Clinical Oncology. 
2021;39(15_suppl):1510 -1510.  
63. Thompson M, Tiwari A, Fu R, Moe E, Buckley DI. In: A Framework To Facilitate the 
Use of Systematic Reviews and Meta -Analyses in the Design of Primary Research 
Studies.  Rockville (MD)2012.  
64. Ariti C. Walter W Stroup, Generalized linear mixed models, modern concepts, methods 
and applications. Stroup Walter W , Generalized linear mixed models, modern concepts, 
methods and applications . CRC Press: Boca Raton, 2012; pound59.99 p. 555. Statistical 
methods in medical research. 2017;26(2):1043 -1044.  
65. Schafer JL. Multiple imputation: a primer. Stat Methods Med Res. 1999;8(1):[ADDRESS_959745] M. Sample size calculations for stepped wedge and cluster 
randomised trials: a unified approach. Journal of clinical epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. 2016;69:137 -
146. 
67. Eldridge SM, Costelloe CE, Kahan BC, Lancaster GA, Kerry SM. How big should the 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_706363]? Statistical methods in medical research. 
2016;25(3):1039 -1056.  
68. Campbell MK, Mollison J, Grimshaw JM. Cluster trials in implementation research: 
estimation of intracluster correlation coefficients and sample size. Statistics in medicine. 
2001;20(3):[ADDRESS_959746] KJ, Eton DT, Garcia SF, Cella D. Minimally important differences were estimated 
for six Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System -Cancer scales in 
advanced -stage cancer patients. Journal of clinical epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. 2011;64(5):507 -516. 
70. Temel JS, Greer JA, El -Jawahri A, et al. Effects of Early Integrated Palliative Care in 
Patients With Lung and GI Cancer: A Randomized Clinical Trial. Journal of clinical 
oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2017;35(8):834 -
841. 
71. Chen CX, Kroenke K, Stump TE, et al. Estimating minimally important differences for 
the PROMIS(R) Pain Interference Scales: results from three randomized clinical trials. 
Pain. 2017.  
72. Analyzing CAHPS Survey Data. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 
https://www.ahrq.gov/cahps/surveys -guidance/helpful -resources/analysis/index.html . 
Published 2016. Accessed Accessed on 1/3/18.  
73. Xie T, Waksman J. Design and sample size estimation in clinical trials with clustered 
survival times as the primary endpoint. Statistics in medicine. 2003;22(18):[ADDRESS_959747] of measuring patient -reported 
outcomes in clinical practice: a systematic review of the literature. Quality of life 
research : an international journal of quality of life aspects of treatment, care and 
rehabilitation. 2008;17(2):179 -193. 
75. Weiner BJ, Lewis CC, Stanick C, et al. Psychometric assessment of three newly 
developed implementation outcome measures. Implementation science : IS. 
2017;12(1):108.  
76. Fetters MD, Curry LA, Creswell JW. Achieving integration in mixed methods designs -
principles and practices. Health services research. 2013;48(6 Pt 2):2134 -2156.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
57 
 77. Ritchie J SL. Qualitative data analysis for applied policy research.  London: Routledge: 
Analyzing Qualitative Data.; 1994.  
78. Pope C, Ziebland S, Mays N. Qualitative research in health care. Analysing qualitative 
data. BMJ (Clinical research ed). 2000;320(7227):114 -116. 
79. Richie JP SL. Qualitative Data Analysis for Applied Policy Research in The Qualitative 
Researchers Companion.  London: Sage Publications 2002.  
80. Creswell JW. Qualitative Inquiry & Research Design: Choosing among Five 
Approached.  Sage Publications; 2013.  
81. Damschroder LJ, Lowery JC. Evaluation of a large -scale weight management program 
using the consolidated framework for implementation research (CFIR). Implementation 
science : IS. 2013;8:51.  
82. Wong SL, Revels SL, Yin H, Stewart AK, McVeigh A, Banerjee M, Birkmeyer JD. 
Variation in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706364]. Ann Surg. 
2015;261(4):632 -6. PMID: 24743604.  
83.  Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer Statistics, 2017. CA Cancer J Clin. 2017;67(1):7 -
30. Epub 2017/01/06. PMID: 28055103.  
84. Janjan N. Palliation and supportive care in radiation medicine. Hematol Oncol Clin North 
Am. 2006;20(1):187 -211. PMID: 16580563.  
85. Fleishman SB. Treatment of symptom clusters: pain, depression, and fatigue. J Natl 
Cancer Inst Monogr. 2004(32):119 -23. PMID: 15263052.  
86. Hernandez -Boussard T, Graham LA, Desai K, Wahl TS, Aucoin E, Richman JS, Morris 
MS, Itani KM, Telford GL, Hawn MT. The Fifth Vital Sign: Postoperative Pain Predicts 
30-day Readmissions and Subsequent Emergency Department Visits. Ann Surg. 
2017;266(3):5 16-24. Epub 2017/06/29. PMID: 28657940.  
87.  Kenzik KM, Ganz PA, Martin MY, Petersen L, Hays RD, Arora N, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_87049] M. How much 
do cancer -related symptoms contribute to health -related quality of life in lung and 
colorectal cancer patients? A report from the Cancer Care Outcomes Research and 
Surveilla nce (CanCORS) Consortium. Cancer. 2015;121(16):2831 -9. PMID: 25891437.  
88. Levit L, Balogh E, Nass S, Ganz PA, editors. Delivering High -Quality Cancer Care: 
Charting a New Course for a System in Crisis. Washington, DC; 2013.  
89. Gilligan T, Coyle N, Frankel RM, Berry DL, Bohlke K, Epstein RM, Finlay E, Jackson 
VA, Lathan CS, Loprinzi CL, et al. Patient -Clinician Communication: American Society 
of Clinical Oncology Consensus Guideline. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35(31):3618 -32. PMID: 
28892432.  
90. Mearis M, Shega JW, Knoebel RW. Does adherence to National Comprehensive Cancer 
Network guidelines improve pain -related outcomes? An evaluation of inpatient cancer 
pain management at an academic medical center. J Pain Symptom Manage. 
2014;48(3):451 -8. PMID: 24439844.  
91. Coolbrandt A, Wildiers H, Aertgeerts B, Van der Elst E, Laenen A, Dierckx de Casterle 
B, van Achterberg T, Milisen K. Characteristics and effectiveness of complex nursing 
interventions aimed at reducing symptom burden in adult patients treated with 
chemotherapy: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Int J Nurs Stud. 
2014;51(3):495 -510. PMID: 24074939.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
58 
 92. Neo J, Fettes L, Gao W, Higginson IJ, Maddocks M. Disability in activities of daily 
living among adults with cancer: A systematic review and meta -analysis. Cancer Treat 
Rev. 2017;61:94 -106. PMID: 29125982.  
93. Valuck T, Blaisdell D, Dugan DP, Westrich K, Dubois RW, Miller RS, McClellan M. 
Improving Oncology Quality Measurement in Accountable Care: Filling Gaps with 
Cross -Cutting Measures. J Manag Care Spec Pharm. 2017;23(2):174 -81. PMID: 
28125364.  
94. Patel K, Thoumi A, Nadel J, O'Shea J, McClellan M. Transforming oncology care: 
payment and delivery reform for person -centered care. Am J Manag Care. 
2015;21(5):388 -93. PMID: 26167705.  
95.  Smith G, Bernacki R, Block SD. The role of palliative care in population management 
and accountable care organizations. J Palliat Med. 2015;18(6):486 -94. PMID: 25723619.  
96. Mitchell SA, Chambers DA. Leveraging Implementation Science to Improve Cancer 
Care Delivery and Patient Outcomes. J Oncol Pract. 2017;13(8):523 -9. PMID: 28692331.  
97. Kotronoulas G, Kearney N, Maguire R, Harrow A, Di Domenico D, Croy S, 
MacGillivray S. What is the value of the routine use of patient -reported outcome 
measures toward improvement of patient outcomes, processes of care, and health service 
outcomes in ca ncer care? A systematic review of controlled trials. J Clin Oncol. 
2014;32(14):1480 -501. Epub 2014/04/09. PMID: 24711559.  
98. Velikova G, Booth L, Smith AB, Brown PM, Lynch P, Brown JM, Selby [CONTACT_33263]. Measuring 
quality of life in routine oncology practice improves communication and patient well -
being: a randomized controlled trial. J Clin Oncol. 2004;22(4):714 -24. Epub 2004/02/18.  
PMID: 14966096.  
99. Basch E, Abernethy AP. Supporting clinical practice decisions with real -time patient -
reported outcomes. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(8):954 -6. Epub 2011/02/02. PMID: 21282536.  
100. Basch E, Deal AM, Dueck AC, Scher HI, Kris MG, Hudis C, Schrag D. Overall Survival 
Results of a Trial Assessing Patient -Reported Outcomes for Symptom Monitoring During 
Routine Cancer Treatment. Jama. 2017;318(2):197 -8. Epub 2017/06/07. PMID: 
28586821.  
101. Donovan JL, Hamdy FC, Lane JA, Mason M, Metcalfe C, Walsh E, Blazeby [CONTACT_54963], Peters 
TJ, Holding P, Bonnington S, et al. Patient -Reported Outcomes after Monitoring, 
Surgery, or Radiotherapy for Prostate Cancer. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(15):1425 -37. 
PMID: 276 [ZIP_CODE].  
102. Grenda TR, Revels SL, Yin H, Birkmeyer JD, Wong SL. Lung Cancer Resection at 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706365]. JAMA Surg. 2015;150(11):1034 -40. 
PMID: 26267440.  
103. Reames BN, Krell RW, Ponto SN, Wong SL. Critical evaluation of oncology clinical 
practice guidelines. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(20):2563 -8. PMID: 23752105.  
104. Brooks GA, Jacobson JO, Schrag D. Clinician perspectives on potentially avoidable 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706366]. JAMA Oncol. 2015;1(1):109 -10. PMID: 
26146663.  
105. Brooks GA, Chen EJ, Murakami MA, Giannakis M, Baugh CW, Schrag D. An ED pi[INVESTIGATOR_706367]. Am J Emerg Med. 
2016;34(10):1934 -8. PMID: 27412915.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/[ADDRESS_959748]. 2013;105(9):634 -42. PMID: 23482657.  
107. Brooks GA, Li L, Uno H, Hassett MJ, Landon BE, Schrag D. Acute hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706368]. 
Health Aff (Millwood). 2014;33(10):1793 -800. PMID: 25288424.  
108. Attai DJ, Sedrak MS, Katz MS, Thompson MA, Anderson PF, Kesselheim JC, Fisch MJ, 
Graham DL, Utengen A, Johnston C, et al. Social media in cancer care: highlights, 
challenges & opportunities. Future Oncol. 2016;12(13):1549 -52. PMID: 27025657.  
109. Han PK, Dieckmann NF, Holt C, Gutheil C, Peters E. Factors Affecting Physicians' 
Intentions to Communicate Personalized Prognostic Information to Cancer Patients at the 
End of Life: An Experimental Vignette Study. Med Decis Making. 2016;36(6):703 -13. 
PMID: 26985015.  
110. Korir A, Mauti N, Moats P, Gurka MJ, Mutuma G, Metheny C, Mwamba PM, Oyiro PO, 
Fisher M, Ayers LW, et al. Developi[INVESTIGATOR_706369] -of-evidence approach to define 
HIV-associated malignancies for cancer registration in Kenya. PLoS One. 
2014;9(1):e85 881. PMID: 24465764.  
111. Shelburne N, Adhikari B, Brell J, Davis M, Desvigne -Nickens P, Freedman A, Minasian 
L, Force T, Remick SC. Cancer treatment -related cardiotoxicity: current state of 
knowledge and future research priorities. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014;106(9). PMID: 
[ZIP_CODE] 198. 
112. Venook AP, Niedzwiecki D, Lenz HJ, Innocenti F, Fruth B, Meyerhardt JA, Schrag D, 
Greene C, O'Neil BH, Atkins JN, et al. Effect of First -Line Chemotherapy Combined 
With Cetuximab or Bevacizumab on Overall Survival in Patients With KRAS Wild -Type 
Advan ced or Metastatic Colorectal Cancer: A Randomized Clinical Trial. Jama. 
2017;317(23):2392 -401. PMID: 28632865.  
113. Sanoff HK, Carpenter WR, Sturmer T, Goldberg RM, Martin CF, Fine JP, McCleary NJ, 
Meyerhardt JA, Niland J, Kahn KL, et al. Effect of adjuvant chemotherapy on survival of 
patients with stage III colon cancer diagnosed after age 75 years. J Clin Oncol. 
2012;30(21):2624 -34. PMID: 22665536.  
114. Sanoff HK, Carpenter WR, Freburger J, Li L, Chen K, Zullig LL, Goldberg RM, 
Schymura MJ, Schrag D. Comparison of adverse events during 5 -fluorouracil versus 5 -
fluorouracil/oxaliplatin adjuvant chemotherapy for stage III colon cancer: a population -
based analysis. Cancer. 2012;118(17):4309 -20. PMID: 22294436.  
115. 2010 Census Urban and Rural Classification and Urban Area Criteria: U.S. Department 
of Commerce; 2015 [Accessed on 1/1/18]. Available from: 
https://www.census.gov/geo/reference/ua/urban -rural -2010.html.  
116. Murray C. Life Expectancy & Probability of Death Data Visualization: Institute for 
Health Metrics and Evaluation; 2016 [Accessed on 1/6/18]. Available from: 
http://vizhub.healthdata.org/le/.  
117. Rurality in the [LOCATION_002]: Housing Assistance Council; 2011 [Accessed on 12/31/17]. 
Available from: 
http://www.ruralhome.org/storage/research_notes/Rural_Research_Note_Rurality_web.p
df. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
60 
 118. Yen PY, McAlearney AS, Sieck CJ, Hefner JL, Huerta TR. Health Information 
Technology (HIT) Adaptation: Refocusing on the Journey to Successful HIT 
Implementation. JMIR Med Inform. 2017;5(3):e28. Epub 2017/09/09. PMID: 28882812.  
119. Institute of Medicine Roundtable on Environmental Health Sciences RM. The National 
Academies Collection: Reports funded by [CONTACT_56758]. In: Merchant J, 
Coussens C, Gilbert D, editors. Rebuilding the Unity of Health and the Environmen t in 
Rural America: Workshop Summary. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US), 
National Academy of Sciences; 2006.  
120. About Rural Health Care National Rural Health Association; 2018 [Accessed on 
12/30/17]. Available from: https://www.ruralhealthweb.org/about -nrha/about -rural -
health -care.  
121. Blake KD, Moss JL, Gaysynsky A, Srinivasan S, Croyle RT. Making the Case for 
Investment in Rural Cancer Control: An Analysis of Rural Cancer Incidence, Mortality, 
and Funding Trends. Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_1948]. 2017;26(7):992 -7. Epub 
2017/06/11.  PMID: 28600296.  
122. Singh R, Goebel LJ. Rural Disparities in Cancer Care: A Review of Its Implications and 
Possible Interventions. W V Med J. 2016;112(3):76 -82. PMID: 27301159.  
123. Clinical Research Resources & Offices: Dana -Farber / Harvard Cancer Center; 2018 
[Accessed on 1/6/18]. Available from: http://www.dfhcc.harvard.edu/research/clinical -
research -support/.  
124. Survey and Data Management Core: Dana -Farber / Harvard Cancer Center; 2018 [cited 
Accessed on 1/6/18]. Available from: http://www.dfhcc.harvard.edu/research/core -
facilities/survey -and-data-management/.  
125. Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research: CFIR Research Team; 2009 
[Accessed on 1/6/18]. Available from: http://www.cfirguide.org/.  
126. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research electronic 
data capture (REDCap) --a metadata -driven methodology and workflow process for 
providing translational research informatics support. J Biomed Inform. 2009;42(2):377 -
81. PMID: 18929686.  
127. REDCap: Research Electronic Data Capture; 2004 [Accessed on 1/6/18]. Available from: 
https://projectredcap.org/.  
128. Caplin M, Saunders T. Utilizing Teach -Back to Reinforce Patient Education: A Step -by-
Step Approach. Orthop Nurs. 2015;34(6):365 -8; quiz 9 -70. PMID: 26575509.  
129. Kawachi I. It's All in the Game -The Uses of Gamification to Motivate Behavior Change. 
JAMA Intern Med. 2017;177(11):1593 -4. PMID: 28973152.  
130. Chambers DA, Glasgow RE, Stange KC. The dynamic sustainability framework: 
addressing the paradox of sustainment amid ongoing change. Implement Sci. 2013;8:117. 
Epub 2013/10/04. PMID: 24088228.  
131. Curran GM, Bauer M, Mittman B, Pyne JM, Stetler C. Effectiveness -implementation 
hybrid designs: combining elements of clinical effectiveness and implementation 
research to enhance public health impact. Med Care. 2012;50(3):217 -26. Epub 
2012/02/09. PMI D: 22310560.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
61 
 132. Loudon K, Treweek S, Sullivan F, Donnan P, Thorpe KE, Zwarenstein M. The PRECIS -
2 tool: designing trials that are fit for purpose. Bmj. 2015;350:h2147. Epub 2015/05/10. 
PMID: 25956159.  
133. Mohler R, Kopke S, Meyer G. Criteria for Reporting the Development and Evaluation of 
Complex Interventions in healthcare: revised guideline (CReDECI 2). Trials. 
2015;16:204. Epub 2015/05/04. PMID: 25935741.  
134. Extensions of the CONSORT Statement: Consort Transparent Reporting of Trials; 2010 
[Accessed on 1/6/18]. Available from: http://www.consort -statement.org/extensions.  
135. Campbell MK, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_25192] G, Elbourne DR, Altman DG. Consort 2010 statement: extension 
to cluster randomised trials. Bmj. 2012;345:e5661. Epub 2012/09/07. PMID: 22951546.  
136. Grayling MJ, Wason JM, Mander AP. Stepped wedge cluster randomized controlled trial 
designs: a review of reporting quality and design features. Trials. 2017;18(1):33. Epub 
2017/01/23. PMID: 28109321.  
137. Thompson M, Tiwari A, Fu R, Moe E, Buckley DI.  A Framework To Facilitate the Use 
of Systematic Reviews and Meta -Analyses in the Design of Primary Research Studies. 
Rockville (MD)2012.  
138. Melamed A, Wright AA. Patient Reported Outcomes: Recent Successes and Future 
Opportunities. Gynecol Oncol. 2018;148(1):1 -2. PMID: 29304953.  
139. Wright A, Raman N, Staples P, Schonholz S, Cronin A, Carlson K, Keating N, Onnela J. 
The HOPE pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]: harnessing patient -reported outcomes and biometric data to 
enhance cancer care. . JCO Clin Cancer Inform. In press.  
140. Joly F, Hilpert F, Okamoto A, Stuart G, Ochiai K, Friedlander M, of the participants of 
the 5th Ovarian Cancer Consensus C. Fifth Ovarian Cancer Consensus Conference of the 
Gynecologic Cancer InterGroup: Recommendations on incorporating patient -report ed 
outcomes in clinical trials in epi[INVESTIGATOR_76296]. Eur J Cancer. 2017;78:133 -8. 
PMID: 28448857.  
141. Reeve BB, Mitchell SA, Dueck AC, Basch E, Cella D, Reilly CM, Minasian LM, 
Denicoff AM, O'Mara AM, Fisch MJ, et al. Recommended patient -reported core set of 
symptoms to measure in adult cancer treatment trials. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014;106(7). 
PMID: [ADDRESS_959749]. 2014;106(7). PMID: 25006190.  
143. Chen RC, Chang P, Vetter RJ, Lukka H, Stokes WA, Sanda MG, Watkins -Bruner D, 
Reeve BB, Sandler HM. Recommended patient -reported core set of symptoms to 
measure in prostate cancer treatment trials. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014;106(7). PMID: 
25006192.  
144. Basch E, Rogak LJ, Dueck AC. Methods for Implementing and Reporting Patient -
reported Outcome (PRO) Measures of Symptomatic Adverse Events in Cancer Clinical 
Trials. Clin Ther. 2016;38(4):821 -30. Epub 2016/04/06. PMID: 27045992.  
145. Cooley ME, Nayak MM, Abrahm JL, Braun IM, Rabin MS, Brzozowski J, Lathan C, 
Berry DL. Patient and caregiver perspectives on decision support for symptom and 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
62 
 quality of life management during cancer treatment: Implications for eHealth. 
Psychooncology. 2017;26(8):1105 -12. PMID: 28430396.  
146. NCI's Comprehensive Database: NIH National Cancer Institute;  [Accessed on 1/6/18]. 
Available from: https://www.cancer.gov/publications/pdq.  
147. Symptom & Side Effect Management Cancer Care Ontario;  [Accessed on 1/6/18]. 
Available from: https://www.cancercareontario.ca/en/symptom -management.  
148. Navigating Cancer Care: American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO); 2005 -2018 
[1/6/18]. Available from: https://www.cancer.net/navigating -cancer -care/side -effects.  
149. Managing Cancer -related Side Effects: American Cancer Society; 2018 [Accessed on 
1/6/18]. Available from: https://www.cancer.org/treatment/treatments -and-side-
effects/physical -side-effects.html.  
150. Kirk MA, Kelley C, Yankey N, Birken SA, Abadie B, Damschroder L. A systematic 
review of the use of the Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research. 
Implement Sci. 2016;11:72. Epub 2016/05/18. PMID: 27189233.  
151. Sittig DF, Singh H. A new sociotechnical model for studying health information 
technology in complex adaptive healthcare systems. Qual Saf Health Care. 2010;[ADDRESS_959750] 3:i68 -74. Epub 2010/10/27. PMID: 20959322.  
152. Bradley EH, Curry LA, Devers KJ. Qualitative data analysis for health services research: 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_5785], themes, and theory. Health Serv Res. 2007;42(4):1758 -72. Epub 
2007/02/09. PMID: 17286625.  
153. Thorne S, Oliffe JL, Stajduhar KI, Oglov V, Kim -Sing C, Hislop TG. Poor 
communication in cancer care: patient perspectives on what it is and what to do about it. 
Cancer Nurs. 2013;36(6):445 -53. Epub 2013/01/26. PMID: 23348667.  
154. Thorne S, Stephens J, Truant T. Building qualitative study design using nursing's 
disciplinary epi[INVESTIGATOR_706370]. J Adv Nurs. 2016;72(2):451 -60. Epub 2015/09/29. PMID: 
26412414.  
155. CFIR Guide: Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research; 2009 [Accessed on 
12/30/17]. Available from: http://www.cfirwiki.net/guide/app/index.html#/.  
156. O'Cathain A, Murphy E, Nicholl J. Three techniques for integrating data in mixed 
methods studies. Bmj. 2010;341:c4587. PMID: 20851841.  
157. Wagner EH, Austin BT, Davis C, Hindmarsh M, Schaefer J, Bonomi A. Improving 
chronic illness care: translating evidence into action. Health Aff (Millwood). 
2001;20(6):64 -78. PMID: 11816692.  
158. Enzinger AC, Wind JK, Frank E, McCleary NJ, Porter L, Cushing H, Abbott C, Cronin 
C, Enzinger PC, Meropol NJ, et al. A stakeholder -driven approach to improve the 
informed consent process for palliative chemotherapy. Patient Educ Couns. 
2017;100(8):152 7-36. PMID: 28359659.  
159. Mallow JA, Theeke LA, Theeke E, Mallow BK. Using Multidisciplinary Focus Groups to 
Inform the Development of mI SMART: A Nurse -Led Technology Intervention for 
Multiple Chronic Conditions. Nurs Res Pract. 2016;2016:7416728. PMID: 27504199.  
160. Rangachari P, Rissing P, Rethemeyer K. Awareness of evidence -based practices alone 
does not translate to implementation: insights from implementation research. Qual Manag 
Health Care. 2013;22(2):117 -25. PMID: 23542366.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
63 
 161. Fixsen D, Scott V, Blase K, Naoom S, Wagar L. When evidence is not enough: the 
challenge of implementing fall prevention strategies. J Safety Res. 2011;42(6):419 -22. 
PMID: 22152258.  
162. van Gemert -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_299556], Nijland N, van Limburg M, Ossebaard HC, Kelders SM, 
Eysenbach G, Seydel ER. A holistic framework to improve the uptake and impact of 
eHealth technologies. J Med Internet Res. 2011;13(4):e111. PMID: 22155738.  
163. Jensen RE, Rothrock NE, DeWitt EM, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_16614] B, Tucker CA, Crane HM, Forrest CB, 
Patrick DL, Fredericksen R, Shulman LM, et al. The role of technical advances in the 
adoption and integration of patient -reported outcomes in clinical care. Med Care. 
2015; 53(2):153 -9. PMID: 25588135.  
164. Dowding D, Randell R, Gardner P, Fitzpatrick G, Dykes P, Favela J, Hamer S, 
Whitewood -Moores Z, Hardiker N, Borycki E, et al. Dashboards for improving patient 
care: review of the literature. Int J Med Inform. 2015;84(2):87 -100. PMID: 25453274.  
165. Mlaver E, Schnipper JL, Boxer RB, Breuer DJ, Gershanik EF, Dykes PC, Massaro AF, 
Benneyan J, Bates DW, Lehmann LS. User -Centered Collaborative Design and 
Development of an Inpatient Safety Dashboard. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 
2017;43(12):676 -85. PMI D: 29173289.  
166. Dykes PC, Rozenblum R, Dalal A, Massaro A, Chang F, Clements M, Collins S, Donze 
J, Fagan M, Gazarian P, et al. Prospective Evaluation of a Multifaceted Intervention to 
Improve Outcomes in Intensive Care: The Promoting Respect and Ongoing Safety 
Throu gh Patient Engagement Communication and Technology Study. Crit Care Med. 
2017;45(8):e806 -e13. PMID: 28471886.  
167. Dykes PC, Stade D, Dalal A, Clements M, Collins S, Chang F, Fladger A, Getty G, 
Hanna J, Kandala R, et al. Strategies for Managing Mobile Devices for Use by 
[CONTACT_23189][INVESTIGATOR_706371]. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2015;2015:522 -31. PMID: 26958185.  
168. The pan -Canadian Oncology Symptom Triage and Remote Support (COSTaRS) project: 
Ottawa Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_39040]; 2017 [Accessed on 1/9/18]. Available from: 
https://ktcanada.ohri.ca/costars/Research/.  
169. Hemming K, Lilford R, Girling AJ. Stepped -wedge cluster randomised controlled trials: a 
generic framework including parallel and multiple -level designs. Stat Med. 
2015;34(2):181 -96. Epub 2014/10/28. PMID: 25346484.  
170. Girling AJ, Hemming K. Statistical efficiency and optimal design for stepped cluster 
studies under linear mixed effects models. Stat Med. 2016;35(13):2149 -66. Epub 
2016/01/11. PMID: 26748662.  
171. Hargreaves JR, Copas AJ, Beard E, Osrin D, Lewis JJ, Davey C, Thompson JA, Baio G, 
Fielding KL, Prost A. Five questions to consider before conducting a stepped wedge trial. 
Trials. 2015;16:350. Epub 2015/08/19. PMID: 26279013.  
172. Salazar MC, Rosen JE, Wang Z, Arnold BN, Thomas DC, Herbst RS, Kim AW, 
Detterbeck FC, Blasberg JD, Boffa DJ. Association of Delayed Adjuvant Chemotherapy 
With Survival After Lung Cancer Surgery. JAMA Oncol. 2017;3(5):610 -9. PMID: 
28056112.  
173. Alexander M, Blum R, Burbury K, Coutsouvelis J, Dooley M, Fazil O, Griffiths T, Ismail 
H, Joshi S, Love N, et al. Timely initiation of chemotherapy: a systematic literature 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
64 
 review of six priority cancers - results and recommendations for clinical practice. Intern 
Med J. 2017;47(1):16 -34. PMID: 27396268.  
174. Alexander M, Beattie -Manning R, Blum R, By[CONTACT_7943] J, Hornby C, Kearny C, Love N, 
McGlashan J, McKiernan S, Milar JL, et al. Guidelines for timely initiation of 
chemotherapy: a proposed framework for access to medical oncology and haematology 
cancer clinic s and chemotherapy services. Intern Med J. 2016;46(8):964 -9. PMID: 
27553996.  
175. Malietzis G, Mughal A, Currie AC, Anyamene N, Kennedy RH, Athanasiou T, Jenkins 
JT. Factors Implicated for Delay of Adjuvant Chemotherapy in Colorectal Cancer: A 
Meta -analysis of Observational Studies. Ann Surg Oncol. 2015;22(12):3793 -802. PMID: 
[ZIP_CODE] 086. 
176. Ettinger DS, Wood DE, Aisner DL, Akerley W, Bauman J, Chirieac LR, D'Amico TA, 
DeCamp MM, Dilling TJ, Dobelbower M, et al. Non -Small Cell Lung Cancer, Version 
5.2017, NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 
2017;15(4):50 4-35. PMID: 28404761.  
177. Benson AB, 3rd, Venook AP, Cederquist L, Chan E, Chen YJ, Cooper HS, Deming D, 
Engstrom PF, Enzinger PC, Fichera A, et al. Colon Cancer, Version 1.2017, NCCN 
Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2017;15(3):370 -98. 
PMID: 28 275037.  
178. Dillman DA SJ, Christian LM. . Internet, mail and mixed mode surveys: the tailored 
design method 2014 [Accessed on 12/30/17]. Available from: 
http://www.wiley.com/WileyCDA/WileyTitle/productCd -[PHONE_14742].html.  
179. Dillman DA, Smyth JD. Design effects in the transition to web -based surveys. Am J Prev 
Med. 2007;32([ADDRESS_959751]):S90 -6. PMID: 17466824.  
180. CAHPS® Cancer Care Survey: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2016 
[Accessed on 12/30/17]. Available from: 
https://www.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/wysiwyg/cahps/surveys -guidance/cancer/drug -
eng-cancer -552a.pdf.  
181. Cancer Surgery: Agency for Healthcare and Quality; 2016 [Accessed on 12/30/17]. 
Available from: https://www.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/wysiwyg/cahps/surveys -
guidance/cancer/surg -eng-cancer -553a.pdf.  
182. CAHPS®: Assessing Health Care Quality From the Patient's Perspective: Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality; 2016 [Accessed on 12/30/17]. Available from: 
https://www.ahrq.gov/cahps/about -cahps/cahps -program/cahps_brief.html.  
183. Bergeson SC, Gray J, Ehrmantraut LA, Laibson T, Hays RD. Comparing Web -based 
with Mail Survey Administration of the Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers 
and Systems (CAHPS((R))) Clinician and Group Survey. Prim Health Care. 2013;3. 
Epub 2013/10/01. PMID: 24078901.  
184. Drake KM, Hargraves JL, Lloyd S, Gallagher PM, Cleary PD. The effect of response 
scale, administration mode, and format on responses to the CAHPS Clinician and Group 
survey. Health Serv Res. 2014;49(4):1387 -99. Epub 2014/01/30. PMID: 24471975.  
185. Stucky BD, Hays RD, Edelen MO, Gurvey J, Brown JA. Possibilities for Shortening the 
CAHPS Clinician and Group Survey. Med Care. 2016;54(1):32 -7. Epub 2015/11/05. 
PMID: 26536332.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
65 
 186. Fielding the CAHPS® Cancer Care Survey 2017 [Accessed on 12/30/17]. Available 
from: https://www.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/wysiwyg/cahps/surveys -
guidance/cancer/fielding -cancer -53.pdf.  
187. Dudgeon D, King S, Howell D, Green E, Gilbert J, Hughes E, Lalonde B, Angus H, 
Sawka C. Cancer Care Ontario's experience with implementation of routine physical and 
psychological symptom distress screening. Psychooncology. 2012;21(4):357 -64. Epub 
2011 /02/11. PMID: 21308858.  
188. Key Drivers and Change Package: Oncology Care Model; 2017 [Accessed on 12/30/17]. 
Available from: https://innovation.cms.gov/Files/x/ocm -keydrivers -changepkg.pdf.  
189. Oncology Care Model: U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services; 2017 [Accessed 
on 12/8/2017]. Available from: https://innovation.cms.gov/initiatives/oncology -care.  
190. SEDD Database Documentation Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality; 2017 [Accessed on 1/9/18]. Available from: https://www.hcup -
us.ahrq.gov/db/state/sedddbdocumentation.jsp.  
191. SID Database Documentation Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality; 2017 [Accessed on 1/9/18]. Available from: https://www.hcup -
us.ahrq.gov/db/state/siddbdocumentation.jsp.  
192. Central Distributor HCUP: Availability of HCUP Databases: Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality; 2017 [Accessed on 1/9/18]. Available from: https://www.hcup -
us.ahrq.gov/db/availability_public.jsp.  
193. Proctor E, Silmere H, Raghavan R, Hovmand P, Aarons G, Bunger A, Griffey R, Hensley 
M. Outcomes for implementation research: conceptual distinctions, measurement 
challenges, and research agenda. Adm Policy Ment Health. 2011;38(2):65 -76. Epub 
2010/10/2 0. PMID: 20957426.  
194. Stetler CB, Legro MW, Wallace CM, Bowman C, Guihan M, Hagedorn H, Kimmel B, 
Sharp ND, Smith JL. The role of formative evaluation in implementation research and the 
QUERI experience. J Gen Intern Med. 2006;[ADDRESS_959752] 2:S1 -8. Epub 2006/04/28. PMID: 
166379 54. 
195. Evans A GD, Maher L. British National Health Service Sustainability Model  
Version 1.0 (Hybrid Conjoint): British National Health Service Modernization Agency; 2002.  
196. Fetters MD, Curry LA, Creswell JW. Achieving integration in mixed methods designs -
principles and practices. Health Serv Res. 2013;48(6 Pt 2):2134 -56. PMID: 24279835.  
197. Powell BJ, Waltz TJ, Chinman MJ, Damschroder LJ, Smith JL, Matthieu MM, Proctor 
EK, Kirchner JE. A refined compi[INVESTIGATOR_157793]: results from the 
Expert Recommendations for Implementing Change (ERIC) project. Implement Sci. 
2015;10 :21. Epub 2015/04/19. PMID: 25889199.  
198. Welcome to RE -AIM.org! : RE -AIM; 2018 [Accessed on 1/8/18]. Available from: 
http://re -aim.org/.  
199. Zhang B LW, Jahanzeb M, and Hassett MJ. Use of patient -reported outcome measures in 
Quality Onocology Practice Initiative registered practices: Results of a national survey. 
March, 2017; Orlando, FL.  
200. Pusic AL, Matros E, Fine N, Buchel E, Gordillo GM, Hamill JB, Kim HM, Qi J, 
Albornoz C, Klassen AF, et al. Patient -Reported Outcomes 1 Year After Immediate 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/[ADDRESS_959753] Reconstruction: Results of the Mastectomy Reconstruction Outcomes Consortium 
Study. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35(22):2499 -506. PMID: 28346808.  
201. Davis J. Epic tops [ADDRESS_959754] in KLAS awards, securing top spot for 7th straight year; see 
complete winners: Healthcare IT News; 2017 [Accessed on 1/6/18]. Available from: 
http://www.healthcareitnews.com/news/epic -tops-[ADDRESS_959755]-klas-awards -securing -top-
spot-7th-straight -year-see-complete -winners.  
202. Rigby M, Magrabi F, Scott P, Doupi P, Hypponen H, Ammenwerth E. Steps in Moving 
Evidence -Based Health Informatics from Theory to Practice. Healthc Inform Res. 
2016;22(4):255 -60. PMID: 27895956.  
203. Harrington L CHC. Usability Evaluation Handbook for Electronic Health Records: 
HIMSS; 2014.  
204. Daigrepont J E, CAPPM, McGrath D, CRNP. . Complete Guide and Toolkit to 
Successful EHR Adoption: HIMSS; 2011.  
205. Krug S. Rocket Surgery Made Easy: The Do -It-Yourself Guide to Finding and Fixing 
Usability Problems: New Riders; 2009.  
206. Bennett AV, Dueck AC, Mitchell SA, Mendoza TR, Reeve BB, Atkinson TM, Castro 
KM, Denicoff A, Rogak LJ, Harness JK, et al. Mode equivalence and acceptability of 
tablet computer -, interactive voice response system -, and paper -based administration of 
the U.S. National Cancer Institute's Patient -Reported Outcomes version of the Common 
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (PRO -CTCAE). Health Qual Life Outcomes. 
2016;14:24. Epub 2016/02/20. PMID: 26892667.  
207. Mendoza TR, Dueck AC, Bennett AV, Mitchell SA, Reeve BB, Atkinson TM, Li Y, 
Castro KM, Denicoff A, Rogak LJ, et al. Evaluation of different recall periods for the US 
National Cancer Institute's PRO -CTCAE. Clin Trials. 2017;14(3):255 -63. Epub 
2017/05/2 7. PMID: 28545337.  
208. Ross TR, Ng D, Brown JS, Pardee R, Hornbrook MC, Hart G, Steiner JF. The HMO 
Research Network Virtual Data Warehouse: A Public Data Model to Support 
Collaboration. EGEMS (Wash DC). 2014;2(1):1049. PMID: 25848584.  
209. Common Data Element (CDE) Resource Portal: NIH U.S. National Library of Medicine; 
2012 [Accessed on 1/7/18]. Available from: http://cde.nih.gov.  
210. Hussey MA, Hughes JP. Design and analysis of stepped wedge cluster randomized trials. 
Contemp Clin Trials. 2007;28(2):182 -91. Epub 2006/07/11. PMID: 16829207.  
211. Hemming K, Haines TP, Chilton PJ, Girling AJ, Lilford RJ. The stepped wedge cluster 
randomised trial: rationale, design, analysis, and reporting. Bmj. 2015;350:h391. Epub 
2015/02/11. PMID: 25662947.  
212. Ariti C. Walter W Stroup, Generalized linear mixed models, modern concepts, methods 
and applications. Stroup Walter W , Generalized linear mixed models, modern concepts, 
methods and applications. CRC Press: Boca Raton, 2012; pound59.99 p. 555. Stat 
Methods Med Res. 2017;26(2):1043 -4. Epub 2015/01/01. PMID: 25549967.  
213. Schafer JL. Multiple imputation: a primer. Stat Methods Med Res. 1999;8(1):3 -15. Epub 
1999/05/29. PMID: 10347857.  
214. Hemming K, Taljaard M. Sample size calculations for stepped wedge and cluster 
randomised trials: a unified approach. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 2016;69:137 -46. Epub 
2015/09/08. PMID: 26344808.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
67 
 215. Eldridge SM, Costelloe CE, Kahan BC, Lancaster GA, Kerry SM. How big should the 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_706363]? Stat Methods Med Res. 2016;25(3):1039 -
56. Epub 2015/06/14. PMID: 26071431.  
216. Campbell MK, Mollison J, Grimshaw JM. Cluster trials in implementation research: 
estimation of intracluster correlation coefficients and sample size. Stat Med. 
2001;20(3):391 -9. Epub 2001/02/17. PMID: 11180309.  
217. Yost KJ, Eton DT, Garcia SF, Cella D. Minimally important differences were estimated 
for six Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System -Cancer scales in 
advanced -stage cancer patients. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 2011;64(5):507 -16. Epub 2011/03/31 . 
PMID: 21447427.  
218. Temel JS, Greer JA, El -Jawahri A, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_24127], Park ER, Jackson VA, Back AL, Kamdar M, 
Jacobsen J, Chittenden EH, et al. Effects of Early Integrated Palliative Care in Patients 
With Lung and GI Cancer: A Randomized Clinical Trial. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35(8) :834-
41. Epub 2016/12/29. PMID: 28029308.  
219. Chen CX, Kroenke K, Stump TE, Kean J, Carpenter JS, Krebs EE, Bair MJ, Damush 
TM, Monahan PO. Estimating minimally important differences for the PROMIS(R) Pain 
Interference Scales: results from three randomized clinical trials. Pain. 2017. Epub 
2017/12/05. PMID: 29200181.  
220. Analyzing CAHPS Survey Data: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2016 
[Accessed on 1/3/18]. Available from: https://www.ahrq.gov/cahps/surveys -
guidance/helpful -resources/analysis/index.html.  
221. Xie T, Waksman J. Design and sample size estimation in clinical trials with clustered 
survival times as the primary endpoint. Stat Med. 2003;22(18):2835 -46. Epub 
2003/09/04. PMID: 12953283.  
222. Ritchie JP, Spencer L. Qualitative data analysis for applied policy research. London: 
Analyzing Qualitative Data; 1994.  
223. Pope C, Ziebland S, Mays N. Qualitative research in health care. Analysing qualitative 
data. BMJ. 2000;320(7227):114 -6. PMID: 10625273.  
224. Richie JP, Spencer L. Qualitative Data Analysis for Applied Policy Research in The 
Qualitative Researchers Companion. Huberman AMaM, M.B., editor. London: Sage 
Publications; 2002.  
225. Creswell JW. Qualitative Inquiry & Research Design: Choosing among Five 
Approached: Sage Publications; 2013.  
226. Damschroder LJ, Lowery JC. Evaluation of a large -scale weight management program 
using the consolidated framework for implementation research (CFIR). Implement Sci. 
2013;8:51. Epub 2013/05/15. PMID: 23663819.  
227.     Preacher  KJ, Hayes  AF. SPSS and SAS procedures for estimating indirect effects in 
simple mediation models.  Behav Res Methods Instrum Comput. 2004 Nov;36(4):717 -31. 
228. Rao AD, Sugar EA, Chang DT, Goodman KA, Hacker -Prietz A, Rosati LM, Columbo L, 
O'Reilly E, Fisher GA, Zheng L, et al. Patient -reported outcomes of a multicenter phase [ADDRESS_959756] Radiat Oncol. 2016;6(6):417 -24. PMID: 27552809.  
229. Ribi K, Luo W, Bernhard J, Francis PA, Burstein HJ, Ciruelos E, Bellet M, Pavesi L, 
Lluch A, Visini M, et al. Adjuvant Tamoxifen Plus Ovarian Function Suppression Versus 
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/[ADDRESS_959757] Cancer: Patient -Reported 
Outcomes in the Suppression of Ovarian Function Trial. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(14):1601 -
10. PMID: 27022111.  
230. Lee SJ, Logan B, Westervelt P, Cutler C, Woolfrey A, Khan SP, Waller EK, Maziarz RT, 
Wu J, Shaw BE, et al. Comparison of Patient -Reported Outcomes in 5 -Year Survivors 
Who Received Bone Marrow vs Peripheral Blood Unrelated Donor Transplantation: 
Long -term Follow -up of a Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Oncol. 2016;2(12):1583 -9. 
PMID: 27532508.  
231. Brown CH, Curran G, Palinkas LA, Aarons GA, Wells KB, Jones L, Collins LM, Duan 
N, Mittman BS, Wallace A, et al. An Overview of Research and Evaluation Designs for 
Dissemination and Implementation. Annu Rev Public Health. 2017;38:1 -22. PMID: 
28384085.  
232. Glaze J. Epic Systems draws on literature greats for its next expansion: Wisconsin State 
Journal; 2015 [1/6/18]. Available from: http://host.madison.com/news/local/govt -and-
politics/epic -systems -draws -on-literature -greats -for-its-next-expansion/articl e_4d1cf67c -
2abf-5cfd-8ce1 -2da60ed84194.html.  
233. Cancer Stat Facts: National Cancer Institute; 2017 [Accessed on 12/29/17]. Available 
from: https://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/.  
234. Traeger L, McDonnell TM, McCarty CE, Greer JA, El -Jawahri A, Temel JS. Nursing 
intervention to enhance outpatient chemotherapy symptom management: Patient -reported 
outcomes of a randomized controlled trial. Cancer. 2015;121(21):3905 -13. PMID: 
26194461.  
235. Khullar OV, Rajaei MH, Force SD, Binongo JN, Lasanajak Y, Robertson S, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_148016] A, 
Sancheti MS, Lipscomb J, Gillespie TW, et al. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_706372]. Ann Thorac Surg. 2017;104(1):245 -53. PMID: 28483154.  
236. Shi Q, Wang XS, Vaporciyan AA, Rice DC, Popat KU, Cleeland CS. Patient -Reported 
Symptom Interference as a Measure of Postsurgery Functional Recovery in Lung Cancer. 
J Pain Symptom Manage. 2016;52(6):822 -31. PMID: 27521528.  
237. Frick MA, Vachani CC, Hampshire MK, Bach C, Arnold -Korzeniowski K, Metz JM, 
Hill-Kayser CE. Survivorship after lower gastrointestinal cancer: Patient -reported 
outcomes and planning for care. Cancer. 2017;123(10):1860 -8. PMID: 28055110.  
238. Gilbert A, Ziegler L, Martland M, Davidson S, Efficace F, Sebag -Montefiore D, 
Velikova G. Systematic Review of Radiation Therapy Toxicity Reporting in Randomized 
Controlled Trials of Rectal Cancer: A Comparison of Patient -Reported Outcomes and 
Clinici an Toxicity Reporting. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015;92(3):555 -67. PMID: 
26068490.  
239. Cowan RA, Suidan RS, Andikyan V, Rezk YA, Einstein MH, Chang K, Carter J, 
Zivanovic O, Jewell EJ, Abu -Rustum NR, et al. Electronic patient -reported outcomes 
from home in patients recovering from major gynecologic cancer surgery: A prospective 
study measuri ng symptoms and health -related quality of life. Gynecol Oncol. 
2016;143(2):362 -6. PMID: 27637366.  
240. Chambers DA, Norton WE. The Adaptome: Advancing the Science of Intervention 
Adaptation. Am J Prev Med. 2016;51([ADDRESS_959758] 2):S124 -31. PMID: 27371105.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: SIMPRO Research Center: Integration and Implementation of PROs for Symptom 
Management in Oncology Practice  
Version  9, August 4 , 202 3 
sIRB: Western IRB Tracking No.  20182593 ; Study No. 1248093  
Sponsor: DF/HCC Investigator Michael Hassett  MD MPH Protocol No. 18 -986R/18 -734 
 
69 
 241. Chambers DA, Feero WG, Khoury MJ. Convergence of Implementation Science, 
Precision Medicine, and the Learning Health Care System: A New Model for Biomedical 
Research. Jama. 2016;315(18):1941 -2. PMID: 27163980.  
242. Interactive presentations, workshops and meetings: Mentimeter;  [Accessed on 1/6/18]. 
Available from: https://www.mentimeter.com/.  
243. Johnson KE, Tachibana C, Coronado GD, Dember LM, Glasgow RE, Huang SS, Martin 
PJ, Richards J, Rosenthal G, Septimus E, et al. A guide to research partnerships for 
pragmatic clinical trials. Bmj. 2014;349:g6826. PMID: 25446054.  
244. Mallow JA, Theeke LA, Barnes ER, Whetsel T, Mallow BK. Using mHealth Tools to 
Improve Rural Diabetes Care Guided by [CONTACT_628323]. Online J Rural Nurs 
Health Care. 2014;14(1):43 -65. PMID: 26029005.  
245. Mallow JA, Theeke LA, Long DM, Whetsel T, Theeke E, Mallow BK. Study protocol: 
mobile improvement of self -management ability through rural technology (mI SMART). 
Springerplus. 2015;4:423. PMID: 26301170.  
246. Smeltzer M, Klesges L, Lee YS, Faris N, Fehnel C, Houston -Harris C, Ray M, Robbins 
E, Osarogiagbon R. PS01.39: Reach and Adoption of a Surgical Intervention to Improve 
Pathologic Nodal Staging Across Healthcare Systems within the US Mid -South: Topic: 
Surge ry. J Thorac Oncol. 2016;11(11S):S293. PMID: 27969507.  
247. Yu X, Klesges LM, Smeltzer MP, Osarogiagbon RU. Measuring improvement in 
populations: implementing and evaluating successful change in lung cancer care. Transl 
Lung Cancer Res. 2015;4(4):373 -84. PMID: 26380178.  
248. Bartels SJ, Pratt SI, Mueser KT, Forester BP, Wolfe R, Cather C, Xie H, McHugo GJ, 
Bird B, Aschbrenner KA, et al. Long -term outcomes of a randomized trial of integrated 
skills training and preventive healthcare for older adults with serious mental ill ness. Am J 
Geriatr Psychiatry. 2014;22(11):1251 -61. PMID: 23954039.  
249. Pratt SI, Naslund JA, Wolfe RS, Santos M, Bartels SJ. Automated telehealth for 
managing psychiatric instability in people with serious mental illness. J Ment Health. 
2015;24(5):261 -5. PMID: 24988132.  
250. Naslund JA, Aschbrenner KA, Kim SJ, McHugo GJ, Unutzer J, Bartels SJ, Marsch LA. 
Health behavior models for informing digital technology interventions for individuals 
with mental illness. Psychiatr Rehabil J. 2017;40(3):325 -35. PMID: 28182469.  
251. Fioretos M, Schersten B. Establishment of research in primary health care in Greece. 
Experiences of Greek -Swedish collaboration. Fam Pract. 1991;8(4):347 -9. PMID: 
1800198.  
 
 
 
 