 
 
 
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
Evaluation of Implementing FLOW in VISN 19:  
Transitioning Stabilized Mental Health Patients to Primary Care  
 
PEX 19 -004 
8/15/[ADDRESS_1283226] priority problems facing the Veterans 
Health Administration (VHA) and VISN 19. Chronic staffing shortages exist for both psychologists and 
psychiatrists.1,[ADDRESS_1283227] intensive 
level of care that is appropriate to their condition8,9 and VA has embraced stepped care.10 As part of this, VA 
has rolled out primary care mental health integration (PCMHI) programs at every VA.11 Primary care, in 
partnership with PCHMI, prov ides access to maintenance treatment (e.g., ongoing psychotropic prescriptions). 
VA mental health manuals encourage the transition from specialty mental health to primary care for patients whose mental health has stabilized and can be addressed in the prim ary care.
11,[ADDRESS_1283228].11 In the absence of guidance, few patients are appropriately transitioned and 
specialty mental health panels remain full, contributing to access problems.  
To address these issues, our team partnered with VISNs 16 & [ADDRESS_1283229] (EMR) note template 
to document care transit ions. In cases where providers believe continued specialty mental health treatment 
is warranted or patients object to the transition, patients remain in specialty mental health. This approach has 
high acceptability to remitted patients because of perception of less stigma and reduction in appointment 
burden when care is managed in primary care.13 The FLOW program fits with VA national priorities to ‘focus 
resources more efficiently’ and ‘improve timeliness of services.’ To implement FLOW, external facilitat ors work 
with site -based internal facilitators and providers in specialty mental health and primary care using evidence-
based implementation facilitation strategies and feeding back data to individual sites to guide implementation.  
FLOW was first implement ed at [ADDRESS_1283230] site indicates that 424 unique patients transitioned from specialty mental health to 
primary care and of those, only nine (2.1%) returned to MH after that transition, suggesting that the majority of 
transfers were successful. Implementation success differed dramatically across the original pi[INVESTIGATOR_913229] a ssociated with 
success. To maximize timely access for new mental health patients, VISN 19 is embracing the FLOW program. 
Given that VACO is moving towards implementing this program nationwide (personal communication 
from [CONTACT_913259] McQuire in OMHSP and Dr . Timothy Dresselhaus in Office of Primary Care),  it is 
essential to examine the impact of this program on VA patients and clinics and understand the factors that facilitate implementation success. We are partnering with VISN [ADDRESS_1283231] rigorous evaluation of FLOW’s clinical impact and the 
implementation factors affecting success at each site.  
Specific aims for this proposal, co -developed with VISN 19, are:  
1. To evaluate the impact of FLOW on patient care, relative to standard care, using the evaluation framework 
RE-AIM, including:  
a. Reach of the program: % of clinic patients transitioned to PC  
b. Effectiveness: % of patients with successful transition to primary care and impact on clinic access  and 
provider time  for incoming SMH patients  
c. Adoption: % of providers in the selected clinics transitioning patients to primary care  
d. Implementation: use of all FLOW components, based upon the implementation checklist (see 
Appendix)  
e. Maintenance: sustainment of FLOW after withdrawal of external facilitation 
2. To evaluate the relationships between successful FLOW implementation and implementation factors as aligned with the Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research model (CFIR)
14, including 
intervention characteristics, inner and outer context (e.g., staffing, resources, readiness to change), 
characteristics of individuals (e.g., leadership, facilitators and providers), and the process of implementation 
(e.g., the process of  implementation facilitation).   
A. Background and Significance  
Access is a priority problem. Improving access and timelines s of services is one of the five priorities in 
the [ADDRESS_1283232] in specialty 
mental health (SMH)1,[ADDRESS_1283233] efficient use of existing SMH providers, patients who are improved or remitted should 
be transitioned from intensive SMH treatment to a less intensive setting, primary care (PC). For our purposes, 
transition to PC is defined as an intentional, planful discharge from SMH and transfer of any prescription and 
monitoring responsibilities to the PCP, when the patient has sufficiently recovered such that they no longer 
need intensive SMH car e. This will increase availability in specialty providers’ panels and provide faster access 
for new patients referred to SMH. This approach also has high acceptability to remitted patients because of 
perception of less stigma and reduction in appointment burden in PC.[ADDRESS_1283234] intensive level of care  
appropriate.8,9,13 VA has embraced stepped c are10 and rolled out primary care mental health integration 
(PCMHI) programs at every VA.11 Primary care, in partnership with PCHMI, provides access to maintenance 
treatment (e.g., ongoing psychotropic prescriptions). VA mental health manuals encourage the  transition from 
SMH back to PC for patients who have stabilized and can be addressed in the primary care setting.11,[ADDRESS_1283235] to ‘graduate’ successfully sends patients the message that continued dependence upon SMH is expected.
 
  
 
Recently, VA’s Office of Mental Health and Suicide Prevention (OMHSP) has embraced the Mental 
Health Continuum of Care Model (CoC; Figure 1).19 It incorporates stepped care, the recovery model, and 
measurement -based care to determine when to step up or step down in care intensity. According to OMHSP’s 
Continuum of Care workgroup report, “ Within stepped care, the basic tenet is t o start with the least resource -
intensive, yet likely to be effective, treatments, only 'steppi[INVESTIGATOR_158002]' to more intensive/specialist services as 
clinically indicated and ‘steppi[INVESTIGATOR_148520]’ once maximum clinical benefit has been obtained from the higher level 
of care.” Further, it indicates that “discussions regarding steppi[INVESTIGATOR_913230].”
[ADDRESS_1283236] 
VA providers and clinics in making this clinically important decision and implementing processes to facilitate it.  
There is no current solution for the problem of care transitions. In the absence of processes to 
facilitate discharge, patients who recover and no longer need SMH are left with 3 options: 1) stay in SMH and 
continue attending multiple unneeded yearly visits; 2) disengage from SMH by [INVESTIGATOR_8614] -showing and discontinuing 
medications without supervision; or 3) ask their SMH provider to transition them to PC. Given the current poor coordination, lack of agreements between SMH and PC, and lack of experience with these transitions, option [ADDRESS_1283237] (EMR) templates 
for transition to PC exist in only a few facilities nationwide and are rarely used.
19 Inpatient
Residential
Specialty Mental Health
General Mental Health
Primary Care Mental Health Integration 
(PCMHI) and PACT
Self-Directed CareFlow 
Program 
Impacts  
Figure 1. FLOW fits 
with OMHSP’s Mental  
Health Continuum of 
Care Model  
 
The FLOW program assists facilities with transitions. The FLOW program was created to address 
this need. FLOW consists of EMR -based criteria to identify patients who may be eligible for transition to PC 
and a user -friendly online report to communicate this information to clinicians. The criteria were developed by 
[CONTACT_913241] a Veteran community advisory board. Current criteria 
are that patients must be taking three or fewer psychotropic medications, not be taking antipsychotics, lithium, 
or a mood stabilizer  when bipolar disorder is present, had no new psychotropic medications in the past [ADDRESS_1283238] not be high 
risk for suicide based upon REACHVet score. Because these criteria rely upon information available in administrative databases, they may miss subjective s igns that the patient is not ready for transition such as 
milder suicidal ideation or near -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_913231]. As such, provider clinical judgment based upon the 
individual patient’s current functioning, strengths, and resources, is the final determi nation of eligibility. The 
process of transition starts first with identification of potential eligibility via the online FLOW report. SMH 
providers review the list and determine which patients they believe are clinically appropriate, and discuss this 
with the patient at their next appointment to determine if the patient feels ready to transition. If yes, the SMH 
provider contacts the PCP to facilitate transition. If a patient is reluctant to transition, the SMH provider may make a plan for what level of functioning would indicate recovery sufficient to transition. FLOW materials 
discuss how measurement -based care can be used to guide decisions about transition and education 
materials for providers in SMH and PC about how to have therapeutic conversations wi th patients about 
transition. It also contains education materials for patients about the transition, how to address service-connection concerns, what to do if they have a resurgence in symptoms, and an EMR template to document 
transitions and facilitate c ommunication to PCPs.  
Implementation of FLOW begins with weekly meetings between the external facilitator, [CONTACT_84135], and the 
identified local champi[INVESTIGATOR_490724] a site. Local champi[INVESTIGATOR_913232] a list of criteria including interpersonal c haracteristics (e.g., strong communicator) and role and tenure at an organization.  The FLOW 
external facilitator meets with the local champi[INVESTIGATOR_913233], provider adoption, transition success, process data, and to problem sol ve barriers that arise. VISN 19 believes that having an 
official channel with processes, coordination, and support for these transitions will enhance the Veteran’s 
experience with transition to PC and encourage a focus on recovery, all while increasing acc ess for future 
patient referrals to SMH (personal communication, [CONTACT_913260], 10/5/18).  
FLOW is effective in pi[INVESTIGATOR_913234]. We pi[INVESTIGATOR_913235] 16 and 17. The process began with 
meetings with leadership and provider stakeholders. Formative qualitative interviews were conducted with 
providers in SMH, PCMHI, and PC before implementation. Qualitative data indicated that providers from all 
settings noted several strengths, including an increase in access to care for newly referred Veterans, less 
appointment burden on recovered patients, and signifying to recovered patients that they were better. 
Providers were concerned that PC could not offer the same level of care as SMH and that some Veterans may be reluctant to transition due to concerns about symptom reoccurrence, loss of service connection, or alliance 
with their SMH provider. To address these concerns, provider and patient brochures were altered where 
necessary to allay concerns. After multiple meetings with VISN and local facility operations  partners, providers 
in the various clinics, and stakeholders, FLOW was implemented.  
Evaluation Framework.  Guiding the evaluation of FLOW was the Reach, Effectiveness, Adoption, 
Implementation, Maintenance framework (RE -AIM).
[ADDRESS_1283239] to as sess outcomes in five 
facets: reach, or % of the population affected by a program; effectiveness, or the impact of the program upon 
the patients and clinics; adoption, or the proportion of providers who use the program; implementation, whether 
the program was implemented as intended; and maintenance of the program over time after implementation.  
FLOW increases access. During implementation, 1,566 patients in participating clinics were identified as 
potentially meeting criteria for transition and 411 unique recovered MH patients transitioned from MH to PC. Of 
those, only nine (2%) returned to MH for care after the transition. The patients transitioned represented 16% of 
all unique patients (n=2,504) treated in the clinics implementing FLOW, suggesting that FLOW had a 
significant impact on workflow and access. After our team left the site, they continued using FLOW to transition 
a further 205 patients and independently implemented the program at a nearby [CONTACT_913242]. Initial data suggests 
that FLOW increased access and timeliness for new patients to obtain a SMH appointment (Figure 2). This 
increase was not due to an increase in mental health staffing, as MH FTEE per [ADDRESS_1283240] liked. Qualitative patient interviews suggested 
that many patients felt ready for transition, although some were surprised by [CONTACT_913243], which is incorporated in FLOW.  
 
Figure 2.  % patients who received a SMH appointment within [ADDRESS_1283241] transitioned 7 and 8% of unique MH patients. At site 4, 
implementation is paused due to inability to enact projec t tasks. Substantial variation also exists in provider 
adoption (100% and 92% at sites 1 and 2, 33% at site 3). Sites differ significantly in readiness to implement 
and more work is needed to understand key barriers and facilitators to refine implementation methods.  
Need for further evaluation.  FLOW has recently been disseminated to other V17 sites through a 
passive implementation strategy --providing sites with FLOW materials and a monthly consultation call. Of the [ADDRESS_1283242] of this program on patients and clinics and understand what 
facilitates implementation success.  Further evaluation in a new VISN -wide setting will a) indicate effectiveness 
in a larger scale evaluation effort and b) allow us to understand which implementation factors are influential 
and provide insights that can shape the implementation strategies used in a later national rollout.  
With approximately 1.8 million Veterans receiving specialty mental health care nationally (Clinic Practice 
Management Dashboard [CPMD], data extracted 4/18/19), a national rollout of FLOW has the potential to 
dramatically increase access. If sites achieve the same transition rate as in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] (7%), an estimated 
126,000 to 288,888 patie nts would transition. Given that the average SMH patient has 7.5 SMH visits per year 
(including assessments, medication management, therapy, groups, and social work visits (CPMD, data 
extracted 4/18/19), this translates into nearly 1 to 1.4 million freed up appointment slots in SMH per year.  
 
B. Research Overlap  
We searched the suggested websites using the search terms ‘mental health’ and ‘access,’ ‘transition,’ 
‘discharge,’ ‘stepped care’ and ‘coordination of care’ and found no similar studies. Existing s tudies of care 
transitions focus on transition into MH treatment, or from inpatient treatment to outpatient SMH. VACO 
indicated that no similar program exists and reported that only a few sites nationwide had EMR notes for 
formalizing the transition from S MH to PC but that these were rarely used, had little impact on transitions, and 
that no incentives or guidance exists to facilitate use. Clinical Practice Guidelines discuss the importance of using stepped care to intensify treatment but do not discuss when or how to transition to less intensive care.  
 
C. Methods (Evaluation Plan)  
Partnership process. Partners in VISN [ADDRESS_1283243], we provided them with data on how FLOW impacted these met rics when 88% 88%91%93%96%
869196
5/2016-10/2016 11/2016-5/2017 5/2017-10/2017 11/2017-5/2017 5/2017-9/[ADDRESS_1283244] in participating, 7 sites were able to promise 4 hours per week of protected time for a 
provider to be the inter nal facilitator at their sites, with two more tentatively committing. Our partners noted that 
they were willing to commit to this because they were certain that the financial and time investment “would be returned many times over in freed up FTEE to see new patients in MH” (personal communication, [CONTACT_913261], 10/5/18). Project aims were developed in collaboration with VISN [ADDRESS_1283245]. The other sites will receive a toolkit for implementing 
FLOW and optional monthly cal ls for support. This may provide supplemental data regarding whether the 
intensive implementation approach at the primary 7- 9 sites is necessary, or how many sites receiving the 
scaled down approach are able to implement FLOW. Because the EMR template will  be implemented at all 
VISN 19 facilities, we will obtain data on the number of patients transitioned to primary care throughout VISN 19, regardless of their participation in this program evaluation process. Exploratory , descriptive  analyses  will 
compare i mplementation of FLOW at the 7- 9 primary sites to the less intensive implementation sites.  
Study Design Overview. A cluster -randomized stepped wedge design
21,22 will examine implementation 
of FLOW in VISN 19. We chose a stepped wedge (see Table 1) because VISN [ADDRESS_1283246] the intra -class 
corre lations in sites to be large. We will use the new CONSORT extension for cluster -randomized stepped-
wedge trials to report methodological considerations and outcomes.23 Sites will be matched on resources and 
staffing ratios and simultaneously randomized to the time in which they begin the intervention (i.e., step 1, 2, or 
3) on the basis of matching. Implementation of the program will be examined in three phases. First, data will be 
collected about the frequency of patient transition during the baseline phas e. Next, FLOW will be implemented 
for 1 year with external and internal facilitation, and program evaluation will be guided by [INVESTIGATOR_21392] -AIM (see Table 
1). Finally, there will be a minimum of a 1 -year maintenance phase during which only data collection will occur . 
Sites. Seven to nine VAMCs and very large CBOCs (>10,000 unique patients) from VISN [ADDRESS_1283247] in the nation.  
Randomization.  Sites will be randomized based upon balancing relevant characteristics across cohorts. 
We propose to match upon: facility complexity, staffing ratios in SMH and PC, and PCMHI penetration rate. We 
will create a composite variable based upon each site’s performance compared to the average participating 
site. A z -score will be created for each selected variable and averaged to create a final composite variable. 
Based upon FY19 data, it appears that the three larger VAMCs would be in the higher resource group whereas the smallest VAM C and the [ADDRESS_1283248] data when the study commences and the final number of sites is determined. We will ensure that each cohort in the stepped wedge has 1 -2 higher resource sites and 1- 2 lower resource sites. If 
9 sites participate, we will use a tertile split for matching.  A random number generator will be used to assign 
sites to the step in which they receive the intervention. Sites will be randomized to rec eive FLOW 
implementation immediately in sequence 1 or to wait until steps 2 or 3 (see Table 1 for timeline) but will not be informed of their randomization until it is time for the site to begin implementation.  
 
Table 1. Project timeline.  
 Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  
Months  Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 
Startup  X            
Cohort 1 (2 sites)   Implementation  Maintenance   
Cohort 2 (3 sites)    Implementation  Maintenance   
Cohort 3 (2 sites)     Implementation  Maintenance   
Assessment timepoints              
Data analysis, papers           X X X 
Report to VISN leaders  X X X X X X X X X X X X 
 
Pre-implementation data- collection. Before implementation (i.e., Q1, Q2, or Q3), baseline rates of 
patient transition from SMH to PC will be examined. Some sites currently have an EMR note template for 
discharge or transition out of specialty mental health; others document this as needed in medication 
management session EMR notes. We will use VA administrative databases to identify the pre -FLOW  discharge 
rate. We will also collect assessments of implementation factors tappi[INVESTIGATOR_913236]: intervention 
characteristics, outer setting, inner setting, characteristics of individuals, and process.  
Implementation of FLOW. Implementation of FLOW will occur by [CONTACT_913244], an 
evidence- based strategy to change clinical practice, guided by [CONTACT_41309] -based implementation facilitation 
manual.[ADDRESS_1283249] of ideal Internal Facilitator (IF) characteristics 
(e.g., strong communicator, opi[INVESTIGATOR_403641], prior QI or PE experience, well -established in their current position) 
and will nominate a provider who fits these. Next, the FLOW implementation team meets with providers from the affected clinics: SMH, PCMHI, and PC, to explain the rationale and procedures and answer any questions 
or concerns. With the input of providers and the local champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394], local processes are identified to support 
communication between different clinics about patients transitioning. Sites are given access to the online 
FLOW report identifying patients who meet criteria for transition, provider and patient materials to explain the process of transition, and an EMR templ ate with a progress note title to document the transition. The project 
team initially holds weekly meetings with the local champi[INVESTIGATOR_913237], and 
implementation is flexibly differentiated to meet each site’s identified barriers (see Table 4 for information about 
strategies employed by [CONTACT_466118]). Data will fed back to the internal facilitator on a monthly basis, including 
information about both the process of implementation and implementation success. Process data will include 
barriers and facilitators, types of actions or interventions the IF enacted to overcome barriers or leverage 
facilitators, assistance from the FLOW team, and local climate and context information arising that affects 
implementation. Implementation success metri cs include the number of patients eligible and transitioned, 
which providers are engaging in FLOW and which providers have yet to transition any patients, etc. The internal facilitator is responsible for local implementation activities guided by [CONTACT_913245].  
Although the implementation strategies used are more resource intensive than passive implementation, 
they are nevertheless more resource efficient than other mental health program implementation efforts in VA 
such as the evidence- based psychotherapy rollouts
28 and thus likely to be scalable for future national 
implementation. The primary ‘cost’ to each facility implementing FLOW is 4 hours per week of one provider’s 
time in the early stages of implementation, with smaller time invest ment as time goes on. Based upon pi[INVESTIGATOR_116378], this provides a return on investment of freeing up many hours of specialty mental health provider time to 
see new mental health patients and substantial improvements in SAIL access metrics.  
 
Measures/Data Source s 
Outcomes. Program effectiveness outcomes were developed with VISN 19 leaders and aligned with the RE -
AIM framework. VISN 19’s priorities are to 1) increase access to timely mental health services for new patients, and 2) ensure that patients who are transitioned bac k to primary care have a clinically appropriate transition. 
Considering these priorities, we developed the outcomes discussed in detail in Table 2.  
Assessment of implementation factors/determinants and their relationship to FLOW implementation 
success is guided by [CONTACT_913246] (CFIR),
14 which is composed of 
five major domains: intervention characteristics, outer setting, inner setting, characteristics of the individuals 
involved, and process. Table 3 shows the proposed implementation factors as aligned with CFIR constructs.  
 
Table 2. RE -AIM outcomes measured during implementation and maintenance phases (Specific Aim 1).  
RE-AIM Domain  Project Outcome  Measured by:  [CONTACT_913247], before and after FLOW 
implementation  Administrative data 
for EMR template  Patient  Baseline; 
quarterly  
Effectiveness  Successful patient transition to PC, defined as 
PCP renews psychotropic prescriptions and 
patient does not return to SMH within 1 year  VA administrative 
data for FLOW 
EMR template use  Patient  Baseline; 
quarterly in impl. 
phase  
Patient satisfaction with FLOW  Qual. interviews  Patient  Post-transition  
Provider satisfaction with FLOW  Qual. interviews  Provider  Post-
implementation  
Impact on access, measured as (1) gain in 
provider hours available and (2) gain in % of CDW Completed 
Appointments Provider  Baseline; 
quarterly  
patients who receive appointments within 7 
days of desired date  Cube  
Adoption  Providers who use FLOW for >2 patients  
Providers’ average % of patients engaged  
If turnover exists, new provider use of FLOW  VA administrative 
data for FLOW 
EMR template use  Provider  Quarterly in impl. 
phase  
Implementation  Fidelity in implementation of FLOW 
components  Implementation 
checklist  Facility  Monthly  
Maintenance  Sustainment, including all RE -AI metrics  
Continuing facilitation activities taken over by 
[CONTACT_913248] & 
provider  Quarterly during 
maintenance 
phase  
 
Table 3. Assessment of implementation factors guided by [CONTACT_210595] (Specific Aim 2).  
CFIR Domain  Construct measured  Measured by  [CONTACT_470638](s)  
Intervention 
characteristics  Attitudes about FLOW  Qualitative interviews  Baseline; 
Implementation  
Outer setting  Facility resources  Facility complexity  Baseline  
Inner setting  Readiness to change  Organizational Readiness for Implementing Care  Baseline  
Facility staffing  Staff to patient ratio in SMH; PCMHI penetration rate; PCP mean 
panel size; Turnover in staffing  All phases  
Facility organization  Degree with which PCMHI is integrated in PC; Existence of 
active Behavioral Health Interdisciplinary Program teams  All phases  
Facility climate  VA Clinical Prac tice Organizational Survey  
Provider qualitative interviews  Baseline;  
Implem. phase  
Inter-service clarity of roles  Existence of MOU between SMH and PC outlining roles and how 
patient care responsibilities are divided  All phases  
Characteristics 
of the 
individuals  Provider support for change  Provider qualitative interviews  Implem. phase  
Leadership support  Provider survey and qualitative interview data regarding 
leadership support  Baseline;  
Implem. phase  
Process  Facilitator behaviors  % of FLOW meetings attended; IF’s documentation of their 
activities; Actual protected time; Provider interview questions re: 
IF behaviors; Qualitative interviews of I fs Implementation 
phase  
 
Implementation phase data collection. The majority of data during the implementation phase will be 
collected via VA administrative databases. Use of the FLOW EMR template, extracted from administrative 
databases,  will provide information on reach (% of patients transitioned pre vs. post FLOW implementation), 
effectiveness (% of patients who receive follow up MH care in PC, based upon filled prescriptions, and % of 
MH patients who return to SMH, based upon consult and appointment data), and adoption (% of providers 
using the template at least three times, average rates of transition by [CONTACT_48368]). We will also track demographic 
characteristics of transitioned patients  to examine whether transition rates differ by [CONTACT_913249]/racial 
background. CDW clinical/administrative data will also be used to collect information on the impact of FLOW 
on access by [CONTACT_913250] 0 to 7 days 
of the preferred date. A second measure of effectiveness will be the expected gain in provider time for new 
patient appointments as a consequence of transitioned patients. This will be calculated for each provider as # 
of patients discharged multiplied by [CONTACT_913251] a patient. We will 
also examine impact on provider time available for new patients by [CONTACT_913252]- post implementation of FLOW.  
Brief qualitative interviews will assess the satisfaction of Veterans and providers (see interview guides in 
Appendix). Veterans will be recruited via ‘opt out’ letter sent to those who transitioned, stratified by [CONTACT_3725]. Final n will be determined by [CONTACT_913253], but we propose [ADDRESS_1283250] -transition. V eterans will complete the interview via phone and receive compensation 
of $30. Provider qualitative interviews will assess perceptions of clinical appropriateness, effectiveness, 
implementation barriers and facilitators such as leadership support and local  champi[INVESTIGATOR_913238] (see Appendix for draft interview guide).  Providers will be recruited by [CONTACT_913254]. We will interview at least 3 providers at each site (n = 27 ) to enable understanding of 
differenc es across sites. All interviews will be audio recorded, transcribed by a professional transcription 
service (see revised budget), and coded by [CONTACT_913255].
[ADDRESS_1283251] once per month, each site’s FLOW checklist to monitor which aspects of FLOW 
are being implemented with fidelity. Local champi[INVESTIGATOR_913239] (for example, logistical support vs. influencing providers) in order to understand the key ingredients of 
facilitation in the local context.  We will also examine the number of FLOW meetings the local champi[INVESTIGATOR_913240] (% of scheduled meetings) and their actual protected time, to understand whether the champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394]’s 
availability and time influence implementation.  
Maintenance phase data collection.  After a 1 -year implementation phase, the FLOW team will phase 
out external f acilitation and the facility will be encouraged to continue using FLOW locally. Maintenance phase 
data will continue to be collected on all reach, effectiveness, adoption, and implementation outcomes.  
Power analysis. Power calculations were conducted for the reach and effectiveness outcomes using 
the Steppedwedge command in Stata Version 14.30 Although between 7 and 9 sites will participate, power 
calculations were estimated conservatively, assuming only 6 facilities (clusters) with 2 randomized into each of the 3 steps of the predominately open cohort (i.e., different patients at different timepoints) complete design. 
Calculations assume a two- tailed alpha of 0.05. VISN 19 leadership reports that  few patients are currently 
being transitioned from MH to PC . Transition rates are <1% of patients in facilities who do not receive the 
FLOW intervention and between 1- 16% of patients in facilities who do receive the FLOW intervention. Given 
an average of 1000 patients per quarter per facility based upon the Clinic  Practice Manager data for VISN 19, 
a sample size of 6 clusters (24,000 patients in total) achieves 80% power to detect a difference in transition 
rates from 1% at baseline to 1.65% upon receiving FLOW. Power is >99% to detect a two -fold increase in 
patients who transition from SMH to PC.  Reach, effectiveness, and most maintenance outcomes are binary 
variables at the patient level (e.g., whether one was transitioned to PC). These outcomes represent an open 
cohort trial, as different patients will be included at each timepoint within a given site. Adoption outcomes are 
both binary (e.g., whether a provider engaged in the FLOW process for at least 3 patients) and continuous 
(e.g., % of patients engaged in FLOW for each provider) at the provider level. These outcomes represent a 
closed cohort trial, as the same providers will be included at each timepoint. Adequate effectiveness will be 
declared if at least 90% of transitioned patients successfully transition without return to SMH in the 1 year 
follow- up period.  Given a very conservative estimation that 4% of SMH patients transition from SMH to PC, an 
average of 40 patients per quarter per facility (4% of 1000 = 40), a sample size of 6 clusters (960 transitions  in 
total) will allow for 80% power to detect a dif ference in the percentage of patients who successfully transitioned 
to primary care from 76.50% to 90% upon receiving FLOW.  
Downstream effectiveness, or impact upon access, will be measured as increase in appointments 
within [ADDRESS_1283252] -implementation. Data extracted from the Clinic 
Practice Manager suggests a fairly high baseline rate of clinic patients receive appointments within 7 days of desired date in VISN 19 (~75 to 80%) . Given an average of 1000 patients  per quarter per facility, a sample size 
of 6 clusters (24,000 patients in total) achieves 80% power to detect a difference in the percentage of patients 
receiving appointments within 7 days of desired date from 80% at baseline to 83% upon receiving FLOW.  
Power calculations are consistent with ICC values of .10, .15, .20, and .25 and would be similar to what is described above for the maintenance phase.  
Quantitative data analysis.  We will begin by [CONTACT_913256], providers, and 
sites (clusters) who were randomly assigned to each sequence and the numbers included at each quarter.  
Intervention conditions will initially be compared using generalized linear mixed models (HGLMs) for binary 
outcomes and hierarchical linear mixed models for  continuous outcomes. Each model will include intervention 
(yes/no) and quarter as fixed predictors and models for reach, effectiveness (except for gain in provider hours), 
and maintenance will also include the value of the outcome during the baseline quar ter as a fixed predictor.  
Site will be included in all models as a random effect. As we expect the intervention effect may be delayed and reach its peak at the end of the implementation period or that the effect may plateau or even decay during the 
maintenance period, we will also conduct a set of models where the treatment by [CONTACT_913257] a fixed effect. Furthermore, given the sequences have different lengths of maintenance we will be able to 
examine whether maintenance varies with time  since removal of external facilitator.  
Qualitative analysis.  We will examine associations between the proposed implementation factors 
(e.g., staffing levels, leadership support) and outcomes. To do so, we will use a mixed- methods comparative 
case study approach,
[ADDRESS_1283253] a large enough number of participating sites to determine statistical associations.34,35 We will 
follow the steps of QCA, including: 1) operationalize the metric of success (example: successful 
implementation of FLOW leading to high reach), 2) identify which sites are classified as high implementation 
success vs. low implementation success, 3) Identify key conditions theoretically affecting implementation 
success (e.g., our implementation determinants), 4) cr eate a matrix of scores signifying whether each site was 
high or low on each determinant, 5) analyze which implementation determinants in the matrix appear to be associated with high implementation success, 6) use freely available software (e.g., fsQCA 2.0) to analyze all possible configurations of selected implementation determinants, and 7) examine the results and resolve 
contradictions (e.g., if a contradictory result is potentially explained by a third, unmeasured variable or by [CONTACT_913258]) and re- run analyses if necessary. QCA can appropriately handle mixed methods data 
because the potential implementation determinants included in the analyses can be quantitative data such as staffing ratios, or can be qualitative data, such as presenc e or absence of a theme arising from qualitative 
interviews at each site. Outcomes produced from QCA will be information regarding whether a particular 
implementation determinant or combination of implementation determinants can be used to successfully 
distinguish between sites with high implementation success vs. low implementation success. This method has 
successfully been used for small n implementation studies such as the currently proposed study.
32,33 
References  
 
1. Office of Inspector General. (2015) . OIG Determination of Veterans Health Administration’s 
Occupational Staffing Shortages. Washington, DC: OIG.  
2. Office of Inspector General. (2017) . OIG Determination of Veterans Health Administration’s 
Occupational Staffing Shortages. Washington, DC: OIG.  
3. Tondo, L., Albert, M.J., & Baldessarini,  R.J. (2006). Suicide rates in relation to health care access in the 
[LOCATION_002]: An ecological study. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 67(4), 517- 23. 
4. Adolph, M., Wu, J., Feldman, S.R., & Balkrishnan, R. (2012). Who will take care of us? Exploring 
differences in respondents’ satisfaction with primary care vs. specialty care physicians. Health 
Outcomes Research, 3 (1), e3- e10. 
5. Galluci, G., Swartz, W., & Hackerman, F. (2005). Impact of the wait for an initial appointment on the 
rate of kept appointments at a mental health center. Psychiatric Services, 56(3), 344 -346. 
https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ps.56.3.[ADDRESS_1283254], H. A., Harris, M.G., McKeon, G., Baxter, A. (2013). Estimating remission from untreated 
major depression: A systematic review and meta- analysis . Psychological Medicine 43(8), 1569- 85.  
7. Veterans Health Administration (VHA). (2017). VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Management of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Acute Stress Disorder. Washington, DC: Author.  
8. Bower P, Gilbody  S. (2005). Stepped care in psychological therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]: access, effectiveness and 
efficiency. Narrative literature review. British Journal of Psychiatry, 186, 11 –17. doi: 
10.1192/bjp.186.1.11.  
9. National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health. (2009). Depression: the treatment and management of 
depression in adults: NICE clinical guideline.  London: National Institute for Health and Clinical 
Excellence.  
10. Rosenberger, P.H. & Philip, Errol & Lee, A & Kerns, Robert. (2011). The VHA's National Pain Management Strategy : Implementing the stepped care model. Federal Practitioner, 28, 39 -42. 
11. Dundon, M., Dollar, K., Schohn, M., Lantinga, L.J. (2011). Primary Care- Mental Health Integration Co-
Located Collaborative Care: An Operations Manual. Syracuse, NY: Center for Integrat ed Healthcare.  
12. VHA. (2008). VHA Handbook 1160.01: Uniform Mental Health Services in VA Medical Centers. 
Washington, DC: VHA.  
13. World Health Organization (WHO). (2007). Integrating mental health services into primary health care. Geneva: World Health Organi zation.  
14. Damschroder, L.J., Aron, D.C., Keith, R.E., Kirsh, S.R., Alexander, J.A., & Lowery, J.C. (2009). 
Fostering implementation of health services research findings into practice: a consolidated framework 
for advancing implementation science. Implementation Science, 4, 50.   
15. Repper, J. & Perkins, R. (2006). Social Inclusion and Recovery: A Model for Mental Health Practice. London: Bailliere Tindall.  
16. Sheedy, C.K. & Whitter, M. (2009). Guiding Principles and Elements of Recovery -Oriented Systems of 
Care: What Do We Know from the Research? HHS Publication No. (SMA) 09- 4439. Rockville, MD: 
Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.  
17. SAMHSA. (2012). SAMHSA’s Working Definition of Recovery: 10 Guiding Princi ples of Recovery. 
Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.  
18. VHA (2011). VHA Handbook 1163.03. Psychosocial rehabilitation and recovery centers (PRRC). Washington, DC: VHA.  
19. Office of Mental Health and Suicide Prevention (OMH SP; 2017). Report from the Office of Mental 
Health and Suicide Prevention (OMHSP) Continuum of Care Workgroup. Washington, DC: OMHSP.  
20. Glasgow, R.E., Vogt, T.M., & Boles, S.M. (1999). Evaluating the public health impact of health 
promotion interventions: t he RE -AIM framework. American Journal of Public Health, 89(9), 1322 -1327.  
21. The Gambia Hepatitis Study Group, The Gambia Hepatitis Intervention Study, Cancer Research, 
1987;47(21):5782– 87. 
22. Brown, C.A. & Lilford, R.J. (2006). The stepped wedge trial design: a  systematic review. BMC medical 
research methodology, 6: 54.  
23. Hemming, K., Taljaard, M., McKenzie, J.E., Hooper, R., Copas, A., Thompson, J.A.,…Grimshaw, J.M. 
(2018). Reporting of stepped wedge cluster randomized trials: Extension of the CONSORT 2010 
statement with explanation and elaboration. BMJ, 363: k1614.  
24. Yano, E., Fleming, B., Canelo, I. et al. (2008). National Survey Results for the Primary Care Director 
Module of the VHA Clinical Practice Organizational Survey. Sepulveda, CA: VA HSR&D Center for the 
Study of Healthcare Provider Behavior.  
25. Ritchie MJ, Dollar KM, Miller CJ, Oliver KA, Smith JL, Lindsay JA, Kirchner JE. (2017). Using Implementation Facilitation to Improve Care in the Veterans Health Administration (Version 2). 
Veterans Health Admini stration, Quality Enhancement Research Initiative (QUERI) for Team -Based 
Behavioral Health, 2017. Available at: 
https://www.queri.research.va.gov/tools/implementation/Facilitation -Manual.pdf  
26. Pomerantz, A.S., Kearney, L.K., Wray, L.O., Post, E.P., & McCarth y, J.F. (2014). Mental health 
services in the medical home in the Department of Veterans Affairs: factors for successful integration. 
Psychol Services, 11(3), 243- 53. 
27. Ritchie, M.J., Parker, L.E., Edlund, C.N., & Kirchner, J.E. (2017). Using implementation facilitation to 
foster clinical practice quality and adherence to evidence in challenged settings: A qualitative study. 
BMC Health Services Research, 17, 294.  10.1186/s12913- 017-2217- 0 
28. Karlin, B. E., Brown, G. K., Trockel, M., Cunning, D., Zeiss, A. M., & Taylor, C. B. (2012). National 
dissemination of cognitive behavioral therapy for depression in the department of veterans affairs 
health care syste m: Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_57847] -level outcomes. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 80 (5), 707 -718.  
29. Beebe, J. (1995). Basic concepts and techniques of rapid appraisal. Human Organization, 54 (1), 42-51. 
30. Hemming, K., & Girling, A. (2014). A menu -driven  facility for power and detectable- difference 
calculations in stepped -wedge cluster -randomized trials. The Stata Journal, 14 (2), 363 -380. 
31. Goodrick, D. (2014). Comparative Case Studies: Methodological Briefs -  Impact Evaluation No. 9. New 
York, NY: Unicef  
32. Cragun, D., Pal, T., Vadaparampil, S.T., Baldwin, J., Hampel, D., & DeBate, R.D. (2016). Qualitative 
comparative analysis: A hybrid method for identifying factors associated with program effectiveness. 
Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 10(3), 251- 272. 
33. Misra -Hebert, A., Perzynski, A., Rothberg, M.B., Fox, J., Mercer, M.B., Liu, X., Hu, B., Aron, D.C., & 
Stange, K.C. (2018). Implementing team -based primary care models: A mixed methods comparative 
case study in a large, integrated health care system.  
34. Chan,  C.M.L. & Pan, S.L. (2008). User engagement in e -government systems implementation: A 
comparative case study of two Singaporean e- government initiatives. The Journal of Strategic 
Information Systems, 17 (2), 124 -139. 
35. Pascual, C., Escarti, A., Llopis, R., G utierrez, M., Marin, D., & Wright, P.M. (2011). Implementation 
fidelity of a program designed to promote personal and social responsibility through physical education: 
A comparative case study. Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 82(3), 499- 511. 
36. Dogherty, E. J., Harrison, M. B., Baker, C., & Graham, I. D. (2012). Following a natural experiment of 
guideline adaptation and early implementation: a mixed- methods study of facilitation. Implementation 
Science, 7(1), 9.  
37. Kotecha, J., Han, H., Green, M., Russ ell, G., Martin, M. I., & Birtwhistle, R. (2015). The role of the 
practice facilitators in Ontario primary healthcare quality improvement. BMC Family Practice, 16(1), 93.  
 
 
 