 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   8/15/05 
Page 1 of 15 Protocol Title: Navigation of the Pelvic Floor in Bladder Exstrophy using Pre -
operative MRI  
 
 
Protocol Version/Date:   Version 3.0, August 2 , 2012 
 
 
JHM IRB:     NA_00069579  
  Investigational Device(s):  VectorVision® Cranial Guided Image System    
     Brain lab, Inc.  
 IDE Number:     Pending 
  Sponsor -Investigator/PI:   [INVESTIGATOR_211594], MD, FRCS  
     The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine  
     Division of Pediatric Urology  
     Bloomberg Children’s Center  
     [ADDRESS_253551], S uite 7302 
     Baltimore, MD [ZIP_CODE]  
 Phone:      (410) 955- 5358  
 Email:     [EMAIL_4102]
 
     [EMAIL_4103]  
  
  
                    
 August 2, [ADDRESS_253552]   
2.0  Objectives   
3.0  Background   
4.0     Study Procedures   
5.0     Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria   
6.[ADDRESS_253553] occurs in approximately 1:30,000 to 50,000 live births, and occurs 
more often in males than females [1] . The abdominal wall musculat ure fails to mature properly in the 
midline of the body leaving the bladder literally splayed open on the anterior surface of the neonate.  
Additionally, the urethra is completely open (epi[INVESTIGATOR_211595]) and the entire penis has failed to roll into a tube.  
The pubic bones are widened and have also failed to fuse properly in the midline.  This birth defect, while 
extensive, is surgically correctable with a multi- stage operative plan over the child’s formative years.  
Initially within a few days of life, the bladd er and abdominal wall undergo closure.  This is often 
accomplished with the use of pelvic osteotomies, which leave the child with external fixation devices 
postoperatively.  The fixator devices are removed after 4- 6 weeks of pelvic immobilization.  The sec ond 
stage involves early repair of the epi[INVESTIGATOR_211596].  If the bladder grows to a sufficient volume, then the child undergoes a continence procedure around age 5 that allows for volitional voiding.  Some children’s bladders grow appropriately and others fail to grow appropriately.  If the bladder does not sufficiently grow, then additional and considerably more complex continence procedure and bladder augmentation are 
required to make the child continent [2]. 
 
Much of the long -term success of these operations depends on the initial closure.  Several studi es have 
demonstrated that a key to successful initial closure involves deep dissection of the pelvic floor so that the bladder can be placed in the most posterior and inferior position possible  [3-5].  Oftentimes, the need for 
repeat closure of the abdomen is required if the initial surgeon failed to properly dissect deep enough into the child’s pelvic floor.  Many surgeons are unfamiliar with the complex anatomy and are unable to verify 
that they have properly reach ed the true pelvic floor during this initial surgery.  This often leads to failed 
closures, which result in poor continence rates later in life  [2]. 
 
It is our hypothesis that the use of intraoperative ster eotactic imaging will help verify where the surgeon is 
during his or her dissection during closure of bladder exstrophy.  We anticipate that successful use of stereotactic imaging will help improve the success rate of initial closure and long -term continence rates.  
 The value of this research is two -fold.  Firstly, the project will help us to verify if w e are indeed dissecting 
down to the proper plane required for successful initial closure of bladder exstrophy. Secondly, this project 
will help others with relatively less experience with bladder exstrophy  to properly identify where they are 
anatomically d uring closure of exstrophy, thus yielding higher success rates and better patient care.  
  
2. Objectives  
 2.1.  The primary objectives of this research are:  
 
a. To deter mine the safety and efficacy of the use the Brainlab, Inc. VisionVector® 
Cranial Image Gui ded Surgery System during  closure of bladder exstrophy.  
b. To verify the proper pl ane of dissection during  closure of bladder exstrophy using 
the VisionVector® Cranial Image Guided Surgery System by [CONTACT_211621]-time where the surgeon’s instruments are  relative to the levator muscles and 
confirming that the bladder is being placed in the most posterior and inferior location possible. 
    
 August 2, 2012 
 John Gearhart, MD  
 NA_00069579  
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
 4 
 2.2.  The secondary objectives of this trial are :  
 
a. To improve the overall success rate of closure of bladder exst rophy  as evidenced by 
[CONTACT_211622], dehiscence, and fistula formation as well as 
improved continence when compared wi th the current standard of care, which does 
not currently involve the use of image guided surgery.   
b. To d ecrease t he learning curve for pediatric urology surgeons associated with 
closure surgery  [6]. 
 
3. Background   
 
Other surgical fields, such as neurosurgery and otolaryngology, have successfully ut ilized stereotactic 
imaging technology to improve accuracy and success of surgical dissection and oncologic control through various procedures.  This technology has resulted in less -invasive procedures with greater technical ease 
and confidence that the surgeon is truly in the correct anatomical location.  The VectorVision Cranial 
Image Guided Surgery System (by [CONTACT_211623], Inc.) is an FDA -cleared  device indicated for use in 
neurosurgery and otolaryngology  as shown on the attached 510K summary .  Several studi es have been 
published demonstrating the safety and success of this device in stereotactic surgery  [7]. 
 
The Cranial IGS system consists of the IGS workstation, the touch screen monitor and the optical 3D 
tracking system.  It also includes a set of hardware accessories that provide for comfortable and accurate 
use of the system.  The IGS workstation holds the patient data during the surgical procedure and runs the cranial software application.  The patient data needed in or der to perform the image guided surgery is 
acquired pre- operatively and is transferred to the IGS workstation via network, data carrier, or data bus. 
 The iPlan Cranial®  allows for pre - and intraoperative stereotactic surgery planning based on stereotactic  
systems. Multiple graphical display functions and 3- dimensional views of anatomical structures offer 
effective and efficient means of presenting the anatomical data for diagnostic and surgical planning.  Software application  offers a  display of the patien t data in various reconstructions , segments and overlays 
on the touch screen monitor in addition to position information of tracked instruments.  The touch screen monitor allows the control of the iPlan Cranial® software application and can be draped for s terile use by 
[CONTACT_11065].  The optical 3D tracking system performs the localization of the patient and surgical tools 
within the operating field.  
 The virtual diagnostic image spaces are registered to the surgical environment by [CONTACT_20947] 3D position of anatomical landmarks with a tracked pointer probe and relating them with the corresponding 
features extracted from the diagnostic image data sets.    Intra -operatively acquired patient data can further be registered to the surgical environment by [CONTACT_211624].  Structures in the patient’s body are 
localized using trackable pre- calibrated or intra -operatively calibrated surgical instruments such as the 
pointer probe.  In addition to the pointer probe, various standard surgical equipment such as forceps  and scissors can be calibrated and used for spatial positioning.    The Cranial IGS System contains a network based software interface that allows downloading medical data (such as image sets, objects, trajectories, or points) and tracking data from the system as well as uploading 
and displaying an image stream to the system.  This interface can be used to implement custom visualization of medical data (e.g. included modalities which are otherwise unknown to the cranial software application) as well as to control other devices.  These view data is strictly under the responsibility of the user and clearly marked as such. 
 August 2, 2012 
 John Gearhart, MD  
 NA_00069579  
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
 5 
  
 Per the 510(k) clearances, these devices are currently indicated for  adults  and children with any medical 
condition where stereotactic surgery may be appropriate and where a reference to a rigid anatomical structure, such as a bone, can be identified relative to MRI or other similar imaging modality.  The device 
has multip le utilities across various surgical fields  and is routinely used in neurosurgery, spi[INVESTIGATOR_79477], and 
otolaryngology.   
 
Studies from various institutions have demonstrated that successful outcomes in bladder exstrophy surgery rely upon proper anatomical dissection during surgery.  Studies involving pre - and post -operative MRI 
have demonstrated this  [8].  Furthermore, it has been well established that many bladder exstrophy closures 
fail because the bladder was not placed deep enough into the pelvis  [5].  This is thought to be secondary to 
the surgeon’s unfamiliarity with the patient’s anatomy in this rare congenital anomaly, thus leading to placem ent of the bladder in a superficial plane, predisposing the patient to potential failed closure  [9].   
 
We propose to use this intraoperative stereotactic imaging system as a guide during the pelvic dissection in 
children age s 0-[ADDRESS_253554] required for successful initial closure.   Due to the nature 
of bladder exstrophy, this study cannot be done on adults.  However, a ccording to multiple studies, image 
guided surgery can be as safe and  beneficial in the pediatric population as it has shown to be in adults [10-
11].   We expect that, as seen with applications in other various fields, the use of image -guided surgery will 
allow for improved visualization a nd accurate navigation of the planned surgery [10, 12 -13].  Additionally, 
the use of image -guided surgery should allow the possibility of extending the pelvic dissection safely in 
order to place the bladder in close r proximity to the puborectalis and levator ani muscles, allowing these 
muscles to aid in increasing bladder capacity postoperatively and ultimately increasing the rate of 
successful  exstrophy  closure and urinary continence  [14]. We also expect that the use of image- guided 
surgery will result in a similar reduction in morbidity and mortality as well as a shortening of hospit al stay.  
  
4. Study Procedures  
 
4.1. Study design  
This is a prospective, single arm, interventional trial of [ADDRESS_253555] clinical practice with the exception of adding confirmatory intra -operative stereotactic imaging. As such, a placebo group or non -
treatment group in not applic able to this study  
 b. Treatment Failure/Patient Removal  
This study does not involve any change to specific disease treatment, so treatment failure definition is not appropriate for this trial.  A patient may be removed from the study based on the wishes of t heir parent/guardian or if a member of a the designated group of faculty in 
charge of safety monitoring (outlined in section 11) feels that the safety of the patient is jeopardized  by [CONTACT_211625].   Studies show that as high as 63%  of closures fai l 
[15].  The designated faculty will work to determine i f the treatment failures are a result of 
this designated intervention and if so patients will be withdrawn.  Any data collected up to the date of patient/guardian withdrawal of consent will be kept and included in study analyses. Any patients removed from study will be replaced.  
 August 2, 2012 
 John Gearhart, MD  
 NA_00069579  
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
 6 
  
4.2. Study Duration  
The study is anticipated to take two years to in order to enroll and evaluate short -term 
outcomes for a maximum of 60 patients.  Each patient will be considered “on- study” from 
date of informed consent through and including the day of their planned surgery.  Study 
“follow -up” will begin the first post -operative day and end [ADDRESS_253556]-operative complications  
 
b. Secondary Outcomes  
The secondary outcome for this trial is improved identification of the pelvic floor anat omy 
during bladder exstrophy closure as reported subjectively by [CONTACT_211626].  
 
4.4. Recruitment Information  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_211597]/guardians of potential participants.  Potential participants will be identified  and assessed for potential eligibility for study 
inclusion at the time of their routine Pediatric Urology clinic visits or inpatient consultations when their operative procedure is scheduled.  Patients will be approached for possible inclusion in this stu dy once the patient’s parents or legal ly authorized representative  (LAR)  
have already decided to have the patient undergo the respective operative procedure.  
 
4.5. Informed Consent  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_211598] -investigator s will be responsible for conducting the 
informed consent discussions with the parents/ LAR  of potential participants. Discussions 
regarding study participation will take place in private areas after the patient and their parent/LAR  have already decided to undergo the respective operative pr ocedure. Enrollment 
in this research study will be presented as optional and purely voluntary. All risks of the study will be discussed. Pa rents  or the legal ly authorized representative  will be provided 
with the IRB approved consent form at their clinic vi sit or initial consultation. Patients or 
the LAR  will be given as much time as needed to consider study participation. As many 
visits as necessary will be provided. The informed consent will be collected from those wishing to participate at a clinic visit or consultation prior to surgery or on the morning of the operative procedure  
Competency to comprehend informed consent both for the research study will be assessed by [CONTACT_093] .  Only parents/legally authorized representatives of  patients that are able 
to understand the consent form and comprehend the nature of the procedure will be enrolled.  
    
 August 2, [ADDRESS_253557] T1 and T2 weighted pelvic MRI ( routinely obtained with 
standard clinical care) in order to plan pelvic osteotomies  (also as per the standard of care) .   
 
Description of the specific medical/surgical procedures involved in the use of the investigational 
Device(s)  
 
On the day of scheduled surgery, the patient will undergo routine pelvic osteotomies, pelvic floor 
dissection, bladder closure, and abdominal wall closure as per the standard of care . 
 
Some i mages from the preoperative MRI will be loaded onto a software program  by [CONTACT_211627]/trained  
members of the IRB approved study team.  The se images will then be used to identify and highlight the 
exact location of the levator muscle fibers, rectum, urethra, bladder , and pelvic bones  when mobilizing the 
bladder and prostatic plates as well as during pelvic floor dissection.  
 
During the osteotomy, standard external fixation pi[INVESTIGATOR_2115]  (orthopedic metal pi[INVESTIGATOR_211599]’s skin) are  placed by [CONTACT_211628].  After placement of the external fixation pi[INVESTIGATOR_2115] , a sterile reference array 
will be attached to the external fixation pi[INVESTIGATOR_211600] a VectorVision® 2- pin fixat or.  Th ese 2-pin 
fixator s are specifically designed to accommodate orthopaedic fixator pi[INVESTIGATOR_211601].  Th e reference array communicates with the 
Vector Vision ® work station (placed in the operating room away from the patient table) by [CONTACT_211629].  
 
The Vector Vision ® software will be used to access the patient’s preoperative MRI images.  Four 
anatomical landmarks (i.e. pubic tubercles, anterior superior iliac spi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], et c.) are used to register the 
patient’s anatomy .  These landmarks can be identified on MRI and visually by [CONTACT_211630].  This is accomplished by [CONTACT_41680] a sterile probe or instrument that is connected to the Vector Vision® 
image guided system stylus  and placing it directly on or near the landmarks on the patient.  These 
landmarks are registered to the IGS work station.  The virtual image or spaces of interest (i.e. pelvic floor 
and bladder) are now correlated to the surgical environment by [CONTACT_20947] 3D position of the pre -
determined anatomic landmarks with a tracked pointer probe  and relating them with the corresponding 
features extracted from the pre- operative MRI image sets.  
 
The stereotactic imaging (which can be viewed in 3 dimensions)  will be  displayed on a monitor  in the 
operating room in real time .  The Vector Vision ® system has several sterile instruments and probes that can 
be used to visualize where the instrument is in real -time.  This capability will allow for stereotactic 
imaging , confirmation that the anatomical structures of interest have been identified by [CONTACT_211631]’s 
eyes in the operative field and the  radiologist’s eyes on the image monitor and thus allow for  placement of 
the instruments during dissection of the  pelvic floor.   
 
 
 August 2, 2012 
 John Gearhart, MD  
 NA_00069579  
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
 8 
 Once the pelvic floor has been properly identified with stereotactic confirmation, th e Vector Vision® 
device will no longer be used.  The reference array will be removed from the external fixation pi[INVESTIGATOR_211602], and surgery will continue as it routinely does during standard clinical practice.  
 
Postoperatively, the patient will receive routine clinical postoperative care  whic h includes placement in 
traction and the use of an external fixator to prevent separation of the pubic bones as  per standard of care. 
A suprapubic tube as well as ureteral stents is  also left in place. Prophylactic antibiotics are continued post -
operatively to prevent renal scarring from vesicoureteric reflux that is usually present and the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_211603].   Prior to discharge from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_211604] [ADDRESS_253558] -operative complications, will be collected 
quarterly  from  the patie nt’s medical record from all follow  up visit s for the 12 months  following the 
surgical procedure .   
 
No change in participant’s care will occur if the study ends or the participant withdraws.  
 
   
6. Inclusion /Exclusion  Criteria  
 
6.1 Inclusion Criteria:  
a. Age 0 -7 years 
b. Diagnosis of classic bladder exstrophy  
c. Scheduled to undergo bladder exstrophy closure by [CONTACT_458] [INVESTIGATOR_211605]’s Broadway campus.  
d. All eligible participants will be children who se parents or legally authorized 
representat ives have already agreed and are being scheduled for osteotomy and bladder 
exstrophy closure as determined by [CONTACT_211632].  
e. Parent or legal ly authorized representative  who is, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], 
reliable and willing to make th emselves and patient available for the duration of the 
study.  
f. Parent or legally authorized representative is able to complete and sign the informed 
consent document.  
g. Patient judged by [CONTACT_211633]’s assessment of the patient’s 
bladder template [16] . 
h.  Patient with cardiopulmonary function sufficient to tolerate general anesthesia as evidenced by  [CONTACT_211634]’s and anesthesiologists assessment of the patient’s overall 
cardio -pulmonary status. 
i. Patients requiring ferromagnetic metal objects such as a metal pace maker during the OR procedure.  
     
 August 2, 2012 
 John Gearhart, MD  
 NA_00069579  
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
 9 
 6.2 Exclusion Criteria  
a. Lack or withdrawal of consent for primary operative procedure.  
b. Parent or legally authorized representat ive who is, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], 
not reliable or unwilling to make themselves and patient available for the duration of 
the study.  
c. Parent or legally authorized representative who is unable to understand, complete 
and/or sign the informed consent document.  Non-English  speaking parents will 
automatically be excluded if they are unable to read and understand the consent form.  
d. Patient who will not un dergo osteotomy prior to closure  for any reason   
 
7. Investigational Devices  
 
7.1 Cranial Image Gui ded Surgery System  
 a. Common Classification  
Name   [CONTACT_211641]  
 
b. Trade Names  VectorVision Cranial  
VectorVision ENT  
Kolibri cranial  
Kolibri ENT  
Cranial Essential  
Cranial Unlimited  
ENT Essential  
ENT Unlimited  
 
c. Regulatory Class:   Instrument/Stereotaxic; Regulatory Class II  
 
d. Manufacturer:   BrainLAB, AG  
 
 
7.2 iPlan Cranial Software  
a. Common/Classification  
Name   [CONTACT_211642]  
 b. Trade Names  iPlan Cranial; iPlan Stereotaxy; iPlan ENT; iPlan Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050]; iPlan View  
 
c. Regulatory Class:  Stereotacti c Instrument; Regulatory Class II  
 
d. Manufacturer:  BrainLAB, AG  
  
7.3 VectorVision® 2- pin F ixator   
 a. Manufacturer:   BrainLAB, AG  
 
8. Study Statistics  
 
8.[ADDRESS_253559] 2, 2012 
 John Gearhart, MD  
 NA_00069579  
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
 10 
 Primary outcome variables include the amount of time added to the operative time, the 
closure complication (fistula, dehiscence, prolapsed) rate, the post -operative complication 
rate, the need for repeat surgeries, and the length of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408].  
 
 8.[ADDRESS_253560] Operative Procedure  
 
Surgery:   
The participant has already agreed to undergo an operation to help correct a pediatric urology issue.  The risk and discomforts of the operation have already been explained and 
are covered under the informed consent that was signed for that particular procedure.  
 
General Anesthesia:   
General anesthesia will be used during the primary operative procedure.  All of the  known 
risks associated with anesthesia apply including respi[INVESTIGATOR_66780], stroke, low blood pressure, and death.  Problems such as these are extremely rare in children.  All anesthetic care will be directed by a certified pediatric anesthesiologist.  
 
9.2.  Risks Specific to Research Activities  
Soft tissue distortion  that occurs during surgery  or inaccuracies during registration  of the 
virtual diagnostic images described in section 6.5 may cause the virtual image  to 
misrepresent the patient’ s actual anatomy .  However, this poses minimal risk to the patient 
as the image guidance will only be used as a supplement to direct visual i nspection of 
patient’s anatomy by [CONTACT_211635] .   
 Another risk is the possibility that the external fixator pi[INVESTIGATOR_211606] 6.5 may shift 
from their original placement while applying the VectorVision® 2- pin fixator.  Though this 
risk is unlikely , if this were to happen corrective measures w ould be taken to restore the 
 August 2, [ADDRESS_253561] protected.  Every effort will be made to keep the subjects' non- electronic records 
and consent forms safe by [CONTACT_211636] a locked office.  If members from the IRB or other 
Federal agency need to inspect records, they will be released.  Hence, absolute confidentiality cannot be guaranteed.  The results of this research project may be presented at meetings or in publications; however, subjects ' identity will not be disclosed. 
 9.4.  Financial Risk  
No additional costs to the patient are associated with the addition of VectorVision stereotactic imaging.  The costs of the disposable instrumentation associated with VectorVision will be funded by [CONTACT_211637].  
 9.5.  Steps Taken to Minimize R isk 
Risks will be minimized through precautions set forth through standard operating room protocols, such as proper attire and scrub and monitored anesthesia.  Hands will be washed before performing an y invasive procedure. Personnel will follow “Universal/Standard 
Precautions” to prevent and minimize exposure to blood and body fluids.  Personnel will wear standard operating room attire, which shall consist of a clean scrub suit, disposable surgical mask  and cap.  A surgical mask that fully covers the mouth and nose will be worn 
when entering the operating room (if sterile instruments are exposed or the operation is about to begin or is underway).  
  
Every effort will be made to maintain participant confid entiality throughout the trial.  
Measures to help ensure protection include use of password- protected Excel spreadsheets for 
all study data.  Patient study records will be kept in a locked office accessible to IRB approved study staff.  
 MRI registration er rors and the possibility of soft tissue distortion that may occur to soft 
tissue as the result of the surgical procedure can lead to inaccuracies with the imaging system.  Extra care will be taken to verify that anatomical structures that can be seen with the surgeon’s eyes match up to the equivalent landmarks seen on the VectorVision system’s virtual image to minimize risk of surgical error.  
 
10. Benefits  
This study may benefit participants through more precise surgical dissection, yielding better outcomes an d reduced complications  
 Classic bladder exstrophy is one of the largest birth defects affecting [ADDRESS_253562]. H erbert  Ballentine Carter , will be involved in safety monitoring.  These 
individuals will be notified promptly for any serious adverse events or deaths and will perform routine monitori ng and oversight reviews of the research and postoperative outcomes to assess for 
trends or risks that were not previously identified.  In the event of an adverse event, unanticipated problem, or a study deviation the IRB will be notified within 24- 48 hour s and the research will be 
halted pending review. Per the Johns Hopkins IRB policy 103.6b, “Unanticipated problems involving risks to participants or others” is defined as: The information is unexpected in terms of nature, severity, or frequency, given:  
 
a. The research procedures described in the protocol and informed consent document; and  
 b. The characteristics of the subject population being studied; and  
c. The information indicates that participants or others are at greater risk of harm (including 
physical, psychological, economic, or social harm) than was previously known or recognized.  
 
Also  as per policy, the prompt reporting of unanticipated problems or events will occur as soon as 
possible after the PI [INVESTIGATOR_54813], but in all cases with in [ADDRESS_253563] be reported within 3 working days.  
 Additionally, a team of designated faculty, including the PI's clinical fellow, the orthopedic surgeon (Paul Sponseller), and the radiologist (Ay lin Tekes), will be present to monitor the patient during 
surgery. Standard safety monitoring by [CONTACT_211638] -operative 
nursing staff will monitor the patient for any safety concerns related to the surgery or immediate post-operative care.  
 11.1 Adverse Events  
 
An adverse event (AE) is defined as an unusual and undesirable symptom or sign that occurs in participants during the clinical study. Adverse events include those clinically significant laboratory values and test results, concomitant illness, accident, medical occurrence or worsening of existing medical condition that emerge during study participation. 
 
11.2 Adverse Event Grading  
 
The investigator will evaluate the severity of each adverse event using the following definitions:  
 
•  Mild - event may be noticeable to subject; does not influence daily activities; usually does 
not require intervention.  
•  Moderate - event may be of sufficient severity to make subject uncomfortable; performance 
of daily activities may be  influenced; intervention may be needed.  
 August 2, 2012 
 John Gearhart, MD  
 NA_00069579  
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
 13 
 •  Severe - event may cause severe discomfort; usually interferes with daily activities; subject 
may not be able to continue in the study; treatment or other intervention usually needed.  
 
All participants will rec eive pre- op, operative, and post -operative care according to the standard of 
care at Johns Hopkins.  Given the broad array of postoperative adverse events associated with an 
extensive surgery of this nature, AEs graded as ‘severe’ which are possibly, proba bly, or definitely 
attributable to the use of the investigational device will recorded and monitored until the event has 
resolved to meet the definition of ‘mild’. All participants will receive care for all adverse events according to good clinical practic e as per the standard of care at Johns Hopkins. 
 
11.3 Serious Adverse Events (SAE)  
 
A serious adverse event will be defined as any adverse event that:  
 
• Results in death  
• Is immediately life -threatening – an adverse event which places the subject/patient at 
immediate risk of death from the adverse event as it occurred  
• Results in permanent or substantial disability  
• Results in or prolongs an existing in- patient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]  
 
11.4 Attribution of Adverse Events  
  All adverse events will be further evaluated for attribution as per the following:  
  
• Unrelated:  Adverse event is clearly not related to the investigational agent.  
• Unlikely:  Adverse event is doubtfully related to the investigational agent.  
• Possibly:  Adverse event is possibly related to the inve stigational agent.  
• Probably:  Adverse event is probably related to the investigational agent.  
• Definitely:  Adverse event is definitely related to the investigational agent. 
 
11.[ADDRESS_253564] -operative complications, 
will be collected quarterly by [CONTACT_211639]’s medical record fo r [ADDRESS_253565] -operative 
dehiscence, bladder prolapsed, or a vesicocutaneous fistula.  These outcomes will be compared to 
previously established rates of success, complications, continence, etc.   
 Only those AE’s deemed as possibly, probably or definitely attributable to use of the investigational 
device will  be collected and reported at the time of the annual IRB continuing renewal .   
 If a serious adverse event (SAE) occurs, the study investigator will complete and submit the Unanticipated Problem form or Problem/Event reporting mechanism via the eIRB. The i nvestigator 
will also compi[INVESTIGATOR_211607] (e.g., copi[INVESTIGATOR_211608], 
 August 2, 2012 
 John Gearhart, MD  
 NA_00069579  
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
 14 
 hospi[INVESTIGATOR_44458], autopsy report, etc.). The IRB will be informed of all required SAE’s 
within ten (10) days as per JHM IRB and institutional guidelines.  
 
Serious adverse events will be reported to the FDA at the discretion of the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_211609] 3500 voluntary reporting mechanism. 
 
a. Death of study participant  
 
As per JHM IRB policy 103.6bi, “Organization Policy on Reporting Death of a JHM Research Participant,”  if a study participant dies within 30 days from the date of the 
investigational stereotactic  bladder exstrophy closure surgery, whether expected or 
unexpected, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_211610]. Death not related to a risk of participation that was listed in the protocol or consent document and was more likely than not caused by [CONTACT_28821]/study intervention will be reported to the IRB and to the FDA no later than 3 working days of when the PI [INVESTIGATOR_211611].
  Deaths considered ‘expected’ due to the nature of the participant’s underlying 
disease or condition or identified as caused by a possible risk of the intervention as described in the protocol and i nformed consent will be reported to the IRB no later than 10 
working days of when the PI [INVESTIGATOR_211611].  
 
Additionally, if the PI [INVESTIGATOR_211612] a JHM former participant who did not complete the protocol for whatever rea son (including voluntary withdrawal or 
removal by [CONTACT_978]) the PI [INVESTIGATOR_211613]’s death as part of the next Continuing Review application for IRB review. 
   11.6  Plan for Data Management   
 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_211614] a quarterly basis and ensure that study documents are monitored 
every six months for the duration of the study for data accuracy and completeness. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_30048] a file of human subjects’  research project documents including  (at a minimum) the 
followin g items: 
a. A copy of the original human subjects research application submitted to the JHM -
IRB  
b. A copy of the JHM IRB approved consent form.  
c. The origina l of each consent form signed by [CONTACT_211640].  
d. A copy of all correspondence with the IRB, FDA, and  others  as appropriate   
e. A copy of all data derived from the study (case report forms, computer data, adverse event reports, drug/device accountability records etc.)  
 
12. Data Handling and Record Keepi[INVESTIGATOR_211615] (Nov. 2008) for investigational device research, 
the PI [INVESTIGATOR_211616] a period of 2 years after 
the latter of the following two dates: The date on which the investigation is terminated  or 
completed, or the date that the records are no longer required for purposes of supporting a premarket approval application or a notice of completion of a product development protocol.   
 August 2, 2012 
 John Gearhart, MD  
 NA_00069579  
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
 15 
 References:  
 
1. Siffel C, C.A., Amar E, Bakker  MK, Bermejo -Sánchez E, Bianca S, Castilla EE, Clementi M, Cocchi G, Csáky -
Szunyogh M, Feldkamp ML, Landau D, Leoncini E, Li Z, Lowry RB, Marengo LK, Mastroiacovo P, Morgan M, 
Mutchinick OM, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_84887] A, Rissmann A, Ritvanen A, Scarano G, Szabova E, Olney RS ., Bladder Exstrophy: An 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_211617], and an 
Overview of the Literature.  American Journal of Medical Genetics Part C (Seminars in Medical Genetics), 2011. 157: 
p. 12.  
2. Nima Baradaran, R.M.C., Ryan Orosco, Bruce J. Trock,  and R.I.M.a.J.P. Gearhart , Effect of Failed Initial 
Closure on Bladder Growth in Children With Bladder Exstrophy.  J Urol., 2011. 186: p. 5.  
3. Richard W. Grady, M.E.M., Complete Repair of Exstrophy.  J Urol., 1999. 162: p. 6.  
4. Gearhart JP, The Exstrophy -Epi[INVESTIGATOR_211618] --Science, Practice and Policy.  J Urol., 1999. 
162(4): p. 3.  
5. Anne K. Ebert, A.F., Roland Brandl, Horst Hirschfelder, Michael Koller, Wolfgang H. Rosch, Pelvic -floor imaging 
using three -dimensional ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging in the long term follow -up of the bladder -
exstrophy -epi[INVESTIGATOR_211619].  BJU Int., 2009. 105: p. 6.  
6. Louis -Philippe Amiot, K.L., Michael Putzier, Hartmut Zippel, and Hub ert Labelle., Comparative Results Between 
Conventional and Computer -Assisted Pedicle Screw Installation in the Thoracic, Lumbar, and Sacral Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050].  Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050], 
2000. 25(5): p. 9.  
7. WC., S., Imaging of maxillofacial trauma: Evolutions and emerging revolutions.  Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral 
Radiol Endod, 2005. 100: p. 22.  
8. Gargollo PC, B.J., Retik AB, Peters CA, Diamond DA, Atala A, Barnewolt CE., Magnetic resonance imaging of pelvic musculoskeletal and genitourinary anatomy in patients before and after complete primary repair of bladder exstrophy.  
J Urol., 2005. 174(4 Pt 2): p. 8.  
9. Kirstan K. Meldrum, R.I.M., Caleb P. Nelson, John P. Gearhart., Subspecialty training and surgical outcomes in 
children with failed bladder exstrophy closure.  Journal of Pedia tric Urology, 2005. 1 : p. 5.  
10. Vitaly Siomin, S.S., Liana Beni -Adani, Shlomi Constantini, Application of the Orbito -Cranial Approach in Pediatric 
Neurosurgery.  Child's Nerv Syst, 2001. 17: p. 6.  
11. Andrew Jea, S.V., Keyne K. Johnson, and James T. Rutka. , Corpus callosotomy in children with intractable epi[INVESTIGATOR_211620]: 12 -year experience at The Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_75521].  
Neurosurg Focus, 2008. 25(3): p. 6.  
12. Martin Thaler, E.M., Alexandra Williams, Jose Moctezuma de la Barrera, and Michael Nogler., Accuracy of an Image -
Guided Navigation System for Pelvic Surgery Based on a Multimodality Registration Object: A Cadaver Study.  Am J 
Orthop., 2010. 39 (8): p. 4.  
13. Christian Krettek, J.G., Leonard Bastian, Mus a Citak, Ferdinand Rücker, Daniel Kendoff, Tobias Hüfner, Computer 
aided tumor resection in the pelvis.  Injury, Int. J. Care Injured, 2004. 35: p. 4.  
14. Nicolas Foroglou, A.Z., Peter Black, Intra -operative MRI (iop- MR) for brain tumour surgery.  British Jo urnal of 
Neurosurgery, 2009. 23 (1): p. 9.  
15. Hafez AT, E. -S.M., Shorrab AA, El -Mowafi H., Complete primary repair of bladder exstrophy in children presenting 
late and those with failed initial closure: single center experience.  J Urol., 2005. 174 (4 Pt 2):  p. 4. 
16. Surer I, B.L., Jeffs RD, Gearhart JP., Modified Young- Dees -Leadbetter bladder neck reconstruction in patients with 
successful primary bladder closure elsewhere: a single institution experience.  J Urol., 2001. 165 (6 pt 2): p. 3.  
 
 