An Exposure-Base d Implementation Strategy t o Decrease Clinici an Anxiety Around 
Suicide Prevention 
NCT: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Document Date: 2/5/2024
City of Philadelphia IRB study protocol document for participants recruited outside of the City of 
Philadelphia mental health system 
 
Version Date: 2/5/2024   Page 2 of 20 Social and Behavioral Sciences Human Research Protocol   
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR :  
[INVESTIGATOR_537602] -Haimes, PhD  
Assistant Professor of Psychology in Psychiatry  
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania  
[ADDRESS_700346], Room 3007, Philadelphia, PA [ZIP_CODE]  
Tele: 215 -573-5614   
PROTOCOL TITLE : An Exposure -Based Implementation Strategy to Decrease Clinician Anxiety about Delivering 
Suicide Prevention Evidence -Based Practices  
 
INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE :  
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_537603], the rate of suicide in the US 
has increased over the past several decades . A potential lever to reduce suicides is to increase the use of evidence -
based suicide screening, assessment, and interventions (SSAIs)  in community settings by [CONTACT_537633]. Suicide is inherently an affectively charged topic and clinicians often 
experience anxiety and low self -efficacy in detectin g and intervening with those at risk.  Clinician anxiety and low 
self-efficacy related to SSAI use are thus candidate targets for implementation strategy design to optimize SSAI 
uptake in diverse mental health settings. This study aims to design a novel, exposure -based implementation 
strategy (EBIS) directly targeting clinician anxiety and low self -efficacy for SSAI use with patients at risk for suicide  
in community settings.  
 
This is one of three exploratory projects through the NIMH -funded P50 Penn Innovation in Suicide Prevention 
Implementation Research Center ( INSPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392] ) Center which brings together  psychology, implementation science, 
health economics, machine  learning, health information technology, psychiatry , and participatory research experts 
to apply innovative  interdisciplinary research to tackle suicide prevention.  
 
OBJECTIVES : 
This exploratory project brings together an interdisciplinary team to leverage decades of research on behavior 
change from exposure theory to design and pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] -test an EBIS to target clinician -level anxiety about SSAI use  to 
improve SSAI implementation  for two gold -standard SSAIs: the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (CSSRS; 
Posner et al., 2011 ) and the Safety Planning Intervention (SPI: [INVESTIGATOR_108953] & Brown, 2008 ).  
 
In partnership with a team of  clinicians, setting leaders, implementation scientists, and suicide experts we propose 
to: 
 
Aim 1:  Develop an EBIS  to reduce clinician anxiety and bolster self -efficacy to deliver SSAI. The EBIS will leverage 
exposure -based therapi[INVESTIGATOR_537604] -risk patient 
encounters. Using participatory design methods,  design and adaptation will be conducted collaboratively 
with key stakeholders.  
 
Aim 2:  Iteratively refine the EBIS in pi[INVESTIGATOR_537605] -testing using rapid cycle prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. We will engage 20 clinicians 
who will receive pi[INVESTIGATOR_537606]; qualitative feedback will inform further refinement.  
 
Aim 3:   Test acceptability, feasibility, and preliminary effectiveness of the EBIS compared to Implementation as 
Usual ( IAU) to target SSAI implementation mechanisms and implementation outcomes in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_537607] [ADDRESS_700347] of both conditions on putative implementation 
mechanisms (clinician anxiety, self -efficacy) and outcomes (SSA I adoption, fidelity). We will triangul ate 
implementation outcomes via surveys, chart -stimulated recall, and standardized role plays coded by 
[CONTACT_537634]. Qualitative interviews with clinicians will further explore implementation outcomes and 
identify which changes to the EBIS are neede d before confirmatory trials.  
 
Note that our objective in the Aim [ADDRESS_700348] in this study (the CSSRS and SPI), whic h are 
currently already the recommended practice in many City of Philadelphia agencies. We are not testing any patient level 
 
Version Date: 2/5/2024   Page 3 of 20 outcomes in this exploratory study  nor are we recruiting or interacting with any patients in this study.  
 
BACKGROUND : 
Designing and testing scalable implementation strategies to increase use of evidence -based practices ( EBPs ) for 
suicide prevention are critical next steps for reducing  suicide rates , which  have risen  since the turn of the century ,18 
with particularly notable increases for disadvantaged populations  in recent years .21 Evidence -based suicide 
screening,22 assessment, and interventions (SSAIs) for individuals at risk for suicide24,43,44 can reduce suicidal 
behavior,45 yet they are underused in routine practice,46 particularly in publicly -funded settings that serve 
disadvantaged populations.47,48 There is an urgent need for research focused on  testing and refining implementation 
strategies, including optimizing clinician training, to improve quality of care for those at -risk for suicide.49  
 
Implementation strategy design should target mutable implementation mechanisms50 to optimize the likelihood of 
clinician behavior change.  The implementation science literature purports that implementation strategies addressing 
specific facilitators and barriers to EBP delivery will be more successful than general strategies.50–[ADDRESS_700349] been largely atheoretical.53 Thus, an important next step in 
practice -based suicide research is development of theoretically informed implementation strategies to increase 
uptake of suicide prevention EBPs.  
 
Clinician anxiety and low self -efficacy related to SSAI use are candidate target barriers to EBP uptake. Clinician 
anxiety  about working with patients at -risk for suicide is well -documented.1,2 In our team’s formative qualitative work 
in this area, while some clinicians perceived themselves to have anxiety that is adaptive and helpful in motivating 
them to critically assess risk, nearly one -third reported moderate to severe anxiety related to us ing SSAIs.10,[ADDRESS_700350], clinicians report experiencing anticipatory anxiety about screening 
patients for suicide risk (e.g., fear of patients endorsing suicidal risk and not knowing how to intervene, not having 
enough time to intervene, or concern that asking about suicide will increase risk).7,8,55 In such cases, clinicians may 
avoid asking about suicide altogether or ask in inappropriate ways that limit the likelihood of identifying a patient at 
risk for suicide  (e.g. “you are not having thoughts about suicide, are you?”) .8 Second, clinicians may fear 
misclassifying a patient’s risk level (e.g., incorrectly deeming a patient safe to go home), fearing that the patient will 
attempt suicide or that they will be liable for making the wrong decision. This may lead to over -referri ng patients to 
emergency rooms or crisis centers or unnecessary hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059],17 even though there is limited evidence that 
inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_537608],17 and concerns about hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]’s iatrogenic effects.56  
 
High anxiety about SSAIs is also caused by [CONTACT_537635] -efficacy , or lack  of confidence in one’s ability to effectively 
intervene to mitigate suicide risk.55,[ADDRESS_700351] specifically targeted clinician anxiety about SSAI use other than offering training,55 
which the implementation literature has established is a necessary, but insufficient , implementation strategy to 
change behavior.61,62 
 
Exposure therapy for clinicians to reduce maladaptive anxiety and bolster clinician self -efficacy related to SSAI use 
is a compelling, but untested, approach.  Exposure therapy  is the key mechanism through which effective 
psychosocial treatment reduces anxiety.28,34,35  Exposure therapy is grounded in learning theories and cognitive 
behavioral models. Maladaptive anxiety comprises unhelpful cognitions (e.g., threat overestimation) and avoidance 
behaviors related to feared stimuli; anxiety is maintained and worsened thro ugh continued avoidance  of feared 
stimuli,30 which also contributes to low self -efficacy to engage with these stimuli60,63 (see Figure 1 ). Exposure breaks 
the cycle of avoidance by [CONTACT_537636].[ADDRESS_700352] literature supports the utility of brief, 
one-session exposure -based treatments to target specific fears65–67 (in this case, fears about treating suicidal 
patients). Exposure -based strategies to address clinician anxiety and improve implementation have shown success 
for increasing uptake of exposure therapy itself – another anxiety -provoking EBP for clinicians33 – but have not been 
tested for SSAI.  
 
Version Date: 2/5/[ADDRESS_700353] not been 
implementation strategy targets. We will target these mechanisms  by [CONTACT_12780][INVESTIGATOR_537609] -testing an exposure -
based implementation strategy ( EBIS ) for implementing the following evidence -based SSAIs: the Columbia Suicide 
Severity Rating Scale (CSSRS) screener and assessment tool22 and the Safety Planning Intervention  (SPI) .[ADDRESS_700354] EBIS at scale.  
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE STUDY POPULATION : 
 
1. Target Population and Accrual : 
 
Aim 1 : Aim 1  is a preparatory aim and does not involve human subjects research.  
 
Aim 2: Aim 2 participants  will be community clinicians (n = 20) recruited from  any local community mental health 
clinics in the Philadelphia region . 
 
Aim 3: Aim 3 p articipants are community clinicians (n = 40) recruited from 3-5 community mental health clinics  in 
the City of Philadelphia . 
 
2. Key Inclusion Criteria : 
 
Aim 1: N/A  
 
Aims 2 and 3 : Participants must be : 
1) Practicing mental health clinician s in the City of Philadelphia  who p rovide direct mental health services to a 
treatment -seeking population . 
**This may include mental health clinicians who are both licensed or unlicensed (i.e., intern or trainees 
seeking licensure or practicing under another provider’s license). If the participant is  a practicing clinician at 
a clinic from which we recruit, they will be eligible for the study. Potential licensures may include but are not 
limited to:   
a. Licensed Family and Marriage Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] (LMFT)  
b. Licensed Clinical Social Worker (LCSW)  
c. Licensed Social Worker (LSW)  
d. Licensed Professional Counselor (LPC)  
e. Licensed Mental Health Counselor (LMHC)  
f. Licensed Clinical Professional Counselor (LCPC)  
g. Licensed Professional Clinical Counselor of Mental Health (LPCC)  
h. Licensed Clinical Mental Health Counselor (LCMHC)  
i. Licensed Mental Health Practitioner (LMHP)  
j. Clinical Psychologist (Licensed PsyD or PhD)  
2) Proficient in the English language   
3) Have access to a computer with internet connectivity  
 
3. Key Exclusion Criteria : 
 
Aim 1: N/A 
 
Aims 2 and 3 : Participants will be excluded if they do not see any mental health patients that are at risk for suicide 
(e.g., they screen out all high-risk patients for their individual practice) . Participants will not be excluded based on 
sex, demographics, and or past experience.   
 
4. Subject Recruitment and Screening : 
 
Aim 1 : N/A  
 
Aim 2:  Community clinicians for Aim 2 activities (n = 20) will be recruited from local community mental health 
clinics  across  the Philadelphia region . Our close partnership with the City of Philadelphia Department of 
 
Version Date: 2/5/[ADDRESS_700355] (formed under Aim 1 activities) will facilitate 
recruitment. In our experience, local clinicians are eager for training  opportunities,  and we will further incentivize 
participation by [CONTACT_537637]. To recruit clinicians, the study 
team will develop email scripts and flyers to disseminate to local agency partners who will in turn share  these 
recruitment materials with their clinicians on staff . Clinics will be eligible if they have clinicians who provide direct 
mental health services to a  mental health  treatment -seeking population. We will only connect with clinicians 
working in these institutions if we receive clinic  leadership  approval. We will not contact [CONTACT_537638]. These materials will 
instruct potential participants to contact [CONTACT_537639], at wh ich point the 
coordinator will present a study overview and proceed with study consent if the clinician is interested. Additional 
recruitment methods may include senior investigators on the project (Oquendo, Becker -Haimes, Jager -Hyman) 
making brief present ations (in person or virtually) at local agency meetings, during which details of the project and 
requirements of participation will be discussed.  At these meetings, clinicians will complete a paper or electronic 
“consent to contact” via REDCap with their preferred contact [CONTACT_3031]. Study staff will then follow up with 
interested clinicians with more information and to review all elements of informed consent. This approach ensures 
that clinicians do not feel pressured to make a  decision to participate.  Recruitment materials and scripts  specific 
to the procedures in Aim 2  are included for the IRB’s review . 
 
Aim 3:  We will recruit  clinicians  for the pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251] (n = 40)  from [ADDRESS_700356]. Oquendo  or ano ther 
senior member of the study team  to attend a clinic team meeting (either virtually or in person) to present an overview 
of the study to interested clinicians. At this meeting, clinicians will complete a paper or electronic “consent to contact” 
via REDCap with their preferred contact [CONTACT_3031]. Following the same procedures described in Aim 2 above, 
study staff will then follow up with interested clinicians to provide  more information and to review all elements of 
informed consent.  
Recruitment materials and scripts  specific to the procedures in Aim 3  are included for the IRB’s review . 
 
5. Early Withdrawal of Subjects : 
 
There is little risk associated with this study, and there is no safety concern associated with participation that would 
lead to participants being withdrawn from the study by [CONTACT_473]. Importantly, exposure -based treatments 
upon which the EBIS implementation activities are based are generally well -tolerated with few , if any, side effects  
(see Risks  below). As outlined in the informed consent document, t here will be no consequences for any providers 
or other personnel who indicate interest and then  do not enroll in the study. All participants will be free to withdraw 
their participation at any time  by [CONTACT_537640].  
 
6. Vulnerable Populations :  
 
We will work directly with clinicians. Vulnerable populations will not be recruited . 
 
7. Populations vulnerable to undue influence or coercion : 
 
N/A 
 
STUDY DESIGN : 
 
This study brings together an interdisciplinary team with expertise in suicide prevention, implementation science, 
and exposure therapy to design a novel, exposure -based implementation strategy (EBIS) directly targeting clinician 
anxiety and low self -efficacy for SSAI use with patients at risk for suicide.  
 
Version Date: 2/5/[ADDRESS_700357] over approximately three  years. The estimated length of individual clinician  
participation i n Aim 2 is 3 -4 weeks. The estimated  length of individual clinician participation in Aim 3 is 4 -6 months. 
The proposed start date  for all study activities  is 8/1/22. See below for proposed timeline:  
      
 
 
METHODS : 
 
Overview  
Aim 1: Develop an implementation strategy grounded in exposure theory (EBIS) to reduce clinician anxiety and 
bolster clinician self -efficacy to deliver SSAIs . We will develop and refine EBIS via presentation and workshoppi[INVESTIGATOR_9770] a stakeholder Advisory Board over multiple meetings, using a modified process of co -design.40,[ADDRESS_700358] exposure therapy practice for patients with 
anxiety disorders: psychoeducation, assessment, practice, and relapse prevention; however, the final 
version will depend on the outcomes of Aim 1. Table 1  presents each anticipated component; each is also 
described below.  
Psychoeducation.  In exposure therapy, psychoeducation is a critical step toward obtaining 
buy-in to engage in exposure practice. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_897], psychoeducation includes information about both 
adaptive and maladaptive anxiety. W e will provide brief information about the role of anxiety in SSAI 
delivery, explain the “cycle of avoidance” that can occur when one experiences anxiety related to 
patient suicide risk , and present clinical implications  (Figure 1 ).  
Assessment/Hierarchy -Building . We will use  the “post -it method”  in a group format  for 
assessment and hierarchy -building. Clinician s will be presented with 8-12 flashcards that delineate 
various fears about interacting with a suicidal patient (e.g., “patient endorses passive suicidal 
ideation”) and fears related to outcomes of intervention (e.g., “patient completes SPI [INVESTIGATOR_537610],”).  Clinicians then rank -order each fear with respect to how anxiety 
provoking it is , and for each scenario, rate their anticipated level of anxiety  using the Subjective Units 
of Distress Scale (SUDS) ranging from 0 (no anxiety) to 10 (maximal anxiety) . We will select each 
clinician’s three most -feared scenarios for exposure practice.  Study Timeline (By [CONTACT_537641])  
Activity  Project Period Quarter  
Y1 Y2 Y3 
1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 
Preparation (secure IRB, hire staff, finalize data collection procedures)              
Aim 1              
Initial adaptation and refinement of EBIS w/ Advisory board              
Aim [ADDRESS_700359] through rapid cycle prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (n= 20 clinicians)              
     Cumulative Enrollment Benchmark:  5 clinicians              
     Cumulative Enrollment Benchmark: 20 clinicians              
Aim 3              
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_37087] (n = 40 clinicians)              
     Cumulative Enrollment Benchmark: 10 clinicians              
     Cumulative Enrollment Benchmark: 20 clinicians              
     Cumulative Enrollment Benchmark: 30 clinicians              
     Cumulative Enrollment Benchmark: 40 clinicians              
Interview transcription and coding              
Data analysis              
Manuscript preparation, dissemination of findings, R01 submission              
 
Version Date: 2/5/2024   Page 7 of 20 Guided Practice (In Vivo & Imaginal Exposure63). Clinicians will engage in either in vivo 
practice or imaginal exposure with a trained actor (research assistant, RA) based on feared 
scenarios selected in the step above. Consistent with a standard exposure model,73 RAs will be 
trained to guide clinicians to (1) identify core fears and anticipated anxiety via SUDS, (2) engage in 
targeted practice to violate assumptions of core fears and track SUDS  changes, (3) engage in 
targeted cognitive debriefing to enhance copi[INVESTIGATOR_52497] -efficacy. RAs will be guided by [CONTACT_1629] “exposure 
checklist” that Project Co-PI [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Becker -Haimes developed  and supervised closely by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Becker -
Haimes during administration .74 A final adapted copy created in Aim 1 activities will be submitted to 
the IRB for review before use in Aim 2 or Aim 3 activities.  
Relapse Prevention/Application to Clinical Practice.  Clinicians will be guided to 
summarize their experience and set intentions for managing anxiety they may experience in practice. 
Follow -up consultation will also include targeted discussion of clinician anxiety and avoidance to 
facilitate maintenance of ga ins.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aim 2:  Iteratively refine EBIS in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_537611] . The primary goal of Aim [ADDRESS_700360] qualitative feedback from clinicians on the extent to which EBIS successfully engages 
target mechani sms of clinician anxiety and self -efficacy.  The outcome of Aim 2 will be a refined  manual to guide 
EBIS in the Aim 3 clinical trial . 
 
Aim 3:  Test acceptability, feasibility, and preliminary effectiveness of EBIS to target implementation mechanisms 
and outcomes relative to implementation as usual ( IAU) via a pi[INVESTIGATOR_537612] 40 community 
clinic ians. Our primary Aim 3 dependent variables  are EBIS acceptability and feasibility, measured through 
questionnaires, interviews, and recruitment and retention statistics. Secondary outcomes are preliminary 
effectiveness of EBIS on implementation outcomes (SSAI adoption and fidelity), and engagement of target  
implementation mechanisms (clinician anxiety and self -efficacy related to SSAI use), assessed via mixed methods 
(questionnaires, chart -stimulated recall , observer -coded role plays , and interviews) . We also will gather data on 
other poss ible implementation mechanisms (e.g., SSAI knowledge, attitudes, intentions, norms , and organizational 
factors ). Qualitative interviews  with clinicians will probe for contextual implementation barriers to SSAI use not 
addressed by [CONTACT_537642].  
 
1. Study Instruments : 
 
Aim 1: N/A  
 
Aim 2:  Data will consist of responses to semi -structured interviews  and completion of a brief survey about 
clinician background and perceptions related to work with patients at risk for suicide . Qualitative d ata will be 
integrated to iteratively adapt and refine the EBIS implementation strategy in preparation for the Aim 3 trial. All 
data will be used exclusively for research purposes.  
- The qualitative  interview guide and Aim 2 brief survey battery was previously reviewed and approved by 
[CONTACT_537643] 3: Clinical trial d ata will consist of clinician responses to self -report questionnaires, chart -stimulated recall, 
semi -structured interviews, and fidelity role -plays with research staff. In addition, recruitment and retention Table 1.  Anticipated EBIS Components and Rationale   
EBIS Component  Rationale  
1. Psychoeducation  Obtain clinician buy -in, explain how anxiety can interfere with suicide EBP 
delivery  
2. Assessment/  
Hierarchy Building  Identify tailored exposure practice targets that best match an individual 
clinician ’s fears  
3. Exposure Practice  Provide exposure to feared outcomes to foster clinician self -efficacy in 
managing high -risk patients, facilitate clinician practice managing anxiety 
in high -risk encounters.  
4.Relapse/ Prevention 
Application to Clinical 
Practice  Transition “learning” about one’s ability to manage high -risk encounters to 
clinical practice; continue to use an exposure frame to support 
implementation  
 
Version Date: 2/5/2024   Page 8 of 20 statistics will  capture feasibility metrics. No identifiable data about patient level information will be collected. All 
data will be used exclusively for research purposes  and will be administered at the following time points: T1 = 
baseline /pretraining;  T2 = post-training ; T3 = 2-week  follow -up; T4 = 12-week follow -up. Specific measures that 
will be administered are described below. Table 2 shows the anticipated assessment battery for the Aim 3 clinical 
trial. All measures will be administered to all clini cians enrolled in the trial, regardless of assigned condition.  
 
Primary Outcomes: Acceptability & Feasibility  
- Acceptability of Intervention Measure: A 4-item, psychometrically -validated measure that indexes the extent 
to which stakeholders believe an implementation strategy (in this case, IAU or EBIS) is acceptable. This will 
be administered at Time 2 and Time 4.  
o This measure was previously reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_1201] . 
 
- Feasibility of Intervention Measure . A 4-item,  psychometrically -validated measure that indexes the extent to 
which stakeholders perceive an implementation strategy (in this case, IAU or  EBIS) is feasible. This will be 
administered at Time [ADDRESS_700361] of three sections. Section 1 will query about the acceptability 
of the implementation condition to which they were assigned (EBIS or IAU) and any barriers that arose in 
engaging with any component of the study. Section 2 will fo cus on how the implementation condition 
engaged target implementation mechanisms. The final section will be guided by [CONTACT_537644], with the primary goal o f 
identifying contextual determinants of use not adequately addressed by [CONTACT_537645] . This will be administered at 
Time 4.  
o This measure was previously reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_1201].  
 
Secondary Outcomes: Target Implementation Mechanisms  
- Subjective Units of Distress Scale  (SUDS ). The SUDS is a one-item, 10-point rating scale of perceive d 
distress, commonly used to guide exposure therapy . This will be administered at Time 1 - 4. 
o This measure was previously reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_1201]  
 
- Suicidal Patient Comfort Survey . A brief, 5 -item measure assessing clinician anxiety about interacting with 
and treating patients with suicidality . This will be administered at Time 1 - 4. 
o This measure was previously reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_1201] . 
 
- Self-Efficacy Questionnaire . Established question stems from behavioral measuring clinicians’ perceptions 
of themselves as having the skills and abilities to perform a task (in this case, SSAI use ) on a 7 -point scale . 
This will be administered at Time 1 - 4. 
o This measure was previously reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_1201] . 
 
Secondary Outcomes: Implementation Outcomes  
- Chart Stimulated Recall  (CSR) . An established technique for examining clinician decision -making and 
clinical processes beyond what can be determined from chart review or self -report alone . A trained research 
team member will review the clinician’s caseload with them for the past clinic week and ask them brief 
questions (no more than 5 minutes) related to the clinician ’s suicide -related practices (e.g., “Did you conduct 
a screen for suicide risk? How did you screen for risk? If risk was present, was a full C SSRS/SPI 
[INVESTIGATOR_537613]?).  This will be administered at Time 1 and 3-4. No identifiable patient information is collected 
during the CSR and the study staff will not ever view the chart directly. Clinicians are instructed to refrain 
from sharing any identifiable patient details during the CSR administration.  
o This measure was previously reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_1201] . 
 
- Brief Role Plays . Participants will receive a vignette and prepare for a 45 -60-minute role play, during which 
they will be asked to complete an SPI [CONTACT_4490] a patient who was determined to be at -risk for suicide following 
CSSRS administration with a trained actor. Role plays wi ll be audio -recorded and coded for competence 
with the Safety Planning Intervention Rating Scale (SPI[CONTACT_58468]).  This will be administered at Time 3 and Time 
4. 
 
Version Date: 2/5/2024   Page 9 of 20 o An example of the procedures and coding scheme for the role play are included for the IRB’s review . 
 
Secondary Outcomes: Additional Mechanisms of Interest  
- Self-Perceived  Knowledge  & Attitudes  About Suicide Scale . Selected subscales (Knowledge, Attitudes) of 
the Short Survey on Knowledge, Self -Confidence, and Attitudes Towards Suicidal Behavior will assess  a 
clinician’s perceived knowledge about suicide and how to intervene . This will be administered at Time [ADDRESS_700362] Safety Planning . A 12-item questionnaire assessing clinician attitudes and beliefs 
about  the use of safety planning interventions in clinical practice with suicidal patients.  This will be 
administered at Time 1 - 4. 
o This measure was previously reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_1201] . 
  
- SSAI Intentions  and Determinants of Intention . Established question stems from behavioral science using 
items on a 7 -point scale asking how willing and how likely one is to use SSAIs  as well as attitudes and 
perceived norms of SSAI use . This will be administered at Time 1 - 4. 
o This measure was previously reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_1201] . 
 
- Clinician Demographics . Brief questionnaire about clinician demographic (e.g., age, sex) and professional 
characteristics (e.g., years of experience, theoretical orientation, caseload descriptions), work setting , and 
a question about the clinician’s person experience with suicide (e.g., “Have you ever had a client die by 
[CONTACT_537646]?”) . This will be administered at Time 1.  
o This measure was previously reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_1201] . 
 
- Anxiety Sensitivity Index  (ASI-3). Questionnaire about the clinician’s physical, cognitive, or social concerns 
about anxiety. This will be administered at Time 1 . 
o This measure was previously reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_1201] . 
 
- Organizational Innovation Specific Capacity for Suicide Prevention Evidence -based practices  (OISCSE). 
Questionnaire about the organizational policies, procedures, and practices within the clinician’s organization 
to observe potential factors that could influence use of SSAI’s. This measure has 14-items on a Likert scale 
plus a yes or no question to query any additional factors about the clinician’s organization not mentioned in 
the first 14 -items. If the clinician responds positively, they are asked an addi tional open response question. 
This measure was adapted from a previously developed measure to assess policies and procedures needed 
to support exposure therapy delivery, guided by [CONTACT_537647] 2 of 
this study and items from the Zero Suicide Organ izational Self -Study in collaboration with suicide prevention 
and implementation science experts.   
o A copy of this measure is included for the IRB’s review.  
 
 
Table 2 . Assessment Schedule for  Aim 3   
Outcome  Measure  T1 T2 T3 T4 
Primary Outcomes  
EBIS Acceptability  Acceptability of Intervention Measure; Qualitative Interview  (T4 only)   X  X 
EBIS Feasibility   Feasibility of Intervention Measure; Recruitment/Retention statistics   X  X 
Secondary Outcomes    
Target Implementation Mechanisms   
Clinician Anxiety  Subjective Units of Distress Scale;71 Suicidal Patient Comfort Survey55; 
Anxiety Sensitivity Index (ASI -3) (Time 1 only)  X X X X 
Clinician Self -efficacy  Established question stems81 X X X X 
Implementation Outcomes  
SSAI use (CSSRS, SPI)  Chart Stimulated Recall82 X  X X 
SPI [INVESTIGATOR_537614] w/ SPI[CONTACT_58468]    X X 
Additional Implementation Mechanisms of Interest  
SSAI Knowledge  Self-Perceived Knowledge About Suicide Scale83 X X  X 
SSAI Attitudes  Attitudes Toward Suicide Prevention;[ADDRESS_700363] Safety X X X X 
 
Version Date: 2/5/2024   Page 10 of 20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Group Modifications : 
 
Aims 1 and 2 : N/A  
 
Aim 3 : After consenting to participate, c linicians will be random ly assigned to one of  the two implementation 
conditions; the measurement battery will be identical for clinicians in each condition, with the exception that 
qualitative interviews for clinicians randomized to the EBIS condition will include  several additional questions 
about their specific experience with EBIS.  
 
3. Method for Assigning Subjects to Groups : 
 
Aim 1 : N/A  
 
Aim 2 : No participants will be randomized as a part of Aim 2 activities .  
 
Aim 3 :  Clinician participants will be randomized 1:1 to receive either Implementation as Usual (IAU) or IAU+ EBIS. 
Randomization will take place after the informed consent process  and prior to beginning either training condition .  
  
4. Administration of Surveys and/or Process :  
 
Aim 1 : N/A  
 
Aim 2: To accomplish Aim 2, we will deliver the draft version of EBIS as outlined in the procedures below. Following 
receipt of the draft version of EBIS, clinicians will complete brief [ADDRESS_700364]  via phone, videoconference , or in person, depending on participant 
preference.  
 
Aim 3: During the clinical trial, all measures will be administered by [CONTACT_537648]. Questionnaires at each time point will be administered either in paper format 
or electronically using REDCap, depending on participant preference ( See Study Instruments above). Qualitative 
interviews will take place via phone, videoconference , or in person, depending on participant preference.  
 
5. Data Management : 
 
Drs. Maria Oquendo (PI) and Becker -Haimes  (co-PI) will oversee a ll data cleaning and management with support 
from co-Investigator [CONTACT_537664] -Hyman .  
 
All primary data, including audio -recordings, will be stored using Research Electronic Data Capture (RED Cap), a 
HIPAA -compliant web -based survey platform. The REDCap system provides secure, web -based applications that 
are flexible enough to be used for a variety of types of research, provide an intuitive interface for users to enter data 
and have real time validation rule s (with automated data type and range checks) at the time of entry. These systems 
offer easy data manipulation with audit trails for  reporting, monitoring and querying patient records, and an 
automat ed export mechanism to common statistical packages (SPSS, SAS, Stata, R/S -Plus). REDCap servers are 
housed in a local data center at the CRCU at the Perelman School of Medicine and all web -based information 
transmission is encrypted. REDCap was developed s pecifically around HIPAA -Security guidelines. REDCap has 
been disseminated for use locally at other institutions and currently supports 240+ academic/non -profit consortium 
partners on six continents and over 26,000 research end -users ( www.project -redcap.org ). Any p hysical copi[INVESTIGATOR_537615] , field notes , and interview data  collected in Aim s 2 and 3  will be kept in a locked filing cabinet with Planning85 
SSAI Intentions  Established question stems 81 X X X X 
SSAI Norms  Established question stems 81 X X X X 
Demographics  Demographics survey  X    
Organizational Factors  Organizational Innovation Specific Capacity for Suicide Prevention 
Evidence -based practices  (OISCSE)   X   
T1=baseline. T2=post -training. T3=2 -week. T4=12 -week follow -up. 
 
Version Date: 2/5/2024   Page 11 of 20 access by [CONTACT_537649]. All participants will be assigned an ID number . The file linking participants’ ID numbers 
and identifiable  information will be stored in a separate REDCap database  with access by [CONTACT_236428]. All 
consent forms with identifiers will be stored in a separate locked filing cabinet  or obtained electronically and 
maintained in a separate REDCap database .  
 
All personnel will complete required training before being granted access to any identifying information. This 
includes training on confidentiality through the Collaborative IRB Training Initiative (CITI) course. All personnel will 
also sign confidentialit y statements. These confidentiality statements will specify the procedures for reporting 
unintentional breaches in confidentiality to the PI s. The confidentiality statements also specify that violations of 
participants’ confidentiality, either unintentiona l or deliberate, may result in termination of hire. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_537616], limits of confidentiality, maintaining confidentiality, and proper 
study procedures. Participants will be notified of the above pro cedures during informed consent. No identified data 
will be disclosed to personnel not listed on the study protocol.  
 
7. Subject Follow -up: 
 
The study investigators have a robust record of conducting community -partnered research to enroll clinicians in 
research trials. We attribute the success of these studies to: 1) taking a true partnered approach to research by 
[CONTACT_537650], 2) the training of staff to build 
rapport with participants, and 3) local travel to participants to facilitate their completion and/ or use of phone 
interviews to facilitate the gathering of qualitative data.  The senior investigative team (Oquendo, Becker -Haimes, 
Jager -Hyman) will meet weekly with study staff to monitor project enrollment and retention so that any problems 
can be identi fied early and remediated. The project has clear benchmarks for recruitment (see Study Timeline ), so 
any deviations from projected benchmarks will be readily apparent. We will track data on clinician enrollment and 
reasons for non -enrollment and study dropout. These data will help us identify specific barriers to participation that 
might be addresse d through revised recruitment procedures. In addition, the investigative team has a  robust record 
of conducting community partnered research  to enroll clinicians  in research trials  with similar demands of 
participants. We attribute this success to strong community partnerships, rigorous training of all study staff in 
building rapport with participants and working closely with participants to facilitate data collection and completion . 
To facilitate retention of clinicians across the multiple assessment time points in Aim 3, we will additionally employ 
the following strategies that have been successful in our prior studies: (1) We will spread out clinician payments f or 
research activities so that clinicians are compensated after each assessment to increase motivation to complete 
each activity, (2) We will collaborate closely with clinician participants to schedule standardized role -plays and 
interviews at hours most c onvenient for them, including after business hours and on the weekends, and (3) We will 
collaborate with our Advisory Board to identify additional strategies for keepi[INVESTIGATOR_537617].  Furthermore,  the City of Philadelphia Department of Behavioral Health has 
expressed support and enthusiasm for this work (see  Letter of Support ). 
 
STUDY PROCEDURES : 
 
1. Detailed Description : 
 
Aim 1: Develop an implementation strategy grounded in exposure theory (EBIS) to reduce clinician anxiety and 
bolster clinician self -efficacy to deliver SSAIs . 
 
We will develop and refine EBIS via presentation and workshoppi[INVESTIGATOR_18499] a stakeholder Advisory Board over 
multiple meetings, using a modified process of co -design.40,[ADDRESS_700365] for EBIS components will be general (e.g., “Tell us 
 
Version Date: 2/5/2024   Page 12 of 20 your thoughts on the psychoeducation component?” “What exposure tasks do you think will be most 
important?”) and specific (e.g., “How can we make the psychoeducation component more engaging?” “How 
can we optimize imaginal exposure to a feared outcome of be ing sued?”). We will query the Board about 
their perceptions as to how EBIS can be designed to be maximally acceptable and feasible for diverse 
settings. Drs. Oquendo and Becker -Haimes will integrate all feedback into a revised prototype that will be 
prese nted to the Advisory Board in a second meeting. We will repeat this until saturation is reached 
(anticipated max. 4 meetings) and a final prototyped version of EBIS is identified for field -testing in Aim 2.  
As noted previously, all Aim [ADDRESS_700366] are considered consulting members of the research team, not participants.  
 
Aim 2:  Iteratively refine EBIS in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_537611] .  
 
We will use rapid cycle prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_537618] 20 clinicians to 
optimize its acceptability and feasibility and identify early implementation challenges. Recruited c linician  
participants will receive approximately 3-4 hours of training in the CSSRS and SPI [INVESTIGATOR_537619] (exact sequencing of didactic and EBIS -based activities will be determined in Aim 1)  either virtually 
or at a location on the University of Pennsylvania’s campus . We will be in communication with clinic 
leadership during the study. As part of the communication, we will ask the leadership at each participating 
clinic if the study activities may be done on work time. Based on this response, we wi ll communicate to all 
participants at each respective clinic site if the study activitie s are permitted to take place during work hours.  
To avoid selecting for a specific type of therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541], we will consider designing trainings to take place in smaller 
increments of time that are maximally feasible to be completed in the work setting (e.g., over the lunch hour); 
we will also clarify to leadership that study training activities  with accompanying CEUs will satisfy licensure 
requirements for suicide training.  Bachelor level RAs, shown to be effective in administering exposure, will 
be guided to ad minister EBIS by  [CONTACT_15957]-PI [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Becker -Haimes , an exposure therapy  expert.  RAs will receive 
close supervision from [CONTACT_412563] -Haimes.  
In this prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_458468], EBIS will be administered either individually to clinicians or in small groups of 2 -4 
clinicians. The syllabus that will guide EBIS administration is included for the IRB’s review. All trainings and 
consultation sessions will be video recorded and transcribed using HIPAA compliant software. During 
administration, study staff will take field notes on implementation challenges. Clinicians will complete a brief 
demographic questionnaire before and after completing the training. After  receiving EBIS, clinicians will 
complete brief qualitative interviews (45 -60 minutes) about their experience with EBIS either virtually or at a 
private location (e.g., the University of Pennsylvania campus or your office location). Interviews will be audi o-
recorded and transcribed. The first part of the interview will query clinicians on acceptability and feasibility 
of EBIS. The second part will comprise semi -structured questions about perceptions of how EBIS influenced 
anxiety and self -efficacy to delive r the CSSRS and SPI. The last part will solicit suggestions for 
improvements to optimize EBIS. Clinicians will also receive continuing education credits for training 
activities. We anticipate it will take clinicians approximately 4 -5 hours to complete stud y procedures (up to 
4 hours of training and 1 hour for the interview).  
We will make iterative refinements after each EBIS administration in response to observed implementation 
challenges and clinician feedback until saturation is reached (anticipated max imum: 20 clinicians ). When 
clarity is needed on whether certain adaptations are needed, we will return to our Advisory Board for 
guidance.  
The finalized manual that will guide EBIS administration in Aim 3 was submitted for the IRB ’s review .  
 
Aim 3:  Test acceptability, feasibility, and preliminary effectiveness of EBIS to target implementation mechanisms 
and outcomes relative to implementation as usual (IAU) via a pi[INVESTIGATOR_37087].  
 
After consenting, clinicians will be randomized to one of two implementation arms: IAU (n=20), or EBIS 
(n=20), which comprises all IAU activities plus EBIS as refined in Aim 2.  If a clinician drops out of the study 
prior to attending their initial workshop (which is when official randomization will occur), we will make 
efforts to replace that individual to obtain a final sample of [ADDRESS_700367] IAU for SSAIs typi[INVESTIGATOR_537620] -implementation 
 
Version Date: 2/5/2024   Page 13 of 20 preparation, didactic training, knowledge tests, experiential role plays, ongoing expert consultation, 
and providing certification status to clinicians who attain established benchmarks. Pre -
implementation preparation will include provision of materials (e .g., SPI [INVESTIGATOR_402284] ,78 instructions ,79 and 
forms). Didactic training will occur in two parts: (1) CSSRS screening and assessment, and (2) SPI  
[CONTACT_3225]. Part one will consist of materials we previously developed based on community clinician 
feedback. Part two will follow established SPI [CONTACT_21401], including didactic training about SPI 
[INVESTIGATOR_537621] . IAU also will include supports for electronic 
health record integration (e.g., previously developed templates). After training, clinicians will receive 
six, one -hour sessions of expert consultation over the course of 12 weeks  to discuss implementation 
barriers and receive more role play practice.  
EBIS Condition . Clinicians randomized to EBIS will receive all IAU elements outlined above 
plus the exposure -based intervention described above and refined in Aims 1 and 2 (see Table 1 ).  
In both arms, clinicians will complete study measures as outlined in Table 2  above at four time points: 
baseline/pre -training (T1), post -training (T2), two -week follow -up (T3), and twelve -week follow -up (T4). A 
12-week follow -up was selected based on base rates of suicidal ideation in outpatient settings to maximize 
likelihood tha t clinicians will encounter at least one patient at risk for suicide during the trial and to align with 
the traditional length of many evidence -based treatment protocols.[ADDRESS_700368] virtually 
or at a location on the University of Pennsylvania’s campus. All trainings and consultation will be video 
recorded using HIPAA compliant software (in both implementation arms). Surveys will be completed online 
or on paper, depending on participant preference. Interviews will take place either virtually or at a private 
location that is convenient for the clinician (e.g., the University of Pennsylvania’s campus or your office 
location).  All interviews will be audio -recorded and transcribed. We will be in communication with clinic 
leadership during the study. As part of the communication, we will ask the leadership at each participating 
clinic if the study activities may be done on work time. Based on this response, we  will communicate to all 
participants at each respective clinic site if the study activities are permitted to take place during work hours.  
To avoid selecting for a specific type of therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541], we will consider designing trainings to take place in smaller 
increments of time that are maximally feasible to be completed in the work setting (e.g., over the lunch hour); 
we will also clarify to leadership that study training activities with accompanying CEUs will satisfy licensure 
requirements for suicide training . 
 
The time allotted for the training in Aim [ADDRESS_700369] 
implementation as usual (IAU) training, role plays, and IAU -focused consult ations. The intervention or EBIS 
condition would receive additional EBIS constructs in training  (i.e., specific psychoeducation about how 
clinician anxiety is normal and to be anticipated in suicide prevention work) , exposure -focused role plays 
(vs. traditional role plays in the IAU condition) and consultations  (IAU = traditional consultation; EBIS = 
emotion -focused consultation).  The training for both conditions will be led by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Shari Jager -Hyman, an 
expert in suicide prevention EBP implementation, and J esslyn Jamison, a post -doctoral candidate, who will 
be trained and supervised by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Jager -Hyman.  
 
Participants will complete baseline surveys  (30 min)  and measures of SSAI use via chart -stimulated recall 
(CSR) (15 min) at T1 and then receive either IAU or EBIS. T2 assessment will comprise surveys (30 min) 
and will take place immediately after training in both arms. At T3 and T4 (two - and twelve -week follow -ups), 
clinicians will complete brief questionnaires  (30 min) , a CSR to measure SSAI use  (15 min), and a role play 
to index SPI [INVESTIGATOR_537622]  (45-60 min) . At T4, clinicians will also complete a qualitative interview  (30 min) . We 
anticipate it will take clinicians approximately 17 hours to complete study procedures  over 12 wee ks (6 hours 
for training, 6 hours for expert consultation, and ~5 hours for research assessments across T1-T4).  
 
Note:  As Aim [ADDRESS_700370] ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]).   
 
2. Data Collection : 
Not applicable.  
 
 
Version Date: 2/5/2024   Page 14 of 20 3. Genetic Testing : 
Not Applicable  
 
4. Use of Deception:  
No deception will be used in this project.  
 
5. Statistical Analysis : 
 
Quantitative  analyses  This pi[INVESTIGATOR_537623].94,95 Findings will provide key preliminary data to support the feasibility of EBIS and study procedures for a 
fully powered R01 (e.g., frequency of suicidal ideation over the 8 -week follow -up period). Qualitative analysis of 
interview transcripts and mixed met hods analysis will supplement quantitative analyses.  
 
Preliminary Analysis. Data screening and missing data analysis will be conducted in accordance with best practice 
recommendations.[ADDRESS_700371] (e.g., coefficient alpha) to confirm adequate performance. We will conduct 
analyses of baseline variables as a randomization check to ensure comparable baseline characteristics for clinicians 
in EBIS and IAU. Any differences will be controlled for in subsequent analyses.  
 
Hypothesis 1 : EBIS will be an acceptable and feasible implementation strategy . We will calculate descriptive 
statistics on the AIM and FIM measures and compare scores between EBIS and IAU. We will also evaluate EBIS 
feasibility by [CONTACT_537651].  
 
Exploratory Hypotheses 1 and 2 : EBIS will engage target implementation mechanisms of clinician anxiety and self -
efficacy better than IAU; clinicians randomized to EBIS will show improved SSAI adoption and fidelity relative to 
clinicians randomized to IAU . We will examine the effect of condition over time on target mechanisms (anxiety and 
self-efficacy) and implementation outcomes (mean CSSRS screening frequency across encounters, proportions of 
appropriate encounters in which clinicians conduct follow -up as sessment with the CSSRS and SPI [CONTACT_3225], as 
measured by [CONTACT_202628], and average SPI [INVESTIGATOR_537624]) using repeated measures analysis of covariance 
(ANCOVA), controlling for organization (given the small sample size and that we will recruit from only a small 
number of organizations for this pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], we do not anticipate the need for multilevel analysis).  
 
Qualitative and Mixed -Method analyses . Qualitative  analysis of interviews will complement quantitative data  to 
better understand: (1) the efficacy of EBIS to reduce clinician anxiety and bolster self -efficacy, (2) processes by 
[CONTACT_537652], and (3) contextual factors in clinicians’ setting s that are not 
addressed by [CONTACT_537645]. Interviews will be transcribed and analyzed via qualitative software, guided by [CONTACT_537653]97 which uses an inductive process of iterative coding to identify recurrent themes, categories, and 
relationships. A structured codebook will be developed. We will code for a priori attributes of interest (i.e., the extent 
to which EBIS engages our target m echanisms of anxiety and self -efficacy) and also use modified grounded 
theory,98 which provides a systematic and rigorous approach to identifying codes and themes (e.g., to identify 
additional barriers that arise to SSAI use). Using the qualitative software program, [CONTACT_412563] -Haimes and a 
postdoctoral fellow  will separately code three transcripts and compare their application of the coding scheme to 
assess its reliability and robustness. Any disagreements will be resolved through discussion and the codebook 
refined and applied to all transcripts. Code reliabil ity will be monitored via  bi-weekly meetings to ensure κ ≥ .85. 
After coding, we will read through all codes to examine themes and produce memos of examples and commentary. 
Mixed methods will analyze themes as a function of quantitative data to identify patterns of responding, following 
NIH guidelines for best practices in mixed methods.[ADDRESS_700372] use findings from quantitative data to identify 
patterns in qualitative data by [CONTACT_537654]. 
Quantitative attributes will categorize and compare important themes among subgr oups. For example, we may 
categorize clinicians into two groups: those with high and low SSAI use on CSR data. Then, if clinician anxiety 
emerges as a theme from interviews, we can query instances when anxiety is discussed among clinicians with low 
and hig h SSAI use; this will allow us to identify patterns and make interpretations across groups based on 
quantitative data.  [CONTACT_412563] -Haimes is experienced in mixed -methods implementation research42,100 and will 
oversee these analyses.  
 
RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT : 
 
Version Date: 2/5/2024   Page 15 of 20  
1. Risks :  
 
Potential harm to participants is minimal as we are testing two ways of training clinicians in gold -standard suicide 
prevention practices, not testing the use of a new suicide prevention practice. There are no known physical, 
financial, or legal risks to participating in the study. However, there is a risk of loss of confidentiality in all research.  
We will minimize this risk by [CONTACT_537655], encrypted servers to host all data and conduct the analysi s. We will 
implement multiple, redundant protective measur es to guarantee the privacy and security of the participant data. 
All investigators and study staff with direct access to the identifiable data will be required to undergo annual 
responsible conduct of research, cybersecurity, and HIPAA certification in ac cordance with University of 
Pennsylvania regulations. Data will be stored, managed, and analyzed on a secure, encrypted server behind the 
University of Pennsylvania Health System (UPHS) firewall. All study personnel that will use this data are listed on 
the IRB application and have completed training in HIPAA standards and the CITI human subjects research. All 
data analyses will be performed using participants’ identification numbers rather than names to minimize the circle 
of study team members who know the identity of the research participants. In addition, risk of loss of confidentiality 
will be minimized by [CONTACT_537656][INVESTIGATOR_537625] (separate 
from one another) in locked file cabinets in locked offices accessible only to trained study staff.  
 
We will minimize the risk of coercion by [CONTACT_537657]. Our experience conducting similar research 
protocols is that therapi[INVESTIGATOR_537626]. 
Managers/leadership will not be present when study staff describes the study to potential participants, enabling  
participants to choose not to participate without having to do so in the  presence of leadership. In addition, we will 
provide participants with ample time to ask questions or have family/friends ask questions about their participation. 
To ensure no participants (potential or actively participating) feel coercion to participate in any of the study aims, we 
will work closely with our IRB, Advisory Board, and stakeholders to ensure that our study is not coercive. In our previous 
work, we have ensured that all data provided by [CONTACT_30223] s are confidential and never shared with peers , supervisors, 
clinic leadership, or the payer in an individual or identified manner. We will continue to take this approach in the 
proposed work.  
 
Self-reported questionnaires, role -plays, CSRs, and semi -structured interviews could lead participants to feel 
temporarily uncomfo rtable. Importantly , exposure -based treatments upon which the EBIS implementation activities 
are based, are generally well -tolerated with few to no side effects. To minimize discomfort, we will follow established 
procedures used in multiple studies executed in the proposed settings by [CONTACT_30967]. Specifically, a 
licensed clinical psychologist  or physician  from the re search team will be available to speak with any participants 
who feel unduly distressed and will make appropriate referrals. Participants are made aware of their ability to 
discontinue participation at anytime without penalty.  
 
Although we will not be asking participants about their own suicidal thoughts or behaviors, if a participant 
spontaneously discloses suicidal thoughts, plans, or behaviors  to a member of the research team , we will follow the 
High Risk Management Protocol used routinely in the Penn Center for the Prevention of Suicide (CPS) IRB -
approved research studies. Co -Investigator Shari Jager -Hyman, Ph.D. from CPS will train all study staff in these 
procedures.  
 
In the event that a clinician mentions child abuse/neglect or a patient’s imminent suicidality/homicidality during 
qualitative interviews, or if suicidality/homicidality is otherwise observed while study staff are embedded in the 
clinical settings, we will  follow established protocols from similar studies carried out by [CONTACT_2296]. Specifically, a 
clinically -trained member of the research team will consult with the patient’s treatment team to ensure that any 
information about child abuse/neglect or intent to harm self or others has been reported to the appropriate parties, 
as required by [CONTACT_2371]. A licensed clinical psychologist or physician with extensive experience assessing risk (Drs. 
Oquendo, Becker -Haimes, or Jager -Hyman) will be available for consultation at all times  that researchers are 
conducting study assessments .  
 
2. Benefits : 
 
Version Date: 2/5/[ADDRESS_700373] benefits to participants; however, participants may find satisfaction in sharing their ideas and 
experiences with research staff. Clinician participants may indirectly benefit from participation by [CONTACT_537658], assessment and the SPI  [INVESTIGATOR_537627]. 
This may contribute to clinicians providing more effective care for treatment -seeking individuals and/or increase 
their understanding of key concepts or strategies  involved in psychosocial treatment. The benefit to the clinical 
community is that the results may ultimately help improve the quality of care. The ratio of risks to benefit is positive, 
considering that we do not think that the study poses any risks and the  scientific yield from the study could be greatly 
beneficial.  
 
3. Subject Privacy:  
 
Privacy will be given utmost consideration and is highly valued in the proposed research. Research staff will 
exercise caution in ensuring privacy within the constraints of the research setting (clinicians’ work environment). 
For participants in Aim s [ADDRESS_700374] Confidentiality : 
 
How will confidentiality of data be maintained?  Check all that apply.  
 
X Paper -based records will be kept in a secure location and only be accessible to personnel involved in 
the study.  
X Computer -based files will only be made available to personnel involved in the study through the use of 
access privileges and passwords.  
X Prior to access to any study -related information, personnel will be required to sign statements agreeing 
to protect the security and confidentiality of identifiable information.  
X Whenever feasible, identifiers will be removed from study -related information.  
 A Certificate of Confidentiality will be obtained, because the research could place the subject at risk of 
criminal or civil liability or cause damage to the subject’s financial standing, employability, or liability.  
 A waiver of documentation of consent is being requested, because the only link between the subject 
and the study would be the consent document and the primary risk is a breach of confidentiality.  (This is 
not an option for FDA -regulated research.)  
X Precautions are in place to ensure the data is secure by [CONTACT_71994], because the 
research involves web -based surveys.   
X Audio and/or video recordings will be transcribed and then destroyed to eliminate audible identification 
of subjects.  
 Other (specify):     
 
The only data will be collected from mental health clinicians  interacting with the strategies being refined  and tested . 
No identifying patient information will be collected. All project staff with direct access to the identifiable data will be 
required to undergo annual responsible conduct of research, cybersecurity, and HIPAA certification in accordance 
with University of Pennsylvania regulations.  When results of the research are presented at scientific meetings or 
published, no identifying information wil l be included. Only authorized persons from Penn and their associated 
Institutional Review Board will have access to review research records. Below we outline how we plan to ensure 
confidentiality specific for all study related activities.  
 
To ensure confidentiality across all aims, we will be using the following methods for protection of data living on C enter 
for Mental Health (CMH)  servers. All data will be de -identified and subject identity will be masked using numeric codes 
and password -protected master lists and will not be linked in any way to the participant’s names. Identifiable d ata will 
be entered and stored into password -protected files on password -protected drives on the CMH encrypted server  or on 
REDCap , and files for analysis wil l only be identified with subject numbers, and will not contain any identifying 
 
Version Date: 2/5/[ADDRESS_700375], it is unlikely there will be a breach of confidentiality.  
 
We will only store and use the data at the following locations: 1) Password -protected PCs in locked offices at Penn; 2) 
The desktop computer that will access the data will be part of the CMH domain, with Windows Active Directory group 
policies in place to distribute and enforce best -practice desktop security policies. Security and software updates are 
pushed through the system in a timely manner using desktop management tool s (Tivoli/BigFix and Windows Automated 
Update Service).;  and 3) A server at the University of Pennsylvania within the facilities managed room in the data 
center.  
 
Physical copi[INVESTIGATOR_537628] a locked cabinet within the CMH office. 
Additionally, all data hosted on the server will be accessed over an encrypted (Value -Added Network)  VAN connection. 
Individually identifiable or deducible data will not be transmitted by [CONTACT_514412] . Any data transfer 
will be sent via secured communications,  which include secure Penn Medicine email  servers  or SecureShare, a web -
based application for secure, encrypted file  exchange available to Penn faculty, staff, and students.  Further, the data 
will not be physically moved or transmitted in any way from the CMH servers or secured desktop(s) without written 
approval.    
 
Brief qualitative interviews and role plays will be audio -recorded during Aims 2 and 3. All trainings and consultation 
sessions will be video recorded. These audio and video recordings will be directly uploaded into REDCap and 
subsequently transcribed and de-identified using HIPAA compliant vendors. All transcripts will be double checked 
to ensure that no identifying information remains.  This means if a participant mentions someone’s name [CONTACT_537663] (e.g., clinic, street name) in the recording, t he identifying information will be removed and replaced with a 
description of the information (e.g., [NAME], [LOCATION]). The recordings will be destroyed after the transcription 
process is completed. The de -identified transcripts will be stored in passwor d-protected files in the CMH encrypted 
server or on REDCap, and the deidentified data will be loaded into qualitative software for data management and 
analysis.  
 
During the clinical trial  phase of the study (Aim 3), quantitative surveys may also collected using pen -and-paper 
hard copy , depending on participant preference ; study staff will enter any pen -and-paper data directly into REDCap . 
All study participants will be given an ID number for identification purposes. A document with participants’ names 
and identification numbers will be electronically stored in a separate REDCap file . Only the research team will have 
access to this file. All data will be protected at  the file -level and operating system level. All data for analysis will 
have personal identifiers removed and the data will be aggregated through qualitative analysis. Field notes will be 
taken and immediately encrypted. Any paper materials related to the s tudy will be stored in a locked file cabinet in 
a locked office at CMH. Only research staff will have access to this locked cabinet.  
 
Individually identifiable or deducible data will not be transmitted by [CONTACT_514412] ., Any data 
transfer will be sent via secured communications, which include secure Penn Medicine email  servers , or SecureShare, 
a web -based application for secure, encrypted file exchange available to Penn faculty, staff, and students . The data 
will ultimately be transferred to CMH encrypted servers and all precautions above will be taken.  
 
The master list linking ID numbers and names will be kept on password protected computer files accessible only to the 
study investigators . Tracking information will be housed in a locked file cabinet within a locked office at Penn and this 
master list will only be used for the coordination of data collection and participant payment. All research staff will sign 
confidentiality statements an d be trained in the protection of human subjects by [CONTACT_537659] (CITI ) course. Participants will be notified that the alternative to participation is to not participate, 
they can withdraw their participation at any time without penalty, and their decision to participate will not affect services  
or employment.  
 
All data, including the master list linking identifiers to the ID number and notes will be retained for the length 
required by [CONTACT_231476]. After this time period has lapsed (three years from the date of the final Federal 
Financial Report), the mast er list linking identifiers to ID numbers and notes will be destroyed.  
 
5. Protected Health Information  
 
 
Version Date: 2/5/2024   Page 18 of 20 The following PHI will be collected  
• Name  
• Address  
• Electronic mail addresses  
• Telephone numbers  
• Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints  
 
Name, address, electronic mail address, and telephone numbers will be collected for the purpose of contact[CONTACT_537660]. Additionally, PHI (voice prints) will be collected via 
audio recording and will be maintained on REDCap, a HIPAA -compliant server.  
 
6. Compensation :  
 
Aim 1: N/A, no human subjects activities.  
 
Aim 2: Clinicians will be compensated $ 75 for all Aim 2 activities (engaging with the EBIS prototype and completing 
follow up interviews and surveys) and will receive continuing education credits for training received in the CSSRS 
and the SPI.  
  
Aim 3 :  Clinicians will receive up to $25 0 for completing study assessments: $50 compensation for completing 
study activities at  T1, $25 for T2, and $75 for T3 and $100 for  T4 study activities . Clinicians also will receive 
continuing education credits for training received in the CSSRS and the SPI.   
  
7. Data and Safety Monitoring : 
 
The NIMH -funded P50 Penn  INSPI[INVESTIGATOR_537629] d a 3-member DSMB from distinguished faculty outside 
of Penn and the INSPI[INVESTIGATOR_537630]. The DSMB include s identified experts by [CONTACT_502684][INVESTIGATOR_537631] s 
of an independent group of experts charged with reviewing study data for data quality and integrity, adherence to 
the protocol, participant safety, study conduct and progress, and making determinations regarding study 
continuations, modifications, and suspen sions/terminations. DSMB members are ind ependent from any 
professional or financial conflict of interest with the research project or study investigators. The DSMB will meet at 
least once for the duration of the project . 
 
As noted above, this study is considered minimal risk to participants, as it consists primarily of observations and 
quality improvement practices. There is no direct interaction with patient populations. Clinician participation in the 
study does not create  or increase the risk of completed suicide for the patients with whom they work. However, it 
is possible  that study staff may learn that a patient is at high risk of suicide and that appropriate safeguards have 
not been enacted to ensure that patient’s saf ety. In the event this occurs, we will follow this risk management 
protocols described above (see Risks ) that we have applied successfully in other studies.   
 
8. Investigator’s Risk/Benefit Assessment : 
 
There are no direct risks to participation. Some strategies may interface with patients, but no new interventions will 
be intr oduced, as the goal is to increase the use of established SSAIs supported by [CONTACT_537661] . Providers will  maintain complete autonomy with respect to patient care.  
 
The benefit to the clinical community is that the results may ultimately help enhance the implementation of suicide 
prevention practices. The ratio of risks to benefit is positive, considering that we do not think that the study poses 
any risks and the sci entific yield from the study could be greatly beneficial. Participants will be adequately 
compensated for their participation throughout all aspects of the project.  
 
INFORMED CONSENT : 
 
1. Consent Process : 
 
 
Version Date: 2/5/2024   Page 19 of 20 Aim 1  does not involve collection of research data and, therefore, there is not a consent process for this phase.  
 
Aim 2 . Prior to beginning data collection for Aim 2, members of the research team will provide a verbal 
description of the study to clinicians.  Clinicians will then be asked to electronically sign consent forms in REDCap 
(using REDCap’s established e -consent signature [CONTACT_40445]) that thoroughly describe the procedures to be followed  
in the study and the type of assessments involved . Clinicians will be informed that all information they provide will 
be kept confidential (unless it is determined that it must be reported as required by [CONTACT_2371]), within the study 
personnel. No information gathered as part of this research will be shared with agency exec utive directors or 
supervisors (unless it is determined that information must be reported as required by [CONTACT_2371]). Clinicians will also be 
informed that participation is voluntary and there is no penalty for declining to participate or withdrawing from the 
study at any point. We anticipate all clinicians will be competent to provide informed consent.  
 
Participants will be provided with copi[INVESTIGATOR_537632] , which no one will have access to other than 
the research team.  
 
Aim [ADDRESS_700376]. Oquendo, Becker -Haimes or another member of the research team will 
verbally provide a full description of procedures to be followed and the type of assessments involved to all clinicians. 
Participants will also be informed at this poi nt that all information they provide will be fully kept confidential  allowable 
by [CONTACT_2371]. No identifiable information gathered as part of this research will be shared with a recruited clinicians’ agency 
executive director, supervisor, or local regulatory department. Participants will be asked to electronically sign a 
consent form through REDCap that thoroughly describes the procedures to be followed in the study and the type 
of assessments involved. There will be no consequences for individuals who elect not to enroll in the study. 
Clinicians will also be informed that they can withdraw from the study at time of their choosing poin t without penalty. 
Informed consent will be completed by [CONTACT_537662]. We anticipate all clinicians will be 
competent to provide informed consent.  
 
Given that we are recruiting practicing mental health clinicians, we do not anticipate recruiting any participants under 
the age of 18; thus, assent procedures will not be necessary.  
  
2. Waiver of Informed Consent : 
 
We are not requesting exemption or alteration of written informed consent documentation  
 
RESOURCES NECESSARY FOR HUMAN RESEARCH PROTECTION : 
Study investigators include MD and PhD-level researchers with expertise in  suicide prevention  (Oquendo, Jager -
Hyman) , exposure therapy (Becker -Haimes) , and implementation science  (Becker -Haimes, Jager -Hyman) .  A 
postdoctoral fellow and clinical research coordinator  will be thoroughly trained in  the study protocol and will facilitate 
all data collection. Given that study activities constitute a clinical trial, all study staff will complete Good Clinical 
Practice (GCP) training. Regular meetings among study team members will ensure that research staff are 
adequately informed of the protocol and their  research -related duties. We are confident that the size of the r esearch 
team will be adequate  to carry out the proposed project.   
 
For Aim 1, we additionally will bring together a n Advisory Board  of clinicians, administrators, suicide prevention 
experts, implementation scientists, and exposure theorists to refine the EBIS implementation strategy. [CONTACT_412563] -
Haimes has close relationships with local community mental health clinics which will facilitate recruitment of 
Advisory Board members.  
 
The Department of Psychiatry at the University of Pennsylvania’s Perelman School of Medicine will provide the 
research infrastructure, physical accommodations, and resources necessary to ensure the project’s success. The 
study team members have dedicated office space with password protected computer systems. Researchers will 
have the necessary word processing and statistical software for the project.  
 
Acronym  Description  
 
Version Date: 2/5/[ADDRESS_700377]  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
 