[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  July 24, 2018  
        
    
12 vs. 20 mL paracervical block  for pain -control during cervical preparation for dilation and 
evacuation: A single-blinded randomized controlled trial  
 
 
, MPH  
, MD 
, MD, MS  
, MD, MPH 
Stanford University  
   
 
 
Phone:  
Email:  
 
 

Project Summary  
 
Description of the Project  
 
1.1 Rationale and objectives of the study 
 
1.1.1 Rationale 
 Paracervical block (PCB) is a widely used , but largely  unstandardized technique for pain 
management in gynecological procedures. From hysteroscopy to first trimester abortion procedures to dilator placement for dilation and evacuation,  providers utilize t he paracervical 
block to manage cervical dilation pain.  However for such a widely used technique , the exact 
method is often prov ider or site specific.  A [ADDRESS_1179416] on  global guidelines, such as those published by [CONTACT_848337]. New 
techniques for p aracervical block that focus on limiting symptoms  and resources  while also 
ensuring adequate pain management are needed to improve  care for women around the world.  
 A randomized controlled trial done by [CONTACT_280170]. in 2012
ii demonstrated that a 4- site, 18 mL 
1% lidocaine paracervical block , with  a [ADDRESS_1179417]- trimester surgical abortions  was bene ficial in reducing pain due to cervical dilation  when 
compared to sham paracervical block. The block technique endorsed by [CONTACT_280170] . was based 
on findings from a combination of studies  about paracervical block  that investigated  variations in 
needle injection siteiii, type of lidocaineiv, depth of lidocaine injectionv, general vs. local 
anesthes iavi, and wait time between  injection and procedurevii. Missing from consideration, 
however, was the volume  of lidocaine necessary to achieve a reduction in dilation pain. The final 
technique used in Renner et al. ’s study was as follows:  
 
• Syringe loaded with 18 mL of 1% plain  lidocaine buffered with 2 mL 8.4% sodium 
bicarbonate (20 mL total); 20 -gauge spi[INVESTIGATOR_13911] 
• 2 mL injected at the tenaculum site, 12 o’clock superficially into the cervix  
• The tenaculum is immediately placed at 12 o’clock  
• The remaining 18 mL are injected slowly over 60 seconds into the cervicovaginal junction in four equal aliquots at 2, 4, 8, and 10 o’clock; the injection is continuous from superficial to deep (3 cm) to superfi cial (injecting with insertion and withdrawal)  
• Dilation begins 3 min utes after application of the block  
 A subsequent study done by [CONTACT_280170]. in 2016
viii aimed to further refine this technique and 
looked at both the 3- minute wait time and the use of 4 -site versus 2 -site injection. Results of the 
study were largely inconclusive, suggesting that no wait time is no worse than a three -minute 
wait and that 2 -site and 4- site injections may be interchangeable. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_77078], global 
guidelines and provider preference continue to follow findings from Renner et al. ’s [ADDRESS_1179418] studies and 
notably employs a smaller volume of lidocaine and only two injection sites . The technique is as 
follows:  
 
• Syringe loaded with 12 mL of 1% lidocaine (120 mg); 22- gauge spi[INVESTIGATOR_13911]  
• 2 mL injected at the tenaculum site, either 6 or 12 o’clock superficially into the cervix  
• The tenaculum is immediately placed  at the previously injected site  
• The remaining 10 mL are slowly injected into the cervicovaginal junction in two equal 
aliquots at 4 and 8 o’clock; the injection is continuous from superficial to deep (3 cm) to superficial (injecting with insertion and withdrawal)  
• No wait time between injection and dilator insertion  
 We aim to compare this technique with one similar to Renner  et al. ’s technique from 2016: 
• Syringe loaded with 20 mL of 1% lidocaine (120 mg); 22- gauge spi[INVESTIGATOR_13911]  
• 2 mL injected at the tenaculum site, either 6 or 12 o’clock superficially into the cervix  
• The tenaculum is immediately placed at the previously injected site  
• The remaining 18 mL are slowly injected into  the cervicovaginal junction in two equal 
aliquots at 4 and 8 o’clock; the injection is continuous from superficial to deep (3 cm) to superficial (injecting with insertion and withdrawal) 
• No wait time between injection and dilator insertion  
 Our justification for this proposed technique  comparison is as follows :  
 With regards to smaller dosage,  there is much research to be done. While  the lidocaine label 
recommends a maximum dose of 200 mg (20 mL at 1%) of lidocaine per 90- minute period for 
paracervical block,
ix it does not recommend a minimum dose. Renner et al.’s 2012 studyii 
provides evidence for paracervical block over sham for cervical dilation pain and Chanrachakul’s 2001 study
x provides evidence that pain relief comes from both lidocaine and distention rather 
than distention alone. These studies point to the benefit of using lidocaine, but to date there is little data providing the optimal  dose between 0 mL and 20 mL. With this knowledge, we 
propose the use of 10 mL of lidocaine in order to maintain the use o f lidocaine for pain control, 
but minimize symptoms  (such as metallic taste, ringing in the ears, and at worst, seizure or 
cardiac arrest)  that are more likely to manifest with 20 mL.  
 With regards to 2 -site versus 4 -site, our aim is to build on the findings from Glantz and 
Shomento’s 2001 study and Renner et al. ’s 2016 study. Glantz and Shomento’s study from 
2001
iii contained four study arms and looked at both 1% chloroprocaine versus placebo and 4-
site versus 2 -site injection. While the original paper concluded that PCB with chloroprocaine 
provides more pain relief than saline for both 4- site and 2 -site injections, subsequent reanalysis 
from 2009xi showcased th at preference for 4 -site or 2 -site versus saline depended on the time 
point at which pain was measured. Regardless, more importantly, the findings showed that when comparing 4-site 1% chloroprocaine block to 2- site 1% chloroprocaine block, there is no 
statistical difference. Furthermore, Renner et al.’s 2016 study
viii, which compared 20 mL of 1% 
buffered lidocaine at 4- site versus [ADDRESS_1179419] of 4 -site. Our proposed technique follow 
findings from these studies and if proven effective, would result in fewer painful injections 
during paracervical block.   Concerning depth of injection, we will utilize the 3 cm  depth as used in Renner’s studies. Wiebe  
et al. ’s 1992 study
iv and Cetin and Cetin ’s [ADDRESS_1179420] utilizing deep injection, as 
dilation pain scores were lower for deep injection in both studies.   Phair  et al. ’s 2002 study
xii and Renner et al. ’s [ADDRESS_1179421] decided to use 1% plain lidocaine. Our hope is that by [CONTACT_848338] a more cost-effective anesth etic, our results will be generalizable to a larger  global audience.  
 Finally, w hile many studies focus on pain control in first -trimester abortion,  including Renner et 
al., in order to isolate cervical dilation pai n from uterine pain, we have chosen to focus on the 
cervical preparation procedure needed prior to a second trimester surgical abortion rather than 
the surgical procedure itself. Need for additional research in this timeframe was highlighted in Soon et al. ’s
xiii work, which demonstrated that the paracervical block technique utilized by 
[CONTACT_280170]. was effective in reducing pain associated with osmotic dilator insertion prior to 
second trimester abortion. We also believe that isolating the pain of the cervical dilation 
procedure will allow us to generalize the findings of our study to be meaningful for any 
procedure in which cervical dilation is necessary.  
 
 1.1.2 Objectives and hypothesis  
 We hypothesize that a 2-site, 12 mL 1% plain lidocaine  injection  paracervical block (PCB)  
technique (2 mL for tenaculum placement,  10 mL for paracervical block) will provide non-
inferior pain control compared to a previously established 2-site, 20 mL 1% lidocaine  injection  
PCB (2 mL for tenaculum placement, 18 mL for paracervical block) when administered  for 
dilation pain control during cervical preparation.  Our primary  objective is to determine pain perceived at time of dilator insertion measured by 
[CONTACT_27326] (VAS ; Dilator Insertion: Immediately following dilator insertion) (0 -
100mm).   Secondary objectives include assessing : 
- Pain perceived at additional time points before, during, and after the procedure (all measured by [CONTACT_8298]  (0-100mm; [ADDRESS_1179422] pain imaginable): 
o Anticipated Pain: 30 minutes prior to procedure  
o Baseline Pain: Immediately prior to procedure 
o Block  injection Pain: Immediately  following injection, but prior to dilator 
insertion  
o Post-procedure Pain: 10-15 minutes following procedure 
o Overall Pain: Assessed after procedure  (prior to discharge)  
- Total procedure time, as defined by [CONTACT_848339]  
- Incidence of complications 
o Inability to dilate cervix  
o Seizure  
o Cardiac arrest  
o Structural trauma (uterine perforation, cervical laceration, etc.)  
o Hemorrage (EBL estimat ion)  
- Symptom Data  
o Following block injection, any experience of: 
 Metallic taste in mouth  
 Ringing in ears 
 Lightheadedness 
- Any other systemic symptoms experienced, including vasovagal reaction 
- Provider reported ease of insertion  
- Global satisfaction (acceptability) of procedure  reported by [CONTACT_3445] (VAS, 0-100mm; 
0 being unsatisfied  and 100 being fully satisfied ) 
 
1.2  Design and methodology  
 
1.2.1 Research design and General Methodological Approach  
 This is a non -inferiority , single blinded, ra ndomized controlled trial.  
 1.2.2 Criteria for the selection of subjects  
Women who need dilator placement for second trimester D&E procedures will be invited to participate in the study protocol. This population was chosen because our aim is to isolate how 
best to manage cervical dilation pain and not uterine aspi[INVESTIGATOR_848335], which is potentially a 
confounding factor when analyzing pain perceived during first trimester abortions rather than cervical dilation procedures alone. Additionally, we will limit our stu dy population to those 
women presenting for an abortion ≥16 weeks gestation . This population was selected  as they 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_848336].   
 Specific inclusion criteria:  
• Women 18 and older • Intrauterine pregnancy ≥16 weeks gestation  
• English speaking competency 
• Willing and able to sign consent forms 
• Agree to comply with study procedures   
1.2.[ADDRESS_1179423] Gynecology Clinic in Palo Alto, [LOCATION_004] and at Planned Parenthood Mar Monte in San Jose, CA. 
• At Stanford, potential participants will be identified by [CONTACT_848340]. Once identified, clinical research coordinator s will obtain 
permission from provider to speak with participants .  
• At Planned Parenthood, clinic staff will notify clinical research coordinators of potential 
participants .  
 
To ensure even allocation across sites, two randomization schemes will be created, one for each 
site.  
 
1.2.4 Description of the drugs and devices to be studied  
 
Xylocaine (lidocaine HCl) is a common local anesthetic that works by [CONTACT_848341]. 
Local anesthetics of the amide type are thought to act within the sodium channels of the nerve 
membrane. According to the packaging insert, anesthesia is achieved within 5 minutes, 
depending on the area of application, and duration of anesthesia is approximately 20-30 minutes.  
 
For paracervical block the drug label recommends a maximum dose of 200 mg (100 mg per side) 
in a 90 minute periodix. Given risk of rapid systemic absorption and possible maternal seizure 
and cardiovascular collapse, the maximum dose should not be exceeded. The label also 
recommends slow injection and a 5- minute interval between each side.  
 
Contraindications  to lidocai ne include the following : 
• Hypersensitivity to lidocaine or any component of the formulation  
• Hypersensitivity to another local anesthetic of the amide type  
• Adam -Stokes syndrome 
• Wolff -Parkinson- White syndrome  
• Severe degrees of SA, AV, or intraventricular hea rt block (except in patients with a 
functioning artificial pacemaker)  
• Premixed injection may contain corn -derived dextrose and its use is contraindicated in 
patients with allergy to corn or corn -related products  
 1.2.[ADDRESS_1179424] clinical research personnel. The second will be providers and clinic staff informing clinical research personnel of potential participants .  
 If potential participants meet inclusion criteria and permission has been granted by [CONTACT_848342], they will be approached by a clinical research coordinator  who will review the study 
protocol and obtain informed consent. After obtaining inform ed consent, participants will be 
randomized to a study arm via computer -generated  block randomization using REDCap 
software . The provider and staff will be aware of arm allocation, but participants will remain 
blinded.  
 There will be two study arms:  
 Experimental :  
• Syringe loaded with 12 mL of 1% lidocaine (120 mg); 22- gauge spi[INVESTIGATOR_13911]  
• 2 mL injected at the tenaculum site, either 6 or 12 o’clock superficially into the cervix  
• The tenaculum is immediately placed at the previously injected site  
• The rem aining 10 mL are slowly injected into the cervicovaginal junction in two equal 
aliquots at 4 and 8 o’clock; the injection is continuous from superficial to deep (3 cm) to superficial (injecting with insertion and withdrawal) 
• No wait time between injecti on and dilator insertion 
 
Control: 
• Syringe loaded with 20 mL of 1% lidocaine (120 mg); 22- gauge spi[INVESTIGATOR_13911]  
• 2 mL injected at the tenaculum site, either 6 or 12 o’clock superficially into the cervix  
• The tenaculum is immediately placed at the previously injected site  
• The remaining 18 mL are slowly injected into the cervicovaginal junction in two equal 
aliquots at 4 and 8 o’clock; the injection is continuous from superficial to deep (3 cm) to 
superficial (injecting with insertion and withdrawal) 
• No wait time between injection and dilator insertion   
 
Prior to the procedure, c linical research coordinators will obtain the following baseline 
information using REDCap:  
• Demographics 
o Location of procedure  
o MRN  
o Date enrolled  
o First name  
o Last name  
o Date of birth  
o Age 
o Phone number 
o Race 
o Ethnicity  
• Medical History (Physical Exam and Ob/Gyn History)  
o Height 
o Weight 
o BMI  
o First day of lest menstrual period  
o Gestational age defined by U/S  
o Medication allergies  
o Current medications  
o Number of previous pregnancies 
 Number of previous vaginal deliveries 
 Number of previous cesarean sections 
 Number of previous abortions 
 Number of previous abortions after 16 weeks gestation 
 Number of miscarriages  
o Recent deliveries  
o Medical problems  
o Previous surgeries  
 Previous cervical surgeries 
 Other previous surgeries  
 
The participant will then be prepped for the procedure. At that point, the clinical research coordinator will accompany participants throughout the duration of their procedure and obtain 
the following information:  
• Procedure Data  
o Provider type (i.e. resident, fellow, attending) 
o Provider reported ease of procedure 
o Initial cervical dilation  
o Uterine position  
o Number of osmotic dilators placed  
o Total procedure time, as defined by [CONTACT_848339]  
o Digoxin given 
o Complications  
 Inability to dilate cervix  
 Seizure  
 Cardiac arrest  
 Structural trauma (uterine perforation, cervical laceration, etc.)  
 Hemorrage (EBL estimation)  
o Administration of Mifepristone for cervical preparation  
• Procedure VAS Data 
o Anticipated Pain: 30 minutes prior to procedure  
o Baseline Pain: Immediately prior to procedure 
o Block injection Pain: Immediately following injection, but prior to dilator insertion  
o Dilator Insertion Pain: Immediately following dilator insertion  
o Post-procedure Pain: 10-15 minutes following procedure 
o Overall Pain: Assessed after procedure (prior to discharge)  
• Symptom Data  
o Following block injection, any experience of: 
 Metallic taste in mouth  
 Ringing in ears 
 Lightheadedness 
o Any other systemic symptoms experienced , including vasovagal reaction  
• Acceptability Data 
o Global sastisfaction with procedure 
• Recognition of group allocation 
 
1.2.[ADDRESS_1179425] and fisher’s exact test, where appropriate; mean and median VAS pain scores will be analyzed with Student’s t-tests and non- parametric tests, respectively; mean and median overall satisfaction 
with pain control and provider reported ease of procedure via VAS scores will be compared using Student’s t- tests and non- parametric tests, respectively; linear regression will be completed 
in multivariable analysis to identify predictors of pain.  Complications and patient symptoms 
associated with lidocaine toxicitiy will be examined between the groups using chi square test and fisher’s exact test, where appropriate . 
 1.2.11 Number of subjects and statistical power  
 88 participants  are required to be 80% sure that the lower limit of a one -sided 97.5% confidence 
interval (or equivalently a 95% two -sided confidence interval) will be less than  the non -
inferiority limit of 15mm. Accounti ng for participant drop- out, we will recruit 96 women to 
participate in this study (significance level, alpha of 5%; power of 80%; standard deviation of 28 ; 
non-inferiority limit of 15).  
 1.2.[ADDRESS_1179426] management will be coordinated, conducted, and monitored primarily by  
, BA , protocol director . Co-investigators,  , MD, MS, , MPH,  
, MD, and , MD, MPH will also monitor the study.  
 1.4 Links with other projects  
 Not applicable.  1.5 Main problems anticipated  
 
Problems anticipated include difficulty recruiting participants and obtaining pain scores during 
procedure.   Difficulty recruiting p articipants: Given participants agreeing to participate in the study may be 
randomized to a smaller dose of pain medication, they may be reluctant to enroll. Rigorous chart review to incre ase number of screened participants and adequate education of clinical research 
coordinators will be necessary to enroll the appropriate number of participants.  
 Obtaining pain scores: As there are many points at which pain scores will be assessed during 
what is a fairly quick procedure, it may be difficult for both the clinical research coordinator to 
obtain and the participant to provide scores at the correct time points. Building a strong relationship with both the provider and the participant will be e ssential for obtaining the pain 
scores at the appropriate time points.   1.[ADDRESS_1179427] one manuscript for submission to a peer-reviewed journal. In addition, the co- investigators 
will present the results of the study at conferences and meetings where appropriate.   
 1.7 References  
 
 
i O’Connell K, Jones HE, Simon M, Saporta V, Paul M, Lichtenberg ES. First- trimester surgical 
abortion practices: a survey of National Abortion Federation members. Contracep- tion 

 
2009;79:385–92.  
 
ii Renner RM, Nichols MD, Jensen JT, Li H, Edelman AB. Parac ervical block for pain control in 
first-trimester surgical abortion: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 2012;119: 1030–
7.  
iii Glantz JC, Shomento S. Comparison of paracervical block techniques during first trimester 
pregnancy termination. Int J G ynaecol Obstet 2001;72:171–8.   
iv Wiebe ER. Comparison of the efficacy of different local anesthetics and techniques of local 
anesthesia in therapeutic abortions. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;167:131– 4.  
v Cetin A, Cetin M. Effect of deep injections of local anesthetics and basal dilatation of cervix in 
management of pain during legal abortions. A randomized, controlled study. Contraception 1997;56:85–7.  
vi Donati S, Medda E, Proietti S, Rizzo L, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_34029] A, Subrizi D, et al. Reducing pain of first 
trimester abortion under local anaesthesia. Eur J Obst et Gynecol Reprod Biol 1996;70:145–9. 
 
vii Phair N, Jensen JT, Nichols MD. Paracervical block and elective abortion: the effect on pain 
of waiting between injection and procedure. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002;186:1304–7.  
viii Renner RM, Edelman AB, Nichols MD , Jensen JT , Lim JY, Bednarek PH. Refining 
paracervical block techniques for pain control in first trimester surgical abortion: a randomized controlled noninferiority trial. Contraception 2016;94: 461-6.  
ix Prescriber’s Digital Reference. Lidocaine drug summary and recommended dosage for 
paracervical block. http://www.pdr.net/drug- summary/Lidoca ine-Hydrochloride- Injection -
lidocaine-hydrochloride-3301.2673  Retrieved on October 24, 2017. 
 
x Chanrachakul B, Likittanasombut P, O- Prasertsawat P, Herabutya Y. Lidocaine versus plain 
saline for pain relief in fractional curettage: a randomized controlled  trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2001;98(4):592–5.  
xi Renner RM, Jensen JT, Nichols MD, Edelman AB. Pain control in first- trimester surgical 
abortion: a systemiatic review of randomized controlled trials. Contraception 2010; 81: 372-88.  
xiii Soon R, Tschann M, Salcedo J, Stevens K, Ahn HJ, Kaneshiro B. Paracer vical Block for 
Laminaria Insertion Prior to Second -Trimester Abortion: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Obstet 
Gynecol 130 (2), 387-392. 8 2017 
 