Impact of Changing Cannulation Strategies on Neurologic Injury in Infants with 
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_60064] : HUM00236110  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_623288]: September 19, 2023  
  
Aims and Approach:  
From 2019 -2021 , there was increas ed use of venoarterial (VA) extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation ( ECMO ) for infants with respi[INVESTIGATOR_1399], up to 92% of neonatal respi[INVESTIGATOR_623289] 2021. Our primary aim is to estimate the average effect on the rate of neurologic 
injury  of VA ECMO versus venovenous (VV)  among infants with respi[INVESTIGATOR_623290] [ADDRESS_830023] using an inverse propensity weighted (IPW) approach. Secondarily, 
we will project this estimated treatment effect forward into the period [ADDRESS_830024]  occurred in 2019 -2021, had the rate of V A ECMO not 
increased  relative to pre -2019 levels . We hypothesize that our results will point to  an increased 
rate of neurologic injury starting in 2019 due to the increased use of VA ECMO.  
 
Outcome:  
The outcome will be the composite occurrence  of neurologic injury (ischemic stroke, intracranial 
hemorrhage, and brain death)  that arise s during critical illness supported by [CONTACT_623293] ( ELSO ) registry , coded as a 0/1 variable (0 = no 
occurrence  was reported  during or after ECMO ; 1 = one or more occurrence was reported ).  
 
Exposure:  
The exposure / treatment of interest is the initial cannulation mode used, coded as a 0/1 
variable ( 0= VV  dual-lumen or two-site; 1= VA peripheral cannulation only ).  
 
Study Population:  
We will analyze data from the ELSO registry. All runs satisfying the follo wing inclusion and 
exclusion criteria will be included in our study population : 
 
Inclusion  criteria : 
• Patient weighed less than  or equal to 10kg at start of ECMO  
• Pulmonary support was the indication for ECLS  
• Initial cannulation strategy was VV or VA  
• The run occurred during the period 2013 -2023 
 
Exclusion  criteria : 
• Patient had CDH  
• Patient was p ost-cardiotomy  
• Non-conventional initial cannulation strategies  were employed, such as   
o Central Cannulation  (surrogate for inability to achieve peripheral cannulation)  
o Veno -veno -arterial ECMO  
o Initial cannulation approach reported as “other”  
• Patient was t ransported into or out of  ELSO center on ECMO support  
• Patient had pre-ECLS Cardiac Arrest  
• Patient did not hav e subsequent ECMO runs in the ELSO registry  
 
In addition, to the above criteria, all otherwise -eligible runs from c enters that do not have at least 
one eligible run from each exposure group  during the study period  will be excluded.  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan:  
 
Step [ADDRESS_830025] the probability of  a patient receiving  VA ECMO.  
 
We will include in this model factors that precede  the start of ECMO and are posited to be 
associated with  both the choic e of cannulation strategy as well as the risk of  neurologic injury .  
 
We will include the following predictors in the propensity score model:  
Unit Type - multinomial categorical  
Admitted at birth -binary  
Age at cannulation (days) - continuous  
Gestational age ( semi -continous to 38 weeks , term infants will older infants will be classified 
together )  
Transfer into the ECMO center - binary  
Weight (cont)   
Sex- binary  
Intubation to Time On (cont inuous ) 
Pre-ECLS pH (cont inuous )  
Pre-ECLS pCO2 (cont inuous ) 
Pre-ECLS PO2 (cont inuous ) 
Pre-ECLS HCO3 (cont inuous ) 
Pre-ECLS FiO2 (cont inuous ) 
Pre-ECLS Mean Airway Pressure - oscillator  (cont inuous ) 
Pre-ECLS Mean Airway Pressure - conventional (cont inuous ) 
Pre-ECLS Mean Arterial Pressure (cont inuous ) 
Pre-ECLS Pulse Pressure (cont inuous ) 
Pre-ECLS Renal Replacement Therapy - binary  
iNO- binary  
Inhaled epoprostenol - binary  
Therapeutic Hypothermia - binary  
Vasoactive Infusions - binary  
Diagnos es 
 Meconium Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_623291] - binary  
HIE- binary  
Pulmonary hypo plasia - binary  
 Respi[INVESTIGATOR_39053] - binary  
 Persistent Pulmonary Hypertension - binary  
Pulmonary Hypertension - binary  
 Sepsis - binary  
Asthma - binary  
Bronchiolitis - binary  
Pneumonia - binary  
Pertussis - binary  
PDA- binary   
 
We will also  take into account each center’s typi[INVESTIGATOR_623292], using 
either a mixed -effects  modeling strategy or the surrogate indicator approach of Li , Zaslavsky , 
and Landrum (2007)  
 
In Step [ADDRESS_830026] (ATE) of VA-ECMO in the period 2013 -
2018 using an IPW approach. We will estimate the ATE using an appropriate estimator that 
takes into account the clustered nature of the data (runs clustered within ELSO center).  
 
Because the availability of VV ECMO cannulas appropriate for infants changed in 2019, we 
expect  that at this point and afterward clinicians generally chose  VA ECMO support  more often 
than they otherwise would have . Using the propensity score model developed in Step [ADDRESS_830027] been had the availability of VV ECMO cannulas not changed (and assuming 
a homogenous treatment effe ct of VA ECMO across periods). If there is a large enough sample 
size, we will perform a sensitivity analysis in a cohort from [ADDRESS_830028] the 
propensity scores. We will use the approach recommended in Leyrat, et al. (2019) to 
incorporate the partial information available from observati ons with missingness. Specifically, 
we will create multiply imputed versions of the data, estimate a separate ATE for each of these 
completed datasets, and then combine the estimated ATEs across imputations to obtain a 
single estimated ATE.  
 
 
References  
Leyrat, C., et al. (2019). "Propensity score analysis with partially observed covariates: How 
should multiple imputation be used?" Stat Methods Med Res  28(1): 3 -19. 
Li, F., et al. (2007). Propensity score analysis with hierarchical data . Proceedings of the 
American Statistical Association Joint Statistical Meetings.  
  
 