IRB#: [ZIP_CODE]  
Version Date: 1.1 8.2022  Page 1 of 7 Protocol Title  
 
Measurement of Oxygen Saturation in healthy human volunteers before, during and after 
hyperemic events using Multi -Modal Techniques: Spatial Frequency Domain Imaging (SFDI), 
transcutaneous oxygen measurement (TCOM), Pulse Oximeter, and Apple Watch.  
 
 
Principal Investigator : 
[INVESTIGATOR_201797] C. Gnyawali, Ph.D.  
Assistant Professor,  
Indiana Center for Regenerative Medicine and Engineering at Indiana University  
Department of Surgery, Division of Plastic Surgery  
School of Medicine , Indiana University  
        
  
IRB#: [ZIP_CODE]  
Version Date: 1.1 8.2022  Page 2 of 7 Table of Contents:  
Study Schema  
1.0 Background & Rationale  
2.0 Objective(s)  
2.1 Primary Objective  
2.2 Secondary Objective  
2.3 Tertiary/Exploratory/Correlative Objectives  
3.0 Outcome Measures  
3.1 Primary Outcome Measures  
3.2 Secondary Outcome Measures  
3.3 Tertiary/ Exploratory/ Correlative Outcome Measures  
4.0 Eligibility Criteria  
4.1 Inclusion Criteria  
4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
5.0 Study Design  
6.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
7.0 Study Procedures  
8.0 Data Safety Monitoring  
9.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
10.0 Statistical Considerations  
11.0 Data Management  
12.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
13.[ADDRESS_240749] Retention  
14.0 References  
IRB#: [ZIP_CODE]  
Version Date: 1.1 8.2022  Page 3 of 7  Background & Rationale  
Pulse oximeters are commonly utilized medical devices used to measure blood oxygen saturation (SpO 2)[2]. 
These devices  (such as the INNOVO Fingertip Pulse Oximeter)  are either stand -alone or integrated into 
physiologic monitoring systems, using 2 wavelengths of lights to determine SpO 2. With rece nt advances in 
technology, Spatial Frequency Domain Imaging (SFDI)  using range of light wavelengths from red to near 
infrared (NIR) such as in Clarifi(R) (Modulated Imaging, Inc., Irvine CA), smartphones such as Apple Watch 
(Apple Inc.,  Cupertino, CA), tra nscutaneous oximetry TCOM (Perimed Inc.,  Las Vegas, NV) now have 
pulse oximetry capabilities. Since it is possible that most  patients could utilize this technology, we sought 
to assess the accuracy, reliability and usability of these  oximeters  and compare  outcomes . In this study, a 
cohort of 20 healthy volunteers above the age of 18 including males and females of different skin colors 
will be a ssessed at the same site and data will be compared. We aim to provide a set of data that will support 
the clinical and scientific community and identify more than one  reliable skin oxygen measurement 
modalit ies.  The Innovo pulse oximeter device will be used for all subjects.  
1.0 Objective(s)  
1.1 Primary Objective  
To investigate multiplatform  for tissue oxygen measurement devices  
1.2 Secondary Objective  
To compare other modalities with FDA approved Pulse Oximet ry 
1.3 Tertiary/Exploratory/Correlative Objectives  
To investigate skin color biasness in the optical Oximeters. Fitzpatrick’s skin type chart 
will be used to evaluate skin type.  
2.0 Outcome Measures/Endpoints  
2.[ADDRESS_240750] for clinical use  
2.3 Tertiary/Exploratory/Correlative Outcome Measures  
Melanin or scarred tissue oxygenation compared to normal skin  
 
3.0 Eligibility  Criteria  
3.1 Inclusion Criteria  
• Healthy volunteers  
• Able to understand and complete the Informed Consent  
• Both m ales and female s 
• Age between 18- 65 years  
• All ethnic backgrounds  
3.2 Exclusion Criteria  
• Patients or limited health conditions  
• Under the age of 18 years or above the age of 65 years  
• Smoking tobacco product  
• Prisoners  
• Cannot consent for themselves  
IRB#: [ZIP_CODE]  
Version Date: 1.1 8.2022  Page 4 of 7 • Pregnant individuals  
4.0 Study Design  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
Potential subjects will be identified from IU School of Medicine staff members.   Each subject will use all 
four devices.  
6.[ADDRESS_240751] will be 
enrolled. Then the non -invasive data collecting procedure will start on the following equipment : 
Spatial Frequency Domain Imaging (SFDI) : During consenting period, the Modulim  equipment will be 
calibrated and setup ready for scanning. Subject’s volar aspect of the thumb along with the palm surface 
Recruitment of initial subject  
Initial screening and consenting  
Conduct a baseline assessment using 4 devices: Spatial 
Frequency Domain Imaging, Transcutaneous oxygen monitoring, 
Apple Watch Oxygen Sensor, and Pulse Oximeter for Oxygen 
Monitoring, then occlude the arm with 200 mmHg using blood 
pressure cuff for 2 minut es per device [1] and measure the 
oxygenation during and post occlusion.  
Analyze and interpret the data  
IRB#: [ZIP_CODE]  
Version Date: 1.[ADDRESS_240752] (ROI) will be taken to measure the 
oxygen parameters such as tissue oxygen saturation (StO 2), oxy- hemoglobin (HbO 2), deoxy- hemoglobin  
(HbR), superficial hemoglobin (HbT1, sub- surface hem oglobin (HbT2).   The model used is a Clarifi 
Modulum  
Transcutaneous oxygen monitoring (TCOM) :  Transcutaneous oxygen monitoring (TCOM or TcpO 2) is 
a noninvasive, clinically- approved method to obtain skin oxygen levels. The method is quantitative, and 
meas ures oxygen delivery to the skin from underlying tissue. Before positioning the electrode, an adhesive 
fixation ring will be placed on the dry skin on the volar aspect of the thumb and a n electrol yte as a contact 
[CONTACT_201798]- wise to fasten it. Recording will 
be started and waited for the oxygen level to stabilize and a fixed value will be recorded.  The model used 
is a Perimed PeriFlux 5000.   The probe will be heated to about 45oC.  Although this device has other 
options, o nly the measurement of O 2 will be performed  using this device.  
Apple Watch Oxygen Sensor : Smart watch blood oxygen sensors also measure blood oxygen level in the 
tissue. Apple Watch Series 6 introduced this new feature for monitoring blood oxygen level using light emitting 
diodes (LEDs) at the back o f apple watches. A low blood oxygen level can be indicative of a serious health issue 
that needs immediate attention.  The apple watch is e quipped with green, red, and infrared LEDs that shine 
light onto the blood vessels in the wrist, with photodiodes measuring the amount of light reflected back. Apple's 
algorithms use this information to calculate the color of  the blood, which is an indication of how much oxygen 
is in the blood. Bright red blood is well oxygenated, while darker blood has less oxygen. This can measure blood 
oxygen levels between [ADDRESS_240753] blood oxygen levels that range from 95 to 
100 percent. The apple watch sensor will be positioned on the user’s preferred wrist.  
Pulse Oximeter for Oxygen Monitoring : The pulse oximeter enables transcutaneous monitoring of the 
oxygen saturation of hemoglobin in arterial blood (S tO2). Pulse oximetry is so widely prevalent in medical 
care that it is often regarded as a fifth vital sign [3]. It is important to understand how the technology 
functions as well as its limitations. To recognize the settings in wh ich pulse oximeter readings of oxygen 
saturation (SpO 2), an understanding of two basic principles of pulse oximetry is required: (i) how 
oxyhemoglobin (HbO 2) is distinguished from deoxyhemoglobin (HbR) and (ii) how the SpO 2 is calculated 
only from the arterial compartment of blood. Pulse oximetry is based on the principle that HbO 2 and HbR 
differentially absorb red and near -infrared (IR) light. It is fortuitous that HbO [ADDRESS_240754] significant 
differences in absorption at red and near -IR light because these two wavelengths penetrate tissues well 
whereas blue, green, yellow, and far -IR light are significantly absorbed by [CONTACT_105]- vascular tissues and water  
[3]. HbO 2 absorbs greater amounts of IR light an d lower amounts of red light than does HbR ; this is 
consistent with experience – well-oxygenated blood with its higher concentrations of HbO [ADDRESS_240755] will be used to measure SpO 2. The model is Innov o iP 900AP. 
Sequence of the events during the study visit:  
1) Consenting and enrolling the subjects  
2) Medical questionnaire  
3) Fitzpatrick’s skin type assessment  
IRB#: [ZIP_CODE]  
Version Date: 1.1 8.2022  Page 6 of 7 4) Non-invasive imaging and data collection of the thumb and index fingers with the above 
devices in the following order:  
a) Baseline imaging and data collection  
b) Occlusion of the blood flow using pressure cuff at 200mmHg for [ADDRESS_240756] the data during occlusion. There is a minimal risk of pain on the arm inflation 
of the pressure cuff up to 200mm Hg. Please see literature (1) where they have used 
240mmHg. 
c) Releasing the cuff and collecting the data during the hyperemic phase (post -deflation 
of the cuff).  
7.0 Reportable Events  
Since all measurement modalities are non -invasive , there are no adverse events  anticipated  or unanticipated 
problems involving risk to participants.   The risk of the ring adhesive would be minimal as it could chafe 
the skin when removed.   
8.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
Participant can withdraw /discontinue  himself o r herself from the study. Since t he study involves only one 
visit the process of withdrawal  is not effective . However, participants can withdraw the study in any time 
during the visit.   
 
9.[ADDRESS_240757] data measurement and imaging , whichever applies to the device s. 
TCOM, Pulse oximeter and apple watch date will be recorded with pen & paper and entered on the spread 
sheet and stored electronically in  REDCap. The storage location will be backed up  manually  for every 
subject and at the end of the subject visit. The quality control methods will be used  single entry with random 
checks of accuracy .  
11.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
Regarding the method for ensuring participant privacy and for protecting privacy and confidentiality, each 
subject will be given a subject ID an d only non- identifiable  demographic data will be collected . Data will 
be stored on REDCap and access  will be limited to designated personnel who processes the data . 
IRB#: [ZIP_CODE]  
Version Date: 1.[ADDRESS_240758] Physiol (1985), 2017. 
122(5): p. 1284 -1291.  
2. Nitzan, M., A. Romem, and R. Koppel, Pulse oximetry: fundamentals and technology 
update.  Med Devices (Auckl), 2014. 7: p. 231 -9. 
3. Chan, E.D., M.M. Chan, and M.M. Chan, Pulse oximetry: understanding its basic 
principles facilitates appreciation of its limitations.  Respir Med, 2013. 107(6): p. 789 -99. 
 