1 
 Feelings about Exercise : Protocol  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
1/23/19  
  
2 
 Background and objectives  
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_85695] y (PA), >50% of adults 
are insufficiently active. Understanding w hy some individuals choose to engage in PA 
while others do not  is important for informing the development of future  PA 
interventions. Previous research has demonstrated  that those who have more  positive 
affective response s to exercise ( i.e., the pleasure o r displeasure  experienced with PA) 
are more likely to exercise in the future.  However, an interesting  paradox is that most 
people generally ‘feel good ’ post-exercise  This begs the questions, if exercise makes 
people feel good, why don ’t more people exercise? The answer may lie in one ’s 
memory of  how exercise makes t hem feel.  
 
This study seeks to compare exercisers and non -exerci sers on their affective responses 
to exercise, which includes pre -, during, and pos t-exercise affect, memory of during and 
post-exercise affect, and anticipated affect towards a future exercise session.  It is 
hypothesized that compared to regular exercisers, non -exercisers will have a  more 
nega tive m emory of how exerci se made the m feel, and as a result, also have more 
negative anticipated affect towards a future exercise session. Further, this study seeks 
to pi[INVESTIGATOR_85696]-exercise rs. It is hypothesized that non -exercisers randomized to an affect -based 
intervention will have  a more favorable affective response to  exercise following the 
intervention  compared to those r andomized  to the  control intervention (e.g., basic PA 
recommendations).  
 
Participants  
A total of 59  individuals with overweight/obesity (BMI 25-40 kg/m2), who were weight 
loss seeking, and between the ages of 18 -60 were  recruited via self -referral from 
Internet  advertisements. Interested individuals completed a phone screen questionnaire 
to determine initi al eligibility. During this screening, trained research assistants queried 
potential participants on their  moderate -to-vigorous intensity PA (MVPA) over the 
previous 6 months  and a recent ‘typi[INVESTIGATOR_2855]’ week . If average MVPA was <30 min/week, the 
individual was classified as a ‘non -exerciser’ , if average MVPA was ≥150 min/week, the 
individual was classified as an ‘exerciser’. Individual s reporting an intermediate amount 
of MVPA (30 to <150 min/week) were  ineligible for this study  as the goal was to target 
distinctive groups of exercisers vs. non -exercisers . Exclusion criteria included condition s 
limiting ability to exercise, history of coronary artery disease (i.e., myocardial infarction), 
stroke, diabetes, pulmonary disease (e.g., COPD), uncontrolled hypertension (i.e., 
resting BP ≥140/90 mmHg), use of any medication that would affect heart rate  (HR; 
e.g., beta blocker), current enrollment in a weight loss treatment program, history of 
bariatric surgery, or women who were  nursing/ pregnant , 
 
Study overview  
Individuals deemed eligible based upon the phone screen attended  an in-person 
orientation session in order to learn about the study in greater detail and to provide 
informed consent  in accordance with guidelines set forth by [CONTACT_85698][INVESTIGATOR_307] . Upon consenting, participants completed a baseline 
assessment , which included measu res of BMI, fitness , and 1 week  of objective physical 
3 
 activity ( PA) monitoring. Participants then returned to the laboratory for Exercise 
Session 1, in which they walked on a treadmill for [ADDRESS_93446] (i.e., how they expect the upcoming 
exercise bout to make them feel) , and momentary a ffect was assessed before, during, 
and after exercise. In days 1, 3, and [ADDRESS_93447] via text messaging. They then returned to the 
laboratory to complete an identical exercise session (Exercise Session 2). Following the 
completion of the final post -exercise affect measurement, ‘non -exercis ers’ randomly 
received 1 of 2 PA interventions and then completed additional study measures 
(described in detail below), while ‘exercisers’ did not complete any additional study 
procedures beyond this point.   
 
Baseline Visit: BMI, Fitness Test , Objective P A Measurement : Prior to participating 
in Exercise Sessions [ADDRESS_93448] 0.1 cm using a wall -mounted stadiometer. Body 
mass index (BMI) was calculated as kg/m2.  
 
Fitness Test.  Fitness was measured via a sub -maximal graded exercise test (GXT). 
Participants walked on the treadmill at 3.0 mph and the spee d and incline were 
increased every three minutes until 75% of age -predicted maximal HR was achieved . 
Total time spent on the treadmill (in seconds) was used as an indicator of fitness. The 
purpose of this GXT was to allow participants to gain familiar ity with walking on a 
treadmill and  assist in determining the starting treadmill grade for the following exercise 
visit.  
 
Objective PA Measurement.  While participants were deemed eligible for this study 
based upon self -report measures of PA, direct PA monitori ng was also performed to 
confirm that ‘exercisers’ and ‘non -exercisers’ significantly differed on MVPA. All 
participants wore  a previously validated activity monitor  (Sensewear Armband , Body 
Media Inc., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_68321])  for 1 week and were asked not to alter  their activity levels 
during this period. The monitor is worn on the upper arm and assesses movement and 
energy expenditure , however the  device does not provide any information  or feedback 
to participants. Minute -by-minute data were collected, and using p roprietary algorithms, 
MET values were computed for each minute the device was worn. Exercise groups 
were compared on time spent engaging  in bout -related MVPA (≥ 3 METs, ≥10 min) . 
 
Exercise Session  [ADDRESS_93449]  towards the upcoming exercise bout using a visual analogue scale (see below for 
additional detail on affect measures).  They then completed the  exercise protocol  which 
consist ed of a 2 -minute warm -up, followed by 30 minutes of moderate -intensity walking 
(70-75% of age -predicted maximal HR), and a 2 -minute cool -down. This exercise 
duration and intensity was chosen because it is consistent with the American College of 
Sports Medici ne’s exercise guidelines, and is feasible for individuals with 
overweight/ obes ity. S tarting exercise intensity was estimated using HR data from the 
baseline fitness test. Heart rate was monitored every minute and the treadmill grade or 
speed was adjusted by [CONTACT_85699]’s HR f ell outside the target 
range for two consecutive minutes.  Affect was assessed every [ADDRESS_93450].  The Feeling Scale (FS ; Hardy & Rejeski 1989 ) was 
used to assess momentary affect before, during and after exercise . This single -item 
measure asks participants to rate how they feel ‘at the present moment’ on an 11 -point 
scale rangi ng from -5 (very bad) to +5 (very good). Pre-exercise affect was assessed as 
individuals stepped onto the treadmill but before the exercise was started. During  
exercise affect was assessed every 5 minutes during  the exercise  bout (excluding 
warm -up), and post-exercise  affect was assessed immediately after the conclusion of 
the exercise protocol and exactly [ADDRESS_93451]  was 
assessed using a 100mm visual analog scale (VAS). This method for assessing 
anticipated affect requires participants to denote their response on a continuous line 
(anchored by ‘very bad’ a nd ‘very good’ similar to the Feeling Scale used for measuring 
current affect ) but does not quantify affe ct with a numerical response (e..g, “2”), thereby 
[CONTACT_85700]. Participants were specifically asked “How do you 
anticipate feeling during exerc ise?” and “How do you anticipate feeling after exercise?”.  
 
Affective Recall and Memory Bias  
In the week following Exercise Session 1, all participants were asked to maintain their 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_85697]. These questionnaires were completed 1, 3, and [ADDRESS_93452] upon 
their Exercise Session 1 by [CONTACT_85701] ; “How do you remember 
feeling overall ?” and this was considered an indicator of global  affective recall. 
Following this response on day [ADDRESS_93453] -exercise (e.g., 
recalled during exercise affect [assessed [ADDRESS_93454] -exercise] minus actual during 
[ADDRESS_93455] [average of Feeling Scale scores every 5 minutes during exercise]. A 
negative number indicates that participants remembered feeling less positive during 
exercise than they actually felt. Memory bias for post -exercise affect wa s computed in a 
similar manner.  
 
Exercise Session [ADDRESS_93456] 1 week following Exercise Session 1. Exercisers were 
compensated $50 for participation in the study, while non -exercisers were randomized, 
and received a brief PA intervention (described below).  
 
Randomized Controlled Trial for Non -Exercisers  
Immediately following Exercise Session 2, all non -exercisers were randomized to a 
brief, affect -based PA intervention (INT; n=15) or an educational PA intervention, which 
served as the control condition (CON; n=15).  
 
Components common to both the Affect I ntervention and Control Condition.  Participants 
in both arms were informed of the national PA guidelines (150 min/wk of MVPA) and 
were encouraged to meet these guidelines. They were also provided with general 
information regarding the physiological and psy chological health benefits of regular 
exercise. They were educated on what types of activities were considered moderate -
intensity and how to gauge this intensity on their own. Finally, they were asked to reflect 
on their reasons for wanting to become more physically active.  
 
Affect Intervention . In addition to the educational content described above, participants 
assigned to this group received a brief, affect -based intervention with a PhD -level 
interventionist in which they were taught cognitive strategie s designed to make their 
affective recall more positive. First, each participant was shown a graph of normative 
data from studies using the Feeling Scale during and post -exercise. This was used in 
the current  study specifically to normalize the experience of reductions (“dips”) in 
positive affect during exercise and to highlight the general positive affect produced by 
[CONTACT_60142] -intensity exercise. The interventionist then shared a graph illustrating the 
participant’s own affective trajectory from Exercise Se ssion 1. The interventionist 
discussed this trajectory with the participant, pointing out the moments that were most 
positive, and using open -ended questions to probe the participants’ feelings about these 
moments and these data. Participants were then sho wn on the graph their recalled 
affect for the same exercise session. Time was spent pointing out discrepancies or 
biases in recalled affect and actual affect. Participants were asked specific questions 
aimed at increasing their awareness of their recall (e .g., why do you think you 
remembered exercise in this way? When you report on how you remember feeling in 
response to exercise, what do you think sticks out most in your mind and contributes to 
your response? Do you think you are focusing more on how you f elt during or after 
exercise?). Third, adopting strategies from positive psychology to draw participants’ 
attention to positive outcomes from a bout of exercise, participants were asked to write 
down any positive feelings they experienced during or as a re sult of the previous 
6 
 exercise session (e.g., improved mood, feeling energized, feeling accomplished/proud, 
or feeling good about doing something beneficial for the body). They then shared their 
responses with the interventionist and participants were encou raged to think about 
these positive experiences, feelings, and motivations for engaging in exercise often, and 
specifically during the next exercise session.  
 
Post -intervention assessment  
Non-exercisers in both arms were informed they could increase their PA following 
Exercise Session [ADDRESS_93457] exercise session (Exercise 
Session 3). This session was identical to the previous exercise sessions and measures 
of anticipated affect, pre -, during, and post -exercise affect were obtaine d. All non -
exercisers attending Exercise Session 3 (INT and CON) were compensated $50 for 
their time.  
 