10/21/2016  
  Page 1 of 7  TMS modulation of insula -related brain networks  (TMS_INS)  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
10/21/2016  
 
  
10/21/2016  
  Page 2 of 7  PURPOSE  OF THE STUDY  
 
The purpose of this study is to investigate the modulatory effects of  repetitive 
transcranial magnetic stimulation ( rTMS ) on functional connectivity with the insula. Functional 
connectivity (FC) measures the interaction between brain region s, and recent neuroimaging 
studies have used FC to investigate how addiction affects FC among pertinent brain regions. 
rTMS, which can e xcite cortical neurons , has shown promise as a method to manipulate brain 
connectivity  and could be used therapeutically to treat addiction. However, we first need more 
information on brain FC  and how it relates to behavior, in order to guide rTMS  target selection . 
 Insula FC  is highly relevant to tobacco addiction. In a recent paper, we reported on pre -
existing differences with insula FC among smokers who underwent a subsequent quit attempt . 
We found greater insula FC with the sensorimotor cortex and putamen among smokers who 
remained abstinent, compared to those that relapsed [1]. We need to conduct this ‘proof of 
principle’ study, to determine whether rTMS can acutely strengthen insula - sensorimotor FC in 
healthy controls.  
 
Aim 1: To investigate the effects of excitatory rTMS on the insula -sensorimotor FC 
Hypothesis IV: rTMS will i ncrease the strength of insula -sensorimotor FC  
Hypothesis V:  The degree rTMS increases FC will be positively correlated with increased 
distress tolerance.  
 
 
DESIGN & PROCEDURES  
  
Overview: Thi s study has a  within -subject design. Healthy controls will be recruited from 
the community, consented, screened for eligibility,  then scheduled for 2 MRI scans and 5  rTMS 
session s. 
 
We will advertise on local radio, television stations, internet, flyers, and  in the 
newspapers for volunteers for the study.  We will also recruit volunteers from the Brain Imaging 
and Analysis Center (BIAC) subject pool ( Pro00010672).  Participants  who qualify over the 
phone  or via an internet -based survey  and are interested in par ticipating will be scheduled for 
further screening at the study site. The informed consent and  screening session  will last about 1 
to 1.5 hr. All aspects of the study will be described and informed con sent will be obtained by [CONTACT_1600], study coordinator, or data t echnician.  Breath and  urine  sample s will be collected in order to 
screen for  drug use  and recent alcohol use. Women of child-bearing potential will undergo urine 
pregnancy testing . Detailed inclusion/exclusion criteria are described below in the Selection of 
Participants  section.  
Each subject will also complete a Duke -UNC Brain Imaging and Analysis Center (BIAC) 
approved fMRI subject screening form  and a TMS Adult Safety Screen (TASS) form . A medical 
history questionnaire will be completed, and i t will be reviewed by [CONTACT_464301]. Participants  who meet all selection criteria will subsequently be scheduled for their  
study day s. 
On the  first study day,  participants  will undergo a [ADDRESS_594996] 
approximately 2 hours.  
On the 2nd through 6th study days, participants will undergo a 1 -hour rTMS session each 
day. On the 7th study day, participants will undergo a 1 -hour MRI session – this session is 
identical to the first MRI study day. All study days will be completed within 3 weeks. See Table 1 
below:  
 
Table 1:  List of Study Visits and Activities  
10/21/2016  
  Page 3 of 7  Study 
Day Activity  
0 Consent and Screening  
1 MRI session  
2 Active rTMS  
3 Active rTMS  
4 Active rTMS  
5 Active rTMS  
6 Active rTMS  
7 MRI session  
 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) : 
 During the MRI scan, participants will be administered a resting -state functional 
connectivity run, a scanner version of the PASAT (see below), a diffusion tensor imaging scan, 
and a structural anatomical scan. Participants will be in the MRI scanner for 1 hour.  
 
TMS Study Interventions:  TMS procedures will occur in the Noninvasive 
Neuromodu latory Neuroscience Lab in the Department of Psychiatry and Be havioral Sciences, 
Duke Clinic South  and in the BIAC facilities . Initially, a m otor threshold (MT)  will be determined 
by [CONTACT_1299] a figure [ADDRESS_594997]’s scalp and applying individual TMS pulses to left 
motor cortex. MT is defined as the minimum magnetic flux needed to reliably elicit a threshold 
EMG response in a tar get muscle . MT is the standard in the field for determining the dosing 
intensity of TMS for each individual and to reduce seizure risk. The motor evoked p otentials 
(MEP) for the contralateral first dorsal interosseus (FDI) will be measured with EMG. The scalp 
region producing the largest amplitude MEP will be identified.  At that scalp location, the lowest 
TMS intensity able to elicit 5 MEP's of ≥50µV in pea k-to-peak amplitude in 10 trials at this site 
will be determined using a descending method of limits procedure. Individual MT will be used to 
determine the intensity of stimulation for each individual, as recommended by [CONTACT_442438].  
 
TMS application  during TMS sessions : The subject will b e seated comfortably in a 
chair . Earplugs will be worn to protect hearing.  TMS coil placement will be guided by a 
neuronavigational system (Brainsight: Rogue,Instruments Montreal, Canada) using infrared 
technology to co-register head and coil locations with subject MRI recordings with millimeter 
accuracy.  The coil will be placed using Brainsight over the sensorimotor  cortex targeted to a 
location chosen based on the subject’s baseline functional connectivity  found in the initial 
imaging session. TMS intensity will be 100% motor threshold.  [ADDRESS_594998] identificati on and recruitment : Prospective participants,  ages 18 – 55, will be 
recruited for the study through local radio, television sta tions, internet, flyers, newspapers , the 
BIAC subject database, and by [CONTACT_72683] -of-mouth.  Potential participants will call our office or fill out 
an online questionnaire and they will be given a brief description of our studies and will be 
asked questions to d etermine interest and eligibility.  
 
Assessment of eligibility : Each potential subject will be contact[CONTACT_464302]. We will ask the potential subject for information including name, telephone 
10/21/2016  
  Page 4 of 7  number, address, age, smoking history, and a brief medical history. Participants  who qualify and 
who are  interested in participating will be scheduled for the screening.   
 
Inclusion criteria  for all participants :  
1) generally healthy  
2) between the ages of 18 -55 
3) right-handed  
 
Exclusion criteria for all participants :  
1) significant health problems (e.g., current and uncontrolled  liver, lung, or heart problems ) or 
presence of medical illness likely to alter brain morphology  (including history of seizure, 
history of epi[INVESTIGATOR_464297], stroke, brain surgery, head injury, and 
known structural brain lesion)  
2) current  diagnosis of Axis I psychi atric disorders ( e.g., depression, anxiety  disorder , 
schizophrenia)  
3) meet DSM -5 criteria for current substance use disorder  other than nicotine  
4) use of psychoactive medications that would result in a positive urine drug screen  
5) Current use of medications known to lower the seizure threshold  
6) positive breath alcohol concentration  
7) presence of conditions that would make MRI unsafe  (e.g., metal implants, pacemakers)  
8) among women, a  positive urine pregnancy  test  
9) vision that cannot be corrected to 20/40  
 
Compensation : Participants will receive $280 for completing the entire study . In addition, 
participants can earn up to $10 on each MRI study day based on their performance for a 
maximum total compensation of $ 300. Participan ts that decide to withdraw from the study 
before completion will be compensated $20/hour of participation  on a pro -rated basis for the 
part(s) of the study that they have completed .  
 
Subject competency:  Only competent participants  will be allowed to parti cipate in the study.  
 
RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT   
 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI):  There are no known long -term health risks to the use of 
magnetic resonance imaging per se when operated within FDA guidelines. However there are 
safety concerns posed by [CONTACT_464303]. All scans conducted 
under this protoco l meet the FDA’s guidelines for non -significant risk for static field strength, 
specific absorption rate (SAR), time varying magnetic fields (dB/dt), and acoustic noise.  
MRI provides clinically relevant anatomic and functional information non -invasively a nd 
with minimal risk, if the well -known contraindications (such as pacemakers) and potential 
hazards (such as attraction of metallic objects) are avoided.  There have been no ill effects 
reported from exposure to the magnetism or radio waves used in this te st. However, it is 
possible that harmful effects cou ld be recognized in the future.  A known risk is that the magnet 
could a ttract certain kinds of metal. Therefore, we will carefully ask participants about metal 
within their bodies (this includes certain d yes found in tattoos).   
 
Incidental MRI Findings : It is possible that this study will identify information about a subjec t 
that was previously unknown. Such incidental findings, if any, will not be shared with the subject 
unless the incidental finding is determined to be likely to cause premature death if untreated. 
Should such life -threatening results be uncovered through the MRI scan the information will be 
shared with the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_464298] t he information with the subjec t.  
  
10/21/2016  
  Page 5 of 7  Women of childbearing potential:  Due to unknown risks and potential harm to the unborn 
fetus, sexually active women of childbearing potential must use a reliable method of birth control 
while participating in this study . Women will be screened with a  urine pregnancy test before the 
MRI scan. Positive pregnancy tests are exclusionary.  Urine pregnancy tests will be administered 
and interpreted by [CONTACT_464304] 1/14/2013.  
 
TMS : There are no known long -term health risks to the use of TMS per se when operated within 
consensus safety guidelines , which include the rTMS  intensity and timing parameters 
considered safe, as well as training, planning for, and managing emergencies (Rossi et al., 
2009) . We will follow these guidelines, and have incorporated them into our screening and 
session procedures.  
The greatest potenti al risk in the use of TMS is seizure. The Rossi et al. (2009) 
consensus safety report stated that “The occurrence of seizures has been extremely 
rare, with most of the few new cases receiving TMS protocols exceeding previous 
guidelines, often in patients u nder treatment with drugs which potentiall y lowered the 
seizure threshold ” [2]. As Rossi et al. delineate, “rare” means that up to the end of 2008, 
[ADDRESS_594999] two decades.  Seven occurred before safety parameters were 
established in 1997.  These seizures appeared to be the result of excessive stimu lator 
intensity, pulse frequency and train duration and too short inter -train intervals, in various 
combinations, and resulted in the establishment of safety guidelines for each parameter 
[2]. To reduce the risk of seizures, participants will be carefully screened for a history of 
seizures, epi[INVESTIGATOR_002], or a family history of epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] (and their neurological status in 
general) . Participants will  also be screened for use of medications that could decrease 
seizure threshold (e.g., olanzipi[INVESTIGATOR_050]).  Personnel who administer rTMS are trained to 
recognize a potential seizure event and to act as “first responders” in order to administer 
appropriate initial care. The first -aid response consists of making sure the subject is 
physically safe for the duratio n of the seizure. This involves moving the participants  out 
of the TMS chair and onto the floor lying down on his or her left side. The subject will be 
kept lying down on his or her left side, while the staff call emergency medical help, via a 
[ADDRESS_595000] for minutes to hours follo wing the end of the 
stimulation, and usually respond  promptly to single doses of over the counter pain medications.  
Cramped conditions extended in time within frameless stereotaxic apparatus can al so lead t o 
head and body aches. These aches are usually managed easily with over -the-counter 
analgesics.  In addition, TMS exposure without hearing protection can result in hearing loss and 
tinnitus . Thus, participants will wear ear protection (ear plugs) during TMS  exposure.   
 
Costs to participants : Participants  will not incur any costs associated with participating in the 
study.  All the study costs, including any procedures related directly to the study, will be paid for 
by [CONTACT_1758].   
 
DATA ANALYSIS & STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
10/21/2016  
  Page 6 of 7  Behavioral and self-report data will be analyzed using SPSS (Chicago, Ill), with 
significance set to alpha = .05. Prior to hypothesis testing, functional data will be preprocessed 
using FSL (Oxford, [LOCATION_006]) to remove noise and artifacts. Images  will be normalized to a template, 
motion -corrected, high -pass filtered, and spatially smoothed (8 mm FWHM).  Functional 
connectivity will be analyzed using the Conn toolbox and an insula -seed region of interest, 
defined using Pi[INVESTIGATOR_464299] [3]. Activations will be consi dered significant at p < 0.05 with a minimum 
cluster extent threshold of 5 contiguous voxels.  Participants  who do not follow  task instructions, 
or those with > 3 mm of movement, will be excluded from the analyses.   
 
DATA &  SAFETY  MONITORING  
  
Data collected for this study will be gathered via paper -and-pencil methods, and 
computer -based methods. Data is either entered by [CONTACT_464305] a computer. All paperwork and electronic files will be checke d 
by [CONTACT_464306] a daily basis. All PHI is stored in a locked file 
cabinet and only accessible by [CONTACT_464]. Internal audits to ensure quality assurance occur at 
the beginning of data collection, mid -way through and at the end of participant enrollment.  
fMRI processing will be performed using custom MATLAB software, SPM  and FSL . 
Analysis will include examination of functional connectivity . Changes in post -processing 
procedures may occur during the duration of this protocol but will not increase the risks 
associated with these experiments.  
 Behavioral and questionnaire data will be analyzed using SPSS using standard 
statistical procedures.   
Adverse events (AE) and protocol deviations will be collected on a daily basis. The 
principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_464300]  (DUHS) Institutional 
Review Board (IRB) office and all applicable regulatory authorities in accordance with the 
Center’s standard operating procedures.  
 
PRIVACY, DATA STORAGE & CONFIDENTIALITY  
 
Participants will be informed, in their consent forms, of the  data storage and 
confidentiality safeguards, which are practiced according to current HIPAA regulations.  
 All MRI data will be stored on a secure server. All PHI is removed from the scanning 
data before it is posted on the secure server and is coded with  a unique id.  
 Except when required by [CONTACT_2371], the subject will not be identified by [CONTACT_2300], social security 
number, address, telephone number or any other direct personal identifiers in the study records. 
The participant will be assigned a unique code number and the key to the code will be kept in a 
locked file in [CONTACT_464307]’s office. Paper records will include only those identifiers necessary for 
tracking purposes (subject ID) . Computer records will be stored in a database on a secure 
server.  
  
References  
1. Addicott MA, Sweitzer MM, Froeliger B, et al. Increased Functional C onnectivity in an 
Insula -Based Network is Associated with Improved Smoking Cessation Outcomes. 
Neuropsychopharmacol (2015).  
2. Rossi S, Hallett M, Rossini PM, et al. Safety, ethical considerations, and application 
guidelines for the use of transcranial mag netic stimulation in clinical practice and 
research. Clin Neurophysiol (2009) 120:2008 -2039.  
3. Maldjian JA, Laurienti PJ, Kraft RA, et al. An automated method for neuroanatomic and 
cytoarchitectonic atlas -based interrogation of fMRI data sets. Neuroimage (2003) 
19:1233 -9. 
10/21/2016  
  Page 7 of 7   