Page [ADDRESS_151138] on Body Composition with Albuterol and 
Caffeine versus Placebo in Adolescents: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Protocol Version Date:  05/05/17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 11 
 Protocol Title: Effect on Body Composition with Albuterol and Caffeine versus Placebo 
in Adolescents: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_133507]:  Daniel S. Hsia , M.D.  
 
Sub-Investigator ’s Name (s): Frank L. Greenway, M.D.  
 
Protocol Version Date:  05/05/17 
 
Objectives  
1. To ass ess the change in lean body mass and fat mass  with the combination of 
albuterol and caffeine versus placebo in obese adolescents age 12 -17 years.  
We hypothesize that the combinati on of medications will cause  an increase in lean body 
mass and a decrease in fat mass, more than the placebo . 
 
2. To assess the safety of the combination of albuterol and caffeine versus placebo in 
obese adolescents age 12 -17 years.  
We hypothesize that adverse events  in the caffeine/albuterol group compared to 
placebo  will be similar . 
 
Background  
Previous studies done at Pennington Biomedical have demonstrated that the equivalent 
of oral albuterol 4mg three times a day (tid) with oral caffeine 100mg tid reduces body 
fat and increases lean tissue in rodents more than the addition of the effect of the two 
components separately.(Liu, Arceneaux et al. 2015)  The combination of albuterol with 
caffeine changed body composition without changing food intake.  An adult ma le taking 
albuterol 4 mg orally tid plus caffeine 100mg orally tid increased lean mass by 1.25% 
and decreased fat mass by 1.2% over a two month period (unpublished).  These effects 
are expected to be even greater in a growing adolescent.  This pi[INVESTIGATOR_114852] t will take the 
first step towards trying to understanding the safety and potential efficacy of this drug 
combination.  The prospect of using inexpensive medications already approved in the 
pediatric population for the treatment of asthma as a novel treatm ent for adolescent 
obesity addresses a medical need that is presently unmet.  
Food restriction in adolescence is not only difficult to accomplish, but it also raises 
concerns about growth and development.  A medication approved for the treatment of 
obesity in the adolescent age group that improves body composition by [CONTACT_133510] a useful 
tool for physicians who address the treatment of obesity in adolescents.  Albuterol is a 
medication, approved for ages 6 and older, used for the treatment of asthma and has 
also been shown to increase muscle strength and lean body mass in children with 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_11902] (Skura, Fowler et al. 2008) and in healthy young men during an 
exercis e training program.(Caruso, Hamill et al. 2005)  A drug approved for the 
treatment of adolescent obesity that increases lean tissue, decreases fat tissue and can 
be given in conjunction with lifestyle modifications would be welcomed by [CONTACT_133511] w ho treat these adolescents and by [CONTACT_133512].  
A provisional patent has been submitted by [CONTACT_133513] a 1:25 ratio for synergistically 
Page 3 of 11 
 increasing muscle mass and decreasing fat mass as a potential treatment for obesity in 
adolescents.   
 
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Participants will come to an initial screening visit (SV) after an overnight fast of 10 
hours.  Consent and assent will be obtained and the inclusion/exclusion criteria below 
will be assessed.  Screening labs (CBC; chem [ADDRESS_151139], ALT, alkaline 
phosphatase, GGT, amylase, iron, cholesterol, triglycerides, HDL, LDL; fasting insulin; 
and uri nalysis with urine pregnancy test as needed) and an EKG will be done to help 
determine eligibility.  
 
Inclusion  
-Healthy males or females with a BMI ≥ 95th percentile  
-Between [ADDRESS_151140] a marked baseline prolongation of  QT/QTc interval (QTc interval >450 ms), a 
history of additional risk factors for  torsade de pointes (e.g., heart failure, hypokalemia, 
family history of Long QT  Syndrome), or use concomitant medications that prolong the 
QT/QTc interval  
-Have history of asthma, hypertension, thyroid disease, or significant  
neurologic disease such as seizure disord er 
-Are pregnant, planning to become pregnant, or nursing .  Females who are sexually 
active must be using adequate contraception . 
-Take a medication known to affect  weight or body composition like systemic 
glucocorticoids, atypi[INVESTIGATOR_900] -psychotics, or weight loss medications  
-Take beta -stimulators or beta -blockers on a regular basis  
-Take stimulants for attention deficit disorder  
-Take monoamine oxidase inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, or diuretics  
-Take any chronic medication that has not had a  stable dose for [ADDRESS_151141] any significant cardiac disease (such as heart failure, arrhythmias, or valve 
disease), uncontrolled pulmonary disease, chronic liver disease, chronic kidney 
disease, or chronic infec tious disease  
-Have any significant psychiatric illness that is unstable or untreated such as bipolar 
disorder, severe depression, or severe anxiety  
-Have a history of suicidal ideation  
-Have an allergy or hypersensitivity  to albuterol  
-Are unwilling to di scontinue caffeine -containing products while in the  study  
-Are deemed unfit to participate in the study based on evaluation by [CONTACT_133514] [ADDRESS_151142] to enroll 20 adolescents to complete studies in 12 adolescents.  
 
Recruitment Methods  
The Recruitment Core is responsible for recruiting potential participants for clinical trials 
from a population that includes a wide range of people of various ages, ethnic 
backgrounds and with varying degrees of health.  The PBRC recruitment team creates 
and implements individualized, trial -specific advertising and awareness campaigns, 
including mass media, traditional advertising, and novel methods including social media, 
digital, and email marketing.  All advertising and awareness are approved by [CONTACT_133515] C 
IRB to ensure ethical and disclosure standards are met.  The PBRC database may  also 
be utilized to find potential subjects for this study.  
 
Study Timelines  
Depending on scheduling, the total duration of this study is approximately 10 weeks 
(including scr eening) with 8 weeks of treatment. Following screening evaluations, 
eligible subjects will be randomized to the study intervention  as follows: either 8 weeks 
of treatment with placebo or 8 weeks with the combination of caffeine/albuterol .  
The estimated le ngth of time to complete the entire study (from enrollment of the first 
subject to compl etion of the last subject) is [ADDRESS_151143] will 
continue on the study intervention  for the entire duration of treatment.  
 
Overview  
Prior to study entry the following procedures will b e performed:  
• obtain written informed consent  
• record medical history  
• verify conformance with entry criteria  
Twelve obese adolescents will be recruited through general advertisement and 
physician referrals.  The study will consist of [ADDRESS_151144] study visit will 
be a screening visit and include a medical history/physical, an electrocardiogram, and 
screening labs.  The Beck Depression Inventory will also be used to screen for 
depression in these adolescents.  A psychologist is availa ble on site to assess anyone 
whose score indicates further evaluation is necessary, and the adolescent may be 
referred to outside sources if deemed necessary.    Adolescents who qualify will return 
Page [ADDRESS_151145] a DXA scan for body composition as well as a Visual Analog Scale (VAS) test for 
hunger and satiety.  A parent will complete a Vanderbilt Assessment Scale for ADHD to 
determine if the adolescent has any signs of attenti on deficit or hyperactivity at baseline.  
The adolescent will then be randomized to either the placebo or treatment group 
(Albuterol 4 mg tid and Caffeine 100  mg tid orally) in a 1:1 ratio. The albuterol and 
caffeine will be obtained from Spectrum Chemical , Letco Medical, or a similar approved 
distributor where the pharmacy ac quires FDA approved medications .  Albuterol is 
approved for the treatment of asthma in adolescents (12 -18) at 4 mg three or four times 
a day . Starting with the baseline visit and at ev ery 2 week visit, the adolescent and 
parent will meet with a registered dietitian certified in pediatric weight management.  
The information provided will include recommendations on healthy eating, increasing 
physical activity, and family participation as recommended by [CONTACT_133516].  At week 2, 4, 6, and 8, compliance (via pi[INVESTIGATOR_10685]) and adverse events 
will be assessed.  At the week [ADDRESS_151146] an electrocardiogram, a repeat DXA, and repeat labs to compare 
with the screening labs.   Approximately 7 days (± 2 days) later, someone from the study 
staff will call the partici pant to assess for any adverse events while off the study 
intervention.     
 
Study Evaluations  
The following study evaluations will be obtained at  the screening visit (SV) : 
• Body weight, height , body mass index (BMI) , vital signs  
• Complete medical history and physical examination  
• Beck Depression Inventory  
• Standard 12 -lead EK G 
• Urinalysis  
• Labs including fasting insulin, Chemistry  26 and CBC ( ~7.5 mL or 1.5 teaspoons 
of blood)  
• Collection of concomitant medication s 
 
The following study ev aluations will be obta ined at the Baseline visit : 
• Body weight, height, body mass index (BMI), vital signs  
• Family weight management counseling  
• Pregnancy test (if applicable)  
• DXA scan for body composition  
• Randomization to either study intervention  
• Dispensing of study medication  
• Visual Analog Scale for hunger and satiety  
• Vanderbilt Assessment scale for ADHD   
• Collection of concomitant medication s 
Page 6 of 11 
 The following study evaluations will be obta ined at the Week 2 visit  
• Body weight, height, body mass index (BMI), vital signs  
• Collection of concomitant medication s 
• Family weight management counseling  
• Dispensing and collecting study medication  
• Assessment of tolerability and compliance (via pi[INVESTIGATOR_10685])  
• Assessment of adverse events  
 
The following study evaluations will be obta ined at the Week 4 visit  
• Body weight, height, body mass index (BMI), vital signs  
• Collection of concomitant medication s 
• Family weight management counseling  
• Dispensing and collecting study medication  
• Assessment of tolerability and com pliance (via pi[INVESTIGATOR_10685])  
• Assessment of adverse events  
• Visual Analog Scale for hunger and satiety  
• Pregnancy test (if applicable)  
• Urinalysis  
• Labs including fasting insulin, Chemistry 26  and CBC ( ~7.5 mL or 1.5 teaspoons 
of blood)  
• Standard 12 -lead EK G 
• Vanderbilt Assessment scale for ADHD   
 
The following study evaluations will be obta ined at the Week 6 visit  
• Body weight, height, body mass index (BMI), vital signs  
• Collection of concomitant medication s 
• Family weight management counseling  
• Dispensing and collecting study medication  
• Assessment of tolerability and compliance (via pi[INVESTIGATOR_10685])  
• Assessment of adverse events  
 
The following study evaluations will be obta ined at the Week 8 visit  
• Body weight, height, body mass index (BMI), vital signs  
• Collection of concomitant medication s 
• Family weight management counseling  
• Collecting study medication  
• Assessment of tolerability and compliance (via pi[INVESTIGATOR_10685])  
• Assessment of adverse events  
• Pregnancy test (if applicable)  
• Urinalysis  
• Labs including fasting insulin, Chemistry 26  and CBC ( ~7.5 mL or 1.5 teaspoons 
of blood)  
• DXA scan for body composition  
• Standard 12 -lead EK G 
• Visual Analog Scale for hunger and satiety  
• Vanderbilt Assessment scale for ADHD   
 
The following study evaluation will be done at Week 9  over the phone  
Page 7 of 11 
 • Follow up with the participant , or participant’s parent(s)/legal guardian if 
participant is a minor,  to assess for any adverse events that may have occurred 
after stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_52399].   
 
Study Procedures  
Whole Body DXA scan  (Baseline and Week 8)  
This scan measures the amount of bone, muscle, and fat in your body.  The scan will be 
performed using a whole -body scanner.  You will be required to wear a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_105463], 
to remove all metal -containing objects from your body, and to  lie down on the table.  A 
scanner emitting low energy X -rays and a detector will pass along your body.  The scan 
takes approximately 5 to 10 minutes.  You will be asked to remain completely still while 
the scan is in progress.   This scan is for research p urposes only and not for diagnostic 
treatment . 
 
Study Schedule  
Procedures  SV Baseline  Week 2  Week 4  Week 6  Week 8  Week 9  
Inclusion/Exclusion,  
Consent and Assent  X       
History and Physical  X       
Beck Depression Inventory  X       
Weight, height, vital signs  X X X X X X  
Collection of concomitant 
medications  X X X X X X  
Family weight management 
counseling   X X X X X  
DXA scan for body 
composition   X    X  
Screening labs : blood draw  X   X  X  
Screening labs: urinalysis  X X  X  X  
Urine pregnancy test (if 
applicable)   X    X  
EKG  X   X  X  
Dispense and collect 
medications   X X X X X  
Tolerability and compliance 
(pi[INVESTIGATOR_10685])    X X X X  
Adverse events    X X X X  
Randomization to treatment 
sequence   X      
Visual Analog Scale for 
hunger and satiety   X  X  X  
Vanderbilt Assessment 
scale for ADHD   X  X  X  
Follow up phone call        X 
      # Each visit has a window of ± [ADDRESS_151147] be HIPAA certified.  
 
Statistics  
Comparisons will be made between the control and intervention groups using chi -
squared tests to compare categorical data and t -tests to compare means with 2 time 
points and analysis of variance for end points with repeated measures  with a significant 
p value of ≤ 0.05.  
 
Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
Participants and their parents will be instructed  on symptoms that  should prompt them 
to contact [CONTACT_133517], such as  palpi[INVESTIGATOR_133508] .  
Adverse events will be monitored every 2 weeks  at each study visit.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_133509] -
investigator  will review lab data  on a regu lar basis  throughout the study (screening, 
Week 4, and Week 8) to ensure the safety of each subject.  Any significant health 
problems coming to our attention during the study will be referred to the participant’s 
usual source of medical care, with his/her  parents’  permission.  
A formal IND application has been filed with the FDA and in addition to the reporting 
requirements set forth by [CONTACT_1201], additional responsibilities include:  
-Reporting any unexpected fatal or life -threatening susp ected adverse reactio ns to the 
FDA no later than 7 calendar days after initial receipt of the information  
-Reporting any (1) serious, unexpected suspected adverse rea ctions, (2) findings from 
other clinical, animal, or in -vitro studies that suggest significant h uman risk, and (3) a 
clinically important increase in the rate of a serious suspected adverse reactio n to the 
FDA and to all investigators no later than 15 calendar days  
- Submitting annual progress reports within 60 days of the a nniversary of the date tha t 
the IND became active (the date clinical studies were permitted to begin)  
 
Withdrawal of Subjects  
During the course of the study, participants may be withdrawn from the study for the 
following reasons:  
 Unwillingness to participate in the study or coopera te with study staff  
Page 9 of 11 
  Presentation of significant medical symptoms or abnormal findings such as a 
prolonged QTc that would warrant termination of study participation to protect the 
participant’s safety  
 
Data that have already been collected during the course  of study participation from a 
withdrawn participant will be used, unless a specific request is otherwise received.  
Subjects will be notified of their withdrawal via telephone or mail.  
 
Risks to Subjects  
General: More serious risks and adverse effects may occur than those listed below.  
The combination of caffeine and albuterol has not been well studied and adverse effects 
may be additive or synergistic with the combination.  There may be more risks of 
ingesting additional caffeine products (such as coffee,  tea, Coke® , or Red Bull® ) and 
alcohol while in the study.  A list of caffeine -containing products to avoid during the 
study will be provided as a reference.  If a dose is missed, the participant should not 
double up on the dose because of the possible risk of adverse effects.  
 
Caffeine: This can be found in a variety of foods and beverages.  Caffeine is a stimulant 
and may cause increased heart rate, alertness, tremor, and difficulty sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007].   
Albuterol: This is a prescription medication that is approved for use in treatment o f 
asthma  in children as young as [ADDRESS_151148] common side effects include: 
nervousness, tremor, headache, tachycardia, and palpi[INVESTIGATOR_814].   
 
Blood Draws:  There is the possibility of infection and/or pain and bruising at the vein on 
your arm wh ere the needle is inserted.  Aseptic (sterile) technique and trained 
personnel minimize these risks.  
 
Electrocardiogram (EKG or ECG):  There are minimal risks associated with this test. 
There is a small possibility there may be some redness or irritation while cleaning the 
skin prior to applying the electrodes or if you happen to be allergic to the adhesive on 
the electrodes.   
 
Whole Body DXA scan: The amount of radiation used for this procedure is very small.  
The radiation dose for this scan is equivale nt to the radiation you are naturally exposed 
to in the environment in less than one day.  Scans will not be performed on any subject 
who is pregnant, and all females will be provided with a urine pregnancy test prior to the 
scan .     
 
Visual Analog Scale for hunger and satiety : This is a well -validated scale to assess 
hunger and satiety and carries little to no risk.  
 
Vanderbilt Assessment scale for ADHD : There is little to no risk in filling out this 
questionnaire.  This is used by [CONTACT_133518] a child’s risk for 
attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder.  This will serve as an additional safety measure 
and will be obtained at baseline and then every [ADDRESS_151149] of puberty will be 
enrolled in the study.  All participants will be provided with an age appropriate assent 
form in additional to the parental consent form.  All questions and concerns will be 
addressed by [CONTACT_5984].   
 
Sharing of Results with Subjects  
Individual participant results will not be provided; however, results from the study will be 
submitted for manuscripts in scholarly journals and presentations.  All study reports will 
presen t only aggregated data to minimize the risks that a participant can be identified 
form their participation in the study.   As required by [CONTACT_133519].gov.  
 
Setting  
Potential participants will be recruited utiliz ing the recruiting services (Recruitment Core) 
of the PBRC. All research procedures will be performed at the PBRC, namely, in the 
Outpatient C linic. 
 
Resources Available  
Pennington Biomedical Research Center  has had a good track record with recruiting a 
population of overweight/obese adolescents for a variety of intervention studies.  
Potential participants come from a variety of sources such as traditional advertising, 
physician referral, word of mouth, etc.  
The clinical research staff are well trained and have to undergo a variety of certifications 
before performing assessments on study participants.   
Medical personnel are available onsite to conduct study visits as well as oversee any 
adverse events.  Psychologists are available on call should the n eed arise for further 
evaluation  based on screening inventories or other assessments.   
Prior to the opening of the study, a start up meeting is held with all of the relevant 
clinical cores to ensure that prop er coordination is in place prior to the first screening 
visit. 
 
Compensation  
Each participant will receive $ 25 after the completion of the baseline visit, week 2, week 
4, and week 6 visit s, and $ 50 after the week 8 visit  for a total of $[ADDRESS_151150]’s privacy.  Safeguards such as password 
protected computer s and networks have been put in place in order to limit access to 
subject data.   These data will be maintained until the results may be published and will 
only be accessible by [CONTACT_3462].   
Subjects will be given ample time to read over the consent, ask questions, and agree to 
participate in the research study.  Subjects may de cline answering questions they are 
Page [ADDRESS_151151] will 
incur transportation costs in getting to PBRC.  
 
Consent Process  
The P.I. or one of the designated clinic staff will obtain informed consent from the 
parent/guardian and separate assent from all of the  minor participant s in the outpatient 
clinic during the  screening visit.  Ample opportuni ty will be given for the parent/guardian  
and the minor participant to review the consent /assent  and to ask any questions prior to 
signing any forms . 
A parent/guardian is to provide his or her identification along with the child’s birth 
certificate in order to verify the relationship to the minor participant.   
As a greater than minimal risk study  with the prosp ect of direct benefit , one parent may 
provide consent for the minor participant to engage in the study.  
 
Drugs or Devices  
Both interventions will be stored in the research pharmacy  located in the outpatient 
clinic.  This is locked at all times and only accessible to limited personnel via a key card.  
The research pharmacist will maintain an inventory of study drugs.  Appropriate 
dispensation of study drug will be confirmed with a second clinic staff member to ensure 
correct drug is being provided to the cor rect participant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 