Version 1 - July 2019  
 1  
 
 
 
 
  
UPLOAD  5/11/2021   
 
 
PRO TOCOL & SAP  
 
 
Medical Pain Consultants 
Version 1 - July 2019  
 2 Study Protocol  
 
HF-01 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
Sustained Acoustic Medicine (SAM) Combined 
with a Diclofenac Ultrasound Coupling Patch for 
Knee Osteoarthritis  
 
 
July 1st [ADDRESS_761926] common form of the disease. 
The prevalence of osteoarthritis is greater among women than men, 
increases with age, and affects all r ace/ethnicity groups.  
 
Osteoarthritis affects articular cartilage, the smooth fibrous connective 
tissue essential for smooth movement and cushioning of the joint. As the 
disease progresses, the cartilage becomes thinner and may completely 
wear away. Infla mmation of the synovial membrane, the lining that 
surrounds the knee joint and contains the synovial fluid, is often a result of 
these changes. Osteoarthritis can form in any joint but is more common in 
weight bearing joints such as the knee and hip, and r esults in joint space 
narrowing, seve re pain and loss of mobility.  
 
Ultrasound therapy for the treatment of Osteoarthritis may be used as 
conservative care  (see reference: cochrane review).  
 
 
1.[ADDRESS_761927] Description  
Low intensity therapeutic u ltrasound (LITUS) will be delivered in this study 
using ZetrOZ’s Ultrasonic Diathermy Device called sam®. The device 
package consists of a Power Controller, 2 Applicators (ultrasound 
generators), Ultrasound Coupling Bandages  1% Diclofenac , Ultrasound 
Gel, Y-Adapter, Charger and User Manual.  
 
1.3 Hypotheses  
It is hypothesized that users of the LITUS device (sam®) device  will be able 
to successfully apply and remove the device daily to the knee . It is 
hypothesized that treatment with the LITUS device (sam®) will yield 
improvements in pain  and stiffness in subjects  with knee Osteoarthritis .   
 
1.4 Potential Risks to Subjects  
The risks of using ultrasound devices to administer physical therapy are 
well established and include: burn, itching and/or pain. These risks 
decrease when using lower intensity ultrasound , as in this study . The 
Ultrasound Diathermy Device uses existing technology to deliver ultrasound 
therapy in a portable and convenient fashion. The subjects will be given the 
chance to ask any questions regarding the trial procedures, requirements, 
and purposes. Once the s ubjects are fully informed of the possible risks 
and benefits of participation in the study and all of their questions have 
been satisfactorily answered, they will be required to sign the informed 
consent form in order to participate in the study. All subj ects must give 
consent themselves and no legally authorized representatives will be 
accepted on their behalf.  
 
 
Version 1 - July 2019  
 4 2.0 Study Objectives and Design  
2.1 Objectives  
Evaluate the usability of the device  for proper design.    
 
Evaluate the ability of LITUS  to reduce  pain, stiffness as measured by  [CONTACT_579735] 
(WOMAC)  
 
2.[ADDRESS_761928] Population(s)  
This study will enroll subjects with physician confi rmed knee Osteoarthritis 
pain. The l ong duration wearable therapeutic ultrasound treatment has 
multiple benefits likely to aid the patients enrolled in this study with  knee 
Osteoarthritis pain . Acoustic waves mechanically stimulate tissue, triggering 
biological effects including the down regulation of inflammatory cytokines, 
increased transport kinetics, protein synthesis, and extracellular matrix 
deposition.  It is therefore hypothesized that the wearable device  has the 
potential to provide sustained OA symptom management.  
 
3.2 Anticipated Number of Research Subjects  
 
Enrollment will be monitor ed at  the assumed rates of Screen Failures and 
Discontinuation may be found to differ in this study from historical controls. 
The objective is to screen and enroll towards a target of 30 completed 
subjects.  

Version 1 - July 2019  
 5  
Subjects to be Screened  50 
Assumed Screen Fail Rate  30% 
Subjects to be Enrolled  (sign IC F) 35 
Assumed Discontinuation Rate  10% 
Total Number Completers  (complete 24 -wk treatment phase)  30 
 
3.3 Inclusion  Criteria  
Subjects to be enrolled in the trial will:  
• Have physician -diagnosed mild to moderate knee OA (OARSI atlas grades 
1-2)  
• Fulfill the American College of Rheumatology clinical and radiological 
diagnostic criteria for knee OA  
• Are between 35 -80 years of age  
• Report a frequent pain score between 3 -7 (range: 0 -10) during the week 
preceding enrollment  
• Report that knee pain negatively affects quality of life  
• Are willing not to use any cream, gel, or topi[INVESTIGATOR_579734]  
• Are deemed appropriate by [CONTACT_437158].  
• Be willing and able to self -administer treatment daily within their place of 
resid ence or during normal daily activity, excluding bathing, showering, or 
other water activities which may result in submersion of the study device.  
• Not use or initiate  opi[INVESTIGATOR_74527]/or non -opi[INVESTIGATOR_73409].  
• Be willing to discontinue any other interv entional treatment modalities on 
the knee  during the study period (e.g., transcutaneous electrical nerve 
stimulation, electronic muscle stimulation, traditional ultrasound).  
 
3.[ADDRESS_761929] will be excluded from par ticipation in this study if he or she : 
• Cannot successfully demonstrate the ability to put on and take off the 
device.  
• Display s any condition which, in the judgment of the investigator, would 
make participation in the study unacceptable including, but not l imited to, 
the subject’s ability to understand and follow instructions.  
• Participated in a clinical trial for an investigational drug and/or agent 
within 30 days prior to screening.  
• Is pregnant.  
• Is a prisoner.  
• Is non-ambulatory (unable to walk).  
• Has a pacem aker.  
• Has a malignancy in the treatment area.  
• Has an active infection, open sores, or wounds in the treatment area.  
• Has impaired sensation in the treatment area, such as caused by 
[CONTACT_437159].  
• Has a known neuropathy (disease of the brain or spi[INVESTIGATOR_153315]).  
Version 1 - July 2019  
 6 • Has a hereditary disposition (tendency) for excessive bleeding 
(hemorrhage).  
• Have knee replacement, other surgical intervention, or hyaluronidase 
injection in the affected knee in the past 6 months  
• Are currently taking steroids  
• Have any contraindication to radiograph  
• Have a secondary cause of arthritis (metabolic or inflammatory)  
 
4.[ADDRESS_761930] Compensation  
Subjec ts will be compensated up to $ 50 for participation in the study.  
Subjects will not be compensated for the initial screening/enrollment visit, 
but will $[ADDRESS_761931] physician -diagnosed mild 
to moderate knee OA (OARSI atlas grades 1 -2). 
 
4.3 Study T reatment  
4.3.1  Treatment Groups  
Subjects will participate in one treatment arm. All devices are manufactured 
by [CONTACT_437160]  (Trumbull, CT)  and are all identical . The 3 MHz device 
was FDA cleared in November 2013, and is marketed in the [LOCATION_002] 
under the brand name [CONTACT_437166]®.  All study s ubjects will apply 2 applicators 
affixed to the coupling ban dages to their knee on the medial and lateral 
sides  as shown in the figure below . The applicators are connected via a Y -
adapter to a single power controller. The subjects will set the power 
controller to a 4 -hour treatment duration for each daily treatment .  
 
Version 1 - July 2019  
 7  
 
 
 
 
 
 
This device delivers continuous 
ultrasound with a maximum acoustic 
power output of 1.3 W/cm2 ±20% 
when 2 applicators are used. The 
frequency is 3 MHz ± 20%. The 
maximum treatment duration 
permitted is 4 hours per day.  
 
Treatment protocol: subjects will self -administer the LITUS therapy for [ADDRESS_761932] 5  days (and  up to 7 days)  for th e 1-week study . 
 
4.3.2  Randomization    
Not Applicable.   
 
4.3.3  Breaking the Blind  
Not Applicable  
 
4.3.4  Treatment Adherence/ Study Compliance  
Treatment compliance will be assessed by [CONTACT_579736] . The Research 
Coordinator will remind the subjects of the treatment protocol and retrain 
them on use of the device if necessary. Study visits should be completed 
within 3 days of the s pecified  time in the Schedule of Assessments  
(Section 4.6). 
 
 
4.[ADDRESS_761933] usability and pain ratings before, during 
and after treatment.  
 
Numeric Rating Scale (NRS)  
Subject -reported rating of pain severity, 0 = no pain, 10 = worst 
pain imagina ble  
 Sample  
Applicator Placement  

Version 1 - July 2019  
 8 Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Arthritis 
Index  (WOMAC)  
Subject reported rating of pain, stiffness and function validated for 
knee Osteoarthritis . 
 
Exit Assessment  
At the conclusion of the trial , each subject will be asked to 
complete an exit assessment form which solicits the subject’s 
feedback on their use of the device, and satisfaction with therapy.  
 
4.4.2  Procedures to Assess Safety  
Adverse events will be recorded at each study visit.  
 
4.5 Use of N on-Study Drugs and Procedures  
Not Applicable. Not Allowed.  
Version 1 - July 2019  
 9 4.6 Schedule of Assessments  
 
 
1 - Visit window: ±[ADDRESS_761934] -
treatment each treatment day throughout the  study, and WOMAC (pain, 
stiffness, and functional change)  will be evaluated on day [ADDRESS_761935] medical occurrence in a clinical study of an 
investigational device; regardless of the causal relationship of the 
problem with the device or, if applicable, other study treatment or 
diagnostic product(s).  
 
Associated with the investigational device or, if applicable, other study 
treatment or diagnostic product(s) .  There is a reasonable possibility that 
the adverse effect may have been caused by [CONTACT_437162], if applicable, the other study treatment or diagnostic product(s).  
 
Disability .  A substantial disruption of a person’s ability to conduct normal 
life functions.  
 
Life-threatening adverse effect .  Any adverse effect that places the 
subject, in the view of the investigator -sponsor, at immediate risk of death 
from the effect as it occurred  (i.e., does not include an adverse effect that, 
had it actually occurred in a mor e severe form, might have caused death).  
Visit Number V1 V1 V2
Visit Type ScreeningStart 
TreatmentEnd of 
Treatment
/Early 
Terminati
on (3)
Visit Day (1) 0 0 7
Inclusion/Exclusion 
Criteriax
Informed Consent x
Medical history x
Treatment history x
Device Assignment Form x
Physical Examination x
Confirm baseline pain >[ADDRESS_761936] and put 
on and take off devicex
WOMAC Scale x x
Adverse Events x x
Protocol Deviations x
Distribute Daily Diary x
Review/Collect Daily Diary x
Assess Compliance (2) x
Distribute sam Device 
with patchesx
Distribute Patches x
Issue Subject 
Compensation and Signed 
Receiptx
Collect sam Device and 
Unused Patchesx
Exit Assessment 
Questionnaire x
Version [ADDRESS_761937] that results in any of the 
following outcomes: death, a life -threatening adverse effect, inpatient 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081], a persisten t or 
significant disability/incapacity, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
 
 
Unexpected adverse effect.   Any adverse effect, the frequency, specificity 
or severity of which is not consistent with the risk information described in 
the clinical study prot ocol(s)  
 
Unanticipated adverse device effect.   Any serious adverse effect on 
health or safety or any life -threatening problem or death caused by, or 
associated with, a device, if that effect, problem, or death was not 
previously identified in nature, seve rity, or degree of incidence in the 
investigational plan or IDE application (including a supplementary plan or 
application), or any other unanticipated serious problem associated with a 
device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects.  
 
6.1.[ADDRESS_761938] Information  
Clinical study subjects will be routinely questioned about adverse 
effects at study visits.  
 
6.1.3  Recording and Assessment of Adverse Effects  
All observed or volunteered adverse effects (serious or non -
serious) and abnormal test findings, regardless of treatment 
group, if applicable, or suspected causal relationship to the 
investigational device or, if applicable, other study treatment or 
diagno stic product(s) will be recorded in the subjects’ case 
histories.  For all adverse effects, sufficient information will be 
pursued and/or obtained so as to permit 1) an adequate 
determination of the outcome of the effect (i.e., whether the effect 
should be  classified as a serious adverse effect) and; 2) an 
assessment of the casual relationship between the adverse effect 
and the investigational device or, if applicable, the other study 
treatment or diagnostic product(s).    
 
Adverse effects or abnormal test findings felt to be associated with 
the investigational device or, if applicable, other study treatment or 
diagnostic product(s) will be followed until the effect (or its 
sequelae) or the abnormal test finding resolves or stabilizes at a 
level acceptable t o the investigator -sponsor.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Causality and Severity Assessmen t 
The investigator -sponsor will promptly review documented 
adverse effects and abnormal test findings to determine 1) 
if the abnormal test finding should be classified as an 
adverse effect; 2) if  there is a reasonable possibility that 
the adverse effect was caused by [CONTACT_437163], if applicable, other study treatment or diagnostic 
Version [ADDRESS_761939](s); and 3) if the adverse effect meets the criteria 
for a serious adverse effect.  
 
If the inv estigator -sponsor’s final determination of causality 
is “unknown and of questionable relationship to the 
investigational device or, if applicable, other study 
treatment or diagnostic product(s)”, the adverse effect will 
be classified as associated with the  use of the 
investigational device or study treatment or diagnostic drug 
product(s) for reporting purposes.  If the investigator -
sponsor’s final determination of causality is “unknown but 
not related to the investigational device or, if applicable, 
other s tudy treatment or diagnostic product(s)”, this 
determination and the rationale for the determination will 
be documented in the respective subject’s case history.  
6.1.4  Reporting  of Adverse E ffects to the FDA   
The investigator -sponsor will submit a completed Form  FDA 3500 
A to the FDA’s Center for Devices and Radiological Health for any 
observed or volunteered adverse effect that is determined to be 
an unanticipated adverse device effect.  A copy of this completed 
form will be provided to all participating sub -investigators.   
 
The completed Form FDA [ADDRESS_761940].  
 
If the results of the sponsor -investigator’s follow -up evaluation 
show that an adverse effect that was initially determined to not 
constitute an unanticipated adverse device effect  does, in  fact, 
meet the requirements for reporting; the investigator -sponsor will 
submit a completed Form  FDA [ADDRESS_761941] in light of the 
previous, similar report(s).  
 
Subsequent to the initial submission of a completed Form  FDA 
[ADDRESS_761942] (IRB), the investigator -sponsor will report, to the IRB, any 
observed or volunteered adverse effect that is determined to meet 
all of the following criteria: 1) associated with the in vestigational 
device or, if applicable, other study treatment or diagnostic 
Version [ADDRESS_761943](s); 2) a serious adverse effect; and 3) an unexpected 
adverse effect.  Adverse event reports will be submitted to the IRB 
in accordance with the respective IRB procedures.  
 
Applicable adverse effects will be reported to the IRB as soon as 
possible and, in no event, later than 10 calendar days following 
the investigator -sponsor’s receipt of the respective information.  
Adverse effects which are 1) associated with the investi gational 
drug or, if applicable, other study treatment or diagnostic 
product(s); 2) fatal or life -threatening; and 3) unexpected will be 
reported to the IRB within 24 hours of the investigator -sponsor’s 
receipt of the respective information.  
 
Follow -up in formation to reported adverse effects will be submitted 
to the IRB as soon as the relevant information is available.  If the 
results of the sponsor -investigator’s follow -up investigation show 
that an adverse effect that was initially determined to not requ ire 
reporting to the IRB does, in fact, meet the requirements for 
reporting; the investigator -sponsor will report the adverse effect to 
the IRB as soon as possible, but in no event later than 10 
calendar days, after the determination was made.  
 
7.0 Monitoring Procedures  
Monitoring of the clinical study for clinical protocol compliance will be conducted 
periodically (i.e., at a minimum of annually) by  [CONTACT_6098] . The sponsor -
investigator will permit direct access to the study monitors and appropriate regulatory 
authorities to the study data and to the corresponding source data and documents to 
verify the accuracy of these data.  
 
8.[ADDRESS_761944] -keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  
A Case Report Form (will be completed  at each s tudy visit  for each subject 
enrolled into the clinical study.  The investigator -sponsor will review, 
approve and sign/date each completed CRF; the investigator -sponsor’s 
signature [CONTACT_57322] -sponsor’s responsibility 
for ensu ring that all clinical and laboratory data entered on the CRF are 
complete, accurate and authentic.   
 
The clinical research team will work with each site to ensure accurate 
completion of CRFs reconciling illegible entries, missing data, and 
conflicting da ta entries.  
 
Source Data  are the clinical findings and observations, laboratory and test 
data, and other information contained in Source Documents .  Source 
Documents are the original records (and certified copi[INVESTIGATOR_230285]); including, but not limited to, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_38109], physician or 
office charts, physician or nursing notes, subject diaries or evaluation 
Version [ADDRESS_761945] Maintenance and Retention  
The investigator -sponsor will maintain records in accor dance with Good 
Clinical Practice guidelines; to include:  
 
• IRB correspondence (including approval notifications) related to the 
clinical protocol; including copi[INVESTIGATOR_437156];  
• Current and past versions of the IRB -approved clinical protocol and 
corresponding IRB -approved consent form(s) and, if applicable, subject 
recruitment advertisements.  
• Signed Investigator’s Agreements and Certifications of Financial Interests 
of Clinical Investigators;  
• Curriculum vitae (investigator -sponsor and clinical protocol sub -
investigators);  
• Certificates of required training (e.g., human subject protections, Good 
Clinical Practice, etc.) for investigator -sponsor and listed sub -
investigators;  
• Instructions for on -site preparation and handling of the investigational 
device and/or study treatment o r diagnostic product(s), and other study -
related materials (i.e., if not addressed in the clinical protocol);  
• Decoding procedures for blinded trials;  
• Master device list; 
• Signed informed consent forms;  
• Completed Case Report Forms; signed and dated by [CONTACT_53953] -
sponsor;  
• Source Documents or certified copi[INVESTIGATOR_68872];  
• Monitoring visit reports;  
• Copi[INVESTIGATOR_427805] -sponsor correspondence to sub -investigators, 
including notifications of adverse effect information;  
• Subject screening and enrollment logs;  
• Subject identification code list;  
• Device  accountability records, including documentation of device disposal  
and returns to sponsor ; 
• Final clinical study report.  
 
Site-subject identification numbers will be assigned to all subjects to de -
identify the associated clinical data. A master subject ID log will be 
maintained by [CONTACT_579737]. The 
master log will contain the assigned site -subject identification number 
matched to each subject’s full name, gender, and d ate-of-birth.  The site -
subject ID will be generated by a two -digit site ID separated by a dash from 
the subject number at that site. Subjects’ names or other directly identifiable 
information will not be used in any reports, publication or other disclosure s 
of clinical study outcomes.  
Version 1 - July 2019  
 14  
The investigator -sponsor will retain the specified records and reports for up 
to 2 years after the marketing application is approved for the investigational 
device; or, if a marketing application is not submitted or approved for the 
investigational drug, until [ADDRESS_761946] 
been discontinued and the FDA so notified.  
9.0 References  
 
Therapeutic ultrasound for osteoarthritis , Cochrane Review, 20 January 2010. 
http://www.cochrane.org/CD003132/MUSKEL_therapeutic -ultrasound -for-osteoarthritis   
Version 1 - July 2019  
 15  