 
 
A Phase 2 Study of Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment with Cisplatin, 
Methotrexate and Gemcitabine  in Patients with Unresectable Pleural 
Mesothelioma  
NCT02 [ZIP_CODE] 37 
 
Version 7 
March 27, 2018  
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
1 
  
 
 
 
 
A
 Phase 2 Study of Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment with Cisplatin, 
Methotrexate and Gemcitabine in Patients with Unresectable Pleural 
Mesothelioma 
 
 
 
Sponsor:       H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute 
         [ZIP_CODE] Magnolia Dri ve 
         Tampa, FL [ZIP_CODE] 
 
 
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_337882], MD, PhD 
         H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute 
         [ADDRESS_417526]  
Tampa, FL [ZIP_CODE] 
Telephone: (813) 745- 8425 
Fax: (813) 813- 449-8729  
e-mail address: [EMAIL_6551] 
 
Agents:   Cisplatin, Methotrexate , Gemcitabine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                          Protocol Version 7:  March 27, 2018 
 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
2 
 S
TUDY SYNOPSIS 
 
Title of Study: A Phase 2 Study of Transarterial Chemoper fusion Treatment with Cisplatin, 
Methotrexate and Gemcitabine in Patients with Unresectable Pleural Mesothelioma.  
Sponsor: H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center  and Research Institute  
Primary Investigator:  Bela Kis, MD, PhD  
Phase of Development: Phase 2  Study Du ration: 3 years  
Primary  Objective : To determine the disease control  rate of transarterial chemoperfusion 
treatment with cisplatin, methotrexate and gemcitabine in patients with unresectable malignant 
pleural mesothelioma  (MPM) . 
Secondary Objectives:  To assess overall survival, progression free survival, severity and 
frequency of adverse events and quality of life in patients with MPM  treated with transarterial 
chemoperfusion with cisplatin, methotrexate and gemcitabine.  
Rationale: MPM has an extremely po or prognosis with median survival time of less than 12 
months. Surgical resection for stage I and stage II MPM is the only curative option. However, the 
majority of patients present with stage III or IV disease with 85 -90% of patients considered 
unresectab le at diagnosis. The largely ineffective current treatment approaches to offer long -
term survival and to improve quality of life warrant the search for new therapeutic regimens.  
Study Design: This is an open -label, single arm, phase 2 study with a lead in  safety cohort  to 
evaluate the safety and efficacy of transarterial chemoperfusion treatment with cisplatin  (35 
mg/m2), methotrexate  (100 mg/m2) and gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2) in patients with unresectable 
MPM . During the lead in phase of the study 3 patient s will be treated with 50% reduced dose of 
methotrexate (50 mg/m2) and regular doses of cisplatin (35 mg/m2 BSA) and gemcitabine (1000 
mg/m2 BSA). Dose escalation will be contingent upon acceptable safety data obtained during 
the first three cycles of trea tment (12 weeks). If no dose limiting toxicity observed , dose is 
escalated to methotrexate ( 100 mg/m2) with cisplatin (35 mg/m2 BSA) and gemcitabine (1000 
mg/m2 BSA) . The reduced dose level safety cohort will be expanded from [ADDRESS_417527] of the patients enrolled in that  cohort developed dose limiting 
toxicity, advancement to the regular dose level cohort can begin.  If > 2 patients in the safety 
cohort experience dose limiting toxicity the methotrexate dose will be reduced to 25 mg/m2 and 
this will be used further in the study.  
During the chemoperfusion procedure b ased on the pre -procedural imaging and the 
angiography findings  the chemoperfusion catheter will be placed within a tumor supplying 
intercostal artery or within the descending aorta slightly proximal to origin of  the most cephalad 
tumor supplying intercostal artery, but below the origin of the left subclavian artery if multiple 
intercostal vessels are supplying the tumor. For tumors located predominantly anteriorly in the 
chest the infusion catheter will be placed  into the ipsilateral internal mammary artery. For tumors 
supplied by [CONTACT_337906].  Chemoperfusion treatment will be administered in every 4 weeks until the patient’s 
death unless the treatment is terminated earlier due to treatment toxicity or other reasons.  
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
3 
 Number of Subjects (planned):  32 
Major Inclusion Criteria:  
 Histologically con firmed unresectable MPM . 
 Failed first line standard of care chemotherapy  or the patient refuses first line 
chemotherapy . 
 Age >18 years . 
 Estimated life expectancy > 12 weeks.  
 ECOG performance status <2. 
 Adequate organ functions.  
 Signed informed consent.  
Major Exclusion Criteria:  
 Allergic reaction to agent used during the study.  
 Known brain metastases or leptomeningeal metastases.  
 Uncontrolled severe intercurrent illness.  
 Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding.  
 Unable to obtain  informed consent.  
Criteria f or Evaluation:  
Efficacy Outcome Measures  
Primary: Disease control  rate measured by [CONTACT_337907].  
Secondary: Overall survival defined as the time from the first day of transarterial 
chemoperfusion treatment to death. Progression free sur vival defined as the time from the first 
day of transarterial chemoperfusion treatment to disease progression based on imaging 
findings using modified RECIST criteria for mesothelioma.  
Safety Outcome Measures  
Safety will be assessed by [CONTACT_337908] e vents and serious adverse events; the 
association with study treatment will be assessed, and severity wil l be graded using CTCAE 
v.4.03.  
Quality of Life M easures  
Quality of life will be assessed using the modified version of the Lung Cancer Symptom Scale 
for Mesothelioma questionnaire.  
Statistical Methods: This is an open -label, single arm, phase 2 study to evaluate the safety and 
efficacy of transarterial chemoperfusion treatment in patients with unresectable MPM. The 
statistical power calculations are ba sed on the Simon’s two -stage design. The one -sided and 
two-sided 95% confidence intervals by [CONTACT_337909], which accounts for 
the nature of two -stage design. The secondary endpoints include overall survival and 
progression free survi val which are estimated by [CONTACT_8761] -Meier method. For all subjects, 
descriptive statistics (median, range for continuous variables and frequency and proportion for 
categorical variables) will be utilized to summarize patients’ demographic and clinical va riables.  
 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
[ADDRESS_417528]/Independent Ethics Committee ........................................ [ADDRESS_417529] KEEPI[INVESTIGATOR_1645]  ................................................................  47 
 
11. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  .......................................................................................  47 
11.1 Study Design and Sample Size Justification ..............................................................  47 
11.2 Accrual Rate ................................................................................................................ 48 
11.3 Stratification Factors ................................................................................................... 48 
11.4 Analysis of Primary and Secondary Endpoints ...........................................................  48 
 
12. REFERENCES ........................................................................................................................  49 
 
APPENDIX A  
Performance Status Criteria .................................................................................................... 52  
 
APPENDIX B  
Cockcroft - Gault Formula ..................................................................................................... 523 
 
APPENDIX C  
Guidance on Contraception .................................................................................................... 54 
 
APPENDIX D  
Quality of Life Questionnaire ................................................................................................... 56 
 
APPENDIX E  
Cisplatin Pharmacologic Information (Package Insert) .........................................................  E-1 
 
APPENDIX F  
Methotrexate Pharmacologic Information (Package Insert) .................................................. F-1 
 
APPENDIX G  
Gemcitabine Pharmacologic Information (Package Insert) .................................................. G-[ADDRESS_417530] 
criteria for mesothelioma [1]. 
 
 
1.2  Secondary Objectives 
 
1.2.1 Overall Survival 
To assess overall survival (OS) in patients with malignant pleural 
mesothelioma treated with transarterial chemoperfusion. 
 
1.2.2 Progression Free Survival 
To assess progression free survival (PFS), defined as the time from the first 
day of cisplatin, methotrexate and gemcitabine transarterial chemoperfusion 
treatment to disease progression (either pleural or extrapleural), based on 
imaging findings using modified RECIST criteria for mesothelioma [1] or death 
from any cause. 
 
1.2.3 Safety and Tolerability 
To determine the severity and frequency of adverse events related to 
transarterial chemoperfusion with cisplatin, methotrexate and gemcitabine 
during the chemoperfusion phase and follow-up phase of the study. 
 
1.2.4 Quality of Life 
To assess quality of life in patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma 
treated with transarterial chemoperfusion. 
 
 
2. BACKGROUND  
 
2.1  Malignant Pleural M esothelioma 
 
Malignant mesothelioma is a rare form of cancer that develops from cells of the 
mesothelium, the lining of the coelomic cavities of the body: the pleura, the 
peritoneum, the pericardium, and the tunica vaginalis testis . Mesothelioma is 
classified into three broad histological subtypes: epi[INVESTIGATOR_337883], sarcomatoid and mixed , 
comprising approximately 50% to 70%, 10% to 20%, and 20% to 40% percent of 
malignant mesothelioma, respectively. Patients with the sarcomatoid and mixed 
subtypes have worse prognosis compared to the epi[INVESTIGATOR_337884] [2]. 
 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
7 
 M
esothelioma is associated with asbestos exposure. It was considered a rare 
disease until 50 years ago, but its incidence dramatically increased due to the 
widespread use of asbestos in the early to mid-twentieth century. Since the median 
latency between asbestos exposure and disease onset is 44.6 years, and increases 
over time in a linear fashion, incidence rates are still rising, with peak incidences 
expected around 2020 and beyond [3]. Due to the long latency of the onset of 
disease after exposure to asbestos, mesothelioma typi[INVESTIGATOR_337885] [4]. 
 
Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is the most common form of mesothelioma 
(67% to 75%) followed by [CONTACT_337910] (25% to 33%) [4] . In the US there 
are approximately 2400 new MPM cases per year [5]. The clinical presentation of 
MPM at the time of diagnosis is shortness of breath and chest pain in 60% of patients 
[6]. MPM progresses with local invasion of the thoracic wall including the intercostal 
nervous structures causes chest pain and the development of chest wall lumps. 
Loco-regional progression of the tumor results in pneumonia, superior vena cava 
syndrome, Pancoast or Horner’s syndrome, dysphagia, pericardial tamponade, and 
arrhythmias. In most patients, death occurs as a result of loco-regional progression 
within the thoracic cavity. Constitutional symptoms (eg, fatigue and weight loss) and 
lymphatic and hematogenous dissemination occurs late in the disease [7]. 
 
Patients with unresectable MPM carry a poor prognosis. The treatment options for 
unresectable stage III and stage IV MPM are radiation therapy and chemotherapy, 
but survivals are usually less than a year [6]. These very poor survival statistics 
necessitates a search for new, more effective therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. 
 
 
2.2  Rationale 
 
MPM has an extremely poor prognosis with median survival time of less than 12 
months [6]. Surgical resection for stage I and stage II MPM is the only curative option. 
However, the majority of patients present with stage III or IV disease with 85-90% of 
patients considered unresectable at diagnosis. The largely ineffective current 
treatment approaches to offer long-term survival and to improve quality of life warrant 
the search for new therapeutic regimens. 
 
Isolated lung perfusion, which permits a selective delivery of high-dose 
chemotherapeutic agents to the tumor, has shown promising results in the treatment 
of lung metastasis in experimental models [8] . These studies have demonstrated the 
superiority of isolated lung perfusion to systemic chemotherapy in terms of 
effectiveness, but despi[INVESTIGATOR_166821], isolated lung perfusion has not been and 
likely won’t be adopted as a routine clinical treatment because it is a very complex 
procedure requiring thoracotomy for cannulation of the pulmonary arteries and veins, 
which is a high morbidity and mortality surgery with a very high associated cost. 
 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
8 
 T
ransarterial chemoperfusion of the liver in patients with uveal melanoma metastases 
demonstrated prolonged survival [9]. Transarterial chemoperfusion through direct 
injection of drugs into the aorta has been described as a treatment option for 
advanced pelvic tumors [10]. 
 
Vogl et al. recently demonstrated that transarterial chemoperfusion in patients with 
unresectable MPM significantly improve survival [11]. In contrast to isolated lung 
perfusion, transarterial chemoperfusion of the lung and pleural cavity can be easily 
and repeatedly performed percutaneously and it is well tolerated by [CONTACT_13935].  
 
Vogl et al [11] administered mitomycin C with cisplatin, and gemcitabine 
transarterially to patients with unresectable MPM. The reason why this drug 
combination was chosen is not explained in their paper. We are proposing 
transarterial chemoperfusion with cisplatin, metothrexate and gemcitabine in patients 
with unresectable MPM . This drug combination is different than what was used by 
[CONTACT_337911]. who used mitomycin C with cisplatin, and gemcitabine. We are proposing 
to use methotrexate instead of mitomycin C because mitomycin C and cisplatin has 
the same mechanism of action, both are DNA crosslinker agent, and we think that 
using chemotherapeutic drugs with different mechanism of action may lead to 
improved clinical response . In addition, folate antimetabolites like methotrexate and 
pemetrexed are regarded as the most active class of cytotoxic drugs against MPM 
[12-14]. In our proposed drug combination each drug acts on different steps of the 
mitotic cycle of cells as cisplatin is a DNA crosslinker, methothrexate is a folate 
antimetabolite and gemcitabine is a nucleoside analogue. 
 
These drugs were proven to be effective in patients with MPM and have established 
safety profiles with intraarterial administration. One could argue to use pemetrexed 
instead of methothrexate since recent reviews [12; 14] showed that the combination 
of pemetrexed with cisplatin achieves the best overall survival and quality of life in 
patients with MPM. However, there is no established safety profile of pemetrexed for 
intraarterial administration. 
 
This proposed transarterial chemoperfusion treatment protocol offers a novel 
approach to treat patients with unresectable MPM. 
 
 
3. PATIENT SELECTION  
 
3.[ADDRESS_417531] histologically or cytologically confirmed malignant pleural 
mesothelioma (MPM). 
 
3.1.[ADDRESS_417532] treatment. 
 
3.1.6 The predominant burden of disease lies in an arterial distribution which is 
accessible for transarterial chemoperfusion treatment.  
 
3.1.7 Men and women >18 years of age . 
 
3.1.8 ECOG performance status <2 (Karnofsky >60%; see Appendix A). 
 
3.1.[ADDRESS_417533] meet the 
following criteria: 
 
- leukocytes      >3,000/ L 
 
- absolute neutrophil count  >1,500/ L 
 
- platelets      >100,000/ L 
 
- prothrombin time    < 1.5 x upper limit of normal (ULN); 
 
- partial thromboplastin ti me < 1.[ADDRESS_417534]; 
 
- total bilirubin     < 1.[ADDRESS_417535]; except subjects with Gilbert 
syndrome who can have total bilirubin < 3.0 
mg/dL) 
 
- aspartate amino transferase <2.[ADDRESS_417536] 
 
- alanine amino transferase <2.[ADDRESS_417537] 
 
- alkaline phosphatase   <2.[ADDRESS_417538] 
 
- creatinine      within normal institutional limits 
OR 
- creatinine clearance   ≥50 mL/min based on the standard 
Cockcroft and Gault formula [15]. 
 
 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
[ADDRESS_417539] agree to use adequate 
contraception (See Appendix C) prior to study entry and for the duration of 
study participation and after for a certain amount of time (as defined below) 
becau se the therapeutic agents used in this trial and the x-ray used during the 
transarterial treatment and diagnostic imaging are known to be teratogenic. 
 
 The individual methods of contraception and duration should be determined 
in consultation with the investigator. The duration of mandatory contraception 
is based on clearance of the investigational drug (5 half-lives after treatment 
completion). For women, an additional 30 days is required to complete an 
ovulatory cycle. Calculation of duration of mandatory contraception: The half-
life of cisplatin is 20-30 minutes (Appendix E), half-life of metothrexate is 8- 15 
hours (Appendix F ) and half-life of gemcitabine is 42-94 minutes (Appendix 
G). Thus, contraception is required for up to [ADDRESS_417540] agree to use 
adequate contraception (See Appendix C) prior to study entry and for the 
duration of study participation and after for a certain amount of time (as 
defined below) because the therapeutic agents used in this trial and the x-ray 
used during the transarterial treatment and diagnostic imaging are known to 
be teratogenic. The investigator shall review contraception methods and the 
time period that contraception must be followed. The duration of mandatory 
contraception is based on clearance of the investigational drug (5 half-lives 
after treatment completion). For males, an additional 90 days is required to 
complete turnover of drug-exposed sperm. Calculation of duration of 
mandatory contraception: The half-life of cisplatin is 20-30 minutes (Appendix 
E), half-life of metothrexate is 8-15 hours (Appendix F) and half-life of 
gemcitabine is 42-94 minutes (Appendix G ). Thus, contraception for men is 
required for up to [ADDRESS_417541] be willing and able to comply with scheduled visits, treatment 
schedule, laboratory tests, imaging studies, and other requirements of the 
study. 
 
3.1.15 This study permits the re-enrollment of a patient who has discontinued the 
study for a reason other than treatment failure or adverse event(s) of the 
study treatment. The patient must be re-consented and assigned a new 
subject number. 
 
 
3.[ADDRESS_417542] Grade 1 toxicity if there was no baseline toxicity or less than or equal to 
the patient’s baseline value. 
 
3.2.[ADDRESS_417543] agent. 
 
3.2.5 Uncontrolled intercurrent illness including, but not limited to, presence of other 
malignancy , ongoing or active infection, symptomatic congestive heart failure, 
unstable angina pectoris, cardiac arrhythmia, or psychiatric illness/social 
situations that would limit compliance with study requirements. 
 
  
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
12 
 3
.2.6 Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding are excluded from the study 
because methotrexate and cisplatin are FDA pregnancy category D agents 
with positive evidence of human fetal risk based on adverse reaction data 
from investigational or marketing experience or studies in humans. 
 
3.2.7 HIV- positive patients receiving combination anti-retroviral therapy are 
excluded from the study because of possible pharmacokinetic interactions 
with cisplatin, methotrexate and gemcitabine during the study.  
 
3.2.8 Prisoners or subjects who are involuntarily incarcerated. 
  
3.2.9 Subjects who are compulsorily detained for treatment of either a psychiatric or 
physical (eg, infectious disease) illness. 
 
 
3.[ADDRESS_417544] sign an informed consent prior to 
registration indicating awareness of the investigation nature of the study and its 
inherent risks in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_337886] (Code of Federal Regulations Part 1X, Subpart B, Sections 50.20-50.27). 
The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_337887] a 
patient. 
 
 
4. TREATMENT PLAN  
 
4.1  Method of Assignment to Treatment 
 
  This is an open-label, single arm, phase 2 study. Patients with unresectable MPM 
who meet all criteria for enrollment will be offered to participate in the study. The 
eligible patients can voluntarily enroll in the study after reviewing the consent form 
and after detailed discussion of the procedural protocol and potential risks and 
benefits of this experimental treatment with the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_83012]-
investigator. 
 
4.2  Study Design 
 
This is an open -label, single arm, phase 2 study with a lead in safety cohort to 
evaluate the safety and efficacy of transarterial chemoperfusion treatment with 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
13 
 c
isplatin, metothrexate and gemcitabine in patients with unresectable MPM. The 
patients receive 15 mg leucovorine po in every 12 hrs for a total of 4 doses starting 
24 hrs after each chemoperfusion procedure. Chemoperfusion treatment will be 
administered in every 4 weeks. The treatment will be continued until the patient’s 
death unless the treatment is terminated earli er due to reasons described in Section 
4.12.1 Removal of Patients From Study  and in Section 4.12.2 Premature Study 
Termination. 
 
  The study will be divided into the following phases: 
    - Screening Phase 
    - Treatment Phase 
    - Follow-up Phase 
 
4.2.[ADDRESS_417545] occur within 4 weeks of the chemoperfusion 
treatment for determination of a patient’s overall eligibility. These 
assessments will include medical history, ECOG performance status, physical 
exam, full hematology and biochemistry laboratory, radiologic assessments of 
disease status, and an evaluation of vasculature compatibility for 
chemoperfusion. 
 
4.2.2 Treatment Phase 
  Patients undergo angiogram and transarterial chemoperfusion treatment in 
every 4 weeks (3-6 weeks interval allowed) when cisplatin, methotrexate and 
gemcitabine will be administered into the thoracic aorta and/or the internal 
mammary artery on the side of the disease. 
 
4.2.3 Follow-up Phase 
  Follow-up assessments will be performed at 4 weeks (3-6 weeks interval 
allowed) after each chemoperfusion treatment. Follow-up assessments must 
occur before the next chemoperfusion is performed. These assessments will 
include medical history, ECOG performance status, full hematology and 
biochemistry laboratory, radiologic assessments of disease status, and 
physical exam with special attention to the arterial access site. Other 
symptoms (severity and duration) such as dyspnea, chest pain, persistent 
cough, etc. will be monitored by [CONTACT_2329] a questionnaire (see Appendix D). The 
questionnaire should be completed and returned to the principal investigator 
[INVESTIGATOR_337888]. 
 
 
4.3   Rationale for Study Design 
 
Transarterial chemoperfusion with mitomycin C, cisplatin and gemcitabine has b een 
shown by [CONTACT_337911]. to significantly improve survival in patients with unresectable 
MPM [11]. We propose transarterial chemoperfusion with cisplatin, methotrexate and 
gemcitabine as a novel treatment option for patients with unresectable MPM. In our 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
[ADDRESS_417546] MPM [12- 14] . Therefore, in our proposed drug 
combination each drug acts on different steps of the mitotic cycle as cisplatin is a 
DNA crosslinker, methotrexate is a folate antimetabolite and gemcitabine is a 
nucleoside analog e. 
 
4.3.1 Rationale for a Lead in Safety Cohort 
  Although, there are data in the literature regarding the safety of intraarterial 
administration of cisplatin, methotrexate and gemcitabine (for details refer to 
section 4.3.2) there is no safety data regarding the intraarterial administration 
of cisplatin, methotrexate and gemcitabine in combination. Vogl et al. [11] 
used the combination of cisplatin (35 mg/m2 BSA), mitomycin C (8 mg/m2 
BSA) and gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2 BSA) in patients with MPM injected 
intraarterially and demonstrated very favorable safety and tolerability profile. 
We are proposing to replace mitomycin with methotrexate and use the same 
concentrations for cisplatin (35 mg/m2 BSA) and gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2 
BSA) as Vogl et al. did [11]. The new drug in our proposed combination is 
methothrexate. Therefore, in our lead in safety cohort we propose to use a 
50% reduced dose of methotrexate (50 mg/m2) with cisplatin (35 mg/m2 
BSA) and gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2 BSA) in [ADDRESS_417547] three 
cycles of treatment (12 weeks). If no dose limiting toxicity observed, dose is 
escalated to methotrexate (100 mg/m2) with cisplatin (35 mg/m2 BSA) and 
gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2 BSA). The reduced dose level safety cohort will be 
expanded from [ADDRESS_417548] of the patients enrolled in that cohort 
developed dose limiting toxicity, advancement to the regular dose level cohort 
can begin. I f > 2 patients in the safety cohort experience dose limiting toxici ty 
the methotrexate dose will be reduced to 25 mg/m2 and this will be used in 
the study. 
 
4.3.2 Rationale for Phase 2 Study 
 Cisplatin, methotrexate and gemcitabine are commercially available 
chemotherapeutic agents with long history of clinical use and well established 
safety profiles. Although, cisplatin plus methotrexate plus gemcitabine drug 
combination has not been administered during the same treatment cycle in 
MPM, these drugs were used in sequential chemotherapy protocol in MPM 
when patients were treated with cisplatin ( 75 mg/m2) and gemcitabine (1,200 
mg/m2) for four courses followed by [CONTACT_337912] ( 10 mg/m2), methotrexate 
(35 mg/m2) and mitomycin (7 mg/m2) for four courses and mild toxicity was 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
15 
 r
eported [25] . The combination of gemcitabine (usual dose around 100 0 
mg/m2) with cisplatin (usual dose around 100 mg/m2) was standard of care in 
the US for treatment of MPM before FDA approval of the use of pemetrexed-
cisplatin combination in 2003 [26]. No unacceptable toxicity was reported in 
studies using cisplatin with gemcitabine in patients with MPM [27]. 
Combination of methotrexate (100 mg/m2) and gemcitabine (800 mg/m2) has 
recently been used to treat MPM and acceptable rate of hematologic toxicity 
was reported and non ‑hematologic toxicity was mild [16]. Combination of 
gemcitabine with cisplatin and methotrexate with cisplatine are also widely 
used in the treatment of muscle invasive bladder cancer with a good safety 
profile [28]. Methotrexate (30 mg/m2) with gemcitabine (800 mg/m2) are used 
in patients with relapsing head and neck cancer with mild to moderate 
reported toxicity [29]. 
 
 Vogl et al. [11] used the combination of cisplatin with mitomycin and 
gemcitabine for intraarterial chemoperfusion in patients with MPM a nd 
demonstrated very favorable safety and tolerability profile. We are proposing 
to replace mitomycin with methotrexate and use the same concentrations for 
cisplatin (35 mg/m2 BSA) and gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2 BSA) as Vogl et al. 
did [11]. We propose to use methotrexate in a relatively low concentration 
(100 mg/m2 BSA) compared to treatment protocols when methotrexate was 
used at concentration of 1500 mg/m2 BSA to treat MPM [13].  
 
 Intraarterial administration of these drugs is proven to be safe. Vogl et al [11] 
used intraarterial administration of cisplatin (35 mg/m2 BSA) with mitomycin ( 8 
mg/m2 BSA) and gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2 BSA) in patients with MPM and 
demonstrated very favorable safety and tolerability profile . High-dose intra-
arterial cisplatin ( 150 mg/m2 BSA) therapy was used for advanced squamous 
cell carcinoma of the head and neck with acceptable toxicity profile [30]. 
Intraarterial methotrexate (110 mg/m2 BSA) with cisplatin (35 mg/m2 BSA), 
mitomycin C (4.5 mg/m2 BSA), bleomycin (15 mg/m2 BSA), and 5-fluorouracil 
(1200 mg/m2 BSA) was reported to treat penile cancer and grade [ADDRESS_417549] frequent chemotherapy-related toxicity [31]. No toxicity was 
reported in the above mentioned studies which developed due to the 
intraarterial administration route.  
 
 In summary, all the chemotherapeutic agents used in this study have 
established safety profile. 
 
4.3.[ADDRESS_417550] worn off, allowing the patient 
time to recover from the stress of the previous treatment. Efforts will be made 
to treat every patients in 4-week intervals, but the protocol allows treatment 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
16 
 inte
rvals of 3-6 weeks to accommodate treatments for unforeseen 
circumstances which could prevent the planned 4-week treatment interval. 
 
 
 
4.4  Rationale for Cisplatin D osage 
 
The recommended dose of cisplatin for transarterial chemoperfusion in this study is 
35 mg/m2 body surface area (BSA). Vogl et al [11] used this concentration of cisplatin 
in their MPM transarterial chemoperfusion study. This is a relatively low concentration 
of cisplatin compared to standard intravenous administration where the 
recommended dose of cisplatin is 75 mg/m2 BSA to treat MPM. The concentration of 
the administered cisplatin solution will be 1 mg/ml as recommended by [CONTACT_13989]. Subjects may receive anti-emetics, e.g., ondansetron, 
dexamethasone, prior to cisplatin infusion per standard of care and investigator’s 
practice. Dose reductions may be required for subjects with hepatic or renal 
impairment or history of hematologic or non-hematologic toxicity to cisplatin.  
 
For complete information on cisplatin dosage and administration, contraindications, 
warnings/precautions, adverse reactions, and drug interactions, please see Appendix 
E. 
 
 
4.5  Rationale for Methotrexate D osage 
 
The recommended dose of methotrexate for transarterial chemoperfusion in this study is 
100 mg/m2 BSA. The anifolates like methotrexate and pemetrexed are regarded as the 
most effective class of cytotoxic drugs against MPM. Earlier publications reported that 
high-dose methotrexate (1500 mg/m2) to be effective in the treatment of MPM, with a 
response rate of 37% [13]. However, high-dose methotrexate was associated with 
severe toxicity. Recent studies showed that 100 mg/m2 BSA dose of methotrexate in 
combination with gemcitabine was effective in treatment of MPM [16]. 
 
The patients receive 15 mg leucovorin po in every 12 hrs for a total of 4 doses 
starting 24 hrs after the chemoperfusion procedure. Methotrexate level measurement 
will be performed if there is suspi[INVESTIGATOR_337889]. In case of 
methotrexate toxicity the patient will be hospi[INVESTIGATOR_337890]. 
 
For complete information on methotrexate dosage and administration, 
contraindications, warnings/precautions, adverse reactions, and drug interactions, 
please see Appendix F. 
 
 
4.6  Rationale for Gemcitabine D osage 
 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
17 
 T
he recommended dose of gemcitabine for transarterial chemoperfusion in this study 
is 1000 mg/m2 BSA. This is a usual therapeutic dose of gemcitabine to treat MPM 
[17]. Vogl et al [11] also used this concentration of gemcitabine in their MPM 
transarterial chemoperfusion study. 
 
For complete information on gemcitabine dosage and administration, 
contraindications, warnings/precautions, adverse reactions, and drug interactions, 
please see Appendix G. 
 
 
4.[ADDRESS_417551] (IRB) and have the opportunity to 
ask the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_337891], and their rights 
and obligations as a trial participant before any protocol related evaluations 
can be performed. An original signed consent form will be retained in the 
patient’s source documentation at the site, and a copy will be provided for the 
patient to take home. 
 
4.7.2 Medical History 
Medical history deemed clinically significant by [CONTACT_337913]. All on-going medical conditions and adverse events 
arising from treatment of those conditions present for ≥ 30 days are 
considered a part of the patient’s medical history and must be recorded at 
baseline. 
 
4.7.3 Physical Examination 
A physical examination will cover the following: 
• Vital signs: heart rate, respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], oxygen saturation by [CONTACT_406], 
blood pressure taken after sitting for 5 minutes, and temperature (T) 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
18 
 • He
ight and weight 
• Head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat 
• Chest 
• Heart 
• Abdomen 
• Extremities 
• Genitourinary system 
• Endocrine and immune systems 
• Skin and appendages 
• Neurological examination (level of consciousness, orientation, sensation , 
and motor function) 
 
4.7.4 Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Status 
ECOG Performance Status will be assessed and the following scores will 
assigned: 
Score 0: Asymptomatic (Fully active, able to carry on all pre-disease activities 
without restriction.) 
Score 1: Symptomatic but completely ambulatory (Restricted in physically 
strenuous activity but ambulatory and able to carry out work of a light or 
sedentary nature. For example, light housework, office work.) 
Score 2: Symptomatic, spends <50% in bed during the day (Ambulatory and 
capable of all self-care but unable to carry out any work activities. Up and 
about more than 50% of waking hours.) 
Score 3: Symptomatic, spends >50% in bed, but not bedbound (Capable of 
only limited self-care, confined to bed or chair 50% or more of waking hours.) 
Score 4: Bedbound (Completely disabled. Cannot carry on any self-care. 
Totally confined to bed or chair). 
 
4.7.5 Allergies and Adverse Reaction 
The patient’s all known allergies and adverse reactions to medications must 
be recorded and added to the patient’s medical record. 
 
4.7.6 Review of Concomitant  Medications 
The patient’s  concurrent medications (medications taken within [ADDRESS_417552] of the study) including prescription and 
over-the-counter medications, herbs, vitamins, minerals, and prophylactic 
vaccines will be reviewed and documented. 
 
4.7.7 Clinical Laboratory 
The following clinical laboratory assessments will be completed: 
• Hematology: white blood cell (WBC) count, platelet count, hematocrit, 
hemoglobin. 
• Chemistry panel: sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, glucose, blood 
urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alkaline 
phosphatase, 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
19 
 total bilirubin, total protein, albumin, calcium, magnesium • Coagulation panel : 
Prothrombin Time (PT), Partial Thromboplastin Time (PTT), International 
Normalized ratio for prothrombin time (INR) 
• Pregnancy test: serum human choriogonadotropin (hCG) level measurement 
will be performed in females of child-bearing potential.  
 
4.7.8 Electrocardiogram or Echocardiogram 
Resting 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) or echocardiogram may be done by 
[CONTACT_337914], physical 
and laboratory findings. 
 
4.7.[ADDRESS_417553] scan (e.g., allergy to iodinated intravenous contrast dye) a 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the chest may be performed. CT with 
FDG-PET scan may be done. 
 
4.7.10 Quality of Life Questionnaire 
Quality of life will be assessed using the modified version of the Lung Cancer 
Symptom Scale for Mesothelioma questionnaire [18] (Appendix D). 
 
 
4.[ADDRESS_417554] visit and deemed clinically significant by [CONTACT_3786]. All on-going medical conditions and adverse events arising from 
treatment of those conditions present for ≥ 30 days are considered a part of 
the patient’s medical history and must be recorded. 
 
4.8.2 Focused P hysical Examination 
The pre-procedure focused physical examination will cover the following: 
• Vital signs: heart rate, respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], oxygen saturation by [CONTACT_406], 
blood pressure taken after sitting for 5 minutes, and temperature (T) 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
20 
 • He
ight and weight 
• Chest 
• Heart 
• Abdomen 
• Extremities (special attention on peripheral pulses on the extermities which 
has been used for arterial access) 
• Neurological examination (level of consciousness, orientation, sensation, 
and motor function) 
 
4.8.3 Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Status 
ECOG Performance Status will be assessed and the scores will assigned as 
described in detail in Section 4.7.4. 
 
4.8.4 Allergies and Adverse Reaction 
The patient’s allergies and adverse reactions will be reviewed and updated 
with any new events in the patient’s medical record. 
 
4.8.5 Review of Concomitant Medications  
The patient’s medication list will be reviewed and updated in the patient’s 
medical record. 
 
4.8.6 Clinical Laboratory 
The following clinical laboratory assessments will be completed within 14 days 
of the procedure: 
• Hematology: white blood count (WBC) count, platelet count, hematocrit, 
hemoglobin. 
• Chemistry panel: sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, glucose, blood 
urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alkaline 
phosphatase, 
total bilirubin, total protein, albumin, calcium, magnesium,  
• Coagulation panel: Prothrombin Time (PT), Partial Thromboplastin Time 
(PTT), International Normalized ratio for prothrombin time (INR) 
• Pregnancy test : urine human choriogonadotropin (hCG) level measurement 
will be performed in females of child-bearing potential. 
 
4.8.[ADDRESS_417555] scan (e.g., allergy to iodinated intravenous contrast dye) a 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be performed. CT with FDG-PET 
scan may be done. 
 
4.8.8 Quality of Life Questionnaire 
Quality of life will be assessed using the modified version of the Lung Cancer 
Symptom Scale for Mesothelioma questionnaire [18] (Appendix D). 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
21 
  
 
 
4
.8.9 Intravenous Access 
Intravenous access will be established either with a new peripheral venous 
stick or accessing the patient’s long term venous access device (e.g. cental 
venous infusion port, PI[INVESTIGATOR_67688], etc.). The venous access is used for 
administration of medications for moderate procedural sedations, intravenous 
fluids or other necessary medications during the chemoperfusion procedure. 
 
4.8.10 Premedication 
The following medications maybe given before the chemoperfusion treatment 
to alleviate the toxicity of the chemotherapeutic agents: 
5% dextrose in 0.45% NaCl solution with 20 mEq KCl and 8 mEq MgSO4 for 
1 hr before and 1 hr after chemoperfusion at 500 mL/hr rate. 
Ondansetron 8 mg IV 30 min before chemoperfusion. 
Fosaprepi[INVESTIGATOR_053] 150 mg IV 30 min before chemoperfusion. 
Dexamethasone 20 mg IV 30 min before chemoperfusion. 
Procholperazine 10 mg IV 30 min before chemoperfusion. 
Mannitol 12.5 grams in 50 mL 0.9% NaCl solution before chemoperfusion. 
 
 
4.[ADDRESS_417556] who is performing the procedure. Vital signs, 
oxygen saturation by [CONTACT_406], and response to verbal commands will 
be monitored and recorded by [CONTACT_337915], MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
22 
 a
nd the recovery period. The sedation flow sheet will be placed in the 
patient’s medical record including the medications and dosages used. 
 
 
4.9.[ADDRESS_417557] sterile 
fashion. Local anesthesia (1% lidocaine) will be used at the puncture site to 
access the common femoral artery or the radial artery. The site and side of 
the arterial access will be determined by [CONTACT_337916] t 
performing the procedure based on the patient’s medical history, vascular 
anatomy, pre-procedural physical exam and the planned infusion site. 
Aortogram and selective angiograms will be performed to localize tumor 
feeding intercostal and/or internal mammary arteries.  
 
Based on the pre-procedural imaging and the angiography findings the 
infusion catheter will be placed for the chemoperfusion within a tumor 
supplying intercostal artery or within the descending aorta slightly proximal to 
origin of the most cephalad tumor supplying intercostal artery , but below the 
origin of the left subclavian artery if multiple intercostal vessels are supplying 
the tumor . For tumors located predominantly anteriorly in the chest the 
infusion catheter will be placed into the ipsilateral internal mammary artery. 
For tumors supplied by [CONTACT_337917]. When 
catheterization of the internal mammary artery is performed, intravenous 
administration of heparin is recommended. The level of anticoagulation will be 
determined by [CONTACT_337918]’s medical condition. 
 
Drugs will be prepared individually for patients by [CONTACT_337919]’ 
recommendations and the drug doses will be calculated based on individual 
BSA of patients (cisplatin 35 mg/m2 BSA, methotrexate 100 mg/m2 BSA and 
gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2 BSA). The chemotherapeutic drugs will delivered 
freshly prepared from the Chemotherapeutic Pharmacy of the Moffitt Cancer 
Center to Interventional Radiology procedure suite in sterile syringes just 
before the start of the procedure. The intact packages will be stored at room 
temperature and protected from light until administration. The drugs will be 
administered in the following sequence: methotrexate followed by [CONTACT_181615], 
then gemcitabine. 
 
After the chemoperfusion the catheters will be removed and will be discarded 
into a selective chemotherapeutic waste container per institutional protocol. 
The arteriotomy sites will be closed by [CONTACT_337920]. 
 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
[ADDRESS_417558] of clinical care and by [CONTACT_337921]. The 
patients receive 15 mg leucovorin po in every 12 hrs for a total of 4 doses starting 24 
hrs after the chemoperfusion procedure. Methotrexate level measurement will be 
performed if there is suspi[INVESTIGATOR_337889]. In case of methotrexate 
toxicity the patient will be hospi[INVESTIGATOR_337892]. 
 
 
4.11 Duration of Therapy 
 
Transarterial chemoperfusion treatment will be administered in every 4 weeks (3-6 
weeks interval allowed) . The treatment will be continued until complete response or 
until the patient’s death unless the treatment is terminated earlier due to reasons 
described below. 
 
 
4.12 Removal of Patients from Study 
 
Patients may be removed from the study at the discretion of the principal investigator 
[INVESTIGATOR_225428]: 
 
 Progression of disease. 
 Patient non-compliance: defined as any deviation from the protocol without prior 
agreement of the principal investigator. 
 Patient’s request to withdraw from the study or refusal of further therapy 
 Unacceptable toxicity. Patients who cannot receive two out of the three individual 
drug component of the chemoperfusion treatment regimen for [ADDRESS_417559] treatment and patients requiring three dose reductions will be 
discontinued from the study (please also see Section 5). 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
24 
  
A patient may be removed from the study for any complication of treatment that 
the investigator feels is life threatening. 
 If patient does not meet eligibility criteria (e.g. patient becomes pregnant) 
 
All subjects who discontinue investigational product should comply with protocol 
specified follow-up procedures as outlined in the study protocol. The only exception 
to this requirement is when a subject withdraws consent for all study procedures 
including post-treatment study follow-up or loses the ability to consent freely (ie, is 
imprisoned or involuntarily incarcerated for the treatment of either a psychiatric or 
physical illness). If study treatment is discontinued prior to the subject’s completion of 
the study, the reason for the discontinuation must be documented in the subject’s 
medical records and entered on the appropriate case report form. 
 
In this study, disease control rate and overall survival are key endpoints of the study. 
Tumor responses initiated by [CONTACT_337922], methotrexate and 
gemcitabine may evolve after treatment discontinuation and the treatment may have 
effect on patient’s survival. Therefore, post treatment study follow-up is of critical 
importance and is essential to preserving subject safety and the integrity of the study. 
Subjects who discontinue study treatment must continue to be followed for collection 
of outcome and/or survival follow-up data as required by [CONTACT_337923]. 
 
 
4.13 Premature Study Termination 
 
The Simon’s two-stage design (see Section 11.1) requires [ADDRESS_417560] stage of the trial. If 4 or less of the patients respond to the 
therapy (CR or PR or SD), the treatment will be stopped. If 5 or more patients 
respond, 14 additional patients (a total of 32 patients per group) will be enrolled. 
 
If conditions arising during the study that indicate that the study should be halted or 
terminated, this action may be taken after appropriate consultation among the clinical 
investigators involved in this study. 
 
Conditions that may warrant termination of the study include, but are not limited to the 
following: 
• The discovery of an unexpected, serious, or unacceptable risk to the subjects 
enrolled in the study. 
• Failure of the investigator to enroll subjects into the study at an acceptable rate. 
• Failure of the investigator to comply with pertinent regulations of appropriate 
regulatory authorities. 
• Submission of knowingly false information from the research facility to the 
appropriate regulatory authority. 
• Insufficient adherence to protocol requirements. 
 
Study termination and follow-up will be performed in compliance with the conditions 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
25 
 s
et forth in the International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) E6,Guideline for 
Good Clinical Practice, Sections 4.12, 4.13, 5.20, and 5.21. 
 
The Principal Investigator, the Protocol Monitoring Committee of Moffitt Cancer 
Center and the IRB have authority to suspend or terminate the study if the study has 
been associated with unexpected problems or serious harm to subjects or the study 
is not conducted in accordance with the IRB or the Moffitt Cancer Center research 
policy and regulatory requirements. 
 
5. Drug Toxicities , Dose Modifications, Dosing Delays  
 
5.1  General Considerations 
 
 Any toxicity observed during the course of the study could be managed by 
[CONTACT_337924]. 
 
 Where several toxicities with different grades or severity occur at the same time, 
the dose modification applied should be the greatest reduction applicable. 
 
 Treatment may be delayed for up to [ADDRESS_417561] be discontinued from the study. 
 
 A patient requiring three dose reductions will be discontinued from the study. Any 
exceptions to discontinuation for a patient who in the judgment of the investigator 
is receiving clinical benefit and would need a further dose reduction must be 
discussed with the co-investigators and the multidisciplinary Mesothelioma 
Treatment Group of the Moffitt Cancer Center. 
 
 Doses omitted during a chemoperfusion treatment will not be made up during the 
next treatment cycles. 
 
 
5.2  Definition of Dose-Limiting Toxicity 
 
This study will utilize the NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events 
(CTCAE) Version 4.03 for Adverse Events (AE) and Serious Adverse Event (SAE) 
reporting. A dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) will be defined as Grade 3 and 4 toxicities 
which occur within 30 days after the chemoperfusion and are considered related to 
the treatment. The exceptions are the followings: 
 Alopecia, vomiting, or diarrhea (unless not controlled by [CONTACT_337925]-emetics 
or anti-diarrheals) 
 Grade 1 or 2 neurotoxicity. The investigator and patient may decide to 
continue the treatment at a reduced dose of cisplatin (25 mg/m2 BSA) and full 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
26 
 d
ose of methotrexate (100 mg/m2 BSA) and gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2 BSA), 
with no delay required, as neurotoxicity may not resolve to baseline values. 
 Grade 3 laboratory AEs that are asymptomatic and return to baseline or 
Grade 1 within 3 days, unless identified specifically as DLT by [CONTACT_1275]. 
 Grade 3 fatigue 
 Grade 3 systemic reactions (such as fever, headache, influenza like 
symptoms, myalgia, malaise, or nausea) that have returned to baseline or 
Grade 1 within 3 days of study inoculation  
 Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_337893]. 
 
Treatment should be delayed until resolution of DLT to at least Grade 1 toxicity if 
there was no baseline toxicity or less than or equal to the patient’s baseline value 
before resuming treatment. 
 
 
5.3  Hematologic al Toxicity 
 
Dose adjustments at the start of a subsequent transarterial chemoperfusion therapy 
will be based on platelet and absolute neutrophil counts (ANC) measured within [ADDRESS_417562] be >1.5 x 109/L and platelet count must 
be >100 x 109/L before any chemoperfusion treatment. Dose delays will occur for up 
to [ADDRESS_417563] be according to the 
dose modification guideline provided in the table below. Hematological toxicities not 
listed in the table, including non-hemolytic anemia do not require dose adjustments. 
 
ANC  
x 109/L  Platelet 
count  
x 109/L Cisplatin  
dose  
(mg/m2 BSA)  Methotrexate  
dose  
(mg/m2 BSA)  Gemcitabine 
dose  
(mg/m2 BSA)  
> 1.0  and > 100  35 100 1000  
0.5 – 1.0 or 50 - 100 35 75 750 
< 0.5  or < 50 delay dose  delay dose  delay dose  
 
 
5.4  Renal Toxicity 
 
Dose adjustments at the start of a subsequent transarterial chemoperfusion therapy 
will be based on creatinine clearance calculated from serum creatinine level which is 
measured within 2 days of the actual treatment. Creatinine clearance will be 
calculated using t he Cockcroft and Gault formula [15] (Appendix B ). The creatinine 
clearance must be >30 ml/min before any chemoperfusion treatment. Dose delays 
will occur for up to [ADDRESS_417564] be 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
27 
 a
ccording to the dose modification guideline provided in the table below. 
 
Creatinine 
clearance  
(ml/min)  Cisplatin  
dose  
(mg/m2 BSA)  Methotrexate  
dose  
(mg/m2 BSA)  Gemcitabine 
dose  
(mg/m2 BSA)  
> 50 35 100 1000  
30 - 50 25 50 750 
< 30 delay dose  delay dose  delay dose  
 
 
5.5  Hepatic Toxicity 
 
Dose adjustments at the start of a subsequent transarterial chemoperfusion therapy 
will be based on bilirubin, aspartate amino transferase (AST), alanine amino 
transferase (ALT) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) levels measured within [ADDRESS_417565] be < 3 x institutional institutional upper limit 
of normal (ULN), AST, ALT and ALP levels must be < [ADDRESS_417566] be according to the dose modification 
guideline provided in the table below. 
 
Bilirubin  
( x ULN)   AST, ALT  
and ALP  
( x ULN)  Cisplatin  
dose  
(mg/m2 BSA)  Methotrexate  
dose  
(mg/m2 BSA)  Gemcita bine 
dose  
(mg/m2 BSA)  
< 2 and < 3 35 100 1000  
2 – 3 or 3 - 5 25 75 750 
> 3 or > [ADDRESS_417567] space compartments (e.g. pericardial effusion, 
pleural effusion or ascites). This results in a prolonged plasma half-life and could 
result in unexpected toxicity. Patients with third space fluid collections require 
especially careful monitoring for toxicity.  
 
Patients with pleural effusion or ascites should undergo drainage of the fluid 
collection immediately before the transarterial chemoperfusion treatment. If the 
thoracentesis and/or paracentesis is not possible due to anatomic or other reason or 
the patient refuses the procedure, those patients will be treated with cisplatin and 
gemcitabine and methotrexate will not be administered during the chemoperfusion 
treatment. Patients with moderate to severe pericardial effusion will be treated with 
cisplatine and gemcitabine and methotrexate will not be administered during the 
chemoperfusion treatment. 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
[ADDRESS_417568] information on dosage and administration, contraindications, 
warnings/precautions, adverse reactions, and drug interactions, see the package 
insert for cisplatin (Appendix E ). 
 
 
6.[ADDRESS_417569] information on dosage and administration, contraindications, 
warnings/precautions, adverse reactions, and drug interactions, see the package 
insert for cisplatin (Appendix F ). 
 
 
6.[ADDRESS_417570] information on dosage and administration, contraindications, 
warnings/precautions, adverse reactions, and drug interactions, see the package 
insert for cisplatin (Appendix G ). 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
29 
 7
. STUDY CALENDAR  
 
Baseline screening evaluations are to be conducted within 4 weeks prior to start of the 
transarterial chemoperfusion therapy. In the event that the patient's condition is deteriorating, 
evaluations should be repeated within 48 hours prior to initiation of the next transarterial 
chemoperfusion. 
 
Transarterial chemoperfusion is performed in every 4 weeks until the patient’s death unless 
the treatment is terminated earlier due to reasons described in Section 4.12. Post-treatment 
follow-up will be performed 4 weeks (3-6 weeks interval allowed) after the chemoperfusion 
treatment. Preferentially, the post-treatment follow-up and the upcoming chemoperfusion 
treatment performed on the same day. 
 
 
a Transarterial chemoperfusion performed in every 4 weeks (3-6 weeks interval allowed) with cisplatin (35 
mg/m2 BSA), methotrexate (100 mg/m2 BSA), and gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2 BSA), as described in 
Section 4.9 unless there is necessary treatment delay and/or dose reduction as described in Section 5. 
Transarterial chemoperfusion treatments will be administered until the patient’s death unless the treatment  Screening Evaluation  
(0-[ADDRESS_417571] 
treatment)  Chemoperfusion  
Treatment  
(every 4 weeks)a Post -treatment follow -up 
([ADDRESS_417572] 
treatment)b Long term follow -up 
(every 2 months)  
Informed consent  X    
Demographics  X    
Medical history  X    
Review of Concomitant 
Medications  X X X  
Vital signs  X X X  
Height  X X X  
Weight  X X X  
Physical exam  X X X  
Performance status (ECOG)  X X X  
Clinical laborato ry testsc X X X  
Serum pregnancy test  X    
Urine pregnancy test   X   
Allergic event evaluation  X X X  
Adverse event evaluation  X X X  
Quality of life questionaire  X X X  
Radiologic  evaluationd X X X  
Trans arterial chemoperfusiona  X   
Survivale    X 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
[ADDRESS_417573] a clinic follow-up in 4 weeks (3-6 weeks interval allowed) .  
 
c Cl
inical laboratory tests include white blood cell count, platelet count, hematocrit, hemoglobin, sodium, 
potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, glucose, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, lactate dehydrogenase 
(LDH), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase, total 
bilirubin, total protein, albumin, calcium, magnesium, Prothrombin Time (PT), Partial Thromboplastin Time 
(PTT), International Normalized ratio for prothrombin time (INR) .  
 
dRadiol
ogic evaluation using modified RECIST criteria performed at baseline during the screening 
evaluation and before each transarterial chemoperfusion treatment as described in Section 8.2. 
 
eOverall survival will be followed every [ADDRESS_417574]  
 
For the purposes of this study, patients are evaluated for response in every 4 weeks (3-6 
weeks interval allowed) before they undergo the next transarterial chemoperfusion 
treatment. The evaluation includes focused medical history, quality of life questionnaire, 
physical exam, imaging study, laboratory tests amongst others. The complete list of studies 
included in the evaluation is detailed in Section 4.[ADDRESS_417575] 1.1 Criteria 
 
The primary objective of this study is to determine the disease control rate of 
transarterial chemoperfusion treatment with cisplatin, metothrexate and gemcitabine 
in patients with unresectable MPM . Tumor response and progression will be 
evaluated in this study using the new international criteria proposed by [CONTACT_39699] (RECIST) guideline (version 1.1) [19]. 
Changes in the largest diameter (unidimensional measurement) of the tumor lesions 
and the shortest diameter in the case of malignant lymph nodes are used in the 
RECIST 1.1 criteria. 
 
8.1.1 Definitions 
Evaluable for Objective Response: Only those patients who have measurable 
disease present at baseline, have received at least one cycle of therapy, and 
have had their disease re-evaluated will be considered evaluable for 
response.  These patients will have their response classified according to the 
definitions stated below.  (Note:  Patients who exhibit objective disease 
progression prior to the end of cycle 1 will also be considered evaluable.) 
 
Evaluable Non-Target Disease Response: Patients who have lesions present 
at baseline that are evaluable but do not meet the definitions of measurable 
disease, have received at least one cycle of therapy, and have had their 
disease re-evaluated will be considered evaluable for non-target disease.  
The response assessment is based on the presence, absence, or 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
31 
 u
nequivocal progression of the lesions. 
 
 
 
8.1.2 Disease Parameters 
Measurable disease: Measurable lesions are defined as those that can be 
accurately measured in at least one dimension (longest diameter to be 
recorded) as >[ADDRESS_417576] x-ray, as >[ADDRESS_417577] scan, or >[ADDRESS_417578] be recorded in 
millimeters (or decimal fractions of centimeters). Tumor lesions that are 
situated in a previously irradiated area are considered measurable in this 
protocol. 
 
Malignant lymph nodes: To be considered pathologically enlarged and 
measurable, a lymph node must be >[ADDRESS_417579] scan (CT scan slice thickness recommended to be no greater than 5 mm). 
At baseline and in follow-up, only the short axis will be measured and 
followed. 
 
Non-measurable disease: All other lesions (or sites of disease), including 
small lesions (longest diameter <10 mm or pathological lymph nodes with ≥ 
10 to <15 mm short axis), are considered non-measurable disease.  Bone 
lesions, leptomeningeal disease, ascites, pleural/pericardial effusions, 
lymphangitis cutis/pulmonitis, inflammatory breast disease, and abdominal 
masses (not followed by [CONTACT_462]), are considered as non-measurable. 
 
Note: Cystic lesions that meet the criteria for radiographically defined simple 
cysts should not be considered as malignant lesions (neither measurable nor 
non-measurable) since they are, by [CONTACT_108], simple cysts. 
 
‘Cystic lesions’ thought to represent cystic metastases can be considered as 
measurable lesions, if they meet the definition of measurability described 
above. However, if non-cystic lesions are present in the same patient, these 
are preferred for selection as target lesions. 
 
Target lesions: All measurable lesions up to a maximum of 2 lesions per 
organ and 5 lesions in total, representative of all involved organs, should be 
identified as target lesions and recorded and measured at baseline. Target 
lesions should be selected on the basis of their size (lesions with the longest 
diameter), be representative of all involved organs, but in addition should be 
those that lend themselves to reproducible repeated measurements. It may 
be the case that, on occasion, the largest lesion does not lend itself to 
reproducible measurement in which circumstance the next largest lesion 
which can be measured reproducibly should be selected. A sum of the 
diameters (longest for non-nodal lesions, short axis for nodal lesions) for all 
target lesions will be calculated and reported as the baseline sum diameters. 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
32 
 I
f lymph nodes are to be included in the sum, then only the short axis is added 
into the sum. The baseline sum diameters will be used as reference to further 
characterize any objective tumor regression in the measurable dimension of 
the disease. 
Non-target lesions: All other lesions (or sites of disease) including any 
measurable lesions over and above the 5 target lesions should be identified 
as non-target lesions and should also be recorded at baseline. Measurements 
of these lesions are not required, but the presence, absence, or in rare cases 
unequivocal progression of each should be noted throughout follow- up. 
 
8.1.3 Methods for Evaluation of Measurable Disease 
All measurements should be taken and recorded in metric notation using a 
ruler or calipers. All baseline evaluations should be performed as closely as 
possible to the beginning of treatment and never more than 4 weeks before 
the beginning of the treatment. 
 
The same method of assessment and the same technique should be used to 
characterize each identified and reported lesion at baseline and during follow-
up. Imaging-based evaluation is preferred to evaluation by [CONTACT_165324](s) being followed cannot be imaged but are 
assessable by [CONTACT_461]. 
 
Clinical lesions: Clinical lesions will only be considered measurable when they 
are superficial (e.g., skin nodules and palpable lymph nodes) and >10 mm 
diameter as assessed using calipers (e.g., skin nodules). In the case of skin 
lesions, documentation by [CONTACT_6775], including a ruler to estimate the 
size of the lesion, is recommended.  
 
Chest x-ray : Not acceptable for tumor evaluation in this study.  
 
Conventional CT and MRI: This guideline has defined measurability of lesions 
on CT scan based on the assumption that CT slice thickness is [ADDRESS_417580] slice thickness greater than 5 mm, the minimum size for a 
measurable lesion should be twice the slice thickness. MRI is also acceptable 
in certain situations (e.g. for body scans).   
 
Use of MRI remains a complex issue. MRI has excellent contrast, spatial, and 
temporal resolution; however, there are many image acquisition variables 
involved in MRI, which greatly impact image quality, lesion conspi[INVESTIGATOR_3934], and 
measurement.  Furthermore, the availability of MRI is variable globally. As 
with CT, if an MRI is performed, the technical specifications of the scanning 
sequences used should be optimized for the evaluation of the type and site of 
disease. Furthermore, as with CT, the modality used at follow-up should be 
the same as was used at baseline and the lesions should be 
measured/assessed on the same pulse sequence.  It is beyond the scope of 
the RECIST guidelines to prescribe specific MRI pulse sequence parameters 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
[ADDRESS_417581]: At present, the low dose or attenuation correction CT portion of a 
combined PET-CT is not always of optimal diagnostic CT quality for use with 
RECIST measurements.  However, if the site can document that the CT 
performed as part of a PET-CT is of identical diagnostic quality to a diagnostic 
CT (with IV and oral contrast), then the CT portion of the PET-CT can be 
used for RECIST measurements and can be used interchangeably with 
conventional CT in accurately measuring cancer lesions over time.  Note, 
however, that the PET portion of the CT introduces additional data which may 
bias an investigator if it is not routinely or serially performed.   
 
Ultrasound: Ultrasound is not useful in assessment of lesion size and should 
not be used as a method of measurement. Ultrasound examinations cannot 
be reproduced in their entirety for independent review at a later date and, 
because they are operator dependent, it cannot be guaranteed that the same 
technique and measurements will be taken from one assessment to the next. 
If new lesions are identified by [CONTACT_12153], 
confirmation by [CONTACT_12154]. If there is concern about radiation 
exposure at CT, MRI may be used instead of CT in selected instances. 
 
Endoscopy, Laparoscopy: The utilization of these techniques for objective 
tumor evaluation is not advised. However, such techniques may be useful to 
confirm complete pathological response when biopsies are obtained or to 
determine relapse in trials where recurrence following complete response 
(CR) or surgical resection is an endpoint. 
 
Tumor markers: Tumor markers alone cannot be used to assess response. If 
markers are initially above the upper normal limit, they must normalize for a 
patient to be considered in complete clinical response. 
 
Cytology, Histology: These techniques can be used to differentiate between 
partial responses (PR) and complete responses (CR) in rare cases. 
 
The cytological confirmation of the neoplastic origin of any effusion that 
appears or worsens during treatment when the measurable tumor has met 
criteria for response or stable disease is mandatory to differentiate between 
response or stable disease (an effusion may be a side effect of the treatment) 
and progressive disease. 
 
FDG-PET: While FDG-PET response assessments need additional study, it is 
sometimes reasonable to incorporate the use of FDG-PET scanning to 
complement CT scanning in assessment of progression (particularly possible 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
34 
 '
new' disease).  New lesions on the basis of FDG-PET imaging can be 
identified according to the following algorithm:  
a. Negative FDG-PET at baseline, with a positive FDG-PET at follow-up is a 
sign of PD based on a new lesion. 
b. No FDG-PET at baseline and a positive FDG-PET at follow-up:  If the 
positive FDG-PET at follow-up corresponds to a new site of disease 
confirmed by [CONTACT_4654], this is PD. If the positive FDG-PET at follow-up is not 
confirmed as a new site of disease on CT, additional follow-up CT  scans are 
needed to determine if there is truly progression occurring at that site (if so, 
the date of PD will be the date of the initial abnormal FDG-PET scan).  If the 
positive FDG-PET at follow-up corresponds to a pre-existing site of disease 
on CT that is not progressing on the basis of the anatomic images, this is not 
PD. 
c. FDG-PET may be used to upgrade a response to a CR in a manner 
similar to a biopsy in cases where a residual radiographic abnormality is 
thought to represent fibrosis or scarring.  The use of FDG-PET in this 
circumstance should be prospectively described in the protocol and supported 
by [CONTACT_4623]-specific medical literature for the indication.  However, it must be 
acknowledged that both approaches may lead to false positive CR due to 
limitations of FDG-PET and biopsy resolution/sensitivity. 
  
Note: A ‘positive’ FDG-PET scan lesion means one which is FDG avid with an 
uptake greater than twice that of the surrounding tissue on the attenuation 
corrected image. 
 
8.1.4 Response Criteria for Evaluation of Target Lesions 
Complete Response (CR): Disappearance of all target lesions.  Any 
pathological lymph nodes (whether target or non-target) must have reduction 
in short axis to <10 mm. 
  
Partial Response (PR): At least a 30% decrease in the sum of the diameters 
of target lesions, taking as reference the baseline sum diameters 
  
Progressive Disease (PD): At least a 20% increase in the sum of the 
diameters of target lesions, taking as reference the smallest sum on study 
(this includes the baseline sum if that is the smallest on study).  In addition to 
the relative increase of 20%, the sum must also demonstrate an absolute 
increase of at least 5 mm. (Note:  the appearance of one or more new lesions 
is also considered progressions). 
  
Stable Disease (SD): Neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify for PR nor 
sufficient increase to qualify for PD, taking as reference the smallest sum 
diameters while on study. 
 
8.1.5 Response Criteria for Evaluation of Non-Target Lesions 
Complete Response (CR): Disappearance of all non-target lesions and 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
[ADDRESS_417582] be non-
pathological in size (<10 mm short axis) 
 
Note: If tumor markers are initially above the upper normal limit, they must 
normalize for a patient to be considered in complete clinical response. 
 
Non-CR/Non- PD: Persistence of one or more non-target lesion(s) and/or 
maintenance of tumor marker level above the normal limits 
 
Progressive Disease (PD): Appearance of one or more new lesions and/or 
unequivocal progression of existing non-target lesions. Unequivocal 
progression should not normally trump target lesion status. It must be 
representative of overall disease status change, not a single lesion increase. 
 
Although a clear progression of “non-target” lesions only is exceptional, the 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_36408], and the 
progression status should be confirmed at a later time by [CONTACT_337926]. 
 
8.1.[ADDRESS_417583] response recorded from the start of the 
treatment until disease progression/recurrence (taking as reference for 
progressive disease the smallest measurements recorded since the treatment 
started). The patient's best response assignment will depend on the 
achievement of both measurement and confirmation criteria. 
 
For Patients with Measurable Disease 
 
Target 
Lesions  Non-Target 
Lesions  New 
Lesions  Overall 
Respon se Best Overall Response 
when Confirmation is 
Required*  
CR CR No CR >4 wks. Confirmation**  
CR Non-CR/Non -
PD No PR  
>4 wks. Confirmation**  
CR Not evaluated  No PR 
PR Non-CR/Non -
PD/not 
evaluated  No PR 
SD Non-CR/Non -
PD/not 
evaluated  No SD documented at least once >4 
wks. from baseline**  
PD Any Yes or No  PD  
no prior SD, PR or CR  Any PD***  Yes or No  PD 
Any Any Yes PD 
*      See RECIST 1.1 manuscript for further details on what is evidence of a new lesion.  
**    Only for non -randomized trials with re sponse as primary endpoint.  
***  In exceptional circumstances, unequivocal progression in non -target lesions may be 
accepted as disease progression.  
 
Note : Patients with a global deterioration of health status requiring discontinuation of 
treatment without  objective evidence of disease progression at that time should be 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
36 
 reported as “ symptomatic deterioration.”   Every effort should be made to document 
the objective progression even after discontinuation of treatment.  
 
 
 
 
For Patients with Non-Measurable Dis ease 
 
Non-Target Lesions  New Lesions  Overall Response  
CR No CR 
Non-CR/non -PD No Non-CR/non -PD* 
Not all evaluated  No not evaluated  
Unequivocal PD  Yes or No  PD 
Any Yes PD 
*  ‘Non -CR/non -PD’ is preferred over ‘stable disease’ for non -target disease sinc e SD is 
increasingly used as an endpoint for assessment of efficacy in some trials so to assign this 
category when no lesions can be measured is not advised  
 
 
8.1.7 Duration of Response 
Duration of overall response is measured from the time measurement criteria 
are met for CR or PR (whichever is first recorded) until the first date that 
recurrent or progressive disease is objectively documented (taking as 
reference for progressive disease the smallest measurements recorded since 
the treatment started). 
 
The duration of overall CR is measured from the time measurement criteria 
are first met for CR until the first date that progressive disease is objectively 
documented. 
 
Duration of stable disease is measured from the start of the treatment until the 
criteria for progression are met, taking as reference the smallest 
measurements recorded since the treatment started, including the baseline 
measurements. 
 
 
8.[ADDRESS_417584] criteria for mesothelioma [1] which 
is specifically designed to address the unique growth pattern of MPM and it is better 
suited for response assessment in this disease .  
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
[ADDRESS_417585] criteria for mesothelioma [1] is using contrast enhanced CT 
scans of the chest. Where CT is contraindicated MRI may be used. At the level of the 
pleura, tumor thickness perpendicular to the chest wall, spi[INVESTIGATOR_337894] [ADDRESS_417586] criteria for pleural mesothelioma are as follows: 
 
• Complete Response: Complete response (CR) is defined as the disappearance of 
all target 
lesions with no evidence of tumor elsewhere. 
 
• Partial Response: Partial response is defined as at least a 30% reduction in the 
total tumor 
measurement. 
 
• Stable Disease: Stable disease is defined as subjects who fulfilled the criteria for 
neither PR 
nor PD. 
 
• Progressive Disease: Progressive disease is defined as an increase of at least 20% 
in the total tumor measurement over the nadir measurement, or the appearance of 
one or more new 
lesions. 
 
 
8.[ADDRESS_417587] documented tumor progression, as determined by [CONTACT_093] (per 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
[ADDRESS_417588] criteria as detailed in Section 8.2), or death due to any cause, 
whichever occurs first. Subjects who die without a reported prior progression will be 
considered to have progressed on the date of their death. Subjects who did not 
progress or die will be censored on the date of their last evaluable tumor 
assessment. 
 
 
8.5  Evaluation of Safety 
 
8.5.1 Adverse Events 
This study will utilize the NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse 
Events (CTCAE) Version 4.03 for Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Event 
reporting. A copy of the CTCAE Version 4.03 can be downloaded from the 
NCI Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program home page (http://ctep.cancer.gov). 
All appropriate treatment areas should have access to a copy of the CTCAE 
Version 4.03. 
 
An Adverse Event (AE) is any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an 
abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with 
the use of a medical treatment or procedure that may or may not be 
considered related to the medical treatment or procedure. An AE is a term 
that is a unique representation of a specific event used for medical 
documentation and scientific analyses. CTCAE is a descriptive terminology 
for AE reporting. A grading (severity) scale is provided for each AE term. 
Grade refers to the severity of the AE. The CTCAE displays Grades 1 through 
5 with unique clinical descriptions of severity for each AE based on this 
general guideline: 
 
Grade 1 Mild; asymptomatic or mild symptoms; clinical or diagnostic 
observations only; intervention not indicated. 
 
Grade 2 Moderate; minimal, local or noninvasive intervention indicated; 
limiting age-appropriate instrumental activities of daily living (preparing meals, 
shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_3112], using the telephone, managing money, 
etc.). 
 
Grade 3 Severe or medically significant but not immediately life-threatening; 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3111]; disabling; limiting 
self care activities of daily living (bathing, dressing and undressing, feeding 
self, using the toilet, taking medications, and not bedridden). 
 
Grade 4 Life-threatening consequences; urgent intervention indicated.  
 
Grade 5 Death related to AE. 
 
 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
39 
  
8
.5.2 Serious Adverse Events 
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) is any adverse drug event (experience) 
occurring at any dose that results in ANY of the following outcomes:  
1) Death.  
2) A life-threatening adverse drug experience.  
3) Inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081] (for >24 
hours).  
4) A persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability 
to conduct normal life functions  
5) A congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
6) Important Medical Events that may not result in death, be life threatening, 
or require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3767] a serious adverse drug 
experience when, based upon medical judgment, they may jeopardize the 
patient or subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent 
one of the outcomes listed in this definition (FDA, 21 CFR 312.32; ICH E2A 
and ICH E6). 
 
It is important to distinguish between serious criteria and severity grade of an 
AE. Severity is a measure of intensity (see Section 8.5.1) whereas 
seriousness is defined by [CONTACT_337927]. A Grade 
[ADDRESS_417589] continue to be followed for collection of toxicity data for 30 days.  
 
Incidences of AEs will be summarized by [CONTACT_9313], preferred term, 
and severity (grading per CTCAE v. 4.03). Each patient will be counted only 
once within a system organ class or a preferred term by [CONTACT_337928], MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
[ADDRESS_417590] severity grade within each category. AEs will also be summarized 
by [CONTACT_9313], preferred term, and relationship to treatment (drugs, 
procedure, device, or unrelated). AEs may be considered related to more than 
one of the causalities listed. AE onset will be shown relative (in number of 
days) to the day of the first study treatment 
 
8.5.4 Adverse Events Based on Signs and Symptoms 
All AEs spontaneously reported by [CONTACT_337929]: ‘What health problems have you 
hadsince the previous visit/you were last asked?’, or revealed by [CONTACT_337930]. When collecting AEs, the recording of 
diagnoses is preferred (when possible) to recording a list of signs and 
symptoms. However, if a diagnosis is known and there are other signs or 
symptoms that are not generally part of the diagnosis, the diagnosis and each 
sign or symptom will be recorded separately. 
 
8.5.[ADDRESS_417591] results that do not 
induce clinical signs/symptoms or require therapy, will not be considered 
clinically significant and will not be reported as AE. Deterioration of a 
laboratory value, which is unequivocally due to disease progression, should 
not be reported as an AE .  
 
 
8.5.6 Causality Collection 
The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_337895], and 
answer ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to the question ‘Do you consider that there is a 
reasonable possibility that the event may have been caused by [CONTACT_33248]?’ The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_337896]-investigators involved in this study. 
 
8.5.7 Interpretation of Causality 
The following factors should be considered when deciding if there is a 
“reasonable possibility” that an AE may have been caused by [CONTACT_33641]: 
• Time course of exposure to suspect drug. 
Has the subject actually received the suspect drug? Did the AE occur in a 
reasonable temporal relationship to the administration of the suspect drug? 
• Consistency with known drug profile. 
Was the AE consistent with the previous knowledge of the suspect drug 
(pharmacology and toxicology) or drugs of the same pharmacological class? 
OR could the AE be anticipated from its pharmacological properties? 
• Dechallenge experience. 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
[ADDRESS_417592] drug? 
• No alternative cause. The AE cannot be reasonably explained by [CONTACT_337931], other drugs, other host or 
environmental factors. 
• Rechallenge experience. Did the AE reoccur if the suspected drug was 
reintroduced after having been stopped? Rechallenge is generally not 
recommended. It may be utilized only in questionable cases and only if patient 
safety is not jeopardized. 
• Laboratory tests .  
A specific laboratory investigation (if performed) has confirmed the 
relationship? 
 
A “reasonable possibility” could be considered to exist for an AE where one or 
more of the above mentioned factors exist. In contrast, there would not be a 
“reasonable possibility” of causality if none of the above criteria apply or 
where there is evidence of exposure and a reasonable time course but any 
dechallenge (if performed) is negative or ambiguous or there is another more 
likely cause of the AE. 
 
Ambiguous cases should be considered as being a “reasonable possibility” of 
a causal relationship unless further evidence becomes available to refute this. 
Causal relationship in cases where the disease under study has deteriorated 
due to lack of effect should be classified as no reasonable possibility. 
 
 
8.6  Evaluation of Quality of Life 
 
Patient-reported symptoms will be assessed using the modified version of the Lung 
Cancer Symptom Scale for Mesothelioma questionnaire [18](Appendix D). 
 
This is a 7-question questionnaire , which covers the most common issues that can 
arise in patients with MPM, such as cough, chest pain, shortness of breath, etc. The 
questionnaire is available in English and Spanish. 
 
The questionnaire will be completed prior to the first chemoperfusion treatment and in 
every [ADDRESS_417593] be conducted by [CONTACT_337932] (GCP) as defined as described in the U.S. FDA Code of Federal 
Regulations 21 CFR 312 (Investigational New Drug Application), 21 CFR 50 
(Protection of Human Subjects), 21 CFR 54 (Financial Disclosure by [CONTACT_1615]), 21 CFR 56 (Institutional Review Boards) and  International 
Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of 
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) guidelines (Guideline to Good Clinical 
Practice). 
 
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_337897], conduct and actions of all members of the research team. This includes 
the final analysis of the protocol. 
 
All protocols include a Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) and procedures for its 
implementation commensurate with the risk and complexity of the study. The DSMP 
must include a structured adverse event determination, monitoring and reporting 
system, including standardized forms and procedures for referring and/or treating 
subjects experiencing adverse events. 
 
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_337898]. The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_337899], that all data required for oversight of monitoring are 
accurately reported to a DSMP and/or to the Protocol Monitoring Committee (PMC) 
and IRB as required, that all adverse events are reported according to protocol 
guidelines, and that any adverse actions reflecting patient safety concerns are 
appropriately reported. 
 
 
9.2  Document Audits and Monitoring 
 
Data will be captured in Oncore, Moffitt Cancer Center’s Clinical Trials Database. 
Regulatory documents and case report forms will be monitored internally according to 
Moffitt Cancer Center Monitoring Policies. Monitoring will be performed regularly to 
verify data is accurate, complete, and verifiable from source documents; and the 
conduct of the trial is in compliance with the currently approved 
protocol/amendments, Good Clinical Practice (GCP), and applicable regulatory 
requirements. 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
43 
  
T
he Protocol Monitoring Committee (PMC) monitors its assigned ongoing research 
protocols monthly for: adverse event reporting, data and safety monitoring, and 
internal audit findings. The PMC upon review of any agenda item may approve the 
study for continuation, require revisions, suspend or close a protocol. 
 
Investigators of studies which are designed to be reviewed by [CONTACT_39716], shall provide a statistical report of the study’s progress and 
summary of adverse events and deviations based on the phase of the study and the 
associated risk of the study. 
 
 
9.3  Adverse Event Recording and Reporting 
 
Adverse Event (AE) is any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal 
laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a 
medical treatment or procedure that may or may not be considered related to the 
medical treatment or procedure. A more detailed definition of AEs can be found in 
Section 8.5.1. 
 
Adverse events should only be recorded by [CONTACT_337933] a health-care 
provider qualified by [CONTACT_3903]. Patients should be asked in an open-
ended manner about the occurrence of AEs. 
 
AEs will be collected throughout the treatment period from the time of the first 
transarterial chemoperfusion treatment and up to and including the 30-day follow- up 
period after the last chemoperfusion treatment. All ongoing and any new AE identified 
during the [ADDRESS_417594] be followed to resolution. 
 
The descriptions and grading scales found in the revised NCI Common Terminology 
Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.[ADDRESS_417595] occurred or might occur can 
be found in Section 5 and Appendix E, F and G (Pharmaceutical Information). A copy 
of the CTCAE Version 4.03 can be downloaded from the NCI Cancer Therapy 
Evaluation Program home page ( http://ctep.cancer.gov ). 
 
AEs will be listed by [CONTACT_337934]. Deaths and other SAEs will be listed and 
summarized by [CONTACT_337935]. Additionally, AEs leading 
to discontinuations will be listed separately. Incidence of AEs will be summarized by 
[CONTACT_11702], maximum grade reported, and relationship to study treatment. 
 
It is the Investigator’s responsibility to report serious adverse events or pregnancy 
occurring during the treatment period or within [ADDRESS_417596]/  Independent 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
44 
 E
thics Committee as defined by [CONTACT_337936] (Table 1). 
 
Table 1. Expedited Reporting Requirements for Adverse Events that Occur within [ADDRESS_417597] Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment 
 
 
FDA REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR SERIOUS A DVERSE EVENTS (21 CFR Part 312)  
 
NOTE: Investigators MUST immediately report to the sponsor ANY Serious Adverse Events, 
whether or not they are considered related to the investigation al agent(s)/intervention (21 CFR 
312.64)  
An adverse event is considered serious if it results in ANY of the following outcomes:  
1) Death  
2) A life -threatening adverse event  
3) An adverse event that results in inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5183] o f existing 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_272] ≥ 24 hours  
4) A persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct normal life 
functions  
5) A congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
6) Important Medical Events (IME) that may not result in death, be life threatening, or require 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_708], based upon medical judgment, they may 
jeopardize the patient or subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of 
the outcomes listed in this de finition. (FDA, 21 CFR 312.32; ICH E2A and ICH E6).  
 
ALL SERIOUS adverse events that meet the above criteria MUST be immediately reported to the 
IRB within the timeframes  per IRB  policies and requirements .  
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
45 
  
9.4 
 Protocol Amendments 
 
Any changes to this protocol will be initiated by [CONTACT_337937] (Moffitt cancer Center) as a protocol amendment. The Investigator must 
submit the amendment to the IRB, with a revised Informed Consent Document if 
applicable. The Investigator must receive written approval from the IRB before the 
amendment may take effect. 
 
 
9.[ADDRESS_417598] of the 
study. This documentation includes, but is not limited to, the following: study 
personnel’s qualifications and training, IRB approvals and communications, 
communications with the Regulatory Sponsor, Site Signature & Responsibility Log, 
laboratory accreditations and reference ranges, and Informed Consent Documents 
(copi[INVESTIGATOR_337900], signed/dated originals, or copi[INVESTIGATOR_337901]). 
 
 
9.[ADDRESS_417599] be signed and dated by 
[CONTACT_37410]’s legally authorized representative and by [CONTACT_337938] n 
conducting the informed consent discussion. The Informed Consent Document must 
fulfill the requirements as contained in the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations (21 CFR 
50.25), the ICH guidelines, and the Declaration of Helsinki. The Informed Consent 
Document must be written in a language understandable to the patient or to the 
representative. 
 
A signed and dated copy of the Informed Consent Document must be given to the 
person signing the document. The original must be retained by [CONTACT_337939]. 
 
Modifications to this template may be made by [CONTACT_337940], regional (e.g., state) or local laws and/or institutional 
requirements. 
 
 
 
 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
[ADDRESS_417600]/Independent Ethics Committee 
 
The protocol, Informed Consent Document, patient recruitment procedures (e.g., 
advertisements), information about payments and compensation available to 
patients, and any amendments must be approved by a properly constituted 
Institutional Review Board/Independent Ethics Committee (IRB/IEC) in compliance 
with current regulations of the U.S. FDA, ICH guidelines, and any country-specific 
regulations. Before study initiation, the investigator must have written and dated 
approval/favorable opi[INVESTIGATOR_5698]/IEC for the protocol, consent form, subject 
recruitment materials/process (eg, advertisements), and any other written information 
to be provided to subjects. The investigator or sponsor should also provide the 
IRB/IEC with a copy of the Investigator Brochure or product labeling, information to 
be provided to subjects and any updates. The investigator or sponsor should provide 
the IRB/IEC with reports, updates and other information (eg, expedited safety reports, 
amendments and administrative letters) according to regulatory requirements or 
institution procedures. 
 
9.[ADDRESS_417601] ensure that the patient’s confidentiality is maintained. Patient 
medical information obtained for the purposes of this study is confidential, and 
disclosure to third parties, other than those noted below, is prohibited. Patients 
should be identified only by [CONTACT_308644]-assigned patient ID number. For 
those patients whose surgical specimen is processed and read by [CONTACT_337941], the patient’s billing information will be requested by [CONTACT_337942]. 
 
Study personnel should follow the requirements of the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act (HIPAA). 
 
All clinical information is confidential, but data generated for this study must be 
available for inspection on request to representatives of the U.S. FDA, other national 
or local regulatory or health authorities and the associated IRB. 
 
All records must be kept in a secured area. 
 
 
9.[ADDRESS_417602] be 
maintained within the Regulatory Binder, and includes the following: 
 
 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
47 
  C
urriculum Vitae (CV):  CVs for the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_244293]-
investigators listed in this study protocol must be signed and dated. These CVs 
must show affiliation with the institution conducting the study and be current 
within two years of the personnel initiating their participation in the study. 
 
 Medical Licenses:  Medical licenses (physicians, physician assistants, nurses) 
listed in this study must be valid according to the regulations of the [LOCATION_012] Board 
of Medicine and the regulations of the Moffitt Cancer Center, and copi[INVESTIGATOR_337902]’s participation in the study. 
 
 
9.[ADDRESS_417603] KEEPI[INVESTIGATOR_337903]. 
 
 
11. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
11.1 Study Design and Sample Size Justification 
 
From historical data [20] we will consider a rate of 23% for response rate (either 
complete response or partial response evaluated by [CONTACT_337943]) as not warranting further study. We will use 45% for disease control 
rate as a promising result to pursue further study. Using Simon’s two-stage minimax 
[21] design with 10% type I error rate and 10% type II error rate, 18 patients 
(including patient from the lead in safety cohort) will be enrolled and will be evaluated 
in the first stage of the trial. If 4 or less of the patients respond to the therapy (CR or 
PR or SD), the treatment will be stopped. If 5 or more patients respond, 14 additional 
patients (a total of 32 patients per group) will be enrolled. If a total number of 
responders (CR or PR or SD) are greater than or equal to 11, the null hypothesis will 
be rejected and the treatment is considered “promising” for further study. The actual 
type I error rate and power are 8.8% and 90.1%, respectively. The expected sample 
size under the null hypothesis (i.e., a disease control rate of 23%) is 23.62. 
 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
[ADDRESS_417604] that a total of 10 ~ 15 patients will accrued per year. Thus, it will take no 
more than 3 years to complete patient accrual. 
 
 
11.3 Stratification Factors 
 
No stratification factor is considered in this study. 
 
 
11.4 Analysis of Primary and Secondary Endpoints 
 
The primary endpoint of this study is to estimate the response rate (either partial or 
complete response). The one-sided and two-sided 95% confidence intervals by 
[CONTACT_251627] [22] will be reported, which accounts for the nature of two-stage 
design. The secondary endpoints include OS and PFS, which are estimated by [CONTACT_17680]-Meier method [23]. Point-wise 95% confidence intervals for survival curves 
and cumulative incidence curves were computed using log-log transformation. The 
association of these time- to-events data with other covariates will be examined by [CONTACT_337944] [24]. For all subjects, descriptive 
statistics (median, range for continuous variables and frequency and proportion for 
categorical variables) is utilized to summarize patients’ demographic and clinical 
variables. 
 
All statistical analyses and summaries will be performed by a statistician using SAS 
statistical software (version 9.3 ). 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
[ADDRESS_417605] criteria for assessment of response in malignant 
pleural mesothelioma. Ann Oncol. 2004; 15(2):257- 60. 
 
2. Musk AW, Olsen N, Alfonso H, et al. Predicting survival in malignant mesothelioma. Eur 
Respir J. 2011;  38(6):1420 -4. 
 
3. Marinaccio A, Binazzi A, Cauzillo G, et al. Analysis of latency time and its determinants in 
asbestos related malignant mesothelioma cases of the Italian register. Eur J Cancer. 
2007; 43(18):2722 -8. 
 
4. van Meerbeeck JP, Scherpereel A, Surmont VF, Baas P. Malignant pleural 
mesothelioma: the standard of care and challenges for future management. Crit Rev 
Oncol Hematol. 2011;  78(2):92- 111. 
 
5. Price B, Ware A. Time trend of mesothelioma incidence in the [LOCATION_002] and 
projection of future cases: an update based on SEER data for 1973 through 2005. Crit 
Rev Toxicol. 2009; 39(7):576- 88. 
 
6. Robinson BW, Lake RA. Advances in malignant mesothelioma. N Engl J Med. 2005; 
353(15):1591- 603. 
 
7. Opi[INVESTIGATOR_7316] I. Management of malignant pleural mesothelioma-The European experience. J 
Thorac Dis. 2014;  [ADDRESS_417606] 2:S238- 52. 
 
8. Grootenboers MJ, Heeren J, van Putte BP, et al. Isolated lung perfusion for pulmonary 
metastases, a review and work in progress. Perfusion. 2006; 21(5):267- 76. 
 
9. Heusner TA, Antoch G, Wittkowski-Sterczewski A, et al. Transarterial hepatic 
chemoperfusion of uveal melanoma metastases: survival and response to treatment. 
Rofo. 2011; 183(12):1151- 60. 
 
10. Vogl TJ, Zangos S, Eichler K, et al. [Transarterial chemoperfusion of the pelvis --results in 
symptomatic locally recurrent tumors and lymph node metastases]. Rofo. 2007; 
179(11):1174- 80. 
 
11. Vogl TJ, Lindemayr S, Naguib NN, et al. Nonselective transarterial chemoperfusion: a 
palliative treatment for malignant pleural mesothelioma. Radiology . 2013; 266(2):649- 56. 
 
12. Campbell NP, Kindler HL. Update on malignant pleural mesothelioma. Semin Respir Crit 
Care Med. 2011; 32(1):102- 10. 
 
13. Solheim OP, Saeter G, Finnanger AM, Stenwig AE. High-dose methotrexate in the 
treatment of malignant mesothelioma of the pleura. A phase II study. Br J Cancer. 1992; 
65(6):956- 60. 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
50 
  
14. 
van Zandwijk N, Clarke C, Henderson D, et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis and 
treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Thorac Dis. 2013; 5(6):E254- 307. 
 
15. Cockcroft DW, Gault MH. Prediction of creatinine clearance from serum creatinine. 
Nephron. 1976; 16(1):31- 41. 
 
16. Kuribayashi K, Miyata S, Fukuoka K, et al. Methotrexate and gemcitabine combination 
chemotherapy for the treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma. Mol Cl in Oncol. 
2013; 1(4):639 -42. 
 
17. Scagliotti GV, Parikh P, von Pawel J, et al. Phase III study comparing cisplatin plus 
gemcitabine with cisplatin plus pemetrexed in chemotherapy -naive patients with 
advanced -stage non -small -cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26(21):3543 -51. 
 
18. Hollen PJ, Gralla RJ, Liepa AM, Symanowski JT, Rusthoven JJ. Measuring quality of life 
in patients with pleural mesothelioma using a modified version of the Lung Cancer 
Symptom Scale (LCSS): psychometric properties of the LCSS- Meso. Support Care 
Cancer. 2006; 14(1):11- 21. 
 
19. Eisenhauer EA, Therasse P, Bogaerts J, et al. New response evaluation criteria in solid 
tumours: revised RECIST guideline (version 1.1). Eur J Cancer. 2009; 45(2):228- 47. 
 
20. Maio M, Scherpereel A, Calabrò L, Aerts J, Perez SC, Bearz A, Nackaerts K, Fennell DA, 
Kowalski D, Tsao AS, Taylor P, Grosso F, Antonia SJ, Nowak AK, Taboada M, Puglisi M, 
Stockman PK, Kindler HL. . Tremelimumab as second-line or third-line treatment in 
relapsed malignant mesothelioma (DETERMINE): a multicentre, international, 
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 2b trial .  Lancet Oncol. 
2017;18(9):1261- 1273.  
21. Simon R. Optimal two-stage designs for phase II clinical trials. Control Clin Trials. 1989; 
10(1):1- 10. 
 
22. Atkinson EN, Brown BW. Confidence limits for probability of response in multistage 
phase II clinical trials. Biometrics. 1985; 41(3):741- 4. 
 
23. Kaplan EL, Meier P. Nonparametric estimation from incomplete observations. Journal of 
the American Statistical Association. 1958; 53(282): 457- 81. 
 
24. Cox DR. Regression Models and Life Tables (with Discussion). Journal of the Royal 
Statistical Society, Series B. 1972; 34:187- 220. 
 
25. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_1946] C, Marino A, De Pangher Manzini V, Benedetti G, Galetta D, Mazzanti P, Del Conte 
G, dell'Amore D, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_48820] E, Giaquinta S, Lopez M, Martoni A. Sequential chemotherapy 
with cisplatin/gemcitabine (CG) followed by [CONTACT_337912]/methotrexate/mitomycin (MMM) 
in patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma. A multicenter Italian Phase II Study 
(SITMP1).  Lung Cancer.  2006: 52(2):199- 206. 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
51 
  
2
6. Nowak AK, By[CONTACT_195163], Williamson R, Ryan G, Segal A, Fielding D, Mitchell P, Musk AW, 
Robinson BW. A multicentre phase II study of cisplatin and gemcitabine for malignant 
mesothelioma. Br J Cancer. 2002; 87(5):491- 6. 
 
27. Kindler HL, Karrison TG, Gandara DR, Lu C, Krug LM, Stevenson JP, Jänne PA, Quinn 
DI, Koczywas MN, Brahmer JR, Albain KS, Taber DA, Armato SG 3rd, Vogelzang NJ, 
Chen HX, Stadler WM, Vokes EE. Multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 
randomized phase II trial of gemcitabine/cisplatin plus bevacizumab or placebo in 
patients with malignant mesothelioma. J Clin Oncol. 2012; 30(20):2509- 15. 
 
28. Zargar H, Espi[INVESTIGATOR_337904], Fairey AS, Mertens LS, Dinney CP, Mir MC, Krabbe LM, Cookson 
MS, Jacobsen NE, Gandhi NM, Griffin J, Montgomery JS, Vasdev N, Yu EY, Youssef D, 
Xylinas E, Campain NJ, Kassouf W, Dall'Era MA, Seah JA, Ercole CE, Horenblas S, 
Sridhar SS, McGrath JS, Aning J, Shariat SF, Wright JL, Thorpe AC, Morgan TM, 
Holzbeierlein JM, Bivalacqua TJ, North S, Barocas DA, Lotan Y, Garcia JA, Stephenson 
AJ, Shah JB, van Rhijn BW, Daneshmand S , Spi[INVESTIGATOR_337905], Black PC. Multicenter 
Assessment of Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy for Muscle-invasive Bladder Cancer. Eur 
Urol. 2015; 67(2): 241-249. 
29. Xydakis E, Repassos E, Poulou M, Papadakou M, Boukis C, Panagos G. Second line 
chemotherapy with methotrexate and gemcitabine in patients with relapsing head and 
neck cancer. J BUON. 2006;11(4):419- 24. 
 
30. Regine WF, Valentino J, Arnold SM, Haydon RC, Sloan D, Kenady D, Strottmann J, 
Pulmano C, Mohiuddin M. High-dose intra-arterial cisplatin boost with hyperfractionated 
radiation therapy for advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. J Clin 
Oncol. 2001;19(14):3333-9. 
 
31. Chiang PH, Chen CH, Shen YC . Intraarterial chemotherapy as the first-line therapy in 
penile cancer. Br J Cancer. 2014;111(6):1089- 94. 
 
 
 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
52 
 A
PPENDIX A 
 
 
Performance Status Criteria 
 
 
ECOG Performance Status Scale  
  
Karnofsky Performance Scale  
Grade  Descriptions  Percent  Description  
0 Normal activity.  Fully active, able 
to carry on all pre -disease 
performance without restriction.  100 Normal, no complaints, no evidence 
of disease.  
90 Able to carry on normal activity; 
minor signs or symptoms of disease.  
1 Symptoms, but ambulatory.  
Restricted in physically strenuous 
activity, but ambulatory and able to 
carry out work of a light or 
sedentary nature (e.g., light 
housework, office work).  80 Normal activity with effort; some 
signs or symptoms of disease.  
70 Cares for self, unable to carry on 
normal activity or to do active work.  
2 In bed <50% of the time.  
Ambulatory and capable of all self -
care, but unable to carry out an y 
work activities.  Up and about 
more than 50% of waking hours.  [ADDRESS_417607] of his/her 
needs.  
50 Requires considerable assistance 
and frequent medical care.  
3 In bed >50% of the time.  Capable 
of only  limited self -care, confined 
to bed or chair more than 50% of 
waking hours.  40 Disabled, requires special care and 
assistance.  
30 Severely disabled, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_373].  Death not imminent.  
4 100% bedridden.  Completely 
disabled.  Cannot carry o n any 
self-care.  Totally confined to bed 
or chair.  [ADDRESS_417608] be observed and provide guidance 
on the use of appropriate methods for sexually active subjects and their partners. Women and 
men who are not capable of reproduction or choose to be abstinent shall be exempt from 
following the pregnancy prevention requirements specified below. All subjects shall be 
counseled on pregnancy prevention and follow pregnancy testing requirements as specified in 
the protocol. 
 
 
1. Duration of Mandatory Contraception 
 
The duration of mandatory contraception is based on clearance of the investigational drug (5 
half-lives after treatment completion). For males, an additional 90 days is required to 
complete turnover of drug-exposed sperm. For women, an additional 30 days is required to 
complete an ovulatory cycle. 
 
 
2. Calculation of Duration of Mandatory Contraception 
 
Males: (Duration of treatment) + (5 half-lives of the investigational drug) + (90 days) 
 
Females: (Duration of treatment) + (5 half-lives of the investigational drug) + (30 days) 
 
 
3. Contraceptive Methods 
 
3.[ADDRESS_417609] a failure rate of < 1% when used 
consistently and correctly. Women of child bearing potential (WOCBP) and female 
partners of male subjects who are WOCBP (unless the male is azoospermic), are 
expected to use one of the highly effective methods of contraception listed below: 
 
1) Male condoms with spermicide 
2) Hormonal methods of contraception including combined oral contraceptive pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353], 
vaginal ring, injectables, implants and intrauterine devices (IUDs) such as Mirena 
3) IUDs, such as ParaGard 
4) Tubal ligation 
5) Vasectomy 
 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
[ADDRESS_417610] not undergone 
requisite preclinical testing for teratogenicity require two forms of contraception for both 
WOCBP and female partners of male subjects who are WOCBP (unless the male is 
azoospermic). One method must be highly effective and the second method may also be 
highly effective or selected from the list of other contraceptive methods in Section B. 
WOCBP are exempt from this requirement if a commitment to abstinence is made. 
 
 
3.2 Other Contraceptive Methods 
 
1) Diaphragm with spermicide 
2) Cervical cap with spermicide 
3) Vaginal sponge 
4) Male condom without spermicide 
5) Progestin only pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353] 
6) Female condom (A male and a female condom must not be used together.) 
 
3.[ADDRESS_417611](s) or concomitant medications will not adversely affect hormone exposures such 
that efficacy might be compromised or present additional risk. 
Female partners of male subjects participating in the study may use hormone based 
contraceptives as one of the acceptable methods of contraception since they will not be 
receiving drug. 
 
3.[ADDRESS_417612] chooses to forego abstinence. 
 
3.5 Methods of Contraception with Insufficent Data to Support Effectiveness 
 
No method 
Withdrawal 
Rhythm 
Spermicide alone 
Bela Kis, MD, PhD Transarterial Chemoperfusion Treatment of Pleural Mesothelioma 
 
56 
 A
PPENDIX D 
 
Mesothelioma Symptom Scale Questionnaire 
 
 
 