Cheese Consumption and Human Microvascular Function  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
September 21, 2021  
 
Page 1 of  28 (V.10/14/2015)HRP-[ADDRESS_351959] Article(s)
Protocol Title:
Cheese Consumption  and Human Microvascular Function (IRB#4340)
Principal Investigator:
[CONTACT_5627]:  Lacy M.  Alexander, Ph.D.
Department: Kinesiology
Telephone: [PHONE_5992]
E-mail Address:  [EMAIL_5657]
Version Date:  8/30/17
Clinicaltrials.gov Registration  #:
1.0 Objectives
1.1 Study  Objectives
Specific Aim  1.  To characterize the vasoprotective effects of cheese on microvascular dysfunction induced by [CONTACT_2715]-
dependent increases in dietary sodium in healthy human adults.  
Hypothesis 1a:   A high-cheese diet (6 servings/d x 7 d) preserves vasodilation responses to physiological (local heating) 
and pharmacological (acetylcholine infusion) stimuli in the cutaneous microvessels that are otherwise impaired by a 
high-sodium diet (5500 mg vs 1500 mg sodium).
Hypothesis 1b:   The vasoprotective effects of cheese will be through nitric oxide (NO)- (endothelium-) dependent 
mechanisms.
Specific Aim  2. To identify the mechanisms by [CONTACT_288685]-induced oxidative stress in 
healthy human adults.  
Hypothesis 2a:   A high-cheese diet protects against oxidative stress in vessels by [CONTACT_288686] a high-sodium diet. 
Hypothesis 2b:   A high-cheese diet attenuates biomarkers of lipid peroxidation, protein oxidation, and inflammation 
that otherwise increase with increasing dietary sodium.  
1.2 Primary  Study Endpoints
Blood biomarkers as  well as microcirculation and conduit vessel function will be measured to elucidate the mechanistic 
and functional effects of cheese on vascular health.
1.3 Secondary  Study Endpoints
2.0 Background
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 2 of  28 (V.10/14/2015)2.1 Scientific Background  and Gaps
Cardiovascular disease  (CVD) is the leading cause of mortality in developed nations, with 40% of all deaths in the United 
States attributable to CVD.  The annual health care burden of the treatment and management of CVD is greater than 
$350 billion and is projected to increase as our population ages9, 10. As such, identification of modifiable risk factors and 
non-pharmacological interventions are cornerstones of global CVD prevention.  Increasing dairy intake is an emerging 
lifestyle factor that is associated with a decreased CVD risk11, 12, yet the majority of Americans over the age of 50 do not 
meet the recommended dietary guidelines of 3 servings per day13.  Interestingly, increased consumption of dairy 
products may inadvertently increase dietary sodium intake, as natural cheeses are often high in sodium.  The American 
Heart Association recommends limiting daily sodium intake to 1500 mg Na/day for healthy individuals, and less for those 
at higher risk.  Consequently, increasing dairy consumption, particularly in the form of cheese, may paradoxically hinder 
adherence to dietary sodium recommendations while mitigating CVD risk.  It is currently unknown whether 
vasoprotective activities of dairy, provided as natural cheeses, protect against sodium-induced impairments in vascular 
function to lower CVD risk.
2.[ADDRESS_351960] velocity8, arterial 
compliance 17, and arterial stiffness16.  Long term dairy consumption is associated with lower blood pressure in healthy 
aged individuals18, but its cardioprotective activities are also known to be mediated independent of any blood pressure-
lowering effect19, consistent with our co-investigator’s controlled studies examining dairy consumption on postprandial 
vascular function14, 20, 21.  Further, increased dairy consumption induces a modest but clinically significant reduction in 
blood pressure in those with previously elevated blood pressure (-4.0 mmHg SBP and -1.9mmHg DBP)22.  The proposed 
mechanisms mediating these improvements in vascular function with increased dairy consumption are multifaceted and 
include angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibition23-25, protection and enhancement of bioavailable NO22, 26, 27, and 
anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant properties26, 28-30 of dairy proteins and micronutrients.
Dietary sodium  intake is independently associated with elevations in  arterial blood pressure32 as well as increased 
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality2.  Individual sodium excretion occurring with increased dietary intake of sodium 
>5.8 g/day is strongly associated with increased systolic and diastolic pressures of 10-11 mmHg and 6 mmHg, 
respectively.  Moreover, this sodium-induced elevation in blood pressure increases with age33.  High quality meta-
analyses indicate that reducing sodium intake reduces blood pressure and the risk of stroke and fatal coronary heart 
disease34.  
Public health  recommendations for reducing sodium intake are supported by [CONTACT_288687]37 and human models38.  
Human studies demonstrate that sodium restriction (≤1.5 g/day) reverses age-associated endothelial dysfunction by 
[CONTACT_288688]-dependent vasodilation and decreasing superoxide dismutase (SOD) expression6.  Non-invasive measures 
of conduit artery endothelial function show that low dietary sodium intake is associated with enhanced flow-mediated 
vasodilation in middle aged and older adults43.  Conversely, even short-term increases in dietary sodium impair flow-
mediated vasodilation in conduit arteries of otherwise healthy young adults38, 44, 45.  Germane to the present proposal, 
short term increases in dietary sodium (7 days) induce microvascular dysfunction in the cutaneous circulation38 through 
increased oxidant stress mechanisms7.  These sodium-induced vascular impairments are independent of changes in 
blood pressure, and suggest that acute sodium-induced alterations in vessel function are (1) endothelial in origin, and (2) 
primarily mediated by [CONTACT_288689].  The proposed sources of oxidant 
stress in the microvasculature, as well as pharmacological interventions that have been shown to be safe and efficacious 
for examination of these mechanisms in vivo in the human cutaneous microcirculation46-48.
One putative mechanism  by [CONTACT_288690].  Administration of dairy proteins in animal models reduces markers of inflammation such as 
TNF-α, soluble VCAM-1, and hsCRP; and attenuates measures of oxidative stress, including total antioxidant capacity 26, 
28, 29.
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 3 of  28 (V.10/14/2015)In support  of this hypothesis, our data demonstrate that acute (single-meal) cheese consumption is protective against 
sodium-induced impairments in NO-dependent vasodilation.   We provided test foods, specifically cheddar cheese, 
pretzels, or soy cheese, that were matched for sodium (560 mg or 1120 mg) prior to evaluating sensitive measures of 
NO-dependent vasodilation.  We demonstrated that the acute consumption of cheese (one meal) prevented sodium-
induced impairment in endothelial function49 (while there was no difference in plasma sodium between treatments 
containing 560mg sodium (cheddar: 133.8±1.8; pretzel: 135.2±1.0; soy: 134.4±1.8 mmol·L-1) or 1120mg sodium 
(cheddar: 135.2±0.5; pretzel 136.1±1.8 mmol·L-1).  Furthermore, acute localized administration of the antioxidant 
ascorbate normalized NO-dependent vasodilation following non-dairy sodium ingestion, but had no effect on NO-
dependent vasodilation after ingesting natural cheese.  These data strongly suggest that non-Na components of natural 
cheese protect against acute sodium-induced endothelial dysfunction in the microvasculature of healthy middle-aged 
adults.  This protective effect appears to be mediated by [CONTACT_288691], which are 
potentially mediated through the known antioxidant activities of dairy proteins19, 50.  Because there were no differences 
in plasma sodium concentrations and the timing of the functional assessment of NO-dependent vasodilation was at the 
expected peak plasma concentrations of dairy proteins14, this effect is not likely related to differences in gastric 
emptying rates.  Collectively, these data suggest that the micro and macro nutrients in natural cheeses may mitigate 
sodium-induced vessel dysfunction through anti-oxidant mechanisms.
2.[ADDRESS_351961] that a high-sodium diet is associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease 
(CVD)1, 2 whereas high dairy intakes, which can be high in sodium, improves cardiovascular health across the lifespan3-5.  
Controlled studies show that a high sodium intake induces endothelial dysfunction by [CONTACT_288692] (NO)-
dependent vasodilation (VD)6, 7.  Although dairy provides vasoprotective effects on the vasculature that are, in part, 
mediated through improving NO-dependent vasodilation8, it remains unclear if these benefits of dairy, especially those 
potentially attributed to natural cheeses, occur independent of sodium intake.  Over the past funding cycle, our 
laboratory has advanced an understanding by [CONTACT_288693] (one meal) ingestion of natural cheese protects 
against sodium-induced reductions in NO-dependent vasodilation.  Our collaborative expertise in vascular biology, 
cellular inflammation and oxidative stress, and controlled-feeding trials is ideally positioned to conduct seminal studies 
demonstrating that cheese, despi[INVESTIGATOR_288660], protects against vascular dysfunction and the 
mechanisms by [CONTACT_288694].  Specifically, the present study utilizes highly-sensitive in vivo microvascular 
methodologies, coupled with robust measures of conduit vessel function, to define vasoprotective oxidant stress-
mediated mechanisms of cheese (6 servings/d) in a 2 x 2 factorial design of controlled, 7 d dietary interventions using 
low-sodium (1500 mg/d) and high-sodium (5500 mg/d) diets as a relevant clinical model of sodium-induced vessel 
dysfunction. 
3.0 Inclusion and Exclusion  Criteria
3.1 Inclusion Criteria
Men and  women (55-75 years)
Apparently healthy  
Normotensive through  mildly hypertensive (pre-hypertensive-Stage 1; <140/90 mmHg) blood pressures
Seated systolic  pressure 120-140 mmHg
Seated diastolic pressure  70-90 mmHg.  
Normoglycemic (HbA1C  <5.7%)
3.2 Exclusion  Criteria
Taking pharmacotherapy  that alters peripheral vascular control
Pregnancy
Breastfeeding
Females taking  contraceptives (pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353], patches, shots, etc.) or hormone replacement therapy
Taking illicit  and/or recreational drugs
Use of  nicotine containing-products (e.g. smoking, chewing tobacco, etc.)
Known allergy  to latex or investigative substances
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 4 of  28 (V.10/14/2015)3.3 Early  Withdrawal of Subjects
3.3.1 Criteria  for removal from study
Participants may withdraw  at any time.  We may end the participant’s role in the study without her/his consent if 
her/his seated blood pressure becomes higher than that specified under the inclusion criteria.  Also, we may end the 
participant’s role if we determine that her/his health or behavior adversely affects the study or increases the risks 
beyond those approved by [CONTACT_288695]/him in the informed consent.
3.3.[ADDRESS_351962] the participants within 5 days.
4.0 Recruitment  Methods
4.1 Identification  of subjects
We recruit  subjects from Centre County, PA and surrounding regions utilizing CTSI resources at University Park.  Also, we 
advertise for subjects (see below).  Interested persons contact [CONTACT_3019].  We also avail ourselves of lists of potential subjects 
maintained by [CONTACT_288696].  People on these lists have screened for other studies and indicated that they wished 
to be maintained on a list of potential subjects to be contact[CONTACT_288697].
4.[ADDRESS_351963] us.  We discuss the study’s purpose and protocol as well as the 
qualifications for the study with the potential subject.  We discuss the informed consent with them.  We invite potential 
subjects to tour the lab, and ask questions.  
4.3 Recruitment  materials
Newspaper/magazine ads   
Letters/Emails to potential participants   
Flyers/posters  
Brochures  
Web Sites     The website and initial screening form collect the same basic pre-screening information.
Listserv  
Script -  Verbal (i.e., telephone, face-to-face, classroom)
Note:  We  advertise through various listservs on and off campus that target under-represented groups (e.g. FOBA) as 
well as listservs belonging groups (e.g. Elks) and others as we become aware of them.  We have a recruiting website 
through the Kinesiology department that we have used for most of our studies.  We use the information from the 
uploaded ad and/or the phone script in other forms of recruitment (e.g. emails, listservs).
4.4 Eligibility/screening  of subjects
People may  contact [CONTACT_3019].  We conduct a basic interview (see uploaded initial screening form) with the potential subjects 
and discuss the study with them.  See “Study Design and Procedures” for screening information.
5.0 Consent  Process and Documentation
5.1 Consent  Process 
5.1.1 Obtaining  Informed Consent
[IP_ADDRESS] Timing  and Location of Consent
The informed consent  is signed before screening procedures have begun when the subject reports to Noll Lab or the 
CRC.  If subjects are not able to understand the protocol and instructions for any reason, written or verbal, they are not 
included in the study.  Subjects are informed throughout the consenting, screening, and conduction of the study that 
they may discontinue their participation at any time.
[IP_ADDRESS] Coercion  or Undue Influence during Consent
Subjects are  informed throughout the consenting, screening, and conduction of the study that their participation is 
voluntary, and they may discontinue their participation at any time. It is possible that a person enrolled in the study 
could be a student or employee.  We tell the person that participation in the study is voluntary and no aspect of their 
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 5 of  28 (V.10/14/2015)participation or  non-participation has an effect on their class or grade, employment or salary, respectively.  The person 
conducting the screening and consenting is not a professor from any of the student’s classes or the employee’s 
supervisor.  We inform patients that participation, non-participation, or withdrawal from the study does not affect the 
quality of their medical care, payment or enrollment in any health plans, or affect eligibility for benefits.
5.1.2 Waiver  or alteration of the informed consent requirement
NA
5.2 Consent  Documentation
5.2.1 Written  Documentation of Consent
When a  potential participant reports to Noll Lab or CRC, she/he signs the informed consent before screening procedures 
begin.  After the participant signs the consent, we give the participant a photocopy.
5.2.2 Waiver  of Documentation of Consent (Implied consent, Verbal consent, etc.) NA
5.3 Consent  – Other Considerations 
5.3.1 Non-English  Speaking Subjects NA
5.3.2 Cognitively  Impaired Adults NA
[IP_ADDRESS] Capability  of Providing Consent
[IP_ADDRESS] Adults  Unable To Consent
[IP_ADDRESS] Assent  of Adults Unable to Consent
5.3.3 Subjects  who are not yet adults (infants, children, teenagers) NA
[IP_ADDRESS] Parental  Permission
[IP_ADDRESS] Assent  of subjects who are not yet adults
6.0 HIPAA Research  Authorization and/or Waiver or Alteration of Authorization NA
6.1 Authorization  and/or Waiver or Alteration of Authorization for the Uses and Disclosures of PHI
Check all  that apply:
X Not  applicable, no identifiable protected health information (PHI) is accessed, used or 
disclosed in this study. [Mark all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3 as not applicable]
Authorization will  be obtained and documented as part of the consent process. [If this is the 
only box checked, mark sections 6.2 and 6.3 as not applicable]
Partial waiver is  requested for recruitment purposes only  (Check this box if patients’ medical 
records will be accessed to determine eligibility before consent/authorization has been 
obtained). [Complete all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3]
Full waiver  is requested for entire research study (e.g., medical record review studies). 
[Complete all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3]
Alteration is requested  to waive requirement for written documentation of authorization 
(verbal authorization will be obtained). [Complete all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3]
6.2 Waiver  or Alteration of Authorization for the Uses and Disclosures of PHI
6.2.1 Access,  use or disclosure of PHI representing no more than a minimal risk to the privacy of the 
individual
[IP_ADDRESS] Plan  to protect PHI from improper use or disclosure
[IP_ADDRESS] Plan  to destroy identifiers or a justification for retaining identifiers 
6.2.2 Explanation for  why the research could not practicably be conducted without access to and 
use of PHI
6.2.3 Explanation for  why the research could not practicably be conducted without the waiver or 
alteration of authorization
6.3 Waiver  or alteration of authorization statements of agreement
7.0 Study  Design and Procedures
7.1 Study  Design
This study’s  goal is to determine the vasoprotective effects of natural cheese, provided as natural cheddar cheese, on 
sodium-induced impairments in microvascular function in an otherwise healthy aged population.  Our research team will 
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 6 of  28 (V.10/14/2015)conduct a  4-arm crossover study in which participants will receive a high-cheese diet (6 servings/d) or one devoid of 
cheese for 7 days in the context of a low-sodium (1500 mg) or high-sodium (5500 mg) basal diet.  A 7-day controlled 
feeding regimen of altered sodium consumption is consistent with our studies showing efficacy in modulating cutaneous 
microvascular function in humans7.  Our approach will utilize sensitive methodologies specific to the microcirculation to 
mechanistically examine the role of oxidant stress in sodium-induced human NO- mediated vascular endothelial 
dysfunction and the potential mitigating effects of natural cheese.  These measures:  (1) are accurate and quantifiable, 
(2) are highly reliable, (3) represent the earliest clinical indicator of vessel dysfunction, (4) are predictive of future 
impairments in conduit vessel function, and (5) enable underlying mechanisms to be reliably explored.   Blood 
biomarkers and conduit vessel function will be measured to elucidate the mechanistic and functional effects of cheese 
on vascular health.  (See Appendix I)
7.2 Study  Procedures
(See section  7.4.1 for names and descriptions of investigative substances) 
Overview:  Microdialysis  (MD) is a procedure in which a thin tube of membrane that mimics the capi[INVESTIGATOR_288661].  As a physiological saline perfuses the membrane, there is bi-directional exchange of molecules 
between the perfusing saline and the fluid bathing the tissue surrounding the membrane.  However, the membrane 
prohibits the exchange of large molecules such as proteins.  Substances of interest may be added to the perfusing saline 
and thus delivered into the surrounding tissues with no systemic effects.  
All experiments  occur in the morning.
Subjects fast  for [ADDRESS_351964]’s diet over the 
previous [ADDRESS_351965] for women of childbearing-age, heart 
rate (HR), blood pressure (BP), height, waist circumference, weight, health history, and standard venipuncture to 
obtain blood (50 ml, <4 Tbsp) for complete blood count (CBC), chemistry analysis, lipid profile, and other 
substances of interest (i.e. Interleukin Panel).  
3. If  participant takes thyroid medication, the nurse obtains thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) level from 
participant.  If TSH level is not available or and has not been measured within 6 months, TSH is measured from 
blood sample (3.5 ml; 0.2 Tbsp).  
4. The  researchers do not perform genetic analyses on the blood nor look for presence of disease (e.g. HIV).
5.  Subjects  undergo ambulatory 24 hour blood pressure monitoring.
If the  research nurse is unavailable for an extended period, the Clinical Research Center CRC staff performs her 
screening tasks.  The CRC uses their admission form to admit potential participants for screening at the CRC.
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 7 of  28 (V.10/14/2015)Participants meet  with a registered dietitian (Amy Ciccarella, R.D.; PSU CTRC dietitian) to determine their eucaloric energy 
requirements and identify food preferences.  The interview includes surveying the subject’s physical activity over the 
previous 7 days.  (This meeting can occur on a day separate from that of the screening.)
B. Baseline  Experiments (Separate Days, the order of the local heating and acetylcholine dose response experiments is 
randomized)
1. Baseline  nutrient assessment:  Subjects complete a 3-day food record that is evaluated using the Nutrition Data 
System for Research (NDSR) dietary analysis software.
2. Preparation  for experiments
a. We  give printed and verbal instructions outlining what the subjects need to do before they come to the lab.  
b. Subjects  continue with their normal diet before and during the days of the baseline experiments except:
i.  They refrain  from consuming alcohol, niacin supplements, and fish oils for 48 hours, and 
caffeine (ex. coffee, tea, Coca Cola, chocolate) for [ADDRESS_351966] not had one within 2 weeks.    
iii. Microdialysis  probe insertion:  The subject washes the ventral forearm with antimicrobial soap.  We 
place a tight band around the arm so we can visualize veins.  For each MD site, we make pairs of pen-
marks on the arm 2.5 cm (1 inch) apart and away from veins.  We remove the tight band.  The MD 
tubing enters and exits the skin at the marks.  We clean the arm with povidone iodine and alcohol.  We 
place an ice bag on the arm for 5 minutes to numb the skin.  Then we insert a thin needle into the skin 
at each entry mark.  The needle’s tip travels between the layers of skin for 2.5 cm (1 inch) and leaves 
the skin at the matching exit mark. We thread the MD tubing through the needle.  Next, we withdraw 
the needle leaving the tubing in the skin.  Any redness of the skin subsides in about 60 – [ADDRESS_351967] a local skin heater and laser Doppler probe over each MD site.  We 
measure heart rate, local temperature, and skin blood flow (SkBF) throughout the MD experiments.  
We also measure blood pressure every 5-7 minutes (brachial osculation and/or Cardiocap).
3. Baseline  Experiments – “Day 1”
a. FMD
FMD assesses  conduit vessel endothelial function.  We place a BP cuff on a forearm, gel on the upper arm 
just above the elbow, and a Doppler ultrasound probe on the gel.  The ultrasound measures vessel size and 
blood velocity.  After a 3-minute “resting” measurement, the cuff inflates for 5 minutes to occlude forearm 
BF.  After the cuff deflates, we perform a second reading.  We may repeat this measure several times.
Sublingual nitroglycerin:   This procedure assesses vascular smooth muscle function.  A nurse administers the 
sublingual nitroglycerine and is present throughout the procedure.  The subject is supi[INVESTIGATOR_72301] a medical bed 
or recliner.  We apply a blood pressure / heart rate monitor (Cardiocap).  We may take manual blood 
pressures.  Also, we perform ultrasonography at the brachial artery at the elbow during the procedure.  We 
place a 0.[ADDRESS_351968]’s tongue.  The subject closes the mouth immediately 
after we insert the tablet.  The tablet dissolves in 15-[ADDRESS_351969] has an exceptional reaction to 
the nitroglycerin (e.g. drop in blood pressure with longer duration), we monitor the subject for up to 60 
minutes following nitroglycerin administration.
b. MD: Local  Heating 
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 8 of  28 (V.10/14/2015)We prepare 4  MD sites:
Probe 1.  Lactated Ringer’s only (control)
Probe 2.  Lactated Ringer’s + Ascorbate
Probe 3.  Lactated Ringer’s + Tempol
Probe 4.  Lactated Ringer’s + Apocyanin
Initially, we set  the local heaters to 34°C (93°F), and only Ringer’s perfuses each probe.  We collect baseline 
data for 20 minutes, then we add the investigative substances to the probes.  After a second 20-minute 
baseline, we increase the temperature of the local heaters 0.5°C/5 sec to a target local skin temperature of 
42°C (107.6°F).  We clamp the local temperature at 42°C (107.6°F).  When the SkBF stabilizes, we add L-NAME 
[CONTACT_288745]-dependent vasodilation.  After the SkBF stabilizes (~40 
minutes), we switch perfusates at all MD sites to Ringer’s + sodium nitroprusside (SNP) for about [ADDRESS_351970] departs.
4. Baseline  Experiments – “Day 2”
a. MD:  Acetylcholine (ACh) Dose Response
We prepare 5  MD sites:
Probe 1.  Lactated Ringer’s only (control)
Probe 2.  Lactated Ringer’s + LNAME
[CONTACT_288746] 3.  Lactated Ringer’s + Ascorbate
Probe 4.  Lactated Ringer’s + Tempol
Probe 5.  Lactated Ringer’s + Apocyanin
We clamp  the temperatures of the local heaters at 34°C (93°F).  When the experiment begins, the subject 
rests for a 20-minute baseline.  When SkBF readings are stable, we add the test substances to probes 3, 4, 
and [ADDRESS_351971] 
concentration of ACh to the perfusate at each probe.  Each site receives 11 increasing concentrations of ACh 
(10^-8M to 10^-1M) each perfused for [ADDRESS_351972] concentration of ACh, we switch perfusates at 
all sites to Ringer’s + SNP for about [ADDRESS_351973] 3 days before proceeding with the Controlled Feeding protocols.
C. Controlled Feeding  Experiments  (the order of the local heating and acetylcholine dose response experiments is 
randomized)
1. Feeding  Protocol
Following baseline experiments outlined  above, participants are enrolled in a randomized, cross-over protocol 
involving 4 controlled feeding periods, each 8 days in duration, (7 days prior to subsequent experiments plus the day 
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 9 of  28 (V.10/14/2015)of first  experiment).  Subjects maintain the assigned feeding protocol through the 2 days of experiments.  The 
feeding protocols are:
low sodium  diet devoid of dairy products (L-Na) 
low sodium  diet containing cheese (L-Na+C) 
high sodium  diet devoid of dairy products (H-Na) 
high sodium  diet containing cheese (H-Na+C)
Three-day rotating  menus are developed by [CONTACT_288698], PhD, RD (Ohio State University) for each 8-day controlled 
feeding period to provide diets low or high in sodium (1500 vs 5500 mg) in combination with a cheese-free or cheese-
containing diet (0 vs. 6 servings/d).
All foods  and beverages are prepared by [CONTACT_288699] (CTRC) 
metabolic kitchen, packaged appropriately, and provided to participants for each 8-day feeding period.  Participants eat 
the prescribed diet at home, but are required to consume only those foods provided to them and to return any uneaten 
portions to accurately quantify food and beverage consumption.  To ensure compliance and maintain effective rapport, 
participants visit the study center every 1-2 days to pi[INVESTIGATOR_288662] 24-48 
hours.   Food intake is determined by [CONTACT_288700], and nutrient intakes calculated by a dietitian ([CONTACT_288758]) using NDSR software.
2.    Preparation for  experiments
a. We  give printed and verbal instructions outlining what the subjects need to do during the 8-day dietary 
intervention and before they come to the lab for experiments.  
b. Subjects  consume only the assigned diet for eight days.  We encourage subjects to eat all food we give to 
them especially the cheese.  
c. Subjects  fill out a daily questionnaire regarding the food/drink they consumed over the previous 24 hours.
d. They  visit the study center every 1-2 days to pi[INVESTIGATOR_288663].
e. While on  the diet, subjects refrain from consuming alcohol, antioxidants (i.e. vitamin C) and drugs with salt 
(e.g. antacids).
f. On  day seven of each dietary intervention, the subjects collect a 24-hour urine (sodium excretion) and 
undergo 24-hour blood pressure monitoring.  Subjects exhibiting a significant increase in blood pressure 
following the high sodium condition are classified as salt-sensitive and excluded.
g. Subjects  refrain from consuming caffeine (ex. coffee, tea, Coca Cola, chocolate) for [ADDRESS_351974] not had one within 2 weeks.    
ii. Microdialysis  probe insertion (described above)
iii. We  attach [ADDRESS_351975] a local skin heater and laser Doppler probe over each MD site.  We 
measure heart rate, local temperature, and skin blood flow (SkBF) throughout the MD experiments.  
We also measure blood pressure every 5-7 minutes (brachial osculation and/or Cardiocap).
3.     Experiments “Day 8”
a.    Subjects undergo 30 ml (2 Tbsp) blood draw to measure plasma oxidant stress and inflammatory markers.
b.   FMD  (described above)
c.    MD Experiment -  Local Heating (or Acetylcholine Dose Response) described above
d.    After the  experiment, subjects resume the controlled feeding protocol.  They eat as much of the food 
suppled for Day 8 as they can.
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 10  of 28 (V.10/14/2015)4.     Experiments “Day 9”
a.    MD Experiment - Acetylcholine Dose Response (or Local Heating) described above.
b.    Subjects resume  normal diet.
 
5.   Subjects wait  at least [ADDRESS_351976] during one of the washout periods.
D. Equipment:
Laser Doppler Flowmetry:  The Laser Doppler Flowmeter (Moor Instruments, Inc.) non-invasively provides a 
qualitative measure of skin blood flow to a depth of about 1 mm in the skin using a weak laser light.  This 
measure is a dimensionless value called “flux” that reflects the speed and number of blood cells moving through 
the microvasculature in an area of skin.  The flowmeter continuously measures skin blood flow using a fiber 
optic probes that fit into holders taped to the skin.  approved by [CONTACT_288701], ECG  (Heart rate):  The CardioCap 5 (General Electric – GE) critical care monitor measures blood 
pressure via a cuff inflated every 5-[ADDRESS_351977].  approved by [CONTACT_288702] (FMD):  FMD measures the health of blood vessels.  The researchers place a blood 
pressure cuff around the forearm.  They put gel on the upper arm just above the elbow.  Then they place a 
Doppler ultrasound probe on the gel.  The ultrasound makes sound waves to measure the size of blood vessels 
and the speed of the blood.  They make a “resting” measurement before they inflate the cuff.  Then they inflate 
the cuff for [ADDRESS_351978] (Ultrasound) FDA 510 (k) approved by [CONTACT_1622]
7.3 Duration  of Participation
Screening (1  Visit) less than 1.5 hour
FMD/MD  Experiments (5  Visits) less than 7 hours each
MD Experiments  (5 Visits) 5 hours
Obtain Food,  24-hour BP monitor & urine container, etc. (~14 Visits) about 15 minutes each
Total: ~75 Hours  (~25 visits; It could take about 8 weeks to complete the study.)
7.[ADDRESS_351979]  Article(s) (Study Drug(s) and/or Study Device(s))
7.4.1 Description
Devices:  See “7.2  Study Procedures”
Acetylcholine ACh Form:  Powder
Role in  Current Study:   Local heating combined with the local perfusion of endothelial agonist, acetylcholine, specifically 
examines the attenuated endothelium-dependent vasodilation (eNOS-derived NO) associated with aging or vascular 
pathologies.
Apocynin Form:  Powder
Role in Current Study:   Apocynin inhibits NADPH oxidase, which is a primary source of superoxide production within the 
vasculature.  
L-Ascorbate Vitamin  C Form: Powder
Role in  Current Study:  L-ascorbate stabilizes norepi[INVESTIGATOR_288664].  A small amount will be delivered by [CONTACT_288703] a 
nickel-sized are of skin.
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 11  of 28 (V.10/14/2015)Lactated Ringer’s Ringer’s Form:  Liquid
Role in  current study:  Lactated Ringer’s acts as the vehicle for the other research substances and as a flush.
LNAME [INVESTIGATOR_1645]-nitro-L-arginine methyl  ester Form: Powder
Role in  current study:  A nitric oxide synthase inhibitor.  L-NAME [CONTACT_288747], L-arginine.  L-NAME [CONTACT_832] a 
non-specific inhibitor for nitric oxide synthases, thereby [CONTACT_288704].  
We deliver small doses of LNAME [CONTACT_1639] a nickel-sized area of the skin.
Sodium Nitroprusside     SNP Form:  Powder
Role in  Current Study:  SNP, acting an NO donor, dilates blood vessels maximally thereby [CONTACT_288705] (SkBF).  Maximal SkBF is a reference point for other measures of skin blood flow.
Tempol Form:  Powder
Role in  Current Study:  Membrane-permeable scavenger of free-radicals. Tempol scavenges superoxide in vivo and 
reduces oxidant stress, acting as a superoxide dismutase mimetic. Tempol increases NO bioavailability in the vasculature 
and improves endothelial function. MD delivers a very small amount to the blood vessels in a nickel-sized area of skin.
7.4.2 Treatment  Regimen
Investigative Substances:   Microdialysis
The following is  a table of the research agents used with intradermal microdialysis.  Based upon research literature, we 
use 14% for calculating maximum delivery of the research agents for all IND applications for our MD studies.  
Research Agent 14% delivery (mg)
ACh 0.[ADDRESS_351980] Article
NA
7.4.6 Receiving,  Storage, Dispensing and Return 
[IP_ADDRESS] Receipt  of Test Article 
The containers  of the substances are dated upon receipt and when opened.    
Research Agent Source(s)  
ACh USP
Apocynin Sigma
Ascorbate Sigma
L-NAME [CONTACT_288748],  Tocris
Lactated Ringer’s VWR,  McKesson, Moore Medical
SNP USP
Tempol Calbiochem
From uploaded  Physician Oversight SOP:  
The investigative  agents are purchased by [CONTACT_288706].  A license from the CRC 
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 12  of 28 (V.10/14/2015)physician, the  nurse manager, or the overseeing physician is filed with vendors (e.g. VWR , Owens and Minor) requiring 
the documentation for the purchase of some investigative agents (e.g. Lactated Ringer's) .  The investigative agents are 
shipped to the Noll Lab or pi[INVESTIGATOR_288665].  Copi[INVESTIGATOR_288666]'s files.
[IP_ADDRESS] Storage
Our procedures  regarding the handling and use of the drugs have been extensively examined by [CONTACT_288707].  
The temperatures are recorded daily during weekdays.  The temperature of the room is also monitored by [CONTACT_288708].  The drugs used with microdialysis in their solid form are stored 
under environmental conditions according to manufacturer's instructions in cabinets, refrigerators, or freezers located in 
Room 224A or 228 Noll Laboratory.  Opened drugs in their solid form are discarded after one year.  The rooms are 
locked when unoccupi[INVESTIGATOR_530].  General Note:  The chemicals used for microdialysis in this study are scientific tools that are 
not FDA-approved, dispensable drugs, and do not have expi[INVESTIGATOR_1659].  We purchase most of these chemicals in solid 
form. The chemicals are stable for years when stored according to manufacturer’s instructions.  Nonetheless, we 
purchase most of the chemicals in small vials that we typi[INVESTIGATOR_288667].  Once mixed, we use 
stock solutions of the drugs within a week if stored in the refrigerator.  We use solutions within 6 months if they are 
frozen.  Final dilutions of solutions prepared for an experiment are used within a couple of minutes or hours of 
preparation.
[IP_ADDRESS] Preparation  and Dispensing
None of  the microdialysis drugs are dispensed to the participant; rather we use them in the experiment, as outlined in 
the Standard Operating Procedures (Phys Ovrsght SOP). The physician providing oversight approves the laboratory 
standard operating procedure for the obtainment, preparation, and administration of all investigational agents for MD 
and other procedures used in experiments.  
From uploaded  Physician Oversight SOP:
Investigative Substances  used with Microdialysis
The following procedures  have been examined and approved by [CONTACT_1622].
Trained lab  personnel prepare the perfusates in accordance with the procedure described in the IRB and FDA IND 
applications. When mixing the perfusates, the experienced technician washes the hands, wears protection (e.g. gloves , 
lab coat), and uses glassware that has been washed with cleaner (designed for use with healthcare instruments , 
pharmaceutical process equipment , tissue culture apparatus , etc.), and rinsed multiple times in tap and then doubly- 
distilled water and air-dried.  Most of the investigational agents are obtained in ultra-pure solid form. The solid 
investigational agents are weighed on a microbalance and then mixed with sterile pharmaceutical-grade Lactated 
Ringer's solution to the desired concentration.  The solution is drawn into the syringe through a 0.[ADDRESS_351981] perfusates are used within minutes or hours 
after preparation.  Stock solutions are made for some investigational agents.  The stock solutions are drawn into sterile 
1-cc syringes through 0.2 µm filters for storage.  The sterile stock solutions are labeled accordingly (e.g. content, date), 
and protected from light.   Stock solutions are not used beyond 1 week (refrigerated) and 6 months (frozen) after mixing.  
Stock solutions are diluted with sterile Lactated Ringer's when preparing the perfusate.  The final dilutions of the 
perfusates are drawn into sterile syringes through 0.[ADDRESS_351982] been submitted to the IRB.
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 13  of 28 (V.10/14/2015)[IP_ADDRESS] Return  or Destruction of the Test Article
Usually, investigative  substances are consumed in the experiments.  Investigative substances not consumed by [CONTACT_288709].  Some 
substances (e.g. protein or peptide-based) are autoclaved prior to disposal.
[IP_ADDRESS]  Prior  and Concomitant Therapy
NA
8.[ADDRESS_351983]  Numbers and Statistical Plan
8.1 Number  of Subjects
Number of subjects to  be enrolled:  [ADDRESS_351984]  needed to complete study:  [ADDRESS_351985] 15%; (ANOVA, power=0.80, α=0.05). 
Our published data  examining within-group differences between microdialysis drug treatments (using similar localized 
microdialysis drug treatments) suggest that within groups with compromised vasodilatory function, sample sizes of [ADDRESS_351986] a meaningful difference (effect size of 15%) between microdialysis 
treatment sites examining particular pathways ([ADDRESS_351987], e.g., NO-dependent dilation).  Our data specific to dietary 
cheese and sodium interventions indicates that [ADDRESS_351988] testing  15 subjects through all of the dietary interventions.  We would plan to perform preliminary analyses 
after testing 8 subjects to reach our desired statistical power for detecting within group differences between 
microdialysis sites.
8.3 Statistical  methods
We use within-person  experimental design and associated repeated measures ANOVA tests with planned contrasts for 
our primary functional outcomes.  We use multivariate regression analysis with possible ANCOVA to determine which 
measures of oxidative stress and antioxidant status are correlated with our functional findings.  For all experiments, we 
accept significance at p<0.05.  We adjust P-values and 95% confidence intervals for the mean difference estimates using 
Tukey’s multiple comparison procedure to account for post-hoc multiple comparison testing and ensure a familywise 
type I error rate less than 5%.  We use residual plots to check modeling assumptions, specifically examining them for 
nonconstant variances and nonnormality.  We analyze data using SAS PROC MIXED, a flexible analytic tool that 
accommodates a wide variety of analysis of variance and regression models and nested and incomplete data structures.  
9.0 Confidentiality,  Privacy and Data Management 
9.1 Confidentiality
9.1.1 Identifiers  associated with data and/or specimens
Most of  the data are coded and do not contain personal identifying information.  Documents allowing identification of 
participants do not leave our labs and are only available to authorized persons.  The names and contact [CONTACT_288710][INVESTIGATOR_99628] a password-protected lab computer.  The 
subjects’ information is deleted immediately from the Qualtrics website after being copi[INVESTIGATOR_530].  Only authorized personnel 
may access the lab computer.  Data forms containing identifiable information are shredded when no longer needed 
(within 6 years after publication of results).
[IP_ADDRESS] Use  of Codes, Master List
We keep  data in the laboratory in locked cabinets, the password-protected folder on the secured PSU server, and on 
password-protected computers maintained in a locked room.  Only authorized personnel have access.  Coded data 
shared with unauthorized persons cannot be traced to individuals.  The list linking code numbers to participants is not 
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 14  of 28 (V.10/14/2015)shared with  unauthorized persons and destroyed when project is completed and published.  The code is destroyed 
within 5 years of publication of the data.
9.1.2 Storage of  Data and/or Specimens
We maintain  data in the laboratory in locked cabinets and on password-protected computers located in rooms that are 
locked when unoccupi[INVESTIGATOR_530].  Most of the data are coded and do not contain personal identifying information.  Documents 
allowing identification of participants do not leave the investigator’s labs and are only available to authorized persons.  
Coded data shared with unauthorized persons cannot be traced to individuals.  We store any list linking the code to 
participants’ identity in locked cabinets and on password-protected computers located in rooms that are locked when 
unoccupi[INVESTIGATOR_530].  Potential participants may submit pre-screening questionnaires via the investigator’s website / Qualtrics 
(commercial survey website).  All web traffic to and from the Qualtrics application is done via a Secure Socket Layer (SSL) 
that encrypts the data in transmission.  Qualtrics deletes data from their servers within [ADDRESS_351989] copy data forms containing identifiable information are shredded when no longer needed 
(within 5 years after publication of results).  Screening data from subjects who are not accepted into the study are 
shredded when the project ends.  Subjects may give permission to have their contact [CONTACT_288711]’s secured files if they wish to be considered for participation in future studies.  After we complete the study, 
we remove all identifiers from the study’s data and store the data indefinitely.  Individual data may be used without 
identifying the subject to illustrate representative responses.
Biological specimens  are stored at University Park and Quest Labs, (Chantilly, VA), Ohio State University (Columbus, OH), 
and Georgia Health Sciences University (Augusta, GA).  At University Park, the specimens are stored in a -80ºC freezer in 
Noll first floor hallway.  All specimens not exhausted upon analysis are maintained no longer than 5 years after 
publication.
9.1.3 Access  to Data and/or Specimens
Only authorized  personnel have access.
9.1.4 Transferring  Data and/or Specimens
Some specimens are mailed  or transported by [CONTACT_288712].  All specimens are 
coded and do not contain identifiers.  We do not share the code with unauthorized persons.  The outside labs are at 
Quest Diagnostics (Chantilly, VA), Ohio State University (Columbus, OH), and Georgia Health Sciences University 
(Augusta, GA).
9.[ADDRESS_351990] Privacy
We tell  participants that they may decline to answer questions and decline to participate in the study.  Only authorized 
personnel are present during screening and experiments.  On occasion (e.g. educational visit, visiting colleague, site visit) 
participants may give permission for visitors to observe a procedure or experiment.
10.0 Data  and Safety Monitoring Plan
NA
10.1 Periodic  evaluation of data
10.2 Data  that are reviewed
10.3 Method of collection  of safety information
10.4 Frequency  of data collection
10.5 Individuals reviewing the data
10.6 Frequency  of review of cumulative data
10.7 Statistical  tests
10.8 Suspension  of research
11.0 Risks
General note:   The research group’s members are trained and competent in their duties.  The group, led by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. 
Alexander, evaluates the effectiveness and safety of protocols and procedures in an ongoing fashion.  We discuss the 
protocol with candidates, invite questions, and offer tours of the laboratory.  Prior to medical screening, candidates read 
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 15  of 28 (V.10/14/2015)and sign  informed consent forms detailing protocols, procedures, risks, sensations, compensation, etc.  We give 
candidates witnessed copi[INVESTIGATOR_42122].  After accepting participants into the study, we discuss and 
review the procedures and protocols with them generally and at each step throughout the project.  We frequently 
remind participants of the option to withdraw from the study at any time.  Restricting access to experiments, data, and 
coding to authorized personnel maintains confidentiality.  The Noll Lab’s electronics technician certifies the electrical 
devices for human use.  Lists of emergency numbers remain by [CONTACT_42157].  At least one cell phone is present at 
each experiment.  A hospi[INVESTIGATOR_288668] 1-[ADDRESS_351991].
Microdialysis:  We  insert a 25 g needle horizontally into and then out of the layers of the skin of the ventral forearm.  
The needle’s entry and exit are about 2.5 cm apart.  We thread the microdialysis “probe,” comprising a tube of 
membrane (320 um OD) with tubing attached at both ends (650 um OD), through the needle.  Then we withdraw the 
needle leaving the membrane under the skin.  We perfuse the probe with sterile saline using a syringe pump.
Cutaneous microdialysis  commonly causes some pain and bruising similar to that experienced during blood draws.  
There is usually no pain after the probe is in place.  The participant may experience mild pain while we remove probe.  
Minor bleeding may occur.  As with routine venipuncture, a participant who is nervous about needles could have 
increased heart rate and blood pressure, become lightheaded or nauseated, or could faint.
As with  venipuncture or any event that breaks the skin, infection is possible, but proper aseptic technique and sterile 
solutions / supplies keep the risk minimal.  However, no participants in any of our experiments been reported infection.  
We place a sterile bandage on the site after the experiment.  
The persons  performing MD have been trained in proper technique and procedure by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Alexander and had their 
technique witnessed / approved by [CONTACT_288713], D.O. ,  and/or Sarah Ferguson, M.D. (see uploads under respective 
“CV”s).  Ice numbs the skin and the small needle reduces pain during insertion.  We stop any bleeding by [CONTACT_288714].  In the unlikely event that the individual has an allergic reaction, we stop 
microdialysis immediately.  If the reaction becomes severe, we seek emergency medical assistance.  Although rare, if the 
membrane should break in half during removal, we remove the remaining half by [CONTACT_288715].  
This presents no additional risk to the participant.  In the unlikely event in which the membrane breaks during removal 
leaving an isolated pi[INVESTIGATOR_288669], we treat the pi[INVESTIGATOR_119159] a manner similar to that for a 
splinter in the skin.  In this case, we may have to make a superficial incision for removal.  Such an event has not occurred 
in projects that have used MD in this lab (over 1,[ADDRESS_351992]. Alexander, alone).  
Perfusate:  Lactated Ringer’s  solution flows through the microdialysis probes.  An allergic reaction to this physiological 
saline solution is highly unlikely.
All substances (ACh,  Apocynin, Ascorbate, L-NAME, SNP, Tempol) added to the lactated Ringer’s perfusing the 
microdialysis probes have been used previously clinically and/or in research in humans.
Microdialysis delivers  small amounts of the substances to a nickel-sized area of the skin.  The small quantities used and 
the extremely localized administration during microdialysis does not produce systemic effects.  To our knowledge, there 
are no reports of long or short-term side effects of these substances administered through microdialysis.  The chance of 
adverse reactions to these substances is extremely small given the minute amount delivered to the a very small area of 
skin, the lack of adverse reactions to similar amounts delivered via MD in many other studies, and lack of adverse effects 
in human cell cultures.  There is a slight chance of allergic reaction to these substances that could produce redness, 
itching, rash, and/or swelling.  A severe reaction (anaphylactic shock) could also cause fever, difficulty in breathing, 
changes in pulse, convulsions, and/or loss of consciousness. 
The perfusate  is sterile.  We prepare the perfusate in their laboratory using sterile techniques and supplies commonly 
used for this purpose in research laboratories.  The Ringer’s solution is sterile as purchased.  We add other solutions 
aseptically to the sterile bag of Ringer’s solution through 0.2 micron Gelman Sterile Acrodisc syringe filters.  We mix the 
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 16  of 28 (V.10/14/2015)perfusate for  same-day use and discard excess perfusate after the experiment.   During the IND application process, the 
FDA accepted the researchers’ technique for preparing perfusates.  Although unlikely, in the case of a severe reaction to 
the perfusate, the researchers call 911. 
Laser Doppler Flowmetry:   The probe attaches to the skin with double-sided tape and measures skin blood flow in a 
1mm3 volume of skin.  Weak lasers can hurt the eye if one should stare into the light for a long time.  The red light seen 
on the surface of the skin is harmless.  We do not turn on the laser until they tape the probes to a surface.  We remove 
the tape afterward carefully.  We have used this technique in their lab with IRB approval for many years without 
incident.  
Blood pressure  (manual and Cardiocap):  The manual and Cardiocap methods use a cuff that inflates on the upper arm.  
The cuff slowly deflates while we listen to the pulse-sounds at the inside of the elbow with a stethoscope or the 
Cardiocap monitors the pulse through the cuff.  The inflated cuff may make the arm feel tingly and numb, and the cuff 
may temporarily bruise the arm.  Efficient and competent measurement technique minimizes the duration of cuff 
inflation.  These techniques to measure blood pressure are unlikely to produce lasting ill effects.
Povidone Iodine:  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_288670].  Participants could be 
allergic to iodine.   An allergic reaction could cause redness, itching, rash, and/or swelling.  A worse reaction could also 
cause fever, breathing problems, changes in pulse and/or blood pressure, convulsions, shock, and/or loss of 
consciousness.  We use only alcohol on participants with iodine allergy as identified during screening.
Blood draw:   Blood draws can cause anxiety (with increased heart rate and blood pressure), mild pain, swelling, nausea, 
lightheadedness, fainting, or bleeding.  There is a slight chance of infection.  A competent nurse performs blood draws 
using standard venipuncture-procedure and techniques that minimize the chance of infection.  Participants may recline 
for the procedure.
Tape and  adhesive disks:   Participants could be sensitive to the adhesive of the tape and double-sided adhesive disks 
used in the study causing redness, rash, tenderness, and/or itching.  We remove the tape and adhesive disks carefully.  
Ointment is available, if needed.  
Screening:  The screening  includes blood sample, height, waist circumference, weight, heart rate, blood pressure, 
pregnancy test, and history performed by [CONTACT_42156].  Participants may be uncomfortable giving 
medical information or being measured.  The participants may decline to answer questions or participate in 
measurements.  We conduct screenings professionally and privately.
Initial Screening  Form:  We use the form to initially determine a candidate’s suitability for the study.  The initial 
interview gathers minimally invasive personal data that is kept confidential.  We used similar interviews in the past 
without problem.  Candidates may complete the form at the lab group’s web site via the Qualtrics commercial survey 
website.  The participant may decline to answer questions.  We conduct phone interviews professionally and privately.  
Only authorized personnel may access completed forms.
ECG:  We  attach three to twelve electrodes to the participant’s chest and then attach the electrode wires to a ECG 
machine.  The machine records the electrical activity of the heart.  There are no adverse effects from this measure.  A 
participant may be shy about electrodes applied to the chest.  We carefully remove the tape afterward.  We conduct the 
test professionally and privately.
Thermoregulation Lab  Website:  Potential participants may enter data into the screening form (see above) via the 
Qualtrics website.  Qualtrics is a secure website and survey application designed to support data capture for research 
studies.   The participant may be concerned about data’s security.  All web traffic to and from the Qualtrics application 
website is done via a Secure Socket Layer (SSL) that encrypts the data in transmission.  The questionnaire contains 
statements advising of the limitations of technology and that there is no confidentiality guarantee.  Data is deleted from 
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 17  of 28 (V.10/14/2015)the Qualtric’s  servers within 24 hours after the user deletes it from the website.  Participants may choose a personal 
interview instead.  
Local Heating:  The local heating control unit (Moor Instruments) precisely controls and monitors the temperature of the 
heated probe holders used with the Laser Doppler Flowmeter.  To determine the maximal SkBF, we increase the 
temperature of the heating units slowly (about 0.1°C every 1 second).   The skin feels very warm but not painful.  Local 
heating causes temporary redness of the skin that subsides within several hours.  This technique is very unlikely to 
produce long-term ill effects.  The local heating controllers (Moor Instruments) precisely control and monitor the 
temperature of the heated probe holders.  The system has programmed maximum temperature limits.  This technique is 
unlikely to cause long-term ill effects.
Latex:  Some  gloves and medical materials are made of latex rubber.  Some people may be sensitive to latex.  Latex:  
Screening identifies and excludes candidates having a known latex allergy.
Controlled Feeding  Protocol:   It is possible that the subject could have a food allergy.  Food allergies can produce 
redness, itching, rash, and/or swelling.  A severe reaction (anaphylactic shock) could also cause fever, difficulty in 
breathing, changes in pulse, convulsions, and/or loss of consciousness.  To avoid known food allergies, screening for this 
study includes identification of known allergies, including food allergies.  Also, subjects meet with a registered dietitian 
prior to participating to identify food preferences.  If a subject is allergic to the investigative substances, she/he is 
excluded from the study.  If a subject is allergic to a substance that may be appropriately substituted with another, we 
make the substitution, otherwise we exclude the subject from the study.
Flow Mediated  Vasodilation (FMD) Test  / Doppler Ultrasound:  There is a small chance the probe could irritate the skin.  
Placing the probe on the arm’s skin may cause temporary minor redness.  The inflated cuffs may cause the participant’s 
arms and feet to feel numb or tingly, and the skin’s color to change slightly.  The cuffs could cause mild bruising.  The gel 
is the same as that used with medical ultrasound tests.  The gel may feel cool or cold on the skin.  A bad reaction to the 
gel is highly unlikely.  The cuffs inflate for a minimal amount of time.  The temporary redness from the probe is unlikely 
to have lasting ill effects.  The participant may decline the test.
Sublingual Nitroglycerine:   Subjects may experience some of the following reactions to the nitroglycerine 
headache lightheadedness dry  mouth flushing
irregular heart beat  weakness nausea vomiting  
5-10 minute  drop in blood pressure fainting dizziness sweating
Subjects may  notice a sweet taste and/or tingling sensation in the mouth while the tablet dissolves.  All these effects are 
usually short-lived.  We minimized the effects by [CONTACT_288716][INVESTIGATOR_2525] [ADDRESS_351993] a mild or severe allergic response to the drug.  This response could include rash, 
itching, difficulty breathing, and swelling of the face, lips, tongue, or throat.  In the event that blood pressure does not 
return to baseline, coupled with related symptoms, we refer subjects for medical follow-up.  In the event of a severe 
reaction (e.g. anaphylaxis) we call 911.
The effects of  nitroglycerin on pregnant or nursing women are unknown.  We exclude subjects who are pregnant or 
nursing.  The use of nitroglycerin for artery measurements is not an FDA-approved use of this drug.  However, 
nitroglycerin has been used in this way in many research studies nation-wide without problem.  Also, sublingual 
nitroglycerin is often prescribed for and self-administered by [CONTACT_288717], or are at risk for, angina (heart 
pain).
Fasting:  Subjects may feel hungry  during the fasting period and for the duration of experiment.  We have conducted many 
research protocols over the years in which subjects were required to fast [ADDRESS_351994] 
experience of the medical research staff and investigators, there is no risk of fainting due to fasting for this length of time.
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 18  of 28 (V.10/14/2015)12.0 Potential Benefits  to Subjects and Others
12.1 Potential  Benefits to Subjects
Subjects receive  a medical screening that could inform them about their health.  They learn their blood pressure and 
blood cholesterol levels.  This is important knowledge.  High blood pressure and blood cholesterol contribute to many 
serious health problems.  
12.2 Potential  Benefits to Others
One in  three adults under the age of 65 and one out of two adults over the age of 60 has high blood pressure.   40% of 
all deaths in the [LOCATION_002] are due to CVD.  This health care burden is greater than $350 billion/year and growing.  As 
the population ages, these problems will increase.  The study will explore dairy as a candidate for early intervention 
through a change in diet.  This could reduce the need for drug treatment and its attending side effects and cost.  The 
projects provide valuable experience, education and partial fulfillment of degree-work for graduate and undergraduate 
students of The Pennsylvania State University.
13.0 Sharing  Results with Subjects
The researchers  give participants copi[INVESTIGATOR_288671].  When the researchers complete data analysis, 
participants may attend an optional presentation of the study’s general findings at Noll Lab.
14.[ADDRESS_351995]  Stipend (Compensation) and/or Travel Reimbursements
Experiments (1  baseline + 4 controlled feeding periods = 5 of each type of experiment)
FMD/Sublingual Nitroglycerin:  $250.00 $50.00 each 
MD local  heating:   $425.00 $85 each ($15.00 for each MD probe + $25 for completing MD
experiment)
MD ACh  dose response:   $575.00 $115.00 each ($15.00 for each MD probe + $40 for completing
MD experiment)
Bonus for  completing all experiments:  $200.00
Total =  $1,450.[ADDRESS_351996] receives $15.00 for each MD probe inserted 
+ $20 ($20.00 is one-half of $40.00).  The researchers may ask subjects to repeat a trial.  If subjects agree to repeat a 
trial, they receive payment for the repeated trial as stated above. They are reimbursed for gasoline if they live more 
than 20 miles from Noll Lab.
15.0 Economic  Burden to Subjects
15.1 Costs  
None
15.2 Compensation  for research-related injury
It is  the policy of the institution to provide neither financial compensation nor free medical treatment for research-
related injury.  In the event of injury resulting from this research, medical treatment is available but will be provided at 
the usual charge.  Such charges may be paid by [CONTACT_288718].
16.0 Resources Available
16.1 Facilities  and locations
The Noll laboratory is a 4-floor  (35,000 sq. ft.) free-standing building devoted to basic, clinical, and applied physiological 
research.  Biochemistry laboratories are available for sample processing and analyses.  Available equipment includes 
centrifuges, osmometer, assay plate reader, shaker,  washer, NA/K analyzer, spectrophotometer, i-Stat analyzer, 
refractometer, hemocue, hematocrit system, fraction collector, hydrogen sulphide analyzer, sonicator, microbalances, 
laser doppler flowmeters, full-field laser perfusion imager, mini-syringe pumps/ controllers,  sweat rate monitoring 
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 19  of 28 (V.10/14/2015)systems, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_288672], medical infusion chair, ECG analysis system, finipres, plethysmograph, refrigerators, 
pharmaceutical refrigerator,  -20 C and -80 C freezers, heated/refrigerated circulators, water-perfused suits, local skin 
cooling/ heating systems, critical care monitors, blood pressure monitors, metabolic cart, gas sterilization equipment, 
and autoclave facilities.  In addition to ample office and laboratory laptop or desktop computers for research and 
student use, Noll Laboratory has two available servers and a trunk line connection to the University’s mainframe 
computer system.  Internal, office and laboratory computers are linked.  The laboratory has four PC-based data 
acquisition systems equipped with Dataq hardware driven by [CONTACT_288719], two of which are located in computer 
controlled environmental chambers equipped with treadmills and bikes.   A Clinical Research Center is contiguous to the 
Noll Laboratory in the 14,[ADDRESS_351997] beds for 
overnight (or longer) stays, a metabolic kitchen, medical examination rooms, and several specialized procedure rooms 
are available.  Because the CRC is contiguous with existing laboratory space, it is readily available for research support, 
e.g., pre-test subject screening.  Noll Laboratory has exceptional in-house support facilities including machine and 
electronics shops.
16.[ADDRESS_351998] been conducting similar experiments for many years and are familiar with the duration of the 
procedures/protocols/projects and the amount of staffing required to complete the project while maintaining their 
other obligations.
16.[ADDRESS_351999] weekly lab 
meetings.  They review any applicable changes or issues.
17.0 Other  Approvals
17.1 Other  Approvals from External Entities
We submit  an IND application to the FDA.
17.2 Internal  PSU Committee Approvals
Check all  that apply:
  Anatomic Pathology  – Hershey only – Research involves the collection of tissues or use of pathologic 
specimens. Upload a copy of the Use of Human Tissue For Research Form on the “Supporting 
Documents” page in CATS IRB. This form is available on the IRB website at: 
http://www.pennstatehershey.org/web/irb/home/resources/forms
  Animal Care  and Use – All campuses – Human research involves animals and humans or the use of 
human tissues in animals
X  Biosafety  – All campuses – Research involves biohazardous materials (human biological specimens in 
a PSU research lab, biological toxins, carcinogens, infectious agents, recombinant viruses or DNA or gene 
therapy). 
  Conflict of  Interest Review – All campuses – Research has one or more of study team members 
indicated as having a financial interest.
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 20  of 28 (V.10/14/2015)  Radiation Safety  – Hershey only – Research involves research-related radiation procedures. All 
research involving radiation procedures (standard of care and/or research-related) must upload the 
Radiation Review Form on the “Supporting Documents” page in CATS IRB. This form is available on the 
IRB website at: http://www.pennstatehershey.org/web/irb/home/resources/forms
X  IND/IDE  Audit – All campuses – Research in which the PSU researcher holds the IND or IDE or intends 
to hold the IND or IDE.
  Scientific Review  – Hershey only – All investigator-written research studies requiring review by [CONTACT_40461]. The scientific 
review requirement may be fulfilled by [CONTACT_080]: (1) external peer-review process; (2) 
department/institute scientific review committee; or (3) scientific review by [CONTACT_74164].  NOTE: Review by [CONTACT_288720], records and/or 
tissues. For more information about this requirement see the IRB website at: 
http://www.pennstatehershey.org/web/irb/home/resources/investigator 
18.[ADDRESS_352000]  Enrollment
18.4 Reporting  of Adverse Events and New Information
18.5 Audit  and Monitoring Plans
19.0 Adverse  Event Reporting
19.1 Adverse  Event Definitions
For drug  studies, incorporate the following definitions into the below responses, as written:
Adverse event Any untoward  medical occurrence associated with the use of the drug in 
humans, whether or not considered drug related
Adverse reaction Any adverse  event caused by a drug
Suspected adverse 
reactionAny adverse  event for which there is a reasonable possibility that the drug 
caused the adverse event.  Suspected adverse reaction implies a lesser degree 
of certainty about causality than “adverse reaction”.
Reasonable  possibility.  For the purpose of IND safety reporting, 
“reasonable possibility” means there is evidence to suggest a causal 
relationship between the drug and the adverse event.
Serious adverse 
event
 or Serious 
suspected adverse 
reactionSerious adverse  event or Serious suspected adverse reaction: An adverse event 
or suspected adverse reaction that in the view of either the investigator or 
sponsor, it results in any of the following outcomes: Death, a life-threatening 
adverse event, inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6929], a persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption 
of the ability to conduct normal life functions, or a congenital anomaly/birth 
defect. Important medical events that may not result in death, be life-
threatening, or require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_708], based 
upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or 
subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the 
outcomes listed in this definition. 
Life-threatening 
adverse
 event or An adverse  event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “life-
threatening” if, in the view of either the Investigator (i.e., the study site 
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 21  of 28 (V.10/14/2015)life-threatening 
suspected
 adverse 
reactionprincipal investigator)  or Sponsor, its occurrence places the patient or research 
subject at immediate risk of death.  It does not include an adverse event or 
suspected adverse reaction that had it occurred in a more severe form, might 
have caused death.
Unexpected 
adverse
 event or 
Unexpected 
suspected adverse 
reaction.  An adverse  event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “unexpected” if 
it is not listed in the investigator brochure, general investigational plan, clinical 
protocol, or elsewhere in the current IND application; or is not listed at the 
specificity or severity that has been previously observed and/or specified.
For device  studies, incorporate the following definitions into the below responses, as written:
Unanticipated 
adverse
 device 
effectAny serious  adverse effect on health or safety or any life-threatening problem 
or death caused by, or associated with, a device, if that effect, problem, or 
death was not previously identified in nature, severity, or degree of incidence 
in the investigational plan or IDE application (including a supplementary plan 
or application), or any other unanticipated serious problem associated with a 
device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects.
19.[ADDRESS_352001] event is interviewed in person or via telephone 
concerning the event and the responses are included into the notes for that event.
All adverse  events (serious or non-serious) and abnormal test findings observed or reported to study team believed to 
be associated with the study drug(s) or device(s) will be followed until the event (or its sequelae) or the abnormal test 
finding resolves or stabilizes at a level acceptable to the investigator.
An abnormal  test finding will be classified as an adverse event if one or more of the following criteria are met:
The  test finding is accompanied by [CONTACT_4659]
The  test finding necessitates additional diagnostic evaluation(s) or medical/surgical intervention; including 
significant additional concomitant drug treatment or other therapy
Note: Simply  repeating a test finding, in the absence of any of the other listed criteria, does not constitute an adverse 
event.  
The  test finding leads to a change in study drug dosing or discontinuation of subject participation in the clinical 
research study
The  test finding is considered an adverse event by [CONTACT_093].
19.[ADDRESS_352002] findings to determine 1) if the 
abnormal test finding should be classified as an adverse event; 2) if there is a reasonable possibility that the adverse 
event was caused by [CONTACT_5257](s) or device(s); and 3) if the adverse event meets the criteria for a serious adverse 
event.
If the  investigator’s final determination of causality is “unknown and of questionable relationship to the study drug(s) or 
device(s)”, the adverse event will be classified as associated with the use of the study drug(s) or device(s) for reporting 
purposes.  If the investigator’s final determination of causality is “unknown but not related to the study drug(s) or 
device(s)”, this determination and the rationale for the determination will be documented in the respective subject’s 
case history.
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 22  of 28 (V.10/14/2015)19.4 Reporting  of Adverse Reactions and Unanticipated Problems to the FDA  
19.4.1 Written IND/IDE  Safety Reports
The Sponsor-Investigator  will submit a written IND Safety Report (i.e., completed FDA Form 3500A) to the responsible 
new drug review division of the FDA for any observed or volunteered adverse event that is determined to be a serious 
and unexpected, suspected adverse reaction.  Each IND Safety Report will be prominently labeled, “IND Safety Report”, 
and a copy will be provided to all participating investigators (if applicable) and sub-investigators.
Written IND  Safety Reports will be submitted to the FDA as soon as possible and, in no event, later than 15 calendar 
days following the Sponsor-Investigator’s receipt of the respective adverse event information and determination that it 
meets the respective criteria for reporting.
For each  written IND Safety Report, the Sponsor-Investigator will identify all previously submitted IND Safety Reports 
that addressed a similar suspected adverse reaction experience and will provide an analysis of the significance of newly 
reported, suspected adverse reaction in light of the previous, similar report(s) or any other relevant information.
Relevant follow-up  information to an IND Safety Report will be submitted to the applicable review division of the FDA as 
soon as the information is available and will be identified as such (i.e., “Follow-up IND Safety Report”).
If the  results of the Sponsor-Investigator’s follow-up investigation show that an adverse event that was initially 
determined to not require a written IND Safety Report does, in fact, meet the requirements for reporting; the Sponsor-
Investigator will submit a written IND Safety Report as soon as possible, but in no event later than 15 calendar days, 
after the determination was made.
19.4.2 Telephoned IND  Safety Reports – Fatal or Life-threatening Suspected Adverse Reactions
In addition  to the subsequent submission of a written IND Safety Report (i.e., completed FDA Form 3500A), the Sponsor-
Investigator will notify the responsible review division of the FDA by [CONTACT_288721], fatal or life-threatening suspected adverse reaction. 
The telephone  or facsimile transmission of applicable IND Safety Reports will be made as soon as possible but in no 
event later than 7 calendar days after the Sponsor-Investigator’s receipt of the respective adverse event information and 
determination that it meets the respective criteria for reporting.
19.5 Reporting  Adverse Reactions and Unanticipated Problems to the Responsible IRB
Problems Not Requiring  Prompt Reporting:  The investigators log internal events/problems that are not problems that 
require prompt reporting to the IRB (i.e., expected and related events) in an accumulative tracking log that is reported to 
the IRB with the yearly Continuing Progress Report (CPR) and at the close of the study.
Problems Requiring  Prompt Reporting:  Internal problems that require prompt reporting and are fatal or life-threatening 
are reported to the IRB in a Problem Report within one weekday of the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_288673].  All other internal problems that require prompt reporting are reported within five weekdays of the principal 
investigator [INVESTIGATOR_288674].  External problems that require prompt reporting are reported 
within 30 days of their receipt by [CONTACT_458].  The investigators issue problem reports to the IRB in the 
case of adverse events that are: (1) unexpected and (2) related/likely related to the research as determined by [CONTACT_288722] (PSU).  These events include:  specific protocol-defined events that require prompt reporting to the 
sponsor, breach of confidentiality, incarceration of a participant in a protocol not approved to enroll prisoners, an 
accidental or unintentional deviation to the IRB-approved protocol that involved risks, an emergency protocol deviation 
take without prior IRB review to eliminate an apparent immediate hazard to a research participant, a complaint of a 
participant that indicates an unanticipated risk or any complaint that cannot be resolved by [CONTACT_16133], 
information that indicates a change to the risks or potential benefits of the research,  change in FDA labeling or 
withdrawal from marketing of the study drug, device or biologic used in this research protocol, or sponsor-imposed 
suspension for risk.  For each problem, the investigator adds the event to an accumulative problem report log included 
with the Problem Report submitted to the IRB.  The investigator submits the log to the IRB with the yearly Continuing 
Progress Report (CPR) and at the close of the study.
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 23  of 28 (V.10/14/2015)In accordance with applicable  policies of The Pennsylvania State University Institutional Review Board (IRB), the 
investigator will report, to the IRB, any observed or reported harm (adverse event) experienced by a subject or other 
individual, which in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_40454] (1) unexpected; and (2) probably related to the 
research procedures. Harms (adverse events) will be submitted to the IRB in accordance with the IRB policies and 
procedures.
19.[ADDRESS_352003]’s participation if the subject should engage in behavior that could 
jeopardize his/her own health and well-being or that of others.  We end the experiments if the subject’s systolic or 
diastolic blood pressures exceed 180 or 110 mmHg, respectively, heart rate exceeds 85% of the age-predicted 
maximum, or the body's core temperature reaches 39°C (102 °F) or decreases 1°C (1.8 °F) from baseline.  Human 
subjects undergoing the Controlled Feeding cease participation in the study if we determine that the procedure 
produces undesirable reactions (i.e. sustained blood pressure increase > 140/90 mmHg).
20.[ADDRESS_352004]. Alexander is ongoing.
20.1.2 Safety Monitoring
The Principal  Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_74160] (AE) are correctly entered into the AE case report forms by 
[CONTACT_14676]; be available to answer any questions that the coordinators may have concerning AEs; and will notify 
the IRB, FDA, sponsor and/or DSMB of all applicable AEs as appropriate. All assessments of AEs will be made by a 
licensed medical professional who is an investigator on the research. 
The research coordinator  will complete the appropriate report form and logs; assist the PI [INVESTIGATOR_288675], FDA, and/or DSMB of all Unanticipated Problems/SAE’s.
The Monitor  will confirm that the AEs are correctly entered into the case report forms. The Monitor will confirm that the 
adverse events are consistent with the source documents and are reported to the appropriate regulatory bodies, as 
required.
21.0 Future Undetermined  Research: Data and Specimen Banking
NA
21.1 Data  and/or specimens being stored
21.2 Location  of storage
21.3 Duration  of storage
21.4 Access to data and/or  specimens
21.5 Procedures  to release data or specimens
21.6 Process  for returning results
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 24  of 28 (V.10/14/2015)22.0 References
Referenced in  Section 2
1. Morrison  AC, Ness RB. Sodium intake and cardiovascular disease. Annual review of public health. 2011;32:71-90
2. O'Donnell M, Mente  A, Yusuf S. Sodium intake and cardiovascular health. Circulation research. 2015;116:1046-[ADDRESS_352005] consumption to prevent cardiometabolic diseases: Epi[INVESTIGATOR_288676]. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2014;99:1235S-1242S
4. Qin  LQ, Xu JY, Han SF, Zhang ZL, Zhao YY, Szeto IM. Dairy consumption and risk of cardiovascular disease: An updated 
meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Asia Pacific journal of clinical nutrition. 2015;24:90-100
5. Yerlikaya O, Acu M,  Kinik O. Importance of dairy products in cardiovascular diseases and type 2 diabetes. Critical reviews in 
food science and nutrition. 2013;53:902-[ADDRESS_352006]. Dietary sodium restriction reverses 
vascular endothelial dysfunction in middle-aged/older adults with moderately elevated systolic blood pressure. Journal of 
the American College of Cardiology. 2013;61:335-343
7. Greaney  JL, DuPont JJ, Lennon-Edwards SL, Sanders PW, Edwards DG, Farquhar WB. Dietary sodium loading impairs 
microvascular function independent of blood pressure in humans: Role of oxidative stress. The Journal of physiology. 
2012;590:5519-5528
8. Crichton  GE, Elias MF, Dore GA, Abhayaratna WP, Robbins MA. Relations between dairy food intake and arterial stiffness: 
Pulse wave velocity and pulse pressure. Hypertension. 2012;59:1044-1051
9. Bodenheimer T.  High and rising health care costs. Part 1: Seeking an explanation. Annals of internal medicine. 
2005;142:847-[ADDRESS_352007] V, Kissela B, Kittner S, Lloyd-Jones D, 
McDermott M, Meigs J, Moy C, Nichol G, O'Donnell CJ, Roger V, Rumsfeld J, Sorlie P, Steinberger J, Thom T, Wasserthiel-
Smoller S, Hong Y. Heart disease and stroke statistics--2007 update: A report from the american heart association statistics 
committee and stroke statistics subcommittee. Circulation. 2007;115:e69-171
11. Crichton  GE, Alkerwi A. Dairy food intake is positively associated with cardiovascular health: Findings from observation of 
cardiovascular risk factors in luxembourg study. Nutr Res. 2014;34:1036-1044
12. Markey  O, Vasilopoulou D, Givens DI, Lovegrove JA. Dairy and cardiovascular health: Friend or foe? Nutrition bulletin / 
BNF. 2014;39:161-[ADDRESS_352008]  KD, Mah E, Guo Y, Pei R, Volek JS, Bruno RS. Low-fat milk ingestion prevents postprandial hyperglycemia-mediated 
impairments in vascular endothelial function in obese individuals with metabolic syndrome. The Journal of nutrition. 
2013;143:1602-1610
15. Moore  LL, Bradlee ML, Singer MR, Qureshi MM, Buendia JR, Daniels SR. Dietary approaches to stop hypertension (dash) 
eating pattern and risk of elevated blood pressure in adolescent girls. Br J Nutr. 2012;108:1678-[ADDRESS_352009] arterial 
stiffness and blood pressure in men?: Evidence from the caerphilly prospective study. Hypertension. 2013;61:42-47
17. Yoshizawa  M, Maeda S, Miyaki A, Misono M, Choi Y, Shimojo N, Ajisaka R, Tanaka H. Additive beneficial effects of 
lactotripeptides and aerobic exercise on arterial compliance in postmenopausal women. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 
2009;297:H1899-1903
18. Wang  L, Manson JE, Buring JE, Lee IM, Sesso HD. Dietary intake of dairy products, calcium, and vitamin d and the risk of 
hypertension in middle-aged and older women. Hypertension. 2008;51:1073-[ADDRESS_352010]  KD, Bruno RS. Protective role of dairy and its constituents on vascular function independent of blood pressure-
lowering activities. Nutrition reviews. 2015;73:36-[ADDRESS_352011] on vascular endothelial function in 
overweight, middle-aged men and women. The British journal of nutrition. 2013;109:882-[ADDRESS_352012]  KD, Bruno RS, Seip RL, Quann EE, Volk BM, Freidenreich DJ, Kawiecki DM, Kupchak BR, Chung MY, Kraemer WJ, 
Volek JS. Acute ingestion of a novel whey-derived peptide improves vascular endothelial responses in healthy individuals: 
A randomized, placebo controlled trial. Nutrition journal. 2009;8:34
22. Turpeinen  AM, Jarvenpaa S, Kautiainen H, Korpela R, Vapaatalo H. Antihypertensive effects of bioactive tripeptides-a 
random effects meta-analysis. Ann Med. 2013;45:51-[ADDRESS_352013] of milk tripeptides on blood pressure: A meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials. Nutrition. 2008;24:933-940
24. Murakami M,  Tonouchi H, Takahashi R, Kitazawa H, Kawai Y, Negishi H, Saito T. Structural analysis of a new anti-
hypertensive peptide (beta-lactosin b) isolated from a commercial whey product. Journal of dairy science. 2004;87:1967-
1974
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 25  of 28 (V.10/14/2015)25. van  der Zander K, Jakel M, Bianco V, Koning MM. Fermented lactotripeptides-containing milk lowers daytime blood 
pressure in high normal-to-mild hypertensive subjects. J Hum Hypertens. 2008;22:804-806
26. Xia  Z, Liu M, Wu Y, Sharma V, Luo T, Ouyang J, McNeill JH. N-acetylcysteine attenuates tnf-alpha-induced human vascular 
endothelial cell apoptosis and restores enos expression. Eur J Pharmacol. 2006;550:134-[ADDRESS_352014] LG. Role of endothelium in the responses of human intracranial arteries to a slight reduction 
of extracellular magnesium. Exp Physiol. 1992;77:209-[ADDRESS_352015] JL, Rains JL, Bull R. L-cysteine supplementation lowers blood glucose, glycated hemoglobin, crp, 
mcp-1, and oxidative stress and inhibits nf-kappab activation in the livers of zucker diabetic rats. Free Radic Biol Med. 
2009;46:1633-[ADDRESS_352016] of n-acetylcysteine on the early expression of 
inflammatory markers in the retina and plasma of diabetic rats. Clinical & experimental ophthalmology. 2009;37:223-231
30. De  Mattia G, Bravi MC, Laurenti O, Cassone-Faldetta M, Proietti A, De Luca O, Armiento A, Ferri C. Reduction of oxidative 
stress by [CONTACT_68058] n-acetyl-l-cysteine treatment decreases plasma soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 concentrations in 
non-obese, non-dyslipi[INVESTIGATOR_288677], normotensive, patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes. Diabetologia. 1998;41:1392-
1396
31.  Committee  DGA. Scientific report of the 2015 dietary guidelines advisory committee 2015
32. Elliott P,  Stamler J, Nichols R, Dyer AR, Stamler R, Kesteloot H, Marmot M. Intersalt revisited: Further analyses of 24 hour 
sodium excretion and blood pressure within and across populations. Intersalt cooperative research group. BMJ. 
1996;312:1249-1253
33. Weinberger  MH. Salt sensitivity of blood pressure in humans. Hypertension. 1996;27:481-[ADDRESS_352017] of lower sodium intake on health: Systematic 
review and meta-analyses. BMJ. 2013;346:f1326
35. He  FJ, Li J, Macgregor GA. Effect of longer term modest salt reduction on blood pressure: Cochrane systematic review and 
meta-analysis of randomised trials. BMJ. 2013;346:f1325
36. Van Horn  L. Dietary sodium and blood pressure: How low should we go? Progress in cardiovascular diseases. [ADDRESS_352018] of high-salt diet on no release and superoxide production in rat aorta. American 
journal of physiology. Heart and circulatory physiology. 2004;286:H575-583
38. DuPont  JJ, Greaney JL, Wenner MM, Lennon-Edwards SL, Sanders PW, Farquhar WB, Edwards DG. High dietary sodium 
intake impairs endothelium-dependent dilation in healthy salt-resistant humans. Journal of hypertension. 2013;31:530-
[ADDRESS_352019] JH. Loss of endothelium and receptor-mediated dilation in pi[INVESTIGATOR_288678] a short-term 
high salt diet. Hypertension. 1999;33:686-[ADDRESS_352020] of a high salt diet on microvascular antioxidant enzymes. Journal of vascular research. 
2002;39:41-50
41. Nurkiewicz  TR, Wu G, Li P, Boegehold MA. Decreased arteriolar tetrahydrobiopterin is linked to superoxide generation 
from nitric oxide synthase in mice fed high salt. Microcirculation. 2010;17:147-[ADDRESS_352021] of high-salt diet on vascular relaxation and oxidative stress in mesenteric resistance 
arteries. Journal of vascular research. 2007;44:382-[ADDRESS_352022]. Low dietary sodium intake is associated with enhanced vascular endothelial 
function in middle-aged and older adults with elevated systolic blood pressure. Ther Adv Cardiovasc Dis. 2009;3:347-356
44. Tzemos  N, Lim PO, Wong S, Struthers AD, MacDonald TM. Adverse cardiovascular effects of acute salt loading in young 
normotensive individuals. Hypertension. 2008;51:1525-[ADDRESS_352023] Physiol (1985). 2012;112:1049-1053
46. Holowatz LA,  Kenney, W. L. Oral atorvastatin therapy increases nitric oxide-dependent cutaneous vasodilation in humans 
by [CONTACT_288723]-sensitive oxidants. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2011;301:R763-[ADDRESS_352024]. Tempol improves cutaneous thermal hyperemia through increasing nitric oxide bioavailability 
in young smokers. American journal of physiology. Heart and circulatory physiology. 2014;306:H1507-1511
48. Medow MS,  Bamji N, Clarke D, Ocon AJ, Stewart JM. Reactive oxygen species (ros) from nadph and xanthine oxidase 
modulate the cutaneous local heating response in healthy humans. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2011;111:20-26
49. Bruning RS,  Santhanam L, Stanhewicz AE, Smith CJ, Berkowitz DE, Kenney WL, Holowatz LA. Endothelial nitric oxide 
synthase mediates cutaneous vasodilation during local heating and is attenuated in middle-aged human skin. Journal of 
applied physiology: respi[INVESTIGATOR_696], environmental and exercise physiology. 2012;112:2019-[ADDRESS_352025] oxidative damage on pc 12 cells. The Journal of dairy research. 2015;82:1-7
L-NAME, SNP, ACh
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 26  of 28 (V.10/14/2015)1. Adler,  S., H. Huang, K. Loke, X. Xu, A. Laumas, and T. H. Hintze. Modulation of renal oxygen consumption by [CONTACT_288724]. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 37:301-309, 2001.
2. Adler,  S., H. Huang, K. E. Loke, X. Xu, H. Tada, A. Laumas, and T. H. Hintze. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase plays an 
essential role in regulation of renal oxygen consumption by [CONTACT_288725]. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 280:F838-843, 2001.
3. Binggeli,  C., L. E. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_5542], R. Corti, I. Sudano, V. Stojanovic, D. Hayoz, T. F. Luscher, and G. Noll. Statins enhance 
postischemic hyperemia in the skin circulation of hypercholesterolemic patients: a monitoring test of endothelial 
dysfunction for clinical practice? J Am Coll Cardiol. 42:71-77, 2003.
4. Buxton, I.  L., D. J. Cheek, D. Eckman, D. P. Westfall, K. M. Sanders, and K. D. Keef. NG-nitro L-arginine methyl ester and 
other alkyl esters of arginine are muscarinic receptor antagonists. Circ Res. 72:387-395, 1993.
5. Chauhan, A.,  R. S. More, P. A. Mullins, G. Taylor, C. Petch, and P. M. Schofield. Aging-associated endothelial dysfunction in 
humans is reversed by L-arginine. J Am Coll Cardiol. 28:1796-1804, 1996.
6. Cooke,  J. P., J. Dzau, and A. Creager. Endothelial dysfunction in hypercholesterolemia is corrected by L-arginine. Basic Res 
Cardiol. [ADDRESS_352026] 2:173-181, 1991.
7. Durante,  W., L. Liao, S. V. Reyna, K. J. Peyton, and A. I. Schafer. Transforming growth factor-beta(1) stimulates L-arginine 
transport and metabolism in vascular smooth muscle cells: role in polyamine and collagen synthesis. Circulation. 103:1121-
1127, 2001.
8. Goode,  G. K. and A. M. Heagerty. In vitro responses of human peripheral small arteries in hypercholesterolemia and effects 
of therapy. Circulation. 91:2898-2903, 1995.
9. Holowatz,  L. A., C. S. Thompson, and W. L. Kenney. L-Arginine supplementation or arginase inhibition augments reflex 
cutaneous vasodilatation in aged human skin. J Physiol. 574:573-581, 2006.
10. Holowatz,  L. A., C. S. Thompson, C. T. Minson, and W. L. Kenney. Mechanisms of acetylcholine-mediated vasodilatation in 
young and aged human skin. J Physiol. 563:965-973, 2005.
Tempol and  Ascorbic Acid
1. Adeagbo,  A. S., I. G. Joshua, C. Falkner, and P. J. Matheson. Tempol, an antioxidant, restores endothelium-derived 
hyperpolarizing factor-mediated vasodilation during hypertension. Eur J Pharmacol. 481:91-100, 2003.
2. Colleluori, D.  M. and D. E. Ash. Classical and slow-binding inhibitors of human type II arginase. Biochemistry. 40:9356-9362, 
2001.
3. Cross,  J. M., A. E. Donald, S. L. Nuttall, J. E. Deanfield, R. G. Woolfson, and R. J. Macallister. Vitamin C improves resistance 
but not conduit artery endothelial function in patients with chronic renal failure. Kidney Int . 63:1433-1442, 2003.
4. Damiani,  E., L. Greci, R. Parsons, and J. Knowland. Nitroxide radicals protect DNA from damage when illuminated in vitro in 
the presence of dibenzoylmethane and a common sunscreen ingredient. Free Radic Biol Med . 26:809-816, 1999.
5. Dessolin,  J., M. Schuler, A. Quinart, F. De Giorgi, L. Ghosez, and F. Ichas. Selective targeting of synthetic antioxidants to 
mitochondria: towards a mitochondrial medicine for neurodegenerative diseases? Eur J Pharmacol. 447:155-161, 2002.
6. DuPont  JJ, Ramick MG, Farquhar WB, Townsend RR, Edwards DG. NADPH oxidase-derived reactive oxygen species 
contribute to impaired cutaneous microvascular function in chronic kidney disease.  Am J Physiol Renal Physiol . Jun 
15;306(12):F1499-506, 2014.
7. Fujii  N, Brunt VE, Minson CT. Tempol improves cutaneous thermal hyperemia through increasing nitric oxide bioavailability 
in young smokers.  Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. Jun 1;306(11):H1507-11, 2014.
6. Gwozdzinski,  K., G. Bartosz, and W. Leyko. Effect of thiol reagents and ionizing radiation on the permeability of erythrocyte 
membrane for spin-labeled non-electrolytes. Radiat Environ Biophys. 22:53-59, 1983.
7. Hirooka,  Y., K. Eshima, S. Setoguchi, T. Kishi, K. Egashira, and A. Takeshita. Vitamin C improves attenuated angiotensin II-
induced endothelium-dependent vasodilation in human forearm vessels. Hypertens Res. 26:953-959, 2003.
8. Johnstone, P.  A., W. G. DeGraff, and J. B. Mitchell. Protection from radiation-induced chromosomal aberrations by [CONTACT_288726]. Cancer. 75:2323-2327, 1995.
9. Kimura,  S., G. X. Zhang, Y. Nagai, K. Miyata, A. Nishiyama, T. Shokoji, L. Yao, Y. Y. Fan, M. Rahman, Y. Fujisawa, A. Miyatake, 
and Y. Abe. Time-dependent transition of tempol-sensitive reduction of blood pressure in angiotensin II-induced 
hypertension. J Hypertens. 22:2161-2168, 2004.
10. Klingler,  W., L. Kreja, W. Nothdurft, and C. Selig. Influence of different radioprotective compounds on radiotolerance and 
cell cycle distribution of human progenitor cells of granulocytopoiesis in vitro. Br J Haematol . 119:244-254, 2002.
Apocynin
1. DuPont  JJ, Ramick MG, Farquhar WB, Townsend RR, Edwards DG. Nadph oxidase-derived reactive oxygen species 
contribute to impaired cutaneous microvascular function in chronic kidney disease. American journal of physiology. Renal 
physiology. 2014;306:F1499-1506.
2. Medow MS,  Bamji N, Clarke D, Ocon AJ, Stewart JM. Reactive oxygen species (ros) from nadph and xanthine oxidase 
modulate the cutaneous local heating response in healthy humans. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2011;111:20-26.
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 27  of 28 (V.10/14/2015)Microdialysis
1. Bennett,  L. A., J. M. Johnson, D. P. Stephens, A. R. Saad, and D. L. Kellogg, Jr. Evidence for a role for vasoactive intestinal 
peptide in active vasodilatation in the cutaneous vasculature of humans. J Physiol . 552:223-232, 2003.
2. Boutsiouki,  P., S. Georgiou, and G. F. Clough. Recovery of Nitric Oxide from Acetylcholine-Mediated Vasodilatation in 
Human Skin In Vivo. Microcirculation. 11:249-259, 2004.
3. Church,  M. K., T. J. Griffiths, S. Jeffery, L. C. Ravell, A. S. Cowburn, A. P. Sampson, and G. F. Clough. Are cysteinyl 
leukotrienes involved in allergic responses in human skin? Clin Exp Allergy. 32:1013-1019, 2002.
4. Clough,  G. and M. Noble. Microdialysis--a model for studying chronic wounds. Int J Low Extrem Wounds. 2:233-239, 2003.
5. Clough,  G. F., P. Boutsiouki, M. K. Church, and C. C. Michel. Effects of blood flow on the in vivo recovery of a small diffusible 
molecule by [CONTACT_288727]. J Pharmacol Exp Ther . 302:681-686, 2002.
6. Crandall,  C. G., M. Shibasaki, and T. C. Yen. Evidence that the human cutaneous venoarteriolar response is not mediated by 
[CONTACT_288728]. J Physiol. 538:599-605, 2002.
7. Holowatz,  L. A., B. L. Houghton, B. J. Wong, B. W. Wilkins, A. W. Harding, W. L. Kenney, and C. T. Minson. Nitric oxide and 
attenuated reflex cutaneous vasodilation in aged skin. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 284:H1662-1667, 2003.
8. Holowatz,  L. A., C. S. Thompson, and W. L. Kenney. Acute ascorbate supplementation alone or combined with arginase 
inhibition augments reflex cutaneous vasodilation in aged human skin. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 291:H2965-2970, 
2006.
9. Holowatz,  L. A., C. S. Thompson, and W. L. Kenney. L-arginine supplementation or arginase inhibition augments reflex 
cutaneous vasodilatation in aged human skin. J Physiol, 2006.
10. Holowatz,  L. A., C. S. Thompson, C. T. Minson, and W. L. Kenney. Mechanisms of acetylcholine-mediated vasodilatation in 
young and aged human skin. J Physiol. 563:965-973, 2005.
Pyrogen References
1. Brown,  S., and A.C. Fuller, “Depyrogenation of Pharmaceutical Solutions Using Submicron and Ultrafilters,” J. Parenteral Sci. 
& Tech., Vol. 47, No. 6, 1993, pp. 285-288.
The effect  of varying the pH and ionic strength on endotoxin removal (depyrogenation) from Water for Injections (WFI) 
was investigated. Studies using submicron filters showed that endotoxin aggregation and filter retention increased with 
increasing molarity and decreasing pH. Using a Sartorius 0.01 micron filter, greater than 98% endotoxin retention could 
be achieved with 10 endotoxin units (EU)/ml bulk solution, and greater than 97% endotoxin retention with the 500 
EU/ml bulk solution. Depyrogenation of active and placebo solutions of the radiopaque, Iohexol (350 mgI/ml), using 
ultrafilters of varying nominal molecular weight limit (NMWL 10,000-300,000) and a Pall Posidyne 0.[ADDRESS_352027] been shown to be capable of efficient depyrogenation of these pharmaceutical 
products.
2. McCormick  J, Pragman A, Stolpa J, Leung D, Schlievert P, “Funtional Characterization of Streptococal Pyrogenic Exotoxin J, a 
Novel Superantigen” Infection and Immunity, Vol. 69, No. 3: p. 1381-1388, 2001.
3. Orwin  P, Leung D, Tripp T, Bohach G, Earhart C, Ohlendorf D, Schlievert P. 2002.
Characterization of  a novel staphylococcal enterotoxin-like superantigen, a member of the group V subfamily of pyrogenic 
toxins. Biochemistry 41:[ZIP_CODE]-[ZIP_CODE], 2002.
Staphylococcus aureus  is an  important human pathogen, causing a variety of diseases. Major virulence factors of this 
organism include staphylococcal enterotoxins (SEs) that cause food poisoning and toxic shock syndrome. Our study 
identified a novel enterotoxin-like protein that is a member of the new subfamily (group V) of pyrogenic toxin 
superantigens (PTSAgs) and examined its biochemical and immunobiological properties. The gene encoding the SE-like 
protein is directly 5‘ of another recently identified PTSAg, SEK. The SE-like protein had a molecular weight of [ZIP_CODE] and 
an experimentally determined isoelectric point between 7.5 and 8.0. We demonstrated that the PTSAg had many of the 
biological activities associated with SEs, including superantigenicity, pyrogenicity, and ability to enhance endotoxin 
shock, but lacked both lethality in rabbits when administered in subcutaneous miniosmotic pumps and emetic activity in 
monkeys. Recombinant protein stimulated human CD4 and CD8 T cells in a T cell receptor variable region, β chain 
(TCRVβ) specific manner. T cells bearing TCRVβ2, 5.1, and 21.3 were significantly stimulated.
4. Orwin  P, Fitzgerald JR, Leung D, Gutierrez J, Bohach G, Schlievert P,  “Characterization of Staphylococcus aureus Entertoxin 
L, “Infection and Immunity, Vol. 71, No. 5p.: 2916-2919, 2003.
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 28  of 28 (V.10/14/2015)5. Weber C,  Linsberger I, Rafiee-Tehrani M, Falkenhagen D: Permeability and adsorption capacity of dialysis membranes to 
lipid A. Int J Artif Organs 20: 144-152, 1997.
Hemodialysis membranes  were tested in vitro for possible penetration by [CONTACT_288729] A. Using lipid A from Escherichia coli as a model substance for this kind of pyrogen, different dialyzers (F4, E3. 
Acepal 1300, Altraflux, F 40, Polyflux 110, Filtral 12, F 60) were challenged by [CONTACT_288730]. 
All membranes exhibited impermability to lipid A (as well as to LPS from Pseudomonas aeruginosa), which was proved 
by [CONTACT_288731], as well as by 
[CONTACT_288732] A as a contaminant. Furthermore, the highest adsorption capacities 
were found for polysulfone and polyamide membranes.
STUDY00004340
Approval: 9/21/2021
Page 1 of 12                       8/6/18CONSENT FOR RESEARCH
The Pennsylvania State University
Title of Project:   Cheese Consumption and Human Microvascular Function
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_288679] M. Alexander, Ph.D.
Address: 113 Noll Laboratory
Telephone Number:  [PHONE_5992]
Subject’s Printed Name: _____________________________
We are asking  you to be in a research study.  This form gives you information about the research.
Whether or not  you take part is up to you. You can choose not to take part. You can agree to take part 
and later change your mind. Your decision will not be held against you.
Please ask  questions about anything that is unclear to you and take your time to make your choice.
1.   Why is this research study being done?   High  blood pressure (hypertension, HT) can lead to disease 
in the body’s blood vessels (cardiovascular disease or CVD).  CVD is the leading cause of death in 
developed countries.  High blood pressure and CVD cause harmful changes to the blood vessels in the 
kidney, heart, and other organs.  These changes also occur in the blood vessels in human skin.
Diet changes  can help to lower blood pressure without using drugs.  Increased dairy intake improves the 
results of tests that measure the health of blood vessels.  People who had mild HT saw a modest drop in 
blood pressure when they increased their dairy intake.  No one knows how dairy improves the function 
of blood vessels and lowers blood pressure in humans.  We plan to explore the effects of cheese intake 
on the function of blood vessels.  Salt in the diet can cause blood pressure to rise.  Cheese contains salt.  
We explore how cheese intake improves the health of blood vessels despi[INVESTIGATOR_288680].  
It is  much easier to see and study the effects of high blood pressure in the blood vessels of the skin.  We 
use “microdialysis” (MD) in this study.  With MD, we perfuse some research drugs into nickel-sized areas 
of skin on your arm.  The drugs remain in the small areas and do not go into the rest of your body.  The 
research drugs are not approved by [CONTACT_288733].  However, the FDA has approved our using 
the drugs in this study.  We and others have used these drugs in people in research studies for many 
years without problem.  
We recruit  people who have normal to mild high blood pressure for this study. We are asking you to be 
in this research because you fit our criteria for being a subject.
2.   What will happen in this research study?
You participate on the circled days or procedures.  Please read the descriptions of the circled days.  Then 
write your initials by [CONTACT_288734].  
STUDY00004340
Approval: 7/25/2019
Approval End Date: 7/24/2020
Page 2 of 12                       8/6/18We may ask you to repeat a trial, procedure, or test.  This could happen for many reasons such as 
equipment failure, power outage, inconclusive test results, etc.  You do not have to repeat a trial, 
procedure, and/or test if you do not wish to do so.
Note:  This study involves the use of drugs that are not approved by [CONTACT_288733].  All of the drugs 
have been used in humans by [CONTACT_288735].  The FDA approved the use of the drugs for this study.  We dilute 
the drugs in Lactated Ringer’s, a type of saline fluid like that found throughout your body.  The drugs are:
Acetylcholine (ACh) – like a substance made by [CONTACT_39625]; causes blood vessels to dilate
Apocynin - antioxidant
Ascorbate (Vitamin C) - found in many foods such as citrus fruit; antioxidant
L-NAME – blocks the production of nitric oxide
Sodium nitroprusside (SNP) – supplies nitric oxide; causes blood vessels to dilate
Tempol – antioxidant
________ initial  A. Screening Visit 
1.    You drink only water and do not eat for 12 hours before the screening.  
2.  The research nurse and/or Clinical Research Center (CRC) staff perform the screening.  The staff 
measures your height and weight, blood pressure (BP), and heart rate (HR).  They measure waist 
circumference.  The staff reviews your medical history.  Women of childbearing age have a urine 
pregnancy test.
3.    The staff draws 30 ml (2 Tbsp) of blood from a vein in your arm.  We send some of the blood to a lab 
to see if the proteins, blood cells, electrolytes, etc. are within normal levels.  We may test the blood 
for other substances of interest.  The researchers do not perform genetic analyses on the blood nor 
look for presence of disease (e.g. HIV).  
4.    If you take a thyroid drug, please tell the nurse your thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) level.  If you 
do not know your TSH level and/or you have not had it measured within 6 months, the nurse draws 
a blood sample (3.5 ml; 0.2 Tbsp) to measure TSH.
5.   You wear a monitor that measures blood pressure for [ADDRESS_352028], shoulder, or upper arm.
You meet  with our registered dietitian.  This meeting helps us to plan the food you eat during the 
controlled feeding-part of this study.  The meeting includes recalling your physical activity on the 7 days 
before the meeting.  Also, you discuss food preferences and issues.  (The meeting can occur on a 
separate day.)
________ initial  B. Baseline Experiments  (Separate days, the order of the Local Heating and ACh Dose 
Response MD experiments is random)
1. You complete a 3-day food record.
2. Preparation for all experiments
a. We give you printed and verbal instructions listing what you need to do before you arrive at the 
lab.  Please follow the instructions with care and arrive prepared.  If you have questions, please 
contact [CONTACT_288736].
b. Do not consume alcohol, niacin supplements, or fish oils for 48 hours before the experiment.
c.   Do not consume caffeine (ex. coffee, tea, Coca Cola, chocolate) for 12 hours before the 
experiment.  
d. Do not   eat anything for 8 hours before the baseline experiments.
STUDY00004340
Approval: 7/25/2019
Approval End Date: 7/24/2020
Page 3 of 12                       8/6/18e. Drink only water for [ADDRESS_352029] 
1 glass (8 ounces) of water before you arrive.  (Drink only water the
 morning of 
experiment.)
iii. Refrain from hard exercise, physical labor, and any other task in which you to exert 
yourself more than a leisurely walk.
iv. We measure your blood pressure, heart rate, and oral temperature.  
v. Women of childbearing age have a urine pregnancy test if they have not had a test within 
2 weeks of the experiment.
vi. We insert the MD probes:  You wash the skin on your forearm.  We place a tight band 
around your arm so we can easily see your veins.  For each MD site, we make pairs of pen-
marks 2.5 cm (1 inch) apart and away from veins.  The MD tubing enters and exits your 
skin at the marks.  We remove the tight band.  We clean your arm with an orange-colored 
fluid and alcohol.  We place an ice bag on your arm for 5 minutes to numb your skin.  Then 
we insert a thin needle into your skin at each entry mark.  The needle’s tip travels 
between the layers of skin for 2.5 cm (1 inch).  It leaves your skin at the matching exit 
mark.  We thread the MD tubing through the needle.  We withdraw the needle leaving the 
tubing in your skin.  Any redness of your skin subsides in about 60 – 120 minutes.
vii. We tape a thin probe and its holder over each site where there is MD tubing in your skin.  
The thin probe measures skin blood flow (SkBF) with a weak laser light.  We control the 
temperature of the holders.  The holders start at 34°C (93°F).  During the experiment, we 
measure blood pressure and heart rate.
3. Baseline Experiments – “Day 1”
a. FMD:  FMD measures the health of blood vessels.
i. We place a blood pressure cuff around your forearm.  
ii. We place gel on your upper arm just above the elbow.  
iii. We place a Doppler ultrasound probe on the gel.  The ultrasound makes sound waves to 
measure the size of blood vessels and the speed of the blood.  
iv. We make a “resting” measurement before we inflate the cuff.  
v. The cuff inflates for 5 minutes to stop blood flow to and from the forearm.  
vi. We deflate the cuff and perform a second reading for 3 minutes.
b. Sublingual nitroglycerin:  This test also measures the health of blood vessels.  Nitroglycerin 
causes blood vessels to dilate.  
i. The nurse is present throughout the procedure.  
ii. You lie on a bed or recliner.  
iii. We apply a blood pressure cuff on your upper arm.  
iv. As with FMD, we use an ultrasound probe during the test.  We place the probe on an 
artery near your elbow.  
v. A nurse places a 0.[ADDRESS_352030] 20 minutes after you receive the nitroglycerin. 
STUDY00004340
Approval: 7/25/2019
Approval End Date: 7/24/2020
Page 4 of 12                       8/6/18vii.  You stay in the lab for up to [ADDRESS_352031] a 
bad or very strong reaction (e.g. drop in blood pressure that lasts longer than usual).  We 
monitor you during this time.
c. MD Experiment - Local Heating (or ACh Dose Response)
i. This experiment has [ADDRESS_352032] baseline data for 20 minutes.
iv. We add the drugs to plain fluid at the MD sites.  
Probe 1. Lactated Ringer’s only (control)
Probe 2. Lactated Ringer’s + Ascorbate
Probe 3. Lactated Ringer’s + Tempol
Probe 4. Lactated Ringer’s + Apocyanin
v. We collect second baseline data for 20 minutes.  
vi. Then, we slowly increase the temperature at the MD sites to 42°C (107.6°F).  
vii. When the skin blood flow becomes stable (about 40 minutes), we add LNAME [CONTACT_288749].  
viii. When the skin blood flow becomes stable again (about 40 minutes), we stop the drugs.  
ix. We keep skin’s temperature at 42°C (107.6°F) at all MD sites.  At the same time, only plain 
fluid + SNP flows through the tubing at all sites.  Heating and adding SNP to the fluid help 
the blood vessels in your skin to dilate.  
x. After about [ADDRESS_352033] the lab.
4. Baseline Experiments – “Day 2”
a. MD Experiment - ACh Dose Response (or Local Heating)
i. This experiment has [ADDRESS_352034] substances to plain fluid in Probe 3, 4, and 5.  After about 30 minutes we 
add LNAME [CONTACT_288750] 2.
Probe 1.  Lactated Ringer’s only (control)
Probe 2.  Lactated Ringer’s + LNAME
[CONTACT_288746] 3.  Lactated Ringer’s + Ascorbate
Probe 4.  Lactated Ringer’s + Tempol
Probe 5.  Lactated Ringer’s + Apocyanin
v. When the SkBF is stable, we collect a second baseline data for about [ADDRESS_352035] amount of ACh to the plain fluid flowing through each probe.  
vii. As the SkBF becomes stable at each probe (about 5 minutes), we proceed to the next 
amount of ACh.
viii. Each probe receives 11 increasing amounts of ACh. 
STUDY00004340
Approval: 7/25/2019
Approval End Date: 7/24/2020
Page 5 of 12                       8/6/18ix. After the last amount of ACh ends, we increase the skin’s temperature to 42°C (107.6°F) at 
all MD sites.  At the same time, we add SNP to all MD probes.  Heating and adding SNP to 
the fluid help the blood vessels in your skin to dilate.  
x. After about [ADDRESS_352036] 3 days before beginning the Controlled Feeding protocols described below.
________ initial  C.  Controlled Feeding Protocols and Experiments  
      (the order of the Local Heating and ACh Dose Response is randomized)
1. Controlled Feeding Protocol
a. Following baseline experiments outlined above, you participate 4 Controlled Feeding Periods.  
Each period lasts 8 days.  After each period, you repeat the experiments described above on 
Days “8” and “9”.  You maintain the assigned feeding protocol through the first day of 
experiments.  The feeding protocols occur in random order:
low sodium diet devoid of dairy products (L-Na) 
low sodium diet containing cheese (L-Na+C) 
high sodium diet devoid of dairy products (H-Na) 
high sodium diet containing cheese (H-Na+C)
b. The special kitchen in the CRC prepares all food and drink for the feeding protocol.
c. During the Controlled Feeding Period, you eat only the food and drink provided by [CONTACT_3019].
d. It is important that you eat all of the food we give to you.  You must eat all of the cheese.  If you 
have a consistent problem with eating all of the food, please talk to us about this issue. 
e. During the Controlled Feeding Period, refrain from antioxidants (e.g. vitamin C) and drugs 
containing salts (e.g. antacids).
f. You may consume the food / drink at home. 
g. Fill out a daily survey about the food and drink that you consumed during the previous day.
h. Visit the CRC kitchen every 1-2 days to pi[INVESTIGATOR_288681] / drink and drop off containers from the 
previous day or 2.
i. Return any unconsumed food / drink to the kitchen in the containers provided.  We measure 
the unconsumed portions to find out your nutrient intake.
2.    Preparation for Experiments
a. We give you printed and verbal instructions telling you to do during the 8-day Controlled 
Feeding periods and before the experiments.  
b. You consume the assigned food / drink for [ADDRESS_352037] all urine you produce for 24-hour into a container that we supply.  
ii. You undergo 24-hour blood pressure monitoring. 
iii. You wear a monitor that measures blood pressure for 24 hours.  If your blood pressure 
goes up too much after eating the high sodium food, your participation in the study 
ends.Refrain from caffeine (ex. coffee, tea, Coca Cola, chocolate) for 12 hours before 
experiments.
iv. Do not   eat anything for 8 hours before the experiments.
STUDY00004340
Approval: 7/25/2019
Approval End Date: 7/24/2020
Page 6 of 12                       8/6/18v. Drink only water for [ADDRESS_352038] 
1 glass (8 ounces) of water before you arrive.  (Drink only water the
 morning of 
experiment.)
iii. We measure your blood pressure, heart rate, and oral temperature.  
iv. Women of childbearing age have a urine pregnancy test if they have not had a test within 
2 weeks of the experiment.
v. We insert MD probes in the same manner as that described for the Baseline Experiments.
vi. We tape a thin probe and its holder over each site where there is MD tubing in your skin.  
The thin probe measures skin blood flow (SkBF) with a weak laser light.  We control the 
temperature of the holders.  The holders start at 34°C (93°F).  During the experiment, we 
measure blood pressure and heart rate.
3.     Experiments “Day 8”
a.    The nurse draws a blood sample 30 ml (2 Tbsp) blood draw.
b.    FMD (described above)
c.     MD Experiment - Local Heating (or Acetylcholine Dose Response) as described above.
d.     After Day 8’s experiment ends, eat the meals we supply for Day 8.  Eat as much of Day 8’s 
meals as you can.
4.     Experiments “Day 9”
a.    MD Experiment - Acetylcholine Dose Response (or Local Heating) as described above.
b.    After Day 9’s experiment ends, eat your normal diet.
 
5. You wait at least [ADDRESS_352039] during one of the washout periods between feeding protocols.
  
3.   What are the  risks and possi ble discomforts from being in this research study?   
Microdialysis:  The risks are less than that for a blood draw because microdialysis uses only a small, local 
area of skin.  In contrast, a blood draw involves not only skin, but also large blood vessels and blood.  You 
are likely to have some pain and bruising like that from a blood draw.  However, we use ice to numb your 
arm when we insert the tubing.  Also, the small needle reduces pain when we insert the tubing.  You are 
not likely to have pain after the tubing is in place.  You may feel a little pain when we remove the tubing 
from your skin.  Needles make some people feel sick to their stomach, lightheaded, or may cause them 
to faint.  Although rare, the tubing could break as we remove it from the skin.  Then we remove the tubing 
still in your skin by [CONTACT_288737].  This presents no added risk for you.  Even rarer, the 
tubing could break so that a pi[INVESTIGATOR_288682].  In this case, we treat any tubing 
still in your skin like a splinter.  We stop any mild bleeding with mild pressure and sterile gauze.  Infection 
is possible.  We keep the risk of infection very small by [CONTACT_288738].  We apply a sterile bandage to the site after the experiment.  We tell you how to 
take care of the site.  
Fluid flowing through the tubing:  The substances flowing through the tubing only go to a 2.5 cm2 (0.4 
inch2) area of skin at each tubing site.  The amount that enters the skin is very small.  However, there is 
STUDY00004340
Approval: 7/25/2019
Approval End Date: 7/24/2020
Page 7 of 12                       8/6/18a chance of having a bad reaction to the substances.  This reaction could produce redness, itching, rash, 
and/or swelling.  A worse reaction could also cause fever, breathing problems, changes in pulse, 
convulsions, and/or fainting.  We and other researchers have used these substances with microdialysis in 
skin.  There have been no reports that these substances caused bad reactions.  If a bad reaction should 
occur, we summon medical help.
Lactated Ringer’s Solution and normal saline:  These fluids are similar to the natural fluids in your skin. 
The fluids contain salt, potassium, lactate (Ringer’s only), and chloride.  The acid content is like that your 
body’s natural fluids.  A bad reaction to these fluids is highly unlikely.
 
ACh, Apocynin, ascorbate, LNAME, SNP, and Tempol: These substances stop or mimic the action of your 
body’s natural chemicals upon the blood vessels in the skin.  A small amount of these substances enter 
the skin around the tubing.  This only affects the blood flow in the vessels in that nickel-sized area of skin.  
The effect of these substances is gone within an hour after the experiment. 
Laser Doppler Flowmetry:  Weak lasers can hurt your eye if you stare into the light for a long time.  We 
do not turn on the laser until the probes are taped to a surface.  The tape may irritate your skin.
Blood Pressure (manual, Cardiocap):  We measure blood pressure with the method used in a doctor’s 
office.  A cuff inflates on the upper arm.  As the cuff slowly deflates, we listen with a stethoscope at the 
bend in the elbow.  Or the Cardiocap monitors blood pressure through the cuff on your upper arm.  During 
the short time cuff inflates, your arm may feel numb or tingly.  The cuff could cause mild bruising. 
Povidone Iodine:  Researchers and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_288683]-colored fluid to clean the skin.  You could 
have a bad reaction to the fluid if you are allergic to iodine.  You inform us if you have this allergy. In this 
case, we use only alcohol instead.  A bad reaction could cause redness, itching, rash, and/or swelling.  A 
worse reaction could also cause fever, breathing problems, changes in pulse, convulsions, and/or fainting.
  
Blood Draw:  Blood draws often cause mild pain, bruising, swelling, or bleeding.  There is also a slight 
chance of infection or a small clot.  If you are nervous about needles, blood pressure and heart rate may 
increase for a little while.  You may also feel lightheaded, sick to your stomach, or may faint.  We keep 
the chance of infection minimal with the same techniques used in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600].  Do not exercise hard for 24 
hours before a blood draw.
  
Tape and sticky disks:   The tape or sticky disks could cause a rash.  During screening, you tell us if you are 
sensitive to tape.  If a disk sticks very strongly, removing the disk could cause an abrasion like a rug-burn 
on your skin.   An abrasion can feel tender or slightly painful, and can increase risk of infection.  If you are 
sensitive to tape, you may have an increased chance for abrasion.   An abrasion has occurred only twice 
during the years that the disks have been used in similar studies in our lab.  We may use an adhesive 
remover like that used in a doctor’s office to remove the disks.  If you get an abrasion a nurse checks the 
site.   Antibiotic ointment and a sterile bandage are applied.  We tell you how to take care of the site.  You 
could have an allergic reaction to the adhesive remover.  The reaction could include rash, itching, fever, 
or breathing problems.  Also, it could include changes in pulse, and/or blood pressure, convulsions, shock, 
and/or fainting.  If a bad reaction should occur, we summon medical help right away.
STUDY00004340
Approval: 7/25/2019
Approval End Date: 7/24/2020
Page 8 of 12                       8/6/18Medical Screening:  You may feel shy about giving health information.  The staff collects the information 
in a private and professional manner.  You may feel shy about being measured.  You may request 
someone of the same sex to conduct parts of the screening.
Initial screening form:  Only members of our lab group use this form.  We use the form to help decide 
whether you are a good candidate for the study. You may feel shy about answering questions.  You may 
request someone of the same sex to ask you the questions.  We collect the information in a private and 
professional manner.  We keep the completed form confidential and secure.
ECG:  This machine measures the electrical activity of your heart to record heart rate.  You have [ADDRESS_352040].  There are no adverse effects.  The tape may irritate.
Local heating:  We measure the temperature of your skin under the holders.  During heating, the skin 
feels very warm but does not hurt.  The heating makes the skin under the holder red like when you take 
a hot bath.  The redness goes away within several hours.  Some people may be more sensitive to heating.  
If your arm feels too hot, tell us, and we reduce or stop the heating.
Controlled Feeding Protocol:   Food allergies can produce redness, itching, rash, and/or swelling.  A severe 
reaction (anaphylactic shock) could cause fever, problems breathing, and changes in pulse.  A severe 
reaction could include convulsions, and/or loss of consciousness.  Please inform the nurse during 
screening of your known food allergies.  Also, inform the dietician when you meet with her.   We may be 
able to replace the problem-food with a food to which you are not allergic without affecting the study.  If 
this is not possible, you cannot be in the study.
FMD Test / Doppler Ultrasound:  There is a small chance the probe could irritate the skin.  Minor redness 
may occur where the researchers place the probe against the arm.  This is temporary.  While the 
researchers inflate the cuffs, the arms and feet may feel numb or tingly, and the color of the skin may 
change slightly.  The cuffs could cause mild bruising.  The gel is the same as that used with medical 
ultrasound tests.  The gel may feel cool or cold on the skin.  A bad reaction to the gel is highly unlikely.
Sublingual Nitroglycerine:  The research-use of nitroglycerin for artery measurements is not an FDA-
approved use of this drug.  However, nitroglycerin has been used in this way in many research studies 
without problem.  Nitroglycerin is FDA approved for the treatment of angina (heart pain).  The drug is 
often prescribed for heart patients who have, or are at risk for, angina.  
You may have some of the following reactions to the nitroglycerine 
headache lightheadedness dry mouth flushing
irregular heart beat weakness nausea vomiting  
5-10 minute drop in blood pressure fainting dizziness sweating
You may also notice a sweet taste and/or tingling in your mouth while the tablet dissolves.  All these 
effects are usually short-lived.  We can reduce some of them by [CONTACT_288739] [ADDRESS_352041] related symptoms (e.g. dizziness) we advise you to see your doctor.  You could have a mild or 
severe allergic response to the drug.  This response could include rash, itching, difficulty breathing, and 
STUDY00004340
Approval: 7/25/2019
Approval End Date: 7/24/2020
Page 9 of 12                       8/6/18swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.  If you have a severe reaction (e.g. severe allergic response) 
we call 911.
The effects of nitroglycerin on pregnant or nursing women are unknown.  You are not to be in the study 
if you are pregnant or nursing.  
Fasting:  You may feel hungry after fasting for the experiments and during the experiments.
There is a risk of loss of confidentiality if your information or your identity is obtained by [CONTACT_288740], but precautions will be taken to prevent this from happening.  The confidentiality 
of your electronic data created by [CONTACT_288741]. Absolute confidentiality cannot be guaranteed.
4.   What are the possible benefits from being in this research study?   
4a. What are the possible benefits to you?
You receive a medical screening that could inform you about your health.  You learn your blood 
pressure and blood cholesterol levels.  This is important knowledge.  High blood pressure and blood 
cholesterol contribute to many serious health problems.  If you have high blood pressure or blood 
cholesterol, we advise you to work with a health care provider to keep your levels controlled.
4b. What are the possible benefits to others?
One in  three adults under the age of 65 and one out of two adults over the age of 60 has high blood 
pressure. 40% of all deaths in the [LOCATION_002] are due to CVD.  This health care burden is greater 
than $350 billion/year and growing.  As the population ages, these problems will increase.  This 
study explores dairy as a candidate for early intervention through a change in diet.  This could 
reduce the need for drug treatment and its attending side effects and cost.  The projects provide 
valuable experience, education and partial fulfillment of degree-work for graduate and 
undergraduate students of The Pennsylvania State University.
5.   What other options are available instead of being in this research study?
You may decide not to participate in this research. 
6.   How long will you take part in this research study?
Screening (1  Visit) less than 1.5 hour
FMD/MD Experiments  (5 Visits) less than 7 hours each
MD Experiments  (5 Visits) 5 hours
Obtain Food,  24-hour BP monitor & urine container, etc. (~14 Visits) about 15 minutes each
Total: about  75 Hours (about 25 visits; It could take about 8 weeks to complete the study.)
7.   How will your privacy and confidentiality be protected if you decide to take part in this research 
study?
We make efforts to limit the use and sharing of your personal research information to people who 
have a need to review this information. 
We keep the list that matches your name [CONTACT_288751] a locked file or 
password protected file on a computer in a room that is locked when unoccupi[INVESTIGATOR_530].  
Only authorized members of the lab have access to the list.  
STUDY00004340
Approval: 7/25/2019
Approval End Date: 7/24/2020
Page 10  of 12                      8/6/18We label your research records with your code number and keep them in a locked file 
or password protected computer in a room that is locked when unoccupi[INVESTIGATOR_530].
We label your research samples with your code number.  We keep the samples in a dedicated 
ultralow freezer in Noll Lab until analysis.
In the event of any publication or presentation resulting from the research, we do not share your 
personally identifiable information.
We will do our best to keep your participation in this research study confidential to the extent 
permitted by [CONTACT_2371]. However, it is possible that other people may find out about your participation in this 
research study. For example, the following people/groups may check and copy records about this 
research.  
The Office for Human Research Protections in the U. S. Department of Health and Human 
Services
 The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
 The research study sponsor , Dairy Management, Inc.
The Institutional Review Board (a committee that reviews and approves research studies) and 
The Office for Research Protections. 
Some of these records could contain information that personally identifies you. Reasonable efforts will 
be made to keep the personal information in your research record private. However, absolute 
confidentiality cannot be guaranteed.
           
A description  of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.clinicalTrials.gov, as required by 
U.S. Law.   This Web site will not include information that can identify you.  At most, the Web site will 
include a summary of the results.  You can search this Web site at any time.
8.   What are the costs of taking part in this research study?
8a. What  will you have to pay for if you take part in this research study? 
Nothing.
8b. What happens  if you are injured as a result of taking part in this research study?
In the  unlikely event you become injured as a result of your participation in this study, medical care 
is available. It is the policy of this institution to provide neither financial compensation nor free 
medical treatment for research-related injury. By [CONTACT_17137], you are not waiving any 
rights that you have against The Pennsylvania State University for injury resulting from negligence of 
the University or its investigators.
9. Will you be  paid or receive credit to take part in this research study?
Experiments (1  baseline + 4 controlled feeding periods = 5 of each type of experiment)
FMD/Sublingual Nitroglycerin:       $250.00 $50.00 each 
MD local  heating:        $425.00 $85 each ($15.00 for each MD probe + $25 for
completing MD  experiment)
MD ACh  dose response:        $575.00 $115.00 each ($15.00 for each MD probe + $40
for completing  MD experiment)
Bonus for  completing all experiments:  $200.00
   Total =  $1,450.00
STUDY00004340
Approval: 7/25/2019
Approval End Date: 7/24/2020
Page 11  of 12                      8/6/18For incomplete  experiments, we pay an amount of money equal to the part completed.  For 
instance, if you complete half of an ACh dose response MD experiment, you receive $15.00 for each 
MD probe inserted + $20 ($20.00 is one-half of $40.00).  We may ask you to repeat a trial.  If you 
agree to repeat a trial, you receive payment for the repeated trial as stated above.  We reimburse 
for gasoline if you live more than 20 miles from Noll Lab.
10. Who  is paying for this research study?
Dairy Management, Inc.  is paying for this study.
11. What are your rights if you take part in this research study?
You do not  have to be in this research. 
If  you choose to be in this research, you have the right to stop at any time. 
If  you decide not to be in this research or if you decide to stop at a later date, there will be 
no penalty or loss of benefits to which you are entitled. 
If  you choose to withdraw from the study, all data collected up to the point of withdrawal 
will remain part of the study and may not be removed.
The person  in charge of the research study or the sponsor can remove you from the research study 
without your approval.  We remove you from the study if your blood pressure increases too much 
during a Controlled Feeding period.  Other possible reasons for removal from the study include if we 
deem that your health or behavior adversely affects the study or increases risks to you beyond those 
approved by [CONTACT_288742].  You may 
decline to answer certain questions.  You may decide not to comply with certain procedures.  
However, your being in the study may be contingent upon answering these questions or complying 
with the procedures.  
During the  course of the research you will be provided with any new information that may affect 
your health, welfare or your decision to continue participating in this research.
12. If you have questions or concerns about this research study, whom should you call?    
Please call: 
Study head, Lacy M. Alexander, Ph.D. (W: [PHONE_5992])
The research nurse, Susan Slimak RN (W: [PHONE_5993], H: [PHONE_5994])
[CONTACT_288759]’s assistant, Jane Pi[INVESTIGATOR_288684] (W: [PHONE_5995], H: [PHONE_5996])
if you:
Have questions, complaints or concerns about the research.
Believe you may have been harmed by [CONTACT_288743].  
You may also contact [CONTACT_288744] (814)  865-1775, [EMAIL_5658] 
if you:
Have questions regarding your rights as a person in a research study.
Have concerns or general questions about the research. 
You may also call this number if you cannot reach the research team or wish to talk to 
someone else about any concerns related to the research.
STUDY00004340
Approval: 7/25/2019
Approval End Date: 7/24/2020
Page 12  of 12                      8/6/18INFORMED CONSENT  TO TAKE PART IN RESEARCH 
Signature [CONTACT_288752]/she has about the research.
______________________________ _________ ________________
Signature [CONTACT_288753]
(Only approved investigators for this research may explain the research and obtain informed consent.)  
Signature [CONTACT_288754]:
Discussed this research study with an investigator, 
Read the information in this form, and
Had the opportunity to ask any questions you may have. 
Your signature [CONTACT_288755], have asked the questions you currently 
have about the research and those questions have been answered. You will receive a copy of the signed and 
dated form to keep for future reference.
Signature [CONTACT_288756] [CONTACT_50841], you indicate that you voluntarily choose to be in this research and agree to 
allow your information to be used and shared as described above. 
___________________________ __________ ________________  
Signature [CONTACT_288757]00004340
Approval: 7/25/2019
Approval End Date: 7/24/2020