Internal brace augmented anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament repair  
and its post -operative effects on syndesmotic volumes:  
A prospective, single -blinded, randomized study  
 
Principal Investigator :  [INVESTIGATOR_244439], MD  
 
Study Coordinators :   Brice Snyder, MSAT, ATC, BCS -O 
    (757)  679-3407  
    Ashley Suttmiller, PhD, ATC  
 
Study Site:  Vann -Virginia Center for Orthopaedics  dba Alantic Orthopaedic  
Specialists  
Protocol ID :   IIRR -[ZIP_CODE]  
 
Clinical Trial Registration :  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
  
Version 1.1: Updated 2/4/[ADDRESS_297526] -
operative effects on syndesmotic volumes: A prospective, single -blinded, randomized study  
 
1. BACKGROUND , OBJECTIVES, & STUDY DESIGN  
 Ankle s yndesmosis disruption due to ankle trauma is associated with significant pain and 
disability.1,2 Surgical  stabilization procedures typi[INVESTIGATOR_244440].  Rigid fixation has 
traditionally been the technique of choice for stabilizing the syndesmosis; however, dynamic 
fixation options like the TightRope® system (Arthrex®, Naples, [LOCATION_002]) have more 
recently demonstrated  some  advantage  over rigid screw fixation techniques  as they attempt to 
mimic the dynamic nature of the syndesmosis.3-6 Tightrope or flexible fixation is still a non -
anatomic reduction and stabilization technique and as such is only an approximation of the 
syndesmotic ligaments .  
Anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament (AITFL) augmentation techniques using 
nonabsorbable suture materials ( Internal Brace, Arthrex®, Naples, [LOCATION_002]) have been used 
to supplement  syndesmotic  fixation in order to more accurately reconstruct the syndesmosis an d 
restore native biomechanics .7,[ADDRESS_297527] -operation. Our 
Version 1.1: Updated 2/4/2022  3 secondary objectives are 1) t o determine whether the addition of the  Internal Brace augmentation  
to the traditional TightRope fixation procedure improves short - and long -term patient -reported 
ankle function and generic health  ratings  and 2) t o explore relationships between syndesmotic 
volume and patient -reported outcomes acros s groups.  
Design  
We will use a prospective, two -arm, single -blind, randomized study design to conduct 
our pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. After informed consent, t wenty patients will be randomized evenly into a 
traditional TightRope  fixation group or a TightRope  fixation with an AITFL augmentation group 
upon enrollment into the study.  As this is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_48505] a small sample size, block 
randomization will be used to reduce the risk of unequal group sizes between groups. A 
researcher who will not otherwise be involved in patient inter actions will serve as the 
randomization coordinator for this trial.  They will prepare a randomization schedule using the 
freely acce ssible tools available at www.randomization.com. The sequence generator uses block 
randomization procedures based on the number of interventions and patients needed in each 
block and creates a schedule based on the patient ID number. Due to the potential emergent 
nature of injuries involved in this study and a short time between enrollment and surgery, the 
surgeon may need to acquire the group allocation shortly after enrolling patients to be able to 
prepare for the surgery and so the schedule will be conv erted to a Google Document that can 
then be accessed by [CONTACT_11065]/PI [INVESTIGATOR_244441]. Since pre -operative and 
post-operative instructions are the same regardless of the procedure, the participants will be 
blinded to their intervention group until the completion of the study period.  
Participant  Population  
Version 1.1: Updated 2/4/2022  4 Due to the nature of the study population needed, potential participants will be recruited 
from the clinic or corresponding hospi[INVESTIGATOR_244442]. Patients will be considered for 
inclusion in the study if they are over 18 years old and demonstrate u nilateral ankle trauma 
causing syndesmotic disruption (e.g., ligamentous rupture, and/or bimalleolar and trimalleolar 
ankle fractures) and are determined to be good candidates for TightRope fixation surgery  outside 
of the research context. Exclusion criter ia is as follows: Illiterate patients, non -English speakers, 
minors, patients with diminished mental capacity, or any patient needing a legally authorized 
representative, pregnant patients, patients that have had a previous ankle surgery, have an open 
fracture, fractures that require posterolateral approach, or any contralateral foot or ankle injury.  I 
Additionally, patients will also be excluded if they are unable to complete the CT scans 
necessary for completing the volumetric assessments, or if  upon surg ical exposure , the AITFL 
remains intact.  In the case of the latter, the patients would still receive  appropriate  procedure s 
necessary for treating their ankle trauma but  would be excluded from the study.  
Participant Enrollment and/or Screening  
 Patients will be identified in the clinic or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_244443]. Patients will be 
consented for syndesmotic open reduction surgery using the TightRope system which will 
indicate the patient for potential inclusion into the study. Patients will then be screened for 
exclusion criteria listed above and if no exclusion criteria are present, the patient would be 
considered for inclusion and the informed consent proc ess would begin.  
Withdrawal of Subjects  
 Participants will be withdrawn from the study if any of the following conditions exist:  
1. Participant voluntarily withdraws from the study  
2. Participant death  
Version 1.1: Updated 2/4/[ADDRESS_297528] of the 
study to a significant degree  
6. Participant fails to comply with protocol requirements  
7. Administrative reasons (e.g., PI [INVESTIGATOR_244444])  
Under these conditions, all patient data will be immediately destroyed. During the consent 
process, participants will be informed of their right to withdraw from the study at any time for 
any reason and without prejudice to alternative treatment. For subjects lost to follow -up, the 
research team should attempt to contact [CONTACT_244451] a minimum of three times before 
considering them lost to follow -up. Participants who withdraw voluntarily or are discontinued by 
[CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_244445].  
2. STUDY PROCEDURES  
Prospective patients will enter the clinic or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_244446]. Patient will be moved through clinic/hospi[INVESTIGATOR_244447]. Once 
the patient elects to undergo syndesmotic stabilization surgery and is over 18 years of age, study 
protocol will be triggered as follows:  
1. The study doctor will do an initial clinical screening for open fractures or fractures that 
would require a posterolateral approach during his examination, and if present, the patient 
will be excluded. If patients are not excluded at this point, the study doctor or another 
Version 1.1: Updated 2/4/[ADDRESS_297529] ample opportunity to 
read through documents to their desire. Patient will be asked if they are literate and speak 
English comfortably and excluded if they do not answer yes to both questions.   
2. Once the consent is signed, a research team member will review patient’s medical history 
for presence of other exclusion factors: previous ankle surgery, or any contralateral foot 
or ankle injury. If any exclusion factor is present, consent documents will be shredded.  
3. If no exclusion factors are present at this point, the following will occur:  
a. The patient will be issued a participant ID number and will complete the pre -
operative patient -reported outcomes (PROs) related to their perceived ankle 
function (The Foot and Ankle Outcome Score) and generic health status (SF -36). 
These will be administere d by a research team member by [CONTACT_244452], or a tablet computer through a survey administration software called 
Surgical Outcome System (SOS).  
b.  The participant ID will be used by [CONTACT_244453].  
4. Patient will follow typi[INVESTIGATOR_199252] -operative procedures. During the procedure, the patients 
will be in a supi[INVESTIGATOR_244448]. The integrity of the AITFL will be examined by [CONTACT_39635], and if  
disrupted the participant will be included in the study and will undergo either the 
traditional TightRope fixation procedure or the double stabilization procedure 
(TightRope fixation plus Internal Brace augmentation) as assigned and performed by [CONTACT_244454] 1.1: Updated 2/4/2022  7 study doctor. If AITFL disruption is not confirmed at this point, the patient will be 
excluded from the study; however, will still undergo the appropriate stabilization 
procedures necessary for treating their traumatic injury. If patients are excluded at t his 
point, they will be informed post -operatively, and all study documents will be shredded.  
5. If participants are not excluded and are assigned to the traditional TightRope fixation 
group: the fibular fracture will be stabilized with fixation and the plate will be applied 
laterally to the fibula. The syndesmosis is directly reduced and held in a st able position 
with the TightRope device. The syndesmosis is then restressed and examined to ensure 
that it is stable and reduced.  
6. If participant is not excluded and is assigned to the TightRope fixation plus Internal Brace 
augmentation group: the FiberTape portion of the Internal Brace will be threaded through 
the distal fibular plate which will then be applied. The fibular fracture will be stabilized 
with fixation and the plate applied laterally to the fibula. The syndesmosis will be directly 
reduced and held in a stable position with the TightRope device. A 3.4 mm drill and 4.75 
mm tap are used to make a small hole in the distal tibia  at the anatomic origin of the 
anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament. A 4.75 mm SwiveLock anchor is then used to set 
the tension of the AITFL repair over the top of the torn AITFL ligament. The 
syndesmosis is then restressed and examined to ensure that i t is stable and reduced.  
7. Pre-operative PRO data for all eligible participants will be entered into a spreadsheet by a 
research team member along with basic demographic information (age, biological sex, 
height, weight, race), involved side (right or left ankle), type of procedure ( traditional or 
traditional plus augmentation), and any relevant surgical notes.  
Version 1.1: Updated 2/4/[ADDRESS_297530] Lineup 
(CurveBeam, Warrington, PA) which will be used to determine 3D syndesmotic volume.  
Participants will be followed throughout the remaining study period and will complete 
the PROs again at [ADDRESS_297531] for their records and knowledge.  
11. Deidentified data will be analyzed by [CONTACT_244455] (AS) at the 
completion of data collection.  
Consent Process and Documentation  
The study doctor or another research team member will complete the entire consent 
process. Potential participants will be identified in the clinic or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. Once the subject has 
signed the surgical consent, the study will be presented and explained to them. After receiving 
detailed information regarding the study, objectives, logistics, inclu sion/exclusion criteria, risks 
and potential benefits, they can then choose to sign the consent form once all their questions 
have been answered. The signed consent form will represent documentation that the consent 
process took place. The documentation will be stored in a locked file cabinet in the secured 
Version 1.1: Updated 2/4/2022  9 research office. Patient will be informed that: data will be kept in excel spreadsheets only 
accessible to authorized study personnel on password protected computers; Identifiers will be 
kept until the end of the study, and data will be destroyed at the so onest possible time; Identifiers 
and data will be kept for the study period and only necessary personnel will have access to data.  
3. OUTCOMES & DATA  
Primary Outcomes  
3D Syndesmotic Volume : Volumetric assessment of the distal syndesmosis will be  
performed with the WBCT using the CubeView software  (CurveBeam, Warrington, PA) . 
The software can calculate 3D volume amounts using cross -sectional imaging.9 
Measurement s will start from the joint line and extend proximally ,9-11 and will be  
performed by [CONTACT_244456].  
Patient -Reported Outcomes :  
• The Foot and Ankle Outcome Score (FAOS)  will be used to assess participants’ 
perceived ankle function.12 It is a 42 -item questionnaire with five subscales 
measuring pain, other symptoms including swelling, stiffness and range of motion, 
activities of daily living, sport and recreation, and foot and ankle -related quality of 
life and has demonstrated high inte rnal consistency with subscales ranging from α = 
0.88-0.97, acceptable test -retest reliability , and validity.12 Items are scored on a 5 -
point Likert scale from no to extreme . Scores are totaled for each subscale and 
transformed into percentages, with 100% being representative of no functional loss.  
• The SF -36 will be used to assess generic  health ratings  as it has demonstrated good 
reliability (ICC = 0.87)  and construct validity.13 It is a 36 -item questionnaire 
Version 1.1: Updated 2/4/2022  10 assessing physical functioning, social functioning, role limitation caused by [CONTACT_244457], bodily pain, mental health, energy, and general 
perceptions of overall health  which combine to form the physical component 
summary (PCS) and the mental component summary (MCS).[ADDRESS_297532] deviation 
of 10  and will be used for analysis to allow for easy comparison with population 
norms.  
Adverse Event s (AE) Definitions & Reporting  
The research team will collect all adverse events (AE) during the study from the time of 
enrollment until the patient exits the study. The following definitions are intended to assist the 
research team in the identification of AEs. The research team will follow applicable regulatory 
requirements to report AEs to regulatory authorities and to the IRB.  
Adverse Event (AE) : An AE is any symptom, sign, illness or experience that develops or 
worsens in severity during the course of the study whether it is related or unrelated to the 
investigational device or its use. An AE need not be symptomatic to be reportable, e.g., 
device disruption detected on imaging that would require treatment, or psychological 
distress or discomfort associated with survey instruments.  
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) : An SAE is any AE that is:   
• Fatal  
• Life threatening : the participant is at risk of death (could have died without 
intervention) at the time of the event. This does not apply to any hypothetical  risk 
of death if the AE were more severe or were to progress.  
• Require or prolong s a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408]: Greater than 1 day (24 hours)   
Version 1.1: Updated 2/4/2022  11 • Permanent impairment to a body structure or body function  
Relationship of AE to the study : The relationship of the AE to the study devices or 
procedures will be classified as either:  
• Related : The adverse event has a reasonable temporal relationship to the use of 
the device or the procedure and cannot reasonably be explained by [CONTACT_244458]’s clinical state or other therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014].  
• Not Related : The adverse event is due to the underlying disease state or is due to 
concomitant medication or therapy not related to the use of the device.  
• Unknown : If the adverse event cannot be determined to have a causal 
relationship, it will be classified as unknown.  
Unanticipated : The sponsor is responsible for classifying AEs as anticipated or 
unanticipated according to the accepted regulatory definitions.  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_244449]’ safety daily and 
for the reporting of  any SAEs and unanticipated AEs that are determined relevant to the devices 
or study procedures. For reportable events, the research team will follow applicable regulatory 
requirements to report the event to regulatory authorities and to the IRB immediatel y.  
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
Investigators and research staff will make every effort to maintain confidentiality. Once 
patients consent and are enrolled into the study they will be given a participant ID number that 
will be used to track and identify them for the remainder of study. O nly those directly involved 
in the research will have access to the document matching the participant's name [CONTACT_244461]. Electronic data will be de -identified and stored on an encrypted and secured network 
drive which is only accessible to the research team. All paper files will be stored in a secured and 
Version 1.1: Updated 2/4/[ADDRESS_297533], Suite #200 in 
the research office.  
All study personnel will be responsible for knowing the protocol and adhering to the 
protocol. Study personnel will self -check and review the protocol frequently to ensure they know 
it very well. If a study team member is found to deviate from the protocol , the member will be 
warned and reminded of the protocol. If this occurs multiple times, the member will be removed 
from the study and the mistakes reported to the IRB. Changes to protocol will not be 
implemented until approved by [CONTACT_1744].  
STUDY RISKS & BENEFITS  
Potential Risks to Study Participants & Risk Mitigation  
1. Potential Risk: Loss of confidentiality  
• Risk Mitigation: All reasonable barriers will be in place to protect against the 
potential loss of confidentiality:  
i. Data will be de -identified and data collection tools used to collect 
participants data will use unique subject ID numbers for identification  
ii. Only generic demographic variables (e.g., age, sex, race) needed to 
evaluate participant characteristics will be captured in data collection  
iii. Study materials and data collection tools will be kept in secure, locked 
areas only accessible to research team  
iv. Electronic spreadsheets will only be accessible to assigned authorized 
personnel and will be password protected  
v. Imaging (e.g., CT scan) will only be accessible by [CONTACT_976] [INVESTIGATOR_244450], 
and will be de -identified and labeled with subject ID numbers before 
Version 1.1: Updated 2/4/2022  13 volumetric assessments are completed  
vi. Study records will be continually monitored by [CONTACT_244459] -identified. Any oversights will be corrected and 
research team members will be notified.  
2. Potential Risk: Harm from radiation exposure during weight -bearing CT scan  
• Risk Mitigation: All reasonable limitations and protections against potential 
adverse health effects that may be associated with radiation exposure will be in 
place:  
i. Patients that are not able to complete the WBCT necessary for volumetric 
assessments will be excluded  
ii. During the consent process, the research team and the participant will 
discuss and assess the participant’s exposure history and determine if the 
potential risk is acceptable for that participant. The participant will be 
given the opportunity to decline to  participate in the study and not undergo 
the WBCT without any loss of benefits to which the participant was 
otherwise entitled.  
3. Potential Risk: Surgery and surgical device implantation risks including infection and 
foreign body reactions or sensitivities. Other specific adverse effects noted for the study 
devices include: osteomyelitis surrounding the TightRope, failure of the impl ant resulting 
in re-diastasis, and painful aseptic osteolysis related to the wear of the FiberWire (not 
noted for XP). The InternalBrace does not have any known increased risk beyond 
potential material sensitivity.  
• Risk Mitigation: All reasonable limitations and protections against potential 
Version 1.1: Updated 2/4/[ADDRESS_297534]:  
i. The study doctor will complete standard of care evaluations to determine 
whether the patient is a good candidate for either of the TightRope fixation 
procedures.  
ii. During the consent process, the research team and the participant will 
discuss and assess the participant’s history and determine if the potential 
risk of device or surgical related risks are acceptable for that participant. 
The participant will be given t he opportunity to decline to participate in 
the study and not undergo the TightRope procedure without any loss of 
benefits to which the participant was otherwise entitled.  
iii. Standard of care procedures will be followed during the procedure to 
minimize the risk of infection and device failure.  
iv. Post-operative directives and follow -ups will follow standard of care to 
minimize device failure, and any adverse effect throughout study timeline 
will be reported as required and outlined above.  
4. Potential Risk: Psychosocial stress or discomfort as a result of filling out the 
questionnaires  
• Risk Mitigation: All reasonable procedures will be in place to protect against 
psychosocial stress or discomfort related to questionnaires, and patients will be 
informed that participation is voluntary and that they may cease participation at 
any time.  
Potential Benefits to Participation  
Version 1.1: Updated 2/4/[ADDRESS_297535] practices 
for caring for ankle injuries that disrupt the syndesmosis.  
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 Significance will be set a priori at P = 0.05. All statistical analyses will be conducted 
using IBM SPSS Statistics, Version 28 (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY). Descriptive analysis 
will be performed to describe participant characteristics and independent t -tests will be used to 
determine differences in pre -operative characteristics and outcomes between groups. In order to 
compare the 3D syndesmotic volume between groups, the volume ratio will first be calculated 
for each patient by [CONTACT_244460].[ADDRESS_297536] moment correlations will 
be conducted to explore relationships between the volumetric ratios and each PRO (FAOS and 
SF-36) at both 6 -weeks and 3 -months. Pearson correlation coefficients (r) will be interpreted as 
(negligible < 0.3, low = 0.3 -0.49, moderate = 0.5 -0.69, high = 0.7 -0.89, very high = 0.9 -1.0).  
  
Version 1.1: Updated 2/4/2022  16 References  
 
1. Switaj PJ, Mendoza M, Kadakia AR. Acute and chronic injuries to the syndesmosis. Clin 
Sports Med. 2015;34(4):643 -677. 
2. Kent S, Yeo G, Marsland D, et al. Delayed stabilisation of dynamically unstable 
syndesmotic injuries results in worse functional outcomes. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol 
Arthrosc. 2020;28(10):3347 -3353.  
3. Naqvi GA, Cunningham P, Lynch B, Galvin R, Awan N. Fixation of ankle syndesmotic 
injuries: comparison of tightrope fixation and syndesmotic screw fixation for accuracy of 
syndesmotic reduction. Am J Sports Med. 2012;40(12):2828 -2835.  
4. Klitzman R, Zhao H, Zhang L -Q, Strohmeyer G, Vora A. Suture -button versus screw 
fixation of the syndesmosis: a biomechanical analysis. Foot Ankle Int. 2010;31(1):69 -75. 
5. Coetzee JC, Ebeling P. Treatment of syndesmosis disruptions with TightRope fixation. 
Tech Foot Ankle Surg. 2008;7(3):196 -202. 
6. Teramoto A, Suzuki D, Kamiya T, Chikenji T, Watanabe K, Yamashita T. Comparison 
of different fixation methods of the suture -button implant for tibiofibular syndesmosis 
injuries. Am J Sports Med. 2011;39(10):2226 -2232.  
7. Regauer M, Mackay G, Lange M, Kammerlander C, Böcker W. Syndesmotic 
InternalBraceTM for anatomic distal tibiofibular ligament augmentation. World J Orthop. 
2017;8(4):301.  
8. Kwon JY, Stenquist D, Ye M, et al. Anterior Syndesmotic Augmentation Technique 
Using Nonabsorbable Suture -Tape for Acute and Chronic Syndesmotic Instability. Foot 
Ankle Int. 2020;41(10):1307 -1315.  
9. de Cesar Netto C, Lintz F, Goetz JE, et al. Automatic 3D Volumetric Analysys of the 
Distal Tibiofibular Syndesmotic Incisura: A Case -Control Study of Subtle Chronic 
Syndesmotic Instability. Foot Ankle Orthop. 2020;5(4):2473011420S2473000190.  
10. Ashkani Esfahani S, Bhimani R, Lubberts B, et al. Volume measurements on 
weightbearing computed tomography can detect subtle syndesmotic instability. J Orthop 
Res. 2021.  
11. Bhimani R, Ashkani -Esfahani S, Lubberts B, et al. Utility of volumetric measurement via 
weight -bearing computed tomography scan to diagnose syndesmotic instability. Foot 
Ankle Int. 2020;41(7):859 -865. 
12. Roos EM, Brandsson S, Karlsson J. Validation of the foot and ankle outcome score for 
ankle ligament reconstruction. Foot Ankle Int. 2001;22(10):788 -794. 
13. Ware JE, Keller SD, Kosinski M. SF-36: Physical and mental health summary scales: A 
user's manual.  Health Assessment Lab; 1994.  
 