COMRADE: Collaborative Care Management for Distress and Depression in 
Rural Diabetes  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
December 11, 2017  
  
PROTOCOL  AND DATA ANALYSIS  
1. Introduction  
Type 2 diabetes (T2D), a significant public health burden, is more  prevalent in the southeastern 
US which includes most of the CDC defined  “Diabetes Belt” [1]. It is estimated that 9.3% of 
Americans have  diabetes and in the counties included in the Diabetes Belt; the percent  affected 
ranges from 11 to 11.7%. Those with T2D are twice as li kely to  have symptoms of depression 
and this relationship may be bi -directional  [2]. Depressive symptoms may also interfere with 
glycemic  control and adherence to the prescribed treatment regimen [3].  Diabetes related 
distress, originally investigated by P olonsky et al.  [4], can be associated with depressive 
symptoms but appears to be a  distinct condition [5]. Diabetes related distress reflects the 
emotional  distress, defined as “patient concerns about disease management, support,  emotional 
burden, and acce ss to care”. High levels of regimen  related  distress have been associated with 
poor medication adherence,  lower self -efficacy, and higher levels of HbA1c [6]. Early evidence  
suggests that improvement in depressive symptoms and/or distress  have been associated with 
improvement in glycemic control and quality  of life [7 –9]. Katon et al. [7] described a shared or 
integrated approach  to both T2D and depression using a care manager specifically trained in  
both diseases, with psychiatrist back -up. However,  Katon et al.'s work  was done in the 
northwestern US with a predominantly Caucasian population  with diabetes and depression only 
(distress not targeted) with  good access to medical care services and the availability of back -up 
psychiatrists. Bogner et al. [8] implemented an integrated care management  strategy for patients 
with T2D and co -morbid depression who  were likely to have medication adherence challenges. 
This study also  provided excellent evidence for the present study; however, it was  conducted in 
an urban setting in the northeastern US, targeted depressive  symptoms only, and outcomes were 
only measured at [ADDRESS_528829] of their model is unknown. Hessler et al. 
[9] used an electronic intervention model and showed that reductio ns in  regimen -related distress 
were associated with improvements in medication  adherence and glycemic control. However, 
this study was conducted  in an urban location on the west coast. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_419383], the American Diabetes Associ ation in its latest guidelines  [10] now recommends 
both regular screening for psychosocial  issues as well as evaluation and treatment including a 
collaborative  patient -centered approach involving behavioral health professionals  when 
indicated. However, the  extent to which this collaborative behavioral  and medical care model 
can be effectively implemented in  busy primary care practices in the southeastern US diabetes 
belt or  other areas of high prevalence, where many patients with poorly controlled  T2D and 
behavioral co -morbidities are managed, remains poorly  defined. The investigators undertook the 
present study to investigate  the pragmatic implementation of an integrated care delivery model 
in the diabetes belt in the rural southeastern [LOCATION_002] with a  much  larger African American 
population.  
In this protocol , the authors describe the design, rationale, and  methods  from a prospective 
randomized pragmatic trial of an  innovative model involving a culturally -relevant integrated 
medical  and behavioral inter vention for uncontrolled T2D, tailored to the unique  needs of 
patients in the southeastern US diabetes belt. The objective  of this clinical trial was to determine 
the feasibility for delivering  and evaluating coordinated and integrated behavioral and  medic al 
care for adult patients with uncontrolled T2D who have comorbid  diabetes -related distress 
and/or depressive symptoms, in the  context of a busy primary care practice and surrounding 
rural communities.  The intervention included a carefully defined protoco l for face-to-face and 
telephone delivered cognitive behavioral health interventions,  tailored to the presence and 
severity of co -morbid distress  and/or depression, in addition to routine medical care for T2D.  
2.2. Intervention design  
The study was designed as a prospective, randomized, non -blinded  pragmatic trial with 
randomization at the patient level to the intervention  arm or to usual care. For the intervention 
arm, a collaborative  or integrated care model involving tailored cognitive -behavioral  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_419384] [10] -informed  standard medical care was 
considered to represent the most practical  approach to treating the established co -morbid illness 
in busy primary  care settings in the southeastern US. The inter vention was designed to  utilize 
modified versions of evidence -based collaborative care management  strategies – particularly 
those described by [CONTACT_419388]. [7] and  Banger et al. [8]. Further, the intervention model was 
built on the  authors' prior work [11] , and was designed to:  
1. Involve an integrated and collaborative care delivery system that  extends the capacity of busy 
primary care providers to be able to  screen and manage the psychological and behavioral needs 
of complex co -morbid patients with T2D  
2. Focus on specific behavioral problems such as depressive and diabetes -related distress 
symptoms that prior literature suggests limits  optimal care outcomes  
3. Utilize a unique stepped care approach that quickly moves the patient  to the right level of 
care and increases or decreases the degree  of intervention based on patient response  
4. Be culturally tailored  to be relevant in the southeastern US and to  African Americans  
5. Use a trained care manager linked to primary care clinicians and  health psychologis ts so that 
it might be readily deployed even in  communities without access to a psychiatrist   
6. Employ a community health worker to provide specific social support  and navigation  
7. Use a combined face -to-face and telephone visit structure to improve  care and cost efficiency 
and to facilitate generalizability in underserved  and rural communities  
2.3. Study population and setting  
The study was specifically targeted at patients with uncontrolled  T2D who also reported either 
depressive symptoms and/or symptom s of diabetes -related distress, as measured by [CONTACT_419389]  (see below). In our prior pi[INVESTIGATOR_419385] [11], 40% of patients screened positive for diabetes  related  distress and 21.5% 
reported ele vated depressive symptoms. The  study took place in an academic Family Medicine 
clinic setting that  included a residency program located in the southeastern U.S.  
2.3.1. Screening  
The population screened for this study included: adult patients (18  to 75 year s of age) who had 
established care at the academic primary  care practice (at least one visit in the last 12 months) 
and who had an  electronic medical record established diagnosis of T2D and a recent  (< 12 mo.) 
HbA1c that reflected inadequate glycemic contr ol (HbA1c≥7.0). Exclusion criteria for screening 
included a medical record  established diagnosis of advanced disease (e.g., end stage renal  
disease, advanced heart failure, blindness, metastatic cancer) or the  presence of alcoholism, 
cognitive impairment, or major psychiatric  disease that would preclude active participation. 
Individuals who met  preliminary eligibility were contact[CONTACT_419390] a study -specific visit or was screened following a  regular provider visit. At the 
time of placement into an examination  room for the study visit, a statement of informed consent 
and HIPPA  consent was carefully reviewed with each potential participant. A two-item version 
of the Diabetes Distress Scale (DDS -2) and t he two -item version of the Patient Health 
Questionnaire (PHQ -2) was then administered  as a screening instrument by [CONTACT_419391]. These 
2-item versions have excellent sensitivity (95% and 97%, respectively), and  are defined in 
greater detail below in the ou tcome measures section.  Study staff collected the completed 
measures and scored them. If the  score on either measure was considered positive (mean score > 
3 on DDS -2; total score > 3 on PHQ -2), the individual was assessed regarding  glycemic control. 
A scre ening fingerstick HbA1c test was obtained  while the patient was in the examination room 
and evaluated  using a Siemens analyzer [DCA Vantage portable analyzer, Siemens  Medical 
Solutions, Malvern, PA] as described below. If the patient  met all the screening criteria 
described above, had a HbA1c value that  day that was>7.0, and also had positive co -morbid 
behavioral  symptoms (depressive and/or diabetes -related distress symptoms on  one or more of 
the 2 item screening instruments), then he/she was  scheduled for an enrollment visit into the 
study. Once enrolled, the  patient completed the full DDS -17 and PHQ -9 plus additional baseline  
instruments that are defined below and  was then scheduled for a study  orientation visit.  
2.4. Sample size and randomization procedur es 
Sample size was estimated as follows. The primary outcome measure  was determined to be the 
change in mean HbA1c from baseline to  12-months follow -up. In the intervention arm, mean 
HbA1c was hypothesized  to decrease by −0.7 compared to no change in the u sual care arm 
(based on values reported by [CONTACT_419392]. [8]). Using an α =  0.05 and a power estimate of 0.80, 
the crude sample size needed in each  group was approximately n=50 for a total sample size of 
N=100  patients. The investigators chose to recruit a nd randomize approximately  70 patients into 
each arm anticipating the possibility of dropouts  and incomplete follow -up data in some 
patients. Randomization  was designed as a blocked randomization process, controlled by [CONTACT_419393], using a com puter -generated allocation sequence with  allocation concealment 
from treating providers, with eligible patients  randomized in blocks of four to the intervention 
or control group. Patients  were randomized at the beginning of the orientation visit, held  one 
week after the screening visit) and were provided group specific  orientation to the study as 
detailed below.  
2.5. Implementation  
At the outset of the study, project faculty met weekly and hired a  project coordinator who 
managed logistics and facilitated patient recruitment  as well as all data collection and data entry.  
2.5.1. Intervention staff selection and training  
The primary intervention was delivered by a team of behavioral  providers working together 
including a nurse care manager who pro vided  small -changes lifestyle coaching [11], a doctoral 
student in  clinical psychology or psychologist who provided cognitive behavioral  treatment 
sessions including elements of problem -solving therapy  where indicated, and a community 
health worker who pro vided navigation  and social support. The nurse care manager was an 
African  American registered nurse from the local area with>10 years' experience  in care 
management for patients with diabetes. A local African  American adult female community 
health worker with>10 years' experience  in chronic disease care, was hired to provide social 
support  and navigation in the community to acquire needed diabetes resources.  All staff hired 
had strong interpersonal skills including a demonstrated  ability to establish rappo rt quickly with 
a wide range of people. The  nurse manager and other intervention staff received extensive ( ≥80 
h) training by [CONTACT_419394] -specific 
evaluation and management, depression and distres s specific  evaluation and management, 
cognitive -behavioral/problem  solving  therapy intervention components, disease and severity 
stratification,  response evaluation and stepped -care transitions, psychological  and medical 
treatment intensification, working with providers and  community partners, and project -specific 
evaluation. One of the investigators  provided regular supervision of the care manager from a  
behavioral intervention perspective.  
2.5.2. Orientation session  
Patients who completed the screening visit and signed informed  consent completed a study 
orientation visit one week later during  which height, weight, and sitting blood pressure (BP) 
were measured  using standardized procedures. All patients in both study arms were  provided 
with educ ational materials about T2D (Living with Diabetes,  American College of Physicians, 
Product #: 11033420E). Patients randomized  at the orientation visit into the Usual Care Arm 
were provided  with general information about the COMRADE study and with a brief  
orientation to future study assessment visits. Patients randomized to the  intervention group were 
provided with general information about the  COMRADE study, a weight scale, and were 
assigned to one of two levels  of behavioral treatment based on the level of  baseline scores (see  
below). Intervention group patients also received an innovative, patient -friendly Tracking for 
Success Calendar developed for daily monitoring  of six possible diabetes and mood self -
management behaviors  including fasting blood glucose , weight, medication administration,  food 
intake, step count, and mood. Each intervention arm patient was  instructed to use this for the 
duration of the study and these records  were reviewed at the start of every study -related session 
by [CONTACT_419395]. Following explanation of study materials  and 
orientation to the COMRADE program, patients were scheduled to  attend their first behavioral 
treatment session.  
2.5.3. Initial assessment of co -morbid behavioral symptoms and severity  stratification  
Once randomized at the orientation visit, patients in both groups  completed a full battery of 
measures which are detailed below. The full  psychological measures [Patient Health 
Questionnaire -9 (PHQ -9) for  depressive symptoms and the Diabete s-related Distress -17 (DDS -
17) scales for diabetes -related distress symptoms], were promptly scored by  [CONTACT_419396] -based behavioral interventions 
based on the severity  of symptoms  of depression or distress [(Small Changes Lifestyle  
Coaching if PHQ -9 < 10 and/or mean DDS -17 < 3) or Cognitive  Behavioral Therapy (CBT; 
PHQ -9≥10 and/or mean DDS -17 – ≥3.0)].  Based on these two measures, it was possible to have 
patients with only  depressi ve symptoms, only diabetes -related distress symptoms, or a  
combination of both distress and depressive symptoms. This complex  design was specifically 
chosen for pragmatic reasons related to: 1) insuring  generalizability in primary care where 
patients with uncontrolled  diabetes frequently have either or both of these co -morbidities,  and 2) 
to explore whether evidence -based but tailored treatments  would relieve varying levels of 
symptoms of diabetes -related distress  and/or depression and facilitate diabetes c ontrol when 
delivered in this  integrated care fashion in the context of a busy primary care practice.  The 
proposed stratification design may also have the potential to be  more efficient and cost -effective 
than providing a potentially suboptimal  level of in tervention for a period of time before 
intensifying  treatment as might occur in a standard stepped care model.  Therefore, the 
behavioral intervention was designed to pi[INVESTIGATOR_21087] a  severity -stratified behavioral treatment 
model with patients being  triaged at  baseline to one of three levels of behavioral intervention  
(small changes lifestyle coaching, or one of two levels of cognitive  behavioral therapy), each 
paired with guideline informed standard  medical care delivered by [CONTACT_102]'s primary care 
provider  with available consultative support from the study's diabetologist to assist  with 
medication selection and monitoring. All three levels of behavioral  health intervention had the 
overarching goal of improving the patient's  glycemic control (i.e., HbA1c) as  well as improving 
depressive and/or  distress symptoms.  2.5.4. Behavioral health intervention structure and content  
In the first 6 months of behavioral treatment all patients in the intervention  arm received one 
individual orientation session and 12 indivi dually  tailored behavioral treatment sessions that 
included the  content described below, delivered by [CONTACT_5984] (trained nurse or  health 
psychologist/doctoral clinical health psychology student) described  above. Patients completed 
the orientation session and the first  intervention session for each level of behavioral intervention 
in-person  and then had the choice of completing the subsequent sessions either in -person  or by 
[CONTACT_756]. Session duration ranged from 30 to 60 min  depending o n treatment content and 
individual patient needs; patients  were not charged for the behavioral intervention. All study 
interventionists  met bi -weekly as a group with the principal investigators for  supervision and 
consultation. The registered nurse met one -on-one weekly for supervision with the licensed 
clinical psychologist principal  investigator. The diabetologist (i.e., primary care physician with 
advanced  training in diabetes care) was also on -site and available for  consultation and referral 
of patients  who developed severe diabetes  signs or symptoms (e.g., hypoglycemia, 
hyperglycemia).  
2.5.5. Small changes lifestyle intervention  
The Small Changes treatment sub -group included intervention arm  patients with low levels of 
diabetes -related distress and/or d epressive  symptoms and the intervention focused on lifestyle 
modifications to  improve diabetes and mood based on the Small Changes health behavior  
change model [12] as we have previously described [11], as well as  American Diabetes 
Association (ADA) [10] r ecommended diabetes  education topi[INVESTIGATOR_419386], being active, 
monitoring, taking  medication regularly, healthy copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], and decreasing risks. The Small  
Changes model encourages health behavior change and maintenance  through the use of 
incremental go als over time that are self -selected by  [CONTACT_419397]. The 
Small Changes approach has  been shown to be more effective for weight loss than traditional  
treatment in a health care setting with Veterans [13].  Small Changes lifestyle intervention 
sessions were delivered by a  nurse trained in behavior change and focused on the development 
of self-management strategies and the setting of SMALL (specific, measurable,  action -oriented, 
linked -to-your-life, and long -term) goals.  Patients wer e instructed to self -monitor and record 
daily fasting finger  stick blood sugar (FSBS), weight, mood, medication taking, and selected  
nutritional intake (using only check marks) using the provided  calendar and scale as well as 
their daily steps with pedomet ers provided  by [CONTACT_1758]. Nutritional monitoring and goal setting 
was based on a  Stop Light Guide [14] which was adapted for diabetic populations. In  this 
modified system, food and beverage items were categorized as  “Green” (high nutrient value, 
little ef fect on glycemic control),  “Yellow” (high nutrient value, moderate effect on glycemic 
control),  and “Red” (low nutrient value, large effect on glycemic control). While  patients were 
introduced to the full modified Stop Light Guide, patients  were instructed  only to monitor how 
many red foods they were eating  daily and make relative nutritional changes to their daily 
baseline  consumption of “Red Foods”. Specifically, patients checked -off daily  servings of Red 
Foods in five categories (breakfast, lunch, dinner , snacks, and beverages) in order to get a daily 
total of Red Food servings  (sum from these five categories) and then set goals to reduce their 
daily  total throughout the course of treatment. Monitoring and goal setting  was designed in this 
manner to reduce monitoring burden and to increase  the patient's focus on food and beverage 
items with potential for  substantial adverse impact on weight and glycemic control.  
2.5.6. Cognitive behavioral therapy  
The Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) subgroup focuse d on the  reduction of depressive 
and/or diabetes -related distress symptoms  through modification of negative thoughts and 
problematic behaviors  as well as improvement of diabetes self -management strategies. CBT  
combines cognitive therapy, which targets mala daptive thinking that  impacts emotions and 
behavior with behavioral therapy which directly  targets the behaviors which impact mood.  CBT 
intervention components were guided by [CONTACT_419398] -based  treatment manuals [15,16] as well 
as an evidence -based  manual [17] for behavioral activation. Session content utilized cognitive 
techniques  to identify and challenge general and diabetes -specific cognitive distortions  that 
result in maladaptive behavior; and behavioral techniques  including behavioral activation and 
specific behavior change related to  diabetes and/or mood (self -monitoring, sleep hygiene, eating 
habits  etc.). Patients were taught behavioral strategies to become re -engaged  in pleasant 
activities (behavioral activation) as well as cognitive techniques  to identify and then challenge 
cognitive distortions that result in  negative automatic thoughts and subsequent maladaptive 
behavior.  These sessions occurred in 50 min face -to-face (in private therapy  rooms in the 
primary care clinic) or via telephonic visits with the health  psychologist/student. Problem -
solving strategies were utilized as  needed to assist with behavioral goals related to mood and 
diabetes  management.  
CBT Therapy was also tailored to individual patient needs. For patients  who met criteria for t his 
subgroup but who had more intermediate  levels of depressive or distress symptoms, the health 
psychologist  utilized Problem Solving Therapy (PST), a variant of CBT which  focuses on 
facilitation of effective copi[INVESTIGATOR_419387] -solving  skills [18 ]. Problem Solving 
Therapy has been shown to be an effective  intervention strategy for improvement in both 
diabetes specific outcomes  and depression [19,20], particularly in patients with lower 
socioeconomic  status and diabetes [21]. Problem Solving Therap y has  also been adapted for 
delivery in primary care settings (PST -PC) as a  brief form of evidence -based psychotherapy 
[22] and is supported by  [CONTACT_419399] [23].  Patients 
receiving CBT involving PST began treatmen t by [CONTACT_49169][INVESTIGATOR_49151]  a personalized on -going list of 
“problems” or areas for potential improvement  based on ADA recommended [10] diabetes 
topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]. In each  session, the patient chose a problem from his or her list to address and  used the 
following steps: 1) proble m definition, 2) establishment of  realistic goals for problem 
resolution, 3) generation of multiple solution  alternatives, 4) determination of the pros and cons 
of solution alternatives  5) evaluation and solution choice, 6) implementation of the  preferred 
solution, and 7) evaluation of the outcome. Additionally,  patients were provided education 
about behavioral activation for mood  improvement and were assisted with setting goals to 
increase engagement  in pleasurable activities for improved mood.  Primary care providers for 
patients in the intervention arm were  offered consultation with the diabetologist and, when 
needed, consultation  with a clinical pharmacist to optimize medical management.  Primary care 
providers were instructed to titrate medicat ion dosages to  appropriate therapeutic dosages based 
on finger -stick blood sugar response  and subsequent HbA1c values. Patient response, 
adherence, and  potential for side effects were monitored regularly by [CONTACT_419400] -to-face and te lephone follow -up, with particular  attention to the potential for 
hypoglycemia associated with insulin and  sulfonylurea drugs.  
2.5.7. Community based support of the intervention  
All intervention patients had access to a trained Community Health  Worker (CHW ) who had 
extensive experience promoting healthy behaviors  for chronic disease management in the 
targeted region. This  CHW component of the intervention was designed as culturally relevant  
peer support and as a navigator to community resources that helped  patients address logistical 
challenges to implementing healthy behaviors,  problem solving, and accessing healthy 
food/activity in the target  community. The CHW contact[CONTACT_419401].   
2.5.8. Usual care group (control)  
Patients in the control group received the educational materials  described above (i.e., Living 
with Diabetes book) and continued to receive  usual care a t their primary care provider's office.  
2.5.9. Overall study evaluation  
The authors evaluated the effectiveness of this stratified integrated  behavioral health model on 
diabetes related distress, depressive  symptoms, and diabetes outcomes (see measures bel ow) at 
6- and 12 -month follow -up visits. It was hypothesized that the collaborative behavioral  health 
intervention would produce greater improvement in  diabetes related distress, depressive 
symptoms, as well as HbA1c at 6  and 12 months vs. usual care. A pr iori analyses were also 
designed to  evaluate mediators of the relationship between improvement in psychological  
measures (distress/depression) and improvement in HbA1c  with the hypothesis that the 
intervention -associated improvements in  diabetes -related di stress, regimen related distress, and 
depressive  symptoms would be associated with improvements in A1c in part via  association 
with improvements in self -care behaviors.  
2.5.10. Mid -study Re -assessment and maintenance treatment  
At the 6 -month mid -study asse ssment, all patients were re -evaluated  using the same measures 
described below, and either continued to receive  twice monthly behavioral sessions (for those 
with no improvement  in distress and depressive symptom scores) as originally assigned  at the 
initia l orientation visits, or were transferred to once per month  telephonic maintenance follow -
up care (for those whose distress and  depressive symptom scores improved). Maintenance 
treatment reinforced  prior intervention strategies that produced benefit and pr ovided  lifestyle 
behavioral counseling using elements of the small  changes model described above) by [CONTACT_419402].  
2.6. Biological and psychosocial measures  
Patients in both intervention and control groups completed a demographic  questionnaire [age, 
gender, race (African American,  Caucasian, other), highest education level completed (high 
school or  less, some college, college degree, any graduate education), marital  status (single, 
married, separated, divorced, widowed), annual hou sehold  income ($ < 40,000/yr. vs. ≥
$40,000/yr.) duration of diabetes  (yrs.; self -reported), number of doctor visits in the last 12 
months] at  baseline; biological and psychosocial assessments were completed at  baseline, 6, and 
12 months. Weight was obtained  using an Eatsmart Precision Plus Bathroom  Scale model 
ESBS -05. Height was measured using a wall stadiometer.  Blood pressure was obtained using an 
Omron Intellisense Automatic  BP Monitor model BP760 (Omron, Inc., Chicago, IL) using a  
standardized protocol.  All patients were seated for five minutes with  both feet on the floor, and 
with their arm supported. Blood pressure was  measured twice and averaged. HbA1c was 
measured by [CONTACT_419403] 2000 HbA1c Reagent Kit.  
The study utilized previously validated psychosocial measures including  the Patient Health 
Questionnaire (PHQ -9), Diabetes Distress  Scale (DDS -17), and the Satisfaction with Life Scale 
with data collected  at baseline, 6 -months, and 12 -months. The PHQ -9 is a nine -item self-report  
measure [24] intended for use in primary care settings to assess  symptoms of depression. Scores 
can be summed to indicate, minimal,  mild, moderate, or severe depressive symptoms. The 
DDS -17 is a 17 -item self -reported measure [4] which is desi gned to indicate a respondent's  level 
of current emotional distress related to diabetes management.  Scores are summed and divided 
by 17 (i.e., mean score) to  categorize distress as low, moderate, or high. The DDS -17 also has 
four subscales, including the R egimen Related Distress sub -score which is an  average from five 
items that assess distress associated with specific  treatment and monitoring activities, and which 
has been correlated  with diabetes outcome measures [6,9]. The Satisfaction with Life Scale  [25] 
is a 5 -item self -report measure designed to assess satisfaction with  a respondent's life as a 
whole.  The study also utilized several previously validated health behavior  measures including 
the Diabetes Empowerment Scale, The Summary of  Diabetes Self -Care Activities Measure 
(SDSCA), the Rapid Eating  Assessment for Participants – Shortened Version (REAP -S), and 
the Duke Activity Status Index, with data collected at baseline, 6 -months,  and 12 -months. The 
Diabetes Empowerment Scale -Short Form [26] is  an abbr eviated self -report measure of 
diabetes -related psychosocial  self-efficacy. Dietary habits were assessed using the REAP -S, a 
16-item self-report survey [27] designed for use in primary care to directly assess  dietary habits 
for patients with diabetes. Phys ical activity was assessed  by [CONTACT_419404], a 
12-item self -report measure  [28] to assess functional capacity.  
2.6.1. Data analysis plan  
All data was collected by [CONTACT_419405] -person interviews/assessments  at all time points 
and entered into a REDCap database.  Demographic and baseline data will be compared between 
treatment  groups; co -variates will be used for any significant differences on subsequent  
analyses. The principal outcome measure, change in HbA1c,  and secondary outcome measures 
(e.g., change in DDS -17 score, PHQ -9 score, etc.) from baseline to 12 months of follow -up, will 
be compared  (intervention group vs. usual care group) using Students t -test or analysis  of 
variance (ANOVA) as appropriate. The correlation between  change in HbA1c and changes in 
other factors such as DDS -17 score,  PHQ -9 score, Diabetes Empowerment Scale Score, etc. 
will be examined  using Pearson Correlation Coefficient. Where appropriate, multivariate  
analyses including general li near models will be used to further examine  the relationship 
between changes in psychosocial variables and  change in HbA1c, (e.g., change in depression or 
distress and relationship  to change in HbA1c) while controlling for demographic characteristics  
and b aseline values. In addition, based on our previous work  [11], analyses examining treatment 
outcomes based on insulin use  between the treatment and control groups will be conducted 
using  Students t -test or repeated measures ANOVA. Furthermore, exploratory  analyses, 
including multiple linear regressions, will be examined in the  treatment intervention group to 
examine potential mechanisms for  change across time. Missing data at follow -up associated 
with patients  missing assessments will be addressed by [CONTACT_2329] m ultiple imputations to  replace 
missing values. All variables with<20% of randomly missing  data will be kept and imputed. 
Multiple imputation is preferred because  it is superior to other missing data approaches (i.e. 
mean replacement,  last observation) and removing patients with missing data from the  study 
(i.e. list -wise) which would result in a significant loss of the study  sample. All analyses will be 
conducted using SPSS vs. 24 (IBM, Armonk,  [LOCATION_001]).  
REFERENCES  
[1] L.E. Barker, K.A. Kirtland, E.W. Greg g, L.S. Geiss, T.J. Thompson, Geographic 
distribution  
of diagnosed diabetes in the [LOCATION_002]: a diabetes belt, Am. J. Prev.  
Med. 40 (4) (2011) 434 –439. 
[2] A. Pan, M. Lucas, Q. Sun, et al., Bidirectional association between depression and  
type 2 diabet es mellitus in women, Arch. Int. Med. 170 (21) (2010) 1884 –1891.  
[3] P.L. Lustman, R.E. Clouse, Depression in diabetic patients: the relationship between  
mood and glycemic control, J. Diabetes Complicat. 15 (2005) 113 –122. 
[4] W.H. Polonsky, L. Fisher, J. Earles, et al., Assessing psychosocial distress in diabetes,  
Diabetes Care 28 (2005) 626 –631. 
[5] L. Fisher, M.M. Skaff, J.T. Mullan, et al., Clinical depression versus distress among  
patients with type 2 diabetes: not just  a question of semantics, Diabetes Care 30  
(2007) 542 –548. 
[6] D.M. Cummings, L. Lutes, K. Littlewood, et al., Regimen related distress, medication  
adherence, and glycemic control in rural African American women with type 2  
diabetes mellitus, Ann. Pharmaco ther. 48 (8) (2014) 970 –977. 
[7] W.J. Katon, E.H. Lin, M. Von Korff, et al., Collaborative care for patients with depression  
and chronic illnesses, N. Engl. J. Med. 363 (27) (2010) 2611 –2620.  
[8] H.R. Bogner, K.H. Morales, H.F. deVries, A.R. Cappola, Integ rated management of  
Type 2 diabetes mellitus and depression treatment to improve medication adherence:  
a randomized controlled trial, Ann. Fam. Med. 10 (2012) 15 –22. 
[9] D. Hessler, L. Fisher, R.E. Glasgow, et al., Reductions in regimen distress are associ ated 
with improved management and glycemic control over time, Diabetes Care  
37 (3) (2014) 617 –624. 
[10] American Diabetes Association, Standards of medical Care in Diabetes – 2017,  
Diabetes Care 40 (Suppl. 1) (2017 Jan) S1 –S135.  
[11] D.M. Cummings, L. Lute s, K. Littlewood, E. DiNatale, B. Hambidge, EMPOWER: a  
randomized trial using community health workers to deliver a lifestyle intervention  
program in African American women with Type 2 diabetes: design, rationale, and  
baseline characteristics, Contemp. Cli n. Trials 36 (1) (2013) 147 –153. 
[12] L.D. Lutes, E. Steinbaugh, Theoretical models for pedometer use in physical activity  
interventions, Phys. Ther. Rev. 15 (3) (2010) 143 –153. 
[13] L.D. Lutes, L.J. Damschroder, R. Masheb, et al., Behavioral treatment for  veterans  
with obesity: 24 -month weight outcomes from the ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392] -VA small changes randomized  
trial, J. Gen. Intern. Med. 32 (Suppl. 1) (2017) 40 –47. 
[14] N.J. Temple, L.T. Bourne, A proposed new food guide: why pyramids should stop at  
traffic lights, Ethn. Dis. 20 (4) (2010) 485 –487. 
[15] D. Greenberger, C.A. Padesky, Mind Over Mood: A Cognitive Therapy Treatment  
Manual for Clients, The Guilford Press, [LOCATION_001], NY, 1995.  
[16] Gilson M, Freeman A, Yates MJ, Freeman SM. Overcoming depres sion: a cognitive  
therapy approach. In Barlow DH (ed): Treatments that Work. Oxford: The Oxford  
Press.  
[17] C.W. Lejuez, D.R. Hopko, R. Acierno, S.B. Daughters, S.L. Pagoto, Ten -year revision  
of the brief behavioral activation treatment for depression: rev ised treatment  
manual, Behav. Modif. 35 (2011) 111 –161, http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/  
0145445510390929.  
[18] K. Dobson, Handbook of Cognitive -Behavioral Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014], The Guilford Press, New  
York, 2010.  
[19] A.M. Nezu, C.M. Nezu, M.G. Perri, Problem -Solving Ther apy for Depression:  
Therapy, Research, and Clinical Guidelines, Wiley, [LOCATION_001], 1989.  
[20] R.E. Glasgow, D.J. Toobert, M. Barrera, L.A. Stryker, Assessment of problem -solving:  
a key to successful diabetes self -management, J. Behav. Med. 27 (2004)  
477–490. 
[21] F. Hill -Briggs, M. Lazo, M. Peyrot, et al., Effect of problem -solving -based diabetes  
self-management training on diabetes control in a low income patient sample, J.  
Gen. Intern. Med. 26 (9) (2011) 972 –978. 
[22] M.T. Hegel, J.E. Barrett, T.E. Oxman, T raining therapi[INVESTIGATOR_4285] -solving  
treatment of depressive disorders in primary care: lessons learned from the treatment  
effectiveness project, Fam. Syst. Health 18 (2000) 423 –435. 
[23] J.W. Williams, W. Katon, E.H.B. Lin, et al., The effectiveness of d epression care  
management on diabetes -related outcomes in older patients, Ann. Intern. Med. 140  
(2004) 1015 –1024.  
[24] R.L. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626], K. Kroenke, J.B.W. Williams, Validation and utility of a self -report  
version of PRIME -MD: the PHQ primary care study, JAMA 282 (1999) 1737 –1744.  
[25] W. Pavot, E. Diener, Review of the satisfaction with life scale, Psychol. Assess. 5  
(1993) 164 –172. 
[26] R.M. Anderson, J.T. Fitzgerald, L.D. Gruppen, M.M. Funnell, M.S. Oh, Diabetes  
Empowerment Scale -Short Form (DES -SF), Di abetes Care 26 (5) (2003) 1641 –1642.  
[27] C.J. Segal -Isaacson, J. Wylie -Rosett, K.M. Gans, Validation of a short dietary assessment  
questionnaire: the Rapid Eating and Activity Assessment for Participants  
Short Version (REAP -S), Diabetes Educ. 30 (5) (2004 ) 774 –778. 
[28] M.A. Hlatky, R.E. Boineau, M.B. Higginbotham, et al., A brief self -administered  
questionnaire to determine functional capacity (The Duke Activity Status Index),  
Am. J. Cardiol. 64 (1989) 651 –654. 
[29] D.M. Cummings, K. Kirian, G. Howard, et  al., Consequences of co -morbidity of  
elevated stress and/or depressive symptoms and incident cardiovascular outcomes  
in diabetes: results from the reasons for geographic and racial differences in stroke  
(REGARDS) study, Diabetes Care 39 (2016) 101 –109. 
[30] H. Oh, K. Ell, Associations between changes in depressive symptoms and social  
support and diabetes management among low -income, predominantly Hispanic  
patients in patient -centered care, Diabetes Care 41 (4) (2018) 706 –713. 
[31] Schmit A, Reimer A, Domin ic E, Kulzer B, Haak T, Hermans N. Reduction of depressive  
symptoms predicts improved glycaemic control: secondary results from the  
DIAMOS study. J. Diabetes Complicat. (in press). doi.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.  
jdiacomp.2017.08.004.  