 
 
1 
 Title:  PHASE II RANDOMIZED PLACEBO -CONTROLLED CLINICAL TRIAL OF GENISTEIN  IN 
REDUCING THE TOXICITY AND IMPROVING THE EFFICACY OF INTRAVES ICAL THERAPY  
Study Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_528767]:   Omer Kucuk, MD  
Study Co-Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_528768], MD  PhD 
Study Supporter: DSM  Nutritional Products  
Version  Date:  16 Jul 2019 
 
Schema:  
E
n
r
o
ll
m
e
n
t 44 TaT1 Tis superficial bladder 
cancer pat ients scheduled to 
receive BCG i ntravesical therapy 
will be consented  
 
Estimated Timeline: until 44 
subjects  are enrolled 
(approximately 2 years ) R
a
n
d
o
m
iz
a
ti
o
n Arm 1: BCG 
intravesical 
therapy with 
placebo pi[INVESTIGATOR_528769] 10 weeks 
(22 subjects)  F
o
ll
o
w
-
u
p Arm 1: Followed -up according to 
standard after -treatment care: one -
month post -treatment appointment 
and subsequent doctor visits.  
Arm 2: BCG 
intravesical 
therapy with 
30 mg 
genistein 
supplement 
PO TID  for 10 
weeks  
(22 subjects)  Arm 2:  Followed -up according to 
standard after -treatment care: one -
month post -treatment appointment 
and subsequent doctor visits.  
Patients will take either [ADDRESS_686407]:   
Patients who are treated with BCG intravesical therapy for TaT1 Tis superficial  bladder 
cancer  often develop adverse effects (urinary tract symptoms) which limit the dose (and 
therefore the efficacy)  of therapy and result in poor quality of life. Genistein is a nutritional 
supplement with  anti-inflammatory properties  which might help alleviate adverse effects of 
intravesical therapy that are due to inflammation. Additionally , genistein also has anti -tumor 
and immunopotentiating properties and has been shown to have no known side effects . Our 
hypothesis is that genistein given together with  BCG  intravesical therapy will reduce its 
adverse effects and improve the efficacy of therapy. Patients ( N=44) scheduled for 
intravesical therapy will be randomly assigned to take 30 mg tablets of genistein supplement 
(N=22) or placebo (N= 22) PO TID during therapy and one  month post therapy.  
2. Introduction and Background:  
BCG i ntravesical therapy is a form of immunotherapy commonly used to prevent the 
recurrence of noninvasive bladder cancer , which occurs in approximately 50 -80% of bladder 
cancer patients within 5 years . 10-20% of all superficial bladder cancer patients will progress 
beyond superficial recurrence within [ADDRESS_686408] 
treatment or  become worse over time as therapy continues. As a result, the  dose of therapy 
is often  reduced  so that  symptoms can be treated symptomatically  with antibiotics or pain 
medication . Dose reduction is generally done in 50% in crements, and the decision to reduce 
the treatment dosage is often subjective based on each patient’s perception of symptoms.  
 
The isoflavone genistein (4,7,4' -trihydroxyisoflavone) is a phytoestrogen found in high levels 
in soy products and can be  taken as a nutritional supplement  for its antioxidant  benefit s and 
its estrogenic properties . The g enistein  supplement is sold over the counter and has  less soy 
isoflavone  than  commonly  found in many healthy diets . For comparison, an [ADDRESS_686409] on decreased 
incidence of urinary, gastrointestinal, and erectile dysfunction s when  42 patients were  
given 100 mg genistein supplement daily for 6 months  in conjunction to radiation .iii 
Additionally, a small pi[INVESTIGATOR_14737] 8 children receiving chemotherapy and/or radiation were 
given [ADDRESS_686410] symptoms ( LUTS ) were studied using standardized 
structured questionnaires.  A total of 96.2 % of subjects reported some consumption of 
genistein, glycitein , or daidzein. In ordinal multinominal logistic regression, subjects with 
dietary total isoflavone of more than 5.[ADDRESS_686411] Information:  
 
This study will use the synthetic non-soy genistein supplement,  BonisteinTM .  BonisteinTM 
has been compounded into tablets name d I-Cool ® .  Each I-Cool tablet contains  30 mg of 
genistein ( BonisteinTM).  I-Cool ® and the corresponding placebo tablets are supplied by 
[CONTACT_528773].  DSM Nutritional Products as the study product supplier , 
provides Certificate of Analysis to Study Sponsor.  Patients enrolled in the study will be 
receiving I-Cool ® tablets or the corresponding placebo tablets.  
 
4. Objectives:  
 
4.[ADDRESS_686412] BCG treatment (baseline) to the symptoms at the 6th week of treatment. The 
difference in the degree of urinary symptoms between the placebo a nd genistein 
supplement  arms will help reflect whether genistein supplement can improve the quality 
of life in BCG intravesical therapy patients.  
  
4.2 Secondary objective  
 
 
4 
 a) A secondary study endpoint will be the presence of cancer and the rate of recurrence  
as determined by [CONTACT_941] [ADDRESS_686413] follow -up visits.  
 
b) A second secondary study endpoint will be the total dose of intravesical therapy 
administered  over the [ADDRESS_686414] to be reduced as much.  This will be measured by 
[CONTACT_528774].  
 
5. Stud y Design and Methods:  
At the pre-operative office  visit before intravesical therapy, eligible  patients will be screened 
and enrolled into the study by [CONTACT_528775] s. Each patient will need to report all other medications so that the study 
team can assess whether certain medications might affect trial outcome.  
 
Patie nts will be randomized into Arm 1 (placebo) or Arm 2 (genistein  supplement ) at a ratio 
of 1:[ADDRESS_686415] based on whether they are age 60 and above or whether they are age 59 and below. 
This will allow for similar age groups to be placed in each arm, so that the degree of urinary 
symptoms while receiving t reatment is not skewed depending on the patient’s  age. 
 
Patients are treated with intravesical therapy once a week for [ADDRESS_686416] -op visit. Each 
patient will  fill out an International Prostate Symptom  Score  (IPSS)  questionnaire at their 
baseline office visit when consented .  Patients will fill out an IPSS questionnaire at each 
subsequent intravesical therapy session and their final one -month follow -up appointment (at 
10 weeks)  either in person or via phone call with  a study team member . The IPSS 
questionnaire will gauge their urinary symptoms throughout their therapy and provide 
measurable symptom scores for the two arms.  The biopsy at [ADDRESS_686417] care fo r superficial bladder patients and will 
help determine cancer rate of recurrence.  
  
 
 
5 
  Baseline  BCG Week 1 -6b 10 Week c 
Placebo Arm  • Screening 
(Physical Exam,a 
Vitals, a 
complete blood 
count and serum 
chemistry 
analyses, a Urine 
Dipstick, IPSS 
Questionnaire)  
• Enrollment  
• Randomization  
 • Urine Dipstick, 
Interval History, Vitals, 
IPSS Questionnaire *, 
• BCG Intravesical 
Therapy  
• 6 weeks of placebo 
(30 mg, PO TID)  
• Continue taking 
placebo for remaining 
4 weeks before biopsy  • Bladder Cystoscopy 
(Biopsy 
recommended, but 
not mandatory )  
• Urinary cytology  (if 
inidicated)  
• Interval History  
• IPSS Questionnaire * 
• Physical Exam  
• Vital  signs  
• Complete blood 
count and serum 
chemistry  panel is 
recommended, but 
not mandatory  
 
 
Genistein 
Supplement 
Arm  • Screening 
(Physical Exam, a 
Vitals, a 
complete blood 
count and 
serum 
chemistry 
analyses, a Urine 
Dipstick, IPSS 
Questionnaire) ,  
• Enrollment,  
• Randomization  
 • Urine Dipstick, 
Interv al History, Vitals, 
IPSS Questionnaire *, 
• BCG Intravesical 
Therapy  
• 6 weeks of genistein 
Supplement (30 mg,  
PO TID)  
• Continue taking 
genistein Supplement  
for remaining 4 weeks 
before biopsy  
 • Bladder Biopsy  
(pathology)   
• Urinary cytology  
• Interval History  
• IPSS Questionnaire * 
• Physical Exam  
•  Vital  signs  
• Complete blood 
count and serum 
chemistry panel is 
recommended, but 
not mandatory  
 
a Within [ADDRESS_686418] of care.  
*IPSS Questionnaire may be coll ected via phone call.  
6. Participant Selection : 
[ADDRESS_686419] -of-care BCG intravesical therapy.  
 
 
6 
 Inclusion Criteria :  
1. Male or female gender  
2. 18 years or older  
3. Diagnosis of  superficial bladder cancer  
4. Scheduled for induction BCG intravesical  therapy  
5. Willing and able to give blood sample  
6. Willing and able to fill out a pi[INVESTIGATOR_528770]  
7. Willing and able to sign informed consent  
***Birth Control is not required for this study!  
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Patients who are  pregnant  
2. Diagnosis of muscle -invasive bladder cancer  
3. Unwillingness to follow study protocol and compliance  procedures  
4. HIV positive or immunocompromised  
5. Receiving concurrent immunotherapy or chemotherapy  
6. Presence of concurrent second cancer  (active, not history)  
7. Quality of Life:  
This study  follows  standard of care for all superficial bladder cancer subjects. All subjects 
will receive standard  BCG intravesical therapy for six weeks and return for  a one -month 
post -operative visit and biopsy. Both the control and intervention arms will receive the 
same care , other  than taking the genistein supplement  or placebo . While genistein  
supplement  is not a standard part of treatment, it has been shown to not have any 
significant toxicities.  It is expected that the subjects taking genistein  supplement  will have  a   
better qu ality of life due to a possible reduction in urinary symptoms , such a s hematuria, 
infection, frequency, urgency,  a nd retention , when compared to those subjects receiving 
standard treatment without the genistein supplement. Each patient’s perception of qua lity 
of life will be seen indirectly  throughout the BCG treatment, as it is a supplemental question 
on the IPSS Questionnaire.  
Quality  of life will be assessed for both arms during an interim analysis and stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_528771] a s well as  an interim analysis of both 
arms. Subjects with toxicities of Grade [ADDRESS_686420] after 22 patients ( 11 on each arm) have been enrolled, treated, and biopsied. If the 
genistein supplement arm has statistically significant toxicities reported or greater degree 
of bladder cancer biopsies then we will immediately discontinue any futur e study 
enrollment. If the genistein  supplement  arm has significant Grade [ADDRESS_686421] after that, the study will be stopped.   
 
 
7 
 8. Statistical Consid eration : 
 
8.1 Power analysis  
We hypothesi ze that, at 6 weeks, the symptom score will increase  by 6 (SD = 3.5) relative 
to the baseline in the placebo arm, while it will only increase by 3 (SD = 3.5) in the 
synthetic genistein supplement arm. A sample size of 20 patients in each arm can reach 
83% power to detect the hypothesized difference at  the significance level of 0.[ADDRESS_686422] . 
 
In an effort to reach a sample size of 20 patients  on each arm , we also hypothesize that 
there will be a 10% drop -out or non -compliance rate. We will accrue 44 patients, 22 
subjects on each arm, for this study with the expectation that 10% will drop out. With a 
10% drop out rate included, this would result in a total  of 40 compliant patients.  
 
8.2 Statistical analysis plan  
 
8.2.1 Primary analysis  
The IPSS score change at 6 -week from baseline will be calculated with 95% confidence 
interval and compared between two experiment groups through Mann -Whitney test . 
The baseli ne, minimum three  treatment period IPSS scores, and the 10 -week biopsy IPSS 
scores are required in order for the patient to be evaluable.  
 
8.2.2 Secondary analysis  
a) For the secondary end point of recurrence rate defined by [ADDRESS_686423] potential covariates, e.g. total BCG 
therapy dose.  
b) For the secondary end point of the total dose of intravesical therapy administered 
over [ADDRESS_686424] and/or sum rank test to test the 
difference  between two arms . If genistein  supplement  works  by [CONTACT_528776] , we expect to see a higher total 
therapy dose  in its arm than in the placebo arm.  
c) We will also explore the change of IPSS score over time by [CONTACT_528777].  
Treat ment, time, interaction between treatment and time, and intravesical 
therapy  dose enter the model as predictors and time -dependent covariate.  
 
 
9. Adverse Event Reporting:   
 
According to [ADDRESS_686425] medical occurrence 
asso ciated with the use of a drug in humans, whether or not considered drug related.  A 
Serious adverse event  or serious suspected adverse reaction  is an adverse event or 
suspected adverse reaction is considered "serious" if, in the view of either the 
 
 
8 
 investiga tor or sponsor, it results in any of the following outcomes: Death, a life -
threatening adverse event, inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6929], a persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the 
ability to conduct normal life functions, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect. Important 
medical events that may not result in death, be life -threatening, or require 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_708], based upon appropriate medical 
judgment, they may je opardize the patient or subject and may require medical or 
surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition. Examples of 
such medical events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an 
emergency room or a t home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in 
inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse.  
 
Adverse events will be recorded at each study visit via direct patient communication as 
well as through patient q uestionnaires. The severity of the AEs will be graded according 
to NCI CTCAE Version 4.0. Subjects with toxicities of Grade [ADDRESS_686426] until the SAE is resolved. Adverse events will 
be reported to the IRB according to their requirements . 
 
IND safety reports will be sent to the FDA in accordance with  312.32  the FDA’s Guidance 
for Industry and Investigators: Safety Reporting Requirements for INDs and BA/BE 
studies . IND safety reports will document any aggregate adverse events , adverse 
reactions  suspected  advers e reactions, or serious adverse events. If the event is 
considered to be unexpected fatal or life-threatening, the IND safety report will be sent 
as soon as possible and  within 7 business days of the investigator being notified. If 
necessary, the investiga tor will report any serious or life -threatening event initially by 
[CONTACT_528778]. IND safety reports will also be 
submitted to the FDA if any related  safety information is released from other sources. 
Any non serious adve rse events will be reported to the FDA  in aggregate on an annual 
basis.  
 
 
10. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP):  
 
Once the study has reached 50% accrual, investigators will plan to initially evaluate the 
results.  A group of physicians from the Winship C ancer Institute  at Emory University will 
review the data and questionnaires to see how patients are reacting to the genistein  
supplement  arm or whether there are drug compliance issues, such as failure to take the 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_528772].  If the genistein  supplement  arm has statistically significant toxicities 
reported or greater degree of bladder cancer biopsies then we will immediately 
 
 
[ADDRESS_686427] after that, the study will be stopped.  
Also, per Winship Cancer Institute’s Data Safety Monitoring Plan, their Data Safety 
Monitoring Committee will review t he study conduct annually as well as monitor for 
regulatory compliance.  
 
 
11. References and Appendices  
i Soy Isoflavones in the Treatment of Prostate Cancer. Nutrition and Cancer. 2003 Nov;47(2):111 -117. Hussain M, 
Banerjee M, Sarkar FH, Djuric Z, Pollak MN, Doerge D, Fontana J, Chinni S, Davis J, Forman J, Wood DP, Kucuk 
O. 
ii Efficacy and  safety of short -term genistein intervention in patients with localized prostate cancer prior to radical 
prostatectomy: a randomized, placebo -controlled, double -blind phase [ADDRESS_686428] ;62(7):[ADDRESS_686429]; 
62(7): [ADDRESS_686430] symptoms in elderly men. Br J Nutr. 2007 
Dec;98(6):1237 -42. Wong SY, Lau WW, Leung PC, Leung JC, Woo J.                                                   