 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REVISION HISTORY  
Version  # Version Date  Summary of Changes  Approver  
1 2/17/2020  Submission to D-HH IRB  for reliance letter  PH 
2 5/26/2020  Include 2.25 and 2.5 in. diameter pessaries  PH 
3 9/13/2020  Include 3 in. diameter pessaries  (retracted)  PH 
4 11/5/[ADDRESS_574956] increased to 
15-20 PH 
 
  Protocol Number:  CP-001 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
Sponsor:  Reia, LLC (“Reia”)  
[ADDRESS_574957]  
Lyme, NH  [ZIP_CODE]  
Medical Monitor:  Paul Hanissian, MD  
[ADDRESS_574958]  
Lyme, NH  [ZIP_CODE]  
Principle 
Investigator:  Kris Strohbehn, MD  
Study Site:  Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology  
Dartmouth -Hitchcock Medical Center  
One Medical Center Drive  
Lebanon, NH  [ZIP_CODE]  
[EMAIL_8641]   
Direct phone number for office of the PI: 603 653 -9312  
24-hour phone number: 603 650 -5000  Early Feasibility Prospective Open -Label Study to 
Assess the Function of a Novel Pessary for the 
Non-Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ 
Prolapse  
    
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Early Feasibility Prospective Open Label Study to Assess the 
Function of a Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
 
 Page 1 of 20  
v.05.31.2019   
Table of Contents  
 
1.0 Study Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  3 
2.0 Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  4 
3.0 Background  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  4 
4.0 Study Endpoints  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 5 
5.0 Study Intervention/Investigational Agent  ................................ ................................  [ADDRESS_574959] the Privacy Interests of Subjects  ................................ ..........  15 
20.0  Compensation for Research -Related Injury  ................................ ...........................  15 
21.0  Economic Burden to Subjects  ................................ ................................ ................  16 
    
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Early Feasibility Prospective Open Label Study to Assess the 
Function of a Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_574960] Comprehe nsion  ................................ ................................ ................................  17 
23.0  Process to Document Consent in Writing  ................................ ..............................  17 
24.0  Setting  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  17 
25.0  Resources Available ................................ ................................ ...............................  17 
26.0  Multi-Site Research  ................................ ................................ ...............................  18 
References  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  19 
 
  
    
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Early Feasibility Prospective Open Label Study to Assess the 
Function of a Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
 
 Page 3 of 20  
v.05.31.2019   
1.0 Study Summary  
 
Table of Study Summary:  
 
Study Title  Early Feasibility Prospective Open -Label Study to Assess the Function of a 
Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
Study Design  Early feasibility study of a medical device  
Primary 
Objective  • To assess the ability of the study device to be retained during Valsalva 
compared to the ability of the subject’s current pessary to be retained during 
Valsalva (by [CONTACT_450917]’s leading edge to the 
hymen)  
• To assess the ability of the study device to be retained throughout regular 
activity (by [CONTACT_450918])   
Secondary 
Objective(s)  • To assess the shape of the study pessary during expulsion if it is not able to be 
retained (by [CONTACT_450918])  
• To assess the orientation of the study pessary stem following regular activity 
(by [CONTACT_450918])  
• To assess the discomfort experienced with removal of the subject’s current 
pessary compared to the discomfort experienced with removal of the study 
pessary (by [CONTACT_110438])  
• To assess the discomfort experienced with insertion of the subject’s current 
pessary compared to the discomfort experienced with insertion of the study 
pessary (by [CONTACT_110438])   
• To globally asse ss the comfort associated with use of the study pessary  (by 
[CONTACT_450919])   
Research 
Intervention(s)/ 
Investigational 
Agent(s)  Temporary placement and assessment of a novel vaginal pessary  
IND/IDE #  Device to be considered for an abbreviated IDE (non -significant risk device)  
Study 
Population  Current users of a ring style or Gellhorn pessary for treatment with Stage II or 
greater pelvic organ prolapse  
Sample Size  15-20 
Study Duration 
for individual 
participants  One hour  
Study Specific 
Abbreviations/ 
Definitions  HRT – Hormone Replacement Therapy  
POP – Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
POP-Q – Pelvic Organ Prolapse Quantification  
UI – Urinary Incontinence  
VAS – Visual Analogue Scale  
FPMRS – Female Pelvic Medicine and Reconstructive Su rgery  
    
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Early Feasibility Prospective Open Label Study to Assess the 
Function of a Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
 
 Page 4 of 20  
v.05.31.2019   
2.0 Objectives  
This is an early feasibility , open -label , non-randomized trial to obtain preliminary 
information about the function and effectiveness of a novel vaginal pessary for the use in 
women who suffer from symptoms of pelvic organ prolapse (POP).  Recruited subjects 
will have Stage II POP or greater and will be current users of a legally marketed vaginal 
pessary. In a single visit, data will be collected on the performance and comfort of the 
subject’s current pessary. After fitting and placement of a study pessary, comparative 
data will be collected betwe en subject’s current pessary and the study pessary on ability 
to support prolapse. The study pessary’s function will be assessed under controlled 
circumstances. The subject will have her current pessary replaced at the conclusion of the 
visit. Results will  be used to inform future design modifications of the study pessary.  
 
3.0 Background  
POP is a prevalent condition that can be observed in over 50% of women over the age of 
50.[ADDRESS_574961] 
surgery for pelvic organ prolapse is 12.6%, or 1:8 .3 As the specialty of Female Pelvic 
Medicine and Reconstructive Surgery (FPMRS) matures and surgical outcomes are being 
followed with more scrutiny, it is becoming increasingly clear that surgica l treatment 
options are less effective than once believed. The [ADDRESS_574962] estimated composite recurrence rates by 6 
years of 43%, 49%, and 57%.4  
 
The vaginal pessary is an effective treatmen t option which is inserted in the vagina and 
acts as a shelf resting upon the pelvic floor muscles to support the descending organs.  
Often, i t is as effective to abate the burdens of prolapse as a successful reconstructive 
surgery. 77% of practicing urogy necologists recommend a vaginal pessary as the first 
line treatment option for their patients with POP.5 Based on this number, statistics cited 
above, and financial information from current pessary makers, there are ~2.[ADDRESS_574963] been reported as high as 
56%7 and include vaginal erosion, bleeding, increased discharge, as well as discomfort 
    
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Early Feasibility Prospective Open Label Study to Assess the 
Function of a Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_574964] wear their pessary when not necessary, which 
induces additional lifestyle impacts such as imp airing a woman’s ability to engage in 
sexual intercourse.  
 
The two most commonly used pessar y types  on the market are the ring  style  and the 
Gellhorn pessary. The Gellhorn pessary is clinically more effective to reduce the life 
impact of prolapse symptoms ,9 and once fit has longer continuation rates than the ring 
with support (10.5 years vs. 1.8 years).10 Additionally, the Gellhorn successfully treated 
71% of women at [ADDRESS_574965] 
practitioners, parti cularly Ob/Gyn physicians who are not additionally specialized in 
FPMRS, preferentially prescribe the ring with support because it is easier and more 
intuitive to use. The Reia Vaginal  Pessary  (study pessary)  has been engineered to 
overcome the liabilities  related to difficulty for physicians and patients to remove and re -
insert the pessary. The Reia Vaginal  Pessary has a structural form similar to the Gellhorn 
and is hypothesized to be simpler and more intuitive to use than the ring with support.  
 
4.0 Study En dpoints  
The primary and secondary endpoints of the study are described in the following table:  
Type  Name  [CONTACT_450939]’s current 
pessary to be retained 
during Valsalva (by 
[CONTACT_450920]’s 
leading edge to the 
hymen)  During 
treatment  The subject will be asked to Valsalva with their current 
pessary in place, and the distance from the leadin g edge 
of the current pessary to the hymen will be measured in 
centimeters. After the current pessary is removed and 
the patient is fit with a n appropriate study pessary, the 
subject will be asked to Valsalva again. The distance 
from the leading edge of th e study pessary to the hymen 
will be measured in centimeters. In order to assess the 
ability of the study pessary to function and be retained, 
the measurements will be compared.  
Primary  To assess the ability of 
the study device to be 
retained throughout 
regular activity (by 
[CONTACT_450918])  During 
treatment  With the study pessary in place, the subject will be 
asked to ambulate for 10 minutes and attempt to void. 
Following these activities, whether the pessary was 
retained or expelled will b e recorded.  
Secondary  To assess the shape of 
the study pessary 
during expulsion if it is 
not able to be retained 
(by [CONTACT_450921])  During 
treatment  The subject will be asked to Valsalva. If the study 
device is expelled during Valsalva, whether the study 
device was expelled fully deployed or whether it 
prematurely folded to its collapsed state will be 
recorded.  
    
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Early Feasibility Prospective Open Label Study to Assess the 
Function of a Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
 
 Page 6 of 20  
v.05.31.2019   
Secondary  To assess the 
orientation of the study 
pessary stem following 
regular activity (by 
[CONTACT_450918])  During 
treatment  Following ambulation and attempting to void and prior 
to removing the study pessary, it will be recorded if the 
study device’s stem rotated out of its original inserted 
position.  
Secondary  To assess the 
discomfort experienced 
with removal of the 
subject’s current 
pessary compared to 
the discomfort 
experienced with 
removal of the study 
pessary (by [CONTACT_450922])  During 
treatment  To indicate discomfort, the subject will be shown and 
asked to mark a visual analogue scale (VAS) a fter 
removal of her current pessary and before using the 
study pessary. The VAS will be a [ADDRESS_574966] ’s mark 
will be measured and compared between the two scales.  
Secondary  To assess the 
discomfort experienced 
with insertion of the 
subject’s current 
pessary compared to 
the discomfort 
experienced with 
insertion of the study 
pessary (by [CONTACT_8298])  During 
treatment  To indicate discomfort, the subject will be shown and 
asked to mark a VAS  after insertion of the study 
pessary. The VAS will be a [ADDRESS_574967]’s current pessary, the 
subject will also be  shown and asked to mark another 
VAS. In order to assess the discomfort experienced 
during insertion of the study pessary, the distance from 
[ADDRESS_574968] ’s mark will be measured and compared 
between the two scales.  
Secondary  To globally assess the 
comfort associated with 
use of the study pessary 
(by [CONTACT_450919])  Post 
treatment  Following insertion of the subject's current pessary, and 
after the subject is dressed, she will be asked whether 
the study pessary was more, less, or as comfortable as 
her current pessary when it was in situ. If she responds 
it was more or less comfortable, she will be asked to 
describe why.   
 
Safety endpoints cannot be reasonably assessed in this study because  risks to subjects  are 
minimal  given the short duration of the study intervention (anticipated to  be 
approximately  30 minutes)  and the nature of the planned intervention. Pain will be 
measure d as described in the secondary endpoints above. Unanticipated events will be 
tracked and follo wed per established FDA guidelines for monitoring investigations of 
medical devices (21 CFR §812.46) . 
 
5.0 Study Intervention/Investigational Agent  
Please see attached document for device description and non -significant risk rationale.  
 
    
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Early Feasibility Prospective Open Label Study to Assess the 
Function of a Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
 
 Page 7 of 20  
v.05.31.2019   
6.0 Procedures Involved  
Methods  
Current users of existing marketed pessaries typi[INVESTIGATOR_450906] 3 -4 
months so that their pessary can be removed and cleaned and their vagina can be 
inspected for erosion caused by [CONTACT_450923].  Fifteen subjects will be recrui ted for this 
study from a panel of established patients who present for this routine care of their ring 
style or Gellhorn pessary to a clinical practice at the Dartmouth -Hitchcock Clinic 
specializing in Female Pelvic Medicine and Reconstructive Surgery  (FPMRS) . Inclusion 
will be based on pre -defined criteria outlined in “10.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria .” 
There will not be discrimination based on race or ethnicity. It is anticipated that most 
participants will be post -menopausal as this reflects the demographic of women who 
suffer from this disorder. Treatment intervention will be non -blinded to the subjec t and 
investigator and will occur in a single visit. Each subject will receive the study pessary 
and wear it in a controlled environment for less than 1 hour. Assessment of the study 
pessary’s performance to support the subject’s prolapse will be determine d by [CONTACT_450924]’s current pessary to the 
hymen and comparing that to the measured distance between the leading edge of the 
study pessary to the hymen, as well as by [CONTACT_450925].  Secondary 
outcomes of subject comfort with insertion, use, and removal of the study pessary will be 
measured.  
 
The study pessary is the only device which w ill be used in this trial, though the subject 
will arrive for her visit and leave with her current pessary. There will be no placebo 
devices placed. The study pessary is not cleared by [CONTACT_1622], and a rationale is provided 
for a non -significant risk device claim in the attached documents. This trial was devised 
so that it could take place at the time in which subjects present for usual care of their 
current pessary, and the procedures are consistent with the standard of care at Dartmouth -
Hitchcock Medical Ce nter, the site of the study.  
 
Study Procedures  
• Exam – Subject will be asked to disrobe and will be positioned in the lithotomy 
position per routine.  Visual inspection of the vulva will be conducted to note for 
atrophy and determine the absence of open wound or tear near the opening of the 
vagina or perineum  [would be done anyway] . 
• Position of the current pessary will be determined in relation to hymen - subject will 
be asked to Valsalva, and the position of the leading edge of the current pessary i n 
relation to the hymen will be recorded in centimeters [research purposes] . 
• The current pessary will be removed and the vagina will be inspected for erosion . 
Current pessary size and stem length will be recorded [would be done anyway ].  Pain 
with removal will be recorded by [CONTACT_8298], a [ADDRESS_574969] to “Kegel” with 
    
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Early Feasibility Prospective Open Label Study to Assess the 
Function of a Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
 
 Page 8 of 20  
v.05.31.2019   
examining fingers in the vagina [research purposes] .  The current pessary will be 
washed with anti -bacterial soap and tap water [would be done anyway] . 
• The study pessary  that maps to the size of the subject’s current pessary  should be 
selected at random fr om the inventory of study pessaries will be removed from its 
sealed bag and the study pessary’s serial number (labeled on the bag) will be 
recorded. The study pessary will be lubricated and placed, and the position of the 
pessary in relation to the hymen w ill be recorded (in centimeters, with Valsalva).  
Pain with insertion will be recorded by a VAS administered with pessary insertion 
and removal.  If the study pessary is expelled with Valsalva, this will be recorded, and 
a notation will be made if it was e xpelled in its deployed state or secondary to it 
prematurely collapsing. In the event a 2.[ADDRESS_574970] will be refit with a 3 inch study pessary and the steps in this section repeated.  
[research purposes] . 
• The subject will dress, ambulate, and void  - the subject will be asked to get dressed, 
walk for 10 minutes, void, and return to the office then disrobe again.  If the study 
pessary is expelled during this activity, this will be recorded  [research purposes] .  
• The study pessary will be removed.  The ori entation of the study pessary inside the 
vagina will be noted prior to removal.  Discomfort with removal will be recorded by 
[CONTACT_8298]. The study pessary will be washed with anti -bacterial soap and tap water and 
inserted into a resealable bag along with its orig inal packaging . The used study 
pessary should be returned to [CONTACT_450942]’s office which is adjacent to the clinic 
space where the study is being conducted [research purposes] .  
• The current pessary will be re -inserted, [would be done anyway]  and pain will be 
recorded by [CONTACT_8298] [research purposes] . The subject will give a global impression of 
study pessary comfort in comparison to current pessary  [research purposes] . 
 
Data Collected  
After the subject provides consent, t he subject ’s medical record will be abstracted for 
their medical history. The subject  may be asked to clarify the medical record.  Data to be 
collected includes:  
Medical History  
• Age 
• BMI (kg/m2) 
o <20 
o 20-30 
o >30 
• Previous gynecologic surgeries  
o Hysterectomy  
o Prior prolapse surgery  
o Prior UI surgery  
    
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Early Feasibility Prospective Open Label Study to Assess the 
Function of a Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
 
 Page 9 of 20  
v.05.31.2019   
o Other gynecologic surgery  
 
• Previous non-surgical prolapse treatment  
o Pelvic floor exercises  
o Pessary use 
• Parity  
o No. of births  
o No. of vaginal births  
• Estrogen status  
o Pre-menopausal  
o Post-menopausal  
o HRT  
• Concomi tant disorders  
o Urinary Incontinence  
o Fecal Incontinence  
o Other  
• Prolapse stage 
• POP-Q measurements prior to pessary fitting  
 
Outcomes  
• Pessary retention and function  
o Retained, normal position  
o Comes out fully deployed before ambulation  
o Collapses and comes out before ambulation  
o Comes out during ambulation  
o Comes out when on toilet, attempting void  
• Rotation during ambulation  
• Distance from the leading edge of the pessary  to hymen  with Valsalva  
o Original pessary  
o Study pessary  
• Discomfort with insertion and removal (VAS completed by [CONTACT_1130] ) 
o Original pessary  
o Study pessary  
• Difficulty  with insertion and removal ( 5 point scale  completed by [CONTACT_48368] ) 
o Original pessary  
o Study pessary  
• Global impression of comfort while using pessary ([ADDRESS_574971] ) 
• Global impression of ease of use ( 5 point scale  completed by [CONTACT_48368] ) 
 
See attached data collection forms. Forms will be filled out in ink and stored 
according to procedures outlined in “ 17.0 Data Management  and Confidentiality .” 
    
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Early Feasibility Prospective Open Label Study to Assess the 
Function of a Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_574972] her current pessary replaced in her 
vagina, and she will be instructed to present for her next routinely scheduled follow up  
visit per her typi[INVESTIGATOR_450907].  
 
7.0 Data and Specimen Banking  
N/A 
 
8.[ADDRESS_574973]  who is 
interested at the time of the visit.  
 
9.0 Study Timelines  
It is anticipated that each participant will be involved in the study for approximately  one 
hour. The study is designed to enroll 15 subjects presenting for routine pessary care to the 
Division of Female Pelvic Medicine and  Reconstructive Pelvic Surgery at  Dartmouth -
Hitchcock Medical Center. This study site sees an average of 50 patients per month for 
routine pessary care of which 80% are using a ring style or Gellhorn pessary and would 
be eligible to participate. Assuming 1: 8 patients who is eligible agree s to participate, it 
should take 3 months to recruit patients and complete this study.  
 
 
10.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Sex of Subjects  
Pelvic organ prolapse (POP) is a disease which only affects females, most typi[INVESTIGATOR_450908] -menopausal. Mal es will not be recruited for this study.  
 
Age of Subjects  
Study participants will be at least [ADDRESS_574974] -menopausal women and is therefore not relevant to the population of 
women less than 18 years old.  
 
Racial and Ethnic Origin  
Pelvic organ prolapse (POP) is a disease which only affects females, most typi[INVESTIGATOR_450908] -menopausal. Males will not be recruited for this study. This is an early 
feasibility study in which 15 subjects will be recruited from a clinical practic e at 
Dartmouth -Hitchcock Medical Center, a tertiary care facility in Lebanon, NH. Eligible 
subjects will be screened for participation sequentially as they present for routine pessary 
care without excluding individuals based on race or ethnicity. 2018 US C ensus estimates 
for nearby [CONTACT_450926], NH, which has similar demographics to Lebanon, demonstrates a 
population which is 97.6% White alone, 0.9% Black or African American alone, and 
    
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Early Feasibility Prospective Open Label Study to Assess the 
Function of a Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
 
 Page 11 of 20  
v.05.31.2019   
0.4% Asian alone. 2.4% are Hispanic or Latino. The population recruited for  this study 
would have similar characteristics.  
Inclusion Criteria  
• Women with Stage II pelvic organ prolapse or greater  
• Current ring style or Gellhorn pessary users  inclusive of sizes 1.5”-3.5” 
• Capable of giving informed consent  
Exclusion Criteria  
• Pregn ancy  
• Deep vaginal erosion noted with removal of current  pessary  
• Presence of vesicovaginal fistula  
• Presence of rectovaginal fistula  
• Vaginal, rectal, or bladder tumor  
• Inflammatory Bowel Disease  
• Presence of open wound or tear near vagina or anus by [CONTACT_450927]  
• Current vaginal or urinary infection requiring treatment  
• Previous pelvic floor surgery in last 12 months  
• Congenital malformation of bladder, rectum, or vagina  
• Significant medical condition interfering with study participation  (psychologic, 
neurologic, active drug/alcohol abuse, etc.)  
• Planning pregnancy in next 6 months  
 
Vulnerable Subjects  
Subjects will not be recruited to this study if they are identified as a member of a 
vulnerable population.  
 
11.0 Vulnerable Populations  
N/A 
 
12.0 Local Number of Subjects  
15 subjects will be recruited for this study. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_450909] 5 -15 subjects.  The upper bound was selected due to the variability of the 
presentation of prolapse (api[INVESTIGATOR_2855], anterior, or posterior, as well as degr ee of severity) to 
evaluate performance of the Reia Vaginal Pessary  across a broad er range of clinical 
presentations.  
 
13.[ADDRESS_574975] Identification and Recruitment  
Subjects will be recruited from a panel of established patients in  a clinical practice 
specializing in FPMRS at the Dartmouth -Hitchcock Clinic. There will be no 
advertisements.  Screening for potential subjects during a given week of care will be 
    
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Early Feasibility Prospective Open Label Study to Assess the 
Function of a Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_574976] complied, subjects will be contact[CONTACT_261670], and using the submitted  phone  script  (see attach ed document) , their interest 
in participation will be gauged. The list will be shredded after all potential subjects are 
contact[INVESTIGATOR_530]. If they demonstrate a preliminary interest, they will be scheduled for the 
appropriate amount of time to complete consent in -person and enter the study as they 
present for their pessary care visit.  Additionally, the recruiter will offer to mail 
prospective subjects a copy of the consent form to review ahead of their appointment. 
Preferred mailing addresses will be collected ove r the telephone and handwritten directly 
on the mailing envelope and not copi[INVESTIGATOR_450910].  
 
Payment for Participation  
Participants will be offered a $[ADDRESS_574977] to be withdrawn from the research s tudy include:  
• The subject is found to have a condition which does not allow participation in the 
research, such as a finding upon physical examination that excludes them from the 
study . 
• The subject has a reaction that requires immediate removal of the research pessary . 
 
If a subject is removed, already collected data may not be removed from the study 
database and will be handled with the same protocol as research data.  The subject will 
receive the usual ongoing care for their pessary . 
 
15.[ADDRESS_574978] could experience minor 
discomfort with insertion and deployment of the study pessary, while she is being asked 
to Valsalva, or if the study pessary is expelled with Valsalva.  There could be m inor 
abrasion of the vaginal epi[INVESTIGATOR_450911]. The risk of these events occurring should be lower 
than them occurring during usual care because the study pessary collapses to a smaller 
diameter than current devices. The study pessary could become dislodged during 
ambulation or voiding, which may cause embarrassment.   
 
16.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects  
Subjects will not directly benefit from participation in this study.  
    
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Early Feasibility Prospective Open Label Study to Assess the 
Function of a Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_574979] who has signed a consent form and entered the study will be assigned a 
random study 3 digit number ( 001-999).  Data related to the study will be handwritten on 
data collection  forms  (see attached document) .  The case report forms will not contain 
unique identifiers  and will  be referenced back to subjects only using the assigned study 
numbers.  A separate key will be created linking the subjects with their random numbers.  
Once the key is created, it will remain  in a locked cabinet which contains other study 
related documents (including, but not limited to, the protocol, instructions for use, all 
versions of the consent form, etc.).  These documents will be maintained by [CONTACT_450928] [ADDRESS_574980] access to subjects' medical records to conduct and oversee the research. 
Excluding this circumstance, Reia, LLC will not intentionally release information to any 
individual, agenc y, or entity.  
 
18.[ADDRESS_574981] accrual, adherence to 
    
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Early Feasibility Prospective Open Label Study to Assess the 
Function of a Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
 
 Page 14 of 20  
v.05.31.2019   
study protocol, and ensure prompt reporting of serious and adverse events  to Western 
IRB and the study sponsor (Reia, LLC).  
 
At each contact [CONTACT_1155], the clinical investigator will seek information on 
adverse events by [CONTACT_450929]. Information on all adverse 
events will be recorded for review by [CONTACT_450930] . Moderate 
adverse events will be reviewed by [CONTACT_450931] o ne week. 
Serious adverse events, as defined by [CONTACT_450932], will be reviewed by [CONTACT_450933] 24 hours and reported to Western IRB and the study sponsor 
(Reia, LLC). Careful monitoring of the recruitment, enrollment, study procedu res, and 
adverse events will help protect the safety of the subjects and quality of the data.  
 
Any unanticipated adverse device effects will be immediately evaluated by [CONTACT_456], 
Reia, LLC.  If it is determined that the adverse device effect presents an  unreasonable 
risk to the subjects, the investigation will be terminated within [ADDRESS_574982] receiving notice.  
 
In compliance with 21 CFR §812.46, if the sponsor, Reia, LLC, discovers  that the study 
team is not complying with the signed agreement, the study protocol, applicable FDA 
regulations, or any conditions for approval of this IRB application, then Reia, LLC will 
either secure compliance or stop delivery of the device and termina te the investigator’s 
participation.  Additionally, Reia, LLC will require the remaining investigational devices 
be returned.  
 
Protection Against Risks  
Most risks for participating in this study are associated with discomfort in use of the 
study pessary, either with insertion, removal, or unintentional expulsion. Per the above 
protocol, the subject will be awake and unsedated for the complete encounter and will be 
able to communicate any discomfort experienced, and the subject’s level of discomfort 
will be  assessed at several points.   
 
It is unlikely that an incidental finding will be discovered since the study population 
presents for similar care every [ADDRESS_574983] will follow 
through to provide appropriate care or make appropriate referrals.  
 
Adverse events will be classified as Grade 1 or mild (easily tolerated by [CONTACT_450934]), Grade 2 or moderate (causing disc omfort or interrupting usual 
activities), or Grade 3 or severe (causing considerable interference with usual activities, 
may be incapacitating, or may require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]). Treatment of any adverse event, if 
indicated, will be coordinated by [CONTACT_450935][INVESTIGATOR_450912]. Specific adverse events will be monitored as 
outlined in the  data and safety monitoring plan described in the above section . 
    
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Early Feasibility Prospective Open Label Study to Assess the 
Function of a Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
 
 Page 15 of 20  
v.05.31.2019   
Additionally, the clinical research team will repo rt any adverse events (regardless of 
whether the event is serious or non -serious) which are unexpected and related to the  
research procedures within 5 working days to the study sponsor (Reia, LLC) and 
Western IRB. Grade 4 (life threating consequences requi ring immediate intervention) and 
Grade 5 (death related to adverse event) terminate the study and will be reported to 
Western IRB and the study sponsor within [ADDRESS_574984]'s identity. Once data collected f or this research study is no longer identifiable, the 
data may be used for other purposes. Protected health information will be handled as 
described in “13.0 Recruitment Methods” and “17.0 Data Management and 
Confidentiality.”  
 
19.[ADDRESS_574985] 
manner , forming a single line 10 feet back from the reception desk. They will then be 
brought to either a patient exam room or a private consultation room to meet with a 
member of the study team who will guide them through the consent process.  Once this 
has been completed , they will be given a chance to void , then brought to an exam room 
by [CONTACT_450936] a  member of the study team.  Given the sensitive 
nature of conditions treated in the O b/Gyn depar tment, all care is delivered in areas not 
accessible to the public. The bathrooms and exam rooms are private.  The study team is 
comprised of clinicians who are sub-specialty trained in FPMRS and facile at asking the 
questions and performing the procedures  outlined in the study protocol . 
 
20.[ADDRESS_574986] develops an illness or sustains an 
injury due to the research study, the study sponsor (Reia, LLC) will pay for the 
reasonable costs of medical treatment.  The sponsor will not pay for:  
• Treatment of illness or injury that results from the negligence of a health care 
provider, or  
• Treatment of a condition the subject  had before they were in the study.  
 
    
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Early Feasibility Prospective Open Label Study to Assess the 
Function of a Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_574987] will be given a copy of the consent form.  Based on their preference, the form will 
be read to them aloud or they ca n read it independently.  Each section will then be 
summarized; questions will be encouraged and answered fully.  The subject will then be 
asked to teach back the information presented in that section to ensure comprehension 
before moving on to the next se ction.  
 
The consent document will then be signed and dated by [CONTACT_450937].  A copy of the consent document will be scanned into the 
subject’s medical record and a copy will be given to the subject.  The original w ill be 
kept in the locked cabinet with other research documents.  
 
As part of the process, subjects will be given as much time as they need to decide on 
participation.  If they appear to be feeling pressure or need more time, they will not be 
enrolled in t he study.  If at any point the subject indicates she does not want to take part 
in the research, the informed consent process will be stopped.  
 
Subject Capacity  
Potential subjects for recruitment to this study are known to the FPMRS clinical team and 
their baseline capacity is known. The subject will not be entered into the study if there is 
concern regarding capacity to provide consent based on a change in function from 
previous encounters, or any of the following:  
• A diagnosis of dementia or cognitive impairment.  
• History of an evaluation of dementia since the last encounter in the FPMRS clinic.  
• A report, in medical records or from a family member or person well acquainted with 
the subject, that the subject has sympt oms of cognitive impairment or dementia.  
    
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Early Feasibility Prospective Open Label Study to Assess the 
Function of a Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
 
 Page 17 of 20  
v.05.31.2019   
• An abnormal degree of confusion, forgetfulness, or difficulties in communication that 
is observed in the course of interacting with the subject.  
• Psychotic symptoms, bizarre or abnormal behavior exhibited by [CONTACT_281694].  
 
Subject Comprehension  
As described above, after the subject has read or been read the consent document, each 
section will again be verbally reviewed and summarized.  In this step, comprehension 
will be determined by a “teach back” method.  
 
23.[ADDRESS_574988] operating procedure: Written Documentation of Consent 
(HRP -091) of the D -HH Human Research Protection Program  (local IRB) , the informed 
consent process will begin when the subject agrees to take  part in the study and end when 
the consent process is documented in writing.  The consent form (see attached) has been 
written in understandable language and has signature [CONTACT_450940] , 
signature [CONTACT_450941] (the principle 
investigator, co -investigator, research assistant, or coordinator ). The subject will receive 
either a photo copi[INVESTIGATOR_450913] a second  signed version  of the consent form.  
 
24.[ADDRESS_574989] at Dartmouth -Hitchcock Medical Center  in the Faulkner 
Ambulatory Building , Level 5, in the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology.  
Subjects will be cared for in exam rooms typi[INVESTIGATOR_450914].  
 
25.0 Resources Availab le 
Fifteen subjects will participate in this study, and participation will be limited to one visit 
on the day of enrollment. The identified study site sees an average of 50 patients per 
month for routine pessary care of which 80% are using a ring style or Gellhorn pessary 
and would be eligible to participate. Assuming 1: 8 patients who is eligible agrees to 
participate, it should take 3 months to recruit patients and complete this study.  
 
The Dartmouth -Hitchcock Clinic encompasse s Dartmouth -Hitchcock Medical Center, a 
381-bed hospi[INVESTIGATOR_450915]. Outpatient care for patients seen in the Division of Female Pelvic 
Medicine and Reconstructive Surgery is  provided on the 5th floor of the adjoining 
Faulkner Ambulatory Building. The clinic is a shared space with the Department of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology with a dedicated entrance, registration, and scheduling desk. 
Within the shared departmental clinical sp ace, there are 30 exam rooms and 3 consult 
rooms in addition to two shared workrooms for provider documentation. Annually, there 
are over 2000 new patients seen at Dartmouth -Hitchcock with the diagnosis of pelvic 
organ prolapse (POP), and approximately [ADDRESS_574990] charting system 
    
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Early Feasibility Prospective Open Label Study to Assess the 
Function of a Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_574991] adequate time to review the documenta tion 
and the opportunity to ask questions to the sponsor and principal  investigator. During this 
meeting, the principal  investigator [INVESTIGATOR_450916].  
 
26.0 Multi -Site Research  
N/A 
 
  
    
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Early Feasibility Prospective Open Label Study to Assess the 
Function of a Novel Pessary for the Non -Surgical Management of Pelvic Organ Prolapse  
 
 Page 19 of 20  
v.05.31.2019   
References  
1. Samuelsson EC,  Victor FT, Tibblin G, Svärdsudd KF. Signs of genital prolapse in 
a Swedish population of women 20 to 59 years of age and possible related factors. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1999;180(2 Pt 1):299 -305. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9988790. Accessed March [ADDRESS_574992] I, Barber MD, Burgio KL, et al. Prevalence of symptomatic pelvic floor 
disorders in US women. JAMA - J Am Med Assoc. 2008. 
doi:10.1001/jama.300.11.1311  
3.  Wu JM, Matthews CA, Conover MM, Pate V, Jonsson Funk M. Lifetime risk of 
stress urinary incontinence or pelvic organ prolapse surgery. Obstet Gynecol. 
2014. doi:10.1097/AOG.[ADDRESS_574993] B, Jelovsek JE. 
Long -term effectiveness of uterosacral colpopexy and minimally invasive  sacral 
colpopexy for treatment of pelvic organ prolapse. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr 
Surg. 2017. doi:10.1097/SPV.0000000000000313  
5.  Cundiff GW, Weidner AC, Visco AG, Bump RC, Addison WA. A survey of 
pessary use by [CONTACT_450938] s ociety. Obstet Gynecol. 
2000.  
6.  Robert M, Schulz JA, Harvey MA, et al. Technical Update on Pessary Use. J 
Obstet Gynaecol Canada. 2013. doi:10.1016/S1701 -2163(15)[ZIP_CODE] -4 
7.  Sarma S, Ying T, Moore KHK. Long -term vaginal ring pessary use: 
Discontinuation rates and adverse events. BJOG An Int J Obstet Gynaecol. 
2009;116(13):1715 -1721. doi:10.1111/j.1471 -0528.2009.[ZIP_CODE].x  
8.  Bugge C, Adams EJ, Gopi[INVESTIGATOR_92063] D, Reid F. Pessaries (mechanical devices) for 
pelvic organ prolapse in women. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;(2). 
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD004010.pub3  
9.  Cundiff GW, Amundsen CL, Bent AE, et al. The PESSRI study: symptom relief 
outcomes of a randomized crossover trial of the ring and Gellhorn pessaries. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol. 2007;196(4):405.e1 -405.e8. doi:10.1 016/j.ajog.2007.02.018  
10.  Wolff B, Williams K, Winkler A, Lind L, Shalom D. Pessary types and 
discontinuation rates in patients with advanced pelvic organ prolapse. Int 
Urogynecol J. 2017;28(7):993 -997. doi:10.1007/s00192 -016-3228 -9 
11.  Deng M, Ding J, Ai F, Zhu L. Successful use of the Gellhorn pessary as a second -
line pessary in women with advanced pelvic organ prolapse. Menopause. 
2017;24(11):1277 -1281. doi:10.1097/GME.0000000000000909  
 