Title: Comparison of Etomidate Plus Propofol, Etomidate Alone on Induction of Anesthesia  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Document Date: March 15, 2017 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of Etomidate Plus Propofol vs. Propofol, Etomidate 
Alone on Induction of Anesthesia, a Pi[INVESTIGATOR_628953] 1 of 9  Revis ed: March 15, 2017  1) Protocol Title  
Comparison of Etomidate Plus Propofol vs. Propofol, Etomidate Alone on Induction of 
Anesthesia, a Pi[INVESTIGATOR_628954]: 5/2/2017  
2) Objectives  
The purpose of this study is compare of etomidate plus propofol vs. propofol or 
etomidate alone during induction of anesthesia.  
The specific aims or objectives are testing patient reactions during induction, and 
in the post anesthesia care unit (PACU).  
The hypotheses to be tested: induction with etomidate combined with pro pofol  
when compared  to induction with propofol or etomidate alone:  
1. will provide less pain during injection,  
2. less hypotension (compare to propofol), less hypertension (compare to 
etomidate) and better hemodynamics than propofol or etomidate during 
induction,  
3. Similar postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) when compared 
with propofol and less PONV when compared with etomidate,  
4. Similar pain score among all three groups  
 
3) Background  
 
Induction of anesthesia is a critical part of anesthesia practic e. Sudden hypotension, 
hypertension, arrhythmias, and cardiovascular collapse are threatening complications 
following injection of induction agent in hemodynamically unstable patients. It is 
desirable to use a safe agent with fewer adverse effects for this  purpose.  
 
Both etomidate and propofol are the most common ly used induction agents for general 
anesthesia (GA) and both propofol and etomidate have their advantages and 
disadvantages. Propofol has been associated with injection pain, significant 
hemodynamic change (hypotension) during induction and less PONV. Etomi date has 
been associated with more stable hemodynamic and less pain during induction, but more 
myoclonic movements at induction and PONV. However, those findings are still 
controversial and the published results are still inconsistent.   
 
In a large retrosp ective study, t he authors found that anesthetic induction with etomidate, 
rather than propofol, is associated with increased 30 -day mortality and cardiovascular 
morbidity after noncardiac surgery. The recommended bolus induction dose is 1.5 –2.5 
mg/kg for p ropofol and 0.15 –0.4 mg/kg for etomidate. One study showed that etomidate 
plus propofol had few effects on respi[INVESTIGATOR_628955]. In 
anoth er study the authors found that with the etomidate -propofol combination (Etofol), a 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of Etomidate Plus Propofol vs. Propofol, Etomidate 
Alone on Induction of Anesthesia, a Pi[INVESTIGATOR_628953] 2 of 9  Revis ed: March 15, 2017  milder hemodynamic response was determined com pared to propofol and etomidate used 
alone, both at an esthesia induction and after the intubation. Etofol can be a valuable 
alternative in patients where cardiovascular fluctuations are not wanted. Since there are 
very limited published results available, it is important to provide more evidence and 
address the question of whether etomidate plus propofol is better than propofol  or 
etomidate alone on induction of anesthesia.  
 
References:  
1. British Journal of Anaesthesia 110 (3): 388 –96 (2013)  
2. Zhou X. et al. Etomidate plus propofol versus propofol alone for sedation during 
gastroscopy: a randomized prospective clinical trial. Surg Endosc. March 22, 2016. DOI 
10.1007/s00464 -016-4861 -6 
3. J Cardiovasc Thorac Res, 2015, 7(4), 134 -140 
4. Anesth Analg. 2013 Dec;117(6):1329 -37) 
 
4) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Patients will be screening for eligibility through local electronic medic al record 
(EMR) review using the IRB -approved HIPAA Waiver for Authorization for 
participant identification and recruitment.  
The inclusion criteria are : 
• Patients scheduled for elective non -cardiac surgery  
• ASA physical status of 2 or 3  
• Age equal to or greater than 18 years old  
Patients who do not meet the above criteria or patients who are in the following 
specif ic populations will be excluded:  
• Adults unable to provide consent  
• Age less than 18 years old  
• Pregnant women  
• Prisoners  
• Difficult airway ( Mallamp ati class 4)  
• Morbid obesity ( Body Mass Index (BMI) equal or greater than 40  
• Preoperative sedation use (benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438])  
• Severe cardiac (heart block, tachycardia, bradycardia, patient with 
pacemaker/AICD, pulmonary and liver diseases  
• Hypotension an d shock  
• Emergency surgeries  
• Allergy to propofol or etomidate  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of Etomidate Plus Propofol vs. Propofol, Etomidate 
Alone on Induction of Anesthesia, a Pi[INVESTIGATOR_628953] 3 of 9  Revis ed: March 15, 2017  5) Study Timelines  
Patients will be participating in the study for t he duration of their surgery and for  
24 hours after induction.  
We anticipated it to take  1 year  to enroll all study subjects.  
We anticipate an extra 12 months after completion of the study for the 
investigators to complete the primary analyses.  
6) Study Endpoints  
 
The primary endpoints include:  
1. Blood pr essure changes during induction   
2. Hear t rate changes during induction  
 
The sec ondary endpoints include:  
1. Pain at injection  
2. M yoclonic movements   
3. PONV in PACU  
4. Postoperative pain score  
5. Incidence of adve rse reactions during induction  
6. Severity of adverse reactions during induction  
7. Dose and frequency of vasoactive age nts and other concomitant medications 
used to treat adverse rea ctions of propofol / etomidate  
8. Sedation dept h using bispectral index (BIS)  
9. Eyelash reflex disappear time  
10. Intubation time  
11. Dose and frequency of analgesic and other sedatives used  
 
7) Procedures Involved  
 
This is a non -blinded, randomized, parallel -group study in patients scheduled for elective 
surgery under general anesthesia and orotrac heal intubation to compare  etomidate plus 
propofol vs. propofol or  etomidate alone on induction of a nesthesia.  
There will be three cohorts of 2 5 patients per cohort with one cohort administered 
propofol, one cohort administered etomidate, and one cohort administered propofol 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of Etomidate Plus Propofol vs. Propofol, Etomidate 
Alone on Induction of Anesthesia, a Pi[INVESTIGATOR_628953] 4 of 9  Revis ed: March 15, 2017  etomidate.  The sample size  was calculated with the blood pressure change ± 20 m mHg, 
SD±25 mmHg, power of 0.80 and p value of 0.05 and resulted 25 in each group.  
 
 
 The research team will create 75 envelopes. Each will be numbered, 25 will be in 
propofol group, 25 will be in etomidate group and 25 will be in propofol/etomidate 
group. On the day of surgery, one envelope will be randomly pi[INVESTIGATOR_628956].  
 
Patients in the three  cohorts will be administered  a [ADDRESS_838163] -dose (Day 2).  There are no plans for long -term follow -up past the 24 hours.  
 
Three cohorts are as follow:  
1. Propofol group: 2 mg/kg propofol  
2. Etomidate group: 0.3 mg/kg etomidate  
3. Propofol plus etomidate group: 1mg/kg propofol plus 0.15mg/kg etomidate.  
Systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, mean  arterial pressure, heart 
rate will be monitored and recorded before induction, at induction and 
intubation followed by 1, 3, 5  and 10 minutes after intubation.  
Pain on injection will be measured using 4 graded scale; 0 --- no pain, 1 --- 
verbal complaint of pain, 2 --- withdrawal of arm,  3 ---both verbal complaint 
and withdrawal of arm.  
The incidence and degree of myoclonic movements also recorded as follows: 0 
= no myoclonic movements, 1 = minor myoclonic movements, 2 = moderate 
myoclonic movements, 3 = major myoclonic movements . 
The medications used in the 3 groups are clinically used already with FDA 
approval for their use . This is an observational study and we will compare the 
effects of the three groups with their medication uses on the parameters we 
listed above: systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, mean arterial 
pressure, heart rate, pain on injection, myo clonic movements, PONV and BIS 
numbers.  
Non-English speaking participants are still eligible for the study. We will use 
translation services in line with HRP [ADDRESS_838164] enrolled 2 patients of a particular language using the short form as the 
study progressed, we will obtain full translation of the consent form into that 
language through the use of UCD Translation Services.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of Etomidate Plus Propofol vs. Propofol, Etomidate 
Alone on Induction of Anesthesia, a Pi[INVESTIGATOR_628953] 5 of 9  Revis ed: March 15, 2017   
8) Data and/or Specimen Ma nagement and Confidentiality  
 
All data will be summarized  using descriptive statistics. Summaries of continuous 
variables will present mean, median, standard deviation, minimum, and maximum; 
summaries of categorical variables will present frequencies and p ercentages. All data will 
be presented in subject data listings.  
 
Subject enrollment and disposition, including reasons for early withdrawal from the 
study, will summarized by [CONTACT_19313].  
Demographic variables will be summarized by [CONTACT_628960]. Data will 
be stored up to [ADDRESS_838165].  
9) Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of S ubjects  
 
As this is a minimal risk study, there  are no pl ans to monitor the data.  
 
10) Withdrawal of Subjects  
 
The PI [CONTACT_1629] d research team can withdraw  subjects from the study without their  consent if 
difficulty securing the ir airway is encountered.   
 
11) Risks to Subjects  
The potential risks are breack to confidentiality  and risks associated with the 
study drugs, Propofol and Etomidate.  
In order to safeguard our patient’s confidential data and to lessen the likelihood of 
a breach of confidentiality, the following parameters will be put in place:  
1. The data will be stored in  the PI’s password -protected  computer in 
his locked office.  
2. We don’t anticipate needing to transport any data, but if need be, 
the data will be transported via  a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_628957], password 
protected IRONKEY.  
3. Patients’ names and medical record numbers will be used initially. 
A numerical number (0001 to 0050) will be assigned to each 
patient.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of Etomidate Plus Propofol vs. Propofol, Etomidate 
Alone on Induction of Anesthesia, a Pi[INVESTIGATOR_628953] 6 of 9  Revis ed: March 15, 2017  4. If the data need to be transmitted, the UCD secured email system 
will be used and the receiving end needs to be same sec ured email 
system.  
5. Only the research team members can access the data.  
 
Risks associated with Propofol and Etomidate :  
Risk of Etomidate : 
Transient venous pain on injection  
Transient Skeletal muscle movements  
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_43548]: Hyperventilation, hypoventilation, apnea of short duration, 
laryngospasm, hiccup and snoring suggestive of upper airway obstruction.  
Circulatory System: Hypertension, Hypotension, tachycardia, bradycardia, arrhythmias  
 
Risks of Prop ofol:  
Cardiovascular: Bradycardia, arrhythmia, tachycardia, hypotension, decreased cardiac 
output  
Central nervous system: movement  
Metabolic/Nutritional: Hyperlipemia   
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_696]: Apnea, respi[INVESTIGATOR_628958]: Ras h, pruritus  
 
 
 
 
12) Potential Benefits to Subjects  
Both propofol and etomidate are used in everyday clinical practice. There are still 
controversial  over which  out of the two is better. By [CONTACT_628961] a reduced dosage in cohort 3, we hope that  patients can 
benefit from those drugs through the minimization of  side effects.  
We are unable to tell if  there will be  a direct benefit to the study participa nt. 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of Etomidate Plus Propofol vs. Propofol, Etomidate 
Alone on Induction of Anesthesia, a Pi[INVESTIGATOR_628953] 7 of 9  Revis ed: March 15, 2017   
13) Multi -Site Research  
N/A 
 
14) Community -Based Participatory Research  
N/A 
 
15) Sharing of Results with Subjects  
There are  no plan s to share  study  results with participants.  
 
16) Prior Approvals  
N/A 
 
17) Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
Eligible patients will be screened through electronic medical record review up to 
[ADDRESS_838166]. Research team will obtain consent from 
interested participants and honor any withdrawal requests based off of 
randomization group or time -constraints.   
This observational study does not allow for any interventions nor study 
procedures  outside of the patient’s normal care, so w e will limit unnecessary  
interactions with the patients to minimize the sense of intrusiveness a subject 
might experience in response to  standard  questions, examinations, and 
procedures.  
The research team will co mplete the HIPPA and required CITI training. Only  at 
the time of data collection can the resea rch team  access the necessary patient’s 
information.   
 
18) Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
 
There is no co mpensation for participating in this minimal risk study .  
 
19) Economic Burden to Subjects  
 
Both medications are already routinely ordered and administered, and will be billed 
accordingly to the patient’s insurance.  
 
20) Drugs or Devices  
This is an observational study using FDA -approved  medications that are used in everyday 
practice for anesthesia induction purpose.  
Medication is routinely stored in PYXIS and will be taken by [CONTACT_628962].  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of Etomidate Plus Propofol vs. Propofol, Etomidate 
Alone on Induction of Anesthesia, a Pi[INVESTIGATOR_628953] 8 of 9  Revis ed: March 15, 2017   
21) Clinical Trials.gov  Registration  
Section 1:  NIH Funded Studies  
If yes to BOTH, the study must be registered on Clinicaltrials.gov.  
Yes  
 This study is funded by [CONTACT_18121]. (If this study is not funded by [CONTACT_4289], go to 
Section 2.)  
 One or more human subjects will be prospectively assigned to one or more 
interventions (which may include placebo or other control) to evaluate the effects 
of those interventions on health -related biomedical or behavioral outcomes.  
 
Section 2:  Studies subject to FDA jurisdiction  
If yes  to ANY the study must be registered on Clinicaltrials.gov.  
Yes  
 This is a prospective clinical study of health outcomes in human subjects that 
compares an intervention with an FDA -regulated device against a control. This 
is not a small clinical trial to determine the feasibility of a device, or a clinical 
trial to test prototype devices where the primary outcome measure relates to 
feasibility and not to health outcomes.  
 This is a pediatric postmarket surveillance of a device as required under section 
[ADDRESS_838167] to FDA jurisdiction clic k 
here.  
 
Section 3: Publishing the results  
If yes to BOTH the study must be registered on Clinicaltrials.gov.  
Yes  
 This study prospectively assigns people or a group of people to an intervention, 
with or without concurrent comparison or control groups, to study the cause -and-
effect relationship between a health -related intervention and a health outcome.  
 The PI [INVESTIGATOR_628959] a 
journal that follows the ICMJE recommendations.  
This requirement includes studies of behavioral interventions.  
Section 4: Registration on Clinicaltrials .gov is not required  
Yes  
 I have read sections 1 -3 above and registration on clinicaltrials.gov  is not required 
for this research .  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of Etomidate Plus Propofol vs. Propofol, Etomidate 
Alone on Induction of Anesthesia, a Pi[INVESTIGATOR_628953] 9 of 9  Revis ed: March 15, 2017  22) Criteria for [ADDRESS_838168] to oversight by [CONTACT_144230] (RA P of C).  
 This research does not involve identifiable information held by [CONTACT_628963], center, or 
program grants.  
 No personnel involved in the d esign, conduct, or reporting of this research have a 
financial interest (RFI)  in this study.  
 
 