Randomized, Controlled, Multi center, Double -Masked, 
Parallel, Phase 2b/3 Trial to Evaluate the Safety and 
Efficacy of TP -03 for the Treatment of Demodex  
Blepharitis ( Saturn -1)  
Protocol Number: TRS-009 
IND Sponsor: Tarsus Pharmaceuticals, Inc.  
Funded by : [CONTACT_12298], Inc.  
 
25-Jan-2021
            [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]

Saturn -1 Trial   
Protocol TRS-009  
   1 STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE  
 
The trial will be carried out in accordance with International Conference on Harmonisation Good Clinical 
Practice ( ICH GCP) and the following :  
 
• [LOCATION_002] (US) Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) applicable to clinical studies ( 45 CFR Part 46,  21 
CFR Part 50,  21 CFR Part 56, and 21 CFR Part 312)  
 
Investigators and clinical trial site staff who are responsible for the conduct, management, or oversight 
of clinical trials  have completed Human Subjects Protection and ICH GCP Training.  
 
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all participant materials will be 
submitted to the Institutional Review Board ( IRB) for review and approval.  Approval of both the 
protocol and the consent form must be obtained before any participant is enrolled.  Any amendment to 
the protocol will require review and approval by [CONTACT_7460].  In addition, a ll changes to the consent form will be IRB -approved ; a determination will be made 
regarding whether a new consent needs to be obtained from participants who provided consent using a 
previously approved consent form.  
 
1  PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
  
1.1 SYNOPSIS  
Title:  Randomized, Controlled, Multicenter, Double -Masked, Parallel, Phase 
2b/3 Trial to Ev aluate the Safety and Efficacy of TP -03 for the Treatment 
of Demodex  Blepharitis ( Saturn -1) 
   
Study Des cription  and 
Hypotheses : This Phase 2b/3  study is a randomized, controlled, multicenter, double -
masked, parallel trial to compare the safety and efficacy of TP -03 to 
vehicle control for the treatment of Demodex  blepharitis.   The 
hypothesis for the study is the proportion of participants cured at Day 43  
with  treatment by [CONTACT_10216] -03, lotila ner ophthalmic solution , 0.25% , is greater 
than  the proportion cured by [CONTACT_12299].    
  
Test Article:  TP-03, lotilaner ophthalmic solution , 0.25%  
 
Control Article:  Vehicle of TP -03 
 
Study Design:  Prospective , randomized, double -masked , multicenter, two-arm, parallel 
vehicle -controlled study  
 
Objective:  To demonstrate  the safety and efficacy of TP -03, 0.25% , for the 
treatment of Demodex  blepharitis  
  
Endpoint s: Primary Endpoint:   Proportion of participants cured based on the ir 
collarette score  of the upper eyelid of the analysis eye  at Day 43 . 

Saturn -1 Trial   
Protocol TRS-009  
   2  
Secondary Endpoint s:   
• Proportion of participants with their  Demodex  mites eradicat ed in 
the analysis eye  at Day 43 . 
• Proportion of participants cured based on a composite of collarette 
and erythema scores of the upper eyelid of the analysis eye  at Day 
43. 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Safety will be determined by [CONTACT_12300], 
intraocular pressure, slit lamp biomicroscopy  and dilated 
ophthalmoscopy  findings .   
 
 
  
Phase:  2b/3  
  
Number of Participants:  
 Up to 418 participants  
 
 
Study Population:  Participants with blepharitis due to  Demodex infestation  defined as 
having an elevated mite density , collarette s and erythema  
 
Description of Sites:  
     
Description of Study 
Treatment : Participants eligible to be randomized will receive one of the following 
treatments administered bilaterally BID for 4 3 days:  TP -03, 0.25%,  or 
the TP -03 vehicle ophthalmic solution .   
  
Study Duration:   
  
Participant Duration:  The study duration for an individual participant is estimated to be 
approximately   weeks for participants enrolled in  and   
weeks  for participants enrolled in  
  
