COVER PAGE  
 
STUDY TITLE:  ASSESSMENT OF THREE BASIC PROGRESSIVE LENS DESIGNS  
 
REGISTRATION NUMBER:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
DATE:  09/27/2021 
 
 
  
STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
STUDY DESIGN : 
This study was a non -invasive double -masked randomized clinical investigation.  The 
interventional model was parallel assignment,  and the study was triple -masked (participant, 
investigator, and outcomes assessor).  For this study, 8 3 participants were  recruited over a 
period of 3 months , 80 patients were enrolled into the study, and 3 participants were excluded  
since they did not meet the inclusion criteria . 
 
STUDY OBJECTIVES:  
The primary purpose of the study was to evaluate the preference, adaptability, and visual 
performance of three basic progressive lens designs.  
 
PRIMARY ENDPOINT:  
Evaluation of the preference among progressive lens designs.  
 
STUDY SUBJECTS AND RECRUITMENT :  
Study subjects w ere experienced progressive addition lens wearers, which w ere recruited b y 
advertisements, by [CONTACT_6968], and with direct person -to-person solicitation.  
 
Inclusion criteria:  1. Subjects should were  experienced progressive lens designs wearers who 
have worn their current prescription for at least one month; 2. The designated progressive lens 
designs wearers ha d no issues about wearing a progressive lens design; 3. Age: 45 to 70 years 
old; 4. Visual A cuity (decimal): far & near monocular cc ≥ 1.0; 5. Normal binocular vision (at 
distance & near: no strabismus on cover testing, aligning prism of less than 2Δ horizontally or 
vertically, stereoacuity of 2’ or better at distance and near); 6. New prescripti on (found at visit#1) 
was in the range: (a) Spherical power: less than +/ -6.00 D; (b) Cylindrical power: less than -
2.75 D minus cylinder; (d) Addition: 1.50 D - 2.50 D; (e) Difference in the power (spherical 
equivalent) between eyes: less than 2.00 D; (f)  7. Understanding and speaking English or 
Spanish to be able to answer questionnaires.  
Exclusion criteria:  1. Subjects who have never worn any progressive lens designs or have not 
worn their current progressive lens design for at least one month. 2. Age: younger than 45 
years or older than 70 years. 3. Visual Acuity (decimal): far & near monocular cc < 1.0. 4. 
Binocular vision problems (at distance & near: strabismus on cover testing, aligning prism of 
2Δ or greater horizontally or vertically, stereoacuity  of less than 2’ at distance and near). 5. 
New prescription (found at visit#1) is: (a) Spherical power: more than +/ -5.75 D; (b) Cylindrical 
power: more than -2.50 D minus cylinder; (d) Addition: less than 1.50 D or more than 2.50 D; 
(e) Difference in the power (spherical equivalent) between eyes: more than 1.75 D; (f) Different 
from current prescription more than 0.[ADDRESS_420179] visit.  
 
PROGRESSIVE ADDITION LENSES:  
 
Each lens pair for each study subject was specific ally made to the subject’s up -to-date 
prescription. To assure optimal vision, all lenses possessed anti -reflective coatings and were 
clear (not tinted). Each frame was fitted to the patient’s anatomic features to assure an optimal 
wearing experience. In ad dition, all subjects were reminded of the specifics of progressive 
addition lenses, their appropriate use, and that a short period of visual adaptation might be 
required.  
 
DATA MONITORING:  
Throughout the entire duration of the study, data monitoring was conducted by [CONTACT_339629]. This involved  checking of consent 
forms being signed dated, checking for the completion of source docum entation and clinical 
research forms and clinical binders.  
 
STUDY PROCEDURES : 
All three visits were  conducted in the Eye Care Institute, WesternU Health Pomona, [ADDRESS_420180], Pomona CA [ZIP_CODE].  
 
During Visit #1:   
• The visit started with an explanation of the study and a discussion of the informed 
consent form for which signatures were  obtained. Then a set of screening questions was 
asked.  
• Subjects, who meet the inclusion criteria continue d in the study, receive d an eye 
examination, and a new progressive addition lens prescription.  
• Each eligible study subject report ed visual experiences with their currently worn 
progressive addition lenses.  
• Each  subject then select ed one appropriate spectacle frame from a selection of high -
quality f rames made from titanium material. For this selected frame, the patient’s fitting 
data were  obtained.  
 
Between Visit #1 and Visit #2:  
• The PI [INVESTIGATOR_339627] d the subject -ID along with the prescription data and the selected 
spectacle frame model to the spectacl e manufacturer. Based on this information, the 
manufacturer ma de three pairs of glasses with the different lens designs for each 
subject. All three pairs w ere manufactured with the frame model that the patient selected 
at visit #1. A maximum of o ne month was planned for production and delivery of the 
progressive addition lenses.  
• The primary investigator, co -investigators and the subject were blinded to which basic 
progressive lens designs were  used by [CONTACT_3455]. To reduce evaluation bias 
stemming fr om the wearing sequence for the lens design, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_339628] a stratified 
permuted block randomization, based on the average lens power data which were 
computed from the prescriptions found during visit #1. This wearing sequence w as 
assigned for each study subject. During the manufacturing process, the frames had 
small marks  on the ir temples to distinguish each  for the assigned wearing sequence.  
  
During Visit #2:  
• Each study subject  receive d three pairs of progressive addition lenses, that were  
adjusted and fitted. At this time, an assessment of distance and near visual acuity w as 
conducted. Then the subject evaluate d first visual impressions with all pairs, one after 
another, after 10 -15 min utes of wearing time.  
• Afterwards, the first pair was handed to the subject and the second and third pairs were 
placed in sealed envelopes along with one set of evaluation surveys   
• Each subject w as instructed:  
• to only wear the first assigned (and labelled) pair of progression ad dition lenses for 
one week (this is the first week of the trial), while carefully observing the ease of 
visual adaptation and visual experiences . 
• to only wear the second assigned (and labelled) pair of progression addition lenses 
in week two of the trial. This pair is also worn for one week, while carefully observing 
the ease of visual adaptation and visual experiences.  
• to only wear the third assigned (and labelled) pair of progression addition lenses in 
week three of the trial. This pair is also worn for one week, while carefully observing 
the ease of visual adaptation and visual experiences . 
 
Between Visit #2 and Visit #3:  
• Study subjects w ore the three pairs of progressive addition lenses in the sequence 
explained during visit #2.  
 
During Visit #3:  
• During  visit #3, each study subject return ed with the three pairs of progressive addition 
lenses. First, an assessment of distance and near visual acuity w as conducted. Then, 
each participant returned  all progressive addition lens pairs to the investigator along  with 
the satisfaction questionnaire s regarding the adaptability and visual performance for 
each progressive addition lens pair. Finally, each patient complete d a final comparison 
questionnaire of all 3 progressive addition lens pairs and rank ed them as “t he best”, 
“good”, “the worst”. At this point, the study e nded for each subject , all 3 pairs of glasses 
were returned , and subjects were reimbursed f or their time and effort.  
 
DATA ANALYSIS : 
Data analysis includes Analysis of Variance (ANOVA)  or its non -parametric alternatives with 
post-hoc tests  and c orrelation analysis . 