1 Randomiz ed Controll ed Trial of Group Prevention C oaching 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
06/26/2019
2 
 Clinical Trial of Group Prevention Clinics  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_662549], MD, MHS  
National Center for Health Promotion (NCP) Lead Collaborator: Margaret (Peg) Dundon, Ph.D.  
A. SPECIFIC AIMS.  Improving prevention services  is a primary focus of the Secretary’s New Mode ls of Care 
Transformational Initiative.  Primary prevention  of cardiovascular disease (CVD) has been challenging to 
achieve; evaluation of new strategies for CVD primary prevention is the focus of this CREATE .   
Multifactorial behavioral interventions  are interventions that, instead of attempting to change a single health 
behavior among patients in a population (eg, increased physical activity, smoking cessation), allow individual 
patients to choose one or more among a number of behaviors, any of which may get them to a common 
clinical objective (eg lowering blood pressure).  These interventions often use some of a set of common 
approaches, such as goal -setting and improving self -efficacy, to assist patients in behavior modification (refs).  
A recent systema tic review suggests  multifactorial behavioral interventions  are likely efficacious in secondary 
prevention of CVD (1),  and t hese interventions are also efficacious in a number of chronic illnesses (e.g., 
hypertension, diabetes).   While there are studies t hat assess the performance of these interventions in 
patients without a common illness (eg, 2), there is little literature directly measuring risk reduction in a primary 
prevention population by [CONTACT_662567] (3 -5); our group ha s performed such a 
study, but in a population very unlike VA  (mostly white, mostly female, all insured) (3).  
Problem solving  (PS) is an approach to behavior change that has a long history in the mental health 
literature (6), but is much less used, and les s well tested, in the prevention arena. PS is an evolution of 
cognitive -behavioral therapy that addresses internal barriers to changing behavior, urging patients to use 
specific techniques designed to prime them for success in any behavior change they prop ose to attempt . PS is 
well-tested in mental health (6,7), and there are small studies suggesting its utility in changing behaviors 
associated with improved physical health (8,9). It is traditionally done in an individual setting, but recent 
literature ind icates promise in use in group settings (10). However, PS has unproven effectiveness both in 
group settings, and among primary prevention patients.  
Group visits  have been shown to be an effective means of improving outcomes in a number of settings ( 11).  
Group visits can either involve medication management or be entirely focused on behavior change; s elf-
management groups  (SMGs) are behavior intervention groups that are conducted by a trained facilitator and 
focus on having patients teach each other how to adopt healthful behaviors (usually in chronic illness).  
Because there is no requirement for medication management, SMGs can be used efficiently in patients without 
medication -requiring chronic illness , as there is no attendant cost of employing a prescribi ng provider .  SMGs 
can be used as a strategy to deliver a multifactorial behavior intervention in patients with a common illness (eg, 
12-14).  However, our study above (3) is the only RCT we can find of SMGs in primary prevention.    
We therefore propose a  2-arm, parallel -group , patient -level randomization  RCT to evaluate the 
effectiveness of Group Prevention Clinic  (GPC) , an SMG intervention  intensified by [CONTACT_662568] , 
in reducing CVD risk  among primary prevention patients with >5% 10 -year risk for a cardiovascular event  as 
estimated by [CONTACT_662569] (FRS ).  The study will be set in the Durham, Buffalo, and Syracuse 
VAMCs.  VA usual care will be the  control.  The following are the specific aims:  
Primary Specific Aim (Aim1):  To determi ne the effectiveness of GPC, compared to VA usual care, in 
reducing CVD risk in a primary prevention  population.   
Primary Hypothesis (H 1):  Among patients with >5% [ADDRESS_894128] a 2.0% difference between G PC and usual care in reduction of predicted rate of fatal or non -fatal MI, 
as estimated by [CONTACT_662569] (FRS).  
Aim 2:  To determine the effectiveness of GPC ( compared to VA usual care) in: (a) increasing physical activity, 
and (b) making diet ary improvements.  
H2A:  Compared to usual care,  GPC will lead to an increase in  physical activity as measured by [CONTACT_662570].    
H2B:  Compared to usual care,  GPC will lead to a decrease in saturated fat intake, as measure d by [CONTACT_662571].  
Aim 3:   Among intervention patients, t o determine the role of group cohesion  in predicting the success (or lack 
thereof) of GPC.  
H3A:  Strong group cohesion, as measured by [CONTACT_662572] , will predict improvem ent in FRS 
among patients receiving the GPC intervention.   
Aim 4  (exploratory) :  To measure the cost of the GPC intervention.  
3 
 B. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE.  
B.1. Cardiovascular (CV) event prevention.  Cardiovascular disease (e.g., myocardial infarction, 
cerebrovascular accident) remains the single most important public health problem in the [LOCATION_002] ( 15), 
and cardiovascular disease is a leading cause of death among VA users ( 16).  CV events are mostly 
considered preventable by [CONTACT_662573] (eg, hypertension (HTN) and 
hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035] (HL)). Modification of behavioral risk factors (eg, smoking cessation, increased physical activity , 
stress reduction ) is also key to CV event prevention, both by [CONTACT_662574] l as by [CONTACT_662575].  Improving the provision of prevention services is a primary focus of the Secretary’s New 
Models of Care Transformational Initiative (1 7).  However, prevention of CV disease has been challenging to 
achieve, as can  be seen by  [CONTACT_662576]; a fifth of American s (a greater 
proportion of  VA users) continue to smoke, only half of people achieve physical activity goals, and more than a  
third of VA users do not achieve treatment targets for blood pressure and/or cholesterol  (18-21).  The 
evaluation of alternative strategies to improve CV disease prevention is the focus of our CREATE.   
 Primary prevention of CV disease is defined as the prevention of CV disease among patients without 
known CV disease.  Primary prevention is often conceived of as better medication management of a single risk 
disease, and large drug trials of lipid or blood pressure medication management often label themselves as 
primary prevention (eg, 22, 23 ).  However, primar y prevention may also reach a large, relatively healthier 
subset of patients who may or may not have any specific risk disease (eg HTN, HL) but who have elevated 
risk, and whose common element is that they have one or more of a number of unhealthful  behavi ors, such as 
poor eating habits or a sedentary lifestyle, or smoking.  Interventions on this much larger population may 
ultimately have a broader impact on population health than those targeted at specific  CV risk  illnesses ( 24).   
B.2. Multifactorial beha vioral interventions .  Interventions for people with one or more unhealthful behaviors 
may choose to focus on a single health behavior; such interventions as smoking cessation groups or personal 
trainers are examples of this.  However, it is also possible to attempt to modify a range of different behaviors 
across different patients as an approach to overall health improvement.  Typi[INVESTIGATOR_897], these interventions attempt 
to improve patients’ self -efficacy (see section B.5 below for details , 1).  These interventi ons often take a 
tailored approach  to behavior change ; the patient chooses the behavior to change, and the interventionist 
works with the patient to set goals and  to overcome barriers to achieving those goals  (25).  After that, the 
person assisting with be havior change provides close follow -up on that  particular behavior.  The interventionist 
can be a professional (eg, a nurse) or a motivated layperson ( 25- 27); when the interventionist is a layperson 
the interventionist is often called  a healthcare coach  (26-27). Interventionists usually receive formal training in 
one or more well -evaluated strategies to promote behavior change  (eg, motivational interviewing , (28)).   
B.2.a. Potential use of m ultifactorial behavioral interventions  in primary prevention.   Multifactorial 
behavioral interventions have been applied widely and effectively by [CONTACT_662577] 
(eg, HTN, diabetes) ( 3,11,26 ). However, these types of interventions might also be applied to a primary 
prevention population.  For  such patients, small improvements across a number of behaviors (eg diet, 
exercise) or clinical parameters (eg BP, cholesterol) can add up to overall significant risk reduction  (3-5).  This 
is well -understood in theory ( 24), but w hile there are randomized trials that assess the performance of these 
interventions on risk behaviors in patients without a common illness (eg, 2), there is little literature directly 
measuring risk reduction in a primary prevention population by [CONTACT_662578]; our group has performed such a study, but in a population very unlike VA  (mostly white, 
mostly female, all insured) (3). 
B.3.  Problem solving.   Problem solving (PS) is an approach to behavior change  that has a long history in t he 
mental health literature, but is much less used, and less well tested, in the “physical”  illness arena. Problem -
solving theory defines a “problem” as “any situation in which an immediate and easily recognizable solution is  
not apparent ( 29).”  The 5 cor nerstones of the problem -solving approach are:  (a) Orientation, or developi[INVESTIGATOR_662550]-efficacy for solving your own problems; (b) Definition, the choice of a particular problem and the setting of 
a goal to overcome that problem; (c) Generation of Alternative s, the outlining of a number of potential plans to 
achieve the goal; (d) Decision -Making, the determination of the probable outcomes and consequences of these 
plans; and (e) Implementation, or the choice and follow -through on a speci fic plan to achieve the  goal (29).  
Early epi[INVESTIGATOR_662551] a strong association between the inability to manage problems and 
depressive symptoms ( 30).  The foundation of PS is to teach patients core skills (eg, resilience, copi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (see 
section B.5 below for details))  for approaching any or all of their own problems, and especially to recognize and 
overcome patients’ internal barriers to general problem -solving skills ( 29-31).  Because the early literature 
4 
 linked problem solving and depression, in the mid 1980s problem -solving  therapy (PST)  emerged as a 
modified cognitive -behavioral therapy approach to managing depression.  The efficacy of PST in depression is 
well-established ( 6).  Furthermore, PST can be used in a primary care setting; a recent VA evidence synthesis 
found this to be an effective intervention for depression  (7).   
B.3.a.  Potential use of Problem Solving for primary prevention .  The problem solving theoretical 
framework has been extended to “physical ” health as well . In this approach, patients are train ed to identify 
internal barriers to general healthful behavior change, overcome these barriers, and then go on to adopt 
healthier behaviors.  The literature on problem -solving training for salutary CV behavior change is scant, but 
there are a few promising  preliminary data among patients with diabetes.  A 2010 study, similar to the early 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_662552], showed significant and clinically meaningful associations between 
problem solving and diet and exercise ( 32).  Similarly, a small (N=29) pi[INVESTIGATOR_662553], development of a healthful eating plan, and weight (none statistically significan t, 33).  Finally, 
an RCT of a PS intervention for weight loss maintenance showed that the problem solving intervention was 
better not only than a usual care control, but also than standard relapse -prevention training ( 8).  These results 
suggest that the us e of PS in  primary  prevention  has a reasonable chance of success .      
B.4. Group Interventions.   Group visits  have been shown to be an effective means of improving a number of 
outcomes in a number of settings (reviewed briefly in ( 11)).  Group clinics, in  general, are thought to be an 
efficient care strategy, and may have special advantages over individual care where shared group experiences 
may promote better health.  This theory revolves around the notion that the peer support offered by [CONTACT_662579] t he group to other members leads to a social environment more conducive to healthful behavior 
choices.  This theory is largely untested in the healthcare setting; that is, only one study of a group intervention  
(as far as we can find) directly measure d the extent to which the group assists each member in making better 
choices around her/his health  (34).  However , there is evidence in the workplace and education literature that 
perceived workgroup coherence by [CONTACT_662580] r individual performance 
(35).  The most relevant type of group strategy to health behavior change interventions is the self -management 
group (SMG) , which is a group -based approach to multifactorial behavioral intervention .   
B.4.a.  Self -Management Groups .  SMGs are conducted by a trained facilitator and are focused on having 
patients teach each other how to cope with and master living with and managing chronic illness  (36).  Groups 
usually have consistent membership, both in terms of facilitators and pati ents, and they usually meet several 
times over the course of a period of months ( 36).  RCTs of SMGs have consistently shown strong efficacy in 
reducing symptom burden in symptomatic illnesses , in particular illnesses  with pain as a primary symptom , and 
often with concomitant imp rovements in self -efficacy (37, 38 ).  However, the effect of SMGs among patients 
who need to change behaviors that do not have a large impact on acute symptoms  has been consistently 
small; that is, s everal studies have shown only mod est potency of SMGs on impacting  cardiovascular risk (e.g., 
12-13).  This suggests a need to enhance the traditional SMG as an approach to primary prevention.  
B.4.b.  Problem Solving  in Groups. Problem solving therapy did not originate as a group intervent ion.  
However, problem solving training interventions have been tested successfully in group settings, and it is now 
widely used in that fashion.  Again, the theory is that group members, facilitated by a trained behavioralist, will 
help each other learn t he copi[INVESTIGATOR_662554] s and achieve healthful behavior 
change.  Group PST was first tested for depression in a non -VA setting and found to be superior to usual care 
(10). Additionally, a recent VA pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]  (N=54)  study conducte d by [CONTACT_662581] (JN, see B.6 below) 
used a group strategy for PST and found promising results  on outcomes such as problem -solving approaches 
and resilience .  Finally, the weight loss maintenance PS intervention shown in section B.3.a above was a 
group intervention, showing the potential efficacy of group PS in promoting behaviors  important to primary 
prevention  (8).   
B.4.c . Brief individual contacts as supplements  to group interventions.  Many group interventions 
utilize brief individual conta cts to enhance the group intervention (eg, 3,11).  This can be done either as a 
“breakout” session in the context of the group (in which the individual leaves the group for 5 minutes or so to 
talk to a provider other than the group facilitator) or as inter val telephone calls.  The purpose of these brief 
individual interactions is to assure that each individual goal is addressed one -on-one, without disrupting the 
peer support aspect of the group setting.  From a theoretical perspective, phone calls and group  may use 
different pathways to improve self -management (see section B.5 below).  Finally, we have used SMGs with 
adjuvant phone calls successfully in a prevention setting before ( 3).  
[ADDRESS_894129] on members’ behavior change.  We think that it follows logically that SMGs , 
enhanced by [CONTACT_662582], may potentially be  a successful primary prevention 
intervention.  Below, we outline a theoretical model that further suggests that PS may have a synergistic, or at 
least additive, role in effecting healthful behavior change  in groups, and then show pr eliminary data that 
support that theory .    
B.5.  Conceptual Model.  The core of o ur conceptual model used to develop the proposed intervention was 
adapted from Bandura’s Social Cogni tive Theory (SCT) (see Figure 1, 39 -41). According to SCT, self -efficacy  
is central to behavior change. Self -efficacy is shaped by [CONTACT_662583] (through skills mastery, 
reinforcement, and persuasion) as well as our social environment (through observational learning, verbal 
reinforcement, and persuasion). In turn, self -effica cy influences health outcomes both directly and indirectly 
through outcome expectations, sociostructural factors, and personal goals  (40, 42 -46). 
Figure 1: Conceptual Model  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An outcome expectation  refers to the belief that a positive outcome will occur as a result of a behavior. 
Sociostructural factors are situational, and health system facilitators and barriers to health behavior change, 
such as cost. Goals, which may be short -or long -term, are ro oted in values and provide an incentive for 
performing healthy behaviors.  
Social support is also an important concept in SCT that describes the structure, processes, and 
functions of social relationships. Social support can affect health outcomes both dire ctly and indirectly  (47-50). 
In the context of group  intervention s, peer support from the group is an important form of social support for 
group members.  Group dynamics theory ( 51) holds that decisions made in groups are very different from those 
made with out group support. Group cohesion is defined a sense of the “we -ness ( 52)” of the group, and it is 
the key concept underlying the extent to which group members support each other to make better decisions 
(53). If a group member does not feel “coherent” wit h the group, s/he will reject the help of the group in making 
a better decision, and stop participating or even stop attending altogether.  In contrast, if a patient feels 
coherent with the group, other members of the group can help access information, ide ntify and solve problems, 
avoid stressors, or even enhance self -efficacy.   
The added phone calls provide support in translating self -efficacy learned in group into goals  (27).  
While the group sessions will foster the outcome expectation that healthful be havior changes will lead to better 
outcomes, the phone interventionist will use techniques such as motivational interviewing during the brief calls 
to assist each patient in understanding the outcome expectation that her/his individual goal will lead to sp ecific, 
individual positive outcomes  (26,27) . 
In addition to SCT, the intervention is informed by [CONTACT_662568], which states that healthy 
choices are a function of people’s problem -solving approaches .  Problem solving focuses especially on Social Suppo rt/ 
Peer Support  Healthful 
behavior 
change  
Sociostructural factors  
• Facilitators  
• Barriers (external)  Orientation to problems  
• Resilience/copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  
• Barriers (internal)  
 Risk Reduction  
Goals  Self-Efficacy  Skills Mastery/ 
problem solvi ng 
mastery  
 
Fostering 
resilience  Outcome 
expectations  
6 
 foster ing “resilience .” A recent article employing systematic review principles, concept analysis, and 
stakeholder consultation broadly defined resilience as the “process of effectively negotiating, adapting to, or 
managing significant sources of stress or traum a” (Windle, 2011, p. 152).  Resilience is also associated with 
better outcomes among patients with diabetes ( 55).  By  [CONTACT_662584] e internal barriers , to 
master better problem -solving techniques, and to be more resilient,  we expect to prepar e them to be better 
able to deal with the sociostructural (external) barriers that they will face and make better use of the strategies 
they use to achieve their stated personal goals.   In essence, we will use problem -solving to “prime” patients for 
using traditional goal -setting approaches to change behavior, with the expectation that this will enhance the 
success of these approaches.  
Our study measures were selected to reflect both the processes and outcomes of behavior change. 
Our primary outcome will be  Framingham Risk Score  (FRS) , a well -validated predictor of cardiovascular events 
(D.8.a below ), which should be lowered with any number of healthful behavior changes (eg healthier eating, 
increased physical activity, smoking cessation).  We will also meas ure those behavior changes directly.  Those 
changes, i n turn, should be increased to the extent that patients are high in self -efficacy, have increased  their 
resilience, and feel as though they have been supported by [CONTACT_662585] (self-efficacy, resilien ce, and group 
cohesion are our process outcomes).  
B.6. Preliminary studies.  
B.6.a. Group multifactorial behavioral intervention s can reduce cardiovascular risk.   A group of 
researchers led by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Edelman performed a small randomized trial of a multifactori al behavioral ( coaching ) 
intervention to improve cardiovascular risk ( 3).  The intervention was similar to the one we will propose below , 
with multiple group sessions and interval individual phone calls designed to teach empowerment skills and set 
goals, a nd individual phone calls for follow -up on goal achievement .  Problem solving was not part of the 
intervention.  The primary outcome was Framingham Risk Score (FRS) , which will be our primary outcome 
here. Intervention patients showed greater improvement i n FRS at both 5 and 10 month follow -up (see figure, 
p=0.06 at 5 months and p=.04 at 10 months).  Note that most of the improvement occurred in the first 5 
months. Also improved in the coaching arm were increase in days of  moderate exercise (1.3  more days 
compared  to usual care, p=0.006) and (not significantly) weight loss (~1 kg more compared to usual  care,
 p=0.11).  However, there were important limitations to this 
study, both scientific (differential dropout between arms) 
and in terms of significance t o the VA (study population 
was 80% female, 60% college -educated, and median 
income was >$60,000).  This study provides proof of 
concept that group multifactorial behavioral interventions  
similar to ours  can reduce CV risk, and validates FRS as 
a measure se nsitive to ch ange.  However,  knowledge 
gaps remain surrounding the extinction of the effect after 
coaching stops , and whether these positive changes  may 
be seen in a VA population.  It also demonstrates our 
ability to deliver a group plus telephone follow -up 
intervention.
B.6.b. Multifactorial behavioral interventions can improve CV risk behaviors among Veterans.  [CONTACT_662623] led CouPLES, a spousal support intervention to improve cholesterol  (56).  The intervention had some 
similarities to our proposed approac h in that patients were allowed to choose from a menu of behaviors to 
potentially lower their cholesterol, and a phone interventionist trained in motivational interviewing helped 
patients set goals regarding CV risk behaviors (diet, activity, med adherence ).  CouPLES was a null study on 
its primary outcome, LDL -cholesterol.  However, there was a moderate, near -significant increase in number of 
patients reaching physical activity goals compared to usual care (20% greater increase, p=0.06) and a modest, 
statistically significant decrease in total (12g/d larger decrease compared to control, p= 0.02) and saturated 
(3g/d, p=0.02) fat intake.  These results show our ability to improve CV risk behaviors among Veterans using 
complex interventions, and highlight the importance of using composite outcomes more sensitive to subtle 
multi -behavioral changes than individual clinical outcomes (eg LDL -C, BP)  
B.6.c.  Group interventions  can improve Veterans’ Health, and potentially be cost effective.   Drs. 
Edelman and Jackson  led a randomized controlled trial at two VAMCs of Shared Medical Appointments for 
Diabetes and the economic analysis of that trial, respectively  (11).  The results showed that Shared Medical 
7 
 Appointments improved systolic blood pressure 7 mmHg compared to  usual care, and LDL -cholesterol by 9 
mg/dl; there was a modest, not statistically significant improvement in hemoglobin A1c (0.3 percentage points; 
p=0.16).  The economic analysis showed statistically significant improvement in per patient cost and in 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_662555].  Similarly, 
[CONTACT_431589] co -led a family caregiver intervention using PST, among other components, and found that the cost 
of care for Veteran care -recipi[INVESTIGATOR_331178] o n average approximately $2700 less than Veterans receiving usual 
care ( 57). These results show that (1) group strategies have the potential to save money, and (2) we can 
deliver a multi -site group intervention randomized trial  in the VA .  Note that the gro up visit strateg ies here are 
totally different from the one we propose; see section  D.5. 
B.6.d.  Problem -Solving can be done with V eterans in groups.  [CONTACT_662624] was a major investigator in a 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_662556] -solving among veterans.  This pi[INVESTIGATOR_662557] 
(median age = 27) received a [ADDRESS_894130] 
Measure   Mean (SD)  Mean (SD)  
PHQ -9   12.8(7.5)  9.8(6.8)  p<.05  
Brief Resilience Scale    17.2(5.8)  17.8(5.9)  p=.14  
Positive Problem Orientation   10.2(4.4)  11.3(4.5)  p=.10  
Negative Problem Or ientation      9.0(4.7)  7.8(4.8)        p<.05   
Impulsivity/Carelessness Style      7.8(3.9)  7.0(4.4)        p=.16  
Avoidance Style        8.7(5.4)  6.6(5.0)        p<.05  
Rational Problem Solving      9.2(5.0)  10.3(5.0)      p=.07  B.6.e.  Summary of our te am’s 
experiences.   We have shown that: 
multifactorial behavioral interventions can 
change CV risk behaviors among veterans; 
group interventions are acceptable and 
potent among veterans; group PST is 
acceptable and potent among veterans; and 
that multifacto rial behavioral interventions can 
reduce cardiovascular risks,   
albeit in populations quite different from the VA.  More importantly, we have shown that, as a team, we can 
deliver all the components both of our intervention  (group, problem -solving, and mu ltifactorial behavior change)  
and of our scientific plan  (RCT, multiple VA sites, FRS as primary outcome) .   
B.7.  Summary and rationale.   In summary:  
• Primary  prevention is important to the VA and for population health ; 
• Multifactorial behavioral interventi ons are promising for primary prevention, and have some limited direct 
evidence of efficacy in primary prevention ; 
• There is preliminary evidence that p roblem -solving may be able to  chang e CV risk ; 
• Problem -solving in groups is generally accepted ; 
• Group s show promise for prevention, but to date self -management g roups have not improved CV risk ; 
• Our team has shown that multifactorial behavioral interventions can improve CV risk, that a self -
management group enhanced with telephone calls can effect healthful behavior change ; that we can effect 
healthful behavior change  among Veterans, and that we can deliver efficacious problem -solving 
interventions.  
We therefore propose that a group  intervention , with supplemental additional telephone contacts and 
enhanced by [CONTACT_662586],  is an intervention that has a high probability of improving 
cardiovascular risk behavior and thus improving primary prevention .  We propose to test this approach  in 
a multi -site VA randomized, controlled trial.  Additionally, our close relat ionships with influential users of 
problem -solving, and with VA’s National Center for Prevention (NCP), will allow this intervention to be directly 
implemented if effective and cost -effective (see Significance, section C below).  
C. Significance to VA.   
VHA has committed to 3 key aspects of this study: prevention, problem solving, and group visits .   
Prevention  is a primary focus of the Secretary’s New Models of Care Transformational Initiative  (58).  In 
particular, primary  prevention, prior to the onset of  CV disease or  disease states with a very high risk for 
comorbid CV disease such as diabetes or peripheral artery disease, is going to be increasingly relevant to VA 
in dealing with younger veterans such as those returning from Central Asia.  The model of  care that we are 
testing potentially represents a novel, effective, and cost effective approach to primary  prevention. NCP, which 
8 
 has been involved in the development and design of this study from the beginning, is clearly strongly intereste d 
in the resul ts. Additionally, the choice of interventionists who mimic key prevention personnel already at VAs 
(section D.5.a, below) will allow NCP to rapi[INVESTIGATOR_662558].  
Problem Solving is strongly promoted by [CONTACT_662587].  That group has conducted 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_662559]; but they have communicated to us an interest in 
evaluating problem solving in physical health as well.  [CONTACT_662624]’s ongoing work with with  VA proble m 
solving leaders (ie, [CONTACT_662625],  VA Senior Consultant/Liaison for Psychological Health , (59)) will allow 
us to inform them on the potential use of problem solving in prevention, and will also allow us to implement this 
aspect of our intervention w ith relative ease.  
Group Visits  have been mandated by [CONTACT_662588]  (60).  They are thought to represent an 
efficient means to provide access to high -quality care, and there is evidence that they meet that goal for 
patients with serious chronic illnes s, including in the VA  (11, 61 -63).  However, group visits for patients without 
severe or symptomatic chronic illness  have not been studied well .  This proposal allows  PACT to determine the 
role of group visits for relatively healthier patients; it may def ine the limits of the group model in VA, or allow VA 
to confidently expand group care to a much wider range of patients.  
D.  RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
D.1 Study Design.  We propose a randomized, controlled trial (RCT) of our GPC intervention (details in 
section D.5  below).   Outcomes will be measured at baseline, 6, and [ADDRESS_894131]. Laura Wray, 
key personnel on this grant, is core faculty of  a VA Mental Health Center of Excellence, the VISN 2 Center for 
Integrated Healthcare  (CIH).  The goal of  CIH is to integrate behavioral health into primary care.  The center 
has numerous research projects ongoing at all times; research personnel at CIH are on staff at Buffalo VAMC .  
Buffalo  will be treated as a n equal  site for the scientific protocol , with the go al of approximately equal  
enrollment from Buffalo and Durham.  
D.3.  Patients .  The patients will be 400 VA users (see enrollment feasibility, D.3.c.v, and sample size , D.9, 
below ) without prior history of cardiovascular event, but with at least 5% risk of such an event, with at least 2% 
of that risk potentially  reversible.    
D.3.a.  Framingham Risk Score .  FRS (64) is calculated using age, gender, blood pressure, total and 
HDL cholesterol, smoking status, diabetes status, and status of taking blood pressure  medication; we are 
excluding diabetic patients (see D.3.a.ii below).  As such, all patients in the study will have hypertension with 
less-than-optimal control, OR elevated total cholesterol, OR be a current smoker.  The table shows some 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_662560] p rofiles .  The examples are all male non -smokers : 
 Subject A1  Subject A2  Subject B1 Subject B2 Subject C1 Subject C2 
Age 50 50 55 55 55 55 
SBP (on med)  - - - - 140 - 
SBP (no med)  135 135 160 140 - 140 
Total cholesterol  210 190 190 190 190 190 
HDL 35 45 45 45 45 45 
10 yr FRS  7% 5% 9% 7% 9% 7% 
D.3.b .  Rationale for 5% risk, with 2% reversibility.   We are targeting a group of primary prevention 
patients that are relatively sick for primary prevention. A 2% reversibility is chosen because this is 
approxim ately the effect size seen in our study of a similar intervention among non -VA users; 5% baseline risk 
is chosen because patients with lower risk than this likely will not justify this relatively intensive intervention 
(nor, often,  have 2% reversibility).  
D.3.c.  Process for identifying eligible patients.  We will use a multi -phase process to identify patients 
that fit this demographic, reviewing aggregated local CPRS data first, then reviewing individual charts, then 
interviewing patients  and obtaining lab  data.  We will target enrolling 200 from each site  (Durham and Buffalo ).   
D.3.c .i  Accrual of potential eligible patients from database:  Patients will be initially identified from 
local VA administrative data (or VINCI, depending on VA policy at that ti me).  In the database phase,  
identification will use the following inclusion and exclusion criteria:  
• Inclusion:  a diagnosis of inadequately controlled hypertension, as defined by [CONTACT_662589] -
[ADDRESS_894132] recent blood pressure with eit her systolic > 140 mmHg or diastolic > 
9 
 90 mmHg , OR (2) inadequately controlled dyslipi[INVESTIGATOR_035], as defined by [CONTACT_662590] > 200 mg/dl  or HDL cholesterol < 35 mg/dl , OR (3) current smoking, which can be 
identified using the CPRS Health Factor  tied to the smoking clinical reminder. Medication -taking 
status for these illnesses is neither required nor excluded.  
D.3.c.ii First contact [CONTACT_662591]:  Patients who are eligible by [CONTACT_662592], ask ing them to call a toll -free number if they do not wish to be called for the study , or 
if they wish to consider enrollment .  Those  who do not call within 1.[ADDRESS_894133] medical 
records reviewed by [CONTACT_3462].   
D.3.c.iii Chart review phase exclusion:  We will exclude patients whose electronic medical record 
reveals any of the diseases that are exclusions in the database phase above, or which contradicts the 
database inclusion (for example, a patient who has quit smoking since th e last completion of the smoking 
cessation reminder).  We will also, at this phase, exclude patients with other severe intercurrent illness or poor 
life expectancy, as defined by:  [CONTACT_662593], except for hormone treatment for breast  or 
prostate cancer; renal dialysis or cirrhosis of the liver; psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_854] [ADDRESS_894134] to be currently eng aged in formal 
efforts to improve a CV risk behavior, including: enrollment in smoking cessation clinic in the last 6 months; 
MOVE! enrollment within the last [ADDRESS_894135] their inclusion and exclusion criteria reviewed over the phone.  This will include all criteria mentioned 
previously as well as the Short Portable Mental Healt h Status Questionnaire ( 65) to determine cognitive 
impairment.  Finally, t he RA will also ask the patient if s/he has set a quit date for smoking, or has enrolled in a 
community -based weight loss or physical activity program; a “yes” answer to either of th ose will exclude the 
patient.  If the patient is still eligible and interested, s/he will be asked to set up a time and place for enrollment 
(see D.4, below).   
 D.3.c.iv.  Interview and lab phase inclusion and exclusion.  As part of  the enrollment visit , blood 
pressure and cholesterol will be measured (see below); patients who lose their eligibility  due to improvement of 
either of these parameters will also be excluded prior to randomization.  
 D.3.c.v.  Self-referral Based  Recruitment Strategies.  In addit ion to the aforementioned outreach -
based recruitment strategies, we will add several approaches that allow patients to self -refer into the study.  
IRB-approved flyers will be distributed around the medical center in approved locations, and included in the 
first contact [CONTACT_281720].  IRB -approved ads in other formats will also be placed in approved medical center 
locations, potentially including the closed -circuit patient television and the DVAMC Facebook page,  
D.3.C.v i.  Enrollment Feasibility.  We do not anti cipate problems enrolling 200 patients at each site.  
In a recent evaluation of our local data, we found approximately  5500  patients with poorly controlled 
hypertension  or hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035] .  Estimating conservatively that 50% of these patients have either di abetes or 
some other vascular exclusion criterion, this will leave approximately 2800  patients eligible for the study by 
[CONTACT_662594][INVESTIGATOR_110259] a; smokers will only add to this number.  As we are usually able to recruit 25 -35% 
of eligible patients in to our studies at the Durham VA, we expect to easily enroll [ADDRESS_894136] agreed to participate in the study, the 
research ass istant (RA) will meet the patient at the local VA or CBOC, and written informed consent for the 
study will be obtained.  Next, the RA will measure a blood pressure.  After that, patients will complete all 
baseline measures (see D.8  below), which will take approximately [ADDRESS_894137] completed the measurement battery and blood draw, we will prepare to randomize 
them to receive or not receive the G PC intervention.  To maintain blinding, patients will be randomized 
remotely from the enrollment, and the blinded research assistant will not provide the assignment.  Instead, the 
research assistant will obtain a date, time, and working phone number for a randomization phone call to be 
made (within 3 business days) by [CONTACT_662595] (Durham vs. Upstate [LOCATION_001] ).  
This delayed randomization is also required in order to allow lipid testing to be completed, so that patients with 
a baseline FRS of < 5%, or lack of reversible risk, may be excluded.  To maintain subject engagement, 
intervention patients will be mailed “Moving Forward,” a VA -approved primer on Problem -Solving, after 
randomization (see D.4.a below).  
10 
  Participating indivi duals will be followed for 12 months.  The intervention lasts only 6 months; however, 
patients are in theory being taught lasting skills in the intervention.  It is therefore an important question to 
determine if the effects of the intervention (if any) ex tinguish after contact [CONTACT_662596].  The local RA 
will ascertain the measurement battery at baseline, 6, and 12 months.  At all follow -up visits, the RA assigned 
to measure outcome variables will be blinded as to which group the patient is random ized.  Patients will 
receive $ 50 compens ation for each scientific visit, for a total maximum of $ [ADDRESS_894138] 10 patients enrolled into the study will be part of a pi[INVESTIGATOR_138886].  They will not 
be rand omized; instead, all 10 will be assigned to the intervention (section D.5 below).  These patients will 
have the same patient experience as patients randomized to the intervention arm (D.4.a below).  This is being 
done to determine if the intervention needs  modification prior to implementation in the study.  These patients 
will sign a separate, clearly marked consent form notifying them that they are in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]; however, the 
risks of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_662561] . 
D.4.a.  Randomization.  The project’s masters -level statistician will maintain a computer generated, 
patient randomization sequence separate from the site of patient enrollment.  The group assignment will be 
communicated to the opposite site RA (ie, Durh am patients will receive a randomization call from the Upstate 
NY RA, and vice -versa).   That RA will make the phone call at the appointed time, and explain the implications 
of the arm assignment to the subject.  This will allow the local RA to remain blin ded to arm assignment for 
follow -up evaluation.  Randomization will be stratified by [CONTACT_662597].  Patients randomized to the GPC 
arm will be offered a choice of one of a few possible half -days for their group session to meet, and that choice 
will lead  to the patient’s assignment to a particular GPC group.  
D.5. Intervention.  The GPC  intervention will be delivered to patients in the active arm.   The basic structure is 
that of a group problem -solving intervention, with interval phone calls delivered to check in on goal progress 
and reinforce group learning.  Groups will meet monthly for 6 months, and each patient will be called once 
between each group session.  Based on our experience with delivering problem solving groups (JN) , each 
group will consist o f 10 patients .  In general, problem -solving principles will represent the content of the group 
sessions .  Problem solving theory is described in greater detail above (B. 4).  Again, problem solving intends to 
teach patients to overcome internal barriers to healthful behaviors. We will directly assess the effects of 
problem solving in our intervention by [CONTACT_662598]-RISC (D.8.b.iii.b).  
The problem solving orientation will be combined, at all group sessions, with the typi[INVESTIGATOR_583923]-efficacy  
training  used in SM Gs, so that patients will be taught simultaneously to overcome both internal and external 
barriers. Similar to our prior studies (eg, CouPLES  (56)), participants will be asked to develop personal goals 
related to CVD -related behaviors (e.g., smoking and we ight reduction).  We will directly assess the coaching 
effects by [CONTACT_512149]-efficacy  across chosen behaviors  using  the Patient Activation Measure (PAM , 
D.8.b.i i.a below)  
D.5.b. Intervention personnel.  The groups will be coordinated by a person  with a  Masters in Social Work 
(MSW)  hired for the research enterprise but trained and credentialed identically to a  facility’s Health Behavior 
Coordinator ( HBC ).  Each facility now has an HBC, and the work of the HBCs is coordinated by [CONTACT_662599].  The 
role of a facility’s HBC is to be the lead interventionist in implementation efforts toward preventive health, and 
to use behavioral techniques to achieve these goals.  HBCs are almost all either clinical psychologists or 
MSW -level social workers, and all are trained in behavior change techniques (e.g., motivational interviewing ; 
see section D.7 for details ).  Additionally, NCP plans to train HBCs in problem -solving in the near future.  It is 
this training in multiple approaches to behavior change that makes the HBC th e appropriate interventionist for 
GPCs.  We will use either an HBC or HBC equivalent so that if GPCs are effective, they can be easily 
implemented with the personnel already assigned at each VAMC.  
The phone calls associated with the intervention will be p erformed by a healthcare coach , who will work 
closely with the group interventionist .  Coache s are relatively inexpensive personnel who  are in wide use 
across the private sector for telephone counseling.  The rationale for the use of coaches  is also based on 
translation of the intervention; at some facilities, HBCs are looking to hire and train sub -RN-level personnel to 
deliver behavior change interventions that the HBC would coordinate.  There is no need for a masters - or RN -
level trained person; coaching interventions are normally (and successfully) delivered by [CONTACT_662600] ( 3, 26, 27).  However, the intervention coaches  will be trained in coaching techniques in 
general, and in MI in particular, prior to starting the intervention  (28). 
D.5.c. Intervention structure.   As soon as [ADDRESS_894139] 90 minutes; the first 20 minutes are set aside for social interaction as a means 
to engage the patients ( 11), and the remaining 70 minutes are for content delivery  (see D.5. d).  Phone calls will 
be made once to each patient in the interval between group sessions.   
D.5.d . Attendance Enhancement Strategies.  Above and beyond the usual encouragement to attend 
group sessions, we will attempt to increase attendance by [CONTACT_662601].  
Behavioral contracts have been shown in randomized, controlled trials to improve attendance to group 
sessions ( 66, 67).  Patients will sign the attendance contract immediately upon arriving to the first group 
session.  In a ddition to contracts, we will offer a cash reimbursement of $ 25, similar to the expected travel pay 
for a clinic visit  for a patient living [ADDRESS_894140] , for patients attending group sessions.  In our hands, session 
attendance has been approximately 80% u sing this combined approach ( 11). 
D.5.e .  Group Session Content.  The group session content is taken from pre -existing group problem -
solving session content, and modified to reflect both the focus on cardiovascular prevention rather than on 
mental health co ncerns  as well as the self -efficacy training orientation .   
Session [ADDRESS_894141] four cornerstones of problem solving ; orientation, definition, generation of 
alternatives, and decision -making.  Orientation  can be thought of as a form of self -efficac y for solving a wide 
range of problems.  In traditional case management, this involves first identifying a behavior that a patient 
wants to change but feels unable to change, identifying barriers, usually external  (e.g., inadequate 
transportation) , that st op the desired behavior from occurring, and having the case manager provide a solution 
to that barrier.  Under the problem -solving approach, the first step is to identify internal  barriers (e.g., 
procrastination)  that inhibit the ability to achieve a numbe r of behavior change objectives ; external barriers are 
identified and addressed later in the process .  Therefore , the first part of the first group session is to get 
patients thinking and talking about their individual internal barriers; the intention  is for patients to be able to 
help each other  approach managing  their barriers  in new and more effective ways .    
Next, the definition  cornerstone is taught.  Problem  solving theory holds that not all categories of 
problem solving are equal, and so patients ar e encouraged to critically evaluate their own approach and 
consider how to make changes to it based on the skills learned in session one. Patients are introduced to a 
preferred  approach to complex problem solving; “externalize, visualize, and simplify.”  Patients will also be 
taught skills for distancing themselves emotionally from their internal barriers, so as to more rationally solve 
problems.  At this point, patients should be chosen a healthful behavior they are ready to adopt.   
Finally, the generation  of alternatives  and decision -making  cornerstones of problem -solving  are 
introduced .  Here we teach patients to 1) generat e a long list of possible healthful behaviors to adopt , including 
potentially somewhat original (for each patient) approaches to behav ior change (eg, a form of exercise  that a 
particular patient has never considered before) , and then (2) thoughtfully evaluat e each solution for probable 
positive and negative outcomes of each.  It is here that external barriers and solutions will be consid ered for 
each potential behavior change.   
After having mastered these concepts , patients  should be ready to use the tools and approaches 
learned to choose a particular salutary cardiovascular goal they are not achieving  (eg, weight loss) , to make a 
list of potential actions that will allow them to  achiev e that goal (e.g., using the  externalization strategy of 
creating lists , make a list of potential strategies for weight loss  as a way to structure steps toward achieving 
healthy behaviors) , and then choose a specific strategy for prevention (eg, stop eating at bedtime).  The first 
phone call, a week after the group session, will finalize the goal and confirm an action plan for its achievement.  
Session [ADDRESS_894142], this session refines the part of session 1 that involves 
“externalize, visualize, and simplify,” by [CONTACT_662602].  Second, if the plan involves another person (such as a significant other who cooks, for a diet 
plan), patients are asked to roleplay the communication with the other person.  Finally, patients are asked to 
consider how they will eva luate their progress along their plan towards their goal (e .g., home blood pressure 
measurement, steps on a pedometer).  For those who are struggling to act on the plan they have developed, 
this session can allow patients to expand on the concepts from ses sion 1, in particular re -evaluating the plan 
for unexpected positive and negative outcomes, and potentially reconsidering the plan for another plan working 
[ADDRESS_894143] the same goal.  The follow -up call will not only reinforce the action plan but check in with the chosen 
method of progress evaluation.  
Session s 3-5 focus on evaluating the success of each member’s  plan in accomplishing the ir particular 
goal.   Patients are encouraged to assess how well they are meeting their goals.  This is done both using the 
objective measures determined in session 2 (are you losing weight?) but also subjective assessment (do you 
feel better? Are other s in your life noticing a positive  change?).  Patients compare the actual effects of the plan 
to their predicted effects in an eff ort to refine their ability to predict outcomes of various plans to address their 
next goal.  At this point, patients are also encouraged to reward themselves for any success they are having.   
Finally, patients will have the opportunity to re -evaluate thei r goals and action plans, with the potential to either 
(a) change an action plan that is failing, or change a goal as other goals become more important, or (b) add 
additional action plans or even goals if they feel ready to do more than they have been doin g.  It is common in 
this session to ask a group member to share a problem with the group, and then have the group walk through 
the entire problem -solving approach as a way to illustrate how to use problem solving as a  real-world 
application.  
Session [ADDRESS_894144], groups will focus on “planning ahead;” that is, taking the skills applied 
to the problem chosen and anticipating how they might be used to develop a plan for addressing other 
cardiovascular risk issues.  This will, again, be performe d by [CONTACT_662603].  Then the patients will be debriefed, reflecting on what about the intervention was most helpful for 
them going forward and potentially for other similar patients.  
D.5.f . Phone Call Content.  Unlike th e group sessions, which will teach skills and techniques  designed to 
be applicable to a large number of patients , phone calls will be designed for the phone coach to work with 
patients on their individual goals and plans.  Calls will take approximately [ADDRESS_894145] 
during the second week after the group meeting.  
Early phone calls (ordinarily the first two, depending on individual patients) will predominantly work on 
goal-setting.  The coach will briefly review the material from the m ost recent group session.  Then, the coach 
will attempt to help the patient choose a specific, achievable , measureable  prevention goal.  By [CONTACT_662604], the goal should be very specific (ie, “exercise [ADDRESS_894146] 30 minutes” as  opposed to 
“exercise more”) and the phone coach and the patient should have settled on a plan .  The action plan will be 
specific, and will include a “how when, and where” for achieving the goal.  This allows later calls to assess the 
success of the plan i n accomplishing the goal.  During these calls the phone coach should check on 
measureable progress (eg, weight loss) as well as assessing if any changes should be made in the plan if the 
goal is not being approached.  
The phone coach will be performing two basic functions in providing this assistance.  First, the coach 
should be able to use appropriate techniques to motivate the patient to meet her/his goal.  The coach should 
attempt to help the patient identify both facilitators and barriers to meeting the goal (note that these barriers are 
specific to the goal and often external, and not the internal barriers general to problem -solving that are 
addressed in group session 1).  Second, the coach should have appropriate resources available to overcome 
these ba rriers.  Our previous work has developed a taxonomy for typi[INVESTIGATOR_662562], such that 95% of patient’s cited barriers are covered by [CONTACT_662605] 
(25).  The phone coach will be equipped with a list of techniques and resources to overcome these barriers.  
The resources may be VA -based, but community resources will also be provided for those who for whatever 
reason prefer to use them.  Examples of community resources would include healt h clubs with aff ordable 
pricing,  websites with healthful recipes, and stress reduction classes.  
D.5.g .  Rationale for intervention above and beyond existing VA risk factor -specific groups.  The VA 
has already developed strategies for addressing individual cardiovascular r isk behaviors, including many 
behavioral groups.  A partial list of these would include:  MOVE!; smoking cessation group clinic; group 
medical clinics for hypertension; group lipid management clinics; nutrition consults; and any number of 
medication manage ment clinics.  However, none of these interventions has a perfect hit rate; the majority of 
patients who go to smoking cessation clinic fail to quit, the large majority of patients referred to MOVE! fail to 
lose weight, and SMGs  make only modest improvemen ts in risk reduction .  Our intervention can be thought of 
as a co -factor for success in these other groups.  Problem -solving seeks to explore what it is about people that 
makes them unable to take up the plans offered by [CONTACT_367648], and helps them change  so that they can 
benefit from these groups, or other structures for risk reduction.  Indeed, we expect that for some of our 
patients, the plan chosen  to achieve a goal  will be an existing VA risk reduction structure (e .g., if the goal is 
[ADDRESS_894147] some patients’ plan to be MOVE! enrollment).  However, we expect 
them to be more ready to succeed in MOVE! than had they been enrolled prior to our GPC intervention.   
VHA has also implemented a number of risk -factor specific groups th at use medication management as 
part of the intervention (Shared Medical Appointments).  While these strategies have been used successfully 
(eg, 11), these interventions are expensive ($460/patient/yr , (11) ), and many patients in primary prevention 
setting s will not require medication management, leaving the expensive prescri bing provider with little to do.  
D.6. Control Group .  Control patients will receive usual care  and will have the same scientific protocol as 
intervention patients.   
D.7.  Interventioni st Training and Oversight.   The group facilitator will either be the facility’s HBC, and thus 
be already fully trained, or an MSW who will be trained exactly as the HBC would be.   This training begins with  
a self-guided, web -based orientation to being an H BC.  Then follows TEACH facilitator training, which is a 2.[ADDRESS_894148]  will receive formal training in MI; we have purchased this service from a local 
MI teacher for numerous other personnel on other successful protocols ( 25).  S/he will also receive training in 
coaching from professional coaches at Duke Un iversity Medical Center ( 3). 
 [CONTACT_662624], who is the investigator  with experience in problem solving  (see budget justification for 
credentials) will supervise the interventionists.  To assure fidelity, all intervention group sessions and phone 
calls will  be recorded, and those that are randomly chosen to be overheard by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Nieuwsma will be overheard 
after they occur.    This eliminates a Hawthorn Effect for behavior of the interventionists when they know they 
are being observed.  Second, we will establis h checklists for both behaviors addressed and Problem -Solving 
approaches used in each session so we have a summative evaluation of intervention fidelity.  
D.8.  Measures.  
D.8.a. Primary Outcome Variable.  The primary outcome is Framingham Risk Score, which yields a 
probability of major cardiovascular event over the next 10 years as its output  (64). The inputs to FRS are:  age; 
gender; diabetes status (which will be 0 at baseline for all enrolled patients); total and HDL cholesterol, which 
will be measured di rectly by [CONTACT_662606]; smoking status, measured by [CONTACT_6270] -report; use of 
blood pressure medications, measured by [CONTACT_662607] -report , and systolic blood pressure.  All 
components of the FRS will be measured at each study visit.  At each  visit, two measure ments of blood 
pressure , taken seated after a [ADDRESS_894149] and at 5 -minute intervals, will be obtained.  The final outcome will 
be the average of the two measures.  All BP measurements will be performed using electronic blood  pressure 
cuffs (148).  Study personnel will be trained in measurement technique using established methods (149).   
D.8.a.i.  Justification for primary outcome.   Patients in the intervention arm may choose one of a 
number of behaviors to work on, with no o bvious common outcome across all potential behaviors (for example, 
someone who quits smoking has probably improved her/his cardiovascular risk even if s/he gains 10 pounds). 
Thus, a direct measure of risk is needed, and FRS is the best validated of these.  Also, we have experience 
with successfully improving FRS in coaching interventions  (3).    
D.8.b.  Secondary measures.  Several measurements will be made that are not inputs  to the primary 
outcome  (FRS) .  Some are behavior change  outcomes of the study , some are designed to assess possible 
mechanisms of action of the intervention, and some are potential analytic covariates or population descriptors.  
D.8.b.i  Secondary Outcomes.   All secondary outcomes will be ascertained at all time points.  For 
each outcom e, the listed reference(s) refer to studies validating the measures.   We recognize that, given that 
different patients may choose different behaviors to change, that we will have diminishing power to see change 
in these behaviors ; nonetheless, the demonstr ation of modest, potentially not quite significant change across a 
number of behaviors is important confirmation of how any change in FRS may have occurred.  
D.8.b. i.a  Exercise.  One of the goals of the intervention will be to increase the amount of leisur e-
time exercise performed by [CONTACT_662608].  Leisure -time 
activity will be measured by [CONTACT_662609] l Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ) , a well -validated physical 
activity inventory commonly used in studies with the goal of changing leisure -time activity ( 70).  Results can be 
expressed as metabolic equivalents.  We selected this measure because it has been validated against a more 
objective method (i.e., accelerometer), yet it has the advantage of bei ng convenient and cost effective as a 
self-report method.  
 D.8.b. i.b. Caloric Intake .  The sentinel impact of diet on cardiovascular risk is weight loss ( 71), 
which leads to significant improvement in blood pressure and lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805].  Therefore, one measure of salutary diet 
14 
 change in this study will be weight.  We will measure height at baseline, allowing us to use body mass index as 
an estimate of appropriateness of weight for each individual.   To capture salutary dietary changes not 
encompassed by [CONTACT_330063] (e.g., decreased fat intake), we will use the Block Brief 2000 Food Frequency 
Questionnaire (FFQ), which was developed from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Surve y 
(NHANES) III food intake data (72 , 73). The questionnaire is a reliable and val id self -report dietary intake 
instrument, and provides information on intake of macronutrients, which will be our dietary outcomes.  We will 
measure saturated fat as our dietary change outcome.  
 D.8.b. ii. Cost.  The intervention, while not enormously expen sive because of its use of relatively 
affordable personnel, will not be trivially inexpensive.  In considering the implementation of GPC, stakeholders 
will want to know whether they are getting appropriate “bang for their buck.”  While full cost -effectiven ess 
analysis is beyond the scope of this proposal, we  will perform simple direct cost analysis of the intervention  so 
that appropriate cost -benefit analyses can be undertaken under separate funding should the intervention be 
effective.  Effects on utilizat ion will not be considered as part of this proposal.  We will measure only 
intervention -related labor for this study; our prior works shows that intervention -related capi[INVESTIGATOR_662563]  (11).  To measure hours required for th e intervention, 4 people will carefully log their 
hours in delivering the intervention (including development) in a spreadsheet.  The group interventionist will log 
time associated with performing and preparing for group sessions; the LPN will log phone ca ll time and any 
time associated with documentation for the phone call; the RA will log only that time spent scheduling group 
sessions; and [CONTACT_662624] will log supervisory time.  Costs will be determined by [CONTACT_662610]/scal e rate for the relevant person (using the appropriate fringe benefits multiplier).  Time spent 
on research activities  (ie, data collection and management)  will not be logged.  
D.8.b.iii . Process  variables.   We are interested in the contribution to GPC’s eff icacy, if any, of three  
process variables; group dynamics, and individual patient resilience.   
 D.8.b. i.a  Self -efficacy .  Self-efficacy involves a “judgment of one’s abilities to produce given 
attainments.”  Individuals who believe they possess the skill s necessary to achieve goals are more likely to 
adopt healthy behaviors ( 40, 41 ).  Measures that measure self -efficacy across a range of behaviors are hard to 
find; our choice is the Patient Activation Measure (PAM ), a 13-item measure that assesses patient s’ 
knowledge, skills, beliefs and confidence for managing their health ( 74).  As a primary outcome measure in 
clinical trials, im provement in PAM scores has le d to improvement in va rious self -management behaviors; a  4-
6 point difference is felt to be clini cally meaningful  (75-78). 
 D.8.b. iii.a. Group Cohesion .   We will measure patients’ perception of their cohesion with the 
group in intervention patients only by [CONTACT_662611] .  The GCS  is a 6-item measure with 
good internal validity ( 53) and correlation to individual performance in workplace settings ( 35).  We will 
evaluate whether GCS  scores are related to improvements in FRS among intervention patients . 
 D.8.b. iii.b. Resilience.   We will evaluate whether Connor -Davidson Resilience Scale (CD-RISC) 
scores are related to improvements in the primary and secondary outcomes  (79).  This 25-item scale is one of 
the most widely used scale s to measure resilience in physical health settings.  A methodological review of 
existing resilience measuremen t scales (15) indicated that the Connor -Davidson Resilience scale (full 25 -item 
version) was one of three measures that received the best psychometric ratings  
 D.8.b.iii.c.. Med adherence.  A [ADDRESS_894150] response to the intervention, including race, age, marital status, education level, gender, adequacy of 
annual income, and number of people living in the household.  All will be measured at baseline by [CONTACT_6270] -report.  
Body Mass Index (BMI):  Patient is weighed using a digital scale that provides a print out.  The patient’s 
weight is entered from the printout (valid ra nge is from 100 -700 lbs). Height is measured twice and entered 
twice. If two heights are more than 0.5” different, then height is measured a 3rd time. Weight is then entered a 
2nd time from the printout (i.e., a real -time double data entry).  If the two we ights are not exactly the same, the 
RA chooses the correct weight.  The two closest heights & the correct weight are used to calculate BMI.   BMI 
will be collected in person at the enrollment and 6 month visits with the research assistant.     
 
D.8.b.v.  O ther Measures.  Short Form Health Survey (SF -1)36: question 1 on self -rated general healthPatient 
Heath Questionnaire (PHQ -8) 37 to measure current depression Tobacco Use/Smoking:   Measure from the 
CDC Adult Tobacco Survey38 asking if they have ever smoked  (100 cigarettes in your entire lifetime) and a 
15 
 second question on current smoking (in the last 7 days) from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System 
(BRFSS) 39Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT -C)40: a 3 question alcohol screen that ca n help 
identify hazardous drinkers for those with active alcohol use disorders (including alcohol abuse or 
dependence).Physical Activity (Exercise Vital Sign)41: Two questions to measure days and minutes per day an 
individual engages in moderate to strenuo us exercise.   Pain:   Three questions on the number of days pain 
interfered with your life within the past 30 days (question from the CDC HRQOL Healthy Days Symptoms 
Module42), the amount of pain today (EuroQol EQ -5D-5L 43),  and pain intensity (VA numeric rating scale from 
[ADDRESS_894151] pain imaginable44) Sleep:   4 questions assessing quality of sleep  
 
D.9. DATA ANALYSIS.  
D.9.a. Descriptive statistics . Descriptive statistics, including graphical displays, will be used to summarize 
all study variabl es overall and by [CONTACT_662612]. Evidence of imbalance in baseline characteristics will be 
noted and discussed as to whether they are clinically significant.  As recommended by [CONTACT_662613] (80), 
we will consider sensitivity analyses adjusting for th ese baseline characteristics to ensure that an observed 
intervention effect is not due to this baseline imbalance.  We will construct individual and mean trajectory plots 
of the longitudinal outcome variables (e.g., FRS) to understand their general trends over the study period. In 
addition, we will explore the variability and correlation structure of the longitudinal outcome variables.  All 
statistical analyses will be performed using the SAS software package; the Durham HSR&D COE maintains 
the current SAS release on our system.  
D.9.b. Missing Data.  Because the main pr edictors of interest, intervention arm  and demographics, are 
collected at baseline, we do not anticipate much missing data in these variables. There may be missing values 
in the outcome measure s due to drop -out, a missed interim assessment, or item non -response. Given a 
thorough understanding of the missing data mechanism, it is possible to use all of the available information in  
analysis, rather than using only subjects with completely observed  information . Our main analysis technique, 
general linear mixed models via maximum likelihood estimation, implicitly accommodates missingness when 
missingness is due either to treatment, to prior outcome, or to other baseline covariates included in the mod el 
(81), defined as missing at random (MAR). Therefore, inferences will be valid even if we have differential 
dropout by [CONTACT_105150].  If the missing v alues are related to other measured patient factors, such as age, 
gender, or employment status, then multiple imputation (MI) provides a framework for being able to incorporate 
information from these auxiliary variables while still preserving a parsimoniou s main treatment effect model 
(82) and is described as a significant advantage in recommendations from Panel on Handling Missing Data in 
Clinical Trials (2010)  (83). Depending on the type and scope of missi ng data MI will be conducted  via the SAS 
procedure PROC MI or the SAS macro IVEware ( http://www.isr.umich.edu/src/smp/ive/ ) (84).  If the probability 
of dropout is related to the actual missing response (which is unobserved because it is missing) or to other 
unobserved quantities, the missing data due to dropout is considered missing not at random (MNAR) or 
nonignorable  (85).  There is a possibility that data may be MNAR, and we propose as additional sensitivity 
analyses to explore MNAR methods, including selection and pattern -mixture models as recommended by 
[CONTACT_662614] ( 86).  
D.9.c. Intent -to-Treat Analysis.  All of the proposed primary and secondary analyses focus on the effe ct of 
GPC as compared to usual care. We, therefore, plan to use the intent -to-treat assumption for all analyses.  
D.9.d. Primary Analysis . The GPC vs usual care comparison in Framingham risk sco re change from 
baseline to month 6 will be examined with the following  general linear mixed model,  
Yijt = β 0 + β 1int*month6  + β 2month12   + β 3int*month12  + β 4site + β 5gender  + β 6smoking  + c jint*month6,  
where Y ijt is Framingham risk score for subject i in group j at t=month0, month6. We will estimate the 
parameters in the model using the SAS procedure MIXED ( Cary, NC), and we will test to see if there is a 
difference in mean FRS change at month 6 between the GPC and usual care arm, i.e., β 1 < 0.  The way time is 
coded in this model is often referred to as a constrained longitudinal data model (cLDA ) (87) in wh ich the 
month  [ADDRESS_894152], the cLDA model is comparable to an ANCOVA model; the two models 
are equivalent when there is no missi ng data.  However, unlike an ANCOVA, subjects who are missing the 
month 6 measurement are included in the model because baseline is part of the response vector.  As 
recommended by [CONTACT_662615] (80),  the model will also be adjusted for stratification variables of site, gender, and 
smoking status for improvement in precision.  We will use an unstructured covariance to account for the 
correlation between repeated measurements, and we include a group -level random effect  for intervention arm 
16 
 patients , ci, to account  for the intra-class correlation between patients in the same prevention group.   Similar 
procedures will be used to assess change through month 12 as a secondary analysis.  
D.9.e. Aim 2 Analyses . Similar to the FRS, the secondary outcomes are all continuous  and measured at 
baseline, month 6, and month 12.   Analyses of these outcomes will thus proceed as describe above for FRS.   
D.9.f. Aim 3 Analyses.   The analyses for Aim 3 will only include the intervention arm patients and will be 
exploratory in nature.  The primary outcome for these analyses will be change in FRS from baseline to month 
6.  We will consider multiple ways of characterizing group cohesion, including: each individual’s group 
cohesion score at the last group session; each individual’s change i n group cohesion from the first to the last 
group session; and, the mean group cohesion score at the last group session.  The relationship between 
change in FRS and group cohesion will be examined with a linear mixed -effects model, where additional 
predict ors will include gender, smoking status, site, race, and age.  A random effect for group membership will 
be included in the model to account for the intra -class correlation between patients in the same prevention 
group.  Because the main predictors in thes e analyses are measured throughout the intervention, these 
analyses may be more impacted by [CONTACT_210339] -out or missed interim assessments than the Aim 1 and 2 analyses.  
We plan to use multiple imputation as the primary approach for handling missing data for the Aim 3 analyses.  
D.9.e. Sample Size Calculations. The primary aim  is to determine if there is a significant GPC vs usual 
care improvement in the mean FRS change from baseline to month 6.  The clinically relevant mean FRS 
change is 2.0%. We assumed that FRS  is normally distributed, and set the type -I error rate at α = 0.05 and the 
type-II error rate at β = 0.20, representing power at 80% to detect significant differences.  
To take the intra -class correlation (ICC) among the group members in the GPC into consi deration, we 
applied the sample size procedures for group -randomized designs of Donner and Klar (88). Let m be the 
number of participants in each of the prevention coaching groups, and let ρ represent the ICC among the 
members of the group. In general, the  minimum number of participants in each treatment arm is given by,  
n = (Z1- α/2 + Z1-β)2 (2σ2) [1 + ( m-1)ρ] / (μ GPC – μUC)2. 
Here, Zp is the p-th percentile from the standard normal distribution, while μ GPC  and μUC is the anticipated 
mean change for the G PC and usual care arms, respectively. However, this formula is not quite right for this 
study – the control condition is usual care, and no ICC is anticipated among its members. As a result, the 
formula is modified to,  
n = (Z1- α/2 + Z1-β)2 {σ2 + σ2 [1 + ( m-1)ρ]} / (μ1 - μ2)2. 
The first σ2 in the braces corresponds to the variance for the usual care control group, while the σ2 [1 + ( m-1)ρ] 
incorporates the design effect in GPC intervention arm (only).  
The anticipated SD of the change in FRS was derived from  previous studies, with a value of 6.3%. We 
have  observed a baseline mean of 29% (SD = 14%) and a correlation between 6 month intervals of 0.9  (3). 
With respect to ρ, we have observed values in the previous studies of 0.03 (11).  Finally, we took m = 10 as  the 
average  size of the prevention coaching groups.  
Applying these assumptions results in a sample size of 180 per arm, or n=360 patients total.  We 
further inflate the sample size to account for a possible 10% attrition rate by [CONTACT_941] 6 -month follow up .  Therefore, 
we plan to enroll n=[ADDRESS_894153] a 2.0% between -arm difference in the change from 
baseline to month with 80% power and a type -I error of 5%.  
D.10. DATA MANAGEMENT AND QUALITY CONTROL  
D.10.a . Data Management Procedures .  We will use  a series of asynchronously connected database 
applications , over which a comprehensive data model will be deployed. Each database application will function 
independently as a discrete system. All data transactions within and between subsystems will run th rough 
secure transactions to ensure database integrity and privacy.  Study data will be maintained on secure servers 
for the duration of the study and as long  after the completion of the study as required by  [CONTACT_662616].  Al l study data will be backed up on a nightly, monthly, and annual schedule.  
All server hardware has built -in redundant systems. Technicians will constantly monitor server hardware, 
operating system and database service performance. Workstations, laptops, a nd any other devices will be 
supported  in order to ensure high performance and secure operation. The primary database technology will be 
Microsoft SQL Server. All automated systems will run using the Microsoft SQL Server Management Agent. 
Automated process es will be monitored daily. The system will be configured to notify the HSR&D IT Group if 
an automated process fails to run successfully. The data collected during in -person interviews will be entered 
directly into our third party survey application named “DatStat Illume” running on an encrypted, password -
protected laptop ( www.datstat.com/ ). This survey application has been developed using Microsoft Visual 
[ADDRESS_894154] used similar methods of data entry in our prior studies.  
D.10.b. Data Quality .  Use of the abov e electronic data management system  will aid the research 
assistant (RA) conducting study visit to monitor which data collection instruments and questions have been 
completed by [CONTACT_102].  Though the computerized auditing procedure, the RA will determin e if all questions 
have been answered.  If not, the subject will be given the opportunity to answer questions.  As with all study 
components, the study patient will have the opportunity to decline to answer any questions.  Before the end of 
the study visit , the RA will complete a checklist to ensure that all measurements are completed.  
Study implementation and quality assurance methods that we will be employed include: 1) careful 
scheduling and timely monitoring of the planned visit schedule to be certain t hat complete visits do occur; 2) 
collection of contact [CONTACT_662617]; 3) prompt rescheduling of missed study visits; 
and 4) review and documentation of the reasons for missed visits that do occur.  We will also review individua l 
patient data promptly to identify problems or missing values that can be completed by [CONTACT_6492] -up. 
D.10.c. Masking Procedures.   All personnel will be unblinded to arm assignment EXCEPT (1) the 
Research Assistant gathering outcomes data, and (2) [CONTACT_213554] .  The purpose of keepi[INVESTIGATOR_662564]. Jackson 
blinded is to have him available to resolve issues regarding individual patients, where knowledge of arm 
assignment might compromise the unbiased nature of the decision.  The purpose of unblinding [CONTACT_74226] is 
to all ow him to use clinical judgment regarding adverse events or other clinical  situations . 
E.  DISSEMINATION AND IMPLEMENTATION  
 Beyond the usual scientific presentations, our partnership with NCP presents us with a unique 
opportunity for rapid dissemination o f our intervention, should it be effective.  Our intervention was developed 
in direct partnership with NCP, and they had significant creative input into the intervention content.  Also, our 
interventionists are mirror images of the HBCs hired by [CONTACT_662618], and NCP 
retains significant control over the roles of the HBCs at the facilities.  Thus, if the intervention appears to 
improve primary prevention, NCP may use its influence over the HBCs to strongly suggest and support the 
implementation of the GPC intervention.  Additionally, [CONTACT_74226] has  experience in implementation of prior 
group interventional studies —he is currently assisting VISN 7 in implementing shared medical appointments in 
diabetes —and he will be willing and able  to do the same for this intervention.  Finally, CIH, which maintains a 
website, frequently leads trainings supporting Primary Care -Mental Health Integration, and hosts a VA mail 
distribution list (Mental and Behavioral Health in PACT), will further support  dissemination of successful 
findings in collaboration with NCP.  
F. PROJECT MANAGEMENT PLAN  
We will recruit a total of 400 patients from the 2 participating sites (Durham, Buffalo ) over a 24-month 
period.  This will lead to at most 1200 patient encounters over the 2 years of enrollment plus follow -up for the 
study, or approximately 2.5 encounters per day.  We propose a 48-month  study (a Gantt chart is below).  We 
request  six months to finalize the interventions, protocols, and train personnel.   There will b e [ADDRESS_894155].  Based on our prior experience on group visit studies, 
we will enroll 4 patients per week for a total of 400 patients in 24 months. Patients will then be followed for a 
total of 12 months.  The final 12 months of the grant will also be devoted to planning analyses, writing data 
analysis programs, preparing data for archiving, and preparing reports.  
18 
  
 1-6 
month  7-12 
month  13-18 
month  19-24 
month  25-30 
month  31-36 
month  37-42 
month  43-48 
month  
Intervention programming  *        
Hiring, training  *        
Patient Recruitment   * * * *    
Intervention   * * * * *   
Follow -up visits    * * * * *  
Data entry & cleaning    * * * * * * 
Analysis/Manuscripts        * * 
Protection of Human Su bjects  
A. Risks to Human Subjects  
1. Human Subjects Involvement and Characteristics.  
 This study will involve human subjects who participate in a randomized controlled trial. We plan to 
enroll 400 subjects (200 from the Durham VAMC, and 200 total from Buffalo a nd Syracuse VAMCs). We will 
enroll subjects from the overall populations at these VAMCs.  Inclusion  criteria will be  a diagnosis of 
inadequately controlled hypertension, or inadequately controlled dyslipi[INVESTIGATOR_035], or current smoking.   We will 
exclude patients  any personal history of CAD or other major cardiovascular disease , cerebrovascular disease , 
peripheral arterial disease,  or diabetes .  We will also exclude patients with other severe intercurrent illness or 
poor life expectancy, including any malignancy  being treated except for hormone treatment for breast or 
prostate cancer , renal dialysis or cirrhosis of the liver , psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_854] [ADDRESS_894156] that is not biologically relevant to what we are trying to 
evaluate.    
2. Sources of Materials.  
 The following human subjects related data elements will be collected for this study, with the source(s) 
of information noted:  
• Diagnoses, smoking status,  medications, previous blood pressure, previous labs (VA electronic medical 
record)  
• Subject demographic and clinical characteristics, including age  (collected as date of birth) , gender, race 
/ ethnicity, income, education level, employment, disability stat us, and marital status (subject self -
report)  
• Subject health -related information, including patient activation, general health, diet and physical activity, 
smoking status (patient self -report)  
• Subject height, weight, and blood pressure (measured by [CONTACT_662619]); subject cholesterol 
(measured by [CONTACT_662620])  
 Only individuals officially assigned to the study team will have access to individually identifiable 
information about human subjects. This will include the principal investigators, co-investigators, project 
coordinators, statisticians, computer programmers, research assistants, coaches, and other appropriate staff. 
All of study team members will have completed VA’s required human subjects training and will be included on 
a staff list ing with the Durham, Buffalo, or Syracuse VAMCs IRBs, as needed.  
 Some data described above (i.e., health conditions noted in VA medical records) will be accessed from 
information already collected as part of usual care. All additional data collected from  subjects will be 
specifically for the proposed research project and not a part of clinical care.  
3. Potential Risks . 
• Physical Risks. We do not anticipate any significant physical risks to be associated with participation on 
this study. The focus of the inte rvention is helpi[INVESTIGATOR_662565].  This may include diets or exercise programs chosen by [CONTACT_659732]; while it is possible 
that exercise or physical activity can result in accidents, or in exacerbat ion of conditions such as arthritis 
19 
 and angina, each of these programs has their own set of criteria for excluding patients which we will not 
alter.  
• Psychological Risks. We also do not anticipate any substantial psychological risks to be associated with 
participation in this study. Our assessment s will not ask participants any questions traditionally thought of 
as uncomfortable, such as those relating to traumatic exposures or to their current mental health. While it is 
always possible that some participan ts may feel uncomfortable answering any questions  in an assessment, 
they will always be allowed to skip questions.  We will only ask questions that involve data that are 
important for study outcomes, and we will inform patients that they may refuse to answe r any questions, 
but still be involved in the study. Participants will  also be informed that if they choose to discontinue the 
study at any time, this will not interfere with their usual medical care.  
If a patient divulges suicidal ideation at any in perso n visit, a provider with VA privileges, either a mental 
health provider or [CONTACT_74226], will be asked to perform and document an assessment of the seriousness 
of the suicide risk; as a non -mental health provider, [CONTACT_74226] will use the structured VA suic ide 
assessment tool.  If no study provider is available, the patient will be escorted to the Emergency 
Department.  Patients found to have more than minimal risk of imminent suicide on assessment will be also 
escorted to the Emergency Department.  An adver se event will be reported within 5 days if the Emergency 
Department is involved, or if a privileged mental health provider determines that s/he provided therapeutic 
intervention that lowered the risk of suicide to where the patient is safe to go home.  
If a patient divulges suicidal ideation over the phone, a warm handoff will be conducted to the VA crisis 
line, and an adverse event will be reported within [ADDRESS_894157] more than minimal risk of lethality 
of threat on assessment will be also escorted to the Emergency Department.  An adverse event will be 
reported within 5 days if the Emergency Department is involved, or if a p rivileged mental health provider 
determines that s/he provided therapeutic intervention that lowered the threat of violence to where the 
patient is safe to go home.  
If a patient divulges homicidal ideation over the phone without an identifiable target, a w arm handoff will 
be conducted to the VA crisis line, and an adverse event will be reported within [ADDRESS_894158] the threatened individual.  
• Financial, Legal, or Other Risks. There are no financial or legal risks associated with  this study. Since 
personal data will be collected as part of this study, there is a risk of loss of confidentiality. However, we will 
take several measures to minimize this risk. First, we will only collect the data necessary for the study. 
Second, all el ectronic data will be stored on a secure VA server, rather than on individual desktop or laptop 
computers. Third, electronic study data will be kept in folders and databases that are only accessible to key 
personnel who are IRB -certified and whose job func tions require access to these data. Fourth, all paper 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_156837] (i.e., consent forms) will be stored in locked cabinets and offices. Any paper documents that 
must be transported to / from clinic enrollment sites will be carried in a locked briefcase.  
B.   Adequacy of Protection Against Risks  
1.   Recruitment and Informed Consent.  
 Participants will be recruited via a [ADDRESS_894159] received an “opt out” telephone call from a patient, a study team member 
20 
 will call to provide additional details about the study, assess the patient’s interest, and conduct a brief 
screening questionnaire to assess eligibility criteria that are not captured in VA electronic medical records. We 
will only ask a limited number of questions that are needed to determine study eligibility.  Eligible, interested 
participants will then be asked to meet a study team member at their clinic (in conjunction with a regularly 
scheduled visit whenever possible) for informed consent, HIPAA authorization, and completion of baseline 
assessments. We will  request a waiver of consent from the IRB to conduct recruitment activities described 
above, including identification of potential participants via ICD -[ADDRESS_894160] about the 
study to help ensure a fully informed decision.  As par t of the consent process, participants will be informed 
about the following (in accordance with VA IRB guidelines):  purpose of the study, principal investigator [CONTACT_403247], sponsor of the study, duration of the study, number of people involved in the st udy, activities involved in 
the study (including assessments, randomization, and possible interventions to which they may be assigned), 
risk and benefits of participating in the study, alternatives to participating in the study, information about how 
study  information will be kept confidential, costs (none) and compensation for study participation), participant 
rights to decline participation or withdraw from the study, and contact [CONTACT_91514].  
   Following informed consent patients wil l have all baseline measures obtained in person including surveys, 
height, weight, blood pressure, and lipid panel.  
2.   Protections Against Risk.  
 We do not anticipate any significant physical, psychological, financial, or legal risks with participation i n this 
minimal risk study. In order to minimize any risks regarding privacy of individuals and confidentiality of data, we 
will take specific measures to protect both paper and electronic data. Except when required by [CONTACT_2371], participants 
will not be identifi ed by [CONTACT_2300], social security number, address, telephone number, or any other direct personal 
identifier in study records disclosed outside VA Health System. All electronic data will be stored on secure VA 
servers in folders and databases accessible only to study personnel whose job functions require access to this 
information. We will minimize the use of paper data collection by [CONTACT_662621], baseline and follow -up assessments, and intervention tracking directly in to a computer database. 
Any paper -based documents (i.e., copy of consent form) will be stored in a locked filing cabinet in a locked 
office. We have used these data security procedures successfully in multiple prior studies.  
 We will follow IRB -specified p rocedures for reporting adverse events to the VA IRB.  
C.   Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to Human Subjects and Others  
 It is possible that participants may not experience any direct benefit from participating in this study, and this 
will be clearly stated in the informed consent document. Participants may experience benefits from the group 
prevention intervention, but we view this trial with equipoise and will not lead participants to believe that they 
will certainly derive benefit . Participa tion in this study will also lead to information that will help others in the 
future. This study is of minimal risk to participants, involving no invasive testing and not interfering with usual 
medical care. Therefore we believe the risks to subjects are r easonable in relation to the anticipated benefits to 
research participations or others.  
D.   Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained  
 This study will be the first to examine an intervention a group problem -solving intervention for primary 
prevention. Fin dings will provide information about the logistics, feasibility, and effectiveness of the intervention 
across VHA.  This study is a minimal risk study and because of the potential benefits to both patients and VHA, 
we judge the risks to subjects to be reas onable in relation to the importance of knowledge that reasonably may 
be expected to result from the study.   
E.   Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
 Veterans of both genders and all racial and ethnic groups will be eligible to participate in the study.  
 Historically, this study group has had great success in minority enrollment at the Durham VAMC; we 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_662566] 40 -50% African -American subjects, whi ch is slightly higher than the prevalence in our overall 
patient population.  Due to our having a Women’s Health Clinic at Durham, we are able to enroll approximately 
10% women in most studies in our research unit.  We expect similar results in Upstate New  York, 
understanding that minority enrollment will be somewhat lower due to a lower prevalence of minority status in 
the overall population; nonetheless, our race -blind, outreach -based enrollment approaches will likely result in 
minority enrollment 5 perce ntage points or so above the underlying prevalence in the population.  
21 
  
F.  Data Security Addendum for IRB.   In this two -site study, all data will reside behind the VISN 6 firewall; 
Buffalo personnel will be given access to study -specific VISN 6 secure data  sites and all data will be entered 
directly to the Durham VAMC.  This eliminates need for data transfer within the VA and thus minimizes security 
risks.  
 
Paper files will be stored in Rm 636 of the Legacy building, VA leased and approved space.  
 
All inter vention software and all databases will be managed using Illume software, as with all other HSR&D 
projects.  No data will be stored on PC hard drives; only servers will be used for data storage.  No mobile 
devices are used.  All servers are located behind two layers of secure doors on VA leased space on the 6th 
floor of the Legacy building (see page 14 for more information about server security).  The server name [CONTACT_662622]:  vhadurhsrdfile1 \create \GPS.  Data will be destroyed in accordance with VA p olicy.  As soon as 
researchers are no longer members of the study team their access to study data will be removed.  Any 
information security breaches will be reported per VA policy.   
 