 Official Study Title: Gabapentin for Relapse Prevention: Alcohol Withdrawal Effects [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] PI: [INVESTIGATOR_634855], MD Document Date: 10/16/2014  
RESEARCH STRATEGY  
 
Significance  
 
While it is estimated that up to 20 million people meet criteria for alcohol use disorders only 20% of them 
receive treatment and , of that number , only 20% (or less than 1 million individuals) receive medication to help 
them with maintaining abstinence or reducing drinking. There are many reasons for this , but a particularly 
salient one is that currently available medications are n ot efficacious for  everyone and/ or might be costly , 
contraindicated,  or not well tolerat ed. It has also been recognized that many “treatment failures” occur during 
the first few months of treatment. So there is a great opportunity to individualize medications  based on subject 
profiles  (personalized medicine) , and to use medications that are well tolerated and not costly . Some examples 
of this are the use  of serotonin acting drugs  for subtypes of alcoholics based on stage of onset  (Johnson , 2000 ; 
Kranzler , 2011 ; Pettinati, 2000 ) and/or genetic predictors of response to these drugs  (Johnson, 2011 ; Kranzler, 
2011 ) or to naltrexone (Anton, 2008 ; Oslin, 2003 ). 
 
One “phenotype /subtype” of alcohol dependence  that has been understudied  is individuals with  alcohol 
withdrawal  syndrome  (AWS)  (Schuckit, 1998) . While the quantity and frequency of drinking might predict who 
is “at ri sk” for AWS, there is considera ble variation (some of which is likely genetic ) as to who will, or will not, 
experience AWS upon the  cessation of drinking.  Over half of inpatient alcoholi cs (Caetano, 1998) and  35% of 
community  alcoholics  reported AW symptoms, and these individuals had a higher rate of alcohol problems at 
follow -up (Schuckit, 2003) . Similarly, our experience suggests that those with previous medicated detoxes 
relapse quicker after drinking cessation  (Wright , 2007) . While up to 30% of alcoholics presenting for clinical 
trials (who are similar to those seen in addiction outpatient clini cs and in primary care)  have acute  AWS , it has 
been recognized that lower grade AWS might be present, and last a longer period of time, in considerably  
more individuals. Many individuals also stop or cut -down drinking prior to initiating treatm ent, and may 
experience subtle to  florid AWS without being diagnosed. In addition , some undergo self-detoxification  by 
[CONTACT_634876] . In three of our recent studies , up to 60% of  individuals  met 
DSM -IV criteria  for past AWS.  In individuals wi th past or current AWS , a constellation of problems including 
irritability, anxiety, dysphoria, and difficulties with concentration and insomnia  might persist for a period of time 
after the cessation of drinking . Some have labeled the se lingering symptoms that occur after the immediate 
alcohol cessation period as “prot racted withdrawal”  (Bonnet, 1999 ). In general, this constellation of symptoms  
and any “desire to drink”  emanating from them  is not likely to be impacted by [CONTACT_14181] -reinforceme nt or anti -craving 
medications, such as naltrexone, which is likely to target more reward -based craving. Consistent with this 
thought, AWS is thought to be mediated by G ABA and glutamate brain signaling,  in contrast to  reward -based 
craving which is  more likely mediated by [CONTACT_5060][INVESTIGATOR_634856]  (Gass & Olive, 2008 ; Littleton, 
1998 ). Therefore, medications that target or “normalize” brain GABA and glutamate systems might be 
particularly useful in the treatment of AWS an d, by [CONTACT_66250] , in those who have previously shown  the 
biological propensity to experience alcohol withdrawal symptoms  (Addolorato, 2011 ; Krystal, 2006 ). 
 
Studies  have  repeatedly shown that anticonvulsants (which  generally affect  GABA -glutamate  systems) hav e 
been useful for the treatment of acute AWS (Book & Myrick, 2005 ; Leggio, 2008 ; Malcolm, 2001 ) but they have 
been studied  less for relapse prevention and chronic  treatment. One exception  is topi[INVESTIGATOR_634857]. W hile not studied  extensively  in acute alcohol withdrawal , topi[INVESTIGATOR_634858]  (Johnson, 2007 ). While not specifically studied , its 
efficacy might be  partially  based on suppression of subtle AWS at cessation of drinking . Although  efficacious , 
topi[INVESTIGATOR_634859] (Goldberg & Brudick, 2001; Martin 
et al, 1999) , especially during rapid dose -titration,  which  limit its us e. Topi[INVESTIGATOR_634860] , which may be compromised by [CONTACT_634877] . On the other hand , our group  (Myrick, 2009 ) 
and others (Mariani, 2006 ) have found gabapentin , a medication  that putatively modulates both GABA and 
glutamate tone , to be efficacious for  acute AWS and  to play a role in relapse prevention  (Furieri & Nakamura -
Palacios, 2007 ) - especially in those with either acute  or historical  AWS  (Anton, 2009 ; Anton, 2011 ). It is also 
safe to use in alcoholics, and  appears to have limited  or no  cognitive effects during treatment  (Goldberg & 
Brudick, 2001 ; Schacht, 2011 ), no adverse  interaction with alcohol (Bisaga, 2006 ; Myrick, 2007 ; Myrick, 2009 ), 
and total renal excre tion. 
 
While the efficacy of gabapentin in alcoholics with AW history based on normalization of GAB A/glutamate 
signaling  has considerable appeal and consistency, it should be noted that GABA and glutamate systems are 
ubiquitous in the brain and li kely sub -serve a  number of neuro physiol ogical processes  including reward or 
reinforcement based systems  as well . Also, in addition to effects on the GABA/glutamate systems , gabapentin 
has other pharmacological effects  on calcium ion -gated channels, some of which might form the  basis of its 
analgesic effects  (Dooley, 2007 ) and/or its effect on GABA/glutamate transmission (Sills, 2006 ). Therefore, it is 
possible that gabapentin could have effects on alcohol cue -induced craving, reward -based drinking, and 
affective modulat ion that go beyond its ability to normalize  putative  protracted abstinence symptoms. For 
instance,  it has been reported that gabapentin  blocks affective cue -induced alcohol craving  (Mason, 2009 ) and 
might reduce drinki ng through a mechanism of sleep normalization  (Karam -Hage & Brower, 2000 ; Karam -
Hage & Brower, 2003 ), especially in those with repeated medical detoxifications (Malcolm, 2007 ), although the 
data on this are not consistent (Brower, 2008 ). Our initia l data  (see below)  while not testing  gabapentin  by [CONTACT_5071] , 
does point to possible  efficacy for relapse prevention but only in those with a n AW hi story . These findings  are 
consistent with our earlier work  on gabapentin’s efficacy  in AWS  (Myrick, 2007) , its related neurobiological 
substrate, and p otentially lingering effects, and are also consistent  with animal work (Roberto, 2008 ). 
Nevertheless, these preliminary re sults need to be replicated, clarified, and expanded in  a prospectiv e study  
directly evaluating the efficacy of gabapentin  alone  and focusing on those with a history of  AW who are  most  
likely to benefit . Finding  a unique and efficacious treatment for a subgroup of particularly vulnerable alcohol 
dependent individuals, those with a history of AWS, is of great need and clinical importance . 
 
If confirmed in a prospective , placebo -controlled , trial that gabapentin is useful for relapse prevention in a  
subgroup of alcohol dependent individuals with a history of AWS , it would provide another treatment option for 
million s of Americans and others worldwide. In addition, if we can determine that changes in brain GABA and 
glutamate underlie gabapentin’s efficacy,  it would suggest that other medications having similar e ffects  could 
also be useful, while at the same time providing translational support for  basic  science information on the 
underlying n eurobiology of alcohol dependence and withdrawal.  Finally, by [CONTACT_634878], the opportunity to define 
which individual (s) might  respond to gabapentin (personali zed medicine) could be evaluated.  
 
Preliminary Data  Supporting Significance  
 
In an exploratory study  (study 1)  our group evaluated a commercial procedure (the combined use of acute 
flumazenil and six weeks of gabapentin) being marketed for alcohol dependence  (Anton, 2009 ). While initially 
agnostic about the utility of this approach , it provided the opportunity to explore the use of gabapentin in a 
structured fashion with the a priori hypothesis that this treatment would work, if at all, only in those with pre -
treatment alcohol withdraw al symptoms. The theory underly ing the use of IV flumazenil was that 1) it has be en 
shown in a few, but not all, studies to ameliorate AW symptoms and 2) that it reversed the ch ronic effect of 
alcohol on GABA -A recep tors (Biggio, 2007 ; Sanna, 2003 ) allowing them to be more responsive to GABA 
signaling . Since gabapentin had  been shown previously to be useful for the treatment of AW (Myrick, 2009 ), 
and as it purportedly normalize s GABA/glutamate balance/tone in the brain , it was hypothesized to work in 
conjunction w ith flumazenil  to “reset” and “maintain” normal GABA and glut amate tone resulting in less craving 
and relapse. Armed wi th this information , we randomized 60 alcohol d ependent individuals in a double blind 
fashion to receive either active flumazenil infusions  (2 consecutive days)  and gabapentin up to 1200 mg/day or 
their matching place bos for approximately six weeks . Individuals who drank up to 72 hours prior to 
randomization were evaluated for alcohol withdrawal using the Clinical Institute Withdra wal Assessment – 
Revised (CIWA -Ar) (Sullivan, 1989 ) and u rn randomized  to the medication groups based on a CIWA -Ar score 
(below or > 7), with o nly [ADDRESS_847938] two days of treatment and drinking was assessed  weekly  by [CONTACT_527936] -back 
calendar method , with %CDT  (a marker of relapse drinking)  measured at baseline, week -3, and end of study . 
We found a significant (p= 0.021) effect favoring act ive treatment  in reducing CIWA -Ar scores in the fi rst two 
days of treatment . Importantly , we found no main effects of medication treatment on any drinking measure but 
a significant interaction of medication gro up by [CONTACT_094] -randomization AW score , such that percent days abstinent 
(p= 0.0006), percent  of individuals  completely abstinent (p=0.002), time to first heavy drinking day (p= 0.06)  
and %CDT (p=0.001) all favored the active medication group in  those with  high pre-randomization CIWA -Ar 
scores  (about 20% of subjects) . Findings were similar when  expanding and comparing those with and without 
a positive DSM -IV AW item (43% of subjects)  (see Figure 1 ). The odds ratio for DSM -IV AW positive 
individuals  not relapsing when treated with active medication vs. placebo was 3.2 (95% CI 1.4 - 7.4). Also, 
while there was more  baseline drinki ng in those who were DSM -IV AW positive , co-varying various baseline  
drinking  and severity (ADS, OCDS) measures did not impact the significance  of the active medication  vs. 
placebo effect , suggesting it was the AWS history itself that was i mportant in predicting outcome  and not 
recent drinking  levels  or alcohol severity . This novel finding of DSM -IV positive AW subjects  possibly  
responding to gabapentin  alone  opens a treatment option for more individuals  and is the basis of this  proposal.  
 
FIGURE 1.  Propor tion non -relapsed based on  pre-randomization  DSM IV history of AWS  (negative or positive)  
treated with Placebo or a combination of IV Flumzenil (FMZ) plus oral Gabapentin (GBP)  
 
 
 
In another  study (study 2) funded by [CONTACT_50533], we evaluated the effect of adding gabapentin to naltrexone, 
compared to naltrexone alone or placebo with the hypothesis that gabapentin given during the first 6 weeks of 
a 16-week naltrexone  trial would improve drinking ou tcomes based on reduction of early abstinence  effects  
(sleep problems, irritability, etc.) . In this study  (Anton, 2011 ), 150 alcohol dependent indi viduals were 
randomized to  naltrexone (50 mg/day) and gabapentin (1200 mg/day), naltrexone alone plus  placebo, or 
double placebo. Gabapentin/placebo was given for 6 weeks and naltrexone/placebo was given for 16 weeks. 
Individuals received Combined Be havioral Intervention (CBI), Medical Manageme nt (MM) , and assessments 
as described  in the COMBINE Study (Anton, 2006 ). The initial results favored the naltrexone -gabapentin group 
over the other two groups (p values 0.001 to 0.04 for different drinking outcomes), especially during the 
gabapentin ph ase (first 6 weeks) of the study. However,  
effects faded over ti me once gabapentin was stopped . 
Further exploratory analysis of the data suggested that 
gabapentin had the greatest efficacy in those with a 
history of AWS (see Anton, 2011) . Based on study 1 
results , and to obtain  further  preliminary data for this 
proposal, we recently reanalyzed the data based on 
meeting DSM -IV AW criteria (SCID AW Item, current 
and historical). Within the group who were positive for a 
history of AW (56% of subjects) , the effect of gabapentin 
over placebo  on the percent subjects with no heavy 
drinking day was p=0.017 with an OR of 4.4 (95% CI 2.4 
– 7.9). For illustration, time to relapse to a heavy drinking 
day is depi[INVESTIGATOR_514979] [ADDRESS_847939] of ntx/gbp  in those without  an AW histo ry and/or 
those with an AW history treated with naltrexone alone  
(p>0.05, data not shown).  Also, although DSM -IV AW 
positive individuals had higher baseline drinking and 
severity, co-varying these variables did not significantly 
alter medication efficacy , findings consistent with study 1.  
FIGURE 2.  Proportion non -relapsed with a pre -
randomization DSM -IV history of AW treated with 
placebo or naltrexone plus gabapentin.  
 
 
 
Also, using a “Reasons for Drinking Scale”  that we devise d to evaluate why people drink: items dealing with 
pleasure,  liking high,  stress, feeling normal, habit , and relief (avoiding feeling bad, nervous, irritable, and 
insomnia), those scoring higher on “relie f drinking” responded better to naltrexone/ gabapentin than place bo or 
naltrexone alone (p=0.001). This also supports the idea that gabapentin works in those  with a history of  AW 
symptoms compared to those without.  
 
While  these studies suggest that  gabapentin is likely to be efficacious in relapse prevention and drinking -
reduction  in those with a history of AW symptoms , they are limited in several important wa ys: 1) gabapentin 
was not given by [CONTACT_5071] , 2) it was given for only 6 weeks  in study 2  and relapse occurred after it was 
stopped , 3) in study [ADDRESS_847940] -hoc. Therefore, it is important to do a proper  16-week  prospective placebo -controlled trial of gabapentin 
alone  in those with a  history of AW  in order to confirm its efficacy in this important subgroup of alcohol 
dependent individuals . This is the primary objective  of this proposal . 
 
As noted previously, g abap entin is thought to reduce brain  glutamate  (Cunningham, 2004 ; Errante & Petroff, 
2003 ) and increase brain GABA  (Loscher, 1991 ) perhaps through its action on voltage sensitive CA(2+) 
channels (Quintero, 2011 ; Sills, 2006 ) thereb y pote ntially rebalancing the dysregulated GABA/glutamate tone 
evident at  the cessation of drinking. We have  the opportunity to examine this issue  as it relates change during 
early abstinence,  relapse prediction, and gabapentin effectiveness . We can do this based on recent advances 
in magnetic resonance spectr oscopy (1H-MRS) that has allowed in vivo  measurement of both of these 
neurotransmitters in humans. Given th e recent recruitment of a world -renowned brain -imaging physicist, [CONTACT_634902], to our Institution and based on our pi[INVESTIGATOR_634861], we are confident that we 
can apply (1H-MRS) to this aim . Please see the  approach -methods section for our pi[INVESTIGATOR_634862] 1H-MRS to 
measure brain glutamate and GABA levels.  
 
Previous  1H-MRS studies have generally supported brain glutamate and GABA level disturbances in 
individuals with alcohol dependence (AD) but timing of measurement in relationship to alcohol use and 
abstinence as well as alcohol severity, brain area of measurement, sample size , smoking, sex,  and recent us e 
of benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_634863]. T he preponderance of studies have supported 
elevated cerebrospi[INVESTIGATOR_872] (Tsai, 1998 ) and anterior cingulate/prefrontal  (Frischknecht, 2010 ; Hermann, 2011 ; 
Lee, 2007 ; Thoma, 2011 ) glutamate /glutamine  levels in recently drinking AD’s relative to controls, while several 
showed changes over ti me during early abstinence (Frischknecht, 2010 ; Hermann, 2011 ; Mon, 2012 ; Umhau, 
2010 ). Several others showed no differences between AD and controls , perhaps because measurements were 
made in the occipi[INVESTIGATOR_307] l obe, had small sample sizes, used older measurement methods  or sampled later in 
abstinence  (Behar, 1999 ; Mason, 2006 ). Also, ACC gluta mate levels were  associated  with cognitive function 
during early abstinence (Lee, 2007 ) and craving after detoxification (Bauer et al, 2013) . Most germane to this 
proposal , Umhau (2010) reported that glutamate increased during early abstinence  (consistent with Mon , 
2012)  and that this increase was suppressed by [CONTACT_634879], a drug approved by [CONTACT_634880] .  
 
1H-MRS  of GABA is technically more challenging and less studied. A lthough one early study reported that AD 
had significantly less occipi[INVESTIGATOR_634864] (Behar, 1999 ), two subsequent studies failed to find 
significant differences in mean brain GABA between AD and controls (Mason, 2006 ; Mon, 2012 ). Close 
inspection of the (Mason, 2006 ) data, however,  suggest that GABA levels might differ by [CONTACT_634881], while smoking history was found to also affect  GABA level change over time. Intravenous ethanol 
reportedly decreases 1H-MRS GABA levels in social drinkers - interpr eted as a reflection of alcohol -induced 
GABA receptor sensitivity leading to down regulation of GABA production and release. While , to our 
knowledge , no one has studied the effect of  gabapentin  on brain glutamate/GABA  in alcoholics , gabapentin  
has been shown to increase b rain GABA levels in humans by 1H-MRS both with acute (Cai, 2012 ; Petroff, 
1996 ; Petroff, 2000 ) and chronic dosing  (Kuzniecky, 2002 ). Remarkably , those with the lowest basel ine levels 
(as might be found  during AW) showed the most increase (Petroff, 2000 ). However, there has been very little  
published data on the effect of gabapentin on human brain glutamate levels. The only existing study found that 
a single  gabapentin  dose  did not significantly impact g lutamate levels in healthy controls  (Cai, 2012 ). Data 
generated from the proposed study could therefore add to the literature by [CONTACT_634882].  
 
In sum, although studies of glutamate and GABA in AD have not been completely consistent, they clearly 
demonstrate that 1) 1H-MRS can be successfully applied to study this issue 2) that both systems might change 
over time with abstinence and/or with gabapentin treatment  in a similar fashion to acamprosate (Umhau, 2010 ) 
and 3) there is a need to study these systems specifically in those with a history of alcohol withdrawal as a 
prediction of medication response  and in the context of salient genetic dif ferences .  
 
Since more emphasis is being placed on personalized medicine (Collins, 2010 ) and given our experience with 
examining the effects of naltrexone based on genetic differences (Anton, 2008 ; Anton, 2012 ; Oroszi, 2009 ) and 
especially on br ain-imaging  genetics  (Schacht et al, 2013) , we also have the ability to explore whether genetic 
differences in specific GABA and glutamate receptors which have been linked to alcoholism might be 
associated with gabapentin response and/or, secondarily , with propensity  to experience AW. The focus, but 
not the limit, of this exploration will be on the GABRA 2 gene single nucleotide polymorphism ( SNP) rs279858 
in exon 5  of the gene that codes for the A2 subunit of the GABA receptor that is important for benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_634865] (Harris, 1998 ) and shifts duri ng alcohol use and withdrawal (Krystal, 2006 ; Sanna, 2003 ). Diversity of 
this SNP has been associated with alcohol dependence both on its own and as part of a haplotype strongly 
associated  with alcohol d ependence (and event related EEG oscillations in alcoholics ) (Edenberg, 2004 ), as 
well as  in a family based alcoholism study (Covault, 2004 ). Those who were h omozygous for the more 
common A (T) al lele had  greater responses to oral alcohol (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_252203] -Lagha, 2005 ) and those with at least  one 
copy of the A(T) allele reported  greater  alcohol su bject ive effects of IV alcohol (Roh, 2010 ). In addition, another 
study suggested variants at this locus not only corresponded with a family h istory of alcoholism but also with 
the level of impulsivity and with reward salience detected by [CONTACT_14548] (fMRI) (Villafuerte, 2012 ). Finally, a 
recent study found that this GABA2A SNP predicted relapse risk (Bauer , 2012).  Taken together this SNP, 
whether it has direct e ffects on GABA function or as  a tag SNP for other genetic variat ion, is a strong  candidate 
gene to investigate the  relationship between  AW and gabapentin response. DNA will be available to look at 
other SNP’s and/or for exon sequencing or to examine epi[INVESTIGATOR_634866]/effects in this region of the GABRA2  
gene. In pi[INVESTIGATOR_634867] 83 alcohol dependent C aucasian individuals and found allele 
frequenci es of rs279858 to be similar (A= 0.57; G=0.43) to that reported in HapMap (A=0.53;  G=0.47) with 
genotype  frequencies (AA= 0.33; AG=0.49; GG=0.18) also comparable to Hap Map (AA=0.30 ; AG=0.45; 
GG=0.25).  
 
For glutamate system  genes there is less reported with  regards to alcoholism heritability and/or alcohol effects . 
However, one focus of exploration could be on  the glutama te receptor 8 ( GRM 8 ) gene that  codes for a pre -
synaptic (group III) glutamate receptor found in br ain cortex/hippocampus  and expressed at nerve terminals 
that target subgroups of GABAergic neurons (Ferraguti, 2005 ). Agonists at this receptor have been shown to 
have anxiolytic effects (Palucha, 2004 ) and reduce alcohol intake and cue responding (Backstrom & Hyytia, 
2005 ). Most germane  for the current project is  a GRM8  SNP rs1361955 located in intron [ADDRESS_847941] activity in 
alcoholics (Chen, 2009 ) with the T allele carriers having greater EEG Theta activity than CC genotypes. Of 
interest, using 1H-MRS (similar to that pro posed here), a strong relationship was reported between brain 
glutamate concentration and frontal theta activity  (Gallinat, 2006 ) suggesting a link between genetics, 
glutamate activity and brain function. Similar to GABA , the DNA will be available to explore other gene receptor, 
enzyme, and transporter variants, along with exome sequenc ing and epi[INVESTIGATOR_634868]. In pi[INVESTIGATOR_634869] 83 individuals mention ed previously we 
genotyped the GRM8  rs1361955 SNP and found allele frequencies to be similar (C=0.60; T=0.40) to that 
reported in HapMap ( C=0.61;T=0.40) with genotype fr equencies (CC=0.40; CT=0.41; TT=0.19) also 
comparable to HapMap (CC=0.35; CT=0.52; TT=0 .13). 
 
By [CONTACT_634883], neurobiological measurement, and genetics i n a clinical trial of alcohol use 
disorder  there are scientific and translational synergies that are larger than the sum of the parts . This in 
addition to providing a critical need – better treatments for alcohol dependence – makes this study quite 
significant.  
 
 
 
Innovation  
 
This investigation addresses a number of novel and important issues. First and foremost there has never been 
a longer -term randomized clinical trial, to our knowledge, that has attempted  to improve relapse -risk based on 
a priori knowledge of AW history . This has enormous clinical importance for alcoholics that might be 
biologically  (perhaps genetically) prone to expe rience AW symptoms (a high relapse -risk group).  
Second, this study  is novel in tha t it could begin to aid in understanding  neurobiological  underpi[INVESTIGATOR_634870]  – thereby [CONTACT_634884]. Furthermore , the exploration of how several genes in these 
key biologi cal systems  which have been previously linked to alcohol dependence , or alcohol effects , 
might interact with brain chemical differences and medication efficacy  is highly nov el and points to a n 
enhanced  “personalized medicine” approach.  Finally, this highly translational approach could add significant 
information linking clinical and basic science findings.  
 
Approach  
 
General Design of the Study : Over  a 39-month enrollment period 19 0 sub jects will be recruited from both 
specific research advertisement and from our clinical program. After a minimum of 3 and maximum of 7 days of 
abstinence, 90 sub jects ( about 50% of those screened) who meet DSM -5 criteri a for both  alcohol use disorder  
AND a history of AWS ( DSM -5 AW Item  positive)  with CIW A-Ar scores < 10 , will receive gabapentin  (N=45) or 
matching placebo  (N=45)  for 16 weeks while receiving medical management (MM). Outcome will be assessed 
during this 16 -week treatment period and again at one month an d three months after the treatment period. 
Inclusion /exclusion criteria as follows are based on  previous studies b ut modified to focus on AW  symptoms.  
 
Inclusion Criteria:   
 Ages [ADDRESS_847942] 30 
days , who also meet a history of DSM -5 alcohol with drawal criteria .   
 Must be a ble to maintain sobriety for a minimum of 3 days as determined by [CONTACT_6270] -report, urinary EtG , and 
breathalyzer measurements  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
 Meets DSM -[ADDRESS_847943] report and urine drug screen   
 Meets DSM -[ADDRESS_847944] -traumatic stress syndrome, bipolar affective disorder, schizophrenia, 
or eating disorder or any other psychotic diso rder or neurocognitive disor der  
 Has current suicidal ideation or homicidal ideation.  
 Need for maintenance or acute treatment with any psychoactive medication including anti -seizure 
medications.  Use of alcohol medications (naltrexone, to pi[INVESTIGATOR_052], acamprosate, disulfir am) in last 30 d ays. 
 Clinically significant medical problems including  hepatocellular disease i ndicated by [CONTACT_634885] 3.0 times nor mal at screening and/or after 7  days abstinence  
 Sexually active fem ales of child -bearing pote ntial who are pregnan t (by [CONTACT_94984]), nursing, or not using a  
reliable form of birth control   
 Pending charges for a violent c rime (not including DUI offenses).   
 Does not  have a stable living situation   
 Has t aken gabapentin in the last month or experienced adverse effects from  it at any time  
 Has a CIWA -Ar score of 10 or more during assessment or history of AW seizures  or DT’s   
 For 1H-MRS , 1) metal in , or near , head 2)  significant claustrophobia or 3) inabilit y to lie still for up to 1 hour  
 
After initial phone screening, further in person screening will occur after signed informed consent (if their 
breathalyzer reading is zero). A urine drug screen will be obtained during the initial assessment day , and on all 
screening days  a breathalyze r me asurement will be done. Subjects  will have their blood drawn for a general 
health screen, liver function tests, gamma glutamyl -transferase (GGT) and carbohydrate deficient transferrin 
(%dCDT).  Also, on the first day , the DSM -5 criteria for alcohol use disorder  will be assessed with special 
attention to the criteria for AW. Historical symptoms of AW based on SCID interview will be recorded and a 
CIWA -Ar will be done. The CIWA -Ar will be repeated at each screening visit. Those that meet criteria for the 
DSM-5 AW item ( current or historical)  will be included  – we expect about 55% of screened subjects to meet 
these criteria  based on data from our [ADDRESS_847945] 400 subjects . A CIWA -
Ar score of  10 or more at any time  during screening  (5% of AW SCID positives  based on recent studies ), 
indicating the need for a more aggres sive medical detoxification  (Mayo -Smith, 1997; Saitz, 1998) , will be 
exclusionary and we will refer the subject for clinical care and/or provide short -term benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_050] 
(lorazepam) until further care can be arranged.  We feel that this is a fair compromise between appropriate 
subject selection, ethical treatment of subjects, and scientific integrity ( referring individuals for clinical care and 
not including participants taking benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_634871], 
GABA/glutamate levels, or interpretation of gabapentin response ).  
 
Study subjects will be asked to come into the clinic at least  2 times prior to randomization (with breathalyzer, 
CIWA -Ar, and urine EtG collected). During this time a full SCID, other questionnaires, a physical history and 
exam will be done.  Subjects who maintain sobriety for  at least 3  days will undergo a mass spectroscopy scan 
(1H-MRS for glutamate and GABA) immediately before receiving the first MM session and first dose of study 
medication.  We chose [ADDRESS_847946] results from previous work (Anton 2011) but not 
too long (no longer than 7 days) as to effect potential gabapentin  efficacy measurement and/or 
GABA/glutamate levels.  If they cannot maintain sobriety , or have a positive EtG on day 3 of abstinence , they 
will be given an additional chance to make the abstinence criteria before being excluded.  For smokers , time of 
the las t cigarette will be recorded and used as a covariate in the glutamate/GABA analysis , if necessary.  
 
Procedure for Pre -Study Evaluation :  
Subjects will receive all the pre -study assessment over a several day assessment period during the pre -
randomization abstinent period  (sobriety days 3 -7).  
  
General Assessment (non -hypothesis specific) : The purpose of these assessments are to provide a subject 
database which includes alcohol use history, levels of consumption,  smoking status,  psychosocial problems 
which  are alcohol related, family history of alcohol and psychiatric problems, employment and social support 
status, as well as general level of psychiatric symptoms and psychological distress. One purpose of these 
measurements will be to compare these salient subject variables across the treatment groups and to provide 
the data for covariate analysis if this becomes necessary because of chance non -random distribution. Another 
purpose of some of these ratings is to provide data for exploratory and/or explanatory  hypotheses regarding 
intermediary variables to explain gabapentin’s actions (such as change in mood, irritability, sleep etc.) on 
drinking behavior. Some variables such as cravi ng (OCDS) are secondary variables for main efficacy analysis.  
 
Instruments to be used for baseline (pre -study) assessment include : 
 
 Structur ed Clinical Interview for DSM -IV (SCID)  modified for DSM -5 
 Addiction Severity Index (ASI)  
 Alcohol Dependence Scale (ADS)  
 Form 90 (modified time line follow -back method for documenting alcohol consumption)  
 Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) and Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI)  
 The Obsessive Compulsive Drinking Scale  (OCDS)  
 The Drinker Inventory of Consequences (DrInC ) 
 Rand SF -36 
 Profile of Mood States (POMS)  
 Pi[INVESTIGATOR_33548] (PSQ)  
 Clinical  Institute for Withdrawal Assessment Scale – abbreviated -revised (CIWA -Ar) 
 SAFTEE Interview for emergent adverse events (side effects)  
 
Subject s will be assessed (see Table 1  on the following page ) by [CONTACT_634886] (MM) provider  (physician, nurse ) on weeks 1, 2, 3,  4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 16 similar to  the 
COMBINE study  (Anton, 2006 ). The MM provider will  evaluate any physical complaints and judge the 
probability of these being related to the stu dy drugs  using the SAFTEE interview .  In addition, physicians will 
be available t o see a subject  at all ti mes during the study. MM providers will follow the COMBINE Study 
manual for MM delivery (Pettinati, 2004 ) that emphasizes medication adherence, alcoho l education, health 
care review, side effect appraisal, and abstinence/non -relapse goals. MM providers will have GGT as well as 
%dCDT (Helander, 2010 ) available at specified weeks for progress feedb ack. The time line follow -back  
calendar drinking method will document daily self -reported drinking during the study. If a subject drops out of 
the study, the reason for this will be recorded on a “reason for termination" checklist.  Week -[ADDRESS_847947] “drops out” prior to that date. We have been successful 
in collecting up to 95% of all drinking data to minimize missing data biases.  
 
Two post -study follow -up asses sment interviews at 1 (week 20) and 3 (week 28) months after stud y completion 
will assess  alcohol use and psychosoc ial functio ning to evaluate sustained post -treatment efficacy effects. 
Subjects will be given $50 for comple ting the 16 -week visit, and 20,  28-week follow -ups (max. total $150) .   
 
Two scales that we have d eveloped and that might be useful to understand gabapentin’s mode of action, the 
Reasons for Drinking Scale (RDS) (see Pi[INVESTIGATOR_634872]) and the Medication Effect Scale (MES) (measures 
similar constructs as RDS during the course of the study) will be uti lized. The OCDS, POMS, and PSQ index 
will also be used to evaluate the effects of gabapentin on craving and aspects of “protracted withdrawal”.  
 
TABLE  [ADDRESS_847948] SCALE    X X X X X X X X X    
SAFTEE (for side effects)   X X X X X X X X X X    
POMS   X X X X X X X X X X    
PI[INVESTIGATOR_634873].   X X X X X X X X X X    
BDI/BAS   X   X  X  X  X  X X 
SCID -FULL   X             
ALCOHOL DEP. SCALE   X         X  X X 
ASI  X         X  X X 
RAND SF -36  X         X  X X 
FAMILY HX -FROM ASI   X             
DRINC*   X         X  X X 
MED. HX AND PHYSICAL   X             
BIOLOGICAL TESTS                
HEALTH PANEL  X      X    X    
LIVER FUNCTION TESTS  X    X  X  X  X  X X 
CBC  X      X    X    
DRUG SCREEN  X      X    X    
%dCDT  X    X  X  X  X  X X 
Urinary EtG   X             
URINE RIBOFLAVIN  X X  X X X X X X X X    
PREGNANCY TEST  X  AS NEEDED ------------------------------------------   
DNA  COLLECTION  X              
Mass Spectroscopy Imaging   X  X           
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT   X X X X X X X X X    
GROUP A  BASELINE ------------------  PLACEBO ---------------------------------------  -FOLLOWUP -------  
GROUP B  BASELINE ------------------  GABAPENTIN UP TO 1200 MG DAILY -- -FOLLOWUP --------  
The following assessments are for inclusion/exclusion criteria: SCID, CIWA -Ar, Form 90, LFT’s, CBC, DRUG SCREEN, PREGNANCY 
TEST, EtG, HX AND PHYSICAL. The following for subject characterization: ASI, DrInC, ADS, FAM -HX, DNA; and the following for 
efficacy (TLFB, OCDS, RAND SF -36, P SQ index, POMS, GGT, %dCDT, RIBOFLAVIN) or safety (SAFTEE interview and BLOOD 
TESTS).  
 
A Survey System Data Capture progra m that reduces the risk of data entry errors by [CONTACT_14662] a tablet PC 
(rather than paper) and stylus (rather than pen) will be used f or data collection of questionnaires and 
interviews. T he system ensures that all necessary items on a questionnaire must be answered, as "business 
rules" can be implemented, which alert the participant to complete the missing item before the next 
questionn aire is administered. Data collected using the Survey System data capture program are easily 
exported into SPSS data files, and exporting of data will occur immediately following each participant's v isit 
and checked for completeness, outliers, and adequacy  of tra nsfer. SPSS data files are backed -up daily.  
 
Gabapentin Dosing : Our group has experience with the use of gabapentin , as detailed in th e background 
section, in alcohol withdrawal studies (Myrick, 2007 ) and clinical trials (Anton, 2009 ; Anton, 2011 ). In our 
experience it is  well tolerated at the doses (1200 mg/day) utilized with no differential drop out between active 
medication and placebo groups.  Gabapentin  is currently a generic drug, FDA approved for the treatment of 
seizure disorders and  post-herpetic neuralgia  and has been utilized for many years and given to millions of 
individuals . The elimination half -life of gabapentin is 5 to 9 hours (McLean, 1994 ). Therefore, in most studies of 
seizure subjects (Ramsay, 1994 ) and anxiety disorder subjects (Pande, 1999 ), gabapentin is given on a three 
times a day  dosing schedule. While the medication is generally well tolerated, sedation could be a limiting 
factor and titration of dosing is recommended. Gabapentin will be purch ased through our research pharm acy 
and over -encapsulated. Active gab apentin capsules (300 mg) and matching placebo capsules will have 
riboflavin added (see below) for compliance monitoring. During the first week gabapentin will be titrated to a 
maximum dosage of [ADDRESS_847949] found this titration and dosing schedule to 
be well tolerated the study physician can lower the gabapentin d ose by [CONTACT_596550][INVESTIGATOR_4382] (300mg) at noon  and, if 
necessary, next r emove the dose scheduled at night  (300mg). This allows a downward titration, first to 900 
mg/day then to 600 mg/day, to occur if side effect or tolerance concerns emerge in some individuals. If a 
person cannot tolerate 600 mg a day he /she will be terminated from the medication aspects of the trial but data 
will be collected for an intent -to-treat analysis . Study physicians will also be able to instruct a willing subject to 
attempt an increase of the GBP pi[INVESTIGATOR_634874] [ADDRESS_847950] not observed this previously, t o minimiz e this risk,  
individuals with active suicidal ideation  will be excluded  from study participation . In addition, we will ass ess 
emergent suicidal ideation in two wa ys 1) by [CONTACT_634887] , 
and 2) by [CONTACT_634888] (item 9) on the Beck Depression Scale at 
weeks 3,6,10, and 16.  
 
Dosing  and Randomization  Schedule : A double dummy placebo controlle d design and dosing schedule will 
be employed  (as in Table 2). Randomization will occur in two strata based on history of AW or no -history of 
AW. Within each stratum , subjects will be further urn randomized by [CONTACT_634889] . 
 
TABLE  [ADDRESS_847951] at 
study visits to monitor and enhance compliance.  
 
Proton Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy  (1H-MRS) for Glutamate and GABA:  This will occur prior to 
randomization (see above) and again at week 3 (wi ndow between days 17 -24) of study medication between [ADDRESS_847952] gabapentin/placebo dose to standardize acute dosing effects. Subjects will be 
breathalyzed prior to the scan and need to be zero (or will be rescheduled ASAP), and, if smokers, t he time of 
last cigarette will be recorded. In an ongoing trial we have found no problems with imaging (fMRI) clinical trial 
participants twice (baseline/week 3)  – very few have to be rescheduled due to drinking and some subjects find 
it intriguing.  Each scan takes about 60 minutes and uses the following protocol: A structural scan will be taken 
for 1H-MRS voxel placement and tissue segmentation (256 sagittal slices; 1mm thick/50% gap). The ACC 
voxel for 1H-MRS will be placed on midsagittal T1 -weighte d images, anterior to the genu of the corpus 
callosum, with the ventral edge of the voxel aligned with the dorsal edge of the genu and a voxel size of 3 x 2.5 
x 2.5 cm3 will be  selected (consistent with Umhau, 2010 and Mon, 2012). Following auto -shimming, single -
voxel water -suppressed 1H-MRS spectra will be acquired using a Point Resolved Spectroscopy (PRESS) 
sequence: Repetition Time (TR) = 2000ms; Echo Time (TE) = 40ms; number of averages = 256); an 
unsuppressed water spectrum will be co -acquired (TE = 40 ms, number of averages = 16), scaled for partial 
volume effects and relaxation, and used as a concentration reference. This sequence has been shown to  A.  Placebo Group  B. Gabapentin Group  
 AM Noon  PM AM Noon  PM 
Day 1  PLC PLC PLC/PLC  PLC PLC PLC/GBP  
Day 2  PLC PLC PLC/ PLC  GBP  PLC PLC/GBP  
Day 3  PLC PLC PLC/ PLC  GBP  GBP  PLC/GBP  
Day 4  PLC PLC PLC/ PLC  GBP  GBP  PLC/GBP  
Day 5 - 112 PLC PLC PLC/PLC  GBP  GBP  GBP/GBP  
PLC =Placebo     GBP =Gabapentin 300 mg  
perform superiorly to other PRESS sequences (TE = 30ms, 80ms; TE -averaged; (Mullins, 2008) ) for imaging 
glutamate. Analysis of PRESS data  will be conducted using LC Model 6. 3 (Provencher, 1993), an operator -
independent curve -fitting software package that uses least -squares estimation for quantifying metabolite 
concentrations; the basis set for TE = 40ms is pr ovided by [CONTACT_634890] -inositol, gamma -
aminobutyric acid (GABA), lactate, taurine and aspartate, creatine, glutamine, glutamate, N -acetylaspartate 
(NAA), N -acetylaspartate -glutamate (NAAG), and phosphocholine (Cho). Although glutamate resona nces are 
historically challenging to isolate, simulation research has demonstrated that glutamate can be measured with 
a similar level of reliability as NAA using the proposed acquisition parameters (PRESS with TE = 40ms,  VOI = 
ACC, field strength = 3T)  (Mullins, 2008). Although a TE = [ADDRESS_847953] acquisition protocols, GABA MRS 
peaks are greatly overshadowed by [CONTACT_634891] . As a result, we will acquire a 
separate GABA MRS scan using the state -of-the-art MEGA -PRESS j -editing technique  for isolation of GABA 
(Mescher , 1998). This sequence (TR = 1500ms; TE = 68ms; number of averages = 256) alternately applies a 
frequenc y-select ive editing pulse at 1.9 ppm and 7.5  ppm, in an interleaved fashion; subtracting these spectral 
pairs produces a spectrum with a GABA peak that is clearly separated from  the larger surrounding creatine  
and choline signals.  Analysis of MEGA -PRESS data will also be conducted using LC Model; the latest version 
of the software (i.e., 6.3) provides a simulated basis set and specialized routines for quantifying GABA 
metabolite concentrations.  
 
Only metabolites with fitting uncertainties (Cramer -Rao Lower Bound va lues) < 20% of SD in the LC Model 
output will be retained for analysis. LC Model includes standardized zero filling, Fourier transformation, and 
automated phase, baseline, and eddy current correction. To address variability in within -voxel tissue 
compositi on we will: 1) co -register T 1-weighted images to their scout images and correct for b 1 field bias, 2) 
extract and segment T 1-weighted images into partial volume maps of gray matter (GM), white matter (WM), 
and CSF using FMRIB Software Library (FSL) tools, 3) match the coordinates and size of the 1H-MRS voxel 
with the segmented images and extract the tissue fractions wit hin the voxel using FSL tools, 4 ) correct the raw 
values obtained from the LC model (scaled to water) for CSF and coil loadin g (Michaelis, 1 993), and 5 ) 
calculate each participant’s GM to brain matter (BM) ratio (i.e., GM:BM = GM/[GM+WM]) for use as a covariate 
in statistical analyses. This calculation will be made separately for each metabolite of interest because the 
spatial region that each  metabolite is localized to is not the same due to the chemical shift artifact. The 
particular displacement of a given metabolite's localization region is determined by [CONTACT_634892]'s  chemical 
shift divided by [CONTACT_634893]. For each metabolite, in each participant, we will match the coordinates and size of the voxel 
(accounting for chemical shift displacement) with the segmented images and extract the tissue f ractions using 
FSL tools. Metabolite concentration estimates will be corrected for T1 and T2 relaxation effects using 
established literature values (Mlynarik, 2001; Wansapura, 1999)  and scaled to water . Following this procedure 
we have produced  the following example spectra:  
 
 
 
 
  4.0     3.8     3.6     3.4      3.2      3.0      2.8      2.6     2.4      2.2      2.0     1.8     1.6 
                           Chemical Shift (ppm)   4.0        3.8        3.6        3.4        3.2        3.0        2.8        2.6        2.4         2.2        2.0   
                                                    Chemical Shift (ppm)  FIGURE 3. LC Model Spectra for  Glutamate  FIGURE 4. LC Model Spectra for GABA  
We have run 6 healthy c ontrols through the PRESS MRS sequence  and found a mean (SD) glutamate , as a 
ratio to water , of 7.66 (1.24) or as a ratio to creatine, 1.38 (0.15). We have run an additional 7 healthy controls 
through the MEGA -PRESS MRS sequence and found a mean (SD) GABA,  as a ratio to water, of 1.75 (0.19). 
These values are consistent with published levels (where there is a range of values based on quantification 
method and reference analyte).  
 
Lab and Genetic Assays:  The CNL lab directed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Anton has 20 years of experience in measuring 
carbohydrate deficient transferrin (CDT) and currently runs a state -of-the-art HPLC based assay that is 
recognized by [CONTACT_634894] a candidate reference method  (Helander, 2010) . The analyte of interest is disialo -
CDT as a percentage of total transferrin (%dCDT). Extensive quality control and proficiency testing is routinely 
performed. His lab also assays urinary Ethylglucuronide (EtG), a sensitive measure of any/low alco hol 
consumption using a Microgen ics immunoassay whi ch correlates highly with LC -MS. Qiagen DNA extraction 
kits are used to extract DNA from whole blood by a dedicated genetic technician in his lab, tested for DNA 
purity, and used in Taqman PCR analysis with specific probes and primers purchased from Life Science 
Technol ogies using a Step One analy zer (Applied Biosystems). His K0 5 funding allowed him to become 
proficient in this type of analysis (Anton, 2012)  and he has genotyped hundreds of samples with various SNP’s 
and VNTR’s including the glutamate and GABA genes of i nterest (see background section).  
 
Outcome Variables and Power Analyses:  The primary drinking outcome variable will be the percent of 
subjects with no heavy drinking days (PSNHDD) as defined by [CONTACT_634895] (2010) , chosen because it is currently 
accepted by [CONTACT_634896]. 
However , other secondary drinking variables such as percent days abstinent, % heavy drinking days, and 
drinks per day , as well as craving (OCDS) and biomark ers (%dCDT and GGT) will be calculated and reported 
for completeness sake. Urinary riboflavin and pi[INVESTIGATOR_634875] a s measures of compliance and 
compared between groups while potentially serving to define compliers for  independent analysis. PSQ,  POMS, 
and MES will evaluate slee p quality, mood state, and medication effect  differences between medication 
groups. P re-randomization and week -[ADDRESS_847954] mediator analysis (see below).  
 
A statistical power calculation was conducted using data from our past two studies (background section) using  
the treatment effect in subjects with a DSM -IV history of AW on  the PSNHDD outcome variable.  With 45 
subjects per medication group (total N=90) the power to detect th e gabapentin treatment effect on  PSHDD is 
between .83 (study 1 calculation) and .98 (study 2 calculation). While significant covariate effects in our earlier 
studies have n ot been observed with this outcome variable, additional power analysis using Monte Carlo 
simulation (n=500) in the presence of covariates modeled, (e.g. pretrial drinking, OCDS, ADS , etc.) on our 
previous studies was conducted.  Power values comparable to those in the simpler analysis were found in all 
cases ranging f rom .81 to .87 (study 1) to .95 to .99 (study 2).  
 
The statistical power calculation for gabapentin’s effect on brain glutamate change from baseline to week -3 is 
based on the work of Umhau (201 0), the study design closest to our own, where an acamprosate -induced 
change in brain glutamate levels (vs . placebo) was detect ed with an effect size of .95. The power to detect a 
similar gabapentin vs. placebo difference in the current proposal with an n= 45/group is in excess of .[ADDRESS_847955] size as low as d  = .[ADDRESS_847956] of gabapentin on 
GABA is quite large ( Cai, 2012; Kuzniecky, 2002; Petroff, 1996; Petroff, 2000 ) the power to detect a 
gabapentin vs. placebo d ifference with an n=45/group is  in excess of .9. Given this large statistical power, an 
expected maximal 10% attrition due to inadequate scans should not materially affect our ability to detect a 
medication effect on glutamate or GA BA. Additionally, there is likely to be sufficient variation in both medication 
response and brain glutamate/GABA level change to allow acceptable use of a mediation analysis to examine 
the effect of this glutamate/GABA change on treatment response.  
 
Powe r has not been calculated for the exploratory genetic analyses. The genetic SNP’s we have chosen to 
explore are not only indicated by [CONTACT_634897] , importantly , have a reasonable genotypic distribution. 
Given our past work and HapMap data  (see P reliminary Data  section)  we expect the distribution o f both the 
GABR A2 and GM8  allele frequencies to be about 60:[ADDRESS_847957] size is moderate to large. In any case, this data will allow more appropriate 
power calculations for subsequent studies.  Effects of genetic variation on brain glutamate/GABA are unknown 
and completely novel  but as a main effect with 90 subjects (even accounting for drop -outs or unusable scans) 
the power to detect a gene by [CONTACT_634898].  
 
Data Analysis Plan: The PSNHDD (with baseline percent heavy drinking days as a covariate) will be analyzed 
with a multiple logistic regression with indicator coding medication group as the primary independent variable. 
All hypothese s (primary, secondary ) will be ass essed with likelihood ratio s. Other possible pre -randomizat ion 
variables, e.g. sex, smoking status, ADS score , pre -randomization CIWA -Ar score,  etc. will be evaluated as 
possible covariates in the final analysis. Missing data (assuming monotonicity) will be imputed as heavy 
drinking days. In addition , the relapse time-course will be analyzed by [CONTACT_634899] f or the full t reatment X 
time factorial design. Secondary outcome variables, e.g.  other drinking variables, OCDS, POMS, PSQ index, 
MES and biomarkers (%dCDT  and GGT), will be analyzed as either mixed models (SAS PROC MIXED) or in 
GEE analyses (SAS GENMOD) depending upon the nature of the variable (parametric or categorical).  
 
Change in glutamate and GABA levels will be analyzed as a mixed model (SAS PROC MIX ED) with time as a 
within subject variable  and medication group as between subject variables.  Significant interactions will be 
interpreted with simple effects and main effects will be assessed in the absence of the interaction. If sex and 
smoking status (reported by [CONTACT_634900]) , or pre -randomization CIWA -Ar score  are found 
to significantly influence glutamate or GABA levels, or if their inclusion reduces residual variance, the y will be 
included in the model as covariates.  
 
In order to assess the degree to which changes in brain GABA and glutamate account for drinking outcomes, 
neurochemical variables (as difference scores) will be entered into the main logistic regression model. A 
reduction in the significance of the main treatment effe ct or the treatment by [CONTACT_634901] a mediation effect. Path analysis will be used to test the significance of the indirect path from treatment to 
GABA/glutamate levels to relapse status and/or other drinking measures.   
 
Timeline:  Since our staff is trained in all procedures and scales are digitalized, the first [ADDRESS_847958] year we will  scree n/randomize  38/18 subjects and then 57/27 subjects in year 2 -3 and 
38/[ADDRESS_847959] five  months will be used for data analysis and publication production.  
 
Interpretations and Future Directions : While this study will focus on gabapentin efficacy  in those with a 
history of AW S, it is possible that it might have anti -craving and reinforcement effects  independent of effects 
based on AWS history . Since this proposal will not include those without a history of AWS we will not be able 
to address  the issue of broader efficacy directly . However, using exploratory analysis on craving effects, 
reasons for drinking and medication effects scales,  as well as sleep, we might discover media tors of treatment 
efficacy that  could be studied in expanded populations in the future. Also,  baseline levels of brain 
glutamate/GABA  cann ot be compared with levels in alcohol dependent  individuals without a history of AW. 
Neverthel ess, the ability to relate drinking outcome to changes in these levels and ability to relate the efficacy  
of gabapentin  to glutamate/GABA brain cha nges would still be salient and important , as would the 
pharmacogenetic exploration. Since th e complete understanding of brain glutamate/GABA levels as measured 
by 1H-MRS is evolving, it is possible that those with AW might have less glutamate and more GABA prior to 
randomization since the pools measured might  exist mostly in the intra-cellular  space due to auto -regulatory 
mechanisms and/or sequestration , but still might change during treatment. The directionality of the effect will 
not negate the potential to observe changes based on gabapentin treatment and the relationship of those 
changes to ef ficacy. It will add data to the growing literature that could, in fact, assist in correct interpretation of 
the localization of these brain neurotransmitters . Furthermore, even if gabapentin is not found efficacious , the 
difference in brain glutamate and G ABA levels change over time, especially in relationship to relapse status, 
would still add new information about AW biology and prognosis  that could be useful for future drug 
development . The collection of DNA on all subjects will allow future explorations  including deeper sequencing 
and epi[INVESTIGATOR_18193]/regulatory changes of the candidate genes proposed, as well as exploration of other genetic 
variation that might emerge in relationship to relapse and medication response.  If these results are positive, 
future studies might investigate more specific pharmacological treatment matching b etween those with and 
without a history of alcohol withdrawal symptoms . 
 
 
 
 
 
 