Detailed protocol  
Drugs Brain and Behavior  (DA02812)  
PI H de Wit , Co-I’s Royce Lee, Sarah Keedy  
NCT #: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Nov 9, 2020  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Aims .  
Addiction, especially addiction to stimulant drugs, remains an urgent public health problem.  In 2016 -7 
as many as 5 million Americans reported misusing prescription stimulants, and 0.4 million had 
stimulant use disorders. In a recent survey of 5,585 young women aged 10 -18, 6.6% reported 
nonmedical use of stimulants. Of all the people who try stimulant drugs,  only a subset go on to 
develop dependence . The risk factors for escalating use  are poorly understood . One biologically 
plausible, but understudied, so urce of risk for repeated use of drugs is individual variation in brain 
reward circuitry. Stimulant drugs have primary actions on  the dopaminergic mesolimbic reward 
system, which also mediates sensitivity to other rewards.  Individuals vary in their subjective and 
behavioral respo nses to stimulants and these variations may be related to brain reward function . We 
recently found that individuals who exhibited greater  striatal brain activity during anticipation of a 
monetary reward experienced greater euphoria  and drug liking after  a single dose of  amphetamine 
(determined on a separate session). Studying effects of drugs on brain reward circuits in relation to 
behavioral indices of reward offers a promising new avenue for identifying a biological basis for risk 
for stimulant drug use.  
In this project, we will examine individual differences in the effects of a stimulant drug, 
methamphetamine (MA), on mesolimbic reward function  using fMRI.   We will determine how  
individual differences in neural activity after the drug are related to its behavioral, rewarding effects.  
The effects of MA on mesolimbic reward function will be examined  using both reward -task-related 
activation and resting state functional connectivity.  On separate sessions, we will examine t he effects 
of MA on behavioral reward in the same subjects, using  ratings of drug liking and euphoria, as well as 
measures of drug seeking (drug and dose choice). Our goal is to identify neural processes that 
predict MA liking and ‘seeking’ behaviors. We have preliminary evidence that amphetamine increases 
striatal brain activity during a nondrug reward task, and that it facilitates frontal -striatal resting state 
functional connectivity. We will extend these observati ons to a larger sample using  a more sensitive 
task, more refined  imaging techniques, more comprehensive behavioral assessment and sufficient 
power to compare men and women.  Healthy young adults will first undergo two fMRI scans with 
placebo and MA (20 mg), while performing the Monetary Incentive Delay and the Doors task. Then, 
they will participate in two behavioral sessions conducted in our laboratory . We will examine 
correlations between the neural responses and behavioral responses to MA.  
 
Specific Aim 1. To determine the effects of MA on regional brain activity during anticipation of 
reward, task -related functional connectivity and resting state connectivity . We will examine the 
direct effects of a moderate dose of MA (20 mg) vs placebo on mesolimbic circuits . Imaging 
measures will include  on regional activation during two reward task s, task -related changes in 
functional connectivity, and resting state functional connectivity.  These measures of assess different 
dimensions of brain function impacting reward processing. We hypothesize that MA will increase 
activation in striatal regions during anticipation of reward, and enhance both task -related and resting 
state functional connectivity in fronto -striatal reward circuits. We also expect that there will be inter -
subject variability in these effects.   
 
Specific Aim 2. To examine the relationship between neural effects of MA and behavioral 
rewarding effects of MA . We will examine the relationship between the neural effects of MA (task -
related and resting state) and rewarding behavioral responses to the drug. Neural effects will be 
assessed as in Aim 1. Behavioral respons es to MA will be assessed in a 2-session procedure 
providing drug liking ratings as well as measure s of reward learning . We hypothesize that greater 
magnitude of effects of MA on brain rewa rd function (regional activation and connectivity) will be 
related to greater behavioral rewarding effects. Specifically, we hypothesize that MA -induced 
increase in fronto -striatal resting state connectivity will be linked more strongly to tonic increases in 
drug liking, whereas task -related striatal activation will be associated with greater reward learning  on 
the learning task . 
 
The project will advance our understanding of how stimulants alter neural reward processes, and how 
individual differences in brain function predict variation in the rewarding and cognitive effects of drugs. 
The findings will help to develop novel treatment approaches, including medications or noninvasive 
techniques such as transcranial magnetic stimulation, that target reward substrates in addicted 
individuals.  
 
Background .  
This project will investigate the effects of methamphetamine ( MA) on brain reward circuits in relation 
to its effects on behavioral indices of reward . Healthy volunteers  will first engage in two fMRI imaging 
sessions in which  they will receive MA (20 mg  oral) or placebo  (PL) under double -blind conditions. 
These scanning sessions  will assess i) regional activation and connectivity in mesolimbic circuits  
during anticipation and receipt of reward, and ii) resting state functional connectivity in fronto -striatal  
circuits . Then , during two behavioral sessions , subjects will receive MA or PL during two sampling 
sessions  on which  they will complete mood  and drug liking  questionnaires  and complete simple 
learning task s.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Methods . 
  We address the following questions: i) does MA alter either regional activation o r task-related 
connectivity in mesolimbic regions during anticipation of reward , ii) does MA alter resting state 
functional connectivity in mesolimbic and frontostriatal circuits, iii) are the neural  effects  of MA on 
reward circuitry  (task -related or resting state connectivity)  related to the  rewarding effects of the drug , 
as measured by [CONTACT_40019] , or to its effects on simple learning ? We will utilize  several indices  of drug 
reward :  ratings of drug liking  or euphoria . We have shown that  ratings of drug liking are highly  related 
to measures of drug seeking . We will also examine sex differences , and  control for menstrual cycle 
phase in women (White, Justice et al. 2002) . 
 MA is a prototypic stimulant drug  with a well -defined mechanism of action . We have conducted 
many studies with MA at the doses proposed here, and its effects on mood and cardiovascular 
function are robust and reliable (Wachtel, Ortengren et al. 2002; Soderpalm, Nikolayev et al. 2003; 
Mayo, Fraser et al. 2013; Ballard, Weafer et al. 2015; Bershad, Kirkpatrick et al. 2015) . MA produces 
effects that are very similar to d-amphetamine (Childs and de Wit 2013; Weafer and de Wit 2013; 
Hart, Gamazon et al. 2014; Wardle, Marcus et al. 2015; Childs, Bershad et al. 2016) . Both drugs  
increase  synaptic levels of dopamine and norepi[INVESTIGATOR_238], and to a lesser extent serotonin (Moore 
1977)  by [CONTACT_40020] -synaptic neuron, as well as blocking  
re-uptake and inhibiting  degradation by [CONTACT_40021]. We selected MA because it has a 
slightly faster onset of effects. There is evidence that the rewarding effects of amphetamine s are 
mediated by [CONTACT_40022] , with some role also for norepi[INVESTIGATOR_238] (Laruelle, Abi -Dargham 
et al. 1995; Kumari, Corr et al. 1997; Mattay, Callicott et al. 2000; Drevets, Gautier et al. 2001; 
Navarra, Clark et al. 2017) .  
  Participants will be  healthy young men and women  (N=80, 80) . They will first participate two fMRI 
scans, when they receive oral MA (20 mg) and PL, in random order under double blind conditions. 
During the scan they  will complete the Monetary Incentive Delay task  (MID)  (Knutson, Adams et al. 
2001)  and the Doors task ( Carlson et al, 2011 ) and resting state data will be obtained . The p rimary 
outcome measures during these sessions will be task -related (anticipation and receipt of reward) 
regional brain activation , task -related connectivity , and resting state functional connectivity. After the 
two scans , subjects will participate in two behavioral sessions during which  they receive MA (20 mg 
oral) or PL in mixed  order , in color -coded capsules. Subjects will complete  mood  and drug effects 
questionnaires , and cognitive tasks .  
 Subject s. Healthy men and women aged 18-[ADDRESS_41767] 
task 
Resting state functional connectivity  
Changes in neural function after  
amphetamine (vs placebo)  
Drug liking, euphoria, reward tasks  
Behavioral responses to   
amphetamine (vs placebo)  
eligibility will be ascertained in a telephone interview (age, current drug use, medical conditions), and 
appropriate candidates scheduled for an in -person interview with a physical examination, EKG and a 
structured clinical psychiatric interview  (First, Williams et al.) . The ir screening information will be 
approved by a physician. Subjects must have a high school education, fluency in English, body mass 
index between 19 and 26, and good physical and mental health. Exclusion criteria are  serious  
psychiatric disorder including psychosis, severe PTSD or depression, any  regular  prescription 
medication, contraindications for fMRI scanning, history of cardiac disease, high blood pressure, 
consuming >[ADDRESS_41768] experienced adverse responses to any of the drugs they might receive.  This information is 
obtained during in-person screening by a trained clinical interviewer.  Women who are not on oral 
contraceptives will be tested only during the follicular phase  (1-12 days from menstruation) because 
responses to stimulant drugs are dampened during the luteal phase of the cycle (White, Justice et al. 
2002) . We recognize that  the 5  sessions will need to be scheduled across two months for women not 
on oral contraceptives . Before participating subjects will complete several questionnaires: a 
psychiatric symptom checklist, the BIS/BAS, the Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scale (DASS) 
(Lovibond and Lovibond 1995)  and the Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire (Patrick, Curtin et 
al. 2002) .  
 Consent . Qualifying subjects will attend an orientation session to familiarize them with the  methods 
and obtain  informed consent . Subjects will be told that the purpose of the study is to investigate the 
effects of psychoactive drugs on mood, brain and behavior. To reduce expectancies, they will be told 
that they might receive a placebo , stimulant/anorectic, opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480], alcohol or sedative/tranquilizer. They 
agree not to use any drugs except for their normal amounts of caffeine for 24 hours before and 6 
hours following each session . Subjects  are informed that drug testing will occur before each sessio n. 
Pregnancy and drug tests are conducted before each session using urine drug tests (ToxCup, Branan 
Medical Corporation) and breathalyzer tests (Alcosensor  III, Intoximeters), and pregnancy tests 
(AimStickPBD, hCG professional, Craig Medical Distribution). Positive tests lead to rescheduling or 
dismissal from the study.  
 Testing environments . Screening and behavioral testing will be conducted  individually  in 
comfortably furnished rooms with a couch,  easy chair, side table, coffee table, television and video 
player. Subjects may relax, read or watch neutral movies when they are not completing study 
measures. Scanning will be conducted in the Magnetic Resonance Imaging Research Center 
(MRIRC) located  a 3-min walk from the behavioral testing rooms.  
Procedures  
Session  Orientation  Scan 1  Scan 2  Behav     
Session 1  Behav Session 
2 
Drug  Practice  MA* PL* PL* MA* 
Measures  MID 
Doors  Self-report  
Mood 
drug, cv  Self-report 
mood drug, cv  Self-report  
Mood drug, cv  Self-report 
mood drug,cv  
 EEfRT  fMRI with 
MID, Doors 
and motor  fMRI with 
MID, Doors 
and motor  EEfRT  EEfRT  
 Stop Task    Stop Task  Stop Task  
 Simple 
reaction time    Simple reaction 
time Simple reaction 
time 
 Go-No-Go   Go-No-Go Go-No-Go 
 Continuous  
performance 
task 
gradCPT    Continuous 
performance  
task gradCPT  
 Continuous 
performance 
task gradCPT  
 
 Weather 
Prediction Task    Weather 
Prediction Task  Weather 
Prediction Task  
 Learning task    Learning task  Learning task  
PL=placebo, MA= methamphetamine , *orders counterbalanced  
 
(i) Imaging (2).  The two fMRI sessions will assess brain activity  under the influence of MA and PL. 
After drug and pregnancy tests, we obtain baseline measures of mood, heart rate and blood 
pressure. At 9:[ADDRESS_41769] a capsule ( PL or MA 20 mg) under double -blind conditions. The 
scan will be conducted from [ADDRESS_41770] circuit function:  i) for reward anticipation:  
regional brain activation during the MID, MID task-related functional connectivity , ii) for reward 
receipt, regional brain ac tivation during the Doors task, Doors task -related functional connectivity  and 
iii) resting state functional connectivity. Subjects will also complete one other task  assessing motor 
reactivity . 
(ii) Behavioral  sessions (2 ):  Sessions are conducted from [ADDRESS_41771] 48 hours apart . 
Upon arrival drug and pregnancy tests  are obtained, and  subjects complete baseline measures of 
mood . Heart rate and blood pressure  are measured . At 9:[ADDRESS_41772] capsule s (PL or MA 20 
mg, in color -coded capsules) under double -blind conditions.  Oral MA (Desoxyn, 5 mg per tablet) will 
be placed in opaque size [ADDRESS_41773] capsules will contain only dextrose . 
Subjects will complete mood and drug effects questionnaires at regular intervals , cognitive tasks and 
a learning  task. At the end of the sessions subjects complete a questionnaire rating their overall drug 
experiences. The primary subjective measures during these sessions are ratings of drug liking and 
drug-induced euphoria . Secondary measures include cognitive tasks.  
(iv) End of study  Interview  When subjects have completed both phases  of the study the PI [INVESTIGATOR_40011] .  
Primary measures   
Imaging : Scanning sessions will be conducted at least [ADDRESS_41774]. Keedy at 
the UC MRI Research Center (MRIRC) on a 3T Philips Ingenia scanner with a [ADDRESS_41775] observed no difference in head motion 
in association with a similar dose  of d-amphetamine (unpublished data from Weafer et al  (Weafer, 
Van Hedger et al. 2019) ). Physiological sensors for heart rate and respi[INVESTIGATOR_40012], and will be used in fMRI data analyses to account for physiological noise.   
Imaging tasks and data collection . 
MID TASK: Following Knutso n (Knutson, Adams et al. 2001) , the MID task assesses neural 
responses for both reward anticipation and consumption, and offers actual small and large monetary 
gains and losses based upon performance. This optimized task version requires participants to 
respond rapi[INVESTIGATOR_40013]. Response windows are titrated 
after a pre -scan practice and during imaging to ensure optimal performance, e.g., 50 -80% success 
rates. There will be [ADDRESS_41776] to the opportunity to either win money or avoid losing money, specified as +/ -$0.30 
or $3.00, or a neutral cue is given ($0.0) indicating that no money is at stake. Win/avoid loss and 
$0.30/$3.00 are presented pseudorandomly and at  equal frequency across 64 of the trials; 32 trials 
are the neutral cue condition interspersed with the other trials. After the cue there is a 2 -4s (jittered) 
interval and then a stimulus (a white box) appears. The stimulus duration is derived from data 
collected during the pre -scan practice. Subjects are required to press their thumb button as quickly 
as possible while the stimulus is visible. Visual feedback is provided indicating whether the 
participant responded within the time frame. Pre -scan practice (PSP) assesses individual -specific 
reaction time (RT) for correct responses. PSP mean RT and standard deviation are used to calculate 
a response window for the stimulus cue during the first run of the MID inside the scanner. For 
example, a subject with a m ean RT of 180ms and SD of [ADDRESS_41777] a stimulus duration/response 
window of 220ms (180+ 2*20), and a delay jitter screen of 780ms (1000ms -220). The technician 
tracks performance after each run and uses the number of total correct responses to modify the 
response time for the next run. If a participant’s accuracy falls below 50%, the stimulus 
duration/response window increases by 0.5 SD (and the delay jitter screen conversely). If the 
participant’s accuracy exceeds 80%, then the stimulus duration/response window decreases by 0.5 
SD. The subjects are told they will receive the money they win based on their performance, added to 
their payment for the scan. They cannot lose money, in accordance with the success rate calibration. 
The task takes ~20 minutes. For  this study, cue conditions (receive/avoid losing $0.30/$3.00; or no 
money at stake) primarily enhance subject task engagement and will be collapsed for primary 
analyses, in accordance with limited clear knowledge of neural system difference s distinguishing 
such conditions (Oldham, Murawski et al. 2018) .  
Doors Task . Participants will complete the doors task (Carlson et al. 2011) during BOLD fMRI to 
assess brain activation during monetary reward and loss. Briefly, two doors are presented on the 
screen, and participants are told that behind one of the doors is a monet ary prize of $.50 (signaled by 
‘↑’) and behind the other door is a loss of $.25 (signaled by ‘↓’). For each trial, participants are instructed 
to use a button box to choose one of the two doors. They are told that they will either win or lose mon ey 
based on their choices, and that they had a chance of winning between $0 and $15 total based on their 
performance. In actuality, the subjects’ performance has no impact on outcomes. The task consists of 
30 predetermined Wins and 30 Losses presented in a  pseudorandom order over two runs. The task 
requires 15 minutes to complete, and all subjects earn $10.  
Motor task : Subjects will complete  a motor task to provide information on the effect of the drug on 
activation of brain regions controlling motor function . As in an early study from our laboratory Uftring 
(Uftring, Wachtel et al. 2001) , subjects will complete  a finger tappi[INVESTIGATOR_40014] 20s blocks, alternating with [ADDRESS_41778] 
blocks. We will assess for motor system changes during this task.  
The scan  will include a 10-minute resting state sequence, eyes open fixating on a light crosshair 
on a dark background,  a high-resolution T1 -weighted image for alignment and spatial standardization , 
and an Arterial Spin Labeling sequence to assess blood flow (described below) . 
Imaging data analysis . Imaging d ata from fMRI tasks will be preprocessed and analyzed using AFNI 
tools, as in Van Hedger (Van Hedger, Keedy et al. 2018) . Preprocessing steps include alignment of 
each time series, spatial registration of the aligned time series to the anatomical scan, anatomical 
scan warped to standard space and warp applied to functional data, functional data spatially 
smoothed, and inten sity normalization. Neural activation for conditions of interest from each task will 
be estimated using AFNI’s 3dDeconvolve program, incorporating motion and heart rate/respi[INVESTIGATOR_40015]. For MID, we will use a gamma response function to create act ivation maps for each task 
element: cues, motor response, and feedback. For the secondary tasks, we will use block functions 
and create contrast maps between the two block types. Mean activation for each subject at each scan 
session will be extracted from regions of interest (ROI). For MID, ROIs will be 8mm spheres created 
around coordinates reported in a recent meta -analysis of 50 MID fMRI studies  (Oldham, Murawski et 
al. 2018) . For Cue: caudate, putamen ventral striatum, thalamus, and anterior insula; Feedback:  
ventromedial prefrontal, orbitofrontal cortex, ventral striatum, amygdala, and will be a subtraction of 
mean activation of loss trials from win trials in each ROI (this contrast is the most common and more 
sensitive approach, per Oldham); Motor: all prior ROIs (to confirm lack of drug effect), primary 
sensori motor cortex. ROI activation will be a subtraction of mean activation of loss trials from win 
trials in each ROI (th is contrast is the most common and more sensitive approach, per Oldham). We 
will also look specifically at win vs neutral and loss vs neutral to confirm whether findings are driven 
by [CONTACT_40023]. Tappi[INVESTIGATOR_007]: primary motor cortex: dorsal striatum (caudate, 
putamen). For connectivity analyses of the MID task and of resting state, we will use the CONN 
toolbox (Whitfield -Gabrieli and Nieto -Castanon 2012)  which employs similar preprocessing steps 
(alignment and spatial standardization, intensity normalization, motion estimation, white matter and 
CSF-based regressors) implemented through SPM12. We will use a 2mm displacement cutoff. For 
MID task -related con nectivity, we will conduct an ROI -to-ROI analysis, using the spherical masks 
described previously. The toolbox allows comparison of correlation strengths (Pearson r converted to 
Fisher z) of the timeseries between each pairing of the ROIs. We will compare these correlations 
between drug and placebo sessions, as well as extract ROI -to-ROI correlation values for assessment 
in relation to behavioral measures. For resting state, we will calculate seed -based connectivity maps 
separately for MA and placebo, as per our prior study  (Weafer, Van Hedger et al. 2019) . Seeds will 
be bilateral caudate, putamen, and ventral striatum . We will conduct paired t tests within CONN to 
compare connectivity following MA and placebo. As our hypotheses are specific to frontal and 
subcortical reward circuitry, statistical inferences will be made within an anatomically -focused frontal -
insular -striatal partial brain mask. The mask will include medial and lateral frontal and orbital regions, 
bilateral precentral gyri, anterior and middle cingulate cortex, anterior insula and ventral striatum. 
Drug order will be included as a covariate in all analyses.  
 Arterial Spin Labeling (ASL)  data will be preprocessed and analyzed using FSL analysis tools 
(Smith, Jenkinson et al. 2004) . Quantification of CBF will be completed using FSL’s BASIL tool 
(Chappell, Groves et al. 2009) . CBF will be quantified in units of ml/100g/min using a kinetic model 
and defaults for the parameters consistent with recent consensus (Alsop, Detre et al. 2015) . For the 
within group analysis between drug and PL, quantified CBF images will be normalized to MNI space 
and adjusted to account for individual differences in global CBF. We will assess for spatial overlap of 
significant changes in CBF and regions of interest from the fMRI outcomes  to inform interpretation of 
our findings.  If there are significant changes in CBF following methamphetamine, we will also include 
CBF as a covariate in each of our fMRI task -based and connectivity analyses.  
Mood Effects of Drug : We will utilize standardized self -report questionnaires to assess the mood -
altering effects of the drug  during the scanning sessions (abbreviated questionnaires) and the 
behavioral session s (Carter and Griffiths 2009) . Participants will complete the Drug Effects 
Questionnaire  (DEQ)   (Morean, de Wit et al. 2013)  which consists of 5 questions; “Do you feel any 
drug effect?”, “Do you like the effects you are feeling now?”,  “Do you dislike the effects?”,  “Are you 
high?” and “Would you like more of what you consumed, right now?” each rated on a 100 mm visual 
analog scale. Ratings of liking will be one of our measures of mood effects of the drug. The Profile of 
Mood States  (POMS) (McNair D. 1971) , an adjective checklist, will be used to assess momentary 
mood states. Subjects indicate how they feel at the moment in relation to each of 72 adjectives on a 
5-point scale from “not at all” (0) to “extremely” (4). The 72 adjectives form 8 scales: Anxiety , 
Depression, Anger, Vigor, Fatigue, Confusion, Friendliness, Elation. They will also complete the 
Addiction Center Research Inventory  (ARCI) (Martin, Sloan et al. 1971) , a 49 -item true -false 
questionnaire that is sensitive to psychoactive drugs (Haertzen 1966) , with scales measuring 
stimulant -like effects (Amphetamine; A, and Benzedrine Group; BG) and euphoria (Morphine -
Benzedrine Group; MBG). The drug liking scale and the ARCI MBG scale s will be the primary  
measures of positive  mood effects of the drug.  Subjects will also complete ratings of drug liking and 
drug identification during the debriefing session after the last session.  
Cardiovascular measures . During sampling session s we will measure heart rate and blood pressure 
at 30 min intervals using portable monitors (Omron 10 Plus, Omron Healthcare).   
Cognitive and Motor Tasks . We will also obtain  secondary measure s of the effects of MA during sampling 
sessions . These will include standardized measures of attention and cognition , most of which are 
available on the public site Psychology Experiment Building Language; PEBL: Stop Task, Simple 
reaction time, Go -No-Go, continuous performance vigilance task , EEfRT), a simple finger tappi[INVESTIGATOR_40016] s of reward and learning ( Pessiglione et al, 2006; Jocham et al, 2014 ), and the Weather 
Prediction Task (WPT ; PEBL )). The Stop Task and Go -No-Go assess inhibitory control, the simple 
reaction time and continuous performance tasks assess attentional control. The motor  task measures  
psychomotor performance and fine motor speed, which may reflect effects of  the drug  independent of its 
rewarding effects. Individuals are instructed to tap the letter “A” on their keyboard with the index finger as 
rapi[INVESTIGATOR_40017] 10 seconds, once with the dominant hand and once with the non -
dominant hand. Mean numb er of ta ps is the outcome measure. The EEfRT measures willingness to 
expend effort (number of key clicks) for varying amounts of reward (hypothetical money).  The Gradual -
Onset Continuous Performance Task (gradCPT; Esterman et al. 2013 Rosenberg et al. 2013) is a test 
of sustained attention and inhibitory control. Stimuli are grayscale images of cities and mountains. On 
each trial (800 ms), one image gradually t ransitions to the next using linear pi[INVESTIGATOR_8070] -by-pi[INVESTIGATOR_40018]. 
Participants are instructed to respond via button press to city scenes (90%) and to withhold response to 
mountains (10%). Performance is measured with response time variability and sensitivity (d'). We will use 
two measures of simple reward learning, an instrumental approach and avoidance learning task used by 
[CONTACT_40024]  (Pessiglione et al., 2008; Fischer and Ullsperger, 2013) and the WPT, a 
standardized measure of learning.  In the Pessiglione  task subjects acquire associations between neutral 
symbols and either gain or loss of point s.  
 
C6. Statistical Plan  
Aim [ADDRESS_41779], for each MID task component separately (cue, motor response, feedback), 
within -group contrasts of the MA vs PL sessions using the extracted activation from the ROIs. Based 
on our preliminary data, we expect greater activation in ROIs , specifically dorsal and ventral striatal 
reward regions (i.e., caudate, putamen, and nucleus accumbens)  following MA compared to PL for 
cue and feedback. Given that we did not see any effect of methamphetamine on motor cortex in our 
preliminary data, we do not expect to see a drug effect on motor here.  Secondary, exploratory whole 
brain analyses will also be conducted comparing MA vs PL in each task component.  To examine the 
effects on task -related connectivity, we will use the CONN toolbox to conduct within -group ROI -to-
ROI contrasts, e.g., we will compare correlation strengths of the seed regions to one another during 
the MA vs. the PL scan, and expect stronger connectivity (correlation) from the MA session , 
specifically between striatal (i.e., caudate, putamen, and nucleus accumbens) and medial frontal (i.e., 
ventromedial prefrontal and orbitofrontal cortex)  reward regions . To assess resting state connectivity 
drug effects, we will use CONN to contrast the seed -based connectivity maps from the MA vs PL 
sessions. CONN analyses will be evaluated at p < .05, familywise , within the fronto -insular -striatal 
mask . Based on our preliminary findi ngs (Weafer, Van Hedger et al. 2019) , we hypothesize greater 
connectivity between striatal seed regions and medial frontal reward regions (i.e., ventromedial and 
orbitofrontal cortex). All analyses will include drug order, age, and sex as covariates.  
Power analysis for Aim 1 : Our preliminary data indicate a large effect size for the effect of MA 
compared to placebo on resting state fronto -striatal (NAcc to OFC) functional connectivity (d = 0.94). 
The proposed sample of N=160 would provide over 99% power (alpha = .05) to detec t an effect of 
MA on resting state functional connectivity.  
Aim 2 is to  determine the relationship s between MA-induced changes in cortico -striatal function  and 
positive behavioral effects of the drug (liking , and task performance ). We hypothesize that MA-
induced frontal -striatal activation and connectivity in reward circuits  will be positively associated with 
behavioral measures of reward , includ ing ratings of drug liking and attentional bias to cues . For the 
behavioral measures, we will first examine the degree of concordance among the different measures 
of MA reward (liking and attentional bias) . We expect that these measures will be moderate ly 
correlated, but we also believe they measure separate components of drug reward . We will then 
create summary scores of drug effects (MA minus placebo) for each of the ROI’s implicated in drug 
reward . For MID task activatio n, we  will subtract activation during Win – Loss following placebo from 
activation following MA within each ROI that showed a significant drug effect. For MID task 
connectivity , we will subtract connectivity estimates following placebo from those following MA for 
each significant ROI -to-ROI connectivity pathway . For r esting state connectivity,  we will extract 
connectivity estimates from 10mm regions surrounding significant peaks for each  seed, and again 
subtract placebo estimates from MA. These neural drug effect scores will then be analyzed in relation 
to each of the behavioral measures. The hypotheses are based on preliminary data  (Weafer, Van 
Hedger et al. 2019) .  
 a. For drug liking, we will perform linear mixed effects models for repeated measures ( Hedeker and 
Gibbons, 2006) within SPSS25 to test the degree to which neural drug effects interact with drug and 
time to predict subjective measures of drug liking , measured during the behavioral phase of the study . 
The models will include random intercept, drug and time effects to allow for individual differences in 
subjective drug response and time trends, and to account for the correlation between repeated 
measurements. Drug order, age, and sex will be included a s model covariates. The effects of interest  
are the two - and three -way interactions among neural drug effects, behavioral drug effects (MA vs. 
placebo) and time (linear and quadratic trends) on subjective liking. We hypothesize that drug liking 
will be correlated with NAcc -OFC connectivity.  
 
Power analysis for Aim 2:  For correlational analyses, the proposed sample size of N=160 yields 
power over 80% to detect correlations of 0.22 and greater for a two -tailed alpha=.[ADDRESS_41780] size (Cohen’s f2 = .051), and so the sample size wi ll allow us 
to detect reasonable associations with good statistical power .  
Ancillary analyses . The design includes several ancillary measures that will serve as important 
controls . During the fMRI scan, subjects will complete a simple motor task and we will examine neural 
responses to th is task, in both reward -related and other brain areas . During the MID task, we will 
collect data during receipt of reward, as well as our primary measure of anticipation of reward . On the 
behavioral sessions, subjects will also complete cognitive tasks (Stop Task, Go No Go and Simple 
Reaction time) , a simple motor task, and  and two reward -learning tasks.  C ardiovascular measures 
will be obtained during the drug and MA sessions . These measures will allow us  to investigate 
individual differences in neural function (as determined by [CONTACT_40025]) and behavioral measures, both 
without drug (PL session) and after drug.  We will examine the specificity of any observed correlations 
to reward -related tasks. We will also assess MA vs PL changes identified in fMRI data against 
changes noted in the ASL data.  
Sex differences . We will compare  each of the measures in  men and women (N=80, 80) , and if  sex 
differences are detected the y will be included as covariates in the correlational analyses . We do not 
expect significant sex differences especially because  women  will be  tested during the follicular phase 
of the cycle  (White, Justice et al. 2002)  and (Wilkinson, Khan et al. 2009) . Nevertheless , we believe it 
is important to investigate drug responses in men and women, with sufficient statistical power.  
 
 
Alsop, D. C., J. A. Detre, et al. (2015). "Recommended implementation of arterial spin -labeled 
perfusion MRI for clinical applications: A consensus of the ISMRM perfusion study group and 
the European consortium for ASL in dementia." Magn Reson Med  73(1): [ADDRESS_41781], M. E., J. Weafer, et al. (2015). "Effects of Acute Methamphetamine on Emotional 
Memory Formation in Humans: Encoding vs Consolidation." PLoS ONE  10(2): e0117062.  
 
Bershad, A. K., M. G. Kirkpatrick, et al. (2015). "Effects of acute doses of prosocial drugs 
methamphetamine and alcohol on plasma oxytocin levels." J Clin Psychopharmacol  35(3): 
308-12. 
 
Carlson JM, Foti D, Mujica -Parodi LR, et al. (2011) Ventral striatal and medial  prefrontal BOLD 
activation is correlated with reward -related electrocortical  activity: a combined ERP and fMRI study. 
Neuroimage  57:1608 –16. 
 
Carter, L. P. and R. R. Griffiths (2009). "Principles of laboratory assessment of drug abuse 
liability and implications for clinical development." Drug Alcohol Depend  [ADDRESS_41782] 1 : S14 -25. 
Chappell, M. A., A. R. Groves, et al. (2009). "Variational Bayesian inference for a nonlinear 
forward model." IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing  57(1): 223 -236. 
 
Childs, E., A. K. Bershad, et al. (2016). "Effects of d -amphetamine upon psychosocial stress 
responses." J Psychopharmacol  30(7): 608 -15. 
Childs, E. and H. de Wit (2013). "Contextual conditioning enhances the psychostimulant and 
incentive properties of d -amphetamine in humans." Addict Biol  18(6): 985 -92. 
 
De Wit, H. (1991). "Preference procedures for testing the abuse liability of drugs in humans." Br 
J Addict  86(12): 1579 -86. 
 
de Wit, H. and S. G. McCracken (1990). "Ethanol self -administration in males with and without 
an alcoholic first -degree relative." Alcohol Clin Exp Res  14(1): 63 -70. 
 
Drevets, W. C., C. Gautier, et al. (2001). "Amphetamine -induced dopamine release in human 
ventral striatum correlates with euphoria." Biol Psychiatry  49(2): 81 -96. 
 
Esterman, M., Noonan, S.K., Rosenberg, R., DeGutis, J. (2012). In the zone or zoning out? 
Tracking behavioral and neural fluctuations during sustained attention. Cerebral Cortex . 23 
(11), [ADDRESS_41783], M., J. Williams, et al. "Structured clinical interview for DSM -5â€”Research version (SCID -
5 for DSM -5, research version; SCID -5-RV)." Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association . 
 
Haertzen, C. A. (1966). "Development of scales based on patterns of drug effects, using the 
addiction Research Center Inventory (ARCI)." Psychol Rep  18(1): 163 -94. 
 
Haney, M. and R. Spealman (2008). "Controversies in translational research: drug self -
administration." Psychopharmacology (Berl)  199(3): 403 -19. 
 
Hart, A. B., E. R. Gamazon, et al. (2014). "Genetic variation associated with euphorigenic 
effects of d -amphetamine is associated with diminished risk for schizophrenia and attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  111(16): 5968 -73. 
 
Holdstock, L. and H. de Wit (2001). "Individual differences in responses to ethanol and d -
amphetamine: a within -subject study." Alcohol Clin Exp Res  25(4): 540 -8. 
 
Jocham, G, TA Klein, M Ullsperger  (2014)  Differential Modulation of Reinforcement Learning 
by D2  Dopamine and NMDA Glutamate Receptor Antagonism J Neurosci 34, [ZIP_CODE] –[ZIP_CODE]  
 
Johanson, C. E. and E. H. Uhlenhuth (1980). "Drug preference and mood in humans: d -
amphetamine." Psychopharmacology (Berl)  71(3): 275 -9. 
 
Knutson, B., C. M. Adams, et al. (2001). "Anticipation of increasing monetary reward selectively 
recruits nucleus accumbens." J Neurosci  21(16): RC159.  
 
Kumari, V., P. J. Corr, et al. (1997). "Effects of acute administration of d -amphetamine and 
haloperidol on procedural learning in man." Psychopharmacology (Berl)  129(3): 271 -6. 
 
Laruelle, M., A. Abi -Dargham, et al. (1995). "SPECT imaging of striatal dopamine release after 
amphetamine challenge." J Nucl Med  36(7): 1182 -90. 
 
Lovibond, P. F. and S. H. Lovibond (1995). "The structure of negative emotional states: 
comparison of the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS) with the Beck Depression and 
Anxiety Inventories." Behav Res Ther  33(3): 335 -43. 
 
Martin, W. R., J. W. Sloan, et al. (1971). "Physiologic, subjective, and behavioral effects of 
amphetamine, methamphetamine, ephedrine, phenmetrazine, and methylphenidate in man." 
Clin Pharmacol Ther  12(2): 245 -58. 
 
Mattay, V. S., J. H. Callicott, et al. (2000). "Effects of dextroamphetamine on cognitive 
performance and cortical activation." Neuroimage  12(3): 268 -75. 
 
Mayo, L. M., D. Fraser, et al. (2013). "Conditioned preference to a methamphetamine -
associated contextual cue in humans." Neuropsychopharmacology  38(6): 921 -9. 
 
McNair D., L. M., Droppleman L. (1971). "Profile of Mood States." San Diego: Eduational and 
Industrial Testing Service . 
 
Moore, K. E. (1977). "The actions of amphetamine on neurotransmitters: a brief review." Biol 
Psychiatry  12(3): 451 -62. 
 
Morean, M. E., H. de Wit, et al. (2013). "The drug effects questionnaire: psychometric support 
across three drug types." Psychopharmacology (Berl)  227(1): 177 -92. 
 
Navarra, R. L., B. D. Clark, et al. (2017). "Methylphenidate Enhances Early -Stage Sensory 
Processing and Rodent Performance of a Visual Signal Detection Task." 
Neuropsychopharmacology  42(6): 1326 -1337.  
 
Oldham, S., C. Murawski, et al. (2018). "The anticipation and outcome phases of reward and 
loss processing: A neuroimaging metaâ€ •analysis of the monetary incentive delay task." 
Human brain mappi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  39(8): 3398 -3418.  
 
Patrick, C. J., J. J. Curtin, et al. (2002). "Development and validation of a brief form of the 
Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire." Psychol Assess  14(2): 150 -63. 
 
Pessiglioni, M et al (2006) Dopamine -dependent prediction errors underpin reward -seeking 
behaviour in humans.  Nature 442 1042 -46 DOI10.1038/nature05051.  
 
Rosenberg, M., Noonan, S., DeGutis, J., Esterman, M. (2013). Sustaining visual attention in 
the face of distraction: a novel gradual -onset continuous performance task. Attention, 
Perception, & Psychophysics, 75 (3), 426 -39. 
 
Smith, S. M., M. Jenkinson, et al. (2004). "Advances in functional and structural MR image 
analysis and implementation as FSL." Neuroimage  [ADDRESS_41784] 1 : S208 -19. 
 
Soderpalm, A., L. Nikolayev, et al. (2003). "Effects of stress on responses to 
methamphetamine in humans." Psychopharmacology (Berl)  170(2): 188 -99. 
 
Uftring, S. J., S. R. Wachtel, et al. (2001). "An fMRI study of the effect of amphetamine on brain 
activity." Neuropsychopharmacology  25(6): 925 -35. 
 
Van Hedger, K., S. K. Keedy, et al. (2018). "Neural responses to cues paired with 
methamphetamine in healthy volunteers." Neuropsychopharmacology  43(8): 1732.  
 
Wachtel, S. R., A. Ortengren, et al. (2002). "The effects of acute haloperidol or risperidone on 
subjective responses to methamphetamine in healthy volunteers." Drug Alcohol Depend  68(1): 
23-33. 
 
Wardle, M. C., B. A. Marcus, et al. (2015). "A Preliminary Investigation of Individual Differences 
in Subjective Responses to D -Amphetamine, Alcohol, and Delta -9-Tetrahydrocannabinol Using 
a Within -Subjects Randomized Trial." PLoS One  10(10): e0140501.  
 
Weafer, J. and H. de Wit (2013). "Inattention, impulsive action, and subjective response to D -
amphetamine." Drug Alcohol Depend  133(1): 127 -33. 
 
Weafer, J., K. Van Hedger, et al. (2019). "Methamphetamine acutely alters frontostriatal resting 
state functional connectivity in healthy young adults." Addict Biol : e12775.  
 
White, T. L., A. J. Justice, et al. (2002). "Differential subjective effects of D -amphetamine by 
[CONTACT_547], hormone levels and menstrual cycle phase." Pharmacol Biochem Behav  73(4): 729 -
41. 
 
Whitfield -Gabrieli, S. and A. Nieto -Castanon (2012). "Conn: a functional connectivity toolbox for 
correlated and anticorrelated brain networks." Brain Connect  2(3): 125 -41. 
 
Wilkinson, L., Z. Khan, and M. Jahanshahi, The role of the basal ganglia and its cortical 
connections in sequence learning: evidence from implicit and explicit sequence learning in 
Parkinson's disease.  Neuropsychologia, 2009. 47(12): p. 2564 -73. 
 
 
 