 
        
 
       
Neurally Targeted Interventions to Reduce Early Childhood Anxiety  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 May 17th, 2024  
 
 
Page 2  
 
Office of IRB Social/Behavioral/Educational Research (SBER) Protocol  
 
1. STUDY  TITLE  
Neurally Targeted Interventions to Reduce Early Childhood Anxiety  
2. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR   
[INVESTIGATOR_242324], MD. Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University  
Jason Moser, Ph.D. Department of Psychology, Michigan State University  
3. STUDY RATIONALE  
Deficits of effortful control (EC) have been posited to underlie early emerging  anxiety such that improving EC may help to 
reduce anxiety symptoms. This study will test a  play-based EC training intervention (Kidpower -Structured Games) against 
an active comparator (Child -led Play) in clinically anxious preschoolers to test the hypothesis that EC training will improve 
EC and thereby [CONTACT_242333] .    
4. SPECIFIC AIMS/HYPOTHESES  
Aim 1: Confirm that Kidpower -Structured Games  engages neural and behavioral markers of EC. We hypothesize that 
Kidpower -Structured Games  will produce greater increases in neurophysiological  and behavior al marker s  of EC than 
Kidpower -Child-Led Play  (CLP, active comparator).  
 
Aim2: Assess the relationship between pre - to post -Kidpower -Structured Games  change in neurobehavioral markers of EC 
and change in clinically significant anxiety. We hypothesize that increases in neurophysiological and behavioral measures of EC will relate to reductions in clinically significant anxiety from pre -to-post Kidpower - Structured Games. Exploratory 
analyses will examine the moderating effects of baseline threat reactivity on the relation between pre - to post -treatment 
increase in EC and reduction in anxiety severity.   
Aim 3: Explore dosing effects of Kidpower -Structured Games  on behavioral EC targets and anxiety symptoms. We 
hypothesize that greater at -home practice of Kidpower -Structured Games  exercises will relate to greater engagement of 
neural and behavioral markers of EC targets and greater reduction in anxiety symptoms. Dosage will be assessed by 
[CONTACT_242334] (frequency, duration).  
5. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE   
Preschool anxiety is prevalent, with 20% of children affected  (Buffered et al, 2012) . Among these, a majority will continue 
to experience symptoms throughout adolescence and adulthood  (Bittner et al, 2007) . Early childhood anxiety also 
predisposes to a host  of negative, long -term outcomes, including major depression and substance abuse  (Bittner et al, 
2007; Zimmerman et al, 2003) , underscor ing the importance of early intervention.  
 We will test a neuroscientifically -derived intervention targeting effortful control (EC) skills, low levels of which have been 
linked to greater emotional reactivity and clinical anxiety. Defined as the ability to effectively regulate behavior and emotion,  EC reflects the activity of frontal brain systems and can be indexed by [CONTACT_242335] -related brain potential, the error -
related negativity (ERN) and time frequency interchannel phase synchrony (ICPS)  (Moran et al, 2015) . The ERN is a 
neurophysiological respon se, localized to the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, signaling the need for adaptive behavioral 
adjustments following errors  (Gehring et al, 2018 ). The ICPS reflects the transmission of this error signal to the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex in order to implement the specified control  (Cavanagh et al, 2009). 
 
Findings from our labs and the work of others have shown that reduced ERN and ICPS relate to behavioral deficits in EC and enhanced threat reactivity (Lo et al, 2015)  similar to that documented in clinically anxious children  (Meyer, 2017) . In 
response, our team developed a child -friendly group EC training, Camp Kidpower -Structured Games, designed to increase 
ERN, ICPS and related EC behaviors in the service of decreasing anxiety symptoms in preschoolers. Results of our pi[INVESTIGATOR_242325]  (Schroder et al, 2022) . Building on this pi[INVESTIGATOR_20732], the current project aims to replicate and extend these 
findings in a larger sample using a randomized controlled design.  
 
 
Page [ADDRESS_294079] an active comparator "Child -led Play" condition  
(Kidpower -CLP). Kidpower -Structured Games will involve executive function training games, shown to improve executive 
function skills in preschoolers (Diamond and L ing, 2016) and tested previously for the treatment of children with ADHD 
(Halperin et al, 201 3).  Kidpower -CLP will permit identification of specific effects of the EC training by [CONTACT_242336]: a) participation in a fun playgroup; b) interaction with new children during activities; c) separation 
from parents; and d) time spent wi th new adults. As detailed next,  Kidpower -CLP is derived from evidence based 
treatment for early childhood psychopathology ; in this study, it will include structured play activities  (art activities, 
dramatic play, and story time ), but not EC games. Both Kidpower -Structured Games   and -CLP conditions will be delivered 
to small groups of clinically anxious preschoolers by [CONTACT_242337] . 
 
Child -led play has been shown to foster the development of cognitive, physical, social, and emotional well - being of 
children (Ginsburg et al, 2007).  Moreover, play is important to healthy brain development (Shonkoff and Phillips, 2000; 
Frost, 1998; Tamis -Lemonda et al, 2004). When play is allowed to be child driven, children practice decision -making skills, 
move at their own pace, discover their own areas of interest. Additionally, child -led play promotes healthy parent -child 
attachment. The most widely em ployed early childhood psychotherapy, Parent Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT), focuses 
on Child -led Play for the first half of treatment. During this portion of PCIT, children experience child -directed play with 
their parents to encourage warm, secure care giver –child relationships ( Lieneman  et al, 2017). The  child -led play condition 
in Camp Kidpower gives children the opportunity to direct their own play at camp, while training parents to deliver child-
led play at -home. As such, it fosters development acros s cognitive, social, neural and relational domains.  
6. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  (1 page maximum)  
Participants are randomized to a camp -style intervention ("Camp Kidpower"), which includes either EC training ( Kidpower -
Structured Games ) or child -led playgroup (active comparator; Kidpower -CLP).  Before and after the 4 -week intervention, a 
multi -level assessment will be completed, including clinical interview with parent about their child's anxiety symptoms, 
parent -report surveys on child and self, lab -observed behavioral tasks and electroencephalo gram (EEG) with child. Primary 
analyses will test for group mean differences in neurophysiological and behavioral indices of EC from time 1  (pre-
intervention)  to time 2 (post -intervention) among childr en assigned to Kidpower - Structured Games  training compared to 
those in assigned to Kidpower -CLP. Secondary analyses will test relationship of changes in neurophysiological targets with 
change in EC behaviors and change in anxiety severity.  
 
The Kidpower -Structured Games  were adapted from a group -based intervention originally designed to treat EC deficits 
in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder  (Halperin et al, 2013)  and a recently published review of 
executive function  and effortful control interventions  (Diamond and L ing, 2016) . Kidpower -CLP was developed by [CONTACT_242338] -Structured Games  except for EC training games.  
 
Both Kidpower -Structured Games  and Kidpower -CLP will occur over [ADDRESS_294080] 30 minutes of camp will include parents, who will be assigned daily homework  involving the same play as at camp  to complete with their child in between camp 
sessions. Two parent meetings (led by [CONTACT_242339]) will take place; the first will occur prior to the beginning of camp to orient parents, and the second will be held mid -way through camp to answer questions that may 
have arisen.  
 
Error- eliciting Zoo Task:  The “Zoo task”, a “Go/No -Go” paradigm assessing effortful control, has been found to reliably 
elicit ERN in preschoolers  (Grammer et al, 2014) . Before performing the task, children are instructed to help the game’s 
zookeeper find all the escaped animals. Children then view a series of animals on a computer screen and are asked to 
press a button when a new animal appears (Go trials), unless the a nimal is an orangutan (i.e., inhibit button response, 
 
 
Page 4 No-Go trials). The task includes 8 blocks, each containing 30 unique animals (Go trials) and 10 orangutans (No -Go trials) 
in random order.  
 
Error Related Negativity (ERN):  As children play the Zoo task, EEG data will be recorded from 32 scalp sensors 
embedded in an elastic cap using the BioSemi Active 2 system (Amsterdam, The Netherlands). ERPs from fronto -central 
recording sites time -locked (within 100 ms) to error and cor rect response will be examined. Differentiation between 
these trial types is the primary ERN measure, but we will also consider ERN on error trials, as well as ERPs on correct 
trials separately. Previous research indicates that the ERN demonstrates good psychometric properties across children, 
adolescents and adults. The number of NoGo errors and response times (RTs) to Go trials will also be considered in NP analyses, as performance can affect ERN amplitude.  
 Time Frequency Interchannel Phase Synchrony (ICPS): Using the same approach previously employed by [CONTACT_27156], complex time- varying energy time -frequency distributions (TFDs) of all the EEG signals at each channel extracted from 
the Zoo task (described above) will be obtained using the reduced interference distribution (RID) Rihaczek distribution. RID based TFDs offer improved time -frequency support relative to wavelets. Functional connectivity will be assessed 
using interchannel phase synchrony (ICPS), based on the phase locking value (PLV), derived from the RID TFDs. Current source density (CSD) transform will be applied to EEG data before phase synchrony analysis to reduce volume conduction, using published methods.  We will focus on ICPS within the theta band in the ERN time window. Consistent 
with previous work, the current study will report ICPS between FCz and lateral frontal sites, indexing mediolateral functional connectivity, indexing control processing.  
 Behavioral Measures: Pre/post behavioral tasks are drawn from widely employed temperament protocols - e.g., Lab -
TAB, Kochanska battery  (Kochanska et al, 1996) , and the age -normed NIH Toolbox  (Zelazo et al, 2013) . In addition to 
these tasks, free play time will be given to children and parent during the session. B ehavioral tasks will be videotaped (if 
consent is given) for analysis. Behavioral tasks total approximately [ADDRESS_294081] behavioral tasks (potential threat task, speech task, and bubbles task)  (McGinnis et al, 2016) , 
children may be asked to wear a lab -owned smartphone attached to a belt that will be worn around the child's waist. 
The smartphone uses a custom program, designed specifically for this research application/data collection and is not publicly available. I t will guide administrators through the tasks by [CONTACT_242340] a ‘start’ and ‘stop’ button 
for data collection. It stores raw mo tion and audio data from the smartphone's accelerometer and microphone, labeled 
only with a de -identified numeric ID. The smartphone will not be connected to either cellular or wireless networks 
during data collection. This de -identified data will be trans ferred to the secure servers via physical wire and 
immediately deleted from the device after each lab visit. Motion and audio data on tasks are especially helpful for generating behavioral indices of fear. In the potential threat task, children walk beside s experimenter towards a 
covered terrarium, and motion data indexes reluctance to approach -- a behavioral correlate of Fear. In the speech task, 
audio data can be submitted to machine learning algorithms to discern speech patterns associated with anxiety severity. Motion and audio data during the Bubbles task will be used to generate a behavioral index of Reward.  
 Clinical Measures:  May include a combination of clinician -assessed and clinical self -report measures for child anxiety 
and depression, temperament, development, intelligence, and parent psychopathology and experiences. These may be administered during screening, at either of the lab visits, and/or during the follow -up phone call. Questionnaires may be 
administered via paper forms or via online via a secure application such as Qualtrics. A summary of measures and timing for administration is included in the Uploads section.  
 Data collected in the current study will be collapsed together with data collected using the same study protocol at Michigan State ( N = 71), [LOCATION_001] State Psychiatric Institute (N = 43) to  test study aims.  
 
In the current study, up to [ADDRESS_294082] in data analysis.  
7.  RESEARCH PARTICIPANTS (2-3 paragraph maximum)  
 
 
Page [ADDRESS_294083] be 4.0 -5.99 years old at time of consent.  
2. Has primary clinical diagnosis of separation anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety 
disorder, panic disorder, obsessive -compulsive disorder, and/or specific phobia if symptoms present more days 
than not.  
3. Written informed consent by a parent/legal guardian.  
4. Fluent in English (note: participant may be bilingual, but must be able to speak and understand fluent English to 
participate in study. ) 
 
Exclusion criteria  
1. History of head injury  
2. History of serious neurological illness or current medical illness  
3. History of major depressive disorder (MDD)  
4. History of post -traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)  
5. History of neurodevelopmental delay, autism spectrum disorder (ASD), or intellectual disability  
6. Currently taking medications that affect the central nervous system (e.g., stimulants for ADHD, SSRIs for anxiety/depression, alpha agonists for ADHD or tics).  
7. Currently receiving psychotherapy or other behavioral interventions  
8. Primary clinical diagnosis is selective mutism.  
9. History of recent physically aggressive behaviors that have caused harm to other children  
10. Sibling of a child who has participated or is currently participating in this protocol  
 Parents of children with clinical anxiety symptoms  
Inclusion criteria  
1. Fluent in English  (note: Participant may be bilingual, but must be able  to speak and  understand fluent English to 
participate in Questionnaire study)  
2. Parent lives with child at least 50% of time  
3. Has access to internet and webcam  
4. Written  informed consent for self and for their child  
 
Exclusion criteria  
1. Under [ADDRESS_294084] the  study team after seeing study advertisements on social media 
or flyers posted in the community. C opi[INVESTIGATOR_1099] -approved study recruitment materials (e.g., flyers) may also be 
provided to cl inic or school staff for them to share with potentially eligible participants ; if interested, potential 
participants may then contact [CONTACT_242341]. O nce in touch with a study team member, potential 
participants will be provided with study information  and their parent/caregiver will be assessed with an IRB -approved 
phone screen (see Telephone Screening Questionnaire). A waiver of written documentation of consent is requested for phone screening and retention of a password -protected “Subject Screen Log” that will contain child name, child age , 
parent name, parent email address and/or phone number , date of phone screen, and brief reason for likely eligibility or 
ineligibility. Retention of this information will be used by [CONTACT_242342] r epeat screening of potential 
participant s previously deemed ineligible or not interested, and to facilitate recontact [CONTACT_242343] /interested but would like to participate at a later date.  After the phone screen, potential subjects will proceed 
to signing a written consent  (“enrolled”) , followed by a detailed clinical assessment to confirm eligibility.  If ineligible 
based on this assessment, the subject will be considered “withdrawn”; consent forms will be retained for those 
 
 
Page [ADDRESS_294085] Screen Log.  
 
Recruitment Settings at Columbia University:  The study team may provide approved recruitment materials to the following programs to share with potentially eligible participants:  
 
CAPES Evaluation Service and the Youth Treatment and Evaluation of Anxiety and Mood (Y- TEAM) Program  
The CAPES Evaluation Service and the Youth Treatment and Evaluation of Anxiety and Mood (Y -TEAM) Program  is part 
of the Children's Day Unit  at the [LOCATION_001] State Psychiatric Institute . The CAPES/Y -TEAM provides free expert 
consultation, evaluation, and treatment referrals for children suffering from mood and anxiety disorders.  
 
Morgan Stanley Children's Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_242326] (CHONY)  
Clinics  at the Morgan Stanley Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_242326]  (e.g., primary care Pediatrics , the Integrated Mental 
Health Program, School -Based Mental Health Program, and Pediatric Psychiatry Clinic).  
 
Columbia University Center for Anxiety and Related Disorders (CUCARD)  and Faculty Practice Organization (FPO)   
CUCARD and the FPO sees 300 new children and adolescents per year referred for anxiety disorders. Clinic staff are 
experienced in providing famil ies with information about potential research opportunitie s at Columbia University . 
 
Private Practice  
Mental health professionals who see children with anxiety disorders in private practice.  
 
Primary Care Doctor's Offices and Clinics  
Primary care clinics at CUIMC or identified through publicly available sources (i.e., websites, Google search). Initial 
outreach  to provide study information to clinics  is shared by  [CONTACT_242344] , copying  
[CONTACT_129833], the study Principal Investigator, noting that she is  available to address any questions/concerns (see email 
template, “Coordinator_to_Clinic_Email_Template_2.18.23”).  
Schools & Daycares  
As with primary care clinics, preschool/kindergarten programs will be identified through publicly available sources ( e.g., 
websites, Google search).  Initial o utreach  to provide study information  will be sent by [CONTACT_242345] & daycares,  copying  [CONTACT_129833], the study Principal Investigator, noting that she is available to address any 
questions/concerns  (see email template, “Coordinator_to_Preschool_Email_Template_2.18.23”) . 
 
Advocacy and Support Groups  
Patient advocacy ( e.g., International Obsessive Compulsive  Disorder  Foundation) and support groups  (e.g, parent 
support groups) . 
 
Craigslist and Nextdoor  
Craigslist website and on Nextdoor  in local communities . 
 
Social Media (e.g. Facebook , Twitter , and study -related websites ) 
An IRB -approved description of our study will be advertised on social media and relevant websites (e.g. departmental, 
Psychology Today). Facebook advertising may include  groups of  treatment providers, support group leaders, and 
parents  or paid Facebook ads . 
 
[LOCATION_001] Family  
[LOCATION_001] Family runs a website (www.NewYorkFamily.com) and publishes regional print magazines that describe resources and activities for families in the NYC area. They also provide opt -in email targeting, where they send emails 
on the behalf of organizatio ns and other companies to parents in NYC who have subscribed to their emails and who 
 
 
Page [ADDRESS_294086] of the Center for [LOCATION_001] City Affairs at The 
New School and runs a website (www.InsideSchools.org) that provides information about the NYC school system. New 
York Family sends newsletters to InsideSchoolssubscribers.  
 
LinkedIn  
LinkedIn to communicate with colleagues about our research efforts.  
 
Google Ads  
Google advertisements to advertise [CONTACT_129833]'s recruitment webpage as one of the top search results for parents who make searches regarding pediatric anxiety in the NYC area.  
 
RecruitMe:Columbia  
Columbia University's RecruitMe, an online tool to connect potential research participants with researchers conducting relevant studies.  
 
Flyers  
Posted  on bulletin boards in Columbia University Medical Center buildings as well as in local laundromats, grocery 
stores, public libraries, and community centers . Please see the attached flyers.  
 Recruitment Settings at Michigan State  University:  
None . The MSU site  has completed recruitment and will not be enrolling any future participants.  
 
9.  INFORMED CONSENT  
Prior to conducting the eligibility portion of the telephone screen, research staff will document verbal consent to 
proceed with the conversation in the Subject Screening Log.  Additionally, a waiver of documentation of consent is  
requested for the phone screen.  
 Prior to initiating baseline clinical assessment procedures, research staff will obtain written consent from the participant's parent/legal guardian for themselves to participate in the study (parent informed consent) and for their child to participate in the study (parental permission). Research staff will describe the purpose and nature of the 
research study and answer any questions. Parents/legal guardians will receive  signed  copi[INVESTIGATOR_242327].   
 
Informed consent is a process that is initiated prior to the potential child subject’s parent agreeing to participate in the study and continues throughout the individual’s study participation. Extensive discussion of risks and possible benefits of this in tervention will be provided to the parent/legal guardian, including risks related to travel for in -person visits 
during COVID -19. The parent will be made aware that the study team requests they not initiate other treatment for 
their child’s anxiety during their participation in this study. It will be made clear that this study is voluntary, so they are free to seek other treatment for their child at an any point if they feel it is needed. If they are considering said additional treatment, the researcher obt aining consent will request that they discuss this with the study team first, and 
may need to be withdrawn from the study as a result.  
 Consent for remote clinical or research procedures will be documented, and the consent discussion process will include discussion of the technology HIPAA -compliant platforms to be used and any concerns the patient may have, such as 
access to a private spac e in which to take calls, or accessibility —access at home to adequate devices, cell signal, or 
internet.  
 
Consent forms (written in non -technical language, understandable by [CONTACT_242346]) describing in detail the study interventions, procedures, and risks will be given to the parent. Upon reviewing the documents, one of the investigators (or their designee) will explain the research study to the subject/parent and answer 
any questions that may arise.  
 
 
Page [ADDRESS_294087] study visit, research staff will 
review the consent with the parent/guardian and collect e -signatures for each of the following:  
 
Parent Informed Consent  
1. Consent for parent study participation  
2. Consent to use parent audio and video recording for sharing/training purposes:  
• For training purposes within the research team at CU/MSU.  
• For training purposes outside CU/MSU.  
• For community outreach and to raise general awareness of this work.  
 
Parental Permission  
1. Consent for child's study participation  
2. Consent to use child audio and video recording for sharing/training purposes: 
• For training purposes within the research team at CU/MSU.  
• For training purposes outside CU/MSU.  
• For community outreach and to raise general awareness of this work.  
 
A waiver of documentation of consent is  used for the phone screen.  
 
Persons designated to discuss and document consent:  
• Fitzgerald, Kate, MD  
• Chen, Yu -Hsuan (Sherry), BA  
• Hay, Briana, BS  
• Risdon, Caroline, BS  
 
10.   PRIVATE, IDENITIFABLE INFORMATION ABOUT RESEARCH PARTICIPANTS  
 
We collect the following  identifiable information: Parent name, child name, parent date of birth, child date of birth, 
parent email address, parent cell phone number, parent city of birth, child city of birth.   
 
To ensure adequate protection of human subjects, the investigators and research staff will complete human subjects 
training as required by [CONTACT_242347] (e.g., CITI Training at CU ). Every possible effort will be made to limit 
identifiable information on potential subjects during recruitment. The minimum amount of necessary information will 
be recorded, and staff are aware of the dangers of emailing, printing, and faxing sensitive i nformation. Conversations in 
which a patient or participant’s name [CONTACT_242356] (e.g., determining study eligibility) will occur in private 
settings. Phone calls with potential research subjects will occur behind closed doors. Remote visits will be conducted via 
HIPAA -compliant video teleconferencing to protect confidentiality, all in accordance with the CU Remote 
Communications Guidance.  
 
During camp, children will only be addressed by [CONTACT_242348] (or first initial if desired by [CONTACT_242349]) to help protect participant privacy.  
 
Privacy of each parent and child’s clinical research information will be protected and only reviewed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_242328]. Mandatory reporting of child abuse and neglect (e.g., detected in surveys, reported in interviews) is required in 
accordance wit h clinical standard practice. If a study team member learns that a subject has the potential to harm him 
or herself, or another individual, we will break confidentiality and take steps to prevent harm. Similarly, any evidence of 
potential child abuse will be reported to Child Protective Services. Mandatory reporting is explained to subjects in the 
informed consent document as a limit to confidentiality.  
 
 
 
Page [ADDRESS_294088] -
protected computers, and all email communication is secure and encrypted. The computing systems are protected from 
outside access by [CONTACT_242350]. Paper records are kept in file drawers in a locked room and paper records with 
identifying information (e.g., payment records) are kept in locked fi le cabinets physically separate from the research 
records. Only authorized research personnel will have access to the locked rooms in which these records are contained.  
 
All questionnaire and task responses, including data from the data from clinical interviews will be kept confidential, and 
will only be marked with subject ID numbers. An electronic database will be used to store the coded data, and the key 
linking to iden tifiable subject information will be kept separate from the database with research data. This coded data 
will be stored using MSU Qualtrics which is a secure, HIPAA - compliant application. Access to Qualtrics requires 
authorization and the study's database  is encrypted and password -protected (see Data Management Plan for details).  
 
Mandatory reporting of child abuse and neglect (e.g., detected in surveys, reported in interviews) is required in 
accordance with clinical standard practice. If a study team member learns that a subject has the potential to harm him or herself, or another individual, we will break confidentiality and take steps to prevent harm. Similarly, any evidence of potential child abuse will be reported to Child Protective Services. Mandatory reporting is explained to subjects in the informed consent document as a lim it to confidentiality.  
 
11.  RISK MINIMIZATION  
Participation in clinical, EEG and behavioral assessments involve everyday procedures that are similar to  those a 
participant could encounter during doctor’s visits or at school ( i.e., no more than minimal risk).   
 
Risks Associated with All Study Assessments 
1. Loss of confidentiality around sensitive information.  
To minimize risk: All research subjects are assigned research numbers, and only this number links all data collected to the subject. A single tracking file contains links to the research records and subject codes. Paper records are kept in locked file draw ers in a locked room to which only authorized research personnel have access. Paper records with 
identifying information are kept in locked file cabinets physically separate from the research records. Computer records with identifying information are kept on secure, password protected servers. All research staff will be well trained to protect the confidentiality of sensitive information.  
2. Some  psychological  (emotional)  discomfort  for parents  answering  questions  included  in the standard 
surveys.  
 To minimize  risk: When  collecting  measures, the  study  team  will pay particular attention  to questions  regarding  self-
harm.  We will require  participants  to complete  the two measures  that include  these  questions  (the PHQ -9 and CBCL)  
prior  to leaving  the lab visit.  If suicidality  is suspected  based  on parent  surveys/answers  or revealed  by [CONTACT_242351], the  PI [INVESTIGATOR_242329]  (child  psychiatrist)  will be contact[CONTACT_242352]  a comprehensive  suicidal  assessment  and establish  a safety  plan  or referral  to Psychiatric  Emergency Services 
in accordance with  standard psychiatric care.  
 
3. Discomfort  or anxiety  in child  participants  at separation  from  parents,  during  the camp  intervention and/or 
pre- and post -visits. 
 
 
 
Page 10 To minimize  risk: Upon  arrival  for assessment,  children  will be given  ample  time  to interact  and play  with  research  
staff  under  supervision  of their  parent  or guardian  (typi[INVESTIGATOR_242330]).  
This will allow  children  to meet  the research  staff  in a safe context  with  parent  nearby.  Children  may  be shown  
parent’s  location  in a nearby  [CONTACT_242353],  and parents  will be able  to view  their  children  at any 
point  during the  assessment through  a secure,  closed -circuit  camera  if needed.  If a child’s  distress at separation  
becomes extreme,  then  the child  will be reunited  with  parent  based  on evaluator  discretion.  
 
Risks  Associated with  Neurophysiological Assessment  
 
1. Most  likely  risk to participants  is minor  physical discomfort  (e.g.,  needing  to sit still while performing  
the experiment,  coolness  of electrode  gel applied  to scalp)  or anxiety  associated  with placement of the 
electrophysiological equipment.  
 
To minimize  risk: We will rely on procedures  that have  been  widely  employed  in the developmental psychophysiology  
literature  and which  have  been  used  when  conducting  similar  tasks  in pi[INVESTIGATOR_242331]. For EEGs, we will take  
special  measures  to reduce children’s anxiety  about  the novel  equipment.  This will involve  play time  in our EEG 
collection  room  as well as  sharing  a short  video/story with  the parent  and child about the  experiment.  
 
2. Participants  may  experience some  discomfort  upon  removal  of the electrophysiological  equipment  – 
specifically, facial electrode sensors.  
 To minimize  risk: Participants  will be informed  that facial  electrode  sensors are similar  to Band - Aids  and will help 
guide their preference for removal.  
 
Risks Associated with Neurophysiological Assessment  
1. Most likely risk to participants is minor physical discomfort (e.g., needing to sit still while performing the experiment, coolness of electrode gel applied to scalp) or anxiety associated with placement of the electrophysiological equipment.  
 To minimize  risk: We will rely on procedures  that have  been  widely  employed  in the developmental psychophysiology  
literature  and which  have  been  used  when  conducting  similar  tasks  in pi[INVESTIGATOR_242331]. For the youngest  child  
participants,  we will take  special  measures  to reduce children’s anxiety  about  the novel  equipment.  This will involve  
play time  in our EEG collection  room  as well as  sharing  a short  video/story with  the parent  and child about the  
experiment.  
 
2. Participants may experience some discomfort upon removal of the electrophysiological equipment – specifically, facial electrode sensors.  
 To minimize  risk: Participants  will be informed  that facial  electrode  sensors are similar  to Band - Aids, to help guide 
their preference for removal.  
 
Risks Associated with Behavioral Battery  
1. Some children may experience some emotional discomfort or apprehension when engaging in the behavioral “potential threat task." During this task, children enter a room and are asked to approach a covered terrarium . 
When they get close, the cover is lifted by [CONTACT_242354] a benign object (e.g., a tissue box). This task elicits uncertainty during approach.  
 
To minimize  risk: Particular care  will be taken  during  debriefing  of the potential  threat  task.  Child participants  will be 
reassured that the covered  object  is not threatening  immediately  after  its presentation. If  a child  becomes  overly  
distressed,  the protocol  may  be interrupted  and parent  can interact  with child  to provide  comfort.  The task may  be 
 
 
Page 11 ended  early  if the child  becomes  tearful  or otherwise highly  distressed.  All participants  will be given  a 5-minute  free 
play with  the parent  immediately after the fear task to regulate and debrief.  
 
Risks Associated with Intervention Training  
1. Risks of participating in the camp are minimal, and include boredom or frustration with training tasks, similar to 
experiences children may encounter in a day -to-day school environment.  
To minimize  risk:  Participants  will be allowed  breaks  throughout  daily  training.  Study  team members  conducting  the camp  
will have  experience with  young  children  and be closely  supervised by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Fitzgerald.  
 
2. As with any group activity with children, there is always the possibility of unpredictable behavior, which could cause children discomfort or distress.  
 To minimize  risk: Every  precaution  will be taken  to ensure  the safety  of all children  participating  in the  camp.  This 
includes  reserving  the right  to ask children  to discontinue  participation  if there  is reasonable concern for unsafe 
behavior.  
 
Risks Associated with COVID -19 
1. Travel to CU for the onsite sessions may increase risk of exposure to COVID -19. 
 
To minimize  risk: The safety  regulations put  forth  by [CONTACT_242355],  and the study  team  will 
work  with  participants  to find convenient  and safe ways  to commute  (also  providing  transportation  reimbursement  if 
requested).  During  consenting  procedures, participants  will be reminded  to exercise  caution  when  traveling  in public  and 
follow  public  health guidelines,  such  as wearing  masks  in public  and avoiding  crowds.  If they  do not feel safe traveling  at a 
certain  time,  they  can call to reschedule  visits.  Finally,  all personnel  administering  in-person behavioral  tasks,  EEG,  and camp  
interventions  will maintain  social  distancing  when  able,  wear masks  at all times,  and sanitize  hands  and surfaces  frequently  
to reduce  risk of infection.   
 ___ Check here if the only risk  of the research is a breach in confidentiality.  If so, no additional information is  
required in this section.  
 
12.  POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
Regarding the prospect of direct benefit to participants, both arms of this study involve an active intervention: Effortful 
Control and Child -Led Play (the control group). As cited in the protocol, the Effortful Control activities are based on prior 
studie s demonstrating the benefit of these game -like tasks for a variety of children’s skills, such as executive 
functioning, attention, and motor skills. Additionally, decades of research support the benefits of Child -Led Play. Play is 
a crucial context in which children learn important social emotional skills and build relationships with peers and adults. Both of the study arms involve positive, structured experiences with supportive adults and with children, which is 
beneficial for youth development, particularly among clinically anxious children. Lastly, parents may obtain important 
information and insight from the course of participation, including via the comprehensive assessment conducted to determine eligibility . 
 
13.   REFERENCES  
Bittner,  A., Egger, H. L.,  Erkanli,  A., Jane  Costello,  E., Foley,  D. L., & Angold,  A. (2007). What  do childhood  anxiety  
disorders  predict?  Journal  of Child  Psychology  and Psychiatry,  and Allied  Disciplines, 48(12),  1174– 1183.   
 
Bufferd,  S. J., Dougherty,  L. R., Carlson,  G. A., Rose,  S., & Klein,  D. N. (2012).  Psychiatric  disorders  in preschoolers: continuity 
from  ages  3 to 6. The American  Journal  of Psychiatry,  169(11), 1157 –1164. 
https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2012.12020268  
 
 
 
Page 12 Cavanagh,  J. F., Cohen,  M. X., & Allen,  J. J. B. (2009).  Prelude  to and Resolution  of an Error:  EEG Phase Synchrony  
Reveals  Cognitive  Control  Dynamics  during  Action  Monitoring.  Journal  of Neuroscience,  29(1), 98– 105. 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4137 -08.2009  
 
Diamond,  A., & Ling,  D. S. (2016).  Conclusions  about  interventions,  programs,  and approaches  for improving  
executive functions  that appear  justified  and those  that,  despi[INVESTIGATOR_242332],  do not. 
Developmental  Cognitive  Neuroscience,  18, 34–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2015.11.[ADDRESS_294089]  JL. (1988).  Neuroscience,  play and brain  development.  Paper  presented  at: IPA/[LOCATION_003]  Triennial NationalConference  
 
Ginsburg,  K. R., Committee  on Communications,  & Committee  on Psychosocial  Aspects  of Child  and Family  Health.  
(2007).  The importance  of play in promoting  healthy  child  development  and maintaining strong parent -child bonds. 
Pediatrics , 119(1), 182- 191.   
 Gehring,  W. J., Goss, B.,  Coles, M.  G. H., Meyer,  D. E., &  Donchin,  E. (2018). The Error -Related Negativity.  Perspectives  
on Psychological  Science:  A Journal  of the Association  for Psychological  Science, 13(2),200– 204.  
 
Halperin,  J. M., Marks,  D. J., Bedard,  A.-C. V., Chacko,  A., Curchack,  J. T., Yoon,  C. A., & Healey,  D. M. (2013).  Training  
executive,  attention,  and motor  skills:  a proof -of-concept  study  in preschool  children With ADHD. Journal of 
Attention Disorders, 17(8), 711– 721.  
 
Lieneman  et al, 2017. Parent Child Interaction Therapy: Current Perspectives Psychol Res Behav Manag 10:239 -256  
 Lo, S. L., Schroder,  H. S., Moran,  T. P., Durbin,  C. E., & Moser,  J. S. (2015).  Neurophysiological evidence of an 
association between cognitive  control  and defensive  reactivity  processes in  young children.  
Developmental   Cognitive   Neuroscience,  15, 35–47.  
 
Meyer,  A. (2017).  A biomarker of anxiety in children and adolescents: A review focusing on the error -related 
negativity (ERN) and anxiety across development. Developmental  Cognitive  Neuroscience , 27, 58- 68.  
 Moran,  T. P., Bernat,  E. M., Aviyente,  S., Schroder,  H. S., & Moser,  J. S. (2015).  Sending  mixed  signals: worry  is associated  
with  enhanced  initial error  processing  but reduced  call for subsequent  cognitive  control. Social  Cognitive and  Affective  
Neuroscience,  10(11),  1548– 1556. https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsv046  
 Schroder
 HS*, Ip KI*, Hruschak JL, Horbatch F, Hall M, Liu Y, Manella K, Muzik M, Rosenblum KL, Moser JS, 
Fitzgerald KD . Targeting cognitive control to reduce anxiety in very young children: A proof -of-concept study 
(2022). Depression and Anxiety: 39(8- 9):646- 656. *Co-first authors. PMID: 35708131.  
 Shonkoff,  J. P., & Phillips,  D. A. (2000).  From  Neurons  to Neighborhoods:  The Science  of Early  Childhood 
Development.  eric.  ed. gov. National  Academy  of Sciences  Press:  Washington DC.  Accessed  on May,  8, 2015 
 
Tamis -LeMonda  C.S.,  Shannon  J.D., Cabrera  N.J.,  & Lamb  M.E.  (2004).  Fathers  and mothers  at play with their  2- and 3-
year -olds:  contributions  to language  and cognitive  development.  Child  Dev., 75:1806 –1820  
 
Zimmermann,  P., Wittchen,  H. U., Höfler, M.,  Pfister,  H., Kessler,  R. C., & Lieb,  R. (2003). Primary anxiety  disorders  
and the development  of subsequent  alcohol  use disorders:  a 4-year  community  study  of adolescents and young 
adults. Psychological Medicine, 33(7), 1211– 1222.  
 
14.  BIBLIOGRAPHY  
 
 
Page [ADDRESS_294090] up to five relevant articles that the IRB can use to provide necessary background for the protocol. Do not append an 
extensive grant -style bibliography.  
 
Grammer, J. K., Carrasco, M., Gehring, W. J., & Morrison, F. J. (2014). Age-related changes in error processing  
in young  children:  a school -based  investigation.  Developmental  Cognitive  Neuroscience,  9, 93– 
105.   
 
Kochanska,  G., Murray,  K., Jacques,  T. Y., Koenig,  A. L., & Vandegeest,  K. A. (1996).  Inhibitory  control  in young 
children  and its  role in  emerging  internalization. Child  Development,  67(2), 490 –507.  
 
McGinnis,  E., McGinnis,  R., Muzik,  M., Hruschak,  J., Lopez -Duran,  N., Perkins,  N., … Rosenblum,  K. (2016). 
Movements  indicate  threat  response phases in  children  at-risk for anxiety. IEEE Journal  of Biomedicaland Health 
Informatics 21(5):1460- 1465.  
 
 