DAPA-AF Protocol Page 1 of 27
Version Date: September 8, 2022 V4.0Use of Dapagliflozin to Reduce Burden of Atrial Fibrillation in Patients Undergoing 
Catheter Ablation of Symptomatic Atrial Fibrillation
(DAPA-AF)
Prospective, Randomized, Multicenter, Placebo-Controlled Trial
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_687114] K. Aktas, MD
Co-Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_687115], MD
Co-Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_687116], MD
1. PURPOSE OF STUDY 
To investigate the effect of dapagliflozin vs. placebo on the burden of atrial fibrillation (AF) in 
subjects undergoing catheter ablation of AF.
2. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a major public health concern in the [LOCATION_002], affecting an 
estimated 2.[ADDRESS_931352] of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_687117]. AF is 
associated with significant mortality, morbidity, and healthcare costs.3, 4 In total, the 
management of AF and its complications costs the U.S. healthcare system approximately $26 
billion each year.5 These costs are expected to increase dramatically unless AF is prevented and 
treated in a timely and effective manner. Antiarrhythmic drug therapy and catheter ablation (in 
select patients) has been the primary treatment for AF,[ADDRESS_931353] patients require multiple interventions in order to 
achieve control, albeit often inadequate.11, 12  Catheter ablation of AF is performed at many 
medical centers in the [LOCATION_002] and throughout much of the developed world and the 
number of patients undergoing ablation of AF continues to rise (Figure 1 below).13 
There are myriad of 

DAPA-AF Protocol Page 2 of 27
Version Date: September 8, [ADDRESS_931354] been shown to 
lead to the onset and maintenance of AF (Figure 2).[ADDRESS_931355] been identified in patients with AF, even in the absence of structural heart 
disease.14 Left atrial stretch secondary to HF results in neurohormonal activation, which in turn 
can activate multiple downstream profibrotic factors.15 Oxidative stress has been linked to the 
onset and maintenance of AF.16 It is recognized that the onset of AF begets adverse structural 
and electrophysiologic alterations which further begets AF.17  
 
The sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) is expressed in the proximal convoluted tubules 
of the glomerulus and is responsible for reabsorption of the majority of filtered glucose.18 
Treatment with dapagliflozin, a selective SGLT2 inhibitor (SGLT2i), results in glucosuria and 
its use was initially approved in the treatment of hyperglycemia in patients with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (T2DM).19-21 Patients with T2DM treated with SGLT2i were shown to experience 
significant reductions in cardiovascular (CV) mortality,22, [ADDRESS_931356] shown 
that the CV and heart failure (HF) benefit of treatment with SGLT2i are independent of the 
presence of T2DM.24, [ADDRESS_931357] of osmotic diuresis and natriuresis,27 
reduction in afterload via vascular effects that results in vasodilation,28 inhibition of cardiac 
fibrosis,29 reduction in atrial dilatation30 as well reductions in inflammation31 and oxidative 
stress.32 
In a retrospective sub-analysis of the DECLARE-TIMI 58 trial, dapagliflozin treatment in 
patients with T2DM was associated with a significant 19% reduction in the risk of AF and atrial 
flutter events.25 There are several putative mechanisms as to how dapagliflozin therapy may be 
Figure 2: Mechanisms Predisposing to AF
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 3 of 27
Version Date: September 8, [ADDRESS_931358] been shown to reduce epi[INVESTIGATOR_618668],33 which is 
closely interconnected with AF.  Thus, it is possible that the pleotropic effects of SGLT2i on 
atrial function, inflammation, fibrosis, and oxidative stress may translate into a corresponding 
reduction in AF burden following catheter ablation of AF. 
The DAPA-HF trial enrolled over 4,700 patients with heart failure with reduced ejection 
fraction (HFrEF) who were randomized to treatment with the SGLT2i dapagliflozin versus 
placebo which were given on top of usual treatment for HF.34 After a median follow-up time of 
18 months, a significant 26% reduction in the composite endpoint of worsening HF or CV death 
was observed in the dapagliflozin treated group. The beneficial effects of dapagliflozin on CV 
morbidity and mortality were observed regardless of the presence of T2DM. Based on the 
results of the DAPA-HF trial, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) expanded and approved 
the use of dapagliflozin in patients with HFrEF (with and without T2DM) as an oral agent to 
reduce the risk of CV death and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_549763].
The DAPA-CKD trial enrolled 4304 patients with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (GFR) 
of [ADDRESS_931359] 50%, end-stage kidney disease, or death from renal or 
cardiovascular causes, was 39% lower among dapagliflozin treated patients when compared to 
placebo. Based on the results of the DAPA-CKD trial, the FDA further expanded and approved 
use of dapagliflozin to reduce the risk of sustained eGFR decline, end-stage kidney disease, CV 
death, and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_687118].
Dapagliflozin is an FDA approved oral agent used 1) to reduce the risk of cardiovascular death 
and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_263693] (NYHA class II-IV) with 
reduced ejection fraction, 2) to reduce the risk of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_687119] 2 diabetes mellitus and established cardiovascular (CV) disease or multiple CV risk factors 
and 3) as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve glycemic control in adults with type 2 
diabetes mellitus, 4) to reduce the risk of sustained eGFR decline, end-stage kidney disease, CV 
death, and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_687118].
Our understanding of the risk factors and complications of AF is based mostly on studies that 
have evaluated AF in a binary fashion (present or absent) and have not investigated AF burden 
(quantity or amount of AF that a person has). AF burden was shown to be associated with 
increased risk of cardioembolic stroke, and other cardiac and noncardiac outcomes, including 
HF progression, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], and mortality.35-38 A reproducible definition of AF burden is 
the amount of time spent in AF divided by [CONTACT_687146] a patient is monitored. 
Cardiac implantable electronic devices (CIED) consisting of either a permanent pacemaker 
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 4 of 27
Version Date: September 8, 2022 V4.0(PPM), implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD), cardiac resynchronization therapy with 
defibrillator (CRT-D) or an implantable cardiac monitor (ICM) are capable of tracking the 
amount of AF during specified time periods. Numerous studies have analyzed the diagnostic 
accuracy of AF detection by [CONTACT_687147] a strong positive predictive value.39-[ADDRESS_931360] of treatment with dapagliflozin versus placebo 
following catheter ablation of AF on the burden of AF during 6-12 months of follow-up using 
CIEDs. We hypothesize that a treatment regimen that includes dapagliflozin in AF patients who 
undergo catheter ablation will decrease the subsequent burden of CIED detected AF when 
compared to placebo.
3. ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION  
The University of [COMPANY_002]ster is the Coordination and Data Center (CDC) for the multisite study.  
The University of [COMPANY_002]ster Medical Center and 6 additional sites (7 total enrolling sites) will be 
participating in this trial.  The University of [COMPANY_002]ster CDC will provide each site with the study 
protocol and a model consent form, along other relevant subject study materials.    As the 
Coordination and Data Center (CDC), the University of [COMPANY_002]ster will provide comprehensive 
training on the study protocol, study operations, and the electronic data capture system 
(TrialMaster).  All training will be documented for each enrolling site.
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_687120], study operations instructions and 
study training. Research activities will include: subject screening, consenting, enrollment, 
conduct of baseline study procedures, conduct of follow-up study procedures, and drug 
dispensing via the UR Investigational Drug Services (IDS). The CDC is responsible for data 
management, analysis, and coordination of logistics. The enrolling sites will manage all subject 
recruitment activity and data collection per protocol as well as interact with the CDC and 
enrolling site study team regarding study operations.  The CDC will be responsible for overall 
study management, data management, data reporting, and site communications for the study. The 
CDC will act as liaison between the UR Research Subject Review Board (RSRB) which will be 
the reviewing IRB for the study, and the UR-unaffiliated collaborating sites. The CDC will 
coordinate with these sites all reviewing IRB communications regarding initial and amendment 
protocol and consent reviews and approvals, as well as ongoing continuing reviews to ensure 
study and regulatory compliance. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_687121]-unaffiliated site investigators and delegated site personnel in 
writing of the RSRB review determinations. Additionally, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_687122]. Weekly internal team meetings will be 
held with the CDC and UR study team; these may be reduced to bi-weekly or monthly as the 
study progresses.
The University of [COMPANY_002]ster is the Study Sponsor and is receiving funding from Astra-Zeneca for 
conducting this research study.
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 5 of 27
Version Date: September 8, 2022 V4.04. STUDY DESIGN
The study is a randomized placebo-controlled prospective multicenter clinical trial of 
symptomatic AF potential subjects who are scheduled to undergo catheter ablation of AF. Prior 
to undergoing ablation, potential subjects will be enrolled (consented) into the study. Following 
successful ablation, study subjects will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to treatment with 
dapagliflozin (10 mg daily) versus placebo. Prior to randomization the subject must have had 
the AF catheter ablation and an implanted functional CIED in place as described below.
AF burden will be monitored by a CIED) either, 1) ICM, used as standard of care (SOC) for AF 
management or 2) existing PPM, ICD, or CRT-D that has remote monitoring capabilities. 
Enrolled subjects will be followed for a minimum duration of 6 months and a maximum 
duration of 12 months following randomization in both the dapagliflozin and placebo arms as 
follows:
CIED interrogation to quantitate AF burden will be performed during in office visits 
and during remote device interrogations. Interrogation results (PHI redacted by 
[CONTACT_318976]) will be shared with the study coordination and database center (CDC) at 
the University of [COMPANY_002]ster where it will be further reviewed by [CONTACT_687148]. AF burden will be quantified.
Clinical data on medication, cardiovascular events, quality of life, and subject reported 
outcomes, will be collected at standard clinical visits.
Primary Endpoint
AF burden assessed at the final follow-up visit following catheter ablation of AF, defined as 
percentage of time spent in AF (i.e. amount of time spent in AF divided by [CONTACT_687149] a subject was monitored).
Secondary Endpoints 
1. Rate of health care utilization (recurrent hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], unplanned office visits, 
unplanned remote visits, need for emergency room visits)
2. Post-ablation HF hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]
3. AF burden and impact on quality of life measured using the AFEQT score.
Tertiary (exploratory) Endpoints
We will acquire data on the effect of dapagliflozin treatment on clinical outcomes in diabetic 
and non-diabetic subjects with AF. Accordingly, the following exploratory outcomes will be 
compared between the two groups:
1. Other cardiovascular events such as stroke and myocardial infarction
2. Association of AF burden and AF type (paroxysmal vs persistent) with clinical 
decompensation defined as CV hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], unplanned office visits, unplanned 
remote visits, emergency room visits or death.
3. Death
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 6 of 27
Version Date: September 8, 2022 V4.0Figure 3: Study Design
Baseline Testing
AFEQT Score
Placebo
(n=12)
Primary Endpoint
AF Burden at final 
follow-up visit 6-[ADDRESS_931361] 
randomization
Secondary Endpoints
Healthcare Utilization
AFEQT Score
HF Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_687123] 10 mg
 (n=13)
Primary Endpoint 
AF Burden at final 
follow-up visit 6-[ADDRESS_931362] 
randomization
Secondary Endpoints
Healthcare Utilization
AFEQT Score
HF Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_687124] + CIED 
(n=25)Randomize 1:[ADDRESS_931363] POPULATION
The study population will include subjects undergoing catheter ablation of AF with an implanted 
CIED or indication for CIED that can be implanted prior to randomization per Figure 3.
Consented eligible subjects will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to either intervention (dapagliflozin 10 
mg once daily) or control (placebo); About 13 or 12 subjects enrolled to each group for a total of 25 
subjects across all enrolling sites. After enrollment (consent), QoL assessment will be obtained 
using the AFEQT questionnaire.  The subjects will then undergo the index catheter ablation of atrial 
fibrillation.  If CIED does not exist prior to consent then CIED implant will occur prior to, during or 
within 24 hours of the ablation procedure. Following catheter ablation and successful CIED 
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 7 of 27
Version Date: September 8, [ADDRESS_931364] will be followed 
over a minimum duration of 6 months and up to 12 months duration depending on date of 
randomization. Subsequent study visits visit will be virtual (through phone contact [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or 
videoconferencing) in which: a) remote de-identified CIED interrogations will be transmitted to the 
CDC by [CONTACT_687150]; b) follow-up data on subject status, study drug 
accountability/compliance, and healthcare utilization/adverse events will be obtained. QoL testing 
will be repeated at the 12-month follow-up visit. We believe that the virtual approach to study visits 
and data collection will contribute to significantly higher acceptance and enrollment than in 
previous studies.
Follow-up visits will be done at 3, 6, [ADDRESS_931365] of care to monitor arrhythmias 
following catheter ablation. Subjects are consented as it is required that the QOL questionnaire be 
obtained prior to the AF ablation. Subjects will be screen failures and not undergo randomization if 
catheter ablation is not performed or if there is no existing functional CIED within 24 hours 
following the ablation procedure.  
There are risks associated with the use of any medication. It is important to note that in this 
study, dapagliflozin will be administered in the intervention according to currently approved 
FDA indications for it use. Medications inherently may be associated with side effects. The 
clinical research team is experienced in cardiovascular trials and the clinical management of 
subjects with heart disease/heart failure and will be monitoring for any adverse effects. This is a 
Phase 4 study, and we are comparing two management strategies that are currently employed in 
clinical practice.
5. INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION CRITERIA
Inclusion Criteria
Eligible for treatment with dapagliflozin per current FDA-approved indications, 
including: 1) heart failure (NYHA class II-IV) with reduced left ventricular ejection 
fraction (<50%), or 2) type 2 diabetes mellitus and established cardiovascular (CV) 
disease or multiple CV risk factors, or 3) as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve 
glycemic control in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus, 4) adults with chronic kidney 
disease at risk of progression as defined by [CONTACT_687151] <60 ml/minute/1.73 m2.
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 8 of 27
Version Date: September 8, 2022 V4.0Scheduled to undergo ablation of symptomatic paroxysmal or persistent AF prior to date 
of randomization per current guideline indications.
A glycated hemoglobin level < 10.5% during the past 6 calendar months prior to consent 
only in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
Age > 18 years
Existing functional CIED or planned to undergo CIED implant as SOC before or within 
24 hours following the AF ablation procedure and prior to randomization date.
Exclusion Criteria
Type 1 diabetes mellitus
History of diabetic keto-acidosis
Child Pugh Class C liver disease
Last measured estimated GFR < 25  ml/minute/1.73 m2 
Pregnancy, plan to become pregnant <[ADDRESS_931366] feeding 
Current therapy with an SGLT2 inhibitor
Hypersensitivity to dapagliflozin
On heart transplant list or likely to undergo heart transplant 
Unwilling or unable to cooperate with the protocol
Participation in other clinical trials (observational registries are allowed with approval). 
Unwilling to sign the consent for participation
Life expectancy <[ADDRESS_931367] research. An overall Recruitment Plan describing the use of 
recruitment materials and processes will be required as an addendum to the individual site’s 
customized protocol for RSRB review and approval.  Sites will utilize the IRB approved Study-
related Documents customized with their individual site information which will be submitted for 
approval to the RSRB under their local site submission documents. Any additional site-specific 
recruitment materials the site develops outside of the approved Study-related Documents will be 
submitted to the RSRB for local site approval.
If the potential subject meets inclusion/exclusion criteria at time of consent, the study team will 
approach potential subjects for participation in the study based on the policies of the enrolling 
site.  Enrolling site study staff will use a recruitment phone script and phone number obtained 
from a potential subject’s records to contact a potential subject by [CONTACT_648]. If during a clinic visit, 
the enrolling site staff will approach the potential subject with the same information as in the 
phone script to assess a potential subject’s willingness to participate in the study. 
7. CONSENT PROCESS
A model consent document as well as the study protocol will be provided to each site to obtain 
reviewing IRB approval specific to the enrolling site.  Revisions to the model consent require 
approval from the Coordination and Data Center prior to submission of the consent to the 
reviewing IRB.  Only the current site-specific reviewing IRB-approved consent form will be 
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 9 of 27
Version Date: September 8, [ADDRESS_931368] owners to grant and control varying levels of access to data 
collection instruments and data (e.g. read only, de-identified-only data views) for other users.  The 
study team member(s) delegated by [CONTACT_465488] [INVESTIGATOR_8178] e-consenting would need to utilize 
uniquely assigned access website credentials to enter the potential subject’s email address to 
enable the email to be sent by [CONTACT_687152].  
The website instructions, secured link, access credentials and unique signing code as identity 
verification assigned by [CONTACT_687153].  The 
potential subject may review the consent on the website and send questions to the study team via 
the website.  
A telemedicine visit will be set up to discuss questions regarding the study with the potential 
subject and to confirm the potential subject fully understands the study requirements.   If the 
potential subject decides to participate in the study, then the potential subject will be provided 
with a unique subject-assigned signing code to electronically sign the consent during the 
telemedicine visit.  The website will indicate to the potential subject that this electronic signature 
[CONTACT_687172] a handwritten signature [INVESTIGATOR_2394] a hard copy of the consent. The study coordinator will 
be able to print a final signed consent after completion of the e-signing process. The potential 
subject’s access to the website will be restricted to only the consent and be disabled following 
consent signature. 
The consent document will be used as a guide for discussion with the potential subject.  The 
potential subject will be given sufficient time to ask questions and to consider participation.  The 
study team provides contact [CONTACT_3031] (email and phone) for potential subjects to contact a study 
team member with questions either in person, email or through the website that has a link for 
questions with a message sent to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_687125].  The study 
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 10 of 27
Version Date: September 8, [ADDRESS_931369]’s email will only be entered in the 
electronic system if the potential subject chooses to electronically sign the consent. 
The potential subject’s refusal to participate or subject’s withdrawal from the study will not 
interfere with future medical treatment.  All subjects will receive a copy of their signed informed 
consent and the original will be maintained at the enrolling site.  Subject recruitment at an 
enrolling site may not begin until the reviewing IRB approval is obtained related to the enrolling 
site study protocol and consent. 
Consent to Re-Contact: 
[CONTACT_687154]. The enrolling sites 
will maintain the confidentiality of the data throughout the process. Only authorized research 
personnel at the enrolling site working on the project will have access to the data. Consent for 
this purpose will be asked of subjects and response noted via checkboxes for subjects to indicate 
consent to future use of information and for “Consent to Re-Contact.”  
Subjects will be asked to consent to re-contact [CONTACT_687155], or someone from the study 
team, in the future about using information for research that is not described in the consent form. 
Additionally, they will be given the option to consent to future contact [CONTACT_687156].  
8. STUDY PROCEDURES
After signing consent, all subjects will undergo randomization and study related procedures, as 
well as standard of care procedures, per Table [ADDRESS_931370] of care.
All subjects enrolled in the study will remain on SOC medications and participation in the study 
will not require discontinuation of any SOC medications. 
Intervention Management Arm (Dapagliflozin)
A block randomization method will be use to randomize subjects to treatment with 
dapagliflozin 10 mg once daily versus placebo. Subjects will take 1 blinded tablet of study drug 
(dapagliflozin) dosed once daily, per the randomization scheme, for a 6-12 month duration 
depending on date of randomization. All active and placebo tablets will be identical in 
appearance (same size, shape and color). Subjects will be encouraged to start study drug within 
[ADDRESS_931371] will be dispensed 35 blinded doses per month, during 
each month of participation in the trial. Quarterly pi[INVESTIGATOR_687126].  All drug dispensing (dapagliflozin and matching placebo) will be managed by [CONTACT_30291] (IDS) in the Department of Pharmacy at the University of 
[COMPANY_002]ster Medical Center. The unit manages drug dispensing for numerous clinical trials and 
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 11 of 27
Version Date: September 8, [ADDRESS_931372] (DSMB) for review (details below). The cost of 
study drug will be covered by [CONTACT_1758]. 
Patients with diabetes who are started on dapagliflozin will continue to undergo standard of 
care glucose monitoring as directed by [CONTACT_140882]. The initiation of 
dapagliflozin does not require any incremental testing/monitoring beyond what is performed as 
standard of care.
IDS is in full compliance with federal, state, Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare 
Organizations (JCAHO), and American Society of Health-System Pharmacists (ASHP) 
requirements regarding control of investigational drugs. Investigational drugs will be stored in 
both the IDS and the Department of Pharmacy to ensure appropriate access, security, stability, 
and compliance with FDA guidelines. Drug order, receipt, and return forms will be maintained 
for all medications used in the clinical trial. Drug accountability records will be maintained for 
all study drug received, stored, dispensed and destroyed by [CONTACT_17387]. Study drug supplies will be 
inventoried on a regular basis for quality assurance purposes. IDS will maintain records after 
study completion according to FDA requirements, or as specified per protocol. JCAHO 
requires that anyone administering an investigational drug have a working knowledge of the 
drug, such as its purpose, side effects, precautions, and procedures for administration. All IDS 
personnel involved in the trial will receive the necessary training to ensure full compliance with 
good clinical practice guidelines.
Control Arm (Placebo)
Subjects will take 1 blinded tablet of placebo drug dosed once daily, per the randomization 
scheme, for a minimum duration of 6 months and maximum duration of 12 months.
Procedures for Both Groups – Regardless of Randomization:  
Post-randomization, follow-up of subjects in each arm will include SOC visits at 3, 6, 9 and 12 
months. When feasible these will be virtual (TeleHome) visits in order to minimize study 
related burden on enrolled subjects. Study related adverse events and protocol deviations will 
be recorded during each of these SOC visits.  CIED interrogation data will be obtained either 
via remote CIED downloads or during in-office visits. The interrogation data will be acquired 
in a standardized PDF format. The interrogation report will de-identified. All protected health 
information will be removed and subject ID will be entered for tracking. The de-identified PDF 
file will be uploaded to the study web-based data management system in a HIPAA compliant 
manner. CIED interrogation reports will be reviewed by [CONTACT_687157], blinded to treatment assignment. The final SOC visit will take place in-office, 
during which time all study related procedures and assessments will be completed.
Standard of Care Procedures 
In-office or TeleHome follow up visits as scheduled will occur at 3, 6, 9 and 12 
months.   These visits will include a medical assessment, drug 
accountability/compliance, device interrogation, and subjects will be questioned 
about clinical and medical (adverse) events. 
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 12 of 27
Version Date: September 8, 2022 V4.012 lead ECGs if performed as SOC at Baseline, 3 months, 6 months, 9 months and 12 
months.
Remote interrogation data from CIED will be collected. 
Echocardiographic data if performed as SOC.
Blood sugar monitoring in diabetics per SOC.
Research Activities:  
Chart reviews will be performed by [CONTACT_10113], medications, ablation procedure, device implantation, and 
follow-up data will be collected from the medical record.  
Assessment of healthcare utilization (comprising the total of unplanned in-office 
visits, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], repeat ablations, or death).
AFEQT questionnaires will be completed by [CONTACT_687158]-up visit. The questionnaire should take the subject approximately ten minutes 
to complete. We will utilize an instrument specifically designed for patients with AF, 
the Atrial Fibrillation Effect on QualiTy-of-Life (AFEQT), a questionnaire focusing 
on symptoms, daily activities, treatment concerns and treatment satisfaction.
Method of Assigning Subjects to Treatment 
Subjects will be randomized 1:1 to Dapagliflozin versus placebo. Randomization will occur 
electronically using the electronic data collection system, TrialMaster that is available 24/7 to all 
study personnel.
Follow-up 3, 6, 9, 12 months (See Table 1)
Following enrollment and randomization all subjects will have SOC follow-up in-office or 
TeleHome visits at 3, 6, 9 and 12 months. TeleHome videoconferencing visits may be replaced 
with in-office visits as needed. 
All subjects will be followed for a time-period of a minimum of 6 months and maximum of 12 
months.  
The following study related data will be collected during SOC visits after ablation.
3 Months ± 1 calendar months from study drug initiation date
oReview of medical history including adverse events, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], 
unplanned office visits, and emergency room visits
oStudy drug accountability and compliance
oCurrent cardiac medication
oBlood sugar values in diabetic patients 
oAssessment of symptoms
o12-Lead ECG (if done per standard of care)
oCIED Interrogation 
6 Months ± 1 calendar months from study drug initiation date
oReview of medical history including adverse events, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], 
unplanned office visits, and emergency room visits
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 13 of 27
Version Date: September 8, 2022 V4.0oStudy drug accountability and compliance
oCurrent cardiac medication
oBlood sugar values in diabetic patients
oAssessment of symptoms
o12-Lead ECG (if done per standard of care)
oCIED Interrogation 
oAFEQT Questionnaire (if final follow-up visit)
9 Months ± 1 calendar months from study drug initiation date
oReview of medical history including adverse events, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], 
unplanned office visits, and emergency room visits
oStudy drug accountability and compliance
oCurrent cardiac medication
oBlood sugar values in diabetic patients 
oAssessment of symptoms
o12-Lead ECG (if done per standard of care)
oCIED Interrogation
oAFEQT Questionnaire (if final follow-up visit)
12 Months ± 1 calendar months from study drug initiation date
oReview of medical history including adverse events, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], 
unplanned office visits, and emergency room visits
oStudy drug accountability and compliance
oCurrent cardiac medication
oBlood sugar values in diabetic patients 
oAssessment of symptoms, NYHA functional class
o12-Lead ECG and Echocardiogram data (if done per standard of care)
oCIED Interrogation 
oAFEQT Questionnaire
Communication at Randomization and the Conclusion of the Final Follow-up Visit
In order to maintain oversight and continued clinical management, the site PI [INVESTIGATOR_687127]’s treating physician that the subject is randomized and participating in 
the study. Also, at the conclusion of the final treatment visit, if the patient tolerated the study 
drug (Dapagliflozin or placebo), the site PI [INVESTIGATOR_687128]’s treating 
physician that it is recommended that the subject be treated with an SGLT2 inhibitor per FDA-
approved indication.
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 14 of 27
Version Date: September 8, 2022 V4.0Table 1:  Schedule of Activities
Reportable
Data ItemsScreen/
Consent/
RandomizationBaseline In-Office or 
TeleHome 
Visit
3 months In-Office or 
TeleHome Visit
6 months In-Office or 
TeleHome Visit
9 months In-Office or 
TeleHome Visit
12 months 
Timeframe Confirm 
eligibility,
consent,
randomizeFollowing 
randomization3 months  (+/-1 
calendar month) 
after date of 
study drug 
initiation6 months  (+/-1 
calendar month) 
after date of 
study drug 
initiation9 months  (+/-1 
calendar month) 
after date of 
study drug 
initiation12 months  (+/-
1 calendar 
month) after 
date of study 
drug initiation
Inclusion/Exclusion √
Informed Consent √
Demographics √
Medical/Cardiac 
History√
Limited Physical 
Exam/NYHA√ √
AF Ablation* √
CIED Device* √
AFEQT 
Questionnaire√ √*** √*** √
CV and Diabetes  
Medication Log*√ √ √ √ √
ECG* √ √ √ √ √
LVEF 
(Echocardiogram)*√ √
HbA1c**  (per SOC) √ √ √
Study Drug 
Initiation/
Accountability√ √ √ √ √
CIED Interrogation 
and Activity Data* √ √ √ √
Follow-up 
Contact/Cardiac 
Events/Procedures/
Glucose**√ √ √ √ √
Adverse Events, HF 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], 
Unplanned 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], 
office, remote or ER 
visit, death√ √ √ √ √
Protocol Deviations √ √ √ √ √
* Standard of care procedures ** Diabetic subjects only   ***If final follow-up visit
Plans for return of research results:
Research results will not be provided directly to subjects, but will be presented in national 
conferences and published in peer-reviewed papers after study completion. If requested by 
[CONTACT_687159].  Subjects will be notified if 
anything of medical importance is found.
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 15 of 27
Version Date: September 8, [ADDRESS_931373] an FDA approved indication for dapagliflozin therapy. If a patient becomes pregnant during 
the course of the study, study drug should be discontinued immediately and CDC notified. The 
outcome of all pregnancies (spontaneous miscarriage, elective termination, ectopic pregnancy, 
normal birth or congenital abnormality) should be followed up and documented even if the 
patient was discontinued from the study medication.
The study is designed to prospectively evaluate whether dapagliflozin can reduce the burden of 
AF after ablation when compared to placebo. 
Confidentiality Risk(s)
The risk to participating in this study may include a potential risk of a breach in confidentiality.  
Every effort will be made to keep the data confidential.  To protect against this risk the 
information collected at each enrolling site will be entered by [CONTACT_687160] a password 
protected electronic data capture (EDC) system.   Subjects will be assigned a unique subject 
identification number at the time of registration, which is completed in the EDC system. The 
subject identification number is not connected with any PHI, such as date of birth or medical 
record.
Dapagliflozin Treatment Risks
Dapagliflozin has been studied in multiple clinical trials and has been found to be very well 
tolerated and has a high safety profile. However, the following serious risks have been associated 
with dapagliflozin treatment.
1.Volume Depletion: Dapagliflozin can cause intravascular volume depletion which may 
manifest as symptomatic hypotension or acute transient changes in creatinine. Acute 
kidney injury requiring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_687129] 2 diabetes receiving SGLT dapagliflozin. Patients with impaired renal function 
(eGFR less than 60 mL/min/1.73 m2), elderly patients, or patients on loop diuretics may 
be at increased risk for volume depletion or hypotension. Diuretic dosing may be titrated 
according to symptoms, signs, weight and other information per standard clinical 
practice. Temporary interruption of study drug may also be considered in subjects at 
potential risk of volume contraction.
2.Ketoacidosis in Diabetes Mellitus has been reported in patients with type 1 and type 2 
diabetes receiving dapagliflozin. Some cases can be fatal. If ketoacidosis is suspected, the 
study drug will be discontinued. Patients on dapagliflozin may require monitoring and 
temporary discontinuation in situations known to predispose to ketoacidosis
3.Urosepsis and Pyelonephritis: SGLT2 inhibitors increase the risk for urinary tract 
infections (UTIs) and serious UTIs have been reported with dapagliflozin. Patients on 
study drug will be evaluated for signs and symptoms of UTIs and will be treated 
promptly.
4.Hypoglycemia: dapagliflozin can increase the risk of hypoglycemia when co-
administered with insulin and insulin secretagogues. Patients with type 2 diabetes at 
randomization will continue to take their glucose-lowering therapi[INVESTIGATOR_687130]-AF Protocol Page 16 of 27
Version Date: September 8, [ADDRESS_931374] of 
care glucose monitoring in diabetic patients. The dose of insulin and/or sulfonylurea 
therapy may be reduced to minimize the risk of hypoglycemia at the discretion of the 
primary treating physician per standard clinical practice.
5.Necrotizing Fasciitis of the Perineum (Fournier’s Gangrene): Rare but serious, life-
threatening cases have been reported in patients with diabetes mellitus receiving SGLT2 
inhibitors including dapagliflozin. Cases have been reported in females and males. 
Serious outcomes have included hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], surgeries, and death. Patients will be 
assessed for pain or tenderness, erythema, swelling in the genital or perineal area, along 
with fever or malaise. If suspected, prompt treatment will be instituted and study drug 
will be discontinued.
6.Genital Mycotic Infections: dapagliflozin increases the risk of genital mycotic 
infections, particularly in patients with prior genital mycotic infections. Patients will be 
monitored and treat appropriately
The DAPA-HF trial enrolled 4,744 patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction 
(HFrEF) and randomized patients to treatment with dapagliflozin 10 mg once daily versus 
matching placebo. Dapagliflozin was stopped in 249 patients and placebo was stopped in 258 
patients (10.5 vs 10.9%, P=0.71). Table below lists common adverse reactions associated with 
dapagliflozin therapy compi[INVESTIGATOR_220752] [ADDRESS_931375] of care 
monitoring of blood sugar values will be recommended for all diabetic patients enrolled in the 
study regardless of treatment allocation.  Of note, treatment with an SGLT2 inhibitor was not 
shown to be associated with increased risk of hypoglycemia, and in the DAPA-HF study the rate 
of hypoglycemia was 1/2368 in the Dapagliflozin treatment arm vs. 4/2368 in the placebo arm. 
All adverse events during the trial will be prospectively collected and reviewed (detailed below 
in Table 2).
Mitigation of risk associated with the Study Drug will follow drug labelling 
Table 2:
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 17 of 27
Version Date: September 8, [ADDRESS_931376] of care and procedures performed in the DAPA-HF clinical 
trial. These will include:
1. Glucose and HgBA1c monitoring in diabetic subjects will be performed as per standard 
of care. Patients with type 2 diabetes at randomization will continue to take their glucose-
lowering therapi[INVESTIGATOR_687131]. The dose of insulin and/or sulfonylurea therapy may be reduced to minimize the 
risk of hypoglycemia at the discretion of the primary treating physician per standard 
clinical practice.
2. Study drug will permanently be discontinued if pregnancy or diabetic ketoacidosis occur. 
Dose reduction (to dapagliflozin 5 mg daily or matching placebo) or temporary 
discontinuation may be considered in cases of acute, unexpected declines eGFR (while 
investigating other causes such as nephrotoxic drugs, urinary traction infection, or 
obstruction.  Similarly, in cases of volume depletion and/or hypotension, alternative 
causes should be considered (e.g. gastrointestinal fluid loss, use of non-essential blood 
pressure-lowering drugs) and the dose of concomitant diuretic therapy re-assessed and 
reduced, if appropriate. Temporary interruption of study drug may also be considered, 
prophylactically, in subjects at potential risk of volume contraction/hypotension, such as 
subjects with an acute medical illness potentially causing volume depletion because of 
inadequate fluid intake or fluid/blood losses (e.g. gastroenteritis, gastrointestinal 
hemorrhage), or subjects undergoing major surgery.
3. Subject notification of possible adverse events at enrollment.
4. Adverse event data collection and independent DSMB monitoring.
Placebo Arm Treatment Risks
Subjects randomized to the placebo arm will undergo standard of care management following 
AF ablation. With regard to AF outcomes there are no known risks associated with not treating 
with dapagliflozin in the placebo arm.  
10. POTENTIAL BENEFITS TO SUBJECTS
Subjects randomized to dapagliflozin may experience a lower burden of AF following ablation. 
11. COSTS FOR PARTICIPATION
There are no additional costs to the subject. All office visit/procedures will follow standard of 
care guidelines and are covered by [CONTACT_1130]’s medical insurance. The randomization process will 
not add to subject costs.
12. PAYMENT FOR PARTICIPATION 
There will be no compensation for participation in this study.
13. SUBJECT WITHDRAWALS
Randomized subjects may be withdrawn prior to the study completion for a variety of reasons 
including:
a) Subject withdraws consent for any reason and will not be replaced.
b) Subject is lost to follow up despi[INVESTIGATOR_687132].
c) Subject withdrawn by [CONTACT_5936].
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 18 of 27
Version Date: September 8, [ADDRESS_931377]’s email address will not be stored nor transmitted with the study data if the subject opts 
for electronic consent signature [CONTACT_687173].  
15. DATA / SAMPLE STORAGE FOR FUTURE USE
Study coordination, database management and statistical analysis will be performed by [CONTACT_10120] (CCRC) at the University of [COMPANY_002]ster Medical Center 
(U of R) acting as the Coordination and Data Center for the study.  
Data will be captured using TrialMaster, a HIPAA compliant secure web-based electronic data 
capture (EDC) system that is used to support the clinical research process.  Data that are entered 
are validated against a set of rules to ensure the accuracy of the clinical data.  The TrialMaster 
system is housed on CCRC servers that are housed behind the U of R firewall in the U of R 
Primary Data Center, where physical access and environmental controls are in place to protect 
the data.  All access to the data is through an authentication process provided by [CONTACT_687161], secured U of R network, which both provide the necessary controls to 
prohibit unauthorized access to the clinical data.  Continuous availability of the data is provided 
by [CONTACT_687162] a physically separate Secondary Data Center. 
Additional details are in the Data Safety Monitoring section below. Only authorized research 
personnel working on the project will have access to the data.
Only enrolling site personnel authorized by [CONTACT_1377] [INVESTIGATOR_687133].  Study personnel at each site delegated with EDC permission will be required to 
complete EDC training before receiving access to the system.  Site personnel with EDC 
permission will have access to the system 24/7 for data entry.  Study personnel will initially enter 
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 19 of 27
Version Date: September 8, [ADDRESS_931378]’s information for research that is not described in the DAPA-AF study 
consent form; or to participate in other research. Re-contact[CONTACT_687163], by [CONTACT_347709].
16. DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN
Adverse Event (AE) Data
An AE is the development of an undesirable medical condition or the deterioration of a 
preexisting medical condition following or during exposure to study drug, whether or not 
considered causally related to the product. An undesirable medical condition can be symptoms 
(e.g. nausea, chest pain), signs (e.g. tachycardia, enlarged liver) or the abnormal results of an 
investigation (e.g. laboratory findings, electrocardiogram). In clinical studies, an AE can include 
an undesirable medical condition occurring at any time, including run-in or washout periods, 
even if no study drug has been administered. The term AE is used to include both serious and 
non-serious AEs. 
All adverse events will be collected after subject randomization at all subject contacts as 
indicated in Table 1. Adverse event data will be captured in the electronic data capture system 
and enrolling site investigators are responsible for reporting to and following reviewing 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) guidelines and reported to the DSMB.  De-identified adverse 
event safety data will be provided to Astra-Zeneca, the study drug manufacturer as reported in a 
password-protected file per post-market FDA regulations.
Adverse Event Reporting 
Enrolling site investigators shall report in the CDC electronic data collection system within five 
business days of PI [INVESTIGATOR_687134]-serious adverse events that are only related or suspected to be 
related to study activities and/or study medication, and all serious adverse events regardless of 
the relationship to the study activities and/or study medication per the serious event definitions 
below. Events leading to death or death (if event leading to death) of a subject must be reported 
as an adverse event, per the serious adverse event definition below. The enrolling site PI [INVESTIGATOR_687135], including the reviewing Institutional Review Broad (IRB). 
The CDC will be forwarding relevant documents to the Chair of DSMB for review and the Chair will 
determine whether individual case will require immediate assessment by [CONTACT_687164]. Any SAEs meeting criteria for 
expedited reporting, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_687136]. 
We will also inform Astra Zeneca, the study drug manufacturer, about reported adverse events per 
FDA post-marketing regulation requirements.
Serious Adverse Event Definition 
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 20 of 27
Version Date: September 8, 2022 V4.0This population is at increased risk of heart failure, death, and poor clinical outcomes. A serious 
adverse event (SAE) is defined as any adverse medical experience that results in any of the 
following outcomes regardless of causal relationship with the study drug: 
Results in death
Is immediately life-threatening or results in death
Requires in-patient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081]
Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity or substantial disruption of the
ability to conduct normal life functions
Is a congenital abnormality or birth defect
Is an important medical event that may jeopardize the subject or may require medical
Intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed above. 
Unanticipated Problem Definition
An Unanticipated problem is any event, experience, issue, instance, problem or outcome that meets 
all 3 of the following criteria:
Is unexpected in terms of the nature, severity or frequency given the research procedures 
that are described in the protocol–related documents AND in the characteristics of the 
population under study or if cause is study drug an adverse event or suspected adverse 
reaction is considered unanticipated if it is not listed in the study drug package insert or is 
not listed at the specificity or severity that has been observed per the study drug package 
insert.
Is related or possibly related to participation in research.  This means that there is a 
reasonable possibility that the incident may have been caused by [CONTACT_687165]/or study 
drug involved in the research study.
The incident suggests that the research places the subject or others at greater risk of harm 
(physical, psychological, economic or social) than was previously known or recognized OR 
results in actual harm of the subject or others.  An unanticipated problem generally required 
a change in policy or procedure, warrants consideration of substantive changes to the 
protocol/consent or other immediate corrective actions in order to reduce the risk or 
eliminate immediate hazard.
Data and Safety Monitoring Board 
A data and safety monitoring board (DSMB) will be appointed to independently monitor the 
conduct and the outcome of the trial. The DSMB will be responsible for monitoring the safety 
and well-being of the subjects participating in this study and ensuring the ethical conduct of the 
trial. The DSMB will be responsible for safeguarding the interests of study participants, 
assessing the safety and efficacy of study procedures and study drug, and for monitoring the 
overall conduct of the study.
The main focus of DSMB activity will be to monitor complications after randomization. For all 
randomized subjects, data on clinical events including adverse events, cardiovascular 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], and death will be collected and provided to the DSMB for evaluation of risks 
associated with participation in the trial.
The DSMB will be an independent group advisory to the Coordination and Data Center study 
principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_687137], continuing, and 
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 21 of 27
Version Date: September 8, 2022 V4.0stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_10098]. In addition, the DSMB asked to make recommendations, as appropriate, 
about:
Efficacy of the study intervention
Benefit/risk ratio of procedures and participant burden
Selection, recruitment, and retention of participants
Adherence to protocol requirements
Completeness, quality, and analysis of measurements
Amendments to the study protocol and consent forms
Performance of individual sites 
Participant safety
The board will be comprised of 4 independent members: (1) 1 statistician with experience in 
clinical trials; (2) [ADDRESS_931379] with expertise in clinical trials; (3) [ADDRESS_931380] with 
expertise in ablation and arrhythmia treatment; and (4) [ADDRESS_931381] the 
right to convene additional meetings with all DSMB members when needed.  The DSMB will 
carefully consider if these events are consistent with anticipated clinical outcome, i.e. unrelated, 
or a consequence of the study activity and/or study drug, i.e. related. Information on all these 
events will be sent to DSMB Chair as they occur and in addition, a full DSMB report including 
an adverse event summary will be prepared before every elective DSMB meeting.
17. DATA ANALYSIS PLAN
Descriptive statistics will be used to evaluate the rates related to the primary endpoint and 
health care utilization and HF hospi[INVESTIGATOR_687138]. Further, mean quality of life AFEQT scores will also be reported. General linear 
models will be used to identify factors associated with the risk of both AF burden and recurrent 
endpoints during follow-up. 
For the primary endpoint of AF burden, defined as percentage of time spent in AF (i.e. amount 
of time spent in AF divided by [CONTACT_687146] a patient was monitored), the 
student’s t-test will be used to statistically compare the placebo group vs. the active treatment 
group. This approach is subject to an examination of the distribution of the percent time in AF. 
Currently, patients with persistent AF account for >60% of the AF ablation volume in each of the 
enrolling sites and therefore we anticipate a higher burden of AF than what has been reported in 
patients with paroxysmal AF, including CAPTAF (in which patients with paroxysmal AF 
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 22 of 27
Version Date: September 8, 2022 V4.0comprised 70% of the study population).42 
Our preliminary data on 125 patients implanted with an ICM at URMC of whom 65% had 
persistent AF, show an overall AF burden of 25%. Other published studies have shown a higher 
burden of AF in persistent AF populations.43 In the present study, enrollment will use a stratified 
proportionate allocation in a 2:1 ratio by [CONTACT_687166] (persistent vs. paroxysmal, respectively) to 
ensure a sufficient proportion of subjects with persistent AF.
 
Sample size
Our re-estimated power calculations are based on the following parameters:
1. [ADDRESS_931382] underestimated AF burden 
(possibly due to the higher risk characteristics of enrolled patients with heart failure, 
diabetes, and renal dysfunction). The revised AF burden estimate takes a conservative 
measure of at least 40%. 
The Table below provides power calculations for a treatment effect in the range of 40% to 50%.
SD sample total
ReduceAverage 
AF 
burden: 
placeboAverage AF 
burden: 
Intervention deviation power size dropout sample
50% 40% 20.0% 15% 85% 23 10% 25
45% 40% 22.0% 15% 76% 23 10% 25
43% 40% 22.8% 15% 73% 23 10% 25
40% 40% 24.0% 15% 66% 23 10% 25
Based on our preliminary interrogation data above, the primary outcome of AF burden over an 
average follow-up of 9 months is assumed to be 40% in the placebo group and 20-24% in the 
intervention (dapagliflozin) group, with a standard deviation of 15% (a conservative estimate 
which allows for 10% drop-out).  With a sample of 25 subjects randomized, a reduction from 
40% to 20%-22% would provide 85%-76% power, respectively. Other possible scenarios are 
provided in the Table above.
We therefore, believe that the study may be the first to provide pi[INVESTIGATOR_687139].
The study power should not be affected by [CONTACT_687167], Dapagliflozin, or AF burden, the primary outcome of the study. 
Further, prior publications have not shown differential effects of this drug within diabetic status 
or medication subgroups. Also, because the study drug and placebo groups will be randomly 
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 23 of 27
Version Date: September 8, [ADDRESS_931383] for diabetics and heart 
failure both parametrically and non-parametrically. Finally, the study was not designed to be 
powered to look for affects in subgroups of the study population, only in the overall enrolled 
study group.
18. COORDINATING CENTER TRACKING
Acting as Coordinating Center for the study, in order to ensure all required information is 
provided to the reviewing IRB, a Coordinating Center Tracking Spreadsheet will be submitted at 
the time of each annual progress review.  
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 24 of 27
Version Date: September 8, 2022 V4.0References:
1. Go AS, Hylek EM, Phillips KA, Chang Y, Henault LE, Selby [CONTACT_687168]. 
Prevalence of diagnosed atrial fibrillation in adults: national implications for rhythm 
management and stroke prevention: the AnTicoagulation and Risk Factors in Atrial Fibrillation 
(ATRIA) Study. Jama. 2001;285:2370-5.
2. Colilla S, Crow A, Petkun W, Singer DE, Simon T and Liu X. Estimates of current and 
future incidence and prevalence of atrial fibrillation in the U.S. adult population. The American 
journal of cardiology. 2013;112:1142-7.
3. Jackson SL, Tong X, Yin X, George MG and Ritchey MD. Emergency Department, 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_687140], and Mortality Burden of Atrial Fibrillation in the [LOCATION_002], 2006 to 2014. 
The American journal of cardiology. 2017;120:1966-1973.
4. Patel NJ, Deshmukh A, Pant S, Singh V, Patel N, Arora S, Shah N, Chothani A, Savani 
GT, Mehta K, Parikh V, Rathod A, Badheka AO, Lafferty J, Kowalski M, Mehta JL, Mitrani 
RD, Viles-Gonzalez JF and Paydak H. Contemporary trends of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_687141], 2000 through 2010: implications for healthcare planning. 
Circulation. 2014;129:2371-9.
5. Kim MH, Johnston SS, Chu BC, Dalal MR and Schulman KL. Estimation of total 
incremental health care costs in patients with atrial fibrillation in the [LOCATION_002]. Circ 
Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2011;4:313-20.
6. January CT, Wann LS, Alpert JS, Calkins H, Cigarroa JE, Cleveland JC, Jr., Conti JB, 
Ellinor PT, Ezekowitz MD, Field ME, Murray KT, Sacco RL, Stevenson WG, Tchou PJ, Tracy 
CM and Yancy CW. 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for the management of patients with atrial 
fibrillation: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:e1-76.
7. Zimetbaum P. Antiarrhythmic Drug Therapy for Atrial Fibrillation. Circulation. 
2012;125:381-389.
8. Gupta A, Perera T, Ganesan A, Sullivan T, Lau DH, Roberts-Thomson KC, Brooks AG 
and Sanders P. Complications of Catheter Ablation of Atrial Fibrillation. Circulation: 
Arrhythmia and Electrophysiology. 2013;6:1082-1088.
9. Freeman JV, Tabada GH, Reynolds K, Sung SH, Liu TI, Gupta N and Go AS. 
Contemporary Procedural Complications, Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], and Emergency Visits After Catheter 
Ablation for Atrial Fibrillation. The American journal of cardiology. 2018;121:602-608.
10. Deshmukh A, Patel NJ, Pant S, Shah N, Chothani A, Mehta K, Grover P, Singh V, 
Vallurupalli S, Savani GT, Badheka A, Tuliani T, Dabhadkar K, Dibu G, Reddy YM, Sewani A, 
Kowalski M, Mitrani R, Paydak H and Viles-Gonzalez JF. In-hospi[INVESTIGATOR_687142] 2000 and 2010: analysis 
of 93 801 procedures. Circulation. 2013;128:2104-12.
11. Kuck KH, Brugada J, Fürnkranz A, Metzner A, Ouyang F, Chun KR, Elvan A, Arentz T, 
Bestehorn K, Pocock SJ, Albenque JP and Tondo C. Cryoballoon or Radiofrequency Ablation 
for Paroxysmal Atrial Fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2016;374:2235-45.
12. Verma A, Jiang CY, Betts TR, Chen J, Deisenhofer I, Mantovan R, Macle L, Morillo 
CA, Haverkamp W, Weerasooriya R, Albenque JP, Nardi S, Menardi E, Novak P and Sanders P. 
Approaches to catheter ablation for persistent atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:1812-
22.
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 25 of 27
Version Date: September 8, [ADDRESS_931384] EK, Mansour MC, 
Kaadan MI, Vangel M and Ruskin JN. Catheter Ablation for Cardiac Arrhythmias: Utilization 
and In-Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_687143], 2000 to 2013. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2017;3:1240-1248.
14. Frustaci A, Chimenti C, Bellocci F, Morgante E, Russo MA and Maseri A. Histological 
substrate of atrial biopsies in patients with lone atrial fibrillation. Circulation. 1997;96:1180-
1184.
15. De Jong AM, Maass AH, Oberdorf-Maass SU, Van Veldhuisen DJ, Van Gilst WH and 
Van Gelder IC. Mechanisms of atrial structural changes caused by [CONTACT_687169]. Cardiovascular Research. 2010;89:754-765.
16. Samman Tahhan A, Sandesara PB, Hayek SS, Alkhoder A, Chivukula K, Hammadah M, 
Mohamed-Kelli H, O'Neal WT, Topel M, Ghasemzadeh N, Ko Y-A, Aida H, Gafeer M, Sperling 
L, Vaccarino V, Liang Y, Jones DP and Quyyumi AA. Association between oxidative stress and 
atrial fibrillation. Heart Rhythm. 2017;14:1849-1855.
17. Wijffels MCEF, Kirchhof CJHJ, Dorland R and Allessie MA. Atrial Fibrillation Begets 
Atrial Fibrillation. Circulation. 1995;92:1954-1968.
18. Wright EM, Loo DDF and Hirayama BA. Biology of Human Sodium Glucose 
Transporters. Physiological Reviews. 2011;91:733-794.
19. Nauck MA, Del Prato S, Meier JJ, Durán-García S, Rohwedder K, Elze M and Parikh SJ. 
Dapagliflozin versus glipi[INVESTIGATOR_124067]-on therapy in patients with type [ADDRESS_931385] 
inadequate glycemic control with metformin: a randomized, 52-week, double-blind, active-
controlled noninferiority trial. Diabetes Care. 2011;34:2015-22.
20. Wilding JP, Woo V, Soler NG, Pahor A, Sugg J, Rohwedder K and Parikh S. Long-term 
efficacy of dapagliflozin in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus receiving high doses of insulin: 
a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2012;156:405-15.
21. Rosenstock J, Jelaska A, Frappin G, Salsali A, Kim G, Woerle HJ and Broedl UC. 
Improved glucose control with weight loss, lower insulin doses, and no increased hypoglycemia 
with empagliflozin added to titrated multiple daily injections of insulin in obese inadequately 
controlled type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2014;37:1815-23.
22. Cavender MA, Norhammar A, Birkeland KI, Jørgensen ME, Wilding JP, Khunti K, Fu 
AZ, Bodegård J, Blak BT, Wittbrodt E, Thuresson M, Fenici P, Hammar N and Kosiborod M. 
SGLT-2 Inhibitors and Cardiovascular Risk: An Analysis of CVD-REAL. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2018;71:2497-2506.
23. Wiviott SD, Raz I, Bonaca MP, Mosenzon O, Kato ET, Cahn A, Silverman MG, Zelniker 
TA, Kuder JF, Murphy SA, Bhatt DL, Leiter LA, McGuire DK, Wilding JPH, Ruff CT, Gause-
Nilsson IAM, Fredriksson M, Johansson PA, Langkilde A-M and Sabatine MS. Dapagliflozin 
and Cardiovascular Outcomes in Type 2 Diabetes. New England Journal of Medicine. 
2018;380:347-357.
24. Packer M, Anker SD, Butler J, Filippatos G, Pocock SJ, Carson P, Januzzi J, Verma S, 
Tsutsui H, Brueckmann M, Jamal W, Kimura K, Schnee J, Zeller C, Cotton D, Bocchi E, Böhm 
M, Choi DJ, Chopra V, Chuquiure E, Giannetti N, Janssens S, Zhang J, Gonzalez Juanatey JR, 
Kaul S, Brunner-La Rocca HP, Merkely B, Nicholls SJ, Perrone S, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_28947] I, Ponikowski P, Sattar 
N, Senni M, Seronde MF, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_278798] J, Squire I, Taddei S, Wanner C and Zannad F. Cardiovascular 
and Renal Outcomes with Empagliflozin in Heart Failure. N Engl J Med. 2020.
25. Zelniker TA, Bonaca MP, Furtado RHM, Mosenzon O, Kuder JF, Murphy SA, Bhatt DL, 
Leiter LA, McGuire DK, Wilding JPH, Budaj A, Kiss RG, Padilla F, Gause-Nilsson I, Langkilde 
AM, Raz I, Sabatine MS and Wiviott SD. Effect of Dapagliflozin on Atrial Fibrillation in 
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 26 of 27
Version Date: September 8, 2022 V4.0Patients With Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: Insights From the DECLARE-TIMI 58 Trial. 
Circulation. 2020;141:1227-1234.
26. Verma S. Potential Mechanisms of Sodium-Glucose Co-Transporter 2 Inhibitor-Related 
Cardiovascular Benefits. The American journal of cardiology. 2019;[ADDRESS_931386] 1:S36-s44.
27. Ansary TM, Nakano D and Nishiyama A. Diuretic Effects of Sodium Glucose 
Cotransporter 2 Inhibitors and Their Influence on the Renin-Angiotensin System. Int J Mol Sci. 
2019;20:629.
28. Li H, Shin SE, Seo MS, An JR, Choi IW, Jung WK, Firth AL, Lee DS, Yim MJ, Choi G, 
Lee JM, Na SH and Park WS. The anti-diabetic drug dapagliflozin induces vasodilation via 
activation of PKG and Kv channels. Life Sci. 2018;197:46-55.
29. Lee TM, Chang NC and Lin SZ. Dapagliflozin, a selective SGLT2 Inhibitor, attenuated 
cardiac fibrosis by [CONTACT_687170]3 signaling in infarcted rat 
hearts. Free Radic Biol Med. 2017;104:298-310.
30. Oldgren J, Laurila S, Åkerblom A, Latva-Rasku A, Rebelos E, Isackson H, Saarenhovi 
M, Eriksson O, Heurling K, Johansson E, Wilderäng U, Karlsson C, Esterline R, Ferrannini E, 
Oscarsson J and Nuutila P. Effects of 6 Weeks of Treatment with Dapagliflozin, a Sodium-
Glucose Contransporter 2 Inhibitor, on Myocardial Function and Metabolism in Type 2 Diabetes 
Patients: A Randomized Placebo-Controlled Study. Journal of the American College of 
Cardiology. 2020;75:1610.
31. Bonnet F and Scheen AJ. Effects of SGLT2 inhibitors on systemic and tissue low-grade 
inflammation: The potential contribution to diabetes complications and cardiovascular disease. 
Diabetes & Metabolism. 2018;44:457-464.
32. Li C, Zhang J, Xue M, Li X, Han F, Liu X, Xu L, Lu Y, Cheng Y, Li T, Yu X, Sun B and 
Chen L. SGLT2 inhibition with empagliflozin attenuates myocardial oxidative stress and fibrosis 
in diabetic mice heart. Cardiovascular Diabetology. 2019;18:15.
33. Sato T, Aizawa Y, Yuasa S, Kishi S, Fuse K, Fujita S, Ikeda Y, Kitazawa H, Takahashi 
M, Sato M and Okabe M. The effect of dapagliflozin treatment on epi[INVESTIGATOR_687144]. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2018;17:6.
34. McMurray JJV, Solomon SD, Inzucchi SE, Køber L, Kosiborod MN, Martinez FA, 
Ponikowski P, Sabatine MS, Anand IS, Bělohlávek J, Böhm M, Chiang CE, Chopra VK, de Boer 
RA, Desai AS, Diez M, Drozdz J, Dukát A, Ge J, Howlett JG, Katova T, Kitakaze M, Ljungman 
CEA, Merkely B, Nicolau JC, O'Meara E, Petrie MC, Vinh PN, Schou M, Tereshchenko S, 
Verma S, Held C, DeMets DL, Docherty KF, Jhund PS, Bengtsson O, Sjöstrand M and 
Langkilde AM. Dapagliflozin in Patients with Heart Failure and Reduced Ejection Fraction. N 
Engl J Med. 2019;381:1995-2008.
35. Chen LY, Chung MK, Allen LA, Ezekowitz M, Furie KL, McCabe P, Noseworthy PA, 
Perez MV, Turakhia MP, American Heart Association Council on Clinical C, Council on C, 
Stroke N, Council on Quality of C, Outcomes R and Stroke C. Atrial Fibrillation Burden: 
Moving Beyond Atrial Fibrillation as a Binary Entity: A Scientific Statement From the American 
Heart Association. Circulation. 2018;137:e623-e644.
36. Chiang C-E, Naditch-Brûlé L, Murin J, Goethals M, Inoue H, O’Neill J, Silva-Cardoso J, 
Zharinov O, Gamra H, Alam S, Ponikowski P, Lewalter T, Rosenqvist M and Steg PG. 
Distribution and Risk Profile of Paroxysmal, Persistent, and Permanent Atrial Fibrillation in 
Routine Clinical Practice. Circulation: Arrhythmia and Electrophysiology. 2012;5:632-639.
37. Pandey A, Kim S, Moore C, Thomas L, Gersh B, Allen LA, Kowey PR, Mahaffey KW, 
Hylek E, Peterson ED, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_687145]. Predictors and Prognostic Implications 
DAPA-AF Protocol Page 27 of 27
Version Date: September 8, 2022 V4.0of Incident Heart Failure in Patients With Prevalent Atrial Fibrillation. JACC Heart Fail. 
2017;5:44-52.
38. Thihalolipavan S and Morin DP. Atrial Fibrillation and Heart Failure: Update 2015. 
Progress in Cardiovascular Diseases. 2015;58:126-135.
39. Hess PL, Healey JS, Granger CB, Connolly SJ, Ziegler PD, Alexander JH, Kowey PR, 
Ruff CT, Flaker G, Halperin JL, Hart RG and Lopes RD. The Role of Cardiovascular 
Implantable Electronic Devices in the Detection and Treatment of Subclinical Atrial Fibrillation: 
A Review. JAMA Cardiology. 2017;2:324-331.
40. Passman RS, Weinberg KM, Freher M, Schaechter A, Goldberger JJ and Kadish AH. 
Accuracy of Mode Switch Algorithms for Detection of Atrial Tachyarrhythmias. Journal of 
Cardiovascular Electrophysiology. 2004;15.
41. Solari D, Bertero E, Miceli R, Brunelli C, Ameri P and Canepa M. Methods, accuracy 
and clinical implications of atrial fibrillation detection by [CONTACT_687171]. 
Int J Cardiol. 2017;236:262-269.
42. Blomstrom-Lundqvist C, Gizurarson S, Schwieler J, Jensen SM, Bergfeldt L, Kenneback 
G, Rubulis A, Malmborg H, Raatikainen P, Lonnerholm S, Hoglund N and Mortsell D. Effect of 
Catheter Ablation vs Antiarrhythmic Medication on Quality of Life in Patients With Atrial 
Fibrillation: The CAPTAF Randomized Clinical Trial. Jama. 2019;321:1059-1068.
43. Wechselberger S, Kronborg M, Huo Y, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_177896] J, Neudeck S, Passler E, El-
Armouche A, Richter U, Mayer J, Ulbrich S, Pu L, Kirstein B, Gaspar T and Pi[INVESTIGATOR_177896] C. 
Continuous monitoring after atrial fibrillation ablation: the LINQ AF study. Europace : 
European pacing, arrhythmias, and cardiac electrophysiology : journal of the working groups 
on cardiac pacing, arrhythmias, and cardiac cellular electrophysiology of the European Society 
of Cardiology. 2018;20:f312-f320.