Title: Proximal Effects of Alcohol on Same -Sex Intimate Partner Violence  
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
Date of Document: April 30, 2025  
  
 
  
Research Protocol and Statistical Analyses  
 
Title: Proximal Effects of Alcohol on Same -Sex Intimate Partner Violence  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Dominic J. Parrott  
Georgia State University  
Department of Psychology  
Sponsor: National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism  
 
Project Summary and Project Goals  
 
Partner violence among sexual and gender minoritized (SGM) individuals’ intimate 
relationships occurs at rates comparable, if not higher, than in cisgender, heterosexual couples. 
Research indicates that this health disparity is due to the stress associated with individuals’ 
sexual and gender minoritized (SGM) identities. In addition, research suggests that stress 
resulting from the COVID pandemic (i.e., COVID stress) may further exacerbate this health disparity.  The purpose of this study is to test a dyadi c, interactional framework to identify 
mechanisms of intimate partner violence ( IPV) perpetration in sexual and gender minoritized 
couples. Specifically, the proposed project will determine (1) the temporal effect of sexual minority stress, gender minority stress, and COVID stress on IPV perpetration, (2) whether proximal alcohol use alte rs the threshold at which these stressors contribute to IPV perpetration, 
(3) the temporal sequence by [CONTACT_755470], proximal alcohol use, and other factors facilitate IPV perpetration, (4) how these interactive and mediational effects are altered by [CONTACT_755471] - and couple -level risk and resilience factors for IPV perpetration, and (5) 
evaluate a brief, low -resource intervention to mitigate the effects of these stressors.  
 The primary outcome s will be self -reported IPV perpetration and alcohol use  and the 
secondary outcomes will be sexual minority stress, gender minority stress, and COVID stress . 
Our overarching goals are to (1) develop an etiological model of IPV perpetration upon which intervention development may be based, and (2) provide data on the efficacy of a culturally-
sensitive, low burden, and easy to disseminate intervention to mitigate these effects critical 
during a pandemic when access to care is limited  
 Rationale and Background Information  
 
Intimate p artner violence (IPV) within SGM  intimate relationships is a critical but vastly 
understudied public health problem. Reviews indicate that IPV occurs at rates comparable, if not 
higher, than in heterosexual couples (Edwards, Sylaska, & Neal, 2015; Messigner, 2014). 
However, with one exce ption (Lewis, Mason, Winstead, & Kelley, 2016), an etiological 
framework for IPV perpetration in SGM relationships has not yet been advanced. Thus, unlike 
research with heterosexual couples, this literature is in d esperate need of methodologically 
rigorous research that can lead to the development of culturally- sensitive interventions that will 
reduce IPV and its associated negative health consequences  in SGM communities .  
 
In addition, r esearch indicates that stress and its concomitant negative mental health and 
physical health outcomes are direct results of pandemic epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841] (Quinn et al., 2011). Stress 
related to COVID -19 is no exception (Holmes et al., 2020; Pfefferbaum & North, 2020; 
Rajkumar, 2020). We argue that this stress – which we term COVID- 19 stress – is temporally 
and proximally related to increases in alcohol use  and IPV perpetration in SGM couples. This 
focus on SGM couples is purposeful. Because the COVID -19 pandemic poses greater economic, 
social, and personal challenges for SGM communities (Salerno, 2020) , they must cope with both 
COVID- 19 stress and well- established minority stressors  (Meyer, 2003) . Thus, they are more 
likely to engage in maladaptive copi[INVESTIGATOR_610], including alcohol use and IPV , relative to 
cisgender, heterosexual people.  
 
In response, the scientific premise of the proposed project is to prioritize three perspectives 
highlighted by [CONTACT_755472] (2011) – minority stress,  social -
ecology, and intersectionality – while simultaneously addressing critical methodological 
weaknesses, including (1) exclusive use of cross -sectional methods that cannot identify temporal 
relations among risk factors for IPV perpetration, (2) a paucity of studies that examine alcohol 
use as a risk factor for IPV perpetration , and no studies that examine the proximal effects of 
alcohol use  on IPV perpetration, in SGM couples , (4) failure to assess the multiple, intersecting 
identities of respondents’ and their partners , and (5) lack of brief, easy- to-disseminate 
interventions which bolster one’s real -time capacity to inhibit a stress -induced proclivity toward 
alcohol use and IPV perpetration.  Methods  
 
Sample and eligibility criteria.  The study plans to conduct a randomized controlled trial of 
[ADDRESS_1034128] one partner identifies as a gender minority , meaning one’s gender identity is non- congruent with the sex they were assigned 
at birth .  
 Inclusion criteria require that participants are either (a) healthy cisgender men and women 
aged 21 and older with a sexual minority identity who are in an intimate relationship with a cisgender, sexual minority partner with the same sex assigned at birth, or (b) healthy gender 
minority people (e.g., trans men, trans women, and/or gender non -binary, non- conforming, or 
queer) aged [ADDRESS_1034129]:  
 
• Report heavy epi[INVESTIGATOR_25194] (i.e., 4- 5 drinks in a single drinking epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865]) at last 
three days in the past year or report consuming an average of [ADDRESS_1034130] year.   
• Report being in their current relationship for at least one month 
• Report at least [ADDRESS_1034131] each week  with their partner  
• Report relatively comparable responses as their partner regarding their relationship 
(e.g., how long they have been together, how many days per week they see each other in person, and how they met).   
 
Exclusion criteria include not speaking English fluently, females assigned a birth who 
endorse being pregnant or  are trying to get pregnant, participants who are seek ing treatment or in 
recovery for an alcohol or substance use disorder, and endorsement of severe IPV (e.g., IPV that 
caused them to fear for their life, caused serious injury requiring medical attention, and/or resulted in them seeking shelter or other services for partner violence).  
 
Recruitment.  This project will use a multi- pronged recruitment approach which includes: (1) 
a heavy emphasis on the use of different social media platforms (e.g., Facebook, Instagram); (2) 
referrals from our community -based partners; (3) outreach activities at public events and venues 
frequented by [CONTACT_755473], LGBT festivals, and LGBT events (e.g., PRIDE); 
(4) posting of flyers in strategic community sites friendly to LGBT populations; (5) targeted newspaper and print ads, and (6) respondent driven sa mpling procedures that elicit peer referrals 
from enrolled participants.  
Study Design and Procedures.  Informed consent will be obtained prior to the baseline 
assessment. The baseline assessment will be conducted online and include measures of (1) economic, social, and personal impacts of COVID -19, (2) sexual minority stress and gender 
minority stress, and (3) pre -intervention levels of emotion regulation and distress tolerance, and 
individual - and couple -level factors that align with empi[INVESTIGATOR_3675] -based risk and resilience factors 
for IPV .   After both partners complete the baselin e assessment, they will participate together in 
an online informational session which provides an overview of the daily diary procedures.  
 After completing the informational session, p articipants will be enrolled into a measurement 
burst daily diary design comprised of four 14- day bursts of daily surveys with three 14- day 
intervals that do not include daily surveys. There are three intervention conditions: (A) no intervention; (B) atten tion-control text messaging; or (C) CBT text messaging intervention (for 
more information on intervention conditions, see below). Between bursts 1 and 2 (Interval 1), all 
participants will be assigned to condition A (no intervention) such that all will complete the first two bursts (28 days) before receiving an intervention. Between bursts 2 and 3 (Interval 2) and bursts 3 and 4 (Interval 3), couples will be randomized to one of the following eight patterns of conditions: AA, AB, AC, BA, BB, BC, CA, or CB. There is no "CC" condition because the CBT 
intervention is not intended to be given in multiple two- week intervals.  
 Condition A:  No intervention. Participants do not receive any messages during the interval 
period. 
Condition B:  Attention control. Over a 14 day period, participants will receive two text 
messages per day (one at 8 a.m. and one at 4 p.m.). They will receive hourly reminders for four hours or until the message is read. Participants receive the same messages in the same order. All texts will be supportive messages which express empathy and unconditional positive regard and 
provide support for dealing with stressors. These messages will be nondirective and will not include any CBT skill suggestions. 
Condition C: CBT Messaging Intervention. Over a 14 day period, participants will receive 
two text messages per day (one at 8 a.m. and one at 4 p.m.). They will receive hourly reminders for four hours or until the message is read. Participants receive the same messages in the same order, with content equally distributed across the four content areas (i.e., psychoeducation regarding effects of stress, distress tolerance, emotion regulation, alcohol reduction).  
 
On the morning after the informational session, participants will begin the first daily survey 
burst.  For each burst, participants will complete daily reports of (1) alcohol use, (2) sexual 
minority, gender minority, and COVID -19 stress (note: gender minority and COVID -19 stress 
are added for this proposal), and (3) IPV perpetration.  All daily surveys will be completed using 
the LifeData app.  
 
Retention Plan.  To maximize our retention rate, we will utilize an secure database to 
organize all activities involving assessment and retention. We also have systems in place (e.g., through LifeData) that can be used to send text messages and e -mail reminders about pending 
follow -up assessments.  We will efficiently maintain our sample and implement multiple 
strategies, including: (1) maintaining cell phone, address, email and other records; (2) providing change -of-contact (email, cell phone, address) “pos tcards” for participants to send electronically; 
(3) sending email “meeting” invites; (4) providing adequate compensation for completing daily diary assessments (i.e., $[ADDRESS_1034132] via the LifeData App, 
bonuses for comple ting higher percentages of daily surveys; and (5) monitoring participant 
progress and contact[CONTACT_755474]. Participants can easily track the number of prompts that have c ompleted 
on the LifeData ap. Our current laboratory personnel comprised of full time research assistants and doctoral students will be responsible for conducting all retention- related activities.  
 Informed Consent.  Participants who are eligible to participate in the study, and choose to do 
so, will be asked to complete a web -based baseline questionnaire battery, an in -person or on- line 
informational session, and a daily diary study.  A waiver of documentation of consent is required.  
 Informed consent will be obtained separately for the web- based questionnaire battery and for 
the informational session and daily diary surveys. The consent form for the questionnaire battery 
will be displayed online and participants will be asked to check a box to indicate that they wish 
to proceed with the survey. An online version of the consent form for the online informational session and daily diary surveys will be sent to participants via a weblink prior to the online informational session. The consent form will ask participants to check a box to indicate that they wish to proceed with the online informational session and subsequent daily diary surveys.  
 
Safety Considerations  
 The three potential risks associated with this research, and our procedures for mitigating those risks, are enumerated below.  
 
1. One potential risk associated with all research that is not anonymous is breach of confidentiality, which could cause negative social or legal consequences. Given the longitudinal nature of this project, this is an important risk to consider.  We believe t hat 
the risk is very low, given that data are collected electronically and stored securely and separately from identifying data. In addition, all participants will be informed that the study includes receiving text messages via the LifeData platform. Thus, there are potential risks to confidentiality associated with receiving text- messages that may appear 
on their phone screen.  
 
In addition, we will use personal identification numbers, access codes, and passwords on 
surveys administered via Qualtrics and the LifeData app.  Only the PI [INVESTIGATOR_755465]. Qualtrics web -survey 
platform and the LifeData app employ a high level of data encryption. All data and 
recruitment materials will be stored on the PI’s password -protected desktop located in his 
locked office at GSU.  
 
2. A second potential risk is that participants’ relationships may be adversely affected by [CONTACT_73764]. There is little evidence that participation in relationship -based research is 
harmful, rather, most couples find it beneficial (Bradbury, 1994; Laurence au & Bolger, 
2005). Nevertheless, as an important way of minimizing the risk of harm from participation, participation is limited to community volunteers who complete an extensive screening process and are provided with detailed information on what partici pation 
entails. We believe that individuals who are concerned that the study might be unpleasant or exacerbate conflict are very unlikely to choose to participate. However, we will exclude from participation any couples who indicate very severe, clinical l evels of 
violence.  
 While excluding the most seriously violent couples will greatly reduce the risk of serious violence occurring during the course of the study, it will not eliminate this risk.  Thus, we will remain vigilant to the occurrence of any negative effects of parti cipation or of any 
serious violence.  There will be regular contact [CONTACT_755475]. At each contact, research personnel will ask whether there are any difficulties or negative consequences associated with participation , and any issues with privacy or 
independence of responses. All participants will be provided with a list of community 
resources in the orientation packet that they receive at their first appointment and may be referred to additional resources if warranted .  These resources will include services 
catering to the needs of sexual minorities.  
3. A third potential risk is that participants will feel uncomfortable answering questions. Participants will be reminded that they have the right to refuse to answer any question in the baseline or daily assessments or to discontinue participation at any tim e. All 
instruments are programmed to allow participants to skip any question but still complete the survey.  The consent documents will provide participants with contact [CONTACT_755476]. The research team will be prepared to provide r esources for 
participants should they request a referral.   
 Data Management and Statistical Analysis  
 
Data Management. All data collected during the baseline survey phase will be initially 
stored on Qualtrics’ secure servers. Qualtrics complies with the privacy standards imposed on health care records by [CONTACT_154213] (HIPAA). Participant data will be stored on GSU secure computing systems that are accessible only by 
[CONTACT_755477]. After downloading the data, all data will be deleted from Qualtrics.  
 
Microsoft Teams will be used for video conferencing for on- line informational sessions. 
Microsoft Teams is compatible with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA). These sessions will not be recorded.  
 All data collected during the daily  diary survey phase will be initially stored on LifeData’s 
secure servers. LifeData complies with the privacy standards imposed on health care records by 
[CONTACT_154213] (HIPAA). Participant data will be stored 
on GS U secure computing systems that are accessible only by [CONTACT_755478]. After downloading the data, all data will be deleted from LifeData.  
 All PCs that will store data for this project are in locked rooms when users are not present. 
The department, as well as University Key Control, maintains a list of individuals with authorized access. All PCs and servers are password -protected. Only indivi duals with a correct 
password can gain access to individual PCs and departmental servers. User accounts are created and maintained by [CONTACT_755479]. To protect individual computers from unauthorized intrusion, computer users do not have administrative privileges on workstations and servers, and therefore are unable to install unauthorized applications and services or modify critical system files that could create vulnerabilities. Only the departmental Technical Support team members h ave administrative rights to PCs and servers. In addition, firewalls protect each 
individual computer and server from intrusion. Further, Georgia State University has additional firewalls and other security devices to protect the network infrastructure from outside the campus. Auditing and password security policies are enabled on computers and servers to track login attempts and restrict unauthorized access.  
 
Statistical Analysis.   All data analysis will be led by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Masyn. Data analysis will be 
conducted using Stat a and MPlus . Because this is the first daily report study to assess IPV among 
SGM couples, it is important to begin by [CONTACT_755480].  M easures of central tendency and dispersion will be 
used to summarize all primary outcomes (i.e., daily alcohol use and daily IPV perpetration) and secondary outcomes (i.e., daily sexual minority stressors, daily gender minority stressors, and daily COVID- 19 stressors) for each of the eight intervention conditions (i.e., AA, AB, AC, BA, 
BB, BC, CA, and CB) corresponding to each of the four 14- day daily diary bursts . 
In order to examine associations between the primary outcomes, we will utilize a multilevel generalized structural equation modeling approach, with burst days (Level 1) nested within individuals or dyads (Level 2).  This flexible modeling framework will al low us to model both 
within -individual/dyad associations and between -individual/dyad variation in those associations.  
For example, we will use a multilevel logistic regression to estimate the within -individual/dyad 
association between daily alcohol use and IPV perpetration across burst days (Level 1) and test for intervention moderation of the effect of alcohol use on IPV perpetration (Level 2).  We will 
evaluate Level [ADDRESS_1034133] -intervention 
bursts for those assigned to one of the four conditions exposed to the CBT text messaging. We 
can further extend this approach to model each partner’s pathways from SGM and COVID -[ADDRESS_1034134] and across bursts data as well as IPV risk and resilience factors assessed at baseline. IPV 
perpetration outcomes will be dichotomous at Level 1 (i.e., perpetration or not) and SGM stress, 
COVID- 19 stress, alcohol use, and risk and resilience factors  will be modeled using scale scores .   
 Sample Size.  The primary outcomes will be self -reported IPV perpetration and alcohol use 
and the secondary outcomes will be sexual minority stress, gender minority stress, and COVID 
stress. Parameter estimates were informed by [CONTACT_12783] -sectional studies of IPV in SGM couples 
(Lewis et al., 2017; Mason et al., 2016) and previous daily- diary studies of heterosexual IPV and 
alcohol use that used an APIM framework (Testa & Derrick, 2014). In addition, there is not 
sufficient data to inform hypothesized daily effects involving effects of SGM stress, COVID stress, or our proposed Level [ADDRESS_1034135] (DSMB). The DSMB members will be chosen by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Parrott . The members, who will all be 
voting members, will be chosen based upon their knowledge of clinical trial methodology, their experience with the topi[INVESTIGATOR_512107] (i.e., alcohol use, intimate partn er violence , sexual and gender 
minoritized communities ), and absence of conflicts of interest. They will be appointed for the life 
of the project.  
 Monitoring of safety and data quality in the proposed study will be the responsibility of all 
personnel on the project, with primary responsibility and supervision by [CONTACT_60306]. Parrott . The 
Institutional Review Board at Georgia State University will approve the Statement of Informed Consent for the study and will provide additional oversight of data and safety issues. The study protocol will be approved prior to soliciting or consenting any participants. Moreover, the study will be reviewed on an annual basis  by [CONTACT_755481] [INVESTIGATOR_695934]. Stuart regarding the progress of the proposed project, including any issues pertinent to recruitment, retention, confidentiality, and safety  of human subjects. Any incidents that involve a breach of this plan or serious 
accident/injury will be reported to [CONTACT_755482] and the DSMB board, the IRB chair at Georgia State University, and the NIAAA Safety and Monitoring Board. 
 The PI [INVESTIGATOR_755466]. All aspects of participant interaction and monitoring, including adverse events, will 
be discussed during these meetings. Research personnel will be trained to do the following if an adverse event occurs: (1) take any and all appropriate medical actions necess ary that are detailed 
in the protocol for dealing with emergency medical situations, including calling 911 if needed; (2) immediately contact [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_755467]; and (3) provide a detailed description of the event on a standardized "Une xpected Problems Checklist" in the subject’s data 
record.  Immediately after being notified about the adverse event, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_34616].  The IRB will then advise the PI [INVESTIGATOR_755468].  
  
References  
 
Asparouhov, T., Hamaker, E. L., & Muthén, B. (2018). Dynamic structural equation models. 
Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 25, 359- 388. 
Bradbury, T. N. (1994). Unintended effects of marital research on marital relationships. 
Journal of Family Psychology , 8(2), 187- 201. 
Holmes, E. A., O'Connor, R. C., Perry, V . H., et al. (2020). Multidisciplinary research 
priorities for the COVID -19 pandemic: a call for action for mental health science. The Lancet 
Psychiatry, 7, 547- 560. 
Laurenceau, J. P., & Bolger, N. (2005). Using diary methods to study marital and family 
processes. Journal of Family Psychology , 19, 86- 97. 
Lewis, R. J., Mason, T. B., Winstead, B. A., & Kelley, M. L. (2017). Empi[INVESTIGATOR_755469] a model of sexual minority specific and general risk factors for intimate partner violence 
among lesbian women. Psychology of Violence , 7, 110- 119. 
Mason, T. B., Lewis, R. J., Gargurevich, M., & Kelley, M. L. (2016). Minority stress and 
intimate partner violence perpetration among lesbians: Negative affect, hazardous drinking, an 
intrusiveness as mediators. Psychology of Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity , 3, 236- 246. 
Meyer, I. H. (2003). Prejudice, social stress, and mental health in lesbian, gay, and bisexual 
populations: conceptual issues and research evidence. Psychological Bulletin , 129, 674- 697. 
Pfefferbaum, B., & North, C. S. (2020). Mental health and the Covid- 19 pandemic. New 
England Journal of Medicine , 383, 510- 512. 
Quinn, S. C., Kumar, S., Freimuth, V . S., Musa, D., Casteneda -Angarita, N., & Kidwell, K. 
(2011). Racial disparities in exposure, susceptibility, and access to health care in the US H1N1 
influenza pandemic. American Journal of Public Health, 101, 285- 293. 
Rajkumar, R. P. (2020). COVID -19 and mental health: A review of the existing literature. 
Asian Journal of Psychiatry , 52, 102066. 
Salerno, J. P., Williams, N. D., & Gattamorta, K. A. (2020). LGBTQ populations: 
Psychologically vulnerable communities in the COVID -19 pandemic. Psychological Trauma: 
Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy , 12(S1), S239. 
Schultzberg, M., & Muthén, B. (2018). Number of subjects and time points needed for 
multilevel time -series analysis: A simulation study of dynamic structural equation modeling. 
Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal , 25, 495- 515. 
Testa, M., & Derrick, J. L. (2014). A daily process examination of the temporal association 
between alcohol use and verbal and physical aggression in community couples. Psychology of 
Addictive Behaviors , 28, 127- 138. 
 