IpsiHand Device Use in Stroke Patients to Assess Functional Motor 
Outcomes
ClinicalTrials.gov Identiﬁer:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Date: July 20, 2020
Page
1
of 6

Study Protocol
The study is a prospective, non randomized, self controlled study performed in two phases
across two investigational sites. The study protocol allowed for a total completion of up to 20
adult subjects (18-85 years of age) who is a chronic stroke survivor of [ADDRESS_300346] was instructed to use the Neurolutions IpsiHand System at home daily, for a use
target of one session, ﬁve (5) out of seven (7) consecutive days per week for a total of 12 weeks.
On each day of IpsiHand Therapy, the subjects completed up to ﬁve (5) 10-minute runs of the
cued task per day.  Each 10-minute run of the cued task consisted of 30 trials in which subjects
tried to open the exoskeleton by [CONTACT_246807] 30 trials, targeting to achieve a
minimum of 150 repetitions per day.
Figure 1
shows
the sequence of timepoints.
Date: July 20, 2020
Page
2
of 6
Figure 1: Study Timeline
Motor evaluations occurred by [CONTACT_246808]ﬁcally trained to administer the Fugl-Meyer
Assessment - Upper Extremity. These motor evaluations occurred before receiving IpsiHand
training (Baseline), 4-week, 8-week and 12-week timepoints. The primary measure of statistical
success was the Fugl-Meyer. The Fugl-Meyer Assessment of the Upper Extremity was used to
assess the impact of the device in improving upper limb motor function and served as the primary
measure of statistical success, as determined by [CONTACT_2329] a two-sided one-sample t-test, assuming a
normal distribution of scores. The Fugl-Meyer Assessment of the Upper Extremity was selected
as the primary measure of statistical success based on FDA guidance and increased sensitivity of
t1he measure, with a reduced ﬂoor eﬀect as compared to the Action Research Arm Test (ARAT).
Statistical Methods
This study tested whether the Neurolutions System provides rehabilitative beneﬁts for stroke
survivors.  The central hypotheses are that ipsilateral motor signals from the unaﬀected
hemisphere in chronic stroke survivors can be used to control a BCI system and furthermore, that
use of the Neurolutions IpsiHand System will enhance functional recovery through endogenous
plasticity
A two-sided, one-sample t-test, examining the change in motor function from baseline to study
completion, was used to evaluate the statistical signiﬁcance (alpha = 0.05) of UEFM changes.
In addition to statistical analysis, the data was evaluated for clinical signiﬁcance by [CONTACT_246809]ﬀerence (MCID) scores for the UEFM.  The MCID has
been deﬁned as an increase of 5.25 points from baseline in those with minimum to moderate
hemiparesis in the chronic phase (>=6 months) of stroke.
Study Sites
The study locations  were St. Louis, MO and Santa Cruz, CA.
Principal Investigator
[INVESTIGATOR_246806], MD, PhD.
Date: July 20, 2020
Page
3
of 6
