 
 
 
 
 
 
 
POEM (Practice Of Embracing Each Moment) STUDY  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
04/19/2019  
  
 
Methods  
Setting  
The POEM  (Practice  Of Embracing  each Moment)  study was conducted within Kaiser Permanente Northern [LOCATION_004] 
(KPNC),  an integrated  health  care delivery  system  that provides  comprehensive health care to  a large,  diverse community - 
based population of over 4.1 million individuals. KPNC provides coverage for approximately 31% of the northern 
[LOCATION_004]  population,  and its membership  is similar  demographically,  ethnically,  and socioeconomically  to the area’s 
overall  population.  The only exception  is with regard  to income; KPNC  members  underrepresent  the very poor and the very 
wealthy.  Participants  for the POEM  study were  recruited from  7 KPNC  oncology clinics  in the San Francisco  Bay Area.  
 
Participants  
We included patients with a diagnosis of cancer who were currently receiving  or had received  chemotherapy,  targeted 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014],  or immunotherapy in the prior  6 months.  The inclusion criteria for both patients  and caregivers  included  age ≥18
years; owning a smartphone, tablet, or computer with internet access; and understanding English. Primary informal caregivers  of 
the patients  were also eligible  and invited  to participate. We excluded  persons  who regularly  meditated  or prayed  at least [ADDRESS_1022577]. The study was registered on ClinicalTrials.gov ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]).  
Recruitment. Patients were recruited using several strategies, including clinic referrals from oncologists, oncology social 
workers, and nurses; brochures at each cli nic; and invitation emails, followed up with phone calls. Eligible patients were 
identified using the KPNC  electronic health record. Caregivers were recruited by [CONTACT_747341].  Patients  could  
participate  with or without  caregiver participati on, and caregivers could also participate without an enrolled patient. 
Participants who completed the study received a $[ADDRESS_1022578] and a year’s subscription to the mindfulness program used for this trial.  
Randomization. Participants were allocated to the  2 study groups  using simple  balanced  blocked  randomization,  stratified  by 
[CONTACT_159580].  Randomization was implemented  by [CONTACT_747342] a set of sequentially  numbered  opaque  
envelopes  filled  by [CONTACT_747343]. Caregivers who enrolled with a patient participant were  
assigned  to the same  arm as the patient.  
Intervention. Participants in the intervention arm received free access to a commercially available mindfulness program, 
HeadspaceTM (www.headspace.com),  for 8 weeks. Headspace is a self -paced program that provides guided mindfulness  
meditation  instructions  via a website  or mobile application (iOS and Android). Research staff emailed  participan ts 
randomized to the intervention arm device -specific  instructions  for downloading the Headspace app and information 
about the program. Research staff checked in with participants over the phone a few days after emailing the instructions and 
provided support  for setting  up Headspace over the phone,  if needed.  
Participants  were  asked  to complete  Headspace sessions on  a daily  basis  during the 8-week  intervention.  They  were 
encouraged to first complete  the 30-day Foundation  Course, which teaches users the basics of mindfulness meditation, then 
the cancer pack, which was designed specifically for individuals affected by [CONTACT_67380].  They also had the option to choose  
other  10- to 30-day courses  that are more  condition-  or situation -specific, such as “Anxiety,” “Stress,” “Acceptance,” 
“Relationships,”  or “Sleep,” or single meditation sessions.  All Headspace courses teach mindfulness using various basic 
techniques, including breathing exercises, body scan  (to mindfully  pay attention  to different  parts  of one’s  body— one of the 
most basic exercises in the MBSR program), noting (being aware of any emotions that may be arising at the moment),  and 
visualization  (visualizing  images  such as sun shining on the entire  body).  The length  of the sessions can be set from  10 to 20 
minutes.  The length  was initially  set to 10 minutes  for all participants.  In addition  to the daily,  progressive audio instruction, 
there are short (1 -2 minutes) lecture videos every several days designed to increase the under standing of mindfulness  and to 
encourage  its integration  into daily  life. Headspace can be set up to send reminders  using push notifications, and study staff 
made phone calls if an intervention participant completed  fewer  than [ADDRESS_1022579] control arm received usual care and were asked not to start  any 
stress  reduction programs  during the study period. On completion of the 8 -week survey, the control participants were 
provided wit h a year’s subscription to Headspace and instructions on downloading the app.  
 
 
Outcome Measures  
Retention. The retention rate was measured as the proportion of enrolled  participants  who completed  the 8-week  survey (the 
primary outcome time point).  
Adherence. The Headspace program automatically collects adherence data, including date, time, length, and name [CONTACT_747349], identified by a study  ID. Headspace transferred  these  adherence  data to the 
researchers  monthly during  the study.  Using  these  data,  we calculated the proportion of days during the 8- week 
intervention period that each participant used the program for any amount of time.  
Participant -Reported Measures. We collected outcome data using self -administered online surveys using DatStat software  
(DatStat Ilume,  version [IP_ADDRESS],  Seattle,  WA)  at the time of consent (baseline survey) and immediately post -intervention  
(8-week  survey)  using validated  questionnaires  as follows.   
Distress. The NCCN Distress Thermometer  was used to assess current  distress  level.  Respondents  were  asked  to rate 
their level  of distress  during the past week  by [CONTACT_43435] a number,  with 0 indicating  no distress  and 10 extreme distress.  
Anxiety and depression . We used the 14- item Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5620] (HADS) to assess anxiety and 
depression.  Higher  scores  indicate  greater  anxiety  and depression.  
Pain. The PROMIS Pain Intensity numeric  rating scale asks  participants  to rate average pain level  in the past 7 days on  
a scale of 0 (“no pain”)  to 10 (“worst  imaginable  pain”). The 8-item PROMIS Pain Interference scale  assesses extent  to which 
pain interfered  with functional  activities  during the past [ADDRESS_1022580] 7 days.  A 
higher summary score indicates  worse sleep disturbance.  
Quality of life . We used the 27- item Functional Assessment  of Cancer  Therapy  General  Scale (FACT -G) to assess QoL 
in patients.  FACT -G asks respondents  to rate their QoL in 4 domains  (physical,  social/family,  emotional,  and functional 
well- being). Caregiver QoL  was determined  using the Caregiver Quality of Life Index –Cancer (CQOLC) scale. The 
CQOLC gauges the daily and overall impact caregiving has on respondents’  QoL.  Higher  scores  indicate better QoL on 
both scales.  
Fatigue . The 9-item Brief  Fatigue  Inventory  assesses the severity and impact of fatigue on various aspects of life in the 
past 24 hours. Higher scores indicate greater fatigue.  
Posttraumatic  growth . The 21-item Posttraumatic  Growth Inventory (PTGI) assesses 5 factors  of posttraumatic  growth, 
positive change experienced becau se of a traumatic event or crisis —relating to others, new possibilities, personal strength,  
spi[INVESTIGATOR_116172],  and appreciation  of life. Respon dents are asked to rate to what extent they have seen the listed  changes  as 
a result  as a crisis  in their lives.  We modified the wording to ask about changes as a result of their (patients) or their loved 
one’s (caregivers) cancer diagnosis.  Higher  scores  indicate  greater  post-traumatic  growth.  
Mindfulness . The 24-item Five Facet  Mindfulness  Questionnaire –Shor t Form (FFMQ -SF) measures 5 factors 
representing elements of mindfulness: observing, describing, acting with awareness,  nonjudging of inner  experience,  and 
nonreactivity to inner experience. Higher scores indicate  greater mindfulness.  
Post-Intervention Interview.  We conducted  phone interviews with   participants   after   they   completed   the   8-week  
intervention  period  to obtain  qualitative  feedback  regarding the  study.  Question  topi[INVESTIGATOR_747340], things they liked about Headspace  or thought could be improved, suggestions for improving the experience of 
study participants, and experience being in the wait -list control arm.  
 
Data Analyses  
Data from patient participants and caregiver participants were analyzed separately. We described baseline distributions 
between arms. Retention rates were calculated by [CONTACT_747344] 8 -week 
surveys by [CONTACT_747345]. We used the program usage data collected by [CONTACT_747346] —the percent of days within the 8- week intervention period that participants engaged in at 
least one Headspace session of any length.  
To obtain preliminary efficacy results, we performed repeated meas ures analysis of variance tests comparing change in 
outcome measures between baseline and 8 -week follow -up survey between intervention and control arms using all 
participants  who completed  both surveys.  Cohen’s d effect  size was calculated  by [CONTACT_747347].  All analyses were intent -to-treat.  As a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], this 
randomized clinical trial was not adequately powered to detect statistically significant differences between groups. As 
such, standardized effect sizes were calculated  to demonstrate  effects  and trends.  Effect  sizes  of approximately 0.2, 0.5, 
 
and 0.8 are generally considered small, medium, and large effects, respectively.  
As a supplementary an alysis, we conducted dose -response per -protocol analyses, repeating the analysis but stratifying  
intervention  participants  by [CONTACT_747348]  (percent  of days during intervention 
period used Headspace: <50% and ≥ 50%) and comparing with the control participants.  
Interviews  were  transcribed  and uploaded into Nvivo 12 software. Inductive thematic analysis was employed to identify 
and develop codes on themes related to mindfulness  benefits,  the interface experience,  the cancer  patients’/caregivers, 
perspective of mindfulness. One primary coder (MM)  initially  coded  each interview  and met with a secondary coder (AA) 
to discuss the coding, identify disagreements,  and ensure  accuracy  of codes.  This article  focuses on the feasibility 
component of the qualitative interviews.  
 