 
 
Official Title of the Study:  Impact of a Sma rtphone Application on Postpartum  Weight Loss and Breastfeeding Rates 
among Low -income Urban Women  
 
NCT ID: 201704147  
 
Principal Investigator : [INVESTIGATOR_825583], MD, Maternal -Fetal Medicine Fellow  at Washington University  School of 
Medicine  in St. Louis  
Co-Investigator : Alison Cahill, MD , MSCI , Associate Professor , Director, Division of Maternal -Fetal Medicine, Department 
of Obstetrics & Gynecology  at Washington University  School of Medicine  in St. Louis  
 
 
  
Adam Lewkowitz, MD, Maternal -Fetal Medicine Fellow  
Alison Cahill, MD , MSCI , Associate Professor , Director, Division of Maternal -Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics & 
Gynecology  
 
Final version: June 15, 2017   
BACKGROUND AND OVERVIEW  
The high rate of obesity in the [LOCATION_002] is a significant health concern for people of all ages. For example, 
nearly 1 in 3 children ages 2 –[ADDRESS_1144766] childhood obesity and  beneficial for long -term 
neurodevelopment, immunity, nutrition, and overall health. Breastfeeding is a lso beneficial to mothers : women who 
breastfeed have long -term cardiovascular health  benefits  and lose more weight by [CONTACT_825587]’t  breastfeed . For these and many other  reasons, numerous public health organizations are focused on 
increasing initiation and continuation of breastfeeding, particularly exclusive breastfeeding. However, although 75% of 
women initiate breastfeeding nationally, only 59% of African -American women and 53% of teenagers do so, and these 
rates may be even lower  among low -income urban women. For example, our unpublished data demonstrate that only 
34% of Medicaid recipi[INVESTIGATOR_825584] -Jewish Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (BJH) exclusively breastfeed  by [CONTACT_825588] . This low rate of exclusive breastf eeding is particularly notable given that BJH is a Baby [CONTACT_211205][INVESTIGATOR_307], 
which means the BJH Obstetrics unit has met a rigorous international standard shown to optimize breastfeeding 
initiation and continuation.  
The low breastfeeding  rate among  low-incom e women  is attributed , in part , to misconceptions about 
breastfeeding benefits and poor social support. To overcome these barriers , we propose the first -ever randomized 
controlled trial assessing the impact of a smart phone application (app) on breastfeeding rates among low -income 
women. We chose an app because nearly 66% of American adults and 90% of those under the age of [ADDRESS_1144767] smart 
phones , and over  66% of Americans with smart phones use them to obtain heal th information via new media (blogs, 
websites, and apps). Additionally , physician -designed new media interventions for low-income women have improved 
intrauterine device uptake rates , increased weight loss,  and decreased rates of postpartum smoking. To dev elop our app  
– Breastfeeding Friend (BFF)  – we first used a well -validated survey  to identify barriers low-income urban women 
perceive  as preventing them from breastfeeding. Next , we used these data , and input from neonatologists, certified 
lactation consu ltants, and focus groups of low -income pregnant women , to create BFF. BFF function s as a virtual 
lactation consultant, increasing breastfeeding knowledge while providing interactive assistance and access to in -person 
resources. Here, we will test the ability of BFF to increase rates of breastfeeding and promote postpartum weight loss.  
 
RESEARCH DESIGN  
Objective(s) : To assess the effects that a novel smartphone application has on breastfeeding rates and postpartum 
weight loss among low -income women  
 
Background: Prior metaanalyses have demonstrated that the highest increases in breastfeeding rates occur from 
individual -level breastfeeding education and support interventions available both during pregnancy and after delivery. 
Thus, we will recruit  women  during their third trimester of pregnancy  and expose half of them to  BFF, which provides  
individual -level educational and support , for one month during pregnancy and three months postpartum . Our overall 
hypothesis  is that  BFF users will have higher rates of breastfeeding and more  postpartum weight loss  than those in the 
control group . To provide the first data on the ability of a new media intervention to increase breastfeeding and 
postpartum weight loss among low -income women , we will  pursu e three specific aims : 
Specific Aim 1: Determine  the effects of BFF on exclusive breastfeeding rates at two days postpartum .  
Hypothesis : Exposure to BFF will increase rates of exclusive breastfeeding at two days postpartum .  
Specific Aim 2: Assess the ability of BFF to increase postpartum weight loss .  
Hypothesi s: Expos ure to BFF will increase maternal  weight loss by [CONTACT_696058] . 
Specific Aim 3: Determine the impact  of BFF on breastfeeding from two days to six months postpartum .  
Adam Lewkowitz, MD, Maternal -Fetal Medicine Fellow  
Alison Cahill, MD , MSCI , Associate Professor , Director, Division of Maternal -Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics & 
Gynecology  
 
Final version: June 15, 2017  Hypothesis : Exposure  to BFF wil l increase  rates of non-exclusive breastfeeding at two days postpartum and 
exclusive breastfeeding at three weeks, three months, and six months postpartum . 
 
 
Study Design: Randomized controlled trial.  
 
Primary Outcome : Exclusive breastfeeding on postpartum  day 2  
 
Secondary Outcomes : Breastfeeding initiation; exclusive and non -exclusive breastfeeding at 6 weeks, 3 months, and 6 
months after delivery; non -exclusive breastfeeding at 2 days postpartum; timing of formula initiation; postpartum 
weight loss; patie nt-reported best breastfeeding or pumpi[INVESTIGATOR_825585] : Women will be included if they are nulliparous, plan to deliver at the clinical site and have singleton 
pregnancies without known severe fetal malfo rmations or genetic conditions at 36 weeks’ gestation. Women will be 
excluded if they have a contraindication to breastfeeding.  
 
Randomization and Treatment : Patients meeting inclusion criteria will be enrolled, provided a complimentary 
smartphone, and ra ndomized in a 1:1 ratio using computer generated randomizaed sequence to one of the two 
treatment protocols:  
1) BreastFeeding Friend (BFF): a novel smartphone application with on -demand videos on breastfeeding and 
educational support for infant development.  
2) A skeleton app: designed to look similar to BFF, the skeleton app will contain only digital breastfeeding handouts 
provided in routine prenatal care  
Methods: Nulliparous women with singleton pregnancies will be recruited at 36 weeks’ gestation at their rout ine 
Obstetric appointments at  the prenatal clinic at the Center for Outpatient Health.  Consenting women will complete an 
intake questionnaire to obtain sociodemographic information as well as self -reported prepregnancy weight, height, and 
breastfeeding int entions. They will then be randomized into two groups: BFF and a dummy app. The dummy app looks 
identical to BFF but contains only the limited breastfeeding content available during routine prenatal care. Each 
participant will receive a complimentary Andro id phone with three months of prepaid internet service. Sprint has heavily 
discounted smart phones and internet plans for use in this study. At two days, three weeks, three months, and six 
months postpartum, participants will complete telephone questionnai res derived from the Infant Feeding Practices 
Study II, a well -validated survey created by [CONTACT_13802]. This survey has been slightly modified to 
better target the study’s breastfeeding and weight -loss aims. Women will also be weighed o n postpartum day two to 
obtain data on their gestational weight gain. The six -month follow -up questionnaire prompts participants to weigh 
themselves during the survey. Postpartum weight loss will be obtained by [CONTACT_825589][INVESTIGATOR_825586].  
 
Sample size: 170 women over an estimated 12 months  
 
Sample size justification:  Our study will include 170 patients: 85 randomized to BFF and 85 randomized to a dummy 
app. Our statistical power estimates assumed a baseline rate of exc lusive breastfeeding of 34%. A sample size of 79 
women in each group (anticipating [ADDRESS_1144768] to follow -up) will afford 80% power to detect a 65% incr ease in 
exclusive breastfeed ing at two days postpartum . Assuming a baseline postpartum weight loss of [ADDRESS_1144769] us 80% power to detect a difference in weight loss of two 
kilograms between women randomized to BFF and t hose randomized to the dummy app.  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan : Primary analysis will follow intention -to-treat analysis. Dichotomous endpoints including 
breastfeeding at two days postpartum and exclusive breastfeeding will be analyzed by [CONTACT_663849]-square tests. 
Continuous measures including duration of exclusive breastfeeding, duration of any breastfeeding, and maternal weight 
Adam Lewkowitz, MD, Maternal -Fetal Medicine Fellow  
Alison Cahill, MD , MSCI , Associate Professor , Director, Division of Maternal -Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics & 
Gynecology  
 
Final version: June 15, 2017  loss will be analyzed by [CONTACT_591875]’s t -test.  We will calculate crude and unadjusted risk estimates and differences. We 
will use multivariable logistic regression to adjust for potential confounders.  
 
COMMUNITY BASIS  
Our study takes place in the predominantly low -income population of women who receive prenatal care at the Center 
for Outpatient Health. These w omen have signi ficantly lower rates of breastfeeding than do higher -income women and 
have higher rates of obesity, putting them and their infants at increased risk of adverse health outcomes. If the trial 
proposed here demonstrates that Breastfeeding Friend improves brea stfeeding rates among low -income women, then 
the Missouri Foundation for Health has encouraged us to apply to them for funding to provide the app free -of-charge to 
low-income women throughout Missouri. Because breastfeeding has significant health benefits extending beyond 
infancy, including lower rates of childhood obesity and higher  rates of postpartum weight loss, widespread 
implementation of BFF could improve long -term health for low -income women and their children in our state.  
 
RELATIONSHIP TO OBESITY PREVENTION OR TREATMENT  
Obesity is a substantial public health problem in the [LOCATION_002] that disproportionately affects low -income women. 
Compared to infants born to normal -weight women, those born to obese mothers have a higher risk of becoming obese,  
developi[INVESTIGATOR_4428] -onset insulin resistance and diabetes, and having early cardiovascular disease , resulting in  a cycle of 
maternal and offspring obesity and metabolic disease. Breastfeeding has significant benefits for infant health outcomes,  
including  appropriate growth and weight gain, and has been proposed as a mechanism to decrease child obesity. 
Breastfeeding also increase s rates of maternal weight loss postpartum. However, low -income women are less likely than 
moderate - and high -income women to breast feed. This proposal —the first of its kind —will test an intervention to 
increase breastfeeding rates in this high -needs population, potentially resulting in improved neonatal and maternal 
health outcomes. If this study demonstrates that BFF improves breastf eeding rates, future work will be directed toward 
statewide dissemination, thereby [CONTACT_825590]'s low -income women and their children . 