Protocol version:  3 
Date  updated : 6/8/2023  1 Study Title:  The effect of clear masks on patient  satisfaction with 
physician communication during awake brain surgery  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
IRB-Approved D ate:  08JUN2023 
 
 
 
     
 
    
 
     
 
    
 
    
 
     
 
 Study Title : The effect of clear masks on  patient  satisfaction  with physician communication during 
awake brain surgery  
 
Protocol version:  3 
Date  updated : 6/8/2023  2 Principal Investigator , Co-investigator(s) :  
[CONTACT_453268], Wake Forest Department of Neurosurgery  
[CONTACT_453269] S. Oravec, Wake Forest Department of Neurosurgery  
[CONTACT_453270], Wake Forest Department of Neurology  
 
Sponsor or funding source: Masks will be provided by [CONTACT_453262]’N’Clear, Inc as a grant for the completion of this study.  
 
Background, Rationale  and Context  
 
When the coronavirus became a pandemic in early 2020, wearing masks became mandatory in all 
public places. This lead to certain challenges such as difficulty communicating among hearing-impaired individuals who may rely lip reading, and the use of clear masks has been shown to alleviate this 
challenge.(Atcherson et al ) In the operating room, masks have been worn to reduce the risk of surgical 
site infections. Surgical masks are currently being worn in the operating room during placement of deep 
brain stimulators (DBS)  in awake patients for the treatment of medically refractory movement disorders, 
including Parkinson’s disease and Essential Tremor. During DBS surgery, a series of questions and 
assessments are carried out by a neurologist  in the operating room  to confirm location and appropriate 
placement of the stimulator, requiring patients to be awake and participatory. As the neurologist 
traditionally wears a surgical mask that prevents patients from lip reading,  a surgical mask without a clear 
window  has the potential to hinder  the communication between the neurologist and the patient. It is of 
vital importance that the patient understands and accurately answers the neurologist’s questions to  
facilitate optimal placement of the  DBS  electrode while maximizing operative efficiency. 
 
Since the availability of clear masks has increased in the wake of the COVID-[ADDRESS_578009] found improved satisfaction among patients whose surgeons use clear masks when discussing or explaining surgery in the outpatient setting. (Kratzke et al)  One example of a clear mask is The 
Communicator (Safe’N’Clear, Inc ., Davidson, NC, [LOCATION_003]), which is the only FDA-approved, ASTM Level 
[ADDRESS_578010] not been evaluated in the intraoperative setting. Our hypothesis is that  the 
utilization of clear surgical masks in the operating room will lead to improved satisfaction and enhance communication for patients undergoing DBS surgery.    
Objective  
 
To evaluate patients’ experience during awake brain surgery when the communicating neurologist  
wears a clear face mask  compared with a standard surgical mask.  
  
Methods and Measures  
 
Design  
Single -center prospective randomized controlled study   
 
Setting  
Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center  
  
Subject selection criteria  
 
Protocol version:  3 
Date  updated : 6/8/2023  3  Study participants who meet the below criteria will be approached for potential participation prior to 
surgery.  
 
• Inclusion Criteria  
- Age >18 years  
- Patients electing to undergo deep brain stimulator placement   
- Patient in whom general anesthesia is not planned for stimulator target localization  
 
• Exclusion Criteria  
- Patients who do not give consent  
- Patients who do not undergo DBS placement  
- Patients who are blind or have a severe visual impairment  
- Non-English speaking patients (i.e., patients for whom an interpreter would be needed to 
conduct the intra -operative assessment ) 
 
• Sample Size  
- Based on statistical calculations and projections, the target sample size will be [ADDRESS_578011] created in the study database. All patients scheduled for a DBS phase I surgery will be contact[CONTACT_453263]. This will be done to give the patient time to consider study participation in order to avoid delays the morning of surgery. The morning of surgery the patient will be approached in pre -operative holding room 
to discuss participation in the study and if amenable sign consent for participation. This discussion will inform the patient that minor changes are being made in an attempt to improve the patient experience, but limited information regarding what steps exactly will be provided so as to reduce potential bias that might result from the patient knowing we are studying a new mask type. If the patient agrees to participation, a consent form will be signed and as a baseline will undergo the Hearing Handicap Inventory for the Elderly (HHIE -S) questionnaire before the operation (Appendix 1) . The patient’s record in the electronic 
study database will then be created and randomized to one of two groups.  Group A will experience the 
neurologist wearing a clear mask, and group B will experience the neurologist wearing a standard covered mask. The patient and all other intra -operative personnel will wear a covered surgical mask.  
Following standard surgical protocol , the DBS surgery will proceed with the patient awake. First, a 
stereotactic frame is securely attached to the patient’s head  and the patient is positioned appropriately. 
Local anesthetic is used for the neurosurgeon to obtain access through the scalp and skull. A microelectrode is then stereotactically placed using headframe coordinates. The neurosurgeon sets up the motor apparatus to allow the  neurologist to advance  the micro electrode to the appropriate deep brain 
target, operating the motor from a non-sterile station arranged next to the patient . The micro electrode will 
stimulate and record neuronal activity, during which time the neurologist will ask the patient questions to assess for changes in symptoms. These questions typi[INVESTIGATOR_453259] : 
- Do you notice any tingling or pulling of the mouth or face?  
- Do you see any flashes of light in your vision?  
- Do you feel any tingling or heaviness of an arm or leg?  
- Do you notice any metallic or strange taste?  
- Can you draw a spi[INVESTIGATOR_453260]?  
- Can you hold your arm out in front of you and keep it still?  
During a routine DBS surgery, the neurologist is positioned in view of the patient  while operating the 
electrode motor and asking the above questions. Microelectrode stimulation and recording will conclude 
Protocol version:  3 
Date  updated : 6/8/2023  4 when the appropriate target has been reached ; that is, when simulation achieves both  symptom 
improvement without new neurologic symptoms. At that point, the microelectrode is withdrawn and the 
macroelectrode is placed. The macroelectrode is stimulated in the determined  position to again confirm 
symptom improvement without new neurologic symptom or deficit, and when confirmed the 
neurosurgeon will secure the macro electrode in place. At this point, the  neurologist ’s testing portion is 
complete, and the neurologist exits the operating room while the neurosurgeon completes the implantation.  
For patients who agree to study participation, the neurologist will wear the mask type assigned by [CONTACT_453264]. At  the conclusion of the neurologist’s 
interaction with the patient, the patient will be asked a series of questions (presented in Appendix 2 , Data 
collection form) to evaluate the communication experience. This step will be performed by [CONTACT_453265] (not the participating neurologist) who will read from the questionnaire and record the patient’s responses using the Likert scale (defined in Appendix 2) . During questioning, the 
neurologist will step out of the operating room to reduce potential bias from the patients answering subjective questions in front of the neurologist.  
At the conclusion of the questionnaire , the patient will undergo a short debriefing regarding the aims 
of the study, specifically the revelation that the purpose of the study is to evaluate the use of a clear surgical mask on the patient’s experience, as assessed by [CONTACT_120266].   
At th e conclusion of the neurologist ’s assessment , as is typi[INVESTIGATOR_2855], the patient will be placed under 
sedation for the completion of the DB S implantation. In the event a patient is having bilateral DBS 
implantation in one operation, only the first DBS implantation will be included in the study. For these patients, the  procedure will be carried out as stated above, but following the first DBS implantation  the 
neurologist will continue to interact with the patient for the second DBS implantation . The second 
implantation will not be included in the study data collection.  
A retrospective chart review will be conducted for the [ADDRESS_578012] -operative period to evaluate for 
surgery -related infection. Evaluating for rates of infection between mask groups will help to ensure there 
is no harm associated with use of a non -covered mask during the operation. The patients will not need to 
be contact[CONTACT_453266]; information will be obtained via medical record  review only. For such a chart review, a waiver of consent will be completed in the IRB 
application. Such a waiver is necessary in order to answer the study question regarding mask safety and surgery -related infection, as it would be difficult to retrospectively re -consent every patient already 
enrolled in this nearly -complete study.  
 
Outcomes and Statistical Plan  
 
 Data will be gathered based on the attached Data Collection F orm (Appendix 2) . Answers to the 
questionnaire will be d eidentified.  
Power calculations will be performed considering the primary endpoint of a dichotomous response to 
question #1 of the CG -CAHPS. Thirty subjects per group will be needed to achieve 80% power to detect 
a difference of 26% or more between proportions (hypothesized standard of care mask positive response rate of 73% versus clear mask positive response rate of 99%) with alpha of 5% using conservative two -
sided Fisher’s Exact Test.  Therefore the enrollment goal will be 60 subjects total.  
Secondary outcomes will include differences in response to the remaining quantitative questions of 
the CG-CAHPS and free text responses to the final question. As the quantitative question responses are 
on a Likert scale, responses 1 -3 will be considered negative and 4 will be considered positive thereby 
[CONTACT_453267]. Fisher’s Exact Test will be used to 
investigate a difference between the standard of care mask and the clear mask for all dichotomous 
outcomes. P -values < 0.[ADDRESS_578013] themes.  
  
Protocol version:  3 
Date  updated : 6/8/[ADDRESS_578014] to 
undergo DBS placement during the enrollment period. The decision to undergo DBS placement will be made on an individual patient basis between patient/family and treating neurologist and neurosurgeon, without regard to consideration or participation in this study. These  potential study participants will then 
be screened using inclusion and exclusion criteria above and approached for interest. If amenable, the 
purpose and steps of the study will be further explained, but without divulging the clear mask as the topic of study to  avoid introducing bias with regard to mask type . If the participant gives consent, the consent 
form will be signed prior to any data collection or randomization. At the conclusion of the patient’s study 
participation (i.e., the completion of the questionnaires intra -operatively) the purpose of the study will be 
fully explained to the patient.  
 Informed Consent  
  Written informed consent will be obtained  prior to data collection or randomization.  The risk of harm 
or discomfort is expected to be negligible, as the intraoperative questionnaire is short and not expected to extend the length of surgery more than [ADDRESS_578015] identifying information will be destroyed in three years ( consistent 
with data validation and study design), producing an anonymous analytical data set.  Data access will be 
limited to study staff.  Data and records will be kept locked and secured, and any computer data will be 
password protected . No reference to any individual participant will appear in reports, presentations, or 
publications that may arise from the study.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring  
  The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_167198]. The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_128550].  
 
Reporting of Unanticipated Problems, Adverse Events or Deviations 
 
 Any unanticipated problems, serious and unexpected adverse events, deviations,  or protocol changes 
will be promptly reported by [CONTACT_458] [INVESTIGATOR_453261].  
 
Protocol version:  3 
Date  updated : 6/8/[ADDRESS_578016] of conventional and transparent 
surgical masks on speech understanding in individuals with and without hearing loss. J Am Acad 
Audiol . 2017;28 (1):58-67. doi:10.3766/jaaa.[ADDRESS_578017] 
Covered Masks on Communication with Patients During Surgical Clinic Encounters. JAMA Surg.  
2021;156(4):372-378.  
 
Appendix  
1. Hearing Screening  Questionnaire 
2. Data collection form  
Protocol version:  3 
Date  updated : 6/8/2023  7 Appendix  1. Hearing Screening  
 
 
 
Patient ID:     Date:      Rater:      
 Hearing Handicap Inventory in the Elderly  – Screening Questionnaire 
 
Instructions: Answer Yes, No, or Sometimes for each question. Do not skip a question if you avoid a situation because of a 
hearing problem. If you use a hearing aid, please answer according to the way you hear with the aid.  
 
1. Does a hearing problem cause you to feel embarrassed when you meet 
new people?  Yes (4)  No (0)  Sometimes (2)  
2. Does a hearing problem cause you to feel frustrated when talking to 
members of your family?  Yes (4)  No (0)  Sometimes (2)  
3. Do you have difficulty hearing when someone speaks in a whisper?  Yes (4)  No (0)  Sometimes (2)  
4. Do you feel handicapped by a hearing problem?  Yes (4)  No (0)  Sometimes (2)  
5. Does a hearing problem cause you difficulty when visiting friends, 
relatives, or neighbors?  Yes (4)  No (0)  Sometimes (2)  
6. Does a hearing problem cause you to attend religious services less often 
than you would like?  Yes (4)  No (0)  Sometimes (2)  
7. Does a hearing problem cause you to have arguments with family 
members?  Yes (4)  No (0)  Sometimes (2)  
8. Does a hearing problem cause you difficulty when listening to TV or 
radio?  Yes (4)  No (0)  Sometimes (2)  
9. Do you feel that any difficulty with your hearing limits or hampers your 
personal or social life?  Yes (4)  No (0)  Sometimes (2)  
10. Does a hearing problem cause you difficulty when in a restaurant with 
relatives or friends?  Yes (4)  No (0)  Sometimes (2)  
 Total Score :________  
 
Interpretation of Total Score: 0 -8 = no handicap; 10- 24 = mild to moderate handicap; 26 -40 = severe handicap.  
 
Adapted from: Ventry I, Weinstein B. Identification of elderly people with hearing problems. ASHA. 1983; 25:37- 42.  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Pr ot oc ol versi o n:  3 
Date  u p date d : 6/ 8/ 2 0 2 3  8 A p pe n di x 2. D at a c ollecti o n f or m  
 
 
P atie nt I D:           Ne ur ol o gist:               
Gr o u p Assi g n me nt :   A – Clear  B – C o vere d  
 
Mas k t y pe  use d : Clear / C o vere d  
 
C G -C A H P S Q uesti o ns  1 = N ot at all  
4 = C o m pletely  
* Di d t his pr o vi der e x plai n t hi n gs i n a wa y t hat was eas y t o u n dersta n d?  1 2 3 4 
* Di d t his pr o vi der liste n caref ull y t o y o u?  1 2 3 4 
* Di d t his pr o vi der see m t o k n o w t he i m p orta nt i nf or mati o n a b o ut y o ur me dical hist or y ? 1 2 3 4 
* Di d t his pr o vi der s h o w res pect f or w hat y o u ha d t o sa y?  1 2 3 4 
* Di d t his pr o vi der s pe n d e n o u g h ti me wit h y o u?  1 2 3 4 
A d diti o n al Q uesti o ns      
* Di d t his pr o vi der de m o nstrate e m pat h y ?  1 2 3 4 
* H o w c o mf orta ble d o y o u feel tr usti n g Dr. ( Ne ur ol o gist)’s decisi o ns?  1 2 3 4 
* Di d y o u u n dersta n d w hat y o u were bei n g as ke d t o d o?  1 2 3 4 
* H o w satisfie d are y o u wit h t he pr oce d ure t h us far o verall?  1 2 3 4 
 1 = Str o n gly dislike d  
4 = Str o n gly like d  
† W hat was y o ur i m pressi o n of t he Ne ur ol o gist’s mas k?  1 2 3 4 
 
§ W hat c o m me nts d o y o u ha ve a b o ut t he Ne ur ol o gist’s  mas k (s) ?          
                           
                             
 
 
* 4 -p oi nt Likert sc ale ( 1 = n ot at all, 4 =c o m pletely ; † 4 -Likert sc ale ( 1 =str o n gly dislike d, 4 =str o n gly like d ; § Free 
res p o nse ; A b brevi ati o ns: C H -C A H P S, Cli nici a n a n d Gr o u p C o ns u mer Assess me nt of He alt hc are Pr ovi ders a n d 
Syste ms  