Cover Page for ClinicalTrials.gov  
Official Title of the Study:  
 Attention -Bias Modification Treatment for PTSD  
Study ID: [REMOVED] . 
Principal Investigator:  
 [INVESTIGATOR_60490], PhD  
 [EMAIL_1178]  
 [PHONE_1120]  
Date of Document:  
 March  5, 2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signed copy on file at IRB                v. 11/15/[ADDRESS_1104542]  
 
March 5,  2019  
 
 
To:  [CONTACT_800479] :  [CONTACT_121722], Co -Chair  
  [CONTACT_121723], Co -Chair  
      
Subject : Approval Notice : Continuation Expedited per 45CFR46.110(b)(1 )(f)Category 8(c)  
 
    
Your protocol # 6688  entitled:   NEURAL AND BEHAVIORAL MARKERS OF  ATTENTION -BIAS 
MODIFICATION TREATMENT IN  PTSD   Protocol version date 03/05/ [ADDRESS_1104543] from April 1 , 2019 to March 31, 2020 .  
 
Consent requirements:  
      √  Not applicable: Data Analysis  Only  
    45CFR46.11 6 (d) waiver  of consent for secondary data analysis  
       Signature [CONTACT_3265] [CONTACT_108443](s) obtaining consent is required to document the consent process  
      Documentation of an independent assessment of the participant’s capacity to consent is also 
required.  
Approved for recruitment of subjects who lack capacity to consent :  No  Yes     
 
Field Monitoring Requirements:   Routine  Special: ___________________  
 
 
  Only copi[INVESTIGATOR_121659].  
  A progress report and application for continuing review is required 2 months prior to the 
expi[INVESTIGATOR_208981].  
  Changes to this research may not be initiated without the review and approval of the IRB except 
when necessary to eliminate immediate hazards to participants.  
  All serious and/or unanticipated problems or events involving risks to subjects or others must be 
reported immediately to the IRB.  Please refer to the PI -IRB website at http://irb.nyspi.org  for 
Adverse Event Reportin g Procedures and additional reporting requirements.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
EN/AW /kpz4alw 
Protocol Summary  Form
6688
Neria, Yuval
Page 1 of 20
Protocol Title:
Neural and Behavioral Markers  of 
Attention-Bias Modification Treatment  in 
PTSD
Protocol Number:
[ADDRESS_1104544] Approval:
05/09/2013
Expi[INVESTIGATOR_5952]:
03/31/2020Version Date:
03/05/2019
Clinic:
Anxiety Disorders Clinic
Contact [INVESTIGATOR_678]:
[INVESTIGATOR_60490],  PHD
Email: [EMAIL_1179]
Telephone: 646-774-8092Co-Investigator(s):
John Markowitz, MD
Franklin Schneier, MD
Erel Shvil, PHD
Research Chief:
Helen Simpson, MD
Cover Sheet
Choose ONE  option from  the following that is applicable to  your study
If you are creating  a new protocol, select "I am submitting a new protocol." As 5 Year Renewals are no 
longer required,  this option  remains  for historical  purposes.
I am submitting an  annual continuation  without modifications 
Division & Personnel
Division
What Division/Department does the  PI [INVESTIGATOR_100534]?
Dept of of Psychiatry, Theraputic  Div
Within the division/department, what Center  or group are you affiliated with, if  any? 
Anxiety Disorders Clinic 
Unaffiliated Personnel
List investigators, if any,  who will be participating in this protocol but  are not affiliated with  New  York 
Protocol Summary  Form
6688
Neria, Yuval
Page 2 of 20
State Psychiatric  Institute or Columbia University. Provide: Full  Name, Degrees and Affiliation.
 
 
 
Application for Continuation of Research
Status
Current Status  of Study: 
All research interventions were completed. Only data analysis is ongoing.
Summary of  Experiences  to Date
Please provide a summary  of scientific progress of  the study and the experience of research participants,  to 
date. This requirement is designed to allow for  the investigator and  the IRB to  reassess the study’s  risks  and 
benefits in terms  of developments in the  field, changing practice patterns, and  new  IRB policies and  
procedures.To date we  have enrolled 51 subjects with Posttraumatic Stress Disorder  (31 female, 20 male). Study 
procedures have been well  tolerated. There have  not been any study findings,  recent literature, or untoward 
events occurring  here  or at  other sites in the past year which might affect the analysis of the safety,  risks, or 
benefits of  the study.  
Funding
Have there  been  any changes in funding status since the prior  approval? 
NoHave the principal  investigator [INVESTIGATOR_100536]/product?Yes
Summary
Have there  been  any study findings, recent literature, or untoward events occuring here or at other sites in  
the past  year which  might  affect the analysis of the  safety, risks or benefits of study participation? 
NoHave there  been  any serious adverse events  (serious and/or unanticipated  problems  involving risks to  
subjects or others  at this  site which occured in the  past year)?  
NoHave all study staff with a  significant role in the design or implementation  of the human subject components 
of this study  received required training in human research subject protections?
Yes
Protocol Summary  Form
6688
Neria, Yuval
Page 3 of 20
Is the study covered by a certificate of confidentiality? No
Overall Progress
Approved sample size60Total number  of participants enrolled to date
51Number of participants  who  have completed the study to date 
41Have there  been  any significant deviations  from the anticipated study recruitment, retention or completion 
estimates? NoComments / additional information 
Sample Demographics
Specify populationPTSDTotal number  of participants enrolled from this population to  date  
51Gender, Racial and  Ethnic Breakdown 
39% Male
61% Female
 
Racial and Ethnic Breakdown:
44% White
34% African American
10% Asian/Pacific  Islander
12% Other
 
78% Hispanic
22% Non-Hispanic 
Summary of  Current Year's Enrollment and  Drop-out  
Number of participants  who  signed consent  in the past year
0Did the investigator  withdraw participants from the study? 
NoDid participants  decide  to discontinue study involvement? 
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_1104545] indicate if this research will include  any of the following  
procedures
   Psychiatric Assessment
   Use of Placebo or Sham Treatment
   Psychotherapy Trial
Population
Indicate which  of the following populations  will be included  in this  research
   Adults
   Adults  over 50
Research Support/Funding
Will an existing internal account be used to support the project?YesDescribe internal accountThe study is funded by a gift account that is administered through RFMH.Is the project  externally funded  or is external funding planned?
No
Study Location
Indicate if the  research  is/will be conducted at any  of the  following
   NYSPI
[INVESTIGATOR_60492]/locations
No
Lay Summary of Proposed  Research 
Lay Summary of Proposed Research
The present pi[INVESTIGATOR_86873] a double blind trial that  seeks  to examine feasibility, acceptability, safety, efficacy, 
and risk/benefit ratio  of ABMT  in individuals with PTSD. This pi[INVESTIGATOR_800454]
[ADDRESS_1104546] the success of the  ABMT.  
In addition,  pi[INVESTIGATOR_800455] (refers to the ability to encode  inputs with  some  degree of 
overlappi[INVESTIGATOR_800456]) will be collected in  subjects with  PTSD via a brief 
memory task, named the Behavioral Pattern Separation Task—Object  Version  (BPS-O) (see Study 
Procedures section (4.A.8.) for  a full description of  the task). 
Research Design:  This pi[INVESTIGATOR_800457]:  (1) to examine feasibility and acceptability of attention-bias-
modification treatment (ABMT) in PTSD. The sample will include individuals with  PTSD (n=60)  with  
attention bias towards and/or away from threat (documented  by [CONTACT_800468]),  which will undergo a  4-
week (8-sessions)  course  of ABMT or an  inactive  Comparison Training  Program  (CTP).
 Methods: The sample (n= 60) will be randomized equally into two groups: Group  1 will receive  a 4-week 
(8-sessions) course  of inactive CTP;  and group 2 will receive  a 4-week (8-sessions) course of ABMT.  The 
randomization will be  stratified by [CONTACT_654] [<40 vs. 40] and  gender  [M/F]. All subjects  will repeat  the Dot- 
Probe Task after  the four weeks  of treatment to reassess attention bias. 
 
 
 
 
Background, Significance  and Rationale
Background, Significance and Rationale
Emerging research implicates  biased attention to threat in  the pathophysiology of anxiety disorders1-4. 
Recent findings demonstrate significant  associations between attention bias and stress vulnerability5, 6. This 
work has motivated  the development of a novel therapy, attention-bias-modification treatment (ABMT). 
ABMT is  designed to implicitly modify patients' biased threat attendance  via computerized training 
protocols. Emerging  evidence indicates  that ABMT is effective in  modifying threat-related  attention biases 
and in ameliorating anxiety symptoms7,8,9,10. However, it is unclear  whether  ABMT  is efficacious for 
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The present pi[INVESTIGATOR_9962] a double blind trial that seeks to  examine 
feasibility, acceptability, safety,  efficacy,  and risk/benefit ratio of ABMT  in individuals with  PTSD. In 
addition this pi[INVESTIGATOR_800458]. In addition, pi[INVESTIGATOR_800459]  
(refers to the ability  to encode inputs with some degree of overlappi[INVESTIGATOR_800460]) will be collected in subjects  with  PTSD via a brief memory task,  named the Behavioral 
Pattern Separation Task—Object  Version (BPS-O) (see Study Procedures  section (4.A.8.) for a full 
description of the task). Evidence suggests that  impaired pattern separation,  which  is a deficiency in the 
ability to differentiate similar stimuli, underlies  fear overgeneralization  and may be highly associated with  
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_1104547] pi[INVESTIGATOR_800461]  a potential grant  that will assessed the putative  association  between – 
attention bias, impaired pattern separation and fear overgeneralization in  PTSD.
 
 
 
 
Specific Aims and Hypotheses
Specific Aims and  Hypotheses
This pi[INVESTIGATOR_800462]-bias-modification treatment 
(ABMT) in PTSD. 
Hypothesis 1: (1) ABMT  will diminish attention  bias at post-treatment assessment (Dot-Probe) compared to 
CTP. (2) ABMT will produce greater  symptomatic response (defined as >30% reduction  on CAPS) than the 
CTP.
 
Description of Subject Population
Sample #[ADDRESS_1104548]  population
Protocol Summary  Form
6688
Neria, Yuval
Page 7 of 20
18-60
Gender, Racial and  Ethnic Breakdown
Population Sex:  
Females  - ~60%
Males -  40%
 
Population Ethnicity:
 African-American- 30%
 Hispanic- 15%
 Caucasian- 45%
Asian/Pacific Islander  - 10%
 
 
Description of subject population
We expect greater proportion of females than males   due  to the higher prevalence of PTSD among women 
in the US population. The ethnic distribution, represents the typi[INVESTIGATOR_800463], moderated by [CONTACT_800469].
 
 
Recruitment Procedures
Describe settings where recruitment  will occur
Anxiety Disorders Clinic 
 
 
How and by [CONTACT_60504]/or recruited? 
Patients will respond to an advertisement (see below "study  advertised/ publicized").  Patient will call the clinic and after verbal 
consent the research  assistant (RA) will conduct  a preliminary screening. If the patient will be eligible  for the study the RA will invite 
him for further screening at the clinic.
How will the study be  advertised/publicized? 
Protocol Summary  Form
6688
Neria, Yuval
Page 8 of 20
Patients will be  informed of the study through: (a) word-of-mouth referrals from former patients, (b) referral 
from area  medical and  mental health professionals,  (c) publicity about the study, including articles in local  
newspapers and magazines, our IRB approved website (www.columbiatrauma.org), IRB approved flyers, appearances on local radio and television  shows,  etc., leading  to self-referral of prospective patients, and (d) 
advertisements placed in local media and on the  Internet (e) recruitme 
 
Do you have ads/recruitment material requiring  review at this time? 
NoDoes this study involve a  clinical trial?
No
Concurrent Research Studies
Will subjects in this  study participate in or be recruited from other studies? 
No
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
Name [CONTACT_40443]/sub samplePTSDCreate or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and  methods  to ascertain them
Inclusion criteria: Method of  Ascertainment:
1. Males or females between the  ages of 18 and 60.  History
2. Current DSM-IV PTSD SCID
3. Score equal or greater than 50 on the CAPS.          CAPS administration
 
4. Fluent in English and willing and able to give informed written consent and participate responsibly in the  protocol.
Clinical interview
5. threat bias  (i.e., >8ms mean decrease or increase  in reaction 
time to threat  faces vs. neutral  faces on dot-probe task) at 
baseline. Dot-probe attention bias task administration
Create or insert table to describe the exclusion criteria and methods to  ascertain them
Exclusion criteria: Method of  Ascertainment:
1. Current DSM-IV Axis  I disorder  other than SCID, HAM-D and clinical evaluation
Protocol Summary  Form
6688
Neria, Yuval
Page 9 of 20
PTSD.  Patients with comorbid (i.e., secondary  
diagnosis of) major depressive disorder (MDD) will be allowed for enrollment  if their HAM-D  score doesn’t 
exceed 25. 
2. Prior or  current diagnosis  of schizophrenia, 
schizoaffective disorder, organic mental  disorder, 
bipolar disorder, or antisocial,  schizotypal,  and 
schizoid personality disorders.SCID and clinical  evaluation
 
 
 
 
3.Suicidal ideation or behavior that poses a 
significant danger to the subject. Unstable  clinical  
condition such that participation in a controlled  
trial would  pose a  significant danger.
 Psychiatric history; score > 2 on item  3 of the 
Hamilton Rating Scale for  Depression  (HRSD-21-
item), and the BDI suicide item
4. Prior participation  in attention bias 
modification treatment (ABMT).Psychiatric interview 
5. Current or past history of seizure disorder (except febrile seizure  in childhood).
Clinical evaluation
 
6. Currently on  psychotropic medication. 
(excluding the use of hypnotics)
 Clinical Interview regarding current medication treatment history.
7.  Currently participating in formal  
psychotherapy. This  includes:  psychodynamic, 
cognitive behavioral and interpersonal therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014].
  History   
8.   Current unstable  or untreated medical illness. Clinical interview, Medical history
10. Vision loss. Preliminary screening,  Clinical evaluation
 
Waiver of Consent/Authorization
Indicate if you are requesting any of the following consent waiversWaiver of consent for  use of records that include protected health information (a HIPAA waiver of 
Authorization) No
Protocol Summary  Form
6688
Neria, Yuval
Page 10 of 20
Waiver or alteration of consentNoWaiver of documentation of consent NoWaiver of parental consent No
Consent Procedures
Is eligibility screening  for this study conducted under a different IRB protocol?
NoDescribe procedures  used  to obtain consent  during  the screening  process 
Potential subjects will be  screened by [CONTACT_165367] a research assistant after  obtaining oral consent (IRB# 
7094R, previously IRB  # 6112R).
Psychiatric Diagnostic Evaluation:  Patients deemed study  eligible following preliminary screening will sign  
the Anxiety Disorders Clinic informed  written  consent for the psychiatric screening evaluation (IRB# 
7094R, previously IRB # 6112R). An experienced psychiatrist will evaluate  presenting symptoms, 
psychiatric history,  treatment history, medical history, trauma history, social  and family history, and  current 
medical status.  A Clinician-Administered PTSD scale (CAPS), Hamilton Depression Scale (HAM-D) as 
well as the  Attention bias testing (Dot-Probe  Task)  to determine further eligibility for the study.
If the subject  is eligible and if  s/he consents for it, s/he will give DNA sample  via saliva  (~2 cc  total) and 
will fill out the Ancestry  Questionnaire. This questionnaire is very  short and asks participant’s to provide 
details of the country of birth and  ancestry of their four grandparents.  If the subject  is not eligible, 
participation in  the study will end  and they will be referred  to other studies or given the appropriate 
referrals. Subjects who are not eligible will not be asked to  provide a saliva sample.  
 
Describe Study Consent Procedures
Patient will meet  face to face with the  person that authorizes to discuss and document consent (see "person 
designed to  discuss and  document consent"). After  patient reads the consent the  clinician  will go over the 
consent with  the patient and answer  all the patient's questions. After answering all the patient's  questions by 
[CONTACT_215116]. Throughout this process,  the patient's  will be told that they 
are free to refuse  and that participation or  non- participation in research  has no effect on their  ability to  
continue to receive clinical care or services. 
 
 
Indicate which of  the following are employed  as a part of screening or main  study consent  procedures
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_1104549] the names of persons designated  to obtain consent/assent
Lazarov, AmitLowell, AriNeria, Yuval, PHD
Suarez-Jimenez, BenjaminType in  the name(s)  not found in the  above  list
Study Procedures
Describe the procedures required for this study
The study consists of the  following  procedures:
1) eligibility  and baseline assessment
2) treatment visits (ABMT or CTP)
3) post treatment  assessment for both ABMT and CTP group
Preliminary Screening: Potential subjects will be  screened by [CONTACT_800470] a research assistant after  
obtaining oral consent. Psychiatric  Diagnostic  Evaluation: Patients deemed study eligible following 
preliminary screening will sign the Anxiety Disorders Clinic informed written consent for the psychiatric screening evaluation (IRB # 6112R). An experienced psychiatrist will evaluate presenting symptoms, psychiatric history,  treatment history, medical history, trauma history, social  and family history, and  current 
medical status.  A Clinician-Administered PTSD scale (CAPS), Hamilton Depression Scale (HAM-D) as 
well as the  Attention bias testing (Dot-Probe  Task)  to determine further eligibility for the study.
If the subject  is eligible and if  s/he consents for it, s/he will give DNA sample  via saliva  (~2 cc  total) and 
will fill out the Ancestry  Questionnaire. This questionnaire is very  short and asks participant’s to provide 
details of the country of birth and  ancestry of their four grandparents.  If the subject  is not eligible, 
participation in  the study will end  and they will be referred  to other studies or given the appropriate 
referrals. Subjects who are not eligible will not ask to provide a saliva  sample. 
Selection of Participants  Based on the Existence of Baseline Threat Bias:  To ensure attentional bias in  
participants enrolled  in the study,  before  they begin treatment and after they have signed study consent, their 
threat related attentional  bias will be assessed through a simple  computerized  task.  If they do not have 
attentional bias towards or away from threat at baseline, their participation  in the study will end  and they 
will be referred to other studies or  given the appropriate referrals. The basic target  for ABMT  is pre-existing 
(pre-treatment) threat  bias; hence the absence of such bias (not  uncommon amongst anxious  patients)  might 
render ABMT ineffective11.
Protocol Summary  Form
6688
Neria, Yuval
Page 12 of 20
Assessment of Attention  Bias: the Dot-Probe Task: The  dot-probe task  version will be used for the 
attention bias assessment at baseline to establish eligibility at treatment, and on post-treatment assessment. A trained  research assistant will administer these tasks.
The stimuli  for the dot-probe task will be derived from pairs of face stimuli with angry and neutral 
expressions used by [CONTACT_476390]-Haim and colleagues13. Two sets of faces  will be used in the study  (set A and set 
B). One set will be used for assessment and the other set will be used for training, allowing us to infer  
generalization. The faces-based dot-probe task will follow  the protocol of the TAU-NIMH  ABMT  Initiative  
(Drs. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_800464]-Haim: PIs). The face stimuli are photographs  of 20 different  individuals (10 female) 
taken from the NimStim stimulus set, except for one female taken from the Matsumoto and Ekman set. 
Images of individuals will be randomly divided into two sets (A and B) – set A will be used for all subjects 
in the present study.  The face display consists of pairs of angry-neutral or neutral-neutral faces of the same 
individual. The pre- and post-ABM/Comparison measurement protocol consists of 120 trials (80 angry-
neutral and 40 neutral-neutral presentations).  For both word-based and faces-based tasks, the target-probe 
display consists of an arrowhead pointing either left or right (“<” or “>”).  The target appears at the location 
previously occupi[INVESTIGATOR_800465], with a small, random  jitter around the center of the stimuli. In 
each trial the participant is presented with the fixation cross  (500ms), followed by [CONTACT_800471]  
(500ms), followed by [CONTACT_800472] (1000ms). Response is followed  by [CONTACT_183001]-trial interval (average  
500ms). In addition, fixation trials are included  to be able to deconvolve the hemodynamic response  
function. Across  trials, angry-face location, probe location, probe  type, and actor are fully counterbalanced 
in presentation.  If the subject performs with less than 70% accuracy on the first [ADDRESS_1104550] and initiate data collection again.
DNA Collection, Extraction and Analysis:  The protocol to be used for collecting DNA samples will be 
identical to that which was previously used by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Thalia Eley, Institute of Psychiatry, London,  and [CONTACT_800480]-Haim, Tel-Aviv University, Israel. After the Eligibility assessment  and consent,  a saliva sample (~2 cc 
total) will be collected from each subject to be used for analyses of genomic DNA.  Deindentified  samples 
will be sent via secure  air courier and with the appropriate documentation to Institute  of Psychiatry (IoP)  at 
King’s College London  for extraction  of DNA using well-established protocols. After  extraction, the 
original sample is destroyed and the extracted  DNA is stored  securely in IoP’s laboratory  system using  a 
unique alpha-numeric code only. IoP will then genotype the samples with the aim of identifying genetic 
markers for ABMT efficacy. The primary  candidate marker is the serotonin transporter polymorphism 
(5HTTLPR), which has been  linked to performance on the dot-probe task and also treatment response. The 
lab will also investigate a limited  number of other candidate markers based  on the current  understanding of 
the mechanisms  involved in etiology and treatment  response.
Treatment. Method of Assuring Double  Blindness (ABMT and CTP): Participants will be randomly 
assigned to one of two conditions: ABMT or CTP. A research coordinator  will place the randomly assigned 
Protocol Summary  Form
6688
Neria, Yuval
Page 13 of 20
condition number in an envelope in each participant's file at the beginning  of the study. Prior to each 
training session,  another  experimenter blind to the studies' aims and protocols will enter the number in the 
file into the computer to automatically begin the appropriate program.  Participants will not know  which 
condition the number represents. Thus, participants and experimenters will remain blind to the participant’s 
condition until all post-ABMT or post-CTP  assessments  are conducted. To assess whether  participants 
remained blind to their respective  experimental condition, we will ask them at post-assessment  whether they 
thought they had received the active versus  comparison intervention.  A trained research  assistant will 
administer the  computer-based ABMT and CTP sessions.
Attention-Bias Modification  Treatment (ABMT): During each session, 240 trials (80 neutral-neutral 
pairs, 160 threat-neutral  pairs) will be presented.  On trials  where participants see one neutral  face and one 
angry face the probe will always  follow the neutral face location.  Thus, although there is no specific 
instruction to direct attention  away from  angry faces, on 66% of all trials (and 100% of the threat-neutral 
trials) the position  of the neutral faces  will indicate  the position of the target  probe.
Comparison-Training-Program (CTP) : The comparison condition is identical to the ABMT  protocol  
except that during the  presentation of the trials  where  a angry face is presented, the probe will appear with 
equal frequency in the  position of the threat and neutral face. Thus, neither threat  nor neutral faces provide 
information regarding  the position of the target probe, and there is  no contingency between the  position  of 
either threat or neutral faces and  the position of the probes.
Behavioral Pattern  Separation-Task Object Version (BPS-O): The BPS-O is a well-established  and 
reliable task19 that was developed in order to characterize the behavioral  outcomes  of neural pattern  
separation. The task  consists of two phases;  a study phase and a  test phase. In the study phase, participants 
engage in an indoor/outdoor judgment of pi[INVESTIGATOR_800466]. In the test phase, immediately  
following the  study  phase, participants  are given instructions regarding a surprise recognition memory test 
in which they have to identify each  item as either “old”, “similar”, or “new”. One-third of the images in  the 
test phase are exact repetitions of  images presented in the study phase  (targets);  one-third  of the images  are 
new images  not previously seen (foils);  and one-third of the images are perceptually similar to those  seen 
during the study phase, but not identical  (lures).  We are  particularly interested in the responses to  these  lure 
trials and the rates at  which participants  correctly identify these as “similar”,  avoiding  the propensity to 
identify these as  “old”. Identifying these lure  trials as “old” (i.e., over generalization)  is likely driven by 
[CONTACT_800473]. The task takes [ADDRESS_1104551] weekly all  currently  enrolled patients in the ABMT and 
CTP treatment, and  will withdraw  a person from the  study if  the participant:
Protocol Summary  Form
6688
Neria, Yuval
Page 14 of 20
1.   Requests to be  withdrawn from the study.
2.   A single  CGI-I scor e of 6 o r more will trigger  evaluation of a  participa nt whose  condition  
seems to be worsenin g, and p rompt an  immediate visit within the nex t few  days. The CGI will 
be administered to consider  PTSD,  and depression symptomatology.
3.   Reports significant suicidal ideation, as  assessed by [CONTACT_384901]/or by [CONTACT_445905]-II- suicide 
item. 
4.   Shows clear-cut deterioration in social or occupational functioning. 
5.   Is non-compliant with protocol requirements. 
6.   Manifests a new or inter-current illness that prevents the patient from complying with the 
protocol.
Withdrawal from this protocol prior to the second Dot-Probe assessment will not  affect the 
treatment to which all  patients enrolling in the  study are entitled.
 
 
Assessment Instruments
Create a table or give a brief  description  of the  instruments  that will be used for assessment
SCID (90 minutes at screening)
Beck Depression Inventory  (10 minutes)
Clinical Global Impression – Severity Scale  (CGI-S) (5 minutes)
Clinician Administered PTSD  Scale (CAPS) (30 Minutes)
Hamilton Rating Scale for  Depression  (Ham-D) (10 minutes) 
Spi[INVESTIGATOR_73593]-Trait Anxiety Inventory (5 minutes)
The Life Events Checklist  (LEC)  (5 minutes)
The Dot-Probe- Tasks (10 minutes for both tasks)
                        Ancestry Questionnaire (5 minutes)
Behavioral Pattern Separation-Task Object  Version (BPS-O) (20 minutes)  
Please attach copi[INVESTIGATOR_014], unless  standard  instruments are used
Protocol Summary  Form
6688
Neria, Yuval
Page 15 of 20
Research Related Delay to Treatment
Will research procedures result in a delay to treatment?YesMaximum duration  of delay to any treatment  
The maximum delay in provision of treatment will be [ADDRESS_1104552] care or treatment of known  efficacy
The maximum delay in provision of active treatment will  be 6 weeks (2 weeks  for baseline assessments and 
4 weeks for study treatments) from initial in-person  psychiatric intake evaluation.  
 
Treatment to be  provided at the  end of the study
Patients will be  offered  3 months  of medication  and/or psychotherapy  treatment in  the ADC until  they are 
remitted or  referred to treatment elsewhere.   
Clinical Treatment Alternatives
Clinical treatment alternatives
Patients will be  offered  3 months  of medication  and/or psychotherapy  treatment in  the ADC until  they 
are remitted  or referred to treatment  elsewhere.  
 
 
Risks/Discomforts/Inconveniences 
Risks that  could be  encountered during the study period
Protocol Summary  Form
6688
Neria, Yuval
Page 16 of 20
Interviews/assessments: Some subjects  may find the interviews and assessments to  be anxiety provoking 
or upsetting.  Subjects  will be informed that they may  choose not  to answer specific questions,  and may stop 
the interview at any  time  if they are feeling  uncomfortable. Every  effort will be made  to ensure patients’ 
comfort. 
Risks Associated  with Treatment Procedures: To date, there are no known  risks associated with 
ABMT. The  procedures  involve repeated exposures  to photographs of faces.   As the procedures involved in 
these tasks  are similar to those encountered in daily life,  no adverse  events  are anticipated. Participants  may 
become fatigued  when  completing the computer  sessions.  Breaks will be offered  frequently.  Every effort 
will be made to ensure patients’  comfort  during treatment, and patients will be withdrawn  if needed.  Non 
improvement and/or  worsening: There  is the risk that some  patients will not  improve  clinically  or will 
experience worsening of  their symptoms  during  the course of the treatment. A single C GI-I scor e of 6 o r 
more will  trigger  evaluation of a p articipa nt, and p rompt an immediate  visit  within the  next few da ys. 
Patients who receive  two consecutive CGI improvement ratings of  6 or 7 will be  removed from the study 
and begin open  treatment.
 
Saliva-sample: The  main  risk is that participants might find it uncomfortable  to not  eat or drink for 
an hour  prior to giving the sample. Participant that will  choose not to  participate will not loss  any of the  
benefit to which  he is otherwise  entitled.  
 Behavioral Pattern  Separation-Task Object Version (BPS-O): there  is no known risk that  is associated  
with this  task.
 
Describe procedures  for minimizing risks
a. Careful medical  and psychiatric screening will be used to identify subjects whose  risk for  potential 
adverse effects from treatment is elevated.  Such subjects  will be excluded from the study. For  example,  an 
actively suicidal patient would  be excluded from study participation  in order to provide immediate  and 
appropriate clinical treatment. 
b. Assessment of safety during first 4 weeks:  All patients will have  a clinical safety assessment completed 
by [CONTACT_800474],  including Clinician-rated  CGI change scale 
and inquiry as to whether the participant  is experiencing any  worsening social anxiety, depression or other 
symptoms, or any suicidal  ideation. (Patients answering affirmatively to any  of these queries  will be  further 
evaluated for the safety of continuation  in the study, including completion of QIDS-C. Significant 
worsening on  the clinician-rated CGI  change scale  (score  of 6 or more) or clinically significant suicidal 
ideation score > 2 on item  12 of (QIDS-C) are two examples of conditions that  would require termination of 
study treatment and  will p rompt an  immediate  visit within the nex t few  days. 
c. Patients will be instructed to contact  [CONTACT_800475]. Patients deemed to have clinically significant deterioration,  relapse, who develop 
other symptoms such as suicidal ideation  that interfere with safe participation, or who ask to discontinue 
research participation will be removed from the study and given appropriate clinical care.
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_1104553]  
nature of “appropriate standard clinical  care” will be determined by [CONTACT_800476], CBT treatment,  or other modalities. 
e. As in any type of treatment or clinical  research program, patients'  confidentiality will be carefully guarded 
and respected. All data with identifying information will be stored in locked file cabinets or password-
protected computer  files. Data being analyzed will be identified by [CONTACT_800477]. The identity  of patients  will not be revealed  in the presentation or publication  
of any results from the project. All assistants and others working on the project will be educated about the 
importance of strictly respecting patients' rights to confidentiality and will have received training in HIPAA 
and Good Clinical Practices.
Methods to Protect Confidentiality
Describe methods  to protect confidentiality
All data collected will be kept confidential  and used for research  purposes  only.   Patients’  charts will 
be kept in locked file cabinets identified  by [CONTACT_6227].  Access to research  records  is restricted  to 
research staff and  Federal, State, and Institutional  regulatory authorities. We have obtained   a 
Certificate of  Confidentiality from the  National Institutes  of Health.    Electronic  data  will be 
protected by [CONTACT_186575]. 
 
Will the  study be  conducted under  a certificate of confidentiality?
Yes, we have already received a Certificate  of Confidentiality
Direct Benefits to Subjects  
Direct Benefits to Subjects
This study  is not designed to directly  benefit  the participants. Participants may or may not benefit from the 
treatment administered in this study
 
 
Protocol Summary  Form
6688
Neria, Yuval
Page 18 of 20
Compensation and/or  Reimbursement  
Will compensation or reimbursement  for expenses  be offered to subjects?
YesPlease describe  and indicate total amount and schedule of  payment(s).  
Include justification for compensation amounts and indicate  if there are bonus  payments.
All subjects will receive $50 for each of the  assessment sessions (pre-treatment and post-treatment 
Dot-Probe task); therefore participants completing  both assessments will receive  a total of $100. The  
compensation will be mailed to the subject  in the form of a  check within 4-6  weeks of the 
completion of each assessment.  
 
 
 
 
References
References
1.         Bar-Haim  Y, Lamy  D, Pergamin  L, Bakermans-Kranenburg  MJ, van IMH. Threat-related             
attentional bias in anxious and nonanxious individuals: a meta-analytic study. Psychol Bull.             
Jan 2007;133(1):1-24. 
2.         Pi[INVESTIGATOR_29835], Fyer A, Grun J, et al. Methods for developmental  studies  of fear conditioning circuitry. 
Biological psychiatry. Aug 1 2001;50(3):225-228.
3.        Pi[INVESTIGATOR_29835], Helfinstein SM, Bar-Haim Y, Nelson E, Fox NA. Challenges in developi[INVESTIGATOR_800467]:  lessons from research  on anxiety. Neuropsychopharmacology : 
official publication of the American  College of Neuropsychopharmacology.  Jan 2009;34(1):213-
228.
4.         Shechner T, Britton  JC, Perez-Edgar K, et al. Attention biases, anxiety,  and development:  toward or 
away from threats or  rewards?  Depression  and anxiety.  Apr 2012;29(4):282-294.
5.        MacLeod C, Rutherford E, Campbell L, Ebsworthy G, Holker L. Selective attention  and emotional  
vulnerability: assessing the causal  basis of their association through the experimental manipulation  
of attentional bias. J Abnorm Psychol. Feb 2002;111(1):107-123.
Protocol Summary  Form
6688
Neria, Yuval
Page 19 of 20
6.         Eldar S, Ricon  T, Bar-Haim  Y. Plasticity in attention: implications for stress response in children. 
Behav Res Ther. Apr 2008;46(4):450-461.
7.         Hakamata Y, Lissek S, Bar-Haim Y, et al. Attention bias modification treatment: a meta-analysis 
toward the establishment of novel  treatment for anxiety.  Biological psychiatry. Dec 1;68(11):982-
990.
8.         Bar-Haim  Y. Research review: Attention bias modification  (ABM): a novel treatment for anxiety 
disorders. Journal  of child psychology and psychiatry, and allied disciplines. Aug 2010;51(8):859-
870.
9.       Hakamata Y, Lissek S, Bar-Haim Y, et al. Attention Bias Modification Treatment:  A Meta-Analysis 
Toward the Establishment  of Novel Treatment for Anxiety. Biological psychiatry. Dec 1 
2010;68(11):982-990.
10.       Bar-Haim Y. Research Review:  attention bias modification  (ABM):  a novel treatment  for anxiety 
disorders. Journal  of Child Psychology  and Psychiatry.  Aug  2010;51(8):859-870.
11.       Henkin  Y, Feinholz M, Arie M, Bar-Haim Y. P50 suppression in children with selective  mutism: a 
preliminary report.  J Abnorm Child Psychol. Jan 2010;38(1):43-48.
12.    Eldar S, Apter A, Lotan D, et al. Attention bias modification treatment for pediatric anxiety  disorders: 
A randomized  controlled trial. American  Journal of Psychiatry. Feb 2012;169:213-220.
13.       Bar-Haim Y, Holoshitz  Y, Eldar S, et al. Life-Threatening Danger and Suppression of Attention Bias 
to Threat. American  Journal of  Psychiatry. Jun 2010;167(6):694-698.
14.       Wald I, Lubin G, Holoshitz Y, et al. Battlefield-like stress following simulated combat and 
suppression of attention bias to threat.  Psychol Med. Apr;41(4):699-707.
15.       Bar-Haim Y, Morag I, Glickman  S. Training anxious children to disengage  attention from threat: a 
randomized controlled trial. Journal  of child psychology and psychiatry, and allied disciplines. Aug 
2011;52(8):861-869.
16.    Amir N, Beard C, Burns  M, Bomyea J. Attention  modification program in individuals with 
generalized anxiety disorder.  J Abnorm Psychol. Feb 2009;118(1):28-33.
17.    Wald I, Lubin G, Holoshitz Y, et al. Battlefield-like stress following simulated combat and 
suppression of attention bias to threat.  Psychol Med. Apr 2011;41(4):699-707.
18.     Shechner T, Pelc T, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_29835], Fox NA, Bar-Haim Y. Flexible Attention Deployment  in Threatening 
Contexts: An Instructed Fear Conditioning Study. Emotion. Mar 5 2012.
19.    Stark, S.M., Yassa,  M.A., Lacy, J. W., & Stark,  E.L. (2013).  A task to assess behavioral pattern 
separation (BPS) in humans:  Data from healthy aging and mild cognitive impairment, 
Neuropsychologia, 51, 2442-2449. 
Protocol Summary  Form
6688
Neria, Yuval
Page 20 of 20
 
Uploads
Upload copy(ies) of unbolded Consent Form(s)Upload copy(ies) of bolded Consent Form(s)Upload a copy of Certificate of ConfidentialityUpload copy(ies) of the  HIPAA form
Upload any additional documents that  may be related to  this study
Data Analysis  
Independent samples t -tests were used to compare between -groups descriptive 
characteristics at pre -treatment, with a chi -square test for gender distribution. Treatment effects 
were tested using Generalized Estimating Equations (GEE; Zeger and Liang, 1986, Zeger  et al. , 
1988) , as recommended for RCTs (Vens and Ziegler, 2012) . GEE accounts for correlated 
repeated -measurements and accommodates missing data under the missing -at-random 
assumption, by [CONTACT_800478], thus serving as an intention -to-treat 
analysis strategy which includes data from all randomized  participants who provided at least one 
data point. To represent within -subject dependencies in the models, we specified an unstructured 
covariance matrix. Overall effects of ACT relative to BC -ABM on clinician -rated (CAPS, 
HRSD) and self -reported (PCL -C, BDI-II) PTSD and depression symptoms were estimated using 
models containing main effects of group and time, and their interaction. The time -by-group 
interaction terms reflects the outcomes of interest in an intention -to-treat analysis (Badura -Brack  
et al. , 2015)  and tests the treatment effect hypothesis of greater improvement (decrease) in 
symptoms over time for one group relative to the other. A Chi -square test was used to compare 
groups on CSC.  
Effects of training on attention indices (AB and ABV) were e xamined per condition, as 
conditions diverged in training method and goal. Specifically, training -related changes in 
attention bias were examined in the BC -ABM group, while changes in ABV were examined in 
the ACT group.  
All statistical tests were 2 -sided,  using α≤.05. Effect sizes are reported using Cohen's d 
when appropriate.  