5-20-2021   
Official Title: ‘Connect for Caregivers’ – Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a Brief Intervention 
for Social Connectedness  
 
NCT number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document Approval Date: 05/20/21  
 
Document Date:  uploaded 1 2/8/22 
 
Document Type: Study Protocol  and Statistical Analysis Plan   
  
5-20-2021   
Study Protoco l 
‘Connect for Caregivers’ – Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a Brief Intervention for Social Connectedness  
Principal Investigator  –Sally Norton  
  
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_508920] (P30AG064103)   
Co-Investigators: Kim Van Orden, PhD , Marsha Wittink PhD, MD  
 
 
 
1. PURPOSE  OF STUDY   
  
Connect for Caregivers  is a mixed method  intervention development pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. The 
purpose of the study is to develop and pi[INVESTIGATOR_21087] a single session behavioral intervention 
to help caregivers gain understanding of the importance of increasing social 
connectedness, awareness of their personal barriers to connectedness, and knowledge 
of local resources for promoting c onnectedness. The specific aims of this mixed method 
study are:  
Aim 1  To characterize caregivers' understanding of their experiences of social 
connectedness and of their perceptions of barriers to social connectedness, 
including which barriers are most common, most problematic, and most difficult 
to change.  
Aim 2  To use in formation provided by [CONTACT_50633] (in Aim 1) to develop a card 
sort discussion prioritization tool ( Connect for Caregivers ) that will systematize 
and routinize a process whereby [CONTACT_508923].  
Aim [ADDRESS_657968] for Caregivers  (a card sort discussion 
prioritization tool combined with personalized education and resources) is 
associated with a signal for efficacy for ch anging connectedness.  
 
  
This submission is for conducting Aim SA3, the final phase of the study, as approved in 
the original study Protocol.  
 
  
 
2. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
Older caregivers for family members with Alzheimer’s disease or related dementia 
(ADRD) are at risk for social disconnectedness that impacts health and quality of life. 
Social connectedness represents an untapped intervention target to improve caregiver 
well-being and health. Caregivers who report high social connectedness appear to be 
buffered from high caregiving burden because they perceive more positive aspects of 
caregiving. Barriers to connectedness among caregivers are numerous, varied, and 
dynamic. Current caregiver interventions effectively improve outcomes for the family 
5-20-2021  member w ith dementia and reduce caregiver burden, but do not improve 
connectedness for the caregiver. Other interventions (e.g., caregiver support groups) 
have not been tested with regards to connectedness.  The evidence base for strategies 
to promote connectednes s is extremely limited. Promising interventions are 
multifaceted, intensive, and/or involve significant time out of the home, rendering them 
infeasible for most caregivers. There are no evidence -based interventions for promoting 
connectedness in older care givers for individuals with ADRD.  
 
3. ADMINISTRATION ORGANIZATION  
Caregiver interviews will be conducted in the subject’s home or convenient location 
identified by [CONTACT_423]. Due to the COVID -[ADDRESS_657969] a 
stable internet connection to participate.  The focus group will be conducted via ZOOM.  
 
4. STUDY DESIGN  
  
This is a mixed method intervention development study using semi structured interviews 
(SA 1a and 2) and a focus group (SA 1b) to develop and refine a psycho -behavioral 
intervention that we will then pi[INVESTIGATOR_21087] (SA 3) using a non -randomized single arm pre-
post approach.    
  
Study outcomes/endpoints  
Aim 3: To investigate whether Connect for Caregivers —a card sort discussion 
prioritization tool combined with personalized education and resources —is associated 
with a signal for efficacy for changing connectedn ess. We will be conducting AIM SA3 in 
this phase of the study, as approved in the original study Protocol.  
•        Outcome 3a: A non-random sample of caregivers  (n=5)  will complete the 
Connect for Caregivers tool with a research assessor, including discus sing 
psychoeducational materials on the benefits of social connectedness, completing the 
card sort to identify personal barriers to connectedness, and reviewing personalized 
community resources to address those barriers. Using semi -structured interviews, t hey 
will provide feedback on the experience of the intervention, including ease of completing 
it and potential utility as well as the extent to which they experienced the SDT 
mechanisms of: autonomy, competence, and relatedness while completing the tool an d 
after completing it.  
•        Outcome 3b: Participants will also complete quantitative measures of their 
motivation to increase social connectedness via self -report measures that assess 
mechanisms posited by [CONTACT_136494] -Determination Theory (i.e., autonomy, com petence, 
relatedness). Participants will complete these measures at their initial screening 
interview and again after completing the Connect for Caregiver intervention.  
 
5. SUBJECT POPULATION  
We will enroll approximately 5 subjects , who are  caregivers  (age 50 or older) for a 
community -dwelling family member with ADRD, living with (or in close proximity to) the 
family member with dementia .  Caregivers will be recruited from the IRB approved 
5-20-2021  Health Aging Research Program (HARP) Population Stud y (RSRB00068059) (see III -d 
Recruitment Procedures).  Care managers will be recruited from Lifespan of [COMPANY_002]ster.  
 
Gender, Age, Racial, and Ethnic Origin of Subjects:  
Caregivers in the US are more likely to be women (67%); Caregivers are also more 
likely to be white, non -Hispanic (67%), while 10% are African American and 8% are 
Hispanic. Using the 2018 Alzheimer’s Disease Facts and Figures along with our local 
demographic distributions, we plan to target 25% minority and 67% women enrollment. 
We will proac tively recruit minority participants (including targeting men for enrollment, 
as they represent the gender minority in the caregiver population) using best practices 
for minority recruitment, including working with providers serving minorities; 
collaborati ng with community gatekeepers; tailoring the recruitment materials to the 
culture and education level in inner city populations.    
 
Procedures for assignment to a study group: Specific Aims [ADDRESS_657970] for Caregivers .  For Aim SA3, the originally approved 
N of 5 subjects will be enrolled. No additional subjects will be enrolled.  
 
6. INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
Caregiver Inclusion criteria  (assessed at the HARP Population Study 
RSRB00068059 , screening assessment ): 
1) Caregiver (age 50 or older) for a community -dwelling family member with ADRD, 
living with (or in close proximity to) family member with dem entia.  
2) Elevated caregiving distress: Above population mean (>11) on 10 -item Perceived 
Stress Scale (PSS -10) and/or at least moderate caregiver strain (score >= 5) on the 
Modified Caregiver Strain Index (MCSI).  
3) Social connectedness: UCLA Loneliness Scale: Short Form score of  equal to or  
greater than 6 (n= 10;  Short Form score of 3 -5,  n=10).  
4) Able to provide informed consent to participate in the research study.  
5) For phase SA2, a stable internet connection for using Zoom video and audio.  
 
Caregiver Exclusion criteria  (assessed at the HARP screening assessment ):  
1) Non English speakers because our primary community partner agency (Lifespan) 
cannot currently accommodate non -English speaking clients.  
2) Current problem drinking on the AUDIT -C (score of 5 or greater indicating exclusion).  
3) Current non -alcohol psychoactive substance abuse (MINI Neuropsychiatric 
Interview), psychotic disorders (current and lifetime, MINI), bipolar disorder (MINI), and 
current mood disorder with psychotic features (MINI).  
4) Significant cognitive impairment  (MOCA <22) and those with hearing problems that 
preclude completion of interviews will be excluded.  
 
Vulnerable Subjects : Individuals who are 50 years of age and older with social risk 
factors for poor mental and physical health outcomes will be included.  The results of this 
study will inform future research and clinical interventions aimed at improving mental 
health treatment for older caregivers.  
5-20-2021   
7. RECRUITMENT METHODS  
Caregiver subjects will be recruited via the IRB approved HARP Population Study 
(RSRB000 [ZIP_CODE]), a research registry run by [CONTACT_74556]’s Investigators. In 
compliance with procedures of the Population Study protocol, subjects of the Population 
Study consent to allow HARP Population Study researchers to share subjects’ 
identifiable data ( both name [CONTACT_3669] [CONTACT_3031]) with investigators conducting 
HARP research at the University of [COMPANY_002]ster; in addition, they consent to allow their 
data collected as part of the Population Study to be included in their research record for 
subsequent HA RP studies they participate in, including the current study. All eligible 
participants will be provided with a study brochure, at their in -person screening visit and 
given information about the study.  
 
8. CONSENT PROCESS  
Caregiver  Consent : Eligible subjects  who have agreed to have their contact 
[CONTACT_508924] -structured interview . We are r equest ing a waiver of documentation of consent 
for the caregivers because the res earch is no greater than minimal risk and the semi -
structured interview questions  will be addressing a topic where written consent is not 
normally required. The waiver won’t affect the rights and welfare of the subjects. Eligible 
subjects will have an oppo rtunity to review the  information letter  with the interviewer and 
ask questions and have their questions answered to their satisfaction prior to the start of 
their semi -structured interview.  The process of reviewing the information letter  will be 
conducted in a manner to facilitate questions from potential study subjects. If a study 
team member is unable to answer a question, an investigator will be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530]. All 
questions from potential subjects should be answered prior to the interviewe r initiating 
the semi -structured interview.  All subjects will receive a copy of the study information 
letter . No subjects will be involved in research activities unless an investigator or a 
designated study staff member  has completed a thorough review of t he information 
letter with the subject.  
 
The information that is given to the subject shall be in language understandable to the 
subject. Potential study subjects will be given ample time to read and consider the 
information letter . All subjects will be r eminded of the voluntary nature of study 
participation. Research personnel will explain the study, the voluntary nature of 
participation, the study’s  potential benefits and risks, and alternatives . An explanation of 
risks will include information that ques tions asked may cause subjects  to feel 
uncomfortable or upset. They will be informed that they may withdraw from the study  at 
any time for any reason  without negative consequences  and receive full reimbursement 
for th e study . Consent will be obtained durin g Aim SA3 in the same manner as was 
done under previously approved Aims SA1 and SA2.  We are r equest ing a waiver of 
documentation of consent for caregivers who enroll in SA3 because the research is no 
greater than minimal risk and the interview questions  will be addressing a topic where 
written consent is not normally required. The waiver won’t affect the rights and welfare 
of the subjects.  
 
5-20-2021    
 
9. STUDY PROCEDURES  
Caregiver Subjects :  The card sort intervention  will be conducted by a trained research 
assistant (RA). The intervention will be conducted  via ZOOM, audio -recorded, and 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_162121] 45 -60 minutes. Interview questions will focus on (1) how 
participants characterize social connectedness and activities they use to connect, (2)  
social connections that are important/meaningful to them, (3) what makes social 
connections easier and more difficult (including barriers), (4) how their social 
connections may have changed with the caregiver role, (5) how or whether they 
prioritize socia l connectedness in their day to day lives, and (6) the advice they would 
give to new caregivers about maintaining or improving social connections. We will use a 
laddered technique with early questions designed to be minimally intrusive and 
deliberately bro ad to allow participants to focus on the experiences of social connection 
important to them. Later questions will be built off the earlier questions and probe for 
detail and specific examples of participants’ unique experiences with social 
connectedness.  The semi -structured interviews will be audio recorded so that the full 
conversation can be transcribed for later analysis, and subjects will be informed of this 
before discussion begins. No identifying information (for example, subject names, or 
other detai ls shared during the discussion) will be included in the transcript. The audio 
recording will be transferred from the recording device to a secure computer in the 
School of Nursing, after which the recording will be deleted from the recording device. 
The d e-identified electronic version of the transcript will remain on the School of 
Nursing’s secure computer where it will be accessible only to the study PI [INVESTIGATOR_508921].  For Aim SA3, new measures will be used and are based on the work 
completed i n AIMS SA1 and SA2.   
 
Caregiver subjects participating in SA 3: Questions included in the last few slides of  
the Power Point presentation of the card sort tool  will be read to the participants, and 
individual s emi structured interviews will also be conducted . The questions in the Power 
Point presentation of the card sort tool and the semi -structured interviews will be 
conducted  by a research assistant (RA) trained in qualitative interviewing techniques.  A 
second research assistant may also join the c all for training purposes. Because the 
interviews will be recorded using Zoom video and audio, subjects will need to have a 
stable internet connection to participate.    
  
 
10. AUDIO/VIDEO RECORDINGS  
We will use audio recorders  and Zoom which  are HIPPA -complia nt and URMC -
approved.   The audio  files will be uploaded onto a secure database within the School of 
Nursing usually within 24 hours (occasionally interviews occurring off site on a Friday 
afternoon will be uploaded on Monday morning).  The audio recordings  will be 
transcribed and the transcripts deidentified.  Audio recordings will then be used to verify 
the transcription accuracy.  Audio recordings will be archived with a unique identifier for 
linkage to the other data and will be kept for 3 years. It is o ccasionally helpful during 
data analysis to listen to the original audio recording to verify the intent of the speaker 
5-20-2021  (e.g., para linguistic cues of humor, sarcasm, or emotion that are not contained in the 
transcription). The archived recordings will be h oused on a University of [COMPANY_002]ster 
School of Nursing firewalled, password -protected, and HIPAA compliant server  and in 
BOX which is URMC -approved . Unique identifiers will be used to maintain future linkage 
between the archived conversations and the Analyti c File.   
 
11.  RISKS TO SUBJECTS   
Potential risks to subjects: minimal risk for all procedures.  
For research assessments —self-report questionnaires and semi -structured interviews —
the primary risk is invasion of privacy, breach of confidentiality (if safety issues are 
detected), or mild reactions of distress or fatigue. All assessment measures and 
procedures have been safely used previous research with older adults; no sustained 
negative effects from assessments are expected, but ne gative outcomes cannot be 
ruled out.  For Aim SA3, we will minimize potential risks to subjects by [CONTACT_508925] [INVESTIGATOR_508922].  
 
Private identifiable informati on collection: Study coordinators and research team 
members will have access to individually identifiable private information about human 
subjects.  
 
For the intervention,  Connect for Caregivers, the primary risk of is emotional distress 
or fatigue. Subject s may think about stressors, negative life events, and caregiving 
burden/distress; they will receive support from the interventionist for such experiences. 
No sustained negative effects are expected, but negative outcomes from behavioral 
interventions cann ot be ruled out. The study PI ([CONTACT_155513]) will provide weekly (and as 
needed) supervision. In addition, [CONTACT_224333] (Co -I) is a clinical geropsychologist and 
is experienced in working with older adults, including those experiencing emotional 
distress an d will available as needed.  
 
Regarding alternative interventions, subjects will not be prohibited from seeking out 
supportive social services, or mental health services (for ethical reasons).  
 
12.  POTENTIAL BENEFITS TO SUBJECTS  
Caregiver subjects might  find identifying their own barriers and facilitators to social 
connection helpful. They may further benefit from feelings of altruism connected with 
participation in research designed to better understand the mental health needs an d 
experiences of community -residing older adults.  There are no other anticipated benefits.  
  
13.  COSTS FOR PARTICIPATION  
None anticipated.  The location of the caregiver interviews will be by [CONTACT_508926] -[ADDRESS_657971] will be paid $20 by [CONTACT_508927]3, for a maximum total of $[ADDRESS_657972] information, we will take a number of 
precautions. These include training research interviewers in confidentiality procedures; 
entry and storage of data using coded identification labels; maintenance of pr oject 
computers in secure locations with restricted access by [CONTACT_224293]; 
use of HIPAA compliant data management software (REDCAP). Back -ups of all study 
files will be made daily to allow for recovery of data due to disk failure. All data , 
including assessment measures, will be obtained with the written consent of the subject . 
Information pertaining to individual subjects  will be released with the subject’s informed 
and written consent only, except in unusual cases where withholding the in formation 
might pose a serious risk or danger to the subject  or others. All data will be identified by 
a uniquely coded study number assigned to each subject . Access to the master list of 
study numbers will be restricted to [CONTACT_155513] and the CRC. Confiden tiality will be 
further maintained by [CONTACT_252447] "hard copy" data in locked files in a locked office. 
Access to computerized data is restricted and subject to review by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Norton. 
Publications or presentations will report only cumulative data or descr iptions certain to 
maintain participants' anonymity. All data collection involving human subjects will be 
HIPAA compliant. Audio recording devices will be kept on the person of the study 
interviewer who will return immediately to the School of Nursing with  audio recorder 
after the interview has been completed. The audio recording will be immediately 
uploaded to the School of Nursing secure server, and once the upload is complete, the 
recording will immediately be deleted from the recording device. Since two  recording 
devices are used to insure protection from any unexpected technical problems, both 
recording devices will have the recordings deleted as soon as uploads are complete 
after each interview . All data involving human subjects will be stripped of any  identifiers; 
the data will be stored in a secure HIPAA compliant program called REDCAP, which 
manages protected health information in a HIPAA compliant manner. Audio recordings 
of semi -structured interviews will be transcribed and then kept for three year s 
 
 
Risks associated with emotional distress or fatigue will be minimized by [CONTACT_508928]. The baseline research interview will last 
5-20-[ADDRESS_657973] alternative data collection strategies (including telephone -based an d 
mail-in interviews), in order to reduce the possibility of overwhelming study subjects and 
to ensure completeness of data collection. These strategies have been employed 
effectively in the PI [INVESTIGATOR_7706] -I’s past research involving older adult populations.   
During the course of the semi -structured  interviews, the  researcher will monitor subjects' 
reactions for signs of distress or fatigue. If necessary, subjects may take breaks from 
the interview, or complete the interview over several sessions if fatigue becomes a 
concern.  
 
 
 
17. DATA / SAMPLE  STORAGE FOR FUTURE USE  
Not applica ble 
 
18. DATA AND SAFETY  MONITORING PLAN  
Attached  
 
19. STATISTICAL  ANALYSIS  PLAN  
  
Testing the ‘Connect for Caregivers’ discussion prioritization tool: Aim [ADDRESS_657974] for Caregivers discussion prioritization tool with a sample of 
caregivers who report disconnectedness (n=5). Caregivers will receive the 
psychoeducation materials on connectedness (delivered by [CONTACT_3647]), complete 
the card sort task to identify personal barriers to connectedness, and received 
personalized commun ity resources to address their identified barriers to connectedness. 
Using the methodology described in Aim [ADDRESS_657975] used 
with success in p rior studies with social connectedness interventions (i.e., Perceived 
Competence Scale and Perceived Autonomy Scale).   Participants will complete these 
measures at their initial screening interview (as described in the STAR Core Battery 
above) and again af ter completing the Connect for Caregiver intervention. We will use 
descriptive statistics to compare changes in mean scores pre and post completion of 
the tool .    