 
 
 
 
NexGen ® TM Tibia  
Clinical  Outcome s Study  
 
PRO SPECT IVE MULTICENTER ST UDY  
OF THE  
NexGen ® TM Monoblock and Modular Tibia s 
 
Protocol #K.CR.I.G.16.34  
U.S. 
 
 
July 17, 201 7 – Version 1.[ADDRESS_429027]  
Warsaw,  IN [ZIP_CODE] 
[PHONE_7173] 
 
 
CONF IDENTIAL - This document contains confidential information belonging  to Zimmer Inc. except as otherwise 
agre ed to in writi ng, by [CONTACT_345454] t, you agree to hold this informa tion in confidence and 
not distribute or disclose it to ot hers (except where required by  [CONTACT_1289])  or use it for unauthorized 
purposes.  In the event of any actual or suspected  breach of this obligation, Zimmer Inc. must be promptly notified.   
Duplication and distribution of this document in any form  or shape requires prior approval from Zimmer Inc. 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.[ADDRESS_429028] to Follow-up ................................ ................................ ....................  13 
L. Radiographic Definitions and Metho ds ................................ ................................ ..........................  13 
M. Recommended Revision Procedure ................................ ................................ ................................  14 
 Reporting................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  14 X.
A. Prior to Init iation of the Study  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  15 
B. Clinical Data Col lection/Submission ................................ ................................ ................................  15 
C. Reporting Requirements  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  16 
D. Management of Incurrent Events  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 16 
E. Medical Events/Adverse Events De finitions and Classifications ................................ .....................  19 
F. Monitoring of the Study  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  22 
 Risk Analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 22 XI.
A. General Surgical Risks  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  23 
B. Risks Associated with Cementless Total Knee Arthroplasty/Study Device  ................................ ..... 23 
 Statis tical Consideratio ns ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  24 XII.
A. General Statistical Methods  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  24 
B. Sample Size  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 24 
 Refe rences................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  25 XIII.
 
 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.0  
 
Page  3 of 25 
 Appendices: 
 
Appendix A Sample Informed Consent  
Appendix B Source Documents  (Case Report Forms)  
Appendix C Study Logs 
Appendix D  Radiograph ic Protocol  
Appendix E Medical Device Reporting Information Form (MDRIF)  
Appendix F  Explant Procedure  
Appendix G Study Abbreviations  
 
 Document History  I.
 
Version  Date  Description of Change  Author/Revised By  
1.0 17-JUL-2017 Initial Document  Scott Abshagen  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.0  
 
Page  4 of 25 
  Study Synopsis   II.
 
STUDY  TITLE  NexGen® TM  Tibia Clinical Outcomes Study  
SPONSOR  Zimmer Inc., Warsaw, Indiana  
PROTOCOL  #  K.CR.I.AM.16.34  
STUDY DEVICES   Zimmer TMT:  NexGen ® Trabecular Metal Monoblock Tibia s 
(referenced as NexGen  TM Monoblock Tibia throughout protocol)  
 Zimmer, Inc:  NexGen® Trabecular Metal Tibial Tray s   
(referenced as NexGen  TM Modular Tibia throughout protocol)  
 
Cementless tibias used with the NexGen ® Knee System or Persona ® femoral . 
STUDY 
OBJECTIVE  The objective  of this study is to evaluate  clinical performance for the 
commercially available NexGen  TM Monoblock Tibia and NexGen  TM Modular 
Tibia used in primary cementless tibia total knee arthroplasty.  
 
The assessments will include:  
1. Clinical perf ormance measured by [CONTACT_345455], pain and 
function, and survival of the device . 
2. Safety based on incidence  and frequency  of adverse events. 
ENDPOINTS  Primary Endpoint:  
The primary endpoint  of this study is to evaluate the clinical performance of the 
implant at 2 years postoperatively using  radiographic parameters .  Radiographs 
will be assessed for the absence of progressive tibial radiolucencies , as defined in 
the radiograph ic protocol.  
 
Secondary Endpoints:  
The secondary endpoints of this study will evaluate  the clinical performance of 
the implant at 2 years  postoperative ly, based upon:  
 No revisions for any reason  
 Oxford Knee Score  (OKS) >38 
TARGET 
POPULATION  Patients qualifying for primary  cementless  tibia  total knee arthroplasty who meet 
the inclusion/exclusion criteria for study participation.  
STUDY DESIGN  Prospective , multicenter, non -randomized, non -controlled   
STUDY TYPE  Post Market Outcomes Study  
SAMPLE SIZE  A minimum  of 132 subjects are to be enrolled in this study . 
 Approximate equal distribution with at  least 66 NexGen  TM Monoblock 
and 66 NexGen  TM Modular subjects.    
 Up to 10  U.S. sites , each  contributing between 22 to 30 subjects .  
 Each site will be selected for a specific NexGen  TM device, either the 
Monoblock or Modular design.   
 The NexGen  TM Monoblock Tibia and NexGen  TM Modular Tibia are 
considered  2 single -arms being analyzed separately.  
 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.0  
 
Page  5 of 25 
 LENGTH OF 
STUDY  4 years (6 months enrollment, 2 years follow -up, and interval windows)  
 Enrollment/Preoperative  
 Immediate Postop Radiograph ( Pre weight -bearing ) 
 6 weeks ( ± 2 weeks)  
 6 months ( ± 1 month)  
 1 year ( ± 1 month)  
 2 years ( ± 2 months)  
 SCORES  Forgotten Joint Score (FJS -12) 
Oxford Knee Score  (OKS) 
UCLA Activity  & Satisfaction  Survey  
RADIOGRAPHS  AP and Lateral X -rays will be required of the operative knee immediate postop 
and at each clinical follow -up visit.  Radiographs will be reviewed for image 
quality by [CONTACT_345456]’s clinical visit.   Radiograph ic images  
must show an orthogonal view of the  tibial  implant  interface .   
 
Study radiographs will be requested from sites for independent radiographic 
review.  
INCLUSION  
CRITERIA  
 INCLUSION CRIT ERIA: 
1. Patient is at least [ADDRESS_429029] one of the following:  
a. Rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, traumatic arthritis, polyarthritis . 
b. Collagen disorders and/or avascular necrosis of the femoral condyle . 
c. Post -traumatic loss of joint configuration, particularly when there is 
patellofemoral erosion, dysfunction or prior patellec tomy . 
d. Moderate valgus, varus, or flexion deformities . 
e. The salvage of previously failed surgical attempts  that did not include 
partial or total knee arthroplasty of the ipsilateral knee.  
3. Patient has participated in the study -related Informed Consent process . 
4. Patient is will ing and able to provide written Informed C onsent  by [CONTACT_345457].  
5. Patient is willing and able to complete scheduled study procedures and 
follow -up evaluations  as described in the Informed Consen t Form . 
6. Independent of study participation, patient is a candidate for commercially 
available cementless NexGen  TM tibial  knee component , implanted in 
accordance with product labeling.  
 
 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.0  
 
Page  6 of 25 
 EXCLUSION 
CRITERIA  
 EXCLUSION CRITERIA:  
1. Previous history of infection in the affected joint . 
2. Active  local  or systemic infection that may affect the prosthetic joint.  
3. Insufficient bone stock on femoral or tibial surfaces . 
4. Skeletal immaturity . 
5. Neuropathic arthropathy . 
6. Osteoporosis or any loss of musculature or neuromuscular disease that 
compromises the affected limb . 
7. A stable, painless arthrodesis in a satisfactory functional position . 
8. Severe instability secondary to the absence of collateral ligament integrity . 
9. Rheumatoid arthritis accompanied by [CONTACT_345458] e skin or a history of 
recurrent breakdown of the skin . 
10. Patient has previously received partial or total knee arthroplasty for the 
ipsilateral knee.  
11. Patient is currently participating in any other surgical intervention studies or 
pain management studies.  
12. Patient is known to be pregnant or considered a member of a protected 
population (e.g., prisoner, mentally incompetent, etc.) . 
13. Patient has a known or suspected sensitivity or allergy to one or more of the 
implant materials.  
 STATISTICAL 
REPORTING  Clinical performance will be evaluated for radiographic success, pain  and 
function , and implant survival by [CONTACT_345459].  C ategorical 
data (e.g., gender, component size)  will be reported using frequency and 
percentages with 95% Confidence Interval (CI) over the time periods of interest.  
Continuous data (e.g. age, weight) will be summarized using mean, standard 
deviation, minimum, median, maximum, and 95% CI over the time periods of 
interest.  Implant survival will be summarized using a Kap lan-Meier method and 
presented with rates (expressed as percentages) and CI.  Routine summaries of 
complication data will be in the form of frequencies and percentages.  
 
This protocol is written based on guidelines from ISO [ZIP_CODE]:[ADDRESS_429030] for Clinical Investigation of 
Medical Devices For H uman Subjects – Good Clinical Practice  [1] and is in acc ordance with US Code of 
Federal  Regulations 21 CFR Parts 11, 50 and 56 [2].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.0  
 
Page  7 of 25 
  Data Collection O verview  III.
The following  tables indicate required  forms and activities to be completed at the g iven time 
point: 
 
Form Name  [CONTACT_345477]  6 Weeks  
Postop  
 (± 2 weeks  )  6 Months  
Postop  
 (± 1 month)  1 Year  
Postop  
(± 1 month)  2 Year s 
Postop  
(± 2 month s) 
Site and Subject  completed:  
Informed Consent Form  X      
Site completed:  
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  X      
Demographic Evaluation  X      
Surgical & Discharge Information   X     
Physical Exam  X  X X X X 
Physician Assessment of Postop 
Radiographs   X X X X X 
Subject completed: 
Forgotten Joint Score (FJS -12)      
Oxford Knee Score  (OKS)       
UCLA Activity & Satisfaction 
Survey       
Site completed a s applicable :
Adverse Event Report       
Protocol Deviation       
Study Completion       
Explanted Device Form       
 
Activity  Preop  Immediate 
Postop  6 Weeks  
Postop  6 Months  
Postop  1 Year  
Postop  2 Year s 
Postop  
Radiograph Submission   X X X X X 
 
 
 
 
 
The following  table in dicates required forms to be completed by [CONTACT_345460]: 
 
Form Name  [CONTACT_345478] “Pre-Revision” exam p eriod. 
Adverse Event Report Document adverse event resulting in the revision. 
Study Completion Complete indicating “Study Prosthesis Removed” under Study 
Completion Status. 
Explanted Device Form  Document explanted device information.  Send explanted device to 
Zimmer Biomet per Appendix F.  
Medical Device Reporting Information  Form 
(MDRIF):  
 If device -related, complete MDRIF form (Appendix E) and forward the 
form and all applicable supporting documents to Zimmer Biomet 
within 7 days. The supporting documents include:  
 Operative reports (index and revision surgery)  
 Radiographs (immediate postop, intermediate, and pre -revision)  X Site completed (Investigator or designee)  
 Subject completed  
 Site completed as applicable  (Investigator or designee) 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.[ADDRESS_429031] practice s and benefit s to patients.  Frick a, et al  [3], describe the potential 
benefits of cementless fixation as preservation of bone stock, shorter operating room time  (and 
thus a cost savings) , ease of revision if necessary, and elimination of any complications 
associated with cemented fixation such as third body wear and retained loose fragments.  
Potential disadvantages are the lack of surgeon experience implanting t he modular tibial tray, 
cost of such implants , and determining if there is an ideal patient population for implantation of 
such devices.   
 
To address clinical challenges and methodologically address implant characteristics, a 
prospective, multi -center, lo ngitudinal data collection model is being proposed  for NexGen  TM 
Tibia components used in primary cementless  tibia  total knee arthroplasty.   
 Study Objectives  V.
The primary objective of this study is to evaluate clinical performance for the commercially 
available NexGen  TM Monoblock Tibia and NexGen  TM Modular Tibia used in primary 
cementless  tibia  total knee arthroplasty.   This will be done  by [CONTACT_345461].   
 
The a ssessments will include: 
1. Clinical perf ormance measured by [CONTACT_345455], pain and function, and 
survival of the device . 
2. Safety based on incidence and frequency of adverse events . 
 
 Study Design VI.
This is a p rospective, multicent er, non-randomized clinical study designed to facilitate the 
collection and evaluation of radiographic parameters, pain and function, survival of the device, 
and adverse e vent data.   This clinical study will include the NexGen  TM Monoblock Tibia and 
NexGen  TM Modular Tibia as 2 single -arms being analyzed separately.   
 
The primary endpoint of this study is to evaluate the clinical performance of t he implant at 2 
years postoperatively using radiographic parameters.  Radiographs will be assessed for the 
absence of progressive tibial radiolucencies , as defined in the radiograph ic protocol.  
 
The secondary endpoints of this study will evaluate the clinical performance of the implant at 2 
years postoperatively, based upon:  
• No revisions for any reason  
• Oxford Knee Score >[ADDRESS_429032] 66 NexGen  TM Monoblock and 66 NexGen  TM Modular subjects.   A maximum of 10 
U.S. sites will contribute , each enrolling between 22 to 30 implanted knees .  Each site will be 
selected for a specific NexGen  TM device, either the Monoblock or Modular design.   
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.[ADDRESS_429033] (IRB)  
approval as required prior to conducting t he study.  In order to avoid potential se lection bias, 
each Investigator will offer study participation to each consecut ive eligible  patient  presenting as 
a candidate for primary  cementless  tibia  total knee  arthroplasty using the NexGen  TM 
Monoblock  or NexGen  TM Modular Tibia .  Eligible candidates who express interest in stu dy 
partici pation will be offered  Informed Cons ent.  All potential study subjects will be req uired to 
participate in the Informed Consent proc ess and will not be considered  enrolled  in the  study 
until the  candidate has signed and dated the IRB approved Informed C onsent  Form .  Study data 
cannot be collected until the candidate has completed the Informed Consent  process and 
signed and dated the IRB approved Informed Consent Form . 
 
All study subjects will  undergo  preoperative clinical evaluations prior to their cementless  tibia  
total kn ee arthroplasty.    An immediate postoperative  radiograph will be required.   Postoperative 
clinical follow -up and radiographic evaluations will be conducted at 6 weeks, 6 months, 1 year, and 
2 years.     
 
The I nvestigator will r eview r adiographs immediately postop and at  each cli nical evaluation to 
ensure the radiographs meet the protocol requirements .  The Sponsor will provide a 
radiograph ic protocol  (Appendix D) to assist sites in proper x-ray technique in order to assure 
adequate images are captured for study analysis.   
 
The Sponsor will request copi[INVESTIGATOR_345451].  The 
Sponsor will request one central  reviewer for all ra diographs indepen dent of the surgeon and 
institution. 
 
 Study Population VII.
The s tudy population for primary statistical analysis will be comprised of subjects  who  require 
prima ry cementless  tibia  total knee arthroplasty and satisfy  the inclusion/exclusion criteria 
outlined in th is section of the protocol.  In  order to avoid potential  selection bias, Investigat ors 
will offer study partici pation to each c onsecut ive eligible  patient  presenting as a candidate for 
primary cementless tibia total knee arthroplasty using the commercially available NexGen  TM 
Monoblock or NexGen  TM Modular  Tibia  implants.  Eligible  candidates who express interest in 
study partici pation will be offered I nformed C onsent .  The Inclusion/ Exclusion Criteria  should 
not be completed until the study -specific Informed C onsent Form has been completed.  
A. Inclusion Criteria  
1. Patient is at least [ADDRESS_429034] one of the following:  
a. Rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, traumatic arthritis, polyarthritis . 
b. Collagen disorders a nd/or avascular necrosis of the femoral condyle . 
c. Post -traumatic loss of joint configuration, particularly when there is patellofemoral 
erosion, dysfunction or prior patellectomy . 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.[ADDRESS_429035] ional position . 
8. Severe instability secondary to the absence of collateral ligament integrity . 
9. Rheumatoid arthritis accompanied by [CONTACT_345462] a history of recurrent 
breakdown of the skin . 
10. Patient has previously received partial or total knee arthroplasty for the ipsilateral 
knee.  
11. Patient is currently participating in any other surgical intervention studies or pain 
management studies.  
12. Patient is known to be pregnant or considered a member of a protected population 
(e.g., prisoner, mentally inco mpetent, etc.) . 
13. Patient has a known or suspected sensitivity or allergy to one or more of the implant 
materials.  
 
 Study Device Inf ormation VIII.
NexGen  knee compo nents i ncluded in th is stu dy are the NexGen  TM Monoblock  Tibia  or NexGen  
TM Modular Tibia .   Both t he NexGen  TM Tibia s are designed specifically to adher e to bone 
through the use of trabecular metal technology.  These device s are  intended for lo ng-term 
implantation in acc ordance with product labeling.  Please refer to the packa ge insert for 
additional information  and instructio ns. 
 
 Study Procedures IX.
A. Offer Study Participation 
Study partici pation will be offered to each co nsecutive eligible patient prese nting as a potential 
candidate for primary  cementless  tibia  total knee art hroplasty using the co mmercially avai lable 
NexGen  TM Monoblock or  NexGen  TM Modular Tibia implants , depending on the clinical site’s 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.[ADDRESS_429036]  Enrollment  Log (Appendix C) will be completed to document  all 
individuals screened as potential candidates for the study.   Eligible  candidates who ex press 
interest in stu dy partici pation will be offered I nformed Co nsent.  Prior to patient involvement in 
the study,  the patient m ust partici pate in the I nformed Co nsent process a nd sign and date the 
IRB a pproved I nformed C onsent  Form . 
B. Informed Consent Process  
For candidates that express interest, the Investigator or Designee will describe relevant study 
information, including the purpose, procedures, possible risks, and potential benefits associated 
with study participation.  The Investigator or Designee will also review, along with the candidates, 
the Informed Consent  Form  approved by [CONTACT_345463].  
Candidates shall have sufficient tim e to read and understand the IRB approved Informed Consent 
Form and discuss whether they wish to participate in the study.  Candidates will be asked to 
acknowledge whether all of their questions and concerns have been addressed to their 
satisfaction.  Any questions that candidates may have will be addressed appropriately by [CONTACT_345464].  Candidates will be further instructed that they are free to obtain 
additional information from the Investigator or Designee at any time, that they are free  to decline 
participation, and that they are free to withdraw their consent and discontinue their participation 
at any time without prejudice.  
 
After com pleting the I nformed Co nsent process, can didates who a gree to enter the study m ust 
sign and date the IR B approved Informed Co nsent  Form .  The I nformed C onsent Form must be 
signed a nd dated prior to study data collection  and the date of stu dy sur gery.  For b ilateral TKA 
candidates that a gree to enroll for both operati ve sides, a separ ate Informed Co nsent Form must 
be signed a nd dated for each o perati ve side.  
 
A copy of the si gned Informed Co nsent Form should  be provided to the  subject.  The ori ginal 
signed Informed Co nsent Form is to be filed in the subject’s study binder . 
 
Study data will not be collected until the I nformed Co nsent  Form  has been si gned and dated.  If 
the ca ndidate does not wish to partici pate (does not si gn and date the I nformed Co nsent  Form ), 
data for that ca ndidate will not be collected for  this study. 
C. Subject Enrollment  
Once the I nformed Co nsent Form h as been si gned a nd dated by [CONTACT_423], the su bject will be 
considered enrolled in the stu dy.  A u nique case i dentification number (Case ID) will be assi gned 
to each partici pating subject/knee (b ilateral s ubjects will be assi gned a unique case ID number for 
each knee).  This u nique case ID number will be used thro ughout the stu dy for i dentificatio n.  
Case ID numbers will be assi gned co nsecuti vely in ascen ding order per site, with the starti ng 
numb er for a given site defined by [CONTACT_1034].    
 
The subject will be considered an active study subject after receiving the study device during 
surgery.  In the event that a subject does not receive the study device at the time of surgery, a 
Study Completion  form must be submitted and this will be documented as a screen failure . 
D. Subject Enrollment  Log 
A Subject Enrollment  Log (Appendix C) will be mai ntained at the site thro ughout the co urse of 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.[ADDRESS_429037] si gns and dates a dditional Informed Co nsent  Form (s) after 
enrollment (e. g., due to a protocol ame ndment, protocol revisio ns, etc.), su bsequent si gnings will 
also be recorded in the lo g.  The proposed date of surgery for each subject will also be added to 
the log.      
E. Monitor Log  
The Monitoring Visit Log  (Appendix C) will be  maintained thro ughout the c ourse of t he stu dy.  
The log will co ntain the visit date, monitor name/si gnature and the p urpose of t he visit (i.e. site 
initiatio n, onsite i nterim  monitoring, site close -out, etc.).  The mo nitoring visit log will be fi led in 
the site Reg ulatory  Binder for t he study. 
F. Delegation of Authority  
A Delegation of Authority  Log (Appendix C) will be  maintained throughout the study and  will 
contain the names, i nitials, si gnatures a nd study respo nsibilities of all site perso nnel/designees 
involved in  study proced ures a nd data collectio n.  The Delegation of Authority Log  will be filed in 
the site Reg ulatory Bi nder for t he stu dy. 
G. Preoperative Data Collection  
Preoperative data will be collec ted on the following  source document s: 
1. Inclusion/Excl usion Cr iteria  
2. Demo graphic Eval uation  
3. Physical Exam  
4. Forgotten Joint Score (FJS -12) 
5. Oxford Knee Score  
6. UCLA Activity & Satisfaction Survey  
7. Protocol Deviatio n (as applica ble) 
8. Study Completion (as a pplicable) 
H. Surgical Technique  
Standard operative procedures will be followed and all surgical procedures will be performed 
under aseptic conditions.  Investigators will implant all commercially available NexGen  TM Tibia 
implants  and any other compatible products in compliance  with corresponding labeling 
requirements and in accordance with appropriate surgical technique(s) , found on 
www.zimmerbiomet.com .  NexGen  TM Tibia implants in this study must be implant ed 
cementless , without the  use of autograft bone paste slurry . 
I. Surgical and Immediate Post -Surgical Data Collection  
Surgical a nd immed iate post -surgical data will be collec ted on the following source document s: 
1. Surgical & Discharge  Information  
2. Physician Assessment of Postop  Radiographs  
3. Adverse Event Report (as applicable)  
4. Protocol Deviatio n (as applica ble) 
5. Study Completion (as a pplicable) 
 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.[ADDRESS_429038] -surgical management for study subjects will follow the investigator’s standard of care for 
patients undergoing total knee arthroplas ty (e.g. prophylactic antibiotic therapy, prevention of 
deep vein thrombosis, prevention of pulmonary embolism, etc.).   Post -surgical rehabilitative 
therapy will be as prescribed by [CONTACT_093].  
J. Postoperative Follow -up Data Collection  
Postoperative follow -up clinical eval uations will be conducted at the following visit i ntervals:  
 
Clinical Interval  Interval Window in 
Days Postop * Approximate Window in 
Weeks or Months Pos top 
6 weeks 28 to 56 days  ± 2 weeks  
6 months  151 to 21 4 days  ± 1 month  
1 year  333 to 396 days  ± 1 month  
2 years  669 to 791 days  ± 2 months  
*Visit(s)  outside of window will be determined b ased on Days Postop 
 
Posto perative follow -up clinical data will be collected on  the following  source document forms:  
1. Physical Exam  
2. Physician Assessment of Postop Radiographs  
3. Forgotten Joint Score  
4. Oxford Knee Score  
5. UCLA Activity & Satisfaction Survey  
6. Adverse Event Report (as applicable)  
7. Protocol Deviation (as applicable)  
8. Study Completion (as applicable)  
9. Explanted Device Form (as applicable)  
 
Subjects will be followed posto peratively for [ADDRESS_429039] to follow -up, 
undergoes revision to re move a stu dy device, or ex pi[INVESTIGATOR_6054].  See Ma nagement of I ncurrent Events 
(Section X, Subsection D of th is protocol) for a dditional details.  Reas on(s) for stu dy completion 
must be documented on the Study Completion  form.   
K. Minimization of Subjects  Lost to Follow-up 
Subject follow -up is extremely important for the conduct of a clinical study, and the expectation 
is to maintain the highest possible rate of follow -up compliance throughout this study.  During 
the informed consent process and at each follow -up interval, subjects should be counseled on 
the importance of completing future study follow -up intervals.  
L. Radiographic Definitions and Metho ds 
All postoperative radiograph s will be evaluated  by [CONTACT_345465] .  An Adverse Event Report  must be completed for 
findings identified as an adverse event.   
 
 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.0  
 
Page  14 of 25 
 It is the  Investigator’s  responsibility to revie w radiographs for image quality during the subject’s 
clinical visit and prior to uploading into the image collection service.   Radiograph ic images must 
show an orthogonal view of th e tibial  implant  interface .  If the Sponsor  determines a radiograph 
is of poor quality, then the site must reschedule the subject for additional radiographs.   
 
1. Required rad iographic views 
 
Radiographic Interval Interval Window  Required Radiograph  
Immediate Postop  Pre weight -bearing  AP and Lateral  
6 weeks  ± 2 weeks  AP and Lateral  
6 months  ± 1 month  AP and Lateral  
1 year  ± 1 month  AP and Lateral  
2 years  ± 2 months  AP and Lateral  
 
Both Anteroposterior (AP) and Lateral  radiographs are required of t he operative knee.   
These images should be taken according to the radiograph ic protocol (Appendix D).   
Radiographs should have similar exposu re and must show the  entire stu dy device and 
surrounding bone.  The  investigative site will retain copi[INVESTIGATOR_014] (hard copy/CD/digital) of all 
radiographs referenced for the study. 
 
Immediate Postop Radiograph s: 
Fluoroscopic imaging is t he optimal technique for immediate postop radiographs  
taken in the Operating Room.  Standard films that show an orthogonal view of the 
tibial implant interface and taken prior to weight -bearing  will also be accept ed.    
 
Follow -up Radiographs:  
Required intervals include clinical follow -up visits at [ADDRESS_429040] be submitted to Sponsor via the designated image collection 
services .  Postoperative  study radiographs will be assessed by [CONTACT_345466]. 
M. Recommended Revision Procedure 
See Management of Incurrent Events  (Section X, Subsection D of this protocol) 
 
 Reporting X.
The ma nagement of all stu dy data received by [CONTACT_345467].  The use or disclosu re of all protected health i nformation will com ply 
with the  Health I nsurance Portability a nd Acco untability Act (HIPAA).  A ll information will be 
treated with strict a dherence to professio nal sta ndards of co nfidentiality and will be filed by [CONTACT_345468] a nd restricted accessi bility by [CONTACT_345469].  A ll electro nic 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.0  
 
Page  15 of 25 
 systems used to create, mo dify, mai ntain, or tra nsmit stu dy recor ds will be val idated accor ding to 
21 CFR  Part 11 [2].  Reports and communications relating to study subjects will typi[INVESTIGATOR_345452]’s i nitials, assi gned stu dy subject Case ID number, date of 
surgery, o perati ve side, and date of bi rth.  This code must be clearly linked to the patient identity 
and can only be decoded by [CONTACT_5243].  
A. Prior to Initiation of the Study  
1. Clinical Trial Agreement (CTA) 
A fully executed (signed by [CONTACT_213246]) CTA must be on file with  the Sponsor  
prior to any investi gator partici pating in th is stu dy. 
 
2. Instituti onal Review Board Protocol Approval 
This stu dy protocol m ust be submitted to a nd approved by [CONTACT_941] I nvestigator’s 
Institutio nal Review Board (IRB).  A copy of the IRB a pproval let ter m ust be submitted 
to Sponsor.   T he letter should i dentify the foll owing: 
 Protocol name [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or number  
 Date of IRB meeting (if available)  
 Date of approval  
 Date of expi[INVESTIGATOR_1516]  
 Signature [CONTACT_110917]  
 
3. Informed C onsent 
A Sponsor-approved sample  Informed Consent Form  (Appendix A) will be provided 
along with t he study protocol for IRB s ubmission a nd approval.  If the IRB req uires 
revisio ns to the provided Informed Co nsent  Form , the req uested revisio ns must be 
submitted by [CONTACT_941] I nvesti gator to the Sponsor for review a nd approval.  Once the 
Sponsor has revie wed a nd approved the revisio n, the I nformed Co nsent  Form  will be re-
submitted to the IRB for fi nal review a nd approval.  A co py of the fi nal IRB a pproved 
Informed Co nsent Form (IC F) must be submitted to S ponsor. 
 
4. ClinicalTrials.gov Registration  
The Sponsor will be responsible  for registering this study on www.ClinicalTrials.gov . 
B. Clinical Data Col lection/Submission 
1. Summary of Source Document  Data Collection 
Study data will be collected on  source documents , which may include study-specif ic 
documents  provi ded by [CONTACT_1034].  For subjects  having bilateral  knee rep lacement, 
separate  source documents  must be com pleted for each operative side.  
 
The foll owing source document completion guid elines  should  be foll owed:  
 Complete carefully and accurately.  
 Complete header information consistently across all source documents  for 
each individual study subject  (when study -specific forms  are used) . 
 Be sure that data on the source documents match that which is entered 
through the electronic data capture (EDC) system . 
 Use the study subject’s unique Case ID number assigned as instructed.   Do 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.0  
 
Page  16 of 25 
 not provide information that is not requested on the source documents . 
 Ensure that all fields are completed.  For fields completed by [CONTACT_423], 
efforts  should be made to obtain any missing responses prior to the subject 
completing their visit.  
 
2. Data Submission  
Completed source documents will be submitted directly to Sponsor by [CONTACT_345470] (EDC) and submission via a met hod a pproved by [CONTACT_2728].  Every effort m ust be 
made to ens ure data submission  to Sponsor is made within  14 days of the visit 
com pletion. 
 
3. Quality Assurance of Data 
The I nvestigator sho uld ensure the accu racy, completeness, legi bility, a nd timeli ness of 
the data reported to the Spo nsor in the EDC and in all req uired reports.  Data reported 
in EDC , which are derived from so urce documents, should be consistent with the so urce 
documents or the discrepa ncies should be explained.  A ll electro nic systems used to 
create, modify, mai ntain, or tra nsmit ele ctronic stu dy recor ds will be val idated 
accor ding to 21 CFR Part 11  [2].  The Sponsor will maintain quality co ntrol s ystems, in 
accor dance with  the Sponsor’s policies and proced ures. 
C. Reporting Requirements  
1. Investigator Reporting Responsibilities  
The I nvestigator sho uld ensu re the accu racy, c ompleteness, legi bility, and ti meliness of 
data re ported to  the Sponsor in  accor dance with this protocol.  The Investi gator or 
Desig nee will provide periodic reports to t heir IRB as req uired to  maintain IRB a pproval 
throughout the stu dy, and  will pro vide any req uired fi nal reporti ng to the IRB u pon 
study completion/termi nation.  A co py of all IRB  re-approval letters m ust be submitted 
to the Spo nsor.  If the IRB termi nates or suspen ds its a pproval of the stu dy, the 
Investi gator or Desi gnee will suspend  study-related  activities and  will pr omptly notify 
the S ponsor.  The I nvesti gator sho uld also promptly provide written reports to  the 
Sponsor and  the IRB  rega rding any cha nges si gnificantly affecting the co nduct of the 
study, and/or i ncreasi ng risk to the subjects.  
 
2. Retention of Records  
Study records must be retained by [CONTACT_345471] a minimum of 2 
years from the Investigator’s study termination date, or per applicable regulatory 
and/or IRB requirements (whichever time period is greater).  Measures shall be taken to 
prevent accidental or premature destruction.  
D. Management of Incurrent Events  
1. Failure to Obtain Informed Consent  
Study data will not be collected until the Informed Consent Form has been properly 
executed .  If a candidate does not wish to participate (does not sign and date the 
Informed Consent  Form ), data for that candidate will not be collected for this study.  
 
 
 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.[ADDRESS_429041] shall proceed according to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s st andard 
procedure.  
 
Device Deficiencies that did not lead to an adverse event but could have led to a 
medical occurrence if suitable actions had not been taken, if intervention had not been 
made, or if circumstances had been less fortunate, shall be reported to the Sponsor as 
soon as possible, as well.  
 
See Section X, Subsection E of this protocol for additional information regarding 
adverse event classifications.   All medical events, regardless of classification, are 
required to  be reported on the Adverse Event Report .  The completed Adverse Event 
Report  must be submitted to the Sponsor in a timely manner.  The Investigator or 
Designee will also promptly provide the Sponsor with any additional requested 
information required for  the Sponsor to comply  with regulatory requirements.  If 
applicable per their reporting requirements, the Investigator or Designee will also 
report applicable adverse event(s) to their IRB.  
 
3. Revision  
Study subjects will be study completed for any revision, regardless of the com ponent 
being revised.   In the event that removal of one or more of the implanted knee 
components is necessary, the Investigator will determine the best treatment and/or 
revision method for the subject.  
 
Prior to revision surgery, the Investigator or qualif ied Designee must document 
radiographic findings on the Physician Assessment of Postop Radiographs .   
 
Once the revision surgery has been completed, the Investigator or qualified Designee 
must complete an Adverse Event Report  as well as a Study Completion form 
terminating the subject from the study.  For the study completion status, select “Study 
Prosthesis Removed”.    
 
All explanted device information must be document ed on an Explanted Device Form .  
In addition, all explanted devices must be returned to Z immer Biomet using the 
Explant Procedure (Appendix F).  
 
4. Investigator Withdrawal  
The Investigator can choose to withdraw a subject from the study if the subject no 
longer meets study inclusion/exclusion criteria.  The reason for the Investigator’s 
withdrawa l of the subject must be documented on the Study Completion  form.  
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.[ADDRESS_429042]’s 
medical record and on the Study Completion  form.  Missed visit(s) also must be 
documented using the Protocol Deviation  form, unless the visit is retrospective. The 
first three contact [CONTACT_345472], with additional attempts as 
outlined in the following table:  
 
If Then 
a response is not received after three  
(3) phon e calls  the Investigator  or Designee  should  send  a 
letter to the subject explaining the  follow-
up agreemen t per the Informed Consent, 
and req uesting a respo nse from the 
subject. 
all attempts to contact [CONTACT_345473] a Study Completion  form  will be 
comp leted and will specify  the reas on the 
subject is no longer partici pating in th is 
study. 
 
7. Protocol Deviations  
Investigators should not deviate from the study protocol.  If a protocol deviation does 
occur, the deviation must be documented on the Protocol Deviation  form and 
submitted to the Sponsor.   If applicable per their reporting requirements, the 
Investigator or Designee will also report applicable protocol  deviations to their IRB.  
 
8. Study Termination  
Study subject participation is expected to end upon completion of the subject’s [ADDRESS_429043] to follow -up, undergoes revision to remove a 
study device, or expi[INVESTIGATOR_6054].  Reason(s) for study completion must be documented on the 
Study Completion  form.  
 
If the Sponsor decides to terminate the study early, the Sponsor will inform the 
Investigators of the reason for early study termination.  It is the responsibility of the 
Investigators to inform their IRB as applicable according to local  and national 
laws/regulations.  
 
9. Modification of the Protocol  
All amendments to this clinical protocol shall be agreed to by [CONTACT_345474] a justification for the amendment prior to implementation.  Ap proval of 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.[ADDRESS_429044] be obtained prior to implementation, if required according to 
the local and/ or national laws/regulations.  
E. Medical Events/Adverse Events De finitions and Classifications 
An adverse event is any unfavorable or unintended sign,  symptom, or disease associated 
with the use of the study device, whether or not related to the device.   Adverse event is 
synonymous with complication or medical event.   All medical events, regardless of 
classification, are required to be reported on the A dverse Event Report case report form.   
The completed Adverse Event Report  must be submitted to the  Sponsor in a timely 
manner.  The Investigator or Designee  will also promptly provide the Sponsor with any 
additional requested information requ ired for Sponsor to comply with  regulatory 
requirements.   If applicable per their reporting  requirements, the Investigator or Designee 
will also report applicable adverse event(s) to their IRB.     
1. Classification of the Event  
Adverse Event (AE) [1]: 
An Adverse Event is defined as any untoward medical occurrence, unintended disease 
or injury, or untoward clinical signs (including abnormal laboratory findings) in subjects, 
users or other persons, whether or not related to the investigational medical device.  
 
Note 1: This definition includes events relate d to the investigational medical device or the 
comparator.  
 
Note  2: This definition includes events related to the procedures involved.  
 
Note 3:  For users or other persons, this definition is restricted to events related to 
investigational medical devices.  
 
Serious Adverse Event  (SAE) [1]: 
A Serious Adverse Event is any adverse  event that 
a. led to death  
b. led to serious deterioration in the health  of the subject, that either 
resu lted in: 
1. a life -thre atening illness or injury, or 
2. a per manent impairment of a body structure or a body function, or 
3. in-patient  or prolonged hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or 
4. medical or su rgical  intervention  to  prevent  life-threatening illness 
or injury or permanent i mpairment to a body structure or a b ody 
function 
c. led to fetal distress, fetal death or a congenital abnormality or birth 
defect. 
 
Note: Planned hospi[INVESTIGATOR_272] a pre-existing c ondition, or a procedure req uired by 
[CONTACT_760], with out serious deterioration in health,  is not considered  a serious 
adverse event. 
 
 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.[ADDRESS_429045] (ADE) [1]: 
An A dverse  Device Effect  is an adverse  event related to the use of a medical device. 
 
Note 1: This definition includes adverse events  resulting from insufficient  or 
inadequate instruct ions for use, deployment, implantation, installation, or operation, 
or any malfunction of the medical d evice. 
 
Note 2: This definition includes any event resu lting from use error or from intentional 
misuse of the medical device. 
 
Serious Adverse Device Effect (SADE) [1]: 
A Serious Adverse Device Effect  is an adverse device effe ct that has resu lted in any of 
the consequences  characterist ic of a serious adverse  event. 
 
The S ponsor is responsible for determining the final class ificati on of adverse events. 
 
If an U nanticipated Serious Adverse Device Effect ([LOCATION_003]DE)  is identified it  will be promptly 
repo rted to concerned  Investigat ors and regulatory authorities  as req uired by [CONTACT_44536].  If applicable per their  reporti ng requirements, the  Investigator 
or Designee will report the [LOCATION_003]DE to their IRB. 
 
2. Intensity of Symptoms 
Mild: 
The subject is aware of the sign or symptom , but finds it easily  tolerated.  The 
event is of little concern to the subject and/o r little clinical significance.  The event 
is not expec ted to have any effect on the subject’s overall  health  or well-being. 
 
Moderate: 
The subject has discomfo rt enough to cause interference  with or change in usual 
activities.   The event is of som e conc ern to the subject’s health  or well-being and 
may require med ical inter vention and/or close follow-up. 
 
Severe: 
The event interferes considerable with  the subject’s  usual activities.  The event is  
of definite concern  to the subject and/o r poses substantial risk  to the subject’s  
health or well-being.  The event is likely  to require medical intervention and/o r 
close follow-up and may be incapacitating or life threateni ng.  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_345453]. 
 
NOTE:  The term “severe” refers  to the intensity of the event and can be used with  
any event, without regard to whet her or not it mee ts the criteria for being 
classi fied as “serious” or “unanticipated”.  For examp le, a subject can have a 
severe headache, but it is not a serious event. 
 
 
 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.0  
 
Page  21 of 25 
 3. Relation to Device  
Not Related:  
There is no possible relationship  between the adverse event and the implanted 
device.  
 
Uncertain:  
It is not known if there is a possible relationship  between the adverse event and 
the device.  
 
Probably:  
There is a reasonable possibility that the adverse event was caused by [CONTACT_8121].  
 
Definitely:  
There is no doubt the adverse event is directly related to the device.  
 
Medical Device Information Reporting  
For any adverse event with a relation to device of “Uncertain”, “Probably” or 
“Definitely”, a Medical Device Reporting Information Form  (MDRIF , Appendix E) must 
be completed and submitted to the Study Manager  within 7 days .  Other required 
supporting documentation that should be sent with the MDRIF :  
 All subject x -rays  
 Operative notes  
 A summary detailing the subjects  postoperative physical therapy regimen  
 Subject activity level a t the time the event occurred.  
 
4. Outcome Definitions 
The outcome is in relationship to the Adverse Event, not the treatment rendered  for 
the event (if any). 
 
Reso lved: 
The adverse event has been resolved and/or no further  treatment is required to 
treat  the reported condition or illness. 
 
Toler ated: 
The adverse  event will most likely never be resolved.  The subject “tolerates” 
the ill ness or condition as a matter of life. 
 
Pending: 
Trea tment or diagnostic studies were prescri bed for the adverse  event and the 
outcome of the adverse  event is  not yet known. 
 
Study With drawal:  
Due to the a dverse event, the subject was withdrawn from the study. 
 
Device Revision/ Remova l: 
The adverse  event resulted  in the removal of a study device. 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.0  
 
Page  22 of 25 
  
Death: 
The outcome indicates the subject died as a direct resu lt of the repo rted 
adverse  event. 
 
Reoperation of Affected J oint: 
The a dverse event resu lted in reoperation of the stu dy joint, but the 
reoperation did not include removal of a study device. 
 
5. Collection Approach  
The type of approach taken to collect adverse event information, whether systematic 
or non -systematic.  
 
Systematic:  
Based on checklists, questionnaires, or tests  
  
Non-Systematic:  
Based on spontaneous reporting and recording  
F. Monitoring of the Study  
Prior to initiating the clinical study, the Sponsor will c onduct a site initiation visit to ensure 
the Investigator(s) and study staff  understands the study protocol and req uirements and 
have adequate time and resources to  implement a nd conduct the study.  Prior to study 
initiati on, the  Investigator must have a fully executed CTA a nd IRB a pproval of the stu dy 
protocol and the study Informed Consent. 
 
During the course of the stu dy, the Sponsor will  conduct periodic central monitoring and 
maintain contact [CONTACT_345475], in accordance with the Sponsor’s policies and procedures.  The Sponsor will 
address any identified  non-compliance with  the execut ed CTA, stu dy protocol, and 
applicable reg ulatory requirements.  
 
If onsite monitoring visit(s)  are de emed ap propriate by [CONTACT_1034], the Investigator will 
permit representat ives of the Sponsor’s monitoring team  to have direct access to inspect 
all source data /documents, study documents/binders, correspon ding sections of study 
subject medical/hospi[INVESTIGATOR_303233], and any other documents  relevant to the study.  All 
Sponsor visits (including site initiation) will be documented us ing the Monitoring Visit  Log 
(Appendix C).  
 
 Risk Analysis XI.
This post -market clinical study is classified as minimal risk  [2] and there are no anticipated risks  
specif ic to study participation other  than  the potential loss of confidentia lity.  There are no 
exper imental  procedures in this study, and partici pation in th is study is not anticipated to affect 
the medical treatment of enrolled su bjects. 
 
 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.[ADDRESS_429046] -market, non -investigational devices 
cleared by [CONTACT_345476] 510(k).  The subjects included in this  study could receive the devices 
without participating in the study.  
 NexGen  TM Monoblock Tibia (K012866, K020295, and K031462)  
 NexGen  TM Modular Tibia (K072160)  
 
When used in accor dance with product labeling, the risks associated with the use of NexGen  
cementless knee c ompo nents are similar to those of stan dard, me tal-on-polyethyle ne 
cementless  knee syst ems used for the same cli nical i ndication or purpose.  These risks are 
categori zed below as either general su rgical risks or risks associated with a ceme ntless total knee 
arthroplasty proced ure/study device. U nanticipated  adverse eve nts can  also occur.  
A. General Surgical Risks  
General sur gical risks  and post-operative adverse events can occur  with a ny surgery and 
include, but are not limited to: 
 Anesthetic complications/reactions 
 Bleedi ng and/or excessive blood-loss 
 Transfusion reaction 
 Chronic Pain 
 Post-operative infection 
 Vasc ular injury 
 Delayed wound heali ng 
 Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) 
 Nerve injury 
 Death 
B. Risks Associated with Cementless Total Knee Arthroplasty/Study Device  
Potential  adverse events associated with cementless total knee arthroplasty include, but 
are not limited  to: 
 Loosening or fracture/damage of the prosthetic knee components or surrounding 
tissues.  
 Dislocation and/or joint instabili ty. 
 Malalignment of the prosthetic knee components.  
 Bone fracture or nerve damage.  
 Swelling or infection.  
 Leg length discrepancies.  
 Poor range of motion.  
 Pain.  
 Venous thromboembolic disease.  
 Inflammation.  
 Metal sensitivity.  
 Corrosion of metal components (t he significance and long -term implications are 
uncertain and await further clinical evidence and evaluation).  
 Wear debris can initiate osteolysis which may result in loosening of the implant.  
 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.0  
 
Page  24 of 25 
 Minimization of Risk 
Complications and/or failure of prosthetic implants are more likely to occur in patients with 
unrealistic functional expectations, heavy patients, physically active patients, and/or with 
patients who fail to follow through with the required rehabilitation program.  Physical activity or 
trauma can result in loosening, wear, and/or fracture of the implant.  The patient must be 
counseled about the capabilities of the implant and the impact it will have on his or her lifestyle.  
The patient must be instructed a bout all postoperative restrictions, particularly those related to 
occupational and sports activities and about the possibility that the implant or its components 
may wear out, fail or need to be replaced.  The implant may not last the rest of the patient’ s life, 
or any particular length of time. Because prosthetic implants are not as strong, reliable, or 
durable as natural, healthy tissues/bones, all such devices may need to be replaced at some 
point.  
 
 Statis tical Consideratio ns XII.
Performance of  the commercially available NexGen  TM Monoblock  Tibia  and NexGen  TM 
Modular Tibia used in  primary cementless  tibia  total  knee arthroplasty will be evaluated 
for radiographic parameters, pain and function, and survival of the device.  Data collected 
in this stu dy will be summarized descriptively and descriptive summaries will be the basis 
of any study reports issued.  These summaries may be used for interim study repo rts and 
may also be used to su pport regulatory submissions, presentat ions, and/o r publicati ons.  
Additional surgical technique and instr umentat ion data may be collected and evaluated. 
A. General Statistical Methods  
Statistical methodology will consist of summarizing collected data descriptively.  
Categorical data (e.g., gender or race) will be summarized using counts and percentages, 
and 95% Confidence Interval (CI), over the time periods of interest.  Continuous dat a, such 
as age, will be summarized by [CONTACT_96508], medians, standard deviation, minimum, 
maximum, and 95% CI over the time periods of interest.  Implant survival and return to 
function will be summarized using a Kaplan -Meier method and presented with rates  (as 
percentages) and confidence intervals.   
B. Sample Size  
A minimum of [ADDRESS_429047] 66 NexGen  TM Monoblock and 66 NexGen  TM Modular subjects.   
The NexGen  TM Monoblock Tibia and NexGen  TM Modular Tibia are considered 2 single -
arms being analyzed separately.    Samp le size is based  upon 6 to 10 sites enrolling between 
22 to 30 subjects per site.    
 
Based on NexGen’s expected success rate of 98% at two years o n the primary  endpoint and 
using a 10% non -inferiority margin against a 98% performance goal, 57 subjects  are required 
to achieve 80% power to test non -inferiority.  57 subjects  also allow  the Sponsor  to control 
the Type -1 alpha error at 0.05.  As suming a 12% loss to follow -up over 2 years, 
approximately 66 subjects  need to be enrolled for each single arm . 
 
 
 
NexGen TM Tibia Clinical Study : CONFIDENTIAL  
Protocol # K.CR.I.G.16.34  
July 17, 2017 – Version 1.0  
 
Page  25 of 25 
  Refe rences XIII.
 
[1] ISO [ZIP_CODE]:2011(E). Clinical investigation of medical devices for human subjects – Good 
clinical practice.  
 
[2] US Food and Dru g Administration. eCFR – Electronic Code of Federal Regulations Title 21. 
Retrieved April 25, 2017, from https://www.ecf r.gov/cgi -bin/text -
idx?SID=e0cb187b56d9cb0279bb080f88b8121d&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title21/21tab_02.t
pl. 
 
[3] Fricka KB, Sritulanondha S, McAsey CJ. To Cement or Not? Two -Year Results of a Prospective, 
Randomized Study Comparing Cemented Vs. Cementless To tal Knee Arthroplasty (TKA). J 
Arthroplasty . 2015 Sept;30([ADDRESS_429048]):55 -58. 