Title: Understanding and Reducing HIV Risk Behavior and Subs tance Use Among Self -
identified Bisexual Adolescent Men  
 
Identifiers: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Date: 03/15/24 
Study Protocol  
Participants were recruited  via paid advertisements on social media (Facebook and 
Instagram). Advertisements directed potential participants to an online eligibility survey. 
Eligibility criteria included: (1) age 14 -17; (2) identify as bisexual, pansexual, or queer; (3) 
report attra ction to more than one gender or regardless of their gender; (4) identify as male; (5) 
live in the US; and (6) have access to the internet.  
Eligibility survey responses were reviewed by [CONTACT_92970] g their preferred method of communication. At this time, they were provided with 
a link to an online assent  form and assessment of decisional capacity. After reading the assent  
form, they were asked a series of questions about the study procedures and ri sks. If they got any 
of the questions wrong, they were given one additional chance to re -read the assent  form and re -
answer the questions. If they got any of the questions wrong the second time, they were ineligible to participate. If they got all of th e questions right, they were asked if they agreed to 
participate in the study. If they agreed to participate in the study, they were automatically directed to the baseline survey.  
After completing the baseline survey, participants were randomized to the in tervention 
group or the control group. Participants in the intervention group were immediately provided with access to the online intervention (described below). They had one month to complete the intervention. As soon as they completed the intervention, t hey were sent a link to an online post -
intervention survey to assess intervention acceptability. After one month, regardless of whether or not they completed the intervention, they were sent a link to an online one -month follow -up 
survey to re -assess inter vention outcomes. They had one month to complete the one -month 
follow -up survey. Participants in the control group were not asked to do anything for one month. 
After one month, they were sent a link to an online post -waitlist survey to re -assess interventi on 
outcomes. Participants could earn up to $[ADDRESS_102745] at Rosalind Franklin University.  
Intervention. T he online intervention (B*SMART)  included 90 minutes of content, which 
could be completed in a single session or across multiple sessions. B*SMART was adapted from two previous se x education programs for LGBTQ youth—Queer Sex Ed (QSE; Mustanski et al., 
2015) and SMART Sex Ed (Mustanski et al., 2020). The goal of the adaptation was to tailor the content to the unique needs of bisexual, pansexual, and queer male youth. B*SMART include d [ADDRESS_102746] module (“Your guide to sexual orientation and gender identity”) cover ed topi[INVESTIGATOR_92968]: diff erences between sexual orientation and gender identity; differences between specific 
sexual orientations and gender identities; coming out (including unique challenges for bisexual, pansexual, and queer male youth and tips for how to do so safely); strateg ies for reducing 
internalized stigma; and positive aspects of being bisexual, pansexual, or queer.  
The second module (“Unfiltered sex ed: Sexual activity, pleasure, and consent”) cover ed 
topi[INVESTIGATOR_20188]: specific sexual behaviors; how to minimize discomfort and maximize pleasure during sex; the importance of consent; and adolescents’ rights related to sex and sexual health (including a state -by-state map depi[INVESTIGATOR_92969]/STI testing/care without 
parental/guardian consent). 
The third module (“Sex ed in the real world”) cover ed topi[INVESTIGATOR_20188]: different types of 
STIs; different types of protection (e.g., external condoms, internal condoms, birth control, pre -
exposure prophylaxis); the level of risk associated with different sexual behaviors  (demonstrated 
via an interactive activity where participants could  see the risk associated with specific sexual 
behaviors and how it changes when different types of protection are used); the influence of 
substance use on sex and sexual health (including an activity where participants could see how their own substance use compared to other bisexual, pansexual, and queer male youth’s substance use based on data from a nationally representative sample); and how to find an HIV/STI testing site (including an activity where participants could identify HIV/STI testing centers near where they live).  
The fourth module (“Single? Taken? It’s complicated? Healthy relationships”) cover ed 
topi[INVESTIGATOR_20188]: healthy relationships; different relationship configurations; the importance of relationship expectations; and using effective communication to promote healthy relationships.  
Statistical Analysis Plan  
Statistical analyses wer e performed in R Version 4.2.1 (R Core Team, 2022). Chi -squared 
tests and independent samples t -tests were used to evaluate data missingness across critical study 
variables (i.e., condition, demographics, baseline levels of outcomes). Similarly, to assess 
randomization success, chi -squared tests and independent samples t -tests were used to compare 
the intervention and control groups on demographics and baseline levels of outcomes. To assess intervention acce ptability, we computed the mean  and standard devi ation  of the scale 
score.  Between group differences in intervention efficacy were modeled using ANCOVAs, 
whereby [CONTACT_92971] f or baseline levels of outcomes.  