Cover Page  
Study Title  
Prostatic Artery Embolization (PAE) for Treatment of Signs and Symptoms of Benign Prostatic 
Hyperplasia (BPH)  
 
NCT:[ADDRESS_362209] Reviewed by [CONTACT_296635] 3/27/23  
 
Protocol Version V 6.10.2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol Version 6.10.2019  
Prostatic Artery Embolization (PAE) for Treatment of Signs and Symptoms of Benign Prostatic 
Hyperplasia (BPH)  
STUDY SUMMARY  
Title Prostatic Artery Embolization (PAE) for Treatment of Signs and 
symptoms of Benign Prostatic Hyperpl asia (BPH)  
 
Short Title  PAE for BPH  
Protocol Number  V 6.10.19  
Phase  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_296630], non -randomized feasibility study  
Study Duration  We estimate it will take approximately 4 years or 48 months  to fully enroll 
and complete the study.   
Study Center(s)  Single Center, Northwestern: (Northwestern University, Northwestern 
Memorial Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_296631])  
Objectives  Primary Objective: Evaluate the safety of PAE for th e treatment of lower 
urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) attributed to BPH.  
Number of Subjects  60 
Diagnosis and Main 
Inclusion Criteria  Subjects with LUTS secondary to BPH refractory to/contraindicated for 
medical treatment  
Study Product (s) Embosphere Microspheres, Merit Medical , given intra -procedurally  
Duration of administration  Dose given one -time during interventional radiology P AE procedure , 
given by [CONTACT_296636] [INVESTIGATOR_54720] -
I’s 
Statistical Methodology  Descriptive Statistics will be employed.  
STUDY OBJECTIVES  
Primary Objectives  
Endpoint #1: Patient safety  
The Primary Objective of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_296632]. Primary Safety Endpoints include:  
1. A reduced incidence and severity of adverse events compared with historical TURP morbidity rates. 
These include genitourinary events (i.e., events associated with the ur inary tract and/or the surrounding 
genital region)  
2. Damage to the bladder floor, trigone, sphincters, and rectum  
3. Incontinence as defined by [CONTACT_296637] (ICS) male IS score of at least +[ADDRESS_362210] ‐procedure events (i.e. catheter dwelling time)  
7. Deaths  
 
Endpoint #2: Objective clinical endpoints  (measured at baseline, 4 weeks, 12 weeks,  6 and 12 
months)  
  
1. Change in International Prostate Symptom Score ( IPSS ) 
2. Change in QoL bother question  
3. Change in BPH impact index  
4. Change in Qmax ( peak and total void volume at each follow ‐up visit)  
Secondary Objectives  
 1. Change in Post Void Residual ( PVR) volumes :  
Measure PVR at each f ollow‐up visit to monitor impairment or improvement of bladder emptying due to the 
treatment or disease progression.  
2. Change in Detrusor Muscle Pressure ( Pdet) at Peak Urine Flow ( Qmax ) 
3. Change in International Index of Erectile Function ( IIEF-EF) doma in: 
Both BPH and many of its therapi[INVESTIGATOR_296633]. Use validated, gender ‐specific measure 
of sexual function assessed at each follow ‐up visit.  
4. Change in Male Sexual Health Questionnaire ( MSHQ ) 
5. Change in Prostate volume: Many devices intended to treat BPH, such as TUMT, can reduce prostatic 
volume.  
6. Cystoscopic appearance of the prostatic urethra  
Endpoints  
Preliminary Safety (Primary Endpoints) will be assessed during treatment and at post -treatment int ervals of 1, 
3, 6 and 12 months. Preliminary effectiveness (Secondary Endpoint) will be evaluated based on International 
Prostate System Score (IPSS) and cystoscopic visualization of the subject’s urethra, prostate and bladder 
based on the timeline listed in the protocol.  
 
Annual Long -term follow -up 
 Patients will be followed for up to 4 additional years a fter the 12 -month visit (visit 6 ) for the following 
evaluations:  
 -physical examination including vital signs, weight and GU evaluation  
 -blood (comprehensive chemistry panel, PSA, Free PSA)  
 laboratory evaluations  
 - urinalysis and urine culture to  be done 1 -2 weeks prior to cystoscopy and urodynamic  testing 
 at this visit   
 -PSA and free PSA  
 -DRE  
 -urodynamic testing including the same parameters as at baseline  
 -IPSS  
 -IIES 
 -MSHQ  
 -concomitant medications  
 -toxicity evaluation  
 -documentation of any new treatments for BPH and/or LUTS  
 
Patients unwilling to come to clinic will be asked to complete the IPSS and IIEF questionnaires and provide 
information of any new treatments for BPH and/or LUTS by [CONTACT_756], email or mail. Information on 
medications and adverse events will not be captured during the long -term follow -up period following the [ADDRESS_362211] 10 subjects of this study will receive PAE adjusted by [CONTACT_296638]. 
These subjects will be treated under Monitored Anesthesia Care ( MAC ) anesthesia to ensure the 
investigator’s complete control and to reduce implementation variables. The investigator will utilize real -
time angiogram images of the prostate to direct the placement/ movement of the microspheres throughout 
the targeted prostate tr eatment volu me. These first [ADDRESS_362212] 10 patients, MAC will only be used when medically necessary.    
 
 
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
General Considerations  
General considerations: continuous variables will be summarized as n, mean, standard deviation, 
median, minimum and maximum. Categorical variables will be summarized as the number and 
percentage of patients in e ach category  
 
Sample Size and Accrual  
 
This is a single center pi[INVESTIGATOR_296634], efficacy, and tolerability 
of PAE for the treatment of signs and symptoms BPH.  A small number of subjects will be recruited for 
this purpose (50 subjects).  The first [ADDRESS_362213], and larger randomized controlled trial in the 
future.  
 
Demographic and Baseline Characteristics  
-age, gender, race, ethnicity  
-baseline BPH/LUTS characteristics (prostate vo lume), PSA, free PSA, maximum flow rate (Qmax), 
average flow rate, detr usor muscle pressure (Pdet), voided volume, total time of voiding and post void 
residual volume (PVR)  
-concurrent medications  
-prior BPH/LUTS therapy  
 
Safety and Outcome Analysis  
Clinical and outcome measures will be compared to baseline. These included IPSS, IIEF, urodynamic test 
changes and prostate volume.  
 
Duration of Procedure  
Parameters to be recorded include during of p rocedure, number of Embosphere vials used, radiation 
exposure, catheter/wire used and amount of contrast.  
 
 Peak Urine Flow (Qmax)  
Peak urine flow (Qmax) from urodynamic assessments will be summarized comparing baseline to follow -
up measurements . 
 
Post void residual (PVR)  
PVR from urodynamic assessments will be  summarized comparing baseline to follow -up measurements.  
 
Detrusor muscle pressure (Pdet)  
Pdet from urodynamic assessments will be summarized comparing baseline to follow -up measurements . 
 
International Index of Erectile Function (IIEF)  
IIEF will be summa rized comparing baseline to follow -up measurements. Each subscale (erectile function, 
orgasmic function, sexual desire, intercourse satisfaction, overall satisfaction). Each subscale will be 
summarized separately at each time point (visit).  
 
Prostate Spec ific Antigen (PSA)  
PSA will be summarized comparing baseline to measurements at each follow -up visit.  
 
Additional Variables from Urodynamic Testing  
Average flow rate, voided urine volume and total time of voiding from the urodynamic assessments will be 
summarized and compared to follow -up time points (visits).  
 
Laboratory evaluations  
Summary statistics for baseline and change from baseline will be summarized.  
 
Vital signs  
Summary statistics for baseline and change from baseline will be summarized.  
 
Cystoscopy  
Cystoscopy results will be summarized for baseline and all subsequent cystoscopi[INVESTIGATOR_014] . 
 
 
 