ii 
  
A single center sham and active controlled double blind randomized 
crossover trial of the magnetic levator prothesis for severe 
blepharoptosis   
 
ClinicalTrials.gov  title: Clinical Trial Comparing Two Non -Surgical Treatments for 
Severe Blepharoptosis  
 
ClinicalTrials.gov ID numbe r: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Institutional IRB title:  Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis 
(MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable force system 
and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)  
Institutional IRB  Protocol Identifying Number:  2019P003055  
 
Principal Investigator s: Kevin E. Houston, OD, MSc, FAAO , Lotfi Merabet, OD, PhD  
Protocol contributors : Kevin E. Houston, OD, MSc, FAAO; Shrinivas Pundlik, PhD; Prerana 
Shivshanker, MPhil Optometry; Alex Bowers, MCOptom, PhD; Sara LaRosa, OT; Mara Robinson, 
PT; Patrick Lee, OD; Eleftherios I. Paschalis, PhD  
 
Draft or Version Number :  version  1 
Date:  May 30, 2024,  
Funding :  NIH/NEI R01EY029437  
 
Disclosure :  
E.I. Paschalis  and K.E. Houston  are named on a US patent application assigned to Schepens Eye 
Research Institute for the technology that is the topic of this research. The institution has 
reviewed this potential conflict and the authors have followed any requirements for 
management. The  IP is not currently licensed and the device is not commercially available.  E.I. 
Paschalis  is also a paid consultant for Strategic Intelligence Inc. but is not a conflict to this 
work .  
iii 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents  Page  
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  1 
STATE MENT OF COMPLIANCE  1 
PROTOCOL SUMMARY  1 
SCHEMATIC OF STUDY DESIGN  2 
1. KEY ROLES  2 
2. INTRODUCTION: BACKGROUND 
INFORMATION AND SCIENTIFIC 
RATIONALE  2 
2.1 Background information  2 
2.2 Rationale  4 
2.3 Potential Risks and Benefits  5 
2.3.1 Known potential risks  5 
2.3.2 known potential benefits  6 
3. OBJECTIVES AND PURPOS E 6 
4. STUDY DESIGN AND ENDPOINT S 6 
4.1 Description of the Study Desig n 6 
4.2.1 Primary endpoint  6 
4.2.2 Secondary endpoints  6 
4.2.3 Exploratory endpoints  6 
5. STUDY ENROLLMENT AND WITHDRAWA L 6 
5.1 Participant Inclusion Criteri a 7 
5.2 Participant Exclusion Criteri a 7 
5.3 Strategies for Recruitment and Retentio n 7 
5.4 Participant Withdrawal or terminatio n 8 
5.4.1 Reasons for Withdrawal or Terminatio n 8 
5.4.2 Handling of Participant Withdrawals or 
terminatio n 8 
5.5 Premature Termination or Suspension of 
Study  8 
6. STUDY AGENT  8 
6.1 Study Agent(s) and Control Descriptio n [ADDRESS_18740] Storage and Stability  9 
6.1.4 Preparation  9 
6.1.5 Dosing and Administration  9 
6.1.6 Route of Administration  9 
6.1.7 S tarting Dose and Dose Escalation Schedule  9 
6.1.8 Dose Adjustments/Modifications/Delays  9 
6.1.9 Duration of Therapy  9 
6.1.10 Tracking of Dose  9 
6.1.11 Device Specific Considerations  10 
6.2 Study agent Accountability Procedures  10 
7. STUDY PROCEDURES AND SCHEDULE  10 
7.1 Study Procedures/Evaluation s [ADDRESS_18741] of care study procedures  11 
7.2 Laboratory Procedures/Evaluations  11 
7.2.1 Clinical Laboratory Evaluations  11 
7.2.2 Other Assays or Procedures  11 
7.2.3 Specimen Preparation, Handling, and 
Storage  11 
7.2.4 Specimen Shipment  11 
7.3 Study Schedule  11 
7.3.1 Screening  11 
7.3.2 Enrollment/Baseline  11 
7.3.3 Follow -up 12 
7.3.4 Final Study Visit   13 
7.3.5 Early Termination Visit  13 
7.3.6 Schedule of Events Table  13 
7.4 Justification for Sensitive Procedures  14 
7.5 Concomitant Medications, Treatments, and 
Procedures  14 
7.5.1 Precautionary Medications, Treatments, 
and Procedures  14 
7.6 Prohibited Medications, Treatments, and 
Procedures  14 
7.7 Prophylactic Medications, Treatments, and 
Procedures  14 
7.8 Rescue Medications, Treatments, and 
Procedures  14 
7.9 Participant Access to Study Agent At Study 
Closure  14 
8. ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY  15 
8.1 Specification of Safety Parameters  15 
8.1.1 Definition of Adverse Events (AE)  15 
8.1.2 Definition of Serious Adverse Events (SAE)  15 
v 
 8.1.3 Definition of Unanticipated Problems (UP)  [ADDRESS_18742]  17 
8.4.5 Reporting of Pregnancy  17 
8.5 Study Halting Rules  17 
8.6 Safety Oversight  17 
9. CLINICAL MONITORING  17 
10. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  17 
10.1 Statistical and Analytical Plans  17 
10.2 Statistical Hypotheses  17 
10.3 Analysis Datasets  17 
10.4 Description of Statistical Methods  17 
10.4.1 General Approach  17 
10.4.2 Analysis of the Primary Efficacy 
Endpoint(s)  20 
10.4.3 Analysis of the Secondary Endpoint(s)  21 
10.4.4 Safety Analyses  21 
10.4.5 Adherence and Retention Analyses  21 
10.4.6 Baseline Descriptive Statistics  21 
10.4.7 Planned Interim Analyses  21 
10.4.8 Multiple Comparison/Multiplicity  22 
10.4.9 Tabulation of Individual Response Data  22 
10.4.10 Exploratory Analyses  22 
10.5 Sample Size  22 
10.6 Measures to Minimize Bias  22 
10.6.1 Enrollment/ Randomization/ Masking 
Procedures  22 
10.6.2 Evaluation of Success of Blinding  23 
10.6.3 Breaking the Study Blind/Participant Code  23 
11. SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO 
SOURCE DATA/DOCUMENTS  24 
12. QUALITY ASSURANCE AND QUALITY 
CONTROL  24 
13. ETHICS/PROTECTION OF HUMAN 
SUBJECTS  [ADDRESS_18743]  24 
vi 
 13.3 Informed Consent Process  24 
13.3.1 Consent/assent and Other Informational 
Documents Provided to Participants  [ADDRESS_18744] POLICY  27 
17. LITERATURE REFERENCES  27 
 
 
 
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  [ADDRESS_18745]  
MEEI  [LOCATION_005] Eye and Ear Infirmary  
HRPP  Human Research Protections Program  
MMSE  Mini Mental Status Exam  
KTFS  Kinesio  Tape frontalis sling  
aQoL  Assessment of Quality of Life  
EQ-5D-5L Euro Quality of Life Questionnaire  
GBI-5F Glasgow Benefit Inventory  
 
STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE  
The trial will be conducted in accordance with Good Clinical Practices, the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations 
on the Protection of Human Subjects (45 CFR Part 46), the Code of Federal Regulations applicable to 
clinical studies (21 CFR 312 – Investigational New Drug Application, 21 CFR 50 – Protection of Human 
Subjects and [ADDRESS_18746] (IRB), except where necessary to eliminate an 
immediate hazard(s) to the study participants. All personnel involved in the conduct of this study have 
completed Human Subjects Protection Trainin g. 
 
PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
Title:  A single center sham and active controlled double blind randomized crossover 
trial of the magnetic levator prothesis for severe blepharoptosis  
  
  
  
Outcome 
measures  Primary outcome: Difference between MLP and KTFS in the change in 
interpalpebral fissure during and spontaneous blinking  
 
 Secondary outcome: Difference between MLP and KTFS in the changes in 
interpalpebral fissure during  opening and  volitional blinking  
 
 Secondary outcome: Proportion of subjects selecting each device at the end of 
the crossover  
 
  
Population:  Individuals with severe unilateral or bilateral ptosis defined as occlusion of the 
visual axis  by [CONTACT_19883]:  N/A 
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  1  
 
  2 
 Number of Sites 
enrolling 
participants : 1 
Description of 
Study Agent :  Magnetic levator prosthesis (MLP) with compatible spectacle  frames  
Kinesio  Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)  
Study Duration:  2 to 3 year s 
Participa nt 
Duration:  [ADDRESS_18747] a clinical decision to  participa te in the extended wear part of the clinical 
trial  
 
SCHEMATIC OF STUDY DESIGN  
Also, please refer to the study schema : 
 
FU: Follow up  
 
1 KEY ROLES  
Principal Investigator  – Overall responsibility for all study related activities.    
Co-investigator (clinical trial lead):  Responsibility for randomized crossover clinical trial management.  
Clinical Research Technicians - Responsible for consenting, enrolling and scheduling subjects. Also will 
collect, record and report all study data , and fit and train for the MLP devic e and the tape (KTFS)  as a 
backup plan . 
Physical Therapy Advisor :  Training  of clinical study staff and monitoring the quality of fitting  for the KTFS.  
Engineering research fellow : Responsible for: Assembling MLP devices and maintaining device logs  
Independent safety monitor :  Examine participants with adverse events and review all safety outcome 
reports.  
 
2  INTRODUCTION: BACKGROUND INFORMATION AND SCIENTIFIC RATIONALE   
 
2.[ADDRESS_18748] cranial nerve, or structural abnormalities. [1] Etiologies include congenital Determine 
eligibility and 
consent subjectRandomiseFirst period of 
crossoverWashoutSecond period 
of crossoverDebrief and 
clinical decision 
whether to 
continue with 
preferred 
deviceIf want to 
continue:
Extended wear 
of preferred 
device + 6 & [ADDRESS_18749] 6 & 12 
month phone 
call to 
administer  ED -
5-5L & GBI -5L 
regardless of 
extended trial 
or not
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  1  
 
  3 
 abnormalities, stroke, traumatic brain injury, tumors of the brain or face, viral illnesses, diabetes, 
autoimmune disorders such as myasthenia gravis, and general aging mechanisms. [1] The prevalence of 
blepharoptosis within the US general population is unknown; however, in Korean and U.K. general 
population it has been reported to be 11% [2, 3]  suggesting [ADDRESS_18750] the 
disorder.  
Severe ptosis and associated ophthalmoplegia cause low vision with negative effects on 
function and quality of life – Total bilateral ptosis causes profound yet potentially reversible visual 
impairment.  Associated ophthalmoplegia results in an inability to consistently utilize the fovea, and so in 
many cases magnification is useful.  In bilateral 3rd nerve palsy, for example, the eye is frequently 
permanently abducted 30° or more, so even if the lids are opened common low vision rehabilitation 
intervention s are needed.  A similar but usually less severe situation exists in poorly controlled myasthenia 
gravis.  When ptosis is subtotal but severe, patients are symptomatic of constricted visual field reporting 
problems with mobility and inability to drive.  In ability to drive and effort of constant frontalis recruitment 
limits employability, making travel to work and sustained computer viewing very difficult.  Severe 
unilateral ptosis (CN III palsy) causes  loss of binocular peripheral field (~30°), stereopsis, and binocular 
summation (which is often problematic at night or other dim environments).  All levels of ptosis have 
negative social and cosmetic impacts which are likely to affect employment and social well -being.   
Common surgical treatments - The most common method currently used to correct ptosis 
involves surgical tightening of the levator muscle, or in more severe cases, frontalis sling. [1]  While these 
procedures are a mainstay of treatment, in our experience they have disadvantages in that they do not 
always restore normal blink function and over -correction may result in exposure keratitis.  In severe cases 
of ptosis a conservative approac h is needed leaving the ptosis under -corrected, and so even surgical 
candidates may benefit from magnetic correction.    
An effective easily adjustable and/or non -surgical treatment is needed - Substantially less 
attention has been given to non -surgical approaches for ptosis, which has led to lack of effective options 
during the early recovery period from neurological etiologies, in cases with daily variability in the ptosis 
such as Myasthenia Gr avis, or other cases where surgery is contraindicated.  Ability for the patient to 
easily adjust the correction as the ptosis varies would be advantageous whether it were applied surg ically 
or not.      
Limitations of available temporary treatments  - We believe that available temporary or non -
surgical treatments are ineffective and even contraindicated for many target populations. These include 
tapi[INVESTIGATOR_19847](s) open and proppi[INVESTIGATOR_19848] a wire on the glasses (ptosis crutch). [4]  
Unfortunately there is a paucity of data on safety or efficacy of the ptosis crutch or tapi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. The crutch has 
to be continually adjusted to keep the lid elevated, does not allow a complete blink, [5]  and poses a risk 
for ocular injury during adjustment or should the patient fall. We have frequently encountered use of skin 
tape to elevate the eye lid, but this has potentially damaging effects on the ocular surface from incomplete 
eye closure.  A newly released eye drop (Upneeq, Osmotica/RVL, January 2021) has recently been 
approved for mild age -related ptosis (might be used off label for severe myo or neurogenic ptosis), but its 
effects are unknown for severe ptosis.  
Static magnets could provide force to elevate the eyelid while still allowing eye closure - In 
most types of ptosis, while opening of the eyelid is impaired, the neuromuscular complex for eye closure 
(Orbicularis oculi muscle/cranial nerve (CN) VII) is intact. [1]  In these cases the ptosis might be alleviated 
using a permanent static magnet system to provide the force to elevate the upper eyelid. [6]  The static 
force exerted by [CONTACT_19884], assuming the force of the magnet is not too great, reanimating the blink.  This approach 
utilizes well -understood, widely avail able and inexpensive static magnetic materials.  Electromagnets 
might seem like an attractive option for the ability to modulate force; however, they generate heat and 
would consume too much energy to be feasible for continuous use.  We had also considered  electrical 
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  1  
 
  4 
 stimulation of the levator muscle; however, our mentors who have investigated the possibility of this 
approach previously indicated that repeated stimulation externally on the skin is painful in addition to 
difficulty accessing the levator non -surgically v ia this technique.      
Prior attempts to use magnets for ptosis - The concept of correcting ptosis with magnetic force 
was first presented in the 1970’s. [6]  Conway described attaching Mu -metal 13 x 4 x 0.5 mm to the upper 
lid in 3 patients (attached with eyelash adhesive or blenderm tape), and a small bar magnet to the 
spectacles.  Specifications of the ferrite spectacle magnet were not provided; however, we  measured 
them in the photos to be ~[ADDRESS_18751]’s photographs showed elevation of the eyelid when 
the lid and spectacle magnet were in contact; however, the ferrite magnet/Mu -metal would not have 
generated enough force to elevate the lid from th e closed position, where there is typi[INVESTIGATOR_897] 15 to 20mm 
separation. [5]  As a result the magnet glasses would have needed frequent adjustment to bring the 
materials back into direct contact [CONTACT_19885].  It is therefore not surprising that the treatmen t was never commercialized.  Since Conway’s 
report, we find no publications on the use of magnets for ptosis, although they have been attempted for 
lagophthalmos via surgical implantation with only limited success. [7-10]  Problems related to surgical 
implantation highlight the benefit of first refining the approach non -surgically.  Static magnets are also 
better suited for ptosis as compared to lagophthalmos, because of the relative strength of the orbicularis 
compared to  the levator.     
 
2.2 Rationale  
We recently described a novel non -surgical magnetic eyewear device referred to as the 
Magnetic Levator Prosthesis (MLP)  that restored blinking in patients with severe paralytic ptosis. [5, 17 -
19] The force to lift the lid was produced by a static Neodymium magnet embedded in a glasses frame 
and a polymer embedded (PDMS) micro -magnet array fitted externally to the upper lid with Tegaderm IV 
securement film (Fig 1).  The Tegaderm is FDA approved for  extended wear on the skin and even as an eye 
covering.  It generated a strong bond, keepi[INVESTIGATOR_19849] a mean of 
6 ± 4 days with good patient reported comfort when used for 2 hours per day during rehabilitation 
ther api[INVESTIGATOR_014].  
Translational Promise – This proposed research to further improve the approach and confirm 
safety, feasibility, and relative efficacy for chronic management of ptosis is needed prior to 
commercialization.  The aims of the proposed study target the clinical population of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_19850] o specializes 
in low vision rehabilitation with subspecialty in neurological visual impairments.  This is a large and 
underserved patient population which includes many individuals with recent neurological pathology, 
many of whom ar e residing in inpatient rehabilitation facilities (IRF). IRFs provide 24 hour medical 
supervision and rehabilitation therapi[INVESTIGATOR_19851] a minimum of 3 hours/day of therapy. There are 1,165 IRFs in the U.S. [20]  with an average length of 
stay of 16 days. [21] If we conservatively estimate an average of 50 beds per 1,165 IRFs revolving every 16 
days there should be approximately 1.2 million admissions and discharges per year in IRFs nationwide . Of 
that population, ~32% are recovering from stroke and 6% from traumatic brain injury. [21] Prevalence of 
CN III palsy in stroke populations has been reported at 2.5%, [22] and 4.4% in TBI (internal data).  
Therefore, the estimated national target population for temporary management of severe ptosis in IRFs 
alone is 12,[ADDRESS_18752] also encountered multiple 
patients with severe unilateral ptosis obscuring the vision in their better eye for whom surgery was 
contraindicated.  There is no available option for these patients other than tapi[INVESTIGATOR_19852] c rutch with the aforementioned problems with these approaches.     
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  1  
 
  5 
 Scientific Premise:   In summary, the premise for the proposed work is that ptosis is a major 
public health concern which to this point has received less attention than it’s lagophthalmos counterpart 
despi[INVESTIGATOR_19853] (but without the extreme con sequence of 
exposure and scarring).  Better non -surgical options are needed.  Weaknesses in prior work in the field 
concerning magnetic correction included use of ferrite magnets, inadequate adhesion methods for 
externa l placement, moving too soon to surgical implantation, and lack of evidence from randomized 
controlled trials to guide clinical approaches.  We will fill a significant gap in the field in terms of non -
surgical correction while not excluding use of data and  methodology to advance success with surgical 
implantation.   In the first part of this study the magnetic levator prosthesis (MLP) was improved by 
[CONTACT_19886] a novel adjustable force system and in the second part of the study the MLP 
will be compared to another non -surgical treatment for blepharoptosis, the Kinesio  Tape frontalis sling 
(KTFS)  
 
 
2.3 Potential Risks and Benefits   
 
2.3.1  Known  Potential Risks  
Risks related to use of the MLP : 
Risk 1 :  Dryness or sor eness  in the eye or on the lid skin  from prolonged use of the MLP  has been reported  
in a prior study of the MLP ( Singh  et. al 2016) .  In that study (n = 6), “total usage time was 32 weeks, 3 
weeks, 1 week, 8 weeks, 2 weeks, and 2 weeks, in each patient respectively.  The average wear time of the 
device was 5 (±2) hrs/d. Patients 1,2,4,5 -6 continued to use the device at the end of the study period while 
P3 reco vered negating further need.  There were no adverse events (as predefined). Mild (2/10) skin 
irritation and worsening in superficial inferior corneal staining (from 0 to 2) occurred in P1’s first week 
after 8 hrs /d of wear.  Reducing wear time to 4 hrs/d and starting artificial tears every 4 hrs reversed SPK 
& prevented further complications.”     
Singh NK, Paschalis EI, Tomasi M, Rizzo JF, Houston KE. The boston blink -netic project: preliminary 
outpatient feasibility results (abstract). Optom Vis Sci 2016;93: E -abstract [ZIP_CODE].  
There have not been any cases of irreversible damage to the ocular surface  occurring during use of the 
MLP  and this would be extremely unlikely because the MLP is easily disengaged by [CONTACT_19887].  We include the remote possibility  of 
irreversible effects of extended exposure in the consent materials , which is meant to refer to any 
permanent ocular surface manifestation that may result from exposure ranging from minor dry sensation 
to scarrin g of the cornea.   
 
Risk 2 , reduced blink reflex:  If the fitting of the MLP is not ideal, it is possible that participants (children 
and adults) would experience slowed or incomplete blink reflex.  There is the potential that this could 
cause reversible ocular surface drying and d iscomfort.  Participants, parents, and involved caregivers will 
be given specific instruction on how identify problems and when to remove the MLP.  To summarize, they 
will be instructed to ask themselves at regular intervals “what is my level of comf ort on a scale of 1 -10” 
and if it is lower than [ADDRESS_18753] the study staff to schedule a visit to investigate.   
It is also possible that a reduced blink reflex could elevate the risk of foreign body in the case of projectiles.  
All participants will be fitted with safety grade or polycarbonate lenses, in their prescription (or non -
prescription plano if they require  none).  Participants will be instructed to wear additional protective 
eyewear and to avoid places like machine shops where  there could be metal shavings.  The lid magnets 
are not strong enough to propel a magnetic/metal object towards the eye and the magnets should actually 
reduce the risk for metallic foreign body projectile entering the eye by [CONTACT_19888]; however, there is risk that metal shavings could accumulate around the magnets if the device is 
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  1  
 
  6 
 used in a situation such as a workshop where shavings are present.  While these would not be projected 
into the eye, minor injury may result if the shavings get around the eye and then are rubbed into or 
sprinkle into the eye(s).  Standard safety goggles w ill fit over the spectacles and participants will be 
informed that they should be worn as they normally would.   
 
Risks related to KTFS tapi[INVESTIGATOR_007] : 
Kinesio  Tape is FDA registered with an indication for extended use on the skin .  Clinically it is most of ten 
used on the upper extremities to support sore or injured muscles.  It is also  often used on the face for 
facial palsy  [7], and sometimes on the eye lids for blepharoptosis.  It is easily removed without any special 
tools or procedures.  Similar to the MLP, there is the possibility that participants might experience ocular 
surface drying and discomfort. There is also a possibility of  skin irritation from the tape. Participants, 
parents, and involved caregivers will be given specific instruction on how to identify problems and when 
to remove the tape.   
 
2.3.2  Known Potential Benefits   
Possible treatment for restoration of eyelid motility in subjects who wear the device comfortably.  
  
3 OBJECTIVES AND  PURPOSE  
To provide a higher level of evidence for the MLP as an emerging treatment, and to 
determine barriers to displacing current non -surgical and temporary approaches . 
To improve the magnetic levator prosthesis (MLP) by [CONTACT_19886] a novel adjustable force 
system. If endpoints are met and the device is determined to be feasible the study will continue to a 
randomized clinical trial comparing the MLP against the predicate treatment of tapi[INVESTIGATOR_19854] . 
 
[ADDRESS_18754] for recruitment will be utilized . 
 
5.1 Participant  Inclusion Criteria : 
1. Presence of Blepharoptosis for at least one eye which occludes the visual axis in the resting state (no 
frontalis drive),  
2. Moderate cognitive function or better defined as greater than or equal to 18 out of 30 on a pre -
screenin g of the Mini -Mental State Exam.   
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  1  
 
  7 
 3. Age 5 or older.   (Children need to be included because they represent an important target 
population (pediatric neuro -muscular conditions), and because facial structure and skin 
characteristics may result in a different response than adults)  
 
5.2 Participant Exclusion Criteria : 
1. Absence of ptosis which occludes the visual axis  
2. Presence of a corneal ulcer of any size , unless managed with a protective contact [CONTACT_19889]’s managing eye doctor .   
3. Age less than 5,  
4. Severe Cognitive impairment defined as MMSE score <18, behaviors consistent with delirium 
(combinations of disorientation, hallucinations, delusions, and incoherent speech), or lethargy .  
5. Presence of corneal hypoaesthesia  unless cleared for enrollment by a  cornea or contact [CONTACT_19890] ; 
6. Orbicularis weakness  on the side of the ptosis .  
7. Mechanical ptosis, including ptosis due to orbital or lid tumor, cicatricial processes affecting the 
movements of the upper lid, and enophthalmos.  
8. Previous ptosis surgery less than 3 months prior to Visit 1.  
9. Lid position affected by [CONTACT_19891].  
10. History of herpes keratitis.  
11. Periocular neurotoxin (eg, Botox, Xeomin, Dysport, Myobloc) injections  on the side of the ptosis  
within 3 months prior to Visit 1 and during the study.  
12. History of hyperthyroidism or thyroid eye disease (ie, exophthalmos, upper eyelid retraction, 
diplopia secondary to extraocular muscle involvement). Hypothyroidism that is controlled on 
medication is allowed.  
 
Hypoaesthesia and chronic corneal ulcers may be treated successfully, usually with artificial tears and/ or 
a protective  contact [CONTACT_13293].  Therefore, when there is hypoaesthesia  or chronic epi[INVESTIGATOR_19855] ’s cornea or contact [CONTACT_19892] (e.g. via email or EMR message (EPIC)), and 
request permission to enroll the candidate .  If the y do not have a cornea or contact [CONTACT_19892], a 
consult with one at MEE who is not affiliated with the study will be requested prior to enrollment.         
 
5.3 Strategies for Recruitment and Retention  
Subjects will be recruited from two main sources : 
 
1. Subjects will be recruited from the PI’s clinical practice, which specializes in patients with 
low vision related to neurological conditions.  Several ophthalmologists, neurologists, and 
physiatrists in the MGB system are aware of the PI’s expertise in sev ere neuro and 
myogenic ptosis and associated strabismus, and routinely refer their patients to the PI’s 
clinic where they will be offered participation if appropriate. Subjects recruited from the 
PI’s clinic will be contact[CONTACT_5143], email or letter with brief details about the study 
(see attached  telephone script and email/letter script). For participants who are among 
the investigator’s own patients, the risks of coercion or undue influence will be minimized 
by [CONTACT_7661] a study team member other than the PI [INVESTIGATOR_19856] . 
 
2. Subjects will be recruited from other relevant clinics within the MGB network (e.g., the 
MGH neuromuscular clinic). Non -study staff physicians at MEEI and other local [LOCATION_011] 
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  1  
 
  8 
 area practices within the MGB network will be sent a letter (see uploaded practitioner’s 
letter) asking them to provide approved study recruitment flyer (see uploaded flyer) to 
potential participants.  The flyer includes contact [CONTACT_19893] a member of the study team.  In addition, flyers may also be posted in 
public areas in clinics, when permitted.           
 
We do not anticipate any problems with subject retention. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_19857]. Subjects will receive regular 
follow ups which will help facilitate retention.   Participants will receive remuneration for 
participating in this research study. They will receive $ 60 at the end of the second period of 
the crossover (typi[INVESTIGATOR_19858] 6).   This will be done using a Clin iCard.    
 
5.[ADDRESS_18755] may be withdrawn 
from the study for any reasons: if it is in the best interest of the subject, intercurrent illness, adverse 
events, or worsening condition.  The site i nvestigators may request the withdrawal of a subject because 
of protocol violations, administrative reasons, or any other valid and ethical reasons.   
Reasons for subject discontinuation may include, but are not limited to, the following:  
1. Investigator determination that it is not in the best interest of the subject to continue 
participation  
2. Serious adverse events  
3. Any other safety concerns  
 
5.4.2 Handling of Participant  Withdrawals or termination  
If a participant  needs to withdraw early, they will be asked to accept a final telephone call at the end of 
the study to confirm vital status.  Participant s who are withdrawn due to an adverse event, serious or not, 
will be followed until the resolution of the event.    
 
5.5 Premature Termination or Suspension of Study  
If the study is terminated or suspended prematurely, all enrolled participant s will be notified and asked 
to attend a final safety visit.  If there are participant s with ongoing adverse events at the time of premature 
termination those participant s will be followed until resolution of the event.   
 
6 STUDY Device  
 
6.1 Study Device Description  
 
Magnetic Levator Prosthesis (MLP) : 
Neodymium magnet embedded in a glasses frame and a polymer embedded (PDMS) micro -magnet array 
fitted externally to the upper lid with IV 3000  securement film. The IV 3000 is FDA approved for extended 
wear on the skin.   Tegaderm, which is essentially the same adhesive, is even FDA approved as an eye 
covering (we used Tegaderm in early studies but switched to IV 3000 for its superior ease of handling 
based on packaging technique).   It generates a strong bond, in a prior study keepi[INVESTIGATOR_19859] d to the eye lid skin for a mean of 6 ± 4 days with good participant  reported comfort when used for 
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  [ADDRESS_18756] a novel a pproach 
where the force is adjusted by [CONTACT_19894] a small dial on the side of the 
spectacle frame .  The MLP is FDA exempt as a Class 1 Device.  An Investigational Device Exe mption (IDE) 
application was not required in prior studies approved by [CONTACT_19895].  MLP status as a device was reviewed extensively by [CONTACT_19896] (Maureen Kelley), last reviewed in fall 2017.    
 
Kinesio  Tape Frontalis Sling (KTFS) : 
Kines io Tape is FDA registered as a 510K exempt class [ADDRESS_18757] 
an expi[INVESTIGATOR_19860] 1 year.  They are stored at room temperat ure.   
 
6.1.4  Preparation  
Magnets are prepared by [CONTACT_19897].  They will be embedded in PDMS at 
Schepens Eye Research Institute using a mold produced onsite with a 3 -D printer.   
 
6.1.9 Duration of Therapy  
see other sections  
 
6.1.1 0 Device Specific Considerations  
The MLP is FDA exempt as a Class 1 Device and therefore an Investigational Device Exemption 
(IDE) application was not required in prior studies approved by [CONTACT_19898].  MLP status as a device was reviewed extensively in the fall of 
2017 by [CONTACT_19899] (Maureen Kelley).  Mass Eye and Ear has submitted 
a patent application for the technology, and  so status was also reviewed by [CONTACT_19900].        
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  1  
 
  10 
 Kines io Tape is FDA registered as a 510K exempt class 1 device, typi[INVESTIGATOR_19861]. It is currently used as a treatment to 
support the lid in cases of severe blepharoptosis. As such an IDE should not be required.  
 
6.2 Study agent Accountability Procedures  
The devices will be stored in the lab offices at Schepens Eye Institute  and dispensed at [LOCATION_005] 
Eye and Ear in the vision rehabilitation service clinical research lab (8th floor, [ADDRESS_18758]) .  Logs will 
be ke pt by [CONTACT_19901].  If devices are returned that will also be noted on the device logs.  
 
7 STUDY PROCEDURES AND SCHEDULE  
  
7.1 Study Procedures/Evaluations  
 
7.1.1  Study specific procedures  
The following procedures will be performed as part of the study  (see schedule of events table in  section 
7.3.7. ) 
1. Refraction (if needed)  
2. Visual acuity  
3. Slit lamp examination of external eye , lid and cornea with Nafl & NEI scale  
4. Comfort rating  
5. Video recording of eye blinks   
6. Rating of skin integrity  
7. EQ-5D-5L questionnaire  
8. GBI questionnaire  
9. aQoL questionnaire  
 
Based on experience, we anticipate that the first study visit will typi[INVESTIGATOR_19862] 120 minutes and 
subsequent visits about 60 minutes.  
Some of the visits will be conducted virtually (as detailed in subsequent sections). To facilitate virtual 
visits, a visual acuity chart will be given to the subject to allow this safety outcome monitoring remotely 
and other safety outcomes  will be conducted during the call (comfort scale, inspection of the external 
eye and lid skin).   
 
Detailed plan for REDCap text message and email communication:  
A short three -question survey will be used to document whether subjects are wearing a device 
during the periods of home use. Consent to receive a survey link by [CONTACT_19902] m ethod (text, email, or both). For 
subjects that consent to receive the survey links, their preferred phone number and/or email address will 
be recorded on a sheet separate from the consent form, which will be kept in a locked cabinet in a locked 
office. As  soon as the phone number and/or email address have been input into REDCap, the original will 
be shredded.  
Subjects who consent to receive the survey links will receive a text message or email (based on 
their communication preference) with a link to a REDCap survey twice daily when using one of the devices 
at home  during the trial week . Please see uploaded document for details of the survey language and 
questions. Subjects wil l be able to decline receiving the survey links at any time.  
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  1  
 
  11 
 Text message plan:  Text messages will be sent to subjects using the Twilio platform. The “Survey 
as webpage” option will be selected so that subjects can access the REDCap survey URL directly from the 
text. Subjects’ phone numbers will only be entered if they consented to r eceiving messages in this way. A 
sentence in the text message will notify the subject that they can opt out of receiving these texts by 
[CONTACT_19903] “Stop”.  
Email plan : In the event that subjects prefer to be contact[CONTACT_19904], they will receive the link 
to survey sent to their email through the REDCap platform. The “automated invitations” option will be 
used to send out emails at certain times of day to the subjects. Subjects’ emails will only be entered if 
they consented to receiving messages in this way. A sentence in the email message will notify the subject 
that they can opt out of receiving these emails by [CONTACT_19903] “Stop”.  
 
7.3 Study Schedule  
 
The study schedule is summarized below  (section 7.3.7) .  
 
7.3.1  Screening  
Pre-Screening :  In order to guide the consent/assent process, t he approved study staff will 
administer a pre -consent cognitive screening using the Mini -Mental State Exam (MMSE).  If score 
is 18 -23 (maximum of 30) representing mild cognitive impairment (Tomburgh et al 1992), 
candidates will be asked to return with a caregiver (if one is not present).  If score is <18, they 
will not be eligible.   
 
Screening : Subjects with MMSE scores of at least [ADDRESS_18759] (uploaded) will be used to determine 
eligibility. Only eligible subjects will be enrolled in the clinical trial.   
 
7.3.[ADDRESS_18760]’s use of the device 
and safety .  During the kfts arm, an occupational  or physical  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_19863].   Mass General Brigham  approved 
software will be used for video calls.  During the trial week of home use  of devices , subjects will 
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  1  
 
  12 
 also receive REDCap survey link notification s each  day to complete a brief survey to log if they 
are wearing the device  (see the detailed plan above, and see attached document  for survey 
language and questions) .  
To ensure no carry -over effects, t here will be a washout of about [ADDRESS_18761] and second  period  of the crossover  during which subjects will not be 
permitted to use any device for their blepharoptosis . (This will be similar to their habitual state 
before enrollment since none of the participants would have been using any device for their 
blepharoptosis  about two weeks before  enrollment).   
At the end of the second period of the crossover , subjects will receive a phone call at 
which the comparison questionnaire (comparing the two devices) and the debriefing 
questionnaire will be administered. Subjects who express a preference for one of the devices and 
are interested in continuing to use the preferred device will be asked to attend Mass Eye and  Ear 
for a study visit with [CONTACT_19920]  determine whether it is clinically appropriate for them to 
continue with the preferred device.  Subjects who do not wish to continue with either of the 
devices wi ll have no further in -person  study  visits  after  this point  (but will be asked to complete 
the 6 and 12 month telephone follow ups),  and they will be asked to return the study device  
unless they get special approval from the clinic to keep it as part of their continued treatment .  
 
 
7.3.3  EXTENDED WEAR Follow -up 
Only subjects for whom the study doctor  determined it was clinically appropriate to continue 
with the preferred device (either MLP o r KTFS) will be invited to participate in the extended wear part of 
the clinical trial.  The extended wear will involve  about  six months of home -use of the  preferred device 
with a study visit at every one  month period . More frequent monitoring visits may be requested by [CONTACT_19905].  During the extended wear period, subjects may  also receive 
REDCap  survey link notifications each day to complete a brief survey to log if they are wearing the device. 
Please see section 7.3.7 for procedures that will be conducted at follow up visits . 
 
7.3.4  Final Study Visit  
At the final study visit (at the end of the  extended wear) a clinical decision will be made as to whether or 
not the MLP  or KTFS  is recommended for continued use . Participants will be allowed to take the preferred 
device (MLP or KTFS) and continue wearing it , if considered clinically appropriate , and transferred to the 
clinical practice of the PI.   
 
7.3.5  Long -term follow up: 6 and 12 -month telephone follow ups  
 All subjects will be called at 6 & 12 months after the final study visit to complete some of the same 
questionnaires from earlier in the study (regardless of participation in extended trial). If subjects had 
continued using the device after the final study visit , the study staff will also ask them about device use & 
abandonment.   
 
7.3.[ADDRESS_18762] 30 days after termination to confirm the event has resolved or the patient is 
receiving appropriate treatment.  
 
7.3.7  Schedule of Events Table  
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  1  
 
  13 
  
*Visits [ADDRESS_18763] any systemic disease that would interfere with the study assessments and or data.  
   
Consent  
EQ-5D-5L Questionnaire  
aQoL Questionnaire  
GBI Questionnaire  
Visual Acuity  
SlitLamp, skin rating, & NEI 
grading  
Video Recordings & 
Comfort ratings  
Application & Removal 
training  
Debrief and device 
comparison questionnaire  
Clinical decision  
 
 
Device 1  Visit 1  x x x  
x x x x   
Visit 2      
x x x x   
 About 1 week wearing at home with video calls for safety monitoring and 
daily survey about wear time  
Visit 3   x x x x x x    
 Washout (about 2 weeks)  
 
 
Device 2  Visit 4   x x  x x x x   
Visit 5   
   
x x x x   
 About 1 week wearing at home with video calls for safety monitoring  and 
daily survey about wear time  
Visit 6   
x x x x x x    
 End of crossover period  
 Phone call          x  
 Visit 7      x x x   x 
 Start of extended wear trial (about 6 months)  
Chosen 
device  
Visit 8  x x x x x x    
Long term follow up  
 6 month 
phonecall   x x x       
 12 month 
phonecall   x x x       
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  [ADDRESS_18764] patients under the Humanitarian Devices 
rules , and Kinesio Tape is commonly used as a treatment for ptosis .    
 
7.10  Virtual Visits  
 
REDCap  consent module will be used to obtain econsent.  
 
In 2022, the NIH provided a supplement to allow virtual enrollment of up to 10 
participants to help meet enrollment goals while promoting greater diversity of the study sample.  
Study procedures will be identical to those described in section 7.3, but will  be conducted 
virtually via video visit.  Methods for virtual monitoring of active participants during the pandemic 
related shutdown were developed and successfully implemented during the in 2020, as described 
in prior sections.  The key differences and lo gistical solutions needed for entirely remote 
participation are summarized here:  
Prior to consideration for enrollment, candidates will be required to provide a copy of a 
complete eye exam by [CONTACT_19906] [ADDRESS_18765] visit. Study activities will not begin until the second video visit, to allow time for 
participants to receive a study equipment package in the mail from us.  The package will include 
device supplies, device application instructions, Burton lamp artificial tears and NaFl strips (for 
remote cornea exam), paper questionnaires, and instructions for downloading a visual acuity  and 
external eye photography app.  Everything described in section 7.3 will be done on the video visit 
platform including but not limited to training to self -apply the lid devices and video recording of 
blinking.   
 
 
 
8 ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY  
 
8.1 Specification of Safety Parameters  
The safety of the study device s will be evaluated at every visit following the enrollment visit and will be 
defined by [CONTACT_19907]. Specifically, we will evaluate:  
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  1  
 
  15 
 10. Systemic safety : Incidence and severity of systemic adverse events during the study (adverse 
events spontaneously reported or observed by [CONTACT_19908]).  
11. Ocular safety : Incidence and severity of ocular adverse events during the study (ophthalmic 
examination, adverse events spontaneously reported).  
SAFETY CUTOFFS:  Serious adverse events which would result in study suspension:  Should visual 
acuity decrease more than 2 lines, worsening of corneal rating of more than 1.5 points or other 
ocular surface ratings more than 2 points, and comfort rating lower than 5/10; stu dy activities 
will cease for at least 1 week and an adverse event report will be sent to the IRB.   Corneal rating 
changes >1.5 points will be reviewed by [CONTACT_19909], and when it may be possible to 
continue.   Serious adverse events which will result in immediate dismissal from the study (and 
treatment) include: 1) development of a  related  corneal ulcer  (as judged clinically by [CONTACT_19910]) with or without infiltrate or 2) broken skin on the eyelid (skin 
decompensation).  
 
 
8.1.1 Definition of Adverse Events  (AE)  
Adverse Event (AE): Any untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence in a human subject, including any 
abnormal sign (for example, abnormal physical exam or laboratory finding), symptom, or disease, 
temporally associated with the subject’s participation in t he research, whether or not considered 
related to the subject’s participation in the research.  
 
8.1.2 Definition of Serious Adverse Events  (SAE)  
Serious Adverse Event (SAE): Any event temporally associated with the subject’s participation in 
research that meets any of the following criteria:  
1. Results in death  
2. Is life threatening  
3. Requires hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]/prolongation of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]  
4. Results in congenital anomaly  
5. Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
6. Required intervention to prevent permanent impairment/damage  
 
8.1.3 Definition of Unanticipated Problems  (UP)  
Any incident, experience, or outcome (including data loss) that is unexpected (in terms of nature, 
severity, or frequency) given (a) the research procedures described in the protocol and the 
characteristics of the subject population being studied. Unantici pated problems may include protocol 
deviations that are not adverse events  
 
8.2 Classification of an Adverse Event  
The Investigator will promptly review documented adverse events and abnormal findings to determine 
1) if the abnormal finding should be classified as an adverse event: 2) if there is a reasonable possibility 
that the adverse event was caused by [CONTACT_19911](s); and 3) if the adverse event meets the criter ia 
for a serious adverse event.  
 
8.2.2 Relationship to Study device  
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  1  
 
  16 
 If an adverse event or serious adverse event is recorded the study PI [INVESTIGATOR_19864].   
 
8.3 Time Period and Frequency for Event Assessment and Follow -Up 
Adverse events or abnormal findings thought to be associated with the study device will be followed 
until the event (or its sequel) or the abnormal finding resolves or stabilizes at a level acceptable to the 
Investigator.  Events that have not resolved or stabilized will be followed for [ADDRESS_18766] study completion.  
 
8.4 Reporting Procedures  
 
8.4.1 Adverse Event Reporting   
All adverse events will be reviewed by [CONTACT_458] [INVESTIGATOR_874] 24 hours of notification and 
reported to the Mass Eye and Ear IRB on the following schedule:  
7. Possibly, Probably, or Definitely Related Expected AE – Report to IRB on annual basis  
8. Possibly, Probably, or Definitely Related Expected Serious AE – Report to IRB within 7 days  
9. Possibly, Probably, or Definitely Related Unexpected AE – Report to IRB within 30 days of event  
10. Possibly, Probably, or Definitely Related Unanticipated Problem – Report to IRB within 7 days of 
event (24 hours for death or data loss)  
11. Possibly, Probably, or Definitely Related Unexpected Serious AE – Report to IRB within 7 days of 
event  (24 hours for death)  
 
8.4.2 Serious Adverse Event Reporting   
Any adverse events that are serious, unexpected and related or possibly related to the study will be 
reported to the Mass Eye and Ear IRB within 7 calendar days from the time the PI [INVESTIGATOR_19865]. Any unexpected and study -related death will be  reported to the Mass Eye and Ear IRB within 24 
hours of the PI’s knowledge of the event by e -mail or telephone.  
 
8.4.[ADDRESS_18767]’s death or was potentially lif e-threatening, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_19866] 
e-mail or phone within 24 hours from the time the event is identified. A follow -up report will be submitted 
if applicable, at a later date when more information is available.  For UAPs that  result in data loss the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_19866] e -mail or phone within 24 hours from the time the UAP is 
identified.   
 
10 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS   
 
10.1 Statistical and Analytical Plans  
Statistical analysis plans are summarized in the subsequent sections.  
 
10.2  Statistical Hypotheses  
Primary outcome measure:  
 
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  1  
 
  17 
 Statistics for the participant characteristics will be presented in terms of mean ± standard deviation or 
median ± interquartile range (25th to 75th). Within subjects repeated measurements, linear mixed effects 
regression will be used to determine the effect of treatment condition on the IPF values (spontaneous 
and resting state open), with a random intercept for the subject factor. Subject age, gende r, blink 
sequence (the order of the blink recorded in the video), and the order of interventions (whether 
evaluated in the first or the second arm of the crossover) will be covariates of interest. Effect of each 
covariate will be investigated alone, and only statistically significant (P<.05) covariates will be included in 
the final regression model, from which, the estimated marginal means and their 95% confidence interval 
(CIs) will be reported for each of the outcomes . Missing values at the T2 time point will be imputed from 
another time point within the same subject (T1 by [CONTACT_19912] T0 if both T1 and T2 were not available). 
For volitional blinks, a test of proportionality will be performed to determine the effect of the [ADDRESS_18768] deviations or medians and ranges, as appropriate. The normality of the data will be 
examined and appropriate statistics and des criptives used based on the results.  
Measurements of Eye Lid Kinematics : 
Our main measures of device efficacy involve s the measurement of eyelid kinematics from video 
recordings made at various timepoints throughout the clinical trial. Measurements may be made 
manually within NIH’s image J software, automatically using a software we create (in Python or similar 
platform), or using crowdsourcing with Amazon Mechanical Turk.  
 
 
10.4.2 Analysis of the Primary Efficacy Endpoint(s)  
 
We will use a repeated measures mixed effects model for analysis of the primary outcome measure 
(change in interpalpebral fissure during opening and spontaneous blinking). The model will include a 
random subject -level intercept and a fixed treatment effect  (MLP or KTFS). A repeated measures model 
will be used with primary timepoint for analysis being after 1 week of use.  . The model will also include 
fixed effects of treatment order (i.e., MLP: KTFS vs KTFS:MLP), and crossover period (period 1 or 2), and 
will control for age and sham opening interpalpebral fissure.   
   
10.4.3 Analysis of the Secondary Endpoint(s)  
The change in interpalpebral fissure during volitional blinking will be analyzed  using the same approach 
as for the primary outcome measure .Questionnaire responses will be summarized using descriptive 
statistics and analyzed  using non -parametric tests . 
 
10.4.4 Safety Analyses  
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  [ADDRESS_18769] ed and unexpected events 
will be kept.  Events will be documented on paper and sent to the PI (if he is not the one 
examining the participant) who wil l place a follow -up call to the participant that day and the 
next day as needed.  Paper documentation will be kept in the study binder and then transferred 
to a worksheet in the study master spreadsheet.  Non -compliance with protocol (e.g. failure to 
use t he study checklist or properly document or report in a timely manner adverse events) will 
be documented.  Once identified, minor issues will be addressed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_19867].  Special meetings will be called depending o n the seriousness of the 
issue.  Repeated offenses will result in removal of that study staff from the protocol. Adverse 
events will be documented and reported to the IRB and NEI per protocol.   
 
10.4.5 Adherence  and Retention Analyses  
Data summaries will be produced (including data on subject enrollment, withdrawals, primary 
outcome measures, and any safety issues) on a periodic basis and reviewed by [CONTACT_978] , other 
study personnel  and the independent safety monitor .  
 
 
10.4.6  Baseline Descriptive Statistics  
Baseline data will be summarized using descriptive statistics, as appropriate.  
 
10.4.7 Planned Interim Analyses   
 
[IP_ADDRESS] Safety Review  
The data summaries will be reviewed by [CONTACT_19913]  [INVESTIGATOR_19868], study progress and determine whether the study should 
change in any way or be stopped. Data summaries will be sent to the independent safety monitor on a 
quarterly basis for a safety review  (at the monitor’s discretion)  and to determine whether the study should 
change in any way or be stopped. Serious (expected or unexpected) adverse events will be reported 
immediately to the PI (by a subject or member of the research team).  
Minor adverse events (e.g. mild discomfort of the lids) will be recorded on a subject’s data sheet 
at the time of occurrence; they will subsequently be reported  internally for that study.  Minor adverse 
events will also be reported on an annual basis to t he relevant IRB committees, as part of the annual IRB 
review of each approved study.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Efficacy Review  
Preliminary data analyse s will occur periodically.   
 
10.4.8  Additional Sub -Group Analyses  
Subgroup analysis is not part of the analysis plan  
 
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  1  
 
  19 
 10.4.9 Multiple Comparison/Multiplicity  
P-values used to indicate significance will be corrected where appropriate.  There is no plan for multiple 
comparisons.   
 
10.4.10 Tabulation of Individual Response Data  
Individual response data will be recorded on data sheets and input into Excel spreadsheets.  
 
10.4.11 Exploratory Analyses  
 No e xploratory analyses are planned . 
 
10.5 Sample Size  
Sample size was estimated based on available preliminary data at the time of study planning, estimating 
40 would need to complete the crossover with an estimated attrition of 10 giving a total of 50 planned 
for enrollment.  However, this was able to be gre atly reduced given the size of the effects measured in 
the interim analyses conducted after 8 participants had completed the crossover.  The final sample size 
required to measure the primary outcome with power of 0.80 and type II error of alpha 0.05  was 16 .   
10.6 Measures to Minimize Bias  
 
10.6.1 Masking AND RANDOMIZATION Procedures  
Masking : 
Subjects will be masked as to which of the two devices is the new treatment. They will simply be told that 
they are evaluating two non -surgical treatments for blepharoptosis. A debriefing questionnaire will be 
administered after the second period of the crossover to determine whether subjects guessed that the 
MLP was the new treatment and the KTFS was the comparison  treatment.  
Data assessors (e.g. Turkers) for the primary outcome will be masked  since they will not be familiar with 
the study or the [ADDRESS_18770] can not be identified  (see Measurements of Eye Lid Kinematics in section 
10.4.1) .   
The person conducting statistical analyses of the primary outcome will be masked.  
It is not possible to mask the study team member who will fit and provide training for the MLP device, 
since the fitting requires specialist expertise. That study team member will avoid telling subjects that the 
MLP is the new treatment. Furthermore the quantification and analysis of the primar y outcome  will be 
conducted by  [CONTACT_19914].  
A person external to the study team will fit and provide training for the KTFS. Again, it will not be possible 
to mask this person. However, t his person is  highly experienced in using Kines io Tape , a proponent for its 
use for blepharoptosis, and has received training in fitting Kinesio  Tape for ptosis. Again they will avoid 
telling subjects that the KTFS is the comparison treatment, and the quantification and analysis of the 
primary outcome will be conducted by [CONTACT_19914].  
Recruitment for the clinical trial has been very successful so far. However the greater number of subjects 
than initially anticipated means that we have been running into problems when trying to schedule visits 
with the Physical Therapy Team Member (PT) fo r fitting of the kinesiotape frontalis sling (KTFS). The PT 
sometimes does not have sufficient room in her clinic schedule to accommodate a   tapi[INVESTIGATOR_19869]. We’ve described a backup plan below to ensure that participants rece ive tapi[INVESTIGATOR_19870].   Please note that the proposed 
plan requires that the PT will provide oversight of all tapi[INVESTIGATOR_19871].  
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  1  
 
  20 
 As a backup plan in case scheduling constraints mean that it is not possible to schedule a tapi[INVESTIGATOR_19872]: 
1. The PI w ill perform the tape placement.  
2. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_19873].  
3. The entire process will be recorded and the video loaded onto a secure server or shared via  
Institutional  DropBox  
4. The PT will be responsible for reviewing the videos within two days of placement, to ensure 
proper technique.  
 
  
Randomization  
Participants will be assigned to one of two possible treatment allocations: 1) MLP then KTFS or 2) KTFS 
then MLP. The allocation will be performed using  software that implements the process of  minimization . 
The first participant will be assigned randomly with each subsequent participant assigned in such a way 
as to approximately balance the number of participants who are [ADDRESS_18771] outcomes. Letter codes, randomly assigned to each of the treatment 
allocations by a r esearcher external to the study  will be  used by [CONTACT_19915]. The  code breaker  will be  
kept in a sealed envelope in a location known only to the external researcher. Data provided to the masked 
data assessors and the masked person conducting statistical analyses will use the letter c odes to identify 
treatment allocation.  
 
10.6.3 Breaking the Study Blind/ Participant  Code  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_19874], the study staff needs to be unblinded on a subject by [CONTACT_19916]/or during a specific study visit  
 
11 SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO SOURCE DATA/DOCUMENTS  
Data collection sheets will be completed for each subject enrolled into the clinical study.  Data Collection 
sheets will be study visit specific and the research technician (oversight by [CONTACT_976]) will review and sign 
each subject visit for completeness and document any minor protocol deviations. Investigator’s 
signature [CONTACT_19919], accurate and authentic.   
All computer generated data will be stored on internal MEEI servers  located on encrypted, passwo rd 
protected MEEI computers . Only the PI [INVESTIGATOR_19875] I network protected folder. If  data is 
sent out to be analyzed the data will be de -identified. The data will contain subject identification 
numbers, which are linked to identifiers on a separately secured spreadsheet. The data will be coded by 
[CONTACT_19917] a subject ident ification number and removing any identifiable information. 
The code will be secured  by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_19876], password protected 
computers at Schepens . The code that links information that can identify the participant to the data 
collected for this research will be kept separate from their health information, which will be destroyed 
once this study is complete and the manuscript has been published.  
 
12 QUALITY ASSURANCE AND QUALITY CONTROL  
The Princip al Investigator will be responsible for quality assurance during this study.  The Principal 
Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_19877].  The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_19878] (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  1  
 
  21 
 train study staff on the protocol procedures and will confirm staff can confidently complete the study 
related assessments.   
 
13 ETHICS/PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS   
 
13.[ADDRESS_18772] CITI certification for confirmation of GCP training and 
their CV’s, licenses and other forms of certifications related to conducting research will be kept with the 
study regulatory binder.  
 
13.[ADDRESS_18773] enrollment and will be reviewed yearly after initial approval.  Any adverse events or 
serious adverse events will be reported to the Mass General Brigham IRB  office; however this is not 
expected to occur because this is a minimal risk protocol.     
 
13.3 Informed Consent Process   
Subjects are required to sign an informed consent before participating in the study. The consent will be 
signed in front of a study team member (witness). The witness and investigator will sign and date the 
consent form. A note will be made on the study record that the informed consent was signed by [CONTACT_2416]. The informed consent will follow the guidelines set by [CONTACT_19918]. A copy 
of the consent form will be given to the participant . A member of the study team will review the study  
procedures, visit schedule, risk and benefits, alternative treatments and rights to withdraw and ask 
questions with all potential subjects before signing the consent. Every participant  has a right to withdraw 
at any time from the study without affecting their care or relationship with the treating physician and 
participating institution. The financial responsibilities of the participant  will be discussed. All participant s 
are required to sign a Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) fo rm before 
participating (unless this is combined with the consent). A study member will explain and discuss with the 
participant  their confidentiality rights as described in the HIPAA form.  
 
13.3.1 Consent/assent and O ther Informational Documents Provided to Participant s 
Consent and assent forms have been uploaded.  
 
13.3.[ADDRESS_18774] Blepharoptosis will receive a 
recruitment packet from the services’ administrative assistant.  If subjects are identified by a pre -
screening (i.e. chart is prescreened and tagged by [CONTACT_941] c linical research office) and they are 
interested in the study they will schedule another appointment in the Vision Rehab Service 
research lab at [LOCATION_005] Eye and Ear Infirmary, [ADDRESS_18775]., 8th floor .  The 
scheduler/study coordinator/research assi stant will inquire about any prior diagnosis of 
dementia or significant cognitive impairment, and if so coordinate the primary caregiver to also 
attend the visit.   
 
Pre-Screening  and assent  for decisionally impaired :  Approved study staff will administer a short 
cognitive pre -screening (mini -mental state exam, MMSE) to determine if there is any cognitive 
impairment.  The MMSE will not be linked to a study identifier and will be retained for aggregate 
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  1  
 
  22 
 analysis only.  If score is <18, the individual is not eligible.  If score is 18 -23 (may be decisionally 
impaired) , an assent process will occur, and consent obtained from the primary caregiver (the 
health care proxy (if one has been named), or the spouse or family member (in that order of 
preference)).   
 
Children:  If the study candidate is a child, one parent will sign the consent and children under 14 
will sign the assent and children over 14 and older will sign the consent (unless decisionally 
impaired as determined with the same MMSE criteria).   
 
Consent procedures:  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_19879] 10 years experience in providing informed 
consent to patients with neurological disorders, and > 15 years providing eye care for this 
population.  One of the trained clinical research technicians will perform the informed consent 
in a private room at [LOCATION_005] Eye and Ear . The PI  [INVESTIGATOR_19880], to prevent any sense of 
pressure/coercion .  Alternatively, informed conse nt may be performed over the telephone, to 
limit the face to face time so long as  the COVID -19 pandemic  is a concern . The study will be 
explained to the potential participant and they will be asked to read (or have read to them) and 
sign the approved informed consent (or assent) form before participation in the study.  
Alternatives to participating will be explained.  They w ill be given ample opportunity to discuss 
all aspects of the study before signing the form.  A detailed explanation of the interventions and 
how they work will be given, including showing them the device s (pi[INVESTIGATOR_19881])  and allowing them to ask questions.  The study staff  will leave the room 
allowing the prospective participant and any family members to discuss in private.  Prospective 
participants will be specifically offered the opportunity to discuss the interventions and the study 
with the PI , their ophthalmologist, and family members/caregivers prior to consenting.  A copy 
of the consent form will be given to the participant.  
 
 
13.[ADDRESS_18776] the confidentiality of participant data including the 
following:  Each member of the study team has completed privacy training and information security 
training at Mass Eye and Ear, paper files will be locked in cabin ets when not in use, paper files will be 
protected from inappropriate access when in use, mobile computing devices and storage media will be 
locked in cabinets when not in use, computing devices will be protected from inappropriate access when 
in use, rese arch data will be coded using a study identification number that does not include the 
participant’s initials and is not derived from the participant’s identifiable information, the key linking the 
study ID to the participant’s info is available only to the  study team, the key will be stored in a locked 
password protected network with access limited to the study members who require access to this 
information, electronic data will be stored on folders only available to the study team.  Devices for video 
recor ding components of the study will be encrypted and/or password protected where possible and data 
will be promptly transferred and deleted from the device.  All video/image and other data will be de -
identified prior to publication.  We will attempt to captu re video/image data so as to only include the 
eyes, which will therefore not be identifiable.  In situations where this is not possible (ie participant 
moves), video/image data will be cropped to reduce the image to eliminate other facial features.  Audio 
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  [ADDRESS_18777]. [LOCATION_011] MA 
[ZIP_CODE], or in or near the PI’s office at Schepens Eye Research Institute, [ADDRESS_18778] Specific Disclos ure Forms before 
participating in the Study.   
 
17  LITERATURE REFERENCES   
1. Houston KE, Tomasi M, Yoon M, Paschalis EI.  A Prototype External Magnetic Eyelid 
Device for Blepharoptosis.  Translational Vision Science & Technology. 2014; 3(6):9.  
2. Houston KE, Tomasi M, Yoon M, Batalha G, Paschalis EI. An external magnetic device for 
severe bilateral blepharoptosis: proof of concept (abstract). Optom Vis Sci 2015; E -
abstract [ZIP_CODE].  
3. Lawrence G, Paschalis EI, Tomasi M, Finch N, Houston KE. A non -invasive magnetic 
system for temporary management of lagophthalmos - proof of concept (abstract). 
Optom Vis Sci 2016;93: E -abstract [ZIP_CODE].  
4. Singh NK, Paschalis EI, Tomasi M, Rizzo JF, Houston KE. The boston blink -netic project: 
preliminary outpatient feasibility results (abstract). Optom Vis Sci 2016;93: E -abstract 
[ZIP_CODE].  
Clinical Trial to improve the magnetic levator  prosthesis (MLP) including the development and testing of a novel adjustable 
force system  and comparison to the Kinesio Tape frontalis sling (KTFS)   Version  1  
 
  24 
 5. Houston KE, Pachalis EI, Angueira DC, Bronstad PM, Barrett AM, Iaccarino MA. 
Restoration of Vision After Brain Injury Using Magnet Glasses. Am J Phys Med Rehabil 
2017 Apr;96(4):e70 -e74.  
6. Houston KE, Tomasi M, Armaral C, Finch N, Yoon MK, Paschalis EI.  The Magnetic Levator 
Prosthesis for Temporary Management of Severe Blepharoptosis: Initial Safety and 
Efficacy. Transl Vis Sci Technol, 2018. 7(1): p. 7.  
7. Sun ZH, Tian YP, Tan YF, et al. Effectiveness of Kinesio tapi[INVESTIGATOR_19882]: A protocol for systematic review and meta -analysis. Medicine (Baltimore) . 
2020;99(46):e23090. doi:10.1097/MD.0000000000023090  
 
 
 
 
   
 