 
   
 
Cover Page  
 
Study Title:  
Prostatic Artery Embolization (PAE) for Treatment of Signs and  
Symptoms of Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (BPH)  
 
NCT:  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Last reviewed by [CONTACT_296635] 11/19/2021  
 
Protocol version 12.3.2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Proto col version 12.3.2019  
Prostatic Artery Embolization (PAE) for Treatment of Signs and  Symptoms of Benign Prostatic 
Hyperplasia (BPH)  
 
 
Title Prostatic Artery Embolization (PAE) for Treatment of Signs and 
symptoms of Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (BPH)  
Short Title  PAE for BPH 
Protocol Number  V 12.3.19 
Phase  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_296630], non -randomized feasibility study  
Study Duration  We estimate it will take approximately 2 years to fully enroll and 
complete the study.  
Study Center(s)  Single Center, Northwestern: (Northwestern University, Northwestern 
Memorial Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_296631])  
Objectives  Primary Objective: Evaluate the safety of PAE for the treatment of lower 
urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) attributed to BPH.  
Number of Subjects  30 
Diagnosis and Main 
Inclusion Criteria  Subjects with LUTS secondary to BPH refractory to/contraindicated for 
medical treatment  
Study Product(s)  BeadBlock® Embolic Beads, BTG International, given intra -procedurally  
Duration of administration  Dose given one -time during interventional radiology PAE procedure, 
given by [CONTACT_296636] [INVESTIGATOR_451096]’s 
Statistical Methodology  Descriptive Statistics will be employed.  
 
 
STUDY OBJECTIVES  
Primary Objectives  
Endpoint #1: Patient safety  
The Primary Objective of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_451097]. Primary Safety Endpoints include:  
 
   
1. A reduced incidence and severity of adverse events compared with historical TURP 
morbidity rates. These include genitourinary events (i.e., events associated with the urinary 
tract and/or the surrounding genital region)  
2. Damage to the bladder floor, trigone , sphincters, and rectum  
3. Incontinence as defined by [CONTACT_296637] (ICS) male IS score of at 
least +[ADDRESS_575202] ‐procedure events (i.e. catheter dwelling time)  
7. Deaths  
Endpoint #2: Objective clinical endpoints (measured at baseline, 4 weeks, 12 weeks, 6 and 12 months)  
1. Change in International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS)  
2. Change in QoL bother question  
3. Change in BPH impact index  
4. Change in Qmax ( peak and total void volume at each followup visit)  
5. Change in Post Void Residual (PVR) Volumes: Measure PVR at each follow -up visit to 
monitor impairment or improvement of bladder emptying due to the treatment or disease 
progression  
6. Change in Detrus or Muscle Pressure (Pdet) at Peak Urine Flow (Qmax)  
7. Change in Inter national I ndex of Erectile Function (IIEF - EF) domain  
8. Change in Male Sexual Health Questionnaire (MSHQ)  
9. Change in Prostate Volume  
10. Cystoscopic appearance of the prostatic urethra  
Endpoints:  
Preliminary Safety (Primary Endpoints) will be assessed during treatment and at post -treatment 
intervals of 1, 3, 6 and 12 months. Preliminary effectiveness (Secondary Endpoint) will be 
evaluated based on International Prostate System Score (IPSS) and cystoscopic visualization of 
the subject’s urethra, prostate and bladder based on the timeli ne listed in the protocol.  
Study Design  
This pi[INVESTIGATOR_102191] a single center, open labeled, non -randomized feasibility study to 
evaluate the initial safety of the PAE for the treatment of symptomatic BOO. 30 adult male 
subjects will be enrolled in this study.  
 
 
   
Statistical Analysis  
General considerations: continuous variables will be summarized as n, mean, standard deviation, median, 
minimum and maximum. Categorical variables will be summarized as the number and percentage of 
patients in each category.  
This is a single center pi[INVESTIGATOR_451098], efficacy, and tolerability of 
PAE for the treatment of signs and symptoms BPH. A small number of subjects will be recruited for this 
purpose (30 subjects). We estimate it will take approximately [ADDRESS_575203] a statistically significant reduction from baseline in IPSS at 12 weeks, a sample size of 30 patients 
is computed based on the following assumptions:  
• 85% power  
• 2-sided alpha of 0.05  
• Mean reduction of 5 points  
• SD of reduction of 8 points The sample size of 28 is rounded up to 30 patients to take account 
of approximately 15% of patients  who drop -out of the study.  
Planned analysis of clinical endpoints  
Change in IPSS, QoL bother question, BPH impact index and Qmax will be assessed using a one - sample 
t-test. A log transformation may be applied if required to adjust for skewed data. In addition a non-parametric 
Wilcoxon test will also be performed.  
 
 
 
 