 
 
 
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan: Cultivating Gratitude: Does Manipulating  
Expectations Improve the Efficacy of a Gratitude Intervention?   
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
January 10, 2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Cultivating Gratitude: Does Manipulating Expectations Improve the Efficacy of a Gratitude  
Intervention?   
Interventions designed to elicit gratitude, an emotion expressed when one feels they have  
received something beneficial from other people or entities (Emmons & McCullough, 2003),  
have been shown to positively affect psychological and physical well-being. In previous studies,  
participants instructed to cultivate feelings of gratitude reported reductions in stress (i.e.,  
O’Leary & Dockray, 2015) and increases in life satisfaction (e.g., Emmons & McCullough,  
2003, study 1; Froh, Sefick, & Emmons, 2008; Khanna & Singh, 2016; and Gilek, 2010; Kerr,  
O’Donovan, & Peppi[INVESTIGATOR_007], 2015), positive mood (e.g., Emmons & McCullough, 2003, study 2;  
Martínez-Martí, Avia, & Hernández-Lloreda, 2010; Khanna & Singh, 2016; and Froh et al.,  
2014, study 2), and well-being (e.g., Khanna & Singh, 2016; Deng et al., 2019; and Jachowska,  
Brown, Ronaldson, & Steptoe, 2015) (e.g. Froh, Sefick, & Emmons, 2008; Emmons &  
McCullough, 2003; Watkins, Woodward, Stone, & Kolts, 2003, study 3, study 4). Though  
gratitude interventions are widely used, there are very few studies that examine whether small  
additions to methodology can enhance the effectiveness of these interventions. Drawing from  
literature on mindset and the placebo effect, we hypothesized that ​providing participants with  
information about the positive effects of previous gratitude interventions would improve their  
well-being, mood, and sleep after participating in a gratitude intervention.  
The majority of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) designed to cultivate gratitude  
report beneficial outcomes, though these effects are typi[INVESTIGATOR_35636]. Evidence from studies on  
mindset and expectations suggest that these effects may be enhanced, though few studies have  
tested this.   Research on mindset - conscious or embodied expectation (Crum, Leibowitz, &  
Verghese, 2017)- and the placebo effect indicates that individuals may experience greater health  
improvements when they know the benefits of a job or activity (e.g., Crum & Langer, 2007;  
Desharnais, Jobin, Côté, Lévesque, & Godin, 1993). In one  study, for example, hotel maids who  
were told how many calories each of their job tasks burned and informed that their work met the  
requirements for good exercise and an active lifestyle exhibited significant health  
improvements--reduced weight, blood pressure, and body fat--when compared to hotel maids  
who were not provided with this information (Crum & Langer, 2007). In another study,  
participants who were told that an exercise program was meant to improve psychological  
well-being showed significant improvements in well-being relative to uninformed participants  
(Desharnais, Jobin, Côté, Lévesque, & Godin, 1993).  These studies suggest that knowing the  
benefits of an activity beforehand can enhance beneficial effects.   
Indeed, motivation and participant engagement are important factors in intervention  
efficacy (Lyubomirsky & Layous, 2013). Being motivated to first begin, and then continue to put  
effort into, a positive intervention can enhance intervention benefits. Participants who chose to  
engage in (and actually received) a “happi[INVESTIGATOR_008]” intervention (either promoting optimism or  
gratitude) experienced the greatest increases in happi[INVESTIGATOR_008]; of those receiving a happi[INVESTIGATOR_879884], participants who put the most effort into their intervention’s exercises had the  
greatest gains in well-being (Lyubomirsky, Dickerhoof, Boehm, & Sheldon, 2011). Similarly,  
there is some evidence that reading encouraging information about an intervention improved  
outcomes. In an intervention in which the experimental conditions wrote about their best possible  
selves - their goals in different domains of life - participants who read peer testimonies about the  
effectiveness of the intervention had greater improvements in well-being than participants who  
read unrelated testimonies and participants in the control condition (Layous, Nelson, &  
Lyubomirsky, 2012).  
To our knowledge, only two gratitude interventions have tested outcome differences  
between informed (of benefits of gratitude interventions) versus not informed conditions. In one  
intervention, one gratitude condition was assigned to read fake articles about gratitude practices  
being effective. These participants experienced decreased well-being (at post-intervention), then  
increased well-being (at a three-week follow-up) compared to participants who read articles  
about gratitude practices being ineffective (Sin, Della Porta, & Lyubomirsky, 2011). These  
results do not clearly indicate if it is beneficial to advertise intervention efficacy, and utilized  
fake testimonies for encouragement. Harbaugh and Vasey (2014) had one gratitude condition  
read a short paragraph explaining the rationale for the intervention which concluded with the  
statement, “Filling out the following questionnaire is expected to have a positive effect on your  
well-being”. Participants were shown this rationale at the beginning of their instructions for  
every writing session, but did not experience better outcomes than the gratitude condition not  
shown the rationale (Harbaugh & Vasey, 2014). This finding may indicate that providing  
encouraging information about gratitude does not enhance intervention effectiveness. However,  
informed participants in Harbaugh and Vasey (2014) were only told one general benefit of  
gratitude. The present study told participants six specific, favorable outcomes from past gratitude  
studies. This design was intended to remind participants of intervention benefits each time they  
made a gratitude list, and was predicted to significantly improve participant’s outcomes.   
The present study sought to determine whether telling participants the benefits of  
gratitude exercises would improve the effectiveness of a two-week gratitude intervention.  
Participants were randomized to one of three conditions: gratitude + expectations (GE), gratitude  
+ no expectations (GNE), or events control. Participants in the GE condition were shown a  
beneficial outcome from a past gratitude study each time they made a gratitude list; those in the  
GNE condition were not. Based on studies in which participants experienced improved health  
and well-being when they knew the benefits of an activity (e.g., Crum & Langer, 2007;  
Desharnais, Jobin, Côté, Lévesque, & Godin, 1993), we hypothesized that participants in the GE  
condition would experience the greatest improvements in outcomes. Our primary outcome was  
well-being and our secondary outcomes were positive affect, sleep quality, sleep quantity,  
gratitude, stress, and depressive symptoms. We hypothesized that, compared to the control and  
GNE conditions, (1) the GE condition would report the greatest increases in hedonic,  
eudaimonic, and overall well-being and (2) the GE condition would report the greatest gains in  
positive affect, sleep quality, sleep quantity, and gratitude, and the greatest reductions in stress  
and depressive symptoms.   
Method  
Participants and Procedure  
Participants were recruited from an undergraduate psychology class at a large, public  
university. Inclusion criteria were being [ADDRESS_1229501] and consent was obtained from participants. The ClinicalTrials.gov identifier for  
this trial is [STUDY_ID_REMOVED].   
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the three conditions (GNE, GE, or events  
control) using a random number generator. On the first day of the study, participants received a  
baseline questionnaire via email. After completing their baseline questionnaire, participants were  
prompted to an online form, with instructions to type a short list, specific to the condition they  
were in (see ​Interventions ​ below for more information). Every two days, participants were  
emailed a link to a new condition-specific online form. In total, participants were instructed to  
complete six condition-specific lists. Participants were emailed their post-intervention  
questionnaire two weeks after they received their baseline questionnaire. Participants received a  
reminder email to complete their baseline and post-intervention questionnaire if they did not  
complete either questionnaire one day after dissemination.   
Interventions  
Participants received an email with a link to each list, sent two days after completion of  
the previous list. GNE participants were instructed to list up to five things they were grateful for;  
GE participants were shown positive findings from gratitude RCTs and were instructed to list up  
to five things they were grateful for. Participants in the events control condition were instructed  
to list up to five events they engaged in that day.   
Both gratitude conditions (GNE and GE) were given the following instructions, adapted from  
Emmons and McCullough (2003) and Sheldon and Lyubomirsky (2006):   
You have been randomly assigned to try to cultivate a sense of gratitude now, and during the  
next few weeks. There are many things in our lives, both large and small, that we might be  
grateful about. These might include particular supportive relationships, sacrifices or  
contributions that others have made for you, facts about your life such as your advantages  
and opportunities, or even gratitude for life itself, and the world that we live in. Think back  
over the past day and, on the lines below, type up to five things in your life that you are  
grateful or thankful for.  
GE participants were also shown a beneficial finding about gratitude on each of their  
questionnaires, immediately before they made their gratitude list. Some of the beneficial findings  
included: “ ​Undergraduates who practiced gratitude had higher expectations for the upcoming  
week (Emmons & McCullough, 2003, Study 1)” and “Gratitude contemplation can decrease  
body dissatisfaction and increase body esteem (Wolfe & Patterson, 2017)”.  
Participants in the events condition were given the following instructions:   
You have been randomly assigned to write about your daily events now and over the next two  
weeks. Throughout a day, we may engage in many different events. These might include  
classes you had today, conversations you had, or activities you engaged in such as studying  
for a test or eating a meal. Many events happen throughout a day. Think back over your  
activities today and, in the space below, type up to five things or events you remember from  
today.  
Measures  
Demographic characteristics. ​Demographic variables - age, sex race, year in school,  
major, relaitonship status, and family income - were assessed at baseline.  
Primary outcomes. ​Hedonic well-being, eudaimonic well-being, and overall well-being  
were assessed at baseline and post-intervention. Well-being was measured with the Mental  
Health Continuum-Short Form (MHC-SF; Keyes, 2009). Participants rated how often they felt  
14 different emotions or statements, such as “happy” and “satisfied with life”. Items are rated on  
a 6-point likert scale (0 = ​never ​, 5 = ​everyday ​), with higher numbers indicating greater  
well-being. This measure assesses both hedonic and eudaimonic well-being. The MHC-SF is  
both reliable and valid for use with young adults (Robitschek & Keyes, 2009)  .   
Secondary outcomes. ​Positive affect, sleep quality, sleep quantity, gratitude, and the  
greatest reductions in stress and depressive symptoms were assessed at baseline and  
post-intervention.   
Statistical Analysis Plan  
Differences in demographic variables were assessed using one-way Analysis of Variance  
(ANOVA) and chi-squared tests to examine baseline differences between groups. Next, for each  
primary (i.e., well-being) and secondary outcome (i.e., positive affect, sleep quality) we ran  
separate repeated measures ANOVAs using SPSS. Differences in change over time between  
groups were assessed using the time-by-condition interaction term, which tells us whether groups  
differed over time for each outcome. Post hoc analyses were then conducted to further  
investigate any significant interactions. Finally, to test if completing the gratitude exercises  
improved well-being, we combined the GE and GNE conditions to create a combined gratitude  
(CG) group which we compared to the control condition. To do this, we ran separate repeated  
measures ANOVAs comparing the CG group to the control condition, looking at the  
time-by-condition interaction term for each outcome.   