  
 The Health Access and Recovery Peer Program (HARP)  
IRB#00047631  
 
Peer -Led, Medical Disease Self -Management Prog ram for Mental Health 
Consumers  
 
 
 
 
The Health Access and Recovery Peer Program (HARP)  
 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Protocol Dated: 10/26/2010  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 I. INTRODUCTION TO THE REVISED APPLICATION  
 We greatly appreciate the thoughtful comments by [CONTACT_241244] , as well as the  reviewers’  enthusiasm 
about the  high public health significance of th e proposed project .  Extensive  modifications  were made in 
response to the se comments , which w e believe considerably strengthen  the application and will add to the 
study’s  scientific and public health  impact.  The following section briefly summarizes those changes:  
 1. Representativeness of group participants  and peer educators :  “The study will take place in the 
context of an organization of consumers who have sought group -based peer -led services…raising 
questions as to the generalizability to routine community mental health center settings. ”  In response to 
this important concern , the application now  propose s a multisite study that would recruit subjects  across 
four diverse community mental health clinics  throughout metro Atlanta  rather than from the Georgia 
Mental Health Consumer Network . (IIIC4 )   
 “Given the requirements listed for the peer specialists to be trained and retain their position, there 
is some doubt that the individuals qualifying for this role will in fact have the same severity of mental 
illness as the treatment participants .”   We have dropped the requirement that the interventionists  be 
certified peer specialists at the time they are recruited . Instead, p eer educators will be chosen  using  
the identical selection  criteria as  subjects participating in the groups .  As part of the initial training, the 
Georgia Mental Health Consumer Network will provide additional instruction  to allow the 
interventionists  to become certified peer specialists , (IIIC6f) which will allow them to bill for services 
during the dissemination phase (IV).   
 2. Peer relapse : “A plan is not evident for when peer specialists relapse .”  We no w describe 
strategies  for addressing  this possibility  in the  text (IIIC6f ) and in the human subjects section (VIID3b ). 
 3.  More detailed  description of pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299]: “The pi[INVESTIGATOR_546191] .”  We now more fully 
describe the initial  pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] , whose results have recently  been published in Schizophrenia Research ,1 (IIIC1d ).  
We also conducted a second  pi[INVESTIGATOR_546192] a  recruitment strategy designed to 
enhance engagement and retention in the program (IIIC1e ).  Together, these studies demonstrated  high rates 
of engagement, retention, fidelity , and the potential for improving  improved clinical outcomes  to as great or 
greater an extent  than in general medical populations.   We believe these data provide a strong foundation and 
rationale for the full-scale study  proposed in this application . 
 4. Study outcomes and power calculations:  “Better rationale for study outcomes, as well as power 
analysi s for a broader set of outcomes … it is not likely the [physical fitness outcomes] would 
change ...” We have better clarified the rationale for choosing the study outcomes; the  number of 
outcome measures has been streamlined and the fitness outcomes have been removed .  (IIID3 ). 
Power calculations are now provided for a broader range of  outcomes  (IIID4 d); based on these new 
calculations  and the proposed sample s ize has been increased from 300 to 400.   
 5. Optimizing engagement  and retention in the intervention group : “Participants in the intervention group 
will be paid $20 for attending five of the six sessions of the  intervention, raising questions 
of…generalizability.. .”  We have dropped the plan to pay consumers to attend sessions  (subjects were not paid 
for attending sessions in either of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602]).   Instead  we are proposing a strategy that couples  an initial 
informational session coupled w ith reminders from the peer educator prior to each group  (section IIIC5a ).  In 
the second pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], t his approach result ed in high rates of participation, engagement , and retention  in groups .  
 6. Other methodological clarifications : “Several issues in the methods …randomization procedures, 
masking or retention ( particularly for control group). Data collection/data collectors .”  We have now more 
clearly speci fied details around each of these important methodological considerations  (IIIC5 , IIID2) . 
“More detail  needed about supports and contacts between sessions, how many people will be in each 
group, how long individuals will have to wait for groups to start… ” We now provide greater detail about 
the contacts between sessions with other peers (IIIC6b2) the numbers of participants  in each group ( 8-
12 members; see section IIIC6a), and the use of rolling recruitment to mi nimize wait times for 
enrollment ( anticipated to be less than three weeks : section IIIC5a).   
 7. Qualitative substudy:  “The qualitative analysis plan …is less well -specified than other parts 
of the application. ”  We agree that this was underspecified and have removed it from the  modified 
proposal  to allow more attention to the expanded  quantitative study.  
 Because of the se major changes , as well as the move to a shorter format, nearly the whole 
application has been rewritten and thus revisions  are not highlighted in the text.
  
 II. SPECIFIC AIMS  
IIA. Introduction  
 Persons with serious mental illnesses (SMI) face elevated rates  of chronic medical illnesses, and a more 
than twofold elevation in preventable mortality caused by [CONTACT_546218].  Despi[INVESTIGATOR_546193], persons with SMI currently have few tools 
available to help them to effectively manage their medical conditions.  
 In general populations, peer -led disease self -management interventions have been demonstrated to lead 
to sustain ed improvements in self -management and health outcomes. The most widely t ested and used  
management program is the  Chronic Disease Self -Management Program (CDSMP)  developed at the Stanford 
Patient Center by [CONTACT_451750].    With funding from an R34 intervention development grant from 
NIMH, the study team has develop ed and  pi[INVESTIGATOR_31219] a modified  version of the CDSMP, called the Health and 
Recovery Peer Program (HARP), to be delivered by [CONTACT_546219].   
The theoretical model underlying the intervention,  the Information -Motivation -Behavior Model, suggests  that 
gaps in health knowledge, motivation, and behavioral activation make it necessary to modify  the CDSMP to 
use it in persons with SMI  --both group members and group leaders) , and guided the  adaptation process.  
 Two p ilot tests of the HARP  program demonstrated that the pr ogram c an be implemented with high 
engagement, retention, and program fidelity,  and can  result in  improvements  across a range of outcomes 
comparable to or greater than those seen in gene ral medical populations.  This application now proposes to 
perform a fully powered, multisite trial  of HARP .  This new  study will make it possible to  establish this new 
intervention as an evidence -based practice, while providing  an understanding of the settings and populations 
where  it may provide the greatest benefits.  
 A total of 4 00 individuals with serious  mental illnesses and one or more chronic medical condition 
(hypertension; heart disease; arthritis; diabetes; or asthma/COPD) will be recruited fro m four diverse 
community mental health clinics in the Atlanta metro region  and randomized to HARP  or usual care.  For 
individuals in HARP , two peer educators  with SMI and one or more medical comorbid condition  will implement  
a six-session manualized intervention  over six consecutive weeks  (one session per week) . Peer educators will 
receive training through the Stanford CDSMP and through the Georgia Consumer Mental Health Consumer 
Network, which will provide additional instruction to allow peers to bec ome certified mental health peer 
specialists.  Follow -up interviews and chart reviews at 3 months , 6 months (primary endpoint ) and one -year 
post-intervention  will assess clinical outcomes , improvement in generic and disease -specific measures of 
illness self-management , and quality of care .  
 During the final year of the study, group participants will be trained to lead HARP groups, which will lay 
the groundwork for dissemination efforts. These efforts will build on the nationwide CDSMP infrastructure.  
Peer-led services can be reimbursed under Medicaid in a large and growing number of states, providing a 
potential funding mechanism for these efforts.   
 
IIB: Study Aims and Hypotheses:  
Study Aim 1 : To study the impact of HARP  on health  outcomes  
H1. As compared with participants  referred to usual care, participants  in HARP  will show  greater improvement 
on validated measures of  physical health -related quality of life , disability, and recovery.  
Study Aim 2 : To study the impact of HARP  on quality of disease management and medical care.  
H2: As compared with participants  referred to usual care, participants  in HARP  will show  greater improvement 
on validated measures of behavioral activation, generic and disease -specific self -management , and quality of 
medical care.  
Study Aim 3:  To understand subpopulations in which the intervention is most and least useful ( moderation ) 
and to understand the mechanisms underlying the effectiveness of the intervention (mediat ion).  
H3: Persons with medical and social vulnerability will show  differentially greater improvement from HARP  than 
non-vulnerable populations; information and motivation will mediate the impact of the intervention on disease 
self-management.  
 
There is an urgent need to develop effective, scalable interventions to address the  high rates of medical co -
morbidity  and premature mortality among persons with serious m ental illnesses.  If successful,  this study will 
establish  and lay the groundwork for disseminating the first evidence -based, fully peer-led intervention  for 
improving physical self -management in this vulnerable population .  
  
 III. RESEARCH STRATEGY  
IIIA. Significance  
 A literature extending back more than [ADDRESS_714721] of these services, states’ growing interest in recovery -based approaches to care, and the expansion of 
Medicaid under health reform, these t rends are likely to accelerate in coming years.  
There is now an opportunity to directly engage mental health consumers  in improving physical health 
and well -being .  The Health and Recovery Peer program (HARP), developed in close collaboration with the 
creator of the nation’s leading disease self -management program and mental health consumer leaders, has 
the potential to improve medical illness self -management among a group of hard -to-reach individuals who are 
commonly underserved by [CONTACT_546220].  The values of wellness and self -management 
promoted by [CONTACT_546221] -based orientation of the mental health 
consumer movement.  17 
The public health significance of the application and its centrality to NIMH’s goals are underscored  by 
[CONTACT_546222]. “ NIMH must measure success by ‘outcomes’ : how well the 
research we support provides the evidence base …to enhance recovery for those affected, serve diverse a nd 
previously under -served populations, and reduce premature mortality among persons with mental illness. ” 18  It 
addresses Goal 3 of the Strategic Plan, “ Strategic Objective 3: Develop New and Better Interventions for 
Mental Disorders that Incorporate the Diverse Needs and Circumstance s of People with Mental Illness,” and 
also Goal 4, “ Strengthen the Public Health Impact of NIMH -Supported Research .” 
 
IIIB. Innovation  
Although there is a growing literature on the  use of  peer-led models to address recovery and mental  
health symptoms among individuals with serious mental disorders , 19-22 we are not aware of  any peer-led 
interventions  that address management of physical  illnesses  in this vulnerable p opulation.  The c urrent study 
will establish a new evidence -based program for improving management of chronic medical conditions that is 
delivered by [CONTACT_546223].   This approach has the potential t o change the 
paradigm of health care delivery for this population, shifting from a professionally -driven approach to one that 
more actively engag es consumers in their own health and wellbeing . 
The dissemination plan (section IV) , which uses a pyramidal  approach in which  graduates of the 
program train leaders to  run groups, will provide  an innovative model for disseminating the intervention , and 
further enhance its public health im pact.  
 
IIIC. Approach  
IIIC1 . Overview of the Chronic Disease Self -Management Program , Adaptation, and Preliminary Data  
IIIC1a . The Chronic Disease Self -Management Program  (CDSMP) : Overview and Evidence of Effectiveness  in 
General Populations  The intervention builds on the Chronic Disease Self Management Program (CDSMP) , the 
most widely established peer -led program for improving chronic illness self -management  in general medical 
populations .  23, 24 CDSMP groups  are led by [CONTACT_546224]; any given 
group includes participants with a range of chronic conditions such as diabetes and arthritis.  A series of six 
group sessions delivered over 6 weeks addresses self -management tasks found to be common across chronic 
health conditions . 25-27  The CDSMP has shown to improve  disease self management, health service  use, and 
clinical outcomes . 28-31 
 
IIIC1b.  Theoretical Model Underlying the Development of the Health And Recovery Peer Program (HARP):  
The Health And Recovery Peer (HARP) program was modified  from the CDSMP using the  Information 
Motivation Behavior Model  (IMB).  The IMB , originally developed for understanding HIV, has been extended to 
a variety of settings for understanding use of preventive32,[ADDRESS_714722] be coupled with motivation  for behavior 
change. 37, 38  Together, information and motivation make it possible to improve behavioral acti vation,  which 
comprises an individual’s capacity 
to manage his or her own illness 
and work effectively within the 
formal health system. 26, 27, [ADDRESS_714723] 
suggested a series of moderating 
factors that might be expected to 
identify populations in whom improving self -management may be particularly important.  Social vulnerability  
factors include  lack of an adequate support network ; medical vulnerability  factors represent  problems in 
obtaining and maintaining appropriate medical services. 40, [ADDRESS_714724] was added to help consumers track disease -specific self -management activities (e.g. measuring blood 
sugar), updated medications, and a list of upcoming appointments, dietary intake, and physical activity .   
Deficits in motivation  for persons with SMI  may be related  in part to limited social networks , and high rates of 
adverse health behaviors within those networks . [ADDRESS_714725] accomplishing action plans and goals.   
 Comorbidity and complexity of conditions may limit these individuals’ behavioral activation  both in 
illness self-management ,47, [ADDRESS_714726] healthy fo od or find safe places for physical activity . 53 Thus  the 
diet section provided  strategies for purchasing healthy food on a budget (including using food stamps) and 
strategies were provided to allow participants to safely exercise in their own homes.  
 
IIIC1d .Randomized  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_4238] : Subsequently, we conducted a small randomized trial comparing the HARP 
program to usual care for a sample of subjects in the DeKalb County  Community Mental Health C enter , an 
urban CMHC .1 The purpose of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_546194], effectiveness , and to inform the 
development of  a full -scale randomized trial .  The program was led by [CONTACT_546225].  On e peer ha s diagnoses of schizophrenia and congestive 
heart failure; the second has bipolar disorder and diabetes.   
Intervention
HARP
Moderators
Medical/Social 
VulnerabilityMediators
Motivation
Outcomes
Behavioral Activation
Self Management
Health Outcomes
  
 1. Recruitment and retention:  A total of 80 individuals were enrolled in the study.  Among the individuals 
randomized to the intervention (n=41), a total of 33 (80.5%) attended at least one session ; 29 (70.7%) 
attended three or more sessions; 26 (63.4%) attended at least 4 sessions, and 22 (53.7%) attended 5 or 6 
sessions.  A second pi[INVESTIGATOR_546195] a modified recruitment strategy  resulted in considerably higher rates of 
engagement and retention (IIIC1e) .  
2. Sample characteristics:  The mean age was 48; most  (82.5%) were  African American , and most were poor 
(mean annual income $7,704 ($2,520, $12,306). The most common mental diagno ses were bipolar disorder 
(32.5%), schizophrenia (28.8%), major depression (26.3%) and PTSD (11.3%).  The most common medical 
comorbidities were hypertension (62.5%), arthritis (48.8%), asthma /COPD  (22.5 %), and heart disease (22.5%) . 
3. 6-month Outcomes:  All outcome analyses were conducted as intent -to-treat, and thus provide a relatively 
conservative estimate of potential intervention effect sizes .  At six month follow -up substantial relative 
improvements in outcome measures were observed for the HARP gro up relative to usual care, although 
several did not achieve statistical significance due to the small sample size. The table below  show s the 
baseline (BL) and six -month measures for the primary outcomes of interest. The table shows the p -value and t -
statis tic for the group*time interaction to quantify difference in outcomes over time between the intervention 
versus usual care (UC) groups. We also present the  Cohen's d effect size (ES), a standardized measure  that 
incorporates both difference in  change and variance . 
 At six month follow -up the HARP group scored higher on the SF-36 Physical Component Summary  
(PCS) than the  usual care  group . The effect size is larger than those reported in studies implementing the 
CDSMP in general medical populations.[ADDRESS_714727] a 15% reduction in inpatient medical hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3094], and a 20% decrease in [ADDRESS_714728] 
significant reductions in inpatient 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], higher rates of diabetes 
and lipid testing, and improvements in 
Hemoglobin A1C control among 
diabetics.57 There was also a significantly 
higher difference in improvement over 
time for the HARP group in the proportion 
of the sample reporting one or more visit to a primary care provider , regarded as a critical element of care 
provision for individuals  with ch ronic conditions.58  HARP participants had an additional 40 minutes per week 
spent in moderate/v igorous exercise comp ared to usual care .  While not  statistically significant, the  difference 
in exercise (d= 0.19) was nearly identical to the six month effect size for the six month follow -up on the original 
CDSMP study in a general community sample (111 vs. 91 minutes) (Lori g et al. 1999).  The Morisky scale for 
medication adherence  has a possible range from zero (no problems) to four (more problems). The mean 
change over time for the HARP group was lower (better) than the mean change for the usual care group 
(d=0.31). 
 
IIIC1e. Open -Label Pi[INVESTIGATOR_546196]: To address the modest initial 
engagement  rate in the first study , we tested a modified recruitment approach using a strategy  that is being 
used in current  dissemination efforts  for the CDSMP .[ADDRESS_714729] engagement, 
retention, and fidelity. The same peers who led the initial trial led this series of groups.  
 The recruitment strategy and eligibility criteria were identical to the strategy proposed for use in the full 
trial which is described in greater deta il in IIIC5a .  Potential subjects were  invited to attend an  initial 
informational session to more fully describe the program and  optimize the informed consent process.  
Attendees at this session who were interested in participating and  met study eligibilit y criteria  were  offered 
informed consent immediately following the informational session .  To optimize retention, p eer educators  called 
participants 1-2 days prior  to each group session  as a reminder and to troubleshoot any potential barriers to  
Table 1: HARP Pi[INVESTIGATOR_546197]  
(n=41)  UC 
(n=39)  group*time  
P T ES 
Physical Component 
Summary  of SF -36 BL 36.9 37.0 .252 1.16 .30 
6mos  42.9 40.0 
Patient Activation  BL 48.3 47.6 .030 2.21 .56 
6mos  52.0 44.9 
>1 Prim ary 
 Care Vis it BL 58.5%  61.1%  .046 2.03 .51 
6mos  68.4%  51.9%  
Medication 
Adherence  BL 1.5 1.5 .220 1.24 .31 
6mos  1.3 1.6 
  
 attendance . Aside from bus tokens for those taking  public transportation, no financial incentives were  provided 
for attending meetings.  
1. Engagement and p articipation  in groups in the second pi[INVESTIGATOR_546198].  Of 13 individuals attending the 
informational session, 8 were eligible and consented to participate in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]. Among those consenting to 
participate (n=8), a total of 4 attended all 6 sessions and the remaining 4 attended 5 out of the 6 sessions, 
resulting in a ttendance at a  mean of 5.5 (SD=0.53) o ut of [ADDRESS_714730] pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] (IIIC1d) , and reflective of the clinic  
population  (IIIC4) with regards to sociodemographic characteristics (mean age 4 4; 87.5% African American; 
mean income $5,120), primary mental health diagnoses (37.5% depression; 37.5% schizop hrenia; 25 % bipolar 
d/o), and medical  comorbidities (hypertension 50%; arthritis 37.5%;  diabetes 25%; asthma/COPD 25%).   
3. Fidelity  was assessed  by [CONTACT_105114][INVESTIGATOR_546199], and using the quantitative fidelity measure described in 
IIIC6e. All audiotapes were  rated by [CONTACT_258518].    Each of the 44 content/activity sections was rated 
using a Likert scale, with 5 being “completely adhered to the written curriculum guide” to 1 being “did not 
adhere to the written curriculum guide at all.”  Totals for two summary categories  indicated of 14 out of a 
possible 15 for patient activatio n enhancing techniques  (making an action plan; sharing and feedback; 
modeling and persuasion) , and 23.5 out of a possible 25 score on training techniques ( lecture with discussion; 
brainstorming; demonstration; feedback ; problem solving).  
 
IIIC2. Summary and Rationale for a full trial:   The R34 grant allowed us to develop and manualize HARP .  
Two pi[INVESTIGATOR_546200], retention, and fidelity, and promise for 
improving  improved key clinical outcomes.   However, these  were  intended to inform a larger trial and  not 
powered to assess statistical significance.  An adequately powered trial is needed to assess whether HARP  
can lead to  improved self-management  and outcomes.   Second, the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]’s outcome s were limited to a 
relatively small number of self -reported measures.  A more diverse set of  measures from multiple data sources 
is essential to definitively test HARP’s  effectiveness.  Third, the pi[INVESTIGATOR_203727] a single urban 
community mental  health center , which limits generalizability and the ability to compare  impact  across different 
types of settings or patient subgroups .  Recruitment from multiple settings  will make it possible to establish 
whether the program is eff ective across a broad population  of persons with SMI and also to understand in  what 
subpopulations the program works best .  If successful, this study will establish the first  evidence -based, fully 
peer-led program to improve physical health and well -being among mental health consumers .  
 
IIIC3.  Overview of the  Proposed Research Project :  We propose a multisite, randomized trial of the HARP  
program , an adaptation of the Chronic Disease Self Management Program delivered by, and to, mental health 
consumers . A total of 400 participants  will be randomized to either HARP  or usual care.  Interviews  and chart 
reviews at 3 months , 6 months  (primary endpoint) , and [ADDRESS_714731] of the program on clinical and functional outcomes and disease self -management  skills . 
  
IIIC4 . Study Setting:  Metro Atlanta CMHCs : The study will recruit from four diverse  safety net mental health  
clinics throughout the greater Atlanta region, with two urban and two suburban  clinics . The Fulton County 
Department of Health and Wellness is a public health clinic that serves the mental health needs of Ful ton 
County, a poor, inner -city C ounty in Atlanta.  The Fulton C ounty CMHC also serves adults with serious mental 
illness in Fulton County .  Two community mental health centers  operated by [CONTACT_546226]  
(GRN) provide care within Gwin nett County, a suburban county located 30 minutes north of downtown Atlanta.   
 
IIIC5.  Recruitment and Randomization  Table 2: Characteristics of Study Sites  
Characteristics of Clients 
FY 2009  Fulton County 
Department of Health 
and Wellness  Fulton County 
CMHC  GRN CMHC 
Lawrenceville Clinic  GRN CMHC 
Norcross Clinic  
# of Adults with SMI served  4,986  3,400  2,029  921 
Location  Urban/Inner City  Urban/Inner City  Suburban  Suburban  
Gender   Female  52.0%  51.2%  57.1%  66.3%  
Race/Ethnicity  
Caucasian  
African American  
Hispanic/Latino   
8.7%  
89.9%  
1.0%   
20.0%  
77.7%  
2.0%   
65.7%  
23.4%  
6.0%   
55.1%  
25.9%  
9.5%  
Income below Federal 
Poverty Line  89.7%  93.6%  73.5%  62.4%  
  
 IIIC5 a. Recruitment Strategy:  We will recruit and randomize [ADDRESS_714732] ing 6 consecutive weekly group meetings of 8-12 participants over a one -year period (1 
group sess ion per week) and then follow -up over a second year.  Rolling recruitment throughout the year will 
be used to minimize waiting time between recruitment and beginning a group program. Based on recruitment 
projections, clients should have to wait no longer t han three weeks between recruitment and entry into a group.  
 To optimize the balance between internal validity and generalizability to community settings, we will use 
the strategy developed for CDSMP dissemination efforts.  59 In our second pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]  (IIIC1e ), this approach  
resulted in high rates of engagement, retention, and representativeness  of the sample .  Flyers will be posted 
and clinicians encouraged to refer subjects to a one -hour weekly informational meeting scheduled at the 
CMHC.   At this meeting, the project director will provide a one -hour description of the HARP intervention and 
the broader study.  The session will describe the intervention, explain random assignment, review the study 
protocol, detail the informed consent process and confidentiality, and answer any questions.  At the end of this 
session, participants who wish to enroll in the study will provide brief written consent for the screening process, 
then be assessed for eligibility via a review of CMHC administrative records and a brief screening interview.   
 Inclusion  criteria will include: 1. On CMHC roster of active patients.  2. Presen ce of a serious mental 
illness (schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, bipolar disorder, major depression, obsessive -compulsive 
disorder, or post-traumatic stress disorder, with or without comorbid substance use ),60 either via CMHC chart 
or the MINI, a brief diagnostic psychiatric interview designed for use in clinical trials.  61 3.  Chronic Medical 
Condition  as noted in the CMHC chart or via self -report : (hypertension;  arthritis; heart disease; diabetes; and 
asthma /COPD ), the most common comorbid conditions seen in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_546201] .62  The exclusion criteri on will be cognitive impairment  based on a score of > 3 on a 6-item, 
validated screener developed for clinical research. 63   
 
IIIC5b.  Randomization:   One fourth of the sample, or 100 individuals, will be randomized at each site.  A block 
randomization strategy will be employed, to ensure balance across each site.  Participants  who meet eligibility 
criteria and provide informed consent will be randomly  assigned using a computer -generated algorithm and 
concealment of allocation techniques to minimize assignment bias, to either the HARP  or usual care.   
 
IIIC6 . Intervention:  Health and Recovery  Peer (HARP)  program  
IIIC6 a. Overview:   The HARP intervention is a 6 -week, 6 -session, group format intervention to improve self -
management of chronic medical diseases.  Each group lasts 90 minutes  and has 8 -12 attendees .  Between 
groups, participants work with partners from the group  to troubleshoot problems and accomplish action plans 
identified during the session.  The intervention will be scheduled at a time and location that is convenient to 
participants and does not interfere with work or homemaking activities, typi[INVESTIGATOR_546202].  When feasible, 
meetings will be held in the Wellness Center, a home -like, nonclinical setting run by [CONTACT_546227] N etwork in downtown Decatur that provides recovery classes as well as a respi[INVESTIGATOR_546203].  Where 
this option is n ot feasible, classes will be held at the mental health centers.   At the end of the program, 
monthly alumni groups meet for six months to reinforce lessons from the intervention, monitor progress, and 
maintain peer support.  
 
IIIC6 b. Optimizing Information,  Motivation and Behavioral Activation:   
1. Optimizing Information:   Charts and handouts are used throughout the sessions to help convey and 
reinforce key concepts. Each attendee is given a copy of the CDSMP workbook titled “Living a Healthy Life 
With Chronic Conditions” which combines information and interactive exercises for self -management of chronic 
illnesses.[ADDRESS_714733]  that include s 
fields for each of the key targets of the intervention: 1. Disease -specific self -management activities (e.g. 
measuring blood sugar); 2. Updated Medication List 3. List of upcoming appointments 4. Dietary in take and 5. 
Physical Activity.  This is used to t rack improvement in self -management activities through the study period.   
All materials are targeted to a 6th grade reading level to address limited health literacy.  
2. Optimizing Motivation : Peer support helps improve motivation by [CONTACT_546228] s, modeling  appropriate 
intensions, and reinforcing positive social norms for self -management, appropriate use of health services, and 
health behaviors. 37, [ADDRESS_714734] once per week with the partner to accomplish 
  
 a specific  action plan  outlined during the session.  For instance, the participant and their partner might set a 
plan in which they will shop together for healthy groceries prior to the next session.  
3. Optimizing Behavioral Activation : Each session, clients develop a short term “action plan”  related to the topic  
of the session .23  This involves identifying a problem that is of particular concern, listing ideas for solving the 
problem, and then d evelopi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a plan outlining specific, short -term goals for improvement.  For instance, the 
plan might be “This week I will walk around the block before lunch on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday for 30 
minutes .” Action plans should be specific and realistic, pr oposing behavior that the client is confident he or she 
can accomplish.  The client is asked about his or her  level of confidence, on a scale of 0 -10, that the specific 
goal can be accomplished.  If confidence is 6 or less then goals are modified according ly and a new action 
plan is developed .  
 
IIIC6 c. Individual Sessions (see manual in Appendix for detailed overview of each session):   
1. Session One : introduces  the concept of disease self management to attendees. Topi[INVESTIGATOR_84946] : 
understanding chronic disease , the basic principles fo r self management , and an introduction to action 
planning.     At the end of the class, each attendee develops a short -term action plan to help them more actively 
manage their chronic medical illness and obtain appropriate preventive services . 
2. Session T wo: provides an overview of problem solving and an introduction to exercise and physical activity. 
The group begins by [CONTACT_546229], with an 
overview of flexib ility, strengthening, and aerobic forms of exercise .  This session includes a “hands -on” 
exercise training session including an easy to perform a chair workout covering  major muscle groups.  This 
workout includes  both strength exercises and some stretching exercises.  
3. Session T hree: provides an overview of pain and fatigue management as well as a continuation of the 
exercise program.   Members learn the potential factors causing or exacerbating pain and fatigue, and 
strategies for address ing them, including good diet, exercise, social contact, and relaxation techniques. 
Breathing strategies are developed and the group is instructed in performing progressive muscle relaxation 
techniques .  Participants develop a personal exercise program usi ng the  FIT acronym ( Frequency, Intensity, 
and Time spent each session ) for a successful exercise program .       
4.  Session F our: provides an i ntroduction to healthy eating, including  food variety ; eating smaller and more, 
regular meals; increasing fruit and vegetable intake; reducing fat and cholesterol intake; reducing carbohydrate 
and salt intake; and increasing water intake .  Sections  on reading nutritional labels and weight loss are 
included. A module covers  how to shop for healthy, culturally appropr iate foods on a limited budget.  A “hands 
on” nutrition session consists  of a thirty minute cooking demonstration.   
5. Session Five: Peer educators provide an overview  of the purposes , benefits, and side effects of common 
medications.  The importance of taking medications as prescribed, even when a patient is asymptomatic, is 
discussed .  A section about combining medications for medical and mental conditions, along with the 
importance of sharing information across different physicians , was added from the CDSMP to HARP .   
6. Session Six:  provides an overview of finding and working with a regular doctor.  Peer leaders present 
strategies for working effectively with a primary care provider, including  the following acronym (PART) : 1. 
Prepar e for the app ointment in advance, and bring a list  of the m ost important  concerns or questions to the 
visit. 2. Ask about diagnosis, tests, treatments, and follow -up.  3. Repeat  back to the provider the key points 
discussed during the visit. 4. Take Action : Let the provider know if there are any potential barriers to following 
through with the recommendations.  A final section reviews the highlights from each of the section and asks 
participants to share goals for the coming months.  
 
IIIC6 d. Graduation and Alumni Gro up:  At the final session, participants have a graduation ceremony in which 
they receive a certificate from the program.  This certificate indicates both that they have graduated from the 
HARP program and that they are eligible to participate in a training  program to lead groups in HAR P. 
Participants are encouraged to continue to meet with the peer  partner to set new action plans. An alumni group 
conducted  by [CONTACT_546230] s monthly for six months after HARP  is completed to track progress and 
help participants  retain gains  made during the program .   
 
IIIC6 e: Assessing Fidelity :  Fidelity, or the degree to which the intervention follows the program model,72, [ADDRESS_714735] developed 
and pi[INVESTIGATOR_169354] a  fidelity measure (IIIC1e ) that will be used in the larger study.  
 All groups will be audiotaped.   The health educator (Sterling) will review a randomly selected session 
from each group. Sessions will be  assessed in terms of overall accuracy and how closely the facilitator 
  
 adhered to the written curriculum guide.  Each of the 44 content/activity sections are rated using a Likert scale, 
with 5 being “completely adhered to the written curriculum guide” to 1  being “did not adhere to the written 
curriculum gui de at all.”  These sections are then  grouped in to two categories:  1. Patient activation enhancing 
techniques , comprising (a)  making an action plan (b). sharing and feedback and (c) . modeling and persuasio n 
and 2. Training techniques, comprising  (a). lecture with discussion (b). brainstorming (c). demonstration, (d) . 
feedback and (e) . problem solving. These are key “active ingredients” of the CDSMP model identified by [CONTACT_546231], and have been recommended for use in assessing fidelity of the model. 59, 75 
 
IIIC6 f. Selection, Training and Supervision of Peer  Leaders : The Georgia Mental Health Consumer Network  
(GMHCN) , will identify , hire, and supervise three part -time peer educators  who will lead groups across all 4 
sites.  The identical criteria will be used for selecting group leaders as selecting group members; active 
treatment at a CMHC; a serious mental disorder; and a chronic medical condition.   Positions will be advertised  
through postings at the four  CMHCs , local news papers, and listservs .   
 Peer educators will attend a [ADDRESS_714736] Patient Education Research Center.  This 
program is led by [CONTACT_546232]. Each t rainee will 
receive a detailed Leader's M anual  (see Appendix) . After the Stanford training workshop, members of the 
study team, including the Principal Investigator (Druss), Health Educator (Sterling), Diet and Nutrition expert 
(Frediani), Disease Self -Management Expert (Dunbar) Directo r of the Georgia Mental Health Consumer 
Network (Jenkins -Tucker), and peer -intervention expert (Fricks) will provide a two -day orientation to the peer 
educators including instruction in the HARP  manual and study design .  
 Next, peers will role play two wor kshop sessions with mock participants, under the supervision of the 
health educator (Sterling) and peer -intervention expert (Fricks).  The health educator and peer -intervention 
expert will provide real -time feedback on all activities.   Sherry Jenkins Tucker, the director of the Georgia 
Mental Health Consumer network, who is a master trainer in the CDSMP, and helped develop the HARP 
curriculum, will attend all six sessions in the first workshop.  She will provide structured feedback to th e 
educators after each of these sessions.  If she has any remaining concerns about the peer educators’ ability to 
effectively lead the groups, she will continue to attend these sessions until the concerns have been resolved.   
 The Georgia Mental Health Co nsumer network will also provide standardized training to allow the group 
leaders to become  certified mental health peer specialists; a standardized  2-week training program focuses  on 
teaching skills such as person -centered planning, recovery -based group l eadership skills , and Medicaid note 
writing and billing protocols, . The certification process includes both a written and oral test covering these core 
skills.  This will provide added training for  the peer educators in leadership and recovery -oriented ski lls, as well 
as make them eligible to bill Medicaid for services during the dissemination of the intervention . 
 Subsequently, weekly supervision will be provided to the peer leaders from [CONTACT_546245] -Tucker  and the 
Principal Investigator.  These sessions wi ll involve reinforcement of core elements of the program, address 
issues and challenges that arise during the sessions, and allow sharing  of success stories.  
 Should peer leaders face difficulties or suffer a relapse, Sherry Jenkins -Tucker a nd [CONTACT_546246] will work 
with the peer leader  to develop a treatment plan with their clinician. One of the other peer leaders will lead 
groups until the consumer is ready to resume leading  groups.  
 
IIIC7 . Usual Care:  Participants  in usual care will continue to obtain  any mental health or peer -support services 
that they would otherwise be receiving .  While we considered using an active or attention -control comparison 
group, we chose a usual care group , using principles from the NIH consensus panel on the use of usual care in 
study design. [ADDRESS_714737] of medical  disease self -
management that w ould otherwise be delivered to the control group.77  
 
IIID. Evaluation  
IIID1. Overview : The study will use interview and chart review data to examine the intervention’s impact on  
clinical outcomes, self -management, and quality of medical  care at three months , six months, and one year 
after the groups are completed .  As with the CDSMP , 28 six-month analyses will be used as the primary 
timeframe . Three -month assessment will be used to assess sho rter term gains after the group sessions  and 
one-year asse ssment will be used to measure  the longer -term sustainability  of any changes resulting  from the 
program.    
 
IIID2 . Training, study procedures , and quality control  for research interviewers : Research interviewers 
will receive a one -week training program covering the study protocol, interviewing and chart abstraction 
  
 techniques, and ethical issues including privacy protection , and subsequently will receive weekly supervision 
from the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_307591] d irector. The project director will oversee three mock interviews to 
ensure that the interviewer has adequately mastered the materials.   
Follow -up interviews and chart reviews will be conducted with the interviewer blinded to participants ’ 
randomization status.   Interviewers will be asked to note any instances of “unblinding.”  Sensitivity analyses will 
be conducted including and not including such unblinded information to assess for the possibility of bias.   We 
have used this approach successfully in our other studies.[ADDRESS_714738] cannot be located at follow -up, a range of search strategies 
will be used  including: 1) Social security death index 2) inmate information for local county jails, and 
prisons al ong with lists of parolees. 3) W hite pa ges reverse address look up 4) C ounty property tax 
information and 5) paid internet person -search sites (e.g. Choicepoint).  
 Interview  and chart data will be entered in a secured, web-based form with a SQL-based server  
located at Emory  University .  A 5% sample of chart reviews will be audited to check on accuracy and 
completeness.  
 
IIID3. Dependent Variables  
IIID3a. Health , Disability and Recovery Outcomes  
1. Physical Health Related Quality of Life  (HRQOL):  The SF -36 is a measure of HRQOL  constructed for use in 
the Medical Outcomes Study. 78, 79 The P hysical Component Summary Score is  an aggregate measure that 
combines subscales for  physical functioning  (both actu al activities  and ability to perform in role s such as work 
and school ), bodily pain, and general  self-reported health.  80   This will be used as the p rimary study outcome 
because it is able to capture multiple domains of health and functioning targeted by [CONTACT_546233] , and is predictive of other distal health outcomes including hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47144] . In other 
populations, the  3-point difference  in change  found in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], and targeted in the current study , has 
been associated with a 15% reduction in medical hosp italization,  and a 20% increase in [ADDRESS_714739] benefits for mental health and functioning.  Therefore we will also examine the 
intervention’s impact on each of the four subscales that make up the Physical Component Summary Score , the 
four mental health subscales, and the Mental Component Summary .  
2. Disability:  The World Health Orga nization Disability Assessment Schedule II (WHODAS II) assesses day to 
day functioning in six activity domains. Results provide a profile of functioning across the domains, as well as 
an overall disability score.  81-84 
3. Recovery:   The goals of wellness and health promoted by [CONTACT_546234] -management programs are closely 
related to the notion of recovery , the “ability to live a meaningful life …while striving to achieve his or her full 
potential .”  85, [ADDRESS_714740] . 87, 88   
 
IIID3b. Behavioral Activation and Self -Management:   The IMB model suggests that the intervention may 
improve behavioral activation, which will facilitate improved generic and disease -specific self management.  
1. Behavioral Activation  will be measured using the  Patient Activation Measure  (PAM) , an instrumen t which 
has been found to be reliable and valid across a wide range of patient populations .39 As a secondary measure, 
we will also include assess mental health -related behavioral activation using a separate survey, the PAM -MH, 
developed for persons with serious mental disorders. 89  
2. Health behaviors:   Dietary intake  will be Kristal Fat and Fiber Behavior (FFB) scale , a validated 20 -item 
scale assessing behav ior related to low -fat eating, 90-92 and the Block Fat -Sugar -Fruit-Vegetable Screener  
which assesses both frequency and quantity of food intake based on typi[INVESTIGATOR_546204]. 93, 94 Physical 
Activity  will be assessed with the International Physical Activity Qu estionnaire (IPAQ) , a one-week recall 
measure of physical activity that includes domains for job -related, transportation, housework and family care, 
recreation domains, as well as time spent sitting , [ADDRESS_714741] strong content and predictive validity in hypertension,98 cardiovascular disease,99 and 
diabetes.100 Separate indicators will be calculated for each class of medications used to treat hypertension, 
cardiovascular disease, arthritis, asthma, and with an average value across the three cardiometabolic conditions 
used as an aggregate measure of adherence.  
  
 4. Disease -Specific Self-Management Behaviors : This variable will be calculat ed as the proportion of disease -
specific activities  performed for which an individual was eligible. For instance, if a subject has both diabetes 
and hypertension, the variable would be calculated as the sum of the total number of self -management 
activities  for both conditions performed by [CONTACT_546235]. 101  Established measures  will be used for measuring 
arthritis self -management , 102, 103 diabetes self -management , 104 104 hypertension self -management, 105 heart 
disease self -management,  106 and asthma and 107 COPD self -management.108  This approach towards 
aggregating measures is similar to that used for measures of physician -delivered quality of care (see IIID3c). 
 
IIID3c. Quality of Medical Care :  Chronic disease self -management programs have been demonstrated to have 
the potential to improve use of appropriate medical services and decrease use of unnecessary  emergency and 
inpatient services.109  A self -reported measure of service use developed for the CATIE trial, the Service 
Utilization and Resources Form (SURF), will be used to track the number of medical and mental emergency 
room visits, outpatient visits, and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_598]. 110, [ADDRESS_714742] Evidence -based Practice Center (EPC) for AHRQ . [ADDRESS_714743] been able to obtain approximately 85% of medical  and mental health charts for 
patients in CMHCs .112  Using these charts, q uality for the individual study diseases will be measured using 
indicators from the RAND Community Quality Index (CQI) study.101, 113, 114 , 115  The quality score for each 
condition is generated by [CONTACT_546236] 
a participant is eligible for indicator.  Quality of preventive care will be  assessed indicators from the US 
Preventive Services Taskforce Guidelines.65   
 
IIID3d. Moderator s, Mediators, and Confounders  
1: Moderator Variables:  In general populations, two groups of factors have been found to place populations at 
risk of  poor self -management and health outcomes: social vulnerability  factors including lack of an adequate 
support network and low SES, and medical vulnerability  factors, such as problems in obtaining and maintaining 
appropriate medical se rvices.40, 41  In keepi[INVESTIGATOR_546205] , medical vulnerability  will be 
defined as lack of a report of a usual source  of care , and social vulnerability  as report of living alone.  Second, 
we will examine cross -site differences in outcomes , comparing the two clinics in poorer, inner -city 
neighborhoods with those in the middle class, suburban settings.   
2. Mediator Variables : The Information Motivation Behavior Model  proposes that information and motivation will 
each be mediators of behavioral  activation , which in turn mediate s better outcomes . Information   will be 
assessed using  a chronic disease knowledge survey that includes  questions about diabetes, hypertension, 
heart disease, and asthma,[ADDRESS_714744] using the Theory of Planned Behavior. 37, 38  
3. Confound ing Variables :  These are variables that are not hypothesized to have a major impact on the 
intervention effect, but which are important to measure to ensure adequacy of randomization and the 
generalizability of the sample.  These will include sociodemographic  characteristics:   (age, race, gender ), 
medical c omorbidity:  measured using the  Total Illness Burden Index (TIBI),118,119 mental diagnosis  using the  
Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) , 61,120  and substance u se using the Alcohol  and Drug 
Composite Problem Indices fr om the Addiction Severity Index  (ASI) .121, 122   
 
Table 3: Summary of Study Measures and Data Collection  
 Screen  Baseline  3-
month  6-
Month  1-
year Source  
Eligibility Measures        
   Active patient in CMHC  X     Chart review  
   Serious Mental Illness  X     Chart review , interview  
   Chronic Medical Condition  X     Chart review, interview  
   No Cognitive Impairment (Callahan)  X     Interview  
 Health Outcomes        
   Health Related Quality of Life (SF -36)     X X X X Interview  
   Disability (WHODAS)   X X X X Interview  
   Recovery (Recovery Assessment Scale)   X X X X Interview  
 Behavioral  Activation  (PAM)   X X X X Interview  
 Self-Management        
  
      Disease -Specific Self -Management   X X X X Interview  
     Mental Health Activation (PAM -MH)       
     Diet (Kristal FFB, Block Screener)   X X X X Interview  
     Physical Activity (IPAQ,  Paffenbarger)   X X X X Interview  
     Medication Adherence (Morisky)   X X X X Interview  
Quality of Medical Care        
     Disease -Specific Quality Indicators (CQI)     X X X X Chart review  
     Quality of Preventive Services (USPTF)   X X X X Chart review  
     Ambulatory Sensitive ER/Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]   X X X X Chart Review  
Potential Mediating Variables        
   Information    X X X X Interview  
   Motivation   X X X X Interview  
Potential Moderating Variables        
   Medical/Social Vulnerability   X X X X Interview  
   Study site   X    Chart Review  
Potential Confounding Variables        
   Sociodemographics   X    Interview  
   Medical comorbidity (TIBI)   X    Interview  
   Mental diagnosis (MINI)   X    Interview  
   Substance Use (ASI)   X X X X Interview  
PAM=Patient Activation Measure ; FFB=Fat and Fiber Behavior ; SURF=Services Utilization and Resources Form ; MINI=Mini -
International Neuropsychiatric Interview ; WHODAS World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule ; ASI= Addiction 
Severity Index  
 
IIID4. Data Analytic Strategy  
IIID4a . Overall analytic strategy:   All analyses will be conducted as intent -to-treat.  Six -month outcomes will be 
the primary study endpoints, consistent with previous work using the CDSMP.  3-month  outcomes will be used 
to examine short -term int ervention impact and [ADDRESS_714745] of HARP. 
The primary analytic technique for assessing differences between the study groups will be random regression  
(repeated measures GLM) , [ADDRESS_714746].124 
 
IIID4b . Departures from Randomization, Noncompliance, and Loss to Follow -Up: 
1. Baseline departures from randomization : Potential confounding variables that differ significantly between the 
groups at baseline will be included as covariates in subsequent analytic models.  
2.  Noncompliance/Dropout from Treatment:   Although the primary analyses will be conducted as intention -to-
treat, we will also conduct a series of analyses to model incomplete group attendance.  Partial attendance will 
be modeled using method -of-moments estimators, which are extensions of econometric instrumental variables 
techniques.125, [ADDRESS_714747]. Peng has experience in using this methodology.  
3. Loss to Study Follow -Up/Missing Data : In addition to the strategies described in section IIID2 for optimizing 
study retention, appropriate analytic techniques will be used to adjust for loss to follow -up. M ultiple imputation 
techniques128,[ADDRESS_714748] greater improvement 
in physical health -related quality of life, disability, and recovery -based outcomes.  The Physical Component 
Summary (PCS) is scored between 0 (poor health) to 100 (perfect health).  The oblique method, which is the 
preferred approach when examining persons with comorbid physical and mental conditions, 133, 134 will be used 
to calculate summary scores .135 Other subscales of the SF -36, the WHODAS, and the Recovery Assessment 
Scale are also s cored as continuous outcomes. Random regression analyses will examine the group*time 
interaction term for each of these continuous variables to assess statistical significance, adjusted means, and 
confidence intervals.  
  
 H2. As compared with participants re ferred to usual care, participants in HARP will show greater improvement 
on validated measures of behavioral activation, and generic and disease -specific self -management and quality 
of medical care.   Patient activation, aggregate disease management, medication compliance, and quality of 
care are scored as continuous measures; random regression analyses will examine the group*time interaction 
term for each of these variables to assess statistical sign ificance, adjusted means, and confidence intervals.     
H3. Medical or social vulnerability will be associated with greater improvements from HARP  in health related 
quality of life:   Moderator analyses make it possible to identify what types of clients ben efit most from a given 
intervention.  The approach will follow Kenny et al’s method for analyzing moderator effects in randomized 
trials using random regression. [ADDRESS_714749] we will use the models in H1 and H2 with a 
group*time*moderator interac tion term, the statistical significance of which will allow us to assess the presence 
of moderation. All appropriate lower -order interactions will also be included in the model .   
H4. Information and motivation will each mediate the impact of the intervent ion on patient activation.  Patient 
activation, will, in turn, mediate the impact of the intervention on health related quality of life   Mediation 
analyses will use adaptations of structural mean models developed by [CONTACT_546237]. 137, 138 Models will be 
constructed to examine the relationship between the independent variable (study arm), the outcome (either 
patient activation or health related quality of life) and each p utative mediator (information, motivation or patient 
activation). Models will determine whether 1. Intervention status is associated with the hypothesized outcome 
at six months. 2. Intervention status is associated with the hypothesized mediator at three m onths . 3. Adding 
the hypothesized mediator at three months  in a multivariate model significantly reduces the magnitude of the 
association between intervention status and the outcome variable.  All models will include covariates that are 
significantly corre lated with randomization status, mediating variables, or outcomes  at baseline . The Sobel 
Test, as specified by [CONTACT_546238], [ADDRESS_714750] errors .  
 
IIID4d . Sample Size Calculation:   Sample size calculations were conducted using the Power Analysis 
Statistical Software (PASS). Our goal is to have 80% power to detect a statistically significant difference in the 
change in outcome over time between the i ntervention and usual care groups. We assume alpha=.05, two -
tailed tests, and a 20% attrition rate over the follow -up period.  A final sample of 320 (160  in each treatment 
arm) will provide 8 0% power to detect the group*time interaction for the primary study outcome, and for other 
effect sizes of Cohen's d=0.30.  
1.Physical Component Summary Score of the SF -36 (Primary Study Outcome):   A final sample of 320 (160 in 
each treatment arm) will provide 80% power to detect a statistically significant group*time  interaction for the 
effect size seen in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] ( Cohen's d=0.30 ). This equates with a n improvement of [ADDRESS_714751] size.56  
2. Other Study Outcomes:  1. For patient activation , a sample size of [ADDRESS_714752] a 0.3 difference (Cohen’s d of 0.3).  3. For the quality of medical care and quality of sel f-management  
we anticipate having 80% power to detect a 10% relative change difference.  112  
3. Mediator analyses:  Using methods developed by [CONTACT_48445],140  a final sample of 320  will provide 
80% power to detect a significant mediat ion effect if there is a moderate effect size in the relationship between 
the intervention and the outcome (e.g. health related quality of life) and a small (t’=.11) remaining direct effect 
after controlling for patient activation (i.e. partial mediation).  This sample size is sufficient to detect the 
mediated relationship when the association between the intervention and the mediator, and the mediator and 
outcome are both in the small to moderate range (r2 =0.14 -0.26).  
4. Moderator analyses:  According to Kenny t he estimate of the moderator effects can be viewed as  a 
comparison of Cohen's d across levels of the moderator.141 This difference is itself a Cohen's d. Our  final 
sample size of 320 will provide power of 80 % to detect a moderate effect, or a difference in Cohen's d of d=.3 
between levels of the moderator (i.e. d=.2 for group*time on the outcome in the high medical vulnerability 
group and d=.5 for group*time on the out come in the low medical vulnerability group).   
 
IV. Dissemination Phase : The final  year of the study will be spent on pi[INVESTIGATOR_28882] a dissemination strategy that 
would build on the approach and infrastructure used  in the CDSMP . The CDSMP  approach  is built on a 
pyramida l workforce approach in which peer educators can  become certified as “master trainers, ” who train  
other peers as group leaders .  This strategy  has made it possible to disseminate the CDSMP to  [ADDRESS_714753]  other mental 
consumer  peer educators . 
Three s ubjects who participated  in the  intervention program will be recontact[CONTACT_546239] .  Peers will keep a log of number of 
groups led and number of members  attending each group ; sessions  will be audiotaped.  D ata will be collected 
on engagement , retention, and fidelity to the HARP protocol .  Peers will bill for thes e services through  Medicaid 
or the Department of Mental Health for uninsured clients . Coupled with the effectiveness data from the current 
study, information on this dissemination pi[INVESTIGATOR_546206] a  larger strategy to  disseminat e 
HARP broadly within a group  mental he alth peers.   
 
V. Potential Limitations : While we believe the proposed study has a number of strengths, including building  
on an evidence -based self -management approach, and the potential for sustainability and genera lizability, we 
also recognize  several limitations:   1. Diversity of chronic conditions and health behaviors:   The proposed 
program, like the CDSMP, will treat patients with a variety of medical conditions.  We recognize that this may 
reduce the ability to track  specific disease -based outcomes.  However, this strategy may increase 
generalizability to public mental health settings.   If successful, this may increase the program’s reach and 
adoption more broadly.  2. Focus on Self -Management Rather than Provide r or System -Based Approaches :  
Approaches such as the Chronic Care Model primarily focus on change at the provider/practice level as a 
strategy for improving illness outcomes.[ADDRESS_714754], the CDSMP and HARP programs focus on improving 
the determinants of health outcomes that are under a patient’s control , including those that occur outside of the 
formal health system. This latter approach is particularly applicable to programs implemented in community 
settings and within the peer workforce.  These two types of approaches are each critical, and potentially 
complementary strategies for addressing morbid ity and mortality in mental health consumers. 3. Challenges  in 
implementing the program as a fully consumer -based approach:   We recognize that having the HARP groups 
led by [CONTACT_546240]. However, our initial work suggests that this approach is not only feasible, but extremely 
empowering for participants, and may provide unique benefits in improving activation and self -management.   
 
VI. Timelin e: We anticipate that approximately 6 months will be required to hire and train research and peers 
prior to starti ng recruitment.  The intervention will be sequentially implemented at each of the four study 
locations . At a rate of 13  participants  per month (derived from our experience on the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]), recruitment is 
anticipated to last 30 months, with the interview data complete appr oximately one -year afterwards. 
Dissemination activities will occur during the final year of the study.  
 
 Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  
Hire and Train Staff                                       
Recruitment                      
Intervention                      
Evaluation                      
Data Analysis                      
Disseminatio n                     
 
  
  
  
VII. HUMAN SUBJECTS  
This study tests a randomized trial of a medical disease self -management program  for mental health 
consumers .  A total of 400 individuals with serious  mental illnesses and one or more chronic medical condition 
(hypertension; heart disease; arthritis; diabetes; or asthma/COPD) will be r ecruited at four community mental 
health centers and  randomized to HARP  or usual care.  For individuals in HARP , peer  leaders  will lead six 
group sessions focusing on improving medical self -management.  Outcome data will be collected at 3 -months, 
6-months and 12 -month intervals after the group program is completed.   
 
VIIA.  Protection of Human Subjects  
VIIA1.  Sources of research material:  
VIIA1a. Interviews:   Interviews will be conducted at baseline, 3 months , and 12 months  after the completion of 
the intervention . Interviews will be conducted in private rooms where peer groups are led.    
 
VIIA1 b. Chart Reviews:   After initial consent, CMHC charts and interview will be used for establishing study 
eligibil ity.  For study participants , medical  charts will be obtained for all mental health and medical visits for all 
study participants.  These will be reviewed at baseline and 12 -month follow -up, with data entered into a 
standardized abstraction form.   
 
VIIA2.  Plans for Recruitment of Subjects :  Recruitment for the groups will rotate across the four study sites, 
with separate sets of groups for subjects at each CMHC.  At each study site, weekly one -hour informational 
sessions will be held at the CMHC.   Partici pants will be notified about these sessions via clinician referrals and 
waiting room flyers. At these sessions, the project director will outline the overall purpose of the study, and the 
fact that if they choose to participate they will be assigned random ly to either the intervention or control group. 
The project director will describe the group format and content of the intervention, as well as the importance of 
being able to attend the full program to achieve its benefits.  Among those interested in part icipating, subjects 
will be offered informed consent to participate in the study by [CONTACT_546241] a one -to-one basis.  
 
VIIB.  Informed Consent:  
 A two -stage informed consent process will be used for the randomized trial  and the dissemination phase 
of the study .  First, brief written consent will be obtained to participate in the eligibility process, which includes 
checking the CMHC records for assessing that the subject is on the roster of established patients, and 
establishing presence of mental (SMI) and medi cal diagnosis.  Potential subjects will be administered a 
cognitive screener.  Next, after eligibility has been established, study participants will be given a full written 
informed consent for the research study .  The senior research interviewer will revi ew the content of the 
informed consent and emphasize that the study is voluntary and confidential.  The senior research interviewer 
will then ask the study participant to briefly describe what the study is about to establish understanding, and 
ask if she h as any questions prior to asking the study participant to sign the informed consent form.  
 Informed consent will only occur if and only if a subject with substantial understanding and in absence of 
control by [CONTACT_2312]. The research staff will be trained to e nsure that the individual is competent to act, receives 
full disclosure, understands the disclosure, acts voluntarily and consents to the intervention.  If there are 
questions with regards to the individual's competence, the research interviewers will cont act the PI [INVESTIGATOR_546207].  
 The informed consent process for the randomized study will include the following: notification that 
participants will be interviewed four times (baseline, three -month, six-month, and 1 -year follow -up); that half of 
participants (s elected at random) will participate in a medical  disease self -management program; that groups 
may be audiotaped; that agreement to participate in the study does not obligate participants to accept any 
particular treatments; and that participants are free t o withdraw from any part of the study (either the 
intervention program or the follow -up assessments) at any time.  After study entry , a separate informed 
consent form will be administered to obtain permission to obtain chart records.   For the dissemination  pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], the 
informed consent will contain information about the program, but not include the sections about randomization, 
interviews, or chart reviews.  
 
VIIC.  Potential Risks   
VIIC1.   Acute medical or mental health crisis:  It is possible that patients will be found to be in a medical or 
mental health crisis at the time of screening or that a new problem will emerge sometime during the study.  The 
  
 exercise class is both extremely low -impact and designed for use in chronically  ill populations.  However, it is 
possible that that it could induce discomfort or medical complications.   It is also possible that the peer leaders 
may have a relapse or face other challenges during the study.  Mechanisms for addressing these risks are 
described below in section VIID3a.  
 
VIIC2.  Incorrect Medical Information or Advice Given to Participants by [CONTACT_445480]:   Although no formal 
medical treatment or medical advice will be provided in the study, it is possible that either peer leaders or 
fellow group  members would give incorrect information to group members.  Mechanisms for addressing that 
potential concern are described in section VIID3b.  
 
VIIC3 . Breach of confidentiality:  It is essential to monitor and minimize the possibility that the research staf f, 
peer leaders, or other group members might reveal personal or sensitive patient information to medical 
providers or family members. Section VIID1 describes the training and supervision process and VIID3c 
discusses methods for keepi[INVESTIGATOR_546208] .  
 
VIIC4. Subject Burden:  Study assessments will always result in an expenditure of time and inconvenience for 
subjects, as well as the potential for discomfort or embarrassment related to the content of the interview.  
Section VIID3d  discusses mechanisms for minimizing subject bu rden.  
 
VIID. Adequacy of Protection against Risks:   
VIID1.  Hiring, Training and supervision of peer leaders   
 Group leaders will be selected using the same inclusion criteria as group members:  1. History of SMI60 2. 
Current treatment in a community mental health center and 3. one or more chronic medical condition.  The 
Georgia Mental Health Consumer Network, which oversees the training and certification program, will then hire  
and supervise three part -time peer ed ucators who will lead groups across all [ADDRESS_714755] training workshop, members of the study team will provide a two -day orientation and tra ining 
program.  The GMHCN will provide additional training in recovery -based treatments and he lp peers obtain 
certification and  allow them to bill for services.  Subsequently, weekly supervision will be provided by [CONTACT_28824] [INVESTIGATOR_546209], the director of the GMHCN, to the peer leaders reinforcing 
core elements of the program, address issues and challenges that arise during the sessions, and allowing 
sharing of success stories.  
 For the dissemination phase of the study, group pa rticipants will be invited to train as peer leaders. They 
will receive training from the CDSMP program, the GMHCN (Sherry Jenkins -Tucker) and the former peer 
educators (who will have been retrained as master trainers).  
 
VIID2.  Training and supervision of the research assistants:   
 The Principal Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_546210] a training program including a) an overview of research and 
ethical issues involved in randomized clinical trials; b) administration of informed consent and c ) patient 
confidentiality (with a focus on recent HIPAA regulations).  Classes will be supplemented with the NIH Human 
Subjects Assurance training and self -test program.   The project manager will provide training in chart 
abstraction and administration of  each of the structured interviews, accompanied b y reference manuals.    The 
project manager will provide basic training i n data entry , data backup, and maintaining patient confidentiality in 
all entry and storage of data.  
 The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/ or project manager will observe the first three instances of each activity 
conducted by [CONTACT_245841]: screening interviews and informed consent processes, interviews, and 
chart reviews.  If there are continuing issues at the end of this period, they will continue to observe and provide 
oversight until they are resolved.  Subsequently, weekly supervision meetings will be held with the research 
assistants, presenting statistics on rates of recruitment, follow -up, and any problems that arise, with p eriodic in -
service lectures about topi[INVESTIGATOR_546211].  
 
VIID3.  Protection Against Specific Risk s: 
VIID3a.  Protocol for addressing acute medical or mental health crisis : 
 In the case that a subject describes any potentially serious symptoms (e.g.  chest pain , shortness of 
breath) in either a group or a study interview, the research assistant or peer leader will immediately contact [CONTACT_28824] [INVESTIGATOR_459107]. Based on the clinical situation, acuity, and patient preferences, a 
  
 decision will be made whether to a. Contact [CONTACT_102]’s primary care provider or mental health clinician or b. 
Call [ADDRESS_714756]. Druss who will establish a plan for follow -up.  The plan will typi[INVESTIGATOR_546212] ’s mental health clinician for further assessment and care, and obtaining consent 
for the study investigator to speak with that clinician.    
 
VIID3b. Addressing possible relapse of peer leaders:  
 The peer educators  will be closely supervised throughout th e study by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Druss and Sherry -Jenkins 
Tucker, who is the Director of the Georgia Mental Health Consumer Network and the Principal Investigator.  
Should peer leaders face difficulties or suffer a relapse, Sherry Jenkins -Tucker and [CONTACT_546246] will work with  the 
peer leader to develop a treatment plan with their clinician. One of the other peer leaders will lead groups until 
the peer is ready to resume work . 
 
VIID3c.  Minimizing Risk of Incorrect Medical Information or Advice Given to Participants by [CONTACT_445480] :  Within the 
HARP group settings, all information and activities will be given in a highly structured, manualized format.   For 
both these group settings and any contacts with peer leaders or fellow group members outside of the classes, 
it will be made cle ar to all participants and group leaders that they that the role of this program is to provide 
support in disease self -management, but in no way to substitute for clinical care.  Should subjects have 
medical symptoms or questions, they will be encouraged t o contact [CONTACT_181391], since neither 
peer leaders nor fellow participants are not qualified to provide formal medical advice.  This will be specified to 
all subjects as part of the informed consent process, and in training and supervision  of the peer leaders.  
 
VIID3d . Protecting against breach of confidentiality:   
VIID3di.   Protecting against breach of confidentiality by [CONTACT_546242]: All peer leaders 
will be  trained in protection of confidentiality.  Each session wi ll begin with a statement that whatever is said 
during the group session is confidential and not to be discussed outside of the group.  Similar instructions will 
be included for all focus groups.  
 
VIID3dii . Preserving privacy and integrity of data:  A web-based, password -protected SQL database will be 
created and housed on a protected drive on the Emory server.  Data will be directly  entered into this  central 
database during data collection .  Unique identifiers will be generated for all study subjects; these will be the 
only identifiers used in files used for data entry and analysis.  The file linking these identifiers to patient names 
and addresses will be stored in a separate locked file that will be available only to the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_546213] m anager.  
 
VIID3e. Minimizing subject burden:   
 Interviews will be scheduled at a time and location that is as convenient as possible for patients – when 
possible, prior to or directly after a mental health appointment.  Interviews will be conducted in a private, 
comfortable setting.  If a subject appears tired or anxious, the subject will be asked if he or she wishes to rest, 
take a break, or terminat e the interview.  Subjects will be paid $20 for each interview to help compensate for 
time and effort.  
 The intervention will be scheduled at a time and location that is convenient to participants and does not 
interfere with work or homemaking activities,  typi[INVESTIGATOR_370731].  When feasible, group meetings and 
interviews will be held in the Wellness Center, a home -like, nonclinical setting run by [CONTACT_546243] a  respi[INVESTIGATOR_546203].  
Where this option is not feasible, classes will be held at the mental health center where patients receive their 
care.  Bus and/or subway tokens will be provided to facilitate transportation to the meetings, and refreshments 
will be prov ided.  
  
VIIE. Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research Project to the Subjects and Others:  
VIIE1. For subjects in the usual care group:  During the study period  the usual care group will not receive 
any benefits from the program other than compensation for time completing interviews. After the initial study 
period and during the dissemination phase, they may have the opportunity to participate in the intervention .  
VIIE2. For subjects in the intervention group : Subjects participating in the intervention group are expected 
  
 to directly benefit from the intervention.  As described in the body of the proposal, we anticipate that the 
intervention may improve medical se lf-management and health outcomes.  
VIIE3. For other persons treated in public safety net settings : The study’s results are hoped to inform the 
development of peer -based medical disease management strategies.  Strategies described in section V will be 
used to disseminate the results of the study to help obtain the broadest possible reach.  
VIIE4. Risk -Benefit Ratio :  Given the protections to ensure confidentiality, ensure high quality of the 
intervention, and minimize subject burden, and the benefits for pati ents in the active treatment group, we 
anticipate a favorable risk -benefit ratio for the project.  
 
VIIF. Data Safety and Monitoring Plan:  
VIIF1. Responsibility, Frequency, and Content of Data Safety Monitoring:  The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_546214].  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_546215] a monthly basis during the course of the study.  
VIIF2. Adverse Event Reporting : Adverse events data will come from two sources: 1) Patient r eports to study 
staff and 2)  Chart reviews.   Any deaths will be reported upon discovery to the IRB.  All other study -related 
serious adverse events will be reported immediately to the Emory IRB.  
 
VIIG: Women and Minority Inclusion  
 
 
TARGETED/PLANNED ENROLLMENT  FOR RANDOMIZED TRIAL: Number of Subjects  
 
 
Ethnic Category  
  
                  Sex/Gender  
Females  Males  Total  
Hispanic or Latino  5 5 10 
Not Hispanic or Latino  201 189 390 
Ethnic Category Total of all Subjects  206 194 400 
 
Racial Categories  
American Indian/Alaska Native  0 0 0 
Asian  3 2 5 
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander  0 0 0 
Black or African American  163 153 316 
Hispanic or Latino  5 5 10 
White  35 34 69 
Other  0 0 0 
Racial Categories: Total of All Subjects  [ADDRESS_714757] different health problems and needs from adults, they would not 
easily be integrated into the broader intervention, and hence will not be included in intervention.  Approximately 
5% of patients at the four CMHCs are betwe en the  ages of [ADDRESS_714758] been validated in the age group (i.e. age 
  
 18 and older).  Therefore, individuals age [ADDRESS_714759] 
that special accommodations will be needed for the group.   
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
1. Druss BG, Zhao L, von Esenwein SA, Bona JR, Fricks L, Jenkins -Tucker S, Sterling E, Diclemente R, 
Lorig K. The Health and Recovery Peer (HARP) Program: a peer -led intervention to improve medical self -
management for persons with serious mental illness. Schizophr Res.118(1 -3):264 -70. PMCID: 2856811.  
2. Maltzberg B. Mortality Among Patients with Mental Disease. Utica:  [LOCATION_001] State Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_546216]; 
1934.  
3. Meyer J, Nasrallah H, editors. Medical illness and schizophrenia. Washington, DC: American 
Psychiatric Press; 2009.  
4. Leucht S, Burkard T, Henderson J, Maj M, Sartorius N, editors. Physical Illness and Schizophreni a: A 
Review of the Evidence. [LOCATION_001]: Cambridge University Press; 2007.  
5. Jeste DV GJ, Lindamer LA, Lacro JP. Medical comorbidity in schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 
1996;22(3):413 -30. 
6. Sokal J ME, Dickerson FB, Kreyenbuhl J, Brown CH, Goldberg RW, Dixon  LB. Comorbidity of 
medical illnesses among adults with serious mental illness who are receiving community psychiatric services. J 
Nerv Ment Dis. 2004;192(6):[ADDRESS_714760] MC, Barreira PJ, Fisher WH, Hargreaves WA, Harding CM. Prevalence, Severity, an d Co -
occurrence of Chronic Physical Health Problems of Persons With Serious Mental Illness. Psychiatr Serv. 
2004;55(11):1250 -7. 
8. Goldman L. Comorbid medical illness in psychiatric patients. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2000;2(3):[ADDRESS_714761], Drake RE, Azeni H. Medical morbidity, mental illness, and 
substance use disorders. Psychiatr Serv. 2002;53(7):861 -7. 
10. Carney CP, Jones L, Woolson RF. Medical comorbidity in women and men with schizophrenia: a 
population -based controlled study.  J Gen Intern Med. 2006;21(11):1133 -7. PMCID: 1831667.  
11. Carney CP, Jones LE. Medical comorbidity in women and men with bipolar disorders: a population -
based controlled study. Psychosom Med. 2006;68(5):684 -91. 
12. Osborn DP, Levy G, Nazareth I, Petersen I, Islam A, King MB. Relative risk of cardiovascular and 
cancer mortality in people with severe mental illness from the [LOCATION_008]'s general practice research 
database. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007;64(2):242 -9. 
13. Felker B YJ, Short D. Mortality and medi cal comorbidity among psychiatric patients: a review. 
Psychiatr Serv. 1996;47(12):1356 -63. 
14. Saha S, Chant D, McGrath J. A systematic review of mortality in schizophrenia: is the differential 
mortality gap worsening over time? Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007;6 4(10):1123 -31. 
15. Newcomer JW, Hennekens CH. Severe mental illness and risk of cardiovascular disease. Jama. 
2007;298(15):1794 -6. 
16. Fricks L. Consumers take charge of wellness. National Council Magazine. 2009(Winter 2009):20 -2. 
17. Sterling E, Von Esenw ein S, Fricks L, Jenkins -Tucker S, Druss B. Health, Wellness, and Recovery. 
Journal of Community Mental Health. 2009;in press.  
18. Insel T. Director's Message to the NIMH Strategic Plan.  
19. Davidson L, Chinman M, Kloos B, Weingarten R, Stayner DA, Tebes J . Peer support among individuals 
with severe mental illness: a review of the evidence. Clin Psychol Sci Prac. 1999;6(6):165 -87. 
20. Davidson L, Chinman M, Sells D, Rowe M. Peer support among adults with serious mental illness: a 
report from the field. Schizophr Bull. 2006;32(3):443 -50. PMCID: 2632237.  
21. Cook J. "Patient -Centered" and "Consumer -Directed" Mental Health Services: A Report Prepared for 
the Institute of Medicine. Chicago, Ill: University of Illinois at Chicago; 2005.  
22. Cook JA, Copeland ME, Hamilton MM, Jonikas JA, Razzano LA, Floyd CB, Hudson WB, Macfarlane 
RT, Grey DD. Initial outcomes of a mental illness self -management program based on wellness recovery action 
planning. Psychiatr Serv. 2009;60(2):246 -9. F. LITERATURE CITED  
  
 23. Lorig K, Holman H, Sobel D,  Laurent D, Gonzalez V, Minor M. Living a Healthy Life with Chronic 
Conditions. Palo Alto, CA: Bull Publishing Company; 1994.  
24. Lorig K. Chronic Disease Self Management Leader's Manual. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford Patient 
Education Research Center; 1999.  
25. Clark N, Becker M, Janz N, Lorig K, Rakowski W, Anderson L. Self -management of chronic illness. 
Journal of Aging and Health. 1991;3:[ADDRESS_714762] JH, Mahoney ER, Stock R, Tusler M. Do increases in patient activation result in improved self -
management behaviors? Health Serv Res. 2007;42(4):1443 -63. PMCID: 1955271.  
27. Mosen DM, Schmittdiel J, Hibbard J, Sobel D, Remmers C, Bellows J. Is patient activation associated 
with outcomes of care for adults with chronic conditions? J Ambul Care Manage. 2007;30(1 ):21-9. 
28. Lorig KR, Sobel DS, Stewart AL, Brown BW, Jr., Bandura A, Ritter P, Gonzalez VM, Laurent DD, 
Holman HR. Evidence suggesting that a chronic disease self -management program can improve health status 
while reducing hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]: a randomized tr ial. Med Care. 1999;37(1):5 -14. 
29. Lorig KR, Ritter P, Stewart AL, Sobel DS, Brown BW, Jr., Bandura A, Gonzalez VM, Laurent DD, 
Holman HR. Chronic disease self -management program: 2 -year health status and health care utilization 
outcomes. Med Care. 2001;3 9(11):[ADDRESS_714763], Laurent DD, Plant K. The internet -based arthritis self -management program: a one -
year randomized trial for patients with arthritis or fibromyalgia. Arthritis Rheum. 2008;59(7):[ADDRESS_714764], Villa F J, Armas J. Community -Based Peer -Led Diabetes Self -management: A 
Randomized Trial. Diabetes Educ. 2009.  
32. Fisher JD, Fisher WA. Changing AIDS -risk behavior. Psychol Bull. 1992;111(3):[ADDRESS_714765] self - examination: A test of the 
Information, Motivation, Behavioral skills model. Journal of Applied Social Psychology. 2003;33:775 -90. 
34. Kodiath M, Kelly A, Shively M. Improving quality of life in patients with heart failure: an innovative 
behavi oral intervention. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2005;20(1):43 -8. 
35. Fisher J, Fisher W. The information -motivation behavioral skills model. In: DiClemente R, Crosby R, 
Kegler M, editors. Emerging Themes in Health Promotion Practice and Research. San Francisco: John  Wiley 
and Sons; 2002.  
36. Fisher W, Fisher J. The Information -Motivation -Behavioral Skills Model: A general social 
psychological approach to understanding and promoting health behavior. In: Suls J, Wallston K, editors. Social 
Psychological foundations of Health and Illness. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing; 2003. p. 82 -106. 
37. Fishbein M, Ajzen I. Belief, attitude, and behavior: An introduction to theory and research. Reading 
MA:: Addison -Wesley, 1975; 1975.  
38. Ajzen I, Fishbein M. Understanding attidutd es and predicting social behavior. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice -Hall; 1980.  
39. Hibbard JH, Stockard J, Mahoney ER, Tusler M. Development of the Patient Activation Measure 
(PAM): conceptualizing and measuring activation in patients and consumers. Health Serv Res. 2004;39(4 Pt 
1):1005 -26. 
40. Aday LA. Health status of vulnerable populations. Annu Rev Public Health. 1994;15:487 -509. 
41. Gelberg L, Andersen RM, Leake BD. The Behavioral Model for Vulnerable Populations: application to 
medical care use and out comes for homeless people. Health Serv Res. 2000;34(6):1273 -302. PMCID: 1089079.  
42. Wingood GM, DiClemente RJ. The ADAPT -ITT model: a novel method of adapting evidence -based 
HIV Interventions. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2008;[ADDRESS_714766] 1:S40 -6. 
43. Harvey  PD, Bowie CR, Friedman JI. Cognition in schizophrenia. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2001;3(5):423 -8. 
44. Dickerson FB, Kreyenbuhl J, Goldberg RW, Fang L, Medoff D, Brown CH, Dixon L. A 5 -year follow -
up of diabetes knowledge in persons with serious mental illness and type 2 diabetes. J Clin Psychiatry. 
2009;70(7):1057 -8. 
45. Dickerson FB, Goldberg RW, Brown CH, Kreyenbuhl JA, Wohlheiter K, Fang L, Medoff D, Dixon LB. 
Diabetes knowledge among persons with serious mental illness and type 2 diabetes. Psychosomatics. 
2005;46(5):418 -24. 
46. Salokangas RK. Living situation, social network and outcome in schizophrenia: a five -year prospective 
follow -up study. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 1997;96(6):459 -68. 
  
 47. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_74182], Heisler M, Ganoczy D, McCarthy JF, Valenstein M. Differenti al medication adherence among 
patients with schizophrenia and comorbid diabetes and hypertension. Psychiatr Serv. 2007;58(2):207 -12. 
48. Bartels SJ, Forester B, Mueser KT, Miles KM, Dums AR, Pratt SI, Sengupta A, Littlefield C, O'Hurley 
S, White P, Perkins  L. Enhanced skills training and health care management for older persons with severe 
mental illness. Community Ment Health J. 2004;40(1):[ADDRESS_714767], Dickerson FB, Wohlheiter K, Fang LJ, Brown CH, Dixon 
LB. Quality of diabetes care among adults with serious mental illness. Psychiatr Serv. 2007;58(4):536 -43. 
50. Roberts L, Roalfe A, Wilson S, Lester H. Physical health care of patients with schizophrenia in primary 
care: a comparative study. Fam Pract. 2007;24(1):34 -40. 
51. Mitchell AJ, Malone D, Doebbeling CC. Quality of medical care for people with and without comorbid 
mental illness and substance misuse: systematic review of comparative studies. Br J Psychiatry. 
2009;194(6):491 -9. 
52. Srebnik DS, La Fond JQ. Advance directives for mental health treatment. Psychiatr Serv. 
1999;50(7):919 -25. 
53. Druss BG, Bornemann TH. Improving health and health care for persons with serious mental illness: the 
window for US federal policy change. JAMA.303(19):1972 -3. 
54. Haas M, Group p E, Muench J, Kraemer D, Brummel -Smith K, Sharma R, Ganger B, Attwood M, 
Fairweather A. Chronic disease self -management program for low back pain in the elderly. J Manipulative 
Physiol Ther. 2005;28(4):228 -37. 
55. Jerant A, Moore -Hill M, Franks P. Home -based, peer -led chronic illness self -management training: 
findings from a 1 -year randomized controlled trial. Ann Fam Med. 2009;7(4):319 -27. PMCID: 2713168.  
56. Ware J. User's Manual for the SF -36v2 Health Survey. Lincoln, RI2007.  
57. Remmers C, Hibbard J, M osen DM, Wagenfield M, Hoye RE, Jones C. Is patient activation associated 
with future health outcomes and healthcare utilization among patients with diabetes? J Ambul Care Manage. 
2009;32(4):320 -7. 
58. Rothman AA, Wagner EH. Chronic illness management: wha t is the role of primary care? Ann Intern 
Med. 2003;138(3):[ADDRESS_714768]. A national dissemination of an evidence -based 
self-management program: a process evaluation study. Patient Educ Couns. 2005;59(1):[ADDRESS_714769] AB, Kanter R, Jung YS. An empi[INVESTIGATOR_546217]. Am J Psychiatry. 1990;147(12):1602 -8. 
61. Sheehan DV, Lecrubier Y, Sheehan KH, Amorim P, Janavs J, Weiller E, Herguet a T, Baker R, Dunbar 
GC. The Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): the development and validation of a 
structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM -IV and ICD -10. J Clin Psychiatry. 1998;[ADDRESS_714770] 20:22 -
33;quiz 4 -57. 
62. Druss BG,  von Esenwein SA, Compton MT, Rask KJ, Zhao L, Parker RM. A randomized trial of 
medical care management for community mental health settings: the Primary Care Access, Referral, and 
Evaluation (PCARE) study. Am J Psychiatry.167(2):151 -9. 
63. Callahan CM, Un verzagt FW, Hui SL, Perkins AJ, Hendrie HC. Six -item screener to identify cognitive 
impairment among potential subjects for clinical research. Med Care. 2002;40(9):771 -81. 
64. Lorig K. Living a healthy life with chronic conditions : self -management of hear t disease, arthritis, 
diabetes, asthma, bronchitis, emphysema & others. 3rd ed. Boulder, CO: Bull Pub. Company; 2006.  
65. US Preventive Services Task Force. Guide to Clinical Preventive Services, 2006. Bethesda, MD: 
Agency for Healthcare Quality and Resear ch; 2006.  
66. Appel LJ, Champagne CM, Harsha DW, Cooper LS, Obarzanek E, Elmer PJ, Stevens VJ, Vollmer WM, 
Lin PH, Svetkey LP, Stedman SW, Young DR. Effects of comprehensive lifestyle modification on blood 
pressure control: main results of the PREMIER clin ical trial. JAMA. 2003;289(16):2083 -93. 
67. Mensing C, Boucher J, Cypress M, Weinger K, Mulcahy K, Barta P, Hosey G, Kopher W, Lasichak A, 
Lamb B, Mangan M, Norman J, Tanja J, Yauk L, Wisdom K, Adams C. National standards for diabetes self -
management educa tion. Diabetes Care. 2007;[ADDRESS_714771] 1:S96 -S103.  
  
 68. Jovicic A, Holroyd -Leduc JM, Straus SE. Effects of self -management intervention on health outcomes 
of patients with heart failure: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. BMC Cardiovasc Disord . 
2006;6:43. PMCID: 1660572.  
69. Gallefoss F, Bakke PS. Impact of patient education and self -management on morbidity in asthmatics and 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Respir Med. 2000;94(3):279 -87. 
70. Monninkhof E, van der Valk P, van  der Palen J, van Herwaarden C, Partridge MR, Zielhuis G. Self -
management education for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a systematic review. Thorax. 
2003;58(5):394 -8. PMCID: 1746688.  
71. Effing T, Monninkhof EM, van der Valk PD, van de r Palen J, van Herwaarden CL, Partidge MR, 
Walters EH, Zielhuis GA. Self -management education for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007(4):CD002990.  
72. Mowbray C, Holter M, TEague C, By[CONTACT_421701] D. Fidelty criteri a: develoment, measurement, and validation. 
American Journal of Evaluation. 2003;24(3):315 -40. 
73. Bond GR, Evans L, Salyers MP, Williams J, Kim HW. Measurement of fidelity in psychiatric 
rehabilitation. Ment Health Serv Res. 2000;2(2):[ADDRESS_714772] D, 
Czajkowski S. Enhancing treatment fidelity in health behavior change studies: best practices and 
recommendations from the NIH Behavior Change Consortium. Health Psychol. 20 04;23(5):443 -51. 
75. Lorig K, Stewart AL, Ritter P, Gonzalez V, Laurent D, Lynch J. Outcome Measures for Health 
Education and Other Health Care Interventions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 1996.  
76. NIH Program on Clinical Research Policy Analysis and Coordination, editor. Considering Usual 
Medical Care in Clinical Trial Design: Scientific and Ethical Issues2005 November 14 -15, 2005.  
77. Weijer C, Miller PB. When are research risks reasonable in relation to anticipated benefits? Nat Med. 
2004;10(6): 570-3. 
78. McHorney CA, Ware JE, Jr., Raczek AE. The MOS 36 -Item Short -Form Health Survey (SF -36): II. 
Psychometric and clinical tests of validity in measuring physical and mental health constructs. Med Care. 
1993;31(3):247 -63. 
79. McHorney CA, Ware JE, Jr., Lu JF, Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36 -item Short -Form Health Survey (SF -
36): III. Tests of data quality, scaling assumptions, and reliability across diverse patient groups. Med Care. 
1994;32(1):40 -66. 
80. Ware JE, Jr., Kosinski M, Bayliss MS, McHorney CA, Rogers WH, Raczek A. Comparison of methods 
for the scoring and statistical analysis of SF -36 health profile and summary measures: summary of results from 
the Medical Outcomes Study. Med Care. 1995;33([ADDRESS_714773]):AS264 -79. 
81. van Tubergen A, Landewe R, Heuft -Dorenbosch L, Spoorenberg A, van der Heijde D, van der Tempel 
H, van der Linden S. Assessment of disability with the World Health Organisation Disability Assessment 
Schedule II in patients with ankylosing spondylitis. Annals of the rheumatic diseases. 2003 ;62(2):140 -5. 
82. Posl M, Cieza A, Stucki G. Psychometric properties of the WHODASII in rehabilitation patients. Qual 
Life Res. 2007;16(9):1521 -31. 
83. McKibbin C, Patterson TL, Jeste DV. Assessing disability in older patients with schizophrenia: results 
from the WHODAS -II. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2004;192(6):405 -13. 
84. Chwastiak LA, Von Korff M. Disability in depression and back pain: evaluation of the World Health 
Organization Disability Assessment Schedule (WHO DAS II) in a primary care setting. Journal of cli nical 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. 2003;56(6):507 -14. 
85. Sterling E, Von Esenwein SA, Tucker S, Fricks L, Druss BG. Integrating wellness, recovery and self -
management for mental health consumers. Journal of Community Mental Health. 2009;in press.  
86. Substance Abuse and  Mental Health Services Administration. National Consensus Statement on Mental 
Health Recovery. 20.  
87. Corrigan PW, Salzer M, Ralph RO, Sangster Y, Keck L. Examining the factor structure of the recovery 
assessment scale. Schizophr Bull. 2004;30(4):1035 -41. 
88. McNaught M, Caputi P, Oades LG, Deane FP. Testing the validity of the Recovery Assessment Scale 
using an Australian sample. The Australian and New Zealand journal of psychiatry. 2007;41(5):[ADDRESS_714774] Behav. 1996;21(2):[ADDRESS_714775] SA, Lazovich D. Assessing change in diet -intervention research. Am J Clin Nutr. 
1994;59([ADDRESS_714776]):185S -9S. 
92. Kristal AR, Shattuck AL, Henry HJ. Patterns of dietary behavior associated with selecting diets low in 
fat: reliability and validit y of a behavioral approach to dietary assessment. J Am Diet Assoc. 1990;90(2):214 -20. 
93. Lalonde I, D'Angelo M, Graham M, Beaton L, Brown J, Block T. Validation of the block 
fat/sugar/fruit/vegetable screener in a cardiac rehabilitation setting. J Cardiop ulm Rehabil Prev. 2008;28:340.  
94. Sternfeld B, Block C, Quesenberry CP, Jr., Block TJ, Husson G, Norris JC, Nelson M, Block G. 
Improving diet and physical activity with ALIVE: a worksite randomized trial. Am J Prev Med. 
2009;36(6):475 -83. 
95. Craig CL, Ma rshall AL, Sjostrom M, Bauman AE, Booth ML, Ainsworth BE, Pratt M, Ekelund U, 
Yngve A, Sallis JF, Oja P. International physical activity questionnaire: 12 -country reliability and validity. Med 
Sci Sports Exerc. 2003;35(8):1381 -95. 
96. Paffenbarger RS, Jr.,  Hyde RT, Wing AL, Hsieh CC. Physical activity, all -cause mortality, and 
longevity of college alumni. N Engl J Med. 1986;314(10):605 -13. 
97. Pereira MA, FitzerGerald SJ, Gregg EW, Joswiak ML, Ryan WJ, Suminski RR, Utter AC, Zmuda JM. 
A collection of Physic al Activity Questionnaires for health -related research. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1997;29([ADDRESS_714777]):S1 -205. 
98. Morisky DE, Green LW, Levine DM. Concurrent and predictive validity of a self -reported measure of 
medication adherence. Med Care. 1986;24(1):67 -74. 
99. Nelson MR, Reid CM, Ryan P, Willson K, Yelland L. Self -reported adherence with medication and 
cardiovascular disease outcomes in the Second Australian National Blood Pressure Study (ANBP2). Med J 
Aust. 2006;185(9):[ADDRESS_714778] EM, Nichol MB, Shi SG, 
Livengood KB, Walden S, Lubowski TJ. Medication adherence and associated hemoglobin A1c in type 2 
diabetes. Ann Pharmacother. 2004;38(9):1357 -62. 
101. McGlynn EA, Asch SM, Adams J, Keesey J,  Hicks J, DeCristofaro A, Kerr EA. The quality of health 
care delivered to adults in the [LOCATION_002]. N Engl J Med. 2003;348(26):2635 -45. 
102. Lorig K, Holman H. Arthritis Self -Efficacy Scales measure self -efficacy. Arthritis Care Res. 
1998;11(3):155 -7. 
103. Lorig K, Chastain RL, Ung E, Shoor S, Holman HR. Development and evaluation of a scale to measure 
perceived self -efficacy in people with arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 1989;32(1):37 -44. 
104. Toobert DJ, Hampson SE, Glasgow RE. The summary of diabetes sel f-care activities measure: results 
from 7 studies and a revised scale. Diabetes Care. 2000;23(7):943 -50. 
105. Kim MT, Hill MN, Bone LR, Levine DM. Development and testing of the Hill -Bone Compliance to 
High Blood Pressure Therapy Scale. Prog Cardiovasc Nur s. 2000;15(3):90 -6. 
106. Sullivan MD, LaCroix AZ, Russo J, Katon WJ. Self -efficacy and self -reported functional status in 
coronary heart disease: a six -month prospective study. Psychosom Med. 1998;60(4):473 -8. 
107. Mancuso CA, Sayles W, Allegrante JP. Development and testing of the Asthma Self -Management 
Questionnaire. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2009;102(4):[ADDRESS_714779]. 1991;99(5):1193 -6. 
109. Chodosh J, Morton SC, Mojica W, Maglione M , Suttorp MJ, Hilton L, Rhodes S, Shekelle P. Meta -
analysis: chronic disease self -management programs for older adults. Ann Intern Med. 2005;143(6):427 -38. 
110. Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, Swartz MS, Rosenheck RA, Perkins DO, Keefe RS, Davis SM, 
Davis CE, Lebowitz BD, Severe J, Hsiao JK. Effectiveness of antipsychotic drugs in patients with chronic 
schizophrenia. N Engl J Med. 2005;353(12):1209 -23. 
111. Essock SM, Covell NH, Davis SM, Stroup TS, Rosenheck RA, Lieberman JA. Effectiveness of 
switching  antipsychotic medications. Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163(12):2090 -5. 
  
 112. Druss B, von Esenwein S, Compton M, Rask K, Zhao L, Parker R. The Primary Care Access Referral, 
and Evaluation (PCARE) Study: A Randomized Trial of Medical Care Management for Community  Mental 
Health Settings. Under Review. 2009.  
113. Brook R. The RAND/UCLA appropriateness method. In: McCormick K, Moore S, Siegel R, editors. 
Clinical practice guideline development: methodology perspectives. Rockville, Md, November: Agency for 
Health Care  Policy and Research; 1994. p. 59 -70. 
114. Shekelle PG, Kahan JP, Bernstein SJ, Leape LL, Kamberg CJ, Park RE. The reproducibility of a method 
to identify the overuse and underuse of medical procedures. N Engl J Med. 1998;338(26):1888 -95. 
115. Asch S, Clar k K. Hypertension. Santa Monica, CA: RAND; 2000.  
116. Gazmararian JA, Williams MV, Peel J, Baker DW. Health literacy and knowledge of chronic disease. 
Patient Educ Couns. 2003;51(3):[ADDRESS_714780] for measuring 
patient knowledge of arthritis and its self -management. Arthritis Rheum. 1995;38(5):590 -600. 
118. Greenfield S, Sullivan L, Dukes KA, Silliman R, D'Agostino R, Kaplan SH. Development and testing of 
a new measure of case mi x for use in office practice. Med Care. 1995;33([ADDRESS_714781]):AS47 -55. 
119. Greenfield S, Kaplan SH, Silliman RA, Sullivan L, Manning W, D'Agostino R, Singer DE, Nathan DM. 
The uses of outcomes research for medical effectiveness, quality of care, and reimbursem ent in type II diabetes. 
Diabetes Care. 1994;[ADDRESS_714782] 1:32 -9. 
120. Sheehan D, Lecrubier Y, K H -S. The validity of the Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Interview 
(M.I.N.I.) according to the SCID -P and its reliability. Eur Psychiatry. 1997;12:232 -41. 
121. McLellan AT, Luborsky L, Woody GE, O'Brien CP. An improved diagnostic evaluation instrument for 
substance abuse patients. The Addiction Severity Index. J Nerv Ment Dis. 1980;168(1):26 -33. 
122. Hodgins DC, el -Guebaly N. More data on the Addiction Severity Index. Reliability and validity with the 
mentally ill substance abuser. J Nerv Ment Dis. 1992;180(3):197 -201. 
123. Bryk A. Hierarchical linear models: applications and data analysis methods. Newbury Park, CA.: Sage; 
1992.  
124. Teh CF, Kilbourne AM, McCarth y JF, Welsh D, Blow FC. Gender differences in health -related quality 
of life for veterans with serious mental illness. Psychiatr Serv. 2008;59(6):663 -9. 
125. Frangakis C, Rubin D. Addressing complications of intention -to-treat analysis in the combined pres ence 
of all -or-none treatment -noncompliance and subsequent missing outcomes. . Biometrika 1999;86(2):[ADDRESS_714783] J, Imbens G, Rubin D. Identification of causal effects using instrumental variables. J Am Stat 
Assoc. 1996;91:444 -72. 
127. Nagelkerke N, Fidler V, Bernsen R, Borgdorff M. Estimating treatment effects in randomized clinical 
trials in the presence of non -compliance. Stat Med. 2000;19(14):1849 -64. 
128. Little R, DB. R. Statistical Analysis With Missing Data.  . [LOCATION_001]: John Wiley; 1987.  
129. Schafer J. Analysis of Incomplete Multivariate Data. London, England: : Chapman and Hall; 1997.  
130. Little R. Pattern -mixture models for multivariate incomplete data.  . Journal of the American Statistical 
Association. 1998;88(421):125 -34. 
131. Little  R. Modeling the drop -out mechanism in repeated -measures studies. . Journal of the American 
Statistical Association. 1995;90 (431):1112 -21. 
132. Little RJ, Rubin DB. Causal effects in clinical and epi[INVESTIGATOR_224238]: 
concepts an d analytical approaches. Annu Rev Public Health. 2000;21:121 -45. 
133. Simon GE, Revicki DA, Grothaus L, Vonkorff M. SF -36 summary scores: are physical and mental 
health truly distinct? Med Care. 1998;36(4):567 -72. 
134. Hann M, Reeves D. The SF -36 scales ar e not accurately summarised by [CONTACT_546244]. Qual Life Res. 2008;17(3):413 -23. 
135. Taft C, Karlsson J, Sullivan M. Do SF -36 summary component scores accurately summarize subscale 
scores? Qual Life Res. 2001;10(5):395 -404. 
136. Kenny DA, Calsyn RJ, Morse GA, Klinkenberg WD, Winter JP, Trusty ML. Evaluation of treatment 
programs for persons with severe mental illness: moderator and mediator effects. Eval Rev. 2004;28(4):294 -
324. 
  
 137. Grundy SM, Cleeman JI, Merz CN, Brewer HB, Jr., Clark LT, Hunninghake DB, Pasternak RC, Smith 
SC, Jr., Stone NJ. Implications of recent clinical trials for the National Cholesterol Education Program Adult 
Treatment Panel III guidelines. Circulation. 2004;110(2):[ADDRESS_714784] T, Joffe M,  Lynch K, Maisto S, Brown G, Beck A. Causal mediation analyses with rank 
preserving models. Biometrics. 2007;in press.  
139. MacKinnon D, Dwyer J. Estimating mediated effects in prevention studies. Evaluation Review. 
1993;17(2):[ADDRESS_714785]. Psychol Sci. 
2007;18(3):233 -9. 
141. Kenny D. Moderation. 2009 [updated 2009; cited]; Available from: 
http://davidakenny.net/cm/moderation.h tm. 
142. Bodenheimer T, Wagner EH, Grumbach K. Improving primary care for patients with chronic illness. 
Jama. 2002;288(14):1775 -9. 
 
 