 
Long- term monitoring of 
patients with cardiac 
amyloidosis  with implantable 
event monitors  
 
NCT# [ADDRESS_303365] SW.  
[COMPANY_002]ster,  MN [ZIP_CODE]  
(77)4 -8846  
 
Grace Lin, MD  
Rosalyn Adigun, MD, PharmD  
Peter Brady, MB, ChB, MD Yong- Mei Cha, MD  
Abhishek Deshmukh, MBBS 
Angela Dispenzieri, MD Martha Grogan, MD 
Dawn  Pedrotty,  MD, PhD 
Funding  Sponsor:  [COMPANY_007]  
[ADDRESS_303366]:  Biomonitor 3 (This  device is being used in the study but is 
already FDA approved for this indication. The device is NOT under investigation.) 
Protocol Number:  (IRBe)  17-006298     IDE Number:  Not Applicable  
Initial version: 4/10/2018 Version  1 
Revised : 3/26/2019 Version 2 
Revised : 10/16/2019 Version  3 
Revised:  1/6/2020 Version 4 
Revised:  1/30/2020 Version 5 
Revised:   4/30/2021 Version 6 
Revised:  6/1/2022 Version 7 
          Revised:           1/5/2023 Version 8 
Page  2 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL            Revised:            3/21/2023 Version 9 
         Revised:            08/22/2023 Version 10  
Page  3 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL   Table of Contents  
STUDY SUMMARY ............................................................................................................................................ 5 
1 INTRODUCTION  ....................................................................................................................................... 6 
1.1 BACKGROUND  ...................................................................................................................................................................... 6 
1.2 DEVICE  ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7 
1.3 CLINICAL  DATA TO DATE ................................................................................................................................................. 7 
1.4 STUDY RATIONALE  AND RISK/BENEFITS  ..................................................................................................................... [ADDRESS_303367]  RECRUITMENT , ENROLLMENT  AND SCREENING  ................................................................................... 13 
4.4 EARLY WITHDRAWAL  OF SUBJECTS  ........................................................................................................................... 13 
4.4.1 When  and How  to Withdraw  Subjects  .......................................................................................... 13 
4.4.2 Data  Collection  and Follow -up for Withdrawn Subjects  .............................................................. 14 
4.5 DESCRIPTION  ..................................................................................................................................................................... 14 
4.6 PREPARATION AND ADMINISTRATION /IMPLANTATION AND EXPLANTATION OF DEVICE  .......................... [ADDRESS_303368]  POPULATION (S) FOR  ANALYSIS  .................................................................................................................. [ADDRESS_303369]  OF ABBREVIATIONS  
 
AE Adverse  Event/Adverse  Experience  
CFR Code  of Federal Regulations  
CRF Case  Report  Form  
DSMB  Data  and Safety  Monitoring Board  
FDA  Food  and Drug  Administration  
GCP  Good  Clinical  Practice  
HIPAA  Health  Insurance  Portability  and Accountability  Act 
IDE Investigational  Device  Exemption  
IRB Institutional  Review  Board  
PHI Protected  Health Information  
PI [INVESTIGATOR_122733]/Serious  Adverse  Experience  
SOP Standard  Operating  Procedure  
UADE  Unanticipated  Adverse  Device  Effect  
Page  [ADDRESS_303370]  Participation 
Duration  Approximately six months +31 days i f removal  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Objectives  There  are four specific  aims.  We seek to determine  in wild type 
transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTRwt):  
Specific Aim 1: Burden of conduction system  disease and arrhythmias, 
specifically  sinus node dysfunction, high grade heart block, and AF and 
VA, which will identify those who might benefit from a PPM or ICD 
Specific Aim 2: Mechanism  of SCD  (asystole,  pulseless  electrical 
activity,  or sustained  VA)  and whether this is different  in early  vs. late 
stage amyloidosis. 
Specific Aim 3 : Risk factors for SCA and more specifically whether 
bradycardia or VA predict SCD, or whether there are imaging or 
clinical characteristics that predict SCA  
Specific Aim 4 : Utility of long term ECG monitoring in TTR -wt 
cardiomyopathy  
Number of Subjects  50 
Diagnosis and Main 
Inclusion Criteria  Patients  with ATTRwt  cardiac amyloidosis are included in this study.  
Device  Biomonitor 3 (Utilized  not investigational)  
Duration of 
Exposure  Intended  to remain  in the body for [ADDRESS_303371]  of care treatment.  
Statistical Methodology  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_249475]  7 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL   1 Introduction  
 
This document is a protocol for a human research  study. This study will be carried  out in 
accordance with the procedures described in this protocol, applicable [LOCATION_002] 
government regulations and Mayo Clinic policies and procedures. 
 
1.1 Background  
Amyloid cardiomyopathy (AC) results from myocardial deposition of amyloid fibrils. The 
most common forms of amyloidosis associated with cardiac involvement include (1) AL 
amyloidosis, an immunoglobulin light chain  plasma  cell dyscrasia;  (2) Transthyretin (TTR - 
m) an autosomal familial  amyloidosis resulting from mutant transthyretin and (3) 
Transthyretin wild type (TTR-wt) amyloidosis, arising from a wild type transthyretin 
primarily in older individuals (1,2). The onset of a restrictive cardiomyopathy and 
progressive heart failure is the primary concern in cardiac amyloidosis, but another problematic aspect is infiltration of the conduction system, causing bradycardia, atrial arrhythmias (AF), and sudden cardiac death (SCD) (1,2). 
 
Conduction disease in AC manifests as high-grade atrioventricular (AV) block and sinus node dysfunction (bradycardia, heart rate <35bpm) and standard clinical indications for pacemaker implantation have been applied (1,3); however, many clinicians hesitate to treat with pacemakers (PPM) due to a perceived higher complication rate. Atrial fibrillation also presents several management dilemmas as AV nodal blocking agents typi[INVESTIGATOR_249476], and data on anti-arrhythmic drug therapy and ablation are limited  (4,5). A major  limitation  of ablation  is high rates  of AF recurrence in amyloidosis 
(4), hypothesized to occur because the arrhythmia is believed to arise from diffuse amyloid infiltration in the atrial tissue rather than from the pulmonary veins, rendering targeted ablation to isolate the pulmonary veins less effective. Although ventricular arrhythmias are also prevalent, their role in SCD in amyloidosis is also controversial (4,6-9). A longer term 
monitoring study with implantable loop recorders in a small number of patients with AL amyloidosis has suggested tha t bradycardia leading to asystole is the more likely culprit, at 
least in advanced amyloid cardiomyopathy, but it is not clear if this is also true earlier in the disease process or if it applies to TTR -wt (8).  
 
A particular challenge with TTR -wt is the paucity of data pertaining to arrhythmia risk. 
Much of the published literature, although also limited in scope and sample size, addresses arrhythmia risk only in AL amyloidosis. TTR- wt cardiomyopathy is characterized by a more 
indolent course compared to AL, and individuals may present with heart block or atrial arrhythmias prior to the onset of advanced heart failure symptoms and often before the diagnosis of TTR-wt cardiomyopathy (1,2). Advancements in imaging techniques such as cardiac magnetic resonance imaging and technetium pyrophosphate scintigraphy that permit earlier and non -biopsy diagnosis of TTR-wt diagnosis have enhanced the diagnosis of TTR- 
wt cardiomyopathy (10,11). As a result, it appears TTR- wt may  be more prevalent than 
previously known; there is a significant overlap between TTR-wt cardiomyopathy and an ageing  population of patients  with heart  failure  with preserved  ejection  fraction,  hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy, and those with aortic stenosis undergoing transcatheter valve replacement  
Page  8 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL   (12-14). Therefore arrhythmia risk and management  in TTR -wt cardiomyopathy will impact 
an increasingly growing population of patients, with unique risk factors and management 
challenges that differ from those with other cardiovascular disease.  
 
One reason  that arrhythmia management  in amyloidosis has been  focused  on AL amyloidosis 
was due to the lack of disease modifying therapi[INVESTIGATOR_249477]- wt. The recent availability of 
disease modifying therapi[INVESTIGATOR_249478] (15-17). Previous experiences  of implantable  cardiac device therapy  in amyloid  cardiomyopathy for arrhythmia 
management have suggested that earlier  implantation may be associated with superior results 
(7,18). Whether the current therapi[INVESTIGATOR_249479], but these therapi[INVESTIGATOR_249480], delay or prevent onset of more severe disease that would not be amenable to treatment and could influence mortality. The main objective of this study is to identify TTR- wt 
cardiomyopathy patients at risk for bradycardia or SCD who may benefit from PPM or implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICD), and to determine whether monitoring of TTR- 
wt patients  undergoing treatment  with  disease modifying therapi[INVESTIGATOR_249481].  
 
1.[ADDRESS_303372]  the following cardiac arrhythmias:  
• atrial  fibrillation  
• bradycardia,  
• sudden rate drop,  
• high ventricular  rate (HVR),  
• asystole  
 
The Biomonitor 3 is  indicated  for use in: 
• Patients  with clinical  syndromes or situations  at increased  risk of cardiac  arrhythmias  
• Patients  who experience transient  symptoms that  may suggest a cardiac arrhythmia  
• The device has not been  tested  for and it is not intended for pediatric use 
 
1.3 Clinical Data  to Date  
 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_249482] (ILR) device  
The objective of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_249483] t
he sensing quality of BIOTRONIK’s second generation of ILR, the BioMonitor 2, a device 
which is inserted subcutaneously. Data of [ADDRESS_303373] common indications for 
Page  9 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL   insertion of the BioMonitor 2 were syncope and symptomatic or asymptomatic atrial 
fibrillation.  The published results  demonstrate safety  and efficacy  of the insertion  procedure 
and the study device. 
The next generation device, the Biomonitor 3 device was FDA approved in 2019 and 
represents an advancement from its predecessor. It is 60% smaller than the Biomonitor [ADDRESS_303374].  Device recordings offer increased  signal 
quality over its predecessor, the Biomonitor 2. 
 
1.4 Study  Rationale and Risk/Benefits  
 
1.4.[ADDRESS_303375] hesitated to treat potentially  life threatening  arrhythmias, or to consider implantation  of cardiac devices  (PPM 
or ICD) which may improve symptoms and impact mortality. The recent availability  of 
disease modifying therapi[INVESTIGATOR_249484] a new era of treatment strategies which improve both mortality  and morbidity. The goal of the study is to identify  patients who would also benefit 
from treatment of arrhythmias, and who might otherwise have succumbed to complications from arrhythmias, including stroke, sudden cardiac death, or injury from syncope due to bradycardia.  
 
Implantable loop recorders  have been  used successfully  to monitor for arrhythmia  burden and 
to identify causes of cryptogenic syncope and stroke in patients with cardiovascular disease (19,20). The devices can be implanted at low risk and with local anaesthesia and can be inserted in an office setting, and remaining in situ for up to 3 years to permit long term monitoring (21). The device are explanted at the time of battery expi[INVESTIGATOR_1516]. Miniaturized 
implantable loop recorders have been used to document mechanisms of sudden death in late 
stage AL amyloidosis but have not been routinely utilized especially in TTR -wt (8). Given 
the perceived high risk for arrhythmias and the lack of robust data on arrhythmia burden, amyloid cardiomyopathy would seem an ideal population to monitor with implantable long- term loop recorders.  
 
An observation from the recently published Transthyretin Amyloidosis Cardiomyopathy Clinical Trial (ATTR -ACT) was the subgroup analysis suggesting greater benefit in less 
severe heart failure (17,22). Arrhythmia risk (AF, heart block, and cardiac arrest) might be different in patients with earlier stages of the disease, and if treatment with tafamidis might prevent further progression of conduction system disease and arrhythmia burden. The 
current study proposed is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_249485] a scertain the effects of 
tafamidis  on arrhythmia burden in different  stages  of disease,  but observations from  the study 
will provide preliminary data for future and necessary prospective monitoring studies. 
 
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_249486], appropriate risk stratification in amyloid cardiomyopathy is lacking. Traditional risk stratification  with decreased  ejection  fraction  (<35%) commonly 
Page  [ADDRESS_303376] increasing doubt on the  wisdom 
of generalizing decreased ejection fraction as a risk stratifier for SCD in patients with heart failure due to other causes, specifically those with non- ischemic cardiomyopathies(23) and 
heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (24). At this t ime, patients with amyloid 
cardiomyopathy are without appropriate risk stratification  metrics  and are at risk for inadequate 
treatment and at increased risk for SCD.  
 
The prognostic value of non- sustained  VA, another traditional risk factor  for SCD  in ischemic 
cardiomyopathy, is also controversial in amyloid cardiomyopathy. Long term outpatient monitoring of both supraventricular and ventricular  arrhythmias for prognostic implications  in 
relation  to other diagnostic modalities  is instrumental in understanding the disease process  and 
providing appropriate therapy. 
 
Currently, the balance of data does not support ICD implantation in amyloid cardiomyopathy (7). However, some studies have demonstrated that ventricular arrhythmias resulting in SCD 
can be successfully treated with defibrillation, hypothesizing that this t reatment may be more 
successful in earlier stage disease (8,26,27). SCD in late stage disease has been hypothesized 
to be due to electromechanical  dissociation  or bradycardia  mediated  asystole for which  an ICD 
would not be beneficial (25)(8,18). The Mayo clinic staging system based on cardiac biomarkers has been validated and is used to stratify severity of disease (early vs late stage)  in 
TTR -wt cardiomyopathy. The reported  4 year survival estimates  of patients  with Mayo  stage I 
(TnT  <0.05ng/ml and NT BNP <3000 pg/mL), II (either TnT >0.05 ng/ml or NT BNP 
>3000 pg/mL), and III (TnT  >0.05 ng/ml and NT BNP  >3000 pg/mL) TTRwt  amyloidosis was 
57%, 42%, and 18%, respectively  (28).  Those patients  with advanced  amyloid cardiomyopathy 
may have estimated  survival less  than  a year  due to  heart  failure  and should be excluded  from 
ICD whereas those with earlier stage may still have added survival benefit. We hypothesize that the occurrence and treatibility of ventricular arrhythmias is dependent on disease 
progression and may be a phenomena of earlier stage disease. Monitoring at all stages of CA disease to understand arrhythmia risk at each  stage is instrumental in understanding the true 
prevalence and treatment of arrhythmias.  
 
Patients with CA and conduction disease undergo pacemaker implantation for standard 
guideline criteria. However, bradycardia has been implicated as a mechanism for SCD. 
Bradycardia leading to asystole has been postulated to be a pre -terminal event reflecting an 
irreversible sick myocardium (8). A second hypothesis is that the reduced cardiac output associated with bradycardia might be sufficient to induce global ischemic stunning of the heavily  infiltrated  ventricular myocardium resulting  in decompensation and pulseless  electrical 
activity (PEA) arrest(8).  In a study of AL amyloidosis patients monitored with ILR, one patient 
with severe bradycardia who underwent early pacemaker implantation survived. Therefore, it is possible that prophylactic pacemaker implantation into healthier myocardium may prevent SCD due to bradycardia, and treatment with disease modifying therapi[INVESTIGATOR_249487]. Furthermore, a recent  study of prophylactic pacemaker insertion in 
patients  with TTR  patients  with a genetic variant  associated with increased risk of conduction 
disorders showed a reduction in major cardiac 
Page  11 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL   events over a 45 month follow up (29). The proposed study would permit improved 
understanding of the initiation of bradycardia, correlating to stage of disease and clinical imaging; helpi[INVESTIGATOR_249488]. 
 
1.4.[ADDRESS_303377] of Anticipated  Risks:  
• Discomfort  at time  of insertion  
• Infection  
• Bleeding  
 
False  detection  is a minimal risk. The BioMonitor [ADDRESS_303378] of care to identify the subgroup of patients who will benefit from PPM or ICD.  
 
2 Study  Objectives  
Listed  below are the specific  aims/objectives  for this study. 
 
Specific Aim 1: Burden of conduction system  disease and arrhythmias, specifically  sinus node 
dysfunction, high grade heart block, and AF and VA, which will identify those who might benefit from a PPM or ICD  
Specific Aim 2 : Mechanism of SCD (asystole, pulseless electrical activity, or sustained VA) 
and whether this is different in early vs. late stage amyloidosis. Specific Aim 3: Risk factors  for SCA  and more  specifically  whether  bradycardia or VA 
predict SCD, or whether there are imaging or clinical characteristics that predict SCA Specific Aim 4 : Utility of long term ECG monitoring in TTR -wt cardiomyopathy 
Page  12 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL    
2.1 Primary  Objective  
 
This is a Pi[INVESTIGATOR_249489]. 
The study is designed to assess arrhythmic events  using the implantable  cardiac monitor, 
Biomonitor 3, in subjects presenting to the clinic with TTR-wt cardiac amyloidosis. 
 
2.2 Secondary  Objective  
 
The secondary goal is  to assess arrhythmogenesis in  relation  to stage of cardiac amyloidosis  
 
3 Study  Design  
3.1 General  Design  
This is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_14737] 50 patients to monitor arrhythmogensis  for six months with +[ADDRESS_303379] implantation in patients TTR -wt cardiac amyloidosis proven by [CONTACT_249505]. Study staff will provide continuous monitoring of 
the ILR.  
 
The general  design is outlined below:  
 
3.2 Primary  Study  Endpoints  
 
1. Sudden cardiac death  (including resuscitated  cardiac arrest) . 
RV Biopsy  or PYP 
study  proven  TTR 
-wt amyloidosis  
25 patients  with  
stage  I or II 
25 patients  with  
stage  III 
Biomonitor  3 
implantation  
Biomonitor  3 
implantation  
6 months  of 
monitoring  
6 months  of 
monitoring  
Biomonitor  3 
explantation  
Biomonitor  3 
explantation  
Page  13 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL   2. Syncope due to heart  block or sinus node dysfunction requiring pacemaker  
 
3.3 Secondary  Study  Endpoints  
 
1. All-cause mortality: with  a focus on HF  deaths  and bradycardia/PEA  
2. PPM  implantation  and indication, frequent  of pacing  required, and if BIV pacing  is 
needed  
3. ICD implantation  and indication,  frequency  of shocks and if appropriate vs 
inappropriate and if successful defibrillation occurred 
4. Frequency  of NSVT  and predictability  with other ventricular  arrhythmias and sudden 
cardiac death  
5. Frequency  of atrial  flutter  or fibrillation  and predictability  with other arrhythmias 
including predictability of ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death 
 
[ADDRESS_303380] the Biomonitor 3 implanted.  
6. Amyloid s tages I -III patients with existing implantable cardiac devices such as pacemakers or 
defibrillators  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
Page  14 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL    
 
4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
 
1. Significant coronary artery disease > 75% luminal stenosis in at least 1 epi[INVESTIGATOR_196520]  (by [CONTACT_249506]), or history of 
myocardial infarction or coronary revascularization. 
2. Congenital heart  disease.  
3. Pregnant patients  
4. Patients whose heart failure is felt to be secondary to primary valvular disease ( ≥ 
moderate/severe  mitral regurgitation), uncorrected  thyroid disease,  obstructive or 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, pericardial disease or a systemic illness. 
5. Absolute contraindications to cardiac  MRI  (such as  renal  failure  with GFR<30%).  
6. Unwilling  or unable to provide informed consent.  
7. Patients  with other life  threatening  diseases  that would likely  decrease their  life 
expectancy over the next four years. 
8. Patients  who are post cardiac transplant.  
9. Difficulty to attend the follow -up schedule due to a history of medical 
noncompliance, difficulty,  or unwillingness to return  to the study center  for follow 
up. 
10. Evidence of ongoing bacteremia or sepsis preventing implantation  of a device.  
11. Unwilling  or able to have the Biomonitor [ADDRESS_303381]  of care therapy  including 
staging with cardiac biomarkers. We will recruit 25 patients with stage I  or II and 25 patients 
with stage III.  Prior to time of recruitment, inclusion and exclusion criteria will be  reviewed 
for each patient.  
 
There are no known contraindications for the insertion of the BioMonitor 3. However, the patient’s particular medical condition may dictate whether or not a subcutaneous, chronically inserted device can be tolerated.  
 
Patients  will have the option to leave the device in situ for the lifetime  of the device . If opting 
for the full battery lifetime, the patient/insurance company would be responsible for the continued monitoring after the 6 month study period and the explantation of the device  at 
battery end of life. 
 
4.4 Early  Withdrawal of Subjects  
 
4.4.1 When  and How to Withdraw Subjects  
 
Patients  may withdraw at any time from  the study. Reason  for withdraw may include but are 
not limited to adverse events, progression of disease requiring withdrawal or simply the patient’s decision to withdraw. 
 
If a subject  does withdraw,  that subject  will be replaced  according  to the originally  assigned 
group to permit enrollment of 50 patients complete the study. 
 
Patients may be withdrawn from the study by [CONTACT_249507]. Reasons for removal include, but are not limited to: patient death;  loss of sensing; inability  to program/interrogate the inserted  monitor; infection, battery 
end of life (normal or premature); system upgrade; physician preference for another insertable monitor model; and/or other reason(s) which may or may not be known to the 
insertable monitor manufacturer. Complications related to other portions of the insertable 
monitor system (i.e., patient) may also result in insertable monitor removal. The table below summarizes some of the more common reasons for insertable monitor removal. 
Page  [ADDRESS_303382]  
 
Battery  Premature depletion or other 
cause(s)  resulting  in excessive 
battery current drain.   
Inability  to program/interrogate; sensing difficulty.  
 
Circuitry  Electrical  parameter  changes 
due to shorts, opens, or 
component parametric drift  
Electromagnetic Interference 
(EMI) from large power tools, industrial equipment, electrocautery, defibrillation, 
radiation  therapy, RF ablation 
therapy, etc.   
Reversion to “Elective Replacement” or electrical 
reset  parameters;  inability  to program/ interrogate; 
other damage to circuit components resulting in 
permanent or temporary parameter changes.  
Patient  Normal  medical  complication  Infection  
Body  rejection  phenomena  Fluid  accumulation;  migration;  erosion.  
 Physician  preference  Upgrade  to an implantable  cardiac  pacemaker  or 
implantable cardioverter defibrillator.  
 
If the device is removed  due to need  for a pacemaker  or implantable  cardioverter  defibrillator 
the patient will continue to be monitored via the pacemaker or defibrillator as per clinically 
indicated standard of care monitoring protocol and intervals. 
 
If a subject chooses to withdraw from the study, and requests the monitor to be explanted prior to the end of the [ADDRESS_303383] 
subcutaneous ECGs (sECGs) and other physiological parameters.  
 
The Biomonitor [ADDRESS_303384] the occurrence of arrhythmias in a patient.  Arrhythmia may be  classified  as atrial  fibrillation  (AF),  bradyarrhythmia, asystole, 
sudden rate drop, or high ventricular  rate. In addition, the Biomonitor [ADDRESS_303385] cardiac rhythm during symptomatic epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841].  
Page  17 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL    
The Biomonitor 3 system consists of three main components:  
1. Biomonitor [ADDRESS_303386]. The device uses two 
electrodes on the body of the device to continuously monitor the patient’s subcutaneous ECG.  The device memory  can store  up to 30 min of subcutaneous ECG 
(sECG) recordings from automatically detected arrhythmias and up to [ADDRESS_303387] a typi[INVESTIGATOR_249490]. For waveform display (real- time streaming sECG with the physician’s 
programmer and snapshots for review by [CONTACT_099]), a different passband is utilized to retain signal features that may have diagnostic value. This passband is 0.5 – 40 Hz, which  is designed to retain  morphological features  of a typi[INVESTIGATOR_249491].  
 
2. BIOTRONIK Renamic / ICS 3000 Programmer  – The programmer is  used to set up 
the Biomonitor [ADDRESS_303388],  or print the 
stored information.  
 
3. BIOTRONIK CardioMessenger® Smart is a telemetry patient device that forwards the data from  the Biomonitor  3 to BIOTRONIK’s Home  Monitoring Service Center.  
 
Biomonitor 3 may be used with BIOTRONIK Home Monitoring® technology, which is an automatic, wireless, remote monitoring system for management of patients with insertable cardiac monitors. When  active,  Home  Monitoring enables  the exchange of information about 
a patient’s cardiac status from the implant. The information is transmitted to the Home Monitoring Service Center (HMSC), where the physician may log in to review. The HMSC can be used to provide the physician with advanced reports from the implanted device and process them into a graphical and tabular format. This information may help the physician optimize the therapy process, possibly providing earlier notification of clinically relevant events to help guide future therapy.  
 
• BIOTRONIK conducted the  TRUST  study to evaluate the safety  and effectiveness  of 
Home Monitoring. With the TRUST study, BIOTRONIK was able to show the 
following with regards to Home Monitoring:  
Page  18 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL   • BIOTRONIK Home  Monitoring information  may be used as a replacement  for device 
interrogation during in-office follow-up visits. 
• A strategy of care using BIOTRONIK Home Monitoring with office visits when 
needed has been shown to extend the time between routine, scheduled in- office 
follow-ups of BIOTRONIK implantable  devices  in many  patients.  Home  Monitoring 
data is helpful in determining the need for additional in- office follow -up. 
• BIOTRONIK Home  Monitoring provides early  detection  of arrhythmias.  
• BIOTRONIK Home  Monitoring provides early  detection  of silent,  asymptomatic 
arrhythmias.  
• Automatic early detection of arrhythmias and device system anomalies by 
[CONTACT_249508]-office follow -ups.  
• BIOTRONIK Home  Monitoring allows  for improved access  to patient  device data 
compared to conventional in- office follow -ups since device data is automatically 
collected and reported on a daily basis.  
• The implanted  device’s  Home  Monitoring function can be used for the entire 
operational life of the implanted device (prior to ERI).  
• NOTE:  When  ERI mode is  reached,  this status  is transmitted  and Home  Monitoring® 
will be discontinued after two weeks.  
 
Electromagnetic Interference (EMI) - Precautions for EMI interference with the 
Biomonitor 3 insertable  cardiac monitors including cellular  telephones,  electronic article 
surveillance systems, and others. 
Use in Cellular  Phone  Restricted  Areas  - The mobile  patient  device (transmitter/receiver) 
should not be utilized in areas where cellular phones are restricted or prohibited (i.e., 
commercial aircraft).  
Elective Replacement Indicator (ERI) - When ERI mode is reached, this status is transmitted.  Home  Monitoring data transmissions  will continue for another 2 weeks.  After 2 
weeks, data will no longer be transmitted to the Service Center.  
Communication Loss - A system alert appears in the physician’s queue on the Home Monitoring website if no data transmissions occur for a period of time programmed by [CONTACT_28024]. You may configure alerts so that an SMS, fax and/or e- mail message is sent to the 
physician regarding the communication loss. If no data transmissions have been received by [CONTACT_249509] 90 days, the patient  will be deactivated.  In the event  of sustained communication 
loss, an in- office follow -up visit is recommended. 
 
4.6 Preparation  and Administration/Implantation  and Explantation of Device  
 
Preparation  of Device  
The B iomonitor 3 is preloaded  in the insertion  tool and is packaged  with  an incision  tool in a 
single container sterilized with ethylene oxide. The device can be implanted in an office setting and all implantations for the study will be performed in the Clinical Research Trials Unit (CRTU). The implantation procedure is performed with injection of a local anesthetic (lidocaine).  Conscious sedation is not required.  
Page  19 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL    
 
Peel off the sealing  paper  of the outer container 
as indicated by [CONTACT_249510]. 
 
    
 
     
 
Insertion 
The FIT OneStep  Tool allows  an “injection -like”  insertion of the implant using a single tool. 
It is used for forming the device tunnel and subsequent subcutaneous delivery of the 
Biomonitor [ADDRESS_303389]. Recommended locations are those areas close to the heart where the implant will be exposed to minimal movement from body positio nal changes or from arm movement. Suitable implant locations are shown below. In 
position A, a location  between  the suprasternal  notch and the left nipple is shown. Position  B 
shows an implant location of approximately 45° with respect to the midline. The choice of placement location is to be decided by [CONTACT_099], on the basis of individual patient anatomy and comfort, as well as cosmetic considerations. The insertion proc ess consists of 
four (4) intuitive steps: Incision, Tunneling, Unlocking and Retraction 

Page  [ADDRESS_303390]  Compliance  Monitoring  
 
All patients will undergo Home Monitoring of their device. By [CONTACT_15094], the Biomonitor 3 
will transmit all data and a daily trend report between 1:00 A.M. and 2:00 A.M. daily. BIOTRONIK’s Home  Monitoring system  is also designed to notify clinicians  in less than 24 
hours of changes  to the patient’s  condition or status  of the inserted  device.  Updated  data may 
not be available if:  
• The patient’s  CardioMessenger  is off or damaged  and is not able to connect  to the 
Home Monitoring Service Center.  
• The CardioMessenger cannot establish  a connection to  the inserted  device.  
• The telephone and/or Internet  connection  do not operate properly  
• The Home  Monitoring Service  Center  is off-line (upgrades are typi[INVESTIGATOR_249492] 24 hours)  
 
These updates  will help  to assist  the subject to  make the necessary  changes  so that data can 
be transmitted and they are not lost to follow up. 
 
4.[ADDRESS_303391] be used, it should not be applied in the immediate vicinity of the insertable cardiac monitor. The patient’s peripheral pulse should be monitored continuously during the treatment. 
Transcutaneous  Electrical  Nerve Stimulation  (TENS)  - Transcutaneous electrical  nerve 
stimulation may interfere with insertable cardiac monitor function. If necessary, the following measures may reduce the possibility of interference:  
Place t
he TENS  electrodes  as close to each  other as  possible.  
Place the TENS  electrodes  as far from  the insertable  cardiac monitor as possible. 
Monitor cardiac activity during TENS use. 
Page  23 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL   Defibrillation  - The following  precautions are recommended  to minimize  the inherent risk of 
insertable cardiac monitor operation being adversely affected by [CONTACT_249511]:  
Page  24 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL   The paddles should be placed  anterior-posterior or along a line perpendicular  to the 
axis formed by [CONTACT_249512].  
 
Radiation - Insertable cardiac monitor electronics  may be damaged  by [CONTACT_249513]. To minimize this risk when using such therapy, the insertable cardiac 
monitor should be protected with local radiation shielding. 
Lithotripsy - Lithotripsy treatment should be avoided for insertable cardiac monitor patients 
since electrical  and/or mechanical  interference  with the insertable  cardiac monitor is possible. 
If this procedure must be used, the greatest possible distance from the point of electrical and 
mechanical strain should be chosen in order to minimize a potential interference with the insertable cardiac monitor.  
Electrocautery - Electrocautery should never be performed within 15 cm (6 inches) of an 
insertable  cardiac  monitor because of the danger of damaging the insertable  cardiac monitor. 
When possible, a bipolar electrocautery system should be used.  
Transurethral  resection  of the prostate - It is recommended  that the cautery  ground plate 
be placed under the buttocks or around the thigh, but not in the thoracic area where the 
current pathway could pass through or near the cardiac monitor. 
Importantly, the device  is MR  Conditional - The cardiac monitor is labeled  and certified 
MR conditional. 
 
The following requirements must always  be fulfilled  in order to perform  an MR scan using 
BIOTRONIK’s BioMonitor 3:  
1. There  are no other active  or abandoned cardiac implants  (e.g., lead extensions, lead 
adapters or abandoned leads) in the patient’s body. 
2. O
ther  active  or passive implants  are permitted  if they are identified  as MR conditional 
by [CONTACT_3455]. NOTE : An MRI scan is permitted only if the product- specific 
conditions are met for all implants and if no metal insertable device longer than 5 cm 
is in the vicinity of the BIOTRONIK cardiac monitor within a distance of less than 4 cm. 
3. Th
e  device is located  in the patient’s  chest  area. 
The MRI  scanner  has to meet  the following conditions:  
1. Use of a clinical  MRI  system  with a cylindrical  bore and a static  magnetic  field 
strength of:  
a. 1.5 Tesla (for BioMonitor and BioMonitor 3) or 3.0 Tesla quadrature transmit 
coils 
b. only (for BioMonitor 2).  
 
2. The slew rate of the MRI  scanner’s  gradient fields  should not exceed  200 T/m/s  per 
axis. 
3. For the head  and the extremities,  local  transmitter  and receiver  coils  are approved for 
use in addition to the local receiver coils.  
4. Only  local  receiver coils  may  be used for the thorax. 
Page  [ADDRESS_303392] be ≤ 100T/m 
(10,000 gauss/cm).  
6. Under worst  case conditions, the BioMonitor 3 is expected  to produce a maximum 
temperature rise of <4.5° C after [ADDRESS_303393] be met during the MR scan:  
1. The MR scan  should be performed  with  the patient  in supi[INVESTIGATOR_2547]. 
2. The mean  specific  absorption rate (SAR) for the whole body as displayed by [CONTACT_249514] 4.0W/kg. 
3. The head  absorption rate displayed  by [CONTACT_249515]  3.2 W/kg.  
 
Environmental factors  
The operation of any insertable  cardiac  monitor can be affected  by [CONTACT_249516]. In some cases the disturbance sources can couple sufficient energy to damage the insertable cardiac monitor.  
BIOTRONIK insertable cardiac monitors have been designed to significantly reduce susceptibility to disturbance sources. However, due to the variety and complexity of sources creating  interference,  there  is no absolute protection against  disturbance sources.  Generally,  it 
is assumed that disturbance sources produce only minor effects, if any, in insertable cardiac monitor patients. If the patient presumably will be exposed to one of the following environmental conditions, then the patient should be given the appropriate warnings.  
 
The following equipment (and similar  devices)  may affect  normal insertable  cardiac monitor 
operation: electric arc welders, electric melting furnaces, radio/television and radar transmitters, power generating facilities, high voltage transmission lines, electrical ignition systems (also of gasoline powered devices) if protective hoods, shrouds, etc., are removed, electrical tools, anti-theft devices of shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_249493], if not in proper condition or not correctly grounded and encas ed. 
Patients  should exercise reasonable caution  in avoidance of devices  which  generate a strong 
electric or magnetic field. Some potential EMI sources include:  
High  Voltage Power Transmission Lines  - High  voltage power transmission  lines 
may generate enough EMI to interfere with insertable cardiac monitor operation if approached too closely.  
Home Appliances - Home appliances normally do not affect insertable cardiac 
monitor operation if the appliances are in proper condition and correctly grounded and encased.  There are reports  of insertable cardiac  monitor  disturbances caused  by [CONTACT_249517].  
Page  [ADDRESS_303394] 
transmitters, linear power amplifiers, or high -power amateur transmitters may generate 
enough EMI to interfere with  insertable  cardiac monitor operation if approached  too closely.  
Commercial Electrical Equipment - Commercial electrical equipment such as arc 
welders,  induction furnaces,  or resistance welders  may generate enough EMI to interfere with 
insertable cardiac monitor operation if approached too closely. 
Electrical  Appliances  - Electric  hand-tools and electric razors  (used  directly  over the 
skin of the insertable  cardiac monitor) have been  reported  to cause  insertable cardiac  monitor 
disturbances. Home appliances that are in good working order and properly grounded do not 
usually produce enough EMI to interfere with the insertable cardiac monitor operation.  
Electronic Article Surveillance (EAS) - Equipment such as retail theft prevention 
systems may interact  with the insertable  cardiac monitor devices.  Patients  should be advised 
to walk directly through and not to remain near an EAS system longer than necessary.  
Cell Phones - Recent studies have indicated there may be a potential interaction between cellular  phones and  insertable  cardiac  monitor operation. Potential effects  may be due to the 
radio frequency signal when the phone is within close proximity (within 6 inches [15 centimeters]) to the insertable cardiac monitor. Based on testing to date, effects resulting 
from an interaction between cellular phones and the insertable cardiac monitors have been 
temporary. Simply moving the phone away from the inserted device will return it to its previous state of operation. 
To minimize  such interactions,  patients  having an inserted  cardiac monitor who operate  a 
cellular phone should:  
• Maintain a minimum separation of 6 inches (15 centimeters) between a hand -held 
personal cellular  phone and the inserted  device.  Portable and mobile  cellular  phones 
generally  transmit at higher power levels  compared  to hand held models. For phones 
transmitting above 3 watts, maintain a minimum separation of 12 inches (30 
centimeters) between the antenna and the inserted device.  
• Patients should hold the phone to the ear opposite the side of the inserted device. Patients should not carry the phone in a breast pocket or on a belt over or within 6 inches  (15 centimeters)  of the inserted  device  as some  phones emit signals when  they 
are turned ON but not in use (i.e., in the listen  or standby [INVESTIGATOR_175591]). Store  the phone in a 
location opposite the side of the cardiac monitor.  
 
4.[ADDRESS_303395] receipt  in the 
device accountability log. 
 
The designated  study staff will count and verify  that the shipment contains all the items  noted 
in the shippi[INVESTIGATOR_68250].  Any  discrepancies,  damaged  or unusable devices  in a given shipment 
will be documented in the study files. The sponsor- investigator will notify the supplier 
immediately of any discrepancies, damaged or unusable products. 
 
4.10.2 Storage  
 
Storage (temperature) - Recommended storage temperature range is -10° to 45°C (14°- 
113°F). Exposure to temperatures  outside this range may result  in insertable cardiac  monitor 
malfunction.  
Temperature Stabilization - Allow the device to reach room temperature before 
programming or implanting  the device.  Temperature extremes  may affect  the initial device 
function.  
Storage - Store  the device in a clean  area,  away  from  sources  of disturbance to avoid damage 
to the device.  
 
4.10.[ADDRESS_303396] surface,  The device will not be 
used if there noted damage on opening the package, or if the device is expi[INVESTIGATOR_5697]. All devices will be returned to Biotronik in exchange for a functional device. All device serial numbers will be recorded on implanation. 
Page  28 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL    
At routine intervals and at the completion of the study, there will be a reconciliation of 
devices shipped, devices utilized, and devices remaining. This reconciliation will be logged on the Device Accountability form, signed and dated. Any discrepancies noted will be documented, the sponsor-investigator will be notified  and an investigation  will be conducted 
to determine the cause of the discrepancy. Devices destroyed on site will be documented in the study files. 
 
5 Study  Procedures  
Arrhythmias will be assessed via home monitoring through the Biomonitor 3 device. Superventricular tachycardia (SVT),  ventricular  arrhythmias (VA),  bradycardia (<35bpm), 
heart block and atrial arrhythmias are considered of interest. 
 
Home Monitoring  for arrythmias  
 
Telemetry  tracings  from  the implantable  monitor will be reviewed  monthly or whenever  an 
event occurs and/or a patient transmits data due to symptoms via remote assistance.  
 
Default  transmission  is data sent daily  between  1:00AM and 2:00AM regardless  of events.  If 
there is a problem with transmission the device will alert the physician within 24 hours and this will help to maintain compliance of transmission.  
 
If no events  occur the device will be interrogated  prior to explantation at the end of the 6 
month monitoring period. 
 
The study investigators will be responsible for telemetry review. The patient’s treating cardiologist will be notified of events of clinical significance. Treatment of the arrhythmias will be based on current clinical guideline recommendations for bradycardia and VA. Clinical follow up will occur via standard of care clinical visits . 
 
SCD is defined as sudden and unexpected death within [ADDRESS_303397] and NOT adverse events, as these are not a consequence of monitoring via the implantable device.  
 
At the end of the 6 month monitoring period, the device will be explanted.  Participants will 
be offered the choice to retain the device until battery end of life if clinically indicated. However,  patients  who opt to continue monitoring will be informed  that their insurance 
Page  29 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL   company will be billed for clinically indicated monitoring and explantation outside the study 
time frame.   
 
For any patients who expi[INVESTIGATOR_249494], the terminal rhythm of participants who die will be reviewed remotely via the Biotronik website irrespective of whether the monitor can be retrieved. Patients will be informed of this possibil ity during the 
consent process.  For stage III patients with existing ICD or pacemakers, rhythm monitoring will be obtained from the device over a 6 month timeframe and may be retrospective if applicable.  
Patients with existing implantable cardiac devices will undergo a device interrogation at enrollment and at the 
end of the 6 month monitoring period.   If available, records from interim routine and unscheduled clinical device 
interrogations during the 6 month monitoring period be requested for review by [CONTACT_473].  
 
 
Routine  clinical follow up will be continued including  clinically  indicated  ECHOs,ECGs, 
and blood work.  
 
Timeline  for testing:  
An insertable  monitor may be removed  emergently  at the investigator’s discretion  at any time 
subsequent to an implant procedure. Reasons for removal include, but are not limited to: 
patient  death;  loss of sensing; inability  to program/interrogate the inserted monitor;  infection, 
EOS  (normal  or premature);  or other reason(s).  Complications  related  to other  portions of the 
insertable monitor system may also result in insertable monitor removal.  
 
6 Statistical Plan Tests   
 
ECHO - TTE At baseline (clinical  echo  within  6 months  of 
enrollment  date)  and scheduled  as clinically  
indicated  
Biopsy or technetium 
pyrophosphate  scintigraphy  As clinically  indicated, inclusion  criteria  for the 
study  
 
EKG  Clinically  indicated at baseline  (within 6 months of 
enrollment) and when clinically indicated  
MRI  with T1 When  clinically  indicated  
Cardiopulmonary  exercise 
test  
When  clinically  indicated  
Biomonitor  3 Monitored  with a clinically  significant  event  
 
NT proBNP  When clinically indicated, inclusion criteria for the 
study based on clinically indicated testing  
 
Troponin  T When clinically indicated, inclusion criteria for the 
study based on clinically indicated testing  
Labs: CBC, Basic Metabolic 
Panel, Mg   
When  clinically  indicated  
Urine  pregnancy  At baseline  for women  of child  bearing  potential  
 
Page  30 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL   6.1 Sample  Size Determination  
This study is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], to assess the true arrhythmic burden seen in the TTR -wt 
population. This is a novel study design and no research  exists.  This study will provide the 
basis for future, larger scale trials.  
Page  31 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL    
6.2 Statistical  Methods 
Descriptive Statistics  
Univariate  descriptive statistics  and frequency  distributions will be calculated,  as appropriate  
for all variables.  Baseline  values  for demographic, clinical,  and outcome variables  (primary 
and secondary) will be tabulated for the two groups. These analyses will help identify 
baseline clinical characteristics that may be associated with risk of sudden cardiac arrest or bradycardia requiring pacemaker implantation. 
 
Handling  of Missing  Data  
 
This is a prospective pi[INVESTIGATOR_249495], MN. All clinically relevant data will stored in the Mayo Clinic electronic medical record (Epic). Data queries will be performed at the conclusion of the study to recover any missing data. 
 
Primary  Hypothesis:  
 
The primary hypothesis that arrhythmogenesis and SCD risk in this population is influenced by [CONTACT_249518],  which 
is often  a marker  of late disease and increased  mortality  due to heart  failure,  and that SCD  due 
to asystole, rather than VA which could be treated with ICD. Conduction system disease 
causing  heart  block, atrial  arrhythmias and VA leading  to SCD  may occur  earlier  in the disease 
process  and treatment of AF, VA, and heart  block could improve both morbidity  and mortality.  
 
A Student’s t- test will be used to compare differences  in arrhythmia burden between  the 
patients in the two groups (early stage I- II vs s tage III either with any implanted cardiac 
device).  
 
6.[ADDRESS_303398]  Population(s) for Analysis  
 
All-implanted  population: Any subject  enrolled  into the study and had a device implanted.  
 
[ADDRESS_303399] (UADE) will be recorded on the appropriate case report form. Records of these events will be maintained and reports submitted to the appropriate regulatory committees per their requirements. Expected clinical adverse events and nonsignificant (not serious) clinical adverse events for the Biomonitor [ADDRESS_303400] experienced 
any adverse events between scheduled study visits or contacts. 
 
In addition, sponsors are required to report analyses of unexpected adverse device experiences to IRBs. FDA encourages efforts by [CONTACT_249519]. The ultimate  goal is to provide more  meaningful 
information to IRBs, particularly when sponsor analysis (including an analysis of the significance of the adverse event, with a discussion of previous similar events where appropriate) is made available to IRBs.  
 
7.1 Definitions  
The only definition of an adverse event in the device regulations (21 CFR 812) is for an “Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect.” The regulations reference “Adverse Effects” and “Adverse Device Effects” may be either anticipated or unanticipated. Investigators will maintain records of all relevant observations including records concerning adverse device effects (whether anticipated or unanticipated), information and data on the condition of each subject  upon entering  and during the course of the investigation, including information  about 
relevant previous medical history and the results of all diagnostic tests. 
 
Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect  (UADE)  
A UADE  is any serious adverse effect  on health  or safety  or any life-threatening problem or 
death caused by, or associated with, implantation of the device, or any other unanticipated serious problem associated with a device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects.  
 
Adverse Effect  (Event)  
Any infection at the site of the implantable device, excessive unstoppable bleeding or development of a hematoma requiring evacuation, or malfunction of the FDA approved device in a subject involved in this clinical  trial. Malfunction of the device includes but is 
not limited loss of sensing; inability to program/interrogate the inserted monitor; or premature EOS. Complications related to other portions of the insertable monitor system may also result in insertable monitor removal.  
 
General  Physical Examination Findings  
At screening, any clinically significant abnormality should be recorded as a preexisting 
condition. At the end of the study, any new clinically significant findings/abnormalities that 
meet  the definition  of an adverse  event  must also be recorded  and documented as an adverse 
event.  
 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059],  Prolonged Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_249496]  [ADDRESS_303401]  unless specifically  instructed  otherwise  in this protocol. 
Any condition responsible for surgery should be documented as an adverse event if the condition meets the criteria for an adverse event.  
 
Neither  the condition, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059],  prolonged hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059],  nor surgery are reported  as 
an adverse event in the following circumstances:  
 
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14841] a preexisting condition. Surgery  should not be reported  as an outcome 
of an adverse event if the purpose of the surgery was elective or diagnostic and the outcome was uneventful 
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_249497] 
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_249498].  
 
Post-study  Adverse  Event  
 
All unresolved adverse events will be followed by [CONTACT_1374], the subject is lost to follow -up, or the adverse event is otherwise explained. At the 
last scheduled visit, the investigator will instruct each subject to report any subsequent event(s) that the subject, or the subject’s personal physician, believes might reasonably be related to participation in this study.  The investigator will notify the study regulatory 
sponsor of any death or adverse event occurring at any time after a subject has discontinued or terminated study participation that may reasonably be related to this study. The sponsor should also be notified  if the investigator is aware of the development of problems, cancer  or 
of a congenital anomaly in a subsequently conceived offspring of a subject that has participated in this study. 
 
Preexisting  Condition  
A preexisting condition is  one that is present  at the start of the study.  
 
Unanticipated Problems  Involving Risk  to Subjects  or Others  (UPI[INVESTIGATOR_14845])  
Any unanticipated  problem or adverse event  that meets  all of the following three criteria:  
• Serious : Serious problems or events that results in significant harm, (which may be 
physical, psychological, financial,  social,  economic,  or legal)  or increased risk  for the 
subject  or others (including individuals who are not research  subjects). These  include: 
(1) d eath;  (2) life threatening adverse experience;  (3) hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]  - inpatient, new, 
or prolonged; (4) disability/incapacity - persistent or significant; (5) birth defect/anomaly; (6) breach of confidentiality and (7) other problems, events, or new information (i.e. publications, DSMB reports, interim findings, product labeling change) that in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_14846], safety, or welfare of the subjects or others, or substantially compromise the research data, AND  
Page  34 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL   • Unanticipated: (i.e. unexpected) problems or events are those that are not already 
described as potential risks in the protocol, consent document, not listed in the 
Investigator’s Brochure, or not part of an underlying disease. A problem or event is "unanticipated" when  it was unforeseeable at the time  of its occurrence.  A problem or 
event is "unanticipated" when it occurs at an increased frequency or at an increased severity than expected, AND 
• Related : A problem or event  is "related"  if it is possibly related  to the research 
procedures.  
 
A
dverse Event  Reporting  Period  
 
 
1. Patients will be monitored for 6 months and all adverse events withing the 6 month time frame will be 
recorded.   If patients choose to retain the monitor, all subsequent monitoring will be clinically indicated.    
 
 
7.2 Recording  of Adverse Events  
Study subjects  will be routinely questioned about adverse effects  at study visits.  Information 
on all adverse events will be recorded immediately in the source document, and also in the appropriate adverse event section of the case report form (CRF). All clearly related signs, symptoms, and abnormal physical exam of the implant site will be recorded in the source document.  
 
All adverse events occurring during the study period will be recorded. All observed or volunteered adverse effects (serious or non- serious) will be recorded in the subjects’ case 
history. For all adverse effects sufficient information will be pursued and or obtained as to permit; an adequate determination of the outcome, an assessment of the casual relationship between  the adverse effect  and the device.  The clinical  course of each event  will be followed 
until resolution, stabilization, or until it has been ultimately determined that the study treatment or participation is not the probable cause. 
 
The only laboratory values that will prompt an investigation would be an elevated 
leukocytosis IN ADDITION to a physical inspection of the implanted site. If the implanted 
site is erythematous, hot, swollen, or there is drainage from  the skin would further steps  need 
to be taken to possibly extract the device. Positive blood cultures would indicate the necessity of a physical exam and inspection of the implant site. 
 
A form  will be created  for capturing  information  related  to adverse  events  and submitted  to 
the IRB.  
Adverse Event CRF:  
• Subject  Study Number/Identifier  
• Device information  (model  and serial  number)  
• Date of event  onset  
• Description  of the event  
• Indicate if device needed  to be explanted  
• Subject  current  status,  or if the event  was resolved  
• Principal  Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_249499]  35 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL   determination  
• Principal  Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_249500].  
 
7.[ADDRESS_303402] as requested. 
 
7.3.1  Sponsor -Investigator Reporting,  Notifying  Mayo  IRB 
 
The sponsor-investigator will report  to the Mayo  IRB  any UPI[INVESTIGATOR_249501] -UPI[INVESTIGATOR_68259]. 
 
Deviations from  the investigational plan.  
 
The sponsor-investigator shall notify Mayo IRB (see 21 CFR 56.108(a) (3) and (4)) of any deviation from the investigational plan to protect the life or physical well-being of a subject 
in an emergency. Such notice shall be given as soon as possible, but in no event later than [ADDRESS_303403] the scientific sou ndness of the plan or the rights, safety, or 
welfare of human subjects, FDA and IRB notification in accordance with 21 CFR 812.35(a) also is required. 
 
7.4 Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_249502]. If frequent adverse events occur with implantation  of the monitoring device that require early  explantation (i.e. frequent infection), 
the study will be stopped. 
 
7.[ADDRESS_303404] of 1996 (HIPAA). 
Those regulations require a signed subject authorization informing the subject of the following:  
• What  protected  health  information  (PHI) will be collected  from  subjects in this  study 
• Who  will have access  to that information  and why  
• Who  will use or disclose that information  
• The rights of a research subject to revoke their authorization for use of their PHI. 
(This  information  is contained  within  the Mayo  IRB  Informed  Consent Template Section  12) 
In the event that a subject revokes authorization to collect or use PHI, the investigator, by [CONTACT_5151], retains the ability to use all information collected prior to the revocation of subject authorization. For subjects that have revoked authorization to collect or use PHI, attempts should be made to obtain permission to collect at least vital status (long term survival status that the subject is alive) at the end of their scheduled study period. 
 
8.2 Source Documents  
 
Source data comprise all information, original records of clinical findings, observations, or other activities in a clinical trial necessary for the reconstruction and evaluation of the trial. Source data are contained in source documents. Our source documents include original documents, and data records including hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1097], clinical and office charts, laboratory notes, memoranda, subjects’ diaries or evaluation checklists, pharmacy dispensing records, recorded  data from  automated  instruments,  copi[INVESTIGATOR_249503], microfiches, photographic negatives, microfilm or magnetic media, x -rays, subject files, and records kept at the pharmacy, at the laboratories, and at 
medico -technical departments involved in the clinical trial.  When applicable, information 
recorded on the CRF shall match the Source Data recorded on the Source Documents.  
 
All data will be stored  in the Mayo  Clinic  electronic medical  record,  and any data relevant  to 
the study will be entered into  the study database stored  on secure Mayo  Clinic  servers which 
is compliant with the FDA’s electronic records and electronic signatures regulations at 21 
CFR Part 11 . 
 
8.3 Case  Report  Forms  
A Case Report Form (CRF) will be completed for each subject enrolled into the clinical study. The investigator-sponsor will review,  approve and sign/date each completed  CRF;  the 
investigator-sponsor’s signature [CONTACT_57322]-sponsor’s responsibility for ensuring that all clinical and laboratory data entered on the CRF are complete, accurate and authentic.  
 
The study case report  form  (CRF)  is the primary  data collection  instrument for the study. All 
data requested on the CRF must be recorded. All missing data must be explained. If a space 
Page  37 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL   on the CRF  is left blank because the procedure was not done or the question was not asked,  it 
will be recorded as “N/D”. If the item is not applicable to the individual case, write “N/A”.  
CRFs  are electronic and  are incorporated  into the 
 
Data  Management  
 
The data will be stored  and managed as  per protocol at  the Mayo  Clinic.  
 
Data  Processing  
 
This is a single center study. All data will be entered monthly for all patients without 
arrhythmias and  data  will be entered  within  a week  of a clinically  relevant  arrhythmic 
occurrence.  
 
Data  Security  and Confidentiality  
 
This is a single site study. The Mayo  Clinic,  [COMPANY_002]ster,  MN campus,  is a major  referral 
center for amyloidosis. Data security is of utmost concern at Mayo Clinic and data security  and confidentiality  will be  maintained  in accordance  of Mayo  Clinic  standards. 
 
Data  Quality  Assurance  
 
Data will be entered  into a RedCap  secure database by [CONTACT_249520].  This data will be reviewed by [CONTACT_249521]. 
 
Data  Clarification Process  
 
Any questions about data will be address  by [CONTACT_249522]. 
 
8.[ADDRESS_303405]  case histories  and regulatory  documents. 
 
The sponsor- investigator  will retain  the specified records  and reports  for: 
1. As outlined in the Mayo  Clinic  Research  Policy  Manual  –“Retention  of and Access  to 
Research Data Policy” http://mayocontent.mayo.edu/research-poli cy/MSS_669717, 
 
9 Study  Monitoring,  Auditing,  and Inspecting  
9.1 Study  Monitoring  Plan 
The investigator will allocate adequate time for such monitoring activities.  The Investigator 
will also  ensure that the monitor or other compliance or quality  assurance  reviewer  is given 
access to all the study -related documents and study related facilities (e.g. pharmacy, 
diagnostic laboratory, etc.), and has adequate space to conduct the monitoring visit. 
Page  38 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL   Data and safety monitoring provides a clinical investigation with a system for appropriate 
oversight and attention  to the protection of human subjects  by [CONTACT_093],  research  team, 
or an independent reviewer. A Data and Safety Monitoring Plan is a quality assurance plan for a research study. A written Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) has been created. 
 
Clinical trial monitoring may include review of the study documents and data generated throughout the duration of the study to help ensure the validity  and integrity  of the data along 
with the protection of human research subjects. This will assist sponsor- investigators in 
complying with Food and Drug Administration regulations. 
 
9.2 Auditing  and Inspecting  
The sponsor-investigator will permit study- related  monitoring, audits, and inspections by [CONTACT_5040], the monitor, and government regulatory agencies, of all study related documents (e.g., source documents, regulatory documents, data collection instruments, study data etc.). The sponsor-investigator will ensure the capability for inspections of applicable study- related 
facilities (e.g., pharmacy, diagnostic laboratory, etc.). 
 
Participation  as a sponsor-investigator in this study implies  acceptance  of potential inspection 
by [CONTACT_5152]. 
 
[ADDRESS_303406] (IRB), in agreement with local legal prescriptions, for formal approval of the study. The decision of the IRB  concerning  the conduct of the study will be 
made in writing to the sponsor-investigator before commencement of this study. 
 
All subjects for this study will be provided a consent form describing this study and providing sufficient information for subjects to make an informed decision about their participation in this study. This consent form will be submitted with the protocol for review and approval by [CONTACT_14884]. The formal consent of a subject, using the Approved IRB consent form,  must be obtained before that subject  undergoes any study procedure. The 
consent form must be signed and dated by [CONTACT_249523]’s legally authorized 
representative, and the individual obtaining the informed consent. 
 
11 Study  Finances  
11.1 Funding  Source 
The study is financed  through [COMPANY_007],  Mayo  Clinic  and Biotronik.  
 
12 Publication  Plan  
 
Study results  will be  published on completion of the study.  
 
Page  39 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL    
13 References  
 
http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/136/Suppl_1/A16347  
 
1. Falk R, Dubrey  SW. Amyloid Heart  Disease.  Progress  in Cardiovascular  Disease 
2010;52:347 -361. 
2. Gertz MA, Benson MD, Dyck  PJ et al. Diagnosis, Prognosis, and Therapy  of 
Transthyretin Amyloidosis. J Am Coll Cardiol 2015;66:2451-2466. 
3. Maurer MS, Hanna M, Grogan M et al. Genotype and Phenotype of Transthyretin 
Cardiac Amyloidosis: THAOS  (Transthyretin Amyloid  Outcome Survey). J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2016;68:161-72. 
4. Barbhaiya CR, Kumar  S, Baldinger SH et al. Electrophysiologic Assessment  of 
Conduction Abnormalities and Atrial Arrhythmias Associated with Amyloid Cardiomyopathy. Heart Rhythm 2016;13:383-390. 
5. Tan NY,  Mohsin Y,  Hodge DO et al. Catheter  Ablation  for Atrial Arrhythmias  in 
Patients with Cardiac Amyloidosis. Journal of Cardiovascular Electrophysiology 2016;27:[ADDRESS_303407] in patients with cardiac 
amyloidosis: presenting rhythms, managment  and outcomes in four patients. 
Resuscitation 2004;60:105-111. 
7. Lin G, Dispenzieri  A, Kyle  R, Grogran  M, Brady  PA. Implantable Cardioverter 
Defibrillators in Patients with Cardiac Amyloidosis. Journal of Cardiovascular Electrophysiology 2013;24:793-798. 
8. Sayed  RH, Rogers D, Khan  F et al. A study of implanted  cardiac rhythm recorders  in 
advanced cardiac AL amyloidosis. European Heart Journal 2015;36:1098-1105. 
9. Lin G, Dispenzieri  A, Brady  PA. Successful  termination  of a ventricular  arrhythmia 
by [CONTACT_249524] a patient with cardiac amyloidosis: insight into mechanisms of sudden death. Eur Heart J 2010;31:1538. 
10. Gillmore  JD, Maurer  MS, Falk RH et al. Nonbiopsy Diagnosis of Cardiac 
Transthyretin Amyloidosis. Circulation 2016;133:2404-12. 
11. Hosch  W, Kristen  AV,  Libicher  M et al. Late enhancement  in cardiac amyloidosis: 
correlation of MRI enhancement pattern with histopathological findings. Amyloid 2008;15:196 -204. 
12. Gonzalez-Lopez E, Gallego- Delgado M, Guzzo -Merello G et al. Wild -type 
transthyretin  amyloidosis as a cause of heart  failure  with preserved  ejection  fraction. 
Eur Heart J 2015;36:2585-94. 
13. Castano  A, 
 Narotsky DL, Hamid  N et al. Unveiling  transthyretin  cardiac amyloidosis 
and its predictors among elderly patients with severe aortic stenosis undergoing transcatheter aortic valve replacement. Eur Heart J 2017;38:2879-2887. 
14. Damy  T, Costes  B, Hagege AA et al. Prevalence and clinical  phenotype of hereditary 
transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy in patients with increased left ventricular wall thickness. Eur Heart J 2016;37:1826-34. 
15. Adams  D, Gonzalez- Duarte  A, O'Riordan WD et al. Patisiran,  an RNAi  Therapeutic, 
for Hereditary Transthyretin Amyloidosis. N Engl J Med 2018;379:11-21. 
Page  40 of 40 
CONFIDENTIAL   16. Benson MD, Waddington- Cruz  M, Berk  JL et al. Inotersen Treatment  for Patients 
with Hereditary Transthyretin Amyloidosis. N Engl J Med 2018;379:22-31. 
17. Maurer  MS, Schwartz JH, Gundapaneni B et al. Tafamidis  Treatment  for Patients 
with Transthyretin Amyloid Cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med 2018. 
18. Rezk T, Whelan CJ, Lachmann HJ et al. Role of implantable intracardiac 
defibrillators  in patients  with cardiac immunoglobulin light chain  amyloidosis. British 
Journal of Haematology 2017. 
19. Kober L, Thune JJ, Nielsen  JC et al. Defibrillator  Implantation  in Patients  with 
Nonischemic Systolic Heart Failure. The New England Journal of Medicine 2016;375:1221- 1230.  
20. Vaduganathan M, Patel RB, Michel A et al. Mode of Death in Heart Failure with Presered  Ejection  Fraction.  Journal of American  College of Cardiology 2017;69:556- 
569. 
21. Grogan M, Dispenzieri  A. Natural  History  and therapy  of AL cardiac amyloidosis. 
Heart Failure Review 2015;20:155-162. 
22. Hamon D, Algalarrondo V, Gandjbakhch E et al. Outcome and incidence of appropriate implantable  cardioverter- defibrillator  therapy  in patients  with cardiac 
amyloidosis. International Journal of Cardiology 2016;222:562-568. 
23. Varr BC, Zarafshar S, Coakley T et al. Implantable cardioverter -defibrillator 
placement  in patients  with cardiac amyloidosis. Heart  Rhythm 2014;11:158-162. 
24. Castano A, Drachman BM, Judge D, Maurer MS. Natural history and therapy of TTR -cardiac amyloidosis: emerging diseae-modifying therapi[INVESTIGATOR_249504]. Heart  Failure  Review  2015;20:163- 
178. 