ACUTE AND LONG -TERM EFFECTS OF APP- DELIVERED HEARTFULNESS MEDITATION 
ON PSYCHOLOGICAL OUTCOMES AND THE ENDOCANNABINOID SIGNALING SYSTEM 
IN CYCLIC VOMITING SYNDROME  
 
Venkatesan T, Hillard CJ, Ayer L, Arumugam S, Culp S, Vyas M, Gofar K, Petrova A, Palsson OS.       
 
        
 
         
 
     Corresponding author   
  
Thangam Venkatesan, MD  
Email:  [EMAIL_7982]
  
02-27-2024  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Introduction  
 
Cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS) is a disorder of gut -brain interaction (DGBI) 
characterized by [CONTACT_14198][INVESTIGATOR_418258]. 
CVS affects 2% of the population and negatively impacts patients. Although gastrointestinal symptoms are prominent, most patients have comorbid anxiety, depression, and high degrees of psychological distress that adversely affect h ealth-
related quality  of life (HRQoL)  and patient  outcomes.  Further, stress is known to 
trigger epi[INVESTIGATOR_418259] ~ 80% of patients. (9) The exact mechanism of how stress 
influences the gut -brain axis in CVS is not clear. It is hypothesized that CVS is a 
disorder of allostatic dysregulation whereby [CONTACT_418264], sleep deprivation, mood disorders  and early life adversity 
can disrupt normal allostatic regulation and result in CVS epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]. CVS is likely multifactorial with a combination of genetic, environmental and neurohormonal factors that result in symptoms.  
Nonetheless, it is crucial to address underlying stress and other psychological comorbidities that can drive symptoms and negatively impact influence overall HRQoL of these patients irrespective of typi[INVESTIGATOR_418260]. (8) Recent guidelines recommend a biopsychosocial model of care 
incorporating techniques like meditation to mitigate stress and improve outcomes in CVS, but there are limited data to support this recommendation.  
One such approach is Heartfulness meditation (HFM), which includes progressive relaxation with a concentrated focus on the heart to increase awareness of the 
present  moment, reduce stress, and promote relaxation.  HFM  is a secular,  guided 
meditation technique that is safe  and offered  free-of-charge.  HFM  has been shown 
to reduce perceived stress, and anxiety  and improve well-being  in normal  subjects.  
Our overall  objective  was to determine the efficacy of HFM  deliver  via an app. The 
specific  aims  of our study  are listed  below.  
 Specific Aim 1a: Conduct a prospective study to elucidate the acute effects  of HFN 
meditation on the ECSS in CVS. We will measure circulating endocannabinoids and related lipi[INVESTIGATOR_418261].  
 
1b: Correlate indices of ECSS with state anxiety and mood pre -and post -HFN meditation.  
We will measure state anxiety and mood with validated tools including the State Trait Anxiety 
Inventory (STAI) and  Profile of Mood States (POMS) which evaluates tension,  depression, 
anger, vigor, fatigue, and confusion. 
 
Hypothesis : HFN meditation will acutely increase circulating endocannabinoids which will be 
correlated with a reduction in state anxiety and improvement in mood. 
 
Specific Aim 2:  Determine the long- term effects  of a 6 -week HFN meditation program on 
ECSS and correlate with psychological outcomes including psychological distress, STAI scores, sleep quality, and HRQoL. We will measure these outcomes with validated tools 
including the Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI), STAI, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2272] (PSQI), 
and PROMIS quality of life questionnaires.  
 
Hypothesis : A regular HFN meditation practice over [ADDRESS_527798] at the Ohio State University and registered with clinicaltrials.gov (Registration  number:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]).  All participants  
signed an informed consent prior to this 6 -week single- arm study.  
 
Development of the Heartfulness meditation app and meditation protocol . 
We developed a HIPAA complaint smartphone application (app) for delivering HFM 
that was self -paced and convenient for patients to use. The meditation app was 
developed in conjunction with the Heartfulness Institute, a non- profit global 
organization that offers HFM free- of-charge and has certified instructors. A standard 
script was used for the instructional video and recorded with the hel p of a certified 
experienced Heartfulness instructor.  App users were encouraged to complete a half-hour meditation session three times weekly throughout the six -week intervention 
period. he app is HIPAA compliant, collecting no personal identifying inform ation, 
and monitored compliance by [CONTACT_418265].  
 
Inclusion and exclusion criteria  
Patients aged 18- 80 years diagnosed with CVS based on Rome criteria were eligible to 
participate. Exclusion criteria included: (1) Major psychiatric illness such as schizophrenia, 
bipolar disease, and major depression or anxiety that was not controlled with medication or 
requiring inpatient care within the past year; (diagnosis was made by [CONTACT_102]’s primary 
care provider or psychiatrist) (2) history of suicidal attempt/ideation in the past year; ( 3) 
cognitive impairment that precluded the ability to meditate; (4) inability to sit for at least 30 minutes; (5) severe cardiopulmonary diseases, malignancy, or renal failure on dialysis; (6) 
organic gastrointestinal diseases or systemic diseases including but not limited to 
inflammatory bowel disease and chronic liver diseases; (7) pregnancy at the time of 
enrolment; (8) BMI < 18 or >35; (9) current regular cannabis use defined as use ≥ 4 times a 
week; and (10) significant prior meditation experience that included mindfulness, 
heartfulness , music therapy, and other forms of meditative movement practices  like yoga 
and qi gong (continuous meditation practice for ≥  3 months within the previous  year).  
 
Study outcomes  
Primary outcomes  
The primary outcomes were state and trait anxiety and mood states, measured using the 
State -Trait-Anxiety Inventory (STAI) (26) and Profile of Mood States (POMS) 
respectively.(27)  The STAI has two 20- item subscales that measure the temporary emotional 
condition of "state anxiety" (STAI -S) and the long- standing personal characteristic of "trait 
anxiety" (STAI -T), respectively. The STAI -S evaluates amount of current feelings of 
apprehension, tension, nervousness, and worry. The POMS is a 35- item validated 
questionnaire that assesses mood across the 6 mood states of tension, depression, anger, 
vigor, fatigue and confusion. These outcomes were measured immediately before and after 
a meditation session at baseline, at 3 weeks, and at the end of study (6 weeks).  
 
Secondary outcomes  
Psychological distress was measured using the Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI) (28). Health -
related quality of life (PROMIS) (29), sleep quality (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2272]) (30) and 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (COPE) (31) were also measured with validated tools. These outcomes were all 
measured at baseline, weeks 3 and 6.  Perceived intervention effectiveness was assessed with a visual analog scale (VAS) (from 0 = “not effective at all” to 10 = “most effective 
imaginable”)  after intervention sessions at baseline and at end of study. All questionnaires 
were completed on REDCap, a secure online platform for conducting research.  
 
Endocannabinoid concentrations and related lipi[INVESTIGATOR_418262] 6 (first and last mediation 
sessions during the study). Serum concentrations of endocannabinoids N -
arachidonylethanolamine (AEA) and 2 -arachidonoylglycerol (2- AG) and related lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805] N -
oleoylethanolamine (OEA) and palmitoylethanolamide (PEA) were quantified by [CONTACT_418266], chemical ionization liquid 
chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC -APCI -MS).  
 
Subjects completed the first and last meditation sessions at the clinical translational unit. 
These sessions were scheduled between 8 AM and 1 PM given diurnal variation in 
endocannabinoid concentrations. The remainder of the session were completed at home by 
[CONTACT_1766]. All study questionnaires were completed at the beginning of the study (baseline), 
week [ADDRESS_527799] deviations or medians 
and interquartile ranges for continuous variables, depending on the distribution of the data.  
Frequencies and relative frequencies were used to describe categorical pat ient 
characteristics.  Changes in means for state and trait anxiety, mood states, health -related 
quality of life, daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008], subscale scores and index scores of the BSI, and subscales scores of the COPE were examined over time (baseline, week 3, and week 6) 
using repeated measures ANOVA.  Paired t -tests were used to compare means of state 
anxiety, total mood disturbance, visual analog scale scores, and levels of serum endocannabinoids and related lipi[INVESTIGATOR_418263] 6 weeks.  Analyses were performed using SPSS version 28.0 (IBM SPSS, Armonk, 
NY). The level of significance for all analyses was α=0.05.    
  
 
 
  
 