 
 
 
Onboarding Positives and PrEP Users to 
Engage Negatives (OPPEN): Peer -driven 
Education to Link YMSM of Color to PrEP  
 
ClinicalTrials.gov ID: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
July 1, 2025  
BACKGOUND 
 
Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) uptake has been slow among young men who have sex with men 
(YMSM), particularly those of color who experience high rates of  HIV infection  in the [LOCATION_002]. 
Limited PrEP knowledge, unfamiliarity with how to access PrEP, medical mistrust, and stigma are 
barriers to PrEP ca re engagement among YMSM, including those of color. Peer -driven social network 
interventions that train individuals as peer educators to disseminate information about HIV prevention 
and treatment in their social networks have been implemented to address similar barriers and improve 
HIV outcomes within marginalized populations. YMSM of color engaged in HIV/PrEP care often employ 
resilience processes to overcome barriers to HIV prevention and care. As such, training YMSM of color engaged in HIV/PrEP care as peer PrEP educators may position them as credible sources of information who can influence behavior change (i.e., PrEP care engagement) among YMSM peers of color in their 
social networks via their ability to disseminate culturally competent PrEP messages in the context of their 
personal experiences using these resilience processes to navigate barriers to care .  
 METHODS  
 This study will pi[INVESTIGATOR_857647] (OPPEN) , a peer -driven 
PrEP education social network intervention, and use a randomized control led trial  study design to 
evaluate its acceptability, feasibility, and preliminary effect on PrEP care engagement among Y MSM of 
color  in San Diego, [LOCATION_004]. YMSM of color engaged in HIV /PrEP care (i.e., indexes ; N=70 with up to 
two-thirds engaged in PrEP care) will be  enrolled and randomized (1:1) to OPPEN (N=35) or a time- and 
attention- matched  control condition (N=35)  using a randomizer programmed in REDCap. Once enough 
indexes  are randomized to each condition to complete a small group  (4-8 indexes), the trained health 
educator will deliver  OPPEN or control sessions  to the groups  over five weeks. Sessions  will consist of 
three two-hour small -group and two one -on-one one-hour booster sessions . At the end of the third 
session, all indexes will be given coupons to recruit YMSM peers of color in their social networks to the 
study (i.e., peer -recruits). Based on prior work, we assume that ~[ADDRESS_1194896] ~140 peer -recruits to undergo HIV testing. HIV -negative peer -recruits w ill learn about PrEP and 
be asked if they are interested in starting  PrEP . Those interested in starting PrEP will then undergo the 
PrEP care engagement process, which includes schedul ing a PrEP visit  within two weeks and helpi[INVESTIGATOR_857648]’s PrEP assistance and Medicaid expansion program s, if eligible and needed.  
Indexes and peer -recruits will complete surveys at baseline and three- month study visits. Peer -recruits 
will also complete brief phone check -ins one- month post -baseline. Data collected via surveys (baseline 
and three -month study visits) and medical records will be used to evaluate the preliminary effect of 
OPPEN on PrEP interest, linkage, and uptake among peer -recruits (AIM 2) and theory -based 
mechanisms targeted by [CONTACT_857649] -recruits (AIM 3). OPPEN  acceptability  and 
feasibility will be evaluated using a mixed- methods approach (AIM 4).  All participants will provide written 
informed consent . All study procedures were approved by [CONTACT_857650], San Diego (UCSD) .  
 
OPPEN Intervention  
 Drawing on existing peer -driven social network interventions, the diffusion of innovations (DOI) and 
information- motivation -behavioral skills (IMB) models , and Harper et al.’s resilience framework (RF),  
indexes randomized to the OPPEN intervention will receive peer PrEP educator tr aining sessions over 
five weeks (t hree two-hour small -group sessions and two one -on-one one -hour booster sessions ) from a 
trained health educator using an intervention manual. To build indexes’ capacity to conduct targeted outreach and PrEP education with YMSM peers of color  in their social networks , training content  and 
activities will include HIV/PrEP information, peer outreach and educat ion strategies,  peer-specific  
outreach and education planning,  skills to disclose HIV/PrEP use and share experiences with HIV/PrEP 
care, role- playing, and support during peer outreach. Training sessions will also support indexes’ 
dissemination of IMB -based educational PrEP messages in the context of their HIV/PrEP care 
experiences to (1) increase accurate PrEP information, (2) enhance personal and social motivation to 
use PrEP, and (3) build self -efficacy and strengthen behavioral skills to navigate PrEP care.  During 
Session 1, indexes will receive a binder of materials on content covered during each session to support 
their retention of the content covered, implementation of the knowledge and skills learned, and 
dissemination of accurate PrEP information and r esources during peer outreach. Sessions 1 -3 will occur 
prior to indexes’ peer outreach.  At the end of Session 3, indexes will receive coupons to recruit YMSM 
peers  of color  in their social networks with whom they discuss PrEP to the study. Booster sessions will 
occur in the first two weeks of peer outreach to support indexes ’ success as peer PrEP educators. To 
enable indexes to support one another between OPPEN sessions and during peer outreach, each small group of OPPEN indexes will be invited to join a private Facebook Group at the end of Session 1.  
 Control Condition  
 
Indexes randomized to the time- and attention- matched control condition will receive a diet and nutrition 
focused intervention over five weeks (three two -hour small -group sessions and two one- on-one one-hour 
booster sessions)  from a health educator trained to deliver m anualized diet and nutrition content . During 
Session 1, indexes will receive a binder of materials on content covered during each session to support their retention of the content covered and adoption of diet and nutrition behavior change. Sessions will 
mirror a similar balance of didactic learning, problem solving, and skills building used in OPPEN, but will 
only focus on changing one’s personal diet and nutrition behaviors. No information on PrEP nor training 
in DOI -informed peer outreach and education skills or IMB -based educational PrEP me ssages will be 
provided to indexes. At the end of Session 3, indexes will be given coupons to recruit YMSM peers of 
color in their social networks  to the study.  Indexes will be asked to inform their peers that they may be 
eligible to participate in a study. Indexes will not be asked to recruit peers via discussions about PrEP.  
Booster sessions will support indexes ’ success in  adopti ng healthy  diet and nutrition behaviors. To  
enable indexes  to support  one another ’s diet and nutr ition behavior change, each small group of control  
indexes will be invited to join a private Facebook Group at the end of Session 1.  
 
Recruitment  
 
Indexes : YMSM of color engaged in HIV/PrEP care will be recruited from UCSD’s HIV/PrEP clinics, 
ongoing UCSD studies with MSM, and other clinical settings and community -based organizations that 
serve YMSM in San Diego. Service providers at each recruitment site will inform potentially eligible 
patients/participants/clients of the study and collect contact [CONTACT_3031] (via a consent to contact [CONTACT_982]) 
from those who are  interested in learning more about the study, which study staff will use to follow -up 
with them within two  business days. Additionally, recruitment  flyers will be posted at  recruitment sites and 
other  physical and social media venues frequented by [CONTACT_857651].  
 Peer -Recruits : Similar to respondent -driven sampling, a chain referral sampling technique often used to 
engage marginalized populations,  all indexes will be asked to recruit YMSM peers of color in their social 
networks to the study. Indexes will recruit peers  using coupons provided to them by [CONTACT_857652].  Coupons will include study contact [CONTACT_3031] (i.e., 
phone number, email address, physical  address)  and a coupon ID that will be used to link the peer -
recruit to the index who  recruited them. To facilitate timely recruitment, indexes will be asked to distribute 
coupons within two weeks  and will be compensated for each peer  they recruit  who presents at the study 
site with a coupon (i. e., peer -recruit).  
 
Data Collection Procedures  
 Data sources include surveys, social network inventories ( SNIs ), qualitative interviews, and medical 
records. In addition, qualitative interviews and OPPEN and control sessions will be audio recorded. 
Interview recordings will be transcribed for analysis and session recordings  will be reviewed to monitor 
the health educator’s fidelity to the OPPEN intervention and control condition content and manuals . 
Surveys will be programmed in REDCap and administered to indexes and peer -recruits at baseline and 
three -month  study visits via computer -assisted self -interviewing (CASI) to collect information on primary 
outcomes, secondary  outcomes , and other individual characteristics . SNIs will be programmed in 
Network Canvas  and interviewer -administered  at baseline and three -month study visits  to collect data on  
the following about  YMSM peers in part icipants ’ social networks:  socio -demographics,  sexual orientation,  
relationship type , closeness , and  duration,  frequency of interaction , trust, support , perceived/known HIV 
and PrEP status , HIV/PrEP status disclosure , and  conversations about sexual health behaviors, 
including PrEP.  Qualitative exit interviews will be conducted at the end of three- month study  visits with a 
random sample of OPPEN indexes and OPPEN peer -recruits  using a semi -structured interview guide 
that will further assess  acceptability and feasibility . Data related to peer -recruits’ PrEP  care visits (visit 
dates, laboratory results, PrEP prescription/injection) will be abstracted from their  medical records . Peer -
recruits will sign a HIPAA Authorization form and Release of Information (ROI) form at baseline giving 
the study  permission to abstract PrEP -related data from their medical records .  
 
Primary Outcome Measures  
 PrEP interest ( AIM 2 ; peer -recruits only) : Baseline CASIs will ask p articipants to use 5- point Likert scale 
responses  (very uninterested to very interested)  to indicate their interest in taking oral PrEP  (How 
interested are you in taking oral PrEP to prevent HIV ?”) and injectable PrEP ( How interested are you in 
taking injectable PrEP to prevent HIV?).  PrEP interest will be defined as responses of “interested” or 
“very interested ” for either oral or injectable PrEP.   
 
PrEP linkage (AIM 2 ; peer-recruits only) : Medical record evidence of a PrEP care visit date within three  
months of baseline. Three- month f ollow- up CASIs will also assess PrEP visit attendance  since baseline.  
 PrEP uptake  (AIM 2;  peer-recruits only) : Medical record evidence of an  oral PrEP prescription or PrEP 
injection within three  months of baseline. Three -month f ollow- up CASIs will also assess  oral and 
injectable PrEP initiation since bas eline. 
 
Secondary Outcome Measures  
 Conversations about PrEP  – DOI mechanism targeted by [CONTACT_857653]  (AIM 3 ; indexes  only) : Three- month 
follow- up SNIs  will ask  participants whether they talked about PrEP with YMSM peers in their social 
networks in the last three months. Participants will be classified as having had conversations about PrEP  
if they reported talking about PrEP with >1 YMSM peer in their social network . Secondary analyses will 
consider the proportion of YMSM peers in their social networks with whom they had PrEP conversations 
and changes in that proportion from baseline to follow -up. 
 PrEP information  – IMB skills mechanism targeted by [CONTACT_857653] ( AIM 3 ; peer -recruits only) : Baseline 
CASIs will ask participants to indicate whether 13 items included in a PrEP knowledge scale are true, 
false, or don’t know.  Item responses  will be scored as correct (1) or incorrect/don’t know (0) and summed  
to create a score such that higher  scores indicate greater PrEP knowledge (range: 0 -13).  
 PrEP motivation  – IMB skills mechanism targeted by [CONTACT_857653] ( AIM3 ; peer -recruits only) : Baseline CASIs 
will ask participants to use 5- point Likert scale responses (strongly disagree to strongly agree)  to indicate 
how much they agree or disagree with items  measur ing PrEP attitudes (5 items), PrEP stigma (5 items), 
subjective PrEP no rms (6 items), and descriptive PrEP norms (6 items) . Item responses  will be summed 
to create a score  such that higher  scores indicate greater motivation to use PrEP  (range: 22 -110). 
 
PrEP behavioral skills  – IMB skills mechanism targeted by [CONTACT_857653] ( AIM 3; peer-recruits only) : Baseline 
CASIs will ask participants to use 4 -point Likert scale responses  (very hard to do to very easy to do) to  
respond to 8 items designed to measure  their self-efficacy  to initiate and stay on PrEP . Responses  will 
be summed to create a score such that higher scores indicate greater PrEP  self-efficacy (range: 8- 32). 
 
Session Acceptability  (AIM 4; indexes only) : Three -month f ollow- up CASI s will ask  participants to use 5 -
point Likert scale responses (strongly disagree to strongly agree) to indicate how much they agree or 
disagree with 21  acceptability items related to the OPPEN/control sessions they participated in (e.g., 
overall rating of sessions, satisfaction with information provided and session activities, perceptions of the health educator,  experiences of distress during sessions, and willingness to  recommend sessions to a 
friend) . Mean scores of participants’ responses to the 21 items will be computed such that higher scores 
indicate greater acceptability (range: 1 -5).  
 
Session Feasibility (AIM 4; indexes only) : Three- month f ollow- up CASI s will ask participants to use 5-
point Likert scale responses (strongly disagree to strongly agree) to indicate how much they agree or 
disagree with 5 feasibility items related to the OPPEN/control sessions they participated in (e.g., it was 
easy for me to attend the session s, it was easy for me to talk to peers in my social network after 
participating in the sessions ). Mean scores of  participants’ response to the 5 items will be computed such 
that higher  scores indicate greater feasibility  (range: 1-5).  
 Acceptability of Interaction with Referring Index (AIM 4; peer -recruits only) : Baseline CASI s will ask 
participants to use 5 -point Likert scale responses (strongly disagree to strongly agree) to  indicate how 
much they agree or disagree with 9  acceptability items related to  their interaction with their peer (i.e., 
referring index)  when they referred them to the study (e.g., satisfaction with, perceived helpfulness/  
burden of peer interactions, experiences of distress during peer interactions) . Mean scores of  
participants’ responses to the 9 items  will be computed such that higher scores indicate greater 
acceptability (range: 1-5). 
 Feasibility of Interaction with Referring Index (AIM 4; peer -recruits only) : Baseline CASIs will ask 
participants to use 5 -point Likert scale responses (strongly disagree to strongly agree) to indicate how 
much they agree or disagree with 2 feasibility items related to their interaction with their peer (i.e., 
referring index) when they referred them to the study (e.g., it was easy for me to determine if PrEP was 
right for me after interacting with my peer) . Mean scores of participants’ responses to the 2 items will be 
computed such that higher scores indicate greater feasibility  (range: 1-5). 
 
Quantitative Data Analysis  
 
We will compare individual - and network -level covariates of indexes by [CONTACT_857654] (OPPEN 
vs. control) and peer -recruits by [CONTACT_857655]- sided tests 
(α=0.05). Multivariable models will include potent ial confounders that differ between comparison groups 
and are known/suspected to be related to the outcomes. Models will also consider product terms (one at 
a time) between the exposure of interest and these covariates to examine whether they modify OPPEN’ s 
effect. To explore differences in outcomes based on the type of care in which indexes are engaged (HIV 
or PrEP), we will also consider product terms that include index type ( engaged in HIV care or PrEP care). 
Final models will exclude non- significant product terms. Analyses restricted to peer -recruits will use 
generalized linear mixed models (GLMMs) (categorical outcomes) and linear mixed models (continuous 
outcomes) to model outcomes as a function of the ex posure of interest as a fixed effect with random  
index effects to account for correlated outcomes among peers recruited by [CONTACT_857656].  AIM 2 : We 
will use unadjusted and multivariable logistic GLMMs to examine OPPEN’s effect on PrEP interest, 
linkage, and uptake among peer -recruits.  AIM 3 : We will use unadjusted and multivariable logistic 
regression to examine OPPEN’s effect on reporting PrEP conversations with peers at follow -up (DOI) 
among indexes. We will use unadjusted and multivariable linear mixed models to examine OPPEN’s 
effect on PrEP information, motivation, and behavioral skills scores (IMB) among peer -recruits. Findings 
will be used to identify content that may need refinement to bolster OPPEN’s impact prior to a future 
efficacy trial. AIM 4 : We will us e unadjusted and multivariable linear regression (indexes) and linear 
mixed effects models (peer -recruits) to examine differences in acceptability  and feasibility scores by 
[CONTACT_30157].  Power : Consistent with the R34 mechanism, AIMS 2- [ADDRESS_1194897] significant 
differences in outcomes by [CONTACT_30157].  
 
Qualitative Data Analysis  
 
Transcripts will be reviewed and coded by ≥[ADDRESS_1194898], and persons providi ng and collecting or analyzing information 
- will be kept throughout the study. Thematic analysis: (1) Transcripts will be uploaded into MaxQDA. (2) 
Team members will read through transcripts to create an initial code list based on a priori  topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102] (i.e., 
deductive) and emerging themes (i.e., inductive). Codes will be iteratively applied and compared across 
participants to (a) explore and refine emergent themes and (b) contextualize relationships between participants’ experiences delivering/receiving PrEP messages and PrEP interest, linkage, and uptake. (3) 
Through these comparisons, we will further condense participant experiences into broad themes. (4) 
Emergent themes will reflect observations made across participants not captured in a priori  coding. (5) 
Themes will be illustrated with participants’ verbatim quotes.  
 
Triangulation and Refinement  
 Using a mixed -methods approach (AIM 4), we will triangulate quantitative and qualitative data on 
acceptability and feasibility. Specifically, qualitative data will be iteratively explored to help contextualize 
quantitative findings and generate unanticipated hypotheses we can explore with the quantitative data. 
Through this process, we will aim to identify areas of convergence and divergence as they relate to 
implementing OPPEN with YMSM of color. This will provide more nuanced insights into our findings and allow for the integration of the research team’s interdisc iplinary interpretations to further refine OPPEN 
prior to a future efficacy trial.  
 