V Navarro/ M Verma                                                                                                                               [ADDRESS_506016] Duration and Inclusion of Proprietary Information  
Protocol Version:  May 8 2017  
Investigators: Victor Navarro, Manisha Verma, Richard Kalman  
Title:    
Remote monitoring of symptoms and cognitive functio n using  Telehealth: T- Liver  project  
 
Purpose :  
End-Stage Liver Disease ( ESLD ) is one of the ten leading causes of death in US. It is marked by 
[CONTACT_14198][INVESTIGATOR_401191], poor quality of life, mental deterioration and repeated hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602].  The overall 
purpose  of this project is to introduce a tele health  based intervention (involving r emote 
monitoring of symptoms and  cognitive function assessment ) initiated during the time of hospi [INVESTIGATOR_401192] . This will  support enhanced clinical care and improve self-
management  in ESLD p opulation . In addition, it  will reduce healthcare utilization , improve 
medication adherence and overall health outcomes.    
 
 
II. Research Project Overview   
 
The primary goal  is to develop and implement a systematic clinical approach for remote 
monit oring of symptoms  and cognitive function in ESLD patients, through developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a 
telehealth based intervention. The intervention includes assembling specific apps on an 
ipad/smartphone /tablet  through a web based secured system, having  patients respond to pe riodic 
assessments  and transmission of  results instantly to providers, who will follow  specified clinical 
pathways stratified by [CONTACT_401199] .  
 
Methods :  This is a  single arm study  to assess  the effectiveness of an experimental telehealth 
intervention within the treatment of ESLD, and compare it with a historic cohort.  All inpatients 
with advanced liver disease and at least 1 complication will be eligible to participate.  the study  
group receives the Telehealth intervention and will be given an ipad/smar tphone  preloaded with 
the instruments used for symptom monitoring  and cognitive function assessment during the 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_063]. A research  coordinator will consent the patients and conduct a 30-minute  
introduction to use of device on the day of enrollme nt (within 24 -48 hours of admission) . The 
second assessment will be done on day 2, and third assessment on day  of discha rge. After  that, 
the patient will be told to do the study assessments daily at home.  The study assessment results 
will be reviewed by t he providers on the same day, and based on the severity scores clinical 
actions will be taken and documented.   
 
IV. Expected Research Outcomes and Benefits  - 
Primary Outcomes :   
1) Healthcare utilization (30 and 90-day readmission ) 
2) Changes in severity scores  of symptoms and qu ality of life over time . 
V Navarro/ M Verma                                                                                                                               2 
 
3) Patient experience/satisfaction .  
Benefits of the research : Applying telehealth intervention (inclusive of remote monitoring of 
symptoms  and cognitive function ) with a well -defined clinical algorithm at the time o f discharge  
of patients with ESLD, who are prone t o impaired quality of life, adds a  new dimension  to the  
care delivery model . This new post -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_401193], including readmission rates, patient satisfaction, and above all on 
the health outcomes.  Arguably , these improvements will reduce health care costs among a group 
of patients with ESLD, who are high utilizers of healthcare services. Benefits to individual 
patients include monitoring o f their own symptoms,  and cognitive function, which will allow 
early detec tion of hepatic encephalopathy  and/or other complications . 
 
VII. Evaluation Component and Research Evaluative Procedures  - Oversight and Statistical Tests   
 
Oversight:  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_401194] -
Investigator . Since the study involves patients who are admitted to the  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], and offers them a 
device to improve their own care, the likelihood of participation is high.  We will assess  the 
attrition rates  and other technical issues during the project. Higher rates of no response to timed 
assessments from enrolled patients will trigger an alert to the research coordinator, who will then 
call the patients to make sure device is working appro priately and explore the reasons for 
missing responses. Furthermore, a detailed discussion at the time of enrollment about the project 
and expected responsibilities from patients will reduce the missing data points.  
 
Statistical Tests:  The data for study group will be described using both graphic and summary 
statistics. Process data on participation, usage and satisfaction with telehealth intervention  will be 
collected and summarized to assess intervention fidelity.  We will assess the change in percent 
readmissions at 30 days and 90 days in the study groupfrom baseline to 3 months.   The average 
rate of change in the defined outcomes in longitudinal (overtime) analyses using paired t tests 
and 95%CIs of the differences in the two groups will be conducted. T he trajectories of symptom 
and quality of life scores  will be illustrated by [CONTACT_401200] . We will test whether the relationship between 
study outcome and study arm differ with t he severity of disease as assessed by [CONTACT_401201] (Model 
for End Stage Liver Disease ) score  using two-way analysis of variance for repeated measures.  
 
 
 
(B) Performance Measures   
B) Performance measures:  
 
1) Number of patients enrolled in the study . 
2) Completion of 7,  28 days and 3 months assessment of symptoms  and cognitive function by 
[CONTACT_13935].  
V Navarro/ M Verma                                                                                                                               3 
 
3) Attrition rates of enrolled patients.  
4) Efficiency of the technical device provided to patients  as assessed from ease of use by 
[CONTACT_134612].  
5) Scholarly activities  (publications and presentations)  resulting from study data.  
 
VIII. Health Disparities  
This project will target the patient population at Einstein, which is largely underserved, and 
minority. No racial/ethnic or gender group will be excluded from the prop osed study.  
Furthermore as the study involves providing an ipad/smartphone  to patients, it eliminates any 
existing disparity of access for anyone who participates.  
 
XI. Research Plan  
(1) Specific Aims   
 
The specific  aims  are: 
1. To develop and implement a syste matic clinical approach for remote monitoring of 
symptoms  and cognitive function in ESLD patients, through assembling specific apps on 
an ipad/smartphone  using web based cloud technology (referred  to as telehealth 
intervention).  
2. To evaluate the impact of o ur telehealth intervention on health care utilization ( 30/90 day 
readmission s) 
3. To assess prospectively the comparative efficacy of telehealth intervention  within the 
treatment of ESLD , in improving i) symptom scores,  ii) patient reported quality of life,  
and iii) satisfaction with device and questionnaire . We hypothesize that Telehealth 
intervention  will show improvement in these domains over time  [a 10% improvement  in 
scores from baseline to 3 months will be considered clinically significant]  
 
 
(2) Background and Significance   
 
End-Stage Liver Disease ( ESLD ) is one of the ten leading causes of death in US. i 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_401195] 93% (due to 
hepatorenal syndrome ), 62% (due to portal hypertension ), and 190% d ue to Hepatitis C and its 
complications from [ADDRESS_506017] the effectiveness of a T-Liver 
intervention to remotely monitor the symptoms  (pain, shortness of breath ) weight , temperature,  
and cognitive function (using symptom questions and a stroop test ) to reduce healthca re 
utilization,  improve  patient satisfaction and  health outcomes.  
 
V Navarro/ M Verma                                                                                                                               4 
 
“HGE healthcare so lutions ” is a group of experts who have pi[INVESTIGATOR_401196], 
and created a smartphone based COPD app (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) , which 
assesse s daily symptoms and triggers alerts to providers for immediate treatments . This app has 
shown to improve health outcomes and reduce hospi[INVESTIGATOR_401197] e approach of 
health care to proactive than reactive. v  vi We will be partneri ng with this c ompany in creating 
and delivering  our telehealth intervention. The company operates on a HIPAA secured platform, 
which maintains confidentiality and security of the data. They also offer technical assistance to 
end users during normal business hours.  
 
 
(3) Research Design, Methods and Activities  -  
 
Methods:   This is a single arm  trial to assess  the effectiveness of an experimental telehealth 
intervention within the treatment of ESLD, and compare it with a historic control.  The study 
patients  continue to rece ive the routine standard of care , which may involve addressing 
symptoms based on individual needs and circumstances. All participants  will be given an 
ipad/smartphone  preloaded with the instruments used for symptom monitoring  and cognitive 
function assessm ent. A research coordinator  will consent the patients and conduct a 30-minute  
introduction to use of device on the day of enrollment . Repeat assessments will be done as 
shown in Table [ADDRESS_506018] of care discharge planni ng, 
including discharge instructions and a confirmed foll ow-up ambulatory visit within 2-4 weeks.  
Inclusion Criteria : All patients being discharged from the in patient liver practice of the Einstein 
Healthcare Network (EHN) who meet the following criteria will be eligible.  
 Patients must be age 18 years or older  
 Ability to provide informed consent, and must be able to cognitively answer 
questionnaires  
 Patients who received a diagnosis of Advanced  Liver Disease with at least 1 of the 
complications (Hepatoren al Syndrome, Portal Hypertension, Ascites, H epatic 
Encephalopathy)  
 Patient must be able to read/ speak English  
 Patient must have a support person  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
 Cognitive impairment which precludes participation  
 Projected survival, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649] o f the provider, of less than six months  
 Current psychosis or confusion, precluding a patient from being consented  
 Patients bei ng discharged to nursing homes  
 Patients with red green color blindness (as they will not be able to respond to stroop test 
questio ns). 
 
Telehealth Intervention : 
Patients will receive a 30-minute  introduction to the use of ipad/smartphone , and instructions to 
respond to the following assessments . Initial  assessments will be performed  on the day of 
enrollment , and all of them will be r epeated  periodically ( Table  1), for a total of 3  months study 
V Navarro/ M Verma                                                                                                                               5 
 
participation . The assessments include the following:  Pain (severity, location), shortness of 
breath (at rest or with mild activity), cognitive function assessment (drowsy, hard time 
concentra ting, irritable, trouble remembering things, slurred speech , unsteady gait ), and stroop 
test (color matching test, one cycle lasts 45 seconds) .  
 
 
Weight monitoring : Monitoring weight will allow assessment of fluid retention in ESLD 
patients, and help detec t any development/ worsening of ascites.  Patients will be instructed to 
enter their daily weights for the first month,  and then ever y week  for next 2  months. Any weight 
gain of more than 2 lbs within  1-2 days for 3 consecutive days will trigger a phone ca ll by [CONTACT_401202].   
 
A simplified ste p by [CONTACT_401203].  
Patients will be given a toll -free number that will be available during work hours (9am to 5pm)  
for any technical issues , and will be urge d to complete assessments by 11 am on a daily basis .  
 
Site: Levy 7 is the home of the “Liver Care Center at Einstein”, a [ADDRESS_506019].   
 
Recruitment methods : The research coordinator will contact [CONTACT_401204] [ADDRESS_506020] informed consent. All patients who consent will be then 
randomized to either of the 2 groups. We assume 3 -4 patients will be enrolled per week, for 7  
months of enrollment period.  
 
Sample size and power : Assuming a baseline risk of readmission in the historic control  of 40%  
and 10% attrition rates, a sample size of [ADDRESS_506021] a difference of 
35% or greater in the intervention group. Accepting  a type I error rate of no more than .05, and a 
Type II e rror rate of .20, we will have 8 0% statistical power to detect a difference of this 
magnitude or larger.   
Retention strategi es: Patients will be informed about the purpose of the study and their 
responsibilities at the time of consent by [CONTACT_23164]. All patients with a support 
person will be eligible.  Strategies (i.e. education about value of study participation) will be added 
if recruitment rates fall within 20% of target . 
Analysis plan:   Medical  records will be utilized to capture the disease severity, diagnosis, 
duration of liver disease and presence of comorbidities. Patients enrolled into the study will be 
followed up for [ADDRESS_506022] ..  . 
 
 
Limitations:  
V Navarro/ M Verma                                                                                                                               6 
 
Patient Attrition: this is an anticipated problem, as physical and cognitive deterioration may 
make the completion of questionnaires difficult. This limitation will be minimized by [CONTACT_401205] 3 months.  
 
 
 
 
(4) Protection of Human Subjects  -  
 
  
(a) Risks to subjects:   There is no medical risk to any participant and no sharing of 
protected health i nformation in this project. It is completely up to the participants to 
agree for this study. Refusal for participation will not impact their health care in the 
office. There are minimal risks to participants related to their completion of survey 
questionna ires. There may be some emotional distress as they complete the symptom 
and quality of life questions, but this will influence and enhance their own care.  
Patients may have technical difficulties, which will be addressed through availability 
of a help desk  and the research coordinator during work hours.  
(b) Adequacy of protection against risks :  There are no known risks in this study. All 
study personnel have completed the IRB required CITI training, and will be trained 
appropriately. Confidentiality is maintai ned through Einstein’s secured system and 
the secure administration through HGE. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_7706] -Investigator will be available 
to answer any of the patient’s concerns. The research coordinator will conduct an in -
depth informed consent explaining the purpose  of the project, and the expectations 
from patients to respond to the assessments in a timely way. All the information 
collected is through a secured password protected system, which allows encrypted 
data transmission to the providers  
(c) Recruitment of subjec ts:  All patients discharged from the Inpatient liver unit who 
meet the eligibility criteria will be approached for consent. Once the patients agree to 
participate, the details of the study and device operations will be discussed. If the 
patient needs more  time to decide, we will allow them to take the information home 
and get back to the research coordinator within 1 -2 days.  
(d) Informed consent :  An in -depth informed consent will be conducted in person using 
paper version. The IRB approval will be attached.  
(e) Data confidentiality  and provision of medical or professional intervention, if needed :  
Einstein Healthcare Network’s Human Research Protection Program (HRPP) is a 
comprehensive system to ensure the protection of the rights and welfare of subjects in 
Huma n Research. It is comprised of the EHN leadership, Office of Research and 
Technology Development (ORTD), Institutional Review Board (IRB), investigators 
and their study staff and relevant departments and units. The HRPP not only promotes 
compliance with re levant laws, regulations and professional and ethical standards at 
all levels, it addresses the needs and concerns of researchers and enhances support of 
their endeavors.  The HGE has a secured system  through which the patients will 
V Navarro/ M Verma                                                                                                                               [ADDRESS_506023].  
(f) Potential benefits  of the research to subjects:  Since this study involves close 
monitoring of symptoms  and development of any hepatic encephalopathy, it will 
enhance patient centered care through timely management of symptoms, and early 
detection of complications of ESLD.   
(g) Importance of knowledge to be gained :  The knowledge gained from this project 
will en able the use of technology in care of liver disease patients in a meaningful 
way, and allow early detection of symptoms/ problems which will trigger clinical 
actions as needed and thereby [CONTACT_401206].  This will po tentially engage patients in their own care, and improve the 
healthcare service delivery model for ESLD.  
 
(h) Inclusion of women, children and minorities in the research:   All eligible candidates 
more than 18 years of age are included in this study, irrespec tive of any specific race / 
sex, etc.  
 
Data Safety Monitoring Plan : During this study medical history and other lab values will be 
assessed at baseline, [ADDRESS_506024]  protected format within Einstein’s secured network drive. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_7706] -Investigator 
will r eview the data on an ongoing basis for data completeness and accuracy including patient 
accrual, compliance with inclusion/ exclusion criteria, patient adherence to intervention. Study 
progress and safety will be reviewed monthly.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES  
                                                             
i Lim, Y. S., & Kim, W. R. (2008). The global impact of hepatic fibrosis a nd end -stage liver 
disease.  Clinics in liver disease , 12(4), 733 -746. 
ii Xu, F., Tong, X., & Leidner, A. J. (2014). Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_401198] C and 
advanced liver disease continue to increase. Health Affairs , 33(10), 1728 -1735.  
V Navarro/ M Verma                                                                                                                               8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
iii  Pub. L. 111 -148: Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Washington, DC: Government Printing 
Office. http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW -111publ148/content -detail.html  
iv Darkins, A., Ryan, P., Kobb, R., Foster, L., Edmonson, E., Wakefield, B., & Lancaster, A. E. (2008). 
Care Coordination/Home Telehealth: the systematic implementation of health informatics, home 
telehealth, and disease management to support the care of vetera n patients with chronic 
conditions. Telemedicine and e -Health , 14(10), 1118 -1126.  
v Cordova, F. C., Ciccolella, D., Grabianowski, C., Gaughan, J., Brennan, K., Goldstein, F., ... & Criner, 
G. J. (2015). A Telemedicine -Based Intervention Reduces the Frequenc y and Severity of COPD 
Exacerbation Symptoms: A Randomized, Controlled Trial.  Telemedicine and e -Health . 
vi Smith, H. S., Criner, A. J., Fehrle, D., Grabianowski, C. L., Jacobs, M. R., & Criner, G. J. (2015). Use 
of a SmartPhone/Tablet -Based Bidirectional T elemedicine Disease Management Program Facilitates 
Early Detection and Treatment of COPD Exacerbation Symptoms.  Telemedicine and e -Health . 