Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
the lens, confirm lens is not inverted (correct 
if it is is) and reinsert.  
1.[ADDRESS_1045821] sphere refraction over 
the study lenses with a phoropter (adopt the maximum plus to maximum visual acuity (MPMVA) approach and use the duo
-chrome 
test for binocular balancing) and record the 
best corrected distance visual acuity to the 
nearest letter (OD, OS, OU).
1.16 Lens Power 
Modification (if 
applicable)Adjust the lens power if the subject’s best 
sphere over -refraction is not plano. 
For each power modification, repeat steps 
(1.13 to 1.16).
Only two power modifications per eye are
allowed. 
1.[ADDRESS_1045822] to look outside (windows or physically walk outside), use electronic 
device (phone, computer), read magazine 
print, and experience dim room illumination for tasks. A member of the clinical site must accompany the subject at all times if outside the clinic area.
1.[ADDRESS_1045823] will respond to the CLUE/PRO 
Post-Fit Questionnaire.
1.20 Distance ETDRS 
LogMAR Visual Acuity
-H i g h  
illumination Per  please confirm 
room illuminance and chart luminance 
acceptable ranges for both high/low contrast 
visual acuity testing .
1.Under high illumination and high chart 
luminance, record the distance (4 meter) 
ETDRS high contrast visual acuity OD 
(HC1) and OU (HC2).
2.Under high illumination and high chart 
luminance, record the distance (4 meter) 
ETDRS low contrast visual acuity OD 
(LC1) and O U(LC2).
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 29 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
Letter-by-letter results will be recorded into 
the electronic data capture form, which will calculate the visual performance score for each chart read.  
1.21 Near logMAR 
Visual Acuity -High 
illumination Per  please confirm room 
illuminance and chart luminance acceptable 
ranges for both high/low contrast visual acuity 
testing.  
1.Under high illumination and high chart 
luminance, record the near (40 cm ) low 
contrast visual acuity OD and O U (once 
each) .
Letter -by-letter results will be recorded into 
the electronic data capture form, which will 
calculate the visual performance score for each 
chart read.   
Regarding Near logMAR VA :
the room illumination will be >400 lux for all 
testing
Regarding the Near logMAR VA  
Reference to verification chart and room 
illuminance  is not applicable
1.22 Distance ETDRS 
LogMAR Visual Acuity
-with googlesPer  please confirm 
room illuminance and chart luminance 
acceptable ranges for both high/low contrast 
visual acuity testing .
1.With the goggles on, under high
illumination and chart luminance, 
record the distance (4 meter) ETDRS 
high contrast visual acuity OD (HC 3)
and OU (HC4).  Allow subject to adjust 
to dim condition for 3 minutes.
Letter -by-letter results will be recorded into 
the electronic data capture fo rm, which will 
calculate the visual performance score for 
each chart read.  
1.23 Near logMAR 
Visual Acuity -with
gogglesPer  please confirm room 
illuminance and chart luminance acceptable 
ranges for both high/low contrast visual acuity 
testing.  
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 30 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
1.With the goggles on, under high
illumination and chart luminance, 
record the near (40 cm ) high contrast 
visual acuity OD and O U (once each) .
Allow subject to adjust to dim condition 
for 3 minutes (if not already adjusted)
Letter -by-letter results will be recorded into 
the electronic da ta capture form, which will
calculate the visual performance score for each 
chart read.   
Regarding Near logMAR VA :
the room illumination will be >[ADDRESS_1045824] 
Sensitivity Function (qCSF)Conduct OD and OU with [ADDRESS_1045825] facing the qCSF monitor and 
under the same dim light conditions that qCSF was measured, take 3 measurements of the pupil size of the subjects OD and OS with 
the pupi[INVESTIGATOR_60187].  
1.26 Quantitative Visual 
Acuity (qVA)A demonstration trial must be performed 
prior to any data collection
Complete the qVA measurement of the OD 
and OU utilizing the following qVA configurations: • Number of rows: 15• Stimulus duration: 3 seconds • Test Distance: 4 meters • Under low room illumination (4 lux), low luminance, high contrast conditions (with the 
M&S mesopic filter placed in front of the 
qVA 
monitor)
Allow subject to adjust to dim condition for 3 
minutes (if not already adjusted)
EDC to record qVAt (threshold) in logMAR 
and qVAr (range) in lines
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 31 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
1.27 Visionix VX118 
Wavefront (if available)Measure the wavefront for each eye with the 
Visionix VX118 instrument (using WF mode) in dim room illumination. On the Coeff. Aberr. tab, select RL display and Night mode, then record the pupil size (in mm), HOA (in microns) and the Sph. Aberr. (in microns) for each eye.
1.28 Cosmetic Lens Fit 
Assessment (without slit
-lamp)The Cosmetic Lens Assessment will be 
assessed by [CONTACT_093] (without slit -
lamp) in primary gaze and extreme gaze 
(right, left, an d upgaze) at a normal 
conversation distance (approximately three 
(3) feet away from the subject).  
1.29 Hula Hoop 
Assessment (without slit
-lamp)
*if unacceptable 
cosmetic lens fit in any gaze*If there is an unacceptable cosmetic fit in any 
gaze, t he Hula Hoop Assessment will be 
assessed by [CONTACT_093] (without slit -
lamp) in primary gaze and extreme gaze 
(right, left, and upgaze) at a normal conversation distance (approximately three (3) feet away from the subject).  
1.30 Subjective Lens Fit 
AssessmentEvaluate overall lens fit acceptance 
(acceptable or unacceptable ) based on 
centration, movement and other fitting 
characteristics.
An unacceptable fit is deemed by [CONTACT_19565]: 
xlimbal exposure at primary gaze or 
with extreme eye movement;
xedge lift;
xexcessive movement in primary and 
up gaze; or 
xinsufficient movement in all three of 
the following conditions: primary 
gaze, up gaze, and Josephson push up.
If the fit is unacceptable, the subject can 
continue with the study.  
1.31
Photographs/VideosPhotographs/Videos of the lenses on eye may 
be taken if there is an unacceptable cosmetic or 
mechanic lens fit.
1.32Remove lensesHave subject remove lenses.  Worn lenses 
can be discarded.  
1.33WashoutThere will be a 5-minute washout between 
lenses
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 32 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
1.[ADDRESS_1045826] to look outside (windows or physically walk outside), use electronic device (phone, computer), read magazine print, and experience dim room illumination for tasks. A member of the clinical site must accompany the subject at all times if outside the clinic area.
1.[ADDRESS_1045827] will respond to the CLUE/PRO 
Post-Fit Questionnaire.
1.42 Distance ETDRS 
logMAR Visual Acuity
-H i g h  
illumination Per please confirm 
room illuminance and chart luminance 
acceptable ranges for both high/low contrast 
visual acuity testing .
3.Under high illumination and high chart 
luminance, record the distance (4 meter) 
ETDRS high contrast visual acuity OD 
(HC1) and OU (HC 2).
4.Under high illumination and high chart 
luminance, record the distance (4 meter) 
ETDRS low contrast visual acuity OD 
(LC1) and O U(LC2).
Letter -by-letter results will be recorded into 
the electronic data capture form, which will 
calculate the visual per formance score for each 
chart read.  
1.43 Near logMAR 
Visual Acuity -High 
illumination Per  please confirm room 
illuminance and chart luminance acceptable 
ranges for both high/low contrast visual acuity 
testing.  
2.Under high illumination and high chart 
luminance, record the near (40 cm ) low 
contrast visual acuity OD and O U (once 
each) .
Letter -by-letter results will be recorded into 
the electronic data capture form, which will 
calculate the visual performance score for each 
chart read.   
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 34 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
Regarding Near logMAR VA :
the room illumination will be >400 lux for all 
testing
Regarding the Near logMAR VA  
Reference to verification chart and room 
illuminance  is not applicable
1.44 Distance ETDRS 
LogMAR Visual Acuity
-with googlesPer , please confirm 
room illuminance and chart luminance 
acceptable ranges for both high/low contrast 
visual acuity testing .
2.With the goggles on, under high
illumination and chart luminance, 
record the distance (4 meter) ETDRS 
high contrast visual acuity OD (HC 3)
and OU (HC4).  Allow subject to adju st
to dim condition for 3 minutes.
Letter -by-letter results will be recorded into 
the electronic data capture form, which will 
calculate the visual performance score for 
each chart read.  
1.45 Near logMAR 
Visual Acuity -with
gogglesPer  please confirm room 
illuminance and chart luminance acceptable 
ranges for both high/low contrast visual acuity 
testing.  
2.With the goggles on, under high
illumination and chart luminance, 
record the near (40 cm ) high contrast 
visual acuity OD and O U (once each) .
Allow subject to adjust to dim condition 
for 3 minutes (if not already adjusted)
Letter -by-letter results will be recorded into 
the electronic da ta capture form, which will 
calculate the visual performance score for each
chart read.   
Regarding Near logMAR VA :
the room illumination will be >400 lux for all 
testing
Regarding the Near logMAR VA  
Reference to verification chart and room
illuminance  is not applicable
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 35 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
1.[ADDRESS_1045828] 
Sensitivity Function (qCSF)Conduct OD and OU with 25 trials.  
1.47 Quantitative Visual 
Acuity (qVA)A demonstration trial must be performed 
prior to any data collection
Complete the qVA measurement of the OD 
and OU utilizing the following qVA configurations: • Number of rows: 15• Stimulus duration: 3 seconds • Test Distance: 4 meters 
• Under low room illumination (4 lux), low 
luminance, high contrast conditions (with theM&S mesopic filter placed in front of the qVA monitor)
Allow subject to adjust to dim condition for 3 
minutes
(if not already adjusted).
EDC to record qVAt (threshold) in logMAR 
and qVAr (range) in lines
1.48 Visionix VX118 
Wavefront (if 
available)Measure the wavefront for each eye with the 
Visionix VX118 instrument (using WF 
mode) in dim room illumination. On the 
Coeff. Aberr. tab, select RL display and Night mode, then record the pupil size (in mm), HOA (in microns) and the Sph. Aberr. (in microns) for each eye.
1.49 Cosmetic Lens Fit 
Assessment (without slit
-lamp)The Cosmetic Lens Assessment will be 
assessed by [CONTACT_093] (without slit -
lamp) in primary gaze and extreme gaze 
(right, left, and upgaze) at a normal conversation distance (approximately three (3) feet away from the subject).  
1.50 Hula Hoop 
Assessment (without 
slit-lamp)
*if unacceptable 
cosmetic lens fit in any gaze*If there is an unacceptable cosmetic fit in any 
gaze, t he Hula Hoop Assessment will be 
assessed by [CONTACT_093] (without slit -
lamp) in primary gaze and extreme gaze 
(right, left, and u pgaze) at a normal 
conversation distance (approximately three 
(3) feet away from the subject).  
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 36 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
For discontinued subjects, the Investi gator will:
xComplete the current visit (scheduled or unscheduled)
xComplete the Final Evaluation, indicating the reason that the subject was discontinued 
from the study
xRecord the spherocylindrical refraction with best corrected dis tance visual acuity , as 
appropriate
xCollect used test article(s) (worn or brought to the visit) fro m the subject and discard 
them, unless otherwise stated in Section 7.[ADDRESS_1045829] article(s) from the subject
An additional subject may be enrolled if a subject discontinues from the study prematurel y. 
In cases where a subject is lost to follow -up, every possible effort must be made to contact [CONTACT_285927] d etermine the reason for discontinuation/withdrawal.  The measur es taken to 
follow up must be documented including two written attempts and  a certified letter (or 
equivalent) as the final attempt.
9.PRE -STUDY AND CONCOM ITANT INTERVE NTION/MEDICATION  
Concomitant medications will be documented during screening and  updated during the study. 
Disallowed medications for this study include: None
Concomitant therapi[INVESTIGATOR_35443]: None
9.1. Systemic Medications  
Due to the non-dispensing, single visit nature of the study and endpoints being assessed, 
systemic medications will be allowed provided they did not interfere wit h contact [CONTACT_13279], 
which will be at the discre tion of the investigator.  
Disallowed systemic medications -Not applicable
10.DEVIATIONS FROM THE PROTOCOL  
Investigator will notify study sponsor upon identification of a  protocol deviation. Protocol 
deviations must be reported to the sponsor within 24 hours afte r discovery of the protocol 
deviation. The Investigator w ill report deviations per IRB/IEC requirements. All deviations 
will be tracked and corrective actions implemented as appropria te. 
If it becomes necessary for the Investigator to implement a dev iation in order to eliminate an 
immediate hazard to the trial subject, the Investigator may implement the deviation 
immediately without notification to the sponsor. Within [ADDRESS_1045830] notify and provide the rationa le to the Sponsor and, as 
required, the IEC/IRB. 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 40 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
If the deviation potentially impacts the safety of patient or changes the techni cal integrity of 
the study then it must be reported to IEC/ IRB. This is a "Major Deviation".
Minor deviations have no substantive effect on patient safety or technical inte grity of the 
study. They are often logistical in nature. The informed consent must also not be contradicted 
by [CONTACT_89629].
Protocol waivers are prohibited
11.STUDY TERMINATION  
The occurrence of one or more Unanticipated Serious Adverse Dev ice Effect ([LOCATION_003]DE), or 
any SAE where the relationship to study agent cannot be ruled o ut, may result in stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_35446]. In the event of a [LOCATION_003]DE or SAE, the Sponsor may unmask 
the treatment regimen for the subject(s) and will discus s this with the Investigator before any 
further subjects are enrolled.
The Sponsor will determine when a study will be stopped. The Pr incipal Investigator always 
has the discretion to initiate stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_171167]’s results are compromised.
JJVC reserves the right to terminate the study at any time for any reason. Additionally, the 
IEC/IRB reserves the right to terminate the study if an unreaso nable risk is determined. The 
study can be terminated by [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_763264] d ue to 
specific clinical observations, if in their opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649], after a di scussion with JJVC, it is determined 
that it would be unwise to continue at the clinical site.
JJVC (and the IEC/IRB and DMC, if applicable) will evaluate all adverse events. If it is 
determined that an adverse event presents an unreasonable risk, the investigation, or that part 
of the investigation presenting t he risk, will be terminated as  soon as possible.
Should the stu dy be terminated (either prematurely or as scheduled), the Inve stigator will 
notify the IEC/IRB and Regulatory Authority as required by [CONTACT_19566] l regulatory requirements.
12.PROCEDURE FOR HANDLI NG PRODUCT QUALITY C OMPLAINTS  
A Product Quality Complaint (PQC) refer s to any written, electronic, or oral communication 
that alleges deficiencies related to the identity, quality, dur ability, reliability, safety, 
effectiveness or performance of test articles after they have b een released for clinical trial use.  
Potentia l complaints may come from a variety of sources including but n ot limited to subjects, 
clinical research associates (CRA), clinical operations manager s (COM), medical monitors, 
and site personnel, etc. The following are not considered produ ct quality compl aints:
xSubject satisfaction inquiries reported via “Subjective Questio nnaires” and “Patient 
Reported Outcomes (PRO) .”
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 41 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
xClinical test articles that are stored improperly or damaged af ter receipt at the 
investigational site .
xLens replacements that occur due t o drops/fall -outs.
xDamage deemed by [CONTACT_171188] h andling by [CONTACT_28024], 
and not indicative of a quality deficiency (i.e. tears, rips, e tc.), only in situations where 
there is no deficiency alleged by [CONTACT_423] .
Within [ADDRESS_1045831] be 
recorded in the EDC system, which will trigger an automatic ema il notification to the 
appropriate COM/CRA and Clinical QA representative. In cases where the EDC system in use 
isnot configured to send automatic notifications or when an EDC s ystem is not used, the 
COM/CRA is responsible for notifying Clinical QA upon discovery  that a PQC has occurred.  
Upon receipt of the EDC notification, the COM/CRA will contact [CONTACT_19568]: 
xDate the complaint was received/recorded in the EDC System (Date of Sponsor 
Awareness) .
xWho received the complaint .
xStudy number .
xClinical site information (contact [CONTACT_2300], site ID, telephone number) .
xLot number(s) .
xUnique Subject Identifier(s) .
xIndication of who first observed complaint (site personnel or s ubject) .
xOD/OS indication, along with whether the lens was inserted .
xAny related AE number if applicable .
xDetailed complaint description (s cheduled/unscheduled visit, wear time, symptoms, 
resolution of symptoms, etc.) .
xEye Care Provider objective (slit  lamp) findings if applicable .
xConfirmation of product availability for return (and tracking information, if available), 
or rationale if produc t is not available for return (
for test article return instructions) .
Once a complaint is received, it will be assessed by [CONTACT_19569], C RA, or trained site personnel 
to determine if it is an Adverse Event/Serious Adverse Ev ent (AE/SAE). If the complaint 
results in an AE/SAE, the COM/CRA, or trained site personnel wi ll follow Section 13of this 
protocol. If the AE/SAE w as potentially the result of a product quality related deficien cy, these 
procedures also applies and will be executed in parallel.  
In some cases, a PQC form may be generated in EDC by [CONTACT_779] i n error. In this event, the 
PQC forms will be marked “Inten tionally Left Blank” or “ILB”.  Justification for ILB must be 
documented.
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 42 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
13.ADVERSE EVENTS  
13.1. Definitions and Classifications  
Adverse Event (AE) –An AE is “any untoward medical occurrence, unintended disease o r 
injury, or untoward clinical signs (including abnormal laborato ry findings) in subjects, users 
or other persons, whether or not re lated to the investigational medical device. 
This definition includes events related to the investigational medical device or the 
comparator , and to the procedures involved .For users or other persons, this definition is 
restricted to events related to investigational medical devices1
An AE includes any condition (including a pre -existing condition) that:
1.Was not present prior to the study, but appeared or reappeared following initiation of 
the study .
2.Was present prior to the study, but worsened during the study. This would include any 
condition resulting from concomitant illnesses, reactions to co ncomitant medications, 
or progression of disease states .
3.Pregnancy must be documented as an adverse event a nd must be reported to the clinical 
monitor and to the Sponsor immediately upon learning of the eve nt.
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) –An SAE is any adverse event thatled to any of the following :
xDeath
xSerious deterioration in the  health of the subject tha t resulted in any of the following:
xLife-threatening illness or injury
xPermanent or persistent impair ment of a body structure or a bod y function
xHospi[INVESTIGATOR_35448] -threatening illness or injury or 
permanent impairment to a body structure or a body function.
xChronic disease
xFetal distress, fetal death or a congenital physical or mental impairment of birth de fect.
Diagnoses and conditions that are considered Ocular Serio us Adverse Events include, but not 
limited to:
xMicrobial Keratitis (MK)
xIritis (including cells in the anterior chamber)
xPermanent decrease in best spe ctacle corrected visual acuity eq uivalent to 2 acuity lines 
or greater
xCentral Corneal Opacity
xCentral Co rneal Neovascularization
xUveitis
xEndophthalmitis
xHypopyon
xHyphemia
xPenetration of Bowman’s Membrane
xPersistent Epi[INVESTIGATOR_763265]-6396, v 2.0  
Page 43 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
xLimbal cell Damage leading to Conjunctivalization
Significant Adverse Events –are defined as events that are symptomatic and warrant 
discontinuation (temporary or permanent) of the contact [CONTACT_763270], but 
not limited to the following:
xContact [CONTACT_35516] (CLPU)
xSignificant Infiltrative Events (SIE)
xSuperior Epi[INVESTIGATOR_32955] (SEALs)
xAny Temporary Loss of > [ADDRESS_1045832] lens related corneal events -e.g. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_901] K eratoconjunctivitis (EKC)
xAsymptomatic Corneal Scar
xAny corneal event which necessitates temporary lens discontinua tion > 2 weeks
Non-Significant Adverse Events –are defined as those events that are usually asymptomatic 
and usually do not warrant discont inuation of contact [CONTACT_35517] a reduction in 
wear time.  However, the Investigator may choose to prescribe t reatment as a precautionary 
measure .
Diagnoses and conditions that are considered Ocular Non -Significant Adverse Events include, 
but not limited to the following:
xNon-significant Infiltrative Event (NSIE)
xContact [CONTACT_19573][INVESTIGATOR_19534] (CLPC)
xSuperficial Punctate Keratitis (SPK)
xConjunctivitis: Bacterial, Viral, Allergic
xBlepharitis
xMeibomianitis
xContact [CONTACT_763271], which 
necessitates temporary lens discontinuation < [ADDRESS_1045833] (ADE) –An ADE is an “adverse ev ent related to the use of an 
investigational medical device.
NOTE 1:to entry: This definition includes adverse events resulting from insufficient or 
inadequate instructions for use , deployment, implantation, inst allation, or operation, or 
any malfunction of the investigational medica l device.
NOTE 2to entry: This definition includes any even t resulting from use error or from 
intentional misuse of the investigational medical device.”[ADDRESS_1045834] (UADE) –Any serious adverse effect on health or 
safety or any life -threatening problem or death caused by, or associated with, the  test article, 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 44 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
if that effect, problem, or death was not previously identified  in nature, severity, or degree of 
incidence in the investigational plan, Investigator’s Brochure or protocol, or any other 
unanticipated serious problem associated with the test article that relates to the rights, safety 
and welfare of subjects.
13.2. Assessing Adverse Ev ents 
In conjunction with the medical monitor, the Investigator will evaluate adverse events to ensure 
the events are categorized correctly. Elements of categorizatio n will include:
xSeriousness/Classifications (see definition in Section 13.1).
xCausality or Relatedness –i.e. the relationship between the test article, study treatment  
or study procedures and the adverse event (not related; unlikel y related; possibly
related; related -see definition in Section 13.2.1 ).
xAdverse Event Severity –Adverse event severity is used to assess the degree of 
intensity of the adverse event (mild; moderate; severe for all e vents -see definition in 
Section 0).
xOutcome –not recovered or not resolved ;recove ring or resolving ;recovered or 
resolved with sequelae ;recovered or resolved ;death related to adverse event ;
unknown .
xActions Taken –none; temporarily discontinued; p ermanently discontinued; other .
13.2.1. Causality Assessment  
Causality Assessment –A determination of the relationship between an adverse event an d the 
test article. The test article relationship for each adverse event should be determined by [CONTACT_19575]:
xNot Related -An adverse event that is not related to the use of the test article, study 
treatment or study procedures .
xUnlikely Related –An adverse event for which an alternative explanation is more 
likely, e.g. concomitant treatment, concomitant disease(s), or the relationship of tim e
suggests that a causal relationship is not likely .
xPossibly Related –An adverse event that might be due to the use of the test artic le, or 
to the study treatment or study procedures. An alternative expl anation, e.g. concomitant 
treatment, concomitant di sease(s), is inconclusive. The relationship in time is 
reasonable. Therefore, the causal relationship cannot be exclud ed.
xRelated –An adverse event that is listed as a possible adverse effect (device) or adverse 
reaction (drug) and cannot be reasonably ex plained by [CONTACT_4867], e.g. 
concomitant treatment of concomitant disease(s). The relationship in time is very 
suggestive, e.g. it is confirmed by [INVESTIGATOR_5328] -challenge and re -challenge .
13.2.2. Severity Assessment  
Severity Assessment –A qualitative assessm ent of the degree of intensity of an adverse event 
as determined by [CONTACT_19577]/her by [CONTACT_19578]. The assessment of 
severity is made irrespective of test article, study treatment or study procedure relationship or 
seriousness of t he event and should be evaluated according to the following sca le:
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 45 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
xMild –Event is noticeable to the subject, but is easily tolerated and  does not interfere 
with the subject’s daily activities .
xModerate –Event is bothersome, possible requiring additional therapy, and may 
interfere with the subject’s daily activities .
xSevere –Event is intolerable, necessitates additional therapy or altera tion of therapy 
and interferes with the subject’s daily activities .
13.3. Documentation and Follow -Up of Adverse Events  
The recording and documenting of adverse events (ocular and non -ocular) begin when the 
subjects are exposed to the test article, study treatment or study procedure.  Adverse events 
reported before the use of te st article, start of study treatment, or study procedures will be 
recorded as medical history. However, if the condition deterior ates at any time during the study 
it will be recorded and reported as an AE. Untoward medical eve nts reported after the subject ’s 
exit from the study will be recorded as adverse events at the d iscretion of the Investigator.
Upon finding an adverse event, the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_19535]. He/she will complete the Adver seEvent /eCRF.  
Complete descriptions of all adve rse events must be available i n the subject record. All 
Adverse Events including local and systemic reactions not meeti ng the criteria for “serious 
adverse events” shall be captured on the appropriate case report form or electronic data system. 
All adverse events occurring while the subject is enrolled in t he study must be documented 
appropriately regardless of relationship.  
It is the Investigator’s responsibility to maintain documentati on of each reporte d adverse event. 
All adverse events will be followed in accordance with applicab le licensing requirements. Such 
documentation will include the following:
xAdverse event (diagnosis not symptom) .
xDrawings or photographs (where appropriate) that detail the fin ding (e.g., size, 
location, and depth, etc.) .
xDate the clinical site was notified .
xDate and time of onset .
xDate and time of resolution .
xAdverse event classification, severity, and relationship to tes t articles, as applicable .
xTreatment regimen instituted, including concomitant medications prescribed, in 
accordance with applicable licensing requirements .
xAny referral to another heal th care provider if needed .
xOutcome, ocular damage (if any) .
xLikely etiology .
xBest corrected visual acuity at the discovery of t he event and upon conclusion of the 
event , if related to the visual system .
In addition, if an infiltrate(s) is present, he/she will comple te the Corneal Infiltrate Assessment 
eCRF. Where necessary, a culture of the corneal lesion will be collected to det ermine if the 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 46 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
infection is microbial in nature. If cultures are collected, th e date of culture collection and 
laboratory utilized will be recorded. 
Changes in the severity of an AE shall be documented to allow a n assessment of the duration 
of the event a t each level of intensity to be performed. Adverse events chara cterized as 
intermittent require documentation of the onset and duration of  each epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865]. Changes in the 
assessment of relationship to the  Test Article shall also be cl early documented.
Subjec ts who present with an adverse event shall be followed by [CONTACT_941] I nvestigator, within 
licensure, until all signs and symptoms have returned to pre -treatment status, stabilized, or 
been satisfactorily resolved. If further treatment beyond licen sure is required , the patient will 
be referred to the appropriate health care provider. The Investigator will use his/her clinical 
judgment as to whether a subject reporting with an adverse event will continue in the study. If 
a subject is discontinued from the study, it will be the responsibility of the Investigator to 
record the reason for discontinuation. The Investigator will al so document the adverse event 
appropriately and complete the Adverse Event eCRF. Any subjects  with ongoing adverse 
events related to the test a rticle, study treatment or study procedures, as of the final st udy visit 
date, should be followed to resolution of the adverse event or until referral to an appropriate 
health care provider, as recommended by [CONTACT_737]. Non -ocular adverse events tha t are 
not related to the test article, study treatment, or study proc edures may be recorded as 
“ongoing” without further follow -up.
13.4. Reporting Adverse Events  
The Investigator will notify the Sponsor of an adverse event by  e-mail, facsimile, or telephone 
as soon as possible and no later than 24 hours from discovery f or any serious /significant 
adverse events, and 2 days from discovery for any non -significant adv erse event. In addition, 
a written report will be submitted by [CONTACT_19579] r to the IEC/IRB according to 
their requirements (Section 13.4.2 ). The report will comment whether the adverse event was 
considered to be related to the test article, study treatment o r study procedures.
13.4.1. Reporting Adverse Events to Sponsor  
Serious/Significant Adverse Events
The Investigator will inform the sponsor of all serious/significant adverse events occurring 
during the study period as soon as possible by e -mail, fax, or telephone, but no later than 24 
hours following discovery of the event. The Investigator is obl igated to pursue and obtain 
informatio n requested by [CONTACT_763272]. All 
subjects experiencing a serious/s ignificant adverse event must be followed up and all outcomes 
must be reported.
When medically necessary, the Investigator may break the randomization code to determine 
the identity of the treatment that the subject received. The Sp onsor and study monitor should 
be notified prior to unmasking the test articles.
In the event of a serious/significant adverse event, the Invest igator must:
xNotify the Sponsor immediately .
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 47 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
xObtain and maintain in the subject’s records all pertinent medi cal information and 
medical judgment for colleagues who assisted in the treatment a nd follow -up of the 
subject .
xProvide the Sponsor with a complete case history whi ch includes a statement as to 
whether the event was or was not related to the use of the test  article .
xNotify the IEC/IRB as required by [CONTACT_6179]/IRB reporting procedu re according to 
national regulations .
Unanticipated (Serious) Adverse Device Effect (UADE )
In the event of an Unanticipated (Serious) Adverse Device Effec t (UADE), the Investigator 
will submit a report of the UADE to the Sponsor and IEC/IRB as soon as possible, but no later 
than [ADDRESS_1045835] report the results of the 
evaluation to FDA, the IEC/IRB and participating Investigators within [ADDRESS_1045836].
Non-Serious Adverse Events
All non -serious adverse events, including non -serious adverse device effects, will be reported 
to the sponsor by [CONTACT_35521] 2 days from di scovery.
13.4.2. Reporting Adve rse Events to the Responsible IEC/IRB and Health Authorities  
Adverse events that meet the IEC/IRB requirements for reporting  must be reported within the 
IEC/IRB’s written guidelines. Each clinical site will refer to and follow any guidelines set forth 
by [CONTACT_19581]/IRB. Each clinical site will refer to and fo llow any guidelines set forth 
by [CONTACT_19582].
The Sponsor will report applicable Adverse Events to the local health authorities according the 
written guidelines, i ncluding reporting timelines. 
13.4.3. Event of Special Interest  
Not applicable
13.5. Reporting of Pregnancy  
Subjects reporting pregnancy (by [CONTACT_6270] -report) during the study will be discontinued after the 
event is recorded as an Adverse Event. Once discontinued, pregnant participants and their 
fetuses will not be monitored for study related purposes. At the Investigator’s discretion, the 
study participant may be fol lowed by [CONTACT_71178]. However, this data will 
not be collected as part of the clinical study database. Pregna nt participants are not 
discontinued from contact [CONTACT_71179], but due to 
general co ncerns relating to pregnancy and contact [CONTACT_19584]. Specifically , pregnant women are 
discontinued due to fluctuations in refractive error and/or vis ual acuity that occur secondary to 
systemic hormonal changes, and not due to unforeseen health ris ks to the m other or fetus.
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 48 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
14.STATISTICAL METHODS  
14.1. General Considerations  
Statistical analys is will be undertaken by [CONTACT_15282]. A general de scription of the 
statistical methods to be implemented in this clinical trial is  outlined below.
All data summaries and statistical analyses will be performed u sing the SAS software Version 
9.4or higher (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). Throughout the analysis of data, the results for each 
subject/eye will be used when available for summarization and stati stical analysis.  
Summary tables (descriptive statistics and/or frequency tables)  will be provided for all baseline 
variables, efficacy variables ,and safety variables as appropriate. Continuous variables will be 
summarized with descriptive statistics ( n, mean, standard deviation [SD], median, minimum 
and maximum). Frequency count and percentage of subjects or eyes within each category will 
be provided for categorical data .
14.2. Sample Size Justification  
This study was not designed or powered to test any sta tistical hypotheses. The purpose of this 
study is to assess the performance of the study lenses with res pect to distance and near visual 
acuity (logMAR), qCSF and qVA. Therefore, the sample size of [ADDRESS_1045837] to the primary endpoint .
14.3. Analysis Populations  
Safety Population:
All subjects who were administered any test article excluding s ubjects who drop out prior to 
administering any test article. At least one observation should be recorded.
Per-Protocol Population: 
All subjects who have successfully completed all visits and did not substantially deviate from 
the protocol as determined by [CONTACT_763273] 
(Per-Protocol Population). Justification of excluding subjects with protocol deviations in the 
Per-Protocol Population set will be documented in a memo to file.
Intent -to-Treat (ITT) Population:
All randomized subjects r egardless of actual treatment and subsequent withdrawal from st udy 
or deviation from protocol. At least one observation should be recorded.
14.4. Level of Statistical Significance  
Not applicable
14.5. Primary Analysis  
Distance and near visual acuity, qCSF and qVA will be descripti vely summarized by [CONTACT_340379] .
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 49 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
14.6. Secondary Analysis  
Not applicable .
14.7. Other Exploratory Analyses  
Further statistical exploratory analysis can be undertaken, if necessary, at the discretion of the 
clinical project leader.
14.8. Interim Analysis  
An interim analysis will not be conducted on this study. 
14.9. Procedure for Handling Missing Data and Drop -Outs  
Missing or spurious values will not be imputed. The count of mi ssing values will be included 
in the su mmary tables and listings. 
14.10. Procedure for Reporting Deviations from Statistical Plan  
The analysis will be conducted according to that specified in above sections. There are no 
known reasons for which it is planned to deviate from these ana lysis methods. If for any reason 
a change is made, the change will be documented in the study re port along with a justification 
for the change.
15.DATA HANDLING AND RE CORD KEEPI[INVESTIGATOR_1645]/ARCHIVI NG 
15.1. Electronic Case Report Form/Data Collection  
The data for this study will be captured o n electronic case report forms (eCRFs) using an EDC 
system (Bioclinica Express 5.5 ).An authorized data originator will enter study data into the 
eCRFs using the EDC system. Data collected on equipment that is  not captured in EDC will 
be formatted to the s pecification of the JJVC database manager and sent to JJVC for analysis.
External Data Sources for this study include: Not Applicable 
The clinical data will be recorded on dedicated eCRFs specifica lly designed to match the study 
procedures for each visi t. Only specifically delegated staff can enter data on a CRF.  Once 
completed, the eCRFs will be reviewed for accuracy and completeness and signed by [CONTACT_3786]. The sponsor or sponsor’s representatives will be authorized to gain access to the 
subjec t recordation for the purposes of monitoring and auditing the study. 
Edit checks, electronic queries, and audit trails are built into the system to ensure accurate and 
complete data collection. Data will be transmitted from the cli nical site to a secure central 
database as forms are completed or updated, ensuring informatio n accuracy, security, and 
confidentiality. After  the final database lock, the Investigator will be provided with Individual 
Patient Profiles (IPP) including the full audit trail on elec tronic media in PDF format for all of 
the study data. The IPP must be retained in the study files as a certified copy of the source data 
for the study. 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 50 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
The content and structure of the eCRFs are compliant with ISO14 155:[ADDRESS_1045838] shoul d be available for the follow ing: 
xsubject identification
xeligibility
xstudy identification
xstudy discussion
xprovision of and date of informed consent
xvisit dates
xresults of safety and efficacy parameters as required by [CONTACT_318500] -up of adverse events
xmedical history and concomitant medication
xtest article receipt/dispensing/return reco rds
xdate of study completion
xreason for early discontinuation of test article or withdrawal from the study, if 
applicable
The subject record is the eCRF or an external record. The autho r of an entry in the subject 
record must be identifiable. The first po int of entry is considered to be the source record.
Adverse event notes must be rev iewed and initialed by [CONTACT_18413].
15.3 ClinicalTrials.gov  
This study will be registered on ClinicalTrials.gov based on the following: confirmatory study 
meets the requ irements for registration.
16.DATA MANAGEMENT  
16.1. Access to Source Data/Document  
The Investigator/Institution will permit trial -related monitoring, audits, IEC/IRB review and 
regulatory inspection(s) by [CONTACT_20618]/documents. Should the 
clinical site be contact[CONTACT_35527]/IRB or regula tory authority, JJVC must be 
contact[CONTACT_19592] [ADDRESS_1045839] and patent application processes, scientific 
data or other pertinent information is confidential and remains the property of JJVC. The 
Investigator may use this information for the purposes of the study only. It is understood by 
[CONTACT_763274]-6396, v 2.0  
Page 51 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
with the development of the investigational product and therefo re may disclose it as required 
to other clinical investigators and to regulatory agencies. In order to allow the use of the 
infor mation derived from this clinical study, the Investigator under stands that he/she has an 
obligation to provide complete test results and all data develo ped during this study to the 
Sponsor.
16.3. Data Quality Assurance  
Steps will be taken to ensure the accuracy and reliability of data, include the selection of 
qualified investigators and appropriate clinical sites and review of protocol procedures with 
the Principal Investigator. The Principal Investigator, in turn , must ensure that all Sub -
Investigators and clin ical site personnel are familiar with the protocol and all stud y-specific 
procedures and have appropriate know ledge of the study article.
Training on case report form completion will be provided to cli nical site personnel before the 
start of the study. Th e Sponsor will review case report forms for accuracy and comple teness 
remotely during the conduct of the study, during monitoring vis its, and after transmission to 
data management. Any data discrepancies will be resolved with t he Investigator or designee, 
as appropriate.
Quality Assurance representatives from JJVC may visit clinical sites to review data produced 
during the study and to access compliance with applicable regul ations pertaining to the conduct 
of clinical trials. The clinical sites will provid e direct access to study -related source 
data/documents and reports for the purpose of monitoring and au diting by [CONTACT_71182].
17.CLINICAL MONITORING  
The study monitors will maintain close contact [CONTACT_763275]’s designated clinical site personnel. The monitor’ s responsibilities will include:
xEnsuring that the investigation is being conducted according to  the protocol, any 
subsequent versions , and regulatory requirements are maintained .
xEnsuring the rights and wellbeing of subjects are protected .
xEnsuring adequate resources, including facilities, laboratories, equipment, and 
qualified clinical site personnel .
xEnsuring that protocol deviations are documented with correctiv e act ion plans, as 
applicable .
xEnsuring that the clinical site  has sufficient test article and  supplies .
xClarifying questions regarding the study .
xResolving study issues or problems that may arise .
xReviewing of study records and source documentation verificatio n in accordance with 
the monitoring plan .
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 52 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
18.ETHICAL AND REGULATO RY ASPECTS  
18.1. Study -Specific Design Considerations  
Potential subjects will be fully informed of the risks and requ irements of the study and, during 
the study, subjects will be given any new informa tion that may affect their decision to continue 
participation. Subjects will be told that their consent to part icipate in the study is voluntary and 
may be withdrawn at any time with no reason given and without p enalty or loss of benefits to 
which they wou ld otherwise be entitled. Only subjects who are fully able to u nderstand the 
risks, benefits, and potential adverse events of the study, and  provide their consent voluntarily 
will be enrolled.
18.2. Investigator Responsibility  
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_763266], the investigational plan,  Section 4 of the ICH E6 
guidelines on Good Clinical Practice (GCP) ,2and applicable regulatory requirements. GCP is 
an international ethical and scientific quality standard for designing, conducting, recording, 
and reporting studies that involve the participat ion of human subjects. Compliance with this 
standard provides public assurance that the rights, safety, and  well -being of study subjects are 
protected, consistent with the principles of the Declaration of  Helsinki 64th WMA General 
Assembly [ADDRESS_1045840] maintain 
clinical study files in accordance with Section 8 of the ICH E6  guidelines on Good Clinica l
Practice (GCP) ,2and applicable regulatory requirements.
18.3. Independent Ethics Commi ttee or Institutional Review Board (IEC /IRB)  
Before the start of the study, the Investigator (or Sponsor when applicable) will provide the 
IEC/IRB with current and complete copi[INVESTIGATOR_19537] (where applicable):
xFinal protocol .
xSponsor -approved informed consent form (and any other written materia ls to be 
provided to the subjects)
xInvestigator’s Brochure (or equivalent information) .
xSponsor -approved subject rec ruitment materials .
xInformation on compensation for study -related injuries or payment to subjects for 
participation in the study .
xInvestigat or’s curriculum vitae, clinical licenses, or equivalent informa tion (unless not 
required, as documented by [CONTACT_8134]/IRB) .
xInformation regarding funding, name [CONTACT_19618], institution al affiliations, other 
potential conflicts of interest, and incentives for s ubjects .
xAny other documents that the IEC/IRB requests to fulfill its obligation .
This study will be undertaken only after IEC/IRB has given full  approval of the final protocol,
the informed consent form, applicable recruiting materials, and  subject compensation 
programs, and the Sponsor has received a copy of this approval.  This approval letter must be 
dated and must clearly identify the documents being approved.
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 53 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
During the study, the Investigator (or Sponsor when applicable) will send the f ollowing 
documents to the IEC/IRB for their review and approval, where a ppropriate:
xProtocol revisions
xRevision(s) to informed consent form and any other written mate rials to be provided to 
subjects
xIf applicable, new or revised subject recruitment materia ls approved by [CONTACT_35531] -related injuries or payment to subjects for 
participation in the study
xInvestigator’s Brochure revisions
xSummaries of the status of the study (at least annually or at i ntervals stipulated in 
guidelines of the IEC/IRB)
xReports of adverse events that are serious, unanticipated, and associated with the test 
articles, according to the IRB’s requirements
xNew information that may adversely affect the safety of the sub jects or the conduct of 
the study
xMajor protocol deviations as required by [CONTACT_6179]/IRB
xReport of deaths of subjects under the Investigator's care
xNotification if a new Investigator is responsible for the study  at the clinical site
xAny other requirements of the IEC/IRB
For protocol revisions that increase subject risk, the revisions and applicable informed consent 
form revisions must be submitted promptly to the IEC/IRB for re view and approval before 
implementation of the change(s).
At least once a year, the IEC/IRB wil l review and reapprove this clinical study. This request 
should be documented in writing.
At the end of the study, the Investigator (or Sponsor where required) will notify the IEC/IRB 
about the study completion. Documentation of this notification must be retained at the clinical 
site and a copy provided to the  CRO or Sponsor as applicable.
18.4. Informed Consent  
Each subject or their representative, must give written consent according to local requirements 
after the nature of the study has been fully explained. The consent form must be signed before 
performance of any study -related activity. The consent for m that is used must be approve d by 
[CONTACT_19597]/IRB. The informed con sent is in accordance with 
principles that originated in theDeclaration of Helsinki,3current ICH2and ISO [ADDRESS_1045841] the aims, methods, reasonably anticipated benefit s, 
and potential hazards of the study, and any discomfort it may e ntail. Subjects will be informed 
that their participation is voluntary and that they may withdra w consent to participate at any
time. 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 54 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
The subject will be given sufficient time to read the informed consent form and the opportunity 
to ask questions. After this explanation and before entry into the study, consent should be 
appropriately recorded by [CONTACT_19720]'s dated sign ature. After having obtained the 
consent, a copy of the informed consent form must be given to t he subject.
Each subject for this study will complete an assent and a paren t or legal guardian must give 
written informed consent according to local requiremen ts after the nature of the study has been 
fully explained. The assent and consent forms must be signed be fore performance of any study -
related activity. The assent and consent forms that are used must be approved by [CONTACT_763276] C/IRB. The assent and informed consent forms should be in 
accordance with principles that originated in the Declaration o f Helsinki ,3current ICH2and 
GCP guidelines, applicable regulatory requirements, and Sponsor  policy. Before entry into the 
study or pre -screening, the Investigator or an authorized mem ber of the clinical site personnel 
must explain to the potential subject and parent and/or legal g uardian the aims, methods, 
reasonably anticipated benefits, and potential hazards of the study or pre -screening, and any 
discomfort it may entail . Subjects an d parent and/or legal guardian will be informed that their 
participation is voluntary and that they may withdraw consent t o participate at any time. They 
will be informed that choosing not to participate will not affe ct the care the subject will receive. 
Finally, they will be told that the Investigator will maintain a subject identification register for 
the purposes of long -term follow -up if needed and that their records may be accessed by [CONTACT_763277] g the confidentiality of the 
subject, to the extent permitted by [CONTACT_6983](s) or re gulations. By [CONTACT_93870], the subject is authorizing such acce ss and agrees to be contact[CONTACT_763278] d.
18.5. Privacy of Personal Data  
The collection, processing and disclosure of personal data and medical information related to 
the Study Subje ct, and personal data related to Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_763267] (e.g., name, clinic address and phone number, curricu lum vitae) is subject to 
compliance with the Health Information Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) i n the 
[LOCATION_002]7and other applicable personal data protection and security laws  and regulations. 
Appropriate measures will be employed to safeguard these data, to maintain the confidentiality 
of the person’s related health and medical information, to properly inform the concerned 
persons about the collection and processing of their personal data, to grant them reasonable 
access to their personal data and to prevent access by [CONTACT_35532].
All informat ion obtained during the course of the investigation will be reg arded as confidential. 
All personal data gathered in this trial will be treated in str ictest confidence by [CONTACT_4718], 
monitors, Sponsor’s personnel and IEC/IRB. No data will be disc losed to any third party 
without the express permission of the subject concerned, with t he exception of Sponsor 
personnel (monitor, auditor), IEC/IRB and regulatory organizati ons in the context of their 
investigation related activities that, as part of the investi gation will have access to the CRFs 
and subject records.
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 55 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
The collection and processing of personal data from subjects enrolled in this study will be 
limited to those data that are necessary to investigate the eff icacy, safety, quality, and utility of 
theinvestigational product(s) used in this study.
These data must be collected and processed with adequate precau tions to ensure confidentiality 
and compliance with applicable data privacy protection laws and  regulations.
The Sponsor ensures that the persona l data will be:
xprocessed fairly and lawfully .
xcollected for specified, expli cit, and legitimate purposes and not further processed in a 
way incompatible with these purposes .
xadequate, relevant, and not excessive in relation to said purpo ses.
xaccurate and, where necessary, kept current .
Explicit consent for the processing of personal data will be obtained from the participating 
subject before collection of data. Such consent should also add ress the transfer of the data to 
other entities and to other countries.
The subject has the right to request through the Investigator access to his personal data and the 
right to request rectification of any data that are not correct  or complete. Reasonable steps 
should be taken to respond to such a request, taking into consideration the nature of the request, 
the conditions of the study, and the applicable laws and regula tions.
Appropriate technical and organi zational measures to protect th e personal data against 
unauthorized disclosures or access, accidental or u nlawful destruction, or accidental loss or 
alteration must be put in place. Sponsor personnel whose respon sibilities require access to 
personal data agree to keep the identity of study subjects conf idential .
19.STUDY RECORD RETENTI ON 
In compliance with the IC H/GCP guidelines ,2the Investigator/Institution will maintain all 
CRFs and all subject records that support the data collected fr om each subject, as well as all 
study documents as specified in ICH/GCP2and all study documents as specified by [CONTACT_12926](s). The Investi gator/Institution will take measures to prevent 
accidental or premature dest ruction of these documents.
Essential documents must be retained until at least two ( 2)years after the last approval of a 
marketing application in an ICH region and until there a re no pending or contemplated 
marketing applications in an ICH region or until at least two (2) years have elapsed since the 
formal discontinuation of clinical development of the investiga tional product. These 
documents will be retained for a longer period if required by [CONTACT_35533]. It is the responsibility of the Sponsor to inform the 
Investigator/Institution as to when these documents no longer n eed to be retained.
If the responsible Investigator r etires, relocates, or for other reasons withdraws from the 
responsibility of keepi[INVESTIGATOR_8090], custody must be tr ansferred to a person who will 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 56 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
accept the responsibility. The Sponsor must be notified in writ ing of the name [CONTACT_763280] c ustodian.  Under no circumstance shall the Investigator relocate or dispos e of any 
study documents before having obtained written approval from th e Sponsor.
If it becomes necessary for the Sponsor or the appropriate regu latory authority to review any 
documentation relating to this study, the Investigator must permit access to such reports.
If the Investigator has a question regarding retention of study records, he/she should contact 
[CONTACT_19599].
20.FINANCIAL CONSIDERAT IONS  
Remuneration for study services and ex penses will be set forth in detail in the Clinical Research 
Agreement. The Research Agreement will be signed by [CONTACT_19600] a JJVC 
management representative prior to study initiation.
JJVC reserves the right to withhold remuneration for costs associated with protocol violations 
such as:
xContinuing an ineligible subject in the study .
xScheduling a study visit outside the subject’s acceptable visit  range .
JJVC reserves the right to withhold final remuneration until al l study related activi ties have 
been completed, such as:
xQuery resolution .
xCase Report Form signature .
xCompletion of any follow -up action items .
21.PUBLICATION  
This study will be registered on ClinicalTrials.gov by [CONTACT_19457].
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 57 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
22.REFERENCES  
1.ISO [ZIP_CODE]:2011: Clinical Investigation of Medical Devices for Human Subjects —
Good Clinical Practice. Available at: https://www.iso.org/standard/[ZIP_CODE].html
2.International Conference on Har monization Good Clinical Practic e E6 (ICH -GCP). 
Available at: http://www.ich.org/pr oducts/guidelines/efficacy/article/efficacy -
guidelines.html
3.Declaration of Helsinki -Ethical principles for Medical Research Involving Human 
Subjects. Available at: https://www.wma.net/policies -post/wma -declaration -of-
helsinki -ethical -principles -for-medi cal-research -involving -human -subjects/
4.[LOCATION_002] (US) Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). Available at: 
https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/collectionCfr.action?collectio nCode=CFR
5.Wirth RJ, et al. Development of the Contact [CONTACT_763279] e: CLUE Sca les.
Optom Vis Sci. 2016;93(8):[ADDRESS_1045842] (HIPAA). Available at: 
https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for -professionals/privacy/index.html
8.EU MDR 2017/745
 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 58 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
APPENDIX A: PATIENT REPORTED OUTCOMES (S TUDY QUESTIONNAIRES)  
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 59 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
35263(&,),&$7,2 )LQDO3URWRFRO-RKQVRQ	-RKQVRQ9LVLRQ&DUH,QF&RQILGHQWLDO 1
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 60 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
35263(&,),&$7,2 )LQDO3URWRFRO-RKQVRQ	-RKQVRQ9LVLRQ&DUH,QF&RQILGHQWLDO 2
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 61 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
35263(&,),&$7,2 )LQDO3URWRFRO-RKQVRQ	-RKQVRQ9LVLRQ&DUH,QF&RQILGHQWLDO 3
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 62 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
35263(&,),&$7,2 )LQDO3URWRFRO-RKQVRQ	-RKQVRQ9LVLRQ&DUH,QF&RQILGHQWLDO 4
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 63 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
APPENDIX B: PATIENT INSTRUCTION GUIDE   
This will be provided separately. 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 64 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
APPENDIX C: PACKAGE INSERT (APPROVED PRO DUCT)  
1-DAY ACUVUE® DEFINE™ Brand Contact [CONTACT_618426]-6396, v 2.0  
Page 65 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
APPENDIX D:   
Near Logmar Visual Acuity Measurement Procedure 
Lens Fitting Characteristics  
Subject Reported Ocular Symptoms /Problems 
Determination Of Distance Spherocylindrical Refractions 
Biomicroscopy Scale  
Distance And Near Visual Acuity Evaluation  
Distance Logmar Visual Acuity Measurement Procedure 
Measuring Pupil Diameter With Neuroptics VIP-200Variable Pupi[INVESTIGATOR_763268]-6396, v 2.0  
Page 68 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
 NEAR LOGMAR VISUAL ACUITY MEASUREMENT P ROCEDURE  
 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 69 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
 LENS FITTING CHARAC TERISTICS  
 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 72 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
3DJHRI







CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 76 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
3DJHRI

CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 77 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
3DJHRI





CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 78 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
 SUBJECT REPORTED OC ULAR SYMPTOMS/PROBLE MS 
 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 79 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
 DETERMINAT ION OF DISTANCE SPHE ROCYLINDRICAL 
REFRACTIONS  
 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 81 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
 BIOMICROSCOPY SCAL E 
 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 88 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
 DISTANCE AND NEAR VISUAL ACUITY EVALUA TION  
 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 94 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
 DISTANCE LOGMAR VI SUAL ACUITY MEASUREM ENT 
PROCEDURE  
 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 99 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
 MEASURING PUPIL DI AMETER WITH NEUROPTI CS VIP -200 
VARIABLE PUPI[INVESTIGATOR_763269] R 
 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 103 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 

3DJHRI
0HDVXULQJ3XSLO'LDPHWHUZLWK1HXU2SWLFV9,39DULDEOH
3XSLOORPHWHU

CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 104 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 

3DJHRI

CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 105 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
 VISUAL ACUITY CHAR T LUMINANCE AND ROOM  ILLUMINATION 
TESTING  
 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 107 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
 QCSF CONTRAST SENSIT IVITY  
 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 113 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
 
 

3DJHRI
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 116 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
 
 

3DJHRI
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 118 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
 
 

3DJHRI
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 119 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
 
 

3DJHRI
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 120 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
APPENDIX E: WORK AID: AST qVA -Custom 100   
 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 121 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
3DJHRI
:RUN$LG$67T9$&XVWRP
:25.$,'$67T9$&XVWRP































CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 122 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
3DJHRI
:RUN$LG$67T9$&XVWRP

CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 123 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
3DJHRI
:RUN$LG$67T9$&XVWRP

 
 
 
 







 

 

 

 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 124 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
3DJHRI
:RUN$LG$67T9$&XVWRP

CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 125 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
3DJHRI
:RUN$LG$67T9$&XVWRP


CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 126 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
3DJHRI
:RUN$LG$67T9$&XVWRP

CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 128 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
APPENDIX F: WAVEFRONT AND TOPOGRAPHY MEASUREMENT USING 
VISIONIX VX118  
 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 131 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
3DJHRI
:RUN$LG:DYHIURQWDQG7RSRJUDSK\0HDVXUHPHQWXVLQJ9LVLRQL[9 ;LQVWUXPHQW
:25.$,':$9()5217$1'7232*5$3+<0($685(0(1786,1*
9,6,21,;9;,167580(17
































CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 132 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
3DJHRI
:RUN$LG:DYHIURQWDQG7RSRJUDSK\0HDVXUHPHQWXVLQJ9LVLRQL[9 ;LQVWUXPHQW

CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 133 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
3DJHRI
:RUN$LG:DYHIURQWDQG7RSRJUDSK\0HDVXUHPHQWXVLQJ9LVLRQL[9 ;LQVWUXPHQW








 
 
 
 




CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 134 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
3DJHRI
:RUN$LG:DYHIURQWDQG7RSRJUDSK\0HDVXUHPHQWXVLQJ9LVLRQL[9 ;LQVWUXPHQW



















CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 135 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
3DJHRI
:RUN$LG:DYHIURQWDQG7RSRJUDSK\0HDVXUHPHQWXVLQJ9LVLRQL[9 ;LQVWUXPHQW







CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 136 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
3DJHRI
:RUN$LG:DYHIURQWDQG7RSRJUDSK\0HDVXUHPHQWXVLQJ9LVLRQL[9 ;LQVWUXPHQW















 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 137 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
3DJHRI
:RUN$LG:DYHIURQWDQG7RSRJUDSK\0HDVXUHPHQWXVLQJ9LVLRQL[9 ;LQVWUXPHQW

CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 138 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
APPENDIX G: COSMETIC FIT AND HULA HOOP  
 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 140 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
APPENDIX H: VISUAL EXPERIENCE WORK AID  
 
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 144 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 







CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 145 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 
Clinical Study Protocol
[COMPANY_012] Vision Care, Inc.
PROTOCOL COMPLIANCE INVESTIGATOR(S) SIGN ATURE PAGE  
Protocol Number and Title: CR-[ADDRESS_1045843] 
Lenses
Version and Date: 2.029January [ADDRESS_1045844] this study according to ISO [ZIP_CODE] ,1GCP and ICH guidelines ,2the
Declaration of Helsinki ,3[LOCATION_002] (US) Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) ,4and the 
pertinent individual country laws/regulations and to comply wit h its obligations, subject to 
ethical and safety considerations. The Principal Investigator i s responsible for ensuring that all 
clinical site personnel, including Su b-Investigators adhere to all ICH2regulations and GCP 
guidelines regarding clinical trials during and after study com pletion.
I will assure that n o deviation from or changes to the protocol will take place wit hout prior 
agreement from the Sponsor and documented approval from the Ins titutional Review Board 
(IRB), except where necessary t o eliminate an immediate hazard( s) to the trial participants.
Iam responsible for ensuring that all clinical site personnel in cluding Sub -Investigators adhere 
to all ICH2regulations and GCP guidelines regardin g clinical trials during and after study 
completion.
All clinical site personnel involved in the conduct of this stu dy have completed Human 
Subjects Protection Training. 
I agree to ensure that all clinical site personnel involved in the conduct of this study are 
informed about their obligations in meeting the above commitments.
I shall not disclose the information contained in this protocol  or any results obtained from this 
study without written authorization.
Principal 
Investigator:
[INVESTIGATOR_19540] (Printed)
Institution/Site:
Institution/Site Name
[CONTACT_16277]/Site Address
CR-6396, v 2.0  
Page 146 of 146JJVC CONFIDENTIAL 