 
 
 
 
Phase 2 Study of Sildenafil for the Treatment of Lymphatic Malformations   
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
June 6, 2016  
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 1 of 47  
  
    
Sildenafil for the treatment of lymphatic malformations   
  
  
Sponsor Name & Address:   Joyce Teng, MD , PhD  
     Stanford University School of Medicine  
     Department of Pediatric Dermatology  
     [ADDRESS_60868] Medication:  Revatio®  
   Protocol Version  1, Original Issue, December 8, 2011 2, Incorporating Amendment #1, March 6, 2012  
   3, Incorporating Amendment #2, March 13, 2013  
   4, Incorporating Amendment #3, September 10,  2013 
   5, Incorporating Amendment #4, November 4 , 2013 
   6, Incorporating Amendment #5, February 23, 2015 
 7, Incorporating Amendment #6, March 15, 2016  
 8, Incorporating Amendment #7, June 6, 2016 
                 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60869] POPULATION  13 
5.2. INCLUSION CRITERIA  14 
5.3. EXCLUSION CRITERIA  15 
5.4. SCREENING LOG  16 
6. STUDY DESIGN  16 
6.1. STUDY DESIGN  16 
6.2. METHODS USED TO MINIMIZE BIAS  19 
7. STUDY PROCEDURES  19 
7.1. VISITS AND EXAMINATIONS  20 
7.1.1. Prescreening communications  20 
7.1.2. Visit 1 – Screening Visit [usually Day -7 to -1]  20 
7.1.3. Baseline Study [Day 0 (medication dispensed)  21 
7.1.4. Weeks 2, 8, and 16 [ ± 1 day]  23 
7.1.5. Weeks 4 and 12 [ ± 14 days ] 23 
7.1.6. Week 20 [ ± 21] 25 
7.1.7. End of Study 32 weeks [± 2 Weeks] 27 
7.1.8. Baseline Active [Day 0 (medication dispensed)  28 
7.1.9. Weeks 2 Active, 8 Active, and 16 Active [ ± 1 day] 28 
7.1.1 0. Weeks 4 Active and 12 Active [ ± 14 days t]  28 
7.1.11. Week 20 Active [End of Treatment, ± 21 days]                                                                          29 
7.
1.12. Week 32 Active [ End of Study, ± 2 Weeks]  [ADDRESS_60870] PREGNANCY  30 
7.3.1. Birth Control Measures  30 
7.4. STUDY METHODS AND MEASUREMENTS  31 
7.4.1. Demographic information  31 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60871]  33 
10. STATISTICAL DESIGN  33 
10.1.  EVALUABILITY  33 
10.2.  EFFICACY 33 
10.2.1. Primary Efficacy  33 
10.2.2. Secondary Efficacy  34 
10.2.3. Exploratory Efficacy  35 
10.3.  SAFETY  35 
11. SAMPLE SIZE JUSTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS:  [ADDRESS_60872] (2 pages ) [ADDRESS_60873] Instructions  45 
18. DECLARATION OF HELSINKI  47 
 
  
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60874] OF ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS OF TERMS:  
 
Abbreviation  De finition  
AE   Adverse Event(s)  
AF   Anchoring Fibrils  
ALT   Alanine Transaminase  
AST   Aspartate Transaminase 
BSA   Body Surface Area 
BUN    Blood Urea Nitrogen 
CBC    Complete Blood Count  
CFR   Code of Federal Regulation  
cGMP    Cyclic Guanosine Monophosphate 
cm²   Centimeters squared or square centimeters (area)  
CPK   Creat ine Phosphokinase 
CRF   Case Report Form  
CT   Computed Tomography  
CYP3A   Cytochrome P [ADDRESS_60875]  
Hgb   Hemoglobin 
IB   Investigator’s Brochure 
ICH   International Conference on Harmonization  
IEC   Independent Ethics Committee  
IND   Investigational New Drug 
IRB   Institutional Review Board 
IUD   Intrauterine Device  
LDH   Lactate Dehydrogenase 
LM   Lymphatic Malformation 
N/A   Not Applicable  
MCV   Mean Corpuscular Volume 
MCH   Mean Corpuscular Hgb 
MCHC   Mean Corpuscular Hgb Concentration  
MRI   Magnetic Resonance Image 
RBC    Red Blood Cells  
RDW    RBC distribution width  
SAE   Serious Adverse Event(s)  
SMP   Safety Monitoring Plan  
SOP   Standard Operating Procedures  
UP   Unanticipated Problems  
UPT   Urine Pregnancy Test  
WBC    White Blood Cells  
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 5 of 47  
 2. SYNOPSIS 
 
Study Phase:     2 
 Financial Disclosure Information for U.S. FDA Submission to be Obtained?  Yes  
 Test Medication:  Sildenafil 20 mg tablets , 2.5mg/ml  suspension (Revatio ®)  
Control Medication:  Placebo  tablets  or suspension resembling Revatio®  
 Study Dosage  / Usage:   Oral dosage of sildenafil. For pediatric patients 8 kg to 20 kg 
the suspension/tablets  dose will be 10 mg/4ml  three times a 
day (30 mg per day) and for patients > 20 kg the dose is 20 mg/8ml  three times a day (60 mg a day). Subjects less than 
8 kg will not be enrolled in the trial. 
 
Route of Administration: The medication will be given orally.   The subjects who w ill 
receive the 10 mg dose will be given an oral suspension  
(using dose calculation by [CONTACT_55775]) or half a tablet. Subjects will have the option of taking tablets or 
receiv ing an oral suspension of the medication in 2.5mg per 
mL. 
 Objective(s):  The objectives of this study are to assess the safety and 
effectiveness of sildenafil taken orally to improve or resolve lymphatic malformations. 
 Study Population:             Sixty Su bjects (60)  
 
Subjects will be between the ages of 6 months to 1 0 years of 
age inclusive with lymphatic malformations (LM) that have a 
minimum diameter of [ADDRESS_60876] size and estimate the total number of subjects required for the study.  
If after analysis of 15, 30 or 45 subjects we find that we are in the range of futility or efficacy, then we will notify the FDA as well as the DSMB, and begin to end the study by [CONTACT_55776].  
 Structure:  Double -blind trial of placebo compared to sildenafil  with an 
open label extension for subjects who received placebo .  
Two to one ratio of two sildenafil treated subjects who  
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60877]’s LMs will be categorized by [CONTACT_55777].  Upon completion of the initial [ADDRESS_60878] the minimum numbers of subjects that should be enrolled further in the study.   
 Duration of Treatment:   [ADDRESS_60879] an option for 20 weeks of active 
sildenafil.   
 Duration of Assessment:  The subjects will be evaluated for 20 weeks on therapy then 
followed for  12 weeks off therapy.   
 Open Label Extension : P lacebo subjects will have an option to enter an open label  
treatment after  they have completed 20 weeks of placebo.  
    
 Duration of treatment: Placebo 20 weeks  
 Washout Between Periods: none  
 Duration of Treatment: [ADDRESS_60880] the option to be followed 
through an IRB approved long- term follow up trial not 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60881] to follow, including 
sildenafil if their regular doctor prescribes it, and their 
response to any therapy .   
 Multi -Center:    Yes  
 Number of Centers:  Up to 4 
  Blinding:    Observer -Blind  Yes 
    Subject -Blind   Yes  
    Double -Blind   Yes 
      Randomization:  Group Assignment Ratio: 2:[ADDRESS_60882] who receives  placebo.  
 Concurrent  Control:  No other treatments for lymphatic malformation  will b e 
allowed  except antibiotics and/or surgical drainage if the 
lesions become infected. Treatment for recurrent infections 
in the lymphatic malformation will be allowed and 
documented during the trial.  Concurrent medications will be 
documented.  Subjects who require sclerosing agents or excisional surgery of their lymphatic malformation will be 
withdrawn from the trial. 
 Variable(s):  PRIMARY:  Change in lesion volume over twenty weeks of the test 
medication as evaluated by [CONTACT_55778].   Comparison 
of placebo to sildenafil treated subjects.   
  SECONDARY:  Change in lesion volume estimated using a soft tape 
measure to measure the length, width, and hemispheric 
measurement  of each of  the lymphatic malformations . (Berk, 
Berk et al. 2011) Comple tion of the form Lymphatic 
Malformation Measurements . 
  Subject’s evaluation of the change in lesion clinical characteristics  from baseline to [ADDRESS_60883]’s  
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60884]’s Assessment of Lymphatic 
Malformation  Change  form. 
 
Physician’s evaluation of the lesion clinical characteristics on 
the day of the visit.  This includes color, tenseness and texture, superficial component, deep component, and distortion of anatomical landmarks.  This requires completion of the Lymphatic Malformation Assessment  form for each LM 
site.   
 
Physician’s evaluation of the change in lesion clinical characteristics from baseline, such as change in texture or thickness, change in distortion of normal anatomy, and over change in lesions.  This requires completion of the Lymphatic Malformation Assessment of Change form for 
each LM site.   
 Comparison of LM volume from MRI assessment to Body Surface Area (BSA) measurements before and after [ADDRESS_60885] additional photographs 
taken after 20 weeks of sildenafil.   
 
Presence, freq uency  or absence of infection during trial . 
 Relationship of response to sildenafil to previous infections, sclerotherapy or surgery.   
  SAFETY:  Adverse events and frequency of lesion infections . 
 Adverse Events:   Both volunteered and elicited. 
 
3. INTRODUCTION  
3.1. BACKGROUND  
 Lymphatic malformations (LMs) are uncommon, congenital vascular anomalies that 
arise due to developmental dysplasia of the lymphatic network in utero. (Blei 2008)  LMs 
are equally rare independent of sex or race. (Redondo, Aguado et al. 2011)   About  65% 
of LMs  are detected at  delivery, 80% by 1 year of age, and 90% by 2 years of age 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 9 of 47  
 emphasizing their childhood expression. (Redondo, Aguado et al. 2011)   The deeper 
ones may not be initially noticed but will become recognized as they increase in size or 
become infected.  Although histologically benign, they are often locally invasive and 
affect the skin and soft tissues, as well as nerve, muscle or bone in some c ases.  Cystic 
hygromas are a specific type of  congenital malformations of the lymphatic system that 
are commonly on the posterior neck.  ( Gallagher, Mahoney et al. 1999)   They occur in 
about one in 1,775 live births  (Howarth, Draper et al. 2005) to one in 2667 live births 
(Fisher, Partington et al. 1996) making them truly an orphan disease.  The incidence 
may be higher as they can be associated with other fetal abnormalities resulting in spontaneous or induced abortions. (Fisher, Partington et al. 1996)   In one series of [ADDRESS_60886] year of life yielding a survival rate of 88%. (Fisher, Partington et al. 1996)   Lymphatic malformations often have 
considerable morbidity, associated with infection,  bleeding and airway or vision 
obstruction as well as significant psychosocial concerns.  (Greene, Perlyn et al. 2011)   
When present on the extremities, they often bleed with physical activity, may inhibit movement and ambulation, and are at times painful.   Clinical research in LMs has been largely neglected primarily due to the common misperception that only surgical and procedural interventions may help alleviate this 
disease. Unfortunately, despi[INVESTIGATOR_55760], none are uniformly effective, all have the risk of significant adverse events, and no standard of care has been established. (Churchill, Otal et al. 2011; Greene, Perlyn et al. 2011) 
Scler otherapy, surgical excision and laser ablation all require general anesthesia in the 
pediatric population, and even when initially effective, the LM may recur. In addition, many LMs are not resectable or able to be treated due to their infiltrative nature.  
Nonetheless, these lesions need to be treated due to risk of infection secondary to lymph stasis, acute enlargement as a reaction to infection or inflammation, disfigurement and pain. Unfortunately, active non- intervention is often the current 
recommendat ion for many patients with LMs due to the limitations of surgical and 
destructive modalities and lack of a disease- modifying medical therapy. Thus, many 
patients are forced to live with lesions which may inhibit movement and ambulation, can bleed and become infected, and are almost always of aesthetic and psychosocial concern.   
 A recent patient observation within our institution brought the possibility of using sildenafil to treat LMs to our attention. A female infant was born with a venous and lymphatic malformation affecting the entire right arm and upper chest with pleural, 
paravertebral, and para- aortic involvement. Examination findings included massive 
enlargement of the affected arm and chest wall. MRI study at 2 months of age confirmed that the affected areas were infiltrated with small, abnormal lymphatic spaces. Due to the nature and extent of the malformation, treatment with sclerotherapy, laser or surgery was not an option, and the patient was simply observed. She was diagnosed with pulmonary hypertension at 9 months of age after repeated admissions for respi[INVESTIGATOR_1506], heart failure and failure to thrive. Sildenafil was started for the pulmonary hypertension, and the patient’s mother noticed a decompression of the LM over the first 17 weeks of sildenafil. At 21 months of age, repeat MRI verified minimal 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60887] due to cardiac and respi[INVESTIGATOR_1399].  The family refused an autopsy.   
 Sildenafil is well tolerated in both the adult and pediatric populations. It works by [CONTACT_55779] 5 (PDE5) and thus inhibits the breakdown of guanosine 3’,5’ -cyclic monophosphate (cGMP). PDE5 is found in high concentrations in 
vascular smooth muscle, as well as in the corpus cavernosum, platelets, and retina.   
(Shekerdemian, Ravn et al. 2002; Wang, Wu et al. 2003)  It has also gained a second 
FDA approval for the treatment of patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension. ( [COMPANY_007] 
2007)   Mortality associated with pulmonary hypertension is extremely high.  Thus, 
despi[INVESTIGATOR_55761], it has been used for pulmonary hypertension in the pediatric population with a very good results, an exceedingly benign side effect profile, and an excellent safety record.  (Abrams, Schulze- Neick et al. 2000; Karatza, Bush et al. 
2005; Barst, Ivy et al. 2012) 
 The possible mechanism for the success of sildenafil treat ment in lymphatic 
malformations seems congruent with our current knowledge of LM pathogenesis and sildenafil's mechanisms of action. Although the pathogenesis of lymphatic malformations is not completely elucidated, it has been postulated that primitive lymphatic sacs separate from the normal network of developi[INVESTIGATOR_55762]. A thickened coat of muscle fibers line these cisterns, and rhythmic contractions of the muscles increase intramural pressures leading to dilation. (Whimster 
1976)  On histopathology a muscular lymphatic channel is often present. Potential 
explanations for the therapeutic effects  of sildenafil include simple smooth muscle 
relaxation, which may open the primary overactive muscular fiber leading to decreased intramural pressures and decompression of the malformation. Alternatively, sim ple 
smooth muscle relaxation could lead to secondary lymphatic channels opening, allowing decompression of the malformation. Both of these explanations intuitively seem very plausible. There are also many other possible explanations why sildenafil may work in lymphatic malformations including sildenafil ’s secondary effect on nitric oxide  via its 
inhibition of cGMP as endothelial nitric oxide synthetase.   
 We initially  started an IRB approved clinical trial giving the subjects [ADDRESS_60888] had 25% to 50% improvement by [CONTACT_941] 12 week visit.  The 
sildenafil was stopped as planned at 12 weeks and follow up at 16 weeks (4 weeks off sildenafil) documented expansion of the lesion.  The parents of the first two children enrolled in the study requested continuation of the sildenafil and a prescription was 
given and follow up off the study was planned.  Those children are now in an IRB 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60889] completed the enrolment and has completed 
12 weeks of sildenafil with 25% to 50% improvement.   
 
One of the problems that we have recognized in this study is the inaccuracy of physical examination as the method to evaluate the response to therapy.  The lesions seem to demonstrate improvement by [CONTACT_55780].  The skin develops a sagging redundant feel to palpation but the measurements of the volume of the lesions are slow to change because of the elasticity of the skin and slow retraction of redundant skin.  In the proposed study, we will use MRI examinations to measure the 
volume change in the lesion over time as well as comparing subjects treated with 
sildenafil to subjects who initially receive placebo.  
3.2. RATIONALE  
Recently propranolol, a commonly used medication for hypertension, has been shown to have impressive efficacy in the treatment of infantile hemangiomas.  (Leaute- Labreze, 
Dumas de la Roque et al. 2008)   The new indication for this “old” drug was discovered 
when two children with infantile hemangiomas and heart problems (one with cardiac myopathy, the other with increased cardiac output) were placed on propranolol. Unexpectedly, their hemangiomas involuted quickly and dramatically after the initiation of the medication. To verify the effect of propranolol on hemangiomas, 9 other infants with infantile hemangiomas but no heart disease were then treated with propranolol, and all had rapid resolution of their infantile hemangiomas.  (Leaute- Labreze, Dumas de 
la Roque et al. 2008)   In addition, propranolol was well -tolerated and has a better side 
effect profile than oral corticosteroids, the traditional treatment for problematic hemangiomas. Additional studies have verified that hemangiomas respond quickly to propranolol, and the medication has been used successfully to treat  not just infantile 
hemangiomas affecting the skin but of the airway and liver, as well as those complicated by [CONTACT_55781]. (Frieden and Drolet 2009; Sans, de la Roque et al. 2009; de 
Graaf, Breur et al. 2011; Fuchsmann, Quintal et al. 2011) After our own striking and 
serendipi[INVESTIGATOR_55763], we are hopeful to verify the effect of sildenafil on LMs. If successful, sildenafil has the potential to have just as large an impact in the treatment of LMs as propranolol has with hemangiomas. There is no effective nonsurgical treatment 
for this orphan disease.    
 
3.3. OBJECTIVE 
The objective in this study is  to assess the safety and efficacy of sildenafil in reducing 
the volume and symptoms of lymphatic malformations when administered to subjects 
who have lymphatic malf ormations greater than 3 cm in diameter.  
 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60890] medication: S ildenafil (Revatio ®) 20 mg tablets  or suspension  
Control Medication: Placebo  or suspension resembling Revatio® 
 
4.2. PACKAGING AND LABELING  
The test medications will consist of Sildenafil 20 mg tablets (Revatio®) and Placebo 
tablets that resemble Revatio®.  These medications will be shipped in bulk containers to 
the Lucile Packard Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (LPCH) Pharmacy  where they will be stored.  
 Each bottle will be labeled in accordance with Good Manufacturing Practice and will include the following information:  
• Study Acronym Name 
• Unique alpha- numeric identifier (Lot number)  
• Storage requirement  
• Investigational use and appropriate caution statements  
• Sponsor identification  
• Unique subject ID  
 The LPCH Pharmacy will dispense the Revatio® or Placebo in bottles labeled with the subjects identification information based upon the randomized code.  The LPCH Pharmacist will compound an extemporaneously prepared oral suspension from Revatio® 20mg tablets  or placebo tablets, depending on subject’s preference. 
Pharmacy staff will know if the subject is receiving Placebo or Revatio®.  Depending on subjects weight, the study pharmacist will formulate  study drug into an oral suspension 
for 2.5mg per  ml dosing volume.  
 Subjects . who weigh 8kg – 20kg will receive a 4 -week supply 10mg/4ml  TID, and the 
treatment will be compounded into a 480ml dosing volume, and then transfer red to four  
bottles of 120 ml each.    Subjects weighing more than 20kg will receive a 4- week supply 20mg/8ml  TID.  The 
subject and the research physician will be blinded to Placebo or Revatio®  until 
completion of the [ADDRESS_60891] , or a member of their staff specifically authorized and delegated by [CONTACT_3786], will check for accurate delivery and acknowledge receipt by [CONTACT_2960] (or initialing) and dating the required documentation and returning it as instructed. The 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60892] will compound Revatio® [ADDRESS_60893] POPULATION 
Subjects should be between the ages of  six months and ten (10) years of age with the 
clinical diagnosis of lymphatic malformation that appears to be greater than [ADDRESS_60894] a minimal weight of 8 kg to enter the trial.   The diagnosis 
will be confirmed by [CONTACT_55782] (6) months of screening 
visit.  The MRI will confirm that the lesion at least 3 cm  in diameter  and the lesion is 
either:  
i. At least 50% of the lesion contains non- enhancing regions separated by [CONTACT_55783],  
 or 
ii. No vessels in the lesion, or only a few small vessels that traverse the lesion but are not intrinsically a portion of the lesion, and no flow voids or only a few small flow voids that traverse the lesion but are not intrinsically a portion of the lesion.  
iii. The volume of the total lesion will be calculated as well as the proportion of the lesion that is macrocystic will be calculated.   
 The enrollment goal will be forty subjects who have completed the twenty weeks of therapy followed by [CONTACT_47486].  We expect to enroll up to sixty (60) subjects.    
 The upper age limit is ten years old because as patients age they may have recurrent 
infections and scarring which may decrease our ability to evaluate the response of the lymphatic malformation to sildenafil.   We will document previous therapi[INVESTIGATOR_55764] .   
 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 14 of 47  
 5.2. INCLUSION CRITERIA 
Subjects will be considered qualified for enrollment if they meet the following criteria:  
 
1. L egally authorized representative of subjects willing and able to give consent.  
Assent will be obtained for subjects between the ages of [ADDRESS_60895] be performed within six (6) months of the screening visit if used as a baseline measure.  
 5. The lymphatic malformation should be causing enough disability for the subject 
requiring them to consider systemic therapy.  
 6. Females must not be pregnant or breast -feeding.  
 7.  Female subjects of childbearing potential have negative urine- pregnancy test 
results.  
 8. A parent or legally authorized representative must be willing and able to ensure 
subject  is present for all required study visits.  
 9. A parent or legally authorized representative must be able to follow instructions.  
 10. During the initial screening evaluation portion of the trial the subjects MRI 
examination will be required to confirm that the lymphatic malformation is present and is 
greater than [ADDRESS_60896] not be a smoker.  
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 15 of 47  
  
5.3. EXCLUSION CRITERIA 
A participant will be ineligible if he/she meets any of the following criteria:  
 
1. The participant  has a medically unstable health status that may interfere w ith 
his/her ability to complete the study.  
 2.  The participant presents with one or more of the following medical conditions:  
Hepatic impairment, severe renal impairment, lymphedema conditions such as Milroy disease, Meige lymphedema, Hennekam syndrome, Njolstad syndrome, Aagenaes 
syndrome, and Fabry disease,  hypotension or at risk for hypotension, seizures or 
history of seizures, any significant cardiovascular risk factors and any condition which 
requires participants to use nitric oxide donors or nitrates in any form, underlying anatomic or vascular risk factor for developi[INVESTIGATOR_55765]- arteritic ant erior ischemic optic 
neuropathy (NAION) including low ocular cup to disc ratio, diabetes, hypertension, 
coronary artery disease, or hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_55766], Turner 
syndrome and Noonan syndrome will be considered on a case- by-case basis.  
 3.  The participant has received at least one of the following medications 
contraindicated in association wit h sildenafil within 15 days of inclusion:  
 
o Organic nitrates in any form, either regularly or intermittently -- Consistent with its 
known effects on the nitric oxide/cGMP pathway, sildenafil was shown to potentiate the hypotensive effects of nitrates.  
o Ritonavir and other Potent CYP3A Inhibitors  ---  Concomitant use of REVATIO with ritonavir and other potent CYP3A inhibitors is not recommended.  
o Alpha -blockers  ---  co- administering alpha- blockers with REVATIO because of 
additive blood pressure- lowering effects  
o Amlodipi[INVESTIGATOR_050]  
o Cimetidine  
 4.  The participant requires concomitant use of potent cytochrome P450 3A4 
inhibitors (such as ketoconazole, itraconazole, erythromycin, saquinavir), or concomitant use of ritonavir.   Also excluded are concomitant use of organic nitrates , 
alpha- blockers , amlodipi[INVESTIGATOR_050], or cimetidine. 
 5. The screening MRI cannot confirm that the lesion is a lymphatic malformation or 
the lymphatic malformation is less than [ADDRESS_60897] of sildenafil  
 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60898]'s source documents and noted on the Screening Log at Stanford and in the Pre- Screening logs at each site.  
6. STUDY DESIGN  
6.1. STUDY DESIGN  
 
Figure 6.1 -1: Study Design Schematic.  Decision points are indicated in bold text.  
Treatment periods are indicated.   Double lined boxes indicate visits that will occur at the 
subject’s closest site, whether at Stanford or at a Cooperating Research Site (Denver, 
Chicago, Kansas City).  
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60899]  in the Initial Treatment Period. Sildenafil or placebo will be given for 20 
weeks.    60 research subjects  will be enrolled . 
 There will be v isits at Screening, Initial dose visit (includes a 2 hour observation period 
after in itial do se), [ADDRESS_60900], including both MRIs.  All other visits (weeks 4, 12, 32) will be conducted at the subject’s local site.   These subjects will be given the option to have the blood work for Screening 
done at their local site or at Stanford.  They will also be given the option to have the eye exams and hearing exams at Screening and Week [ADDRESS_60901] will be evaluated by [CONTACT_9268], and will undergo an eye exam and a hearing exam .  After the MRI, eye exam, and 

  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60902] completes the 20 weeks of sildenafil and/or placebo.  The MRI will be read and the data recorded by [CONTACT_55784].  Once the data is collected and recorded, the research radiologist will learn name [CONTACT_55806].     
 The volume data on the subject’s LM(s) relative to the subject’s BSA will then also be evaluated for any changes.  Since all subjects will be children under [ADDRESS_60903] follow -up visits at 4 week s 
after beginning medication, 12 weeks after beginning medication and 20 weeks after 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60904] three MRI examinations.  Subjects on active medication will be requested to stop the medication in order to be followed over the next 
twelve weeks with no medication (week 32) .   
 With the subject’s permission, we will send a report to the subject’s primary and 
special ty care physicians with the data that was obtained on the subject during the 
study , including the MRI LM research blinded segmentation results.  Subjects will be 
returned to their primary care physician or specialty care physicians for follow -up at 
completion of the study .  The subject can work with their local physician to decide to 
continue or not continue the sildenafil into the future independent of this research 
protocol  and IND .  As part of a separate IRB approved follow up protocol  independent of 
this IND and after informed consent , we will request the subject to allow us to contact  
[CONTACT_55785] a year  for the next five years to ask how their lymphatic 
malformation  lesion has progressed or changed and what additional therapi[INVESTIGATOR_55767].  
 
6.2. METHODS USED TO MINIMIZE BIAS  
All subjects will have the option to receive [ADDRESS_60905] assignment to sildenafil or placebo in the initial 
treatment period will be random.  
 
7. STUDY PROCEDURE S 
For a summary of the required procedures by [CONTACT_765], refer to Table 17-1 : Study 
Procedures by [CONTACT_55786].  
 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60906] (IRB) to s creen 
subjects on the phone after they  contact [CONTACT_3019].  Subjects from the cooperating research 
sites will be referred to contact [CONTACT_55787].  The subjects  will 
also obtain our contact [CONTACT_55788]. gov or through a local physician 
or community resource that is aware of our study.  Potential subjects who contact [CONTACT_55789] a telephone screening, using a script approved by [CONTACT_55790], to verify that they meet the initial inclusion criteria for this trial.  Potential subjects 
who meet the initial criteria will be mailed information about the study, including consent forms for their review.  We will also send and ask them to sign and send back to us a 
release to obtain and examine their medical records in order to have more details about 
their current condition.    
 Once the prescreening communication documents that the patient is appropriate for the trial, the patient will be scheduled for a screening visit at  the Stanford Dermatology 
Clinics .  All screening visits may be conducted at Stanford, even for patients identified at 
non-Stanford cooperating research study sites.  Patients identified at non- Stanford 
cooperating research study sites will be given the option to have the laboratory tests, ophthalmology evaluation and hearing test locally before coming to Stanfor d for the 
other screening tests.  If they opt to do these locally, they will sign a consent form at  the 
cooperating research study site prior to these exams.  The visit at Stanford will be set up so that the subject can receive the screening evaluation, MR I, ophthalmology 
evaluation (if not done at the cooperating site), hearing test  (if not done at the 
cooperating site), and laboratory test s (if not done at the cooperating site)  during a two 
to three day visit to the Stanford site.  
7.1.2. Visit 1 – Screen ing Visit  [usually Day - 7 to - 1] at Stanford  
NOTE: Any subject for whom an informed consent/assent has been obtained, but fails 
to meet the required entry criteria is considered to be a screen failure. All demographic information must be captured with the reason for screen failure specified.  
 1. Explain the purpose and nature of the study, and have the subject’s parent or legally authorized representative, read, sign, and date the IRB -approved informed consent 
document. Even subjects who may have signed a consent form at the cooperating 
research study site prior to laboratory,  eye and hearing exams will sign the Stanford 
consent form at this visit.  T he subject ’s assent to participate in the study will be 
obtained if the subject is between [ADDRESS_60907]’s medical record.  The original copy will be maintained in the research 
files. 
 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60908] protocol inclusion and exclusion criteria (Sections 5.2, 
5.3). Subjects not meeting the criteria are screen failures and must exit the study at 
this point.  
 3. Obtain demographic information and medical history, including information on all medications currently being taken at the time of signing the informed consent.   
Instruct the subject and/or caregiver of the excluded medications and give them a list.  Document previous treatments for the lymphatic malformation and previous 
infections in the lymphatic malformation.   
 4. Review the subject ’s prev iously obtained MRI, X -rays or CT scans  and other 
laboratory test results with the subject.  
 5. Perform a physical examination including heart and pulmonary auscultation, liver and spleen palpation, abdominal auscultation and palpation,  and documentation of 
peripheral pulses .  Examine the characteristics of their lymphatic malformation to 
see that it  meets the criteria for the trial.  
 6. Obtain Vital Signs including height, weight, temperature, heart rate, blood pressure, 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], and oxygen saturation. 
 7.  If the patient meets all the screening criteria then they will then be sent for an eye 
examination (if not done at the cooperating site) , hearing test  (if not done at the 
cooperating site) , laboratory test evaluating a complete blood count (CBC) in 
addition to testing their  liver and kidney function (if not  done at the cooperating site) 
(see section 17 .1), and an MRI.  We will also obtain a pregnancy test on females 
who have achieved menarche.   
  
7.1.3. Baseline Study [Day 0 (medication dispensed) ] at Stanford 
This will usually be the day after the screening. 
 
1. Review inclusion and exclusion criteria with the subject , including the results of their 
laboratory data, eye examination, and MRI.   If subject no longer meets criteria for 
participation, exit the subject from the study as a screen failure.  
 2. Obtain demographic information and medical history, including information on all medications currently being taken.   Document concomitant medications .  Instruct the 
subject and/or caregiver of the excluded medications and give them a list  if they do 
not have their list  that was previously given to them.  
 3. Perform a physical examination including heart and pulmonary auscultation, liver and spleen palpation, abdominal auscultation and palpation, and documentation of 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60909] diameter of the lesion.  The length, and width, will then 
be calculated as described in Figure 2 of Berk et  al.(Berk, Berk et al. 2011)   In order 
to document the site of the measurements a diagram will be drawn by [CONTACT_55791].  Each clinic visit will try to duplicate t he 
measurements methods used in the initial visit .   
 6. Physician’s evaluation of the lesion clinical characteristics on the day of the visit.  This includes color, tenseness and texture, superficial component, deep component, and distortion of anatomical landmarks.  This requires completion of the Lymphatic Malformation Assessment  form for each LM site.   
 7. Site investigator will acquire digital photographs of each lymphatic malformation as 
described in Section 7.4.4, and summarized as follows:  
o Subject will be seated on a chair.  If subject is an infant, then subject’s parent 
or guardian will be seated on a chair with subject sitting on his/her knees or in his/her arms.  
o All photographs will include a color chart in the field of view, held in the same 
plane as the target lymphatic malformation. 
o Distance and angle of each photograph relative to subject will be documented 
at baseline and repeated for all subsequent photographs.  
o Photograph 1: front -on view of each lymphatic malformation. 
o Photograph 2: side- on view of each lymphatic malformation (to visualize 
thickness). 
 
8. Review possible adverse events included in informed consent . 
 9. Medication journals  will be given and instructions reviewed. 
 10. Study medication dose for 1 month will be calculated and obtained from the 
pharmacy . Subjects will receive an oral suspension of the study medication (see 
Section 18.2 for pharmacy instructions ).  
 11. The first dose of the medication will be consumed in the clinic. The subject will 
remain within the clinic area and temperature, heart rate, blood pressure, respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], and oxygen saturation will be repeated every 30 minutes for the initial 2 hours 
after the initial dose.  
 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60910] information for 
the research physicians  and the foods and medications to be avoided while on 
sildenafil.  
 
13. If there are no safety issues  identified during the 2 hours of observation, the 
participant or parent/guardian is dispensed enough study treatment until the next visit at Week [ADDRESS_60911] and/or caregiver 
will again be instructed of the excluded medications and the list will again be reviewed.   The subject will be advised to stop medication and notify the study team 
immediately if they notice a change in vision or hearing or if they feel dehydrated.  
 14. If a subject approves, we will send a copy of the dictated record for the study visit to 
their local primary care doctor and/or pediatric dermatologist and other specialty physicians that the subject requests.  If the subject is to be followed at one of the local cooperating research sites, a copy to the record will be sent to the center.  The 
MRI results, ophthalmology report, hearing test report and laboratory data will also be sent to the subject ’s local cooperating research site.  We would like to be sure 
that the physicians in their home community are aware of the study and the subject ’s 
participation in the study.   
 
7.1.4. Week s 2, 8, and 16 [ ± 1 day]  
Study staff at Stanford will call the subject on the phone and query subject and/or 
caregiver regarding any changes in general health and the use of concomitant 
medications.  We will review previous and current concomitant medications .  We will 
instruct the subject and/or caregiver of the excluded medications and answer any question that the subject may have.  
 
7.1.5. Weeks 4 and 12 [ ± 14  days before or after scheduled visit]  at subject’s 
cooperating research site or at Stanford if the subject is local to Stanford.   
 
1. If the subject is being seen at a cooperating research site the subject will need to review  the purpose and nature of the study with the local investigator at the 
cooperating site.  If not already done before local laboratory tests, eye and hearing 
exams prior to the screening visit at Stanford, the subject’s parent or legally authorized representative must read, sign, and date the IRB -approved informed 
consent document for the local cooperating research site. The subject’s assent to participate in the study will be obtained if the subject is between [ADDRESS_60912]’s medical record.  A copy will be 
sent the Stanford.  The original copy will be maintained in the research files.  This consent will document the cooperation of the Stanford site and the local cooperating research site. 
 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60913] and/or caregiver regarding any changes in general health and the use 
of concomitant medications.   Obtain demographic information and review interim 
medical history, including information on all medications currently being taken.  
Review previous concomitant medications and current concomitant medications .  
Instruct the subject and/or caregiver of the excluded medications and give them a list if they do not have their list with them.  
 3. If any adverse events are observed or reported, they must be recorded as instructed in Section 13, Adverse Events.  
 4. Review criteria for treatment discontinuation. If treatment must be permanently discontinued, proceed to Section [ADDRESS_60914] diameter of the lesion.  The length, and width, will then 
be calculated as describe in Figure 2 of Berk et  al (2011) . In order to document the 
site of the measurements a diagram will be drawn by [CONTACT_55791].  Each clinic visit will try to duplicate the measurements methods used in the initial visit .   
 8. Completion of subject’s evaluation of the change in lesion clinical characteristics 
from baseline, such as decreased discomfort, texture or thickness, distortion of normal anatomy or overall change obtained in the subject’s completion of Subject’s Assessment of Lymphatic Malformation  Change form.  
  9. Completion of the physician’s evaluation of the lesion clinical characteristics on the day of the visit.  This includes color, tenseness and texture, superficial component, deep component, and distortion of anatomical landmarks.  This requires completion of the Lymphatic Malformation Assessment  form for each LM site.   
 10. Physician’s evaluation of the change in lesion clinical characteristics from baseline, such as change in texture or thickness, change in distortion of normal anatomy, and over change in lesions.  This requires completion of the Lymphatic Malformation 
Assessment of Change form for each LM site.   
 11. Count study drug and perform compliance assessment; medication journal reviewed.  
 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60915] pharmacy will dispense adequate study medication (s ildenafil or 
placebo) to last until the next visit.  The medication will be shipped directly  to the 
subject’s home. 
 13. Review possible adverse events included in informed consent . 
 14. New m edication journals reviewed  and instructions reviewed. 
 15. Arrange a MRI examination to be done before the [ADDRESS_60916] for the study visit to their local primary care doctor and/or pediatric dermatologist and other specialty physicians that the subject requests.  If the subject is to be followed at one of the local cooperating research sites, a copy to the record will be sent to the Stanford site.  We would like to be sure 
that the physicians in the subject’s  home community are aware of the study and the 
subject’s participation in the study.   
 
7.1.6. Week 20 [ ± 21 days before or after scheduled visit]  at Stanford 
End of Treatment for subjects treated with sildenafil.  Possible commencement of 
treatment for those subjects on placebo.  
 1. Query subject and/or caregiver regarding any changes in general health and t he use 
of concomitant medications.  Obtain demographic information and review interim medical history, including information on all medications currently being taken.  Review previous concomitant medications and current concomitant medications .  
Instruct the subject and/or caregiver of the excluded medications and give them a list if they do not have their list with them.  
 2. If any adverse events are observed or reported, they must be recorded as instructed in Section 13, Adverse Events.  
 3. Ophthalmology evaluation, hearing exam, and blood draw  performed.  Subjects from 
cooperating research study sites will have the option to do these tests at their local site or at Stanford.  
 4. Perform a physical examination including heart and pulmonary auscultation, liver 
and spleen palpation, abdominal auscultation and palpation, and documentation of 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60917] diameter of the lesion.  The length, and width, will then 
be calculated as describe in Figure 2 of Berk et  al (2011).   In order to document the 
site of the measurements a diagram will be drawn by [CONTACT_55791].  Each clinic visit will try to duplicate the measurements methods used in the initial visit .   
 7. Photographs of the Lymphatic malformation will be taken using standardized procedures  described in Baseline Visit .  
 8.  Completion of subject’s evaluation of the change in lesion clinical characteristics from baseline, such as decreased discomfort, texture or thickness, distortion of normal anatomy or overall change obtained in the subject’s completion of Subject’s Assessme nt of Lymphatic Malformation Change form.  
  9. Completion of the physician’s evaluation of the lesion clinical characteristics on the day of the visit.  This includes color, tenseness and texture, superficial component, deep component, and distortion of anatomical landmarks.  This requires completion 
of the Lymphatic Malformation Assessment  form for each LM site.   
 
10. Physician’s evaluation of the change in lesion clinical characteristics from baseline, such as change in texture or thickness, change in distortion of normal anatomy, and over change in lesions.  This requires completion of the Lymphatic Malformation 
Assessment of Change form for each LM site.   
 11. Collect study drug and perform compliance assessment ; medication journal 
reviewed.  
 12. Obtain a pregnancy test  if the subject is has achieved menarche. 
 13. The participant or parent/guardian and the investigator will complete the qualitative 
assessment of efficacy.  The subject ’s evaluation of the response to the treatment 
will be reviewed. The results report of the MRI done at the twenty week visit will be 
shared with the subject and compared with the initial MRI reported results.  After that discussion the subject will be told if they were on sildenafil or placebo.  S ubjects who 
received placebo will be given the option to start the sildenafil.  Subjects who 
received active medication will be requested to stop the sildenafil for the next twelve weeks  and follow up at the 32 week visit  to examine the response of the lesion off  of 
the sildenafil.  
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60918] for the study visit to 
their local primary care doctor and /or pediatric dermatologist so that the physicians in their home community are aware of the study and the subject ’s participation in the 
study.   
 
7.1.7. End of Study  32 weeks  [± 2 Weeks ] at subject’s cooperating research site or at 
Stanford if the subject is local to Stanford  for subjects who are on active sildenafil for 
the initial twenty weeks of the trial  
 
1. Query subject and/or caregiver regarding any changes in general health and t he use 
of concomitant medications.  Obtain demographic information and review interim medical history, including information on all medications currently being taken.  Review previous concomitant medications and current concomitant medications .  
Instruct the subject and/or caregiver of the excluded medications and give them a list if they do not have thei r list with them.  
 2. If any adverse events are observed or reported, they must be recorded as instructed in Section 13, Adverse Events.  
 3. Perform a physical examination including heart and pulmonary auscultation, liver 
and spleen palpation, abdominal auscultation and palpation, and documentation of 
peripheral pulses .  Examine  and describe the characteristics of their lymphatic 
malformation . 
 
4. O btain Vital Signs including height, weight, temperature, heart rate, blood pressure, 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], and oxygen saturation. 
 5. Clinical assessment of each lymphatic malformation including measuring the hemicircumference of the lesion by [CONTACT_2329] a soft measuring tape placed on the skin over the area of the widest diameter of the lesion.  The length, and width, will then 
be calculated as describe in Figure 2 of Berk et al  (2011).  In order to document the 
site of the measurements a diagram will be drawn by [CONTACT_55791].  Each clinic visit will try to duplicate the measurements methods used in the initial visit .   
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60919]’s evaluation of the change in lesion clinical characteristics from baseline, such as decreased discomfort, texture or thickness, distortion of normal anatomy or overall change obtained in the subject’s completion of Subject’s Assessment of Lymphatic Malformation Change form.  
  7. Completion of the physician’s evaluation of the lesion clinical characteristics on the day of the visit.  This includes color, tenseness and texture, superficial component, deep component, and distortion of anatomical landmarks.  This requires completion of the Lymphatic Malformation Assessment  form for each LM site.   
 8. Physician’s evaluation of the change in lesion clinical characteristics from baseline, such as change in texture or thickness, change in distortion of normal anatomy, and over change in lesions.  This requires completion of the Lymphatic Malformation 
Assessment of Change form for each LM site.   
 9. If a subject approves, we will send a copy of the dictated record for the study visit to their local primary care doctor and/or pediatric dermatologist and other specialty physicians that the subject requests.  If the subject is to be followed at one of the local site cooperating research site, a copy to the record will be sent to Stanford .  
We would like to be sure that the physicians in their home community are aware of the study and the subject’s participation in the study.  By [CONTACT_55792].  Besides sharing this information with the subject, the information will be available for the subject’s physic ians.   
 [ADDRESS_60920]’s parent or guardian’s 
consent for a separate Stanford IRB -approved long term follow up protocol.  If the 
subject is between [ADDRESS_60921] site for the 32 week visit.   
 
7.1.8. Baseline Active [Day 0 (medication dispensed)]  at Stanford for subjects who 
are on placebo for the initial twenty weeks of the trial  
For those subjects who were on placebo and request that they begin sildenafil, the first 
dose of the medication will be dispensed in the clinic, as described in the original baseline visit, Section 7.1.3.  This visit will follow the same procedures described in Section 7.1.3.  
7.1.9. Week s 2 Active , 8 Active, and 16 Active [ ± 1 day]  
These phone calls will follow the same procedures described in Section 7.1.4.  
 
7.1.10 . Weeks 4 Active  and 12 Active [ ± 14 days before or after scheduled visit] at 
subject’s cooperating research  site for subjects who are on placebo  for the initial 
twenty weeks of the trial  
These visits will follow the same procedures described in Section 7.1. 5. 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 29 of 47  
  
7.1.11. Week 20 Active [End  of Treatment, ± 21 days before or after scheduled visit]  
at Stanford for subjects who are on placebo  for the initial twenty weeks of the trial  
This visit will follow the same procedures described in Section 7.1. 6, except that there is 
no unblinding and no option to start a treatment period of active sildenafil.  
 7.1.12. Week 32 Active [ End of Study, ± 2 Weeks] at subject’s cooperating research  
site for subjects who are on placebo  for the initial twenty weeks of the trial  
This visit will follow the same pr ocedures described in Section 7.1. 7. 
 7.1.13. Early Exit  at subject’s cooperating research  site  or at Stanford 
In addition to the procedures required at the EOT visit : 
1. The subject will be exited from the study.  
2. S tudy medication will be collected .  The subject may elect to not return to Stanford 
or the cooperating research site for this visit.  In this case, we will have them mail the 
unused medication back to Stanford.  We will give them pre -addressed shippi[INVESTIGATOR_55768].  If the sub ject does not return for this visit,  we may also arrange to get the 
pregnancy test at a local hospi[INVESTIGATOR_55769].   
7.1.14. Unscheduled Visits  at subject’s local site  or at Stanford 
Unscheduled exams may be conducted at the discretion of the Investigator with all obtained information recorded in the source documents . Subjects will be requested to 
have their local physician also send us any information on visits they may have with their local physician related to the lymphatic malformation or lymphatic malformation 
treatment.  
7.1.15. Concomitant Medications  
A concomitant medication is any drug or substance administered from the signing of the informed consent for the study through the last study visit  Items 3 and 4 in Section 5.3 
(Exclusion Crit eria) list those medications that are not permitted during the study period.  
Investigational drugs or devices : The use of concomitant therapi[INVESTIGATOR_55770]'s  source documents .  
 
7.2. DISCONTINUED SUBJECTS  
Discontinued subjects are those who voluntarily discontinue participation, who are 
withdrawn for safety reasons or use of prohibited concomitant treatments, or who have 
missed a sufficient number of study visits, procedures or test medication doses as to be 
ineligible for further participation.  
 All subjects who discontinue the study prior to completing the regularly scheduled visits must complete the EOT and Exit Visit procedures described in Section 7 .1.11. Any 
changes in medical health and/or the use of  concomitant treatments must be captured. 
If any adverse events were observed since the previous visit, they must be recorded 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 30 of 47  
 (refer to Section 13, Adverse Events). Finally, if appropriate, the Investigator also should 
advise the subject’s parent or legally authorized representative of subsequent therapy 
and/or procedures necessary for their medical condition.  
 In the case of subjects who persistently fail to return for scheduled visits, three attempts must be made to contact [CONTACT_423]’s parent or legally authorized representative for the purpose of scheduling an Exit/EOS Visit. The third attempt should be via registered mail, return receipt requested.   
7.3. SUBJECT PREGNANCY  
Females of child- bearing potential (defined as post -menarche as documented in the 
medical history) are not excluded from the study, though we do not expect to enroll sexually active females since the upper age limit is [ADDRESS_60922] 
becomes pregnant during the study, the investigators  should be contact[CONTACT_55793]. Pregnancy is not reportable as an adverse event; however, complications related to the pregnancy may be reportable as determined on a case- by-case basis. Pregnancy -related information will be collected 
until termination of the pregnancy.   The subject who becomes pregnant will be removed 
from the trial . 
 
7.3.1 . Birth  Control  Measures  
Females of childbearing potential (those who are post -menarche as documented in the 
medical history) may participate in the study if they meet all of the following conditions:  
• they are not breast feeding;  
• they have a negative urine or serum pregnancy test at screening;  
• they agree to undertake a urine pregnancy test at the completion of week 20 of 
treatment or placebo  
• they agree to undertake a urine pregnancy test upon exiting the study if they 
elect to withdraw prior to the week [ADDRESS_60923];  
• they do not intend to become pregnant during the study;  
• they are using adequate birth control methods and they agree to continue using those methods for the duration of the twenty (20) weeks of treatment or placebo.  
 Adequate birth control methods are defined as: hormonal —topi[INVESTIGATOR_2855], oral, implantable or 
injectable contraceptives; mechanical —spermicide in conjunction with a barrier such as 
a condom or diaphragm; IUD; or, surgical sterilization of partner. For non- sexually active 
females, abstinence may be regarded as an adequate method of birth control; however, if the subject becomes sexually active during the study, she must agree to use an 
adequate birth control method as described above for the remainder of the study.   Since 
the oldest age at entry for this trial is [ADDRESS_60924] with the parent or guardian so that the child will not be 
embarrassed during the visit .  We will discuss this topic with th e child in accordance 
with the wishes of the parent or guardian.    
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 31 of 47  
 7.4. STUDY METHODS AND MEASUREMENTS 
7.4.1. Demographic information 
General demographic data include age, sex, race, and ethnicity. Location of the 
lymphatic malformation, age at diagnosis, confirmatory diagnostic tests (previous MRIs , 
biopsies, etc), family history of lymphatic malformation, and associated complications, 
e.g., infection, disability . 
7.4.2. Vital signs  
Vital sign measurements include measurement of temperature (oral or tympanic membrane), resting pulse rate, respi[INVESTIGATOR_1487],  oxygen saturation, systolic and diastolic 
blood pressure; along with height and weight.  
7.4.3. Lymphatic malformation assessment  
The most precise method of lymphatic malformation evaluation will be the MRI 
examination.  Clinical assessment of each lymphatic malformation includes measuring 
the hemicircumference of the lesion by [CONTACT_2329] a soft measuring tape placed on the skin over the area of the widest diameter of the lesion.  The investigators will be fully trained in the standardized methods to obtain these measurements.  We have found in our preliminary subjects that the investigators vary in their measurement of length, width and hemispheric measurement unless they practice these measurements together in order to standardize their methods.   The length, and width, will then be calculated as 
described in Figure 2 of Berk et al. (Berk, Berk et al. 2011)   We will use linear mixed 
model to compare the changes in volume over time between and within subjects who receive placebo and those who receive sildenafil. 
 In order to document the site of the 
measurements a diagram will be drawn by [CONTACT_55791].  Each clinic visit will try to duplicat e the measurements methods used in the 
initial visit .   
7.4.4. Photography methods  
The digital photographs of each lymphatic malformation in this study will be acquired by 
[CONTACT_55794]. The investigators will be fully trained in the standardized 
acquisition procedures.   At least two digital photographs of the lymphatic malformation 
will be acquired for each subject at the baseline visit  and the [ADDRESS_60925] parallel to the lymphatic malformation (front -on view) and the second photograph will be taken with the image plane at a 
different angle to that of the first photograph (side- on view) so that the thickness of the 
lesion can be clearly visualized. The subject will be sitting on a chair while photographs are taken.  If subject is an infant, subject’s parent or guar dian will be sitting on a chair 
with the infant  sitting on his/her knees, if  possible, or in his/her arms.   In the field of 
view, all photographs will include a color chart for color and size calibration.  Patient identification information, date of the photograph and therapy information will not be visible on the photograph.  For each photograph acquisition, the color chart will be held 
in the same plane as the lymphatic malformation. The photographs will be acquired at a 
fixed distance from the patient at  two different angles  defined at baseline (one for 
Photograph 1 and one for Photograph 2).  
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 32 of 47  
  
The photographs will serve the following purposes:  
1: To identify the lymphatic malformation  or malformations if the subject has more than 
one malformation.  
2: To qualitatively assess lymphatic malformation evolution between visits  and to 
quantify the size and the color of the lymphatic malformation at baseline and Week 20. 
7.4.5. Laboratory test s 
The CBC and chemistry panel is detailed in Appendix 17. These are to be assessed at 
the Screening Visit  and End of Treatment Visit (Week 20) .   All required lab tests must 
have been completed.   At the discretion of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_1461], a topi[INVESTIGATOR_24242]- based 
anesthetic (eg. Lidocaine 4% cream) may be used prior to clinical laboratory sample collection to decrease potential discomfort to the subject. A pregnancy test will be done at the end of treatment for females of childbearing potential . 
8.  DATA MANAGEMENT PLAN  
Paper source documents will be prepared prior to study start.  These source documents 
will be used in clinic to collect data for the study. Data will be collected at study visits, 
using the prepared data collection forms.  All source documents will be retained in the subject’s study binder. Source documents can include, but are not limited to:  
• Signed informed consent documents  
• Data collection forms (source documents)  
• Laboratory reports  
• MRI reports  
• Dictations/summary reports  
  
REDCap,  an electronic data capture (EDC) system, will be utilized in this study as an 
electronic case report form (eCRF).  REDCap is a HIPAA -secure database system 
available through Stanford at http://redcap.stanford.edu.This system can only be 
accessed by [CONTACT_55795], and only users with permission to view identifiers will be able to view PHI.  Users mus t sign into REDCap using their Stanford University ID and 
password.  Additionally, users may only access the database from a Stanford IP address, or via a Virtual Private Network (VPN).  Prior to study start, a database will be designed for this study that incorporates the data points collected in the source documentation.   The Stanford site will receive a copy of the paper source documents 
from the local cooperating research sites after every visit of the subject at the local site.  
The Stanford site will place the information from the local site into REDCap.    A
fter each study visit, data will be transcribed from paper source documents into the 
electronic data capture (EDC) REDCap system. Hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_55771].  Photographs, laboratory reports,  
and dictations will be uploaded to REDCap.    Study staff will be responsible for “cleaning” the source document data and EDC prior to monitoring at each site.  This includes but is not limited to: making sure that dates are 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60926]  
A DSMB will be developed to monitor the study.  The details of the DSMB are described in the Safety Monitoring Plan (SMP), in Item 10, section [ADDRESS_60927] on placebo elects to take sildenafil for 20 weeks the MRI used for comparison after 20 weeks of sildenafil will be the MRI taken after 20 weeks of placebo.   
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 34 of 47  
  
We will include in the interim analysis information about the characteristics of LMs.  We will do a sub- analysis looking at specifics of location, lesion type (microcystic, 
macrocystic, or mixed and percent macrocystic), as well as previous procedures, infections or other interventions.  If this process documents characteristics of lesions that do or do not respond to sildenafil, we will reconsider our study entry criteria and submit a protocol amendment for the IND and this grant, focusing more on specific characteristics of which type of lesion a subject should have in order to be enrolled in the trial.  
 
10.2.[ADDRESS_60928]’s Assessment of Lymphatic Malformation Change 
form.   This will give data on the subject’s evaluation of the change in lesion clinical 
characteristics from baseline, such as decreased discomfort, texture or thickness, distortion of normal anatomy or overall change by [CONTACT_55796]’s completion of Subject’s Assessment of Lymphatic Malformation Change form. 
 Statistical analysis of the Lymphatic Malformation Assessment  form for each LM site.   
This will give data on the physician’s evaluation of the lesion clinical characteristics on the days of the visits.  This includes color, tenseness and texture, superficial component, deep component, and distortion of anatomical landmarks.   
 Statistical analysis of the Lymphatic Malformation Assessment of Change form for each 
LM site.  This  will give data on the physician’s evaluation of the change in lesion clinical 
characteristics from baseline, such as change in texture or thickness, change in distortion of normal anatomy, and over change in lesions.   
 Change in LM volume from MRI assessments in relation to BSA will also be carried out.  REDCap calculates the BSA from height and weight measurements at each visit.  Since growth can be non- linear, relating the LM volume to a subject’s BSA may help to explain 
why a small change to the LM (by [CONTACT_55797]) is assessed as moderate by 
[CONTACT_55798] (i.e., the LM may have stayed the same size but the child grew quickly, so the LM appears smaller by [CONTACT_55799]).  
 The digital photographs of each lymphatic  malformation in this study will be acquired by 
[CONTACT_55794]. At least two digital photographs of the lymphatic malformation  will 
be acquired for each patient at each scheduled study visit , a front -on view and a side- on 
view.  See Section 7.4.4.   The clinical photographs  evaluated by [CONTACT_55800] a 
blinded manner by [CONTACT_55801].  The observers of the 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 35 of 47  
 photographs will compare the baseline photographs and score the additional visits as 
worse, no change, 1- 25%, 26- 50%, 51- 75%, 76- 100% improvement .  We will also 
examine the potential value of 3D photography during the Baseline, [ADDRESS_60929] to patients requiring discontinuation from treatment and from study (any reason and for safety reasons). AE summaries will  
focus on treatment -emergent AE and will summarize subject AE incidences by [CONTACT_926], 
seriousness, and relationship to treatment. Vital signs, laboratory tests, and concomitant medication usage will be displayed as listings by [CONTACT_1130].  
11. SAMPLE SIZE JUST IFICATION AND  STATISTICAL ANALYSIS :  
This is an exploratory, descriptive study for an orphan disease. The sample size is based on the prevalence of the disease and the availability of the subjects for the study.  Based on our clinic numbers and expected numbers of subjects who will travel for this study, we expect [ADDRESS_60930] size and estimate the total number of subjects required for the study. If after analysis of 15, 30 or 45 subjects we find that we are in the range of futility or efficacy, then we will notify the FDA as well as the DSMB, and begin to end the study by [CONTACT_55776].   
 We will include in the interim analysis information about the characteristics of LMs.  We 
will do a sub- analysis looking at specifics of location, lesion type (microcystic, 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 36 of 47  
 macrocystic, or mixed  and percent macrocystic), as well as previous procedures, 
infections or other interventions.  If this process documents characteristics of lesions 
that do or do not respond to sildenafil, we will reconsider our study entry criteria and 
submit a protocol amendment, focusing on specific characteristics of which type lesion a 
subject should have in order to be enrolled in the trial.  
12. ADVER SE EVENTS  
 
12.1 . GENERAL INFORMATION  
Adverse event (AE): any untoward medical occurrence associated with the use of a 
drug in humans, whether or not considered drug related.  AEs include any new events not present during the pre- intervention period or events that were present during the 
pre-intervention period, which have increased in severity.  
 A
ll adverse events that occur during the course of the study will be recorded in the 
source documentation  including  the event’s onset and resolution date (if the event has 
resol ved), the frequency and severity of the event, a summary of any action taken as a 
result of the event (both in regard to any treatment given and to any change in dosing with the test medication), and an assessment of the event’s relationship to the test medication. 
12.2. NON-SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS 
A nonserious adverse event is  an adverse event that does not meet the requirements 
for a serious  adverse event (see Section 13.3 ). Nonserious adverse events will be 
documented in study records  and reported to the FDA in the annual IND report . All 
nonserious adverse events will be recorded in study documentation regardless of 
whether or not they are considered to be related to the test medication. 
12.3. SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS 
Life threatening AE: Any AE that places the subject, in the view of the investigator, at 
immediate risk of death.  It does not include an adverse event or suspected adverse reaction that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death.  
 
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) :
  Any adverse event that, in the view of the investigator, 
results in any of the following outcomes:  
• D eath  
• A life-threatening adverse event  
• Inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] 
• A persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to 
conduct normal life functions  
• A congenital anomaly/birth defect  
 
Important medical events that may not result in death, be life- threatening or require 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_708], based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the subject and may require medical or surgical 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 37 of 47  
 intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition.  Examples of such 
medical events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse.  
 
12.4 REPORTING OF SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS 
 
12.4.1. Reporting to FDA 
For serious adverse events (SAE), a MedWatch Form FDA 3500A containing all 
available information must be sent to the FDA within 15 days of the Investigator's 
knowledge of the event; new information should be reported by [CONTACT_55802].  Fatal or life- threatening SAEs will be reported to the FDA 
within 7 days of the Investigator’s knowledge of the event.  We will also inform [COMPANY_007], the manufacturer of sildenafil (Revatio®), about  the SAE.  SAEs at any given site will be 
communicated to Stanford immediately by [CONTACT_55803].  All coordinating sites will be informed of SAEs promptly.  
 
A MedWatch Form  FDA 3500A  must be completed for all serious adverse events and 
forwarded to the FDA within 15 days  of the Investigator's knowledge of the event and to 
the Institutional Review Board/Independent Ethics Committee, according to their 
requirements. When new significant information is obtained as well as when the outcome of an event is known, the Investigator must inform FDA by [CONTACT_12221]. 
Fatal or life- threatening SAEs will be reported to the FDA within 7 days of the 
Investigator’s knowledge of the event  
 
12.4.2. Reporting to IRB 
Unexpected deaths or life- threatening experiences related to the research must be 
reported to the IRB within 5 working days from the when the site’s PI [INVESTIGATOR_55772]. All SAEs (as defined in section 13.3) will be reported to the IRB within 10 working 
days from when the site’s PI [INVESTIGATOR_54813].  
 Unanticipated problems involving risks to participants or others, or Internal Events that are unexpected and related to the research should be reported to the IRB within 10 working days from when the site’s PI [INVESTIGATOR_55773], or receives 
assessment from monitoring entity.  
 Additional reportable events include: unanticipated problems (UPs) involving risks to participants or others (including internal or external events, deaths, life- threatening 
experiences, injuries, breaches of confidentiality, or other  problems) that occur any time 
during or after the research study.  
 Additional Reportable information: 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 38 of 47  
 • New information that indicates a change to the risks or potential benefits of the 
research, in terms of severity or frequency  
• Protocol deviation.  P rotoc ol deviations/violations are to be reported only if:  
o Intended to eliminate apparent immediate hazard to a research participant, or  
o Harmful, or  
o Possible serious or continued noncompliance 
• Complaint that is unresolved by [CONTACT_5051], or that indicates increased or unexpected risks  
• Incarceration when, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_17439], it is in the best interest of the 
participant to remain on the study  
 
12.4.3. Reporting to DSMB  
Reporting to the DSMB is described in detail in the Safety Monitoring Plan, under Item 
10, section 2 of the IND application.  In brief, SAEs will be reported as soon as possible to the DSMB Safety Officer, who will determine if it is necessary to convene the entire DSMB, and any other events that are potentially reportable to other regulatory agencies will also be reported to the DSMB.  
 
12.5. ASSESSMENT OF ADVERSE EVENT SEVERITY , CA[LOCATION_003]LITY , AND 
EXPECTEDNESS  
Unexpected AE: Any adverse event , the specificity or severity of which is not consistent 
with the risk information described in the Investigator’s Brochure.  
 
Severity : S everity of the AE will be determined by [CONTACT_093].  Severity may be 
mild, moderate, or severe:  
• M ild – An event is mild  if the subject is aware of, but can easily tolerate the sign 
or symptom 
• Moderate – An event is moderate if the sign or symptom results in discomfort 
significant enough to cause interference with the subject’s usual activities  
• Severe – An event is severe if the sign or symptom is incapacitating and results 
in the subject’s inability to work or engage in their usual activities  
 In addition, the Investigator will determine if the adverse event is may have been caused by [CONTACT_55804]. The following circumstances would be considered to be possibly related:  
• A single occurrence of an event that is uncommon and known to be strongly associated with drug exposure (e.g., angioedema, hepatic injury, Stevens -
Johnson Syndrome).  
• One or more occurrences of an event that is not commonly associated with drug exposure, but is otherwise uncommon in the population exposed to the drug (e.g., tendon rupture).  
• An aggregate analysis of specific events observed in a clinical trial (such as 
known consequences of the underlying disease or condition under investigation 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 39 of 47  
 or other events that commonly occur in the study population independent of drug 
therapy) that indicates those events occur more frequently in the drug treatment group than in a concurrent or historical control group.  
 In source documentation, causality will be recorded using the following definitions:  
• Not Related – An event is considered to be not related to the use of the test 
medication when the event is DEFINITELY UNRELATED or UNLIKELY to have 
any relationship to the use of the test medication  
• Possibly Related – An event is considered to be possibly related to the use of the 
test medication when there is a REASONABLE POSSIBILITY that the test 
medication caused the adverse event  
 
12.6. UNBLINDING OF TEST MEDICATION  
If a subject develops an adverse reaction that requires withdrawal from the study we will document whether they are receiving placebo or active medication.  The treatment assignment will also be unblinded during the twenty week visit after the MRI 
examination is completed.  
 
12.7. FOLLOW- UP OF SUBJECTS WITH ADVERSE EVENTS 
For subjects who are experiencing ongoing unresolved adverse events at the time of their study completion or early discontinuation from the study, the Investigator will 
schedule an appropriate follow -up visit in order to determine the outcome of the event.  
 
13. INVESTIGATOR OBLIGATIONS  
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_55774] (Form FDA 1572), with current Good Clinical Practice (GCP), and with all 
applicable regulatory requirements as outlined in Appendix 18. [ADDRESS_60931] the appropriate site visits  
monitoring at the appropriate intervals. The clinical investigation will be monitored to 
ensure that: the rights and well being of the subjects  are protected; the reported data 
are accurate, complete, and verifiable from the source documents; and the study is conducted in compliance with the current approved protocol , with current GCP, and with 
applicable regulatory requirements.  
 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60932]  the site at appropriate intervals.  
 
15. REFERENCES  
Abrams, D., I. Schulze -Neick, et al. (2000). "Sildenafil as a selective pulmonary 
vasodilator in childhood primary pulmonary hypertension." Heart  84(2): E4.  
Barst, R. J., D. D. Ivy, et al. (2012). "A randomized, double- blind, placebo- controlled, 
dose- ranging study of oral sildenafil citrate in treatment -naive children with 
pulmonary arterial hypertension." Circulation  125(2): 324- 334. 
Berk, D. R., E. J. Berk, et al. (2011). "A novel method for calculating the volume of 
hemangiomas." Pediatr Dermatol  28(4): 478- 482. 
Blei, F. (2008). "Congenital lymphatic malformations." Ann N Y Acad Sci 1131: 185- 194. 
Churchill, P., D. Otal, et al. (2011). "Sclerotherapy for lymphatic malformations in 
children: a scopi[INVESTIGATOR_17971]." J Pediatr Surg  46(5): 912- 922. 
de Graaf, M., J. M. Breur, et al. (2011). "Adverse effects of propranolol when used in the 
treatment of hemangiomas: A case series of 28 infants." J Am Acad Dermatol  
65(2): 320- 327. 
Fisher, R., A. Partington, et al. (1996). "Cystic hygroma: comparison between pr enatal 
and postnatal diagnosis." J Pediatr Surg 31(4): 473 -476. 
Frieden, I. J. and B. A. Drolet (2009). "Propranolol for infantile hemangiomas: promise, 
peril, pathogenesis." Pediatr Dermatol  26(5): 642- 644. 
Fuchsmann, C., M. C. Quintal, et al. (2011). "Propranolol as first -line treatment of head 
and neck hemangiomas." Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 137(5): 471- 478. 
Gallagher, P. G., M. J. Mahoney, et al. (1999). "Cystic hygroma in the fetus and 
newborn." Semin Perinatol  23(4): 341- 356. 
Greene, A. K., C. A. Perlyn, et al. (2011). "Management of lymphatic malformations." 
Clin Plast Surg  38(1): 75- 82. 
Howarth, E. S., E. S. Draper, et al. (2005). "Population -based study of the outcome 
following the prenatal diagnosis of cystic hygroma." Pren at Diagn 25(4): 286- 291. 
Karatza, A. A., A. Bush, et al. (2005). "Safety and efficacy of Sildenafil therapy in 
children with pulmonary hypertension." Int J Cardiol  100(2): 267- 273. 
Leaute- Labreze, C., E. Dumas de la Roque, et al. (2008). "Propranolol for s evere 
hemangiomas of infancy." N Engl J Med  358(24): 2649- 2651.  
[COMPANY_007]. (2007). "Revatio Patient Information Sheet."   Retrieved November 29, 2011, 
2011, from 
http:/ /www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2007/021845s004lbl.pdf . 
Redondo, P., L. Aguado, et al. (2011). "Diagnosis and management of extensive 
vascular malformations of the lower limb: part I. Clinical diagnosis." J Am Acad 
Dermatol  65(5): 893- 906; quiz 907- 898. 
Sans, V., E. D. de la Roque, et al. (2009). "Propranolol for severe infantile 
hemangiomas: follow -up report." Pediatrics  124(3): e423- 431. 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 41 of 47  
 Shekerdemian, L. S., H. B. Ravn, et al. (2002). "Intravenous sildenafil lowers pulmonary 
va
scular resista nce in a model of neonatal pulmonary hypertension." Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med  165(8): 1098- 1102.  
Wang, P., P. Wu, et al. (2003). "Identification and characterization of a new human type 
9 cGMP -specific phosphodiesterase splice variant (PDE9A5). Differential tissue 
distribution and subcellular localization of PDE9A variants." Gene 314: 15- 27. 
Whimster, I. W. (1976). "The pathology of lymphangioma circumscriptum." Br J 
Dermatol  94(5): 473- 486. 
 
 
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 42 of 47  
 16. STUDY PLAN  
 
Table 16- 1: Study Procedures by [CONTACT_55805] 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60933] s will be obtained upon entry  (baseline) and end of treatment  into the 
clinical trial. The exams will  include:  
 
• C omplete Blood Count:  
Hematocrit  
Hemoglobin 
White Blood Cell Count (WBC)  
WBC differential  
Red Blood Cell Count (RBC)  
MCV (Mean Corpuscular Volume)  
MCH (Mean Corpuscular Hgb)  
MCHC (Mean Corpuscular Hgb Concentration)  
RDW (RBC distribution width)  
Stained Red Cell examination (Peripheral Smear)  
Platelet Count  
 
• C omplete Metabolic Panel:  
Albumin  
Alkaline Phosphatase Total  
ALT 
AST 
Urea Nitrogen 
Calcium  
Chloride  
CO2 Content  
Creatinine  
Glucose  
Globulin  
Potassium  
Sodium  
Total Bilirubin  
Total Protein Anion Gap 
 
• Urine Pregnancy  if required (See Schedule of Events)  
 
17.[ADDRESS_60934]  
  
  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June [ADDRESS_60935] (2 pages) 
 
page 1:  
 
         

  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 45 of 47  
 page 2:  
 
 
 
17.2.[ADDRESS_60936] Instructions for Oral Suspension of 10mg and 20mg  
 
 
   

  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 46 of 47  
 Subjects taking 20mg/8ml  
 
 
                      
 
           
         

  Version 8 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL – Confidential   June 6 , 2016 
Page 47 of 47  
  
Subjects taking 10mg/4ml  
 
                      
 
        
18. DECLARATION OF HELSINKI  
This clinical study will be performed in compliance with the ethical principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and Good Clinical Practice (GCP).  
