 
 
 
Impact of intraoperative fluid management on electrolyte and acid -base 
variables  
 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
February 17, 2017  
Title: Impact of intraoperative fluid management on electrolyte and acid -base 
variables  
 
Investigators: David P. Martin, Renata Miketic, Ajay D’Mello, Joseph D. Tobias  
 
Describe the background and rationale for this project. Reference to 
peer reviewed literature is desirable: During major surgical procedures, 
intravascular volume is maintained with the administration of isotonic fluids such 
as Lactated Ringers (LR), Normal Saline (NS) or Normosol -R. All three of these 
fluids are in common clinical use for this pur pose. While all of these fluids have 
sodium concentrations that are close to physiologic levels, they contain varying 
amounts of chloride and different buffers (none in normal saline, 
acetate/gluconate in Normosol, and lactate in LR). Prospective trials ha ve failed 
to show any significant differences in clinical outcomes among these 3 isotonic 
fluids, although there may be subtle differences in biochemical and electrolyte 
parameters (sodium and acid -base status). During the intraoperative care of 
patients u ndergoing major surgical procedures, acid -base status may be followed 
as an indirect measure of intravascular resuscitation and tissue perfusion. 
Inadequate resuscitation may result in a rising lactic acid, which will be reflected 
as an increasing base exc ess. However, an increasing base deficit may also  
occur merely due to the administration of a large volume of normal saline which 
results in a dilutional acidosis. This dilutional acidosis is not seen when LR or 
Normosol are used for intraoperative resusc itation. The difference is not easily 
discernible on standard arterial blood gas analysis and may require additional 
testing such as measurement of a serum lactate  value.  
 
1. Awad S, Allison SP, Lobo DN: The history of 0.9% saline. Clin Nutr 2008; 
27:179 –188. 
2. Scheingraber S, Rehm M, Sehmisch C, et al: Rapid saline infusion 
produces hyperchloremic acidosis in patients undergoing gynecologic 
surgery. Anesthesiology 1999;  90:1265 –1270.  
3. Chowdhury AH, Cox EF, Francis ST, et al: A randomized, controlled, 
double -blind crossover study on the effects of 2 -L infusions of 0.9% saline 
and Plasmalyte® 148 on renal blood flow velocity and renal cortical tissue 
perfusion in healthy volunteers.  Ann Surg 2012;  256:18 –24. 
4. Williams EL, Hildebrand KL, McCormick SA, et al: The effect of intravenous 
lactated Ringer’s solution versus 0.9% sodium chloride solution on serum 
osmolality in human volunteers. Anesth Analg  1999;88:999 –1003.  
5. Krajewski ML, Ragh unathan K, Paluszkiewicz SM, et al: Meta -analysis of 
high- versus low -chloride content in perioperative and critical care fluid 
resuscitation. Br J Surg  2015;102:24 –36. 
6. Yunos NM, Kim IB, Bellomo R, et al: The biochemical effects of restricting 
chloride -rich fluids in intensive care. Crit Care Med  2011;39:2419 –2424.  
7. Neyra JA, Canepa -Escaro F, Li X, et al; Acute Kidney Injury in Critical 
Illness Study Group: Association of hyperchloremia with hospi[INVESTIGATOR_459259]. Cri t Care Med 2015;  43:1938 –1944.  
8. Rocktaeschel J, Morimatsu H, Uchino S, et al: Unmeasured anions in 
critically ill patients: Can they predict mortality? Crit Care Med 
2003;31:2131 –2136.  
 
How will your study be funded (i.e., will you use departmental funds, 
submit a grant application, etc.): No funding is required.  
 
Provide a potential start date for your study to be included in the IRB 
application: December 2016  
 
Describe the significance of the proposed research: As large volumes of 
NS may result in a dilutional acidosis and an increasing base deficit, it may cloud 
clinical decision making when r esuscitative efforts are guided by [CONTACT_459262] -base status 
on routine arterial blood gas analysis. The current study will evaluate changes in 
acid-base and electrolyte (sodium, potassium, calcium) status and lactate values. 
with the use of various isotonic fluids  for intraoperative resuscitation. We 
hypothesize that the use a fluid containing a buffer (LR or Normosol) will 
mitigate acid -base changes during intraoperative care and allow for the use of 
the base deficit as a surrogate measure of intravascular  resusci tation.  
 
State the primary and secondary objectives of the study:  
1. The primary objective is to determine differences in acid -base status 
based on the fluid used for intraoperative  status.  
2. The second objectives are to determine the following based on the 
isotonic fluid used for intraoperative  resuscitation:  
a. Differences in electrolyte values (sodium, potassium and ionized 
calcium) and lactate  values  
b. Differences in intraoperative fluid requirements as judged by [CONTACT_459263]  
c. Differences in intra operative urine  output  
 
If this research is hypothesis driven, succinctly state the hypothesis: 
The intraoperative administration of NS will result in an increase in the base 
deficit when compared to LR or Normosol -R resuscitation.  
 
Outline the major steps and methodologies in the clinical protocol.      
If necessary, include a description of any procedures being performed 
already for diagnostic or treatment  purposes . 
Inclusion would be: 
10-21 years of age  
Major surgical pro cedure requiring arterial access  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
Comorbid disease process that contraindicates the use of any of the [ADDRESS_586558]. For 
the purpose of this study, randomization will occur so that intraoperative fluid 
resuscitation/administration will include one of 3 isotonic fluids: NS, LR or 
Normosol -R. 
The anesthetic technique will follow our routine standardized anesthetic 
for posterior spi[INVESTIGATOR_61680]. Premedication will include oral or intravenous 
midazolam following by [CONTACT_459264]. As per our usual routine, two peripheral intravenous 
cannuals and an arterial cannula will be placed. Maintenance anesthesia will 
include desflurane (inspi[INVESTIGATOR_459260] a t 50-60) and a sufentanil or remifentanil (infusion up to 0.3 µg/kg/hour 
for sufentanil or 0.3 µg/kg/hour) to maintain the mean arterial pressure at [ADDRESS_586559]. 
Labetolol (0.1 -0.15 mg/kg/dose) will be administered as needed to control the 
MAP if the sufentanil infusion is not effective. Fluid will be administered as 
clinically indicated based on clinical para meters including heart rate, blood 
pressure, and urine output. As clinically indicated, arterial blood gas and 
electrolytes will be analyzed using the point -of-care monitoring (I -stat). At this 
time, we will also run for lactate values. This is generally o btained [ADDRESS_586560] Cobb Angle, levels 
fused of spi[INVESTIGATOR_050], region of spi[INVESTIGATOR_61680], and  instrumentation.  
 
Identify the variables to be measured and how they will be statistically 
evaluated: The primary ou tcome variable is base deficit. Secondary outcomes 
include electrolyte values, lactate values, intraoperative fluid requirements, and 
intraoperative urine output. The primary hypothesis of the study will be 
evaluated using measurements obtained after admin istration of fluid (NS, LR, or 
Normosol, according to randomized assignment) during each procedure. 
Specifically, the incidence of base deficit in excess of -2 mEq/L will be compared 
between NS and LR and between NS and Normosol using tests of proportions.  In 
a pi[INVESTIGATOR_459261] 48 patients, we found that the incidence of base deficit in 
excess of -2 mEq/L was 15%. The study will be powered to detect an increase in 
incidence from 15% to 40% between NS and either LR or Normosol, with the 
overall Type I e rror set at 0.05 and the significance level of individual tests (NS 
vs. LR; NS vs. Normosol) adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Bonferroni 
correction.  To attain  80% power  for detecting  this expected  difference,  two- 
tailed tests of independent proportions will require [ADDRESS_586561]  
>99% power to detect a -2 mEq/L difference in base deficit after fluid 
administration between NS and either LR or Normosol, using ANOVA with a 
Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons, and assuming a standard 
deviation of 2.2 mEq/L based on our pi[INVESTIGATOR_123704]. Continuous data on the primary 
and secondary outcomes will be evaluated further using mixed effects linear 
models, to account for repeated measures (including any measures taken prior  
to fluid administration) and potential time -varying and time -invariant 
confounding  characteristics.  