 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 1 of 35 
[USE THIS BIOMEDICAL PROTOCOL TEMPLATE IF YOUR PROJECT INVOLVES ANY  
PHYSICAL  CONTACT [CONTACT_749528]]    
 
INSTRUCTIONS:  
 Use this template  to prepare a document with the information from the following 
sections.  
 Depending on the nature of what you are doing, some sections may not be applicable to 
your research. Do not delete any sections, questions , or help text and mark “N/A” if 
sections do not apply  
 When you write a protocol, keep an electronic copy. You will need to modify this copy 
when making changes.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  
 Intervention Pi[INVESTIGATOR_749518] -Dependent Children   
(Modified 6/1/18 and approved by [CONTACT_749529])  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
 [CONTACT_5627] - Valerie Toly, PhD, RN, CPNP  
 Primary Department - CWRU FPB School of Nursing  
 Telephone Number - [PHONE_15631]  
 Email Address - [EMAIL_418]  
 
UH FACULTY ADVISOR:  
If the principal investigator’s primary role at UH is resident, fellow or student, identify a faculty 
advisor.  
 Name N/A 
 Primary Department  
 Telephone Number  
 Email Address  
 
OTHER DEPARTMENTS INVOLVED IN THIS STUDY (IF APPLICABLE) : 
Pulmonology - [CONTACT_521662] is the UH Sponsor  
 
VERSION NUMBER:  
 Include the ve rsion number of this protocol if  assigned by [CONTACT_176135].  
I am not sure of the version number.  
 
DATE:  
 Include the date of submission or revision.  
It is the current version as of May 21, 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 2 of 35 
 
 
Objectives  
 
1. Describe the purpose, specific aims, or objectives . 
2. State the hypotheses to be tested .   
Purpose:  The purpose of this randomized clinical trial (RCT) is to test the efficacy of a 
Resourcefulness Training intervention designed for 94 parent (male and female) 
caregivers of technology -dependent children on the parents’ psychological and physical 
outcomes and on family outcomes at [ADDRESS_1024893] -intervention. 
Theoretical underpi[INVESTIGATOR_749519], as a result, will augment their  caregivin g 
capacity. This intervention involves the following components: 1) a face -to-face session for 
teaching  social (help -seeking) and personal (self -help) resourcefulness skills using a 32 minute 
video , 2) ongoing access to video vignettes of  parents of techno logy-dependent children 
describing the application of resourcefulness skills in daily life, 3) 4  weeks of skills’ 
reinforcement using daily journal writing by [CONTACT_7903], and 4) weekly phone calls from the  
intervention nurse over [ADDRESS_1024894] of the intervention on psychological and  physical outcomes and family outcomes (family 
functioning) over time and whether changes in resourcefulness skills mediate thes e outcomes.  
 
The specific aims of the study are to: Aim 1: Determine whether Resourcefulness 
Training versus Attention Control improves psychological (general mental health, 
depressive cognitions, depressive symptoms, appraised stress, burden) and physical 
outcomes (general physical health, chronic stress [hair cortisol]) and family outcomes 
(family functioning) over 6 months in parents of technology dependent children, after 
controlling for the parents’ race/ethnicity, sex, family income, and child ren’s functional 
status. Aim 2: Determine whether changes in psychological and physical outcomes 
andfamily outcomes are mediated by [CONTACT_640783]’ levels of resourcefulness 
(personal and social).  
   
 
Background  
1. Describe the relevant prior experience  and gaps in current knowledge describing how it 
will add to existing knowledge .      
2. Describe any relevant preliminary data .      
 
Please add relevant references at the end of the protocol, not at the end of this section.  
Introduction/Background  
Carin g for a child at home who is dependent on medical technologies such as mechanical 
ventilation, intravenous nutrition, feeding tubes or tracheostomies, can be a daunting task. 
Mothers, often the primary caregivers of technology -dependent children, not only manage the 
demanding care regimens and coordinate the frequent health care and therapy appointments, but 
must handle many other household responsibilities and perhaps outside employment. Past 
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/[ADDRESS_1024895] the chronically ill child’s growth and development.1 Toly2 found that 39.2% of 
mothers caring for a technology -dependent child at home (n=103) scored ≥ 16 on the Center for 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_2557] - Depression Scal e (CES -D) indicating high risk for clinical depression. 
Furthermore, 34.9% of the variance in family functioning was explained primarily by [CONTACT_749530], underscoring the impact of such symptoms.2 Empi[INVESTIGATOR_749520] (RT) is an effective cognitive -behavioral intervention that directly 
contributes to a decrease in negative emotions and depressive cognitions and improved 
functioning and health3-5and it can be implemented on an individual basis in a variet y of locales.  
This pi[INVESTIGATOR_749521] a RT 
intervention with mothers of technology -dependent children as well as provide necessary 
preliminary data regarding effect size for a larger, subsequent intervention study. The study 
results will also aid in any necessary intervention modifications based upon the feasibility, 
acceptability, and fidelity information gleaned from participants and interventionists.  
Justification/Rationale/Significance of the Study  
In controlled, experimental trials, RT was found to significantly improve resourcefulness,3-[ADDRESS_1024896] used a group teaching format/videoconferencing,4 two current studies are examining the 
efficacy of RT using an in -person individual format including grandmothers raising 
grandchildren.16  This format is based on resea rch indicating stronger effects for individualized 
interventions16. Additionally, this study includes an opportunity to practice and reinforce RT 
skills taught using expressive writing (EW); personal journaling about specific events. EW has 
been found to s ignificantly improve physical and psychological health and reduce negative 
emotions as well as health care visits.17 While RT has not been tested in young caregivers, 
equivocal ef fectiveness is anticipated.  
Although children with special health care needs  comprise only 16.2% of all children under 
18 years, they accounted for 45.5% of the medical expenditures in [ADDRESS_1024897] in better care for their child.  
The study model  is based on resourcef ulness theory.19-20 Major constructs in the model 
represent contextual factors, process regulators, resourcefulness (personal, social), and quality of 
life outcomes. RT is proposed to directly affect all model constructs except contextual factors as 
indica ted by [CONTACT_749531].  Contextual factors  include mother’s variables (age, race, income, 
education), child’s variables (age, level of technology dependence, functional status) and 
caregiving situation (duration of care, amount of home health care nursing). Process regulators  
(depressive cognitions , depressive cognitions, burden, stress ) include variables that mediate 
effects of contextual factors on resourcefulness. Depressive cognitions are thought patterns that 
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 4 of 35 
may lead to depression.22 Assertions that cogn itions influence resourcefulness has been validated 
in women caregivers.19 
Resourcefulness  is an “acquired repertoire of skills and behaviors necessary for the 
successful execution of self -control behavior.”19 p.26 These skills are learned throughout life by 
[CONTACT_749532][INVESTIGATOR_473053].19 Skills of self -instruction, problem -solving, 
belief in copi[INVESTIGATOR_749522], thoughts and 
sensations on performance of daily tasks.19 Zauszniewski’s20 model includes personal 
resourcefulness (self -help) and social resourcefulness (help -seeking) that are beneficial for 
maintaining healthy physical and psy chological functioning across the lifespan. Resourcefulness 
training (RT) includes teaching positive self -talk, problem -solving and priority setting.15 
Empi[INVESTIGATOR_749523] a significant predictor of quality of life 
for non -caregivers/caregivers.19, 23 Parent outcomes  are conceptualized as absence of depressive 
symptoms, positive family functioning , better self -assessed health . Depressive symptoms  
include depressed mood and feelings of helplessness and hopelessness.10 Greater  resourcefulness 
is a significant predictor of a decreased level of depressive symptoms.25 Conversely, less 
resourcefulness contributed to perceptions of worse family functioning in grandmothers raising 
grandchildren.17 Family functioning  is a parent’s per ception and level of satisfaction with 
relationships between the family and individuals as well as subsystems and the community. Self-
assessed health is the mother’s perception of her health and includes both physical and 
psychological well -being.[ADDRESS_1024898]  18 years of age  
2. Parents caring for a child age 16 years and younger at home who is technology -
dependent (Group 1 mechanical ventilators; Group 2 intravenous 
nutrition/medication; Group 3 respi[INVESTIGATOR_749524]);  
3. Able to speak, write and understand English.  
4.  
 
3. Describe the criteria that define who will be excluded  in your final study sample . 
 Exclusion  
1. Parents  of children with cancer.  
2.  
3.  
4.  
 
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 5 of 35 
Number of Research Participants  
1. Indicate the target number of research participants to be accrued locally .  
2. If this is a multi -site study, indicate the total number of research participants to be 
accrued across all sites . 
For this study, 123 subjects are expected to be enrolled.  
Vulnerable Populations  
1. Indicate specifically if you will include each of the following special populations by 
[CONTACT_61951] :  
☐ Adults unable to consent  
 ☒ Minors  (infants, children, teenagers)   
 ☐ Wards of the state  
  ☐ Foster Children  
 ☒ Pregnant Women   
 ☐ Neonates  
☐ Neonates  of Uncertain Viability  
 ☐ Employees of CWRU or UHHS  
 ☐ Prisoners  
 ☐ Illiterate Individuals  
 ☐ Non-English Speaking  
 ☐ University Students  
 
2. If the research involves individuals that are included in a vulnerable population, describe 
the additional safeguards included to protect the rights and  welfare of the individuals  for 
each population indicated . 
 
We will include pregnant women or women who become pregnant while enrolled in the 
study because many mothers of technology -dependent children are in the child -bearing 
years. They will be told th at they are volunteers and can leave the study at any time. 
While we will not be directly asking the children any questions we will be asking their 
parent to describe things such as what type of technological equipment they use and 
questions about their ea ting and sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. Therefore, we have a procedure for asking 
about the child’s assent if they are [ADDRESS_1024899] not been translated into another language.  
 
Recruitment Methods  
1. Describe the source of the research participants .  
2. Describe the methods that will be used to identify potential research participants .  
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/[ADDRESS_1024900] access to ?  
4. Describe when, where, and how potential research participants will be recruited .  
5. Desc ribe materials that will be used to recruit research participants . 
 
Participant recruitment and enrollment:  RB&C Specialty Clinics (Pulmonary, 
Gastroenterology, Trach/Vent, Comprehensive Care) and Family Learning Center who are 
associated with this study  will distribute the IRB approved study flyer or brochure that 
contains study staff contact [CONTACT_749533]. Potential participants can 
then call the study staff with questions or to volunteer.  
 
We will also check EMR (All Scripts, S oarian, Whiteboard) and do prescreening for 
potential participants by [CONTACT_749534]. We will come to 
clinic to meet those who meet eligibility to invite them to hear more about the study. If they 
are interested the study team member will ask about a date/time for appointment. If they are 
unsure of their schedule we will ask for the best way to contact [CONTACT_749535] 
a time/place of their choosing like their home or a library.  
 
Another recruitment strategy w ill be to post IRB approved study flyers in RB&C/UH 
Common areas, Family Learning Center and Family Resource Center as well as the RB&C 
inpatient units that admit technology -dependent children and their corresponding famil y 
lounge bulletin boards or postin g areas as well as clinic rooms. This will help to gain 
visibility of our study to enhance recruitment efforts.  
 
We will also distribute our brochures and flyers at family health fairs, specialty 
organization meetings, support groups, parenting events and gatherings that are frequented 
by [CONTACT_640796] -dependent children in Northeast Ohio community to promote 
awareness of the study by [CONTACT_29436]. In addition, they will be distributed to organizations 
such as United Cerebral Palsy, Achievement Center of Cleveland, Health Departments that 
provide services for technology -dependent children and their families. We will also place ads 
in regional Parenting Magazines and Facebook to help promote recruitment.  
 
Discharge coordinators from RB&C 3, 5, and [ADDRESS_1024901] 
after the child is discharged home. Data collection would be completed following the child's 
discharge.  
 
The RB&C Specialty Clinics (Pulmonary, Gastroenterology,  Trach/Vent, Comprehensive 
Care) will identify names and contact [CONTACT_640795]. A 
letter describing the st udy and a request for the parent  to contact [CONTACT_749536]. Th e letter als o informs the parent  that study staff will follow -up 
with him/her by [CONTACT_640790] 1 week. This method of recruitment has been successful 
in the Principal Investigator’s previous studies. An assent information letter for the child will 
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 7 of 35 
also be included with the lette r sent to the mother. The parent  is to give this letter to the child 
to read if he/she is over age 7 years and able to read it independently. If the child is over 7 
years of age and is unable to read the letter independently, the mot her will be asked to read it 
to the child. The parent  will then obtain verbal assent from the child that he/she is in 
agreement to have the mother participate in the study. Potential participants will be contact[CONTACT_749537]. 
During the telephone pre -screening interview, the nature of the study and the fact that the 
interview is part of a pre -screening process and does not represent enrollment in the study 
will be clearly  explained to the subject.  The questions asked during the interview do not 
present more than minimal risk or harm to the participants and the interview does not contain 
any procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research context 
according to 45 CFR 46.117 (c ) 2. See attached document for pre -screening question. This 
question will determine if the child remains dependent on medical technology and thus 
determine s the parent 's eligibility for participation in the study.  
 
We will also recruit potential participants using Facebook and Twitter. This includes 
development of a Facebook page that includes contact [CONTACT_749538]. “Friend” requests will be made to parent caregiver 
organizations who have members likely to meet eligibility requirements that includes an 
introductory letter. We will also recruit using Facebook ads that target users that have 
connections with technological equipment, technology -dependence and children. Twitter will 
also be used for recruitment. An image of the IRB approved study flyer will be attached with 
the tweets.  
 
Participants who meet the inclusion criteria will be identified by [CONTACT_749539]&C pulmonary, gastroenterology, 
trach/vent and comprehensive care clinics and invited to participate.  A letter describing the study and a 
request for the parent to contact [CONTACT_749540]. The letter 
also informs the parents that study staff will follow -up with him/her by [CONTACT_749541] 1 week. This 
method of recruitment has been successful in the Principal Investigator’s previous studies.  An assent 
information letter for the child will also be included with the letter sent to the parent. The parent 
is to give this letter t o the child to read if he/she is over age 7 years and able to read it 
independently. If the child is over 7 years of age and is unable to read the letter independently, 
the parent will be asked to read it to the child. The parent will then obtain verbal as sent from the 
child that he/she is in agreement to have the mother participate in the study. Potential participants 
will be contact[CONTACT_749542]. Following this assessme nt and affirmation of the parent’s willingness to participate 
they will be queried as to the child’s receipt of the assent letter and confirm the child’s assent to 
have the mother participate in the study. With the above confirmed, the parent will be asked  to 
set up an appointment with the research staff at a mutually convenient time and location.  If the 
potential participant does not contact [CONTACT_228164] [ADDRESS_1024902] the study staff to ask questions or t o volunteer to participate. The flyer will help to 
advertise the study.  
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/[ADDRESS_1024903] the flyer and increase awareness regarding the study. A 
"Friend" request will be sent to other paren t caregiver organizations with Facebook sites likely to include 
eligible participants   asking for permission to post the IRB approved study flyer on their Facebook page 
and let their members know about the study. The informational letter to be sent with th e "Friend" 
request is attached.  
  
2. Tweets are limited to 140 characters or less. Tweets will be used and an 
image of the study flyer will be attached with the tweets.   As we find more 
followers and parent caregiver organizations, we will tag them in our tweets to 
increase our visibility. “@” will be used to tag or mention an organization   and 
“#” will be used to categorize the tweets. Here are examples of tweets:  
  
@resourceTD needs your help to test a way to reduce stress in #parent 
#caregivers of techno logy-dependent children in Northeast Ohio!  
@resourceTD Are you a #parent #caregiver of a child who uses #oxygen 
#ventilator or #gtube medical technology in Northeast Ohio?  
@fpbnursing researching how to reduce stress in #parent #caregivers of 
children on m edical technology in Northeast Ohio. Please contact [CONTACT_640793]!  
 
Following this assessment and affirmation of the mother’s willi ngness to participate the 
parent  will be queried as to the child’s receipt of the assent letter and confirm the child’s 
assent t o have the mother participate in the study. With  the above confirmed, the parent  will 
be asked to set up an appointment with the research staff at a mutually convenient time and 
location. If the potential participant doe s not contact [CONTACT_228164] [ADDRESS_1024904] 
of their choosing (their home, public library, their place of employment, child's therapy 
center such as United Cerebral Palsy Center, Dahm's Clinical Research Un it) to obtain 
informed consent. Study personnel  will obtain informed consent and explain to the potential 
participant that he/she is being asked to provide consent for participation in  a research study. 
It will be explained that participation is totally voluntary and their choice regarding 
participation will not affect their child's care i n any way. Additionally, parents  will be given a 
description of the study, procedures, risks and be nefits, confidentiality and voluntary nature 
of the study including the option to withdraw at any time. Fo llowing this discussion, parents  
will be given the  consent form to review. Parents  will be given the opportunity to take a few 
minutes alone to revi ew the written consent form and to make a decision regarding 
participation. No data collector  that has clinic contact [CONTACT_749543] i nfluence to participate. Parents  will be 
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/[ADDRESS_1024905] of the parent’s choosing 
such as their home, library. Our study office is located in the FPB School of Nursing, 
CWRU.  
 
2. Identify where your research te am will identify and recruit potential research 
participants . As described in the above section we will recruit our participants from a 
number of RB&C Specialty Clinics (Pulmonary, Gastroenterology, Trach/Vent, 
Comprehensive Care) and Family Learning Center. We will also distribute our brochures 
and flyers at family health fairs, specialty organization meetings, support groups, 
parenting events and gatherings that are frequented by [CONTACT_640796] -dependent 
children in Northeast Ohio community to promote awareness of the study by [CONTACT_29436]. 
In addition, they will be distributed to organizations such as United Cerebral Palsy, 
Achievement Center of Cleveland, Health Departments that provide services for 
technology -dependent children and their families.  We will also use social medi a such as 
Facebook and Twitter as well as place Facebook ads to advertise the study. The RB&C 
specialty clinics will provide lists of eligible participants so that an introductory letter can 
be sent out to potential participants asking them to contact [CONTACT_749544] [ADDRESS_1024906] them to see if they are interested in participating. We will also be using 
UH EMR (Physician Portal, Sorian) to screen RB&C specialty clinics described above 
for potential participants and go to the clinic to invi te them to hear more about the study  
 
3. Identify the physical location where  research procedures will be performed .  
See above comments. Data collection - private place of the parent’s choosing . 
 
Consent Process  
Indicate whether you will be obtaining consent : 
☒ Yes  ☐ No 
 
If yes describe : 
 Where the consent process will take place  
 Any waiting period available between informing the prospective subject and 
obtaining the consent  
 Any process to ensure ongoing consent  
 The role of the individuals listed in the application as being involved in the 
consent process  
 The time that will be devoted to the consent discussion  
 Steps that will be taken to minimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence  
 Steps that will be taken to ensure the research participants’ understanding  
Where consent take place:  Private place of the parent’s choosing.  
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 10 of 35 
Waiting period:  The potential participant will have time between when they schedule the 
appointment and arriving at the appointment.  
Process  to ensure ongoing consent : The participant ensures ongoing consent if they schedule and 
show up for data collection appointments.  
Role of individuals listed on application involved in consent process:  All listed on the application 
as obtaining consent wil l ask the potential participant if they would prefer to read the or to if 
they’d like the team member to go through the consent form with the participant. The team 
member would then answer any questions they may have about the study.   
Time devoted to the consent process: Typi[INVESTIGATOR_897], it takes 5 -10 minutes depending on how long it 
takes the participant to read the consent and the number and type of questions.  
Steps to minimize coercion or undue influence:  No team member performing consent process 
will be pro vider of care for the parent, child. Team members obtaining consent will be certain to 
mention that they are volunteers and their care won’t be affected in any way by [CONTACT_749545].  
Steps to ensure participants’ u nderstanding: To ascertain that potential participants fully 
understand the study, what is required of them, risks and benefits and their rights as a participant 
they will be asked to indicate understanding with a "yes" or "no" response. They will also be 
given an opportunity to ask any questions they have regarding the study.  
 
Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process or Documentation (consent will not be obtained, 
written consent will not be documented)  
Indicate which part of the consent process you are requesting be waived or altered : 
☐ I will o btain consent , but not participant’s signature  
☒ I will obtain  consent, but request a waiver for pre -screening purposes  
 ☐  I will obtain  consent, but request a waiver of some of the elements of consen t  
                      (e.g. use of deception)  
 ☐  I will not obtain consent, and I am r equesting a full waiver of consent  
 
1. Give the rationale for the request of a waiver or alteration of the consent process or 
documentation .  
We need to have a waiver due to prescreening to verify if the individual is eligible for the 
study.  
 
2. If you will obtain consent, but not document consent in writing (e.g. over the phone, 
verbally, electronic survey, etc.), please describe and provide a rationale . N/A 
Describe how you will be documenting that a research participant has consented  
 
Be sure to upload a consent script or information sheet with your study protocol  
 
Additional Considerations for Consent Process with Adults  
Non English Speakers  
 If research participants who do not speak English will be enrolled, describe the 
process to ensure that the oral and written information provided to those research 
participants will be in that language during initial consent as well as throughou t 
the study. Indicate the language that will be used by [CONTACT_53030] .  
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 11 of 35 
 List the  language(s) other than English that will be included . 
 Above is Not Applicable  
 
Adults Unable to Consent  
 Describe the process to determine whether an individual is capable of consent . 
 List the individuals from whom permission will be obtained in order of priority 
(e.g. durable power of attorney for health care, court appointed guardian for 
health care decisions, spouse, and adult child) .  
o For resear ch conducted outside of the state, provide information that 
describes which  individuals are authorized under applicable law to 
consent on behalf of a prospective subject to their participation in the 
procedure(s) involved in the research . 
Above is Not Applicable  
 
 Describe the process for assent of the research participants. Indicate whether : 
o Which subjects  that are unable to consent will be required to give assent ? 
If not all, explain why .  
o Describe whether assent of the research participants will  be documented 
and the process to document assent .  
Above is Not Applicable  
 
Research Participants Who Are Not Yet Adults (infants, children, teenagers)  
1. Will parental permission be obtained from : 
☐  One parent even if the other parent is alive, known, competent, reasonably 
available, and shares legal responsibility for the care and custody of the child or  
☐  Both parents unless one parent is deceased, unknown, incompetent, or not 
reasonably available, or when only one parent has legal respons ibility for the care 
and custody of the child  
☐  Waiver of parental permission  
Above is Not Applicable  
 
2. Describe whether permission will be obtained from individuals other than parents, 
and if so, who will be allowed to provide permission. Describe the process used to 
determine these individuals’ authority to consent to each child’s participation in 
research .  
Above is Not Applicable  
 
3. Indicate whether assent will be obtain ed from all, some, or none of the children. If 
assent will be obtained from some children, indicate which children will be required to 
assent . Children who are 7 years of age or older. An assent information letter for 
the child will also be included with t he letter sent to the parent. The parent is to 
give this letter to the child to read if he/she is over age 7 years and able to read it 
independently. If the child is over 7 years of age and is unable to read the letter 
independently, the parent will be ask ed to read it to the child. The parent will 
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 12 of 35 
then obtain verbal assent from the child that he/she is in agreement to have the 
mother participate in the study  
 
4. When assent of children is obtained describe how it will be documented . 
Assent will be documente d during the time scheduling takes place. Document along 
with scheduling notes in Project Manager’s log.  
 
 
 
Sharing of Results with Research Participants  
Describe whether results (study results or individual subject results such as results of 
investigational diagnostic tests, genetic tests, or incidental findings) will be shared with the 
research participants or others (e.g. the subject’s primary care physicians) and if so, describe 
how the results will be shared .  
 
 ☒  Results will not be shared with research participants  
Results will be shared after the study and the study analysis are complete by [CONTACT_604626].  
 
 
Study Design, Procedures and Timeline  
1. Describe and explain the study design .  
 
 
Research Design.  A quasi -experimental RCT design with random assignment 
will be used to test the efficacy of a Resourcefulness Training (RT) intervention 
compared with an attention control group in mothers and fathers of technology -
dependent children. All participants will receive a face -to-face v isit from study 
staff for the T1 data collection. In addition, the intervention group will receive 
individually tailored RT web based instruction via an approximately 30 minute 
video that provides details on each of the 8 resourcefulness skills with short 
examples of application, instruction on journal writing to practice and reinforce 
use of resourcefulness skills, access to video tapes of parents describing 
application of resourcefulness skills in the care of their technology -dependent 
child. Parents will  be asked to provide their email address so that we may send 
them invitation for access to the website that they may visit at any time to 
access the video tapes. Data will also be collected face -to-face at 3 months (T3) 
and 6 months (T4) post -intervention.  At 6 weeks parents will be emailed a link 
to the REDCap survey for Time 2 data collection and contact[CONTACT_749546] -
12 survey with email reminders. Open -ended questions following their final data 
collection appointment will allow mothers/fathers to di scuss feasibility, 
acceptability, and fidelity of this intervention and suggestions for potential 
modification of the intervention and follow up procedures.  
For this study, 99 female participants and 24 male participants are expected to 
be enrolled that ta kes into account 10% attrition.  
Measures/Instruments.  
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 13 of 35 
The Depressive Cognition Scale  an 8-item scale (α =.75), will measure 
depressive thought patterns that may lead to depression.8 Reponses on a 6 -
point scale range from strongly agree (5) to strongly disa gree (0) with a score 
range 0 -40. Items include depressive cognitions such as hopelessness and 
worthlessness; higher scores indicate more depressive cognitions.  
The Resourcefulness Scale,  a 28-item scale (α =.85), will assess both 
personal (16 items) and s ocial (12 items) resourcefulness.9 Responses on a 6 -
point scale range from extremely descriptive (5) to not descriptive (0) with a 
score range 0 -140; higher scores indicate greater resourcefulness. Construct 
validity was assessed using confirmatory factor analysis.  
The CES-D Scale  will measure depressive symptoms.10 The 20 -item interval 
scale (α =.85), with responses ranging from rarely (0) to most or all of the time 
(3) is summed; higher scores indicate more depressive symptoms. A cut -off of 
16 is used to identify those at high risk for clinical depression.  
Medical Outcomes Short Form Health Survey (SF -12 v.2)  is a 12 -item 
scale that is a measure of perceived physical health status and mental health. It 
measures the following eight concepts: physical functi on, general health, bodily 
pain, role limitation due to physical health, bodily pain, vitality, social function, 
role limitation due to emotional problems and mental health. Two distinct 
component scores (physical, mental) are then derived. Median α for th e two 
subscales is >.76.27 
The Feetham Family Functioning Survey (FFFS) , a 25 -item scale (α =.85), 
will assess family functioning.12Reponses on a 7 -point likert scale range from 
little (1) to much (7) that asks (a) how much is there now? (b) how much 
shoul d there be? This provides a discrepancy score; higher scores reflect 
greater the dissatisfaction with family functioning.12 
The Demographic Characteristics Questionnaire  includes questions about 
the child’s age, mother’s/father's age, education and race. Q uestions regarding 
additional covariates such as caregiving duration (years), home health care 
nursing hours per week and family income are also included. Mothers/fathers 
will also be asked if they are willing to be contact[CONTACT_749547] a later date should 
future studies be conducted. If yes, mothers/fathers will complete the section of 
the demographic questionnaire with address, zip codes and names and contact 
[CONTACT_21115] 2 persons who might know there whereabouts should they move.  
The Functional Status II -Revised  (FSII -R) will assess the child’s functional 
status.13 The 14 -item tool (α=.86) is administered in two parts. Part [ADDRESS_1024907] two weeks 
with responses ranging from never/rarely (0) to almo st always (2); Part 2 
probes responses indicating poor function to determine if responses were due to 
illness. Higher scores indicate higher function.13 
Level of Technology Dependency Questionnaire  will be used to determine 
group assignment (Group 1 mechan ical ventilators; Group 2 intravenous 
administration of nutritional substances/drugs; Group 3 respi[INVESTIGATOR_696]/nutritional 
support equipment). Past studies of this population have used this rubric.14 
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 14 of 35 
Resourcefulness Skills Scale  is an 8 -item questionnaire (α=.7 8) that will 
assess the fidelity of the Resourcefulness Training (RT) 
intervention.30 Participants are asked the frequency of use for each of the items 
taught in the RT intervention from never (0) to always (3). Higher scores 
indicate greater use of resour cefulness skills.30 
Parent Inventory for Parents (PIP)  is a 42 -item scale (α=.80 -.96) that 
assesses parenting stress (frequency, difficulty) of caring for a chronically ill 
child; higher scores indicates greater stress Construct validity was established 
by [CONTACT_749548].  
Chronic Stress  will be measured by a hair cortisol sample.  
Caregiver Burden  will be measured using the Zarit Burden Interview -12 
(α=.85 -.89), a 12 -item tool that assesse s the burden people feel when taking 
care of another person; higher scores indicates higher burden.  
Qualitative Assessment of Feasibility, Acceptability, and Fidelity  of RT 
will be assessed by [CONTACT_245825] -recording  participant’s responses  to: “Tell me what 
it was like for you to (a) do expressive writing and (b) apply RT?”, “What parts 
were easiest/most challenging?”, “What part of RT was most/least interesting?”, 
“Did you learn all parts of RT?”, “How can we enhance RT teaching/learning in 
the future?” "Any pa rts of the intervention (ie. teaching or intervention 
materials) or follow up you think we can modify to appeal more to male 
caregivers?" The  research team responses  will be assessed by [CONTACT_749549] l east a bimonthly basis: 
“What parts of teaching RT were easiest/most challenging?,” Was any portion of 
the intervention omitted?,” “Is the timing of data collection appropriate?,” 
“What portion (if any) of the intervention needs to be modified?,” “What 
challenges (if any) have there been with study recruitment?,” “Has any group 
contamination been noted?,” “Describe rate of and reasons for attrition.” “What 
challenges have occurred with the follow -up data collection?”  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 15 of 35 
 
 
 
Table 1: Study Tools  and Measures  
Variable  Measure  
(Appendix A)  Time of measure  Reliability in previous 
studies  
Outcome Variables: Parent    Enroll   6 Wk 
3M   6M        
Psychological and Physical 
Health  Medical Outcomes 
Short Form Health 
Survey (SF -12 
version 2)    X       X       X       X     α=.85 -.93 
Depressive Cognitions  Depressive 
Cognition Scale    X       X       X       X     α=.75 -.93 
Depressive Symptoms  Center of 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_48413] - Depression 
Scale (CES -D)   X       X       X       X     α=.84 -.93 
Stress  Pediatric Inventory 
for Parents (PIP) - 
subjective  
Hair Cortisol - 
objective    X       X       X       X     
  
  X                X       X α=.80 -.96 
  
Sensitivity/Specificity=100%  
Burden  Zarit Burden 
Interview -12   X       X       X       X     α=.85 -.89 
Outcome Variable: Family    Enroll   6 Wk 
3M   6M        
Family Functioning  Feetham Family 
Functioning Survey    X       X       X       X     α=.73 -.83 
Mediating Variable    Enroll   6 Wk 3M   6M   
Resourcefulness:   Personal  Resourcefulness 
Scale (Personal 
Resourcefulness 
Subscale)    X       X       X       X   α=.83  
Resourcefulness:   Social  Resourcefulness 
Scale  
(Social 
Resourcefulness 
Subscale)    X       X       X       X   α=.79  
Covariates    Enroll   6 Wk 3M   6M   
Parent : 
·         Race/Ethnicity, Gender, 
Family Income    
Enrollment form    
  X   
IRR=1.0  
Technology -Dependent Child:  
·         Functional Status    
Functional Status II -
Revised    
  X       X       X       X     
α=.76 -.80 
Sample Characteristics    Enroll   6 Wk 3M   6M   
Parent : 
·         Age, Marital Status, 
Duration of Tech. Dependent 
Child Caregiver Role  
·         Education, Amount of 
Home Nursing Support Services, 
Lay Caregiving Assistance  
·         Interpersonal Support    
Enrollment form  
  
  
Enrollment form  
  
  
Interpersonal 
Support Evaluation 
List   
  X 
  
  
  X       X       X       X  
  
  
  X       X       X       X     
IRR=1.0  
  
  
IRR=1.0  
  
  
α=.88 -.90 
Technology -Dependent Child:        
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 16 of 35 
  
After confirming the child's assent and obtaining the participant's written 
informed consent, the participant will be assigned a code number. 
Mothers/fathers  will be randomly assigned  to one of two treatment conditions - 
Resourcefulness Training intervention or Attention Control using the Minim 
computerized method of random assignment based on parent gender, child's 
type of technology (mechanical ventilation or intravenous medication/nu trition, 
all others), race ethnicity (White non -Hispanic, all others). Data collection will 
take place in a private place of the mother’s/father's choosing such as her/his 
home. The instruments should take about 50 minutes to complete at initial 
enrollment  but thereafter it should take about 30 minutes (Table 1). After the 
participant has completed the self administered questionnaires, the interviewer 
will score the CES -D. If the total score of the CES -D exceeds the cutoff of 16 for 
depressive symptoms the participant will be notified and the 
information   regarding mental health resources will be given -(see additional 
files). Following T1 data collection, mothers/fathers will receive either 
intervention or attention control protocol according to their random  assignment. 
The RT intervention which includes instruction on maintaining a [ADDRESS_1024908] cards will be sent as needed. A $[ADDRESS_1024909] at a time convenient for the participant and will be audio -recorded.  
In order to aid in retention, participants will be mailed birthday cards on the 
parent's and child's birthdays as well as monthly postcards with an inspi[INVESTIGATOR_749525].  
The RT intervention  group will be taught RT skills and mnemonic strategies 
(acronyms, practice) to facilitate recall of RT skills using a web based program 
that includes a video approximately 32 minutes long. The 8 letters in the 
acronym  RESOURCE  will be used to prompt recall:  Rely on 
family/friends;  Exchange ideas with others;  Seek professionals or 
experts;  Organize daily activities;  Use positive self -talk; Reframe the situation 
positively;  Change from usual reaction;  Explore new ideas. Practice of RT will 
occur through using a p ersonal semi -structured journal (example in other study 
documents) to daily record which resourcefulness skills were used that day as 
well as one’s thoughts and feelings related to specific situations in which the 
resourcefulness skills were used. As inter vention reminder tools mothers/fathers 
will be given a laminated card to keep in their journal as well as a magnet to ·         Age 
·         Type of Medical 
Technology Used  Enrollment form  
Technology 
Dependency 
Questionnaire    X   
  X       X       X       X   
  IRR=1.0  
NA 
  
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/[ADDRESS_1024910] on their refrigerator with the above 8 letter acronym RESOURCE and 
reminder phrases as well as the PI's name, research study office email and 
telephone number (See Attachment).   They will also be given a brochure with a 
summary of the intervention. The intervention nurse will also obtain the 
participant's email so that an invitation can be sent to access the study RT 
videos on Box.com.  The RT intervention group will be asked to review their RT 
laminated card with the RESOURCE acronym each day prior to journaling and 
write about any RT skills used. To assist with adherence to daily journaling, the 
intervention nurse will make weekly call s for 4 weeks to query for questions; 
reminding them to write in their journals. Mothers/fathers will be encouraged to 
summarize the events for any days missed. Journals will be mailed back by 
[CONTACT_749550] -addressed, stamped envelopes provided at 4 weeks after 
RT to monitor adherence and review for content. The intervention nurse will 
also describe the use of the RTvideo and the video tape vignettes (2 -3 minutes 
each) as examples of resourcefulness skill application during care of their 
technolo gy-dependent child.  
  
Booster sessions  of Resourcefulness Training will be delivered at [ADDRESS_1024911]’s memory of 
resourcefulness skills and prevent decline in skill usage.  The sessions will 
be conducted in [ADDRESS_1024912] the parent’s memory of skills learned, review skills that have been 
forgotten, determine whether he/she still has and uses the RESOURCE reminder 
card and magnet, ask for examples of skill applicatio n since the last study 
contact [CONTACT_749551], and 
collaboratively plan approaches to promote continued skill application. Parents 
who are unable to locate the RESOURCE card and/or magnet will be mailed a 
new one. Because practice is an important component of this intervention, we 
will ask them to begin 1 week of daily journaling as they did for the initial 
Resourcefulness Training intervention, using journal pages given in advance. We 
will phone them one wee k after each booster session (2 -3 minutes) to inquire 
about their journaling and answer questions about application of 
resourcefulness skills. They will be asked to return their journals in a study -
provided self -addressed, stamped envelope. To keep contact  [CONTACT_749552] (about 5 -10 minutes) from the study 
team at [ADDRESS_1024913] and to remind them of upcoming 
appointments.  
  
 
 
2. Provide a description of all study -related research procedures  being performed 
including procedures being performed to monitor research participants for safety or 
minimize risks .  
Minimal risk is involved with participation in this study. Physical discomforts 
might involve fatigue due to the length of time (about 50 minutes) needed to 
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 18 of 35 
answer the interview and study questions. Parents will be told that they may 
choose to take a break at any point during the interview. The amount of time 
required for participation in the study may also be viewed as an inconvenience. 
A potential emotional risk during the interview is that recalling information 
regarding their child’s course of illness and home management difficulties may 
make some parents uncomfortable.  Participants will be told that they may 
withdraw from the study at any time. The interviewer will be vigilant to assess 
the participant’s discomfort. Participants experiencing considerable discomfort 
will be asked if they wish to stop the interview and wi ll be given supportive 
assistance by [CONTACT_20679]. The mother/father will then be given the number 
of United Way First Call (211) to access on call mental health professional 
services in their local area or Cuyahoga County 24 -Hour Mental Health Crisis 
Information and Referral Hotline (216 -623-6888). If any participant is noted to 
have a level of depressive symptoms above the recognized cutoff of 16 on the 
Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_2557] (CES -D) measure she/he will be told of the 
findings and given an information sheet regarding accessing mental health care 
resources such as United Way First Help (phone 211) or the Cuyahoga County 
24-Hour Mental Health Crisis Information and Referral Hotline (216 -623-6888). 
Any participant noted to have a score of [ADDRESS_1024914] or perhaps killing themselves. If the answer to 
any portion of the question is “yes” the participant will be told of a concern for 
their safety and the necessity for the interviewer to contact [CONTACT_749553] 24 -Hour Mental Health Crisis, Information and 
Referral Hotline immediately. The risks and discomforts involved are reasonable 
becaus e the risks are temporary and can be minimized by [CONTACT_749554]. In addition, the discomfort is no more than what the participant 
might experience in her/his daily life.  
 
3. Describe : Procedures to decrease risk - See above  
Drugs/Devices; Source Records - Not Applicable  
☐  Procedures performed to lessen the probability or magnitude of risks  
☐  List all drugs and devices used in the research and the purpose of their use and 
their regulatory approval status (more detailed information is request ed in the 
section on Drugs and Devices at the end of this document.)  
☐  The source records, including medical or educational records, which will be 
used to collect data about subjects  
4. Describe  when research procedures will take place and the duration of an individual 
subject’s participation in the study. Use of the descriptive table listing the study 
procedures that indicates the visit/week of the interventions below is encouraged . See 
above table and description.  
 
 
 
 
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 19 of 35 
 
 
 
Radiation and Radioactive Substances  
1. Does the research involve the use of radiation or radioactive substances ? 
 ☐  Yes     ☒  No – leave rest of the section blank  
 
If yes, answer the following questions . 
Please note that you must receive Radiation Safety Committee (RSC) prior to IRB 
submission.  
2. Is the radiation use only for the purposes of the research study (e.g. over and above 
standard of care ) 
☐  Yes     ☐  No 
 
3. Does the protocol use radionuclides ? 
☐  Yes     ☐  No 
 
4. Provide justification for the additional risk associated with the research radiation use . 
 
ClinicalTrials.gov Information  
Has this study been registered on ClinicalTrials.gov ?  
☒  Yes. Provide the following :  
 
i. The ClinicalTrials.gov identifier : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
ii. Investigator/sponsor responsible for registering : Valerie Toly  
 
☐  No. Explain if there are plans to register or why registration is not required   
(i.e., the study is not NIH funded, registration is i n process, or does not meet the 
definition of a clinical trial)  
 
List of Data to be Collected  
1. Indicate what identifiers you will collect  
☒ Name  
☒ Address  
☒ Dates related to an individual  (e.g.,  Date of admission, birth, surgery, etc.)  
☒ Telephone number  
☐ Fax number  
☒ Email address  
☐ Social security number  
☒ Medical record number  
☐ Health plan beneficiary number  
☐ Account number  
☐ Certificate/license number  
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 20 of 35 
☐ Any vehicle or other device serial  
☐ Device identifiers or serial numbers  
☐ Web URL  
☐ Internet protocol (IP) address  
☐ Finger or voice prints  
☐ Photographic images  
☐ Other : Any characteristic that would uniquely identify the individual  
 
2. List all other data to be collected for the research study (e.g. laboratory values, physician 
notes, length of stay, etc.) .  
Hair sample for cortisol level, audio recording with only subject ID number for exit interview 
regarding intervention for intervention group only. Questionnaires will be administered as well.  
 
Data Analysis Plan  
1. Describe the data analysis plan, including any statistical procedures. Provide a power 
analysis  if applicable .   
2. If applicable, describe the primary and secondary study endpoints including safety 
endpoints .   
 
ANALYSIS. All data will be entered into UH REDCap and cleaned.We hypothesize 
that parents receiving the Resourcefulness Training intervention will have 
significant improvement in parental outcomes (psychological and physica l) and 
family outcomes (family functioning) compared with parents in the Attention 
Control arm. We also hypothesize that resourcefulness will mediate the effect of 
the intervention on all study outcomes.  
  
Preliminary Analyses. Exploratory data techniques will be used to examine 
univariate characteristics  (central tendency, dispersion, and distribution) of 
demographics and covariates measured upon randomization  
in each arm. These exploratory techniques will be based on proportions (in the 
case of dichotomou s variables)  and medians and/or means (in the case of 
variables measured on an interval scale). Due to randomization, no  
formal tests of these variables will be performed because any imbalance 
between arms is known to be due to  chance. Profile plots will a lso be used to 
describe the participant -specific (parent) and arm -specific trends for  
each outcome over the four time points.  
  
Primary Analyses.  
Aims 1 & 2: Analysis of the monthly rate of change in each of the parent 
outcomes in each arm will be  estimate d via linear mixed models and fit using 
SAS PROC MIXED.108,109 Each model will include a random  
intercept and slope (possibly modeled using a polynomial spline) to account for 
between -subject variance in  each outcome over time. Conditional on these 
random effects, we will also explore within -subject variance in  
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/[ADDRESS_1024915] appropriate  structure using likelihood -based criteria. Fixed 
effects will include a continuous variable to re present time since  
randomization, an indicator variable to represent the intervention, and 
stratification factors used during  randomization (facility, OTA technology group, 
sex and race/ethnicity). Assuming a linear rate of change over  time, the 
regression  coefficient of the terms representing interactions between time and 
the intervention  indicator variable will be used to estimate the difference in the 
monthly rate of change in each outcome  between the two arms.  
  
To determine if resourcefulness mediates the effect of the resourcefulness 
intervention on parent  outcomes, a model -based causal mediation 
model110,[ADDRESS_1024916] (or mediated)  effects and will allow us to estimate the 
proportion of the total effect that is mediated. Variance estimates, and  
consequently 95% confidence intervals, will be estimated using a bootstrappi[INVESTIGATOR_749526] [ADDRESS_1024917] using measurements of the mediator and maternal 
outcome taken at other  time points as well (e.g., total effect of resourcefulness 
intervention on parent ou tcomes at 6 months that are  mediated by [CONTACT_749555] 3 months).  
  
To account for any multiple comparisons, a Bonferroni -corrected two -sided 
significance level will be  applied to all analyses for all aims. Additionally, as with 
any study, we expect some level of missing data at  each time point. To adjust 
for the missing data in all mixed -models analyses, we will use pattern -mixture  
models. This modeling approach will be applied to each model to ensure that 
missing data is adequately  accounted for in each analysis. In contrast to a 
“completers only” approach, pattern -mixture models will provide  a consistent 
and asymptotically efficient estimate of the effect of intervention on the monthly 
rate of change in  parent and family outcomes when data is missing not at 
random.  
 
Secondary Analyses. To obtain more precise estimates of the intervention effect 
on the time point  interval rate of change in each parent or family outcome, 
additional multivariable analyses will characterize and  estimat e the relationship 
between potential covariates at baseline and each outcome. For continuous 
variables  that do not have a linear relationship with the outcome, appropriate 
transformations or categorization will be  considered. For nominal and ordinal 
variab les, the number and type of categories will be considered to obtain  
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/[ADDRESS_1024918] modifier or at the 25th, 50th,  
and 75th percentiles of a modifier that is measured on an interval scale.  
  
Sensitivity analyses will also be applied to all mediation models described for 
the Primary Analysis to  evaluate the assumption of sequential ignorability (e.g., 
no unmeasured confounders of the association  between the mediator and each 
maternal outcome). As described by [CONTACT_640819],[ADDRESS_1024919].  
 
Confidentiality of Specimens and Banking  
☐   I am not storing specimens in this research project  – please leave the rest of this section 
blank  
 
 
Describe : 
☒  The source of the specimens   Hair samples for cortisol level      
☒  Where the specimens will be stored   Locked file cabinet in study office     
☒  How long the specimens will be stored   Until final data collection then 
shipped together in one batch to lab for analysis     
☒  How the specimens will be labeled    Each hair sample will be la beled with 
participant ID number and time point sample taken    
☒  How the specimens will be accessed   Going into locked file cabinet      
☒  Who will have access to the specimens   Members of the research team who 
have IRB approval.      
☒  When and how will the specimens be destroyed    The specimens will be 
autoclaved and destroyed following processing by [CONTACT_38768].     
☒  How will the specimens be transported  (Please note if transporting specimens, 
a Material Transfer Agreement (MTA) is required).   The hair samples are 
wrapped in foil and enclosed in an envelope. All samples will be shipped next 
day air FedEx to the lab in a box.     
Describe : 
☐  The proce dures to release specimens including : 
i. The process to request a release       
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 23 of 35 
ii. Approvals required for a release       
iii. Who can obtain specimens       
iv. The data to be provided with specimens, including if the data will be 
identifiable to others     No data other than  ID number and time point.  
☐  For genomic data, please include an attestation of no master list and no attempt will 
be made to re -identify the specimens .      
 
Are you storing the specimen for future use for other research projects ? 
☐   Yes 
☒   No 
 
Confidentiality of Data  
1. To maintain the confidentiality of the data : 
☒ I will use a unique study identifier (not derived from the participants personal  
            identifiers) to code individuals’ data  and I will store this ID log separate from  
            study data . 
☐ Other  (please explain)  
 
2. How are you storing your electronic data ? 
☐ UH Redcap  
☒ CWRU Redcap   
☒ Secure Research Environment  (SRE)  
☒ CWRU Box  
☐ OnCore  
☐ UH Secure Network Drive  
☒ CWRU Secure Network Drive  
☐ Other  - List storage method and provide justification:  
 
3. ☒ I acknowledge that paper research data and documents will be stored in a double - 
            locked secure environment in the following location :  
            Location:  FPB School of Nursing - Study Office  
 
4. If sharing data, describe : Not Applicable.  
 The exact data elements that will be shared       
 How data will be sent       
(Please note if sharing data, a Data Use Agreement (DUA) is required.  
 
HIPAA Authorization  
If you are going to be accessing PHI (Protected Health Information), indicate how HIPAA  
authorization will be obtained (check all that apply) : 
☒   HIPAA  authorization is in the consent form  
☒   Requesting a full or partial waiver of HIPAA for prescreening  
☐   Requesting a full or partial waiver of HIPAA  
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/[ADDRESS_1024920] the participants for initial enrollment or 
follow up data collection.  
2. If the identifiable information will be used or disclosed by [CONTACT_137698], please state who those individuals/entities are and provide justification for the 
disclosure . Not applicable.  
3. Describe how long identifiers will be kept for in relation to study length and data 
collection and analysis . They will be kept until data collection and analysis is completed 
and manuscript writ ing is finished.  
 
☒  I assure that protected health information collected for purposes of this research study 
will not be reused or disclosed to any other person or entity, except as required by [CONTACT_2371], 
for authorized oversight of the research study, or fo r other research for which the use of 
disclosure of protected health information for which an authorization or opportunity to 
agree or object is not required by [ADDRESS_1024921] the reasonably foreseeable risks such as breach of confidentiality, discomforts, 
hazards, or inconveniences to the research participants related to their participation in 
the research. Include a description of the probability, magnitude, duration, and  
reversibility of the risks. Include  the physical psychological, social, legal, and economic 
risks .  
Minimal risk is involved with participation in this study. Physical 
discomforts might involve fatigue due to the length of time (about 50 
minutes) needed  to answer the interview and study questions. Parents 
will be told that they may choose to take a break at any point during the 
interview. The amount of time required for participation in the study may 
also be viewed as an inconvenience. A potential emotio nal risk during the 
interview is that recalling information regarding their child’s course of 
illness and home management difficulties may make some parents 
uncomfortable. Participants will be told that they may withdraw from the 
study at any time. The int erviewer will be vigilant to assess the 
participant’s discomfort. Participants experiencing considerable discomfort 
will be asked if they wish to stop the interview and will be given 
supportive assistance by [CONTACT_20679]. The mother/father will then be 
given the number of United Way First Call (211) to access on call mental 
health professional services in their local area or Cuyahoga County 24 -
Hour Mental Health Crisis Information and Referral Hotline (216 -623-
6888). If any participant is noted to have a  level of depressive symptoms 
above the recognized cutoff of 16 on the Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_48413] (CES -D) measure she/he will be told of the findings and given an 
information sheet regarding accessing mental health care resources such 
as United Way  First Help (phone 211) or the Cuyahoga County 24 -Hour 
Mental Health Crisis Information and Referral Hotline (216 -623-6888). 
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/[ADDRESS_1024922] or perhaps killing 
themselves. If the answer to any portion of the question is “yes” the 
participant will be told of a concern for their safety and the necessity for 
the interviewer to contact [CONTACT_749556] e Crisis Team from the Cuyahoga 
County 24 -Hour Mental Health Crisis, Information and Referral Hotline 
immediately. The risks and discomforts involved are reasonable because 
the risks are temporary and can be minimized by [CONTACT_749557]. 
In addition, the discomfort is no more than what the participant might 
experience in her/his daily life.  
2. If applicable, indicate which experimental procedures may have risks to the research 
participants that are currently unforeseeable .  
3. If applicable, indicate which  procedures may have risks to an embryo or fetus should the 
research participant or their partner be or become pregnant . Not applicable.  
4. If applicable, describe the risks to others who are not research participants . Not 
applicable.  
5. Describe the availab ility of medical or psychological resources that research 
participants might need . See above.  
 
Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Research Participan ts 
Describe the steps that will be taken to protect research participants’ privacy interests.   
(consider issues such as physical space, proximity to other, and participant preferences)   
 
To maintain participant privacy, all interviews will be conducted in a private 
area in a place of the mother’s/father's choosing such as her/his home,  public 
library, place of employment or the Dahms Clinical Research Center. Privacy will 
be maintained as well in the procedures for identifying participants as described 
above. Participants will be mailed an introductory letter prior to study staff 
making  telephone contact.  
Facebook and Twitter will be used to post the IRB flyer about the study. A 
"Friend" request will be sent to parent caregiver organizations who have 
members likely to meet inclusion criteria along with an introductory letter about 
our st udy and the request to post our recruitment flyer. The organization can 
make a decision to accept or reject the request to post our study flyer. Potential 
participants reached through either Facebook or Twitter would then self -identify 
and voluntarily cont act us to hear more about the study and decide on 
participation. When they contact [CONTACT_749558] -to-face data 
collection.  
           A digital audio recording device  will be used during parent interviews 
that might be regarded as an invasion of privacy. The reason for use of the 
audio recording device is to allow the data collector to focus on the interview 
and probes without the encumbrance of taking notes and risk m issing essential 
portions of the parent’s response. Using the recording device will therefore add 
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 26 of 35 
to the richness of the interview data for analysis. The participant’s name [CONTACT_749566]. The recording device and any memory  
cards will be kept in a locked filing cabinet when not in use.  
 
 
Potential Benefit to Research Participants  
1. Describe the potential benefits that individual research participants may experience from 
taking part in the research. Include the probability, magnitude, and duration of the 
potential benefits. Indicate if there is no direct benefit .  
2. If no direct benefit, state the potential benefit to society or others. Do not list 
compensation .  
 
Participants may receive some benefit from the stress reducing methods used in 
this study (Resourcefulness Training, journal writing). The potential risk for 
emotional distress is minimal and reasonable given the potential benefit for 
reducing stress and improving quality of life. This study will benefit othe r 
families by [CONTACT_749559]/fathers 
reduce stress and promote optimal family functioning when they are caring for a 
technology -dependent child.  
 
Withdrawal of Research Participants  
1. Describe the anticipated circumstances under which research participants will be 
withdrawn from the research without their consent .  
2. Describe the procedures that will be followed when research participants withdraw  or 
are withdrawn  from the research, including partial withdrawal  from procedures with 
continued data collection .  
 
Possible causes for the participant to be withdrawn from the study include that 
the child with special medical technology has become too ill or  has died. The 
participant may decide to withdraw from the study due to lack of interest to 
complete the remaining questionnaires at T2, T3, T4 or that she/he is not 
interested in continuing to complete the journal writing. If the participant 
indicates an intent to withdraw from the study, she/he will be invited t o 
complete the final phone interview that describes challenges of the intervention, 
suggestions for modifications in the intervention and/or data collection 
procedures, and reasons for desire to withdraw from the intervention study. 
Participants will not b e followed after they have voluntarily withdrawn from the 
study unless they indicate that they wish to be contact[CONTACT_749560] -up studies.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/[ADDRESS_1024923] their 
child’s health care in any way.  
 
Costs to Research Participants  
☒   There are no costs to research  participants or their insurance companies  – please leave the 
rest of this section blank  
 
1. If applicable, describe what costs the research participants will be responsible for 
because of participation in the research including but not limited to: transportation to 
study visits, parking for study visits, costs of procedures, lost, broken or stole n devices, 
costs of drugs or therapy, etc .  
2. You must clearly state if insurance will be charged and who will be responsible if 
insurance does not pay .  
3. List what research procedures and research interventions will be covered by [CONTACT_15365] .  
 
Research  Participant Compensation  
☐   There is no compensation for research participants – please leave rest of this section blank  
  
1. Describe the schedule , payment method  and payment to tal of any incentives or 
compensation  that research participants will receive for participation in the research  
(e.g., gift cards or cash with amounts, t -shirts, devices, bags, swag, etc.)         
2. Describe the schedule , payment method  and payment total of any reimbursements that 
research particip ants will receive for participation in research  (e.g.,  parking, mileage, 
meals, etc. )      
There is no reimbursement for parking and meals but an incentive will be given 
to participants for their time and inconvenience. Participants will be given a $[ADDRESS_1024924] at each of 4 time points following completion and return of the 
questionnaires. The total payment will be $100 over the study time if they 
complete all portions (4 data collection points) of the study.  
 
Compensation for Research Related Injury  
Describe who will pay for the costs of medical treatment and/or compensation in the event of a 
research related injury : 
☐   Funding agency is providing some/all payment for injury  
☐   Funding agency is providing no payment for injury  
☒   Not applicable  
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/[ADDRESS_1024925]/Committee? If yes, provide 
information about the DSMB/C including the contact [CONTACT_139873](s) (as applicable); whether it is independent from the study sponsor; ho w often it 
meets; the type of data that will be used; written reports, etc .  
 
Data and safety monitoring will be conducted to determine if data collection 
should be altered or stopped. Every [ADDRESS_1024926]. Toly, the principal in vestigator will make the decision related 
to altering the study in collaboration with the committee if more than two 
mothers/fathers experience significant discomfort or distress that required a 
referral to United Way First Call.  
 
Data and Safety Monitorin g 
a.     Monitoring Entity  
A Safety Monitoring Committee (SMC) team will be comprised of “non -research 
team” members from the university community, including a bioethicist who is 
also a nurse ([CONTACT_749567] [EMAIL_2884]), a statistician not involved with the 
project ([CONTACT_25636] [EMAIL_419]), and a doctorally prepared RN ([CONTACT_749568] [EMAIL_14328]) with a specialty in caregiver research. Study team 
members will include [CONTACT_749569], PI, and [CONTACT_749570], Co -I. [CONTACT_256581] will 
chair the co mmittee and be responsible to submit reports to the NINR within [ADDRESS_1024927], this committee will review data on this 
study regarding 1) study safety, including auditing selected cases for 
compliance wi th IRB requirements, conformance with informed consent 
requirements, verification of source documents, and investigator compliance; 2) 
minimizing research -associated risk; and 3) protecting the confidentiality of 
participant data. In addition, it will revi ew (1) all causes of mortality and (2) 
issues with participation. The rate of recruitment refusal (percent and reasons) 
and subject attrition (percent and reasons) will be tracked and reported at these 
reviews. Differential attrition from the intervention and control arms also will be 
monitored. If concerns or problems are identified by [CONTACT_4484], they will be 
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 29 of 35 
reported to the IRB and NINR/NIH via email by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Toly and [CONTACT_256581], 
respectively, within [ADDRESS_1024928] instructional review of the nature and types of unanticipated and adverse 
events as described by [CONTACT_749561]. As they occur, all 
unanticipated events and adver se events will immediately be reported to the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_749527] -serious adverse event  and unanticipated problem 
reporting. These will be summarized in the twice annu al reports to the SMC. 
Annual progress reports to the IRB and NINR/NIH will include a summary of the 
SMC’s activities and findings as well as any adverse events regarding human 
subjects. Program Officials at NINR will be informed in a timely manner (3 
business days) of unanticipated problems (e.g., a data breach) or unexpected 
serious adverse events that may be related to the study protocol or IRB -
approved revisions to the study protocol that indicate a change in risk for 
participants.  
  
Although this study  is deemed as having minimal risk, we recognize that some 
unanticipated or adverse events may occur, which may vary in seriousness. As 
an example of a less serious event, if a participant learns the nature of the 
experimental condition (Resourcefulness Tra ining) and calls to express 
disappointment, we will inform him/her before he/she completes the study that 
all participants who are in the comparison group will be given the opportunity to 
receive the Resourcefulness Training after completing the study. The se 
situations will be noted and reported at the next SMC meeting.  
  
Some participants may have personal situations that may cause them to contact 
[CONTACT_749562]. If parents contact [CONTACT_749563], we will note that an d give them United Way’s  First Call for Help  telephone 
number. The  First Call  service provides resources on various issues such as 
legal matters, housing, etc. We also will have a list of statewide and national 
agencies for making necessary referrals and c an provide more specific resources 
if necessary. Experienced project staff, including the Investigators, will be 
available to talk with participants usually within [ADDRESS_1024929] questions regarding the care of their 
children they will be referred to their child’s healthcare provider.  
  
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/[ADDRESS_1024930]. This information and the team’s 
analysis will be disseminated to the SMC at least annually, or sooner if 
important external factor s or relevant information is identified that impacts 
subject safety or raises ethical concerns. In addition, at each committee 
meeting, SMC members also will be queried about new studies or ethical issues 
that they think should be discussed or reviewed, an d these items put on the 
SMC meeting agenda.     
  
f.      Advanced Plans for Interim or Futility Analysis  
This research project compares the psychological and physical outcomes of 
Resourcefulness Training against Attention Control in parents caring for 
technology -dependent children at home. The study investigators anticipate a 
medium effect size for these interventions; given this expectation and the low 
risk nature of the study, no formal “futility analysis” will be conducted. 
However, data summaries will be reviewed by [CONTACT_749564].  
 
 
 
Drugs or Devices  
☒   There are no drugs or devices being utilized  in this research project  – please leave rest of this 
section blank  
 
1. If the research involves drugs or device(s), describe your plans to store, handle, and 
administer those drugs or device(s) so that they will be used only on research 
participants and be used only by [CONTACT_10733] .  
2. How will the drug(s) be dispensed ( i.e., indicate the pharmacy that will be used )? 
3. If the drug is investigational (has an IND) or the device has an IDE or a claim of 
abbreviated IDE (non -significant risk device), identify the holder of the 
IND/IDE/Abbreviated IDE         
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/[ADDRESS_1024931] any additional information regarding your study not covered in the template, please 
include it here.  
 
Community -Based Participatory Research  
☒   This is not a community -based participatory research project  – please leave rest of this 
section blank  
 
If applicable, d escribe the involvement of the community in the design and conduct of the 
research .  
Note: Community based research is research that is conducted as an equal partnership between 
academic investigators and members of a community. In Community Based Participatory 
Research (CBPR) protects, the community participates fully in all aspects of the research 
process .   
 
International information  
☒   This is not an international study  – please leave rest of the section blank  
☐   We will be conducting this research at the following international sites : 
1.  
☐   We are recruiting participants outside of the US  from the following locations : 
1.  
☐   We are sending  data outside of the US  to the following locations : 
1.  
☐   We are receiving  data from outside of the US  from the following locations : 
1.  
 
MULTI -SITE RESEARCH (when UH or CWRU is the IRB of Record ) 
Does this project have multiple sites ? 
☒   Yes 
☐   No 
 
The Cleveland  Clinic Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (Pulmonary, Gastroenterology, Neurology 
sections) are only inviting their patient’s parents to participate in the study. If the parent is 
interested they complete a form giving their contact [CONTACT_749565].  
 
Non-Local Site Information  for Multi -Site Studies  
If this is a multi -site study where you are the lead investigator , list the following information for 
each relying site : 
1. Name [CONTACT_50854] :  
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 32 of 35 
2. PI [INVESTIGATOR_137653] :  
3. Name [CONTACT_137719] :  
4. Phone number of IRB contact :  
5. Email address of IRB contact :  
 
[CONTACT_51584]-Local Recruitment Methods for Multi -Site Studies  
If this is a multi -site study and research participants will be recruited by [CONTACT_137715] (e.g. call centers, national advertisements) describe those methods. 
Local recruitment methods are described above .  
1. Describe when, where, and how potential research participants will be recruited .  
2. Describe the methods that will be used to identi fy potential research participants .  
3. Describe the materials that will be used to recruit research participants .  
 
Above Not Applicable.  
 
Multi -Site Research Communication Plan (when you are the lead investigator )  
Not applicable  
 
If this is a multi -site study where you are the lead investigator , describe the processes to e nsure 
communication among sites including : 
 All sites will have the most current version of the protocol, consent document, and 
HIPAA authorization       
 All required approvals (initial, continuing review and modifications) have been obtained 
at each site (including approval by [CONTACT_779]’s IRB of record)       
 All modifications have been communicated to sites, and approved (including approval of 
the site’s IRB of record) before the modification is implemented       
 All engaged participating sites will safeguard data, including secure transmission of 
data, as required by [CONTACT_28584]       
 All local site investigators conduct the study in  accordance with applicable federal 
regulations and local laws       
 All non -compliance with the study protocol or applicable requirements will be reported 
in accordance with local policy       
If this is a multi -site study where you are the lead investi gator, describe the method for 
communicating to engaged participant sites :  
 Problems       
 Interim results       
 The closure of the study       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 33 of 35 
References     
  
1.   Miles, M. S., Holditch -Davis, D., Burchinal, P., & Nelson, D. (1999). Distress 
and growth outcomes in mothers of medically fragile infants.  Nursing Research, 
48(3), 129 -140. 
2    Toly, V. (2009).  Normalization and family functioning in families with a child 
who is technology dependent. Doctoral dissertation, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH.  
3.   Braden, C. (1991). Patterns of change over time in learned response to 
chronic illness among participants in systemic lupus erythmatosus self -help 
course.  Arthritis Care Research, 4, 158 -167. 
4.   Rosswurm, M.A., Lar rabee, J.H. et al.  (2002). Training family caregivers of 
dependent elderly adults through on -site and telecommunication 
programs.  Journal of Gerontological Nursing, 28 , 27-38. 
5.   Zauszniewski, J.A., Eggenschwiler, K., Preechawong, S., Roberts, B.L., & 
Morris, D.L. (2006). Effects of teaching resourcefulness skills in elders.  Aging 
and Mental Health, 10 (4), 1 -9. 
6.   Zauszniewski, J., Bekhet, A., et al. (2007). Effects of teaching 
resourcefulness and acceptance on affect, behavior, and cognition of chronic ally 
ill elders.  Issues in Mental Health Nursing, 28 , 575-592. 
7.   Zauszniewski, J.A., Krafcik, K., et al. (2004). Focused 
reflection:  Reminiscence for elders using specific themes and visual 
images.  Journal of the Applied Gerontology, 23 (4), 429 -442. 
8.   Zauszniewski, J.A.  (1995). Development and testing of a measure of 
depressive cognitions in older adults.  Journal of Nursing Measurement, 3 (1), 
31-41. 
9.   Zauszniewski, J., Lai, C., et al., (2006). Development and testing of the 
resourcefulness scale fo r older adults.  Journal of Nursing Measurement, 14 , 57-
68. 
10. Radloff, L. S. (1977). The ces -d scale: A self -report depression scale for 
research in the general population.  Applied Psychological Measurement, 1 , 385-
401. 
11. Murphy, F. (1994).  Relationship  between family use of normalization and 
psychosocial adjustment in children with chronic physical disorders.  Unpublished 
Masters Thesis, McGill Univ, Montreal, Quebec.  
12. Roberts, C. S., & Feetham, S. L. (1982). Assessing family functioning across 
three areas of relationships.  Nursing Research, 31 (4), 231 -235. 
13. Stein, R. E., & Jessop, D. J. (1990). Functional status ii(r): A measure of 
child health status.  Medical Care, 28 (11), 1041 -1055.  
14. Office of Technology Assessment. (1987).Technology -dependent  children: 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_640778]. home care: A technical memorandum, Congress of the United 
States.  
15. Zauszniewski, J. (1997). Teaching resourcefulness skills to older 
adults.  Journal of Gerontological Nursing, 23 , 14-20. 
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 34 of 35 
16. Richards, K., Enderlin, C., et al . (2007). Tailored bio -behavioral 
interventions: A literature review and synthesis.  Research and Theory for 
Nursing Practice, 21 , 271-285. 
17. Pennebaker, J. (1997). Writing about emotional experiences as a 
therapeutic process.  Psychological Science, 8 (3), 162-166. 
18. Newacheck, P., & Kim, S. (2005). A national profile of health care utilization 
& expenditures for children with special health care needs.  Archives in Pediatric 
& Adol. Medicine, 159 (1), 10 -17. 
19. Rosenbaum, M. (1990).  Learned resourcefulnes s: On copi[INVESTIGATOR_25110], self -
control, and adaptive behavior . [LOCATION_001]: Springer Publishing.  
20. Zauszniewski, J.A.  (2006). Resourcefulness.  In J.J. Fitzpatrick & M. Wallace 
(Eds.),  Encyclopedia of Nursing Research (pp.256 -258). [LOCATION_001]: Springer 
Publishing.  
21. Zauszniewski, J., Morris, D., Preechawong, S., & Chang, H. (2004). Reports 
of depressive symptoms in elders with chronic conditions.  Research and Theory 
for Nursing  Practice, 18(2/3), 185 -196. 
22. Zauszniewski, J.A. (1995). Development and testing of a  measure of 
depressive cognitions in older adults.  Journal of Nursing Measurement, 3 (1), 
31-41. 
23. Zauszniewski, J., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_288119], S., Roberts, B., et al. (2005). Predictors of 
resourcefulness in African American women.  Journal of Aging and Health, 7 , 
609-633. 
24. Musil, C., Warner, C., Zauszniewski, J., Wykle, M., & Standing, T. (in press). 
Grandmother caregiving, family stress and strain, and depressive 
symptoms,  Western Journal of Nursing Research . 
25. Musil, C., Warner, C., Zausniewski, J., Jeanblanc, A., & K ercher, K. (2006). 
Grandmothers, caregiving, and family functioning.  Journal of Gerontology, 61B , 
S89-S98. 
26. Deatrick, J. et al. (2006). Family management style framework: a new tool 
with potential to assess families who have children with brain tumors.  J. of 
Pediatric Oncology Nursing, 23 (1), 19 -27. 
 
27. Ware, J., Kosinski, M., &  Keller, S. (1996). A 12 -item short -form health 
survey.  Medical Care, 34 , 220-233. 
 
28. Lee, K. A., Hicks, G., & Nino -Murcia, G. (1991). Validity and reliability of a 
scale to as sess fatigue.  Psychiatry Research, 36 , 291-298. 
 
29. Buyssee, D., Reynolds, C., Monk, T., Berman, S., & Kupfer, D. 
(1989).  Psychiatry Research, 28,  193-213. 
 
30. Zauszniewski, J. A., & Bekhet, A. K. (2011, in review). Measuring use of 
resourcefulness skill s: Psychometric testing of a new scale.  Nursing Research 
and Practice.  
 
 
 HRP -503BIO  TEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol  
Approved:  05/11/2018  Prior Version:  1/23/2018  
 
  Page 35 of 35 
 
Please reference the Investigator Manual for local institutional requirements.  
 
 