DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
1  
  
 
PROTOCOL  
 
 
DoxyPEP: Evaluation of doxycycline post -exposure prophylaxis to reduce sexually transmitted infections in 
men who have sex with men and transgender women either on PrEP or living with HIV  
    
Version 9.0 
 
May 27, 2022  
 
 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/[ADDRESS_327397]  ................................................................................................................................... 16 
5.2 Safety of  doxycycline  ....................................................................................................................... 16 
5.3 Doxycycline dispensing and administration.  ..................................................................................... 17 
5.4 Concomitant  medications  ................................................................................................................. 17 
5.5 HIV pre -exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) and HIV antiretroviral therapy (ART)  ..................................... [ADDRESS_327398] and syphilis  ............................................... 23 
6.5 Testing for resistance in setting of STI diagnoses on study  .............................................................. 25 
6.6 Treatment of STIs  ............................................................................................................................ 26 
6.7 Qualitative interviews  ....................................................................................................................... 26 
6.8 Reenrollment of partic ipants enrolled prior to  3/15/2020 ...................................................................  26 
7 ADVERSE EVENTS (AE) AND STUDY MONITORING  ........................................................................... 26 
7.1 Adverse Event Collection Requirements  .......................................................................................... 26 
7.2 AE and SAE attribution to doxycycline  ............................................................................................. 27 
7.3 Study  Monitoring .............................................................................................................................. 27 
8 CLINICAL MANAGEMENT  ISSUES ........................................................................................................ 28 
8.1 Toxicity  ............................................................................................................................................. 28 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/[ADDRESS_327399] 5/13/[ADDRESS_327400] (IRB)  Review .......................................................................................... [ADDRESS_327401] CONTAINMENT  ................................................................................................................. 33 
REFERENCES  ................................................................................................................................................ 34 
 
 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
4  
 STUDY TEAM  
 
Connie Celum, MD, MPH, co -Principal Investigator 
[INVESTIGATOR_269168], MD, co- Principal Investigator 
[INVESTIGATOR_269169], MD, PhD  
Ruanne Barnabas, MBChB, DPhil 
Susan Buchbinder, MD, MPH 
Katerina Christopoulos, MD, MPH 
Edwin D. Charlebois, MPH, PhD 
Stephanie Cohen, MD, MPH  
Julie Dombrowski, MD, MPH 
Deborah Donnell, PhD  
Rob Frederickse n, PhD  
 Diane Havlir, MD  
Chaz Langelier, MD,PhD 
Hyman Scott, MD, MPH 
Olusegun Soge, MSc, PhD 
Vivek Jain, MD, MAS  
Emma Bainbridge, MD, MPH  
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/[ADDRESS_327402]-exposture  prophylaxis  
PLWH  People living with  HIV 
PrEP Pre-exposure  prophylaxis  
RPR  Rapid Plasma Reagin  
SAE Serious Adverse Event  
STI Sexually transmitted infection  
TCN Tetracycline 
TGW  Transgender  women  
VDRL  Venereral Disease Research  Lab 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
6  
  
 
SCHEMA 
 
DoxyPEP: Prospective, randomized, open -label, clinical trial to evaluate the impact of doxycycline post -
exposure prophylaxis on the occur rence of bacterial STIs among men who have sex with men (MSM) and 
transgender women (TGW) PrEP users and people living with HIV  
 
 
Design:  Open- label randomized clinical trial of doxycyline PEP to reduce bacterial STIs (N. 
gonorrheae [GC], C. trachomatis [CT ], and T. pallidum [syphilis]) among MSM and 
transgender women (TGW) living with HIV (PLWH) or on HIV  PrEP.  
 
Study Population: S ample size of 780, approximately equal numbers of PLWH and participants taking HIV pre -
exposure prophylaxis (PrEP)  
 
Study Sites:  
1. HIV/AIDS Clinic (“Ward 86”), Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], UCSF, San 
Francisco  
2. San Francisco City Clinic, San Francisco Department of Public Health, San Francisco 
(municipal STD  clinic)  
3. Madison HIV/AIDS Clinic, Harborview Medical Center University of Washington,  Seattle  
4. Public Health -Seattle & King County Sexual Health Clinic at Harborview Medical Center,  
Seattle  
 
Primary Study Objectives:  
1. Evaluate the effectiveness of doxycycline post -exposure prophylaxis (PEP) to reduce 
STI infections in two populations: a) MSM living with HIV and b) MSM/TGW taking HIV 
PrEP 
2. Investigate the impact  of doxycycline  PEP on development  of culture -based  tetracycl ine 
(TCN) resistance in N. gonorrheae and among nasopharyngeal carriers of S. aureus  
 
Secondary Study Objectives:  
1. Assess the safety, tolerability, and acceptability of doxycycline PEP 
2. Investigate the impact of doxycycline PEP  on detection of culture and molecular 
markers of tetracycline (TCN) resistance in C. trachomatis (CT), and T. pallidum  
(syphilis - molecular markers only ) 
3. Evaluate the development  of phenotypic  tetracycline  resistance  among oropharyngeal 
carriers of commensal Neisseria  species  
4. Measure the proportion of sex acts which are covered by [CONTACT_269194] 
5. Assess the effect of doxycycline PEP on the gut resistome through measuring the 
abundance of tetracycline resistance genes in  stool of  a subset of 50 MSM living with 
HIV and 50 MSM/TGW on PrEP assigned to receive doxycycline PEP as well as rectal 
swabs from all participants, stored for future evaluation 
 
Exploratory Objectives:  
1. Evaluate the diversity of the gut microbiome and quantity and breadth of  drug 
resistance genes in participants on doxycycline PEP and not on  PEP 
2. Assess the association between meningococcal vaccination and incident GC  infection  
3. Evaluate the incidence of nongonococcal, nonchlamydial urethritis and the proportion 
of urethritis  in which Mycoplasma genitalium (MG) is  detected  
4. Assess the rate of detection of Mycoplasma genitalium (MG) in urine in each arm and 
the presence of tetracycline and other antimicrobial resistance in MG in each arm. 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
7  
 5. Evaluate association of doxycycline use with weight change over  time 
6. Evaluate whether doxycycline PEP is associated with PrEP  persistence and HIV 
virologic suppression by [CONTACT_269195].  
7. Evaluate the incidence of lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV) in those diagnosed 
with rectal chlamydia in each arm 
 
 
Approach:  Eligible  participants  randomized to receive  PEP will receive open- label  doxycycline  [ADDRESS_327403] (receptive anal, insertive anal, vaginal, or oral, or use of shar ed sex toys). No more 
than [ADDRESS_327404] and syphilis 
(for syphilis, DNA obtained from mucosal or lesional swabs). Nares and pharyngeal swabs 
will be obtained to evaluate tetracycline resistance among nasopharyngeal carriers of S. 
aureus and commensal Neisseria species (oropharyngeal swab only). Stool samples from 
50 MSM/TGW living with HIV and 50 MSM/TGW on PrEP in the doxycycline PEP arm at 3 
time points will undergo  metagenomic  sequencing for tetracycline resistance genes.  Rectal  
swabs  from all participants who consent will be archived for future evaluation of the enteric 
microbiome and resistome, as well as for presence of  MG. 
 
 
  
Study Schema  
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
8  
 1 BACKGROUND AND  SIGNIFICANCE  
 
1.1 Background 
The incidence of bacterial sexually transmitted infection (STI) continues to increase in the US, with more than 2 
million diagnoses of syphilis, gonorrhea (GC) and chlamydia (CT) in 2016.[ADDRESS_327405] sex with men (MSM) and transgender women (TGW), 
including those living  with and without  HIV. In the US, MSM  accounted  for 81% of syphilis  infections  in 2016 and 
38% of gonorrhea cases; the latter represents a nearly [ADDRESS_327406] is also increasing 
among MSM, with rectal chlamydia rates of 17% and the highest rates of CT diagnosed in STI clinics in MSM ≥ [ADDRESS_327407] ver y high bacterial STI 
incidence, reaching or exceeding 50% new STI diagnoses per year .3, [ADDRESS_327408] increased 28% in the past few years;6 it is likely 
that some of this increase comes from ‘bridging’ from MSM to heterosexual populations.7 Distressingly, drug - 
resistant  GC continues  to rise globally8-10 and in the US,11 leading to limited  oral treatment  options;  recent  cases 
of highly -resistant GC in the [LOCATION_006] and Australia required treatment with ertapenem.12, 13 Untreated STIs increase 
the risk of HIV transmission from individuals with HIV infection who are not virologi cally suppressed,14, 15 as 
occurs in nearly half of those living with HIV nationwide.16 With the recent CDC -endorsed “U=U” campaign (i.e., 
undetectable=untransmitt able) ,[ADDRESS_327409]  ‘serosorting’  in selection of sexual  partners  and decisions  to use condoms.  Accordingly,  there  is an urgent 
need for innovative,  effective, and acceptable interventions  to halt the rise in syphilis,  GC, and CT among MSM 
and TGW living with and at -risk for HIV infection.  
 
One potential STI control strategy for these high- risk populations is post -exposure prophylaxis (PEP) 
with doxycycline. Antibiotic prophylaxis against STIs is not a new concept; minocycline was used as PEP for 
GC in the US Navy in the 1940s and showed transient benefits with no clinical harms, but the rapid emergence 
of tetracycline resistance prevented uptake of this approach as a public health strategy 18 A systematic review of 
presumptive periodic treatment of sex workers s howed overall 50% reductions in GC and CT without risk 
compensation or increased AMR,  and this approach is recommended for populations  with high baseline GC and 
CT prevalence 19. The rationale for STI prophylaxis  among MSM  and TGW  is similar,  given the high prevalence 
and incidence of bacterial STIs among MSM living with HIV and MSM on PrEP. An effective STI prophylaxis 
strategy could augment frequent STI screening, partner notification and other efforts to reduce STI acquis ition 
and transmission among  MSM.  
  
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/[ADDRESS_327410] with very high efficacy 
(97-100%). Doxycycline is used to treat syphilis for persons with 
penicillin  allergy.  Notably,  CT and syphi lis have  not developed  TCN 
resistance in spi[INVESTIGATOR_269170]. Doxycycline is not recommended for GC treatment due 
to baseline resistance and increased TCN resistance will not affect 
GC management.  
 
The IPERGAY study demonstrated efficacy of single dose 
doxycyclin e PEP after condomless sex among 232 HIV -negative 
MSM taking event -driven PrEP in [LOCATION_009].20 Doxycycline PEP 
resulted in a 47% relative  reduction in new bacterial  STIs (GC,  CT, 
or syphilis) over 8.7 months of follow -up (45.9 v s. 79.6 per 100 
person- years in those assigned to doxycycline PEP vs. no PEP 
control, respectively; Figure 1A . Doxycycline PEP reduced the  
incidence of CT and syphilis,  but not GC (Figure 1B-D), which was 
not surprising given doxycycline resistance in >50% of GC strains 
in [LOCATION_009]. MSM in IPERGAY had a median age of 38 years, were 
highly educated, majority Caucasian, and highly adherent to event -
driven HIV PrEP. MSM in the doxycycline arm in IPE RGAY took a 
median of 680 mg of doxycycline per month. Adverse events were 
rare and there was no difference in self -reported  sexual  behavior  
between MSM  in the two study  arms.  
 
Limitations  of generalizability  from the IPERGAY  study  include that 
the sample was small  (n=232),  and in contrast  to MSM  in the US 
heavily  impacted by [CONTACT_269196],  MSM  were  older  (median age 38), highly  educated,  and majority  Caucasian. In addition,  
with respect  to adherence to event -driven  doxycycline  PEP,  MSM  in the IPERGAY study  were  highly adherent  to 
event -driven  HIV PrEP  and were  already  ‘cueing’  their TDF-FTC (Truvada) PrEP dosing to their sexual  activity. 
Importantly, uptake and adherence to doxycycline PEP among daily PrEP users are unknown. Additionally, 
IPERGAY did not conduct detailed measurements of the pattern of doxycycline use with sexual practices nor 
evaluate for antibiotic resistance as sociated with intermittent doxycycline use. Doxycycline PEP may be more 
efficacious  for reducing GC incidence  in the US than in Europe,  due to lower  GC TCN resistance  in the US (25% 
vs 55% respectively).11, [ADDRESS_327411] reduction in 
rectal and urethral GC infections  with doxycycline PEP in IPERGAY.21 
 
A small study pi[INVESTIGATOR_269171] 30 MSM living with HIV with a history of syphilis, and showed a 
73% reduction in composite STIs,  without  power  to assess individual  STIs.22 The greater  risk of side effects  and 
antimicrobial resistance (AMR) with daily dosing of doxycycline have dampened enthusiasm for daily dosing of 
doxycycline as PrEP against STIs. Event -driven doxycycline PEP has not been s tudied in MSM living with  HIV. 
 
Significant scientific knowledge gaps remain about on- demand STI doxycycline PEP in PrEP users and 
MSM living with HIV . MSM in IPERGAY were already ‘cueing’ their Truvada PrEP dosing to sexual activity; 
PEP adherence in daily PrEP users  is unknown.  IPERGAY did not conduct  detailed measurements  of the pattern 
of doxycycline  use with sexual  practices  nor report  antibiotic  resistance associated with intermittent  doxycycline 
use. Doxycycline  PEP may be more  efficacious  for reducing GC incidence in the US than in Europe,  due to lower 
TCN resistance in GC the US (30%  vs 55% respectively) .11, 20 PEP may also be more  effective  to prevent  GC at 
non-pharyngeal sites; there was a trend toward reduction in rectal and urethral infections with doxycycline PEP 
in IPERGAY.[ADDRESS_327412]  
Figure 1. IPERGAY Study: Time to first STI (panel a), GC 
infection (panel b), CT infection (panel c), and syphilis 
infection (panel d) 1 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
10  
 begun to prescribe doxycycline PEP to reduce incident STIs in MSM without a confirmatory study or normative 
guidance. Moreover, the balance of benefits and risks of doxycycline PEP need to be carefully studied in MSM 
living with HIV as well as in PrEP users in a study powered to assess effectiveness for each population. The 
relative benefits and risks of doxycycline PEP may differ in MSM living with HIV and PrEP users due to 
differences in adherence, sexual practices, potential risk compensation, sexual networks, and/or pre- existing 
antibiotic resistance due to higher prior antibiotic exposure among MSM living with HIV.  
 
In summary, a sufficiently -powered, high- quality study is needed to evaluate the effectiveness of 
doxycycline  PEP in populations  both with and without  HIV infection,  and to evaluate  its impact  on drug 
resistance in target bacterial STIs and resident bacterial microbiota. There is a public health need and 
sufficient clinical equipoise to conduct an effectiveness study of doxycycline PEP as an STI reduction strategy 
for a diverse population of MSM in the US to address the following key scientific questions: 1) Effectiveness of 
doxycycline PEP for bacterial STI prevention in MSM and TGW on PrEP,  2) Effectiveness of doxycycline PEP  
in MSM and TGW living with HIV ; 3) Differential tolerability and impact on antimicrobial resistance between  
MSM/TGW  living  with HIV and MSM/TGW  on PrEP; 4) TCN resistance  in GC, CT and syphilis,  5) TCN resistance  
in commensal  Neisseria  (which  can transfer  TCN resistance)  and potentially  pathogenic  Staph  Aureus  in carriers,  
and 6) effect on the gut resistome  in terms of changes in TCN resistance  genes . 
 
 
1.[ADDRESS_327413] C. difficile.29, 30 
Doxycycline  is a scalable PEP intervention,  as it is generic,  inexpensive,  and widely  available.  Doxycycline  does 
not require dose adjustment in hepatic or renal failure, including dialysis. In the IPERGAY doxycycline PEP study, 
there was no difference in grade 3 or 4 adve rse events between the study arms. As anticipated, there were more 
gastrointestinal side effects in those on PEP (25%) vs. the non -PEP control arm (14%). Discontinuation of 
doxycycline was uncommon with 8  study participants (7%) stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_269172] t o side effects attributed 
to doxycycline, the majority of which were gastrointestinal.1 Given the safety profile of doxycycline and the 
enrollment of participants receiving ongoing clinical care for HIV or HIV PrEP, study -specific monitoring will be 
limited  to complete  blood count  and liver function tests  at months  3 and 9 to assess for hematologic  and hepatic 
toxicity,  which  occur  rarely  with chronic  doxycycline  use (<1%).  Assessment  for side effects  (eg., pi[INVESTIGATOR_269173], 
photosensitivity, new onset headaches), with clinical and laboratory testing if indicated if potential serious 
adverse events are suspected. Participants will receive standard of care monitoring through their HIV or PrEP. 
Typi[INVESTIGATOR_269174] -annual  viral load monitoring,  renal  and liver function 
tests, and annual CBC. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_269175] -annual or annual renal  monitoring.  
 
1.2.[ADDRESS_327414]-sex dose of doxycycline  is the long in vivo doubling time of syphilis  (approximately 
30-33 hours)31, 32, which is the rationale for treatment of early syphilis with long- acting IM penicillin or oral 
doxycycline for 14 days. However, the incubation time for syphilis is 10- 90 days,33and doxycycline PEP 
administered within 72 hours of exposure may deliver sufficient chemoprophylaxis to abort primary infection. 
Notably,  in IPERGAY,  a 73% reduction in syphilis  incidence was observed with single  dose  doxycycline.1 In 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
11  
 addition, single dose doxycycline PEP has been shown to be effective for Lyme disease34 and leptospi[INVESTIGATOR_269176] 35, 36 
– spi[INVESTIGATOR_269177].35, 37 An alternative approach is doxycycline  PrEP (i.e., 
daily dosing).[ADDRESS_327415]-coital doxycycline PEP.  
 
1.2.3  Potential for drug  resistance  
An important consideration with intermittent doxycycline use for STI prophylaxis is selection of drug resistance, 
in both target bacterial STI pathogens as well as in microbiota which are potential pathogens or possible 
reservoirs  of antimicrobial  resistance,  such  as S. aureus  and commensal  Neisseria  species.  GC has sequentially 
developed resistance to antibiotics in multiple classes, including those previously or currently recommended for 
treatment. Rates of TCN -resistance in GC in the US are 25% -38% in studies of MSM,11 compared with >50%  in  
Europe.[ADDRESS_327416] or syphilis.  However,  TCN resistance from single  point  mutations  has been reported in related 
organisms such as Chlamydia suis38, 39 and Brachyspi[INVESTIGATOR_269178] .40 in antibiotic -exposed pi[INVESTIGATOR_14107], suggesting that 
development of TCN resistance could evolve (or be acquired from a resistant organism such as E. coli 41). 
Azithromycin -resistant Treponema pallidum emerged from a single mutation42 and rapi[INVESTIGATOR_269179],[ADDRESS_327417] of doxycycline use on S. aureus is an important consideration, 
given that ∼ 30% of the population are S aureus carriers .[ADDRESS_327418] the larger microbiome, with decreased 
diversity of gut flora and shifts in the predominant species, which may fuel a “dysbiotic” environment and may 
contribute to inflammation and complications such as C. difficile.46-48 In sum, a comprehensive assessment of 
doxycycline PEP is needed, including public health benefits, safety, tolerability, adherence, and AMR among 
bacterial  STIs and organisms  that may can be pathogenic  (e.g. S. aureus  among carriers)  or transfer  resistance 
to GC (e.g., from commensal  Neisseria ). 
 
1.2.4  Rationale for evaluation of meningococcal vaccination status  
A recent  report  from New  Zealand suggests  that vaccination with an outer  membrane- based Group  B Neisseria 
meningitidis  vaccine  is associated with a reduced  risk of gonorrhea in adolescents  and adults  aged 15-30 years 
of age; the estimated effectiveness of the OMV meningococcal vaccine against gonococcal infection to be 33% 
[ NZ OMV is part of the composition of the 4CMenB vaccine, commercially distributed as BEXSERO49 ([COMPANY_004]). It 
is not known if other meningococ cal vaccines are associated with a similar decrease in GC infections. 
Meningococcal vaccination (Serogroup A/C/W/Y) is currently recommended by [CONTACT_269197] B vaccination is a consideration for adolescents and young adults50. Meningococcal vaccine status 
will be recorded, with the type of vaccine if known, to evaluate for a potential association of vaccination with 
decreased GC  rates.  
  
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
12  
 1.2.5  Rationale for evaluation of nongonoccal urethritis (NGU) and Mycoplasma genitalium  (MG) 
Mycoplasma genitalium  is a frequent  cause  of urethritis  in men .51 MG can be detected with nucleic  acid testing; 
however, many public health programs do not routinely test for MG and instead treat  non-gonoccocal urethritis 
(NGU) empi[INVESTIGATOR_3675].[ADDRESS_327419]  
Study enrollment and the majority of in- person study evaluations were halted in March 2020 due to the COVID - 
19 pandemic and the hold on clinical research required by [CONTACT_28144]. As  a result, patients 
enrolled 3/2020 or earlier were unable to undergo regular ascertainment for the STI endpoint during the following 
months. Given the need for full endpoint ascertainment and acknowledging potential changes in sexual behavior 
during the C OVID pandemic, participants enrolled 3/[ADDRESS_327420]   
Enrollment into t he DoxyPEP study was stopped early on 5/13/[ADDRESS_327421] sex with men (MSM) and 
transgender women (TGW ).  The e ffectiveness of doxycycline PEP  was observed and statistically significant 
both in the cohort of participants living with HIV and the cohort of participants  without HIV who were taking 
PrEP. The strategy of doxyPEP was safe and well -tolerated, with no doxycycline- associated Grade [ADDRESS_327422] of care 
arm for the remainder of their 12 month participation. Participants who roll ov er from the control arm  into the 
active doxy cycline PEP arm will undergo  the same  evaluations as specified for  the active arm (e.g., safety 
labs) per the schedule of events and will continue with quarterly study visit s through month [ADDRESS_327423] of care arm schedule of events . All 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/[ADDRESS_327424] of intermittent 
doxy cycline PEP on an timicrobial resistance and the gut microbiome. This information is critical for 
understanding the risk/benefit profile of doxycycline PEP and to inform  guidelines about the doxyPEP strategy 
which will be  considered both by [CONTACT_8335] , providers,  and public health authorities.  
 
 
2 STUDY DESIGN  
 
Design: The overarching goal is to assess the effectiveness of doxycycline PEP on incidence of STIs and 
tetracycline resistance among STIs and commensal bacteria to inform public health policy. Participants will be 
randomized 2:1 (see Schema), with two -thirds receiving doxycycline PEP and one- third receiving the standard 
of care control,  to maximize  data on safety,  tolerability,  adherence coverage of sexual  acts,  and resistance data 
in participants randomized to doxycy cline PEP, without negatively impacting power to measure effectiveness. 
Participants will be counseled about the preliminary effectiveness data from IPERGAY, and the potential for AMR 
in STIs or other bacteria. Possibi lity of unreported doxycycline use in the control arm (contamination) will be 
monitored  through  retrospective batch testing  of doxycycline  metabolites  in hair, to detect  doxycycline  use in the 
prior [ADDRESS_327425] for MSM living with HIV and MSM on 
PrEP because of potential differences in safety, tolerability, adherence, sexual networks, sexual practices, 
background AMR, and ultimately, PEP effectiveness. Eligible participants randomized 2:[ADDRESS_327426] (oral or anal). [ADDRESS_327427] once per 24 hour period 
regardless of the number of sexual acts occurring during this time period. the rationale for 2:1 randomization is 
to maximize  data on doxycycline  PEP safety,  tolerability,  acceptability,  and resistance,  while  providing sufficient 
power for the primary outcome of  the effectiveness of  doxycycline PEP. Sexual activity will be recorded for both 
arms of the study (doxycycline PEP and control condition) by [CONTACT_50591] a smartphone applicati on that 
will be adapted for study use; this will enable comparable assessment of risk in the two arms. PEP pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382] -taking will 
also be measured by [CONTACT_269198]. Sexual activity and adherence will also be assessed in person at quarterly visits.  STI testing will be conducted quarterly from three 
anatomic  sites (pharyngeal,  rectal , and urinary)  and blood obtained for syphilis  testing,  following  CDC guidelines  
for serologic  diagnosis  of syphilis.  Participants  with a positive  STI test will return for STI treatment  and for swabs 
of the affected  site for resistance testing;  culture  based for GC and molecular  methods  for CT and syphilis.  Those 
with signs and symptoms suggestive of syphilis infection and those with a reactive syphilis serologic test that 
indicates a new syphilis infection will have swabs of any current active lesion (if present) as well as mucosal 
swabs from the orophar ynx. Swabs from the anterior nares and oropharynx will be obtained at baseline, 6 and 
12 months to evaluate tetracycline resistance in S. aureus among carriers and orophary ngeal swabs will be 
obtained at baseline and 12 months to evaluate tetracycline resistance in commensal Neisseria  species.  
 
Stool samples fro m 100 participants on the doxycycline PEP arm − 50 MSM and TGW living with HIV and 50 
MSM and TGW on PrEP− will be collected at baseline, [ADDRESS_327428] of doxycycline PEP on the enteric microbiome and resistome.  
 
Study population: This study will enroll 780 participants living with HIV and HIV -negative persons taking PrEP . 
An approximately equal number of  PLWH and HIV uninfected persons taking PrEP will be enrolled.  An 
approximately equal number of participants in each of these cohorts (and in each study arm) will be enrolled in 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
14  
 San Francisco and Seattle.  
 
Current  or planned initiation  of PrEP use is an eligibility  criterion  for enrollment,  because this population of MSM 
and TGW  has high rates  of STIs and is typi[INVESTIGATOR_269180].  However,  participants  may opt to 
stop PrEP  use at any time during the study without affecting their involvement in the study. Any participants 
without HIV infection who subsequently seroconvert will be managed clinically by [CONTACT_269199] (appropriate counseling,  clinic al evaluation,  and immediate  linkage to clinical and psychosocial  
services). These participants will also be retained in the study unless they choose to discontinue study  
participation.  
 
 
[ADDRESS_327429] -exposure prophylaxis (PEP) to reduce STI infections 
in two populations: a) MSM/TGW living with HIV and b) MSM/TGW taking HIV  PrEP.  
3.1.[ADDRESS_327430] of doxycycline PEP on development of culture -based tetracycline (TCN ) 
resistance in N. gonorrheae and among nasopharyngeal carriers of S.  aureus  
 
3.[ADDRESS_327431] of doxycycline PEP  on detection of culture and molecular markers  of tetracycline 
(TCN) resistance in C. trachomatis (CT ), and T. pallidum  (syphilis - molecular markers only).  
3.2.[ADDRESS_327432] of doxycycline PEP on the gut resistome through measuring the abundance of 
tetracycline resistance genes in stool of a subset of 50 MSM living with HIV and 50 MSM/TGW 
on PrEP assigned to receive doxycycline PEP as well as rectal swabs from all participants, 
stored for future  evaluation 
 
3.3 Exploratory objectives  
3.3.1 Evaluate the diversity of the gut microbiome and quantity and breadth of drug resistance genes   
in participants on doxycycline  PEP and not on PEP 
3.3.2 Assess the association between meningococcal vaccination and incident GC  infection  
3.3.3 Evaluate the incidence of urethritis  without  identified bacterial  etiology  and the proportion  which  is 
associated with MG in each arm 
 
3.3.4 Assess the rate of detection of Mycoplasma genitalium (MG) in urine in each arm and the presence of tetracycline and other antimicrobial resistance in MG in each arm. 
3.3.5 Evaluate association of doxycycline use with weight change over  time 
3.3.6 Evaluate whether doxycycline PEP is associated with PrEP  persistence and HIV virologic 
suppression by [CONTACT_269200].  
3.3.7 Evaluate the incidence of lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV) in those diagnosed with rectal 
chlamydia in each  arm 
 
 
 
4 SELECTION AND ENROLLMENT OF  PARTICIPANTS  
 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
15  
 4.1 Inclusion  criteria  
4.1.1 Willing and able to give written informed  consent  
4.1.2 Age > [ADDRESS_327433] three months and a current prescription for 
PrEP (both daily or event -driven PrEP permitted) or plan to start PrEP within [ADDRESS_327434] wi th ≥ [ADDRESS_327435] 12 months.  
Note: self report of STI is acceptable if documentation not available.  If the participant reports an incident 
STI in the past year at the same clinic where the participant will be enrolled, this diagnosis  should be 
confirm ed by [CONTACT_269201]. If the diagnosis  from this clinic cannot be confirmed, the 
participant should not be enrolled.  If the STI was reported at a clinical site that is not the study site, and 
records cannot be obtained, self -report will suffice . 
 
Note: Syphilis diagnosis within the last year refers to primary syphilis, secondary syphilis, and 
documented early latent syphilis (< [ADDRESS_327436]).  Known late 
latent syphilis or latent syphilis of unknown duration would not qualify. Positive syphilis titers which 
represent serofast status and not active disease do not qualify as a syphilis diagnosis. Clinician 
judgement regarding qualifying syphilis diagnosis should be sought when the diagnosis of syphilis in the 
past year is not clear or if there is a question about serofast status vs. active infection.  
 
 
4.[ADDRESS_327437] on 
INR 
4.2.4 Anticipated use of doxycycline during the coming 12 months for non -STI prevention use (e.g., 
acne treatment).  
 
4.[ADDRESS_327438] 
recruitment at clinics, referrals from other providers of PrEP and ART, and use of online and social networking websites and apps. Recruitment materials will educate participants about STI prevalence and incidence in their 
community and the pi[INVESTIGATOR_269181].  
 
The study will enroll from 4 clinical sites , 2 in Seattle and 2 in San Francisco (Table 1), which have established 
track records of high quality research in M SM and TGW populations integrated into clinical care settings; 
annual retention rates in clinical trials conducted in these sites exceed 80% -90%. The sites have large MSM 
populations that are ethnically and racially diverse.  
 
 
Table 1. Study Sites  
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
16  
 High volume, comprehensive HIV care clinics with 
on-site STI testing & treatment.  • “Ward 86” HIV Clinic, ZSFG, UCSF, San 
Francsico,  CA 
• Madison (HIV) Clinic, Harborview Medical 
Center, UW, Seattle,  WA 
 
Municipal STI clinics with integrated on -site HIV 
PrEP programs.  • San Francisco City Clinic, San Francisco  CA 
• Public Health – Seattle & King County 
Sexual Health Clinic, Seattle,  WA 
 
4.4 Co-enrollment  guidelines.  
Participants may be co- enrolled in other research studies, provided that these are a) observational studies or b) 
evaluation of an FDA approved intervention which is not an antibiotic, is not intended to treat or prevent an STI, 
and is compatible with coadministration of doxycyc line. The study team should be consulted for co- enrollment 
in studies that do not meet this guidance or if there are questions about eligibility for co- enrollment. For any co -
enrolled study, combined blood draws should not exceed current Red Cross phleboto my guidance.  
 
 
[ADDRESS_327439]  
Generic  delayed release  doxcycyline  hyclate 200 mg capsules  (Mayne Pharmaceuticals)  will be provided by 
[CONTACT_269202] -label  PEP, and to participants who choose to roll over to active 
doxycycline PEP following the 5/13/[ADDRESS_327440] is bioequiva lent to 
doxycycline  hyclate IR.  60, 61 Doxycycline  hyclate is widely  available and FDA approved for the treatment  of 
multiple infectious conditions. The full prescribing information can be accessed at : 
https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=cd2ab9b8-9619-4199-8a5d-83377b3274d1 
 
5.[ADDRESS_327441] s of doxycycline are62, 63 
• Gastrointestinal: nausea, diarrhea, epi[INVESTIGATOR_50684], anorexia, glossitis, enterocolitis, anal and genital 
candidiasis  
• Esophageal disorders: dysphagia, pi[INVESTIGATOR_269182], and rarely esophageal ulceration. Risk for 
esophageal irritation can be reduced by [CONTACT_269203] (to avoid lying down during doxycycline intake) at a meal with a large glass of water (100  ml). 
• Skin reactions including maculopapular, erythematous and photosensitivity skin reactions. Due to 
concer n for photosensitivity, individuals taking doxycycline are advised to avoid excessive exposure to 
sunlight and UV radiation (such as tanning beds).  
 
Other pos sible but rare adverse effects occurring in < 1% in post -marketing reports include:  
• Hypersensitivity reactions: urticarial, anaphylaxis, serum sickness, drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms  (DRESS)  
• Skin toxicity: fixed drug eruption. Stevens -Johnson syndrome, toxic epi[INVESTIGATOR_194], erythema 
multiforme, fixed drug eruptions exacerbation of preexisting lupus  erythematosus  
• Pericarditis  
• Hematological disorders: hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia,  eosinophilia 
• Intracranial hypertension (also known as pseudotumor  cerebri)  
 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/[ADDRESS_327442] medication or provide additional medication when needed (see MOPS 
for addition dispensing guidance). Capsules should be stored at room temperature (59- 86o F) to the extent  
feasible. Participants will be instructed to take [ADDRESS_327443] is defined as receptive anal, insertive 
anal, vaginal, or oral sex (which includes oral/anal and oral/genital contact) or use of shared sex toys without  a 
condom used for the entire time. For partici pants reporting multiple sexual encounters, [ADDRESS_327444] 60 minutes before bed to reduce risk of esophageal irritation. All participants randomized to PEP 
will be advised to avoid excessive sun exposure and artificial UV light, such as tanning beds, and to consider 
use of sunscreen if they will be exposed to sun.  
 
5.4 Concomitant  medications 
Participants randomized to doxycycline PEP should report current and new medications to the study team to 
ensure no concern for drug interactions with doxycycline. The prescribing information for doxycycline 
monohydrate should be reviewed to ensure no potential for drug interactions.  
 
5.4.1  Prohibited  medications  
• Barbiturates  
• Carbamazapi[INVESTIGATOR_050]  
• Phenytoin 
• Methoxyflurane  
• Systemic retinoids, such as acitretin and  isotretinoin  
 
5.4.2  Precautionary Medications 
• Antacids containing aluminum, iron, calcium, or magnesium, or bismuth subsalicyclate products 
(such as Pepto -Bismol) may impair doxycycline absorption and should be separated 2 hours 
before or after  doxycycline  
• Oral iron supplements may impact doxycycline absorption. Iron should be separated  2 hours 
before or after doxycycline  
 
5.5 HIV pre -exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) and HIV anti retroviral therapy (ART)  
PrEP and ART will not be provided by [CONTACT_269204]. Each of the participating sites has a clinical infrastructure in place to assist individuals with obtaining ART and PrEP, including fo r those without insurance or whose insurance status changes.  
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
18  
 6 CLINICAL AND LABORATORY MONITORING  
 
6.1 Schedule of  Events  
 
Month (+2/-10 week window)  0 3 6 9 12 or 
Termination  
visit Doxy cycline  
initiation  visit for 
those in control 
arm 
Informed consent  √     √ 
Smartphone app instructions  √      
Review of current medications  √ √* √* √* √* √ 
Antibiotic & STI history  √ √ √ √ √  
Meningococcal vaccination history  √    √  
Sexual behavior questionnaire √ √ √ √ √  
Dispense pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353]/adherence counseling*  √* √* √* √*  √ 
Doxycycline pi[INVESTIGATOR_269183]*   √* √* √* √*  
Doxycycline PEP acceptability survey*    √*  √*  
General symptom assessment  √ √ √ √ √  
Costing questionnaire   √ √ √ √  
Condoms/lubricant  √ √ √ √ √  
Risk reduction counseling √ √ √ √ √  
GC/CT testing (throat & rectal swab, urine 
collection)  √ √ √ √ √  
Syphilis testing  √ √ √ √ √  
Rectal swabs stored for future microbiome 
testing, all participants  √  √  √ √ 
Rectal swab stored for future MG testing √ √ √ √ √  
Urine stored for future MG testing (also at 
time of symptomatic urethritis)  √ √ √ √ √  
Swabs/urine at time of evaluation for STI 
symptoms or confirmed STIs for 
resistance testing   at time of evaluation for STI symptoms or confirmed STI  
Anterior nares and oropharyngeal  swabs 
for Staph ylococcus  aureus  culture  √  √  √  
Oropharyngeal swabs for cultures of 
Neisseria species  √    √  
Stool sample from first 50 PLWH & first 50 
HIV- on PrEP*  √*  √*  √*  
Collection of hair for doxycycline testing   √  √  
 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
19  
 HIV testing data from local care  
(HIV RNA, CD4)  √    √  
CBC and liver function tests*   √*  √* √**  
Stored serum for future testing (Optional)  √    √  
Reimbursement  √ √ √ √ √  
Weight  √ √ √ √ √  
Qualitative interviews*  
(subset of participants, optional)   3-12 months  
*Intervention arm only   **Standard of care arm only   
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/[ADDRESS_327445]  locating  information;  the latter  will be updated at each study 
visit. At enrollment,  demographic,  behavioral,  and clinical information  will be collected and a release of 
information obtained to permit access to medical records. STI testing for chlamydia and gonorrh ea 
through nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) of clinician or self -collected pharyngeal and rectal 
swabs  and first void urine  will be conducted.  Serologic  testing for syphilis  will be conducted.  If required 
STI testing has been conducted within past 30 days, these results may be used for the enrollment 
evaluation. Participants diagnosed with an STI at baseline will be treated; presence of a baseline STI will not preclude enrollment but STI’s present at time of enrollment will not count towards study 
endpoints. All STIs will be reported to the local health department as required per local standard 
procedures.  
 
Randomization Within 14 days of enrollment, participants will be randomized in a 2:[ADDRESS_327446] of care control  condition (regular  STI counseling,  screening and 
treatment as indicated). The randomization code and resulting allocation list will be generated and 
maintained by [CONTACT_4305]. The list  will be blocked and stratified by [CONTACT_3725]. While neither 
participants nor study staff will be blind to each participant’s randomization group once assigned, the randomization scheme will utilize varying block  sizes in order to protect the blind prior to randomization 
of each participant.  
 
6.2.2 Quarterly visits after  enrollment . Quarterly  visits  will be conducted  every  90 days,  +2 weeks/  -10 
weeks. Participants unable to attend a quarterly visit will be asked to return for an unscheduled visit as 
soon as feasible. The quarterly evaluations should be completed at the time of this visit. Subsequent 
visits should occur on the assigned quarterly scheduled to the extent  possible.  
 
6.2.3 Unscheduled interim visits : Participants will be instructed to contact [CONTACT_269205]  a) new diagnosis  of STI, b) concern for possible adverse  event 
associated with doxycycline, c) need for additional doxycycline (in participants who were randomized to PEP arm), d) difficulty using the smartphone app, or any other study -related concerns. 
Reimbursement will not be provided for unscheduled visits. All interim contacts and visits will be documented in participants' study records and on applicable CRFs.  
 
6.2.4 Termination visi t: In the event that a participant prematurely discontinues study participation, the  
evaluations for the termination visit shoul d be completed if  possible.  
 
6.3 Instructions for  evaluations  
 
6.3.1 Smart phone application: A smartphone application (app), Blackbook, ( developed in conjun ction 
with UCSF researchers) currently in use to track sexual behavior and PrEP use in young MSM has 
been adapted for use in this study  to measure  daily sexual  risk practices  (both  study  arms)  and 
doxycycline PEP administration (intervention arm only). Study staff will assist with obtaining 
smartphones through local  available resources  such  as Lifeline  Assist , which  make  cell phones  
available to qualifying lower income individuals, when needed and feasible 
(https://www.truconnect.com/lifeline/freephone/signup ). Participant s will be given unique code s to 
permit download of the app from an online resource and guidance on how to use the application.  
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
21  
  
6.3.2 Review of current medications : All participants will have current medications reviewed at screening 
for possible drug interaction with doxycycline.  At subsequent  quarterly  visits,  participants  randomized 
to doxycycline PEP will have current medications be reviewed and any new medications will be 
assessed for possible drug interactions.  
6.3.3 STI symptom  screen . Participants  will be asked about  current  STI symptoms  including dysuria,  rash, 
throat pain, rectal pain/discharge, and genital  lesions 
6.3.4 Symptom assessment . At each visit, participants in both study arms will be asked about possible 
doxycycline side effects, including esophagitis, rash, gastrointestinal symptoms, photosensitivity, 
headache, and changes in vision (including blurred, double vision, vision loss). Control arm 
participants  will be asked about  these  symptoms  to establish a comparator  for non-specific  symptoms 
which can occur in the absence of  doxycycline.  
6.3.5 Antibiotic  and STI history : History  will be recorded  of any non-study  provided antibiotics  taken in the 
last 3 months  and any  STI diagnosis  in preceding 3 months,  including the diagnosis  of urethritis  
requiring treatment  but without detection of gonorrhea or chlamydia. At study entry, STI history for 
preceding 12 months will be recorded as well as obtained through chart review when possible.  
6.3.6 Meningococc al vaccination history: At study entry and at month 12, receipt of any prior 
meningococcal vaccination and the type (if known)  will be recorded , using a checklist that will include  
- Serogroup A only (includes MenAfriVa,  PsA- TT) 
- Serogroup B only (includes Trumenba,  Bexsero)  
- Serogroup C only (includes Meningitec, NeisVac  C) 
- Quadrivalent A/C/Y/W (includes Menomune, Menveo,Nimirix,  Menactra)  
- Or other  formulation  
Type of vaccination may be confirmed by [CONTACT_269206].  
6.3.7 Sexual behavior questionnaire: Participants will be asked to complete a sexual behavior 
questionnaire recording number and type of sexual contacts in the past [ADDRESS_327447] 3  months .  
 
Note: any period of 7 or more days in which the participant had condomless sexual activity but did 
not take doxycycline will be recorded as a doxycycline interruption. This includes interruptions due to 
lack of doxycycline,  forgetting to take doxycycline, taking medication not compatible with doxycycline, 
or participant decision to temporarily or permanently discontinue study -provided doxycycline.  
6.3.9 Doxycycline  PEP acceptability survey.  At months  6 and 12, participants  assigned to  or now taking 
doxycycline  PEP will be given a brief self -administered questionnaire evaluating acceptability of  PEP 
6.3.10 Risk reduction counseling and offer to provide of condoms/lubricant . At each visit, staff will 
counsel all participants  about STI risk reduction and HIV prevention (if not living with HIV), and the 
importance of adherence to ART and PrEP, according to local standard of care.  
6.3.11 STI testing.  
GC/CT: First void urine and pharyngeal and rectal swabs will be collected for NAAT testing. Swabs 
may be self collected or collected by [CONTACT_464]. GC & CT testing should be conducted at least 14 
days after treatment to avoid false positive nucleic acid r esults.  
 
Note: If GC or CT have been conducted within 30 days prior to study visit and these results are 
available, these results may be used for the quarterly STI assessment. All available STI results should 
be recorded.  
 
RPR: Blood will be collected for non-treponemal assay (RPR or VDRL) with titer if positive. 
Treponemal assay results should be recorded if RPR or VDRL are positive. Syphilis testing will be 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/[ADDRESS_327448] 
results and current  symptoms  and exposure  history.  The need for treatment  will be based  on 
the clinical assessment of the site investigator based on the serological data and clinical findings. All 
syphilis endpoints will  be determined by [CONTACT_269207] (see 10.3)  
 
Note:  It is preferred  to not repeat  syphilis  testing at a quarterly  visit if testing has been done less than 
[ADDRESS_327449] results should be 
recorded.  
 
6.3.12 Rectal swab for future M. genitalium  and other  testing.  
Rectal swab will be collected and stored for future batched M.gen  testing, including M.ge n antibiotic 
resistance testing, and potential testing for other infectious organisms. Swab s may be self -collected 
or collected by [CONTACT_464].  
 
6.3.13 Urine for M.genitalium  testing  
At the time of urine collection for GC/CT testing, a sample of this urine collection will be stored for 
future batched testing for MG. Remnant urine from GC/CT testing may be used or the initial first catch  
specimen may be divided  into two samples,  as long as the minimum  volume for GC/CT  testing is met. 
See the MOPS for more inf ormation. Urine should also be collected for M.gen  at the time of 
symptomatic urethritis (see Table 6.4.1)  
6.3.14 Nasal and oropharyngeal  swab for Staph ylococcus aureus : nares  and oropharynx  will be swabbed  
and cultured for S. aureus , with antibiotic resistance testing if S. aureus  growth present  
6.3.15 Oropharyngeal swab for  commensal  Neisseria species. At baseline and month 12 , all participants 
will undergo oropharyngeal swab for Neisseria species and TCN -resistance testing if Neisseria 
species are isolated.  
6.3.16 Stool specimen: Stool samples from the first [ADDRESS_327450] up to 2 weeks from the enrollment 
and 12- month visit to return the stool specimens for those visits, and up until two weeks after the 9 -
month visit t o return the stool specimen for the 6- month visit .  
6.3.17 Rectal  Swab  for microbiome testing : Rectal  swabs  will be collec ted and frozen for future  
microbiome analysis. Th ese swabs  may be self collected or collected by [CONTACT_49124].  
6.3.18 Hair collection : Hair will be collected from all participants who consent to collection and who meet 
eligibility for hair collection (occipi[INVESTIGATOR_269184] > 0.5 cm and absence of bleaching in area to be 
collected) See manual of procedures for details on hair  collection  
6.3.19 HIV testing and RNA data:  
For PLWH : At entry and month 12, the most recent HIV RNA data available from clinical visits will be 
recorded  
For participants  on PrEP:  At entry,  the most  recent  HIV antibody  or viral test results  from clinical care 
will be recorded.  If no test results  available within  the past [ADDRESS_327451] results from clinical care will be  recorded.  
6.3.20 ART and PrEP status  
For PLWH , current ART regimen and status (taking vs. not taking) will be recorded at each visit. At 
entry and month [ADDRESS_327452] recent HIV RNA and CD4+ cell count available from clinical 
visits will be recorded if available  
For participants on PrEP  At each  visit for those on PrEP, PrEP status will be assessed (taking vs. 
not taking, and how PrEP is taken - daily vs intermittent ). At entry and month 12, the most recent HIV 
antibody or viral load test results from clinical care will be recorded.  
6.3.21 Hematologic and liver function  tests:  Complete  blood count  (CBC)  (white  count  with differential , 
hemoglobin,  platelets) and liver function testing (AST,  ALT,  total bilirubin  and alkaline  phosphatase)  
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/[ADDRESS_327453] of care arm, 
CBC will be done at the month 12 visit. In the event that  a CBC cannot be obtained at month 12, an 
available CBC from any time during study participation may be used.   
6.3.22 Serum for storage  (Optional): At months 0 and 12, 10 mL of serum will be collected for storage for 
future analysis (non- genetic) in participants who agreed to this. Serum may be collected up to 14 
days after the visit if blood cannot  be collected at the time of the visit. 
6.3.23 Reimbursement : Participants will be reimbursed at the enrollment visit , at quarterly visits, and at the 
time of return for treat ment of STIs with accompanying collection of swabs. An additional 
reimbursement will be provided for participants who consent to the optional stool sample collection at 
the baseline, [ADDRESS_327454] of care to active doxycycli ne:  All participants  initially  assigned to the 
standard care arm will be offered the option to receive doxycycline through the study for the remainder 
of their  [ADDRESS_327455] of care arm participant elects to initiate doxycycline, 
they will complete a new informed consent at the doxycycline initiation visit, and will be provided with 
instructions and counseling on how to use doxycycline PEP.  If a control arm participant comes  in to 
initiate doxycycline at a time that falls within the visit window for the next scheduled study visit, all 
scheduled visit evaluations will be conducted, in addition to a rectal swab for microbiome testing, if 
not already scheduled. Up to three  bottles of doxycycline will be dispensed at the initial visit - a 
sufficient quantity to ensure enough doxycycline for daily use until the next quarterly visit or the end 
of study visit . If a control arm participant comes in to initiate doxycycline at a time that is before the 
visit window for the next scheduled study visit, doxycycline will be dispensed and a rectal swab 
obtained for microbiome  evaluation. CBC and LFT evaluations for possible doxycycline toxicity will 
occur  at the month 3 and month 9 study visit s per the SOE.  If there is a delay in the participant’s 
ability to come in for a doxycycline initiation visit, it is acceptable for doxycycline to be provided  
through primary care or other provider in advance of visit. Roll over to doxycycline and t he date of 
starting doxycycline will be recorded on a CRF. 
 
6.[ADDRESS_327456] symptoms of an STI at a study visit given characteristic clinical presentation (such as chancre, rash characteristic of syphilis, symptomatic urethritis or proctitis) such that the treating c linician will 
provide empi[INVESTIGATOR_269185], standard STI testing should be obtained from 
urine/pharynx/rectum for GC/CT and blood for syphilis testing. In addition,  the following specimens should be 
obtained for resistance testing from symptomatic anatomic sites  based on the clinical presentation as outlined 
in Table 6.4.1.  
 
NOTE: For specimens collected due to presumptive infection, the resistance testing specimens (swabs/urine 
collection) should be held until definitive STI testing is available. If STI testing indicates no infection, the 
specimens may be discarded. Alternati vely, the site may send all specimens for storage . Specimens that are 
not associated with a confirmed STI will be discarded when the data management team confi rms absence of 
STI. If there is uncertainty about whether STI if present, the specimens should be sent to the BioHUB for testing.  
 
NOTE: Testing for evidence of resistance to GC, CT and syphilis should be conducted prior to STI treatment.  If 
collect ion of  specimens before treatment  is not possible , CT and syphilis testing can be conducted the same 
day of treatment after treatment has been provided. Per the SURRG protocol, GC cultures should only be collected before GC treatment .  
  
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
24  
 Table 6.4.1 Specimen collection for resistance testing at time of evaluation for STI and presumptive 
STI treatment  
 
Presumptive 
infection   Specimen collection  
 Buccal 
Swab 
(Zymo)  Rectal 
Swab 
(Zymo)  Urine 
(Zymo)  Urine 
(Hologic 
urine 
specimen 
for M.gen)  Swab of 
chancre/ 
mucosal 
lesion  
(Zymo)  GC culture per local 
protocol (all anatomic 
sites of sexual 
exposure in past 90 
days)  
Urethritis    √ √  (urethral discharge)  
Proctitis   √    √ 
Syphilis with  
chancre/mucosal 
legion      √  
Syphilis diagnosis 
without 
chancre/mucosal  
lesion  √      
 
  
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
25  
 6.4.2  Documented  STI: 
Individuals with positive GC and/or CT NAAT results or with serologic testing indicating a new syphilis infection 
will be contact[CONTACT_269208], as outlined in Table 6.4.1  Specifically:  
• Those with positive G C NAAT results will have 
1) a swab obtained from the involved anatomic site and other sites of sexual contact [CONTACT_269209] 90 
days (to include throat, rectum, urine) if indicated for GC culture- based phenotypic testing 
according to local GC culture protocol,  and 
2) a swab/urine sample obtained from anatomic site of infection only for molecular resistance 
testing.  
• For those with CT infection, a swab or urine specimen will be collected (depending on the site of 
infection) for molecular resistance  testing.  
• For those wit h confirmed rectal or pharyngeal CT, a swab will be collected for chlamydia cell culture. 
Please see MOPS for specimen handing instructions.  
• For those with syphilis serologies indicating new infection and in whom no chancres/mucosal lesions 
are present, a buccal mucosal swab will be obtained for T. pallidum DNA amplification which , if 
positive, will be used for resistance testing. If suspected syphilitic chancre is present, this should be 
swabbed for molecular  testing  
 
Documented STI   Specimen collection  
 Buccal 
Swab 
(Zymo)  Pharyngeal 
Swab 
(Zymo ) Rectal 
Swab 
(Zymo)  Rectal or 
pharyngeal 
swab 
(Culture)  Urine 
Collection 
(Zymo)  Swab of 
chancre 
(Zymo)  GC culture per 
local protocol 
(all anatomic 
sites of sexual 
exposure in past 
90 days  
Chlamydia   √* √* √* √*   
Gonorrhea   √* √*  √*  √ 
Syphilis with 
chancre/mucosal  
legion       √  
Secondary 
syphilis (rash)  √       
 
*Specimen sent from site of confirmed infection only  
 
 
6.[ADDRESS_327457] Olusegun Soge at the UW/PHSKC STI program 
or the SFDPH Public Health Laboratory for testing by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Godfred Masinde. Both laboratories participate in the 
Strengthening the US Response to Resistant Gonorrhea (SURRG) program. GC isolates collected in Seattle and frozen isolates from San Francisco will be shipped to [CONTACT_269228] on a monthly basis for agar dilution 
antimicrobial susceptibility to a panel of antimicrobials including tetracycline, as part of the Antimicrobial 
Resistance Lab Network (ARLN) supported by [CONTACT_29510]. In addition, [CONTACT_269228]’s laboratory will determine whether 
tetracycline MICs increases among the subset with repeat GC infections during follow - up. 
 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
26  
 6.5.2  Molecular testing for tetracycline resistance genes in C. trachomatis, T. pallidum and N.  gonorrhoeae.  
DNA from positive NAAT tests for C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae and from buccal or chancre/mucosal lesion 
swabs from those with newly diagnosed syphilis will be evaluated using established CRISPR/Cas9 techniques 
to screen against a comprehensive library of antibiotic resistance mutationsin order to establish rapid throughput 
methodology for the multicenter study. Tetracycline resistance will be assessed using FLASH (Finding Low 
Abundance Sequences by [CONTACT_269210])) targeted sequencing of antimicrobial resistance genes that will then 
be compared to an established antibiotic resistance database as well as evaluated for known tetracycline 
mutations that have been documented in the target STIs or closely related organisms64. Molecular resistance 
testing will conducted at the San Francisco Chan- Zuckerberg Biohub under the supervision of collaborating 
investigator [CONTACT_269229], who has  extensive expertise in molecular diagnosis of mutations associated with 
antibiotic resistance. Any TCN -resistance mutations in C. trachomatis or T. pallidum will be inve stigated further, 
as clinically relevant tetracycline resistance has not been reported to date. The results will not be reported for use 
in clinical care as these methods are experimental and have not been validated for clinical care. 
 
6.6 Treatment of STIs  
Local clinic standards will be followed for the treatment of STIs diagnosed by [CONTACT_269211]. If doxycycline is used for treatment of an STI for an individual in the PEP arm, doxycycyline PEP 
will be held during treatment and resumed when treatment completed.  
 
6.7 Qualitative interviews  
A qualitative interview will be offered to a subset of participants assigned to take doxycycline, approximately 
20 per site, during months 3- 12, and up to one month after study completion. Qualitative interviews will also 
be offered to 10- 20 providers at each of the sites A separate consent will be provided for these interviews.   
 
6.8 Reenrollment of participants enrolled prior to  3/15/2020  
Participants enrolled prior to the COVID pandemic wil l be re- enrolled starting 7/2020 with the same initial 
assignment. At time of re -enrollment, these participants  will undergo all day 0 evaluations with the exception of 
the following  
• Meningoccal vaccine  history  
• Medical & STI  history  
• Stool sample collection from first 50 PLWH and HIV uninfected on  PrEP  
 
 
7 ADVERSE EVENTS (AE) AND STUDY MONITORING  
 
7.[ADDRESS_327458] been met:  
• All grade 2 and higher hematologic and hepatic laboratory abnormalities that are attributed to 
doxycycline in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_91382]  
• All AEs meeting SAE definition  
• All grade 3 and 4 adverse events judged to be associated with doxycycline (possibly, 
probably , or def initely  related)  
 
Serious Adverse Events (SAEs)  
An SAE is defined as any untoward medical occurrence that:  
• Results in death  
• Is life -threatening  
• Requires inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081] 
• Results in persistent or significant  disability/incapacity  
• Is an important medical event that may not be immediately life- threatening or result in death or 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
27  
 hospi[INVESTIGATOR_46182])  
 
All AEs that are recorded must have their severity graded. To grade AEs, sites should refer to the Division 
of AIDS Table for Grading the Severity of Adult and Pediatric Adverse Events (DAIDS AE Grading Table), 
corrected Version 2.1, Ju ly 2017, which can be found on the DAIDS RSC website at https://rsc.tec h- 
res.com/docs/default -source/safety/division -of-aids-(daids) -table -for-grading- the-severity -of-adult -and- 
pediatric -adverse- events -corrected -v-2-1.pdf  
 
7.[ADDRESS_327459] of the study through monthly summary reports of arms of accrual, and  
baseline characteristics  and quarterly  reports  of data pooled over treatment  arms  of data completeness, specimen 
collection, and AEs. The study will review individual participant -level safety data frequently to assess  the relation 
of all reported AEs to study  treatment.  On a monthly  basis,  the study  team  will review  by- arm summaries of 
premature study discontinuations and premature study treatment discontinuations (and reasons) and AEs.  
 
7.3.[ADDRESS_327460] will be monitored by [CONTACT_244733]. Monitors will visit participating clinical research sites  
to review  the individual  participant  records,  including consent  forms,  eCRFs,  supporting  data,  laboratory specimen 
records, and endpoints through laboratory and medical records (physicians’ progress notes, nurses’ notes, 
individuals’ hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1332]), to ensure protecti on of study participants, compliance with the protocol, and 
accuracy and completeness of records. The monitors also will inspect sites’ regulatory files to ensure that 
regulatory  requirements  are being followed  and sites’  pharmacies  to review  product  storage  and management.  
 
7.3.[ADDRESS_327461] (DSMB)  
An independent data safety and monitoring board (DSMB) will be convened for this study with expertise in STIs, 
PrEP, and HIV care and a biostatistician. The purpose of the DSMB is to monitor the study for operational futility, 
social harms, and efficacy. The DSMB will evaluate the progress of the project, including periodic assessments 
of accrual, retention, safety, performance and variation of the project sites, and other factors that  can affect 
project implementation. The DSMB will review the study after 1/[ADDRESS_327462]- protected closed reports of STI endpoints by [CONTACT_63615].  
  
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
28  
 8 CLINICAL MANAGEMENT  ISSUES 
 
8.1 Toxicity  
Only toxicities related to study medications provided through the study will be considered in the toxicity 
management section.  
 
Grade 1 or 2  
Participants who develop Grade 1 or 2 toxicity (per DAIDS toxicity table) felt to be related to doxycycyline may continue study treatment at the discretion of the site investigator with close follow -
up. If a participant chooses to discontinue study treatment, the site should notify the study  
protocol team within [ADDRESS_327463] all 
evaluations performed per the SOE.  
 
Grade 3  
• Participants who develop a Grade [ADDRESS_327464] doxycycline PEP withheld and the site should consult with the core protocol 
team. The participant should be reevaluated weekly until the AE returns to Grade ≤2, at which 
time study drug may be reintroduced at the discretion of the site investigator in consultation with 
the protocol  team.  
• Participants experiencing Grade [ADDRESS_327465] all evaluations performed per the  SOE.  
 
Grade 4  
• Participants  with Grade 4 asymptomatic  laboratory  abnormalities  may continue doxycycline  PEP 
if the site investigator has  compelling evidence that the toxicity is NOT related to study  drug.  
• Participants who develop a Grade [ADDRESS_327466] doxycycline PEP 
permanently discontinued and the site should notify study team within 72 hours.  
• Participants experiencing Grade [ADDRESS_327467] all evaluations performed per the 
SOE.  
•  
8.2 Specific Management of Toxicities Related to Study- Provided Drugs  
Possible intracranial hypertension  (IH) 
Participants taking doxycycline who report new or worsening headaches, visual changes , or vision  loss should 
have doxycycline temporarily discontinued and evaluated for IH if these symptoms persist, including a 
fundoscopic exam to look for papi[INVESTIGATOR_044]. If IH is ruled- out or an alternate etiology identified, doxycycline may 
be restarted, at the discretion of the site investigator.  
 
Skin erythema  
Increased photosensi tivity is a known possible side effect of doxycycline. Doxycycline may be discontinued if 
skin erythema develops at the discretion of the site investigator and may reinstituted when resolved at the discretion of the site investigation. Any serious skin reaction judged by [CONTACT_269212] .  
 
Fixed drug eruption  
Suspected fixed drug eruption should be evaluated for possible etiologies  – if a doxycycline fixed drug eruption 
is suspected, doxycycline should be stopped.  
 
Allergic  reactions  
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/[ADDRESS_327468] all evaluations performed per the SOE.  
 
 
9 CRITERIA FOR DISCONTINUATION  
 
9.1 Premature Study Treatment  Discontinuation  
 
• Requirement for prohibited concomitant medications or other contraindication to doxycycline  
• Occurrence of an adverse event requiring discontinuation of  doxycycline  
• Request by [CONTACT_269213]  
• Clinical reasons believed life threatening by [CONTACT_099], even if not addressed in the toxicity 
section of the protocol  
• Requirement for chronic tetracycline use ( >14  days)  
 
Participants who stop doxycycline PEP should be continued on study, off doxycycline PEP with 
continued evaluations as per the SOE. The reason for doxycycline discontinuation should be 
recorded.  
 
9.2 Premature Study  Discontinuation  
 
• Request by [CONTACT_108336]  
• Request of the primary care provider if she or he thinks the study is no longer in the best 
interest of the participant  
• Participant judged by [CONTACT_269214]  
• At the discretion of the IRB/EC, NIAID, Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP), other 
government agencies as part of their duties, investigator, or industry  supporter  
 
 
10 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
10.1 Outcome measures  
 
10.1.1  Primary  outcome : 
Combined incidence  of GC, CT, or early  syphilis infection  by [CONTACT_13754] - based diagnosis  (e.g.,  positive  GC or CT 
based on NAAT,  syphilis  based on four-fold increase in non- treponemal titers or positive darkfield on exudate 
from a lesion). Incident STI diagnoses will be ascertained through  the study  through  periodic  testing,  interim  visits  
for STI symptoms,  as well as STI surveilla nce from the San Francisco  and King County  Departments  of Health  
and by [CONTACT_269215].  
 
10.1.2  Secondary outcomes : 
• Safety of doxycycline PEP, measured by [CONTACT_269216] 3 and 4  AEs attributed to study medication.  
• Tolerability,  measured using a brief quarterly  questionnaire administered  to both intervention and control  groups  
evaluating side effects  commonly  associated  with doxycycline  as well as recording any discontinuations of 
doxycycline by [CONTACT_269217].  
• Acceptability,  assessed  through  a brief questionnaire for all PEP recipi[INVESTIGATOR_269186] 6 and 12 and 
in-depth structured qualitative interviews for a subset, conducted within 6 m onths of month 12 visit. A separate 
consent will be provided for the in- depth qualitative interview at the time of this interview.  
• Doxycycline coverage of sexual contacts in the prior 3 months,  ascertained by [CONTACT_269218] 9.0 5/27/2022  
30  
 use from the web-based app, augmented by [CONTACT_269219][INVESTIGATOR_67056].  
• Longitudinal  exposure  to doxcycyline  will be assessed using hair collection,  with a semiquantitive evaluation in 
the control arm (doxycycline present vs. absent) and in the PEP arm (doxycycline concentration high vs.  low). 
• Adherence to HIV medications as reflected in viral suppression among participants living with HIV, assessed 
by [CONTACT_269220].  
• Discontinuation of PrEP, based on  self-report  
• Residual hair samples of participants without HIV infection on PrEP  will be archived for future tenofovir testing 
to measure adherence to Truvada PrEP.  
 
10.2 Statistical power and analysis  
 
Primary  endpoint:  We selected a sample  size for each cohort  (MSM/TGW  living  with HIV and MSM/TGW  on 
PrEP) to achieve 80% power with 0.05 two- sided Type 1 error, for the endpoint of any lab- detected incident early  
syphilis,  GC and/or  CT infection,  based on quarterly  assessments  for each  person,  10% annual  loss to follow -up 
and an intra-class  correlation of 0.2, reflecting  the high prevalence of STI re-infection that has been observed in 
these populations. With these assumptions, a cohort of approximately 390 of MSM/TGW living with HIV and 390 
of MSM/TGW on PrEP (130 in the control and 260 in the intervention for each cohort) will pr ovide 80% power to 
detect a decrease in quarterly STI prevalence from 10% to 5%, which corresponds to an annual reduction in 
combined STI incidence  from 34% to 19% (Table 10.2.1) . With allowance for 10% lost to follow- up, the sample 
size for each cohort wi ll be approximately [ADDRESS_327469]  in the control  arm in 
each quarter approximately 5% of participants to have GC, 5% CT and 2% early syphilis, acknowledging some 
will be diagnosed with more than one infection. Based on the higher susceptibility of GC to TCN in the US vs 
[LOCATION_009] (75% vs < 50%11, 20) and t he 70% reduction of CT and syphilis with PEP in IPERGAY ,1 we anticipate  
effectiveness  of doxycycline  PEP to be 35% for GC, 65% for CT and 65% for syphilis.  Given  these assumptions,  
with a 2:[ADDRESS_327470] infections  and 19 vs 13 syphilis 
infections in the doxycycline PEP and control arms respectively, some of which will occur in the same individuals. 
Sample sizes were computed using nQuery for repeated measures for two pr oportions.  The analysis  will compare  
time-averaged  proportion  of infections  in each  quarter  between  arms, using repeated measure  methods.  
 
Table 10.2.1:  Power Table for N = 390; 2:1 randomization doxycycline PEP: SOC. Sample size 
assumes [ADDRESS_327471] 50% reduction  Power to detect 65% reduction  
ICC = 0.2  ICC = 0.1  ICC = 0.2  ICC = 0.1  
10% 5% 80% 87% 96% 99% 
7.5%  3.75%  68% 76% 90% 95% 
5% 2.5%  51% 59% 77% 85% 
3% 1.5%  35% 41% 57% 65% 
2% 1% 26% 30% 43% 50% 
 
 
  
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
31  
 Within the total enrollment of 780, we will not require the enrollment of HIV -infected and uninfected participants 
to be equal. Anticipating the possibility of lower enrollment but possibility of equivalent or  higher STI rates in the 
HIV-infected cohort, Table 10.2.2 assesses the power characteristics of the study with a cohort that contributes 
from 30% to 50% of the total enrolled, with quarterly events rates of 10% and 12%. With a higher event rate or 
a lower intracl ass correlation, the smaller cohort ret ains reasonable power to detect a 50% reduction.  
 
 
Table 10.2.2 : Power characteristics for reduced sample size in a cohort, assuming event rate of 10% 
and 12% STIs occurring each quarter in SOC arm  
 
Total Evaluable  
sample size in cohort  ICC Doxy: SOC  Power to detect 
50% reduction  
(10% in SOC)  Power to detect 
50% reduction  
(12% in SOC)  
370 (50% of total)  0.1 246:123  87% 92% 
370 0.2 246:123  80% 86% 
296 (40% of total)  0.1 196:98  79% 86% 
296  0.2 196:98  71% 78% 
259 (35% of total)  0.1 174:87  74% 82% 
259 0.2 174:87  66% 74% 
222 (30% of total)  0.1 148:74  68% 76% 
222 0.2 148:74  60% 67% 
 
 
Secondary  endpoints  include evaluation of PEP effectiveness  on incidence of each specific  STI and on time to  
first STI, as well as by [CONTACT_269221]  (oral,  rectal,  urethral).  Impact  of risk practices  and sexual  activity on STI 
incidence will be compared between arms. Survey data will be analyzed to understand factors impacting 
acceptability of doxycycline PEP, including demographic factors, socioeconom ic status, substance use, history 
of STI s, HIV infection status, and experience with PEP. The qualitative interviews will be coded using inductive 
(i.e., codes arise from careful reading of the text) and deductive (i.e. , codes arise a priori from topi[INVESTIGATOR_269187]) approaches, which when employed together have proven useful  in health services research.  
Interviews  will be coded by [CONTACT_269222] a selection  of transcripts  
until >90%  agreement  is reached.  Dedoose,  a web-based program,  will be  used  to facilitate  indexing,  coding,  and 
searching.  The qualitative  team  will meet  regularly  to group  codes into categories and develop major and minor  
themes.  
 For resistance we will assess the proportion with tetracycline resistance in visits with N. gonorrheae and S. 
aureus . Exploratory endpoints include incidence of tetracycline resistance in C. trachomatis and T. pallidum 
using molecular techniques (e.g., CRISPR and CAS -9), for which the molec ular technologies are new and the 
clinical significance of resistance mutations is less clear. Stool samples from 50 participants living with HIV and 
50 participants on PrEP will be obtained at baseline, 6 and 12 months for metagenomic evaluation targeting TCN 
genes.  Overall  TCN resistance  gene abundance  (expressed as dpM/patient)  and the number of distinct TCN 
resistance genes present per participant will be assessed at baseline and evaluated for change over time during 
doxycycline use. Rectal swabs will be collected and stored for future evaluation of shifts  in the fecal  microbiome,  
decrease in flora diversity,  and quantification of TCN-resistant  abundance and diversity  
 
 
10.3 Endpoint  adjudication  
All STI endpoints will be reviewed by a blinded, independent Endpoint Adjudication Committee, following CDC 
guidelines for the diagnosis of STIs .52 Incidence of individual STIs and tetracycline resistance will also be 
evaluated.  
 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/[ADDRESS_327472] COVID  follow -up 
The team  will monitor  discontinuation rates  in the participants  enrolled prior to the COVID  epi[INVESTIGATOR_901]  (3/15/2020). 
If there is a differe ntial discontinuation in the active vs. control arm, this will be di scussed with DSMB and the 
team statistician with consideration of additional  enrollments to ensure adequate power for the primary endpoint.  
 
10.5 Analyses after  5/13/2022 closure to enrollment  
Analyses after 5/13/2022 closure to enrollment and doxycycline provision to control  will include the following : 
 
STI incidence :  
- Comparison of STI incidence per quarter in control arm before and after doxycycline initiation 
- Comparison of STI incidence per quarter in all participants receiving doxycycline (including those in 
control arm after rolled over to receive doxycycline) compa red to incidence on control arm prior to 
doxycycline roll over  
 
Antimicrobial r esistance  
- Evaluation of tetracycline resistance in Staphylococcus  aureus , commensal Neisseria  in comparison 
to the control arm and to individual baseline  
- Evaluation of genotypic or phenotypic tetracycline resistance in bacterial STI s in all participants who 
receive doxycycline compared to control arm participants, prior to receipt of doxycycline.  
- Evaluation of changes in the gut microbiome and total gut bu rden of tetracycline resistance before and 
after taking doxycycline PEP  
 
Adherence  
- Evaluation of doxycycline coverage of qualifying sex before and after study closure 5/13/[ADDRESS_327473] (IRB)  Review 
The study protocol, site- specific informed consent forms, participant education and recruitment materials, and 
other requested documents —including any subsequent modifications —will be reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_269223], as the single IRB of record r esponsible for oversight of research conducted at the study sites. 
Subsequent to initial review and approval, the UCSF IRB will review the study at least annually.  
 
11.[ADDRESS_327474] will be documented in the participant’s record. Electronic consenting will 
be an option to reduce face to face exposure during the COVID epi[INVESTIGATOR_901].  
 
11.[ADDRESS_327475] operating procedure for confidentiality protection. Each site will ensure 
that study records including administrative documentation and regulatory documentation as well as documentation related to each participant enrolled in the study, including informed consent forms, locator forms, 
case report  forms, notations of all contacts with the participant, and all other source documents are stored in a 
secure manner.  
 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
33  
 11.4 Confidentiality  
Participants’ study information will not be released without their written permission, except as necessary for 
oversight by: 
- The Protocol co- Chairs or designees  
- Study  funders  
- University of [LOCATION_004], San Francisco IRB 
- University of Washington  IRB 
 
All laboratory  specimens,  evaluation forms,  reports,  and other  records  that leave the site will be identified by 
[CONTACT_163425]. The exceptions are STI testing results which are 
subject  to local and state  reporting which  is names -based.  Local  public  health may contact  [CONTACT_269224] e and partner notification. Participants will be informed prior 
to STI testing that results are reportable and may lead to contact [CONTACT_269225]. In addition, GC culture specimens will be evaluated for drug resistance as part of an existing GC 
program evaluating clinical isolates and may contain patient identifiers such as MRN, name [CONTACT_269227], according to local laboratory requirements and practice.  
 
All records  will be kept locked.  All computer  entry  and networking programs  will be done with coded numbers only. 
Clinical information will not be released without written permission of the participant, except as necessary for monitoring by [CONTACT_1201]/EC, NIAID, OHRP, other local, US, and international r egulatory entities as part of their 
duties, or the industry supporters or  designees.  
 
 
[ADDRESS_327476] be 
transported using packaging mandated by [CONTACT_44321] 42 Part 72. Please refer to instructions detailed in the 
International Air Transport Association (IATA) Dangerous Goods Regulations.  
  
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/[ADDRESS_327477] sex with men: an open -label randomised substudy of the ANRS IPERGAY trial. 
Lancet Infect Dis, 2017.  
 
2. CDC, Sexually Transmitted Disease Surveillance 2016. 2017.  
 
3. Volk, J.E., J.L. Marcus, T. Phengrasamy, D. Blechinger, D.P. Nguyen, S. Follansbee, and C.B. 
Hare, No New HIV Infections With Increasing Use of HIV Preexposure Prophylaxis in a Clinical 
Practice Setting. Clin Infect Dis, 2015. 61 (10): p.  1601- 3. 
 
4. Montano, M.A., J.C. Dombroski, L.A. Barbee, M.R. Golden, and C.M. Khosropour. Changes in 
sexual behavior and STI diagnoses among MSM using PrEP in Seattle, WA (Abstract #979) . in 
Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections (CROI) . 2018. [LOCATION_011],  MA. 
 
5. Oliver, S.E., M. Aubin, L. Atwell, J. Matthias, A. Cope, V. Mobley, A. G oode, S. Minnerly, J.  Stoltey,  
H.M. Bauer, R.R. Hennessy, D. DiOrio, R.N. Fanfair, T.A. Peterman, and L. Markowitz, Ocular 
Syphilis - Eight Jurisdictions, [LOCATION_002], 2014 -2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep, 2016. 
65(43): p. 1185 -1188.  
 
6. Bowen, V., J. Su, E . Torrone, S. Kidd, and H. Weinstock, Increase in incidence of congenital 
syphilis - [LOCATION_002], 2012- 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep, 2015. 64(44): p.  1241 -5. 
 
7. Cunningham, S.D., G. Olthoff, P. Burnett, A.M. Rompalo, and J.M. Ellen, Evidence of heterosexual 
bridging among syphilis‐positive men who have sex with men. Sexually Transmitted Infections, 
2006. 82(6): p.  444-445. 
 
8. Wi, T., M.M. Lahra, F. Ndowa, M. Bala, J. -A.R. Dillon, P. Ramon -Pardo, S.R. Eremin, G. Bolan,  and 
M. Unemo, Antimicrobial resistance in Neisseria gonorrhoeae: Global surveillance and a call for 
international collaborative action. PLOS Medicine, 2017. 14(7): p. e1002344.  
 
9. Gianecini, R., C. Oviedo, G. Stafforini, and P. Galarza, Neisseria gonorrhoeae Resistant to 
Ceftriaxone and Cefixime, Argentina. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2016. 22 (6): p.  1139 -1141.  
 
10. Camara, J., J. Serra, J. Ayats, T. Bastida, D. Carnicer -Pont, A. Andreu, and C. Ardanuy, Molecular 
characterization of two high- level ceftriaxone -resistant Neisseria gonorrhoeae isolates detected in 
Catalonia, Spain. J Antimicrob Chemother, 2012. 67 (8): p.  1858- 60. 
 
11. Kirkcaldy, R.D., A. Harvey, J.R. Papp, C. Del Rio, O.O. Soge, K.K. Holmes, E.W . Hook, 3rd, G. 
Kubin, S. Riedel, J. Zenilman, K. Pettus, T. Sanders, S. Sharpe, and E. Torrone, Neisseria gonorrhoeae Antimicrobial Susceptibility Surveillance -  The Gonococcal Isolate Surveillance 
Project, 27 Sites, [LOCATION_002], 2014. MMWR Surveill Sum m, 2016. 65 (7): p.  1-19. 
 
12. BBC. 'World's worst' super -gonorrhoea man cured. 2018 4/26/2018]; Available from:  
http://www.bbc.com/news/health- 43840505 . 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
35  
 13. Lahra, M.M., N. Ryder, and D.M. Whiley, A new multidrug- resistant strain of Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
in Australia. N Engl J Med, 2014. 371 (19): p.  1850- 1. 
 
14. Cohen, M.S., I.F. Hoffman, R.A. Royce, P. Kazembe, J.R. Dyer, C.C. Daly, D. Zimba, P.L. 
Vernazza, M. Maida, S.A. Fiscus, and J.J. Eron, Jr., Reduction of concentration of HIV -1 in semen 
after treatment of urethritis: implications for prevention of sexual transmission of HIV -1. AIDSCAP 
Malawi Research Group. Lancet, 1997. 349 (9069): p.  1868- 73. 
 
15. Schacker, T., A.J . Ryncarz, J. Goddard, K. Diem, M. Shaughnessy, and L. Corey, Frequent 
recovery of HIV -1 from genital herpes simplex virus lesions in HIV -1-infected men. JAMA, 1998. 
280(1): p.  61-6. 
 
16. CDC. Understanding the HIV Care Continuum . 2017; Available from:  
https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/library/factsheets/cdc -hiv-care- continuum.pdf . 
 
17. The Lancet, H., U=U taking off in 2017. Lancet HIV, 2017. 4 (11): p. e475.  
 
18. Harrison, W.O., R.R. Hooper, P.J. Wiesner, A.F. Campbell, W.W. Karney, G.H. Reynolds, O.G. 
Jones, and K.K. Holmes, A trial of minocycline given after exposure to prevent gonorrhea. N Engl J 
Med, 1979. 300(19): p.  1074- 8. 
 
19. Steen, R., M. Chersich, A. Gerbase , G. Neilsen, A. Wendland, F. Ndowa, E.A. Akl, Y.R. Lo,  and 
S.J. de Vlas, Periodic presumptive treatment of curable sexually transmitted infections among sex 
workers: a systematic review. Aids, 2012. 26(4): p. [ADDRESS_327478], B. Bercot, E. Cambau, C. Semaille, and P. Sednaoui, Gonococcal 
infections and emergence of gonococcal decreased susceptibility to cephalosporins in [LOCATION_009],  2001 
to 2012. Euro Surveill, 2014.  19(34). 
 
21. Molina, J.M., I. Charreau, C. Chidiac, G. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_269188], E. Cua, C. Delaugerre, C. Capi[INVESTIGATOR_053], D. Rojas - 
Castro, J. Fonsart, B. Bercot, C. Bebear, L. Cotte, O. Robineau, F. Raffi, P. Charbonneau, A.  Aslan,  
J. Chas, L. Niedbalski, B. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_1312], L. Sagaon -Teyssier, D. Carette, S.L. Mestre, V. Dore, and L. 
Meyer. Supplement to: Molina J M, Charreau I, Chidiac C, et al. Post -exposure prophylaxis with 
doxycycline to prevent sexually transmitted infections in men who have sex with men: an open- label 
randomised substudy of the ANRS IPERGAY trial. Lancet Infect Dis 2017. 2017; Available from:  
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1473309917307259?via%3Dihub#sec1 . 
 
22. Bolan, R.K., M.R. Beymer, R.E. Weiss, R.P. Flynn, A.A. Leibowit z, and J.D. Klausner, Doxycycline 
prophylaxis to reduce incident syphilis among HIV -infected men who have sex with men who 
continue to engage in high- risk sex: a randomized, controlled pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Sex Transm Dis, 2015. 
42(2): p.  98-103. 
 
23. Gaillard, T., M. Madamet, and B. Pradines, Tetracyclines in malaria. Malar J, 2015. 14: p. 445. 
 
24. van Zuuren, E.J. and Z. Fedorowicz, Interventions for rosacea: abridged updated Cochrane 
systematic review including GRADE assessments. Br J Dermatol, 2015. 17 3(3): p.  651-62. 
 
25. Bienenfeld, A., A.R. Nagler, and S.J. Orlow, Oral Antibacterial Therapy for Acne Vulgaris: An 
Evidence- Based Review. Am J Clin Dermatol, 2017. 18 (4): p.  469-490. 
 
26. Sloan, B. and N. Scheinfeld, The use and safety of doxycycline hyclate and other second-  
generation tetracyclines. Expert Opin Drug Saf, 2008. 7 (5): p.  571-7. 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
36  
 27. Turner, R.B., C.B. Smith, J.L. Martello, and D. Slain, Role of doxycycline in Clostridium difficile 
infection acquisition. Ann Pharmacother, 2014. 48 (6): p.  772-6. 
 
28. Tariq, R., J. Cho, S. Kapoor, R. Orenstein, S. Singh, D.S. Pardi, and S. Khanna, Low Risk of 
Primary Clostridium difficile Infection With Tetracyclines: A Systematic Review and Metaanalysis. 
Clin Infect Dis, 2018. 66(4): p.  514-522. 
 
29. Doernberg, S.B., L.G. Winston, D.H. Deck, and H.F. Chambers, Does doxycycline protect against 
development of Clostridium difficile infection? Clin Infect Dis, 2012. 55(5): p.  615-20. 
 
30. Khanna, S., Do tetracyclines have the potential to reduce the risk of Cl ostridium difficile  infection?  
Expert Review of Anti -infective Therapy, 2018: p. 1- 3. 
 
31. Magnuson, H.J., H. Eagle, and R. Fleischman, The minimal infectious inoculum of Spi[INVESTIGATOR_269189] (Nichols  strain) and a consideration of its rate of multiplication in vivo. Am J Syph Gonorrhea 
Vener Dis, 1948. 32(1): p.  1-18. 
 
32. Cumberland, M.C. and T.B. Turner, The rate of multiplication of Treponema pallidum in normal and 
immune rabbits. Am J Syph Gonorrhea V ener Dis, 1949. 33(3): p.  201-12. 
 
33. Lafond, R.E. and S.A. Lukehart, Biological basis for syphilis. Clin Microbiol Rev, 2006. 19(1): p. 29 - 
49. 
 
34. Nadelman, R.B., J. Nowakowski, D. Fish, R.C. Falco, K. Freeman, D. McKenna, P. Welch, R. 
Marcus, M.E. Aguero- Rosenfeld, D.T. Dennis, and G.P. Wormser, Prophylaxis with single -dose 
doxycycline for the prevention of Lyme disease after an Ixodes scapularis tick bite.  N Engl J Med, 
2001. 345(2): p.  79-84. 
 
35. Levett, P.N., Leptospi[INVESTIGATOR_269176]. Clin Microbiol Rev, 2001. 14 (2): p.  296-326. 
 
36. Schneider, M.C., J. Velasco- Hernandez, K.D. Min, D.G. Leonel, D. Baca- Carrasco, M.E.  Gompper,  
R. Hartskeerl, and C. Munoz -Zanzi, The Use of C hemoprophylaxis after Floods to Reduce the 
Occurrence and Impact of Leptospi[INVESTIGATOR_269190]. Int J Environ Res Public Health, 2017. 14 (6). 
 
37. Burkot, T.R., J. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_269191], and R.A. Wirtz, Quantitation of the Borrelia burgdorferi outer surface protein A in Ixodes  scapularis: fluctuations during the tick life cycle, doubling times, and loss while 
feeding. J Infect Dis, 1994. 170 (4): p.  883-9. 
 
38. Wanninger, S., M. Donati, A. Di [LOCATION_009]sco, M. Hässig, K. Hoffmann, H.M.B. Seth -Smith, H. Marti, 
and N. Borel, Selective Pressure Promotes Tetracycline Resistance of Chlamydia Suis in Fattening 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_14107]. PLOS ONE, 2016. 11(11): p.  e0166917.  
 
39. Dugan, J., D.D. Rockey, L. Jones, and A.A. Andersen, Tetracycline resis tance in Chlamydia suis 
mediated by [CONTACT_269226] -like gene. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother, 2004. 48(10): p.  3989- 95. 
 
40. Mirajkar, N.S., P.R. Davies, and C.J. Gebhart, Antimicrobial Susceptibility Patterns of Brachyspi[INVESTIGATOR_269192]. J Clin Microbiol, 2016. 54(8): p.  2109 -19. 
 
41. Centurion- Lara, A., C. Castro, W.C. van Voorhis, and S.A. Lukehart, Two 16S -23S ribosomal DNA 
intergenic regions in different Treponema pallidum subspecies cont ain tRNA genes. FEMS 
Microbiol Lett, 1996. 143 (2-3): p.  235-40. 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
37  
 42. Mitchell, S.J., J. Engelman, C.K. Kent, S.A. Lukehart, C. Godornes, and J.D. Klausner, 
Azithromycin -resistant syphilis infection: San Francisco, [LOCATION_004], [ADDRESS_327479] Dis, 
2006. 42(3): p.  337-45. 
 
43. Stamm, L.V., Global challenge of antibiotic -resistant Treponema pallidum. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother, 2010. 54(2): p.  583-9. 
 
44. Lucet, J. -C. and B. Regnier, Screening and Decolonization: Does Methicillin- Susceptible 
Staphylococcus aureus Hold Lessons for Methicillin- Resistant S. aureus? Clinical Infectious 
Diseases, 2010. 51 (5): p.  585-590. 
 
45. Stevens, D.L., A.L. Bisno, H.F. Chambers, E.P. Dellinger, E.J. Goldst ein, S.L. Gorbach, J.V. 
Hirschmann, S.L. Kaplan, J.G. Montoya, J.C. Wade, and A. Infectious Diseases Society of, Practice 
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of skin and soft tissue infections: [ADDRESS_327480] Dis, 2014. 59(2): p.  e10-52. 
 
46. Jakobsson, H.E., C. Jernberg, A.F. Andersson, M. Sjölund- Karlsson, J.K. Jansson, and L. 
Engstrand, Short -Term Antibiotic Treatment Has Differing Long -Term Impacts on the Human Throat 
and Gut Microbiome. PLOS ONE, 2010. 5(3): p.  e9836.  
 
47. Shanahan,  F., The colonic  microbiota  in health  and disease.  Curr Opin  Gastroenterol,  2013.  29(1): 
p. 49-54. 
 
48. Blaser, M.J., The Past and Future Biology of the Human Microbiome in an Age of Extincti ons. Cell, 
2018. 172(6): p.  [ADDRESS_327481] 
gonorrhoea in New Zealand: a retrospective case- control study. Lancet, 2017. 390([ZIP_CODE]): p.  1603-  
1610.  
 
50. ACIP. Recommended Immunization Schedule for Adults Aged 19 Years or Older, [LOCATION_002], 
2018. 2018; Available from:  https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/imz/adult.html#f10 . 
 
51. Taylor -Robinson, D. and J.S. Jensen, Mycoplasma genitali um: from Chrysalis to multicolored 
butterfly. Clin Microbiol Rev, 2011. 24 (3): p.  498-514. 
 
52. Workowski, K.A., G.A. Bolan, C. Centers for Disease, and Prevention, Sexually transmitted 
diseases treatment guidelines, 2015. MMWR Recomm Rep, 2015. 64(RR -03): p.  1-137. 
 
53. Mena, L.A., T.F. Mroczkowski, M. Nsuami, and D.H. Martin, A randomized comparison of 
azithromycin and doxycycline for the treatment of Mycoplasma genitalium -positive urethritis in men. 
Clin Infect Dis, 2009. 48(12): p.  1649- 54. 
 
54. Schwebke, J.R., A. Rompalo, S. Taylor, A.C. Sena, D.H. Martin, L.M. Lopez, S. Lensing, and J.Y. 
Lee, Re-evaluating the treatment of nongonococcal urethritis: emphasizing emerging pathogens --a 
randomized clinical trial. Clin Infect Dis, 2011. 52(2): p.  163-70. 
 
55. Cho, I., S. Yamanishi, L. Cox, B.A. Methe, J. Zavadil, K. Li, Z. Gao, D. Mahana, K. Raju, I.  Teitler,  
H. Li, A.V. Alekseyenko, and M.J. Blaser, Antibiotics in early life alter the murine colonic 
microbiome and adiposity. Nature, 2012. 488 (7413): p. 621- 6. 
DoxyPEP protocol Ver 9.0 5/27/2022  
38  
 56. Angelakis, E., M. Million, S. Kankoe, J.C. Lagier, F. Armougom, R. Giorgi, and D. Raoult, Abnormal 
weight gain and gut microbiota modifications are side effects of long- term doxycycline and 
hydroxychloroquine treatment. Antimicrob Agents Chemot her, 2014. 58 (6): p.  3342- 7. 
 
57. Lane, J.A., L.J. Murray, I.M. Harvey, J.L. Donovan, P. Nair, and R.F. Harvey, Randomised clinical 
trial: Helicobacter pylori eradication is associated with a significantly increased body mass index in 
a placebo- controlled study. Aliment Pharmacol Ther, 2011. 33(8): p.  922-9. 
 
58. Kamada, T., J. Hata, H. Kusunoki, M. Ito, S. Tanaka, Y. Kawamura, K . Chayama, and K. Haruma, 
Eradication of Helicobacter pylori increases the incidence of hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_269193]. Dig Liver Dis, 2005. 37(1): p.  39-43. 
 
59. Angelakis, E., N. Armstrong, C. Nappez, M. Richez, E. Chabriere, and D. Raoult, Doxycycline 
assay hair samples for testing long- term compliance treatment. Journal of Infection, 2015. 71 (5): p. 
511-517. 
 
60. Geisler, W.M., W.D. Koltun, N. Abdelsayed, J. Burigo, L. Mena, S.N. Taylor, B.E. Batteiger, A.R. Thurman, I.I.I.E.W. Hook, T.A. Vaughn, M.P. Annett, R.A. Muenzen, and J. Caminis, Safety and 
Efficacy of WC2031 Versus Vibramycin for the Treatment of Uncomplicated Urogenital Chlamydia 
trachomatis Infection: A  Randomized, Double- blind, Double- Dummy, Active -Controlled, Multi center 
Trial. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 2012. 55 (1): p.  82-88. 
 
61. FDA. 505(b)(2) Efficacy Supplement, Resubmission/Class [ADDRESS_327482] 4/1/2019]; 
Available from:  https://www.fda.gov/m edia/[ZIP_CODE]/download.  
 
62. Lexicomp, Doxycycline (Lexi -Drugs)  2019.  
 
63. Mayne. Doxycycline Prescribing information 1/5/2019]; Available from:  
https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/getFile.cfm?setid=54ce5887 -5e72 -4d7a -a821 - 
936dd3ffa68c&type=pdf&name=54ce5887 -5e72- 4d7a- a821- 936dd3ffa68c  
 
64. Jia, B., A.R. Raphenya, B.  Alcock, N. Waglechner, P. Guo, K.K. Tsang, B.A. Lago, B.M. Dave, S. 
Pereira, A.N. Sharma, S. Doshi, M. Courtot, R. Lo, L.E. Williams, J.G. Frye, T. Elsayegh, D.  Sardar,  
E.L. Westman, A.C. Pawlowski, T.A. Johnson, F.S. Brinkman, G.D. Wright, and A.G. McArt hur, 
CARD 2017: expansion and model -centric curation of the comprehensive antibiotic resistance 
database. Nucleic Acids Res, 2017. 45 (D1): p. D566 -D573.  