(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 1 of 11 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  9-2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  02/10/2020  
 
 
 
 
 
Title of Protocol : Inner Engineering Online (IEO) Intervention for a Specific Company 
Employee Program  
 
NCT Number : NCT0412656 4 
 
Document Date: February  10, 2020 
 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 2 of 11 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  9-2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  02/10/2020  
 
 
PART B  
STUDY DESCRIPTION  
 
TITLE OF PROTOCOL  Inner Engineering Online (IEO) Intervention for a Specific Company Employee 
Program  
Principal Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_193818], MD MPH  
 
 
B1. PURPOSE OF PROTOCOL  
The purpose of this study is to determine th e effects of a we b based intervention called “ Inner Engineering Online 
(IEO) ” on the burnout states, stress and overall well -being  of employees in a company .  
 
The specific aims include:  
1. To test feasibility and acceptance of IEO through assessment of parti cipation, compliance, protocol 
adherence & study satisfaction.  
2. To quantitatively assess the effects of IEO on measures of Burnout, Stress & well -being among the 
participating employees.  
3. To determine the ef fect of IEO on measures of well -being among control  employees after they cross over 
to the intervention group at the end of first phase.  
 
 
B2. SIGNIFICANCE AND BACKGROUND FOR THE STUDY  
Burnout is described as a syndrome resulting from chronic workplace stress that has not been successfully 
managed. It is characterized by [CONTACT_193821], depersonalization, and reduced professional efficacy.[ADDRESS_230247] evaluated interventions that are aimed at identifying and ameliorating burnout, or components of burnout 
such as high stress and sleep disturbances. 2-4 Meditation, specifically, has shown to be an accessible and efficient 
method for combating stress, burnout, and promoting a sense of well -being.5 
 
Inner Engineering Online (IEO) is a web  based intervention administered by [CONTACT_193822], a not -for-profit, 
global, volunteer -based organization. IEO is widely practiced around the globe, but lacks a systematic evidence 
base. The Inner Engineering Online program is a holistic tool for promoting well -being that teaches individuals 
how to mindfully and eff ectively respond to daily stressors using yogic sciences. The program offers guided 
meditation and yoga practices to promote harmonizing mind -body -emotion and energy of the individual while 
simultaneously promoting mindfulness, joy, and vitality.[ADDRESS_230248] 
that practice of Inner Engineering medi tation may be a pragmatic treatment for stress reduction.6  
 
S2Tech is  a reputed company providing Information Technology (IT) support to businesses in 35 states of United 
States of America for over 22 years. The company is looking to promote mindfulness a nd combat burn out and 
stress in its employees while voluntarily  supporting research studies assessing these markers.  The Company is 
offering the  standalone  Inner Engineering Online (IEO) course from Isha foundation for all its interested 
employees  primari ly to combat stress . While the participants are encouraged to participate in this study , research 
participation is entirely optional for the participants  and will not impact their relationship with their employees in 
any form . The primary purpose is for th e company to offer programs to combat stress and research is optional.  
 
In this randomized controlled trial , differences in overall stress, burnout and wellbeing will be assessed for 
employees participating in IEO, an online mind -body course that incorpora tes both meditation and yoga.  
 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 3 of 11 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  9-2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  02/10/2020  
 
 
The following specific aims are to be accomplished via this study:  
• Specific Aim 1:  To test the feasibility and acceptance of Inner Engineering Online through assessment of 
participation, compliance, protocol adherence and st udy satisfaction.  
• Specific Aim 2:  To quantitatively assess the effect of IEO on measures of burnout, stress, and well -being 
among study participants.  
• Specific Aim 3:  To determine the effect of IEO on measures of well-being  among the control -group after 
they cross -over to the intervention group at the end of first phase.  
 
The study will be conducted in [ADDRESS_230249] phase will accomplish specific aims 1 and 2, while specific aim 3 
will be accomplished in the second phase.  
 
References:  
1. WHO. Burn -out an “occupational phenomenon”: International Classification of Diseases [Internet]. 2019 
May 28. Available from:  https://www.who.int/mental_health/evidence/burn -out/en/   
2. Shioata MN, Keltn er D, John OP. Positive Emotion Dispositions DifferentiallyAssociated with Big Five 
Personality and Attachment Style. The Journal of Positive Psychology. 2006. 1(2): p. 61 -71.  
3. Ryan RM, Frederick C. On Energy, Personality, and Health: Subjective Vitality a s a Dynamic Reflection of 
Well -Being. Journal of Personality, 1997. 65(3): p. 529 -565.   
4. Ryan RM, Deci E. To Be Happy or To Be Self -Fulfilled: A Review of Research on Hedonic and Eudaimonic 
Well -Being. Annual Review of Psychology. Fiske S. Editor. 2001. An nual Reviews: Palo Alto. CA. p. 141 -166.  
5. Zeidan F, Johnson S, Diamond B et al. Mindfulness meditation improves cognition: Evidence of brief 
mental training. Consciousness and Cognition. 2010. 19(2) p: [ADDRESS_230250], Bauer S, Chopra D et al. Effects of Shambhavi Mahamudra Kriya, a Multicomponent Breath -
Based Yogic Practice (Pranayama), on Perceived Stress and General Well -Being. Journal of Evidence -Based 
Complementary & Alternative Medicine. 2017: p. 1 -10. 
 
  
 
 
 
B3. DESCRIPTION OF RESEARCH P ROTOCOL  
A. Study Design – Overview, Methods, Procedures  
 
Study Overview:  
 
This study involves evaluation of  the effects of Inner Engineering Online (IEO) intervention by [CONTACT_193823] -being in the form of a survey  to company 
employees participating in the study . 
 
In order to evaluate this, we randomize the participants into either of the two groups: one who  
participate in the IEO activities daily for the first [ADDRESS_230251] 30 days.  We then evaluate stress and burnout along with measures of well - 
being in these participants using validated electronic instruments at baseline and at the end of the 30 
days. This is phase 1 of the study.  
 
For the phas e 2, we cross -over the group 2 participants and provide them with the IEO intervention. We 
follow them through another 30 days and then evaluate measures of stress, burnout and well -being 
using validated instruments at the end of these 30 days.  
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 4 of 11 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  9-2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  02/10/2020  
 
 
 
Enrollmen t: 
 
The recruitment is done by [CONTACT_941] S2Tech company using flyers  for advertisements at the company. The 
recruitment process also involves  awareness campaigns,  word of mouth announcements as well as 
advertising flyers on the social media and official websites  of the company.   
The research team sends a public survey link , where participants can confirm their interest in the 
study and get detailed information of the study procedures  after the company recruits potential 
participants during awareness campaigns or ganized by [CONTACT_7904] .  
If they are interested in participating after receiving the email, they will be directed to REDCap where 
they will be asked a few screening questions to ensure study eligibility. Participants who are eligible 
will then be directed to an electronic consent form.  
Randomization:  
Participants will be randomized into one of the two groups using [Simple Randomization Technique ] 
by [CONTACT_61604]. Participants will be randomized into:  
1. Intervention Group: Participants will receive the Inner Enginee ring Online Intervention for a total 
of 30 days (4 weeks)  
2. Control Group: Participants will read a book/journal of their choice for 25 minutes each day for a 
total of 30 days (4 weeks)      
 
 
Study Procedure:  
 
We will be administering a brief survey to willi ng participants after they provide electronic consent. If 
a participant decides to participate, they will receive a paper survey to complete, or they can 
complete the survey online via an anonymous REDCap survey link.  
The Isha Foundation (which is responsi ble for the Inner Engineering Online Course) has agreed to 
send participants an email which contains detailed instruction s on how to perform the IEO 
intervention after the electronic consent has been signed. The Isha Foundation receives the 
participating e mployee emails from the company , as they are the primary instructors for the 
intervention.  
Subjects will be randomized following the consent into two groups.  
Group 1  will be asked to complete the Inner Engineering Online course which includes completing 7  
meditation and yoga course modules in a duration of 30 days. They will be given an IEO activity diary 
and will be asked to keep a track of their progress. The activity diary will be collected from them on a 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 5 of 11 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  9-2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  02/10/2020  
 
 
weekly basis for 30 days.  
After 4 weeks (i.e., 30 days) they will be administered the same set of survey questionnaires which 
was asked before the intervention was administered. All communications will be conducted 
electronically or via phone.  
Group [ADDRESS_230252] online submission or a 
scanned copy to be uploaded and sent to a redcap survey link at the end of each week. In order to 
account for national holidays and personal circumstances, p articipants may  submit their activity 
diaries and/or reading logs within 2 weeks of the 30 day  and 60 day  time point .   
30 day Follow Up:  
We aim to follow up wit h the participants after [ADDRESS_230253] group 2 
will receive these follow up surveys at 30 days after their study period  completion  (i.e. at 9 0 day time 
point).  
These follow up surveys include the baseline surveys, i .e. the same set of questionnaires administered as 
a pa rt of the study. In addition, a  set of compliance questions aimed at collecting i nformation on 
whether or not  IEO was practiced post the study period and its perceived effectiveness in participant’s 
life with possible reasons for non -compliance are  include d in this follow up questionnaire.  
 
Final Survey:  
 
These surveys are being sent out after the study  analysis  has been completed and aim’s to look at long 
term compliance to (IEO) intervention and its impact on the participants  lives . The survey captures bo th 
qualitative and quantitative data on how the study has impacted their lives and provides information on 
the study acceptance.  
   
Questionnaires:  
 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 6 of 11 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  9-2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  02/10/2020  
 
 
The following questionnaires are incorporated into the study survey and will be administered to the 
study p articipants at the aforementioned time points.  
 
Mindfulness Attention Awareness Scale (MAAS):  
MAAS is a 15 question validated instrument that assesses mindfulness and attention while performing 
routine activities of daily living. Participants are asked to rate on a scale of 1 (Almost Always) to 6 
(Almost Never) to assess the frequency of occurrence of each experience.  Mean is then computed using 
items from each of the 15 questions to create a MAAS score.  
 
Perceived Stress Scale (PSS):  
PSS is a 10 question  validated instrument that assesses stress. Participants are asked to rate on a scale of 
0 (never) to 4 (very often) how often they agree with various  statements. Items from each of the 10 
questions are then summed to create a total perceived stress score.  
 
Maslach Burnout Inventory - General Services Survey (MBI)  
This survey consists of 16 questions across three dimensions: exhaustion, cynicism, and professional 
efficacy. Each question is scored on a scale from 0 (never) to 6 (everyday). The points from ea ch 
dimension are added to provide a total score for that dimension. Average scores for each dimension are 
also computed .  
 
Dispositional Positive Emotion Scale - Joy Subscale (DPES -Joy) 
The joy subscale of DPES is a 6 item questionnaire that measures a disp ositional tendency to feel joy in 
life. Participants report their level of agreement to each item on a scale of 1 (Strongly agree) to 7 
(Strongly disagree). Mean is computed for the combination of all 6 items.  
 
Centre for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_2557]: Depressio n Scale (CES -D) 
This scale aims to measure depressive symptomatology and consists of [ADDRESS_230254] week. The questions are rated on a scale of 1 (Rarely or none of 
the time, less than 1 day) to 4 (Most or a ll of the time, 5 -7 days). Possible range of scores is 0 -60 with 
higher scores indicating the presence of more symptomatology.       
 
Emotional Distress and Anxiety Short Form - 7 Item Questionnaire measuring Anxiety  
This is a short survey used to assess fo r anxiety in participants. The questionnaire includes 7 questions 
which are rated on a scale of 1 (Never) to 5 (Always). Sum is computed for the responses and scores 
range between 7 -35, with higher scores indicating greater severity of anxiety.   
 
IEO Acti vity Diary:  
The IEO activity diary is a tool which helps the participants to keep a track of their activities each week. 
This enables the study team to measure compliance and protocol adherence by [CONTACT_3038].  
  
Reading Log:   
The reading log is a too l which helps the participants to keep a track of their reading each week. This 
enables the study team to measure compliance and protocol adherence by [CONTACT_3038].  
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 7 of 11 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  9-2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  02/10/2020  
 
 
B. Statistical Considerations  
 
a. Sample Size Justification:    
In this survey based, randomi zed cross -over study , we are looking at the feasibility of implementing 
an Inner Engineering Online Intervention on a group of willing company employees. Since it is a 
feasibility study, we plan to enroll a minimum of 60 participants. Data from these parti cipants will be 
used to power a larger trial based on the outcomes such as stress, burnout & overall well -being 
measured during the course of the study.   
 
b. Data Analysis:   
Baseline characteristics of participants will be recorded.  Continuous data will be  presented as means ± 
standard deviation or median (interquartile range) depending on the distribution of the data and 
assess ed with a parametric or non -parametric t -test, as appropriate. Normality will be assessed with 
the Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_2152] -Wilk test.  Categorical data will be presented as frequencies and proportions and assessed 
with a chi -square or Fisher’s exact test.  SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC) will be used for all analyses 
with two -sided p -values < 0.05 considered statistically significant.   
  
Anal ysis of Aim 1:   
Trial feasibility and adherence will be assessed using data from how often participants in the 
intervention group complete their IEO activities. This would be reported as the proportion of 
completed activities out of the total required per protocol. Similar analysis would be done for the 
control group and adherence to protocol too would be ascertained as a proportion of instance of 
protocol deviation out of total required activity per protocol. Participant satisfaction will be measured 
using  an internally developed survey.  Continuous and dichotomous data will be reported and assessed 
in a similar fashion as above.   
 
Analysis of Aim 2:   
Given the continuous nature of the s cales used to assess stress, burnout  and measures of well -being , 
diffe rences between groups will be assessed with a parametric or non -parametric t -test.  Although we 
expect that randomization should account for any differences between baseline characteristics, 
unadjusted and adjusted linear regression may be utilized in orde r to account for differences that 
persist.  Our primary analyses will be assessed using intention -to-treat principles.  In order to assess 
whether there are differences between baseline and at six weeks, we will employ the use of paired t -
tests as appropri ate.   
 
Analysis of Aim 3:   
To assess the effect of IEO intervention on the control group following its cross -over to the intervention 
will be assessed using a parametric or non -parametric t -test.  Although we expect that randomization 
should account for any differences between baseline characteristics, unadjusted and adjusted linear 
regression may be utilized in order to account for differences that persist.  Our primary analyses will be 
assessed using intention -to-treat principles.  In order to assess wh ether there are differences between 
baseline and at six weeks, we will employ the use of paired t -tests as appropriate.    
 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 8 of 11 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  9-2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  02/10/[ADDRESS_230255] Selection  
Inclusion Criteria:  
• Age ≥18 years  
• Interest in Inner Engineering Online (IEO) Program  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
• Low E nglish proficiency  
• Not currently residing in [LOCATION_002]  
 
Subjects will be enrolled without regards to race, gender, or vulnerable category status.  
  
 
 
B4. POSSIBLE BENEFITS  
We cannot guarantee any direct benefit to study participants.  Insights gained from this trial may allow 
us to better understand the association between meditation and stress/burnout and propose an 
approach to combat it.  If successful, results of this trial could be used to inform other studies.  
 
 
B5. POSSIBLE RISKS AND ANALYSIS OF  RISK/BENEFIT RATIO  
Potential physical risks of the study interventions:  The IEO intervention is simple and only involves 
meditation & yoga practices.  As such, there are no physical risks expected with the IEO intervention.  
Similarly, by [CONTACT_193824] , burnout or well -being measures; we do not anticipate any risk of physical 
harm to any of the research subjects.    
 
Potential psychological risks :  It is possible that there could be psychological or emotional risk to 
subjects in this study if they were to become aware of their performance in assessments and more so 
than they would be if they were not participating in the study.  Subjects will not be given the scores of 
their assessments, but if they were to become aware of a decline in their performance this could be 
stressful or disconcerting to the subject.  Additional counseling regarding any psychological or emotional 
distress stemming from this will be provided by [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_193819].  
 
Risk of breach of confidenti ality:   As with any research study, there is a small risk associated with a 
breach of confidentiality.  All research staff for this trial has been extensively trained in how to handle 
confidential data and how to minimize the possibility of this risk. To m itigate this risk, electronic data 
and that on paper will be kept in confidential, locked file cabinets and secure offices and/or on 
password -protected computers.  Subjects will also be assigned a unique study ID to minimize this risk.    
 
Risk/Benefit Rat io:  IEO intervention  has no expected risks and the knowledge gained could potentially 
lead to studies that focus on improvement of stress, burnout and overall long -term we ll-being of general 
population .  Research team members will attempt to mitigate any of the possible risks described above; 
therefore, we believe the risk/benefit ratio is in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_193820].    
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 9 of 11 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  9-2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  02/10/[ADDRESS_230256] information for the study team to ensure that all of the 
participant’s questions are answer ed prior to providing consent. Electronic consent will then we 
obtained from willing participants prior to initiation of any study procedures.  
 
Please see the attached electronic enrollment script.  
 
Subject Protection  
It is unlikely that participants will  be vulnerable to coercion or undue influence in this study. 
Participants will be informed that their decision to participate or not to participate is entirely voluntary. 
Participants will have the ability to discontinue their participation at any time.  Their decision to 
withdraw or discontinue the study will in no form affect their relationship with the company.  
 
B7. STUDY LOCATION  
Privacy   
All efforts will be taken to ensure participant privacy. All study interactions will be completed 
electronically or  via the phone, in a private location that is comfortable for the participant.    
 
Throughout the study, only the minimum required information will be collected, assuring participant 
privacy during the study protocol.  
 
Data collection will occur only on pa ssword -protected computers secured by [CONTACT_6102]. Data collected will be limited to only the minimum necessary to accomplish the 
stated research purposes.  
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 10 of 11 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  9-2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  02/10/[ADDRESS_230257] been trained to 
maintain PHI in a secure and compliant manner  
 
 
B8. DATA SECURITY  
All electronic data will be stored in REDCap and/or on password -protected servers behind the BIDMC 
firewall.  Any data collected on paper will be stored in locked file cabinets or in secure offices. All 
data would directly be entered into REDCap database.  
 
No individual identifier will be obtained from the company other than the email for sending surveys. 
Each su bject will be assigned a study -specific ID number.  A crosswalk between the participants and 
their study IDs will be maintained on password -protected computers by [CONTACT_92278]. At no time will this crosswalk be shared outside the study team .  
 
All data would be directly entered into REDCap database and a t the completion of the study all 
identifiable will be deleted and data analysis will occur using only the participant's study ID, to 
further ensure confidentiality of their responses  
 
B9 Multi-Site Studies  
 
Single Center Study - N/A 
 
Is the BIDMC the coordinating site ?        Yes     No  
 
Is the BIDMC PI [INVESTIGATOR_2783] -site study?      Yes     No  
 
 
 
B10 Dissemination of Research Results  
 
Please explain whether you will be able to thank subjects and provide research results and, if so, how 
this will be accomplished. If you do not think this is feasible, appropriate or applicable to this 
research, please sp ecify why.  
 
Patients will be thanked for their time throughout the study. Because study results are likely to be 
published a few years after a given subject’s participation, study investigators are concerned that 
mailing the published manuscript and an add itional thank -you note years after participation risks 
violating subject privacy, as mailing addresses are increasingly likely to change with passing time. It is 
out of the scope of this study to continue tracking mailing addresses after study completion.  
 
(CCI) Committee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 11 of 11 
 
Study Description – Part B  
CCI Form:  9-2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  02/10/2020  
 
 
However, a n aggregate result at the end of the study will be shared with the participating company  
(S2Tech)  and Isha F oundation.  Individual participant data  or results will never be disclosed  to 
anyone . 
 