Evaluating an Eating Disorder Prevention Program for Young 
Women With Type 1 Diabetes  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
January 31, [ADDRESS_910983] the effectiveness of an evidence- based eating -disorder prevention 
program specifically targeted for individuals with Type 1 Diabetes (T1D) compared to an 
educational control group. The Diabetes Body Project (DBP), is an adaptation of the 
Body Project which is the only eating disorder prevention program to have repeatedly 
produced effects when evaluated by [CONTACT_674133], produced stronger effects than credible alternative interventions, and affected objective outcomes. DBP h as been 
adapted slightly for individuals with T1D who are at ultra-high risk for eating disorders. 
The study aims to test the effectiveness of the DBP of reducing body image concerns and 
reducing eating pathology and improving glycemic control. 
b. Objectives 
Aim [ADDRESS_910984] 
will show significantly greater improvements in  glucose control (HbA1c and Time in 
Range [TIR]), the primary outcomes, as well as reductions in diabetes distress, illness perceptions, and quality of life (secondary outcomes) over follow-up than control 
participants who view educational lectures of diabetes management and EDs. Although 
HbA1c is the most common measure of long -term blood  glucose management (ADA, 
2018), wi th the advent of continuous glucose  monitoring (CGM), the ability to classify 
sensor glucose levels into  various ranges has been feasible. Time in Range (TIR), which 
reflects the amount of time an individual had glucose values between 70 and 180 mg/dL, has shown a robust inverse association with development of diabetic retinopathy and 
microalbuminuria (Beck et al., 2019). As of July 2022, we are making the CGM optional, this will decrease our power to detect changes in TIR.  
Aim [ADDRESS_910985] participants  will show 
significantly greater reductions in ED risk factors (pursuit  of the thin ideal and body 
dissatisfaction), ED behaviors (dietary  restriction, insulin omission), and ED symptoms 
(additional secondary outcomes) than control participants, and whether reductions in ED 
outcomes correlate with reductions in HbA1c and increases in TIR and mediate the 
effects of the Diabetes Body Project on improvements in  HbA1c and TIR. 
If this pi[INVESTIGATOR_674125] a larger trial testing the  effectiveness of DBP and the dissemination of DBP thereby 
[CONTACT_4205][INVESTIGATOR_674126] T1D.  
January 31, [ADDRESS_910986]. 
2. STUDY PROCEDURES  
a. Procedures  
Participants will be recruited through flyers, online postings, and other postings at various clinics treating Type 1 Diabetes (T1D) in the Bay Area. To determine eligibility, during screening participants will be asked their age, gender, how long they have had T1D, if they are taking insulin, if they have visited their diabetes care provider in the past year, 
and basic questions assessing body dissatisfaction.  
On the flyers and other recruitment materials, participants will be directed to a short survey on a secure platform that only asks for contact [CONTACT_3031] (see section 16) to show interest in the study. The study team will use the contact [CONTACT_674134]-up a phone screen for interested individuals. IF the participant shows interest through 
one of the Honest Broker methods (such as MyChart) or through ResearchMatch.org 
which shares the contact [CONTACT_253657], then a member of  the 
research team will reach out to the individual using the contact [CONTACT_674135] a phone screen. See section [ADDRESS_910987] them to confirm 
eligibility. Informed parental consent and adolescent assent (for ages 15 -17) or consent 
(for ages 18 - 30) will be secured prior to enrollment. If an adole scent turns [ADDRESS_910988] assessment or group 
session after turning 18.  
Baseline Assessment: After eligibility is confirmed but before groups begin, the research  
assistant will email participants a Redcap link to complete the surveys for baseline assessment. At the baseline assessment, participants will complete a survey involving the 
following questionnaires: 
1) the 8 -item Ideal -Body Stereotype Scale- Revised (Stice et al., 2017) which assesses 
pursuit of the thing ideal  2) the 9 -item Body Dissatisfaction Scale (Berscheid et al., 2973) which assesses 
dissatisfaction with various body parts  3) the 16-item Diabetes Eating Problem Survey-Revised (Markowitz et al,. 2010)  
4) the 28- item Type 1 Diabetes Distress Scale (Fisher et al., 2015) which assesses distress 
related to diabetes  
5) the 5 -item World Health Organization Well- Being Index (deWit et al., 2007) that 
assess health related quality of life  
January 31, 2023   Page 3 of 14 6) Negative affect will be assessed with the sadness, guilt, and fear/anxiety subscales 
(totaling 20 items) from the Positive Affect and Negative Affect Scale -Revised (PANAS -
X; Watson & Clark, 1992)  
7) 10- item Dutch Restrained Eating Scale (van Strien et al., 1986) that measures dieting 
behaviors.  
At the baseline assessment, participants will also complete an Eating Disorder Diagnostic 
Interview (EDDI) over the phone. The EDDI can take between [ADDRESS_910989] a CGM 
and does not want to wear one, then we will not send them one. This means they will not receive the $[ADDRESS_910990] 2 weeks of data at each time point.  
Prevention Program:  
After baseline assessments are completed, participants will be randomized to either the 
Diabetes Body Project groups or the educational control.  
Randomization:  
We will use a random number generator to determine if participants will be in Diabetes 
Body Project or the educational control. If an even number is generated, the participant 
will be assigned DBP. If an odd number is generated, the participant will be ass igned to 
educational control. As there is a 50% chance the number will be either even or odd, there is a 50% chance that someone will be assigned either to DBP or the educational 
control. It is only after the baseline assessment that indivi duals will be randomized. This 
will prevent the assessor at baseline from being influenced by [CONTACT_674136]. The assessor completing the EDDI at post -test and 3 -month follow -up will be 
blind to the participant's condition.  
Diabetes Body Project: The Diabetes Body Project is an adaptation of the Body Project. The original Body Project involves weekly 1- hour sessions for 4 weeks. The adapted 
version includes weekly 1- hour sessions for 6 weeks. Sessions will be co- led by a 
clinician and a peer educator with Type 1 Diabetes. The adaptation involves diabetes-
specific content in the sessions as well as the inclusion of a peer educator with Type 1 Diabetes. In session 1 participants volunteer to participate verbally in the session, collectively define the thin appearance ideal, discuss costs of pursuing this ideal, and are assigned home exercises (e.g., write a letter to a younger girl about the costs associated 
January 31, 2023   Page 4 of 14 with pursuing the thin ideal). In session 2 participants discuss each home exercise, 
dissuade facilitators from pursuing the thin ideal in role -plays, and are assigned more 
exercises (e.g., generate a top -[ADDRESS_910991] of things young women can do to challenge t he thin 
ideal). In session [ADDRESS_910992] role -plays challenging 
thin-ideal statements, discuss personal body image concerns, and are assigned home 
exercises (e.g., engage in two activities that challenges the thin ideal). I n session 4 
participants discuss home exercises, discuss the negative effects of social comparison, the 
advantages and costs of social media, and are assigned home exercises (e.g., track 
situations in which they engage in social comparison and state altern ative ways of 
thinking). In session 5 participants discuss home exercises, discuss strategies of living 
well with diabetes and maintaining good self -care, as well as the physiological and 
psychological advantages of insulin, and are assigned home exercises (e.g., writing a 
letter to a younger girl with T1D with advice on having a positive relationship with her diabetes). In Session [ADDRESS_910993]; as a final home exercise, participants are encouraged to engage in 
at least one more self -affirmation exercise and email the facilitators to tell them how it 
went. This is different from standard of car e, as most times individuals with Type 1 
Diabetes don't have the opportunity to discuss body image concerns and eating 
pathology, especially specifically in relation to Type [ADDRESS_910994] eating 
disorder prevention program designed specific ally for this high -risk population. 
Participants will continue to receive usual care from their diabetes care team during their participation in the study  
 
Educational Control:  
We selected a T1D management/ED psychoeducational comparison condition previously tested (Olmsted et al., 2002) to control for expectancy effects and demand characteristics. 
To match the Diabetes Body Project, the educational lectures by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Olmsted will be 
delivered in 6 1- hour blocks. Topi[INVESTIGATOR_674127], complications of ED behaviors, diabetes and body image, effects of dieting on blood glucose, and the risk of complications. Strategie s to develop a healthy relationship 
with food, how to overcome binge eating and purging behaviors (including intentional insulin omission), and how to improve body image are also discussed.  If participants are randomized to the Diabetes Body Project, they will meet in groups of [ADDRESS_910995]:  
After the six weeks of either Diabetes Body Project or the educational control, participants will be asked to complete the same questionnaires that they assessed at baseline and the EDDI.  
3-Month Follow -up:  
At 3-month follow -up, participants will again complete the questionnaires and the EDDI, 
but will also wear the continuous glucose monitor (either the one they already have or the 
January 31, 2023   Page 5 of 14 Libre 2 provided by [CONTACT_16133]) and be asked to self -report A1c. After the [ADDRESS_910996] the option of not participating in 
conversations or  exercises in the intervention modules that cause them any discomfort.  
They will also be free to withdraw from participating in the  intervention and/or overall 
study at any time. Survey measures are  non-invasive and present minimal risk. Glucose 
monitors are minimally  invasive and provide no added level of risk or discomfort beyond 
routine diabetes management tasks.  
Adolescent and caregiver participants will be advised of their rights to withdraw from the 
intervention at any time without penalty or  consequence on their receipt of future health 
care services at Stanford  University's Lucile Packard Children's Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_674128].  
c. Use of Deception in the Study  
Deception will not be used.  
d. Use of Audio and Video Recordings  
Participants will be informed that we will make video recordings of the Diabetes Body Projects groups for clinical supervision and quality assurance purposes. These recordings will be reviewed by [CONTACT_674137]. Email supervision based on these ratings 
will be provided to facilitators which has been found to maximize intervention effects. After they are viewed and rated for fidelity and competence, all records of the r ecordings 
will be deleted from devices and destroyed. Recordings are not optional. As the group 
sessions are virtual and conducted via Zoom, it is impossible for someone to "go out of 
view of the camera" and recording is an important part of the interventi on. Also, 
recording is an important part of the intervention so turning off their camera on Zoom is not an option. There are three main factors that increase cognitive dissonance: public 
accountability, level of effort, and voluntary basis. By [CONTACT_253661], public 
accountability is greatly increased and the effect of the intervention improves. Thus, if they are in DBP individuals must be wil ling to be recorded.  
e. Alternative Procedures or Courses of Treatment  
Currently, there are not any eating disorder prevention programs  specifically designed for 
individuals with Type [ADDRESS_910997] treatment is being withheld from participants.  
January 31, 2023   Page 6 of 14 f. Will it be possible to continue the more (most) appropriate therapy for the 
participant(s) after the conclusion of the study?  
If the Diabetes Body Project (DBP) produces significantly larger improvements than the 
educational lectures, we will offer the DBP to educational controls. 
g. Study Endpoint (s) 
It is important to test whether effects persist at [ADDRESS_910998] Experimental and/or Clinical Findings  
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is a chronic illness caused by [CONTACT_674138] -producing beta cells in the pancreas, wherein the lack of insulin leads to 
elevated blood glucose levels (American Diabetes Association [ADA], 2018). Poor 
glycemic control is associated with higher risk of diabetes complications, such as cerebrovascular and cardiovascular disease, retinopathy, neuropathy, nephropathy, and 
mortality (Patterson et al., 2019). The lifetime prevalence of T1D is 9.5% and is 
incre asing (Mobasseri et al., 2020), implying that over [ADDRESS_910999] 
this chronic life -compromising disease.  
The continuous self -regulation task of adjusting insulin to diet, physical activity, and 
emotional state to maintain recommended blood glucose levels to avoid serious diabetes complications places a high burden on youth with T1D and their families. Diabetes self -
care and glycemic control are associated with anxiety, depression, and eating disorders (EDs) (Colton et al., 2015). Indeed, young females with T1D are an ultra- high-risk group 
for EDs. Young women with T1D show 200%-400% greater prevalence of ED compared 
to females without T1D (Colton et al., 2015; Mannucci et al., 2005; Young et al., 2013). For instance, a prospective study of adolescent girls with T1D found that the lifetime incidence of EDs was 60% over a 14-year follow- up (Colton et al., 2015), which is 462% 
greater than in young women without T1D (Stice et al., 2013). Youth with T1D are also at elevated risk for ED behaviors, such as dietary restriction and intentional insulin omission, and ED symptoms, such as binge eating, fasting, excessive exercise, vomiting, and laxative/diuretic misuse (Olmsted et al., 2008). Longitudinal studies of people with 
T1D reveal that ED behaviors and symptoms are likely to persist and become more 
severe in young adulthood (Peveler et al., 2005). Critically, ED pathology is associated with poorer glycemic control, as indexed by [CONTACT_674139] A1c (HbA1c) (Young et al., 2013). Intentional insulin omission for weight 
control is reported by 37% of females with T1D (Rodin et al., 2002) and is associ ated 
with a 300% increase in mortality (Goebel-Fabbri et al., 2008). Of note, 61% of young 
women with T1D and a history of EDs report intentional insulin omission versus 26% of young women with T1D without a history of an ED (Peveler et al., 2005). Insulin 
omission or restriction increases risk for diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and frequent 
presence of ketones in the body can cause heart complications, kidney failure, cerebral edema, coma, and death (Hanlan et al., 2013). Comorbid T1D and EDs are associated 
January 31, 2023   Page 7 of 14 with increased risk of diabetes complications and mortality (Nielsen et al., 2002), 
underscoring the importance of effective prevention efforts for this population. For example, 84% of youth with T1D and ED pathology showed some degree of retinopathy 
compa red to 24% of those without ED pathology (Rydall et al., 1997). Comorbid T1D 
and EDs also increases risk for nephropathy (Takii et al., 2008). No intervention has been 
shown to prevent this co-morbidity.  The Body Project is the only ED prevention program that has repeatedly reduced future 
onset of EDs, produced effects when evaluated by [CONTACT_674133], produced 
stronger effects than credible alternative interventions, and affected objective outcomes (Stice et al., 2019). The Body Project is a dissonance-based ED prevention program wherein high-risk young women with body image concerns collectively critique pursuit 
of the thin appearance ideal in verbal, written, and behavioral exercises. It has produced 
greater reductions in risk factors (pursuit of the thin ideal, body dissatisfaction, dieting, negative affect), ED symptoms, and future ED onset over a 2- to 4-year follow- ups than assessment -only control conditions and alternative interventions in over 25 controlled 
trials (e.g., Becker et al., 2010; Ghaderi et al.,2020; Halliwell & Diedrichs, 2014; Stice et al., 2000, 2006, 2008, 2011, 2013, 2017, 2020). The effectiveness of the Body Project in reducing ED risk factors, behaviors, and onset led to a call to test its efficacy for young women with T1D (Hanlan et al., 2013). Wisting et al. (2021) tested an adapted version of 
the Body Project (Diabetes Body Project) in an uncontrolled pi[INVESTIGATOR_674129]. The 
adapted version added [ADDRESS_911000] showed significant reductions in pursuit of the thin ideal (d = .81), body dissatisfaction (d = .67), dieting (d = .63), diabetes eating 
pathology (d = .83), diabetes distress (d = .48), and diabetes illness perceptions (d = .41). 
Qualitative data collected from participants in this initial pi[INVESTIGATOR_674130].  Given the robust evidence for the effectiveness of the Body Project and the promising 
preliminary data for the Diabetes Body Project, we propose to conduct a controlled 
efficacy trial of this ED prevention program for young women with T1D. 
b. Findings from Past Animal Experiments 
None 
4. PARTICIPANT POPULATION  
a. Planned E nrollment  
(i) All subjects will be enrolled at Stanford. We expect to enroll 60 participants. (ii) N/A (iii) Participants are female-identifying individuals between 15-[ADDRESS_911001] likely benefit from it is important in testing its effectiveness.  
b. Age, Gender, and Ethnic Background  
All participants will be female -identifying 15–30- year-olds . All ethnicities will be 
recruited and included.  
January 31, 2023   Page 8 of 14 c. Vulnerable Population s 
Participants aged 15 -17 years -old may be considered potentially vulnerable subjects as 
they are not yet adults. Adolescents (aged 15- 17), especially female adolescents, are at an 
elevated risk of eating disorder onset and serve to benefit from the eating disorder 
prevention program. Parental consent will be required before adolescents’  assent to 
partake in the study. Parents will be informed of all tasks the adolescents will be asked to 
complete (surveys, glucose monitoring, diagnostic interview, and treatm ent group).  
d. Rationale for Exclusion of Certain Populations  
Women, minorities, and adolescents (aged 15 -17) are included in the study. Children 
younger than [ADDRESS_911002] using both online and in person strategies.  
Online -  Ads will be posted on the internet using social media sites: Twitter, Facebook, 
and Instagram, community forums: Craigslist and Reddit, and the study website. We will 
manage an instagram and facebook page with postings about the study using the 
approved images and captions. All posts on the page will be moderated by [CONTACT_674140]. Posting of online ads will  
be managed based on inclusion criteria, i.e., within the [LOCATION_002], age, etc. Social 
media recruitment posts will be set up such that the security settings do not allow 
participants or others from the public to post on the wall/public forum. If this is not 
possible due to the social media platfor m's settings, the social media posts will be 
monitored and any disclosures of PHI removed.  
 
Additionally, all families who call the Stanford clinic for services are asked about their 
willingness to be contact[CONTACT_33632]. Parents of youth who indicated they are willing to be contact[CONTACT_674141] c riteria will be 
called and asked if they are willing to hear about a Stanford research study. We will put 
flyers in the community and around middle and high schools as well as send postcards 
via email and mail.  
 Due to [CONTACT_225759]'s clinical practice, we will be able to recruit at 3 clinics that specialize in 
T1D treatment (Stanford, UCSF/Oakland, Kaiser). Additionally, we will be able to 
recruit more broadly in the Bay Area by [CONTACT_674142] (SDRC) Type [ADDRESS_911003] Diabetes Research Center's clinical 
registry (in which subjects have already consented to be recruited for research studi es). 
Stanford Diabetes Research Center's clinical registry is composed of individuals who 
have expressed interest in participating in research and have voluntarily included their 
name [CONTACT_225755][CONTACT_253663]. More 
information on the SDRC registry can be found at: https://sdrc.stanford.edu/clinical -
research -registry.  
 
Participants will also be recruited through online flyers sent out through established 
diabetes -related listervs run by [CONTACT_225750].  
 
The IRB -approved recruitment flyer and email will also be circulated through online 
websites, forums newsletters, emails listervs, and social media pages (primarily run by 
[CONTACT_225751]) and shared with diabetes providers and 
clinics within and outside of Stanford. These online avenues are often used to disseminate information to families of youth with type [ADDRESS_911004] Broker outreach. Potential participants are identified via STARR and invited by [CONTACT_674143] (honest broker) on behalf of study team. See Section [ADDRESS_911005] Broker study 
invitation letters. We will be using Children’s Epic MyChart, Postal Mail honest broker 
outreach. For Epic MyChart, study team receives only the interested responses via Epic 
MyChart InBasket. For Postal Mail, study team may support the process by [CONTACT_253666] -
printed address labels (created by [CONTACT_674144]) on the envelopes. Invitations will not be 
sent to the same individual via more than one honest broker outreach method, unless as a 
separate reminder.  
 The Research Participation team informed us of Study Pages. We are going to be part of 
the University's pi[INVESTIGATOR_674131]. They are testing Study Pages with 100 
studies to see if it helps with recruitment and outreach. Through the StudyPage we ca n 
text and call participants in a HIPPA -compliant manner. We can also schedule 
participants.  
h. Eligibility Criteria  
i. Inclusion Criteria  
I)female -identifying  
II) aged 15- 30 years old  
III) diagnosis of T1D for at least a 6 -month duration per ADA criteria who are taking 
insulin  
IV) have visited their diabetes care provider in the past year  
V) body image concerns  
ii. Exclusion Criteria  
January 31, 2023   Page 10 of 14 I) not female identifying  
II) not in age range  
III) does not have a diagnosis of T1D for at least 6 months per ADA criteria  
IV) not taking insulin  
V) have not visited their diabetes care provider in the past year  
VI) do not report some level of body dissatisfaction  
VII) do not live in the [LOCATION_002]  
VIII) Unwilling to be video -recorded if assigned to Diabetes Body Project  
IX) restricted English proficiency, and pervasive developmental, cognitive, or 
psychiatric limitations that compromise participation in the intervention sessions and study.  
Glucose monitors will be provided to participants who are not already using these devices such that device use will not be a criterion of eligibility or exclusion.  
i. Screening Procedures  
Participants will indicate interest by [CONTACT_12550] a short survey on a secured platform, such as REDCap, that asks them for contact [CONTACT_3031]. From there, a member of the research team will contact [CONTACT_253668]. For adolescents, a member of the research team will first screen the 
parent and ask them about the adolescent. We will ask the parent for verbal consent to 
contact [CONTACT_674145]. A second phone screen will oc cur with 
the adolescent where verbal assent will be obtained. The second phone screen serves to increase rapport and to obtain the adolescents own body image concerns.  
j. Participation in Multiple Protocols  
As a part of the informed consent process, subjects will be asked if they are participating in any other research projects. Their participation in other protocols will not exclude them 
from participation in this study.  
k. Payments to Participants  
Participants will be paid $[ADDRESS_911006] assessment, $[ADDRESS_911007], and $25 for 
the 3- month follow -up assessment (baseline, post -test, and three -month follow -up) and 
$25 for each complete wear of glucose monitoring. In total, then, participants  could 
receive $110. They will be paid for whatever portions of the study they complete (i.e., it is prorated). If they do not wear the CGM/provide CGM data, total possible payout is $60. 
l. Costs to Participants  
There will be no cost to participants.  
m. Planned Duration of the Study  
It is estimated that the study will take one year. The screening is expected to take [ADDRESS_911008] about 5 months. Participants will complete the 
baseline assessment (1.5 hours), then wear the CGM for two weeks, then complete the six-week intervention (each session is one hour), and then a post -test assessment (about 
1.5 hours). After the initial baseline asses sment, intervention, and the post -test 
January 31, [ADDRESS_911009] data analysis on 
the outcome measures.  
5. RISKS 
a. Potential Risks  
i. Investigational d evices  
None 
ii. Investigational d rugs 
None 
iii. Commercially available drugs, biologics, reagents or chemicals 
There are no risks of commercially available drugs, reagents, or chemicals as none will 
be used. 
iv. Procedures 
Data Collection: Self -reported survey will be kept confidential and collected online via 
secure RedCap database system. The diagnostic interviews will require phone numbers as 
they will be conducted over the phone, but the interview forms will only be labe led with 
the participant ID number. All stored and collected interview data will not include names 
or phone numbers. There are no known psychological risks to subjects completing self-
report subjective rating scales or participating in the intervention ses sions. However, the 
survey and intervention may contain items or questions that make the subjects feel uncomfortable in that they ask about their physical and psychological health and 
feelings/emotions. Subjects will be informed that any items on questionn aires or topi[INVESTIGATOR_674132].  
Protections Against Risk. All research staff have completed rigorous training in the 
protection of human subjects, including CITI training. The plan for protecting privacy and confidentiality recognizes that the protection of privacy in studies involving s ensitive 
data is of utmost importance. We will attempt to do this in several ways. The research 
assistant will introduce the study to eligible participants and explain the purposes, 
benefits, and risks of the project to the subjects, and offer them an oppo rtunity to ask 
questions and/or decline participation. The voluntary and confidential nature of the research, as well as limits to confidentiality, will be highlighted during informed consent 
process. Study participation will not interfere with clinical ca re and all patients have 
standard access to the treatment team on a routine (clinical care) and emergency basis. 
All responses to interview items will be given by [CONTACT_225753]. Survey data collection will only occur through tools and resources that have acceptable security 
features. We will minimize all communications that involve names or other identifying 
information. All clinically -relevant and study information will be kept in locked files in 
January 31, [ADDRESS_911010]. In all datasets we will use ID numbers only. A separate dataset linking names with ID numbers will be accessible only to authorized study personnel under the direction of the PI.  
There’s a small chance there will be some discomfort upon applying and wearing the 
CGM if you or your child have never worn one before, especially if this is your first time 
wearing one. Sometimes the discomfort can last a day or two, but often is mild and goes 
away. If the discomfort persists, please contact [CONTACT_3019].  
v. Radioisotopes/radiation -producing machines  
There are no risks of radioisotopes/radiation -producing machines or associated risks as 
no radioisotope/radiation- producing machines will be used  
vi. Physical  well -being  
Participants may experience slight discomfort upon applying and wearing the CGM, especially if it is the participant's first time wearing one. However, reports like this are not common and mild. Participants will be told to contact [CONTACT_674146] s. 
vii. Psych ological  well -being  
Psychological discomfort may result from some of the questions in the questionnaires, 
but participants may choose not to answer questions if they feel uncomfortable. 
Additionally, participants may feel uncomfortable sharing in the group setting. If they 
feel uncomfortable, they will be able to communicate with the group leaders, RA, or 
principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_253654]. In 
past trials the Diabetes Body Project and the Body Project, participants have not reported 
discomfort discussing sensitive materials in gro up sessions.  
viii. Economic well -being  
There are no risks to economic well -being 
ix. Social  well -being  
There are no risks to social well -being  
x. Overall evaluation of risk  
Low 
b. International Research  Risk Procedures  
N/A 
c. Procedures to Minimize Risk  
Confidentiality: All materials, such as questionnaires and interview forms, and data collected from each participant will be identified by [CONTACT_674147] 31, [ADDRESS_911011] a thorough understanding of the 
participants' rights to confidentiality.  
Emotional discomfort: Participants will be reminded of their right not to answer specific 
questions during the research visit. Research assistants will be sensitive to signs of 
exhaustion or other distress and will schedule breaks or will end the visit as warranted to protect the comfort of participants. All participants will receive information about whom to contact [CONTACT_253670], concerns, or distress regarding any aspect of 
the study. 
All research staff have completed and will maintain rigorous training in the protection of human subjects, including CITI training. The plan for protecting privacy and confidentiality recognizes that the protection of privacy in studies involving sensitive 
data is of utmost importance. We will attempt to do this in several ways. Research staff 
will introduce the study to eligible participants and explain the purposes, benefits, and risks of the project to the subjects, and offer them an opportunity to ask questions and/or decline participation. The voluntary and confidential nature of the research, as well as 
limits to confidentiality, will be highlighted during informed consent process. Study 
participation will not interfere with clinical care and all patie nts have standard access to 
the treatment team on a routine (clinical care) and emergency basis. All responses to interview items will be given by [CONTACT_225753]. Survey data collection will only 
occur through tools and resources that have acceptable security features. We will 
minimize all communications that involve names or other identifying information. All 
clinically -relevant and study information will be kept in locked files in locked offices or 
password protected files.  
All recordings of intervention sessions will be saved on a password-protected secure server. Information about subjects will not be accessible to any nonauthorized study personnel without the written consent of the subject. In all datasets we will use ID numbers only. A separate dataset linking names with ID numbers will be accessible only 
to authorized study personnel under the direction of the PI. 
d. Study Conclusion  
If the subject wants to end their participation in the study at any time, they can do so. If the investigator determines that participation would be harmful to the subject or 
investigator in any way, they can terminate the experiment. If not ended early, p articipate 
participation will end after the 3-month follow-up. 
e. Risks to Special Po pulations  
The study involves no more than minimal risk for the adolescents enrolled and parent consent will obtained both before the screening and actual enrollment in the study. The study is minimal risk as no known risks are known for using the Abbott Libre 2, sel f-
reporting A1C, answering the questionnaires, participating in the Diabetes Body Project 
or educational control group, or completing the diagnostic interview. If participants 
experience psychological discomfort the RA is trained in how to recognize distre ss and 
comfort. The clinicians and peer educators running the Diabetes Body Project groups will also be assessed for therapeutic competence and be able to provide support should 
discomfort occur. 
6. BENEFITS  
January 31, [ADDRESS_911012] (HIPAA) and privacy policies of Stanford University, Stanford Health Care, and Stanford Children’s Health. 