 INVESTIGATOR STUDY PLAN  
 
 Page 1 of 9  Urogynecological  Office V isits and Patient Satisfaction of Limited English -Proficient 
patients with phone Interpreter Services compared to In -Person Interpreters :  Randomized 
Controlled trial (SIPI)  
 
NCT0347019 4 
 
Document Date (IRB Approval): [ADDRESS_943172] 2018  
 INVESTIGATOR STUDY PLAN  
 
 Page 2 of 9   
1. TITLE  
Urogynecological  Office Visits and Patient Satisfaction of Limited English -Proficient patients 
with phone Interpreter Services compared to In -Person Interpreters:  Randomized Controlled 
trial (SIPI)  
 
2. EXTERNAL IRB  REVIEW HISTORY * 
N/A 
 
3. PRIOR APPROVALS : 
None  
Conflict o f Interest (COI):  N/A  
Clinical Engineering Department: N/A  
Biohazardous Agents: N/A  
Radiation : N/A  
 
4. OBJECTIVES * 
Primary Objective:   To determine if In -person interpreters increases patient satisfaction of 
Urogynecological(URGYN) office visits compared to the use of phone interpreter services for Limited 
English Proficient (LEP) patients  
  
Secondary Objective:   To determine if type of  provider, years spent in the US, income level, or 
level of education influences patient satisfaction of UROGYN office visits  
 
 
5. BACKGROUND * 
Cultural and linguistic competence are two vital principles, regardless of specialty, providers and 
health care s ystems must understand to offer quality health care to patients.  Linguistic 
competence, initially described in 2004 by [CONTACT_695174]’s capacity to respond effectively to the health literacy needs of the populations served 1. 
The National Center for Cultural Competence (NCCC) for years has emphasized the importance 
of cultural and linguistic competence as a fundamental aspect of quality health care and mental 
health care for diverse populations 1. Moreover, this awareness is key to develop essential 
strategies for reducing health care disparities by [CONTACT_695175], utilization and quality of   
care. 1 
 
Both linguistic and cultural competency are important; however, in recent years there has been 
published literature investigating strategies to optimize linguistic competence.  To improve upon 
current linguistic competence, the field of Emergency Medicine has studied and researched key 
ways to improve its linguistic competence, mainly by [CONTACT_695176].  Barriers are created when the patient and physician do not speak 
the same language  this can ha ve a negative impact on patient satisfaction.  It has been reported in 
the literature one way to limit this barrier is by [CONTACT_358515] -person interpreter for all limited English 
proficiency (LEP) patients.  Bagachi et al randomized patient presenting to the ED  to receive in 
person interpreter services or the usual interpreter services (Ad Hoc and telephone).2   They 
concluded that use of in person interprete rs significantly increased patients’ and providers’ 
satisfaction. 2   Garcia et al found similar results when they evaluated the influence of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_695168] 3 of 9  trained, Ad Hoc, and telephone  interpreters on perceived satisfaction of limited English 
proficient parents presenting to a pediatric Emergency Department 4.  In their study, they found 
parents of patients were  significantly more satisfied ( p <0.001) with in person hospi[INVESTIGATOR_695169]. [ADDRESS_943173] improved patient satisfaction with the use to in 
person interpreters in other specialty areas as well; however, to our knowledge this has not been 
evaluated or reported in the Urogynecology literature.  In a rap idly evolving field that focuses 
primarily on quality of life outcomes , it is important we adequately communicate with our 
patients to offer appropriate treatment plans.  In our study, we evaluated LEP patient’s 
satisfaction of UROGYN office visits with ph one interpreter services compared to in-person 
interpreters.   
 
References  
1. Goode TD, Dunne MC, Bronheim SM. The Evidence for Cultural and Linguistic 
competency in health care . [LOCATION_001], NY:  Commonwealth Fund;2006  
 
2. Bagachi A, Dale S, Verbistsky -Savitz N, et al. Examining Effectiveness of Medical 
Interpreters in Emergency Department for Spanish -Speaking Patients with Limited 
English Proficiency:  Results A randomized Controlled Trial. Ann Emerg Med . 2011; 
57:3:248 – 256 
 
3. Boudreaux ED, O ’Hea El. Patient Satisfaction in the emergency department:  a review of 
the literature and implications for practice. J Emerg Med. 2004;26:13 -26. 
 
4. Garcia EA, Roy C, Okada PJ, et al. A comparison of influence of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] -trained, ad 
hoc, and telephone inter preters on perceived satisfaction of limited English -Proficient 
parents presenting to a pediatric emergency department.  Pediatr Emerg Care. 2004; 
20:373 -378. 
 
5. Gany et al. Patient Satisfaction with Different Interpreting Methods:  A 
randomized Controlled  Trial. J Gen Intern Med 2007 . 22 (suppl 2): 312 -318. 
 
 
 
 
 
6. INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION CRITERIA * 
Inclusion Criteria:  
 INVESTIGATOR STUDY PLAN  
 
 Page 4 of 9  • LEP speaking Spanish and Portuguese female patients presenting to the U Mass 
UROGYN clinic with or without Ad -hoc interpreters  
•  Spanish and Portuguese speaking female patients with LEP presenting to the U Mass 
UROGYN clinic for an office visit of any type  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
• Unable to provide consent  
• Under 18 years of age  
• Pregnant women  
• Prisoners  
• LEP subjects who decline interpreter services  
• Non -Spanish or Non – Portuguese speaking subjects  
• Patients with cognitive impairment  
• Visually or hearing impaired patients  
• Patients not requiring a follow up appointment  
 
 
7. STUDY -WIDE NUMBER OF SUBJECTS * 
N/A 
 
8. STUDY -WIDE RECRUITMENT METHODS * 
N/A 
 
9. STUDY TIMELINES * 
Subjects will be enrolled and randomized at their initial visit and participation will occur at the 
subsequent visit.  Participation will be for the duration of the single subsequent office visit, and 
then participation will be done.  
 
Our Urognecology department has approximately 15 Spanish or Portuguese LEP per month and 
given this trend we anticipa te approximately 14 months for recruitment of patient.  Taking into 
consideration time needed for data entry, statistical analysis, and manuscript writing we 
anticipate the duration of the study will be 17 months.    
 
10. STUDY ENDPOINTS * 
The primary outcom e, patient satisfaction will be measured by a fourteen -item questionnaire 
previously used and internally validated by [CONTACT_695177].  The questionnaire has 3 sections that 
evaluates satisfaction with the interpreter, provider, and nurse. We will be assessin g the 
interpreter satisfaction section scores of each subcategory as well as the overall score.  All items 
are answered on a scale of 1 to 4 and weighted on a 100 - point scale.   
 
Secondary outcomes evaluate patient satisfaction in relation to type of pro vider, years spent in 
the US, income level, and level of education.  
 
11. PROCEDURES INVOLVED * 
This study is a randomized controlled trial. Patients presenting to our UROGYN clinic  will be screened 
for eligibility using inclusion and exclusion criteria ..  LEP patients will be identified as patients that 
 INVESTIGATOR STUDY PLAN  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_943174] to be enrolled 
at the time of the follow up visit.  Study assignment will be revealed using sequentially 
numbered sealed opaque envelopes. Randomiza tion will be performed using software and a 
block randomization scheme  to yield a 50% chance of having an in -person interpreter .  
Portuguese and Spanish LEP participants will be randomized from two separate blocks.  
Bilingual participants will be identified at that time and be asked the primary language they 
would like for medical interpreter services for the subsequent office visit .  Those assigned to the 
control group will receive phone translation services and the experimental group will have in 
person interpreters. Once randomized, research team members will make a note in the computer 
scheduling system if an in -person interprete r is needed for the next visit..  At the subsequent 
visit, demographic information will be collected and patients will then receive interpretation 
services from the phone or an in -person interpreter.   
At completion of the follow up visit subjects will com plete two forms, in their native 
language.  The first form is a fourteen -item patient satisfaction questionnaire that has 
been previously used in published studies.  The first form also has two question from the 
Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and System Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14069]                      
( www.cahps.ahrq.gov ).  The second form will assess subjects English proficiency, 
overall health status, and yearly household income.  
For eligible patients who decline  participation we will be collecting non -identifiable 
information including; patient age, type of visit, language, provider, and if the patient was 
alone for the visit.  This will provide us non -identifiable data for comparative analysis 
between the group of eligible patients who agreed to participate and those who declined.  
 
12. DATA AND SPECIMEN BANKING * 
N/A 
 
13. Data Anal ysis and M anagement * 
Power calculations were based off findings from Garcia et al. which showed a mean difference of 12 
between telephone and translator nursing satisfaction scores. In their study patients ’ satisfaction was 
evaluated looking specifically looking at three main subcategories, nursing, physician, and interpreter 
satisfaction.  Sample size calculations we re based off seeing a minimum of [ADDRESS_943175] a meaningful 
difference between mean scores of the other two subcategories as well.  We calculated an  initial sample 
size of 48 with a significance level of 5% and power of 80%.  Taking into consideration data analysis with 
multivariate linear regression analysis we add ed 10 additional participan ts per variable (Expected 
dependent variables include:  Engli sh fluency, interpreter service experience, language, and age)  
 INVESTIGATOR STUDY PLAN  
 
 Page 6 of 9  48 +(10 x 4) = 88.  Based on our patient population and taking into consideration potential conflicts that 
could arise with patients cancelling follow up appointments  we are expecting a 30% dro p out rate . This 
gave us to a final total sample size of 114 (57 each arm)  
 
 
14. PROVISIONS TO MONITOR THE DATA TO ENSURE THE SAFETY OF SUBJECTS * 
The datasheets will be kept in a locked cabinet in a locked office in the administrative offices of 
the divisi on on Jaquith 2. The data will be entered into a de -identified, password protected file 
kept on the departmental computer servers.  
 
15. WITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS  WITHOUT THEIR CONSENT * 
We do not anticipate a situation where a subject would have to be removed from the study. A 
unique situation that could arise, is that a participant could become incarcerated prior to their 
follow up visit.  Section # [ADDRESS_943176]. Subjects who fail to show for their follow -up visits will not be withdrawn from the study  
 
 
 
16. RISKS TO SUBJECTS * 
This s tudy poses minimal risk to subjects, there is the potential risk of embarrassment 
that the participant might feel with the question about household income. That is not the 
intent of the question, and the question is optional. Other items that could cause p otential 
embarrassment are the patient satisfaction questionnaire, and questions regarding English 
proficiency and education level.  These questions have been well thought out and written 
with care to try to avoid this.  
There is no economic risk to the pat ient, as the medical interpreter service is not an 
additional fee for the patient.  There is a risk of breach of confidentiality since  protected 
health information is being collected The datasheets will be kept in a locked cabinet in a 
locked office in th e administrative offices of the division on Jaquith 2. The data will be 
entered into a de -identified, password protected file kept on the departmental computer 
servers.  
 
17. POTENTIAL  DIRECT  BENEFITS TO SUBJECTS * 
N/A 
 
18. VULNERABLE  POPULATIONS * 
 
N/A.  No known vulnerable populations are routinely offered these procedures. We do not serve 
a pediatric population or pregnant population. In the last [ADDRESS_943177] their rights and welfare.   
 
 
19. MULTI -SITE RESEARCH * 
N/A 
 
20. COMMUNITY -BASED PARTICIPATORY RESEARCH * 
N/A 
 
21. SHARING OF RESEARCH RESULTS WITH SUBJECTS * 
Subjects will not be notified of the results.  Questionnaires will be scored once all data has been 
collected and entered into the database.  
 
 
22. SETTING  
Subjects will be identified and recruited in the urogynecology clinic located in two locations, 
UMass  Memorial and Northbo rough UMass Memorial Health Care. The urogynecology division 
has two full -time designated surgeons (including the PI) and both will participate in the study. In 
addition, the nurse practitioner and department fellows will work as co-PI [INVESTIGATOR_695170] . 
This comprises the team who will recruit  subjects and obtain intraoperative and postoperative 
study data.  
 
Data entry an d analysis will be performed in the administra tive offices of the division on  
Jaquith 2  in U Mass Memorial . 
 
23. RESOURCES AVAILABLE  
Roles of the research team members:  
• Principal investi gator:  The PI’s role will include identifying potential subjects for the 
study, consenting of subjects, participatin g in data analysis, preparing submissions to 
the IRB, oversight of the conduct of the study and research personnel.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_695171].  
• Co-PI: [INVESTIGATOR_695172] -PI  [INVESTIGATOR_695173] f or the study, 
consenting of subjects, participatin g in data collection, analysis, and , preparing 
submissions to the IRB . Study assistant s: All study assistants will identify potential 
subjects for the study, collect data, and consent subjects, All study a ssistants have 
participated in prior research studies conducted by [CONTACT_695178].  
• Biostatistician: The OB/GYN departmental biostatistician will help with data analysis 
She has worked with the urogynecology division on several research studies previou sly. 
She will not participate in the recruitment of study subjects.   
The PI , co-PI, Biostatistician and study assistants are CITI -trained . All of them, except 
the biostatistician are also clinical members of the urogynecology division at UMass 
Memorial Me dical Center Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology.  Before initiation of 
the research, all  research team members  will be instructed on the study protocol and 
 INVESTIGATOR STUDY PLAN  
 
 Page 8 of 9  research procedures at the urogynecology department’s scheduled bimonthly research 
meetings.  
 
 
24. LOCAL RECRUITMENT METHODS  
 
Our power calculations, as detailed previously in question 13, calculated 114 study participants 
will be needed.  Based off our clinic trends we anticipate approximately 17 months to recruit 114 
subjects for the study.  
 
All subjects will be identified and recruited through the urogynecology clinic , at the two clinic 
sites previously mentioned in question 22.  Our two full -time attendings  (including the PI) will 
both participate in the study, as well as the department, nur se practitioner and fellows —
therefore, this yields access to every urogynecological patient.  The study team will screen 
potential subjects using inclusion and exclusion criteria at office visits. No identifiers will be 
recorded during screening. Once eligi bility has been determined, potential subjects will be 
offered enrollment in the study by [CONTACT_695179]. 
Clinical staff will not be involved in the recruitment process.  The study will be reviewed in detail 
and ample opportunity for questions will be given.  The opportunity to decline participation will 
also be given , and no information on these patients will be recorded for this study. An un -
identified tally will be recorded counting screened patients who we re “ineligible” or “declined”.  
For women agreeing to participate, a fact sheet in the participant’s native language will be 
given. .  There will be no payment to subjects in the study.  
 
25. LOCAL NUMBER OF SUBJECTS  
We seek to enroll [ADDRESS_943178] access to this key. The document that links 
the study participant ID number to patient identifiers (medical record number) will be 
stored in a separate locked filing cabin et in a different departmental locked office.  Once 
the study is published, this document will be destroyed, thus anonymizing data.   
 
 
27. PROVISIONS TO PROTECT THE PRIVACY INTERESTS OF SUBJECTS .  We will be requesting a 
HIPPA Wavier of authorization.  All patients being recruited will be recruited by [CONTACT_695180]; however, for data collecting purpose 
office/clinic note and problem list may be rev iewed.  This may be reviewed by a research team 
member who is not that participant’s provider.  The HIPPA waiver of authorization will be in 
 INVESTIGATOR STUDY PLAN  
 
 Page 9 of 9  participants’ native language.  An English version of the HIPPA waiver of authorization will be 
translated by [CONTACT_695181].  This is a reputable translation 
company recommended by U Mass Memorial interpretation services.   
 
 
. 
 
28. COMPENSATION FOR RESEARCH -RELATED INJURY  
Because there is minimal risk, there will be no compensation fo r subjects participating in the 
study. In the highly unlikely event of research -related injury, no funds have been set aside and 
the study subject will be responsible for  the cost of care of any research related injury.  
 
29. ECONOMIC BURDEN TO SUBJECTS  
There is no economic burden to the subjects. Both randomized groups will receive our standard 
of care and all necessary examinations, interventions, and procedures will continue regardless of 
the subject’s participation in the study  
 
30. CONSENT PROCESS  
Once participants have agreed to be enrolled, participants will be given a fact sheet that will be 
reviewed with them.  We will be using the Fact Sheet Template form found on the IRB website 
under forms and templates. The  Fact sheet will be translated into part icipants’ native language, 
by [CONTACT_695182].  We are requesting a waiver of documents of consent for 
the following reasons  
• The research present no more than minimal risk to subjects  
• The research involved no procedures for which written consent is normally required 
outside of the research context  
• We will be proving subjects written information about the study that embodies the 
elements of the consent  
 
How to review the fact sheet with subjects will be reviewed at our monthly research meeting 
prior to study recruitment, and all recruiting study staff are CITI trained. . Patients will be given 
ample time as previously described in section #[ADDRESS_943179] sheet will  be provided to the patie nt, along with the principal 
investigator [CONTACT_6227]. Subjects will be encouraged to call with any additional questions.  
 
31. PROCESS TO DOCUMENT CONSENT IN WRITING  
N/a 
We will be requesting  a waiver of documents of consent as previously described in section # 30 
 
 
 
32. DRUGS OR DEVICES  
N/A 
 