Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 1 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/2020   
 
Title:  Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of 
the Brain in COP D 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_452466] L. Moy, MD, MSc  
 Phone: [PHONE_9480]  
 E-mail: [EMAIL_8698]  
Protocol Version Number: 1.2 
Protocol Version Date:  21 June 2021  
 
Funding Mechanism:   VA Rehabilitation R& D SPi[INVESTIGATOR_21392] 1 I21 RX003305 -01A1  
Clinical Tr ials.gov:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
  
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 2 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/2020  TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1. Protocol Summary/Abstract  ................................ ................................ ...............................  3 
2. Background Information  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 4 
3. Rationale and Purpose  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 7 
4. Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  8 
5. Relevance to Veteran’s Health  ................................ ................................ ..........................  [ADDRESS_576812] Exclusion Criteria  ................................ ................................ .......................  11 
c. Recruitment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  11 
8. Data Collection/Study Measures  ................................ ................................ .....................  12 
9. Planned Statistical Analyses  ................................ ................................ ...........................  15 
10. Ethical Issues  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  16 
a. Risks to Subjects  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 16 
b. Potential Benefits ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 18 
c. Analysis of Risks in Relation to Benefits  ................................ ...............................  19 
d. Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_1869]  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  19 
11. Safety Monitoring Plan  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 19 
12. Adverse Event/Unanticipated Problems Reporting Plans  ................................ ............  20 
13. Literature Citations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  20 
  
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 3 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/2020  1. Protocol Summary /Abstract    
 
Objectives : Persons with COPD have both chronic musculoskeletal pain and 
dyspnea that require accurate diagnosis and treatment, ultimately to 
optimize functional status.  We will use advanced neuroimaging 
techniques to understand central mechanisms of chronic pain, 
dyspnea, and physical activity promotion in COPD .   We will correlate 
subjective symptoms (chronic pain and dyspnea) with an objective 
central biomarker (resting state functional connectivity) and 
examine their changes in response to a non -pharmacological, n on-
addictive physical activity (PA) promotion in Veterans with COPD.  
 
Resting state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging 
(fcMRI) is used in  brain mappi[INVESTIGATOR_452467] a resting state, 
before a sensory event or when an explicit task is not being 
performed.  The resting pattern and strength of functional 
connectivity specifically within the “default mode” network (DMN) 
(posterior cingulate, inferior parietal lobes, and medial frontal gyrus) 
have been examined in several studies of clinical disease states, as 
this network is reliably detected and well -characterized. The DMN is 
a critical network involved in many functions with high 
interconnectivity with other networks and could be a sensitive 
network that responds to symptom change. These resting 
communications are altered in older adults with chronic 
musculoskeletal pain .  Chronic musculoskeletal pain has not been 
specifically studied with neuroimaging in COPD.  
 
Research Design:  The study is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_452468] 30 Veterans with COPD 
who will be recruited through a current VA [LOCATION_011] IRB approved 
study (#3199 ) of a web -based PA intervention  (Every Step Counts 
ESC)  or through VA [LOCATION_011]’s  clinical PR program .  Participants will 
undergo a fcMRI of the brain at baseline and after one of these 
PA/exercise program  for approximately 3 months .  Scans will be 
performed in the Neuroimaging for Veterans Research Center 
(NeRVe) of VA [LOCATION_011] . 
Aim 1: Characterize and correlate the relationship between 
functional connectivity and chronic musculoskeletal pain and 
dyspnea in 30 persons with COPD ( aiming for approximately 10 with 
both symptoms, 10 with chronic pain, and 10 with dyspnea).   
Aim 2: Explore changes in functional connectivity and 
changes in symptoms in 30 persons with COPD after PA promotion 
through use of the ESC intervention  or conventional PR.   
 
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 4 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/2020  Methodology  Aim 1: Group average correlation maps will assess cross -sectional 
differences in functional connectivity between those with combined 
chronic musculoskeletal pain and dyspnea, compared to those with 
either symptom alone.  Our analysis will involve modeling with group 
as the independent variable and baseline neuroimaging p arameters 
as the dependent variable.   
Aim 2:  After completion of the PA /exercise  intervention,  
associations between longitudinal increases in PA measured as daily 
step counts and changes in mean regional connectivity will be 
assessed in each of the three groups and computed over the cortex 
using multiple linear regression  with FreeSurfer’s mri_glmfit and 
MATLAB (Mathworks; Natick, MA). Clinical characteristics associated 
with functional connectivity  when analyzed individually in 
preliminary analyses will be included in the regression models.    
 
Clinical Implications:  This proposal will provide insight into the biologically complex 
relationships between symptoms (chronic pain and dyspnea), 
behavior (PA), and biology at the central level (functional 
connectivity).   
 
 
 
2. Background Information   
 
Chronic musculoskeletal pain and dyspnea coexist and are highly prevalent in COPD.    
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), a major cause of global morbidity, is the fourth  
leading cause of death in the [LOCATION_002].1,2  COPD affects up to 11% of all VA healthcare patients.3  
Patients with COPD experience significant dyspnea despi[INVESTIGATOR_452469].4,5  
Breathlessness is an “all -consuming and life -changing” experience associated with profound fear.5,6  In 
addition, pain significantly impacts health -related quality of life (HRQL) and functional ability, but remains 
poorly understood in COPD.7-[ADDRESS_576813] 2.5 times greater pain compared to 
healthy adults.7  Over half of patients with COPD experience chronic pain --largely musculoskeletal pain.8-
10  Importantly, the co-occurrence  of dyspnea and chronic back or arthritis pain exists in 50 -67% of persons 
in a Medicare database.[ADDRESS_576814] a considerably higher prevalence of pain than 
those without, 64 vs. 18%, respectively.[ADDRESS_576815] their 
perceptions of one symptom amplified or modulated by [CONTACT_27748].7-11 Clinically, it is often difficult to 
distinguish a patient’s perception of chronic pain from dyspnea using self -report and questionnaires.  Yet, 
it is critically important to distinguish them to make accurate diagnostic and treatment decisions.  Patients 
who experience and report pain, heightened by [CONTACT_452504], may be overtreated with narcotics 
which can lead to respi[INVESTIGATOR_452470].    Similarly, a patient’s report of dyspnea, 
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 5 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/2020  amplified by [CONTACT_452505], may lead to unnecessary testing for etiologies of dyspnea and 
undertreatment of pain.  Novel diagnostic tools are needed to accurately and objectively distinguish 
between these symptoms in persons with COPD.  
 
Unique patterns of resting state functional connectivity may be a novel marker for symptoms.  
Unique brain activity networks and specific structural changes in the brain are traditionally 
associated with chronic pain stimuli.12  It has also been shown that resting state functional connectivity, 
between the anterior insular cortex and brainstem periaqueductal gray, determines pain perception in 
healthy humans.13  Resting state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI) is used 
in brain mappi[INVESTIGATOR_452471] a 
resting state, before a sensory event or 
when an explicit task is not being 
performed.14,15  The resting pattern and 
strength of functional conn ectivity 
specifically within the “default mode” 
network (DMN) (posterior cingulate, 
inferior parietal lobes, and medial 
frontal gyrus) have been examined in 
several studies of clinical disease states, 
as this network is reliably detected and 
well-character ized.[ADDRESS_576816] 
easily visualized networks.  It is a critical 
network involved in many functions with 
high interconnectivity with othe r 
networks and could be a sensitive 
network that responds to symptom change.16 These resting communications are altered in older adults 
with chronic musculoskeletal pain who show greater functional connectivity between the posterior 
cingulate and left insula, superior temporal gyrus, and cerebellum.17  Chronic musculoskeletal pain has 
not been specifically studied with neuroimaging in COPD.  
Currently, the central mechanisms of dyspnea in COPD are unknown.  “Dyspnea is not a carbon 
copy of pain.”18  Neuroimaging of dyspnea is in its infancy; most studies to date focus on acute dyspnea 
elicited in healthy volunteers. Only two studies have examined dyspnea in patients with COPD, and 
characterized its association with resting state functional connectivi ty in the anterior insular cortex, 
anterior cingulate cortex, prefrontal cortex, and posterior insular cortex.19,20  Even less is known about 
brain  activity or functional connectivity in persons with COPD who experience both  chronic pain and 
dyspnea.21  No study has examined the relationships between chronic musculoskeletal pain and dyspnea, 
and resting state functional connectivity.  Unique patterns and varying strength of functional connectivity 
may be novel biomarkers to assess underlying mechanisms of symptom perception and understand the 
unique contributions of chronic musculoskeletal  pain and dyspnea to a COPD patient’s symptom complex, Figure 1. Conceptual Model  
 

Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 6 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/2020  for accurate diagnosis and clinical management.  Based on our preliminary work using questionnaires and 
the published literature, we propose a Conceptual Model (Figure 1) in which COPD patients with both 
chronic musculoskeletal pain and dyspnea have common  and unique resting state functional connectivity.   
 
Physical activity is non -pharmacological therapy for chronic musculoskeletal pain and dyspnea.    
It is also important to understand chronic musculoskeletal  pain and dyspnea in COPD because 
they are common barriers to engaging in physical activity (PA)8,[ADDRESS_576817] spi[INVESTIGATOR_452472], physical inactivity, and deconditioning.4,5 Chronic 
pain similarly leads to a negative cycle of physical inactivity and functional limitation.  Symptoms worsen 
with even minimal movement, ultimately resulting in significant physical disability (Figure 1).   
Nevertheless, exercise and PA are effective non -pharmacological therapi[INVESTIGATOR_452473].7,22,24 -30  Conventional Pulmonary Rehabilitation (PR) is the standard of care to promote 
exercise and is the most effective therapy for dyspnea in stable COPD.24  There is also a need to include 
pain interventions in PR.9,10  However, PR is inaccessible and underutilized.26  Thus, we developed Every 
Step Counts (ESC), a technology -mediated intervention accessed via the internet, to promote PA in 
COPD.31-34  Based on the Theory of Self -Regulation,35,36  ESC couples a dynamic website with pedometer 
use to directly monitor step counts.  The website provides individualized step -count goals, iterative 
feedback, education on disease self -management, motivation, and online social support .33,34,37 -40  In two 
randomized studies in Veterans with COPD, we demonstrated ESC’s safety, feasibility, and efficacy to 
increase PA and improve HRQL over [ADDRESS_576818] shown that ESC can improve dyspnea as 
assessed with questionnaires.  Using the same web -based platform, Krein et al. showed that PA promotion 
decreases chronic back pain -related disability in the general Veteran population.41  No study has examined 
structured PA/exercise as treatment for both chronic musculoskeletal  pain and dyspnea in COPD.  N ovel 
tools are needed to assess the impact of PA promotion on pain and dyspnea, highly prevalent symptoms 
in Veterans with COPD.  
 
Symptom response to exercise may be associated with unique functional connectivity patterns.  
The biological mechanisms underlying the benefits of PA are only beginning to be elucidated. 
Neuroimaging studies focused on pain have shown distinct patterns in prefrontal cortex activity 
associated with pain improvement  after cognitive and meditative therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014].42  One small study showed 
that decreases in dyspnea after PR are associated with brain activity changes in the insula, anterior 
cingulate cortex and prefrontal cortex.20 Little is known about changes  in resting state functional 
connectivity patterns  associated with changes in chronic musculoskeletal pain and dyspnea as a result of 
PA and exercise interventions in COPD.  We propose a Conceptual Model in which PA can break the cycle 
of functional limitation in COPD that results from chronic musculoskeletal  pain and dyspnea, and 
reduction in these symptoms may map to unique functional connectivity patterns in the brain (Figure 1).  
No studies have examined changes in chronic musculoskeletal pain and dyspnea in response to PA and 
exercise, and their associated effects on functional connectivity, in persons with COPD.  We propose to 
address this gap in knowledge and examine the se central mechanisms using resting state functional 
connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI)  in a well-characterized cohort of Vete rans with COPD 
who have used the ESC web -based  PA intervention  or conventional PR . 
 
Neuroimaging in elderly patients with COPD is feasible.  There are a limited number of neuroimaging 
papers currently available on PubMed that examine resting state functional connectivity19, 44,45, brain 
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 7 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/2020  activity20, or the default mode network (DMN)43 in persons with COPD.  Yu et al. identified the insula as a 
seed region associated with dyspnea in 15 patients with COPD, compared to 15 controls.19  Wang et al. 
showed abnormal intrinsic brain activities in the posterior cingulate cortex, precuncus, and brainstem in 
19 patients with COPD.44.45  Herigstad  et al. showed that PR is associated with altered neural responses 
related to learned breathlessness in 31 patients with COPD, average age 68 ± 9 years.20  Finally, Hu et al. 
showed that cognitive impairments correlate with changes in the DMN 
in 29 persons with mild 
COPD, 30 with moderate 
COPD, and 24 with severe 
COPD.43  These results 
highlight the de arth of 
data about central 
mechanisms of chronic 
musculoskeletal  pain and 
dyspnea in COPD.  
Nevertheless, the 
published results provide 
guidance for our current 
proposal (i.e. sample size, 
insula as possible seed 
region) and demonstrate 
feasibility for imaging and 
interpreting fcMRI results from the COPD population.  In addition, [CONTACT_452522] (Co -Investigator) has extensive 
experience studying functional connectivity and the DMN in Veterans (Figure 2), and interpreting 
neuroimaging data from elderly adults.46-[ADDRESS_576819] in Aging, recruiting 
1200+ healthy adults aged 36 -100+, will provide context for interpretation of our fcMRI data in the 
proposed COPD cohort with an estimated mean age of 72 ± 8.40,47  Normative data are also available from 
the VA [LOCATION_011] Translational Research Center for Traumatic Brian Injury and Stress Disorders (TRACTS) 
which images Veterans with demographics and comorbidities similar to our COPD cohort.49    
 
3. Rationale and Purpose  
 
Statement of the Problem    
  COPD is the nation’s fourth  leading cause of death and affects up to 11% of all VA healthcare 
patients .  Patients with COPD experience significant dyspnea despi[INVESTIGATOR_452469].  In 
addition, over half of patients with COPD experience chronic pain --largely musculoskeletal pain.  
Clinically, in patients who suffer from both chronic pain and dyspnea, it is difficult to distinguish a 
patient’s perception of one symptom modulated by [CONTACT_27748] .  Novel objective diagnostic tools are 
needed to complement patient self -report and accurately distinguish symptoms in patients who have 
both chronic pai n and dyspnea to optimize clinical management.   It is also important to study chronic 
pain and dyspnea in COPD because they are common barriers to engaging in physical activity (PA) and 
exercise.  The clinical course of COPD is characterized by a downward spi[INVESTIGATOR_452474], 
physical i nactivity, and significant functional limitation.  Although chronic pain and dyspnea can be 
barriers, PA and exercise are powerful, but underused, non -addictive therapi[INVESTIGATOR_452475] 2.  With permission 
from [CONTACT_452522]; ref #4 6 
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 8 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/2020  these symptoms in COPD.  Conventional Pulmonary Rehabilitation (PR) delivers exercise in a supervised 
setting and is an intervention that can improve pain.  Because a large percentage of patients with COPD 
cannot access conventional PR, w e developed Every Step Counts (ESC), a technology -mediated 
intervention based on the Theory of Self -Regulation, to promote PA in COPD.  We have demonstrated 
ESC’s safety, feasibility, and efficacy to increase PA and improve health -related quality of life i n Veterans 
with CO PD.  In two separate studies using questionnaires, ESC has been shown to improve dyspnea in 
COPD and relieve chronic back pain in Veterans.  An important next step is to understand  the 
mechanisms of benefit of conventional PR and PA interventions, like ESC, in the many COPD patients 
with both chronic musculoskeletal pain and dyspnea  to optimize treatment of these symptoms.   
Currently, the central mechanisms of chronic pain and dyspnea, and how they change in response to PA 
promotion in COPD are largely unkn own.  It has been shown that pre -stimulus resting state functional 
connectivity determines pain perception in healthy humans.  Resting state fcMRI  evaluates interactions 
between brain regions before a sensory event or when an explicit task is not being performed.  These 
communications are altered in older adults with chronic musculoskeletal pain.  Functional connectivity 
among regions specifically within the “default mode” network (DMN) (posterior cingulate, inferior 
parietal lobes, and medial frontal gyrus ) have been examined in clinical disease states, as this network is 
reliably detected and well -characterized.  Functional connectivity may be a novel biomarker of chronic 
pain and dyspnea.  
 
Hypotheses or Key Question  
Persons with COPD have both chronic musculoskeletal pain and dyspnea that require accurate 
diagnosis and treatment, ultimately to optimize functional status.  We propose to use advanced 
neuroimaging techniques to understand central mechanisms of chronic pain, dyspnea, and physical activity 
promotion in COPD .  Our novel proposal to correlate subjective symptoms (chronic pain and dyspnea) with 
an objective central biomarker (resting state functional connectivity) and examine their changes in 
response to a non -pharmacological, non -addictive physical activity promotion (ESC  or conventional PR ) 
will personalize the care of Veterans with COPD.  
We hypothes ize that, in COPD,  there will be unique differences in the mean regional connectivity 
in the DMN between those with both chronic musculoskeletal pain and dyspnea versus those with either 
symptom alone, and that, after a PA promotion intervention (either web -based ESC or con ventional PR), 
functional connectivity will have specific changes associated with changes in chronic pain and dyspnea . 
 
4. Objectives  
Aim 1: Characterize and correlate the relationship between functional connectivity and chronic 
musculoskeletal pain and dyspnea in 30 persons with COPD ( aiming for approximately 10 with both 
symptoms, 10 with chronic pain, and 10 with dyspnea).   
 
Aim 2: Explore changes in functional connectivity and changes in symptoms in 30 persons with 
COPD after PA promotion through use of the ESC intervention  or conventional Pulmonary Rehabilitation .   
 
This proposal will provide insight into the biologically complex relationships between symptoms 
(chronic pain and dyspnea), behavior (PA), and biology at the central level (functional connectivity).   
 
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 9 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/[ADDRESS_576820]  the rehabilitative care of a vulnerable elderly population of Veterans with chronic disease.  
 
5. Relevance to Veteran’s Health  
Understanding the relationships between chronic musculoskeletal pain and dyspnea using advanced 
neuroimaging tools could personalize the clinical management of complex COPD patients .  Understanding 
the central mechanisms may target the use of novel drugs for relevant neurotransmitter systems.50 Our 
proposed work to correlate subjective symptoms (chronic musculoskeletal  pain and dyspnea) with an 
objective central biomarker (functional connectivity) and examine the impact of a non -pharmacological, 
non-addicti ve PA intervention on symptoms is aligned with VHA and RR&D research priorities.  There are 
strong implications for translation into clinical practice to advance the rehabilitative care of Veterans  by 
[CONTACT_162908] (1) accurately assessing baseline and relative changes in chronic musculoskeletal pain and 
dyspnea in response to exercise rehabilitation, and (2) informing the design of PA interventions to improve 
treatment of these symptoms.   Our work will establish feasibility of using neuroimaging as a biomark er.  
 
6. Study Design   
Conceptual model.  Figure 1 illustrates our hypotheses that, in COPD,  there will be unique differences in 
the mean regional connectivity in the DMN 
between those with both chronic 
musculoskeletal pain and dyspnea versus 
those with either symptom alone (Aim 1), and 
that, after a PA promotion intervention  (either 
web -based ESC or conventional PR), functional 
connectivity will have specific changes 
associated with changes in chronic pain and 
dyspnea (Aim 2).  
 
Overview (Table 1). This neuroimaging pi[INVESTIGATOR_452476] (1) participants who 
have enroll ed in an active study  examining the 
efficacy of a web -based intervention (ESC) to promote PA Veterans with COPD and who are assigned to 
the PA intervention group  (RR&D Merit I01 RX002855; 2019 -2023 , VA [LOCATION_011] IRB #3199 ) or (2) patients who 
will enroll in conventional Pulmonary Rehabilitation (PR) as part of usual clinical care at VA [LOCATION_011] .   
 
We will perform fcMRIs in a convenience sample of 30 males with COPD: aiming for approximately 10 
participants with chronic musculoskeletal pain and dyspnea, 10 with pain alone, and 10 with dyspnea alone.  
The 30 participants will be enrolled over 16 months.  A total of 60 neuroimaging scans ([ADDRESS_576821] PA/exercise ) will be performed.  This neuroimaging study will not affect 
the conduct or validity of the #[ADDRESS_576822] Nov-
Feb  
Mar -
Jun 
Participant 
Enrollment        
Cleaning Data 
Neuroimages        
Data Analysis        
Dissemination  
of Results        

Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 10 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/2020  data and the fcMRI data for the neuroimaging SPi[INVESTIGATOR_452477], including 
responses on questionnaires that assess pain and dyspnea.   
 
Pedometer and internet -mediated physical activity intervention (ESC).  As part of IRB #3199  and covered 
under the #3199 IRB approval , participants assigned to the ESC intervention are asked to wear a Fitbit 
pedometer every day, except while asleep or showering/bathing, during the [ADDRESS_576823] amount of burden on the 
participant . 
 
For participants who are enroll ed in #3199 and agree to this neuroimaging study, the only new testing in 
is the fcMRI.  All other assessments ( including chronic musculoskeletal pain, dyspnea, and daily step 
counts) will be collected as part of #[ADDRESS_576824]  their 
data  into a data repository ( VA IRB #2999).  We  may also use other information obtained as part of the 
subject’s  participation in #[ADDRESS_576825]  results , X-ray images/readings, exercise tests, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_452478], emerge ncy contact [CONTACT_3031], PR evaluations, medical history, allergies, 
imaging studies and reports, procedure reports, or mental health treatment .   
 
Conventional Pulmonary Rehabilitation.  
As part of usual medical care and covered under the clinical PR program, participants engage in a 
supervised exercise program.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Marilyn Moy is the Medical Director of the VA [LOCATION_011] Pulmonary 
Rehabilitation Program.  This is a clinical program comprised of a multidisciplinary team of specialists 
providing rehabilitative care to individuals with a variety of pulmonary dise ases.   The team includes 
physicians specializing in pulmonary care, a physician assistant, a respi[INVESTIGATOR_299329] a 
kinesi otherapi[INVESTIGATOR_541].  The comprehensive evaluation, educational, and exercise components are offered on 
an outpatient basis approximately two hours twice weekly for [ADDRESS_576826] 9 of the 18 PR exercise 
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 11 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/[ADDRESS_576827] agreed to participate in a PA /exercise  promotion 
program, either : (1) the web -based ESC intervention as part of the Merit study IRB#3199 , or (2) 
conventional PR as part of usual clinical care .   Therefore, they would meet the inclusion criteria as 
stated in research study #[ADDRESS_576828] any metal in their body including shrapnel, surgical medical clips, implants, 
pacemakers, or metal -based tattoos will be excluded.   
 
In summary, p articipants will meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria of #3199 or they will meet the 
clinical indications for enrollment in conventional PR.  In addition, for the proposed neuroimaging study, 
exclusion criteria are:  
a) Female sex  
b) Claustrophobia  
c) History of seizures  
d) Known brain lesion  
e) Current diagnosis of bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, or psychotic disorder  
f) Cognitive disorder such as dementia  
g) Known metal in body including shrapnel, surgical medical clips, implants, pacemakers, or metal -
based tattoos   
 
c. Recruitment  
We recruit from IRB #3199 participants assigned to the web -based ESC PA intervention.  We also recruit 
from the VA [LOCATION_011] clinical PR Program.   
 
(1) Those who enroll in #[ADDRESS_576829] signed the #[ADDRESS_576830] been assigned to the ESC PA 
intervention group  will be contact[CONTACT_452506] .  
Eligible and interested participants will sign an ICF and HIPAA for the neuroimaging study .   
 
(2) Recruitment of participants through conventional PR will be compatible with the established 
clinical workflow of the outpatient program based at VA [LOCATION_011].  During the PR intake 
assessments, candidates are evaluated by [CONTACT_452507].  Subjects typi[INVESTIGATOR_452479] a median of 6 -8 weeks after the clinical intake assessment, depending upon PR program 
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 12 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/2020  slot availability.  The PR program consists of 18 sessions held twice weekly for 9 weeks; exercise 
classes are conducted at the Jamaica Plain VA under the clinical care of the core PR team based 
at VA [LOCATION_011].  At the final PR session, a clinical exit evalu ation is performed at Jamaica Plain.   
 
[CONTACT_452523] and her study staff will review all incoming consults (see HIPAA waiver application) for 
eligibility based on COPD status.  Once a potential subject has been identified, initial contact [CONTACT_452508] a letter which will be mailed to the subject’s home address on file ( Please see 
recruitment letter and reply postcard template).  The letter will contain general information on 
the study, both in the body of the letter and in an enclosed brochure, as well as a postage -paid 
response postcard and t elephone number to contact [CONTACT_452509].  If the subject expresses interest, or if no opt -out response is received 
within [ADDRESS_576831] and/or conduct a telephone screening for eligibility (Please see telephone 
screening script).  We note that patients referred to VA[LOCATION_011]’s PR program but who choose to 
do a PR program outside of VA[LOCATION_011] are eligible to participate i n this neuroimaging study.  
 
Recruitment will be conducted  by [CONTACT_452510].  Enrollment in the 
neuroimaging study is voluntary and not a requirement of participating in #[ADDRESS_576832] brochures with study information in the waiting areas of pulmonary and primary 
care clinics.   
 
8. Data Collection/Study Measures  
Data assessments will be conducted at VA [LOCATION_011], JP campus, by [CONTACT_49165].   At the time 
of the fcMRI, all participants will complete assessments for pain (BPI [INVESTIGATOR_452480]) and shortness of breath  
(MMRC a nd UCSD SOB) . These 4 questionnaires will take up to 15 minutes to complete.  
 
Neuroimaging  (All Participants) .  Participants will complete a fcMRI scan clearance form. Scans will be 
performed in the Neuroimaging for Veterans Research Center (NeRVe) of the VA [LOCATION_011] Healthcare 
System, and a clinical MRI technician will be present for all scans. Each scan will start with [ADDRESS_576833] expansion, oxygen saturation, and end -
tidal C O2 will be assessed.  Neuroimaging data will be acquired  on a 3 -Tesla Siemens (Erlangen, [LOCATION_013]) 
TIM Trio scanner, using a 32 -channel brain array.46  Two multiecho MPRAGE (Magnetization Prepared 
Rapid Gradient Echo) T1 -weighted anatomical scans (1 mm isotropic) will be acquired for surface 
reconstruction, functional connectivity seed placement, and inter -participant registration.50,[ADDRESS_576834] L ifespan study.47,48   The fcMRI is being 
performed for research purposes only.  Participants will be paid  $65 for participation in each fcMRI scan 
performed .  They will be asked to disclose their personal identifying information (name, address, and 
social security number) to the VA  [LOCATION_011] Fiscal Office  in order to receive the cash payment.    
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 13 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/2020   
The scans performed in this study are for specific research purposes and are not meant to find any medical 
abnormalities. The results from the research scan will not be routinely shared with the participant’s clinical 
provider, except upon the participant’ s request.   However, if the investigators or MRI technician notice any 
potential incidental finding, the scan will be reviewed by a clinical radiologist who will determine whether a 
clinical evaluation is warranted.  If there is a finding that warrants a clinical follow -up, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Moy  will 
discuss this with the participant.  If any abnormality 
on the MRI is noted by [CONTACT_16133], the 
participant will be notified to follow up with  his usual 
provider.  
 
Symptom and physical activity assessments 
(Enrolled through PR  only) .  These will be assessed 
by [CONTACT_452511] 
(completed in person or  mailed through USPS to the 
participants, who will return them to study staff 
using a pre -paid mailer ) Table 2. Participants will be 
well-characterized at baseline with respect to 
demographics, medication use, comorbidities, lung 
function  (all based on medical chart review) , 
anxiety,52 depression,53 and sleep quality,54 (based 
on self-administered questionnaires) .  We will 
review the participant’s medical history and obtain 
information about cigarette use, supplemental 
oxygen use, and prior participation in PR.  We will 
assess chronic musculoskeletal  pain intensity and 
interference using the single -item N umeric Rating 
Scale (NRS)55,56 and the B rief Pain Inventory (BPI)  
short form57, respectively.  The NRS asks participants 
to rate pain intensity over the past week on a 
numbered scale of [ADDRESS_576835] week.57  The BPI 
[INVESTIGATOR_452481] .57  The 
arithmetic mean of the four severity items of the BPI [INVESTIGATOR_452482]; the arithmetic mean of the 
seven interference items measures pain interference.57  Dyspnea will be assessed with the mMRC scale 
(responses [ADDRESS_576836] dyspneic).58  We will also use  the UCSD Shortness of Breath 
Questionnaire for a detailed assessment of dyspnea.59  The MCID has been determined to be ± 5 units.60   
To assess intensity of PA reported at baseline, we will administer the 9 -item Rapid Assessment of Physical 
Activity (RAPA) which categorizes activity level as sedentary, underactive, and active.62,[ADDRESS_576837]  
Rapid Assessment of Physical Activity (intensity)  
Physical Activity Recall Questionnaire  
Barriers to Exercise  
Exercise Adherence (Exercise Logs)  
Exercise Self -Regulatory Efficacy  
St. George Respi[INVESTIGATOR_452483]’s Depression Inventory -II 
Epworth Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_452484] (short form) and Numerical 
Rating Scale for Pain  
Healthcare Utilization  
EQ-5D Health Utilities  
Veterans Rand 36 Item Health Survey (VR -36) 
CHAMPS Physical Activity Questionnaire  
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 14 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/2020  Exercise Adherence : We will measure exercise adherence by [CONTACT_18654] -report.  Subjects will be asked to 
complete daily exercise logs.  The paper log is intentionally simple to minimize  burden and potential 
influence to be part of the intervention.  Subjects will circle a yes/no response to 2 -3 questions about 
whether exercise was performed that day.  Subjects will bring completed logs to their follow -up visits or 
will be given a prepaid  return envelope to mail logs to study staff.  Exercise adherence, calculated weekly 
or monthly,  will be defined as > 70% of days with self -reported exercise.  70% is chosen since all 
participants are instructed to exercise most days (5 of the 7 days) each week.  
Exercise Self -Regulatory Efficacy :  The belief in one’s ability to self -regulate and exercise regularly when 
faced with challenges is a key variable that influences engagement in exercise.  The Exercise Self -
Regulatory Efficacy Scale for persons with COPD measures exercise self -regulation, a nd incorporates items 
from Resnick’s self -efficacy scale for older adults and McCauley’s self -efficacy questionnaire for sedentary 
adults.64  The 16 -item questionnaire is reliable and valid in COPD.64 
Health -Related Quality of Life :  Respi[INVESTIGATOR_696] -specific HRQL will be assessed with the St. George’s 
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_6015] (SGRQ).65  We will examine the composite Total Score (SGRQ -TS) as well as the 
subscales of Activity, Symptoms, and Impact.  Lower SGRQ scores indicate better health status.  The 
minimal clinically important difference (MCID) for the SGQR -TS is + 4 units.66  The SGRQ has been used 
extensively in COPD.  
Dyspnea :  Dyspnea will also be assessed using the Modified Medical Research Council scale (responses [ADDRESS_576838] dyspneic).58  We will also use  the UCSD Shortness of Breath Questionnaire for a 
detailed  assessment of dyspnea.59  The MCID has been determined to be ± 5 units.60  
Depression : Depression will be assessed with the Beck’s Depression Inventory -II.67  A score of 14 or higher 
represents a clinical diagnosis of depression.  If responses meet the cut -off scores indicating a clinical 
diagnosis of depression or anxiety, with the patients’ permission, we will inform their medical and mental 
health providers of the results for further evaluation and/or treatment.  
 
Healthcare Utilization :  Acute Exacerbation and Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_452485]:  Assessment of AEs and COPD -
related hospi[INVESTIGATOR_452486] -report and medical chart review.  During the study, all 
subjects will be instructed to call study staff with any changes in clinical status or medications.  Most 
patients remember the occurrence of AEs because they are well -defined periods of worsening symptoms 
that require treatment with an antibiotic and/or prednisone.[ADDRESS_576839] scan reports, and any additional 
information.  Patient reports will be verified with review of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_452487], whenever possible . An AE will be clearly defined as “a complex of respi[INVESTIGATOR_037] (increased or new onset) of more than one of the following: cough, sputum, wheezing, 
dyspnea, or chest tightness with a du ration of at least 3 days, requiring treatment with antibiotics or 
systemic steroids”.70  Occurrence of AEs within 14 days of each other will be considered a single AE.71  This 
definition will also be used at the baseline visit for assessment of occurrence of AEs in the year prior to 
study entry.  
 
We will also administer the following:  
4-meter gait speed as a measure of overall frailty.  
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 15 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/[ADDRESS_576840] to be  completed and sent back in a pre -paid mailer.  
 
No 38 USC 7332 information (e.g., alcohol/drug abuse, HIV, sickle cell) be collected.   
Participants can be removed from the study by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_452488].   
 
All study data will remain at VA [LOCATION_011], behind the firewall. 
 
9. Planned Statistical Analyses  
Analytic approach.  For neuroimaging, all analyses will be performed with complementary advanced 
imaging procedures for brain network mappi[INVESTIGATOR_007], including seed -based and independent component 
analysis procedures, to assure the robustness of the findings.  We will correlate neur oimaging data with 
clinical data.  We will perform secondary analyses to examine the potential influence of PA and clinical 
characteristics that may contribute to the findings.  Our main image analyses will use robust and careful 
seed -based DMN mappi[INVESTIGATOR_4585].  Analyses will account for known contributors to the fcMRI signal 
including motion, respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516], and cardiac signals.46-[ADDRESS_576841] stream  (motion correction, time shifting, 
concaten ation of scans, motion regressed from time series, regression of the global  mean and the average 
time courses from the white matter  and the ventricles, band pass filtering between 0.01 and 0.1  Hz).46  
Time points, runs, and sessions with excessive motion  will be excluded (0.5 mm/TR; 20 TRs/run; 30 
TRs/session).  Data will be sampled to and smoothed on the surface, and each brain will be warped to a 
surface -based template (fsaverage).[ADDRESS_576842] anatomical representation for each participant.78  The vertex -wise partial 
correlation to the seed will allow further group -level analyses.   We will focus on the DMN, but ex plore 
other networks including pain networks.  We will also explore resting state functional connectivity 
associated with the anticipatory symptom scenarios.  
 
 
 
 
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 16 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/2020  Statistical analysis.    
Aim 1: Group average correlation maps will assess cross -sectional differences in functional connectivity 
between those with combined chronic musculoskeletal pain and dyspnea, compared to those with either 
symptom alone.  Our analysis will involve modeling with group as the independent variable and baseline 
neuroimaging p arameters as the dependent variable.  We will include any confounding variables in the 
models.  
 
Aim 2:  After completion of t he PA/exercise  intervention,  associations between longitudinal increases in 
PA measured as daily step counts and changes in mean regional connectivity will be assessed in each of 
the three groups and computed over the cortex using multiple linear regression  with FreeSurfer’s 
mri_glmfit and MATLAB (Mathworks;  Natick, MA).46 Clinical characteristics associated with functional 
connectivity  when analyzed individually in preliminary analyses will be included in the regression models.   
We note that although the exercise/PA from ESC and PR are of different intensities, we will be assessing 
daily step counts as a marker of PA which will be assessed and analyzed in the same way regardless of the 
exercise/PA program used.   
 
Sample size/Power calculation.  This is an exploratory proposal in a convenience sample of [ADDRESS_576843] application.  
 
10. Ethical Issues  
a.  Risks to Subjects  
Human Subjects Involvement and Characteristics:  
Patients with a diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease  (COPD) who have been 
assigned to the ESC PA intervention group of the  #[ADDRESS_576844] been enrolled in conventional 
PR at VA [LOCATION_011] will be eligible to participate in the proposed neuroimaging study.   
 
Sources of Materials :  Data will be collected from human subjects for research purposes.   As part of the 
primary Merit #3199  or clinical Pulmonary Rehabilitation program,  some or all of the following 
information will be collected at baseline and 3 -months follow -up:  
a)    Demographic information  and medical history  
b) Step count data from the pedometer which all patients will wear for 10 days at baseline, and for 
10 days at follow -up assessments.   
c)   Questionnaires to assess dyspnea, pain, health -related quality of life, depression, anxiety, and 
exercise self -efficacy.   
d) 6-minute walk test distance to assess exercise capacity.  
 
For the proposed neuroimaging study , additional  sources of materials are:  
a)  fcMRI of brain   
 
Potential Risks   
Neuroimaging with MRI Scanning  (All Participants) : Minimal risks are associated with MRI scanning.  Lying 
down in the MRI scanner may cause back discomfort or anxiety, particularly if the subject tends to be 
claustrophobic.  There is a risk of falling getting on and off the scanner table.  Extended periods of time in 
the MRI scanner can become uncomfortable. There is no risk of ionizing radiation exposure with MRI.  
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 17 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/2020  During the MRI procedure, participants will hear many different sounds. These sounds are sharp and 
repetitive and can cause anxiety in some subjects. While they may be annoying, these sounds are not 
harmful to one’s hearing.   
 
Potential risks to study participants enrolled through PR performing  assessments include the following:  
1. Subject discomfort with questionnaire items - It is possible that some questions on the 
questionnaires may make a subject feel uncomfortable.  Subjects do not need to answer these 
questions.  
 
Protection Against Risks  
Neuroimaging  (All Particip ants) 
We will use all reasonable means to promote comfort including but -not limited to use of pi[INVESTIGATOR_452489].  Some people experience a "closed -in" feeling due to the relatively restricted space within the 
MRI machine. If a participant should experience suc h feelings, he can let the researchers know by 
[CONTACT_452512].  He can do this at any time to stop the scan. We will minimize sharp sounds 
through the use of earplugs.  
 
All safety precautions will be reviewed with the subject immediately prior to having the MRI.  If there is 
any doubt as to whether the subject has metal in his body, he will be requested to have an X -ray to 
determine this. If the X -ray shows that there is metal in the participants, he will not be able to take part 
in the MRI study.  If there is more than one part of the body in which metal is questionable, the 
participant will not be able to have an X -ray and will not be able to participate in the MRI study . 
 
Study staff will provide pi[INVESTIGATOR_452490]. The 
criteria for discontinuing a subject’s participation in the neuroimaging protocol include the participant’s 
request, any potential for harm, and any lif e-threatening or potentially disabling unintended event, 
including syncope, an injurious fall, new or worsened symptoms of musculoskeletal pain, shortness of 
breath, or chest pain, hemodynamic instability, mental status changes, dysrhythmia, angina, myocar dial 
infarction, or anaphylaxis.  These adverse events will be recorded and included in the database. Any 
subject who develops adverse events during the conduct of study protocols will be given immediate 
medical care and will be referred to his primary car e physician for ongoing care.  
 
Participant confidentiality and data security will be maintained at all times.  Each participant will be given 
a unique study ID that will be used for all research purposes.  Neuroimaging data will be stored behind 
the VA firewall at VA [LOCATION_011].  These data are backed up every night. The document linking the participant 
name [CONTACT_452520] a locked file separate from data collection files.  Only the Principal 
Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_452491].    
 
For those recruited through PR  
We estimate the total time of testing to be approximately  1 hour per study visit  (including the 
MRI) . Staff performing the 6MWT will be trained in Basic Life Support.  Emergency treatments including 
nebulizer therapy, an automated external defibrillator, and a code cart will be available.  During the 
pulmonary function tests and 6MWTs, subjects can rest if  short of breath and will be allowed to use 
supplemental oxygen if usually prescribed.  Subjects will be instructed to bring their medications to the 
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 18 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/2020  visit and will be allowed to take their bronchodilators if needed after performing the walk tests.  If oxygen 
saturation <85% is observed at the baseline 6MWT, subjects will be temporarily excluded and their 
primary provider contact[CONTACT_452513].  Th ese subjects can be reassessed for eligibility at a later date 
when clinically stable.  If hypoxemia occurs during a follow -up 6MWT, patients will be referred to their 
primary providers for assessment and suspended from the study until clinically stable.   Hypoxemia and 
dyspnea predict balance impairment and falls in COPD; both are assessed right before the 6MWT is 
performed.  Also, if the subject is unsteady on his feet during the short walk to assess device accuracy and 
is obviously a fall risk, the 6MWT will not be performed.     Depression will be assessed with the Beck’s 
Depression Inventory -II; a score of 14 or higher suggests a clinical diagnosis of depression.  If responses 
meet the cut -off scores indicating possible depression or anxiety, with the p atients’ permission, we will 
inform their medical and mental health providers of the results for further evaluation and/or treatment.  
Additionally, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_452492] 9 of the Beck’s, and 
the PI [INVESTIGATOR_452493].  The 
clinical diagnosis of depression or anxiety will need to come from the participants’ mental health  or 
primary care providers, we are not diagnosing it in the  research study.   
Subjects do not have to answer any questions on questionnaires with which they are 
uncomfortable.  Available 24/[ADDRESS_576845] by [CONTACT_452514], collected by [CONTACT_452515], in a locked filing system.   No data collection form will be linked to a participant’s name.  Study reports 
will be aggregated so that individual participants cannot be identified.  All data w ill be stored in Access 
databases, identified only by [CONTACT_32221], behind the firewalls at VA [LOCATION_011].  These data are backed 
up every night. The document linking the participant name [CONTACT_452520] a locked file 
separate from data collection files.  Only the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_452491].  
Removal of access to research study data will be accomplished in a timely manner for study personnel 
when they are no longer part of the research team.   
 
b. Potential Benefits  
There are no direct benefits of the proposed neuroimaging study to the subjects and others.   This 
multidisciplinary proposal will provide insight into the biologically complex relationships between 
symptoms (chronic musculoskeletal pain and dyspnea) and behavior (PA/exercise) using neuroimaging 
techniques.  First, understanding how breathlessness and chronic musculoskeletal pain interact at the 
central level in individuals with COPD  could lead to a personalized clinical decision -making process when 
choosing treatment options for a COPD patient suffering from both chronic pain and dyspnea.  
Understanding the relationships between chronic pain and dyspnea using neuroimaging tools could 
complement patient self -report to p rovide complete diagnostic information to personalize the clinical 
management of complex patients who suffer from both symptoms, ultimately to maximize functional 
recovery of Veterans with COPD.  If we can identify an objective neuroimaging marker that distinguishes 
pain from dyspnea in COPD patients, this would reduce narcotic overtreatment and unnecessary testing 
for dyspnea.  Functional con nectivity is potentially a novel solution to address the clinical challenge of 
distinguishing between chronic pain a nd dyspnea.  It may be particularly efficacious in the subgroup of 
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 19 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/[ADDRESS_576846] on reducing PA/exercise 
would optimize health -related quality of life and maximize engagement in PA.  In two separate studies 
using questionnaires, our web -based PA intervention improved dy spnea in COPD and relieved chronic 
back pain in Veterans.  An important next step is to understand  the mechanisms of benefit of PA 
interventions, like ESC, in the many COPD patients with both chronic musculoskeletal pain and dyspnea .  
Since not all persons  with COPD benefit from conventional PR and PA interventions, neuroimaging may 
allow patient stratification to guide development of better PA interventions to personalize and optimize 
treatment of these symptoms.  Thus, there are strong implications for tr anslation into clinical practice to 
advance the rehabilitative care of Veterans  by [CONTACT_162908] (1) accurately assessing baseline and relative 
changes in chronic musculoskeletal pain and dyspnea in response to exercise rehabilitation, and (2) 
informing the design of better PA interventions to personalize and improve treatment of chronic 
musculoskeletal pain and dyspnea.  Our proposed work will establish feasibility and acceptability, evaluate 
neuroimaging as a biomarker for chronic pain and dyspnea, and provide effect estimates  for study design 
of a full Merit Award application.  The VA ORD Strategic Plan includes research in COPD rehabilitation to 
optimize functional recovery.  
 
c. Analysis of Risks in Relation to Benefits  
The possible risks to subjects are reasonable in relation to anticipated benefits to subjects, and the 
anticipated  importance of the knowledge that may reasonably be expected to result.  
 
d. Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_1869]  
A participant may withdraw his participation at any time .  There are no stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_452494].  
 
11. Safety Monitoring Plan  
All safety precautions will be reviewed with the subject immediately prior to having the MRI.  If 
there is any doubt as to whether the subject has metal in his body, he will be requested to have an X -ray 
to determine this. Study staff will provide pi[INVESTIGATOR_452495]. The criteria for discontinuing a subject’s participation in the neuroimaging protocol 
include the participant’s request, any potential for harm, and any life -threatening or potentially disa bling 
unintended event, including syncope, an injurious fall, new or worsened symptoms of musculoskeletal 
pain, shortness of breath, or chest pain, hemodynamic instability, mental status changes, arrhythmia, 
angina, myocardial infarction, or anaphylaxis.  These adverse events will be recorded and included in the 
database. Any subject who develops adverse events during the conduct of the study protocol will be given 
immediate medical care and will be referred to his primary care physician for ongoing care.  Available 24/[ADDRESS_576847] by 
[CONTACT_452516], collected by [CONTACT_155353], in a locked filing sy stem.   No data 
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 20 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/2020  collection form will be linked to a participant’s name.  Study reports will be aggregated so that individual 
participants cannot be identified.  All data will be stored in Access databases, identified only by [CONTACT_452517], behind the firewalls at VA Bos ton.  Neuroimaging data will be similarly stored at VA [LOCATION_011].  
These data are backed up every night.  The document linking the participant name [CONTACT_452521] a locked file separate from data collection files.  Only the PI [INVESTIGATOR_452496].    
All adverse events will be ascertained by [CONTACT_452518].  This will occur in 
real time as well as during monthly lab meetings.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_452497], 
seriousness, relatedness, and expectedness.  The PI w ill review aggregated adverse events at annual 
continuing review to determine whether there are trends that could affect subject safety.  There is no 
blinding for this study. There is no Data and Safety Monitoring Board for this neuroimaging study.  
 
 
12. Adverse Event/Unanticipated Problems Reporting Plans  
All adverse events will be reported in writing to the IRB at continuing review.  All serious adverse events 
and unanticipated problems will be reported in writing within 10 working days of the study staff being 
aware of the event/problem.  The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_452498], 
Adverse Events, and safety monitors’ reports to the IRB in accordance with VHA Handbook 1058.[ADDRESS_576848]  AS.  Global burden of COPD: risk factors, prevalence, and future trends. Lancet 
2007;370:765 -773. PMID: 17765526  
 
2. Deaths from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease --[LOCATION_002], 2000 -2005. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2008;57:1229 -1232. PMID: 19008792  
 
3. Sharafkhaneh A, Petersen NJ, Yu HJ, et al.  Burden of COPD in a government health care system: a 
retrospective observational study using data from the US Veterans Affairs population. Int J Chron 
Obstruct Pulmon Dis 2010;5:125 -132. PMID: 20461144  
4. From the Global Strategy for the Diagnosis, Management and Prevention of COPD, Global Initiative 
for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 2017. Available from: http://goldcopd.org.   Accessed 
February 10, 2019  
5. Manning HL,  Schwartzstein  RM.  Pathophysiology  of dyspnea. N Engl J Med.  1995 Dec 
7;333(23):1547 -53. PMID:7477171  
6. Hayen  A, Herigstad M , Pattinson KT.  Understanding dyspnea as a complex individual experience. 
Maturitas. 2013 Sep;76(1):45 -50. doi : 10.1016/j.maturitas.2013.06.005. Epub 2013 Jul 10. Review. 
PMID:23849705  
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 21 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/[ADDRESS_576849] JD, Darlene Reid W.  Pain in people with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). Respir Med. 2012 Jul;106(7):998 -1005. doi: 
10.1016/j.rmed.2012.03.004. Epub 2012 Apr 22.PMID:22531146  
8. Andenæs R, Momyr A, Brekke I. Reporting of pain by [CONTACT_452519] (COPD): comparative results from the HUNT3 population -based survey. BMC Public Health. 
2018 Jan 25;18(1):181. doi: 10.1186/s12889 -018-5094 -5. PMID:29370850  
9. Lee AL , Goldstein RS, Brooks D. Chronic  pain  in people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: 
prevalence, clinical and psychological implications. Chronic Obstr Pulm Dis. 2017 May 21;4(3):194 -
203. doi: 10.[ZIP_CODE]/jcopdf.4.3.2016.0172. PMID:28848931  
10. Lee AL , Harrison SL, Goldstein RS, Brooks D.  Pain  and its clinical associations in individuals with 
COPD: a systematic review. Chest. 2015 May;147(5):1246 -1258. doi: 10.1378/chest.14 -2690. 
Review. PMID:25654647  
11. Clark N , Fan VS, Slatore CG, et al. Dyspnea and  pain  frequently co -occur among Medicare managed 
care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2014 Jul;11(6):890 -7. doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201310 -369OC. 
PMID:24960243  
12. Knudsen L , Petersen GL, Nørskov KN, Vase L, Finnerup N, Jensen TS,  Svensson P .  Review of 
neuroimaging studies related to pain modulation. Scand J Pain. 2018 Jul 1;2(3):108 -120. doi: 
10.1016/j.sjpain.2011.05.005. PMID:29913745  
13. Ploner  M, Lee MC, Wiech K, Bingel U, Tracey I.  Prestimulus functional connectivity 
determines  pain  perception in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jan 5;107(1):355 -60. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.[PHONE_9481]. Epub 2009 Nov 30. PMID:[ADDRESS_576850], Kaye AD.  Functional connectivity 
alterations: novel therapy and future implications in chronic pain management. Pain Physician. 2018 
May;21(3):E207 -E214. Review. PMID:29871376  
15. Lee MH, Smyser CD, Shimony JS.  Resting -state fMRI: A review of methods and clinical applications. 
Am J Neuroradiol 2013; 34:1866 –1872. PMID:22936095  
16. Shehzad Z , Kelly AM, Reiss PT, et al.  The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable. Cereb Cortex. 
[ADDRESS_576851];19(10):2209 -29. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhn256. Epub 2009 Feb 16. PMID:19221144  
17. Duke Han S,  Buchman AS,  Arfanakis K,  Fleischman DA,  Bennett DA.  
Functional  connectivity  networks associated with chronic musculoskeletal  pain  in old age. Int J 
Geriatr Psychiatry.  2013 Aug;28(8):858 -67. doi: 10.1002/gps.3898. Epub 2012 Nov 5. 
PMID:2312484 4 
18. Herigstad M , Hayen A, Wiech  K, Pattinson KT.  Dyspnoea and the brain. Respir Med. 2011 
Jun;105(6):809 -17. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2010.12.022. Epub 2011 Feb 3. Review. PMID:21295457  
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 22 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/[ADDRESS_576852] M, Hess A, et al.  Functional connectivity and information flow of the 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_452499]. Hum Brain Mapp. 2016 
Aug;37(8):2736 -54. doi: 10.1002/hbm.[ZIP_CODE].PMID:27059277  
20. Herigstad M , Faull OK, Hayen A, et al. Treating breathlessness  via the brain: changes in brain activity 
over a course of  pulmonary  rehabilitation. Eur Respir J. 2017 Sep 12;50(3). pii: 1701029. doi: 
10.1183/13993003.[ZIP_CODE] -2017. PMID:[ADDRESS_576853] 15;48(1):200 -6. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.06.015. Epub 2009 Jun 12. 
PMID:[ADDRESS_576854] JD,  Reid WD .  Pain  and physical performance in people with COPD. 
Respir Med. 2013 Nov;107(11):1692 -9. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2013.06.010. Epub 2013 Jul 8. 
PMID:23845881  
23. Harrison SL , Lee AL, Elliott -Button HL, et al.  The role of  pain  in pulmonary rehabilitation: a 
qualitative study. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Nov 8;12:3289 -3299. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S145442. eCollection 2017. PMID:29184398  
24. Spruit MA, Singh SJ, Garvey C , et al.  An official American Thoracic Society/European Respi[INVESTIGATOR_216862]: key concepts and advances in pulmonary rehabilitation. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 2013;188:e13 -64. PMID: 24127811  
25. Waltz H, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_210372] F, [COMPANY_002]ster CL, et al. An official European Respi[INVESTIGATOR_452500]. Ear Respi[INVESTIGATOR_1312] J 2014;44:1521 -37. PMID: 25359358  
26. [COMPANY_002]ster CL, Vogiatzis I, Holland AE, et al.  An Official American Thoracic Society/European 
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_452501]: Enhancing implementation, use, and delivery of pulmonary 
rehabilitation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015 Dec 1;192(11):1373 -86. PMID:26623686  
27. Higgins DM , Martin AM, Baker DG, et al. The relationship between chronic pain  and neurocognitive 
function: a systematic review. Clin J Pain . 2018 Mar;34(3):262 -275. PMID:28719507  
28. Sitthipornvorakul E, Klinsophon T, Sihawong R, Janwantanakul P.  The effects of walking intervention 
in patients with chronic low back pain: A meta -analysis of randomized controlled trials. 
Musculoskelet Sci Pract. 2018 Apr;34:38 -46. doi: 10.1016/j.msksp.2017.12.003. PMID:29257996  
29. Becker WC, DeBar LL, Heapy AA, et al.  A research agenda for advancing non -pharmacological 
management of chronic musculoskeletal pain: Findings from a VHA state -of-the-art conference. J 
Gen Intern Med. 2018 May;33(Suppl 1):11 -15. doi: 10.1007/s11606 -018-4345-6.PMID:29633136  
30. Edmond SN, Becker WC, Driscoll MA, et al.  Use of non -pharmacological pain  treatment modalities 
among Veterans with chronic pain : results from a cross -sectional survey. J Gen Intern Med. 2018 
May;33(Suppl 1):54 -60. doi: 10.1007/s11606 -018-4322 -0.PMID:29633141  
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 23 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/[ADDRESS_576855] 2007;4:59. PMID: 18021411  
32. Richardson CR, Buis LR, Janney AW, et al.  An online community improves adherence in an internet -
mediated walking program. Part 1: results of a randomized controlled trial.  J Med Internet Res 
2010;12:e71. PMID: 21169160  
33. Moy ML, Janney AW, Nguyen HQ, et al.  Use of pedometer and Internet -mediated walking program 
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. J Rehabil Res Dev 2010;47(5):485 -496. 
PMID: 20803392  
34. Moy ML, Weston NA, Wilson EJ, et al.  A pi[INVESTIGATOR_452502]. Respir Med 2012;106:1342 -1350. PMID: 22795984  
35. Boekaerts M, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_452503], Zeidner M, eds. Handbook of self -regulation. San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press; 2000.  
36. Cameron LD, Leventhal H, eds. The self -regulation of health and illness behavior. Routledge; 
2003.Locke EA and Latham GP.  A theory of goal setting and task performance. 1990, Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice -Hall.  
37. Martinez CH, Moy ML, Nguyen HQ, et al.  Taking healthy steps: rationale, design and baseline 
characteristics of a randomized trial of a pedometer -based internet -mediated walking program in 
Veterans with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.  BMC Pulm Med 2014;14:12. doi: 
10.1186/1471 -2466 -14-12. PMID: 24491137  
38. Moy ML, Collins RJ, Martinez CH, et al.  An internet -mediated pedometer -based program improves 
health -related quality of life domains and daily step counts in COPD: A randomized controlled trial. 
Chest 2015; 148:128 -137. PMID: 25811395  
39. Moy ML , Martinez CH, Kadri R, et al.  Long -term effects of an internet -mediated pedometer -based 
walking program for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: randomized controlled trial.  J Med 
Internet Res 2016 Aug 8;18(8):e215. doi: 10.2196/jmir.5622. PMID:275025 83 
40. Wan ES, Kantorowski A, Homsy D, et al.  Promoting physical activity in COPD: Insights from a 
randomized trial of a web -based intervention and pedometer use. Respir Med 2017, Vol130, 102 – 
110. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rmed.2017.07.057. PMID:29206627  
41. Krein SL , Kadri R, Hughes M, et al.  Pedometer -based internet -mediated intervention for adults with 
chronic low back pain: randomized controlled trial. J Med Internet Res. 2013 Aug 19;15(8):e181. doi: 
10.2196/jmir.2605.PMID:23969029  
42. Nascimento SS , Oliveira LR, DeSantana JM. Correlations between brain changes 
and pain  management after cognitive and meditative therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]: A systematic review of 
neuroimaging studies. Complement Ther Med. 2018 Aug;39:137 -145. PMID:30012384  
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 24 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/[ADDRESS_576856] Pulmon Dis. 2018 Feb 
7;13:519 -528. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S146870. eCollection 2018. PMID:2944 5270  
44. Wang W , Li H, Peng D, et al. Abnormal intrinsic brain activities in stable patients with  COPD : a 
resting -state functional MRI study. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. [ADDRESS_576857] 17;14:2763 -2772. doi: 
10.2147/NDT.S180325. eCollection 2018.PMID:30425494  
45. Li H, Xin H,  Yu J, et al. Abnormal intrinsic functional hubs and connectivity in stable patients 
with  COPD : a resting -state MRI study. Brain Imaging Behav. 2019 Jun 11. doi: 10.1007/s11682 -019-
[ZIP_CODE] -7. [Epub  ahead of print] PMID:[ADDRESS_576858]  exposure  is associated with altered 
functional connectivity in Veterans independent of concussion symptoms at time of  exposure. Hum 
Brain Mapp. 2015 Mar;36(3):911 -22. doi: 10.1002/hbm.[ZIP_CODE]. PMID:[ADDRESS_576859] in Aging: An 
overview. Neuroimage. 2019 Jan 15;185:335 -348. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.10.009. Epub 
[ADDRESS_576860] 15.PMID:[ADDRESS_576861] across ages: 
imaging protocols for the lifespan development and aging projects. Neuroimage. 2018 Dec;183:972 -
984. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.09.060. Epub 2018 Sep 24. PMI D:30261308  
49. McGlinchey RE,  Milberg WP , Fonda JR, Fortier CB.  A methodology for assessing deployment trauma 
and its consequences in OEF/OIF/OND veterans: The  TRACTS  longitudinal prospective cohort study. 
Int J Methods Psychiatr Res. 2017 Sep;26(3). doi: 10.1002/mpr.1556. Epub 2017 Feb 
17.PMID:28211592  
50. Biswal B, Yetkin FZ, Haughton VM, Hyde JS.  Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of the 
resting human brain using echo -planar MRI. Magn Reson Med 1995;34:537 –541. PMID:8524021  
51. van der Kouwe AJW, Benner T, Salat DH, Fischl B.  Brain morphometry with multiecho MPRAGE. 
Neuroimage. 2008 Apr 1;40(2):559 -569. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.12.025.  PMID:18242102  
52. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626] R, Kroenke K, Williams J, Lowe B. A brief measure for assessing generalized anxiety disorder. 
The GAD -7. Arch Intern Med 2006;166:1092 -1097.  
53. Kroenke K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626] R, Williams J. The PHQ -9. Validity of a brief depression severity measure. J Gen 
Intern Med 2001;16:[ADDRESS_576862]. 1993 Jan;103(1):30 -6. PMID:8417909  
55. Kroenke K , Krebs EE, Turk D, et al. Core outcome measures for chronic musculoskeletal pain 
research: Recommendations from a  Veterans  Health Administration work group. Pain Med. 2019 Jan 
5. doi: 10.1093/pm/pny279. [Epub ahead of print] PMID:30615172  
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 25 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/2020  56. Chiarotto A, Maxwell LJ, Ostelo RW, Boers M, Tugwell P, Terwee CB. Measurement properties of 
visual analogue scale, numeric rating scale, and  pain  severity subscale of the brief  pain  inventory in 
patients with low back  pain : A systematic review. J  Pain . 2019 Mar;20(3):245 -263. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpain.2018.07.009. Epub 2018 Aug 10. Review. PMID:[ADDRESS_576863] JD, Coxson HO, Camp PG,  Reid WD .  Reliability and validity of the 
Brief  Pain  Inventory in individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Eur J  Pain . 2018 
Nov;22(10):1718 -1726. doi: 10.1002/ejp.1258. Epub 2018 Jun 22.PMID:29883526  
58. Bestall JC, Paul EA, Garrod R,et al.  Usefulness of the Medical Research Council (MRC) dyspnoea 
scale as a measure of disability in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Thorax 
1999;54:581 -586. PMID: 10377201  
59. Eakin EG, Resnikoff PM, Prewitt LM, et al.  Validation of a new dyspnea measure: the UCSD 
Shortness of Breath Questionnaire. Chest 1998;113:619 -624. PMID: 9515834  
60. Kupferberg DH, Kaplan RM, Slymen DJ, et al.  Minimal clinically important difference for the UCSD 
Shortness of Breath Questionnaire. J Cardiopulm Rehabil 2005;25:370 -377. PMID: 16327533  
61. Moy ML, Danilack VA, Weston NA, et al.  Daily step counts in a US cohort with COPD. Respi[INVESTIGATOR_154320] 2012;106(7):962 -969. PMID: 22521225  
62. Coultas  DB, Jackson BE, Russo R, et al. Home -based physical activity coaching, physical activity, and 
health care utilization in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.  Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2018;15:470 -
478. PMID:29283670  
 
63. Topolski TD , LoGerfo J , Patrick DL , et al. The Rapid Assessment of Physical Activity (RAPA) among older 
adults. Prev Chronic Dis.  [ADDRESS_576864];3(4):A118. PMID:16978493  
 
64. Davis AH, Figueredo AJ, Fahy BF, et al. Reliability and validity of the Exercise  Self-Regulatory  Efficacy  
Scale  for individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.  Heart Lung 2007;36:205 -16. 
PMID:[ADDRESS_576865]. George's Respi[INVESTIGATOR_6015]. Am Rev Respir Dis 1992;145:1321 -1327. PMID: 
[ADDRESS_576866]. George's Respi[INVESTIGATOR_6015]: MCID. COPD 2005;2:75 -79.  PMID: [ADDRESS_576867] CH, Mendelson M, Mock J, Erbaugh J. An inventory for measuring depression. Arch 
Gen Psychiatry 1961;4:561 -571.  
 
68. ATS statement: guidelines for the six -minute walk test. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002;166:111 -117. 
PMID: 12091180  
 
Effects of Chronic Pain, Dyspnea, and Physical Activity Promotion on Functional Connectivity of the Brain 
in COPD  
 Version 1.3  
Date: 8.2.2021  
 
Page 26 of 26                                                                                            VAIRRS  Protocol Template – version 10/15/[ADDRESS_576868] JR, et al. Predictive accuracy of patient -reported exacerbation 
frequency in COPD. Eur Resp J 2011;37:501 -507. PMID:20650988  
 
70. Anthonisen NR. Bacteria and exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. N Engl J Med 
2002;347:526 -527. PMID:12181408  
 
71. Aaron SD, Fergusson D, Marks GB, et al. Counting, analysing and reporting exacerbations of COPD in 
randomised controlled trials. Thorax 2008; 63:122 -128. PMID:17702790  
 
72. Miller MR , Hankinson J, Brusasco V, et al. Standardisation of spi[INVESTIGATOR_038] . Eur Respir J 2005 
Aug;26(2):319 -38. PMID:16055882  
 
73. Hankinson JL, Odencrantz JR, Fedan KB. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_11825] a sample of the general 
U.S. population. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;159:179 -187. PMID: 9872837  
 
74. Fischl  B, Sereno MI, Dale AM.  Cortical surface -based analysis. II: Inflation, flattening, and a surface -
based coordinate system. Neuroimage 1999; 9:195 –207. PMID:9931269  
 
75. Cox RW.  AFNI: Software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance 
neuroimages. Comput Biomed Res 1996; 29:162 –173. PMID:8812068  
76. Lindemer ER, Salat DH, Leritz EC, McGlinchey RE, Milberg WP .  Reduced cortical thickness with 
increased lifetime burden of PTSD in OEF/OIF veterans and the impact of comorbid TBI. Neuroimage 
Clin 2013; 2:601 –611. PMID:[ADDRESS_576869]  averaging and a coordinate 
system for the cortical surface. Hum Brain Mapp. 1999;8(4):272 -84. PMID:10619420  
78. Fischl B , Salat DH, Busa E, et al.  Whole brain segmentation: automated labeling of neuroanatomical 
structures in the human brain. Neuron. 2002 Jan 31;33(3):341 -55. PMID:1183222  
 