 
  [Year]  
Effect of probenecid on 
synovial fluid ATP levels 
in C[COMPANY_003]  
PROTOCOL AND  STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
FEBRUARY 28, 2022  
 
Study protocol  
 
1. Subjects diagnosed with CPDD according to the McCarty -Ryan criteria are 
identified through the rheumatolgy clinical practice.   
2. Inclusion/Exclusion criteria are met.  
3. Subjects are interested in participating in the study and sign an informed consent 
form a nd HIPPA.  
4. The affected joint is aspi[INVESTIGATOR_691975] [ADDRESS_938448] is randomized to receive no additional treatment or to receive 2 
grams/day of proben ecid given in two divided doses.  
6. The subject is called daily to monitor symptoms in the affected joint and any side 
effects.  
7. The subject is seen again by [CONTACT_691976] 6.  Another [ADDRESS_938449] is then offered an intra -articular corticosteroid 
injection in the affected joint.  
8. This completes the study.  
 
ATP measurement in Synovial Fluid  
 
Basal Salt Solution pH 7.5       
 
130 mM NaCl   
5 mM KCl   
1.5 mM CaCl 2          
1 mM MgCl 2            
5 mM Glucose   
0.1% BSA           
 
Mix and then check pH, adjust with NaOH  
 
ATP substrate (FL -AAM from Sigma):  Add 5 mL water to vial according to manufacturer’s 
directions.  
 
For standard curve: dilute A TP substrate in salt solution in a ratio of 40% substrate and 60% salt 
solution.  Add 25 l/well for the standard curve.  
 
Standard curve uses the following concentrations of ATP.  
(1 nM, 2.5 nM, 5 nM, 10 nM, 25 nM, 50 nM, 100 nM)  
 
100 l of salt solution is  added to the first well to serve as the zero.  
100 l of each of the concentrations of ATP  
 
 
To Measure the synovial fluid  (SF) :  100 l of SF (fresh or in citrate) is added to each of 3 wells 
and then 4 l of the stock ATP substrate is added to the wells.  Tap the plate on the counter to 
mix then read immediately in a plate reader set for luminescence.  
 
N.B. Synovial fluid needs to be me asured within 1 hour of collection to avoid loss of ATP.  
 
 
 
Statistical Analysis Plan  
The primary outcome will be ATP levels measured from extracted synovial fluid. The two 
treatment groups include those who received probenecid and those with no intervention.  A 
baseline measurement will be taken at the beginning of the study period and ano ther 
measurement taken at 7 days.  Each participant will serve as their own control.  A delta will be 
calculated (7 -day ATP level – baseline ATP level) for each participant and a non -parametric 
Mann -Whitney t -test will be performed.  ATP levels commonly re quire non -parametric analysis 
as it tends not to be normally distributed. The mean change between baseline and the 7 -day 
timepoint along with the corresponding 95% confidence interval will be presented.   
A Wilcoxon matched pairs t -test will be used to ass ess whether the intervention produced a 
statistical difference between the two timepoints with probenecid treatment.   
 