 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Development of a context -aware glucose prediction algorithm in 
patients with type 1 diabetes  
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
IRB# [ZIP_CODE]  
 
Protocol and Consent and Authorization Version date: June 11, 2021  
 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_54807]: Development of a context -aware glucose prediction algorithm in 
patients with type 1 diabetes  
  
STUDY SITE:  Oregon Health Science University  
[ADDRESS_59074]  
Portland, OR [ZIP_CODE]  
 
 
    
FUNDING : NIH 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS:  Jessica R. Castle MD; Peter Jacobs PhD  
 
CO-INVESTIGATORS:  Joseph El Youssef MBBS  
Leah Wilson MD  
 
Background:  
T1D is characterized by [CONTACT_54827] β cells. These  patients rely on the 
administration of insulin, putting them at significant risk of hypoglycemia and excessive 
hyperglycemia. Repeated exposures to hypoglycemia can result in hypoglycemia unawareness  
[1, 2] . These p atients have a 20x increased likelihood of experiencing severe hypoglycemia 
compared with those patients without it  [3]. Better approaches to helpi[INVESTIGATOR_54808].  Continuous 
gluco se monitoring (CGM) has be en shown to  help T1D  patients improve time i n range and 
avoid hypoglycemia  [4, 5] . Automated Insulin Delivery (AID)  systems have now become an 
important standard -of-care for people with T1D and have demonstrated a reduction, but not 
elimination, of hypoglycemia during long -term studies [6-10]. AID systems have not been shown 
to be effective at eliminating ex ercise -induced hypoglycemia, even when incorporating 
additional physical activity sensors such as heart rate and accelerometry sensors [11-16].  
 
One limitation of current AID systems is that they have no knowledge  about the context or 
environment that a person is currently experiencing. Contextual patterns can potentially improve 
the performance of an AID by [CONTACT_54828]. The team at OHSU is d evelopi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a context -aware glucose prediction 
algorithm that will capture context data from the patient both indoors and outdoors. This context 
data will be provided to the algorithm to allow for detecting contextual patterns that might relate 
to hypo - or hyperglycemia. The goal of this study will be the creation of a data set that will 
include contextual patterns along with glucose, insulin and physiological data. Participants will 
complete meals and exercise at specific times.  The purpose of the prescribe d meals and 
exercise sessions is to generate ground truth patterns that will be used in the design of the 
context -aware glucose prediction algorithm.  
 
Primary Objective  
 To assess the accuracy of the context -aware glucose prediction by [CONTACT_54829] G6 CGM values using mean abs olute relative 
error (MARE)  
 To assess the accuracy of the context -aware glucose prediction by [CONTACT_54829] G6 CGM values using mean relative error  (MRE). 
Study Hypothesis:  
 The study hypothesis is that context pattern data will improve the accuracy of the 
prediction of hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia in the context -aware glucose prediction 
algorithm.  
 
Primary Endpoints:  
 Comparison of the accuracy of hypoglycemia prediction comparing glucose prediction 
values against the Dexcom G6 CGM values using mean absolute relative error (MARE).  
 Comparison of the accuracy of hypoglycemia prediction comparing glucose prediction 
values against the Dexcom G6 CGM valu es using mean relative error (MRE).  
 
 
    
Study Type  
This is a single center randomized prospective study measuring  the accuracy of the 
context -aware glucose prediction against the Dexcom G6 CGM values.    
 
Study Population  
Study population will be adults with type 1 diabetes, ages 18 – 65 years of age.  Older subjects 
are excluded due to higher risk of unrecognized coronary artery disease.  Younger subjects are 
excluded as it is appropriate to assess safety and efficacy firs t in the adult population. Thirty  
subjects will be recruited to participate in studies.   
 
Protocol Summary:  
Subjects will be on study for 28 days.  Sensor glucose, activity, exercise, insulin , indoor and 
outdoor contextual patterns  and meal data will be c ollected during this time. Subjects will wear 
the Dexcom G6 CGM system  and a FitBit Ionic (or similar FitBit), Polar, Garmin  or Apple Watch 
physical activity monitor for the entire 28 days. Physical activity monitors will send data to the 
iPancreas mobile app created by [CONTACT_54830]. iPancreas will be supplied to participants on a 
separate study -provided phone. Subjects will continue to use their own insulin pump . Subjects  
will be asked to also wear a MotioWear indoor/outdoor context -aware tracking tag and to install 
the MotioWear beacons within their home. Subjects  will be randomized to complete either 
aerobic, high intensity interval training, or resistance exercise video s twice weekly at home  
during weeks [ADDRESS_59075] a self -
selected meal prior to these prescribed exercise sessions. Subjects  will consume a high 
carbohydrate dinner  once each week on the same day, at approximate ly the same  time (but not 
on the exercise days).  
 
Subjects will use the T1 DEXI mobile app created by [CONTACT_54831] 28 day period . Subjects will take photos of their food the 
day of  and the day after they complete the exercise video. While at home, subjects will check 
CBG before and after exercise, for symptoms of  hypoglycemia, and for Dexcom G6 alarms for 
sensor <70 mg/dL and >25 0 mg/dL. See Figure 1  below for a diagram of the study  flow. The 
study investigators retain the authority to modify any aspects of the protocol at his/her discretion 
if he/she believes the subject’s safety is a concern.    
 
Figure 1: Study Flow Design  
 
 
 
Background on MotioWear System  
Our group at OHSU has developed a unique context measurement system in collaboration with 
MotioSens (Portland OR) called MotioWear. MotioWear (Figure 2) is comprised of a wearable 
tag, beacons that are plugged in around a home, and a data hub that captures the movement 

 
 
   and cont ext data and transmits it back to a remote monitoring server. The wearable tag includes 
several sensors important for movement and context awareness: (1) a time of flight (TOF) radio 
transceiver that ranges with the beacon positioned around the home to tra ck location and 
inferred activity of daily living, (2) a 9 -axis inertial measurement including accelerometer, 
magnetometer, and gyroscope, (3) a Bluetooth low energy (BTLE) wireless transceiver for 
device interconnectivity, and (4) a global positioning sys tem (GPS) sensor for outdoor tracking. 
We have developed sophisticated tracking and inference algorithms for indoor / outdoor tracking 
of a person wearing the tag and inferring context based on movement patterns [17-21]. 
Indoor context using MotioWear:  MotioWear learns the specific regions of interest within a home 
through a simple calibration routine t hat takes about [ADDRESS_59076] (e.g. bathroom, shower, toilet, kitchen, bed, refrigerator 
etc). The system matches the x,y,z locations detected by [CONTACT_54832] -phone app. After the 
calibration routine is completed, the system can infer the person’s location within  these regions 
of interest within the home and infer activities.  
Outdoor context using MotioWear:  MotioWear uses GPS to get outdoor context. Latitude and 
longitude collected by [CONTACT_54833] (Figure 2); geographic 
information systems techniques are used to relate location to regions of interest including 
restaurants, pa rks, gyms, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600], etc.  
While MotioWear is a sophisticated tool that we plan to use within this study to quantify context, 
a context -aware AID could potentially use contextual information gathered from a variety of 
other ubiquitous wearable and beacon -based technologies that are now becoming commercially 
availab le, including such in -home monitoring technologies developed by [CONTACT_54834] (Echo), Apple 
(iBeaco n) and Amazon (Alexa). The purpose of our work with MotioWear is to demonstrate the 
benefit of context such that in the future, AID systems can make use of context regardless of 
how this context information is gathered; it is our intentent that CA -AID syst ems will be 
hardware agnostic, and not dependent on one platform such as MotioWear.  
 
Subject Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Diagnosis of type [ADDRESS_59077] 1 year.  
2. Male or female subjects 18 to 65  years of age.  
3. Physically willing and ab le to perform 30 min of exercise (as determined by [CONTACT_54835]’s activity level).  
4. Current 
use of 
an 
insulin 
pump 
for at 
least 3 
months .  
5. Able 
and 
willing 
to count 
 Figure 2:  (a) MotioWear tag based indoor/outdoor tracking and context 
awareness system. (b) MotioLab software that can be used to do real -time 
tracking indoors and outdoors. (c) Beacons are placed around the home, creating 
a wireless mesh that the wearable communicates with . A smart -phone app 
identifies key regions of interest.  (a) (b) (c) 
 
 
   carbohydrates during study period  as determined by [CONTACT_54836]’s insulin pump download . 
6. A1C <10.5% at the time of screening.  
7. Has a smart phone.  
8. Willingness to follow all study procedures, including attending all clinic visits.  
9. Willingness to sign informe d consent and HIPAA documents.  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Female of childbearing potential who is pregnant or intending to become pregnant or 
breast -feeding, or is not using adequate contraceptive methods. Acceptable 
contraception includes birth control pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382] /  patch / vaginal ring, Depo -Provera, Norplant, 
an IUD, the double barrier method (the woman uses a diaphragm and spermicide and the 
man uses a condom), or abstinence.  
2. Any cardiovascular disease, defined as a clinically significant EKG abnormality at the 
time of screening or any history of: stroke, heart failure, myocardial infarction, angina 
pectoris, or coronary arterial by[CONTACT_54837]. Diagnosis of 2nd or 3rd degree 
heart block or any non -physiological arrhythmia judged by [CONTACT_54838].  
3. Renal insufficiency (GFR < 60 ml/min, using the MDRD equation as reported by [CONTACT_54839]).  
4. Liver failure, cirrhosis, or any other liver disease that compromises liver function as 
determined by [CONTACT_093].   
5. Hematocrit of les s than 36% for men, less than 32% for women.  
6. History of severe hypoglycemia during the past 12 months prior to screening visit or 
hypoglycemia unawareness as judged by [CONTACT_093]. Subjects will complete a 
hypoglycemia awareness questionnaire.  Subjec ts will be excluded for four or more R 
responses.  
7. Adrenal insufficiency.  
8. Any active infection.  
9. Known or suspected abuse of alcohol, narcotics, or illicit drugs.  
10. Seizure disorder.  
11. Active foot ulceration.  
12. Peripheral arterial disease.  
13. Major surgical operation within 30 days prior to screening.  
14. Use of an investigational drug within 30 days prior to screening.  
15. Chronic usage of any immunosuppressive medication (such as cyclosporine, 
azathioprine, sirolimus, or tacrolimus).  
16. Bleeding disorder or platelet c ount below 50,000.  
17. Current administration of oral or parenteral corticosteroids.  
18. Any life threatening disease, including malignant neoplasms and medical history of 
malignant neoplasms within the past 5 years prior to screening (except basal and 
squamous ce ll skin cancer).  
19. Beta blockers or non -dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers.  
 
 
   20. Current use of any medication intended to lower glucose other than insulin (ex. use of 
liraglutide).  
21. A positive response to any of the questions from the Physical Activity Rea diness 
Questionnaire with one exception: subject will not be excluded if he/she takes a single 
blood pressure medication that doesn’t impact heart rate and blood pressure is controlled 
on the medication (blood pressure is less than 140/90 mmHg).  
22. Any chest  discomfort with physical activity, including pain or pressure, or other types of 
discomfort.  
23. Any clinically significant disease or disorder which in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_54809]’s safety or compliance with the protocol.  
 
Subject Recruiting:  
Subjects will be recruited from OHSU clinics, from flyers to be posted in approved places at 
OHSU or posted on the web to the clinical trials page for the OHSU Schnitzer Diabetes Clinic, to 
the Clinic’s facebook group, ads on facebook, electronic newletter or from the OHSU Subject 
Recruitment website. Handouts may also be made available to faculty at Providence , Tuality, 
Kaiser  and Legacy to pass along to patients/participants who show interest in the study. 
Records from OHSU Schnitzer D iabetes Clinic patients may be screened to find potential 
subjects. Subjects will also be recruited from a list of subjects who participated in past OHSU 
studies who have agreed to be contact[CONTACT_54840]. Castle or El 
Youssef, from the OHSU diabetes research registry and/or www.clinicaltrials.gov . Non -English 
speaking subjects will not be recruited since this protocol would require the use of medical 
devices and mobile software that do not have non -english versions available.  
 
Up to [ADDRESS_59078] be withdrawn if the following applies:  
1. Hypoglycemia during the treatment period posing a safety problem as judged by [CONTACT_1275].  
2. Hyperglycemia during the treatment period posing a safety problem as judged by [CONTACT_1275].  
3. Protocol deviation hav ing influence on efficacy or safety data as judged by [CONTACT_3786].  
4. Substantial and repeated non -compliance with trial procedures.  
5. Pregnancy.  
6. Intention of becoming pregnant.  
 
Visit Procedures  
Staff will confirm participant and household do not have  COVID -[ADDRESS_59079] with 
participants per OHSU Covid -19 policy, there is the option to complete some visits virtually.  
 
Screening (Visit 1)  
Screening wil l take place within [ADDRESS_59080] at 
OHSU’s Oregon Clinical Translational Research Institute (OCTRI) outpatient clinic, the 
 
 
   Biomedical Engineering Point of Care (BME POC) Laboratory or at the Harold Schnit zer 
Diabetes Health Center. The subject will be sent the consent form prior to the screening by 
[CONTACT_54841]. Upon arrival at the clinic and prior to any proced ures, study staff will explain the 
study, give the subject ample time to ask questions and consider participation, and ensure that 
subject voices understanding of the informed consent and study requirements. To minimize the 
possibility of coercion and to e nsure that subject is signing the appropriate version of consent, 
an informed consent checklist will be used by [CONTACT_464]. After the subject has signed the 
consent, a copy of the consent/authorization form will be given to the subject. The original will 
be kept for the source document.  
 
A capi[INVESTIGATOR_30135] (CBG) will be obtained and measured by a Contour Next glucose 
meter and recorded after consenting. Prior to measurement of any blood samples, the meter will 
undergo quality control testing with t wo different glucose levels, one high and one low, and both 
values must fall within the accepted range for a meter to be used.  
 
Study personnel will review medical history, and medications. Height, weight, pulse, and blood 
pressure will be obtained.  A st udy investigator will perform a physical examination, excluding 
breast and pelvic exams. Females of child -bearing potential will take a urine pregnancy test, 
which must be negative to participate.  A venous blood sample will be taken for the following 
tests: hemoglobin A1C, complete blood count, complete metabolic set (including creatinine, liver 
set, and electrolytes.  If subjects have had any of the aforementioned labs performed within the 
[ADDRESS_59081]. An EKG will be completed. A study investigator will assess 
inclusion/exclusion criteria and review the subject’s medical record for clarification as needed. 
The participant’s insulin pump will be do wnloaded to determine if they are counting 
carbohydrates for meals.   A three -digit subject ID number will be assigned to the subject.  One 
research staff member and a study investigator will on site for this visit.   
When the risk of Covid -[ADDRESS_59082] to be within 6 feet of the participant is when the study investigator is completing the 
physic al exam and when research staff is completing the EKG and drawing blood for screening 
labs.  
 
This visit will take approximately 1 .5 hours.  
 
Study Start -up Visit (Visit 2 ): 
Subjects will be on study for 28 days.  Sensor glucose, activity, exercise, insulin, indoor and 
ouotdoor contextual patterns and meal data will be collected during this time. Subjects will wear 
the Dexcom G6 CGM system along with the Dexcom G6 smart phone application. Subjects will 
wear a FitBit Ionic (or similar FitBit), Polar, Garmin or Apple Watch physical activity monitor. 
Subjects will continue to use their own insulin pump. Subjects will be given a MotioWear 
indoor/outdoor context -aware tracking tag t o wear and be shown how to install the MotioWear 
beacons within their home. Subjects may be asked to plug the MotioWear beacon into their 
router to improve data uploads. In this visit, they will be asked to complete a lifestyle 
questionnaire asking about t heir current exercise habits and blood glucose management. 
Subjects will be instructed on the use of the T1 DEXI mobile app created by [CONTACT_54842] . Subjects will be instructed to take photos of 
their food the day of and the day after they complete the exercise video. Study staff may contact 
[CONTACT_54843], text, or email for clarification if the meal photo  is difficult to interpret . While at 
home, subjects will check CBG before and after exercise, for symptoms of hypoglycemia, and 
 
 
   for Dexcom G6 alarms for sensor <70 mg/dL and >250 mg/dL. Subjects will be provided with a 
Contour Next blood glucose meter for testing capi[INVESTIGATOR_30135].  
 
Subjects  will be randomized to complete either aerobic, high intensity interval training, or 
resistance exercise videos twice weekly at home  during weeks [ADDRESS_59083] a self -selected m eal prior to these prescribed exercise 
sessions.  Instructions for the exercise will be provided via video links . Subjects will be instructed 
to check a CBG before initiating exercise to ensure safety. Subjects will be instructed to consume 
a snack if gluco se is <120 mg/dL and delay exercise until glucose is >80 mg/dL. Also, if glucose 
is >250 mg/dL, subjects will be instructed to calculate if a correction dose is needed and delay 
exercise until glucose is <250 mg/dL. Subjects will enter information about ex ercise into the T1 
DEXI app. Subjects will receive reminders via phone or text to complete their exercise and to 
monitor adherence to protocol. Participants may also receive reminders to enter activity 
information through the T1DEXI app. Subjects will also  be instructed to check a CBG after 
exercise and consume a snack if needed.  
 
Subjects will consume  a high carbohydrate dinner  prepared by [CONTACT_54844] (but not on the exercise study video 
days). The meals can potentially be pi[INVESTIGATOR_54810].  
 
Subjects will be able to contact [CONTACT_54845] t he devices. Study staff will follow -
up with subjects every 7 days. Subjects may receive text messages from stu dy staff with study 
reminders/instructions or clarification of meal photos. This visit should take approximately [ADDRESS_59084] experience . Participants will be asked to download his/her pump 
weekly or biwee kly during the 28 days on study.  This will  allow for frequent data capture  in case 
of a battery change or loss of power to the pump which can erase insulin data .   
 
When the risk of Covid -19 is considered to be significant and OHSU is on modified operations: 
there is the option to comple te this visit via Webex  with the study devices/meals delivered to the 
participant via a courier and study staff virtually connecting with participants for training on the 
devices and study procedures while they are at home.   
 
The study staff and participa nts will be screened for COVID -19 symptoms within the prior 14 
days and day of the Start -up visit per “OHSU COVID -19 Clinical Research Risk Assessment 
Screening and Mitigation” protocol as follows:  
 
 Fever or chills  
 Cough  
 Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing  
 Fatigue  
 Muscle or body aches  
 Headache  
 New loss of taste or smell  
 Sore throat  
 
 
    Congestion or runny nose  
 Diarrhea  
The study  staff member (s) will go into the participant’s home for installation of the tracking 
devices, maintaining appropriate social distancing. No more than two staff members will be 
assigned to installation. Due to the lengthy installation process, two staff members performing  
set up will help minimize time spent in the participant’s home  (with 2 staff - approximately 2 
hours) . The staff in the home will wear masks , eye shields  and gloves  during the installation.  All 
participants and family members present during the installat ion will wear masks.  
 
Data Collection  
In this study, we will be collecting de -identified physiologic data from people with type 1 
diabetes.   The following data will be collected from participants in this study:  
 Responses from the “Lifestyle Questionnaire”  
 Glucose sensor data (Dexcom G6) 
 Insulin data from the subject’s insulin pump.  
 Physical activity data will be collected with  the OHSU iPancreas app  on a study provided 
phone  and recorded through  a FitBit Ionic, Polar , Garmin or Apple  Watch.   iPancreas 
will send physical activity data to the iPancreas server. This fitness data will include the 
following:  
o Heart rate  
o Step count  
o Metabolic expenditure  
o Sleep  
o Activity types (e.g. running, jogging, etc).  
 Self-report food and exercise data logged by [CONTACT_3433] e participant  
To collect the data, each participant in the study will use their own phone  and a study provided 
phone to collect data.    
 A Dexcom commercial app will  collect data from the Dexcom G6 glucose sensor  on the 
subject’s phone or on a provided study phone .   
 The activity watch  commercial app will collect sleep data from the watch on the provided 
study phone.  
 A custom app developed by [CONTACT_54846] T1 -Dexi will also be installed on the subject’s 
phone  or on a provided study phone .  The T1 -Dexi app has undergone a security review 
by [CONTACT_54847].    
 A custom app developed by [CONTACT_54848] a provided study 
phone. The iPancreas ap p has undergone a security review by [CONTACT_54849].  
 
The T1 -Dexi app will serve as the ‘data aggregator’ on the phone and will perform the following 
functions:  
 T1-Dexi app will collect self -report meals and e xercise data from the participants both as 
text / categorical selections and also as food photographs collected from the camera on 
the phone.  
 Data is collected by [CONTACT_941] T1 -Dexi app and this non -medical, deidentified data is pushed to 
the OHSU -version of the Amazon Web Services (AWS) Cloud instance. The following 
data is pushed to the Dexi AWS server:  
 
 
   a. Photographs of the user’s food as taken on their smart phone camera  
b. Food types and amounts as acquired by [CONTACT_941] T1 -Dexi app  
c. Exercise types and amounts as acquired by [CONTACT_941] T1 -Dexi app  
d. Insulin pen data acquired through Apple Health Kit  
 Physical Activity Data is collected by [CONTACT_54850] -medical, 
deidentified data is pushed to the OHSU -version of the Amazon Web Services (AWS) 
Cloud instance. The follow ing data is pushed to the iPancreas AWS server:  
a. Heart rate  
b. Accelerometry  
c. METs  
 The data stored within AWS  is de-identified and does not contain any information from 
the 18 HIPAA designations of personally identifiable information.    
 
Day 28 Study Completion visit:  
At this visit, the device s will be turned in and the subject’s insulin pump will be downloaded . A 
study investigator will be available for consult if needed regarding insulin management . The 
Dexcom sensor  will be removed from the subject. The sensor site will be inspected for signs of 
irritation or infection. In addition, the sensor will be inspected for the possibility of breakage or 
fracture. If there is any evidence of sensor breakage, it will be record ed. If an area of 
inflammation of [ADDRESS_59085]. Subjects 
will be given oral carbohydrate for values below 85 mg/dl, and will be instructed to give an 
injection of aspart insulin if deemed appropriate by [CONTACT_54851] 150 
mg/dl. This visit will take approximately [ADDRESS_59086] information.  
 
Statistical methods   
The hypothesis of this study is that we will be able to identify contextual patterns in the 
movement data that will relate to glycemic outcomes.  We will use machine learning techniques 
 
 
   including k -means clustering and Gaussian mixture model s to g roup contextual patterns and 
then relate these groups of patterns with glycemic outcomes including the following:  
 Time in hypoglyemia (<70 mg/dL)  
 Time in hyperglycemia (>180 mg/dL)  
 Time in a target range (70 -180 mg/dL)  
 Mean glucose  
 Glucose variability (sta ndard deviation and coefficient of variance).   
 
We will evaluate if the clusters of contextual patterns are related to differences in glycemic 
outcome measures using generalized estimating equations, which takes into account correlated 
data and repeated m easures.  Data will be analyzed using an intention -to-treat analysis and 
missing sensed glucose values will be interpolated for up to 20 min segments.   
    
Confidentiality and Protection of Human Subjects  
RISKS and BENEFITS  
Risks:  The risks of the protocol procedures are considered minor. Subjects will be managing 
their own blood  glucose as they normally would.  
Risks from exercise include falls, sprains, bruises, very low risk of bone fractures and head 
trauma. The likelihood of s ignificant harm is quite low.  
There is a small risk of sensor fracture, and in such a case, a pi[INVESTIGATOR_54811]. For this reason, the study investigator will inspect each 
removed sensor for the possibilit y of breakage or fracture. Any evidence of sensor breakage will 
be recorded and reported to the sensor company . 
 
Benefits:  The subject may not directly benefit from being in this study; however, their 
participation may help to advance automated insulin dec ision support software.  
 
COSTS :   
Subjects will receive $500 for completion of all study visits.  If subjects withdraw early from the 
study, compensation will be given as follows: $[ADDRESS_59087] will also receive $125 for the partial week. There is no 
compensation for the screening visit.  Additional reimbursement will be available for participants 
who complete protocol requirements to help compensate for their time. The payment amount  
will be specified in the informed consent form.  
 
Monitoring Entity:  
This investigation will be monitored by [CONTACT_54852], Jessica Castle, MD and Peter 
Jacobs, PhD. Drs. Jacobs and Castle have no commercial interest in any of the companies 
which manufacture any of the devices used in this study.  
 
Data Collection:  
Subject privacy will be protected by [CONTACT_2329] a three -digit identifying number to code study 
documents. Study staff will record data required by [CONTACT_54853]  
(CRF). Case report forms (CRF) for this study will be entered into REDCAP, a clinical research 
electronic data application designed to support traditional case report form data capture for 
research studies housed at Oregon Health Science University and ad ministered by [CONTACT_54854] (OCTRI). Investigators and research coordinator will 
verify that the procedures are conducted according to the approved protocol. All paper source 
documents will be kept in a locked cabin et for a minimum of five years. Original, completed 
 
 
   CRF’s will be kept with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_2993] a designated repository. All data from CRF’s will subsequently 
be entered into the authorized electronic REDCAP database.  
 
Recording of Data:  
Investigators and staff will record data collected during the clinical trial on the CRF’s. Case 
report forms (CRF) for this study will be entered into REDCAP, a clinical research electronic 
data repository housed at Oregon Health Science University and administered by [CONTACT_54854] (OCTRI). The REDCAP CRFs will include:  
1. Screening form  
2. Startup  visit 
3. Study Completion visit  
4. Adverse Event form  
5. Serious Adverse Event form  
6. Concomitant Medications  
7. Lifestyle questionnaires  
 
The Principal Investigators may authorize other personnel to make entries in the CRF.  
 
The de -identified data collected during this study will be used for analysis of the primary and 
secondary endpoints listed in this protocol. This data will also be stor ed in the OregonAPC 
repository according to IRB protocol [ZIP_CODE].  During screening, participants may sign the 
consent form to store their study data in the data repository.  The data to be collected includes: 
1) glucose sensor data, 2) blood glucose data, 3 ) insulin data, 4) physical activity data, and 5) 
food and exercise data. All data, except for blood glucose  and insulin , is aggregated by [CONTACT_54855]. The blood glucose data is collected through downloading the Contour Next BG 
meters and exporting data a s an excel file. The insulin data is collected by [CONTACT_54856]’s insulin pump. There are no biological specimens collected during this study.  
 
Monitoring Procedures:  
This protocol is written in accordance with the principles established by [CONTACT_941] 1 8th World Medical 
Assembly General Assembly (Helsinki, 1964) and amendments and clarifications adopted by 
[CONTACT_941] 29th (Tokyo, 1975), 35th (Venice, 1983), 41st (Hong Kong, 1989), 48th (Somerset West, 
South Africa, 1996), 52nd (Edinburgh, 2000), 53rd (Washingto n, 2002), 55th (Tokyo, 2004), 
59th (Seoul, 2008), and 64th (Brazil, 2013) General Assemblies. The investigator will ensure 
that the study described in this protocol is conducted in full conformance with those principles, 
the protocol, current FDA regulatio ns, ICH Good Clinical Practices (GCP) guidelines, Good 
Laboratory Practices (GLP) guidelines, local ethical and regulatory requirements, including the 
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, U.S. applicable Code of Federal Regulations (title 21), 
any IEC requ irements relative to clinical studies.  
Should a conflict arise, the investigator will follow whichever law or guideline affords the 
greater protection to the individual subject. The investigator will also ensure thorough familiarity 
with the appropriate u se and potential risks of use of the study device, as described in this 
protocol, prior to the initiation of the study.  
Unanticipated problems will be detected by [CONTACT_54857] -approved research protocol and the current IRB approved 
consent form, any underlying disease or conditions of the subject experiencing the adverse 
 
 
   event, a careful assessment of whether the adverse event is related or possibly related to the 
subject’s participation  in the study.  
 
Triggers for reporting unanticipated problems are seizure, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], death or any other 
occurrence considered serious by [CONTACT_978]. If ongoing monitoring of the closed -loop studies 
reveals studies repeatedly being terminated because of unresponsive hyperglycemia or 
repeated serious hypoglycemia (resulting in altered mental status, loss of consciousness, or 
seizure) believed not amenable to revisions in control system parameter tuning, then the study 
will be discontinued immediately. If studies in two subjects are stopped for severe hypoglycemia 
or severe hyperglycemia, then the entire study will be halted. In addition, if there is any 
unexpected event such as death or patient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], the studies will be stopped until the 
root cau se is evaluated.  
 
Any adverse event (AE) and/or unanticipated problem (UP) will be reported to the investigator 
monitor immediately by [CONTACT_54858]. Hypo - and hyperglycemia will not be 
considered AEs unless subject has positive ketones or displ ays symptoms of hypoglycemia 
such as: loss of consciousness, slurred speech, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_54812].  One of 
the investigators will always be on -call during the closed -loop studies and will write up a 
description of the adverse event/unanti cipated problem. All reportable new information (RNI) will 
be reported to the IRB within five calendar days after the PI [INVESTIGATOR_54813]. RNI is any 
information that might meet the regulatory definition of an unanticipated problem involving risks 
to su bjects or others or serious or continuing noncompliance that might impact the criteria for 
IRB approval. The report will be submitted to the IRB by [CONTACT_458] [INVESTIGATOR_54814]. A summary of all UP's and adverse events, including those t hat do not meet the 
requirement for RNI, will be submitted with the continuing review.  
 
 
Confidentiality Procedures:  
To protect confidentiality, standard institutional practices will be followed as described in the 
OHSU Information Security and Research Data Resource Guide 
(http://ozone.ohsu.edu/cc/sec/isg/res_sec.pdf) to maintain the confidentiality and security of 
data collected in this study. Study staff will be trained regarding these procedures. See IRB 
protocol [ZIP_CODE] for a complete description of th e confidentiality and security of the study data 
collected during this study to be stored in the OregonAPC repository. Paper files will be stored 
in locked filing cabinets in restricted access offices at OHSU. After the study, source documents 
will be main tained at the participating clinical center (or offsite record storage facilities) 2 years 
after a marketing application is approved for our group's decision support device or 
discontinuance of pursuit of marketing approval.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
Appendix A:  Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire  
 
 

 
 
   Appendix B: Devices  
FitBit           Garmin  Watch  
 
 
Polar Watch       Apple Watch  
 
   
Dexcom G6 Continuous Glucose Monitoring System which includes Sensor and Sensor 
Transmitter  
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
   Smart phone  with T1 DEXI app  
 
 
Contour Next Blood Glucose Meter   
  
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
   Appendix C: Hypoglycemia Awareness questionnaire:This survey item will be used to 
categorize awareness or having reduced awareness of hypoglycemia.  
 
 
1. Check the category that best describes you: (check one only)  
 
 I always have symptoms when my blood sugar is low (A)  
 I sometimes have symptoms when my blood sugar is low (R)  
 I no longer have symptoms when my blood sugar is low (R)  
 
 
2. Have you lost some of the symptoms that used to occur when your blood sugar was low?  
 
 Yes (R)  
 No (A)  
 
 
3. In the past [ADDRESS_59088] you had moderate hypoglycemia epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]? (Epi[INVESTIGATOR_54815], disoriented, or lethargic and were unable to treat yourself).  
 
 Never (A)  
 Once or twice (R)  
 Every other month (R)  
 Once a month (R)  
 More than once a month (R)  
 
 
4. In the past year, how often have you had severe hypoglycemia epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]? (Epi[INVESTIGATOR_54816] a seizure and needed glucagon or intravenous glucose?)  
 
 Never (A)  
 1 time (R)  
 2 times (R)  
 3 times (R)  
 4 times (R)  
 5 times (R)  
 6 times (R)  
 7 times (R)  
 8 times (R)  
 9 times (R)  
 10 times (R)  
 11 times (R)  
 
 
    12 or more times (R)  
 
5. How often in the last month have you had readings < 70 mg/dl with symptoms?  
 
 
 Never  
 1 to 3 times  
 1 time/week  
 2 to 3 times/week  
 4 to 5 times/week  
 Almost daily  
 
6. How often in the last month have you had readings < 70 mgdl, without symptoms? R: 5<6, A: 
6<5; 
 
 Never  
 1 to 3 times  
 1 time/week  
 2 to 3 times/week  
 4 to 5 times/week  
 Almost daily  
 
 
7. How low does your blood sugar need to go before you feel symptoms?  
 
 60-69 mg/dl (A)  
 50-59 mg/dl (A)  
 40-49 mg/dl (R)  
 < 40 mg/dl (R)  
 
 
8. To what extent can you tell by [CONTACT_54859]?  
 
 Never (R)  
 Rarely (R)  
 Sometimes (R)  
 Often (A) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Appendix D : Exercise Video Outlines  
 
 
Aerobic Exercise Video Outline  
Segment  Segment Time  Activities  
Warm -Up Intro  
(2 min)  0:00 – 2:00 0:00: Welcome! Marching Reach Up  
0:30: Side to Side Kick Back Pull Back  
0:45: Side to Side Kick Back Butt Kick  
1:00:  Side to Side Kick Back Butt Kick Reach 
out 
1:15: Grapevine  
1:30: Grapevine with Arm Circles  
Active Exercise  
(30 min)  Each activity is performed 
for 30 seconds  1. Modified Jump  rope  
2. Jumpi[INVESTIGATOR_54817]  
3. Side to Side Knee Raise (alternate left/right 
crunch ) 
4. Side Steps  (active recovery)  
5. Modified Jump  rope  
6. Jumpi[INVESTIGATOR_54818]  
7. Side to Side Knee Raise ( alternate left/right 
crunch)  
8. Side Steps (active recovery)  
9. Arms Alternating A, T and Y with Heal 
Tap 
10. Left Jab Bounce (left foot forward)  
11.  Side Steps (active recovery)  
12. Arms Alternating A, T and Y with Heal 
Tap  
13. Right Jab Bounce (right foot forward)  
14. Side Steps (active recovery)  
15. Right Leg Lunge Alternate Forward Back  
16. Left Leg Lunge Alternate Forward Back  
17. Jog in Place Hands Raised  
18. Side Steps (active recovery)  
19. Right Leg Lunge Alternate Forward Back  
20. Left Leg Lunge Alternate Forward Back  
21. Jog in Place Hands Raised  
22. Side Steps (active recovery)  
23. Squat to Upper Cut (right foot forward)  
24. Right Jab Bounce (right foot forward)  
25. Side Steps (active recovery)  
26. Squat to Upper Cut (left foot forward)  
 
 
   27. Left Jab Bounce (left foot forward)  
28. Side Steps (active recovery)  
29. Horse Stance Overhead Reach Side Bend/ 
Standing Alternating Side Bend  
30. Side Jump with Squat Alternating Left 
Right  
31. Right Lateral lunge with Right Knee Drive 
Pull Up  
32. Left Lateral Lunge with Left Knee Drive 
Pull Up 
33. Side steps (active recovery)  
34. Horse Stance Overhead Reach Side Bend/ 
Standing Alternating Side Bend  
35. Side Jump with Squat Alternating Left 
Right  
36. Right Lateral lunge with Right Knee Drive 
Pull Up  
37. Left Lateral Lunge with Left Knee Drive 
Pull Up 
38. Side steps (active recovery)  
 
 
 
Intermittent High -Intensity Interval Exercise Video Outline  
 
Segment  Segment Time  Activities  
Warm -Up Intro (2 min)  0:00 – 2:00 0:00: Welcome!  
0:15: Jog with Front Japs  
0:30: Hip Circles Feet Apart  
0:45: Side to Side Reach Out  
1:00:  Alternating Direction Arm Circles Feet 
Apart  
1:15: Side steps (active recovery)  
1:45: Intro for exercise  
Active Exercise (30 min)  Each activity is performed 
for 40 seconds, followed 
by a 70 second cool down  1. High Knee Sprint with Heel Tap  – 40 
seconds high intensity  
2. Side steps (active recovery )-10 seconds    
3. Side Steps with Arm Pull Back -1 minute  
4. Alternating Knee Lunges (knee touching 
ground) then Jump Up Arms Raised then 
Squat -high intensity -40 seconds  
5. Side steps (active recovery) -10 seconds   
6. Side Steps with Arm Pull Back -1 minute  
 
 
   7. High Plank Alternating Knee Reach  –  40 
seconds high intensity  
8. Side steps (active recovery) -10 seconds   
9. Side Steps with Arm Pull Back -1 minute  
10. Advanced Plank (Bear Crawl ) Alternating 
Forward Backward – 40 seconds  high 
intensity  
11. Side steps (active recovery) -10 seconds   
12. Side Steps with Arm Pull Back -1 minute  
13. Diagonal Plank Alternating Reach Out 
Opposite Arm Leg Back to Middle -40 
seconds high intensity  
14. Side steps (active recovery) -[ADDRESS_59089] Opposite Knee Kick Back -
40 seconds high intensit y 
17. Side steps (active recovery) -[ADDRESS_59090] -5 Left then 5 Right -Repeat -40 sec 
high intensity   
20. Side steps (active recovery) -10 seconds   
21. Side Steps with Arm Pull Back -1 minute  
22. Burpee  (Bent Waist Rapid Jog Arm  
Punches Down then Plank then Jump Up) – 
40 se conds high intensity  
23. Side steps (active recovery) -[ADDRESS_59091] to Toes -40 seconds high intensity  
26. Side steps (active recovery) -10 seconds   
27. Side Steps with Arm Pull Back -1 minute  
28.  Upper Body Swimmer (High Plank 
Alterating Arm Circle Forward) -40 seconds 
high intensity  
 
 
 
Resistance Exercise Video Outline  
Segment  Segment Time  Activities  
Warm -Up Intro (2 min  20 
sec) 0:00 – 2:20 0:00: Alternating Heel Kick Forward Arm 
Swing  
 
 
   0:15: Arms on Hips Alternating Straight Leg 
Extend with Bend at Waist  
0:30:  Arms on Hips Alternating Straight Leg 
Extend with Bend at Waist Add Arm Sweep  
0:45: Alternating Leg Lunge Knee 90 Degrees  
Arm Sweep  Up 
1:10: Crunch (Arms Behind Head Alternating 
Knee Touch to Elbow)  
1:30: Scarecrow (Knees Slightly Bent Torso 
Forward Arms Down then Up)  
2:00: Alternating Side Lunge Arms Up/Down  
2:20: Toe Touches with Spread Arms/Legs  
Active Exercise (28 min)  Each activity is performed 
at a controlled pace in 
good form. Aiming for 
about 2 seconds to pull 
the weight the entire 
range, holding for 1 
second, then controlling 
the return of the 
movement in about 
another 1 seconds.  Set 1: (approximately 8 min) Upper B ody 
Resistance band bicep curl [ADDRESS_59092] 
then back 3 x 8  
 
Set 2: (approximately 10 min) Lower Body  
Resistance band squat 3 x 8  
Resistance band deadlift 3 x 8  
Resistance band reverse lunge 3 x 8  
Resistance band glut crunch with hip raise 3 x 
8 
 
Set 3: (approximately 10 min) Total Body and 
Abs 
Resistance band side lunge to diagonal lateral 
raise 3 x 8/side  
Resistance band (standing ) squat with arm 
raise  3 x 8/side  
Resistance band (on back) alternating 
opposite arm and leg extend straight 3 x 8  
Resistance band (on back) alternating 
opposite arm and leg extend bent 3 x 8  
Resistance band (standing) alternating 
right/left crunch 3 x 8  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
References  
 
[1] P. E. Cryer, "Diverse causes of hypoglycemia -associated autonomic failure in diabetes," 
(in eng), N Engl J Med, vol. 350, no. 22, pp. 2272 -9, May 27 2004.  
[2] P. E. Cryer, "Mechanisms of hypoglycemia -associated autonomic failure in diabetes," N 
Engl J Med, vol. 369, no. 4, pp. 362 -72, Jul 25 2013.  
[3] U. Pedersen -Bjergaard  et al. , "Severe hypoglycaemia in 1076 adult patients with type 1 
diabetes: influence of ri sk markers and selection," (in eng), Diabetes Metab Res Rev, vol. 
20, no. 6, pp. 479 -86, Nov -Dec 2004.  
[4] M. R. Rickels  et al. , "Continuous Glucose Monitoring for Hypoglycemia Avoidance and 
Glucose Counterregulation in Long -Standing Type 1 Diabetes," (in eng), J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab, vol. 103, no. 1, pp. 105 -114, Jan 1 2018.  
[5] R. W. Beck  et al. , "Effect of Continuous Glucose Monitoring on Glycemic Control in 
Adults With Type 1 Diabetes Using Insulin Injections: The DIAMOND Randomized 
Clinical Trial," (i n eng), Jama, vol. 317, no. 4, pp. 371 -378, Jan 24 2017.  
[6] J. R. Castle  et al. , "Novel use of glucagon in a closed -loop system for prevention of 
hypoglycemia in type 1 diabetes," Diabetes Care, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 1282 -7, Jun 2010.  
[7] A. Haidar, L. Lega ult, V. Messier, T. M. Mitre, C. Leroux, and R. Rabasa -Lhoret, 
"Comparison of dual -hormone artificial pancreas, single -hormone artificial pancreas, and 
conventional insulin pump therapy for glycaemic control in patients with type 1 diabetes: 
an open -label randomised controlled crossover trial," Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol, vol. 3, 
no. 1, pp. 17 -26, Jan 2015.  
[8] R. Hovorka  et al. , "Overnight closed -loop insulin delivery in young people with type 1 
diabetes: a free -living, randomized clinical trial," (in eng) , Diabetes Care, vol. 37, no. 5, 
pp. 1204 -11, 2014.  
[9] R. Nimri  et al. , "MD -Logic overnight control for 6 weeks of home use in patients with 
type 1 diabetes: randomized crossover trial," (in eng), Diabetes Care, vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 
3025 -32, Nov 2014.  
[10] H. Thabit  et al. , "Home use of closed -loop insulin delivery for overnight glucose control 
in adults with type 1 diabetes: a 4 -week, multicentre, randomised crossover study," (in 
eng), Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol, vol. 2, no. 9, pp. 701 -9, Sep 2014.  
[11] M. D. Breton  et al. , "Closed -Loop Control During Intense Prolonged Outdoor Exercise in 
Adolescents With Type 1 Diabetes: The Artificial Pancreas Ski Study," (in eng), 
Diabetes Care, vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 1644 -1650, Dec 2017.  
[12] J. Castle  et al. , "Randomize d outpatient trial of single and dual -hormone closed -loop 
systems that adapt to exercise using wearable sensors," Diabetes Care, vol. in press, 
2018.  
[13] M. D. DeBoer, D. R. Chernavvsky, K. Topchyan, B. P. Kovatchev, G. L. Francis, and M. 
D. Breton, "Hear t rate informed artificial pancreas system enhances glycemic control 
during exercise in adolescents with T1D," (in eng), Pediatr Diabetes, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 
540-546, Nov 2017.  
[14] P. G. Jacobs  et al. , "Randomized trial of a dual -hormone artificial pancreas with dosing 
adjustment during exercise compared with no adjustment and sensor -augmented pump 
therapy," (in eng), Diabetes Obes Metab, vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 1110 -1119, Nov 2016.  
 
 
   [15] N. Resalat, J. El Youssef, R. Reddy, and P. G. Jacobs, "Design of a dual -hormone model 
predictive control for artificial pancreas with exercise model," (in eng), Conf Proc IEEE 
Eng Med Biol Soc, vol. 2016, pp. 2270 -2273, Aug 2016.  
[16] N. Resalat, J. E. Youssef, R. Reddy, and P. G. Jacobs, "Evaluation of model complexity  
in model predictive control within an exercise -enabled artificial pancreas," IFAC -
PapersOnLine, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 7756 -7761, 2017/07/01/ 2017.  
[17] P. G. Jacobs, A. S. Paul, and E. A. Wan, "EmbedRF position tracking and mobility 
assessment system: a low -power and low -cost system for passive assessment of patient 
health in a home health -care setting," in 24th International Technical Meeting of the 
Satellite Division of the Institute of Navigation 2011, ION GNSS 2011 , Portland OR, 
2011, pp. 1499 -1506.  
[18] A. S. Paul  et al. , "MobileRF: A Robust Device -Free Tracking System Based On a Hybrid 
Neural Network HMM Classifier," (in eng), Proc ACM Int Conf Ubiquitous Comput, vol. 
2014, pp. 159 -170, 2014.  
[19] A. S. Paul, E. A. Wan, and P. G. Jacobs, "Sigma -point Ka lman smooting for indoor 
tracking and auto -calibration using time -of-flight ranging," in Proceedings of the 24th 
International Technical Meeting of the Institute of Navigation (ION GNSS 2011) , 
Portland OR, 2011, pp. 3461 -3469.  
[20] M. C. Shastry  et al. , "Context -aware fall detection using inertial sensors and time -of-
flight transceivers," (in eng), Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc, vol. 2016, pp. 570 -573, 
Aug 2016.  
[21] E. A. Wan, A. S. Paul, and P. G. Jacobs, "Tag -free RSSI based indoor localization," in 
Proceedings of the 2012 International Technical Meeting of the Institute of Navigation , 
Newport Beach, CA, 2011, pp. 940 -944. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
CLINICAL RESEARCH CONSENT AND AUTHORIZATION  
SUMMARY OF KEY INFORMATION ABOUT THIS STUDY  
 
TITLE : Development of a context -aware glucose prediction algorithm in patients with 
type 1 diabetes  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR : [INVESTIGATOR_54819]   (503) 494 -7072  
 
You are being asked to join a research study. This consent form contains important 
information to help you decide if you want to join the study or not.  
 
PURPOSE:  
The pu rpose of the study is  for the creation of a dataset that will be used for the development 
of a glucose prediction system  for the management of diabetes. This dataset will include 
glucose sensor values, fingerstick glucose values, insulin data, food and rescue carbohydrate 
consumption, as well as information on the type, intensity and duration of exercise. It will also 
inclu de context data, which is collected from a sensor tag on the user’s body and sensors 
distributed in their living space. This  data recognizes environments and  patterns of living that 
are related to changes in glucose.  
 
DURATION:  
Your participatio n in the study will consist of [ADDRESS_59093] 1 .5-2 hours.  
 
PROCEDURES:   
If you decide to take part i n this study, you will have a number of tests and procedures.  
 After you qualify, you will begin the study with  Visit 2, the start -up visit for the 28 day 
study.  You will be asked to fill out a lifestyle questionnaire asking about your current 
exercise routine and blood glucose management. You will be given the Dexcom G6 
CGM, a physical activity watch  connected to a study phone , and a tracking tag to wear 
and a tracking beacon to install in your home  for use during the next 28 days. You will 
install theG6 app on your pe rsonal phone.  
 You will be shown how to use a smart phone app on your phone to enter all of your 
meal and exercise data along with meal photos.  
 You will be asked to complete a 30 -minute exercise video once or twice a week with a 
meal prior to exercise . 
 You will be asked to pi[INVESTIGATOR_54820] a prepared meal once each week on the 
same day at a set time  at home .  
 
 
    At the end of the 28 days, you will come in for a one -hour study completion visit  
where we will download your insulin pump .  
RISKS: There are risks involved in participating in the study, some of which may be very  
serious. These may include, but are not limited to, more common risks such as high blood  
glucose, low  blood glucose to less common risks such as falls/injuries while exercising, or 
allergic reaction from the insulin.  
 
BENEFITS: You will not directly benefit from taking part in this research. This research may  
benefit future people with type 1 diabetes by [CONTACT_4205][INVESTIGATOR_54821].  
 
ALTERNATIVES: You may choose no t to participate in this study or participate in another 
study if one is available.  
 
This is a voluntary research study.  You do not have to join the study.  Even if you decid e to 
join now, you can change your mind later.  Please ask the Investigator if you have any 
questions about the study or about this consent form.  
 
END OF CONSENT SUMMARY  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
IRB#: [ZIP_CODE]  
  
MED. REC. NO.  _____  
NAME  _____  
BIRTHDATE  _____  
 
 
Clinical Research Consent and Authorization Form  
 
TITLE : Development of a context -aware glucose prediction algorithm in patients with type 
1 diabetes  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR : [INVESTIGATOR_54819]   (503) 494 -7072  
 
 
WHO IS PAYING FOR THE STUDY? :  National Institute of Health (NIH)  
 
WHO IS PROVIDING SUPPORT FOR THE STUDY ?:   Dexcom  
 
OHSU is being compensated by [CONTACT_54860].  This is to pay for tests 
performed only for study purposes, and for the time involved on the part of the investigator(s) 
and study staff.   You may freely discuss this with your physician and the investigator if you have 
concerns.  Your study doctor and the research staff have no financial involvement with the funder 
and are not being paid directly by [CONTACT_54861].  Howeve r, they may have 
travel expenses covered by [CONTACT_54862].  
 
DO ANY OF THE RESEARCHERS HAVE A CONFLICT OF INTEREST WITH THIS STUDY?    
OHSU and Drs. Jacob and Wan (co -investigators) and Jonathon Folsom have a financial interest  
in MotioSens, a company that is involved in this study. The nature of this financial interest and 
the design of the study have been reviewed by [CONTACT_54863]. They have put in place 
a plan to help ensure that this research study is not affected b y the financial interest. If you would 
like more information, please contact [CONTACT_54864] (503) 494 -7887.  
 
WHY IS THIS STUDY BEING DONE? : 
You have been invited to be in this research study because you have type [ADDRESS_59094]  context data through sensors worn on your body  and distributed in 
your home . Context means “what you are doing at a given time and where you are doing it ”. This 
data will help us  recognize  repeatable patterns in your life. An e xample of this might be 
consistent low blood sugars while you at the gym on Mondays and Wednesdays  from  6-8am. 
With the data, we can determine how those patterns  affected your  glucose. We be lieve that an 
automated insulin delivery system can use context data to recognize environments and living 
patterns that negatively affect your glucose. With the data collected by [CONTACT_15365], we hope to 

 
 
   design a system that can help predict low or high bloo d sugars based on known behavior 
patterns , adjust insulin accordingly and improve the time  glucose is in the target range.   
 
This study requires [ADDRESS_59095] during your study  will be kept in a data bank, also called a repository.   This 
data will be stored indefinitely and may be used  and disclosed  in the future for research . 
 
 
WHAT EXAMS, TESTS AND PROCEDURES ARE INVOLVED IN THIS STUDY?    
Visit [ADDRESS_59096] an 
equal chance of being assigned to aerobic (cardio), anaerobic (strength), or high intensity interval exercise 
video sessions.  You will also pi[INVESTIGATOR_54822]  a dinner  prepared by [CONTACT_54865] a week 
on the sam e day at a set time  at home .  See Figure 1  below for a diagram of the study  flow. Data collected 
from/about you in this  study will be used to develop  a glucose prediction model for an automated insulin 
delivery system.  
 
Figure 1: Study Flow Design  
 
 
You will b e using the Dexcom G6 CGM system including a sensor and transmitter . The Dexcom 
G6 CGM system is an FDA approved device. We expect to study up to 30  subjects in this study 
at OHSU.    
 
Clinic Visit #1: Screening Visit :   
The screening visit will be completed at the OHSU Oregon Clinical and Translational Research 
Institute Clinic (OCTRI) , the Biomedical Engineering Point of Care (BME POC) Laboratory  or at 
the OHSU Harold Schnitzer Diabetes Health Center.  After this consent form is signed, you will ha ve 
blood drawn for tests. The blood test is to monitor diabetes control, liver and kidney function, 
electrolytes, and blood count. About one tablespoon of blood is needed for these tests.  If you have 
had any of these tests completed in the last [ADDRESS_59097] ions about your medical history, and a brief physical exam will be 
performed. Your vitals will be taken (height, weight, pulse, blood pressure) along with a capi[INVESTIGATOR_54823]. If you are a woman who can become pregnant, you will need to take a 
urine pregnancy test. This test must be negative for you to participate in the study.  You will also 
have an EKG done. As part of the screening procedures for this study, the investigator w ill review 
your medical records for information related to your el igibility in the study. For example, they may 
review your recent lab results and visit notes from your endocrinologist. We will download your 
insulin pump in order to determine how often you are counting carbohydrates for meals.   
 
You will be asked to fil l out 2 questionnaires.  These questionnaires will be used by [CONTACT_54866]:  
 Physical activity readiness  
 Hypoglycemia awareness  
 
When the risk of Covid-[ADDRESS_59098] to be within 6 feet is when the study 
investigator is completing the  physical exam and when research staff is completing the EKG and 
drawing blood for screeni ng labs. We will give you a mask to wear during the visit.   
This visit will take about one and a half hours.  
 
Clinic Visit #2: Start -up Visit for 28 day study  
This visit will be completed at the OHSU Oregon Clinical and Translational Research Institute Clinic 
(OCTRI) , the Biomedical Engineering Point of Care (BME POC) Laboratory  or at the OHSU 
Harold Schnitzer Diabetes Health Center. This v isit will last approximately 1.5  hours, d epending on 
user experience.  
 
You will continue to use your own insulin pump and manage your glucose as you normally would  
for the 28 days . You will be asked to answer questionnaires from the “Lifestyle Questionnaire,” that 
ask about your exercise routine  and your blood sugar control. You will insert a Dexcom G6 CGM 
according to the manufacturer’s directions and connect to the Dexcom G6 app , setting the alerts at 70 
and 250 mg/dl  and changing out every 10 days . You will be given a physical activity watch  
connected to the iPancreas app on a study -provided phone . You will be given a tracking tag to wear 
and shown how to install tracking beacon s in your home. You may be asked to plug the MotioWear 
beacon into your router to improve data uploads  You will also be  instructed on a mobile app, T1 
DEXI.  You will enter your physical activity and meal data into this app, including taking photos 
of all of your food  on the day of and the day after exercise . You will install the study app, the 
commercial app for the activity watch , the app for the activity watch and the Dexcom G6 app on 
your personal phone.  (If your phone is not compatible with the study apps, the provided study 
phone may be used.)  
 
You will be asked to complete two at -home  exercise se ssions using a 30 minute exercise video 
during  week s 1 and 2 and one session during weeks 3 and 4  after a meal of your choice . You will 
be assigned to either aerobic ( cardio), anaerobic (strength), or high intensity interval exercise 
video sessions. You will be i nstructed to consume a snack if your glucose is <120 mg/dL and 
delay exercise until your glucose is >80 mg/dL. Also if your glucose is >250 mg/dL, you will be 
instructed to calculate if a correction dose is needed and delay exercise until glucose is <250 
mg/dL.  You will be given a Contour Next blood glucose meter and strips. You will be instructed 
to check your glucose after exercise and to consume a snack if needed.   
 
 
 
   You will be asked to pi[INVESTIGATOR_54822]  a high carbohydrate dinner  prepared by [CONTACT_54867] (but 
not on the exercise days). The meals can be pi[INVESTIGATOR_54810].  You will 
be asked to download your pump weekly or biweekl y during the [ADDRESS_59099] you to clarify the 
content of your  food photos or to remind you to complete your exercise  or pi[INVESTIGATOR_54824].  
 
Clinic Visit #3 : Study Completion Visit  
At this visit, study staff will remove the Dexcom sensor  and you will turn in all devices .  Study 
staff will download your insulin pump. A study investigator will be available for consult if needed 
regarding insulin management . The sensor will be taken out earlier if the sensor is not working 
correctly or the investigator decides it should be removed.  It will also be taken out if you ask for it to 
be removed. We will inspect the skin where the sensor was placed and will take a  photo of the area if 
it is red or swollen. Your face will not be included in the photograph. There is little risk of 
identification unless you have an identifying tattoo or mark on your stomach. If the study coordinator 
notes any significant redness or sw elling, the study investigator will be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530]. If you have a red 
area around the place where the sensor was, the study investigator may ask you to return to the clinic 
to make sure you do not have an infection.  This visit wi ll take approximately [ADDRESS_59100] blood drawn for tests. Your blood will be destroyed after 
the OHSU lab finishes running  the tests listed in table below . The following data will be 
collected during this study and stored in a repository: 1) Dexcom G6 sensor data, 2) blood 
glucose data from a study Contour Next BG meter, 3) insulin data from your pump , 4) physical 
activity data, 5) food and exercise data th at you entered into the Da ilyDose app, and 6) context 
data from the tag worn on your body and the beacon from your home . In the future, this data  may 
 
 
   be used for other research studies at OHSU.  The data will be labeled as described in the WHO 
WILL SEE MY PERSONAL INFORMATION? section.  
 
If you have any questions regarding this study now or in the future, contact [CONTACT_54868], MD  at (503) 494 -7072 o r Peter Jacobs PhD at (503) [ADDRESS_59101] the study coordinator Debbie Branigan at 503 -418-9070.  
 
 
Clinic Visit Schedule  
Visit Number  1 3 4 
Procedures  Sign consent, obtain 
medical history and 
vitals  
 28 day study start -up 
visit Study completion  
visit 
Lab Tests  Blood Panel*, EKG, 
pregnancy test (if 
applicable)  Pregnancy test (if 
applicable)   
Physical Exam  History and Physical 
Exam   Exam of skin  
Time  1 ½ hours  1 ½ hours  60 minutes  
*The Blood Panel includes HgbA1C, liver tests (ALT, AST, albumin), kidney tests (creatinine), 
and electrolytes (Na, K, Ca) and a complete blood count to rule out anemia.  
 
WILL I RECEIVE RESULTS FROM THE TESTING  IN THIS STUDY?  
Some of the information collec ted and created in this study may be placed in your OHSU 
medical record.  While the research is in progress, you may or may not have access to this 
information. After the study is complete, you will be able to access any study information that 
was added to  your OHSU medical record.  If you have questions about what study information 
you will be able to access, and when, ask the investigator.  
 
We will run routine labs at your screening visit to monitor diabetes control, liver and kidney 
function, electrolytes, and blood count to determine if you are eligible for the study.  We do not plan 
to share your test results with you or your primary care provider.  However, if we discover 
information that is important for your health care, either in this stud y or in the future, we will 
contact [CONTACT_54869].  If you choose to receive the results, you 
may need to have the test repeated in a non -research laboratory.  You may learn information 
about your health that is upsetting or t hat impacts your health. You will be able to ask the 
investigator about any of the study results.   
 
 
WHAT RISKS CAN I EXPECT FROM TAKING PART IN THIS STUDY ?:  
Risk of Low and High Blood Sugar  
Exercise can cause the blood sugar to drop. Symptoms of low blo od sugar can include sweating, 
weakness, shaking and not feeling well.  The Dexcom app  will have high and low glucose alerts 
that you can adjust. There is a very low glucose alert that cannot be adjusted. Symptoms of high 
blood sugar  includes increased thirst, tiredness, blurred vision and irritability. It is unlikely that 
you will experience severe low or high blood sugar because of the use of the Dexcom G6 sensor  
with alarms set.  
 
Blood Draw Risks  
 
 
   We will draw blood from your arm a t the screening visit .  You may feel some pain when your 
blood is drawn.  There is a small chance the needle will cause bleeding, a bruise, an infection, or 
fainting.  
 
Exercise  
You will be completing exercise.  You may feel tired and may have low or high b lood sugar.  
Rarely, exercise may cause a heart attack, irregular heart rate or death.  You will an EKG 
performed at screening.   
 
Dexcom Sensor  
The Dexcom  sensor may produce pain when it is inserted into the skin, similar to a pump site 
insertion or insulin injection. Rarely, a skin infection can occur at the site of insertion of the 
sensor.  Itchiness, redness, bleeding and bruising at the insertion site m ay occur. An allergy to 
the tape that holds the sensor to the skin is possible.  The risk of skin problems could be greater 
if you use a sensor for longer than it is supposed to be used.  There is a chance that the sensor or 
needle may break under your ski n.  This is not expected to occur, but if it does, you should speak 
with your study doctor about what to do.  
 
Finger Stick Blood Glucose Measurements  
During the study blood glucose measurements need to be made with a finger stick.  The finger 
stick may cau se pain or bruising.  
 
Pregnancy Risks for Women  
If you are nursing an infant or you are pregnant now, you cannot be in the study.  This study may 
involve risks to an embryo, fetus, or nursing infant that are currently unknown.  If you are 
sexually active and could become pregnant, you and your male partner(s) must use birth control 
that works well or you must not have sex. The investigator will talk to you about the types of 
birth control that are acceptable.  You will have to do this the whole time you ar e in this study. If 
you become pregnant during the research study, please tell the investigator and your doctor 
immediately.  
 
Lifestyle Questionnaire  
There is a slight risk of a breach of confidentiality with your questionnaire responses. However, 
the plan  listed in the section “WHO WILL SEE MY PERSONAL INFORMATION?” makes it 
unlikely that the breach would occur.  
 
Other Side Effects  
One risk to taking part in this study is that the study may not be effective in helpi[INVESTIGATOR_54825]. This means you may spend time in the study that may not provide you with any health -
related benefits. You may have some side effects we do not expect.  
 
Risks from Storage of Data in Repository  
There is a slight risk of a breach of confidentiality from keepi[INVESTIGATOR_54826] i n a repository.  
However, the plan listed in the section “WHO WILL SEE MY PERSONAL INFORMATION?” 
makes it unlikely that a breach would occur.  
 
Risks from Using Provided Study Phone  
You will be provided with a phone with security controls in place. These c ontrols include 
password access so only you can access the phone. However, if you lose the phone - or it is 
stolen - data could be accessed by [CONTACT_54870]. In using the study phone, you accept the risk, however slight, that your in formation 
could be compromised.  
 
WHAT ARE MY CHOICES IF I DECIDE NOT TO TAKE PART IN THIS STUDY?   
You may choose not to be in this study.  If you do not take part in this study, the alternative is to 
continue your current diabetes treatment and care. You could chose  to use the Dexcom G6 CGM  
system for management of your diabetes without being in the study. We encourage you to 
discuss your options with your study doctor, your general primary care physician, or another 
health  care professional.   
 
WHO WILL SEE MY PERSONAL INFORMATION ? 
We will take steps  to keep your personal information confidential, but we cannot guarantee total 
privacy.  To protect your privacy, you will be assigned a [ADDRESS_59102] 
in a limited access folder. The study phone  you will use will b e registered to this 3 -digit number.  
All of the data stored on the phone  will be associated with this ID.  The data that will be stored 
includes:  
 Exercise , sleep  and activity data from the exercise  Watch  
 glucos e sensor data from the Dexcom G6 CGM  
 insulin from your insulin pump  
 the food and exercise data you log in the study app (this app has undergone a security 
review by [CONTACT_54871])  
 the context data collected from the wearable tags and beacon in your home  
We will c reate and collect health information about you as described in the WHY IS THIS 
STUDY BEING DONE?  and the WHAT EXAMS, TESTS AND PROCEDURES ARE 
INVOLVED IN THIS STUDY?  section s of this form.  Health information is private and is 
protected under federal law  and Oregon law .  By [CONTACT_29585], you are giving 
permission (also called authorization) for us to use and disclose your health information as 
described in this form.  
 
The investigators, study staff, and others at OHSU may  use the information we collect and create 
about you  in order to  conduct and oversee this research study and store in a repository.  
 
We may release  this information to others outside of OHSU who are involved in conducting  or 
overseeing research , including : 
 
 The funder of this study, National Institute of Health (NIH) , and Dexcom Inc., and the 
funder’s representatives  
 The Food and Drug Administration  
 The Office for Human Research Protections, a federal agency that oversees research 
involving humans  
 
Those lis ted above may also be permitted to review and copy your records , including your 
medical records . 
 
Your name, date of birth and social security number may be provided to the study funder (or an 
organization acting on their behalf) so the funder can meet Med icare reporting requirements  
 
 
    
Data  from this study may be shared with other investigators for future research studies.  All 
identifying information about you aside from some dates will be removed from the data before it 
is released to any other investigato rs.  
 
To protect your privacy, you will be assigned a [ADDRESS_59103] questions about what study information 
you will be able to access, and when, ask the investigator.  
 
WILL ANY OF MY INFORMATION OR SAMPLES FROM THIS STUDY BE USED FOR 
ANY COMMERCIAL PROFIT ?  
Any data obtained from you in this research may be used for commercial purposes, such as 
making a discovery that could, in the future, be patented or licensed to a company, which could 
result in a possible financial benefit to that company, OHSU, and its researchers.  There are no 
plans to pay you if this happe ns.  You will not have any property rights or ownership or financial 
interest in or arising from products or data that may result from your participation in this study.  
 
 
   Further, you will have no responsibility or liability for any use that may be made of your samples 
or information.  
 
WHAT ARE THE COSTS OF TAKING PART IN THIS STUDY ?   
There will be no cost to you or your insurance company to participate in this study.  
 
You will receive $5 00 for completion of all study visits.  If you withdraw early from the study, 
compensation will be $125  per 7 days on study.  There is no compensation for the screening visit. 
If you complete a partial week, you will also receive $[ADDRESS_59104] 
your social security number in order to process any payments for participation.  
 
You will receive additional compensation for completion of study procedures at hom e. You will 
get $[ADDRESS_59105] time/date . 
You can receive a maximum of $6/week in incentives. We will text you once a week to notify 
you of your progress.  
 
You may receive payment via a debit card.  There may be fees (for example, if the card is 
inactive for more t han six months), which will be deducted from the balance on your card. 
Details on how to use the card and any fees are included in the separate card member agreement 
and FAQ sheet given to you with the debit card.  
 
Payment received as compensation for part icipation in research is considered taxable income for 
a research subject. If payments are more than $600 in any one calendar year, OHSU is required 
to report this information to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).  Research subject payments 
exceeding $600  during any calendar year will result in a 1099 (Miscellaneous Income) form 
being issued to the research subject and a copy will be sent to the IRS.  
 
WHAT HAPPENS IF I AM INJURED BECAUSE I TOOK PART IN THIS STUDY? :   
If you believe you have been injured or harmed as a result of participating in this research and 
require treatment, contact [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Jessica Castle by [CONTACT_1555] (503) 494 -7072 or page her at (503) 
494-8311 or Peter Jacobs by [CONTACT_1555] (503) [ADDRESS_59106] compensation for injury related to negligence on the part of those 
involved in the research.  Oregon law (Oregon Tort Claims Act (ORS 30.260 through 30.300) ) 
may limit the dollar amount that you may recover from OHSU or its caregivers and researchers 
for a claim relating to care or research at OHSU, and the time you have to bring a claim.  
 
If you have questions on this subject, please call the OHSU Research I ntegrity Office at (503) 
494-7887.  
 
WHERE CAN I GET MORE INFORMATION?  
If you have any questions, concerns, or complaints regarding this study now or in the future, 
contact [CONTACT_54872] (503) 494 -7072, Peter Jacobs at (503) 494 -3870 or Deborah Branigan  at 
(503) [ADDRESS_59107] (“IRB”) , a 
committee that protects the rights and welfare of research participant s. You may talk to the  IRB 
at (503) 494 -7887 or [EMAIL_045] if:  
• Your questions, concerns, or complaints are not being answered by [CONTACT_5051].  
• You want to talk to someone besides the research team.  
• You have questions about your rights as a research participant . 
• You want to get more information or provide input a bout this research.  
 
You may also submit a report to the OHSU Integrity Hotline online at 
https://secure.ethicspoint.com/domain/media/en/gui/[ZIP_CODE]/index.html  or by [CONTACT_54873]-free 
(877) 733 -8313  (anonymous and available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week ).   
 
WHAT ARE MY RESPONSIBILITIES IN THIS STUDY?  
There are important instructions for you to follow during the study. We will ask you to use the 
DEXI  app for entering you r meal, rescue carbohydrate, exercise data  and food photos .  We will 
also ask you to wear your physical activity monitor to collect data using the iPancreas app. We 
will ask you to respond to the glucose sensor alarms  and insert a new G6 sensor every [ADDRESS_59108] TO TAKE PART IN THIS STUDY?  
Your participation in t his study is voluntary.  You do not have to join this or any research study.   
You do not have to allow the use and disclosure of your health information  in the study , but if 
you do not, you cannot be in the s tudy.   
 
Your health care provider may be one of the investigators of this research study and, as an 
investigator, is interested in both your clinical welfare and in the conduct of this study.  Before 
entering this study or at any time during the research, you may ask for a second opi[INVESTIGATOR_29582].  You do not have to be 
in any research study offered by [CONTACT_29591].   
 
The participation of OHSU students or employees in OHSU research is completel y voluntary 
and you are free to choose not to serve as a research participant  in this protocol for any reason.  
If you do elect to participate in this study, you may withdraw from the study at any time without 
affecting your relationship with OHSU, the inv estigator, the investigator’s department, or your 
grade in any course.   
 
IF I DECIDE TO TAKE PART IN THIS STUDY, CAN I STOP LATER?  
If you do join  the study  and later change your mind, you have the right to quit at any time .  This 
includes the right to wit hdraw your authorization to use and disclose your health information . If 
you choose not to join any or all parts of this study , or if you withdraw early from any or all parts 
of the study, there will be no penalty or loss of benefits to which you are other wise entitled, 
including being able to receive health care services or insurance coverage for services.   Talk to 
the investigator if you want to withdraw from the study.  
 
If you no longer want your health information to be used and disclosed as described in this form , 
you must send a written request or email stating that you are revoking your authorization  to: 
 
Jessica Castle, MD  
 
 
   Oregon Health and Science University  
[ADDRESS_59109].  
MC: OP 05 -DC 
Portland, Oregon [ZIP_CODE]  
[EMAIL_1027]  
 
Your request will be effective as of the date we receive it.   However, health information 
collected before your request is received may continue to be used and disclosed to the extent that 
we have already acted  based on yo ur authorization.   
 
If you choose to withdraw from the study, you will be asked to bring in all of the study devices 
and have the Dexcom sensor removed.   
 
If in the future you decide you no longer want to participate in this research, we will destroy all 
your information.   However, if your samples are already being used in an ongoing research 
project and if their withdrawal jeopardizes the success of the ent ire project, we may ask to 
continue to use them until the project is completed.  
 
You may be removed from the study if the investigator stops the study, you become pregnant, 
you develop serious side effects, or you do not follow study instructions.  
 
We will give you any new inform ation during the course of this research study that might  change 
the way you feel about being in the study.  
 
A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov , as required 
by U.S. law. This web site will not include information that can identify you. At most, the web 
site will include a summary of the results. You can search this web site at any time.  
 
 
 
SIGNATURES :  
State:   Your signature [CONTACT_54874].   
 
We will give you a copy of this signed form.  
 
 
 
Participant  Printed Name   [CONTACT_54875]  
 