 
 
 
 
 
November 6, 2018  
 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial (FAZST) 
 
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
 Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan (including summary of protocol amendments) 
 
 
 
Study Project Officers  
[CONTACT_552106] F. Schisterman, NICHD  
[CONTACT_552107] L. Mumford, NICHD  
 
Site Principal Investigators  
Dr. C. Matthew Peterson, University of Utah 
[CONTACT_552108], University of Utah 
[CONTACT_552109], University of Utah  
[CONTACT_552110], Minneapolis, Minnesota 
[CONTACT_552111], The Emmes Corporation 
[CONTACT_552112], University of Iowa  
[CONTACT_552113], University of Iowa 
[CONTACT_552114], Northwestern University  
Supported by  
[CONTACT_552035] (NICHD)  
Study Dietary Supplements  Provided by 
[CONTACT_95860], Inc.  
 
Version 11 .0 
November 6, 2018  
 
This study is being conducted in compliance with the protocol, FDA regulations (21 CFR Parts 50, 54, 56 and 312 when applicable ), Good Clinical Practices, applicable local regulations and 
the Declaration of Helsinki.  
  

Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725516]/Ethics Committee. I will obtain written  informed consent from all study participants prior to 
conducting any study procedures. 
I understand that my electronic or handwritten signature  [CONTACT_552104] a co- investigator on a case report form 
indicates that the data contained on that form have been rev iewed and accepted as accurate by [CONTACT_214349].  
I agree to conduct this study in compliance with the applicable local regulations, FDA regulations as 
applicable (21 CFR 50, 54, 56, 312), Good Clinical Practices, and the Declaration of Helsinki. 
I understa nd and am aware of my responsibilities as an Investigator as described in the applicable Good 
Clinical Practices guidelines. 
I agree to protect the confidentiality of my patients when allowing the Sponsor of this clinical trial , their 
authorized monitors  and/or relevant regulatory authorities access to my medical records for FAZST 
participants.  
 
  
 Principal Investigator, Printed Name   
 
    
 [CONTACT_2761]: Telephone # 
 
    
 Principal Investigator, Signature  [CONTACT_240421], send this page (original) to the  DCC for their files and keep a copy for your Regulatory Binder.  
 
FAZST Data  Coordinating Center  
c/o Kayla Chaney [ADDRESS_725517] Version 11.0  
 
2 
 
  
PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  
 
Study Title  Folic  Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial (FAZST). 
Objectives  To evaluate the effects of folic acid and zinc dietary supplementation in males on semen quality 
parameters , and indirectly on fertility and pregnancy outcomes among couples attempting to 
conceive a nd seeking assisted reproduction . 
Study Design  This is a multi -center, double -blind, block randomized placebo -controlled trial which randomizes 
men of couples attempting to conceive and seeking assisted reproduction either to study dietary 
supplements or to placebo to assess the effects of folic acid and zinc dietary supplementation on 
semen quality and fertility  outcomes.  The trial is sponsored by [CONTACT_552036] (NICHD).  
Cohorts and 
Sample Size  A total of 2 ,400 male participants will be randomized equally (1:1) either to active study dietary 
supplements (5 mg folic acid and 30 mg elemental zinc  daily ) or to matching placebo. Only the 
males will be randomized to study  dietary  supplement or placebo. Randomization will be stratified 
by [CONTACT_552037] (IVF, non -IVF/receiving fertility treatment at a study 
site, non -IVF/receiving fertility treatment at a non -study site).  
Supple ment 
Duration  6 months  
Participant Selection  Male p articipants will be recruited from couples seeking assisted reproduction .  Additional 
inclusion/exclusion criteria are described in Section 3.2.  
Primary Hypothesis  Folic acid and zinc dietary supplementation will maintain and improve normal semen quality 
parameters and increase live birth rate.  
Study Endpoints  Primary  
a) Semen quality – Standardized quantification of volume, concentration, motility, 
morphology, sperm count, and deoxyribonucleic acid ( DNA ) fragmentation index.  
b) Live birth – based on hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1097]. 
Secondary  
c) Human Chorionic Gonadotropin  (hCG ) detected pregnancy (implantation) – a 
quantitative hCG evaluation in serum > 5 mIU/mL.  
d) Clinical intrauterine pregnancy – visualized gestational sac in the uterus on ultrasound.  
e) Ectopic pregnancy – either visualization of no gestational sac in the uterus with a 
suspi[INVESTIGATOR_552006], an hCG level more than 1500 mIU /mL 
without visualization of an intrauterine gestational sac on ultrasound, or a slowly rising or 
plateauing serum hCG level without visualization of an intrauterine gestation on 
ultrasound.  
f) Early pregnancy loss (EPL) – hCG pregnancy loss will be defined as a serum hCG > 5 
mIU/mL followed by a decline. Clinically recognized pregnancy loss es will be identified 
by [CONTACT_552038] a loss prior to 20 weeks 
gestation . 
g) Specific pregnancy outcomes – including, but not limited to Cesarean section,  pre-
eclampsia,  gestational diabetes, growth restriction , gestational age, preterm birth, birth 
weight (small for gestational age), and major neonatal complications including death, and 
severe post -partum maternal morbidity. Outcomes will be determined based on hospi[INVESTIGATOR_552007] . 
h) Early embryonic development parameters   – Fertilization rates, method  of fertilization, 
number of cells and embryo morphology on day [ADDRESS_725518] Version 11.0  
 
3 
 
  
Study Title  Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial (FAZST) . 
 sperm penetration assay results. When available, information regarding the chromosomal 
complement of embryo will be assessed.  
i) Reproductive hormones and other measured biomarkers – Measured urinary, serum, and 
salivary concentrations of reproductive hormones, particularly androgens, proteomic 
analysis of human sperm and cardiometabolic risk factors and markers of oxidative stress, 
as well as measures of trace elements in toenails.  
Plans for Data Analysis  The primary analysis will be  an intent to treat (ITT) analysis based on the total cohort of randomized 
participants. This approach will be applied to the primary endpoints (semen parameters, live births) 
as well as designated secondary endpoints (i.e., early pregnancy loss, specific pregnancy outcomes 
and early embryonic development parameters). The difference between the measures of semen 
quality parameters, including concentration, motility, and morphology, and sperm DNA 
fragmentation for the two study cohort s will be examined by [CONTACT_1192] -sided t -tests. The common null 
hypothesis states that the effect of folic acid/zinc on the outcomes is null compared to the placebo. 
Multivariate techniques will also be employed to consider the effects of folic acid/zinc on overall semen quality.  
The semen parameters will also be assessed using analysis of covariance 
(ANCOVA) models with each semen parameter as the dependent variable, clinical center, IVF 
strata and treatment group as factors.  The outcome of live birth will also be assessed using a 
Mantel -Haenszel analysis to evaluate effects across fertility treatment strata.  
The secondary objectives with binary endpoints will be analyzed using the standard Z -score (using 
the normal approximation to the binomial distribution). For binary outcomes such as pregnancy 
loss, the time to event may be of interest. In this case, survival analysis methods will be applied 
with the log -rank test for comparison of the two study cohort s. A stratified log -rank test will be 
used to assess treatment effects across IVF strata. For continuous outcome s such as birth weight , 
either parametric or non -parametric methods will be used as appropriate. If transf ormations to 
approximate a normal distribution are feasible, they will be carried out prior to the parametric 
analysis. The normality of the data will be examined both graphically using Q -Q plots and by [CONTACT_552039] ( Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_552008]).  For data (either on original or transformed scale) assumed to be normally 
distributed , the comparison of the two cohort s will be carried out by a t -test. Alternatively , if a non-
parametric test is required, the Wilcoxon -Mann -Whitney  test will be used. Stratified analyses w ill 
also be performed for secondary outcomes. Specifically,  continuous secondary outcomes stratified 
analyses will be conducted using ANCOVA models with IVF strata and clinical center as factors 
for the comparison of the two cohorts.  If a non- parametric t est is required, van Elteren tests will 
be used to compare the two cohorts, accounting for strata, to detect differences in the distributions 
of the secondary endpoints. 
 
The trial is sponsored by [CONTACT_92430] (NICHD). The designated NICHD Study Project Officers for FAZST are Drs. 
Enrique Schisterman and Sunni Mumford. Drs . Schisterman and Mumford will be responsible for:  
• General design and conduct of the trial and preparation of the essential study documents, 
including the protocol, Manual of Procedures ( MOP ), and data collection forms  
• Obtaining necessary regulatory approvals including , if applicable, an  Investigational New 
Drug  (IND)  application , Offic e of Management and Budget Clinical Exemption , and an 
Institutional Review Board  (IRB) Reliance Agreement  
• Monitoring and overseeing the contractors’ performance 
• Review ing data collection practices and procedures  
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725519] Version 11.0  
 
4 
 
 • Reviewing and implementing any recommendations from the Data and Safety Monitoring 
Board (DSMB)  
• Chang ing study procedures as appropriate  
• Appointing to, and disbanding of, study implementation subcommittees  
• Reviewing  study progress in achieving goals and taking necessary steps to enhance the 
likelihood of achieving those goals  
• Overseeing all study -related analyses and publications  
 Drs. Schisterman and Mumford will have no contact [CONTACT_552040]. 
Drs. Matthew Peterson and Erica Johnstone  are the University of Utah (Salt Lake City, UT) 
Principal Investigators. The co -Principal Investigator s at the University of Iowa are [CONTACT_552115] and [CONTACT_552112]. The P rincipal Investigator at Northwestern University is [CONTACT_552116]. [CONTACT_552110] is the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_552009] (Minneapolis, MN). They each are responsible for the following: 
• Ensuring the study is conducted according to the protocol and MOP   
• Identifying, recruiting, s creening , enrolling , and retaining participants  
• Protecting participants ’ rights  
• Updating the IRB regarding changes  in the study protocol and MOP 
• Obtaining signed informed consent from each participant  
• Collecting study data per protocol , and following participants through study completion, 
including on-site semen analysis and collection and storage of biospecimens  
• Distributing the study dietary supplements to participants and assuring safety and integrity 
of the dietary supplements when stored at the study sites  
• Retaining specific records (e.g., dietary supplement storage and distribution  records, local 
participant information, etc .)  
• Preparing and sending required reports to the DCC  (e.g., recruitment , adverse event reports , 
documentation of IRB review and approval)  
• Providing the DCC with de -identified data from the clinical questionnaire and SART 
databases for FAZST enrolled couples  
• Communicating questions, concerns, and/or observations to the NICHD Project Officer and/or DCC 
 [CONTACT_552111] is the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_552010]. The 
roles and responsibilities of the DCC include:  
• Develop ing and maint aining   the study website and web -based data management system  
• Develop ing and amend ing the study protocol and MOP  
• Develop ing the randomization scheme and procedures as well as blinding/unblinding 
procedures 
• Develop ing and implementing   data management procedures, including data entry, edits, 
and error reporting  
• Coordinating and manag ing data collection , processing, and tracking (data and 
biospecimens), and data quality control for the duration of the study 
• Monitoring and reporting a dverse event s 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725520] Version 11.0  
 
5 
 
 • Com municat ing with clinical sites: scheduling of meetings and training sessions , 
responding to, and documenting ad hoc communications  
• Conducting site visits to ensure adherence to the protocol and procedures  
• Establish ing and implementing quality control procedures  
• Develop ing periodic reports : enrollment, participant status, study progress, adverse events, 
participant status (e.g., drop-outs) , etc.   
• Obtaining and distributing dietary supplements  to the clinical sites  
• Creating s tatistical analysis and presentation of the study data  
• Providing resulting datasets and documentation to NICHD 
• Organiz ing DSMB meetings : prepar ing reports for DSMB review and preparing summary 
reports of DSMB recommendations  
  
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725521]  of folic acid and zinc dietary 
supplementation in males on semen quality and indirectly fertility outcomes (i.e., live birth rate) 
among couples attempting to conceive  and seeking assisted reproduction.  A double -blind, 
placebo -controlled block randomized trial of folic acid and zinc dietary supplemen tation will be 
conducted. Following a screening /randomization  visit, participants will return at 2, 4, and 6 
months. The rate of adverse events will be noted throughout the double- blind trial.  
 
2.0  BACKGROUND  
Two micronutrients fundamental to the process of spermatogenesis, folic acid ( folate) and zinc, 
are of particular interest  for fertility  as they are of  low cost and wide availab ility.  Though the 
evidence has been inconsistent, small randomized trials and observational studies show that folate 
and zinc have biologically plausible effects on spermatogenesis and improved semen parameters.  These results support the potential benefits of  folate on spermatogenesis and suggest that dietary 
supplementation with folate and zinc may help maintain and improve semen quality, and perhaps, 
fertility rates.  Healthy , “fertile”  couples attempting to conceive face a normal success rate of only 
15-20% per month. Couples who attempt conception for more than one year without achieving  
pregnancy are thought to have low fertility and are likely to be ideal candidates for the study of 
the effect of dietary supplementation  on semen parameters and fertility r ate.  It is estimated that 
10 to 15% of couples fall under this category.  
Folate and zinc are of particular interest with respect to spermatogenesis through a likely effect on 
sperm DNA structure . Folate is a critical micronutrient for several reasons.  Regulation of DNA 
function takes place in part by [CONTACT_51716] , and f olate provides methyl groups that are transferred 
to the N5 position of cytosine in DNA via methionine .
[ADDRESS_725522] Version 11.0  
 
7 
 
 (RCT), 94 infertile men and 99 fertile men were divided into four groups receiving either folic 
acid (5 mg/day)/zinc sulfate (66 mg/day), folic acid/placebo, zinc sulfate/placebo, or placebo/placebo for 6 months.
12 Only concomitant administration of folic acid an d zinc led to a 
significant 74% increase in sperm density and total count in subfertile patients (insignificant increase in fertile men). Furthermore, in a study of 251 men of couples undergoing IVF or ICSI, fertile men showed a significant inverse association between seminal plasma folate and sperm DNA fragmentation index ( DFI).
[ADDRESS_725523] been observed between fertile and infertile men.
16-18 Pi[INVESTIGATOR_552011] o f DFI (>27%) were associated with decreased fertility in patients using assisted 
reproductive technologies ( ART ),[ADDRESS_725524] semen 
parameters .20 Among the numerous available tests of sperm DNA quality, the sperm chromatin 
structure assay (SCSA), which measures the stability of  sperm chromatin in acid media with 
acridine orange, is proven to be a superior measurement of DNA integrity and useful for 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_29820] .21, [ADDRESS_725525] of dietary 
supplement ation  on fertility.  
Tests of sperm DNA quality generally correlate well with other semen parameters, including concentration and m otility,
17, 23 and time -to-pregnancy.18, 24 However, the association s between 
DNA damage and pregnancy outcomes in assisted reproduction are less consistent. A recent 
literature review of work completed on this association from 1997 to present revealed little 
assoc iation between DNA integrity  and fertilization rates ; however, there was a strong association 
evident between DNA damage, embryo/blastocyst quality, and pregnancy rates.[ADDRESS_725526] es seeking assisted reproduction is questionable.
25 Given the 
conflicting evidence to date, large prospective studies  are needed to further examine the predictive 
ability of traditional semen parameters along with DNA fragmentation on human reproduction. 
Studies looking at  the role of micronutrients on early embryonic development are practically 
nonexistent because of lack of access to the early develop ing human embryo in vivo.  Patient s 
undergoing in vitro fertilization (IVF ) and intracytoplasmic sperm injection  (ICSI) represent a 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725527] importance in the study of effects of dietary supplementation with 
folic acid and zinc in male s on human reproduction.   
In summary, preliminary evidence from the aforementioned studies suggests that dietary 
supplementation with folic a cid and zinc may help maintain or improve semen quality, and 
perhaps, downstream fertility rates . Large prospective studies are needed to further elucidate the 
effects of folic acid/zinc dietary supplementation on semen quality, fertility rates , and early 
embryonic development parameters.  
3.[ADDRESS_725528] will be conducted according to the guidelines described in the International Conference 
on Harmonisation (ICH) E6 Industry Guidance for Good Clinical Practice (CGP). These guidelines can be found at the following website:  
http://www.ich.org/fileadmin/Public_Web_Site/ICH_Products/Guidelines/Efficacy/E6_R1/Step4/
E6_R1__Guideline.pdf      
 
3.2. Eligibility Criteria  
Couples Inclusion Criteria:  
a. Heterosexual couples in a committed relationship with a female partner aged 18 -45 
years and male partner aged 18 years and older attempting to conceive  and seeking 
assisted reproduction at participating fertility clinics .  
b. Couples actively trying  to conceive.  
c. Couples who are planning ovulation induction ( OI), natural fertility optimization 
methods, or intrauterine insemination  (IUI) should be willing to be on the study 
dietary supplement for at least 3 weeks before starting the next assisted 
reproduction cycle.  Women with regular periods may initiate their  fertility  therapy 
at the start of the woman’s menstrual cycle following randomization if 
randomization occurred within the first [ADDRESS_725529]  wait one 
menstrual cycl e if th e visit occurred after day 10 of the cycle). For women with 
irregular periods or amenorrhea, the male must be on the study supplement for 3 weeks prior to initiation of any ovulation induction medication (e.g., clomid, letrozole, gonadotropi[INVESTIGATOR_2115]). 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725530] Version 11.0  
 
9 
 
 Couples Ex clusion Criteria:  
a. Female partner unwilling to participate (e.g., no abstraction of her assisted fertility 
treatment record  or unwilling to complete baseline visit).  
b. Couples using donor, cryopreserved sperm, or sperm obtained via microsurgical or percutaneous epi[INVESTIGATOR_552012]. 
c. Couples attempting to conceive with a gestational carrier (surrogate) . 
d. Positive urine pregnancy test at screening . 
Male Inclusion Criteria:  
a. Willing to provide semen samples according to the proposed schedule at  baseline,  
2, 4, and [ADDRESS_725531] male fecundity (e.g., cigarette smoking, fever, high temperature environment and other environmental exposures) and other data collection instruments (e.g., physical activity, food frequency questionnaire , stress).  
Male Exclusion Criteria:  
a. Age <18 years.  
b. Unwilling to abstain from use of non- study approved dietary supplements or 
medications containing folic acid or oral preparations containing zinc throughout the study. 
c. Unwilling to abstain from use of testosterone supplementation throughout the study.  
d. Diagnosis of Vitamin B
12 deficiency or pernicious anemia.  
e. Consuming a vegan diet. 
f. A known genetic cause of male factor subfertility, including chromosomal disorders related to subfertility (e.g., Y chromosome deletions).  
g. Current use of drugs known to interact with folic acid or interfere with the 
biosynthesis of folic acid including all dihydrofolate reductase inhibitors, including but not limited to Trimethoprim, Triamterene , Bactrim, Iclaprim,  and 
Sulfonamides including diuretics, such as Hydrochlorothiazide  (HCTZ),  
Metolazone , Indapamide, Lasix , Bumex,  Torsemide,  Chlorthalidone, 
Acetazolamide, Mefruside, Xipamide; Sulfonylureas , such as Glipi[INVESTIGATOR_552013]; Cox -2 inhibitors, such as Celecoxib; Probenecid;  Sulfasalazine; 
Sumatriptan; Mafenide; Acetazolamide; Ethoxzolamide; Sulfiram; Zonisamide; 
optic agents including Dorzolamide and Dichlorphenamide; Valproic acid; Fluorouracil; Capecitabine; Methotrexate,  or other drugs known to interact with folic acid.  
h. History of organ transplantation 
i. Physician diagnosed: 
i. Current  poorly controlled chronic diseases such as heart disease, diabetes 
mellitus, hypertension, cancer, inflammatory diseases, autoimmune, thyroid disease, endocrine dysfunction, live r disease, kidney disease , or HIV/AIDS 
or other immune- insufficient related illnesse s. 
ii. Crohn’s disease, celiac disease, ulcerative colitis, gastric by[CONTACT_4897], lap band surgery  or history of intestinal surgery  to remove a portion of small 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725532] Version 11.0  
 
10 
 
 bowel. History of diseases/symptoms that require folic acid dietary 
supplementation, such as megaloblastic anemia, homocystinemia, and 
homocystinuria.  
iii. History of alcohol dependency disorder and/or other drug/substance dependency in the past [ADDRESS_725533] obstruction. 
k. Known allergy to folic acid or zinc dietary supplements . 
 
Female Exclusion Criteria:  
a. Age <18 or >45 years . 
 
3.3. Study Dietary Supplemen t Formulation   
Male p articipants will be randomized  (1:1) into two groups receiving one of the following: 
• Folic acid 5 mg plus  elemental zinc 30 mg (minimum, range 30- 40 mg) taken orally 
 daily  
• Placebo taken orally daily  
 Randomization will be stratified by [CONTACT_552037] (IVF, non-IVF 
receiving fertility treatment at a study site, and non -IVF receiving fertility treatment at a non -study 
site). Folic acid plus zinc and placebo tablet s will be identical in appearance and weight to maintain 
blinding. The duration of dietary supplem ent regimens will be six months.  For the remainder of 
the protocol, the term “Study Supplement” will be used to refer to folic acid and zinc  dietary 
supplements. 
4.0  OUTCOME MEASURES  
Semen parameters 
Four fresh semen samples, collected at baseline and after 2, 4, and 6 months of study supplement  
or placebo, will be assessed for the following parameters  (outcome measures)  utilizing the World 
Health Organization (WHO) semen analysis procedure 5
th edition27: volume, concentration, total 
sperm count, total motile count, percent motility, percent forward motility, percent normal 
morphology , and sperm DNA integrity. For sperm DNA integrity testing, sperm chromatin s tructure 
assay (SCSA ) and other testing will be used.[ADDRESS_725534] for epi[INVESTIGATOR_552014], efficiency, and prognostic value for 
men’s fertility potential.
[ADDRESS_725535] protocols within the trial clinical sites.  Oocytes will be assessed 16 –[ADDRESS_725536] 
culture, embryos will be graded 5 days after fertilization based on Society for Assisted Reproductive Technologies (SART) morphology criteria. When available, information from 
preimplantation genetic screening will be collected.  
hCG recognized pregnancy (implantation) 
For couples undergoing IVF/ICSI, serum quantitative hCG level will be measured at scheduled 
clinic visits at approximately [ADDRESS_725537] 14 days after ovulation will be followed by [CONTACT_552041]’s choice.  
Clinically recognized pregnancy 
Clinical recognition will be determined by [CONTACT_46917] a gestational sac on ultrasound scans. For the majority of  patients,  this will occur at the study site.  For patients who opt out of this 
element of standard care, documentation of intrauterine gestational sac or fetal heart tones as assessed by [CONTACT_552042].  
 
Early (biochemical) pregnancy loss (EPL)  
Pregnancy loss is a measure of impaired human fecundity and encompasses two types of losses:  1) EPL or hCG detected pregnancy loss , and 2) clinically  recognized pregnancy loss.  
Approximately one -third of all pregnancies are spontaneously aborted, of which two- thirds are 
hCG pregnancy losses.
[ADDRESS_725538] will be defined as a decrease in serum hCG between any 2 sequential serum hCG levels, followed by a decrease in hCG to <5 mIU/mL without intervention.  
Clinically recognized spontaneous pregnancy loss 
Clinic ally recognized pregnancy loss  is defined as a pregnancy loss before [ADDRESS_725539] approximately 10 -15% of women 
with recognized pregnancies.  
 
Ectopic pregnancy 
 Ectopic pregnancy will be defined as either visualization  of no gestational sac in the uterus with a 
suspi[INVESTIGATOR_552015], an hCG level more than 1500 mIU /mL without 
visualization  of an intrauterine gestational sac on ultrasound, or a slowly rising or plateauing serum 
hCG level without visualization  of an intrauterine gestation on ultrasound.  
 
Multiple gestation  
 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725540] Version 11.0  
 
12 
 
 Multiple gestations will be identified by [CONTACT_552043]’s 
prenatal visits.  
Pregnancy outcomes  
The outcome of live birth will be defined as birth of a fetus with any sign of life (e.g. , pulsation of 
umbilical cord, purposeful movements). 
Stillbirth will be defined as intrauterine fetal demise  occurring at or  after [ADDRESS_725541], or purposeful movement of 
voluntary muscle. 
For IVF patients, the gestational age will be based on the date of embryo transfer. For all other 
patients, gestational age will be based on the LMP using the guidelines defined in the table below.  
Method of estimating gestational age Variability  ([ADDRESS_725542] 
deviations ) 
Days from oocyte retrieval  or co-incubation  in in vitro fertilization  + 14 days  ±1 day  
Days from estimated ovulation in Ovulation induction  + 14 days  ±3 days  
Days from artificial insemination  + 14 days  ±3 days  
Days from known single sexual intercourse  + 14 days  ±[ADDRESS_725543] + 14 days  ±[ADDRESS_725544]-trimester physical examination  ±2 weeks  
Second -trimester physical examination  ±[ADDRESS_725545] -trimester physical examination  ±[ADDRESS_725546]-trimester obstetric ultrasonography  (crown -rump length) ±8% of the 
estimate  
Second -trimester obstetric ultrasonography (head circumference, femur  length)  ±8% of the 
estimate  
Third -trimester obstetric ultrasonography (head circumference, femur length)  ±8% of the 
estimate  
 
As a general rule, the official gestational age should be based on the actual beginning of the last 
menstrual period, unless any of the above methods gives an estimated date that differs more than the variability for the method, in which case the difference cannot probably be explained by [CONTACT_552044]. For example, if there is a gestational age based on the beginning of the last menstrual period of 9.[ADDRESS_725547] -trimester obstetric ultrasonography gives an estimated 
gestational age of 10.0 weeks (with a 2 SD variability of ±8% of the estimate thereby [CONTACT_91959] a 
variability of ±0.8 weeks), the difference of 1.0 weeks between the tests is larger than the 2 SD variability of the ul trasonography estimate, indicating that the gestational age estimated by 
[CONTACT_552045]. (Reference: A Simple Solution to 
Dating Discrepancies: The Rule of Eights  Hunter, L. A. (2009). "Issues in Pregnancy Dating: 
Revisiting the Evidence". Journal of Midwifery & Women's Health 54 (3): 184–190. 
doi:10.1016/j.jmwh.2008.11.003) 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725548] Version 11.0  
 
13 
 
 Small for gestational age will be defined when i nfant birth weight is ≤ 10% for gestational age 
(weight < 10th percentile), as defined by [CONTACT_552046], et al. 
(http://www.pediatrics .org/cgi/content/full/108/2/e35 ). 
Preterm birth will be defined as d elivery prior to 37 weeks of completed gestation.  Early preterm 
(up to <34 weeks ) will be distinguished from late preterm 34 up to 37 weeks.  Spontaneous preterm 
labor and delivery and preterm premature rupture of membranes will be distinguished from indicated preterm birth due to maternal or fetal conditions ( for example, preeclampsia or small for 
gestational age ( SGA ) fetus.   
Fetal intolerance of labor will be defined as C esarean delivery due to abnormal fetal heart rate 
tracing.  
Abruption or vaginal bleeding will be defined as abruption or vaginal bleeding that result in 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], Cesarean delivery, or pre- term birth.  
 
Biospecimen analysis 
Reproductive hormones and other biomarkers will be measured from stored urine , serum, and 
saliva samples for assessment of reproductive hormone concentrations, particularly androgens, 
cardiometabolic risk factors , markers of oxidative stress, and measures of trace metals in toenails . 
A proteomic analysis of human sperm will also provide valuable information regarding potential 
mechanisms.  
5.0  PARTICIPANT MANAGEMENT  
5.1. Recruitment  
Potential study participants will be recruited from heterosexual couples seeking fe rtility evaluation 
and/or assisted reproduction at fertility clinics  or other participating practices providing 
reproductive care. Recruitment methods will include attempts to enroll couples  of various racial 
and socioeconomic backgrounds. This recruitment  will happen in the clinical setting and may also 
occur with in the community such as health fairs, radio ads, brochures and flyers, standardized 
phone messages while patients are “on hold” at the study site clinics, social media, community 
health clinics, student health centers, and holistic care centers; such as fertility yoga, fertility 
acupuncture and fertility massage etc. Couples seeking assisted conception will be approached 
regarding the study by [CONTACT_137021], study coordinator or member of the re search staff before, 
during, or after their initial consult or clinical visit. They will be given information regarding the 
study, and the opportunity to enroll on that day or given the opportunity to schedule an enrollment 
visit at a later time.  
 Patient s attending clinic visits who request information regarding the trial will obtain information 
via phone calls, email,  posted mail or meet with research staff , who will then further explain the 
study and invite them to participate if appropriate.  Couples se eking assisted conception at 
participating study centers  may be given a brief information form regarding the study and the 
opportunity to schedule an enrollment visit.  Whenever possible , clinic patients will be provided 
basic study information and a conse nt form to review in the days prior to their clinic visit. This 
basic study information will be given, explained, and questions answ ered via phone, mail, or email. 
When discussing the study information with interested couples, the males will be asked to abstain from ejaculation for  2-[ADDRESS_725549] visit.  Because of couple time constraints of work or home, the couple may need to 
return to clinic on another day to complete the enrollment/baseline visit, semen analysis , and 
randomization.  Men presenting to the primary clinical sites for semen analysis  without their partner will be 
provided with study and contact [CONTACT_552047]. Research staff will contact 
[CONTACT_552048] . Eligible couples who agree to 
participate will be scheduled for baseline data collection. Study information materials and contact 
[CONTACT_552049]. Study site  websites will provide information regarding 
study participation as well as contact [CONTACT_552047]. Patients attending clinic visits who request information regarding the trial will be provided with contact [CONTACT_552050]. 
The study coordinator, research staff and principal investigator  (PI) may provide 
inclusion/exclusion and enrollment criteria to local physicians and clinic nurse managers and be available to discuss the study parameters for potential study integration into their clinics.  
Facebook, web  and radio announcements can be developed as needed.  
 Couples seeking assisted reproduction will be approached at their first clinic visit.  Potential participants planning to undergo a care protocol other than IVF will be counseled that they may participate in the study if the male partner is willing to be on study dietary supplements for at least 3 weeks prior to initiating their assisted reproduction method.  Women with regular periods may initiate their therapy at the start of the woman’s menstrual cycle following the visit if randomization occurred within the first 10 days of the cycle, or to skip one menstrual cycle if the visit occurred after day 10 of the cycle). For women with irregular periods or amenorrhea, the male must be on the study supplement for 3 weeks prior to initiation of any ovulation induction medication (e.g., clomid, letrozole, gonadotropi[INVESTIGATOR_2115]). 
5.2. Screening Process  
Couples will be asked screening questions  by [CONTACT_3462] , and those that meet the initial 
inclusion/exclusion criteria will be invited to participate in the study.  These screening questions 
for inclusion and exclusion criteria can take place via phone, email , or in person. Testing for 
anemia (Hemoglobin <13 gm /dL) in males will be done using a point-of- care, hemoglobin meter, 
as a preliminary screen for men who require additional evaluation to rule out B12 deficiency.  Men 
who screen positive for anemia (hemoglobin <13) will have blood drawn for a serum B12 with reflex to methylmalonic acid (MMA), but may still be enrolled and randomized.  They  will be 
advised of their abnormal lab result, and to discuss this with their  primary care provider .  Written 
informed consent will be obtained prior to the initiation of an y study -specific procedures. Female 
partners wil l provide informed consent for  the baseline collection of study -related biospecimens 
(blood and urine)  and a urine pregnancy test , medical chart abstraction, study questionnaires, 
anthropometric body measurements, vital sign measurement (blood pressure and pulse rate) and 
email or online contact [CONTACT_552051].  If a female is pregnant at the screening visit, the 
couple will be excluded from participation in the study.  During the screening procedures, both the female and male participants must c onfirm that the female partner is not currently pregnant and a 
urine pregnancy test will be completed.  If participants remain interested, they will either be 
immediately  enrolled (if they meet study inclusion and abstinence criteria), or will be scheduled  
for a later enrollment visit and reminded to abstain from ejaculation  for [ADDRESS_725550] Version 11.0  
 
15 
 
 be contact[CONTACT_3012] , text, mail, or email to remind them of their study visits,  and study staff will 
provide instruction on study eligibility criteria.   
For men who screen positive for anemia, results of further testing will be available within 3 
business days. If serum B12 is ≥ 300 pg/mL, no further testing is needed and the male will continue study participation.  If serum B12 is <300 pg/ml, MMA will b e determined from the same serum 
sample.  If MMA is > 0.4 µmol/L, the study supplement will be discontinued, and the participant will be advised to discuss likely B12 deficiency with his primary care provider.  Other aspects of study participation (questio nnaires, semen analysis, and biospecimens) will continue. 
5.3. Baseline Study Visit  
Baseline data collection  for males and females  will consist of questionnaires (i.e., diet, physical 
activity, medication, and reproduc tive history) , and anthropometric and vital  sign (blood pressure 
and pulse  rate) measurements . The b aseline study visit will include an additional review of 
inclusion/exclusion criteria in the event of any changes during the  intervening time period. The 
baseline interview will be conducted at study  centers . Urine, blood, saliva, and semen samples will 
be collected  from male participants, and urine and blood samples will be colle cted from female 
participants. Male participants will also be given access and instructed in the completion of an 
online daily journal. This will be the only study visi t for the female participants. After all baseline 
data are collected, study personnel will randomize male participants to one of the two study 
cohorts.   
5.4. Randomization 
A computer -generated randomization schedule  that assigns  participants  to the study supplement 
and placebo cohorts will be created by [CONTACT_941] D ata Coordinating Center (DCC). A total of 2 ,400 
participants will be randomized (1:1) to active study supplements or matching placebo.    Randomization will be stratified  (with random sequences of block sizes)  by [CONTACT_552052]  (IVF ; non- IVF/receiving fertility treatment at a study site; and non -IVF/ 
receiving fertility treatment at a non -study site ) to ensure that balance between groups is 
maintained within these factors over the enrollment period. The two Non -IVF strata will include 
natural fertility optimization methods , OI, and IUI. Participants who meet all criteria for 
randomization will be forma lly randomized during the baseline visit by [CONTACT_552053]  (AdvantageEDC
SM) system. Cohort 
assignments will be generated automatically by [CONTACT_552054].  
 
Subsequent to randomization, m ale participants will be given bottles  that will have a sufficient 
number of tablets for daily intake until the next scheduled visit ( two and a half  months) .  
Participants will be counseled on how to take study supplements and will be instructed to begin 
taking study supplements starting on the day of randomization.  
5.5. Active Follow -up 
Male participants will have scheduled follow-up visits at 2, 4, and 6 months  (± 1 week) . Study 
personnel will collect  anthropometric measureme nts, urine specimens, weigh  remaining  
supplements , perform venipuncture for blood collection, and collect additional biospecimens 
including semen, saliva and, when appropriate, toenail clippi[INVESTIGATOR_14839]. During these scheduled follow -
up visits participants will be  asked about their journal use to ensure appropr iate recording of 
information. Additional supplement bottles will be provided as needed at the visits (i.e., 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725551] Version 11.0  
 
16 
 
 participants turn in previous bottle and receive a new one at the end of the visit). Participants will 
respond to questionnaires including , but not limited to , dietary intake, physical activity, 
reproductive health, and medication use, and basic anthropometrics will be measured. Prior to the follow- up visits, study staff will issue reminders via text me ssage, email or phone to reinforce 
study participation , and to remind participants to abstain from ejaculation  for [ADDRESS_725552] abstraction at each  visit to the clinic during assisted reproduction cycles for a period 
of up to 9 months after study enrollment . In addition, females will be asked to complete a short 
monthly questionnaire via online, phone or email to update their pregnancy status, and 
reproduction cycles  progress. Once (if during this initial 9 -month period) a female partner becomes 
pregnant, pregnancy outcomes will also be followed by [CONTACT_552055]. If a female partner has one or more pregnanc ies, followed by a loss, all pregnancies will be followed 
through the initial [ADDRESS_725553] study will be initially processed and stored at the 
local trial coordinating c enter sites in –80°C freezers. Eventually ALL specimens collected from 
the clinical sites will be sent to  the NIH Tissue Repository (Fisher Bioservices: [ADDRESS_725554], Rockville, MD [ZIP_CODE]; 301-762- 1772). All samples will be tracked by [CONTACT_552056].   
In general, biospecimens will be collected from male participants at each cli nic visit in the 
following order: blood, urine, semen, saliva, and toenail (at one follow -up visit ).  For women 
partners , blood and urine are collected, and they will be obtained only at the baseline visit.  
Blood collection 
Each male participant will have blood collected by [CONTACT_552057]. In 
general, participants will be seated for several minutes prior to blood draw to allow fluid shifts to 
equilibrate.  Male participants will have blood collected at each study visit. Female part ners will 
have blood collected at the baseline study visit only.  A total of up to 50 mL of blood will be drawn 
at each blood draw using the following tubes:    
2 X 4.5 mL Light Blue Top, citrate anticoagulant  
2 X 10 mL Red Top, no anticoagulant 1 X 10 mL Green Top, Sodium Heparin (freeze dried), 72 USP Units 
1 X 10 mL Lavender Top, Liquid K
3 EDTA, 15% additive solution 
 
Blood samples will be processed into serum, aliquoted into cryovials, and frozen for future use.   
Urine collection  
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725555] 2 full days and not more than 5 days 
before attending the baseline clinic visit.   Samples will be collected by [CONTACT_552058] 4.5-oz. 
Specimen Containers with screw cap . Sample volume will be measured after which semen aliquots 
will be removed for determination of motility, morphology, and frozen for later DNA 
fragme ntation analysis (see Outcomes S ection 4.0 for specifics ). If a participant is unable to 
provide an adequate sample (e.g. , due to spi[INVESTIGATOR_4598], forgetting abstinence, etc .), he will  be asked to 
schedule another clinic visit to provide an additional sample.   
Saliva c ollection  
Male participants  will be asked to donate a bolus sample (1 mL) of whol e saliva at each clinic 
visit.  Samples will be collected using the passive drool technique.[ADDRESS_725556] 
long-term (on average, up to 1 year) exposures which usually cannot be captured using blood and urine samples.   
  
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725557] Version 11.0  
 
18 
 
  
Table 1:  Schedule of Events: Male Participant  
 
 Screening  Baseline  Month 2  Month 4  Month 6  
Assessments       
Informed Consent process  X     
Inclusion/Exclusion criteria review  X X    
Demographic Collection  X     
Concomitant Medication Review  X X X X X 
Anthropometrics (body measurements)  X    X 
Vital Signs (blood pressure and pulse)  X     
Screening for Anemia  with reflex B12 and 
MMA testing  X     
Medical History   X    
Lifestyle Questionnaire   X    
Food Frequency Questionnaire   X   X 
Soy/Caffeine Questionnaire   X   X 
24-Hour Dietary Recall    X X  
Questionnaire Baseline   X    
Questionnaire month 2    X   
Questionnaire month 4     X  
Questionnaire month 6      X 
Daily Journal   X X X X 
Dietary Supplement Randomization   X    
Dietary Supplement Adherence Assessment    X X X 
Dietary Supplement Safety Questionnaire   X X X X* 
Biospecimen Collection       
Semen   X X X X 
Blood   X X X X 
Urine   X X X X 
Saliva   X X X X 
Toenail     X  
*The Dietary Supplement Safety Questionnaire will also be administered via email [ADDRESS_725558] Version 11.0  
 
19 
 
 Table 2: Schedule of Events: Female Partner s  
 
Assessments   
Screening  Baseline Visit 
Collection and 
Instruction  During 
Assisted 
Conception   Pregnancy 
Follow Up  
 Ideally screening and baseline 
visit will be on the same day    
Informed Consent Process  X    
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria Review  X X   
Demographic  Collection  X    
Food Frequency Questionnaire   X   
Soy/Caffeine Questionnaire   X   
Lifestyle Questionnaire   X   
Anthropometrics (body measurements)   X   
Vital Signs (blood pressure and pulse)   X   
Baseline Questionnaire   X   
New Couples Questionnaire – Clinic Baseline  X    
Monthly Questionnaire    X X 
Medical Chart Abstraction   X X X 
Biospecimen Collection      
Urine Pregnancy Test  X    
Blood   X   
Urine   X   
5.8. Retention Plan and Compensation  
Retention of the research participants will be one of the most difficult tasks of this study. There 
are multiple clinical visits  each requiring blood, semen, saliva, and urine collection. Timing  of 
these visits is important. As such, participant burden should be minimized as much as possible.  
Retention begins at the time of recruitment, and it is essential to establish a positive rapport w ith 
the research participants. This includes providing information in a friendly manner, being 
responsive to their concerns  and time commitments of work and home, providing potential 
participants with enough detail to understand the requirements of participation , and stressing the 
importance of the potential research findings. The importance of timing and frequency of study 
visits and sample collectio n need to be stressed clearly. A gender- specific participant pamphlet 
will be provided to each participant with FAQs , instructions for filling out questionnaires and 
contact [CONTACT_552059].  The male participant will be provided 
with an ASA 24 Dietary Recall instruction sheet at his month 2 visit . Awareness of the participants’ 
time commitment will be integral. Participants will be compensated for their participation in the trial.  
 A total compensation amount of $350 will be provided to participants who complete all of the 
required procedures at the following  visits: 
1. Baseline visit $ 50    
2. 2
nd visit $50  Participants will receive an additional $15 if 80% of the daily journals have 
been submitted since the previous visit 
3. 3rd visit $ 75  Participants will receive an additional $15 if 80% of the daily journals have 
been submitted since the previous visit 
4. 4th visit $125  Participants will receive an additional $ 20 if 80% of the daily journals have 
been submitted since the previous visit 
 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725559] completed the visit an d signed the compensation 
form. Participants will also be required to complete a W9 form for personal tax purposes. The 
original form will remain in their research chart. If a participant is unable or unwilling to provide 
a social security number on the W9 form, he can still be in the study if interested but cannot be compensated m onetarily. Females will not receive reimbursement for their participation.  
  
Exit Questionnaire (Withdrawal) 
 
As in any study, participants may choose not to follow the study protocol fully until its completion.  
Even with the utmost effort to retain study participants, some drop out is expected.  To remove the possible bias, information on reasons for study withdrawal, non-compliance, and drop out will be 
collected  whenever possible.   
 Study Supplement Retrieval  
All attempts will be made to retain participants at any level they feel comfortable participating in 
this study. In general, study staff will continue to work with participants as long as they are 
responsive, to find the best way to retrieve the supplemen t bottles dispensed to each participant.  
If the participant is not responsive after three attempts, the supplement bottles will be considered 
lost.  On a case -by-case basis, the number of attempts may vary to ensure that we do not 
unnecessarily burden or disturb participants.   All forms of attempted communication to recover IP bottles will be documented.   If the participant cannot be contact[CONTACT_19904], phone, or text a certified letter can be sent to the participant requesting the return of the dispense d supplement by 
[CONTACT_552060]:  
• Staff may offer to pi[INVESTIGATOR_552016]’s office or participant’s home 
• Staff may send a stamped, self -addressed envelope to the participant if the current 
address is known. 
When the dispensed bottle is determined to be lost or thrown away, this will be documented in 
AdvantageEDC, on the last completed visit Supplement Accountability (ACT) Form.  
6.[ADDRESS_725560] Version 11.0  
 
21 
 
 The typi[INVESTIGATOR_552017] 
1 (female timeline is shown on the top in red, male timeline is  shown on the bottom in bl ue). After 
the initial consultation, women may have a saline sonohysterogram and/or an ultrasound (US) 
completed.  Within [ADDRESS_725561] IVF  assisted conception cycle is initiated. During the 
IVF cycle she will undergo 2 to 5 US and blood samples  to assess uterine lining, follicular 
development and maturity. Egg retrieval (ER) is done and 3 or 5 days later embryo transfer (ET) is completed.  For the men, a SA  is completed, along with a hamster egg penetration test (HEPT).  
Male partners collect a fresh semen sample on the day of  ER.  Depending on the pregnancy 
outcome, an additional frozen embryo transfer (FET) or fresh cycle may be initiated within the following months.  During the six months of study follow -up it is anticipated that couples may 
complete between 1 and 3 IVF assisted reproduction cycles.  
Figure 1. Recruitment and subsequent clinic (non- study related) visits for new IVF 
consults  
 
The typi[INVESTIGATOR_552018] 2 (female 
timeline is shown on the top in red, male timeline is shown on the bottom in blue).  After the initial consultation women usually undergo an US, hysterosalpi[INVESTIGATOR_8913] (HSG), or saline 
sonohyste rogram. Once IUI cycles are initiated they can be done for several months in a row as 
required. If unsuccessful after approximately [ADDRESS_725562] Version 11.0  
 
22 
 
 Figure 2. Recruitment and subsequent clinic (non- study related) for  patients initiating 
therapy with IU I 
 
 
 
 
The typi[INVESTIGATOR_552019] 3 (female timeline 
is shown on the top in red, male timeline is  shown on the bottom in blue). After the initial 
consultation women usually undergo an US, HSG,  or saline sonohysterogram. OI cycles are then 
followed- up by [CONTACT_552061]/or estrogen and  progesterone (P4) measurements. If unsuccessful after 
approximately three OI assisted conception , the women  may then undergo an additional 
consultation for further assisted conception methods . The men undergo a SA after the initial 
consultation. It is anticipated that couples may undergo up to three OI cycles over the 6 -month 
course of the study protocol. 
 
Figure  3. Recruitment and subsequent clinic (non -study related) for patients undergoing 
OI 
 
  

Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725563] trial is designed as a multi- center double -blinded block randomized controlled clinical 
trial with two cohorts : folic acid and zinc compared to placebo. The primary objectives are to 
compare t he cohort s on four quantitative assessments of sperm quality (concentration, motility, 
morphology, and DFI) and live births  in their partners. The study is designed with a  sample size 
of 2,[ADDRESS_725564] meaningful 
differences in the live birth rate between cohorts .  Since the comparison of sperm parameters are 
differences between continuous assay measurements, this sample size will be more than sufficient 
for the pr imary sperm parameter comparisons.   
The primary analysis plan is based on an “intention- to-treat” (ITT) approach comparing the two 
cohorts based on the randomized assignment, ignoring later changes in dietary supplement 
consumption. This analysis is descr ibed in Section 7.2. The DCC will perform periodic safety 
analyses and present interim reports to the Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) as requested, during the recruitment phases  of the trial. It is anticipated that safety analyses will be 
performed  every 6 -12 months. The final analysis will be performed upon completion of data 
collection and editing in the follow -up and close -out phase of the trial. Also,  one full formal interim 
analysis is planned and the power calculations with considerations for the choice of optimal time 
for the analysis are given in Section 7.3.  
7.2. Study Endpoints and ITT Analysis  
 Study endpoints: operational definition and verification  
Study endpoints will be determined based on laboratory evaluation including standardized SA, 
clinical pregnancy tests, and medical record evaluations (including routine pregnancy follow -up, 
ultrasound). Whenever possible, endpoints will be verified using different sources of information. 
For example, self -reports of pregnancy loss will be ascerta ined by [CONTACT_30219] (in case of a 
clinically recognized pregnancy) or by [CONTACT_41225].  
Operational definitions for study outcome events are detailed in Section 4.0. The sources of 
information for study endpoints ascertainment are described below :  
Primary  
a) Semen quality – Standardized quantification  of volume, concentration, motility, 
morphology, sperm count, and DF I fragmentation. 
b) Live birth – based on hospi[INVESTIGATOR_552020]  
c) hCG detected pregnancy (implantation) – a quantitative hCG evaluation in serum > 5 
mIU/mL .  
d) Early pregnancy loss (E PL) – hCG pregnancy loss will be defined as a serum hCG > 5 
mIU/mL followed by a decline. Clinically recognized pregnancy losses will be identified 
by [CONTACT_552038] a loss prior to 20 weeks 
gestation . 
e) Clinical intrauterine pregnancy – visualized gestational sac in the uterus on ultrasound. 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725565] Version 11.0  
 
24 
 
 f) Ectopic pregnancy – either visualization of no gestational sac in the uterus with a 
suspi[INVESTIGATOR_552006], an hCG level more than 1500 mIU/mL 
without visualization of an intrauterine gestational sac on ultrasound, or a slowly rising or plateauing serum hCG level without visualization of an intrauterine gestation on ultrasound. 
g) Specific pregnancy outcomes -  including but not limited to  Cesarean section, 
preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, growth restriction, gestational age, preterm birth, birth weight (small for gestational age), major neonatal complications including death, and severe post -partum maternal morbidity will be determined based on hospi[INVESTIGATOR_552021].  
h) Early embryonic development parameters  - Proportion of ICSI, proportion of MII 
oocytes fertilized, number of cells and embryo morphology on day 3 and day 5, number of good quality  embryos on day 5, proportion of good quality embryos on day 5
, number 
of embryos transferred, quality of embryos transferred, number of embryos cryopreserved, sperm penetration assay results. 
i) Reproductive hormones and other measured biomarkers – Measured urinary, serum, and 
salivary concentrations of reproductive hormones, particularly androgens, proteomic analysis of human sperm and cardiometabolic risk factors and markers of oxidative stress, as well as measures of trace elements in toenails.  
All events will be reviewed and verified by a central outcome review that will be performed by 
[CONTACT_552062] s and the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_552022].  
ITT analysis  
The primary analysis of the clinical trial will be ITT ana lysis based on the total cohort of 
randomized participants. This approach will be applied to the two primary endpoints (semen parameters and live birth rate) as well as designated secondary endpoints (number of follicles, number and proportion of oocytes f ertilized). The difference between the measures of semen 
quality parameters, including concentration, motility, and morphology, and sperm DNA fragmentation for the two cohorts will be examined by [CONTACT_1192] -sided t -tests. The common null 
hypothesis states that th e effect of folic acid/zinc on the outcomes is null compared to the placebo. 
Multivariate techniques will also be employed to consider the effects of folic acid/zinc on overall semen “quality”. Specifically, a permutation test based on the sum of t -statist ics across the four 
quality measurements will be conducted. The frequency of live births across cohorts using the 
standard Z -score (using the normal approximation to the binomial distribution) will be compared. 
Both of the primary analyses will be done with two- sided tests conducted at the 0.05 level.  The 
semen parameters will also be assessed using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) models with each semen parameter as the dependent variable, clinical center, IVF strata and treatment group as factors.  The outcome of live birth will be assessed using a Mantel -Haen szel analysis to evaluate 
treatment effect acro ss IVF strata.  
The secondary objectives with binary endpoints will be anal yzed using the standard Z -score. For 
binary outcomes such as live births, the ti me to event may be of interest. In this case, survival 
analysis methods will be applied with the log -rank test for comparison of the two study cohorts.  
A stratified log -rank test will be used to assess treatment effect across IVF strata.  For continuous 
outcomes such as birthweight either parametric or non- parametric methods will be used as 
appropriate. If  transformations to approximate a normal distribution are feasible, they will be 
carried out prior to the parametric analysis. The normality of the data will be examined both 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725566] Version 11.0  
 
25 
 
 graphically using Q -Q plots and by [CONTACT_552063] (Wilks -Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_423777]). For data (e ither on original 
or transformed scale) assumed to be normally distributed, the comparison of the two cohorts will 
be carried out by a t -test. Alternatively if a non -parametric test is required, the Wilcoxon -Mann -
Whitney test will be used. For continuous s econdary outcomes stratified analyses will be 
conducted using ANCOVA models with IVF strata and clinical center as factors for the 
comparison of the two cohorts.  If a non- parametric test is required, van Elteren tests will be used 
to compare the two cohorts, accounting for strata, to detect differences in the distributions of the 
secondary endpoints. 
7.3. Sample Size and Power Determinations  
Table [ADDRESS_725567]. An alpha level of 0.05 and a sample 
size of 2 ,400 couples divided equally to the folic acid/zinc and placebo arms of the trial  are 
assumed throughout the trial. Previously published studies suggest that for the control group, a 
probability of about 0.60 - 0.70 for live birth (PLB) can be expected, assuming up to three  cycles 
of assisted conception.  
In the following,  a range of probabilities for the placebo arm of 0.60, 0.[ADDRESS_725568] of the intervention will be measured as 
the rate ratio (RR) of live birth in the folic acid/zinc arm compared to placebo. The calculations were performed using R statistical software based on a two -sample test of populations. Table [ADDRESS_725569] study is comprised of three strata (couples receiving IVF, couples receiving non -IVF 
at a FAZST site, couples receiving non -IVF at a non -FAZST site), which are block randomized. 
The power and sample size calculations for the analysis of the overa ll trial are presented 
previously.  The following calculations are to demonstrate adequate statistical power when 
stratified analysis is to be performed. In Table 4, we provide the results in sample size distributions among the strata and their correspondi ng live birth RRs that can be detected at 80% statistical 
power, with an alpha level of 0.05 and a total sample size of 2400 couples divided among the folic acid/zinc and placebo arms of the trial. These calculations assume that the cumulative live birth rate in the placebo arm for the IVF stratum is 0.[ADDRESS_725570] size in the IVF stratum than that in the non-IVF strata is consistent with clinical knowledge in that enhanced live birth rates attributable to folic acid/zin c supplementation is likely to be greater in the non -IVF strata assuming it is generally 
more fecund than the IVF strata and the IVF treatments are highly effective leaving less room for improvement. When multiple comparisons are corrected, we see slight e levation of effect sizes 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725571] Version 11.0  
 
26 
 
 (1.15, 1.24, and 1.24, respectively) that can be detected at the same 80% statistical power and with 
the same sample sizes.  
Table 4. Stratified power analysis for comparing live birth rate in treatment and placebo 
arms with no interim looks based on a total sample size of 2400, 80% statistical power, and 
an alpha level of 0.05. The three strata are:  A -IVF stratum, B -non- IVF FAZST site  stratum 
and C -non- IVF non- FAZST site stratum. The PLB in placebo in these strata are 0.63, 0.[ADDRESS_725572] estimates 
detectable with 80% statistical power and an alpha level of 0.05.  
  
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725573] Version 11.0  
 
27 
 
 Table 5. Stratified power analysis for comparing live birth rate in treatment and placebo 
arms with no interim looks based on a total sample size of 2400, 80% statistical power, and 
an alpha level of 0.05, when the two non- IVF strata are collapsed. The two strata are:  A -
IVF stratum, B -non- stratum. The PLB in placebo in these strata are 0.[ADDRESS_725574] plan  describes how alpha (α) will 
be spent across the interim and final analyses of the data.   
The interim analyses will be performed based first on the sequential interim monitoring of the 
semen quality parameters ( sperm concentration; total sperm motility; and sperm morphology 
(abnormal form)) after 50% of the FAZST participants have completed their six months follow -
up.  The analyses will be unadjusted by [CONTACT_552064] , in line with the ITT approach.  The overall 
Type I error rate will be controlled at a pre -specified level, accounting for both multiple semen 
outcomes and the interim analysis.  As the effects of the nutritional supplementation are not clearly understood, the study should be stopped early only if there is strong evidence of harm.  Given this a one -sided  alpha spending function, which approximates the O’Brien -Fleming
[ADDRESS_725575], a Bonferroni adjustment will be used to distribute the (some times called 
experiment -wise) Type I error alpha among the multiple semen parameters.  A α=0.025 (one -
sided) is  to be  assigned to the experiment -wide alpha level for the assessment of semen parameters, 
where α 3=α/3 = 0.[ADDRESS_725576].  For each 
semen parameter, the amount of α 3 available for the interim analysis performed at time t is α 3(t) 
and will be obtained from the  O’Brien-Fleming spending function.  Time t for the first st age of the 
FAZST interim analysis will be once 1200 (50% of the participants) have completed six months of follow -up.   Using these assumptions the test statistic for lower bound of harm w ill be 3.5547 
for each of the 3 comparisons with α
3(t) = 0.[ZIP_CODE] whe re t represents 50% of the participants 
completing  [ADDRESS_725577] Version 11.0  
 
28 
 
 parameters.  The DSM B will consider the consistency of all semen analysis data to determine 
whether the second stage of the interim analysis should be considered.   
If the DSM B determ ines that the second stage of the interim analysis is applicable, it will be 
conducted based on the available data and the outcome of live birth.  For this stage, the estimated 
information fraction  will be defined as the total number of participants comple ting 6 months of 
follow- up at the time of database closure for the second stage interim analysis.   Similarly,  the 
alpha spending function approach will be applied to the sequential monitoring of live birth.  An overall alpha of 0.05 and a one -sided procedure in data monitoring will be used.  The hypothesis 
will be tested by a one -sided O’Brien -Fleming alpha spend ing design.   Assuming PLB = 0.[ADDRESS_725578] boundaries  using the O’Brien- Fleming alpha 
spending design based on various values of the information fraction are provided in the table 
below. When a stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_552023], there will be an indication that the treatment has an 
increased risk of harm for live birth.  The DSMB will consider this result and all live birth data to determine whether a suspension of the trial intervention should be considered.   
Table [ADDRESS_725579] will be utilized to develop prediction 
models for various endpoints for couples undergoing IVF and/or ICSI procedures. These models will enhance understanding of these processes and the factors that may affect outcomes. Thus, the 
study will provide important information beyond the evaluation of the effects of folic acid/zinc on 
semen quality alone.  
The prediction models approach is described here only briefly. 
Prediction of live birth  
Various prediction models can be built for this binary event considering baseline and follow -up 
information (including, though not limited to, sperm concentration, motility, morphology, sperm 
DNA fragmentation,  female age, female anti -müllerian hormone (AMH) and/or antral follicular 
count, female diagnos es, female assisted conception type,  the number of embryos transferred, and 
embryo quality). Three methods can be used to build a prediction model: (a) logistic regression , 
(b) neural networks , and  (c) regression trees. While logistic regression is a stand ard technique, the 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725580] Version 11.0  
 
29 
 
 other two methods will allow consideration for  more complicated associations between risk factors 
and outcome s (e.g., interactions and optimal cut -off points) as well as discrete outcomes with 
several possible categories (e.g. , early pre gnancy loss, pregnancy complications, and  birth).  
Validation methods will be used to compare these approaches whereby [CONTACT_552065] (e.g. , 2/3 of the data) and validation sets (e.g., 1/3 of the data). The models 
will be fit using the training set and their predictive ability will be compared on the validation set. Receiving operating characteristic (ROC) curves will be used to compare the different models and 
determine which is  preferred .
34, [ADDRESS_725581] Officer statistical methods for evaluation of drop out 
and compliance for future analyses of the study results. Both drop- outs and non- compliance 
introduce a problem when the processes do not occur at random. Drop- outs pote ntially lead to 
selectively missing data that may bias crude ITT comparisons. Non- compliance to assigned study 
supplements can also be influenced by [CONTACT_552066]. Marginal structural models (MSM) sugg ested in the causal inference framework
39-
[ADDRESS_725582] of 
cohort assignment  building upon the theory of causal inference and the idea of ‘potential 
outcomes’.44, 45 A key component to these models is inverse probability weighting to model the 
exposure (e.g., folic acid and zinc supplementation) with the end result providing an estimate of 
the relative risk of the outcome of interest among the actual dietary supplements  compared to 
placebo, with appropriate confidence intervals  and appropriately adjusting for time -dependent 
confounders affected by [CONTACT_552067]. 
Compliance  
All bottles, both study supplement and placebo bottles, will be weighed as a measure of participant 
adherence at the 2 -, 4-, and 6- month study visits. Participants will be asked  to bring all bottles 
(both unopened and opened) and unused tablets  to each study visit. The original weight of the 
bottles when distributed should be recorded on the appropriate visit checklist. The bottles will be 
weighed using a calibrated  scale. The bottles should be weighed outside the room where the 
participant is  located , when possible.   
7.8. Implementation of Statistical Analysis 
Descriptive data analysis will be performed by [CONTACT_15791]. Questions related to data analysis and methodological issues will be discussed periodically at staff meetings at the DCC. Interim results 
will be summarized and presented at the DSMB meetings and discussed with the Project Officer. 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725583] Version 11.0  
 
30 
 
 Holding regular discussions of study analysis is crucially important to ensure that study aims are 
met and that the interpretation of data is valid. Publication  quality summaries of the results of the 
statistical analyses will be prepared by [CONTACT_552068] ; presentations 
and manuscripts in conjunction with statistic al investigators at NICHD.  
8.[ADDRESS_725584] Web -based System  
Data c ollection  
Source Documents : Source documents are defined as original documents, data and records.  They 
may include hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1097], clinical and/or office charts, laboratory data/information, 
participants’ journal s or evaluation checklists, pharmacy dispensing records, recorded dat a from 
automated instruments, microfiches, photographic negatives, microfilm or magnetic media and x -
rays.  Study staff will clearly define the various source documents used to support the study as part of their local data management support. 
 
The investig ator(s)/institution(s) will permit study -related monitoring, audits, IRB/ Independent 
Ethics Committee (I EC) review, regulatory inspection(s), and will provide direct access to all 
source data documents at the time of monitoring and/or upon request by [CONTACT_15791].  
 
Web-based data collection and management system 
Data collection will occur via a web -based data entry system (AdvantageEDC for study specific 
needs such as enrollment and participant ID assignment) provided by [CONTACT_552069] t o enrollment [ADDRESS_725585] access to each electronic case report form for data entry. As data are entered, they are validated through range and within-form consistency checks. 
 
Data storage and quality control 
Data for individual participants will be recorded on electronic case report forms (eCRF) in the AdvantageEDC system. All participants screened for the study, including the screen failures, must  
be entered into AdvantageEDC. Participants will be randomized in the AdvantageEDC system, 
and the eCRFs must be current to reflect participant status at each phase d uring the course  of the 
study. Participants will not be identified on the eCRFs by [CONTACT_180530]; instead, once 
participants are entered into AdvantageEDC, the system will assign them unique participant 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725586] be kept on file with the p articipant’s study dossier. Study records should be 
maintained  for at least three years post completion of the final study report or publication of the 
primary endpoints or per local site IRB requirements  (whichever is longer). 
 
Data processing and data management 
Clinical data processing and management will be employed based on the procedures developed in 
conjunction with the DCC. All of the data entered into the AdvantageEDC system will be checked 
for valid values and ranges, between item logical consistency, and within- participant variation. 
Prior to any analy ses the distributions of the measures will be examined to aid in selecting 
appropriate statistical techn iques and data transformations. Data transformations (e.g.,  log 
transformations) will be used in an attempt to normalize non -normally distributed data s o as to still 
be able to use statistical techniques appropriate for normal data. In addition, nonparametric and semi -parametric techniques may be used with non -normally distributed data. 
 
Data plan for participants with incomplete data 
Participants will be included in the data analysis provided that they complete the testing procedures listed and have completed at least one follow-up visit, and do not receive additional interacting 
medications. The DCC will work with site staff to ensure  that the study records for all participants 
who terminate early are as up to date and as possible, with field and form exceptions reviewed and accepted to account for all required data. 
8.3. Questionnaires and Other Data Forms  
All necessary forms and document ation material will be available online through the study website 
and can also be printed on location at the clinical sites as needed. The availability of information 
online ensures that all are working with the same most updated version   Forms will be de signed to be clear, concise, and convenient to use and for the web- based forms 
also include imbedded coding and initial error checking mechanisms. Data collection for the FAZST trial will begin with screening, continue through the baseline visit, active follow-up (with 
daily journals and biospecimens  collections ) for six months, and end with passive follow -up during 
pregnancy. The principal mode of data collection for FAZ ST will be web -based.   
 
Questionnaires    
 The mal e study questionnaires include the baseline questionnaire, 24- hour dietary recall, food 
frequency questionnaires, and [ADDRESS_725587] Version 11.0  
 
32 
 
 dietary recall, the ASA24 Automated Self -administered 24- hour Recall (v. 2011 or 2014) 
developed by [CONTACT_552070].  The ASA24 is a freely available, secure, 
Web -based tool that enables self -administered 24 -hour recalls 
(http://riskfactor.cancer.gov/tools/instruments/asa24/ ). All questionnaires will be reviewed by [CONTACT_368849]/staff to verify understanding and completion.  
 
The female study questionnaires include th e baseline questionnaire, food frequency 
questionnaires, and monthly questionnaires. Refer to Table 2 for specific questionnaire content. Briefly, baseline questionnaires will elicit socio -demographic information, stress, medical and 
reproductive history a nd health -related habits. Monthly on -line follow -up questionnaires will 
obtain information on any current fertility treatment she has received and pregnancy outcomes. 
Questionnaires are self -administered and entered into the AdvantageEDC system. Questionna ires 
will be reviewed by [CONTACT_74309]/staff to verify understanding and completion.   
Daily journals 
  These will be completed daily via the internet, smartphone , or a telephone system by [CONTACT_552071]. These forms, eliciting information 
on dietary supplement  compliance, intercourse, exposures to alcohol and stress, and possible 
adverse effects are designed to be simple and convenient to encourage response.  
Abstraction forms  
 Information on the reproductive history and demographics of the female partner and the course of 
fertility treatments she may have received , pregnancy and delivery will be obtained through 
abstraction of medical records from routine pre -natal clinic visits, routine tests (e.g., blood tests, 
ultra-sound, amniocentesis) and any hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], OBGYN, other primary medical doctor , or 
emergency room visits.  
 
Biospecimen tracking  
For each visit where specimens are collected , pre-printed labels that include barcodes will be  
provided and placed on tubes and containers per the Manual of Procedures (MOP). Each specimen sample after processing will be  labeled with a barcode and dot matrix code, and all biospecimens 
will be entered and tracked in the Global Trace System , a component of the AdvantageEDC 
System.    The barcodes contain the participant identification  number, the visit number and the 
type of specimen. Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_552024]. Shipment f rom the local repository to the central study repository 
will be documented and performed according to the Standard Operating Procedures ( SOP) for the 
lab specimen and in collaboration with the central repository. The specimen tracking information will be saved in Global Trace which is maintained by [CONTACT_15791] .  
 
8.4. Adverse Experience Reporting  
Definitions of adverse event (AE) and serious adverse event (SAE) 
Standard definitions for AEs and SAEs, their identification, characterization regarding severity 
and relationship to study interventions, and processing are included in Appendix A. 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725588] Version 11.0  
 
33 
 
 • AE collection period and follow-up 
All AEs will be recorded from the first day the study supplement was taken through seven days 
following the last dose of the supplement. All reportable events and all suspected adverse 
reactions will be followed until resolution or medically stable.   
All AEs, either observed by [CONTACT_410047]/her medical collaborators, or reported 
by [CONTACT_258844], or in response to direct questioning, will be reported.  Any SAE  regardless of severity or potential association with the study supplements must be 
documented in study records by [CONTACT_552072] (within 24 hours of learning about the event).  Non- serious adverse events can be collected in a routine 
manner using case report forms.  Adverse events will be collected in the males receiving study 
supplements.  Important female associated study endpoints, including adverse pregnancy 
outcomes  and pregnancy loss , will be collected throughout the study  and reported as adverse 
events  via questionnaires and medical record abstraction forms .
 
• Obligations of Site Investigators  
 
FAZST requires the site investigators to report all AEs, regardless of their severity or potential 
associati on with the study supplements. When submitting adverse event information the DCC, 
a site investigator may not delegate someone other than a listed study physician the 
responsibility for reviewing the accuracy of the content s of the adverse event report. When 
reporting an AE, the site investigator must assign a severity grade to each event and also 
declare an opi[INVESTIGATOR_552025]. 
 
For any SAE , the DCC must be notified within [ADDRESS_725589] be collected with supporting 
documentation and entered in the AdvantageEDC data collection system.  This data entry serves as notification of the  DCC. The 24- hour reporting deadline is necessary to provide 
adequate time to investigate the report and determine if the S AE requires further reporting. The 
DCC and/or NICHD would then prepare materials to submit, if necessary, to regulatory authorities a nd IRBs within the timeframes required by [CONTACT_552073].  
 
For AEs considered non- serious, timely reporting is considered acceptable within seven days 
of learning about the event. 
 
• SAE  Reporting Responsibilities of the Site  
 
When an SAE is identified, the site investigator (or the s tudy coordinator) shall promptly: 
 1. Notify the site PI (if a different person) in person or by [CONTACT_552074]. 
2. Use the AdvantageEDC system to prepare the available SAE  information on a study  
adverse event  case report form. If supplementary information is to be supplied, this may 
be attached to the case report form in AdvantageEDC.  If the data system is not available , 
use a MedWatch Form FDA 3500A and fax to the DCC.  The event must be entered into AdvantageEDC as soon as the system is available.  
3. The site PI (or another designated study physician) is responsible for reviewing and approving the report contents (including the event description, grading of event severity, and relatedness to study  supplements). 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725590] Version 11.0  
 
34 
 
 4. Submit the initial report to the DCC within 24 hours of recognizing the event.  Submission 
to the local IRB is based on the site’s responsibilities per the site’s IRB.  
5. The adverse event report and each page of any attached materials must des cribe the study 
participant only by [CONTACT_552075](s). Any personally identifying information (e.g., name, telephone number, address, etc.) must be removed or obscured before delivery to the DCC.  Transmission may be done electronically via the AdvantageEDC system or by [CONTACT_552076].  Any information that cannot be submitted via the AdvantageEDC system to the DCC must be sent by [CONTACT_395035]  (1-800-576-
5790). 
6. If the DCC requests additional information or if furth er pertinent details become available 
(e.g., laboratory reports, follow -up evaluations, discharge summaries, autopsy reports, 
etc.), promptly submit them to the DCC.  
• Submitting an expedited Safety Report to the Local IRB 
 
When the DCC or NICHD informs a s ite that expedited safety reporting to regulatory 
authorities is required, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_552026].   
 
Each expedited safety report should routinely include a brief cover memorandum, the completed MedWatch Form FDA 3500A, and any additional pertinent information recommended by t he DCC or the Medical Monitor. Once a report is assembled  by [CONTACT_552077], the  site PI [INVESTIGATOR_552027].  Follow -up reports will be submitted when 
required or when pertinent information becomes available.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_119072] a complete copy of each expedited safety report as it was submitted to the ir IRB, and forward a c opy of  each 
report to the DCC. The DCC will be responsible for further dissemination of expedited safety reports as described below.  
 
• Obligations of Study Sponsor and Data Coordinating Center 
 
The NICHD, or the DCC on behalf of the NICHD, must immediately investigate each reported serious adverse event . Recommendations for reporting AEs for dietary supplements are 
described in the FDA “Guidance for Industry: Questions and Answers Regarding Adver se 
Event Reporting and Recordkeepi[INVESTIGATOR_552028] ” (2007) and if applicable, 
may be covered in the  FDA regulations regarding drug products. FDA (and other rel evant 
regulatory authorities), the DSMB and all participating investigators  must be notified  within 
[ADDRESS_725591] notify the FDA and the DSMB as soon as possible but no later than seven calendar days after the sponsor’s initial receipt of the information.  
 All SAEs  must be reported to the DCC through AdvantageEDC within [ADDRESS_725592] Version 11.0  
 
35 
 
  
When the DCC or NICHD has determined that expedited reporting of an AE is required, the 
DCC will be responsible for performing the following procedures and for reporting the AE to 
regulatory authorities within the required timeframes: 
 
1. Notify the site that expedited reporting will be required and request any additional 
information needed to complete an appropriate report. This may include completion or updating the information in AdvantageEDC and the submission of supporting documentation, laboratory reports, discharge summaries, etc. The DCC will prepare a cover memorandum for reporting the event to regulatory authorities. 
2. When the cover memorandum, MedWatch Form FDA 3500A, and any pertinent 
attachments are ready, the DCC will submit a copy of the completed report, by [CONTACT_552078], to the following persons: 
a. FDA (addressed to FDA, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Off ice of 
Food Defense, Communication and Emergency Response, CAERS Team, HFS -11, 
[ADDRESS_725593] for the study);  
b.Site PIs at each active participating site (who is responsible for forwarding the 
 report to the local IRB); 
c. NICHD Project Officer s; 
d. DSMB Chair .  
3. If relevant follow -up information becomes available, the DCC will be responsible for 
obtaining the details from the site. This information will be reviewed by [CONTACT_22955]. A follow-up MedWatch form will be completed and forwarded to all parties that received the earlier safety report.  
4. The DCC will also transmit copi[INVESTIGATOR_552029] -referenced IND sponsors, if applicable. A copy of the safety 
sections of the annual FDA reports, if applicable, will be forwarded to the NICHD and will 
be provided to the designated individual from any cross-referenced IND sponsors. 
• Terminology to Use for AE Description  
 
When reporting an AE, the event description should use the best matching terminology 
describing the event as found in the “Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events” 
(CTCAE, v4.0). If an available CTCAE term fits the event  well, no additional descriptors may 
be needed.  However, necessary descriptions should be added in order to clarify the event or to place it in an appropriate context.  The AE name [CONTACT_552105] 1 -3 words in length with 
additional description provided elsewher e on the adverse event report. A copy of the CTCAE 
is posted on the study website.  Standardized terms from CTCAE are used the DCC and the study sponsor to categorize events for reporting to regulatory authorities using the “Medical Dictionary for  Regulatory Activities” (MedDRA).  In most cases, the CTCAE terms match the 
MedDRA coding terminology.  If an appropriate term matching the AE cannot be found in the 
CTCAE and the preferred MedDRA term is unknown, the AE description should include a 
diagnosis, sign or symptom with additional information to facilitate subsequent categorizations into MedDRA coding terms. 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725594] trial could not 
be linked to the participant’s identifier except for cases where medical attention may be needed. 
Participants’ personal information with exception of date of birth will be kept locally at each 
clinical center and kept separately from the data collected during the study where only the 
Participant ID for each participant will appear. The locator information will be kept in a secured local server with paper forms in a locked secure cabinet/area.  
8.6. Quality Control Procedures  
The DCC will per form ongoing checks of all data  entered into the database. These will be part of 
the AdvantageEDC Suite (Integrity ) and will include checks for discrepancy between information 
obtained through different forms and/or at different follow -up times. These procedures are 
essential for the success of the trial. Quality control processes will be established to identify any 
deviations and discrepancies in information obtained from various sources. Routine error and completeness reports will be sent to the clinical center  and should be returned to the DCC in a 
timely manner to resolve identified problems and correction of errors. Concise summaries of the findings of the quality control procedures will be presented periodically on the study web -site to 
alert study personnel of common problems.  The DCC will suggest resolutions as well as any 
modifications to the study protocol.  
 Quality control for clinical monitoring  
The DCC with the NICHD will conduct annual field audits of the clinical sites to assure adherence to the study protocol and requirem ents. The audits will include examination of the data 
collection process, specimen collection and processing, data entry procedures, local data management and record keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007].  
8.7. Reports and Newsletter  
The DCC will be responsible for preparation and distribution of interim and final reports, annual newsletter, presentations and other publications in coordination with the Project Officer s at the 
NICHD and in collaboration with the study investigators. Reports will include summaries of recruitment and follow -up status, by [CONTACT_68566], graphical and tabular presentations and results 
of interim statistical analysis. The reports will have clear explanations of the methods used, interpretations and point out questions or problems that need special attention.   Special reports of AEs occurring during the course of the study will be prepared periodically and 
submitted to the Project Officer and the DSMB.   The annual newsletter wi ll be made available on the study website and contain information on the 
progress and pe rformance of the clinical centers.  
8.8. Investigational Product 
Identity of Investigational Product 
The study supplement and matching placebo is supplied by [CONTACT_552079]. Each tablet of the active study supplement contains 5 mg of folic acid and 30 mg elemental zinc (as zinc sulfate 
monohydrate).
 Inactive ingredients include silicified microcrystalline cellulose, isomalt, fumed 
silica, croscamellose sodium, fumed silica and magnesium stearate.    The same inactive 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725595]. All unblinding events should be 
recorded on a protocol violation  form in EDC within 24 hours of the unblinding. 
 
Storage and Disposition of Supplies 
A specified number of bottles containing 77 tablets of 5 mg folic acid and 30 mg elemental zinc 
or matchi ng placebo will be shipped to the PI’s designated pharmacy or other acceptable controlled 
storage location for inventory control and dispensing to study participants. All tablets will be stored 
at room temperature, in a tightly -closed container, away from heat and light, an d in a locked 
storage area. Room temperature of 77°F is ideal; excursions permitted from  59° to 86°F (15 -
30°C).  A temperature log will be kept on a weekly basis .   
 The dietary supplements and matching placebo  product s used in this stud y are designated 
specifically for and are to be used only within the context of this study  under the supervision of 
the PI .  Returned study supplies  may not be re -dispensed. As specified in the Manual of 
Procedures, a ll used and expi[INVESTIGATOR_552030].  Following study closeout, all other unused clinical 
supplies will be discarded.  
Supplement Accountability  
The PI, or a qualified designee, will verify that study supplies are received intact and in the correct 
amounts. An accurate inventory of study supplements will be kept by [CONTACT_779]. Each site will be 
provided with electronic supplement accountability forms to document receipt of supplies from 
UPM Pharmaceutical s, Inc. Supplement dispensation and accountability will be verified by [CONTACT_552080].     
9.[ADDRESS_725596] 
trial.  
 DSMB  
This stu dy will be overseen by a DSMB. The DSMB will receive tabulated data relating to  safety 
of study participants. This evaluation will also assess data quality and timeliness, participant 
recruitment, accr ual, and retention. These reviews will allow the DSMB to determine whether 
there is any change to the anticipated benefit -to-risk ratio of study participation. These reviews 
will also allow the DSM B to determine whether the stu dy should: 1) continue as originally 
designed, 2) implement a protocol change, or 3) be terminated.  If a recommendation is made to 
change the research study design, an adequate rationale for t his decision must be provided. In 
addition, members of the DSM B will review data from individual study participants on a quarterly 
basis to evaluate the progress of the study and the safety and confidentiality of study participants. Any SAEs or breaches in confidentiality will be reviewed by [CONTACT_552081].   
  IRB review and informed consent 
This protocol and the informed consent document and any subsequent modifications w ill be 
reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_552082]. 
Four IRBs will review this protocol: 1) University of Utah, and 2) The Emmes Corporation 3) 
University of Iowa 4) Northwestern University . NICHD will  be covered under a reliance 
agreement with the University of Utah.    The principles of informed consent in the current edition of the Declaration of Helsinki will be 
implemented before any protocol -specif ic procedures are carried out. Informed consent wi ll be 
obtained in accordance with U.S. 21  CFR Part 50. 2 and all other appli cable regulatory 
requirements. A signed consent form will be obtained from the par ticipant. The consent form will 
describe the purpose of the study, the procedures to be followed, and the risks and benefits of participation.  A copy of the consent form will  be given to the participants. Study participants will 
be informed he/she is free to refuse any aspect of study participation without repercussion or to withdraw at any time.     
 All investigators will have completed the federally required training in research ethics and will 
emphasize the v oluntary nature of this study. Approval from the IRB will be in place prior to 
beginning recruitment.   
 Participant confidentiality  
Raw data will be stored in locked cabinets in a locked office. Social security numbers may be 
collected  for payment purposes only but will not be submitted to a central database .  De -identified 
data will be submitted to a central d atabase designed by [CONTACT_941] D CC. The database will be password 
protected. All laboratory specimens, evaluation forms, reports, and other records that leave the site 
will be identified only by [CONTACT_552083].  All records 
will be kept in a locked file cabinet.  Clinical information will not be released without written permission of the participant, except as necessary for monitoring by [CONTACT_1201], N ICHD, or the 
NICHD’s designee. Any information uncovered through the interviews that might indicate  abuse 
or neglect requires the investigators to inform appropriate local agencies in accordance with State law.  Otherwise, all information will remain confidential.  
 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725597] 
This study will be conducted using good clinic al practice (GCP), as delineated in Guidance for 
Industry: E6 Good Clinical Practice Consolidated Guidance, and according to the criteria spe cified 
in this study protocol. Before study initiation, the protocol and the informed consent documents 
will be rev iewed and approved by [CONTACT_4215]. Any amendments to the protocol or to the 
consent materials must also be approved before they are implemented.  
 
Compliance with 42 CFR P art 93, Public Health Service  (PHS)  Policies on Scientific Misconduct 
is implicit in the application for this proposal. The academic institutions participating in this 
proposal have approved assurances and required renewals on file with the Office of Research Integrity (ORI) and compliance with these policies and procedures and the requirements of Part 
[ADDRESS_725598] per PHS policies (fabrication, falsification, or plagia rism in 
proposing, performing, or reviewing research, or in reporting research results). 
9.1. Regulatory Binders  
9.2. Retention of Records  
Each site will maintain a confidential regulatory binder that contains site -specific and study- wide 
documentation. The regulatory binder does not contain clinical records, CRFs or other source 
documents regarding individual participants. The site PI [INVESTIGATOR_552031], auditors and 
regulatory authorities.  Both current and outdated study documents must be maintained. Older versions of documents may be stored elsewhere in a secure location, provided a reference to the 
actual storage l ocation remains in the binder. If the binder contents become too voluminous, 
multiple volumes  may be maintained.   The regulatory binder may also be kept in electronic 
format; file structure will be provided by [CONTACT_15791].   If kept electronically, the binder must be 
stored on a secure network server.    
The site PI [INVESTIGATOR_552032] a period of at least two years 
after the investigation is dis continued and the sponsor has notified  any applicable regulatory 
authorities . Local policies for records retention may require  longer periods, or the NICHD may 
request a longer retention period. The NICHD should inform the Investigator/Institution in writing 
when trial -related records are no longer needed.  
9.3. Risks and Benefits  
 Procedure risks   
Folic acid/zinc supplement and placebo: Any dietary supplement (including folic acid and zinc) can have harmful side effects, especially when mixed with other products or if the participant is allergic to folic acid or zinc. Participants who are allergic to the folic acid/zinc dietary supple ments  
will be ineligible to participate. Research personnel will monitor participants’ pi[INVESTIGATOR_69653] (including supplements and herbal remedies) through text/email reminders  and the information provided in 
the daily journal . Folic acid usually has very few side effects, but symptoms reported with the use 
of folic acid  include fever, general weakness or discomfort, reddened skin, shortness of breath, 
skin rash or itching, tightness in chest, trouble breathing, and wheezing.  Although many people 
who take zinc do not experience side effects, nausea, vomiting and upset stomach may occur.  Rare 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725599], 
trouble breathing, and wheezing.  Although it is possible that folic acid supplementation may mask 
some symptoms of pernicious anemia, specifically the hematological disorder , but did not improve 
the associated neuropathy.48 The neuropathy is reversible if treatment begins promptly , and the 
symptoms of anemia are not necessary to diagnose the deficiency and the brief length of study dietary supplement administration , 6 months, should ensure prompt tr eatment.    
 Blood Sample: This procedure is likely to involve discomfort or minimal pain as well as bruising. Rarely, blood draws may lead to clotting, infection, and fainting. Blood is drawn by [CONTACT_552084]/or medical facilities.  
 Anthropometric Measurements  and vital signs : There are no anticipated physical risks associated 
with anthropometric measurements  and the measur ement of vital signs ( i.e., blood pressure, pulse 
rate). However, there could be some discomfort and/or embarrassment when having the 
measurements taken. This procedure will be conducted by [CONTACT_59856].   
 Urine Collection: There are no known risks associated with this procedure. This is a standa rd test .  
 Semen Collection: There are no known risks associated with this procedure. However, there could 
be some discomfort and/or embarrassment when providing semen samples.  Saliva Collection : There are no known risks associated with this pr ocedure.  
 Toenail Collection: There are no known risks associated with this procedure.  Interview: Men will be interviewed at baseline, coinciding with initial evaluation at the fertility 
clinic, in order to obtain information on demographics, reproductive history, occupational history, stress, depression, medical history, and lifestyle factors that may be related to their fertility. This 
could be uncomfortable and or embarrassing. This interview will be conducted by [CONTACT_552085].   Daily journal : Recording information every day can be difficult and frustrating at times. However, 
the diary has been designed to collect information in a concise fashion to minimize the time spent on this component of the study. The risks associated with this procedure are minimal and include the accidental or incidental disclosure of  sensitive personal information.  This risk is minimized 
by [CONTACT_552086] (see below).  
 Medical Records Review: The risks associated with this procedure are minimal and include the 
accidental or incidental disclosure of medical information. This risk is minimized by [CONTACT_552086] (see below).  
  Benefits to participants and others 
Couples enrolled in this st udy may not realize a direct benefit as a result of their participation. 
However, during the medical evaluations and interviews, information about their medical care and fertility enhancement  may be discovered that may not have been without participating in this study. 
In this event, that information will be relayed to the couple and their referring physician so that management of these issues can be pursued.  
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725600] semen quality and fertility  outcomes for many couples 
seeking assisted conception in the future.  
  Benefits and importance of the knowledge to be gained  
Recent literature suggests that dietary supplementation with folic acid and zinc may be beneficial 
for maintaining  semen quality , and perhaps, downstream fertility and pregnancy  outcomes. Folic 
acid/zinc supplementation may be an ideal dietary supplement ; it is safe, widely available, has few 
side effects, and is inexpensive. The possibility that these dietary supplements could have a major 
impact on semen quality and fertility is very important to study but there are still many unknowns. 
It is not clear which participants would benefit from folic acid/zinc supplementation, whether other factors  that can influence semen parameters add to the effects of folic acid/zinc supplementation, 
and the potential side effects of this dietary supplementation . Earlier studies have only focused on 
specific effects of folic acid/zinc supplementation on semen parameters, and not necessarily with downstream fertility and pregnancy outcomes. As essential micronutrients in the spermatogenesis  
process, the effects of folic acid/zinc supplementation are expected to have an impact  not only 
semen quality, but also may impact fertilization rates, embryo quality, implantation, and thus, 
increasing chance of conception . 
 The potential risks to the participants in this study are relatively low and are reasonable in relation to the importance of the knowledge gained. Procedures outlined in this protocol such as semen, blood and urine collection, anthropometric measurements, and interviews have minimal risk and 
it is not anticipated that the risks are above those in the course of a person’s daily life.   
 Alternative procedures  
Men and women may choose not to participate in this study and continue attempts at conceiving a pregnancy on their own or after consultation with a physician.   Protection of Human Subjects from Research Risks  
 
 DCC responsibilities  
The DCC responsibilit ies to protect human subjects from research risk will focus on the 
information aspects. The potential risks involved in this study include clinical ones (e.g., adverse allergic reaction to the folic acid/zinc supplement), emotional ones (e.g. , increased an xiety, 
embarrassment due to questions related to sexual behavior) and risks to privacy. The clinical sites , 
along with the DCC, will help develop a clear informed consent document to make sure that 
participants understand the study and know the risks involved, however minimal. Participants’ personal information, test results and other data will be kept confidential throughout the trial and stored in secured data archives. Personal information will be kept in a locked file cabinet  with 
limited access to specific study staff. Interviews (personal and by [CONTACT_756]) and specimen collection will be conducted in privacy. Personal information is never released without prior permission from participants. Locator information is stored separately from the data identif ied by 
[CONTACT_552087] 6, [ADDRESS_725601] protection training. Any harm suffered by a 
participant, either physical or emotional, or alleged infringement on privacy will be documented and reported to the IRB and to the DSMB.   The Division of Intramural Population Health Research , NICHD, is committe d to reproducible 
research and fully supports the NIH data sharing (including biospecimens) policy.  The Division 
has a protocol for requesting such information that was publicly posted in the Federal Register and 
approved by [CONTACT_92434].  In short, potential collaborators submit a concept protocol using a 
standardized methodology that undergoes peer review. If found acceptable and contingent upon having the resources for the research, the Division prepares an analytic file and supporting biospecimens for distribution to the collaborating institution once IRB approval is in place at the destination. All information is de -identified, and may undergo additional security measures for 
ensuring confidentiality of data and participants’ privacy, depending upon the research question. Every effort is afforded for the continued protection of study participants, their data and biospecimens during all aspects of research and beyond. There is no expi[INVESTIGATOR_552033]’ protection through all phases of research including follow on studies relying on the biospecimen repository.   TCC responsibilities  
The University of Utah’s responsibilities to protect human subjects from research risk will focus on ensuring the informed consent , safety of participants , and confidentiality  of data collection 
processes for its and subcontracted clinical sites.  
  All University of Utah  personnel and personnel from subcontracted sites  will complete human 
subject protection training from CITI or an eq uivalent documented training  program . Any harm 
suffered by a participant, either physical or emotional, or alleged infringement on privacy will be documented and reported to the IRB and to the DSMB.  
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725602] Version 11.0  
 
43 
 
 9.4. Study Population  
 Men and minorities 
Couples attempting  to conceive  and seeking assisted conception  at participating fertility clinics 
will be recruited  for participation this study. No efforts will be made to exclude any men based on 
minority, racial, or ethnic status.  
 Participants will be requested to comp lete a brief questionnaire at the time of informed consent 
that identifies ethnicity and racial designation(s). The participant will be asked for ethnicity first and then will be able to identify one or more racial designation.  The trial is potentially op en to all male partners of heterosexual couples attempting to conceive 
and seeking assisted conception at participating fertility clinics who fit the inclusion/exclusion 
criteria. The DCC will work with the clinical sites to identify potential sources of d ata to 
characterize as best as possible the race/ethnicity composition of the population to be screened for participation in the trial. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_897], trial populations do not accurately represent the target population. However, effort will be made to direct the screening to allow a heterogeneous group to be included. The DCC will generate monthly summaries to each site with the age and ethnic composition of the population screened and the group recruited. I f an imbalance develops, the 
issue will be discussed w ith the clinical sites and with the project officer to come up with necessary 
changes in recruitment strategies to minimize exclusion of minorities for any reason. No sub -group 
analysis is planned but statistical modeling of the data will assess the impact of age and 
race/ethnicity on study endpoints.   Special populations and circumstances  The study will not be recruiting and enrolling special classes or participants such as children, prisoners, institutionalized individuals, or others who are likely to be vulnerable populations. This study does not include plans to include special conditions such as the use of recombinant DNA molecules, human embryonic germ cells, or human embryonic stem cells.  
  Pregnant women, fetuses, placenta  
Women are excluded from  enrolling in the study  as partners  if they are already pregnant. However, 
since this study is focused on improving the outcome of reproductive health, it will be necessary to follow women if they become pregnant during the course of the study. All stipulations outlined in 45 CFR 46.204 (Research Involving Pregnant Women and 45 CFR 46.206 (Research Involving, After Delivery, the Placenta, the Dead Fetus, or Fetal Material ) will be followed to maintain 
research integrity and protection to the participants.    Exclusion if unable to consent  
Although this is identified in the inclusion/exclusion above, it is important to reiterate that anyone 
who does not have the ability to provide effective informed consent will not be enrolled.  
9.5. Confidentiality Procedures  
To ensure the strict confidentiality of participants’ information and data , the following procedures 
will be followed:  
 
a) Participant IDs – upon recruitment, each participant will be assigned a study 
identification number (Participant ID). This ID will be used by [CONTACT_552088], laboratory specimens and in the study’s main databases. In this manner, 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725603].  
b)  A separate locator file will have the identifying information for each participant (including name [CONTACT_3816]) linked to the Participant ID number. This file will be 
kept in a secure place and will only be available to the site personnel, not the DCC or sponsor.  
c)  Reports generated based on the collected data will not include any identifying information and thus preserve the confidentiality of the participants.  
d)  The only occasion where participant identity may be linked to the collected data is 
in case of an adverse event that requires medical intervention; these cases will be discussed with the Project Officer on a ca se-by-case basis.  
e)  The need to ensure strict confidentiality of the data collected from participants will be stressed as part of the training of the study personnel involved in data collection. The importance of preserving confidentiality as a moral duty of researchers will be explained. The data may include sensitive information about sexual history and contacts and other personal data such as medical history. The willingness of participants to give such information is based on the trust that this data  will be used 
for the research purposes only. Therefore, it is essential that study staff understand this and protects the data collected not only through the study protocols but also information gathered through incidental observations of study participants.  
f)  The data collected during the study will be presented in an aggregated form as totals (means, medians , etc.) or percentages and will not include specific individual 
results.  
g)  Access to the database will be limited to authorized study staff and will be protected 
with a changing password.  
 The DCC will not have any street -level locator information in the study database. All locator 
information will be kept at the local clinical sites. The participant’s ID number and identity will 
be kept in locked files in the research center of the study PIs. Only key staff and investigators will 
have access to the records. In order to monitor this research study, authorized representatives from 
the clinical sites’ IRBs , and other federal agencies such as NIH (National Institutes of Health), 
FDA (Food and Drug Administration) and OHRP (Office of Human Research Protection) , and 
qualified monitors from the DCC  may inspect the  research records. A Certificate of Confidentiality 
(#CC -HD-13- 19) has been issued by  [CONTACT_552089].   
10.0 APPENDICES  
Appendix A: Safety Monitoring Definitions  
An adverse event  (AE) is any untoward medical occurrence in humans, whether or not considered 
study supplement related which occurs during the conduct of a clinical trial. Any change in clinical 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725604] Version 11.0  
 
45 
 
 status, ECGs, routine labs, x -rays, physical examinations, etc., that is considered clinically 
significant by [CONTACT_552090].    
Suspected adverse reaction  is any adverse event for which there is a reasonable possibil ity that 
the study supplement caused the adverse event. A reasonable possibility implies that there is 
evidence that the study supplement caused the event.  
Adverse reaction is any adverse event caused by [CONTACT_552091].  
Serious Events (Serious Adverse Events, Serious Suspected Adverse Reactions or Serious Adverse Reactions)  
A serious adverse event or serious suspected adverse reaction or serious adverse reaction as determined by [CONTACT_552092]: 
1. Death  
2. Life-threatening AE (Life -threatening means that the study participant was, in the  
  opi[INVESTIGATOR_26335], at immediate risk of death from the reaction as    it occurred.)  
3. Inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_061]  
4. Persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct 
 normal life functions  
5. Congenital abnormality or birth defect 
6. Important medical event that may not result in one of the above outcomes, but may 
 jeopardize the health of the study participant or require medical or surgical 
 intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in the above definition of serious 
 event.  
 Unexpected Adverse Event  
Any adverse event, the specificity or severity o f which is not consistent with the symptoms 
reported with the use of the study supplement or the informed consent. AEs that can be associated with  folic acid supplementation: 
• Fever  
• Weakness  
• Reddened skin 
• Shortness of breath 
• Skin rash 
• Itching  
 
AEs that can be associated with zinc supplementation: 
• Nausea  
• Vomiting  
• Upset stomach  
• Fever  
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725605] Version 11.0  
 
46 
 
 • Weakness  
• Sore throat 
• Reddened skin 
• Shortness of breath 
• Skin rash 
• Itching  
• Tightness in chest 
• Trouble breathing 
• Wheezing  
 Guidelines for assessing intensity of an adverse event  
The Investigator should use the following definitions when assessing i ntensity of an AE: 
• Mild: Transient (< 48 hours) or mild discomforts, no or minimal medical therapy or 
intervention required, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_266772], no or little limitation in normal 
activities, nonprescription or single -use prescription therapy may be employed to relieve 
symptoms (e.g., aspi[INVESTIGATOR_266773], acetaminophen with codeine for post -surgical 
pain).  Mild adverse events may be listed as expected consequences  of the therapy for any 
given protocol, and standard supportive measures for such an expected event do not 
necessarily elevate the event to a higher intensity.  
• Moderate: Mild to moderate limitation in activity, some assistance may be needed; possibly 
none but usually minimal intervention/therapy required, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_9841].  
• Severe: Marked limitation in activity, some assistance usually required; medical intervention/therapy required; hospi[INVESTIGATOR_410026]. 
• Life-Threatening: Extreme limitation in activity, significant and immediate assistance 
required; significant medical/therapy intervention required to prevent loss of life; hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], emergency treatment or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_328525]. This grade is used when the participant was, in the view of the Investigator, at substantial risk of dying at the time of the adverse event , or it was suspected that use or continued use of the study supplements 
would have resulted in the participant’s death.  (This does not include a reaction that, had it occurred in a more serious form, might have caused death.  For example, drug-induced hepatitis that resolved without evidence of hepatic failure would not be considered life-
threatening even though drug- induced hepatitis can be fatal).  
 
 Guidelines for determining causality of an adverse event 
The Investigator will use the following question when assessing causality of an adverse event to study supplement:  Is there a reasonable possibility that the study supplement caused the event?  
Reasonable possibility implies that there is evidence that the specific adverse event observed  in 
the specific subject  is caused by [CONTACT_552091].  
 An affirmative answer designates the  event as a suspected adverse reaction.  
  
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725606] Version 11.0  
 
47 
 
 11.0 REFERENCES  
 (1)  Wagner C. Biochemical Role of Folate in Cellular Metabolism. In: Bailey LB, editor. Folate in 
Health and Disease .[LOCATION_001]: Marcel Dekker; 1995. p. 23-42. 
 (2)  Brody T. Folate  in Nutritional Biochemistry . San Diego: Academic Press; 1999.  
 (3)  Forges T, Monnier -Barbarino P, Alberto JM, Gueant -Rodriguez RM, Daval JL, Gueant JL. Impact 
of folate and homocysteine metabolism on human reproductive health. Hum Reprod Update  2007 
May; 13(3):225-38. 
 (4)  Hamdi SA, Nassif OI, Ardawi MS. Effect of marginal or severe dietary zinc deficiency on testicular 
development and functions of the rat. Arch Androl  1997 May;38(3):243-53. 
 (5)  Favier AE. The role of zinc in reproduction. Hormonal mechanisms. Biol Trace Elem Res  1992 
January;32:363-82. 
 (6)  Chimienti F, Aouffen M, Favier A, Seve M. Zinc homeostasis- regulating proteins: new drug targets 
for triggering cell fate. Curr Drug Targets 2003 May;4(4):323-38. 
 (7)  Zago MP, Oteiza PI. The antio xidant properties of zinc: interactions with iron and antioxidants. 
Free Radic Biol Med  2001 July 15;31(2):266-74. 
 (8)  Bray TM, Bettger WJ. The physiological role of zinc as an antioxidant. Free Radic Biol Med  
1990;8(3):281-91. 
 (9)  Quinn PB, Cremin FM,  O'Sullivan VR, Hewedi FM, Bond RJ. The influence of dietary folate 
supplementation on the incidence of teratogenesis in zinc- deficient rats. Br J Nutr 1990 
July;64(1):233-43. 
 (10)  Favier M, Faure P, Roussel AM, Coudray C, Blache D, Favier A. Zinc defici ency and dietary folate 
metabolism in pregnant rats. J Trace Elem Electrolytes Health Dis 1993 March;7(1):19-24. 
 (11)  Tamura T, Kaiser LL, Watson JE, Halsted CH, Hurley LS, Stokstad EL. Increased methionine 
synthetase activity in zinc -deficient rat liver . Arch Biochem Biophys  1987 July;256(1):311-6. 
 (12)  Wong WY, Merkus HM, Thomas CM, Menkveld R, Zielhuis GA, Steegers -Theunissen RP. Effects 
of folic acid and zinc sulfate on male factor subfertility: a double -blind, randomized, placebo-
controlled trial. Fertil Steril  2002 March;77(3):491-8. 
 (13)  Boxmeer JC, Smit M, Utomo E et al. Low folate in seminal plasma is associated with increased sperm DNA damage. Fertil Steril  [ADDRESS_725607] 21. 
 (14)  Vujkovic M, de Vries JH, Dohle GR et al. Associations between dietary patterns and semen quality 
in men undergoing IVF/ICSI treatment. Hum Reprod  2009 February 19. 
 (15)  Merviel P, Heraud MH, Grenier N, Lourdel E, Sanguinet P, Copin H. Predictive factors for 
pregnancy after intrauterine insemination (IUI): an analysi s of 1038 cycles and a review of the 
literature. Fertil Steril  2010 January;93(1):79-88. 
 (16)  Evenson DP, Darzynkiewicz Z, Melamed MR. Relation of mammalian sperm chromatin 
heterogeneity to fertility. Science  1980 December 5;210(4474):1131-3. 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725608] Version 11.0  
 
48 
 
  (17)  Irvine DS, Twigg JP, Gordon EL, Fulton N, Milne PA, Aitken RJ. DNA integrity in human 
spermatozoa: relationships with semen quality. J Androl  2000 January;21(1):33-44. 
 (18)  Spano M, Bonde JP, Hjollund HI, Kolstad HA, Cordelli E, Leter G. Sperm chromatin dama ge 
impairs human fertility. The Danish First Pregnancy Planner Study Team. Fertil Steril  2000 
January;73(1):43-50. 
 (19)  Larson KL, DeJonge CJ, Barnes AM, Jost LK, Evenson DP. Sperm chromatin structure assay 
parameters as predictors of failed pregnancy fo llowing assisted reproductive techniques. Hum 
Reprod [ADDRESS_725609];15(8):1717-22. 
 (20)  Saleh RA, Agarwal A, Nelson DR et al. Increased sperm nuclear DNA damage in 
normozoospermic infertile men: a prospective study. Fertil Steril  [ADDRESS_725610];78(2):313-8. 
 (21)  Collins JA, Barnhart KT, Schlegel PN. Do sperm DNA integrity tests predict pregnancy with in 
vitro fertilization? Fertil Steril  2008 April;89(4):823-31. 
 (22)  Tarozzi N, Bizzaro D, Flamigni C, Borini A. Clinical relevance of sperm DNA damage in assis ted 
reproduction. Reprod Biomed Online  2007 June;14(6):746-57. 
 (23)  Zini A, Bielecki R, Phang D, Zenzes MT. Correlations between two markers of sperm DNA 
integrity, DNA denaturation and DNA fragmentation, in fertile and infertile men. Fertil Steril  2001 
April;75(4):674-7. 
 (24)  Evenson DP, Jost LK, Marshall D et al. Utility of the sperm chromatin structure assay as a diagnostic and prognostic tool in the human fertility clinic. Hum Reprod  1999 April;14(4):1039-
49. 
 (25)  Collins JA, Barnhart KT, Schlegel  PN. Do sperm DNA integrity tests predict pregnancy with in 
vitro fertilization? Fertil Steril  2008 April;89(4):823-31. 
 (26)  Rubio C, Rodrigo L, Mir P et al. Use of array comparative genomic hybridization (array -CGH) for 
embryo assessment: clinical resul ts. Fertil Steril 2013 March 15;99(4):1044-8. 
 (27)  World Health Organization. WHO laboratory manual for the Examination and processing of 
human semen . 5th Edition ed. Switzerland: 2010. 
 (28)  Evenson DP, Larson KL, Jost LK. Sperm chromatin structure assay: its clinical use for detecting sperm DNA fragmentation in male infertility and comparisons with other techniques. J Androl  2002 
January;23(1):25-43. 
 (29)  Veeck LL. Oocyte assessment and biological performance. Ann N Y Acad Sci  1988;541:259-
74.:259-74. 
 (30)  Wilcox AJ, Weinberg CR, O'Connor JF et al. Incidence of early loss of pregnancy. N Engl J Med  
1988 July 28;319(4):189-94. 
 (31)  Granger DA, Kivlighan KT, El -Sheikh M, Gordis EB, Stroud LR. Salivary alpha -amylase in 
biobehavioral research: recent developments and applications. Ann N Y Acad Sci  2007 
March;1098:122-44. 
 (32)  Mistry HD, Broughton Pi[INVESTIGATOR_142412] F, Redman CWG, Poston L. Selenium in reproductive health. 
American Journal of Obstetrics  and Gynecology  2012 January;206(1):21-30. 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725611] Version 11.0  
 
49 
 
  (33)  Apostoli P, Catalani S. Metal ions affecting reproduction and development. Met Ions Life Sci  
2011;8:263-303. 
 (34)  Eftekhar B, Mohammad K, Ardebili HE, Ghodsi M, Ketabchi E. Comparison of artificial neural  
network and logistic regression models for prediction of mortality in head trauma based on initial 
clinical data. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak 2005;5:3. 
 (35)  Ennis M, Hinton G, Naylor D, Revow M, Tibshirani R. A comparison of statistical learning 
methods on the Gusto database. Stat Med  1998 November 15;17(21):2501-8. 
 (36)  Zhou XH, Obuchowski NA, McClish DK. Statistical methods in diagnostic medicine. [LOCATION_001]: 
Wiley; 2002. 
 (37)  Fluss R, Faraggi D, Reiser B. Estimation of the Youden Index and its associat ed cutoff point. Biom 
J [ADDRESS_725612];47(4):458-72. 
 (38)  Greiner M, Pfeiffer D, Smith RD. Principles and practical application of the receiver -operating 
characteristic analysis for diagnostic tests. Prev Vet Med  2000 May 30;45(1-2):23-41. 
 (39)  Hernan MA,  Brumback BA, Robins JM. Estimating the causal effect of zidovudine on CD4 count 
with a marginal structural model for repeated measures. Stat Med  2002 June 30;21(12):1689-709. 
 (40)  Hernan MA, Brumback B, Robins JM. Marginal structural models to estimate the causal effect of 
zidovudine on the survival of HIV -positive men. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]  2000 September;11(5):561-70. 
 (41)  Robins JM, Hernan MA, Brumback B. Marginal structural models and causal inference in epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]  2000 September;11(5):550-60. 
 (42)  Wang C, Vlahov D, Galai N et al. The effect of HIV infection on overdose mortality. AIDS  2005 
June 10;19(9):935-42. 
 (43)  Cole SR, Hernan MA, Robins JM et al. Effect of highly active antiretroviral therapy on time to 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome or death using marginal structural models. Am J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]  
2003 October 1;158(7):687-94. 
 (44)  Pearl J. Causality: models, reasoning, and inference . [LOCATION_001]: Cambridge University Press; 
2000. 
 (45)  Hogan JW, Lancaster T. Instrumental variables and  inverse probability weighting for causal 
inference from longitudinal observational studies. Stat Methods Med Res  2004 February;13(1):17-
48. 
 (46)  Lallas CD, Preminger GM, Pearle MS et al. Internet based multi -institutional clinical research: a 
convenient and secure option. J Urol  2004 May;171(5):1880-5. 
 (47)  Kuchenbecker J, Dick HB, Schmitz K, Behrens- Baumann W. Use of Internet Technologies for 
Data Acquisition in Large Clinical Trials. Telemedicine Journal and e -Health  2001 March 
1;7(1):73-6. 
 (48)  Wald. Folic acid, pernicious anaemia, and prevention of neural tube defects. Lancet  
1994;343(8893):307. 
 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial Protocol   November 6, [ADDRESS_725613] Version 11.0  
 
50 
 
   (49)  Lan KKG, DeMets DL.  Discrete sequential boundaries for clinical trials. Biometrika 1983; 
70(3):659-663 
 
(50)   O'Brien PC, Fleming TR.  A multiple testing procedure for clinical trials.  Biometrics, 
1979;35:549-556. 
 
 
 
 
 
1 of 2  
 Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial 
Amendment 5.0 
Summary of Changes 
March 19, 2013 
 
AMENDMENT CHANGE SECTION(S) AFFECTED BY 
[CONTACT_552093], grammatical and spelling errors 
replaced. All applicable sections 
Clarified the Primary Objective of the study by [CONTACT_1583] “attempting to conceive” and replacing “fertility 
treatment” with “assisted reproduction.” All applicable sections 
Added “dietary” in front of “supplements.” All applicable sections 
Replaced “treatment arms” with “cohorts.” All applicable sections 
Clarified secondary study endpoints. Study Synopsis 
Updated Study Background. 2.0  Background 
Modified: 
Couples Inclusion Criteria: clarified all criteria  Couples exclusion Criteria: 
Added: 
a. Couples attempting to conceive with a gestational 
carrier (surrogate) or a known egg donor. 
b. Positive urine pregnancy test at baseline. 
Male Exclusion Criteria: 
1. Deleted “vitamin B-12 deficiency” from criteria k. 
2. Added “Diagnosis of Vitamin B12 deficiency or 
pernicious anemia.” 
3. Added “Any other diagnosis of anemia within the 
last 5 years that has not been successfully 
treated.”  3.2  Eligibility Criteria 
Added “minimum, range 30-40 mg”  3.3  Study Supplement Formulation 
Changed “Fertilization and Embryo Quality for 
IVF/ISCI Procedures to “Early Embryonic Development Procedures.”   Added the statement “When available, information 
from preimplantation genetic screening will be 
collected.”  Replace “OI and/or IUI” with “other assisted reproduction techniques.” 4.[ADDRESS_725614] for women at baseline.   Added blood pressure and pulse rate measurements 
for men and women at baseline. 5.2. Screening Process, 5.3 Baseline  Study Visit, 5.6 Female Partner 
 Follow Up, Table 1 and Table 2. 
Clarified randomization process. 5.4  Randomization. 
Clarified follow up procedures. 5.5  Active Follow Up & 5.6 Female  
  Follow Up. 
 
2 of 2  
 AMENDMENT CHANGE SECTION(S) AFFECTED BY 
[CONTACT_552094]. 5.7  Specimen Collection 
Clarified compensation information. 5.8  Retention Plan and Compensation 
Deleted the statement “Adverse events will only be 
collected in the males receiving study supplements though important female associated study endpoints, including adverse pregnancy outcomes, will be collected throughout the study in a timely manner.” 
Added “Adverse events will be collected in the males 
receiving study supplements though important female associated study endpoints, including adverse pregnancy outcomes and pregnancy loss, will be 
collected throughout the study and reported as 
adverse events.” 7.5  Safety Analyses 
Added section about Safety Analyses 7.5   Safety Analyses 
Clarified biospecimen tracking 8.3  Questionnaires and Other Data 
 Forms,  Biospecimen Tracking  
Added the statement “Adverse events will be collected in the males receiving study supplements.  Important 
female associated study endpoints, including adverse 
pregnancy outcomes and pregnancy loss, will be collected throughout the study and reported as adverse events.” 
Added the fax number for SAE reporting. Added “Recommendations for reporting AEs for 
dietary supplements are described in the FDA 
“Guidance for Industry: Questions and Answers Regarding Adverse Event Reporting and Recordkeepi[INVESTIGATOR_552034]” (2007) and if applicable, 
may be covered in the FDA regulations regarding drug products. 
Added the address for reporting supplement adverse 
events, if applicable. 8.4  Adverse Event Reporting 
Replaced “SAS/STAT® data management programs” with “AdvantageEDC Suite (Integrity).” 8.[ADDRESS_725615] retention. 9.2  Retention of Records 
Added risks related to pulse and blood pressure measurement. 
Deleted “Since there are no proven medications to 
improve semen quality and fertility treatment outcomes, there are no alternative procedures to offer 
to participants.” 9.3  Risks and Benefits 
 
 
1 of 3  Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial 
Amendment 6.0 
Summary of Changes 
January 22, 2014 
 
AMENDMENT CHANGE SECTION(S) AFFECTED BY 
[CONTACT_552093], grammatical and spelling errors 
replaced. All applicable sections 
Clarified abstinence criteria for males at all study 
visits, “the males will be asked to abstain from 
ejaculation for 2-5 days prior to presentation for their 
clinic visit” All applicable sections 
Updated the protocol synopsis to reflect changes in analysis and stratification.  Added:  
1. “Randomization will be stratified by [CONTACT_552095] (IVF, non-
IVF/receiving fertility treatment at a study site, 
non-IVF/receiving fertility treatment at a non-study site)”,  
2. “The semen parameters will also be assessed 
using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) 
models with each semen parameter as the 
dependent variable, clinical center, IVF strata 
and treatment group as factors.  The outcome 
of live birth will also be assessed using a 
Mantel-Haenszel analysis to evaluate effects 
across fertility treatment strata”.  
3. Replaced “live birth” with “pregnancy loss”. 
4. “A stratified log-rank test will be used to 
assess treatment effects across IVF strata”. 
5. “Stratified analyses will also be performed for 
secondary outcomes. Specifically, continuous secondary outcomes stratified analyses will be 
conducted using ANCOVA models with IVF 
strata and clinical center as factors for the 
comparison of the two cohorts.  If a non-parametric test is required, van Elteren tests 
will be used to compare the two cohorts, 
accounting for strata, to detect differences in 
the distributions of the secondary endpoints”. 
 Protocol synopsis 
Amendment 6.0 - Summary of Changes 
January 22, 2014 
 
2 of 3  AMENDMENT CHANGE SECTION(S) AFFECTED BY 
[CONTACT_552096] “Providing the DCC with de-identified data 
from the clinical questionnaire and SART databases for FAZST enrolled couples” as a responsibility of the TCC. Protocol synopsis 
Deleted “proportion of live births” from the secondary 
endpoints. Protocol Synopsis, 7.2 Study Endpoints and ITT Analysis 
Added “block” to describe randomization. All applicable sections 
Replaced “fertility” with “reproductive outcomes” 3.1 Introduction 
Deleted “attempting pregnancy” and added “Women 
with regular periods may initiate their fertility therapy at the start of the woman’s menstrual cycle following randomization if randomization occurred within the first [ADDRESS_725616] wait one menstrual 
cycle if the visit occurred after day 10 of the cycle). 
For women with irregular periods or amenorrhea, the male must be on the study supplement for 3 weeks prior to initiation of any ovulation induction medication (e.g., clomid, letrozole, gonadotropi[INVESTIGATOR_2115])” to couples 
inclusion criteria. 
 Deleted “or a known egg donor” and changed “baseline” to “screening” from couples exclusion criteria. 
 
Added “males < 18 years” from male exclusion criteria. 3.2 Eligibility criteria, 5.1 Recruitment 
Added the stratification by [CONTACT_552037]. 3.3 Dietary Supplement Formulation 
Replaced “abortion” with “pregnancy loss” 
Deleted “Clinically recognized spontaneous abortions 
will be defined as those with a gestational sac 
detected from ultrasound scans followed by a loss 
before 20 weeks gestation”. Added “visualization” to clarify the review of ectopic pregnancies and deleted “ultimately requiring medical or surgical therapy”.  
Added “estimated” and “based on ovulation predictor 
kits or trigger shots” to clarify the estimated date of conception in IVF participants.  4.[ADDRESS_725617]. 5.2. Screening Process 
Added “receiving fertility treatment at a study site; and non-IVF/ receiving fertility treatment at a non-study 
site” to clarify stratification at randomization.  
 5.4 Randomization 
Amendment 6.0 - Summary of Changes 
January 22, 2014 
 
3 of 3  AMENDMENT CHANGE SECTION(S) AFFECTED BY 
[CONTACT_552097] 24 hour recall and women’s pregnancy questionnaire. Table 2: Schedule of Events: Female Partners.  
 
Updated the compensation to: 
1. Baseline visit $50  
2. 2nd visit $50  Participants will receive an 
additional $15 if 80% of the daily journals have 
been submitted since the previous visit 
3. 3rd visit $75  Participants will receive an 
additional $15 if 80% of the daily journals have been submitted since the previous visit 
4. 4
th visit $125  Participants will receive an 
additional $20 if 80% of the daily journals have been submitted since the previous visit 
 5.8 Retention Plan and Compensation 
Deleted “Proportion of live births -  IVF versus Non-IVF ART”   Added “The semen parameters will also be assessed 
using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) models with 
each semen parameter as the dependent variable, clinical center, IVF strata and treatment group as factors.  The outcome of live birth will be assessed using a Mantel-Haenszel analysis to evaluate 
treatment effect across IVF strata” in the primary 
analysis section. In the secondary analysis section, added: “A stratified log-rank test will be used to assess treatment effect across IVF strata” and “For continuous secondary outcomes stratified analyses will be conducted using 
ANCOVA models with IVF strata and clinical center as 
factors for the comparison of the two cohorts.  If a non-parametric test is required, van Elteren tests will be used to compare the two cohorts, accounting for strata, to detect differences in the distributions of the 
secondary endpoints”. 7.[ADDRESS_725618] 
Updated the NICHD division to “Division of Intramural 
Population Health Research”.  Clarified HSP training. 9.3 Risks and Benefits 
Added specifics of the Certificate of Confidentiality 9.5 Confidentiality Procedures 
Updated references 11.0 References 
 
 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial  
Amendment 7.0 
Summary of Changes  
February 21, 2014 
 
AMENDMENT CHANGE  SECTION(S) AFFECTED BY 
[CONTACT_552098] “Reproductive hormones and 
other measured biomarkers – Measured urinary, 
serum, and salivary concentrations of reproductive 
hormones, particularly androgens, proteomic analysis of human sperm and cardiometabolic risk factors and 
markers of oxidative stress, as well as measures of 
trace elements in toenails”.  Protocol Synopsis  
Added the biospecimen  outcome measures 
“Reproductive hormones and other biomarkers will be 
measured from stored urine, serum, and saliva samples for assessment of reproductive hormone 
concentrations, particularly androgens, 
cardiometabolic risk factors, markers of oxidative 
stress, and measures of trace metals in toenails. A 
proteomic analysis of human sperm will also provide 
valuable information regarding potential mechanisms”  
 4.[ADDRESS_725619] sizes and to table 
3   7.3 Interim Analysis  
 
Page 1 of 1 
/i255
/1 /2 /3 /4 /5 /i255 /7 /5 /4 /8 /i255 /9 /10 /8 /i255 /11 /4 /10 /5 /i255 /12 /13 /14 /14 /3 /15 /16/15 /10 /17 /9 /17 /4 /2 /10 /i255 /18 /19 /4 /9 /3 /i255
/7 /16/15 /10 /8 /16/15 /10 /17 /i255 /20 /21 /22 /i255
/12 /13 /16/16/9 /19 /23 /i255 /2 /24 /i255 /25 /26 /9 /10 /27 /15 /28 /i255
/1 /15 /29 /19 /13 /9 /19 /23 /i255 /30 /22 /31 /i255 /30 /22 /32 /33 /i255
/i255
/7 /35/36 /37 /38 /35/36 /37 /18 /i255 /25 /39 /7 /37 /40/36 /i255 /12 /36 /25 /18 /41 /42/37 /43 /12 /44 /i255 /7 /1 /1 /36 /25 /18 /36 /38 /i255 /45 /46 /i255
/7 /35/36 /37 /38 /35/36 /37 /18 /i255 /25 /39 /7 /37 /40/36 /i255
/47 /48 /48 /49 /48 /i255 /50 /49 /51 /i255 /52 /53 /54 /49 /i255 /52 /54 /55 /56 /56 /i255 /57 /58 /59 /52 /60 /i255 /61/55 /54 /54 /62 /49 /51 /i255 /63 /49 /54 /49 /59 /52 /64 /50 /i255 /55 /50 /48 /i255
/65 /59 /53 /66 /55 /i255 /67 /64 /62 /50 /52 /54 /64 /50 /49 /i255 /55 /59 /49 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255 /68 /50 /53 /69 /49 /59 /52 /53 /54 /70 /i255 /64 /56 /i255 /68 /54 /55 /62 /i255 /71 /72 /55 /73 /54 /i255 /74 /55 /75 /49 /i255
/76 /53 /54 /70 /77 /i255 /68 /78 /79 /i255 /63 /59 /53 /50 /66 /53 /80 /55 /73 /i255 /81 /50 /69 /49 /52 /54 /53 /82 /55 /54 /64 /59 /52 /60 /i255 /78 /62 /49 /i255 /66 /64 /83 /63 /59 /53 /50 /66 /53 /80 /55 /73 /i255
/81 /50 /69 /49 /52 /54 /53 /82 /55 /54 /64 /59 /52 /i255 /55 /54 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255 /68 /50 /53 /69 /49 /59 /52 /53 /54 /70 /i255 /64 /56 /i255 /81 /64 /51 /55 /i255 /55 /59 /49 /i255 /58 /59 /60 /i255 /84/53 /50 /50 /70 /i255
/85 /70 /55 /50 /i255/55 /50 /48 /i255/58 /59 /60 /i255/86 /59 /55 /48 /i255/87 /55 /50 /i255/87 /64 /64 /59 /62 /53 /52 /60 /i255/78 /62 /49 /i255/63 /59 /53 /50 /66 /53 /80 /55 /73 /i255
/81 /50 /69 /49 /52 /54 /53 /82 /55 /54 /64 /59 /i255 /55 /54 /i255 /88 /64 /59 /54 /62 /51 /49 /52 /54 /49 /59 /50 /i255 /68 /50 /53 /69 /49 /59 /52 /53 /54 /70 /i255 /53 /52 /i255 /58 /59 /60 /i255 /67 /55 /59 /49 /48 /i255
/85 /64 /89 /53 /50 /52 /60 /i255 /58 /59 /60 /i255/86 /59 /90 /66 /49 /i255/76 /55 /91/80 /89 /49 /73 /73 /i255/53 /52 /i255/54 /62 /49 /i255/63 /59 /53 /50 /66 /53 /80 /55 /73 /i255
/81 /50 /69 /49 /52 /54 /53 /82 /55 /54 /64 /59 /i255 /55 /54 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255 /76 /49 /50 /54 /49 /59 /i255 /56 /64 /59 /i255 /85 /49 /80 /59 /64 /48 /90 /66 /54 /53 /69 /49 /i255 /61/49 /48 /53 /66 /53 /50 /49 /i255
/71 /61/53 /50 /50 /49 /55 /80 /64 /73 /53 /52 /77 /i255 /61/88 /79 /60 /i255 /78 /62 /49 /70 /i255 /49 /55 /66 /62 /i255 /55 /59 /49 /i255 /59 /49 /52 /80 /64 /50 /52 /53 /89 /73 /49 /i255 /56 /64 /59 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255
/56 /64 /73 /73 /64 /51 /53 /50 /82 /92 /93 /i255
/i255 /i255/63 /59 /64 /54 /64 /66 /64 /73 /i255 /72 /70 /50 /64 /80 /52 /53 /52 /i255
/47 /48 /48 /49 /48 /i255 /55 /50 /i255 /49 /94 /66 /73 /90 /52 /53 /64 /50 /i255 /66 /59 /53 /54 /49 /59 /53 /64 /50 /i255 /57 /68 /50 /51 /53 /73 /73 /53 /50 /82 /i255 /54 /64 /i255 /55 /89 /52 /54 /55 /53 /50 /i255
/56 /59 /64 /91/i255 /90 /52 /49 /i255 /64 /56 /i255 /54 /49 /52 /54 /64 /52 /54 /49 /59 /64 /50 /49 /i255 /52 /90 /80 /80 /73 /49 /91/49 /50 /54 /55 /54 /53 /64 /50 /i255 /54 /62 /59 /64 /90 /82 /62 /64 /90 /54 /i255
/54 /62 /49 /i255 /52 /54 /90 /48 /70 /60 /93 /i255
/i255/95 /60 /96 /i255 /65 /73 /53 /82 /53 /89 /53 /73 /53 /54 /70 /i255 /76 /59 /53 /54 /49 /59 /53 /55 /i255
/47 /48 /48 /49 /48 /i255 /55 /i255 /54 /55 /89 /73 /49 /i255 /90 /52 /49 /48 /i255 /54 /64 /i255 /48 /49 /54 /49 /59 /91/53 /50 /49 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255 /91/49 /54 /62 /64 /48 /i255 /64 /56 /i255
/49 /52 /54 /53 /91/55 /54 /53 /50 /82 /i255 /82 /49 /52 /54 /55 /54 /53 /64 /50 /55 /73 /i255 /55 /82 /49 /60 /i255 /i255 /i255
/i255
/47 /48 /48 /49 /48 /i255 /55 /48 /48 /53 /54 /53 /64 /50 /55 /73 /i255 /54 /49 /94 /54 /i255 /90 /52 /49 /48 /i255 /54 /64 /i255 /48 /49 /54 /49 /59 /91/53 /50 /49 /i255 /82 /49 /52 /54 /55 /54 /53 /64 /50 /55 /73 /i255
/55 /82 /49 /i255 /57 /47 /52 /i255 /55 /i255 /82 /49 /50 /49 /59 /55 /73 /i255 /59 /90 /73 /49 /77 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255 /64 /56 /56 /53 /66 /53 /55 /73 /i255 /82 /49 /52 /54 /55 /54 /53 /64 /50 /55 /73 /i255 /55 /82 /49 /i255
/52 /62 /64 /90 /73 /48 /i255 /89 /49 /i255 /89 /55 /52 /49 /48 /i255 /64 /50 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255 /55 /66 /54 /90 /55 /73 /i255 /89 /49 /82 /53 /50 /50 /53 /50 /82 /i255 /64 /56 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255 /73 /55 /52 /54 /i255
/91/49 /50 /52 /54 /59 /90 /55 /73 /i255 /80 /49 /59 /53 /64 /48 /77 /i255 /90 /50 /73 /49 /52 /52 /i255 /55 /50 /70 /i255 /64 /56 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255 /55 /89 /64 /69 /49 /i255 /91/49 /54 /62 /64 /48 /52 /i255
/82 /53 /69 /49 /52 /i255 /55 /50 /i255 /49 /52 /54 /53 /91/55 /54 /49 /48 /i255 /48 /55 /54 /49 /i255 /54 /62 /55 /54 /i255 /48 /53 /56 /56 /49 /59 /52 /i255 /91/64 /59 /49 /i255 /54 /62 /55 /50 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255
/69 /55 /59 /53 /55 /89 /53 /73 /53 /54 /70 /i255 /56 /64 /59 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255 /91/49 /54 /62 /64 /48 /77 /i255 /53 /50 /i255 /51 /62 /53 /66 /62 /i255 /66 /55 /52 /49 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255 /48 /53 /56 /56 /49 /59 /49 /50 /66 /49 /i255
/66 /55 /50 /50 /64 /54 /i255 /80 /59 /64 /89 /55 /89 /73 /70 /i255 /89 /49 /i255 /49 /94 /80 /73 /55 /53 /50 /49 /48 /i255 /89 /70 /i255 /54 /62 /55 /54 /i255 /69 /55 /59 /53 /55 /89 /53 /73 /53 /54 /70 /i255 /55 /73 /64 /50 /49 /60 /i255
/97 /64 /59 /i255 /49 /94 /55 /91/80 /73 /49 /77 /i255 /53 /56 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /59 /49 /i255 /53 /52 /i255 /55 /i255 /82 /49 /52 /54 /55 /54 /53 /64 /50 /55 /73 /i255 /55 /82 /49 /i255 /89 /55 /52 /49 /48 /i255 /64 /50 /i255
/54 /62 /49 /i255 /89 /49 /82 /53 /50 /50 /53 /50 /82 /i255 /64 /56 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255 /73 /55 /52 /54 /i255 /91/49 /50 /52 /54 /59 /90 /55 /73 /i255 /80 /49 /59 /53 /64 /48 /i255 /64 /56 /i255 /98 /60 /99 /i255
/51 /49 /49 /75 /52 /77 /i255 /55 /50 /48 /i255 /55 /i255 /56 /53 /59 /52 /54 /83 /54 /59 /53 /91/49 /52 /54 /49 /59 /i255 /64 /89 /52 /54 /49 /54 /59 /53 /66 /i255 /90 /73 /54 /59 /55 /52 /64 /50 /64 /82 /59 /55 /80 /62 /70 /i255
/82 /53 /69 /49 /52 /i255 /55 /50 /i255 /49 /52 /54 /53 /91/55 /54 /49 /48 /i255 /82 /49 /52 /54 /55 /54 /53 /64 /50 /55 /73 /i255 /55 /82 /49 /i255 /64 /56 /i255 /100 /99 /60 /99 /i255 /51 /49 /49 /75 /52 /i255
/71 /51 /53 /54 /62 /i255 /55 /i255 /96 /i255 /72 /58 /i255 /69 /55 /59 /53 /55 /89 /53 /73 /53 /54 /70 /i255 /64 /56 /i255 /101 /102 /103/i255 /64 /56 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255 /49 /52 /54 /53 /91/55 /54 /49 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /59 /49 /89 /70 /i255
/82 /53 /69 /53 /50 /82 /i255 /55 /i255 /69 /55 /59 /53 /55 /89 /53 /73 /53 /54 /70 /i255 /64 /56 /i255 /101 /99 /60 /102 /i255 /51 /49 /49 /75 /52 /79 /77 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255 /48 /53 /56 /56 /49 /59 /49 /50 /66 /49 /i255 /64 /56 /i255
/100 /60 /99 /i255 /51 /49 /49 /75 /52 /i255 /89 /49 /54 /51 /49 /49 /50 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255 /54 /49 /52 /54 /52 /i255 /53 /52 /i255 /73 /55 /59 /82 /49 /59 /i255 /54 /62 /55 /50 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255 /96 /i255 /72 /58 /i255
/69 /55 /59 /53 /55 /89 /53 /73 /53 /54 /70 /i255 /64 /56 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255 /90 /73 /54 /59 /55 /52 /64 /50 /64 /82 /59 /55 /80 /62 /70 /i255 /49 /52 /54 /53 /91/55 /54 /49 /77 /i255 /53 /50 /48 /53 /66 /55 /54 /53 /50 /82 /i255
/54 /62 /55 /54 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255 /82 /49 /52 /54 /55 /54 /53 /64 /50 /55 /73 /i255 /55 /82 /49 /i255 /49 /52 /54 /53 /91/55 /54 /49 /48 /i255 /89 /70 /i255 /90 /73 /54 /59 /55 /52 /64 /50 /64 /82 /59 /55 /80 /62 /70 /i255
/52 /62 /64 /90 /73 /48 /i255 /89 /49 /i255/90 /52 /49 /48 /i255/55 /52 /i255/54 /62 /49 /i255/64 /56 /56 /53 /66 /53 /55 /73 /i255/82 /49 /52 /54 /55 /54 /53 /64 /50 /55 /73 /i255/55 /82 /49 /60 /i255
/71 /85 /49 /56 /49 /59 /49 /50 /66 /49 /92 /i255/47 /i255/72 /53 /91/80 /73 /49 /i255/72 /64 /73 /90 /54 /53 /64 /50 /i255/54 /64 /i255/58 /55 /54 /53 /50 /82 /i255
/58 /53 /52 /66 /59 /49 /80 /55 /50 /66 /53 /49 /52 /92 /i255 /78 /62 /49 /i255 /85 /90 /73 /49 /i255 /64 /56 /i255 /65 /53 /82 /62 /54 /52 /i255 /104 /90 /50 /54 /49 /59 /77 /i255 /74 /60 /i255 /47 /60 /i255
/71 /96 /99 /99 /98 /79 /60 /i255 /105 /81 /52 /52 /90 /49 /52 /i255 /53 /50 /i255 /63 /59 /49 /82 /50 /55 /50 /66 /70 /i255 /58 /55 /54 /53 /50 /82 /92 /i255 /85 /49 /69 /53 /52 /53 /54 /53 /50 /82 /i255 /54 /62 /49 /i255
/65 /69 /53 /48 /49 /50 /66 /49 /105 /60 /i255 /106 /107 /108 /109 /110 /111 /112 /i255 /107 /114 /i255 /115/116 /117 /118 /116 /114 /119 /109 /120 /i255 /121 /i255 /122/107 /123/119 /110 /124 /125 /i255 /126 /119 /111 /112 /127 /128 /i255 /33 /129 /i255
/71 /95 /79 /92 /i255 /100 /102 /130 /131 /100 /98 /99 /60 /i255 /48 /64 /53 /92 /100 /99 /60 /100 /99 /100 /132 /133 /134 /60 /134 /91/51 /62 /60 /96 /99 /99 /102 /60 /100 /100 /60 /99 /99 /95 /79 /93 /i255 /i255 /i255/130 /60 /99 /i255 /135/90 /54 /66 /64 /91/49 /i255 /61/49 /55 /52 /90 /59 /49 /52 /i255
/63 /55 /82 /49 /i255 /100 /i255 /64 /56 /i255 /96 /i255
/i255
/i255
/1 /2/3 /4 /5 /2/3 /4 /6 /i255 /8 /9 /1 /4 /10/3 /i255 /11 /3 /8 /6 /12 /13/4 /14 /11 /15 /i255 /1 /16 /16 /3 /8 /6 /3 /5 /i255 /17 /18 /i255
/1 /2/3 /4 /5 /2/3 /4 /6 /i255 /8 /9 /1 /4 /10/3 /i255
/19 /20 /21 /22 /23 /20 /24 /i255 /22 /25 /26 /27 /28 /29/30 /31 /22 /27 /25 /i255 /28 /20 /32 /30 /28 /24 /22 /25 /32 /i255 /31 /33 /20 /i255 /34 /35 /24 /30 /31 /20 /24 /i255 /35 /30 /28 /31 /22 /36 /22 /35 /30 /25 /31 /i255
/35 /30 /29/35 /33 /37 /20 /31 /23 /i255 /35 /28 /27 /21 /22 /24 /20 /24 /i255 /31 /27 /i255 /31 /33 /20 /i255 /35 /30 /28 /31 /22 /36 /22 /35 /30 /25 /31 /23 /i255 /38 /39 /i255 /32 /20 /25 /24 /20 /28 /40
/23 /35 /20 /36 /22 /26 /22 /36 /i255 /35 /30 /28 /31 /22 /36 /22 /35 /30 /25 /31 /i255 /35 /30 /29/35 /33 /37 /20 /31 /i255 /41 /22 /37 /37 /i255 /42 /20 /i255 /35 /28 /27 /21 /22 /24 /20 /24 /i255 /31 /27 /i255 /20 /30 /36 /33 /i255
/35 /30 /28 /31 /22 /36 /22 /35 /30 /25 /31 /i255/41 /22 /31 /33 /i255/43 /39 /44/23 /45 /i255/22 /25 /23 /31 /28 /34 /36 /31 /22 /27 /25 /23 /i255/26 /27 /28 /i255/26 /22 /37 /37 /22 /25 /32 /i255/27 /34 /31 /i255
/46 /34 /20 /23 /31 /22 /27 /25 /25 /30 /22 /28 /20 /23 /i255 /30 /25 /24 /i255 /36 /27 /25 /31 /30 /36 /31 /i255 /22 /25 /26 /27 /28 /29/30 /31 /22 /27 /25 /i255 /27 /26 /i255 /28 /20 /23 /20 /30 /28 /36 /33 /i255
/23 /31 /30 /26 /26 /i255 /30 /31 /i255 /31 /33 /20 /i255 /42 /30 /23 /20 /37 /22 /25 /20 /i255 /21 /22 /23 /22 /31 /47 /i255 /i255 /48 /33 /20 /i255 /29/30 /37 /20 /i255 /35 /30 /28 /31 /22 /36 /22 /35 /30 /25 /31 /i255 /41 /22 /37 /37 /i255 /42 /20 /i255
/35 /28 /27 /21 /22 /24 /20 /24 /i255 /41 /22 /31 /33 /i255 /30 /25 /i255 /39 /49 /39 /i255 /50 /51 /i255 /52 /22 /20 /31 /30 /28 /53 /i255 /19 /20 /36 /30 /37 /37 /i255 /22 /25 /23 /31 /28 /34 /36 /31 /22 /27 /25 /i255
/23 /33 /20 /20 /31 /i255 /30 /31 /i255 /33 /22 /23 /i255 /29/27 /25 /31 /33 /i255 /50 /i255 /21 /22 /23 /22 /31 /47 /54 /i255/55 /47 /56 /i255 /19 /20 /31 /20 /25 /31 /22 /27 /25 /i255 /57 /37 /30 /25 /i255 /30 /25 /24 /i255 /58 /27 /29/35 /20 /25 /23 /30 /31 /22 /27 /25 /i255
/39 /24 /24 /20 /24 /i255 /22 /25 /23 /31 /28 /34 /36 /31 /22 /27 /25 /23 /i255 /26 /27 /28 /i255 /23 /31 /34 /24 /53 /i255 /23 /34 /35 /35 /37 /20 /29/20 /25 /31 /i255 /28 /20 /31 /28 /22 /20 /21 /30 /37 /i255 /i255
/i255
/38 /59 /60 /61 /62 /63 /i255 /59 /61 /65 /65 /66 /67 /68/67 /69 /60 /i255 /70 /67 /60 /71 /72 /67 /73 /74 /66 /i255
/i255
/39 /37 /37 /i255 /30 /31 /31 /20 /29 /35 /31 /23 /i255 /41 /22 /37 /37 /i255 /42 /20 /i255 /29/30 /24 /20 /i255 /31 /27 /i255 /28 /20 /31 /30 /22 /25 /i255 /35 /30 /28 /31 /22 /36 /22 /35 /30 /25 /31 /23 /i255 /30 /31 /i255 /30 /25 /53 /i255
/37 /20 /21 /20 /37 /i255 /31 /33 /20 /53 /i255 /26 /20 /20 /37 /i255 /36 /27 /29/26 /27 /28 /31 /30 /42 /37 /20 /i255 /35 /30 /28 /31 /22 /36 /22 /35 /30 /31 /22 /25 /32 /i255 /22 /25 /i255 /31 /33 /22 /23 /i255 /23 /31 /34 /24 /53 /47 /i255
/75 /25 /i255 /32 /20 /25 /20 /28 /30 /37 /45 /i255 /23 /31 /34 /24 /53 /i255 /23 /31 /30 /26 /26 /i255 /41 /22 /37 /37 /i255 /36 /27 /25 /31 /22 /25 /34 /20 /i255 /31 /27 /i255 /41 /27 /28 /76 /i255 /41 /22 /31 /33 /i255
/35 /30 /28 /31 /22 /36 /22 /35 /30 /25 /31 /23 /i255 /30 /23 /i255 /37 /27 /25 /32 /i255 /30 /23 /i255 /31 /33 /20 /53 /i255 /30 /28 /20 /i255 /28 /20 /23 /35 /27 /25 /23 /22 /21 /20 /45 /i255 /31 /27 /i255 /26 /22 /25 /24 /i255 /31 /33 /20 /i255
/42 /20 /23 /31 /i255 /41 /30 /53 /i255 /31 /27 /i255 /28 /20 /31 /28 /22 /20 /21 /20 /i255 /31 /33 /20 /i255 /23 /34 /35 /35 /37 /20 /29/20 /25 /31 /i255 /42 /27 /31 /31 /37 /20 /23 /i255 /24 /22 /23 /35 /20 /25 /23 /20 /24 /i255
/31 /27 /i255 /20 /30 /36 /33 /i255 /35 /30 /28 /31 /22 /36 /22 /35 /30 /25 /31 /47 /i255 /i255 /75 /26 /i255 /31 /33 /20 /i255 /35 /30 /28 /31 /22 /36 /22 /35 /30 /25 /31 /i255 /22 /23 /i255 /25 /27 /31 /i255 /28 /20 /23 /35 /27 /25 /23 /22 /21 /20 /i255
/30 /26 /31 /20 /28 /i255 /31 /33 /28 /20 /20 /i255 /30 /31 /31 /20 /29/35 /31 /23 /45 /i255 /31 /33 /20 /i255 /23 /34 /35 /35 /37 /20 /29/20 /25 /31 /i255 /42 /27 /31 /31 /37 /20 /23 /i255 /41 /22 /37 /37 /i255 /42 /20 /i255
/36 /27 /25 /23 /22 /24 /20 /28 /20 /24 /i255/37 /27 /23 /31 /47 /i255/i255/77/25 /i255/30 /i255/36 /30 /23 /20 /40 /42 /53 /40 /36 /30 /23 /20 /i255/42 /30 /23 /22 /23 /45 /i255/31 /33 /20 /i255
/25 /34 /29/42 /20 /28 /i255 /27 /26 /i255 /30 /31 /31 /20 /29/35 /31 /23 /i255 /29/30 /53 /i255 /21 /30 /28 /53 /i255 /31 /27 /i255 /20 /25 /23 /34 /28 /20 /i255 /31 /33 /30 /31 /i255 /41 /20 /i255 /24 /27 /i255 /25 /27 /31 /i255
/34 /25 /25 /20 /36 /20 /23 /23 /30 /28 /22 /37 /53 /i255 /42 /34 /28 /24 /20 /25 /i255 /27 /28 /i255 /24 /22 /23 /31 /34 /28 /42 /i255 /35 /30 /28 /31 /22 /36 /22 /35 /30 /25 /31 /23 /47 /i255 /i255 /i255 /39 /37 /37 /i255
/26 /27 /28 /29/23 /i255 /27 /26 /i255 /30 /31 /31 /20 /29/35 /31 /20 /24 /i255 /36 /27 /29/29/34 /25 /22 /36 /30 /31 /22 /27 /25 /i255 /31 /27 /i255 /28 /20 /36 /27 /21 /20 /28 /i255 /75 /57 /i255
/42 /27 /31 /31 /37 /20 /23 /i255 /41 /22 /37 /37 /i255 /42 /20 /i255 /24 /27 /36 /34 /29/20 /25 /31 /20 /24 /47 /i255 /i255 /i255 /75 /26 /i255 /31 /33 /20 /i255 /35 /30 /28 /31 /22 /36 /22 /35 /30 /25 /31 /i255 /36 /30 /25 /25 /27 /31 /i255
/42 /20 /i255 /36 /27 /25 /31 /30 /36 /31 /20 /24 /i255 /42 /53 /i255 /20 /29/30 /22 /37 /45 /i255 /35 /33 /27 /25 /20 /45 /i255 /27 /28 /i255 /31 /20 /78 /31 /i255 /30 /i255 /36 /20 /28 /31 /22 /26 /22 /20 /24 /i255 /37 /20 /31 /31 /20 /28 /i255
/36 /30 /25 /i255 /42 /20 /i255 /23 /20 /25 /31 /i255 /31 /27 /i255 /31 /33 /20 /i255 /35 /30 /28 /31 /22 /36 /22 /35 /30 /25 /31 /i255 /28 /20 /46 /34 /20 /23 /31 /22 /25 /32 /i255 /31 /33 /20 /i255 /28 /20 /31 /34 /28 /25 /i255 /27 /26 /i255
/31 /33 /20 /i255 /24 /22 /23 /35 /20 /25 /23 /20 /24 /i255 /23 /34 /35 /35 /37 /20 /29/20 /25 /31 /i255 /42 /53 /i255 /41 /33 /22 /36 /33 /20 /21 /20 /28 /i255 /29/20 /31 /33 /27 /24 /i255 /22 /23 /i255
/29/27 /23 /31 /i255 /36 /27 /25 /21 /20 /25 /22 /20 /25 /31 /i255 /26 /27 /28 /i255 /31 /33 /20 /i255 /35 /30 /28 /31 /22 /36 /22 /35 /30 /25 /31 /79 /i255 /i255
/i255 /49 /31 /30 /26 /26 /i255 /29/30 /53 /i255 /27 /26 /26 /20 /28 /i255 /31 /27 /i255 /35 /22 /36 /76 /i255 /34 /35 /i255 /31 /33 /20 /i255 /42 /27 /31 /31 /37 /20 /i255 /26 /28 /27 /29/i255 /35 /33 /53 /23 /22 /36 /22 /30 /25 /80 /23 /i255
/27 /26 /26 /22 /36 /20 /i255 /27 /28 /i255 /35 /30 /28 /31 /22 /36 /22 /35 /30 /25 /31 /80 /23 /i255 /33 /27 /29/20 /i255
/i255 /49 /31 /30 /26 /26 /i255 /29/30 /53 /i255 /23 /20 /25 /24 /i255 /30 /i255 /23 /31 /30 /29/35 /20 /24 /45 /i255 /23 /20 /37 /26 /40 /30 /24 /24 /28 /20 /23 /23 /20 /24 /i255 /20 /25 /21 /20 /37 /27 /35 /20 /i255
/31 /27 /i255 /31 /33 /20 /i255 /35 /30 /28 /31 /22 /36 /22 /35 /30 /25 /31 /i255 /22 /26 /i255 /31 /33 /20 /i255 /36 /34 /28 /28 /20 /25 /31 /i255 /30 /24 /24 /28 /20 /23 /23 /i255 /22 /23 /i255 /76 /25 /27 /41 /25 /47 /i255
/81/33 /20 /25 /i255 /31 /33 /20 /i255 /24 /22 /23 /35 /20 /25 /23 /20 /24 /i255 /42 /27 /31 /31 /37 /20 /i255 /22 /23 /i255 /24 /20 /31 /20 /28 /29/22 /25 /20 /24 /i255 /31 /27 /i255 /42 /20 /i255 /37 /27 /23 /31 /i255 /27 /28 /i255
/31 /33 /28 /27 /41 /25 /i255 /30 /41 /30 /53 /45 /i255/31 /33 /22 /23 /i255/41 /22 /37 /37 /i255/42 /20 /i255/24 /27 /36 /34 /29/20 /25 /31 /20 /24 /i255/22 /25 /i255
/39 /24 /21 /30 /25 /31 /30 /32 /20 /82 /52 /58 /45 /i255/27 /25 /i255/31 /33 /20 /i255/37 /30 /23 /31 /i255/36 /27 /29/35 /37 /20 /31 /20 /24 /i255/21 /22 /23 /22 /31 /i255
/49 /34 /35 /35 /37 /20 /29 /20 /25 /31 /i255 /39 /36 /36 /27 /34 /25 /31 /30 /42 /22 /37 /22 /31 /53 /i255 /83 /39 /58 /48 /84 /i255 /43 /27 /28 /29/47 /i255 /38 /i255/55 /47 /56 /i255 /19 /20 /31 /20 /25 /31 /22 /27 /25 /i255 /57 /37 /30 /25 /i255 /30 /25 /24 /i255 /58 /27 /29/35 /20 /25 /23 /30 /31 /22 /27 /25 /i255
/39 /24 /24 /20 /24 /i255 /26 /34 /28 /31 /33 /20 /28 /i255 /36 /37 /30 /28 /22 /26 /22 /36 /30 /31 /22 /27 /25 /i255 /30 /42 /27 /34 /31 /i255 /76 /20 /20 /35 /22 /25 /32 /i255 /31 /20 /29/35 /20 /28 /30 /31 /34 /28 /20 /i255
/37 /27 /32 /i255 /38 /39 /i255 /31 /20 /29/35 /20 /28 /30 /31 /34 /28 /20 /i255 /37 /27 /32 /i255 /41 /22 /37 /37 /i255 /42 /20 /i255 /76 /20 /35 /31 /i255 /27 /25 /i255 /30 /i255 /41 /20 /20 /76 /37 /53 /i255 /42 /30 /23 /22 /23 /47 /54 /i255/56 /47 /56 /i255/75 /25 /21 /20 /23 /31 /22 /32 /30 /31 /22 /27 /25 /30 /37 /i255/57 /28 /27 /24 /34 /36 /31 /79 /i255/49 /31 /27 /28 /30 /32 /20 /i255
/30 /25 /24 /i255 /52 /22 /23 /35 /27 /23 /22 /31 /22 /27 /25 /i255 /27 /26 /i255 /49 /34 /35 /35 /37 /22 /20 /23 /i255
/i255
/i255
/i255
/i255
/i255 /i255
/57 /30 /32 /20 /i255 /50 /i255 /27 /26 /i255 /50 /i255
/i255
 
Page 1 of 1 
 Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial  
Amendment 9.0 
Summary of Changes  
October 30, 2015  
 
AMENDMENT CHANGE  SECTION(S) AFFECTED BY 
[CONTACT_552099]:  
 
“Diagnosis of anemia at screening. All participants will 
be screened at baseline for anemia and any men that 
screen positive (Hemoglobin <13 gm/dL) will be 
excluded.”  
 
 
“Any other diagnosis of anemia within the last 5 years 
that has not been successfully treated.”  
 Addition of the following exclusion criterion:   
“History of organ transplantation“  
 3.2 Eligibility Criteria  
Revised information regarding the updated anemia 
testing procedures “Testing for anemia (Hemoglobin 
<13 gm/dL) in males will be done using a point -of-
care, hemoglobin meter, as a preliminary screen for 
men who require additional evaluation to rule out B12 
deficiency.  Men who screen positive for anemia 
(hemoglobin <13) will have blood drawn for a serum 
B12 with reflex to methylmalonic acid (MMA), but may still be enrolled and randomized.  They will be advised 
of their abnormal lab result, and to discuss this with 
their primary care provider.”  5.2 Screening Process  
  
 
 
  
 
Page 1 of 2 
 
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial 
Amendment 10.0 
Summary of Changes 
March 09, 2016 
 
AMENDMENT CHANGE SECTION(S) AFFECTED BY 
[CONTACT_552100] 7.3 Interim Analysis was renamed Sample 
Size and Power Determinations. Language regarding interim analysis was removed and from this section.   7.3 Interim Analysis 
Revised information regarding the updated interim analysis:   The interim analyses will be performed based first on 
the sequential interim monitoring of the semen quality 
parameters (sperm concentration; total sperm motility; and sperm morphology (abnormal form)) after 50% of the FAZST participants have completed their six months follow-up.  The analyses will be unadjusted by 
[CONTACT_552064], in line with the ITT approach.  The 
overall Type I error rate will be controlled at a pre-specified level, accounting for both multiple semen outcomes and the interim analysis.  As the effects of the nutritional supplementation are not clearly understood, the study should be stopped early only if 
there is strong evidence of harm.  Given this a one-
sided alpha spending function, which approximates the O’Brien-Fleming
[ADDRESS_725620], a Bonferroni adjustment will be used to distribute the (sometimes called experiment-wise) 
Type I error alpha among the multiple semen 
parameters.  A α=0.025 (one-sided) is to be assigned 
to the experiment-wide alpha level for the assessment of semen parameters, where α
3=α/3 = 0.[ADDRESS_725621].  For each semen parameter, the amount of α
3 
available for the interim analysis performed at time t is 
α3(t) and will be obtained from the O’Brien-Fleming 
spending function.  Time t for the first stage of the 
FAZST interim analysis will be once 1200 (50% of the participants) have completed six months of follow-up.  
Using these assumptions the test statistic for lower 
bound of harm will be 3.5547 for each of the 3 comparisons with α
3(t) = 0.[ZIP_CODE] where t 
represents50% of the participants completing [ADDRESS_725622] one of the   
 
Page 2 of 2 
 AMENDMENT CHANGE SECTION(S) AFFECTED BY 
[CONTACT_552101].  The DSMB will consider the 
consistency of all semen analysis data to determine 
whether the second stage of the interim analysis 
should be considered.   If the DSMB determines that the second stage of the interim analysis is applicable, it will be conducted based on the available data and the outcome of live 
birth.  For this stage, the estimated information 
fraction will be defined as the total number of participants completing 6 months of follow-up at the time of database closure for the second stage interim analysis.   Similarly the alpha spending function approach will be applied to the sequential monitoring 
of live birth.  An overall alpha of 0.05 and a one-sided 
procedure in data monitoring will be used.  The hypothesis will be tested by a one-sided O’Brien-Fleming alpha spending design.   Assuming PLB = 0.[ADDRESS_725623] boundaries using the O’Brien-Fleming alpha 
spending design based on various values of the information fraction are provided in the table below. When a stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_48948], there will be an indication that the treatment has an increased risk of harm for live birth.  The DSMB will consider this result 
and all live birth data to determine whether a 
suspension of the trial intervention should be considered.   
Table 6.  Examples of Critical Values of the 
Test Statistics for Live Birth 
Information 
Fraction Lower Bound 
0.20 
4.8769 
0.25 
4.3326 
0.30 
3.9286 
0.35 
3.6128 
0.40 
3.3569 
0.50 2.9626 
 
 7.4 Interim Analysis   
 
     
Folic Acid and Zinc Supplementation Trial  
Amendment 11.0 
Summary of Changes  
November 6, 2018 
 
AMENDMENT CHANGE  SECTION(S) AFFECTED BY 
[CONTACT_552102]. 
Original text: Couples initiating an IVF cycle in the sixth 
or seventh month after randomization will continue to be followed if pregnancy occurs for pregnancy outcomes for 
9 months following the start of their IVF assisted 
conception cycle.  
 
Revised text: Couples initiating an IVF cycle in the sixth or 
seventh month after randomization will continue to be 
followed if pregnancy occurs for pregnancy outcomes 
during the initial 9 -month period.   5.6 Female Partner Follow -up 
Language regarding specific semen collection container  
was removed and from this section.   5.7 Specimen Collection  
Language specifying ‘(Withdrawal)’ was added to this 
section’s subhead: “Exit Questionnaire”.  5.8 Retention Plan and Compensation  
Revised text regarding safety analyses .  
Original text: Adverse events will be collected in the males 
receiving study supplements though important female 
associated study endpoints, including adverse pregnancy 
outcomes and pregnancy loss, will be collected throughout 
the study and reported as adverse events.   
 
Revised text: Adverse events will be collected in the males 
receiving study supplements though important female 
associated study endpoints, including adverse pregnancy 
outcomes and pregnancy loss, will be collected throughout 
the study and reported as adve rse events via questionnaire 
and medical chart abstraction .  7.6 Safety Analyses  
Revised text regarding data storage and quality control .   
Original text: Study records should be maintained for at 
least two years post completion of the final study report or publication of the primary endpoints.  
 
Revised text:  Study records should be maintained for at 
least three years post completion of the final study report 
or publication of the primary endpoints or per local site 
IRB requirements (whichever is longer).  8.[ADDRESS_725624] Web- based System  
Revised text regarding AE collection period and follow -up. 
Original text: Important female associated study endpoints, 
including adverse pregnancy outcomes and pregnancy loss, will be collected throughout the study and reported as 
adverse events. 
 
Revised text:  Important female associated study 
endpoints, including adverse pregnancy outcomes and 
pregnancy loss, will be collected throughout the study and reported as adverse events 
via questionnaires and 
medical record abstractio n forms.  8.[ADDRESS_725625]  Amendment 11.0  Summary of Changes   November 6, 2018  
 
AMENDMENT CHANGE  SECTION(S) AFFECTED BY 
[CONTACT_552103] I RB review and informed consent.  
Original text: Two IRBs will review this protocol: 1) 
University of Utah, and 2) The EMMES Corporation. 
NICHD will be covered under a reliance agreement with 
the University of Utah.    
 
Revised text: Original text: Four IRBs will review this 
protocol: 1) University of Utah, and 2) The Emmes 
Corporation 3) University of Iowa 4) Northwestern 
University.  9.[ADDRESS_725626] ing participant confidentiality.   
Original text: No social security numbers will be collected.  
De-identified data will be submitted to a central database 
designed by [CONTACT_15791].  
 
Revised text : Social security numbers may be collected for 
payment purposes only but will not be submitted to a 
central database.   9.0 Human Subjects Protection and 
Confidentiality Procedures  
 
Language regarding maintaining regulatory binders  was 
removed and from this section.  This information is located 
in the Manual of Procedures.   9.1 Regulatory Binders  
 