1 
 A pi[INVESTIGATOR_415710] a 
cascading alert system in reducing 30d readmission in high risk medical and surgical patients.  
 
 
 
 
Revision number:  10.0  
Date:   03/08/[ADDRESS_524053] the Privacy Interests of Participants  ................................ .........................  28 
4.7 Compensation and Economic Burden to Patients and Providers  ................................ ...............  28 
5 Data MANAGEMENT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  30 
3 
 5.1 Data Security  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  30 
5.2 Protection o f Participant Privacy  ................................ ................................ ................................  31 
6 DEVICE INFORMATION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  32 
6.1 DEVICE DESCRIPTION:  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  32 
6.2 Data T ransport via physIQ Android Mobile App and physIQ Platform  ................................ .......  33 
6.3 Analytics  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 33 
6.4 Regulatory Status  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  33 
7 Bibliograp hy ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  35 
8 Appendix 1 – Patient Questionnaire & Interview  ................................ ................................ ...............  39 
8.1 Demographic Survey (Ileostomy Cohort – Pre) ................................ ................................ ..........  39 
8.2 Self-Care Self -Efficacy Scale (Ileostomy Cohort – Pre and Post)  ................................ .................  40 
8.3 Monitoring Process Random Question Bank  ................................ ................................ ..............  43 
8.4 User Experience Survey (Ileostomy Cohort – Post)  ................................ ................................ .... 44 
8.5 City of Hope Quality of Life Ostomy (Ileostomy Cohort – Pre and Post)  ...... Error! Bookmark not 
defined.  
8.6 Semi -Structured Interviews  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  47 
8.6.1 Pre-discharge Interview Guide  ................................ ...............  Error! Bookmark not defined.  
8.6.2 Study Endpoint Interview Guide  ................................ ............  Error! Bookmark not defined.  
9 Appendix 2 – Provider Survey and Interview  ................................ ................................ ......................  53 
9.1 Study Start point (Demographic  Survey + Interview)  ................................ ................................ . 53 
9.2 End Point (Survey + phone follow up if survey incomplete)  ................................ .......................  55 
9.3 Study Endpoint (User experience survey + Interview)  ................................ ................................  [ADDRESS_524054] -discharge utilization in high risk 
medical and surgical patients can be reduced by [CONTACT_2329] a vendor platform  (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_415711])  that involves wearable sensors  (Vital Patch)  that collect real-time, continuous ambulatory vital 
signs , a mobile device that collects patient reported outcomes  and machine learning algorithms in the 
clou d that identify patients at risk of physiologic perturbation . Data from t his vendor platform will be tied 
to operational workflows at NorthShore that involve a monitoring nurse  who then conveys information 
to the clinical team  as necessary in a cascading a lert system .  
1.[ADDRESS_524055] (ACA) hospi[INVESTIGATOR_415712] (HRRP) in which hospi[INVESTIGATOR_415713] s.[ADDRESS_524056] decompensation is checked manually and 
intermittently  (spot check)  for the majority of patients. When patients are discharged , vital signs are 
frequently  not monitored  in the 30-day readmission window . This lack of monitoring in the post disch arge 
period may prevent identification of patients at risk of decompensation and readmission.  When spot vitals 
are monitored at home , reductions in readmission rates for certain populations have been seen.2-[ADDRESS_524057] looked at how continuous monitoring  of vital s can identify patients 
in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_415714] .18-28 There is a lack 
of data on using these devices upon discharge to evaluate for decompensation and prospectively trying 
to reduce readmiss ions.  Similarly, t here is a lack of  data in tying these devices to a cascading and escalating 
alert system  to identify patients at risk of decompensation . There is qualitative data on looking at how 
wearables are perceived by [CONTACT_415758][INVESTIGATOR_307]29-30 but there is a lack of data on 
perception of this technology for remote monitoring.  
Postoperative ileostomy patients are frequently readmitted because of physiologic perturbation31-35 and 
has readmission rates between 15 -30% at NorthShore. Ileostomy patients are readmitted because of 
dehydration.33-35 There has been early work establishing the predictive potential of m ultivariate 
physiological telemetry (pi[INVESTIGATOR_415715]) from a wearable sensor providing accurate early detection of 
impending rehos pi[INVESTIGATOR_415716] a predictive accuracy comparable to 
implanted devices . [ADDRESS_524058] that involves monitoring nurse , mid -level providers, specialists, 
and surgeons. We describe the quantitative and qualitative aspects of the study in detail below.  
6 
 2 QUANTITATIVE  
 
2.1 Quantitative Research Aims – Ileostomy Cohort  
 
Aim 1: Determine if wearable technology deployed for 30 days in a high -risk patient population can 
augment 30 -day readmission risk prediction and improve care processes via an escalating feedback 
protocol.  
Aim 2: Understand and finalize thresholds and criteria for alert system at the levels of Vital Patch, 
physIQ’s pi[INVESTIGATOR_415715], monitoring  RNs for ileostomy patients  
Aim 3: Finalize process maps and workflows for nurse navigators  and clinical care teams that optimize 
identifying high risk patients while minimizing provider burden  
 
Aim 4: Calculate the return on investment of the re mote monitoring solution  
Aim 5: Perform a deep analysis of the full process to understand effectiveness, feasibility, efficiency and 
bottlenecks  
2.2 Experimental Plan and Methods  
The goal of the study is to reduce readmission rates  for high risk medical and surgical patients . The goal 
of the study  is to understand how physIQ’s platform Pi[INVESTIGATOR_415717] a cascading set of alerts including 
the wearable device alerts, patient reported metrics, CAPE navigator or monitoring nurse  alerts can be 
developed and improved upon to reduce the incidence of 30 day readmission. We will be enrolling  10 
colorectal (post ileostomy formation) patients w ho will be using a standardized set of cascading alerts 
that have been fine tuned with the goal of re ducing decompensation and 30-day readmissions.  
Ileostomy  
For the c olorectal patients , we will attempt to e nroll every patient that has a colectomy followed by 
[CONTACT_415759]. These will be patients of Drs. Joseph Muldoon, Monika Krezalek , and James  Spi[INVESTIGATOR_415718], Glenbrook , and Highland Park hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600] . The colorectal surgeons will notify the 
study team when a patient has undergone surgery and the research coordinator will perform 
recruitment . Patients will be approached by [CONTACT_415760]. 
If the patient is agreeable the patient will receive a kit from physIQ prior to discharge. A Vital patch will 
be placed on the patient prior to discharge and the patch will be connected via blue tooth to the phys IQ 
mobile device and pi[INVESTIGATOR_415719]. The study coordinator will teach the patient how to apply and 
remove the patch and what to do if there are issues with the patch. The study coordinator will also 
teach the patient how to use the mobile device an d the physIQ application. This will also occur 
immediately prior to discharge.  
On discharge colorectal patients will be asked questions every morning and every afternoon from the 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_415720].  The pi[INVESTIGATOR_415721] 
7 
 morning . We would also  ask if the patient has any infectious symptoms such as fever, discharge or 
redness around the incision site or stoma and if the patient has any dehydration symptoms suc h as 
decreased urine output, dark urine , or obstruction and other alarming symptoms that the team would 
like to know about . In the afternoon,  the symptom questions  will be asked again . The monitoring nurse  
will evaluate the pi[INVESTIGATOR_415722] . They will evaluate the responses 
to the questions and the physiologic alerting system built by [CONTACT_415761]. There will again be an al gorithm 
built within physIQ’s system that provides an alert to the monitoring nurse  if the criteria from Table 4 
are met.  
 
 
physIQ Alert System – Ileostomy  
Patients:  

8 
 Any positive symptom (dehydration ,infection , or obstruction ) 
≥[ADDRESS_524059] alerts in a day  
Table 4: PhysIQ alerts system for CAPE navigator or monitoring nurse  for Ileostomy  
 
For ileostomy the thresholds for the high -risk alerts and the number of standard alerts may be changed 
from patient to patient based on how each case progresses and the density and frequency of alerts. 
Determining the optimal thresholds for these two types of alerts will be a key aim of this study  The goal 
is again maximizing signal while minimizing noise.  
 
If any of these conditions listed in Table  4 are met the monitoring nurse  will call the patient and go 
through a predefined note with the following data elements and questions.  
 
  
9 
 Infection Symptom  
a) Fever  
b) Dysuria  
c) Redness at ostomy site  
d) Drainage or swelling at ostomy site  
e) Other (Free Text)  
 
Obstruction Symptom  
a) Nausea  
b) Vomiting  
c) Bloating  
d) Decreased or no ostomy output  
e) No gas through ostomy  
 
Dehydration Symptom  
a) Lightheadedness  
b) Dry mouth  
c) Low or dark urine output  
d) Dizziness  
e) Increased ostomy output  
 
Symptom Change (Obstruction, Dehydration, Infection) [This can show up if any symptom is pi[INVESTIGATOR_112899]]  
1. New  
2. Worsening  
3. Stable  
4. Improving  
5. Resolved  
Ostomy output  
a) 500-1200cc  
b) >1200cc  
c) <500cc  
Is patient NPO? Yes/No  
Is patient  on antibiotics? Yes/No  
Patient is on stool thickening regimen?  
a) None  
b) Metamucil powder 1 tsp bid  
c) Immodium 2mg bid w/ meals (20 mins before meals)  
d) Immodium 2mg qid w/ meals (20 mins before meals)  
e) Immodium 4mg qid w/ meals (20 mins before meals)  
f) Stool thickening managed by [CONTACT_415762]:  
a) MCI alert  
b) Afib with RVR alert  
c) Tachypnea alert ( First, frequent, increasing density, other alerts also present, no other 
concerning pulmonary comorbidities)  
10 
 d) Tachycardia alert (First, frequent, increasing density, other alerts also present, no other 
concerning Comorbidities or ostomy output uptrending or near 1200cc threshold)  
e) Other physiologic alert  
FOLLOWUP PLAN  
1. Case Communication to Clinical RN  
2. Case Communication to Ostomy RN 
3. Call Clinical RN  
4. Call Ostomy RN  
5. Consider Call Clinical RN  
6. Evaluate trend of ostomy output  
7. Stool thickening initiation Metamucil powder 1 tsp bid  
8. Stool thickening escalation Immodium 2mg bid w/ meals (20 mins before meals)  
9. Stool thickening escalation Im modium 2mg qid w/ meals (20 mins before meals)  
10. Stool thickening escalation Immodium 4mg qid w/ meals (20 mins before meals)  
11. Stool thickening escalation management by [CONTACT_332417]  
12. IV fluids administration  
13. Consider IV fluids administration  
14. Consider Lab test s BMP, Mag, Phos  
15. Consider Lab test CBC  
16. Advance Diet as Tolerated ( Clear liquids for 6 hours and then advance as tolerated to low 
residue diet)  
17. Continue NPO statu s 
18. Possible urgent clinic evaluation  
19. Assess for home visit  
LOGIC:  
a) MCI, Afib  w/ RVR, Tachycardia, Tachypnea (1, 3, 6)  
b) Other physiologic alert (5)  
c) Ostomy output >1200cc and patient on no stool thickening regimen (1, 5, 7, 13)  
d) Ostomy output >1200cc and patient on metamucil stool thickening regimen (1, 5, 13, 8)  
e) Ostomy output >1200cc  and patient on immodium 2mg bid stool thickening regimen (1, 5, 13, 
9) 
f) Ostomy output >1200cc and patient on immodium 2mg qid stool thickening regimen (1, 5, 13, 
10) 
g) Ostomy output >1200cc and patient on immodium 4mg qid stool thickening regimen (1, 3, 13, 
11) 
h) Ostomy output <500cc (1, 3)  
i) Has ANY Obstruction symptom, NEW, or WORSENING Obstructive Symptom, Patient not NPO 
(1, 3, 14)  
j) Has ANY Obstruction symptom, RESOLVED Obstructive Symptom, Patient not NPO (1)  
k) Has ANY Obstruction symptom, NEW or WORSENING Obst ructive Symptoms, Patient NPO (1, 
3, 14, 17)  
l) Has ANY Obstruction symptom, STABLE or IMPROVING Obstructive Symptoms, Patient NPO 
(17) 
m) Has ANY Obstruction symptom, RESOLVED Obstructive Symptoms, Patient NPO and Ostomy 
output 500 -1200 (1, 3, 16)  
n) Has ANY Obstr uction symptom, RESOLVED Obstructive Symptoms, Patient NPO and Ostomy 
output >1200, patient not on stool thickening regimen (1, 3, 16)  
11 
 o) Has the following Infectious symptoms ( Redness at ostomy site, Drainage or swelling at 
ostomy site), NEW OR WORSENING Inf ectious Symptoms, Patient not on antibiotics (2, 4, 15)  
p) Has the following Infectious symptoms ( Redness at ostomy site, Drainage or swelling at 
ostomy site), RESOLVED Infectious Symptoms, Patient not on antibiotics (2)  
q) Has the following Infectious symptoms (Redness at ostomy site, Drainage or swelling at 
ostomy site), NEW OR WORSENING Infectious Symptoms, Patient on antibiotics (2, 4, 15, 18)  
r) Has the following Infectious symptoms ( Redness at ostomy site, Drainage or swelling at 
ostomy site), RESOLVED Infecti ous Symptoms, Patient on antibiotics (2)  
s) Has the following Infectious symptoms ( Fever, Dysuria or Other), NEW,WORSENING, 
IMPROVING, OR STABLE Infectious Symptoms, Patient not on antibiotics (1,3, 15)  
t) Has the following Infectious symptoms ( Fever, Dysuria or  Other),  RESOLVED Infectious 
Symptoms, Patient not on antibiotics (1)  
u) Has the following Infectious symptoms ( Fever, Dysuria or Other), NEW OR WORSENING 
Infectious Symptoms, Patient on antibiotics (1,3, 15, 18)  
v) Has the following Infectious symptoms ( Fever,  Dysuria or Other), RESOLVED Infectious 
Symptoms, Patient on antibiotics (1)  
w) Has ANY Dehydration symptom, NEW, or WORSENING Dehydration Symptom, Patient not 
NPO (1, 3, 12, 14)  
x) Has ANY Dehydration symptom, STABLE OR IMPROVING Dehydration Symptom, Patient no t 
NPO (1, 5, 13)  
y) Has ANY Dehydration symptom, RESOLVED Dehydration Symptom, Patient not NPO (1)  
 
Table 5: CAPE Navigator or monitoring nurse  alerts system for clinical team for Ileostomy  
Table [ADDRESS_524060] any high risk alerts (MCI, Afib with RVR, Tachycardia, Tachypnea), the monitoring nurse  
will route a note and call clinical RN and evaluate the trend of ostomy output. All other physiological al erts 
will result in consideration  call to clinical RN.  
 
If patient ostomy output >1200cc and patient not on stool thickening regimen yet, the monitoring nurse  
will send note and call clinical RN,  consider IV fluids administration and start stool thickenin g regimen 
escalation. Monitoring  RNs will call cinical RNs for guidance on IV fluid administration guidance. The stool 
regimen escalation can occur daily while the output is ≥1200ml in 24 hours. There is no monitoring nurse  
de-escalation protocol, and this  will be performed by [CONTACT_6098]. If a patient is non -adherent to 
Metamucil and/or Imodium  and output is ≥1200ml in 24 hours , medications will be maintained without 
escalation and patient will be counseled on the importance of adherence to medications. If the output 
continues to be greater than ≥1200ml in 24 hours and there are no further options for escalation , the 
monitoring nurse  will call the clinical care team for further guidance.  
 
If ostomy output is <500cc, monitoring nurse  will rou te note and call clinical RN. If pati ent has any new or 
worsening obstruction symptom but not NPO  yet, monitoring nurse  will route note and call clinical RN, 
and consider lab tests (BMP, Mag, Phos). If the obstructive symptoms resolve while patient is NPO,  home 
healrh RNs will route not to clinical RN.  
If patient has new or worsening obstruction symptoms but is NPO already,  monitoring nurse  will note and 
call clinical RN, consider lab tests (BMP, Mag, Phos), and continue NPO status.  If patient obstruction 
12 
 symptom is stable or improving under the NPO status, monitoring nurse  will keep patient NPO. If patient 
has resolved obstructive symptoms, still NPO and ostomy output is >[ADDRESS_524061] patients to advance diet as tolerated.  
 
Any new  or worsening redness at ostomy site, drainage or swelling at ostomy site,  but patient not on 
antibiotics , monitoring nurse  will note and call the ostomy RN  for guidance in management , and consider 
CBC labs. If the above symptoms resolve without antibiotics, home healrh RN will call ostomy RN to 
update.  
 
If patient has new or worsening redness at ostomy stite, drainage or swelling at ostomy site, and is already 
on antibiotics, home healrh RNs will note and call ostomy RN, consider CBC labs and urgent clinic 
evaluation. If above symptoms resolve with antibiotics, home healrh RN will call ostomy RN.  
 
Any new, worsening, improved or stable  fever, dysuria or other infectious symptoms, but patient not on 
antibiotics,  the monitoring nurse  will note and call clinical RNs, and consider CBC labs. If the above 
symptoms resolve without antibiotics, the  monitoring nurse  will route note to clinical RN.  
 
If patient has any new, worsening, improved or stable fever, dysu ria or other infectious symptoms, but is 
already on antibiotics , the monitoring nurse  will note and call clinical RNs, and consider CBC labs  and 
urgent clinic visits . If the above symptoms resolve with antibiotics, the monitoring nurse  will route note 
to clinical RN.  
 
If patient has new or worsening dehydration symptoms, but not NPO, monitoring nurse  will note and call 
clinical RN, consider IV fluids administration, and consider labs (BMP, Mag, Phos) . If the dehydration 
symptoms are stable or improving whil e patient is not NPO, the home healrh nurses will route note to 
clinical RN, consider call clinical RN, and consider IV fluids administration under guidance of clinical team. 
When dehydration symptoms resolve, the home healrh RNs will route note to clinica l RN.  
 
We will be evaluating the high risk alerts and other physiological alerts to find the optimal alert types, 
thresholds and alerting frequency to maximize signal and minimize noise.  
 
  
13 
  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Process map for Ileostomy Patient s  
 
If care is escalated to the clinical care team which includes ostomy RNs, clinical RNs , and Physicians, the 
care team will pursue various interventions including counseling, altering medication therapy such as 
antibiotic therapy, procedures such as debride ment  or drainage , urgent visits to the colorectal surgery 
clinic ideally within 72 hours , and if no other available options readmission. These workflows will be left 

14 
 to the discretion of the clinical care team given the nuance in taking care of these high -risk patients and 
the existing relationship and prior history with these providers. There are some standardized workflows 
that will be followed by [CONTACT_415763]. Infusions of IV fluids will occur if the patient has 
≥[ADDRESS_524062] monitoring nurse  perform infusion at the patient’s home . Also, all messaging from the 
monitoring nurses  will be forwarded to the colorectal/ileostomy  pool per protoco l and logic in Table [ADDRESS_524063] rapid response back to the patient if required.  
The final specs of the study will include : 
1. Optimal inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
2. Specific thresholds for high risk alerts for each use case  
3. Specific thresholds for standard alerts (likely use physIQ standard thresholds)  
4. Finalized physIQ alerts to CAPE navigators and monitoring nurse  
5. Finalized CAPE navigator and monitoring nurse  alerts to clinical care team  
6. Finalized EPIC note  
7. Finalized proces s maps  
8. Finalized workflows by [CONTACT_415764]  
9. Discussion with physIQ to optimize the pi[INVESTIGATOR_415723] 10  ileostomy patients  each for 30d of monitoring to evaluate if 
the remote monitoring technology from physIQ and cascading alert system and process can reduce 30 -
day readmissions. We will also perform economic calculations to determine if there is return on 
investment for this  workflow  tied to remote monitoring. Finally, we would like to do a n in-depth  analysis 
of the process to understand effectiveness, feasibility, efficiency,  and bottlenecks. Some of the 
questions we would like to understand include : 1) W hat component of the  cascading alert system 
provides the highest effectiveness of identifying patients at risk ? 2) Can we reduce the number of 
monitored days and still effectively reduce 30 days of readmission?  3) Are there specific subgroups of 
patients who may benefit from the remote monitoring solution , or alternatively, are there subgroups 
who do not benefit from the remote monitoring solution?  4) Can we take our process maps and perform 
process simulation  with data from the study  and process mining to optimize our process and identify 
chokepoints with our current flow.  
[ADDRESS_524064] -study from both providers and patients' 
viewpoints.  1) ascertain perceptions of telemonitoring and remote patie nt management of high -risk 
patients, of organization and effectiveness of care by [CONTACT_415765]; and 2) 
evaluate patient acceptance, perceptions of and satisfaction with wearable patches, with prompted 
requests for patient status i nformation, and with escalation pathways for nurse navigators and physicians 
using interviews and survey tools.  
3.2 Experimental Plan and Methods  
We will assess remote monitoring combined with non -invasive wearable technology's potential by 
[CONTACT_415766] (A/TAM).52 We describe the 
approach to providers and patients in detail below. We stress that these will be linked to care delivery 
processes and the measures described above in the quantitative section to realize the full potential of a 
mixed -methods approach.  
I.  Ascertain providers' perceptions of telemonitoring and remote patient management of 
high -risk patients, organization, and effectiveness of care using interviews and surveys.  
Provider induction (prior to patient enrolment):  Provider induction will include an in -depth review of the 
wearable device, remote management, and escalation pathway, followed by [CONTACT_415767] 
A/TAM to establish each provider's comfort level (i) with wearable tech nology and any experience of such 
a device (e.g., habitual use of wrist -worn activity monitoring), and (ii) with wearable technology as a 
means of monitoring a post -discharge patient's status, including (iii) anticipated challenges in technology -
mediated i nteraction with patients; and finally (iv) identification of any knowledge gaps that may need to 
be filled through the induction process.  
Provider progress monitoring (throughout the trial period): Providers' progress and experience of the 
program will be assessed through: (a) a survey including open -ended questions with each provider 
following the completion of the study , to evaluate the extent to which anticipated issues and challenges 
may be realized. (b) a partly randomized, recurring opportunity to res pond to one question once at the 
point of interaction with the patient; based on a matrix of questions, patients and providers, a single 
multiple choice question appears as part of a best practice alert to ensure that it is seamlessly integrated; 
neverthel ess, collectively, all questions, all providers and all patients will receive adequate coverage.  
Provider satisfaction (after the trial):  At the conclusion of the study, providers: (a) will be debriefed 
through a comprehensive semi -structured interview to assess (i) their subjective perception of the 
effectiveness of wearable -mediated, post -discharge care; and (ii) actual challenges encountered in the 
course of the program (e.g., frequency of interaction, patients' comprehension of instructions, perception 
of patients' adherence, including any socio -emotional issues that may be impi[INVESTIGATOR_415724]); (b) will participate 
in a post -trial half -day event to network with patients and the research team towards an open -ended 
16 
 evaluation of the joint experience and to elicit o pi[INVESTIGATOR_415725] a follow -up randomized 
clinical trial proposal, and (c) will be invited to contribute to one or more joint evaluative publications.  
A timeline illustrating provider related study activities can be found in Figure 4.
 
Figur e 4 Provider Interview Timeline  
II. To evaluate patients’ acceptance, perceptions of and satisfaction with wearable patches, 
with prompted requests for patient status information, and with escalation pathways for 
nurse navigators, midlevel providers and specialists .  
Patient enrollment (prior to discharge ): Following a detailed presentation of the device and study, and 
informed consent, researchers will administer a questionnaire to establish the participant’s comfort and 
experience level with a wearable device and to ascertain that the participant has under stood the 
limitations of the devices (e.g. that they provide continual but not constant, “real -time” monitoring) prior 
to hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2345]. This will be followed by [CONTACT_28920] -person semi -structured interview The interview is 
informed by A/TAM to establish the  patient’s readiness to use a wearable device as a means of monitoring 
their post -discharge status, including to establish any anticipated challenges in technology -mediated 
interaction with the care team; and finally, to identify any knowledge gaps that ma y need to be filled 
through the induction process. Paradata will be collected at the interview to assist with analysis.  
Patient progress (throughout the period of device use):  Monitoring of the patient’s experience and 
satisfaction with the device and the  study process will be combined with weekly monitoring questions 
focusing on the following aspects:  (a) experience with physical use and tolerance of the device; assess any 
difficulty in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_415726], any skin reaction, possible somatization of heal th concerns; (b) experience 
of self -monitoring and communication with care team through the device (c) degree of reassurance or 
anxiety about the patient’s recovery process; finally, (e) paradata from device and interaction metrics, 
including possible sent iment analysis of interaction text.  
Conclusion ( Study endpoint ): (a) Surveys will be administered at study endpoint to assess each patient’s 
strength of feeling in each response by [CONTACT_415768] “paradata” —
the research er’s assessment of the patient’s affect in providing the response. On this basis,  (b) in Prior to 
patient 
enrollement: 
Survey + 
Interview
Patient 
enrollmentSurvey
Randomized, 
recurring 
questionsStudy End 
Point: Survey 
+ Interview
Stakeholder 
Engagement 
Meeting
[ADDRESS_524065] -study interview with the researcher. Using a mixe d methods philosophy, the interview 
will seek links between performance measures and the experience of participants. (c) The interview will 
link to the quantitative results in terms of outcome and process measures, as well as to the patient status 
reports throughout the 30 -day period to propose hypotheses for further study, e.g. on subjective 
tolerability of the wearable device or faith in a remote monitoring system and care process measures, 
such as unscheduled visits.  (d) Patients will be invited to a pos t-trial half day event to network with their 
providers and the research team towards an open -ended evaluation of the joint experience and to elicit 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_415725] a follow -up randomized clinical trial proposal; and  (e) will be invited 
to contribute to a publication on the patient experience and to review scientific publications by [CONTACT_5055].   
For the ileostomy cohort, we will use think -aloud methods to compliment the semi -structured interviews 
during the study end -point intervie w. Patients will think -aloud and convey their thoughts and experience 
to interviewer while using the patch, phone, and physIQ app. The other topi[INVESTIGATOR_415727] -point will 
continue with the semi -structured formats.  
A timeline illustrating patient  related study activities  can be found in Figure 5. 
Figure 5 Patient Interview Timeline  
Informed
ConsentPrior to 
DischargeSurvey + 
Interview30 
Monitoring 
Period: 
Recurring 
questions30 Day 
Study 
EndpointSurvey + 
InterviewData 
AnalysisStakeholder 
Engagemen
t Meeting
18 
 3.3 Content and focus of interviews  
3.3.1 Patient  
Interview questions are developed based on A/TAM to elicit information. An example of the potential 
survey and interview questions th e research team will use during the interview can be found in the 
appendices as Appendix 1 .  
Table 8. Patient A/TAM Structure  
 Positive 
Affect  Negative 
Affect  Perceived 
Usefulness  Perceived 
Ease of Use  Attitude 
Toward 
Using  Behavioral 
Intention to 
Use Actual 
System Use  
 
Wearable 
Device  Past positive 
experience 
with using 
wearable 
devices  Past negative 
experience 
with using 
wearable 
devices  
(Technology 
anxiety)  Perceived 
usefulness of 
the wearable 
technology 
improving 
life quality/ 
med 
adherence/ 
health  
management
/ health 
outcomes…  
 
Perceived 
benefits/barr
iers 
associated 
with 
wearable 
device  
 Perceived 
ubiquity of 
the wearable 
technology  
 
Easiness of 
wearing/cha
nging the 
patch  
 
Easiness of 
using the 
mobile 
phone  
 
Easiness of 
answering 
the survey 
via mobi le 
platform  
 Positive 
attitude 
towards 
using the 
wearable 
device/mobil
e 
phone/techn
ology  
 
Negative 
attitude 
towards 
using the 
wearable 
device/mobil
e 
phone/techn
ology  Compliant 
with device 
usage  
 
Non -
compliant 
with device 
usage  Readmission  
Telemonit
oring  Past positive 
experience 
with remote 
monitoring  Past negative 
experience 
with remote 
monitoring  Perceived 
usefulness of 
the 
telemonitori
ng process 
improving 
life quality/ 
med 
adherence/ 
health 
management
/ health 
outcomes..  
 Perceived 
easiness of 
communicati
ng with care 
team  
 
Perceived 
easiness of 
following 
care team 
instructions  
 
 Positive 
attitude 
towards 
telemonitori
ng 
 
Negative 
attitude 
towards 
telemonitori
ng Compliant 
with clinical 
instructions  
 
Non -
compliant 
with clinical 
instructions  Readmission  
19 
 Perceived 
benefits/barr
iers 
asso ciated 
with 
telemonitori
ng process  
 
 
 
Sociocultu
ral factors  Positive 
disease 
management 
experience  
 
Language 
(English)  
 
Social 
support 
(Family/frien
d/PCP)  
 
Marital 
status 
(Married, 
good support 
system)  
 
Non -smoker  
 
Good contro l 
over diet  
 
Income 
status 
(Stable)  
 
Traditional/R
eligion 
values  
 
Good mental 
health status  Negative 
disease 
management 
experience  
 
Language 
(Non -English)  
 
Social 
support 
(Family/frien
d/PCP)  
 
Marital 
status  
(Single, 
Widowed, no 
support)  
 
Smoking Hx  
 
Poor control 
over diet  
 
Income 
status 
(Unstable)  
 
Traditional/R
eligion 
values  
 
Depression   Perceived 
control over 
the external 
factors  Self-
motivation 
to tech usage 
adherence  Positive/Neg
ative attitude 
towards 
technology 
and device 
acceptance  Self-care  
 
Demographic Form  – Sociodemographic information will cover gender, ethnicity, race, household 
income, education level and marital status.  
20 
 The Self-Care  Self-Efficacy  Scale  – The Self-Care  Self-Efficacy  Scale  is authored  by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Barbara  Riegel . 
Confidence  is not part of self-care  per se, but a factor  that greatly  influences  self-care.  For this reason,  
[CONTACT_415787]  include  a confidence  (or self-efficacy)  scale  as part of the self-care  scales.  The Self-Care  
Confidence  scale  can be used  alone.  
 
Stom a Quality of Life Scale  – The QOL instrument is a 21 -item questionnaire that mesures work/social 
function, secuality/body image, and stoma function.  
Device User Experience  – These questions ask about patient’s experience on using the vital patch and 
physI Q platform.  
Telemonitoring Experience  – These questions ask about patient’s experience the telemonitoring process.  
3.3.2 Provider  
The survey and interview questions for the provider cohort are developed based on A/TAM to elicit 
information. An example of the pot ential survey and interview questions the research team will use 
during the interview can be found in the appendices as Appendix 2. 
Table 8. Provider A/TAM structure  
 Positive 
Affect  Negative 
Affect  Perceived 
Usefulness  Perceiv
ed Ease 
of Use  Attitude 
Toward 
Using  Behavioral 
Intention 
to Use  Actual 
System Use  
 
Wearable 
Device  Past 
positive 
experience 
with using 
wearable 
devices 
with 
patients  Past 
negative 
experience 
with using 
wearable 
devices  
(Technology 
anxiety)  Perceived 
usefulness 
of 
monitoring 
patient 
vitals  
 
 Easiness 
of using 
the 
physIQ 
portal 
to 
review 
vitals  
 
Easiness 
of using 
smart 
note 
templat
e in EPIC  
 
 Positive 
attitude 
towards 
promoting 
the device 
for patient 
usage  
 
Negative 
attitude 
towards 
promoting 
the device 
for patient 
usage  
 Intend to 
promote 
usage 
among 
patients  Engagement 
in device 
monitoring  
Telemonit
oring  Past 
positive 
experience 
with 
remote Past 
negative 
experience 
with remote Perceived 
usefulness 
of 
monitoring 
patient Easiness 
of 
commu
nication 
betweePositive 
attitude 
towards 
telemonitor
ing Intend to 
practice 
telemonito
ring as a 
method Engagement 
in patient 
remote 
monitoring 
process  
21 
 patient 
monitoring  patient 
monitoring  disease 
progress  n 
provider
s 
 
Easiness 
of 
commu
nication 
betwee
n 
patients  
 
Easiness 
of 
managi
ng 
patient 
medicat
ion 
 
Easiness 
of 
providin
g clinical 
instructi
ons 
  
Negative 
attitude 
towards 
telemonitor
ing for patient 
manageme
nt 
Sociocultu
ral factors  Individual’s 
tendency 
to innovate 
in daily life  
 
Individual’s 
level of 
technology 
usage in 
personal 
life 
 
Organizatio
nal level 
factors  Individual’s 
tendency to 
innovate in 
daily life  
 
Individual’s 
level of 
technology 
usage in 
personal life  
 
Organization
al level 
factors  Will the 
usage of 
technology 
enable 
providers  
to reduce 
effort /ena
ble 
patients to 
better 
disease 
manage  Organiz
ation 
support 
(educati
on on 
device/t
ech 
usage)  Positive/Ne
gative 
attitude 
towards 
participatin
g in the 
program  Intention 
to 
participate 
in the 
program  Activeness 
in the 
program  
 
Demographic Form – Demographic form will cover p osition title and the target patient population they 
are caring for.  
22 
 Device User Experience  – These questions ask about providers’ experience on using the physIQ platform. 
We developed this questionnaire based on the systematic usability scale (SUS).  
Telemonitoring User Experience – These questions ask about providers’ experience in the telemonitoring 
process.  
3.[ADDRESS_524066] matter, so that they may change and emphasize alternate points to those already 
brought up by [CONTACT_20679].  We will use probes and follow -up questions when indicated, and new 
constructs and ideas will be allowed to emerge.  The interviewer may  take notes during interviews, but 
de-identified transcriptions will be the primary source for analysis.  
3.5 Codebook Development  
The research team will develop study codebook based on the A/TAM theory:  
1. Codes will be generated from the A/TAM theory.  
2. Research ers will review and revise the code in context of the data.  
3. Researchers will determine the reliability of coders and the code  
3.6 Analyses  
We will complete a systematic analysis of interview transcripts to identify specific themes guided by [CONTACT_941] 
A/TAM to inform  future implementations of the wearable device and cascading alert system.  After the 
initial few interviews have been completed, two researchers, working independently, will use a 
codebook of constructs adapted from the A/TAM to identify significant phras es that exemplify each 
construct.  They will then independently review each other’s work and come together to discuss 
differences of opi[INVESTIGATOR_415728].  The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_415729], adding or consoli dating as warranted.  The researchers will then continue to perform 
interviews, adding codes to the codebook as needed, and meeting as a team periodically to review the 
codes and achieve consensus.  We will use Atlas TI qualitative data analysis software t o manage data 
and assist in analysis.  Finally, we will create an overview description of the important themes, and their 
relationship to A/TAM constructs.  
 
23 
 4 STUDY PROCEDURES  
4.1 Recruitment Procedure  
4.1.1 Patients  
The participants will be recruited from Northshore  University HealthSystem’s Evanston Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], 
Glenbrook and Highland Park hospi[INVESTIGATOR_415730]. The recruitment process will follow protocol 
standards to ensure consistency in the recruitment process. The participants will be informed that their 
participation is completely voluntary and that they can drop out at any time. The participants will also 
be required to sign consent forms to participate.  
4.1.2 Providers  
Clinical team staff will be asked to participate in surveys and semi -structured interviews.  
4.2 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
4.2.1 Patients  
Ileostomy Cohort  
Inclusion Criteria:   
• Patient underwent a new ileostomy formation at index hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]  
• Patient is an inpatient a t Evanston, Glenbrook, Highland Park hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600]  
• Patient of Drs. Joe Muldoon, Monika  Krezalek and James Spi[INVESTIGATOR_7316]  
• At least 18 years of age  
• Fluent in English  
• Patient is discharging with home health services  
• Patient a grees to protocol -required procedures  
Exclusion Criteria:  
• Patient has cognitive or physical limitations that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], limit the 
patient’s ability to maintain patch/wrist device, phone  
• Patient has allergy to hydrocolloid adhesives  
• Patient has present skin damage preventing them from wearing a study device  
•  Patient discharges to a skilled nursing fac ility, or other subacute facilities  
• Pregnancy  
 
[ADDRESS_524067] a thorough review of the consent details, including study procedure, 
risks, confidentiality, etc. with the potential participants. Participants will be given adequate time to 
think about their decision t o participate without under coercion on the part of the researchers. Whether 
a patient wishes or not, to be enrolled, that patient’s medical care will not be affected. No consent will 
be completed if the participants have unanswered questions, and potentia l participants may talk over 
the details with the consent with whomever they wish, prior to giving consent.  
Participants will need to be consented in a face -to-face meeting with the research coordinator and if 
they wish to obtain a copy of the consent, th ey are free to do so. If there is a change in the consent 
during ongoing study activities, the participant may be asked to re -consent, if changes will have a direct 
effect on the participant.  
The research coordinator is responsible for explaining the stud y to potential and willing participants or 
to their Legally Authorized Representative (LAR). The consent process begins once the participant is 
interested in being enrolled in the study. At this time, the research coordinator will conduct a thorough 
review  of the consent details, including study procedure, risks, confidentiality, etc. with the potential 
participants or if applicable, with their LAR. Participants will be given adequate time to think about their 
decision to participate without coercion on the  part of the researchers. Whether a patient wish to be 
enrolled, that patient's medical care will not be affected. No consent will be completed if the 
participants have unanswered questions, and potential participants may talk over the details with the 
consent with whomever they wish prior to giving consent.   
Participants or when applicable, their LAR will need to consent in a face -to-face meeting with the 
research coordinator. If there is a change in the consent during ongoing study activities, the participant 
may be asked to re -consent if changes will directly affect the participant.   
 
If the participant cannot provide informed consent but are interested in the study, their LAR can sign the 
form on their behalf. The research coordinator will answer all study -related questions and communicate 
all study details before signing the consent form. In addition, the research coordinator will file all legal 
documents confirming LAR’s relation to the participant in the study binder.   
[ADDRESS_524068] in the study but 
is unwilling to participate in interviews, the research coordinator will present the no -inter view consent 
form to patients  as an alternative option . Once the no -interview gro up is full, patients will only be 
presented the consent form with interviews.  
 
As part of the informed consent process:  
1. The participant agrees to wear a total of [ADDRESS_524069] the VitalPatch every 7 days and to answer survey 
questions either daily (in the morning) or twice a day for the duration of the study  in a 
timely fashion  
3. The participant agrees to follow directions on the pi[INVESTIGATOR_415719]  
4. The participant agrees to allow access to basic demographics, medical conditions, wearable 
and pi[INVESTIGATOR_415731], other vital signs, medical care received during the 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_415732] [ADDRESS_524070] 24 hours to decide whether or not they are willing to participate in the study. The 
26 
 research coordinator will follow up with potential participants after 24 hours. We will scan the signed 
consent form into EPIC and link the patient’s chart to the study.  
 
However, starting on 4/19/2021, the research team noticed that someileostomy patients were admitted 
over the weekend but discharged the following Monday . For sampling purposes, we will include these 
patients in the study.  For patients who require a phone consent, research coordinators will follow the 
below process : 
1. Research coordinators will approach the eligible patients the day of discharge, introduce 
the study, and go over the consent form with patients  
2. Research coordinators will provide the patient  with two copi[INVESTIGATOR_415733] 
a pre -paid mailing envelope  
3. Research coordinators will  schedule a follow -up phone call with the patient for the next 
day 
4. Research coordinators will call patients the ne xt day  and answer any remaining 
questions the patients and caregivers might have about the study  
Suppose the patient is agreeable to participate in the study. In that case, the research 
coordinator will either (a) ask the patient for their email address an d send a copy of the 
consent form  to the patient’s email address via part [ADDRESS_524071] the 
patient sign via DocuSign. Research coordinators and the pat ient will both receive a signed 
copy of the consent form. Research  coordinators will schedule to overnight the study kit to 
the patient. (b) If the patient does not have an email address, the research coordinators will 
ask the patient to sign the consent f orm they received at discharge, and mail back the 
consent form using the prepaid mailing envelope provided by [CONTACT_5051] . Upon 
receiving the signed consent form, coordinators will overnight the study kit to the patient.  
5. Once the patient receives the  study kit, the coordinators will call the patient to guide 
them to put on the patches and pair the phone.  
6. Coordinators will also complete required questionnaires and interviews over the phone 
with the patient  
 
 
4.3.1 Providers  
The research coordinator will be responsible for the consent of the clinical team staff for enrollment in 
this study. The consent process begins once the participant is interested in being interviewed for the 
study . At this time, the researcher will conduc t a thorough review of the consent details, including study 
procedure, risks, confidentiality, etc. , with the potential participant. It is assumed that working providers  
in the field will be mentally capable of participating  in the study ; therefore, no scr eening measures will 
be undergone to obtain eligibility. Researchers and investigators will be available to answer any 
questions the professionals have prior to consenting. The consent must be done in a face to face 
meeting or via video conferencing by [CONTACT_415769]. If consent is done through video 
conference, a signed consent form will still be collected by [CONTACT_23164].  
[ADDRESS_524072] a secure server for uploads of 
recordings and delete them after transcription is complete. If any patient’s name [CONTACT_415785], we will have the transcription service replace the name [CONTACT_415786]. 
Transcripts will be scrubbed of PHI during transcription and will be given a study ID number.  Quality 
control to make sure all PHI has been removed from each transcript will be conducted by [CONTACT_415770].  The final transcripts will be analyzed b y the study team. The list that links 
the transcripts to the research participants will also be stored on the secure collaboration portal. The 
recordings will be deleted once they have been transcribed and analyzed. The key for the study ID 
numbers will be  destroyed once the analysis is complete .  
[ADDRESS_524073] number to the patient MRN 
will only be kept by [CONTACT_415771] (CAPE 
navigators, monitoring nurse  and the clinical care team).  
 
In order to protect participant privacy, the research coordinator’s phone number and office address will 
be registered on the physIQ pi[INVESTIGATOR_415734]. PhysIQ’s tec hnical support team will 
contact [CONTACT_415772]. The research coordinator will call participant to review device usage instruction and provide 
technical assistance as needed.  
 
No PHI will be provided to physIQ and other study team members outside of NorthShore. The study 
team will collect patient name, MRN, date of birth, phone number for the purpose of conducting the 
study. All patient information will be aggregated du ring study analysis and no identifiers will be provided 
in the analysis.  
 
Upon study completion all study data will be destroyed,  and verification will be provided to data 
governance.  
 
During informed consent and enrollment, the study coordinator will ma ke sure that patients are alone 
or in a room with family members that the patient agrees to participate in decision making around the 
study. The door will be closed,  and any study -related information will be paused when other staff or 
visitors enter the ro om. We will allocate [ADDRESS_524074] protected and stored on Northshore 
University HealthSystem’s secure internal server.  During the study period , the operational team will also 
receive access to the linking information  to identify which patients a re in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_415735]. Other 
study team members will not have access to the key.  
PhysIQ’s solution , including wearable devices, mobile device and cloud platform  on Microsoft Azure  was 
evaluated and approved  by [CONTACT_415773] (HIT) as part of a prioritized active project.  No PHI will be 
uploaded to the physIQ platform.  The vital and alert data will be transferred back to NorthShore for 
storage using a n sFTP . PhysIQ’s telemonitoring platform will be used for the study procedure. PhysIQ 
will not receive any protected health information.  
PhysIQ operates in line with both HIPAA and GDPR. Neither HIPAA nor GDPR support an external authority 
that can formally attest to compliance, but physIQ  does operate and measure its internal security and 
privacy program against  both frameworks and is operating in line with each.  
There are three (3) core components of the physIQ product; 1) a 3rd party disposable patch worn by [CONTACT_4677], 2) a physIQ supp lied mobile phone running as a data hub, and 3) a web browser -based clinical 
portal for viewing analytics and raw data. The data flow within these basic components is secure at all 
time. No sensitive and/or protected data resides in the physIQ offices nor on the corporate network.  
The sensor patch collects physiological data (not considered PHI) and through a 128 -bit encrypted 
Bluetooth offload, transmits that data to an Android -based, dedicated lockdown (kiosk) mobile phone, 
which is validated and approved  to interface and collect patient data. The device is provided by [CONTACT_415761]; 
this is not a bring -your -own -device (BY[CONTACT_349802]) system. In kiosk mode this device runs only the physIQ mobile 
application with no ability to make calls, SMS text, nor internet browsing. A ll Bluetooth offloaded 
physiological data is stored in Android’s encrypted memory. Furthermore, all data is deidentified; there is 
no PHI on the mobile device. The phone is assigned a “node ID” in the cloud platform which functions as 
the alias and link to  the specific phone. Uploads are made to the cloud with the node ID credentials. The 
mobile phone then uploads the data through cellular connection to physIQ’s Google Cloud Services (GCS) 
cloud platform.  
The physIQ cloud architecture includes service relat ionships with certified partners. The production (VPC) 
stack is in GCS, with the back -up snapshot in Amazon Web Services (AWS). The physIQ platform is an 
isolated GCS network inside which servers communicate with limited pi[INVESTIGATOR_415736]. Port  
443 is the “front door” and uses TLS encryption for all traffic. All data exchange is sanctioned and handled 
by [CONTACT_185352]. physIQ’s product is entirely API -enabled. Mobile phone (node) uploads of data and Clinical 
Portal browser sessions are both API [INVESTIGATOR_6045].  There are also two (2) VPN “back doors” for occasional 
maintenance of the VPC and for the read -only requests from AWS for back -ups.  
Other cloud security measures include; role -based -access -controls (RBAC) for all URL routes in the API [INVESTIGATOR_415737], all data -at-rest in GCS and AWS is encrypted by [CONTACT_415774], all patients in the 
31 
 system are known by [CONTACT_415775] i s stored separately from medical data, and all servers (VMs) 
are instances of a security -hardened image  
Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) is a collaborating site and will have access to de -identified and date 
shifted patient and healthcare provider informa tion. No HIPAA identifiers will be included in the data 
shared with CMU. Collaborators at CMU will be involved in developi[INVESTIGATOR_415738] 30 -day 
readmission prediction model. Deidentified and date shifted data will be transferred to CMU over a 
Secure  Sockets Layer (SSL) using a HIPAA compliant File Transfer Protocol (FTP). Data will be stored at 
NorthShore and at CMU on password -protected, encrypted computers. All research team members and 
graduate and doctoral students working with the data will comp lete Human Subjects Research 
certification. After completion of this project, all data at both NorthShore and CMU will be destroyed.  
5.2 Protection of Participant Privacy  
Patient Privacy – During this study, non -invasive wearable devices will be provided to p atients to collect 
continuous physiologic data. PhysIQ’s solution, including wearable patches, mobile device and Microsoft 
Azure cloud platform comply with the administrative safeguards and implementation specifications 
described in 45CFR§164.308, with res pect to HIPAA. No PHI will be uploaded to the physIQ platform.  
The physiological data upload via digital cellular network is secured with TLS cryptographic protocol 
between the mobile phones and the server.  The physIQ platform is securely hosted in the G oogle cloud.  
The physIQ cloud stores the raw physiological telemetry data captured by [CONTACT_19911], and also 
stores analytical results generated by [CONTACT_415776]. All 
the telemetry and analytical results ar e stored separately from any personally identifiable information 
(PII) that an institution might choose to enter in the system.  There is no requirement to enter PII to use 
the platform, as all data can be tracked solely by [CONTACT_415777]. PHI will not be transmitted to 
physIQ for this process and the only data that will be transmitted is a random study ID generated at 
NorthShore. NorthShore will maintain the key to the identifier. The data can only be obtained or viewed 
via secure authenticated login.  
The physiologic, alert, and patient reported status data will be transferred back to NorthShore for storage 
using a sFTP. Data from wearable devices and physIQ platfrom and EHR data from NorthShore will be 
linked, deidentified using standard NorthShore prot ocol prior to transfer to CMU via secure FTP. There is 
an existing Data Use Agreement in place between NorthShore and Carnegie Mellon University (CMU)  
which will be renewed for this project . Only the PI [INVESTIGATOR_415739] -PI [INVESTIGATOR_415740] e 
sFTP site. Only named study personnel will have access to data. PhysIQ will not have access to any PHI. 
Northshore and CMU will delete all data after study termination.  
 
 
32 
 6 DEVICE  INFORMATION  
 
COMPANY ADDRESS :   physIQ, Inc.  
[ADDRESS_524075]., Suite 550 
Chicago, IL [ZIP_CODE]  
6.1 DEVICE DESCRIPTION:  
The pi[INVESTIGATOR_415741] a wireless remote patient monitoring system intended for use by [CONTACT_415778].   The 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_415742] -grade  wearable sensors such as the VitalPatchTM Sensor (a 510k -
cleared disposable patch with integrated biosensors and a wireless transceiver) and the physIQ  Platform 
(a mobile application for secure data transmission, cloud -based information -technology [IT] 
infrastructure, physiology analytics modules, and clinician user interface).  The patch is worn on the 
torso for up to 5 days and measures and records phy siological variables that can include, but are not 
limited to, electrocardiography (ECG), vital signs and activity.   Data are transmitted wirelessly from the 
VitalPatchTM Sensor to the physIQ cloud for storage and analysis and presentation within the clini cian 
user interface.   
 
INVESTIGATIONAL DEVICE:  
Device Description  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_415743] a wireless remote monitoring system intended for use by [CONTACT_415779].   Pi[INVESTIGATOR_415744]:  
 VitalPatchTM Sensor (chest -worn disposable biosensor patch)  
 Mobile application (“app”) for secure data transmission  
 Cloud -based IT infrastructure  
 Physiology Analytics modules, comprising:  
o Personalized Physiology Analytics  
o Vital Sign Feature Anal ytics  
o Heart rhythm analytics  
o Actigraphy analytics  
o Clinician -defined rules  
 Browser -based clinician user interface  
 
Biosensors  
Vital Connect VitalPatch  
VitalPatchTM (Vital Connect Inc) is an FDA 510(k) -cleared, wearable adhesive Band -Aid-like multi -sensor 
device which will be used to stream and collect continuous vital sign data from patients. The device is a 
disposable adhesive patch with an integral one -time -use battery and integrated electronics. The battery 
life of each disposable adhesive patch lasts a bout 7 days.   
The VitalPatchTM is generally applied to the skin of the patient’s left upper chest (worn diagonally on the 
chest above the heart or laterally on the rib cage just below the heart). Further VitalPatchTM description 
[ADDRESS_524076] in the removal 
of the VitalPatchTM.  
6.2 Data Transport via physIQ Android Mobile App and physIQ Platform  
The physIQ Android mobile app is loaded onto an Android -based phone or tablet mobile device.  The 
mobile device offloads vital sign data from th e VitalPatchTM (via low energy Bluetooth) and uploads it 
using digital cellular or WiFi network to the cloud -based server. In addition to transmitting physiological 
data, the app also may present questionnaires to the patient  that are ans wered directly within the app.  
Upload via digital cellular network is secured with TLS cryptographic protocol between the mobile 
phones and the server.  The physIQ platform is securely hosted in the Google cloud.  The physIQ cloud 
stores the raw physiolog ical telemetry data captured by [CONTACT_19911], and also stores analytical 
results generated by [CONTACT_415776]. All the telemetry and 
analytical results are stored separately from any personally identifiable in formation (PII) that an 
institution might choose to enter in the system.  There is no requirement to enter PII in order to use the 
platform, as all data can be trac ked solely by [CONTACT_415777] . PHI will not be transmitted to physIQ for 
this process and the only data that will be transmitted is a random ID  generated at NorthShore . 
NorthShore will maintain the key to the identifier.  The data can only be obtained or viewed via secure 
authenticated login.  
6.3 Analytics  
The study will utilize physIQ’s multivariat e analytical methods that learn the behavior of an individual 
patient’s vital signs at a baseline, and then detect changes in the behavior of the vital signs compared to 
the baseline.  Changes in vital signs relationships may be indicative of current or fu ture important 
clinical events.   These changes are indicated through the Multivariate Change Index (“MCI”), which is a 
scalar index between 0 and 1, where values close to 0 indicate no significant change from baseline and 
values close to 1 indicated great er changes from baseline.   
Additional “feature” analytics include atrial fibrillation detection, arrhythmia (ectopic beat) burden, 
Cheyne -Stokes respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516], sleep quantification, and walking detection.   Clinician -defined rules include 
applying threshold s to time series vital signs, sleep fragmentation, tachycardia, bradycardia, A -Fib with 
RVR, elevated respi[INVESTIGATOR_1487], and long -duration horizontal posture.  
6.4 Regulatory Status    
This study is considered a non -significant risk (NSR) Investigational Device  Exemption (IDE) study 
according to 21 CFR §812.2(b) to evaluate the clinical utility of PhysIQ vital patch solution. All FDA -
cleared devices in pi[INVESTIGATOR_415745].  The components of this 
system and clearance status ar e described below:   
1. VitalPatch wearable biosensor:  FDA 510k -cleared Class II -regulated medical device – 
Vital Signs Biosensor ( K190916 ) 
2. PhysIQ Cloud -based IT platform (physIQ mobile app, IT platform, Clinician User Interface): 
FDA Class I -regulated medica l device – Medical device data system  
34 
 3. PhysIQ Personalized Physiology Analytics: FDA 510k -cleared Class II -regulated medical 
device – Multivariate Change Index ( K142 512) 
4. PhysIQ feature analytics:  FDA 510K cleared Class II -regulated medical device – heart 
rate, heart rate variability, respi[INVESTIGATOR_415746] ( K183322 ) 
5. PhysIQ actigraphy analytics: FDA Class -I-regulated medical device – walking, steps, 
posture, sleep, body tilt, gross activity, activity stratification.  
 Potential Risks and Benefits  
When used in accordance with the clinical protocol, risks associated with pi[INVESTIGATOR_415747]. To ensure proper use of the solution, subjects, patients and providers  will be 
trained in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions for use. In addition, clearly defined 
study eligibility criteria have been established to ensure that only appropriate patients are 
enrolled in the study.  
The potential risks of VitalPatch  may include the following: adverse skin reactions, skin 
irritations, mild soreness, redness (see attached IFU).  
 Device Packaging, Labeling and Use  
The VitalPatchTM and mobile phone will be shipped as a kit to NorthShore in the care of the 
PI/research coor dinator. Device components will be labeled “For Prescribed Use in a Clinical 
Trial” and packaged by [CONTACT_415780]. Upon completion of data 
collection, the subject will mail back all study equipment in a pre -paid mailer that was  provided 
in the kit. PhysIQ and NorthShore research team will maintain device accountability records for 
each study site and for each subject enrolled, pursuant to 21 CFR§812.110 and Good Clinical 
Practices (GCP).  
 
[ADDRESS_524077],  Vol 
[S][ADDRESS_524078] of home -based 
telemonitoring using mobile phone technology on the outcome of heart failure patients aft er an 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_154758]: randomized controlled trial. J Med Internet Res. 2009 Aug 
17;11(3):e34.  
3. Kitsiou S, Paré G, Jaana M. Effects of home telemonitoring interventions on patients with 
chronic heart failure: an overview of systematic review s. J Med Internet Res. 2015 Mar 
12;17(3):e63.  
4. Palmieri V, Pezzullo S, Lubrano V, Bettella S, Olandese M, Sorrentino C, et al. [Home -based 
telemonitoring of simple vital signs to reduce hospi[INVESTIGATOR_109877]: real -world 
data from a commu nity-based hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]]. G Ital Cardiol (Rome). 2011 Dec;12(12):829 –36. 
5. Selvaraj N, Nallathambi G, Moghadam R, Aga A. Fully Disposable Wireless Patch Sensor for 
Continuous Remote Patient Monitoring. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2018 Jul;2018:1632 –5. 
6. Herna ndez -Silveira M, Ahmed K, Ang S -S, Zandari F, Mehta T, Weir R, et al. Assessment of the 
feasibility of an ultra -low power, wireless digital patch for the continuous ambulatory 
monitoring of vital signs. BMJ Open. 2015 May 19;5(5):e006606.  
7. Preejith SP, Dhin esh R, Joseph J, Sivaprakasam M. Wearable ECG platform for continuous cardiac 
monitoring. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2016;2016:623 –6. 
8. Guk K, Han G, Lim J, Jeong K, Kang T, Lim E -K, et al. Evolution of Wearable Devices with Real -
Time Disease Monitorin g for Personalized Healthcare. Nanomaterials (Basel). 2019 May 29;9(6).  
9. Khan S, Ali S, Bermak A. Recent Developments in Printing Flexible and Wearable Sensing 
Electronics for Healthcare Applications. Sensors (Basel). 2019 Mar 11;19(5).  
10. Khan Y, Ostfeld AE, Lochner CM, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_11958] A, Arias AC. Monitoring of Vital Signs with Flexible and 
Wearable Medical Devices. Adv Mater Weinheim. 2016 Jun;28(22):4373 –95. 
11. Ajami S, Teimouri F. Features and application of wearable biosensors in medical care. J Res Med 
Sci. 2015 Dec ;20(12):1208 –15. 
12. Balsam P, Lodziński P, Tymińska A, Ozierański K, Januszkiewicz Ł, Główczyńska R, et al. Study 
design and rationale for biomedical shirt -based electrocardiography monitoring in relevant 
clinical situations: ECG -shirt study. Cardiol J. 2018; 25(1):52 –9. 
13. Chan AM, Selvaraj N, Ferdosi N, Narasimhan R. Wireless patch sensor for remote monitoring of 
heart rate, respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516], activity, and falls. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2013;2013:6115 –8. 
14. Burnham JP, Lu C, Yaeger LH, Bailey TC, Kollef  MH. Using wearable technology to predict health 
outcomes: a literature review. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2018 Sep 1;25(9):1221 –7. 
15. Tan MKH, Wong JKL, Bakrania K, Abdullahi Y, Harling L, Casula R, et al. Can activity monitors 
predict outcomes in patients with heart failure? A systematic review. Eur Heart J Qual Care Clin 
Outcomes. 2019 01;5(1):11 –21. 
16. Lieback A, Proff J, Wessel K, Fleck E, Götze S. Remote monitoring of heart failure patients using 
implantable cardiac pacing devices and external sensors: results of the Insight -HF study. Clin Res 
Cardiol. 2012 Feb;101(2):101 –7. 
17. Inan OT, Baran Pouyan M, Javaid AQ, Dowling S, Etemadi M, Dorier A, et al. Novel Wearable 
Seismocardiography and Machine Learning Algorithms Can Assess Clinical Status of Heart Failure 
Patie nts. Circ Heart Fail. 2018;11(1):e004313.  
[ADDRESS_524079]. Resuscitation. 2019 
Mar;136:47 –53.  
19. Khanna AK, Hoppe P,  Saugel B. Automated continuous noninvasive ward monitoring: future 
directions and challenges. Crit Care. 2019 May 30;23(1):194.  
20. Weenk M, van Goor H, Frietman B, Engelen LJ, van Laarhoven CJ, Smit J, et al. Continuous 
Monitoring of Vital Signs Using Wearab le Devices on the General Ward: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]. JMIR 
Mhealth Uhealth. 2017 Jul 5;5(7):e91.  
21. McGillion MH, Duceppe E, Allan K, Marcucci M, Yang S, Johnson AP, et al. Postoperative Remote 
Automated Monitoring: Need for and State of the Science. Can J Cardiol. 20 18;34(7):850 –62. 
22. Downey CL, Croft J, Buckley H, Randell R, Brown JM, Jayne DG. Trial of Remote Continuous 
versus Intermittent NEWS monitoring after major surgery (TRaCINg): protocol for a feasibility 
randomised controlled  trial. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_182240]. 2018;4:112.  
23. Downey CL, Chapman S, Randell R, Brown JM, Jayne DG. The impact of continuous versus 
intermittent vital signs monitoring in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600]: A systematic review and narrative synthesis. Int J 
Nurs Stud. 2018 Aug;84:19 –27. 
24. Donnelly N, Hunniford T, Harper  R, Flynn A, Kennedy A, Branagh D, et al. Demonstrating the 
accuracy of an in -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_415748]. 
Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2013;2013:6711 –5. 
25. Downey C, Randell R, Brown J, Jayne DG. Continuo us Versus Intermittent Vital Signs Monitoring 
Using a Wearable, Wireless Patch in Patients Admitted to Surgical Wards: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_415749]. J Med Internet Res. 2018 Dec 11;20(12):e10802.  
26. Boer C, Touw HR, Loer SA. Postanesthesia care b y remote monitoring of vital signs in surgical 
wards. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2018 Dec;31(6):716 –22. 
27. Breteler MJM, Huizinga E, van Loon K, Leenen LPH, Dohmen DAJ, Kalkman CJ, et al. Reliability of 
wireless monitoring using a wearable patch sensor in high -risk surgical patients at a step -down 
unit in the Netherlands: a clinical validation study. BMJ Open. 2018 27;8(2):e020162.  
28. Cardona -Morrell M, Prgomet M, Turner RM, Nicholson M, Hillman K. Effectiveness of 
continuous or intermittent vital signs monitoring i n preventing adverse events on general wards: 
a systematic review and meta -analysis. Int J Clin Pract. [ADDRESS_524080];70(10):806 –24. 
29. Prgomet M, Cardona -Morrell M, Nicholson M, Lake R, Long J, Westbrook J, et al. Vital signs 
monitoring on general wards: clinical staff perceptions of current practices and the planned 
introduction of continuous monitoring technology. Int J Qual Health Care. 2016 Sep;28(4):515 –
21. 
30. Downey CL, Brown JM, Jayne DG, Randell  R. Patient attitudes towards remote continuous vital 
signs monitoring on general surgery wards: An interview study. Int J Med Inform. 2018;114:52 –
6. 
31. Chin MH, Goldman L. Correlates of Early Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_415750] P atients w ith 
Congestive Heart Fa ilure. The American Journal of Cardiology. 1997 Jun 15;79(12):1640 –4. 
32. Krumholz HM, Parent EM, Tu N, Vaccarino V, Wang Y, Radford MJ, et al. Readmission after 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_415751]. Arch Intern Med. 
1997 J an 13;157(1):99 –104.  
33. Justiniano CF, Temple LK, Swanger AA, Xu Z, Speranza JR, Cellini C, et al. Readmissions w ith 
Dehydration After Ileostomy Creation: Rethinking Risk Factors. Dis Colon Rectum. 
2018;61(11):1297 –305.  
34. Fish DR, Mancuso CA, Garcia -Aguilar JE, Lee SW, Nash GM, Sonoda T, et al. Readmission After 
Ileostomy Creation: Retrospective Review of a Common and Significant Event. Ann Surg. 
2017;265(2):379 –87. 
37 
 35. Chen SY, Stem M, Cerullo M, Canner JK, Gearhart SL, Safar B, et al. Predicting the Risk of 
Readmission f rom Dehydration After Ileostomy Formation: The Dehydration Readmission After 
Ileostomy Prediction Score. Dis Colon Rectum. 2018;61(12):1410 –7. 
36. VitalConnect [Internet]. [cited 2019 Jun 26]. Available from: https://vitalconnect.com/  
37. Personalized Physiology Analytics for Continuous Insight [Internet]. PhysIQ. [cited 2019 Jun 26]. 
Available from: https://www.physiq.com/  
38. Whitehead AL, J ulious SA, Cooper CL, Campbell MJ. Estimating the sample size for a pi[INVESTIGATOR_415752] 
a continuous outcome variable. Stat Methods Med Res. 2016 Jun;25(3):1057 –73. 
39. Steh li, J, Schamalfuss C, Bozkurt B, Nativi -Nivolau J, Wohlfahrt P, Wegerich S, et al. Continuous 
Wearable Monitoring Analytics Predict Heart Failure Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. CIRC Heart Failure. 
2020 ;13:e006513  
40. IB. Diwakar, A. Chouldechova, MA. Clements, R. Padman (20 16). On Extracting Features from 
Asynchronous Multivariate Data Streams.  Fourth International Conference on Business Analytics 
and Intelligence (ICBAI) , Bangalore, India  
41. W. Wang, H. Zhao, H. Zuang, N. Shah, R. Padman. DyCRS: Dynamic Interpretable Postopera tive 
Complication Risk Scoring. WWW’20: Proceedings of the Web Conference 2020 , Taipei, Taiwan, 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3366423.3380253 . 
42. Y. Zhang, R. Padman (2015). Innovations in Chronic Care Delivery Using Data -Driven Clinical 
Pathways. American Journal of Managed Care , special issue on Health Information Technology, 
2015; 21(12): e661 -e668.  
43. Perotte A, Ranganath R, Hirsch JS, Blei D, Elhadad N. Risk prediction for c hronic kidney disease 
progression using heterogeneous electronic health record data and time series analysis. J Am 
Med Informatics Assoc. 2015;22(4):872 –880.  
44. Nagin DS. Group -Based Modeling of Development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; 
2005.  
45. Nagin DS, Jones BL, Lima Passos V, Tremblay RE. Group -Based Multi -Trajectory Modeling. 
Statistical Methods in Medical Research · October 2016. DOI: 10.1177/0962280216673085.  
46. P. Burckhardt, D. Nagin, V. P. R. Vijayasarathy, R. Padman. Multi -Trajectory Modelin g to Predict 
Acute Kidney Injury in Chronic Kidney Disease Patients. AMIA Annu Symp proceedings.  2018 .  
47. Burckhardt P, Nagin DS, Padman R. Multi -Trajectory Models of Chronic Kidney Disease 
Progression. AMIA Annu Symp proceedings. 2016:1737 –46.  
48. Hastie T, Ti bshirani R, Friedman J. The elements of statistical learning, second edition: data 
mining, inference, and prediction. [LOCATION_001]: Springer; 2009.  
49. M. Ganßauge, R. Padman, A. Karambelkar, P. Teredesai (2016), “Exploring dynamic risk 
prediction for dialysis pat ients”, AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2017 Feb 10;2016:1784 -1793. 
eCollection 2016. PubMed PMID: 28269937; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5333314 . 
50. van Houwelingen HC. Dynamic Prediction by [CONTACT_415781]. Scand J Stat 
2007; 34(1):70 –85. 
51. P. Burckhar dt, D. Nagin, V. P. R. Vijayasarathy, R. Padman. Multi -Trajectory Modeling to Predict 
Acute Kidney Injury in Chronic Kidney Disease Patients. AMIA Annu Symp proceedings. 2018.  
52. Angela Lee Siew Hoong, Lip Sam Thi and Mei -Hua Lin (November 21st 2017). Affect ive 
Technology Acceptance Model: Extending Technology Acceptance Model with Positive and 
Negative Affect. Chapter 8 of Knowledge Management Strategies and Applications , Muhammad 
Mohiuddin, Norrin Halilem, SM Ahasanul Kobir and Cao Yuliang (eds), IntechOpen , DOI: 
10.5772/intechopen.[ZIP_CODE]. (https://www.intechopen.com/books/knowledge -management -
38 
 strategies -and-applications/affective -technology -acceptance -model -extending -technology -
acceptance -model -with -positive -and-negati. Accessed June 5, 2020.)  
53. Wengraf T. Qualitative Research Interviewing: Biographic Narrative and Semi -Structured 
Methods . Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications Inc; 2001  
39 
 8 APPENDIX 1 – PATIENT QUESTIONNAIR E & INTERVIEW  
 
8.1 Demographic Survey ( Ileostomy Cohort – Pre) 
 What is your gender?  
1. Female  
2. Male  
3. Other (specify) :_______  
 Do you consider yourself to be of Hispanic, Latino/a, or Spanish origin?  
1. Yes 
2. No 
 Which racial group or groups do you consider yourself to be in?  
1. American Indian or Alaska Native  
2. Asian  
3. Black or African American  
4. Native Hawaiian or  Other Pacific Islander  
5. White  
6. Other  
 What is the highest degree or education level you have completed?  
1. Some high school  
2. High School  
3. Some college/Associate’s degree  
4. Bachelor’s degree  
5. Master’s degree or higher  
6. Prefer not to say  
 What is your marital status?  
1. Single  
2. Married  
3. Separated  
4. Divorced  
5. Widowed  
 How many people live in your household with you?  
 What was your total household  income  before taxes during the past 12 months?  
1. Less than $25,000.  
2. $25,000 to $34,999.  
3. $35,000 to $49,999.  
4. $50,000 to $74,999.  
5. $75,000 to $99,999.  
6. $100,000 to $149,999.  
7. $150,000 or more  
  
40 
 8.2 Self-Care Self -Efficacy Scale ( Ileostomy Cohort – Post only ) 
 
In general, how confident are you that you can:  
(Circle one number for each 
statement)  
1. Keep yourself stable and free of symptoms?  [ADDRESS_524081] been 
given?  [ADDRESS_524082]  in following the treatment plan   
even when difficult?  1 2 3 4 5 
4. Monitor your condition  routinely?  [ADDRESS_524083]  in routinely monitoring your 
condition even when difficult?  1 2 3 4 5 
6. Recognize changes  in your health if they 
occur?  1 2 3 4 5 
7. Evaluate the importance  of your symptoms?  1 2 3 4 5 
8. Do something  to relieve your symptoms?  [ADDRESS_524084]  in finding a remedy for your 
symptoms even when difficult?  1 2 3 4 5 
10. Evaluate  how well a remedy works?  1 2 3 4 5 
[IP_ADDRESS].1.   
 
© [CONTACT_415788] related questions:  
In general, how confident are you that you can:  
1. Continuously wear the device for 30 days?  
2. Follow the research study protocol for 30 days?   
41 
   
42 
 Enrichd  Social Support Instrument (Ileostomy cohort – Pre) 
  

43 
 8.3 Monitoring Process Random Question Bank  
 
Week 1  
 
I had difficulty learning to use the devices.  
o Not at all  
o A little bit  
o Somewhat  
o Quite a bit  
o Very much  
 
I felt safe being monitored through the system.  
o Not at all  
o A little bit  
o Somewhat  
o Quite a bit  
o Very much  
 
Week 2  
 
I experienced problems with the patch.  
o Not at all  
o A little bit  
o Somewhat  
o Quite a bit  
o Very much  
 
I felt reassured seeing my data on the phone.  
o Not at all  
o A little bit  
o Somewhat  
o Quite a bit  
o Very much  
 
Week 3  
 
I experienced problems with the phone application.  
 
o Not at all  
o A little bit  
o Somewhat  
o Quite a bit  
o Very much  
 
I felt more self -conscious of my symptoms as a result of the monitoring.  
 
o Not at all  
o A little bit  
o Somewhat  
44 
 o Quite a bit  
o Very much  
 
Week  4 
 
Using the system requires a lot of technical support.  
 
o Not at all  
o A little bit  
o Somewhat  
o Quite a bit  
o Very much  
 
Using the devices helped me overall.  
 
o Not at all  
o A little bit  
o Somewhat  
o Quite a bit  
o Very much  
 
Week 5  
 
I am excited to be using a device to monitor my health.  
o Not at all  
o A little bit  
o Somewhat  
o Quite a bit  
o Very much  
 
I think using devices to monitor my health is an advance in modern medicine.  
 
o Not at all  
o A little bit  
o Somewhat  
o Quite a bit  
o Very much  
8.4 User Experience Survey ( Ileostomy Cohort – Post ) 
(5 point likert scale, 1=strongly disagree, 3=neither disagree/agree and 5=strongly agree)  
Definition of application: The mobile phone application downloaded on the smart phone. It is used by 
[CONTACT_3445]’s to res pond to survey questions.  
Device  
1. I could use the patch anytime and anywhere throughout my daily life.  
2. The patch is easy to replace.  
3. The application is easy to use.  
[ADDRESS_524085] doubts using this application in the future.  
Home Health  
8. The home health nurses are responsive to my questions and concerns.  
9. My home health nurses are interested in my health.  
10. The instructions given by [CONTACT_415782].  
11. I am satisfied with the amount of communication I receive from the home health nurses.  
12. I am satisfied with the quality of my interactions with my home health nurses.  
Clinical Care Team  
13. The care team is responsive to m y questions and concerns.  
14. My care team is interested in my health.  
15. The instructions given by [CONTACT_415783].  
16. I am satisfied with the amount of communication I receive from the care team.  
17. I am satisfied with the quality of my interactions with my care team.  
Program  
18. I am satisfied with the remote monitoring program.  
19. The remote monitoring program allows me to stay better connected to my care team.  
20. The remote monitoring program helped me eat healthier.  
21. The remote monitoring program helped me t ake my medications on time.  
22. Participating in this program makes me feel more secure in detecting problems with my health 
in general.  
23. Participating in this program helped me stay out of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  
24. I would recommend this program to other patients.  
 
8.5 Stoma Qua lity of Life  (Ileostomy Cohort – Post)  
 
46 
  
 

47 
  
8.6 Semi -Structured Interviews  
Definitions  
Wearable Device: Electronic devices that a person can wear, like Fitbits and smartwatches (applewatch, 
Samsung watch), and are designed to collect someone’s personal health  and exercise data , like how 
many steps you walked, or how fast your heart is beating .  
Telemonitoring: Clinical providers using information technology , such as phone calls, video calls, chat 
functions,  to monitor patients at a distance.  
 
8.6.1 Ileostomy Pre -discharge Interview  
 

48 
 Example of questions  Example of probing questions  
What is your previous experience with using wearable 
devices?   If no experience, probe why   
 Did you find it useful? How was it useful?  
 What were some of the challenges with it?  
 
What is your previous experience with 
telemonitoring?   If no experience, probe why  
 How did you feel about the telemonitoring?  
 What were some of the challenges with 
telemonitoring?  
 
Can you describe your experiences living with XXX 
prior to the surgery?   
How do you manage your health conditions at home?   Is there anything you do related to diet or 
medications?  
 Tell me about some of the challenges with …  
 Are your family/friends involved with 
managing your health?  
How do you feel about …  
What happened leadin g up to this ileostomy 
procedure?   What physical symptoms of your illness did 
you experience?  
 Who participated in the decision to go 
through with this procedure?  
 What did they say?  
 How do you feel about being in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]?  
49 
 We know that managing your health condition could 
be very expensive.  
Can you give us some examples of what those 
expense are?  
Has that been a problem for you ?  Can you give us some examples of how you 
have dealt with those expenses?  
Can you describe your  initial reaction to the stoma?   
In what way , if any , do you think participating in this 
study might be beneficial to you?   
 
How do you feel about the upcoming discharge?  Negative feelings – Why?  
Positive feelings – Is being enrolled in the study part 
of the reason (of the positive feelings)? Why?  
 
Is there anything you would like to add? Or is there 
anything else you would like to discuss?   
 
8.6.2 Ileostomy Study Endpoint Interview  
 
Example of questions  Example of probing questions  
Device   
Tell me about your experience using the device.  How was the patch/phone/physIQ app? Tell me more 
about that.   
50 
 Home Health  Home health nurses are the nurses from Home Health 
that visits you at your house.  
Tell me about your experience working with the 
monitoring nurse .  Were there any challenges?  
Please tell me more about that.  
Do you think the monitoring nurse  have good 
awareness of your needs?  Why or why not?  
In what ways, if any, did working closely  with the 
monitoring nurse  impact your health?  
 Why or Why not?  
Care Team  Clinical Care Team are the physicians, physician 
assistants, nurse practitioners and nurses who took care 
of you during hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].  
Did your surgery  team contact [CONTACT_10825], or did you contact 
[CONTACT_50832] c surgery  team during the 30 day remote 
monitoring period?  Yes  Complete Care team question session  
No Skip entire Care team session  
Tell me about your experience working with the clinical 
care team  (for the past 30 days)  Were there any challenges?  
Please tell me more about that.  
 
In what ways, if any, did working closely  with the 
clinical team impact your health?  Why or Why not?  
Stoma   
Can you describe how daily life is now with the stoma?  How does the change impact your social life?  
How does the change impact your work? (if applicable)  
51 
 How would you compare your experience now with life 
prior to the colorectal surgery?   
Program  By [CONTACT_415784], we mean the whole experience wearing 
the devices, interacting with home health, and clinical 
care team.  
What was it like to be part of this program?   
How practical do you think the program is?  Were the instructions easy to follow?  
Were the daily requirements easy to complete?  
Why or why not?  
What do you think about the discharge care you 
received for the past month?  
  
Do you feel like this study prevented a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_369670]?  
(Skip if patient is readmitted)  Why or why not?  
Please walk me through how you (or your caregiver) 
managed your ostomy while enrolled in the program?  Tell me more about that.  
 
Has b eing in this program led to any changes in how 
you feel about your ostomy?  What kind of changes? Tell me more about that.  
Do you feel stressed about having an ostomy?  
Did the study help you reduce stress for the 
past month?  Why or why not?  
Do you feel dow n or depressed about having an 
ostomy?  
Did the study help you reduce depressing 
feelings for the past month? Why or why not?  
[ADDRESS_524086] 
month?  Why or why not?  
Has the study empowered you to own and mange  your 
care?  Why or why not? Or How/In what ways did it…  
Were your family or friends assisting you with the 
devices?  How does your family/friends feel about the program?  
Do they feel like the program is practical? Why or why 
not?  
Does it help ease burden of care? Why or why not?  
Do you think you could have done the study without 
their assistance?  
Please walk me through your feelings towards using the 
devices in the past month.  
(Ex. Enthusiastic in the beginning  felt bored later or 
worried at the beginni ng  felt comfortable later)   
I want to ask you a question for you to help us. How do 
you think we could make this program better?   
Is there anything you would like to add?   
 
53 
 9 APPENDIX 2 – PROVIDE R SURVEY  AND INTERVIEW  
 
9.1 Study Start point (Demographic Survey + Interview)  
Demographic Survey:  
 
1. Please tell me your position title: ________________  
Interview at Study Start Point  
 
 
Example of questions  Example of probing questions  
What experience do you have with telemonitoring?  
 Yes  Tell me more about that  
No  No probe  
Vague response  Probe to see if they have 
telemonitoring experience (Experience during COVID -
19 pandemic)  
When you first heard about the program, what did 
you think about it ? What do you think about the workflow/pro tocol?  
What do you think about the monitoring platform?  
 
In what ways, if any, do you think the program could 
be beneficial to your patients?  
 Why or why not?  
What expectations, if any, do you have about this 
program as this relates to your work?   
54 
 What supports do you think you will need , if any, 
with implement ing remote monitoring?  What do you think it will take for us to continue 
offering this as standard of care?  
 
For clinical team:  How do you feel about 
implementing patient remote monitoring with Hom e 
Health?  
For home health:  How do you feel about 
implementing patient remote monitoring with the 
regular care team?  Why or why not?  
What concerns do you have about this program, if 
any?  
 Yes  Tell me more about that  
No  No probe  
Vague response  Probe  
Is there anything you think we should have asked you 
and didn’t?   
For colorectal providers:   
What are you experiences with taking care of 
colorectal patients?  What about new ileostomy patients?  
Can you walk me through taking care of a typi[INVESTIGATOR_415753]?  
What were some challenges with patient care?  
How do you think this study would help with patient 
care?  
Sometimes patients have difficulty with treatment 
plan adherence and as a result they adapt based on 
their life situations.  
 What do you think about this?  
Is this frequent in ileostomy patients?  
What tactics do you use to assist with adherence?  
How effective do you think they are?  
55 
 What are you thoughts on the study helpi[INVESTIGATOR_415754]?  Do you expect the communica tion to be more 
targeted and efficient?  
What are your thoughts on the study helpi[INVESTIGATOR_415755] 
(and or patient family) transition to this new life?   
 
9.2 End Point (Survey + phone follow up if survey incomplete)  
 
Experience Survey  
(5 point likert  scale, 1=strongly disagree, 3=neither disagree/agree and 5=strongly agree)  
1. I received  adequate support to participate in the program.  
2. The platform was easy to use.  
3. The workload was manageable.  
4. The protocol made sense to me . 
5. The escalation process was easy to follow.  
6. I had problems communicating with some  patient s. 
7. For home health : I had problems communicating with the clinical team . 
For clinical team : I had problems communicating with the home health team.  
8. The program improved patient care effectivene ss. 
9. The program improved patient care timeliness.  
10. For home health:  I experienced moments of uncertainty.  
For clinical team:  I experienced occasions of doubts concerning the severity of the patient’s 
condition.  
11. I felt like this program is an improvement to usual care.  
12. What are some challenges you experienced so far? ________________  
 
9.3 Study Endpoint (User experience survey + Interview)  
 
Remote Monitoring Platform User Experience  
(5 point likert  scale, 1=strongly disagree, 3=neither disagree/agree and 5=strongly agree)  
1. I think that I would like to use the platform frequently.  
2. I found the platform unnecessarily complex.  
3. I thought the platform were easy to use.  
4. I think that I would need the support  of a technical person to be able to use the platform.  
5. I found the various functions in the platform were well integrated.  
[ADDRESS_524087] people would learn to use the platform very qui ckly.  
8. I found the platform very cumbersome to use.  
9. I felt very confident using the platform  
10. I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with the platform.  
Interview Guide at Study Endpoint  
Questions: Do providers feel that the wearable -media ted post -discharge care was effective in 
preventing readmission in  patients  with postoperative ileostomy formation . 
 
Questions  for providers   Probing questions  
Platform : 
1. How would you describe your experience in the 
program?   
- Could you describe that more in detail?  
- Was that helpful/unhelpful?  
 
2  What features or capabilities are important to you 
in a monitoring platform?  
 - Why is ______ important for you?  
- What does it help with?  
- What if that feature did not exist?  
Program:   
2. How would you describe your experience 
with the program?  - Please tell me more about ___________.  
3. What are your impressions of what patients 
think about the program?  - Why do you think that?  
- How did patients respond to the program?  
 
4. In your opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649], what is the impact of this 
program on patients’ ability to manage their 
condition  at home?  - Medication management  
- Monitoring symptoms  
- Reach out to providers  
- Engaging family members  
- Diet management  
5. How was your experience communicating 
with enrolled patients in this program?  - Tell me more about that  
- How did the program change how you 
communicate with your patients?  
6. How did the program change how you 
communicate with your patients?  - Method of communication  
- Frequency  
57 
 - How do you feel about the changes?  
- How did it impact how you did your job?  
7. How did participating in this program affect 
your work load?  
  
Monitoring nurse only:  
a. What was your experience with escalating 
patient cases to the care team?  
b. What changes, if any, would you suggest for 
the escalation pathway?  
Note to interviewer: provide visual aid to interviewer   
- Timeliness of provider responses  
- Ability to get ahold of the pt  
- Methods to get ahold of pt / provider  
Clinicians only:  
c. What is your experience with handling the 
escalation to your team?  - How was your experience working with the 
monitoring nurses?  
Please tell me more about:  
- Timeliness of escalation  
- Communication between providers involved  
 
8. How do you feel about this remot e 
monitoring program compared to usual 
patient care?  - How did it differ?  
- How was it the same?  
 
9. How did you feel about patient adherence to 
this program?  - Monitoring symptoms  
- Taking medications as prescribed  
- Following new changes to their care plan (e.g. 
P.T, medication changes, ect.)  
10. What supports do you think patients need to 
continue with remote monitoring work?   
- Who do you think should provide _______ 
support? / whose role is it to provide that 
support?    
- What type training do patients need?  
11. What is your opi[INVESTIGATOR_415756]?  - Please tell me more about _____________.  
58 
   
12. What resources or support would you require 
to continue with remote monitoring work?  
 - Staff support  
- Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_415757]  
- Clinician education  
13. What changes would you make to this 
program?  - Could you go into more detail about that?  
- How would that change help?  
 
 