IRB Approved Template  
MUST  BE APPROVED  
FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE  
AS MODIFIED  
Nov 25, [ADDRESS_1108325] INFORMATION AND CONSENT FORM  
 
 
TITLE : A Randomi sed Controlled Multicent re Trial, Examining the Effect 
of Natrox® Oxygen Wound Therapy on the Healing Rate of 
Chronic Diabetic Foot Ulcers  (NOW.T -001) 
 
PROTOCOL NO .: NOW.T -001 
 WIRB® Protocol #20191085  
 
SPONSOR : Inotec AMD Inc 
 
INVESTIGATOR : Name  
 [CONTACT_168534], State  Zip  
 Country  
 
STUDY -RELATED  
PHONE NUMBER(S):  Name  
 [CONTACT_19649](s) (24 hours)  
 [24-hour number is required]  
 
 
SUMMARY  
 
You are being asked to be in a research study  because you are a p erson with diabetes who has a 
non-healing wound on your foot (Diabetic Foot Ulcer or DFU) . The purpose of this consent form 
is to help you decide if you want to be in the research study . 
 
You should not join this research study until all your questions are  answered , and you understand 
the answers to those questions . 
 
Things to know before deciding to take part in a research study:  
   
• The main goal of a research study  is to learn things to help patients in the future.  
• The main goal of regular medical care  is to help each patient.  
• The decision to join or not join the research study will not cause you to lose any medical 
benefits . If you decide not to take part in this study, your doctor will continue to treat 
you. 
• Parts of this study may involve standard medic al care . Standard medical care (also called 
Standard of Care, or SOC) is the treatment normally given for a certain condition or 
illness.  
• After reading the consent form and talking  with the research staff, you should know 
which parts of the study are exper imental and which are standard medical care.  
IRB Approved Template  
MUST  BE APPROVED  
FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE  
AS MODIFIED  
Nov 25, 2019  
 
Version 2.0, 01 November 2019 
Page 2 of 12 • Your medical records may become part of the research record . If that happens, your 
medical records may be looked at and/or copi[INVESTIGATOR_802865] w ith the study.  
• Your medical insurance may be billed for any standard medical care you receive during 
the research study . If your insurance company is billed , then it may have access to the 
research records . Insurance companies may not pay for treatment tha t is part of a research 
study . Taking part in a research study could affect your current or future insurance 
coverage.  
 
PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  
 
The treatment  of diabetic foot ulcers (DFUs) continues to be part of the major economic burden 
of chronic wounds w orldwide with costs of at least $[ADDRESS_1108326] of care (SOC) , the process can take many months.  During this time , 
wounds can become infected and at higher risk for lower extremity amputation. Adding 
treatments that can speed the healing process will result in lower treatment costs as well as 
lowering risks of complications.  
 
There is a wealth of evidence to support the benefits of oxygen therapy on wound healing1-7.  
Oxygen is required for all major pro cesses of wound healing and wound hypoxia is common.  
Skin wounds can receive oxygen from the blood stream via perfusion and from oxygen uptake 
through the skin.  Yet, both wound perfusion and blood oxygen levels are frequently insufficient 
in patients wit h chronic wounds due to poor circulation, vascular disruption, and 
vasoconstriction, thereby [CONTACT_305468]’s capacity to heal.  
 
The purpose of this study is to find out if adding Natrox® Oxygen Wound Therapy to Standard 
of Care in chronic Wagner Grad e 1 and 2 diabetic foot ulcers (DFUs) makes those wounds heal 
faster than when they are treated with SOC alone.  
 
PROCEDURES  
 
You will sign and date th is informed consent  form before the study doctor does  any study -related 
procedures.  Once the informed con sent is signed, the [ADDRESS_1108327] will be used to offload (take pressure off) the 
wound. The cast will be changed [ADDRESS_1108328] (TCC). If you have never worn a TCC before you will ha ve an extra 
visit [ADDRESS_1108329] change and to make sure you’re not having 
problems with it. After the screening period, the TCC will be changed weekly at your scheduled 
treatment visit.  
 
IRB Approved Template  
MUST  BE APPROVED  
FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE  
AS MODIFIED  
Nov 25, 2019  
 
Version 2.0, 01 November 2019 
Page 3 of 12 During the Screening Period,  the study doctor will perform the following assessments and 
procedures : 
 
• Demographics  such as age, sex and race  
• Medical and surgical history , including foot ulcer history and any other wounds  
• Find out what medications you take and if you have any changes  
• Phys ical examination , including vital signs  
• Check how much pain you’re having from the study ulcer  
• Study ulcer history and assessment  e.g. how long you’ve had the wound, how much 
drainage and what type of drainage  
• Check for infection in the study wound  
• Measure  the blood -flow to your foot by [CONTACT_802867] ( Ankle -Brachial Index), SPP 
(skin perfusion pressure), TCOM (transcutaneous oximetry) measurement, TBI (Toe -
Brachial Index) or Arterial Doppler Study if you don’t have test results within the past 90 
days 
• Test your HbA1c with a fingerstick if you don’t have test results within the past 90 days  
• Pregnancy test (blood or urine) if you are a female of childbearing potential  
• Debride (remove dead, damaged or infected tissue) the study ulcer, if necessary  
• Clean the st udy ulcer  
• Take a d igital photo graph and measurement  of the study ulcer  
• Place SOC dressings on your wound (absorbent dressings of hydrofiber/alginate)  
• Offload (take pressure off the wound) with a TCC, if the wound is on the bottom of your 
foot 
• Check that yo u’ve been wearing the cast correctly and not having any problems with it, 
(if applicable)  
• Review  your eligibility to continue in the screening period  
•  
If you successfully complete the Screening Period, you will immediately move to the Treatment 
Period whic h has 13 scheduled visits.  
 
At Treatment Visit 1,  the study doctor will perform the following assessments and procedures : 
• Check how much pain you’re having from the study ulcer  
• Check that you’re wearing the TCC correctly and not having any problems with it , (if 
applicable)  
• Check for any changes in your health  
• Check for any changes in your medications or treatments  
• Assess  the study ulcer , e.g. how much drainage and what type of drainage  
• Check for infection in the study wound  
• Clean the study ulcer  
• Debride the  study ulcer, (if necessary)  
• Take a d igital photo graph and  measurement  of the study ulcer  
• Measure the change in wound size over the past 2 and 4 weeks  
• Confirm you meet all the requirements to continue in the study  
• Randomization  
IRB Approved Template  
MUST  BE APPROVED  
FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE  
AS MODIFIED  
Nov 25, 2019  
 
Version 2.0, 01 November 2019 
Page 4 of 12 • For Group 1: Placement of S OC dressings (absorbent dressings of 
hydrofiber/alginate) and Natrox® Oxygen Wound Therapy    
• For Group 2: Placement of SOC dressings (absorbent dressings of 
hydrofiber/alginate) only   
• Offload (take pressure off the wound) with a TCC if the wound is on the  bottom of 
your foot  
 
If, after reviewing the information from the screening period the study doctor finds that you do 
not meet all the requirements to continue in the study, you will be finished with the trial.  
 
If the study doctor finds that you do meet all requirements to be in the study, you will be 
randomized to one of two treatment  group s: 
 
• Group [ADDRESS_1108330] of care therapy and Natrox® Oxygen Wound Therapy .   
• Group [ADDRESS_1108331] of care therapy alone.   
 
Randomization is like fli ppi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a coin: you have an equal chance of being placed in either group.  
Neither you, your study doctor, nor the research staff can choose the group you will be in. Your 
study doctor has a sealed envelope assigned to your study number that contains a lette r saying 
which study group you will be in.  You must be okay with being in either group.  
 
The study doctor will apply the treatment that you are randomized to and make sure offloading 
of your wound (if applicable) is satisfactory.  You will then be seen on ce a week up to 1 2 more 
weeks for additional treatment visits.  
 
At weekly Treatment Visits 2 -12, the study doctor will perform the following assessments:  
• Check how much pain you’re having from the study ulcer  
• Check that you’ve been wearing the TCC correctl y and not having any problems with 
it, (if applicable)  
• Check for any changes in your medications or treatments  
• Check for any changes in your health  
• Check if the study ulcer is fully healed  
o If the study ulcer is 100% healed , you will be finished with the tr ial  
• Assess the study ulcer, e.g. how much drainage and type of drainage  
• Check for infection in the study wound  
• Clean the study ulcer  
• Debride the study ulcer, if necessary  
• Take a d igital photo and measurements of the study ulcer  
• For Group 1 : Placement of S OC dressings (absorbent dressings of 
hydrofiber/alginate) and Natrox® Oxygen Wound Therapy  
• For Group 2: Placement of SOC dressings  (absorbent dressings of 
hydrofiber/alginate) alone  
• Offload (take pressure off the wound) with a TCC if the wound is on the bottom of 
your foot  
 
IRB Approved Template  
MUST  BE APPROVED  
FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE  
AS MODIFIED  
Nov 25, 2019  
 
Version 2.0, 01 November 2019 
Page 5 of 12 At Visit 13  (End of Study Visit ), or at any earlier visit if you heal before Visit 13 , the study 
doctor will p erform the following assessments:  
• Check how much pain you’re having from the study ulcer, if not fully healed  
• Check that you’ ve been wearing the TCC correctly and not having any problems with 
it, (if applicable)  
• Check for any changes in your medications or treatments  
• Check for any changes in your health  
• Check if the study ulcer is fully healed  
o If the study ulcer is 100% healed, you will be finished with the trial  
• If not fully healed, assess the study ulcer e.g. how much drainage and what type of 
drainage  
• Check for infection in the study wound, if not fully healed  
• Clean the study ulcer , if not fully healed  
• Debride the study ulcer,  if not fully healed, and if necessary  
• Take a d igital photo graph  of the healed area, or a digital photograph and 
measurement of the study ulcer  if not fully healed  
• Place a standard medical dressing on the study ulcer, if not fully healed  
• Complete the Study  Exit Form  
 
There may be times your study doctor will want you to come in for an Unscheduled Visit;  for 
example, you have a lot of drainage and they want to change the dressings more than once every 
week.  
 
At an Unscheduled Visit  the study doctor will perf orm the following assessments:   
 
• Check how much pain you’re having from the study ulcer  
• Check that you’ve been wearing the TCC correctly and not having any problems with it  
• Check for any changes in your medications or treatments  
• Check for any changes in y our health  
• Debride the study ulcer, if necessary  
• For Group 1: Placement of SOC dressings (absorbent dressings of hydrofiber/alginate) 
and Natrox® Oxygen Wound Therapy    
• For Group 2: Placement of SOC dressings (absorbent dressings of hydrofiber/alginate) 
alone  
• Offload (take pressure off the wound) with a TCC if the wound is on the bottom of your 
foot 
 
RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS  
 
The possible risks or discomforts associated with  receiving the Natrox®  Oxygen device  may 
include potential allergic reaction/ skin irr itation.  To decrease the already unlikely chance of 
allergic reaction the device is made of medical grade materials.  
 
The possible risks associated with debridement (standard of care) include allergic reaction to 
anesthetic and/or antibiotics, pain, infect ion and maceration.  
IRB Approved Template  
MUST  BE APPROVED  
FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE  
AS MODIFIED  
Nov 25, [ADDRESS_1108332] tell your study doctor 
immediately . Pregnant women will be taken out of the study ; however, t he pregnancy will be 
followed to outcome for safety follo w up.  
 
Other Risks  
 
Your diabetic foot ulcer  may stay the same  or may get worse during this study . 
 
NEW INFORMATION  
 
You will be told about any new information that might change your decision to be in this study . 
You may be asked to sign a new consent form  if this occurs.  
 
BENEFITS  
 
Your diabetic foot ulcer  may get better or heal  while you are in this study; however, 
improvement or healing cannot be promised . The results of this study may help people with 
diabetic foot ulcers  in the future.  
 
COSTS  
 
Inotec A MD Inc, will provide the Natrox®  Oxygen Wound Therapy device free of charge during 
this study . Tests and procedures that are done only for the study will not be billed to you or your 
insurance company . 
 
You or your insurance company may be billed for:  
 
• Any standard medical care given during this research study.  
 
You may want to talk with your insurance company about its payment policy for standard 
medical care given during a research study . If your insurance company does not pay, you may be 
billed for those  charges.  
 
You might have unexpected expenses from being in this study . Ask your study doctor to discuss 
the costs that will or will not be covered by [CONTACT_456] . This discussion should include who will 
pay the costs of treating possible side effects.  
 
IRB Approved Template  
MUST  BE APPROVED  
FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE  
AS MODIFIED  
Nov 25, 2019  
 
Version 2.0, 01 November 2019 
Page 7 of 12 PAYMENT FOR PARTICIPATION  
 
You will receive a $100.[ADDRESS_1108333] Screening Visit you will receive a reloadable gift/debit card to use 
throughout the study. Paymen t will be added onto this card within [ADDRESS_1108334] of care (cleaning the wound, reducing pressure on the wound, using bandages to keep 
the right amount of moisture in the wound, debridement, and, if necessary,  antibiotics,)  and/or 
receiving  other treatments  that may be available in your clinic.  Ask the study doctor to discuss 
these alternatives with you . You do not need to be in this study to receive treatment for your 
condition , including receipt of therapy with the study device outside of this rese arch. 
 
COMPENSATION FOR INJURY  
 
If you are injured or get sick as a result of being in this study, call the study doctor immediately . 
The study doctor will provide emergency medical treatment  or direct you where to go for 
emergency medical treatment . Your insurance will be billed for this treatment . The sponsor will 
pay any charges that your insurance does not cover . No other payment is routinely available from 
the study doctor or sponsor.  
 
VOLUNTARY PARTICIPATION AND WITHDRAWAL  
 
Your participation in this study is voluntary . You may decide not to participate , or you may stop 
participating in the study at any time . Your decision will not result in any penalty or loss of 
benefits to which you are  otherwise  entitled.  
 
You can be taken out of  this study at any time by [CONTACT_619680], including : 
 
• If it is in your best interest  
• If you do not consent to continue in the study after being told of changes in the research that 
may affect you  
• If you are significantly non-compliant with the requirements of the protocol.  
• If you become pregnant (Note: the pregnancy will be followed up to term for safety 
follow -up. Relevant safety information collected after the study has completed will be 
reported as supplemental informat ion.) 
• If you have surgery to improve the blood flow on the lower leg that the study ulcer is on . 
IRB Approved Template  
MUST  BE APPROVED  
FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE  
AS MODIFIED  
Nov 25, 2019  
 
Version 2.0, 01 November 2019 
Page 8 of 12 • If your ulcer gets worse  to the point where there is exposed bone.  
• If your study ulcer merges with an other  ulcer.  
• If you are treated with a medication  that’s n ot allowed . 
 
If you leave the study before the planned final visit, you may be asked by [CONTACT_288248].  
 
SOURCE OF FUNDING FOR THE STUDY  
 
The sponsor , Inotec AMD  Inc, will pay for t his research study.  
 
CONFIDENTIALITY  
 
Information from this study will be given to the sponsor. “Sponsor” includes any persons or 
companies that are contracted by [CONTACT_288245].  
 
The infor mation may also be given to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). It may be 
given to similar governmental agencies in other countries. Medical records which identify you 
and the consent form signed by [CONTACT_802868]/or copi[INVESTIGATOR_802866]:  
 
1. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) agencies,  
2. the institution where the research is being done , and  
3. Western Institutional Review Board® (WIRB®). 
 
Whenever possible, your identifying information will be protected;  for example, a study number 
will be used instead of your name. Complete  confidentiality cannot be guaranteed because of the 
need to give information that identifies you to these parties. The results of this research study 
may be presented at meetings or i n publications. Your identity will not be used in those 
presentations.  
 
QUESTIONS  
 
Contact  [Name]  at [Number]  (24 Hours)  for any of the following reasons:  
 
• if you have any questions about you r participation in this study,  
• if you feel you have had a researc h-related injury or a reaction to the study drug, or  
• if you have questions, concerns or complaints about the research . 
 
IRB Approved Template  
MUST  BE APPROVED  
FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE  
AS MODIFIED  
Nov 25, [ADDRESS_1108335]:  
 
 Western Institutional Review Board® (WIRB®) 
 [ADDRESS_1108336] SE  Suite 120  
 Puyallup , Washington [ZIP_CODE] -2115  
 Telephone:  1 -[PHONE_6597] or 360 -252-2500  
 E-mail:  [EMAIL_6164]  
 
WIRB is a group of people who independently review research.  
 
WIRB will not be able to answer some study -specific questions, such as questions about 
appointment times . However, you may contact [CONTACT_802869].  
 
Do not sign this  consent form unless you have had a chance to ask questions and you understand 
the answers to those questions . 
 
If you agree to be in this study, you will receive a signed and dated copy of this consent form for 
your records.  
 
A description of this clinica l trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov , as required 
by U.S. Law . This Web site will not include information that can identify you . At most, the Web 
site will include a summary of the results . You can search this Web site at any time.  
IRB Approved Template  
MUST  BE APPROVED  
FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE  
AS MODIFIED  
Nov 25, [ADDRESS_1108337] read this consent form (or it has been read to me) . All my questions about the study and 
my part in it have been answered . I freely consent to be in this research study.  
 
I authorize the release  of my medical and research records for the purpose of this study.  
 
By [CONTACT_50841], I have not given up any of my legal rights.  
 
CONSENT SIGNATURES:  
 
 
  
Subject Name (printed)  
 
 
    
Signature [CONTACT_802870] 25, 2019  
 
Version 2.0, 01 November 2019 
Page 11 of 12 **For Sites in [LOCATION_004]**  
AUTHORIZATION TO USE AND DISCLOSE INFORMATION FOR 
RESEARCH PURPOSES   
 
What information may be used and gi ven to others?  
The study doctor will get your personal and medical information.  For example:  
• Past and present medical records  
• Research records  
• Records about phone calls made as part of this research  
• Records about your study visits.  
 
Who may use and give out information about you?  
The study doctor and the study staff.  [They may also share the research information 
with [enter SMO company name] , an agent for the study doctor. delete if the site 
does not have an SMO]  
 
Who might get this information?  
The spon sor of this research.  “Sponsor” means any persons or companies that are:  
• working for or with the sponsor, or  
• owned by [CONTACT_456].  
 
Your information may be given to:  
• The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA),  
• Department of Health and Human Services (D HHS) agencies,  
• Governmental agencies in other countries,  
• The institution where the research is being done,  
• Governmental agencies to whom certain diseases (reportable diseases) must be 
reported, and  
• Western Institutional Review Board® (WIRB®)  
 
Why will th is information be used and/or given to others?  
• to do the research,  
• to study the results, and  
• to make sure that the research was done right.   
 
If the results of this study are made public, information that identifies you will not 
be used.  
 
IRB Approved Template  
MUST  BE APPROVED  
FOR  SITES  BEFORE  USE  
AS MODIFIED  
Nov 25, 2019  
 
Version 2.0, 01 November 2019 
Page 12 of 12 What if I deci de not to give permission to use and give out my health 
information?  
Then you will not be able to be in this research study.  
 
May I review or copy my information?  
Yes, but only after the research is over.  
 
May I withdraw or revoke (cancel) my permission?  
This permission will be good until December 31, [ADDRESS_1108338] your permission to use and disclose your health 
information at any time.  You do this by [CONTACT_130919].  
If you withdraw your permission, you will not be able to stay in this study.  
 
When you withdraw your permission, no new health information identifying you 
will be gathered after that date.  Information that has already been gathered  may 
still be used and given to others.   
 
Is my health infor mation protected after it has been given to others?  
There is a risk that your information will be given to others without your 
permission.  
 
Authorization:  
I have been given the information about the use and disclosure of my health 
information for this rese arch study.  My questions have been answered.  
 
I authorize the use and disclosure of my health information to the parties listed in the 
authorization section of this consent for the purposes described above.  
 
AUTHORIZATION SIGNATURE:  
 
 
    
[CONTACT_802871]  