Cover page for Clinicaltrials.gov
Research Protocol
Official title: Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults
NCT#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Document date: 8/10/2021
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults 
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 1 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  INSTRUCTIONS:  
●Use this “TEMPLATE PROTOCOL (HRP -503)” to prepare a study protocol
outlining your research plan.
●Depending on the nature of your study, some major sections might not be
applicable to your research. If so, simply mark as “N/A.” For example, a simplesurvey might have many sections with “N/A.”  For subsections (e.g., 1.x or 8.x)you can mark as “N/A”if you are certain that the subsection is not applicable.
●Once the IRB/HRPP approves your submission, your latest approved version ofthe protocol will be stored  in the IRB Protocol Management online system .
●If your research plan changes and you need to modify the protocol, please submit
an amendment to Protocol Management with the requested modifications.Download your current protocol from Protocol Management and indicate thechanges /revisions  using the track changes feature in order to make review of the
modifications easier to follow. If you are unable to use track changes, pleasecreate a new paragraph wherever you need to make a change, and in dicate
“Amendment: Date” before making a change to any section. Protocolmanagement will store the older versions of your protocol if the  IRB or HRPP
staff need to compare them during the review.
PROTOCOL TITLE: 
Include the full protocol title .  
Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults 
P
ROTOCOL NUMBER: 
Include the number assigned in Protocol Management (verify this has been added 
before submitting protocol to HRPP) .  
18
-535
PRI
NCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
Full Name  [CONTACT_272437] : Kevin P. Davy, PhD  
Department : Human Nutrition, Foods, and Exercise 
Telephone Number : [PHONE_5672] 
Email Address : [EMAIL_5285] 
FUNDI
NG: 
Sponsor (s): National Institute of Health  
Funded already or in the proposal phase?: Awarded and new Award in progress  
Is Virginia Tech the primary awardee or the coordinating center of this grant or contract? If not, list the primary institution : Click here to provide a response. 
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 2 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021   
VERSION NUMBER/DATE:   
Include the version number and date of this protocol. Versions should start at 1.0. 
 1.0: 10/20/18 WIRB  
2.0: 1/ 30/2020  
3.0: 4/16/2020  
4.0: 8/10/2021  
 
REVISION HISTORY:  
Use this table to keep track of changes. Add more rows as needed.  
 
Revision 
# Version Date  Brief Summary of Changes  
(i.e., the different sections)  Consent 
Change?  
1.0  10/20/18  Initial submission to WIRB transfer to 
BRANY  N 
2.0 1/30/2020  Change of Study Site Location to: [ADDRESS_332907] Garvin Bldg, Blacksburg, VA  
[ZIP_CODE]  Y 
3.0 4/16/2020  New funding source, significant changes to 
protocol new measurements.  Y 
4.0 8/10/2021  Changes to protocol , flyer  and informed 
consent form  Y 
 
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 3 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  Table of Contents  
1.0 Study Summary  4 
2.0 Objectives  4 
3.0 Background  5 
4.0 Study Endpoints  6 
5.0 Study Design and Statistical Analysis Plan  7 
6.0 Setting  8 
7.0 Study Intervention(s)/Investigational Agent(s)  [ADDRESS_332908] the Privacy Interests of Subjects  32 
21.0  Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  33 
22.0  Compensation for Research Related Injury  34 
23.0  Economic Burden to Subjects  35 
24.0  Consent Process  35 
25.0  Process to Docume nt Consent in Writing  39 
26.0  Resources Available  39 
27.0  Multi- Site Research  41 
 
  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 4 of 41 Revised: August  10, [ADDRESS_332909] a larger, more 
comprehensive and mechanistic trial in the future.  
Secondary 
Objective(s)  - Obtain preliminary data for effect size generation . 
Study Population  We are recruiting men and women who are between the ages 
of 18- 79 years of age . We will recruit individuals of all races 
and ethnic backgrounds . 
 
 
Sample Size  60 subjects  
Research 
Intervention(s)/ 
Investigational 
Agent(s)  -Interventions (Choline and Placebo supplementation in 
capsule form)   
Study Duration for 
Individual Participants  How long will a participant spend in your study?  If multiple 
sessions, list time required for each session plus total .  
Visit: 1 = 1 hour  
Visit: 2, 8, 11, 17 = 3 hours each  
Visit: 3, 9, 12, 18 = 2 hours each  
Visit: 4, 10, 13, 19 = 3 hours each  
Visit: 5, 6, 7, 14, 15, 16 = 30 minutes each  
Total Time: 36 hours  
Acronyms and 
Definitions  TMA  = Trimethylamine  
TMAO = T rimethylamine -N-oxide  
T2D = Type 2 Diabetes  
GI = Gastrointestinal 
FMD = Flow mediated dilation  
CGM = Continuous glucose monitor  
 
 
 
2.0 Objectives  
2.1 Describe the purpose, specific aims, or objectives  of this study : 
 
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 5 of 41 Revised: August  10, [ADDRESS_332910] a larger, more comprehensive and 
mechanistic tr ial in the future.  
 
2.2 State the hypotheses to be tested :  
 
We hypothesize that gut microbiota -generated increases in  plasma TMAO will be greater 
in older compared with young adults and this will be associated with a correspondingly  
greater reduction  of insulin sensitivity, mixed meal tolerance, and 24- hr glycemic control 
in older adults.  In addition, w e hypothesize  that the magnitude of change in gut microbiota -generated 
increases in TMAO and measures of insulin sensitivity, mixed meal tolerance, an d 24-hr 
glycemic control with the intervention will be associated with the magnitude of change  in 
the abundance of TMA -producing bacteria and/or expression of cutC TMA lyase.  
 
3.0 Background  
3.1 Summarize the relevant prior research on  this topic and gaps in current 
knowledge within the field of study : 
 
Dysbiosis of the gut microbiota, characterized as adverse changes in the abundance and/or composition of gut microbes, has been implicated in pathophysiology of a number of chronic dis eases including neurological disorders, colitis, atherosclerosis, and 
metabolic diseases. Several lines of evidence in both animal models and humans also implicate gut dysbiosis in the etiology of insulin resistance and T2D. Future studies are needed to understand the potential link between gut microbial composition and function with glucose homeostasis and risk of T2D. Recently, gut microbiota -generated increases 
in TMAO has become a novel target for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases. The results of  studies in rodent models indicate a causal role of TMAO in the development of 
atherosclerosis and several meta- analyses support a dose -dependency of TMAO in 
predicting adverse CVD events. Given the close relationship between T2D and cardiovascular disease, perhaps it is not surprising that a higher prevalence of T2D has been observed in populations with elevated TMAO. The potential role of TMAO in the development of insulin resistance and T2D is supported by [CONTACT_272420]. Changes in gut microbial composition with aging are observed even in the absence of overt disease. However, the role of these changes on the reduced  glucose homeostasis 
observed with aging is unknown. Interestingly, TMAO increases with advancing age in both mice and humans. Human TMAO increases are believed to be a consequence of changes in the gut microbiota, i.e., dysbiosis. Indeed, there is an increase in the 
abundance of TMA -producing bacteria with aging. Importantly, and as emphasized 
earlier, plasma TMAO concentrations are dependent on the composition of the gut 
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 6 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  microbiota and higher baseline TMAO concentrations are associated with larger increases 
in TMAO with choline loading. As such, we hypothesize that older adults will demonstrate greater gut microbiota generated increases in TMAO following choline loading compared with young adults. Furthermore, the greater gut microbiota -generated 
increases in TMAO following choline loading will be associated with not only a greater 
abundance of TMA -producing bacteria but a larger decrem ent in insulin sensitivity, 
mixed meal glucose tolerance, and a reduction in 24- hr glycemic control.  
 
 
3.2 Describe any relevant preliminary data:  
 
N/A  
3.3 Based on the existing literature, provide the scientific or scholarly 
rationale for and significance of your research and how will it add to existing knowledge : 
 
The premise of the present proposal is that: 1) advancing age is associated with 
increases the abundance of TMA producing bacteria and TMAO concentrations; 2) older  
adults are at increased risk  of insulin resistance, glucose intolerance, and T2D; and 3) 
there is accumulating evidence that elevated TMAO levels  are predictive of, and 
contributory to, risk of T2D; and 4) the impact of gut microbiota -generated increases in 
TMAO on age -related changes in glucose homeostasis is unknown. Our proposal has  
significant translational potential as  our findings will advance basic science findings in 
mouse models to determine relevance in humans and provide novel  mechanistic insight 
into meta -organismal nutrient metabolism as a basis of age -related reductions  in glucose  
homeostasis. One of the major challenges in understanding this link is the potential 
confounding influence of habitual  dietary intake on key outcome variables. We will 
overcome this limitation by [CONTACT_272421] -organismal metabolism of dietary choline 
as a basis for elevated risk o f T2D with advancing age using state -of-the-art and 
reproducible methodology. Furthermore, our study will provide important insight into the gut microbiota as an important source of variability in glucose  metabolism to TMAO. 
Our findings could have importa nt policy and clinical implications. If modifying the gut 
microbiota  to reduce age -related T2D risk is prudent, then clinical practice could be 
advanced by [CONTACT_272422] T2D risk.  
 
 
4.0 Study Endpoints  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 7 of 41 Revised: August  10, [ADDRESS_332911] common in clinical trials but are sometimes applicable to other types of biomedical  research , as well as social, 
behavioral, or educ ational research. See link below for a discussion.  
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Wocz7K7a0hCQJPPO_khh5l1
SQQjhGDDGHzcOPRHR5Tw/edit?usp=sharing   
 
With this study , there are three continuous measurements which will define our study 
endpoints. These include oral glucose tolerance, flow mediated dilatio n of the brachial 
artery and aortic pulse wave velocity measurements corresponding to arterial stiffness  
and a mixed meal tolerance test . 
 With regards to our hypothesis stated in section 2.2, our study endpoints will be as follows: G ut microbiota -generated increases in  plasma TMAO will be greater in older 
compared with young adults and this will be associated with a correspondingly  greater 
reduction of insulin sensitivity, mixed meal tolerance, and 24 -hr glycemic control in older 
adults.  
 
4.2 Describe any primary or secondary safety endpoints. These should be included for all studies that are greater  than minimal risk . (Minimal risk: 
The probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research that are not greater in and of t hemselves than those ordinarily 
encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological examinations or tests.) : 
 
Our safety endpoints will correspond to the potential risks that subjects may experience which are stated in section 17.1.  
Potential safety endpoints which could occur with this study are as 
follows: 1) Any severe GI distress or complaints reported with consumption of the choline  or placebo supplement , 2) Discomfort or pain 
which is not tolerated by [CONTACT_272423], 3) Discomfort and pain due to the inflation of the BP cuff on the forearm of the participant; 
and 4) Discomfort which is reported when measuring arterial stiffness 
measurements due to slight pressure being applied to the carotid, brachial, radial and femoral arteries.  
 
5.0 Study Design and Statistical Analysis Plan  
5.1 Describe the basic study design/approach (e.g., qualitative study using five focus groups of first year students to describe assimilation into the university community;  randomized controlled trial of a behavioral change 
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 8 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  intervention to increase  dietary  intake of whole grains ; pre- post -test 
evaluation of new pedagogical techniques to improve adult literacy) : 
 
A double -blind randomized 2x 3 crossover design with 3 repeated measures in each 
period will be used. Pre -/post -test evaluation used in each period to evaluate the ingestion 
of choline/placebo on the effects  to card iometabolic  health.  
 
  
5.2 Describe corresponding data analysis plan/approach (e.g., content analysis of focus group transcripts ; descriptive analysis followed by [CONTACT_40190];  nonparametric analysis of pre - and post -test 
measures) :
 
 
Data will be examined for the presence of outliers, violations of normality and missing 
data. Major violations of normality will be corrected with an appropriate transformation 
procedure. In case of an outlier, rather than transform the data, the outlier will be “Winsorized”, that is, replaced by [CONTACT_272424].  Data will be checked for sequence, period and carryover effects. Next , a mixed -effects 
linear model (using SAS PROCMIXED) will be used to estimate the treatment differences between choline  and placebo (H0: μAB -  μBA = 0). Because of the two 
repeated measurements of the dependent variable in each period, we will treat the multiple observations as nested within individuals. This will allow us to model the various sources of intra -person and inter -person variability, as well as account for the 
correlation in the nested data to make the correct inference regarding differences between 
treatments. Confidence intervals (95%) and bootstrapped standard error estimates  will be 
reported for statistical precision and estimation of effect sizes for a larger more 
comprehensive trial. An identical approach will be used for analysis of other outcomes (e.g., arterial stiffness, etc.).
 
 
6.[ADDRESS_332912] the 
research.  Consider each of the items listed below:  
● Identify where your research team will identify and recruit potential 
subjects.  
● Identify where the team will perform the research procedures.  
● Describe the comp osition and involvement of any community 
advisory board (s). 
● For research conducted in other locations, describe:  
o Site-specific regulations or customs affecting the research at 
those locations. 
o Local scientific and ethical review structure at those locations.  
Examples include work in other cultures or ethnic groups (within or outside of the U.S.)  and work with churches. The 
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 9 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  HRPP will provide additional guidance for international 
research.  
 
 - Subjects will be recruited from the New River Valley and surrounding areas.  
- The study will be conducted in the Department of Human Nutrition, Foods, and 
Exercise at Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA. Participants will be required to come to Garvin Buildin g, Suite 1575 ([ADDRESS_332913]. , Blacksburg, VA [ZIP_CODE]) for 19  visits .  
 
  
7.0 Study Intervention(s)/Investigational Agent(s)  
7.1 Describe the study interventions (including behavioral interventions) and/or investigational agents (e.g., drugs or  devices ) to be used in this study .  Consider 
each of the items listed below:   
● Drug/Device Handling: If the research involves drugs or devices, 
describe your plans to store, handle, and administer the drugs or devices so that they will be used only on subj ects, and only by 
[CONTACT_10733]. 
● Describe whether any of the following will be used: microwaves, X -
rays, DEXA scans, general anesthesia, or sedation 
● If control of the drugs or devices used in this protocol will be 
accomplished by [CONTACT_10734], approved organizational SOP (e.g., Research Pharmacy SOP for the Control of Investigational Drugs, etc.), please reference the SOP in this section. 
  
This study will utilize the use of choline supplement (500mg BID capsules)  and a same 
look/taste placebo supplement (500mg BID capsules) randomized in a double blinded 
trial as interventions.  
 The choline  and placebo supplements will be stored and locke d away in the Human 
Integrative Physiology Lab and only members of the research team will have access to 
these capsules . Once subjects are required to be provided with the choline or placebo 
supplement, they will be provided to the participants in sealed c ontainers which are 
assigned by [CONTACT_9178]. Only members of the research team will provide the supplements  
to the subject.  
 
The capsules  will be produced in aseptic conditions in the Human Integrative Physiology 
Laboratory by [CONTACT_8362].   
 
DEXA scans will be used as part of a body composition analysis required on four  visits  
(Visit 3, 9, 12, 18). The amount of radiation that a DEXA exam incurs is less than the 
amount permitted by [CONTACT_2165] (FDA) per year. The amount that 
will be received is equal to 4*1/[ADDRESS_332914] x -ray.  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 10 of 41 Revised: August  10, [ADDRESS_332915] the name [CONTACT_40232]  (including any vitamins, supplements, herbs, or 
nicotine ) to be used in the study.  Indicate  whether  they have FDA 
approval, and list any limitations for their use :  
 
Choline: Choline is a water -soluble vitamin -like essential nutrient that is available as an 
over-the-counter supplement. Adequate intake for adults is 550 mg/day for men and 
425 g/day for women. Tolerable upper intake level for adults is 3500 mg/day. Doses 
over the daily upper intake levels may cause side effects such as sweating, a fishy body 
odor, gastr ointestinal distress, diarrhea, and vomiting. Some individuals might be 
allergic to choline or the other ingredients. Individuals who have known allergies to 
choline or other ingredients will be excluded. The subject s always will have the ability 
to terminate their participation for any reason without consequence. The dose of 1000 
mg/day dose of choline bitartrate USP (500 mg BID; NutriScience, Trumbull, CT) provided is well below the tolerable upper intake level for adults. Choline bitartrate USP is avai lable as an over -the-counter supplement and is Generally Recognized as 
Safe by [CONTACT_1622].   
Placebo: This will mimic the look of the choline capsule  and contains 1000 mg (500 mg 
BID) of maltodextrin , a polysaccharide or carbohydrate commonly found in foods  in a 
normal diet.  
Nitroglycerin: These are stabilized sublingual compressed tablets which will contain 
0.4mg of nitroglycerin and are FDA approved.    
 
7.[ADDRESS_332916] all devices, how they will be used, their purpose in the study, and if 
they will be used in a manner consistent with their approved uses. If they will be used in ways that are not yet FDA approved, indicate whether they need  an IDE or a determination that they are exempt from the IDE 
Determination. If a determination of significant risk or non- significant risk 
is needed for any of the devices, include the researcher’s recommendation for each of those devices :  
 
- To perform the FMD portion of the investigation , duplex ultrasonography will used. To 
perform this , a GE Vivid S6 unit equipped with a high- resolution linear array transducer 
will be used in accordance with published guidelines. Furthermore, carotid imaging will be performed using the same unit to obtain carotid artery diameters.  
 
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 11 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  - To perform the arterial stiffness measurements , applanation tonometry will be used. A 
fingertip probe which is equipped with a high- fidelity strain gauge transducer will be 
placed on the carotid, brachial, radia l, and femoral arteries to obtain pressure waveforms 
and amplitudes. Again, this procedure will be performed following published guidelines.  
 
- Continuous measurements of glucose will be assessed using the FreeS tyleLibre Pro, 
Abbott  CGM . It will be placed on the upper back side of an arm . This will be performed 
following the guidelines and protocol from the device's company ( Abbott) .  
 
- Blood pressure measurements will be obtained using a mercury sphygmomanometer or 
automated blood pressur e monitor and these measurements will strictly conform to 
American Heart Association guidelines . 
 
- Body composition analysis will be obtained via a DEXA scan with a Prodigy 
Advance, GE Healthcare unit. This will be performed only by [CONTACT_272425] a DEXA exam incurs is less than the 
amount permitted by [CONTACT_272426].  
 
7.4 If the drug is investigational (has an IND) or the device has an IDE or a 
claim of abbreviated IDE (non -significant risk device), include the 
following information:  
● Identify the holder of the IND/IDE/ abbreviated IDE. 
● Explain procedures followed to comply with sponsor requirements 
for FDA regulated research for the following:  
 Applicable to:  
FDA Regulation  IND Studies  IDE studies  Abbreviated 
IDE studies  
21 CFR 11  X X  
21 CFR 54  X X  
21 CFR 210  X   
21 CFR 211  X   
21 CFR 312  X   
21 CFR 812   X X 
21 CFR 820   X  
 
 
IDE exempt  
   
 
  
8.0 Procedures Involved  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 12 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  8.1 Describe and explain the study design:  
 
Using a randomized cross -over design, participants will be given and asked to consume 
either choline or a placebo  (maltodextrin)  supplement  for four weeks and will consume 
1000 mg (500 BID) of choline or placebo per day. Testing will take place over twelve  
visits. Participants will complete a screening visit and two periods of three- day testing 
sessions before and after the four -week period  of choline and placebo supplement . In 
between experimental sessions , there will be a two -week “washout”.  
 
 
8.2 Provide a description of:  
● All research procedures being performed  
● If the study has more than one procedure, session, and/or subject 
population, descri be each procedure, session, and/or  study 
population separately. For complex studies, you are encouraged to include a figure or chart. 
  
Session 1: Baseline (screening) session (Approximately 2 hour s) Garvin Building , Suite 
[ADDRESS_332917] :  Subjects will be asked to avoid eating or drinking anything except water 
and to avoid consuming any caffeine -containing beverages for [ADDRESS_332918] results will not be influenced by [CONTACT_272427].   
 
Blood Chemistry: A blood draw will be collected for choline  concentrations as well 
glucose, cholesterol, and other factors that may impact or be reflective of vascular function/health. A needle will be inserted in an arm vein to dr aw blood (approximately 2 
tablespoons /draw).  
 Urine Test: Subjects  will be asked to urinate in a small cup. S odium and other 
electrolytes, glucose, protein, pH, and whether ther e are blood cells present will be 
measured to determine whether it is safe for each individual  to participate in the study.  
 Proof of COVID -19 vaccination : Subjec ts will be asked to bring the ir vaccination card 
against COVID -19 to the laboratory.  
 
Medical History:  Subjects will be asked to complete a medical history questionnaire, which will be used to screen for health problems (unstable heart disease) or other reasons (medications which influence study results) that would preclude participation.  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 13 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  Physical Activity : Subjects will be asked to complete a questionnaire regarding usual 
daily activities.  They will also be asked to wear a device called an accelerometer over a 
4-day period to measure their physical activity level  
 
Infection/Inflammation Questionnaire:  Subjects will be asked to complete a 
questionnaire about any recent illnesses or infections that they may have had in the prior 
month.  Dietary Record: Subjects will be asked to record/recall all of the food they eat during a 4-day period.  
 Body mass and height: Body weight will be measured on a digital scale accurate to +0.01 
kg. Height will be measured with a stadiometer  
 Resting Blood Pressure and Heart Rate: Blood pressure measurements will be made 
under quiet, comfortable ambient labor atory conditions via mercury sphygmomanometry  
or an automatic blood pressure monitor . Heart rate will also be determined by [CONTACT_272428]. Measurements will conform strictly to American Heart Association guidelines.  
 Session 2, 8, 11, 17: (Approximately 3 hours) Garvin Building , Suite [ADDRESS_332919]: Subjects will be asked to avoid eating or drinking anything except water and to avoid consuming any caffeine -containing beverages for [ADDRESS_332920] results will not be influenced by [CONTACT_272427].   
 Resting Blood Pressure and Heart Rate:  Blood pressure measurements will be made under quiet, comfortable ambient laboratory conditions via mercury sph ygmomanometry  
or an automatic blood pressure monitor . Heart rate will also be determined by [CONTACT_272428]. Measurements will conform strictly to American Heart Association guidelines.  
 Body Mass: Body weight will be measured on a digital  scale accurate to +/ - 0.01 kg.  
 
Dietary intake analysis (24 -hour recall): Subjects will be asked to recall all the food and 
beverages they consumed in the previous 24- hour period.  
 
Oral Glucose Tolerance Test:  One small plastic tube (catheter) will be placed in one of the subject's arm veins.  After a baseline blood draw to measure glucose, insulin, cholesterol, and other factors that may impact or be reflective of the subject's health status (e.g., C -reactive protein), the subject will drink a sugary drink of glucose (75 
grams) and blood will be collected in small amounts  (less than one half teaspoon) every 
half hour (4 blood draws  total) for a 2 -hour period.      
 
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 14 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  Stool Collection: Subjec ts will be given a test tube and asked to collect a sto ol sample. 
Subjec ts will be asked to bring the sample back to the laboratory during their next 
scheduled visit. All supplies and instructions will be provided by [CONTACT_25699].  
 
Continuous Glucose Monitoring: Glucose will be measured by a continuous glucose 
monitor  (FreeStyle Libre  Pro, Abbott) . A small sensor will be placed on the subjec t's skin 
overlying the  back side of their arm  in order to measure glucose continuously. The sensor 
has a small plastic tube that is inserted into the tissue just below the skin and is held in 
place with sticky tape. The device will be worn for 3- 4 days.  
 Session 3, 9, 12, 18: (Approximately 2 hours) Garvin Building , Suite [ADDRESS_332921] : Subjects will be asked to avoid eating or drinking anything except water 
and to avoid consuming any caffeine -containing beverages for [ADDRESS_332922] res ults will not be influenced by [CONTACT_272427].   
 Resting Blood Pressure and Heart Rate:  Blood pressure measurements will be made 
under quiet, comfortable ambient laboratory conditions via mercury sphygmomanometry  
or an automatic blood pressure monitor . Heart rate will also be determined by [CONTACT_272428]. Measurements will conform strictly to American Heart Association guidelines.  
 Body Mass: Body weight will be measured on a digital scale accurate t o +/- 0.01 kg.  
 
Dietary intake analysis (24 -hour recall): Subjects will be asked to recall all the food and 
beverages they consumed in the previous 24- hour period.  
  Blood Chemistry: A blood draw will be collected for choline  concentrations as well  
glucose, cholesterol, and other factors that may impact or be reflective of vascular function/health. A needle will be inserted in an arm vein to draw blood (approximately 2 tablespoons /draw).  
 Arterial Stiffness: Carotid Ultrasonography  - Common caroti d artery diameters will be 
measured from the image obtained from an ultrasound unit (GE Vivid S6) equipped with 
a high -resolution linear array transducer. Applanation Tonometry  - The carotid, brachial, 
radial and femoral artery pressure waveform and ampli tude will be obtained by a 
fingertip probe incorporating a high- fidelity strain gauge transducer.  
 
Brachial Artery Flow Mediated Dilation  (FMD) : FMD of the brachial artery will be 
assessed using duplex ultrasonography (GE Vivid S6) with a high- resolution l inear array 
transducer according to published guidelines. Reactive hyperemia will be produced by [CONTACT_16131] a pediatric BP cuff around the forearm for [ADDRESS_332923] -reactive hyperemic diameters and velocities will be performed using 
edge detection software (Vascular Analysis Tools, Medical Imaging Applications, Inc.).  
 
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 15 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  Endothelium Independent Vasodilation: This w ill be assessed by [CONTACT_272429] [ADDRESS_332924] a history of coronary heart disease.  
 
24-hour Urine Collection: Subjec ts will be asked to collect all urine samples over a 24 -
hour period and bring the sample back to the laboratory during their next scheduled visit. 
All supplies and instructions will be provided by [CONTACT_25699].  
 Body Mass and Composition:  Body weight will be measured on a digital scale accurate to +0.01 kg.  Height will be measured with a stadiometer. Percent body fat and fat -free 
mass will be measured in all subjects using dual- energy x -ray absorptiometry (DEXA)  
(Prodigy Advance, GE Healthcare).  
 Pregnancy Test:  If a subject is female and pre - or peri -menopausal or not 
postmenopausal for at  least  [ADDRESS_332925].  
 Session 4, 10, 13, 19: (Approximately 3 hours) Garvin Building , Suite [ADDRESS_332926] : Subjects will be asked to avoid eating or drinking anything e xcept water 
and to avoid consuming any caffeine -containing beverages for [ADDRESS_332927] results will not be influenced by [CONTACT_272430].   
 
Resting Blood Pressure and Heart Rate:  Blood pressure measurements will be made 
under quiet, comfortable ambient laboratory conditions via mercury sphygmomanometry  
or an automatic blood pressure monitor . Heart rate will also be determined by [CONTACT_272428]. Measurements will conform  strictly to American Heart 
Association guidelines.  
 Body Mass: Body weight will be measured on a digital scale accurate to +/ - 0.01 kg.  
 Dietary intake analysis (24 -hour recall): Subjects will be asked to recall all the food and 
beverages they consumed i n the previous 24- hour period.  
 Mixed Meal Tolerance Test:  A small plastic tube (catheter) will be placed in one of the 
subject's arm veins.  After a baseline blood draw to measure glucose, insulin, cholesterol, and other factors that may impact or be reflective of the subject's health status (e.g., C -
reactive protein), the subject will drink a mixed meal  beverage ( Ensure original  plus  ®, 
350 calories, 48 g carbohydrate, 11 g fat, and 16 g protein) and blood will be collected in 
small amounts  (less than one half teaspoon)  at timepoints 0, 30, 60, 90, and 120 over a 
two-hour period.  
 Continuous Glucose Monitoring: The device which was placed on the subject will be 
removed.  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 16 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021   
Choline Supplement/Placebo: Subjects  will be given enough capsules to last one week 
and asked to consume 1000 mg (2 x 500 mg tablets) of choline or  placebo with a bottle of 
water every  day.  
 
Sessions 5- 7, 14- 16: (Approximately  30 minutes per session)  Garvin Bldg , Suite 1575  
 
Choline Supplement/Placebo: Subjects  will be given enough capsules to last one week 
and asked to consume 1000 mg (2 x 500 mg tablets) of choline or the placebo with a bottle of water every  day. 
  Resting Blood Pressure and Heart Rate: Blood pressure measurements will be made 
under quiet, comfortable ambient laboratory conditions via mercury sphygmomanometry  
or an automatic blood pressure monitor . Heart rate will also be determined by [CONTACT_272428]. Measurements will conform strictly to American Heart 
Association guidelines.  
 
Body Mass: Body weight will be measured on a digital scale accurate to +/ - 0.01 kg.  
 Dietary intake analysis (24 -hour recall): Subjects will be asked to rec all all the food and 
beverages they consumed in the previous 24- hour period.  
 After session 10: Following this session, subjects will return to their normal activities for  
a two-week  "washout".  
 
 
8.3 Describe:  
● Procedures or safeguards intended to reduce the probability and 
magnitude of risks . (For example: Reducing the risk of injury in a 
virtual reality study either by [CONTACT_42630] -free space for walking. ) 
● Be sure to describe a ll drugs and devices used in the research, when 
they will be administered or used, and their purpose.  
● Methods used to collect data about subjects. Please upload all data 
collection forms to Protocol Management. Som e common e xamples 
are: 
● Screening questionnaires  
● Survey(s) , including online surveys  
● Demographic questionnaire(s)  
● Interview guide(s) , e.g., questions or pool of questions for semi -
structured interviews  
● Focus group guide(s)  
● Other document s used to collect data  
 
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 17 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021   
- Blood Draw:  The P.I. or a trained technician will perform all blood draws.  Aseptic 
conditions will be followed during all of the procedures. Universal precautions will be 
taken in collection and handling of all blood samples. Subjects will be informed that their blood will be analyzed for presence of HIV and Hepatitis , if an experimenter is exposed 
to their blood.  - Endothelial Function: The risk of low blood pressure during nitroglycerine 
administration is minimized because the subject is already in the sup ine position.  There 
is a small risk of a headache, but this will last only a few minutes. Individual s taking 
Cialis or Viagra cannot participate in this aspect of the study.  
 - DEXA scan: DEXA procedure will be performed by [CONTACT_32341]. Subjec ts will be 
informed of the risk of radiation exposure prior to study enrollment.  
 
- Continuous Glucose Monitor: T he placement of the CGM on the subject will be 
performed by  [CONTACT_32341] . This will take place in aseptic conditions , minimizing the 
risk of any infection. 
 
 
8.[ADDRESS_332928] during the study and how you will  obtain them ? 
Please i nclude descriptions of electronic data collection, database 
matching, and app- based data collection:  
 
- Study data will be collected on data sheets and manually entered into a database 
(Excel format) on a secure computer.  
 
8.5 Who will transcribe or code  audio and/or video recordings?:  
 N/A  
8.6 Include a description of any deception to be used in the study. Include 
justification for the use of deception ( why the deception is necessary ), 
describe the debriefing process, and describe how the study meets all  the 
following criteria  for  alteration of consent  (deception is considered an 
alteration of informed consent) : 
• The research involves no more th an minimal risk to the subjects  
• The alteration will not adversely affect the rights  and welfare of the 
subjects  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 18 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  • The research could not practicably be car ried out without the 
alteration /deception  
• (Optional  but encouraged in most cases ) Subjects will be provided with 
additional pertinent information after participation (i.e., debriefing f or 
studies involving deception)   
 
 N/A  
 
8.7 If the study involves  long -term follow -up (once all research related 
procedures are complete), describe what data will be collected during the follow up period and when it will occur :  
 
N/A  
 
   
9.0 Data and Specimen Long Term Storage and Use  
9.1 If you will store data or specimens for future use, describe where you will 
store the data or specimens, how long they will be stored, and how and by 
[CONTACT_40207] : 
 
All data will be stored in a locked cabinet in [CONTACT_272439]'s laboratory the Human Integrative Physiology Laboratory located in Garvin Building , Suite 1575 ([ADDRESS_332929]., Blacksburg, VA [ZIP_CODE])  which is also locked with access to authorized personnel  
only. The  computer data will be store d in the locked lab on a computer that is password 
protected. All de -identified data will be kept indefinitely and there is no need to use 
specimens for the scope of the study.  
 
 
9.[ADDRESS_332930] the data to be stored or associated with each 
specimen : 
 
N/A  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 19 of 41 Revised: August  10, [ADDRESS_332931] a release, approvals 
required for release, who can obtain data or specimens, and what data 
will be provided with specimens : 
 
N/A  
9.[ADDRESS_332932] access to it, and when it will be destroyed : 
 
Codes using a combination of letters and/or numbers will be used to de -identify subjects 
from their personal information. This de -identified data collection sheet will be stored 
and locked away and the key will be kept in a locked cabinet separate from the subjects ' 
completed data documents and accessibility will be limited to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_1238] C o-PI's.  
The p eople who will have access to this data are the investigators and students involved 
in the study  
De-identified data may be kept indefinitely. Identifiable data and blood samples will be 
retained before being destroyed for [ADDRESS_332933] the identifiers you will obtain  (whether directly from 
participants or from another source) , including but not limited to:  
 
☒ Name  
☒ Geographical subdivisions smaller than a state, including street address, 
city, county, precinct, zip code, and equivalent geocodes (note, the initial 
three digits of a zip code  are not considered identifiable)  
☒ Elements of dates (except year) for dates directly related to an individual, 
including birth date, admission date, discharge date, date of death, and 
single year of age  over 89 and all elements of dates (including year) 
indicative of such age  (note,  such ages and elements may be aggregated 
into a single category of age 90 +) 
☒ Phone numbers  
☐ Fax numbers  
☒ Electronic mail addresses (e -mail)  
☐ Social Security numbers  
☐ Medical record numbers  
☐ Health plan beneficiary numbers  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 20 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  ☐ Account numbers  
☐ Certificate/license numbers  
☐ Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers  
☐ Device identifiers and serial numbers  
☐ Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs)  
☐ Internet protocol (IP) address numbers  
☐ Biometric identifiers, including finger and voic e prints (audio recording)  
☐ Full face photographic images and any comparable images  (including 
video recording)  
☐ Student record number or identification  number   
☐ User name [CONTACT_40233]  
☐ Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code (note this 
does not mean the unique code assigned by [CONTACT_40209]) : Click here to explain.    
 
10.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects  
10.1 Describe whether you will share results (study results or individual subject 
results, such as results of investigational diagnostic tests, genetic tests, or 
incidental findings) with subjects or others (e.g., the subject’s primary care physician). If so, describe how  you will share  the results and include this 
information as part of the consent document. Upload materials you  will use 
to explain the results  to subjects : 
 
At the conclusion of the study or when the subjects'  involvement in the study ends , they 
will be provided with their blood pressur e readings, body composition results, and 
information on their dietary intake. This information will be provided in a summary of the study's findings.  
 
 
 
11.0 Study Timelines  
11.1 Describe:  
● The duration of an individual subject’s participation in the study  (for 
example, 1 hour, 2- 4 weeks, 3 -5 years) . 
● The amount of time expected to enroll all study subjects ( weeks, 
months, years, etc .) 
● The amount of time expected  for the investigators to complete this 
study  including primary data analyses . 
 
 
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 21 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  The duration of an individual's participation in this study will be approximately [ADDRESS_332934]'s visits will depend on their and the study staff 's schedule.  
Subjec ts will begin the study on a rolling basis, but this will take place across 
approximately 12 months.  The to tal amount of time expected to complete this study is approximately 24 months.  
 
 
12.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
12.1 Describe how  you will screen  individuals for eligibility.  When will 
screening occur and what procedures will you use ? Upload any screening 
scripts or surveys to Protocol Management :  
 
 Those who respond to the investigation's advertisements will be asked to complete a brief online screening questionnaire to confirm basic eligibility criteria on Q ualtrics (e.g., age, 
health status).   
Furthermore, subjects will be screened for any possible health problems that would make it unsafe to participate, they will be required to complete a medical history questionnaire and made fully aware of their right t o withdraw from the study at any time.  
 
 
 
 
12.2 Describe the eligibility criteria that define who will be included and who 
will be  excluded from enrollment for  each p rocedure of your  study. 
Include any ge ographic criteria (e.g., Virginia Tech undergraduate 
students, a national sample of adults with engineering degrees, minors aged 8- 12 in the New River Valley, university faculty in Virginia and 
Paris, [LOCATION_009]) : 
 
Inclusion criteria is as follows: 
- 18-79 years of age  
- Sedentary (low ph ysical activity)  
- Not diabetic  
- Not taking medications that influence the study results  
- Not have severe obesity (BMI <35kg/m^2)  
- Non -smokers  
- Not pregnant  
- Without any major medical problems  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 22 of 41 Revised: August  10, [ADDRESS_332935] a BMI >35 kg/m^2. Additionally, if they have changed their 
dietary patterns in the last month, have unstable heart disease or diabetes, vegetarians, vegans, untreated high cholesterol, or have health problems that make it  unsafe to 
participate  
 
12.3 Indicate specifically whether you will include or exclude each of the following special populations: (You may not include members of these populations as subjects in your research unless you indicate them in the description of your subject population.)  
● Minors , as defined by [CONTACT_40211] 
(infants, children, teenagers)  
● Pregnant women (can be included in minimal risk studies by 
[CONTACT_40212] 13.1)  
● Prisoners (including all incarcerated individuals)  
● Adults not capable to consent on their own behalf  
 
All of the above will be excluded from the study.  
 
 
13.[ADDRESS_332936] their rights and welfare. Consider the applicable items listed below:  
● If the research involves Virginia Tech students, indicate whether these are students of any of the investigator s. If so, describe whether 
the activities will take place during class time as part of the curriculum and the steps  you will  take to reduce the possibility that 
student s feel obliged  to participate in order to improve their course 
grade. The HRPP can provide further guidance as needed. Describe whether  you will request access to student records (e.g., SAT, GPA, 
GRE scores).  
● If the research involves employees of Virginia Tech or the research sponsor, describe steps you will take to ensure that the employees are freely participating and describe how their data will be protected from inspection by [CONTACT_40213].  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 23 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  ● If the research involves Virginia Tech NCAA athletes, you must 
obtain approval from the athletic department.  
● For research involving Montgomery County Public Schools, you must obtain c ounty approval (after obtaining contingent Virginia 
Tech approval). Other locales have different requirements ; please 
check on these and describe here.  Approval is typi[INVESTIGATOR_40170], principal, and classroom teacher (in that order). Approval by [CONTACT_40214]. School approval, in 
the form of a letter or a memorandum should be uploaded as a supporting document . 
● If the research involves pregnant women, review “CHECKLIST: Pregnant Women (HRP -412)” to ensure that you have provided 
sufficient information  in this protocol . 
● If the research involves prisoners, review “CHECKLIST: Prisoners 
(HRP -415)” to ensure that you have provided sufficient information 
in this protocol.  
● If the research involves persons who have not attained the legal age 
for consent to treatments or procedures involved in the research (minors ), review the “CHECKLIST: Minors  (HRP -416)” to ensure 
that you have provided sufficient information in this protocol. 
● If the research involves cognitively impair ed adults, review 
“CHECKLIST: Cognitively Impaired Adults (HRP -417)” to ensure 
that you have provided sufficient information in this protocol. 
 
 
This research study has the potential to include employees of Virginia Tech. 
However, during the consenting process of the research study , the participants 
will be made aware that only members of the research study will have access to their data and that this data will utilize a coding system making their data unidentifiable. This data will be locked away and they will be made fully aware of  
their right to withdraw from the study at any time.  
 
 
 14.0 Number of Subjects  
14.1 Indicate the total number of subjects to be enrolled and how this number 
was determined (e.g., sample size calculation [show], number of available subjects in a finite pool, number of tests funding award would allow) :  
 
We have powered our pi[INVESTIGATOR_272404] a change in insulin sensitivity 
of 20 ± 32% (effect size=0.63) .  We believe changes in other outcomes will 
be of similar magnitude.  We will enroll 60 participants .  Importantly, the 
purpose of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_272405], acceptability, and 
provide proof of concept.  Even with a small sample size (n= 60), a cross -
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 24 of 41 Revised: August  10, [ADDRESS_332937] sizes, which is needed for a more comprehensive future trial.  
 
14.2 If this is a multi -site study, indicate the number of subjects to be enrolled 
at this site and the total to be enrolled from all sites : 
 
N/A 
 
14.[ADDRESS_332938] to 
screen  for enrollment , and the number of subjects you will need to 
complete the research procedures : 
 
300-400 potential subjects will be screened for eligibility in this study. Of this 300- 400 
individuals, 60 participants who are eligible will be enrolled to take part in the 
investigation.  
 
 
14.4 If the study has more than one procedure, indicate the total number of 
subjects to undergo each procedure separately : 
 
All subjects will complete each procedure.  
 
15.0 Recruitment Methods  
15.1 Describe when, where, and how you will recruit potential subjects : 
 
Recruitment will take place immediately following IRB approval. We are looking to recruit subjects from the New River Valley and surrounding areas. We will recruit 
subjects via posted fliers, newspaper advertisements, web postings, and community blood 
pressure screenings. Additionally, we plan to contact [CONTACT_272431]/people who have expressed interest in future studies and who gave us permission to contact [CONTACT_272432] . 
 
15.2 Describe the source of subjects  (for example, clinic patients with specific 
conditions, students in the library, community members at a gathering, or members of a local gym) : 
 
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 25 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  We want to recruit from the general population.  
 
15.3 Describe the methods that you will use to identify poten tial subjects : 
 
Posted fliers, newspaper advertisements, web postings, and community blood pressure 
screenings. Additionally, we plan to contact [CONTACT_272431]/people who have 
expressed interest in previous studies who gave us permission to contact [CONTACT_272433] f uture 
studies. Potential subjects will also be filtered via the use of Qualtrics as a basic screening for eligibility and potential subjects to follow up on.  
 
15.4 Describe materials that you will be use to recruit subjects. Attach copi[INVESTIGATOR_272406] s with th is protocol in Protocol Management and be 
sure to include  the IRB protocol number on each document .  
● For flyers, attach the final copy of printed flyers.  
● For Virginia Tech News, Facebook postings and ads, newspaper ads, websites, MTurk/SONA/online survey systems , etc., attach the final 
wording and graphics to be used.  
● For e mail recruitments, please include the subject line.  
● For advertisements meant for  audio broadcast, please  submit the 
wording of the advertisement prior to tapi[INVESTIGATOR_007] ( to avoid having to re -
record with approved language) and submit the final recorded version for IRB review before use.   
● Describe any compensation to subjects. Separate compensation into  
appropriate categories, such as: reimbursement for expenses, time and effort, and additional incentives for study participation.  For each category, specify the amount (including any pro -rated amount), schedule, 
and method of payment.  
 
Subjects may  receive up to $400 in compensation. 
 Subjec ts will receive $ 20 for completing  each testing  session  2-18. After completing 
session 19, subjects will receive $ 60. There will be no compensation for completing the 
first screening session  
 
 
 16.0 Withdrawal of Subjects  
16.1 Describe circumstances under which  you anticipate  subjects could be 
withdrawn from the research without their consent : 
 
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 26 of 41 Revised: August  10, [ADDRESS_332939] fails to 
follow instructions or adhere to the investigations intervention, and if they are late or miss scheduled appointments.  
 
 
16.2 If applicable, describe any procedures  for orderly termination ( e.g., 
discontinuation of a study drug or debriefing after a behavioral 
intervention) : 
 
If a participant is terminated or discontinued from the study for reasons as described above, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_272407]. Additionally, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_272408]. The participant will be provided with the compensation that is due and provided their information which is available to them (blood pressure, body composition and dietary intake). It will then be suggested that the study personnel part ways with the participant.  
 
 
16.3 Describe procedures that you will follow  when subjects withdraw from the 
research, including partial withdrawal from procedures with continued data collection (e.g., participant declines  to continue with regular blood 
draws, but continues with periodic behavioral questionnaires) : 
 
If a subject who is enrolled into the investigation is taking Cialis and/or Viagra , they will 
not be allowed to participate in the endothelial function aspect of the research which involves the sublingual use of nitroglycerin. However, they will be allowed to participate in all other aspects and the use of such medications will not be a determining factor in the inclusion/exclusion of the subject.  
 In the rare chance in which there could be difficulty with the placement of the catheter in order to obtain blood draws for the oral glucose tolerance test, blood samples may then be 
performed via finger stick to collect glucose level measurements.  
 
If the subjec t is uncomfortable with any aspect of having blood drawn, they have the 
opportunity to voluntarily pull out of any/all of the blood draws and will be allowed to continue with other aspects of the study.  
 
 
17.0 Risks to Subjects  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 27 of 41 Revised: August  10, [ADDRESS_332940] the reasonably foreseeable risks, discomforts, hazards, or 
inconveniences to the subjects related the subjects’ participation in the research. Include for the IRB’s consideration a description of the probability, magnitude, duration, and reversibility  of the risks. Consider 
physical, psychological, social, legal, privacy, and economic risks. Do not indicate  “No risk” or “N /A.” Instead, for studies with very low risk (e.g., 
anonymous online questionnaire on a mundane topic) indicate  “The 
investigators are not aware of any risks from participation in this study.” or “No more than risks than are found in everyday life.”  The example 
consent form presents a tabular method for risk information , which you 
can also use here . Common risk types include:  
● Physical (e.g., potential for pain, discomfort, infection)  
● Psychological (e.g., potential for stress, discomfort, and/or embarrassment)  
● Social (e.g., potential for discrimination or stigmatization and disruption of personal and family relationships)  
● Legal (e.g., potential for disclosure of illegal activity, negligence)  
● Privacy (e.g., potential for personal information being accessed, used, or disclosed without the subjects’ knowledge or consent, breach of confidentiality/security)  
● Economic (e.g., potential for individuals to lose access to economic services, employment, insurability)  
 
Choline: Choline is a water -soluble vitamin -like essential nutrient that is available as an 
over the counter supplement. Adequate intake for adults is 550 mg/day for men and 425 
g/day for women. Tolerable upper intake level for adults is 3500 mg/day. Doses over the 
daily upper intake levels may cause side effects such as sweating, a fishy body odor, gastrointestinal distress, diarrhea, and vomiting. Some individuals might be aller gic to 
choline or the other ingredients.  Individuals who have known allergies to choline or other ingredients will be excluded.  The subject always will have the ability to terminate their participation for any reason without consequence. The dose of 1000 mg provided is 
well below the tolerable upper intake level for adults.   Blood Draw: Some pain or discomfort may be experienced when the catheter is inserted in the vein, but this should persist for only a short time.  During the blood draws, subjects 
may have pain and/or bruising at the place on their arm where the blood is taken.  In 
about 1 in 10 or 10% of the cases, a small amount of bleeding under the skin will cause 
bruising. The risk of a blood clot forming in the vein is about 1 in 200, while the r isk of 
infection or significant blood loss is 1 in 1000.  There is a small risk of the vein becoming inflamed and/or painful in the hours or days after the needle is removed.  If subjects feel faint during or after a blood draw, they will be informed to notify the study doctor or study staff immediately and lie down right away to avoid falling.  Having staff who are experienced in venipuncture and blood draws will minimize these risks.  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 28 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  Oral Glucose Tolerance Tests: This procedure requires the placement of a catheter in an 
arm vein, the risks here are identical to that stated above. In addition, there is a small risk of low blood sugar occurring during or after the test. We will be monitoring subjects blood sugar frequently and can usually anticipate before blood sugar drops too low. If this happens, orange juice (with table sugar) or some other simple carbohydrate 
containing food will be provided. We will monitor the individual’s glucose until it returns 
to normal.   DEXA Scan: The amount of radiation that s ubjects will receive in the DEXA exam is less 
than the amount permitted by [CONTACT_2165] (FDA) per year. The amount subjects will receive is equal to 1/[ADDRESS_332941] x -ray. The more radiation an 
individual receives over the course of the ir lifetime, the more likely that individual’s risk 
increases in developi[INVESTIGATOR_272409]. The radiation in this study is not expected to greatly increase these risks, however the exact increase in such risk is not known.  
 
HIV/AIDS:  In the event a rese archer or other staff person is improperly exposed to the 
subject’s blood, his or her blood will be tested for the presence of HIV, the Hepatitis B 
Virus, and the Hepatitis C Virus. There will not be any cost to the subject for this test. The research team  will follow proper procedures for testing and reporting as outlined by 
[CONTACT_55936], which includes sending the individual to a doctor's  office for a blood 
draw. Should the blood be tested positive, the affected individual will be informed of  the 
results and provided with the opportunity to receive appropriate and timely counseling. In addition, the results, if positive, will be sent to the local health department.  
 Endothelial Function: Some pain or discomfort may be experienced when the blood 
pressure cuff is inflated and the participant may have pain and/or bruising at the place on the arm where the cuff was inflated but this is unlikely. However, these reactions are temporary and resolve within a short time after completing or stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_272410]. 
There is a small risk that the subjec t will become lightheaded, dizzy, or faint following 
nitroglycerin administration. If these events occur, the feet of the subject will be elevated to alleviate the  symptoms. Since they are alrea dy lying down, there is no risk of falling. 
These risks are minimized by [CONTACT_7661] a trained individual perform the procedure.  
 Arterial Stiffness: There is a risk of slight discomfort due to very slight pressure being applied to the carotid artery during the ultrasound procedure and to the carotid, brachial, radial, and femoral arteries during the tonometry procedure.  
Continuous Glucose Monitor: The placement procedure requires a sensor being inserted into the back side of the upper arm  of the subjec t. When the wire -like sensor is deployed 
by [CONTACT_3021] , the subject can expect a sensation similar to a needle insertion for a 
blood draw. Potential risks associated here include discomfort during the insertion, pain, inflamma tion, redness, swelling, minor bleeding and minor infection at the site. These 
risks will be minimized by [CONTACT_7661] a trained individual perform  the procedure and this 
will be performed in aseptic conditions. Subjec ts might also experience the se symptoms 
as a result of contact [CONTACT_40217]. In rare cases, an infection can spread to other parts of the body. Allergic reactions can develop in 
response the adhesive used to keep the CGM in place. If these sympt oms occur, subjec ts 
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 29 of 41 Revised: August  10, [ADDRESS_332942] the ability to remove the CGM at -will and can anticipate that their symptoms will 
clear up within a short time . 
 
17.2  Indicate the measures you will use to minimize risks and monitor subjects 
for safety. (e.g., asking a subject at regular intervals to rate how they are feeling from 1 to 10, or to slowly crouch in order to check their balance.)  
 
Blood Draw:  The P.I. or a trained technician will perform all blood draws.  Aseptic conditions will be followed during all of the procedures.  Universal precautions will be taken in collection and handling of all blood samples.  Subjects will be informed that their blood will be analyzed for presence of HIV and Hepatitis if an experimenter is exposed to their blood.  Endothelial Function: The risk of low blood pressure during nitroglycerine administration is minimized because the subject is already in the supi[INVESTIGATOR_2547].  There is a small risk 
of a headache, but this will last only a few minutes.  Individual s taking Cialis or Viagra 
cannot participate in this aspect of the study.  
 DEXA scan: The DEXA procedure will be performed by [CONTACT_272434] f. Subjec ts will be 
informed of the risk of radiation exposure prior to study enrollment.  
 
Whilst in the laboratory, each subjec t will be constantly monitored by [CONTACT_272435]. Furthermore, they will be 
made aware of their right to withdraw or discontinue any aspect of the protocol at any 
time.  
 
17.[ADDRESS_332943] risks to the subjects 
that are currently unforeseeable. This will be rare, and usually applicable when testing a new drug or device or a new use of an existing drug or device:  
 
N/A  
17.[ADDRESS_332944] be or become pregnant : 
 
N/A  
17.5 If applicable, describe risks to others who are not subjects (e.g., collection 
of sensitive health data that might affect sexual partners if disclosed, 
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 30 of 41 Revised: August  10, [ADDRESS_332945] family 
members or relationships) : 
 
N/A  
18.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects  
18.1 Describe the potential benefits that individual subjects might experience 
from participating in the research. Include the probability, magnitude, and duration of the potential benefits , as this will be useful to the IRB’s 
risk:benefit analysis . Do not include benefits to society or others. Do not 
list monetary or non- monetary compens ation for participation, as this is 
not a benefit  These should be included in section 2 or 3 of this document : 
 
Subjec ts will receive information about their dietary intake, body 
composition and blood pressure . 
 
18.[ADDRESS_332946] benefit s for 
participants :  
 
 
There are no direct benefits of participation. Subjects will be informed that this is not a wellness or medical exam and to discuss any concerns about their health information with their personal physician.  
 
19.0 Data Management and Confidentiality  
19.1 Describe procedures that  you will use for quality control  to ensure validity  
of collected data:  
 
To ensure quality control and validity of the data collected, all aspects of the research procedures will be conducted by [CONTACT_272436] a regular basis by [CONTACT_978]'s laboratory.  
 
19.2 Describe any existing data or biospecimens you will obtain as part of this study. Include :  
● Variables or samples to be obtained  
● Source  of the data or specimens  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 31 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  ● Your authorization to access or receive the data or biospecimens  
● Whether the data or biospecimens are publicly available  
● Whether the data or specimens  you receive will  contain identifiers  
 
N/A 
 
19.[ADDRESS_332947] protection, encryption, physical controls, certificates of 
confidentiality, separation of identifiers and data, etc.:  
 
Data will always be secured and deidentified. Only authorized and trained personnel 
will have access to study data. All data o n electronic devices will be password protected 
in a locked office in a locked building. Study identifier s will be kept in a separate 
locked cabinet  then data files .  
 
19.4 For multi- site studies , describe how data or specimens will be handled 
and secured for  each site ( e.g., central or disseminated data storage, data 
coordinating center ): 
 
N/A 
 
19.5 Describe the plan for data disposition following the conclusion of the 
study (e.g., long term maintenance of data, data destruction methods) .  
● What information will be included in the long term storage of data or specimens?  
● How long will the data or specimens be stored?  
● Where and how data or specimens will be stored?  
● Who will have access to the data or specimens  during long term 
storage ? 
● Who is r esponsible for receipt or transmission of the data or 
specimens?  
● How will data or specimens be shared or transported? 
● When and how will personal identifiers be destroyed? 
 
 
Only unidentified data or specimens will be stored, they may be stored indefinitely in the 
Garvin Building , Suite 1575. Only members of the research team in the protocol will 
have access and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_272411].  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 32 of 41 Revised: August  10, [ADDRESS_332948] subjects’ privacy interests. 
“Privacy interest” refers to a person’s desire to place limits on with whom they interact or to whom they provide personal information (e.g., collecting the minimal amount of private information required to complete the study, protecting the data once it is obtained) :  
 
The minimal amount of private information will be collected and once the 
necessary data is collected all data will be unidentifiable through the use 
of codes and remain confidential in a locked cabinet.  
 
20.2 Describe steps that you will take  to make subjects feel at ease with the 
research situation in terms of the questions being asked and the procedures being performed. “At ease” does not refer to physical discomfort, but the sense of intrusiveness a subject might experience in response to questions, examinations, and procedures (e.g., use of a same gender investigator to place sensors on the torso , a private changing area 
if clothing must be changed, sensitivity when discussing  pregnancy test ing 
with subjects , making it clear on surveys that participants  can discontinue 
at any time, not asking questions about private or sensitive issues unless necessary for the research ): 
 
For procedures requiring the placement of sensors on a sensitive area of the body, such as tonometry meas urements (arterial stiffness) on the inner thigh, this will be performed by 
a same gender investigator.  
 There is a private changing area in our Human Integrative Physiology Laboratory for 
when individual s need to change into hospi[INVESTIGATOR_272412].  
 
There is a private bathroom for subjects to use and for when they are required to provide a urine sample for urinalysis.  
 Sensitivity will be ensured when discussing pregnancy testing with subjects.  
During the consenting process and throughout the investigation, subjec ts will be made 
fully aware of their rights to withdraw from a procedure or the study.  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 33 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021   
20.3 Describe how you plan to access existing sources of information about the 
subjects (e.g., medical records, grades) and how you will protect participant privacy through the data security plan:  
 
No existing sources of information will be accessed. 
 
20.4 Describe any required reporting that might  occur as a result of your 
research questions, study populations, and data collection methods. 
Examples for Virginia and Virginia Tech include:  
• Any suspi[INVESTIGATOR_40179] (e.g., circumstantial, disclosed) of child abuse (physical, 
emotional, sexual ) and neglect  
• Sexual discrimination and/or sexual violence that involves a student  
• Disclosure or signs of intention to harm one self (i.e., suicidal ideation 
and/or plan)  
• Disclosure or signs of  desire to harm others (i.e., homicidal ideation 
and/or plan)  
• Suspected abuse, neglect or exploitation of vulnerable adults (e.g., individuals with a disability, elderly persons ) 
  
We do  not anticipate any required reporting from the conduct of our study. However, we 
will report any of the above if there is circumstantial or disclosed information to the 
above points. 
  
 
21.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
Safety monitoring is required  when research involves greater than m inimal r isk 
and is sometimes appropriate for other studies . 
21.1 Describe:  
● The plan to periodically evaluate the data collected regarding both harms and benefits to determine whether subjects remain safe  (e.g., 
periodic reporting to the IRB , establishing a data monitoring 
committee , reporting data monitoring committ ee findings to the IRB 
and the sponsor ). 
● What data you will review, including safety data, unexpected  events, 
and data that show the ability to produce the intended results . 
● How the safety information will be collected (e.g., with case report forms, at study visits, by [CONTACT_40225] ). 
● The frequency of data collection, including when safety data collection starts.  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 34 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  ● Who will review the safety data and with what fr equency . 
● The statistical tests for analyzing the safety data to determine 
whether harm is occurring. 
● Any conditions that will trigger an immediate suspension of the 
research (e.g., a serious adverse event).  
 
 The data safety monitoring plan (DSMP) for this study focuses on close monitoring by 
[CONTACT_458] (PI) in conjunction with a safety officer (Jose R ivero, MD), 
along with prompt reporting of excessive adverse events and any serious adverse events (AEs) to the NIH and to the Institutional Review Board. All serious AEs will be reported 
by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_874] [ADDRESS_332949] Coordinator 
(Elaina Marinik, Ph.D.) will be responsible for assembling the data and producing these reports as well as assuring that all parties obtain copi[INVESTIGATOR_96462]. Reports will be submitted annually to the VT IRB for review.  
  The frequency of data review for this study differs according to the type of data, the availability of data collected, and the perceived level of risk. Subjec ts will be queried at 
the laboratory visit s when supplements a re provided as to any side effects or changes in 
health status that they experience . Any reported side effects will be discussed 
immediately with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_272413] (i.e., serious adverse event), with [CONTACT_272440] ro. 
Out-of-range laboratory data (i.e., BP, bloodwork) will be discussed immediately with 
the PI [INVESTIGATOR_20196]. Rivero to determine if medical intervention or other actions are warranted.  Subjects will be referred to their primary care physician  if there are i ncidental 
findings.  
 
 
  
 
       
  
 
22.0 Compensation for Research  Related Injury  
22.1 If the research involves more than m inimal r isk to subjects, describe the 
available compensation in the event of research -related injury, if any : 

VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 35 of 41 Revised: August  10, [ADDRESS_332950] common for 
sponsored research:  
 
N/A  
23.0 Economic Burden to Subjects  
23.1 Describe any costs that subjects might be responsible for because of 
participation in the research, including any uncompensated costs for items such as transportation, missed work, and childcare : 
 
There will be minimum transportation to and from the study location, but we do not anticipate any additional uncompensated costs. 
 
24.0 Consent Process 
24.1 Indicate the process by [CONTACT_42642]. Please upload all consent, parental permission, and assent forms, documents, and scripts reference d in this section to Protocol 
Management.  
Describe the following:
 
● Where the consent process will take place (e.g., clinic waiting area, classroom, online)  
● The time  interval between  sharing the consent information with the 
prospective subject and obtaining consent . For lab, interview, and 
focus group studies, t he Virginia Tech IRB prefers that subjects have 
at least 24 hours to review the consent form and study information before the appointment  where consent will be obtained. For simple 
online survey studie s, you can typi[INVESTIGATOR_272414].  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 36 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  ● If applicable, process es to ensure ongoing consent or assent (e.g., 
for multiple sessions; for research in which a minor will turn 18 
during the study; for longitudinal research with minors who will later be asked to provide or affirm their assent ). 
● Please review “SOP: Informed C onsent Process for Research (HRP -
090)” for recommended procedure. Describe your process, being sure to include:  
o The name [CONTACT_42651] [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_42616]  
o The time that will be de voted to the consent discussion 
o Steps that you will take  to minimize the possibility  of coercion 
or undue influence  
o Steps that you will take  to gauge or ensure the subjects’ 
understanding 
 
Those who respond to the stud y's advertisements will be asked to complete a brief online 
screening to confirm basic eligibility criteria on u Qaltrics (e.g., age, health status).  Those 
still interested and eligible to participate will be provided a consent document to review 
and consider.  Those who continue to express interest in participating will be invited to an 
initial session to hear the details of study and potential risks associated with their 
involvement.  They will be given a chance to ask any questions and have them a nswered 
to their satisfaction.  Those who would like to participate will be required to sign the consent document.  
A member of the investigative team will obtain consent from subjects.  [CONTACT_272439] will be responsible for oversight of all aspects of the  study  
The consent process will take place in the Human Integrative Physiology Laboratory in the Garvin Bldg  and this will occur in the initial contact [CONTACT_109116] , where the 
study will be explained to them and they will be emailed or receive a copy of the 
informed consent.  
Subjects will be allowed to take a copy of the informed consent home with them to review or a copy will be mailed, emailed or faxed to them.  They will return at a later date with the consent to ensure they have had enough time to review the consent and have any questions answered.  
 
Non-English Speaking Subjects  
● Indicate what language(s) other than English are understood by 
[CONTACT_40228].  
● If non- English speakers will be recruited , describe the process  you 
will use  to ensure that the oral and/or written consent information 
provided will be in a language that they understand.  
● If you translate consent forms and study materials , please provide a 
certified translation of the form as well as the certification document.  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 37 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  ● Indicate the spoken language that study  personnel obtaining consent  
will use . Describe how you will assess fluency of personnel obtaining 
consent  to ensure that the translation is accurate. 
 
 
Non-English -speaking individuals are not being recruited. English is the only language 
spoken by [CONTACT_44518] (all native and fluent speaking).  
 
 
Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process (consent will not be obtained, 
required information will not be disclosed, or the research involves deception)  
● Review the “CHECKLIST: Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process (HRP -410)” to ensure you have provided sufficient information for 
the IRB to make these determinations (i.e., that it meets the criteria for a waiver or alteration of the consent process).  
 
N/A 
  
Subjects who are not yet adults (minors: infants, children, teenagers)  
● Describe the criteria that you will use  to determine  legal age for 
consent to treatments or procedures involved in the research under 
the applicable law of the jurisdiction in which the research will be conducted (e.g., in Virginia, individuals under the age of 18 years).  
o For research conducted in Virginia , review “SOP: Legally 
Authorized Representatives, Minors, and Guardians (HRP -
013)” to determine which individuals in the state meet the definition of “minor.”  
o For research conducted outside of the state, please describe the legal requirements for the definition of “minor.”   
● Describe the process for obtaining parental permission.  o Permission from o ne parent  is acceptable for  studies  that 
involve no greater than minimal risk OR involve greate r than 
minimal risk but present  the prospect of direct benefit to the 
minor  subject . 
o Permission from both parents is required in all other cases (unless one parent is deceased, unknown, 
incompetent, or not reasonably available, or when only one parent has legal responsibility for the care and custody of the minor ).
 
● Describe whether you will obtain permission from individuals other 
than parents or Legally Authorized Representatives , and if so, who 
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 38 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  will be allowed to provide permission. Describe the process you will 
use to determine these individuals’ authority to consent to the  
minor’s general medical care.  
● Indicate whether you will obtain assent from all, some, or none of the minors. If  you will obtain assent from some minors, indicate 
which minors will be required to assent. Consider  chronological age 
and intellectual capacity  when determining who will be required to 
provide assent (e.g., infants are unable to assent. However, teenagers are likely able to read and sign an assent form ). 
● When assent of minors is obtained, describe whether and how you will document  it.  Will minors  sign an assent form or give verbal 
assent? 
● Attach parental permission and minor assent forms or scripts in Protocol Management .  
 
 N/A 
 
 
Adults  Unable to Consent  
● Describe the process you will use to determine whether an individual 
adult is capable of consent. 
● List the individuals from whom  you will obtain permission in order 
of priority (e.g., durable power of attorney for health care, court appointed guardian for health care decisions, spouse, and non-
minor child).  
o For research conducted in the Virginia , review “SOP: Legally 
Authorized Representatives, Mi nors, and Guardians (HRP -
013)” to determine which individuals in the state meet the definition of “legally authorized representative.”  
o For research conducted outside of Virginia , please describe 
the legal requirements for obtaining permission from a legall y 
authorized representative in the state where the research will occur.  
● Describe the process for assent of the subjects.  
o Indicate whether y ou will require assent from  all, some, or 
none of the subjects. If some, indicate which subjects will be required to assent and which will not.  
o If you will not obtain assent from some or all subjects, please provide justification for not obtaining assent . 
o Describe whether and how yo u will document assent.  
 
N/A 
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 39 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021   
25.0 Process to Document Consent in Writing  
25.1 Consult “SOP: Written Documentation of Consent (HRP -091)” for 
recommended procedures , and describe whether and how consent of the 
subject will be documented in writing:  
 
Subjects  will be asked to sign the consent form to make sure they understand what is 
being asked from them and the potential risks and benefits involved. A member of the 
study team will acknowledge the witnessing of the signature [CONTACT_272438].  
 
 
25.[ADDRESS_332951] that the IRB waive the requirement to obt ain written documentation of consent 
(e.g., consent to participate is indicated by [CONTACT_7326] a button for an online questionnaire – after the consent information is presented and before the questionnaire begins) : 
 
N/A 
 
25.3 If you will document consent in writing, attach a consent document with 
places for signatures. If you will obtain consent, but not document consent 
in writing, please attach the consent script or text. Review “CHECKLIST: 
Waiver of Written Documentation of Consent (HRP -411)” to ensure that 
you have provided sufficient information. You should use “TEMPLATE CONSENT DOCUMENT (HRP -502)”to create the consent document or 
script : 
 
N/A 
 
 
 
26.[ADDRESS_332952] the research . For example, as 
appropriate:  
● Describe t he PI’s availability to supervise the research.  
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 40 of 41 Revised: August  10, 2021  ● Justify the feasibility of recruiting the required number of suitable 
subjects within the agreed recruitment period. For example, how many potential subjects do you have access to? What percentage of those potential subjects do you need to recruit? 
● Describe the time that you will devote to conducting and completing the research.  
● Describe your facilities.  
● Describe the availability of medical or psychological resources that subjects might need as a result of an anticipated or unanticipated consequence of participation in the research.  
● Describe your process to ensure that all persons assisting with the resear ch are adequately informed about the protocol, the research 
procedures, and their duties and functions (e.g., training plans, detailed study notebooks). 
 
-  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_272415] 70% of his effort to research activities so is broadly available and in 
the labora tory on a daily basis.  
- We have powered our pi[INVESTIGATOR_272404] a change in FMD  1.0±1.5%. The purpose of 
the pi[INVESTIGATOR_272405], acceptability, and provide proof of concept. Even with a small sample size (n= 60), a cross over design with  repeated measures will give us 
fairly good estimates of the effect sizes, which is needed for a more comprehensive future trial.  - The PI [INVESTIGATOR_16884] a 20+ track year record (15 years at Virginia Tech) recruiting and studying 
participants for studies similar to these. We typi[INVESTIGATOR_272416] 10 individuals for every 1 participant enrolled.  
- The PI [INVESTIGATOR_272417] a laboratory with a clinical coordinator and 5- 6 graduate students. He is 
in the laboratory on a daily -basis working with students and is invol ved in data 
collection.  
- The Human Integrative Physiology Laboratory (Director: K. Davy) is located in the 
Garvin Bldg affiliated  the Virginia Tech campus in close proximity to the Laboratory for 
Eating Behaviors and Weight Management in Wallace Hall. Th ere is ⁓ 1000sq ft of 
laboratory space dedicated to the conduct of the proposed studies. The clinical 
physiology laboratory ( ⁓250sq ft), the physiology laboratory ( ⁓250sq ft), body 
composition laboratory ( ⁓150sq ft), echocardiography laboratory ( ⁓150sq ft), and 
biochemistry laboratory ( ⁓250sq ft) will be used specifically for the conduct of the 
studies associated with the present proposal.   
- The laboratory staff are all BLS certified (including operation of an AED). The Virginia 
Tech Rescue squad is available (911) for on campus emergencies. [CONTACT_272441] is the 
medical director of the laboratory and provides general oversight.  
- All staff are trained on study procedures they are assigned to perform before any  subjec t 
is enrolled. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_272418]. The laboratory staff meet weekly with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_272419] 's duties and responsibilities. Retraining/refresher training is performed 
periodically to avoid drift.   
VT  18 -535 Short Term Choline Supplementation and Cardiovascular Health in Adults  
VT Research Protocol version 4.0 Page 41 of 41 Revised: August  10, [ADDRESS_332953] the HRPP for multi- site research (i nvolving multiple institutions) and 
the details required for this section  will be provided. Otherwise , indi cate N/A. 
 
N/A 