Page 1 of 17 ; Version 1 1 (08.10.2022 ) 
 
 
 
 
Title:  Tobacco treatment in the context of lung cancer screening: NRT and text messaging  
 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_528666] M. Rojewski, PhD  
 MUSC IRB: Pro00068951 
 
NCT: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 17 ; Version 1 1 (08.10.2022 ) 
 
SPECIFIC AIMS – RESEARCH STRATEGY  
 
Screening for lung cancer at earlier, more treatable stages has the potential to reduce mortality from the 
U.S.’s most deadly cancer.83 Annual screening with low -dose computed tomography (LDCT) is now 
recommended for high risk individuals based on age and smoking history.[ADDRESS_686274] for patients who wish to receive 
the scan .20 Lung cancer screening (LCS) has the potential to engage high risk patients who smoke in tobacco 
treatment , particularly those who may be geographically difficult to reach in traditional clinic -based counseling.  
Indeed, due to the geographical location of many medical centers, the LCS  visit may be the only time rurally -
located patients are able to come to a medical visit , unless they require medical follow -up based on the results 
of their LDCT. Tobacco treatment interventions should be packaged in a novel w ay to: a) increase the reach of 
a tobacco treatment intervention after LCS, b) improve cessation rates following LCS, and c) establish a 
treatment protocol that is translational and easy to implement in the context of LCS. The clinical ramifications 
of smoking cessation following a LDCT could be prof ound. Indeed, data from my Co- Mentor  [CONTACT_528699]’s 
group from the NLST showed that the combination of smoking abstinence and LDCT screening resulted in a 
38% risk reduction for lung cancer mortality.84  
The independent research herein will inform the design of more effective smoking cessation treatments for 
LCS patients as it will: 1) utilize a mailed NRT model to distribute medication and improve the likelihood of a 
successful quit attempt, and 2 ) evaluate gain- framed and medication reminder text messaging  as a way to 
increase adherence with the intervention  and overall cessation rates .  
 
The specific aims of the Research Strategy are:  
 
Aim 1:  Conduct a 2 -arm pi[INVESTIGATOR_528667] (N = 80)  to 
evaluate 7- day point prevalence abstinence rates and determine effect size estimates among  participants who 
receive a standard intervention (single, brief counseling session at time of LCS) versus an enhanced 
medication and text messaging intervention ( MTI; standard intervention + 8 weeks NRT + gain -framed 
messages with medication use reminder s). 
Hypothesis 1.1:  Compared to the standard intervention, NRT and gain- framed text messaging will produce 
higher rates of smoking cessation at the end of Week 8 .  
 
Secondary Aim 2:  To develop effect size estimates for  rates of smoking cessation at the 3 -month follow -up. 
Hypothesis 2.1:  Compared to the standard intervention, NRT and text messaging will produce higher rates of 
smoking cessation at the 3- month follow -up.  
 
Exploratory Aim 3:  To examine mediators and moderators of smoking cessation outcomes ( i.e., nicotine 
dependence, medication adherence, positive lung finding from the scan [e. g., nodule is present]).  
Hypothesis 3.1:  Patients with greater nicotine dependence will have lower rates of cessation compared to 
those who have less nicotine dependence. Those who are more adherent with medication regimens in general 
(as assessed at baseline), as well as those who are adherent with the NRT regimen throughout the 
intervention,  will have higher rates of cessation compared to those who are less adherent . Patients with a 
positive lung nodule finding after LDCT will be more likely to quit smoking than those who have a normal LDCT 
scan.  
 Exploratory Aim 4: To conduct exploratory analyses of cost -effectiveness of the intervention.  
Hypothesis 4.1: I expect that the treatment intervention will be more cost -effective than standard counseling 
alone.  
 
Summary : In the proposed study, I will integrate two complementary approaches:  NRT and a gain- framed text 
messaging intervention specifically designed for LCS  patients. The model has the potential to be highly 
translatable to other LCS settings. I am  proposing easily translational behavioral (text messaging) and 
pharmacotherapy (NRT) interventions that would not need a specialized service.  This study will also serve as a 
complement to my career development plan in furthering my training in cancer prevention  and control , and 
health services research. Further, this pi[INVESTIGATOR_528668] a critical 
foundation for an R01 grant application, which is essential to  launching  my career as an independent 
researcher.  
 
Page 3 of 17 ; Version 1 1 (08.10.2022 ) 
 
RESEARCH STRATEGY  
A. Significance:  
A1. Smoking and Lung Cancer Screening: Smoking causes 30% of all cancer deaths and nearly 90% of all 
lung cancer deaths.21 Lung cancer screening (LCS) with low- dose CT scans (LDCT) identifies lung cancer at 
earlier, more treatable stages in high- risk patients. Evidence from the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST), 
for which MUSC was a study site, showed that screening with LDCT for high risk individuals (>30 pack years of 
smoking, <15 y ear quit -time, and 55 -74 years of age) conferred a 20% reduction in mortality for those patients 
who received [ADDRESS_686275] (LDCT) scans.22 These findings led the U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force (USPSTF) to recommend annual screening with LDCT in persons at high risk  for lung cancer  based on 
age and smoking history ,23 with CMS and many private insurers now covering screening for this population. 
Continued smoking, particularly for high- risk groups (like LCS patients), leads to worse clinical outcomes and 
survival . While one might hypothesize that simply having a CT scan may promote cessation, evidence 
suggests that having a scan increases quit rates only slightly, if there is any increase at all.24,[ADDRESS_686276] scanning prompted smoking cessation shortly following the scan, especially  when the results were 
abnormal, but this outcome was not sustained over time.26 Likewise, referral to a physician for an abnormal 
finding may increase initial quit attempts but this is not always sustained.27,28  
One important tobacco treatment -related issue to consider in the context of LCS is patient access. LCS has 
the potential to capture and engage smokers  at high risk for lung cancer, particularly those who may be 
geographically difficult to reach . Indeed, of  all patients between the ages of 55 and 74, who are current or 
former smokers, who visited MUSC for LCS  between 1/1/2015 and 3/10/2016, the average distance traveled to 
MUSC was 24.62 miles (range: 0.8 -  81.9 miles). Effective treatment for smoking cessat ion at the point of LCS 
must be offered in a way that reduces travel burden, and more broadly, increases access to care.  
Unfortunately, existing cessation treatments have substantial barriers to access. The PHS Clinical Practice 
Guidelines indicate that both behavioral (e.g., counseling) and pharmacological (e.g., NRT) interventions are 
effective treatments for tobacco use.29 However, interviews conducted on the use of tobacco dependence 
treatments by [CONTACT_3433] e Nation al Health Interview Survey show that only 22.4%  of the interviewed smokers  who tried 
to quit in the last year had used any type of cessation aids  (21.7% pharmacotherapy aids, and 1.3% behavioral 
counseling) .[ADDRESS_686277] underuse of approved therapi[INVESTIGATOR_159084] a quit attempt.31 Smokers’  misperceptions about the health risks  
and cost, and incorrect use of medication appear to be related to their underuse, and most providers do not 
offer tobacco- specific behavioral counseling. Engaging high risk individuals with a tobacco treatment provider 
at the point of LCS and increasing the access to care after LCS is critical to delivering effective interventions. 
Therefore, I am proposing to enhance existing tobacco treatment interventions in a novel way to: a) increase 
the reach of a tobacc o treatment intervention after  LCS, b) improve cessation rates following LCS, and c) 
establish a treatment protocol that is translational and easy to implement in the context of LCS  in the U.S . 
A2. Nicotine Replacement Therapy (NRT).  NRT is an evidence -based pharmacological intervention for 
smoking that is easy for tobacco treatment providers to disseminate at the point of care because no 
prescription is required. Providing NRT i s particularly useful because it can be delivered at LCS, does not 
require a prescription, and can increase the number of quit attempts and quitting.32,[ADDRESS_686278]. Toll’s recently funded NCI R01 (Co- Is: Rojewski, Carpenter, Silvestri) will evaluate NRT 
sampling (a 2- week supply of dual NRT and suggestion to “try” the two medications) in a  LCS population. I will 
be able to leverage the resources from that grant to assist with the conduct of this proposed study. The present 
study will differ from [CONTACT_528700]’s R01 in that I will evaluate an [ADDRESS_686279] 2- week supply 
will be delivered at the point of screening in the treatment arm, and I will mail the 3 remaining 2 -week supplies 
of NRT to the participant. This will further increase accessibility, reduce possible waste from non -use, and also 
reduce participant burden from pi [INVESTIGATOR_528669] (similar to a state smokers’ quitline model). I will also 
assess medication adherence through the use of text messages (described below in A3) throughout the 8 -
week treatment period, and send novel text messaging reminders to use the NRT to enhance adherence.  
A3. Text Messaging:  Texting is a relatively low -cost way to reach smokers frequently and in the context of their 
day-to-day lives. Recent evidence shows that smoking cessation behavioral support programs provided by [CONTACT_528681] .[ADDRESS_686280] messages are delivered, or framed. The framing implications of 
Page 4 of 17 ; Version 1 1 (08.10.2022 ) 
 
prospect theory suggest that decision makers cognitively organize information relevant to decisions in terms of 
potential gains (i .e., benefits) or potential losses (i .e., costs). S everal previous studies have shown that gain -
framed messages are more effective than loss -framed messages for increasing intentions to quit, quit 
attempts, and smoking cessation in general populations of smokers.15,37- [ADDRESS_686281] at Hollings Cancer Center (HCC). Thus,  this text protocol could 
be easily implemented as standard care at the HCC LCS Program, and this type of dissemination and 
implementation work could be the topic of future research endeavors. Further, the potential exists for the 
programmable texts to be easily disseminated to other sites.  
A4. Summary of Primary and Secondary Aims.  In the proposed study, I will investigate  2 complementary 
treatments: NRT and gain- framed text messaging  designed for LCS patient s. The primary aim is to determine 
an effect size estimate for the intervention at the end of treatment. I will also examine abstinence rates among 
the two treatment arms. I hypothesize that an NRT intervention plus gain- framed text messaging will produce 
higher rates of smoking cessation a t the end of treatment compared to standard care for LCS patients. As a 
secondary aim, I plan to develop effect size estimates for rates of smoking cessation at the 3- month follow -up.  
A5. Mediators, Moderators, and Exploratory Analysis.  This study will also evaluate important mediators and 
moderators of response to the intervention. Several message framing studies from both our group and others 
have found that nicotine dependence can moderate treatment efficacy.42-[ADDRESS_686282] of LCS findings 
(presence/absence of nodule) on smoking behavior,26-[ADDRESS_686283] care.  
B. Innovation:   
1. This is the first  study to test a gain- framed texting intervention in LCS . Although texting and gain- framed 
messaging have both been independently shown to be effective  for smoking cessation, whether gain- framed 
text messages will improve quit rates for LCS patients is an empi[INVESTIGATOR_25137]. Delivery of gain- framed texts 
has the potential to enhance quit rates above those reported in prior studies because I  plan to: 1) make the 
messages specific to a LCS population and 2) include reminders about medication use to increase the 
likelihood of medication adherence, and thus increase participant engagement with the intervention.  
2. The model has the potential to be highly translatable to other LCS  settings. I am proposing an easily 
translational behavioral ( text messaging) and pharmacotherapy (NRT) intervention. A subsequent R01- funded 
full scale clinical trial could evaluate the intervention further for potential dissemination.  
3. An assessment of mediators and moderators is also an innovative feature of this study as nicotine 
dependence, medication adherence, and lung screening findings are understudied in LCS  patients.  
C. Approach:  
C1a. Preliminary Data on Gain- Framed Messaging  
Quit4Hlth: R21CA181471 (PI: B. Toll , Co-I: Rojewski) . The goal of this study, funded in October 2015, is to 
address tobacco control by [CONTACT_528682]. We are comparing quit rates for smokers who 
receive [ADDRESS_686284] size estimate for 
7-day point prevalence abstinence smoking cessation at 30 weeks. I was involved in the development and 
testing of the text message bank for this study, and will use the bank to build off of and tailor to LCS patients 
for the text messaging in the present proposal.   
 C1b. Preliminary Data on Lung Cancer Screening and Smoking  
Nicotine Dependence, Smoking Variables, and Clinical Outcomes in LCS . I recently began a collaborative 
endeavor with Drs. Silvestri, Toll, and 3 additional colleagues, Drs. Tanner, Ravenel, and Gebregziabher to 
Page 5 of 17 ; Version 1 1 (08.10.2022 ) 
 
conduct secondary data analyses on the NLST data from the American College of Radiology Imaging Network 
(ACRIN) subset. In the ACRIN subset of the NLST, 14,[ADDRESS_686285] for Nicotine Dependence (FTND)48,49 score 
was 6.1, and the average Heaviness of Smoking Index (HSI)50 score was 4.2. LCS patients who had higher 
FTND scores had higher rates of cancer (2. 3% for very low dependence smokers vs. 6 .1% for very high 
dependence,  p < 0.01), higher rates of mortality (5. 9% for very low dependence smokers vs. 11.0 % for very 
high dependence,  p < 0.01), and higher rates of lung cancer -specific mortality ( 1.0% for very low dependence 
smokers vs. 2. 9% for very high dependence,  p < 0.01). Similar patterns emerged for the HSI. Further, those 
who were smoking at the time of LCS and had hi gh dependence scores were less likely to quit smoking after 
LCS (very high dependence vs very low dependence; Odds Ratio= 0.59 , 95%Confidence Interval = 0.48 -0.73). 
These data show that people presenting for lung cancer screening with high levels of nicotine dependence are 
more likely to die from lung cancer and all other causes than those less dependent. Further, t hose with high 
nicotine dependence are less likely to quit smoking after lung screening.  I was invited to the Lung Cancer 
Specialized Program of Research Excellence (SPORE) Workshop to present the initial data in June 2016. This 
shows  strong evidence of: 1) my appreciation of LCS as an opportunity to deliver a smoking cessation 
intervention , 2) my understanding of smoking among the LCS population, 3)  my ability to collaborate  with 
senior faculty on tobacco control research with LCS patients, 4) my motivation to contribute to the literature on tobacco use among LCS patients, and 5) the interest of the research and medical community in smoking 
cessation among LCS patients. The manuscript detailing these data is currently in preparation for submission.  
C2. Design and Methods:   
General overview : A 2-arm randomized controlled pi[INVESTIGATOR_528670] e a treatment package to  
increase rates of smoking cessation for LCS patients (N=80). E ligible participants will be randomized to receive 
either: 1) standard care (SC) or 2) Medication and Texting Intervention (MTI) after LCS. A description of the arms is presented in Table 1. The current standard of care in the 
HCC LCS program is standard counseling. One potential wekaness 
of this design is that we will not know if differences between MTI 
and SC are due to specific components of the MTI package (i. e., 
NRT or t exting), or a combination. A  fractional ( Multiple 
Optimization Strategy [ MOST ]) design
51 may be preferred  to assess 
the components of the treatment package,  but such an approach 
seems unwise for this K07.  I hope to disintangle any effects of the 
combined intervention in future grant endeavors.  
Text Message Development and Testing : I will create a  library of gain- framed and medication reminder texts by 
[CONTACT_528683] a selection of the [ADDRESS_686286] on the participant’s opi[INVESTIGATOR_528671]. A 
survey will be distributed to each participant, with  several questions regarding their current text message use, 
their preferences regarding texting, and the degree to which they may like certain types or frequency of 
messages . They will be compensated $20. This survey feedback model was employed in the R21 study we are 
currently conducting, and was successful in gathering feedback regarding the messages.  
Participants and Randomization  
Participants:  Our target sample will be 80 patients  who currently smoke and are attending the LCS program at  
MUSC for the intervention, and an additional 15 patients for the message testing portion of the developmental 
phase. The following key eligibility criteria will ensure that we obtain our study sample of LCS  patients. 
Inclusion criteria will follow the USPSTF screening guidelines52: 1) 50  years or older (no reason for upper limit 
given supportive evidence for cessation among elderly),53 2) 20 pack year history of smoking, 3) current Table 1. Description of Treatment Arms  
Arm Intervention  
Standard 
care (SC) Standard counseling  
Medication 
and Texting 
Intervention 
(MTI)  Standard counseling + 8 
weeks of NRT + gain-framed text messages with 
medication reminders  
Page 6 of 17 ; Version 1 1 (08.10.2022 ) 
 
smoker (defined as self -report any smoking in the past 7  days) , 4) willing to be randomized, 5) English 
speaking; 6) access to device(s) that allows for text messaging and downloading apps; Exclusion:  1) unstable 
psychiatric/medical conditions such as suicidal ideation, acute psychosis, severe alcohol dependence, 
substance abuse, or dementia, 2) in the immediate (within 2 weeks) post myocardial infarction period, 3) 
serious arrhythmias, 4) unstable angina pectoris,5) hemodynamically or electrically unstable, or 6) currently taking part in any other tobacco treatment program or using cessation medication (i.e., taking NRT or other 
cessation medications, enrolled in the Quitline, in another drug study) . Exclusion criteria will be assessed 
through participant interview and/or medical record review. 
 
 
Randomization.  Given the goal of establishing an effect size, and the relatively small N in each group, we will 
use block randomization in an effort to ensure equal numbers in each treatment arm.[ADDRESS_686287] for these confounders in our analysis using regression modeling.  
 
Intervention Procedures : Participants will be identified through the established lung cancer screening programs 
at MUSC. Interested LCS patients who meet the intake criteria will speak with a research assistant . Patients 
who want to enroll in the study  will be screened, consented, and randomized. Additionally, other recruitment 
methods might be used such as postcards, flyers,  Craigslist ads,  radio ads, billboard ads, and newspaper ads 
to assist with recruitment to the study as well as for the LCS program in general. A postcard may  be sent 
informing individuals that they may be eligible to participate in a research study. Study personnel may obtain 
information to send postcards through chart reviews and/or marketing strategies. The research staff will cal l 
these patients prior to their appointment to gauge interest in the study. If the patient would like more 
information, a research staff member will either meet the patient on their proposed scan date, at another 
agreed upon time and place, or speak by [CONTACT_648]. The flyers will be placed around the community in areas that 
our potential participant pool will see (i.e. community centers, senior centers, patient rooms in family medicine 
at MUSC, etc.). Study  eligibility will be determined in concert with a clinic  staff member and myself (with 
guidance from [CONTACT_528700] as necessary) .  
 
Informed consent  Process  
For MUSC Charleston participants : Informed consent  and HIPAA authorization will be obtained prior to any 
other procedures . We will provide participants with the option to complete consent and/or baseline session 1) 
in person, 2) via REDCap electronic consent (e- consent) combined with a phone discussion, 3) by [CONTACT_528684] a phone discussion, or 4) a combination of these options. Below is an overview of the 
procedures for each of these options.  
1) In person consent –  Research staff will meet with the patient at a specified time and place to review the 
consent form and obtain a signature.  
2) Redcap electronic consent - Signatures on the consent form may be obtained electronically via 
REDCap. Patients will be sent the redcap link to the consent form. The research staff will review the consent by [CONTACT_528685]. The 
patient will be asked if they are in a private place where they can discuss personal information. If they 
are, the research staff will continue with the consent process. If they are not, patien ts will be asked to 
move to a private place if there is one readily available or the call will be rescheduled for a time when 
the patient has access to a private space. The e -consent form will advise the participant to scroll to the 
bottom of their screen to input their electronic signature.  
3) Mail – If patients are unable or unavailable to complete the consent process by [CONTACT_528686][INVESTIGATOR_243305], a baseline questionnaire, and a pre -
addressed, pre -stamped return envelope. All mailed materials will include our contact [CONTACT_3031], and 
encourage individuals to call our office with any questions. A member of the research staff will  call the 
patient to discuss the consent form and answer any questions after the consent is mailed. The person 
obtaini ng consent will sign and date their copy and then ask the participant to sign and date their copy. 
Once the MUSC researcher receives the participant’s signed copy, the two copi[INVESTIGATOR_528672] a fully executed consent document.  
 
Page 7 of 17 ; Version 1 1 (08.10.2022 ) 
 
If a patient, using the remote study visit option, is randomized into a group receiving NRT, the medications will 
be mailed to the participant as soon as possible.  
 
For MUSC Lancaster , MUSC Chester , MUSC Florence, and MUSC Columbia participants:  
If an eligible patient from MUSC Lancaster , MUSC Chester , MUSC Florence , or MUSC Columbia  is interested 
in enrolling into the study, all study procedures will take place remotely. It is not feasible to perform study procedures in person due to the far distance from study staff, who are located at MUSC Charleston. 
Recruitment and all study proc edures will follow the same procedures as described for MUSC Charleston sites, 
apart from using in- person methods. If the electronic medical record identified the patient as a smoker, or if the 
patient reports being a smoker at the time of their scan, the nurse practitioner will speak with the patient regarding the study and/or the patient will speak by [CONTACT_528687]. The nurse 
practitioner will be given study flyers t o hand out to eligible patients. Patients who express interest in the study 
will set up a virtual intake appointment with a research staff member. All participants recruited through these sites will complete the consent and baseline session using either 1)  REDCap electronic consent (e- consent) 
combined with a phone discussion, 2) by [CONTACT_528688] a phone discussion, or 3) a combination of these 
options.  
 
All participant s will have a smoking cessation counseling session with the lung screening nurse practitioner 
as part of standard clinical care. Of note, the treatment provided to study participants by [CONTACT_528689] a reimbursable service. This is important for 2 reasons: 1) NCI grant funds are  not 
needed to support these  high- cost services provided in this project, and 2) this increases the future 
translational  possibilities of the intervention, as these methods will be sustainable at other cancer centers 
because insurance reimbursement will pay for these services. The counseling provided by [CONTACT_528690], which is a cognitive -behavioral, evidence -based, smoking 
cessation treatment modality.[ADDRESS_686288] counseling described above, participants in the MTI arm will receive dual NRT 
(nicotine patch plus lozenge). An initial 2- week supply of [ADDRESS_686289], 
including instructions for use, will be p rovided in the take -home packet  or emailed to the participant . We will 
inform patients about both single NRT use, as well as combined use , and participants will be given the 
opportunity to use the medications individually or together (participant choice, including none at all). B oth patch 
and lozenge will be provided for four reasons. First, a number of studies demonstrate their efficacy when used 
singularly .[ADDRESS_686290] shown 
that combined use of patch + lozenge is superior over placebo and single NRT products . Finally, the National 
Comprehensive Cancer Network Smoking Cessation Guidelines list combination NRT as first line 
pharmacotherapy. Those in the SC condition will receive standard counseling but no medications, and we will 
contact [CONTACT_276224] [ADDRESS_686291] regarding medications, research assistants will also assess point prevalence 
abstinence.   
 These two week check -ins will occur either by [CONTACT_528691]’s automated survey 
feature. Surveys can be automatically sent to patients for each two- week follow -up and patients can fill out the 
questions to indicate whether they would like mo re medications to be mailed to them. After the completion of 
the two- week check -ins, patients will be sent an Amazon gift code as a form of compensation. The payment 
will be as follows: $10 for each completed two -week check -in and $[ADDRESS_686292] 3 of the 4 check -ins, a $30 bonus amazon gift code will be provided.   
 
Page 8 of 17 ; Version 1 1 (08.10.2022 ) 
 
Text Messaging:  Based on previous research35 and our current R21, participants in the MTI condition will 
receive 3 messages per day for the 8 week treatment period following LCS. The messages will be gain- framed 
to highlight the improved health benefits of quitting and they will also give reminders for participants to use their 
medication. A subset of texts will also be interactive to assess their craving or medication use, and some will 
specifically refer to their LCS  nodule outcome and risk . To be clear, we are not framing any information to 
encour age LCS – the gain- framed intervention w ill focus on smoking cessation in the context of LCS. For 
example, the messages would highlight that quitting smoking will significantly reduce their risk for lung cancer 
in conjunction with screening.[ADDRESS_686293] might say: “ Even if your  screening 
does not show any nodules , quitting smoking is the single best thing you can do to reduce your risk of lung 
cancer .” Some texts will involve interactivity between us and t he participant. For example, participants may be 
asked to reply to a text such as “Did you use your NRT patch today?  Reply: YES or NO”. The next text sent to 
the participant will be tailored to their medication use. For instance, if a participant says “NO” then the reply text 
may read “NRT will help with managing cravings. Apply your patch to clean, dry skin.” If the participant says 
“YES”, the reply text may read “We are glad you are using the NRT to manage your cravings! You are on your 
way to a healthier new y ou!” Interactive texting will also allow us to also assess smoking status at the follow -up 
time points.  For example, consistent with the outcome definition (defined below) the text may read : “Did you 
have a cigarette, even a puff in the past 7 days ?” and t he participant will be able to text back with a reply of 
“YES” or “NO .” We will assess the interactive texting data to determine if they corroborate (or enhance) 
smoking outcome data collected by [CONTACT_528692] 2 -week “check in” timepoints, 
the end of treatment , and the 3 -month follow -up. The comparison of text message data to written  data in this 
trial will allow us to ascertain if data collection by [CONTACT_528693] a larger trial. The texting protocol we design will be programmed and delivered via the MUSC REDCap databas e. MUSC’s  REDCap database 
allows us to send SMS text messages with an assigned phone number with the protection of MUSC’s firewall . 
The REDCap database  has the ability to auto reply based upon the message received and to broadcast 
messa ges to various lists.  
Follow -up: Participants will complete either online or paper assessments (no return clinic visit) at the end of 
treatment and 3 month follow -up session. Point prevalence abstinence will be established. At the 3 -month 
follow- up all of the participants will also complete a biochemical verification of abstinence (see Outcome 
Definition  below). Participants will be paid $[ADDRESS_686294] codes for completion of the 3  
month follow -up interview.  
Assessments (Items with an asterisk will be tested as a mediator or moderator):  
 Demographic,  Smoking History , and Current Medications  Questionnaire:  This questionnaire will obtain: 1) 
basic demographic information and 2) basic smoking status and history.12,15,62  
Tobacco Use Calendar (Timeline Followback):  This standardized, validated, and reliable experimenter -
administered rating scale63-[ADDRESS_686295] point.  
 *Fagerström Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND) and Heaviness of Smoking Index (HSI) : The FTND is a 
commonly used scale for the measurement of severity of dependence on nicotine.[ADDRESS_686296] both the FTND and HSI as moderators of treatment.   
 *Medication Adherence Questionnaire  (MAQ) : The MAQ  is a self -report instrument composed of four items 
that assess participants’ history of medication adherence,68,69 which may moderate treatment outcomes.70 
Using the MAQ score, medication adherence will be assessed as a baseline moderator of treatment outcome.  
 *Use of Pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] : We will determine the amount and frequency of NRT used (per product), and 
will also determ ine use of products we provide vs. purchase of additional products. For all participants , at each 
refill or contact [CONTACT_528694] 8- week time frame, we will ask how many total patches and lozenges were 
used since the last contact, and how many were used each day. I will also incorporate a text -message based 
medication use assessment, as previously described. This novel approach will allow us to collect a daily 
medication diary from each participant, instead of relying on retrospective report. After calculating a percentage 
of medications taken, medication adherence will be assessed as a mediator of treatment outcomes.70,71  
 Attitudes Towards NRT:  Attitudes towards NRT may differ depending on the amount of NRT they elect to 
receive, the types of NRT selected, and the patient experience with the medication.  We will assess 1) positive, 
and 2) negative attitudes towards NRT, as well as 3) general knowledge of NRT.32,72 -76  
Page 9 of 17 ; Version 1 1 (08.10.2022 ) 
 
 Motivation and Confidence to Quit:  We will assess motivation and confidence to quit smoking using our 
modification of the Contemplation Ladder77,78 which assesses readiness to quit in the next month.  
 *Findings from screening:  Lung screening findings will be defined as  pulmonary findings (nodule, cancer, 
emphysema, enlarged lymph nodes) and coronary findings (calcification).  
 Adverse Events: We will assess adverse events at each NRT refill time point for the MTI group. For the S C 
group, we will ask about adverse events at each contact [CONTACT_528695]. We will grade and report the severity 
of adverse events as described in Protection of Human Subjects. Participants who have significant side effects 
from NRT use will be encouraged t o discontinue NRT use immediately.  
 Texting Satisfaction Survey:  We will assess participant satisfaction with the texting intervention, including 
frequency, timing, and content of the text messages.  
Outcome Definition: For our primary outcome, consistent with [CONTACT_528700]’s past quitline clinical trials,13,15,62 
abstinence will be defined as  self-reported 7-day point prevalence abstinence. We will ask participants during 
follow- up, “Have you smoked a cigarette, even a puff, in the past 7 days ?” An answer of “no” to this item will be 
considered abstinence. We will also ask about number of days since the participant quit, to retrospectively compute longer -term quit rates, including 30- day point prevalence abstinence. At the end of treatment and the 
3-month follow -up, we will also attempt to obtain smoking status via text. The text to participants will be the 
same point prevalence question described above. After comparing these data to the interview- based data, we  
will be able to determine if  texting is a viable method for collecting smoking cessation data in a larger trial. I will 
also attempt to obtain biochemical verification at  baseline and the 3 -month follow -up using breath carbon 
monoxide (CO) . Biochemical verification is often used in smoking cessation studies to objectively confirm self -
reported smoking status.
79 If the baseline visit occurs in person, we will obtain breath CO at the visit. If the 
baseline visit occurs remotely, then a breath CO monitor will be mailed to the participant. At the 3 -month visit, 
we will mail a breath CO monitor to participants  who did not receive one at baseline (i.e., those who completed 
the baseline visit in person). Breath CO monitors will be mailed with instructions for use.  At a prearranged time, 
participants will be sent a doxy.me link. Doxy.me is a secure, virtual telemedicine “room.” Participants will 
virtually meet with research staff and will complete the breath CO sample live so that we can be sure it was the 
participant who provided the sample and reduce the chance of sample falsification . The CO device will also 
email a report of the CO sample to research staff.   Studies examining the validity of smokers’ self -reports have 
noted that differences between self -report and biochemical validation have been relatively small  in absolute 
terms, so we will use self -report for primary abstinence outcomes and CO for secondary analyses of 
outcomes.81,[ADDRESS_686297]. Garrett -Mayer, Director of the HCC Biostatistics Shared Resource.  
Sample size justification: Eighty participants (40 per group) will be enrolled. A sample size of 40 will allow us to 
establish estimates of abstinence with 95% confidence intervals (CI) for each arm, and to assess the precision 
in our estimates. The goal i s to establish reasonably precise effect sizes to power a future study so we do not 
expect to achieve statistical significance in group comparisons. 95% CI and corresponding half widths for 
exemplar abstinence rates are provided in Table 2. With 40 patient s per arm and an observed abstinence rate 
of 0.30, we can be 95% confident that the true abstinence rate is between 0.17 and 0.47 for that intervention.                                        
Statistical Analysis:  Aims [ADDRESS_686298] 95% CIs. Differences in rates and the 
95% CIs for the differences will also be estimated. Baseline clinical 
and demographic variables will be assessed with summary 
statistics and reported by [CONTACT_19313], and compared to evaluate balance 
across groups. While the main aim of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_528673], we will also conduct a preliminary examination of between group differences in 
abstinence using logistic regression.  With respect to exploratory analyses, logistic regression will also be 
implemented to evaluate effects of mediators and moderators of treatment on abstinence, and linear regression will be used to compare costs in the two arms. Given the pi[INVESTIGATOR_159148] t his study, emphasis is on 
estimating effect sizes and variances and not statistical significance of associations. A sample size of [ADDRESS_686299] Size Estimates  
Observed Rate  
of Abstinence  95% CI  Half Width  
0.50 (0.34,0.66)  0.16 
0.30 (0.17,0.47)  0.15 
0.10 (0.03,0.24)  0.10 
Page 10 of 17 ; Version 11 (08.10.2022 ) 
 
Patients eligible for this study will come from the LCS programs at HCC  Downtown, Mount Pleasant, North 
Charleston, West Ashley, Lancaster, Chester, Florence, and Columbia . [CONTACT_528700] is the Co -Director of program, 
and I will have full access to all LCS patients who smoke. To date, the 
program has screened more than 300 patients and is expanding outreach 
efforts. Between 11/1/16 and 2/1/17, 21 current smokers were screened (7 per month). Not all patients may be inter ested in participating in a 
research study, so I conservatively estimate that I could recruit [ADDRESS_686300] of launching a 
$30,[ADDRESS_686301] 20 
current smokers per month over the next 6 months, and I do not anticipate 
a problem with recruitment . The study timeline is presented in Table 3.  
D. Summary and Future Directions  
The proposed independent research extends the rigorous research method s found in recent studies of NRT 
and gain- framed text messaging interventions in the general population to the important, yet understudied 
clinical population of  LCS patients. The proposed research has numerous strengths including: a) a timely 
research question, namely how to optimally enhance smoking cessation in current smokers who are receiving 
LCS; b) gain- framed smoking cessation text messaging specifically developed for LCS  patients ; c) a robust 
pharmacotherapy strategy ; d ) a rigorous study design and analyses to establish effect sizes for future 
research in this area, and e)  potential  to easily translate the  findings to the growing number of LCS programs 
across the country. Research on tobacco treatment interventions for LCS patients could reduce the future 
incidence of cancer and mortality for this high- risk patient population. This is an area of research where 
creative and rigorous research is desperately needed to capi[INVESTIGATOR_528674] . Further, this project will allow me to extend my training goals of health 
services resear ch to an avenue of research.  My career development plan and independent research proposed 
herein will ensure that  I am fully capable of achieving my long- term career goal  of contributing to the research 
on tobacco treatment in an oncology setting, and LCS more specifically . 
PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 RISKS TO THE SUBJECTS  
 
Human Subjects Involvement and Characteristics  
In this experiment, participants will be recruited to participate in a smoking cessation study in the context of 
lung cancer screening. For the study, we will use the following inclusion and exclusion criteria. Inclusion: 1) 50  
years or older (we see no reason for upper limit given supportive evidence for cessation among elderly), 2) 2 0 
pack year history of smoking (i.e., the base population of high risk smokers to get screened), 3) current smoker 
(defined as  self report  any smoking in the past 7 days), 4) willing to be randomized, 5) English speaking;  6) 
access to device(s) that allows for text messaging and downloading apps;  Exclusion: 1) unstable 
psychiatric/medical conditions such as suicidal ideation, acute psychosis, severe alcohol dependence, or 
dementia, 2) in the immediate (within 2 weeks) post myocardial infarction period, 3) serious arrhythmias, 4) 
unstable angina pectoris, or 5) hemodynamically or electrically unstable, or 6) currently taking part in any other 
tobacco treatment program or using cessati on medication (i.e., taking NRT or other cessation medications, 
enrolled in the Quitline, in another drug study). We intend to enroll [ADDRESS_686302] is open- ended questions through 
interviewer -administered self -report questionnaires of background, behavior (eg, smoking), and cognitions (eg, 
motivation). Questionnaires will be administered at the time of intake, at the end of the [ADDRESS_686303] access to the database.  
 
Potential Risks. The risks associated with participating in these studies are minimal. Participants are informed 
in advance about the content of the educational materials that they will receive and the kinds of questions that Table 3. Study Timeline  
Months  
1–12: IRB approval, create 
texting materials  
Months 
13-17: Test the text protocol; 
obtain medication, train 
staff 
Months 
18-49: Recruit 80 participants 
and follow for 3 months  
Months 
50–60: Follow -up, data analyses, 
prepare presentations 
and publications.  
Page 11 of 17 ; Version 11 (08.10.2022 ) 
 
they will be asked. They are also informed that they may terminate participation without penalty. Moreover, 
they are informed that, if any pre - or post -intervention question seems too personal or if they prefer not to 
respond for any reason, they can skip the question without penalty. P articipants in the treatment arm will be 
offered nicotine replacement therapy (NRT), and there are risks in taking NRT. The NRT used in this study 
(patch and lozenge) is a standard smoking cessation intervention and is available over -the-counter. The most 
common adverse effect of nicotine transdermal delivery is topi[INVESTIGATOR_523169], ranging from mild erythema to 
a more generalized skin reaction, frequently in subjects with a history of eczematous dermatitis. The most 
commo n adverse effects of nicotine replacement lozenges are upset stomach and heartburn.  
 ADEQUACY OF PROTECTION AGAINST RISKS  
 
Recruitment and Informed Consent  
Participants will be recruited through the lung cancer screening programs at Medical University of South 
Carolina/ Hollings Cancer Center  Downtown, Mount Pleasant, North Charleston, Lancaster, Chester, Florence, 
and Columbia. Informed consent will be obtained prior to beginning the study.  
 
Protection Against Risk. We will take the following steps to reduce the direct risk of participating in the study:  
 
(a) If offended in any way, participants can terminate any part of participation without penalty. In all of the 
preliminary experiments reported in this proposal, no participant reported being unduly distressed or upset 
about his or her participation, although occasionally participants do drop out because they are no longer 
interested in the study or because it is taking too long and they have other obligations. To date, no one has 
expressed significant regret about having participated.  
 (b) If a participant or potential participant appears extremely distraught or clearly preoccupi[INVESTIGATOR_530], investigators will 
use their discretion as to whether or not to attempt to enroll the individual into the study or suggest that their 
participation stop.  
 
(c) If a participant reports an adverse effect of the NRT, we will work with them to ensure that they are using 
the medication properly. If it is determined that they have been using the medication properly and are still 
experiencing an adverse effect, they will be encouraged to discontinue use of the NRT.  
 
 
d) Several steps will be taken to safeguard the confidentiality of subjects and their data. All research data that is 
collected will be assigned a study participant number and that number will only identify participants in digital 
databases. The names of part icipants will not be associated with this data and assessments will be maintained 
according to participant study number. A master list connecting participant study numbers to participant names 
will be kept in a locked file cabinet where it can only accessed by [CONTACT_528696]. Any information 
published as a result of the study will be such that it will not permit identification of any participant.  Right to 
privacy for participation in this research will be protected through coding of data and proper  storage of research 
records. Consistent with mandated reporting requirements for health providers, we advise participants that in the 
case of child abuse or neglect, threat of injury to self or others, or intention to destroy property, that we may need  
to intervene and report that information to the proper authorities. Subjects will be informed of this limit to 
confidentiality as it is stated in the informed consent document.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_528675]. Organizations that have a responsibility for protecting human participants, including the MUSC IRB, may 
have access to subjects’ medical records containing PHI. Additionally, the funding agency ( National Cancer 
Institute ) may have access to subjects’ medical records containing P HI. 
 
 POTENTIAL BENEFITS OF THE PROPOSED RESEARCH TO THE SUBJECTS AND OTHERS  
 Participants will receive advice about quitting smoking. Subjects participating in this study may benefit from the 
information provided to them by [CONTACT_528697]. Although the investigators cannot know for sure whether this 
Page 12 of 17 ; Version 11 (08.10.2022 ) 
 
study will be of any direct benefit to participants, the results of the study will facilitate the development of more 
effective smoking cessation intervention materials, which will promote tobacco and cancer control.  
 IMPORTANTCE OF THE KNOWLEDGE TO BE GAINED  
 Although the proposed research poses minimal risks to participants, it has high potential for advancing 
knowledge in the field of smoking cessation. The proposed research will augment current knowledge on the 
efficacy of interventions administered in the c ontext of lung cancer screening. Administering a sample of NRT 
and gain- framed text messages may help to identify a low -cost method for increasing the effectiveness of a 
moderate- intensity intervention for smoking cessation that has the potential to reach smokers at high risk of 
lung cancer, thereby [CONTACT_528698]. Given the minimal 
risks in the study and the potentially great benefit to science, the risk/benefit ratio in this study appears quite 
favor able.  
 DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  
 
Monitoring for data integrity and safety will be the responsibility of the investigators, and the MUSC Institutional 
Review Board (IRB).  
 
Data Monitoring . For this review process, I will compi[INVESTIGATOR_5829] a semiannual report of aggregate data that contains 
screening data, baseline demographics, retention data, adverse events data, accrual status including projections, times to milestones, and any other data that will help in the assessment of the experiments and 
discuss the report with my full mentoring committee. Based on this report, each mentor will make 1 of 2 
recommendations: 1) maintain the current study protocol; 2) schedule formal meeting immediately with the 
MUSC IRB. If any committee member recommends a meeting, this will be scheduled within 1 week. The 
committee will vote on whether the current study should: 1) continue recruitment unchanged; 2) continue with a 
protocol amendment; 3) stop the study pending further investigation. If after this meeting any committee 
member votes to request a protocol modification, the MUSC IRB will be immediately informed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Rojewski.  
 
Safety Monitoring. This protocol presents minimal risks to participants. The study involves receiving gain-
framed text messages and NRT, and to complete follow -up interviews. The only risk s that can be anticipated 
from this study is loss of confidentiality, and this will be protected using the procedures described in the “Sources of Materials” section above. In addition, participants may experience side effects from NRT (as 
previously described). Nonetheless, because we anticipate that behavior change (which will pose minimal risk to participants) will be a product of participating, we have developed a safety monitoring plan to report adverse 
events resulting from behavioral changes.  
 
Monitoring to identify adverse events. Prior to implementing the randomized study, research staff will be 
trained to identify adverse events. Research staff wi ll be instructed to provide [CONTACT_528701] with a detailed 
description of the event. [CONTACT_528701] will grade the event in conjunction with [CONTACT_528700] within 24 hours. The 
following additional individuals will be informed immediately of serious adverse events: (a) the mentoring committee; (b) the National Cancer Institute (NCI); and (c) the MUSC IRB. All of these individuals and 
comm ittees will receive a copy of a SAE Form within 48 hours, at which point a decision will be made whether 
to convene a meeting.  
 
Plan for grading adverse events. Serious Adverse Events (SAE). The FDA’s definition of serious adverse 
events (21 CFR 312) will be used. Serious Adverse Events include any untoward medical occurrence that at 
any dose results in death or the immediate risk of death, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_181684], persistent or significant disability/incapacity or a congenital anomaly/birth defect, new cancer, or medication overdose. Adverse events will be defined and graded for risk as foll ows:  
 Coding of Severity:  
0 = No adverse event or within normal limits  
1 = Mild adverse event  
Page 13 of 17 ; Version 11 (08.10.2022 ) 
 
2 = Moderate adverse event  
3 = Severe, resulting in psychiatric or medical hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]  
4 = Life- threatening adverse event  
5 = Fatal adverse event  
 Coding of Attribution will be made for adverse events grade 3 and above (ie, serious adverse events):  
1 = Unrelated to study interventions  
2 = Unlikely relationship to study interventions  
3 = Possible relationship to study interventions  
4 = Probable relationship to study interventions  
5 = Definite relationship to study interventions  
 Plans for reporting serious unanticipated and anticipated adverse events. Serious adverse events, 
whether unanticipated or anticipated, will be reported immediately (within 24 hours) to the MUSC IRB and the 
National Cancer Institute, and a written report will be submitted within 48 hours. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_528676]/Benefit 
ratio of the study and whether modifications to the protocol or the consent procedures are required.  
 
Plans for reviewing and reporting nonserious anticipated or unanticipated adverse events. Any 
participants' experiences of anticipated and unanticipated adverse events will be reported on an annual basis to the MUSC IRB and the NCI as part of an annual progress report (NCI) and annual re -approval (MUSC IRB).  
  
Page 14 of 17 ; Version 11 (08.10.2022 ) 
 
References  
14. Toll B, Martino S, Latimer A, et al. Randomized trial: Quitline specialist training in gain- framed vs 
standard care messages for smoking cessation. Journal of the National Cancer Institute (JNCI) 2010;102:96 -
106; PMID: 20056957; PMCID: PMC2808347.  
15. Toll B, O'Malley S, Katulak N, et al. Comparing gain-  and loss -framed messages for smoking cessation 
with bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_2394]: A randomized controlled trial. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors 2007;21:534 -44; PMID: 
18072836; PMCID: PMC2527727.  
16. Fucito LM, Czabafy S, Hendricks PS, Kotsen C, Richardson D, Toll BA. Pairing smoking- cessation 
services with lung cancer screening: A clinical guideline from the Association for the Treatment of Tobacco 
Use and Dependence and the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco. Cancer 2016;122:1150- 9. 
17. Kovalchik SA, Tammemagi M, Berg CD, et al. Targeting of low -dose CT screening according to the risk 
of lung- cancer death. The New England journal of medicine 2013;369:245 -54. 
18. Tammemagi MC, Katki HA, Hocking WG, et al. Selection criteria for lung -cancer screening. The New 
England journal of medicine 2013;368:[ADDRESS_686304] screening in the National Lung 
Screening Trial. The New England journal of medicine 2014;371:1793 -802. 
20. Mazzone P, Powell CA, Arenberg D, et al. Components necessary for high- quality lung cancer 
screening: American College of Chest Physicians and American Thoracic Society Policy Statement. Chest 
2015;147:295 -303. 
21. Shopland D, Eyre H, Pechacek T. Smoking- attributable cancer mortality in 1991: is lung cancer now the 
leading cause of death among smokers in the [LOCATION_002]? . Journal of the National Cancer Institute 
1991;83:1142 -8. 
22. National Lung Screening Trial Research Team. Reduced lung- cancer mortality with low -dose computed 
tomographic screening. New England Journal of Medicine 2011;365:395- 409. 
23. Screening for Lung Cancer:  U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Final Recommendation Statement 
December 2013. (Accessed January 28, 2014, at http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf13/lungcan/lungcanfact.pdf.
) 
24. Clark MM. Change in smoking status after low -dose spi[INVESTIGATOR_528677]: 
opportunity for smoking intervention. Thorax 2009;64:371.  
25. Cox LS. Change in smoking status after spi[INVESTIGATOR_467441]. Cancer 
2003;98:2495.  
26. Anderson CM. Smoking cessation and relapse during a lung cancer screening program. Cancer 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], biomarkers & prevention 2009;18:3476.  
27. Styn MA. Smoking behavior 1 year after computed tomography screening for lung cancer: Effect of 
physician referral for abnormal CT findings. Cancer epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], biomarkers & prevention 2009;18:3484.  
28. Townsend CO. Relation between smoking cessation and receiving results from three annual spi[INVESTIGATOR_528678]. Cancer 2005;103:2154.  
29. Fiore MC, Jaen CR, Baker TB, et al. Treating tobacco use and dependence: 2008 update. Rockville, 
MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, U.S. Public Health Service; 2008.  
30. Cokkinides VE, Ward E, Jemal A, Thun MJ. Under -use of smoking- cessation treatments: Results from 
the National Health Interview Survey, 2000. American Journal of Preventive Medicine 2005;28:119 -22. 
31. Foulds J, Hughes JR, Hyland A, et al. Barriers to use of FDA -approved smoking cessation medications: 
implications for  
policy action. Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco 2009.  
32. Carpenter M, Hughes J, Gray K, Wahlquist A, Saladin M, Alberg A. Nicotine Therapy Sampling to 
Induce Quit Attempts Among Smokers Unmotivated to Quit A Randomized Clinical Trial. Archives of Internal Medicine 2011;171:[ADDRESS_686305] of Access to Free Medication to Quit 
Smoking: A Clinical Trial Testing the Role of Motivation. Nicotine & Tobacco Research 2014;Online first.  
34. Fiore MC, McCarthy DE, Jackson TC, et al. Integrating smoking cessation treatment into primary care: 
An effectiveness study. Preventive Medicine 2004;38:412 -20. 
35. Free C, Knight R, Robertson S, et al. Smoking cessation support delivered via mobile phone text 
messaging (txt2stop): a single- blind, randomised trial. The Lancet 2011;378:49- 55. 
Page 15 of 17 ; Version 11 (08.10.2022 ) 
 
36. Tversky A, Kahneman D. The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice. Science 
1981;211:453 -8. 
37. Toll BA, Martino S, Latimer A, et al. Randomized trial: Quitline specialist training in gain- framed vs 
standard -care messages for smoking cessation. Journal of the National Cancer Institute 2010;102:96- 106. 
38. Schneider T, Salovey P, Pallonen U, Mundorf N, Smith N, Steward W. Visual and auditory message 
framing effects on tobacco smoking. Journal of Applied Social Psychology 2001;31:667- 82. 
39. Steward W, Schneider T, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_7988] J, Salovey P. Need for cognition moderates responses to framed 
smoking- cessation messages. Journal of Applied Social Psychology 2003;33:2439- 64. 
40. McKee S, O'Malley S, Steward W, Neveu S, Land M, Salovey P. How to word effective messages 
about smoking and oral health: Emphasize the benefits of quitting. Journal of Dental Education 2004;68:569 -
73. 
41. Gallagher K, Updegraff J. Health Message Framing Effects on Attitudes, Intentions, and Behavior: A 
Meta -analytic Review. Annals of Behavioral Medicine 2012;43:101- 16. 
42. Fucito L, Latimer A, Carlin- Menter S, Salovey P, Cummings K, Toll B. Nicotine dependence as a 
moderator of a quitline based message framing intervention. Drug and Alcohol Dependence 2011;114:229- 32; 
PMID: 21036492.  
43. Fucito L, Latimer A, Salovey P, Toll B. Nicotine dependence as a moderator of message framing effects 
on smoking cessation outcomes. Annals of Behavioral Medicine 2010;39:311- 7; PMID: 20502997; PMCID: 
PMC2749968.  
44. Moorman M, van den Putte B. The influence of message framing, intention to quit smoking, and 
nicotine dependence on the persuasiveness of smoking cessation messages. Addictive Behaviors 
2008;33:1267 -75. 
45. Szklo A, Coutinho E. The influence of smokers' degree of dependence on the effectiveness of message 
framing for capturing smokers for a Quitline. Addictive Behaviors 2010;35:620- 4. 
46. Hollands GJ, Sutton S, McDermott MS, Marteau TM, Aveyard P. Adherence to and Consumption of 
Nicotine Replacement Therapy and the Relationship With Abstinence Within a Smoking Cessation Trial in Primary Care. Nicotine & Tobacco Research 2013;15:1537 -44. 
47. Shiffman S. Use of more nicotine lozenges leads to better success in quitting smoking. Addiction 
2007;102:[ADDRESS_686306] for Nicotine Dependence: A 
revision of the Fagerström Tolerance Questionnaire. British Journal of Addiction 1991;86:1119- 27. 
49. Kozlowski L, Porter C, Orleans T, Pope M, Heatherton T. Predicting smoking cessation with self -
reported measures of nicotine dependence:  FTQ, FTND, and HSI. Drug and Alcohol Dependence 
1994;34:211 -6. 
50. Heatherton TF, Kozlowski LT, Frecker RC, Rickert W, Robinson J. Measuring the Heaviness of 
Smoking: using self -reported time to the first cigarette of the day and number of cigarettes smoked per day. 
British Journal of Addiction 1989;84:791- 800. 
51. Collins LM, Murphy SA, Nair VN, Strecher VJ. A strategy for optimizing and evaluating behavioral 
interventions. Annals of Behavioral Medicine 2005;30:65 -73. 
52. Moyer VA. Screening for lung cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation 
statement. Annals of internal medicine 2014;160:330- 8. 
53. Gellert C, Schöttker B, Brenner H. Smoking and all -cause mortality in older people: Systematic review 
and meta- analysis smoking and All -cause mortality in older people. Archives of Internal Medicine 
2012;172:837 -44. 
54. Altman DG, Bland JM. How to randomise. BMJ : British Medical Journal 1999;319:703 -4. 
55. Fiore M, Jaén C, Baker T, et al. Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence 2008 Update: Clinical Practice 
Guideline. Rockville, MD: USDHHS; 2008.  
56. Fiore M, Jaén C, Baker T, et al. Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence 2008 Update: Clinical Practice 
Guideline. Rockville, MD: USDHHS; 2008.  
57. Carpenter M, Jardin B, Burris J, et al. Clinical Strategies to Enhance the Efficacy of Nicotine 
Replacement Therapy for Smoking Cessation: A Review of the Literature. Drugs 2013;73:407– 26. 
58. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_11826] M, Smith S, Schlam T, et al. A randomized placebo- controlled clinical trial of 5 smoking cessation 
pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. Archives of General Psychiatry 2009;66:1253- 62. 
Page 16 of 17 ; Version 11 (08.10.2022 ) 
 
59. Smith S, McCarthy D, Japuntich S, et al. Comparative effectiveness of 5 smoking cessation 
pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_184209]. Archives of Internal Medicine 2009;169:2148 -55. 
60. Baker TB, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_46746], Stein JH, et al. Effects of Nicotine Patch vs Varenicline vs Combination Nicotine 
Replacement Therapy on Smoking Cessation at 26 Weeks: A Randomized Clinical Trial. Jama 2016;315:371 -
9. 
61. Tanner N, Kanodra N, Gebregziabher M, et al. The association between smoking abstinence and 
mortality in the National Lung Screening Trial. American journal of respi[INVESTIGATOR_528679].  
62. Toll BA, Leary, V., Wu, R., Salovey, P.,Meandzija, B., & O'Malley, S. S. A preliminary investigation of 
naltrexone augmentation of bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_528680]. Addictive Behaviors 2008;33:173 -
9. 
63. Sobell L, Sobell M. Alcohol consumption measures. In: Allen J, Wilson V, eds. Assessing Alcohol 
Problems: A Guide for Clinicians and Researchers, Second Edition. Bethesda, MD: NIAAA; 2003:75- 99. 
64. Toll B, Cooney N, McKee S, O'Malley S. Do daily Interactive Voice Response (IVR) reports of smoking 
behavior correspond with retrospective reports? Psychology of Addictive Behaviors 2005;19:291 -5; PMID: 
16187808; PMCID: PMC2527779.  
65. Brown R, Burgess E, Sales S, Whiteley J, Evans D, Miller I. Reliability and validity of a smoking timeline 
followback interview. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors 1998;12:101 -12. 
66. Szklo AS, Coutinho ESF. The influence of smokers' degree of dependence on the effectiveness of 
message framing for capturing smokers for a Quitline. Addictive Behaviors 2010;35:620- 4. 
67. Moorman M, van den Putte B. The influence of message framing, intention to quit smoking, and 
nicotine dependence on the persuasiveness of smoking cessation messages. Addictive Behaviors 2008;33:1267 -75. 
68. Morisky DE, Green LW, Levine DM. Concurrent and predictive validity of a self -reported measure of 
medication adherence. Medical care 1986;24:67 -74. 
69. Toll BA, McKee SA, Martin DJ, Jatlow P, O'Malley SS. Factor structure and validity of the Medication 
Adherence Questionnaire (MAQ) with cigarette smokers trying to quit. Nicotine & tobacco research : official 
journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco 2007;9:597- 605. 
70. Ferguson SG, Shiffman S, Gitchell JG. Nicotine replacement therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]: patient safety and persistence. 
Patient Related Outcome Measures 2011;2:111- 7. 
71. Raupach T, Brown J, Herbec A, Brose L, West R. A systematic review of studies assessing the 
association between adherence to smoking cessation medication and treatment success. Addiction 2014;109:35 -43. 
72. Bansal MA, Cummings KM, Hyland A, Giovino GA. Stop -smoking medications: Who uses them, who 
misuses them, and who is misinformed about them? Nicotine & Tobacco Research 2004;6:S303 -S10. 
73. Cummings KM, Hyland A, Giovino GA, Hastrup JL, Bauer JE, Bansal MA. Are smokers adequately 
informed about the health risks of smoking and medicinal nicotine? Nicotine & Tobacco Research 2004;6:S333 -S40. 
74. Etter JF, Perneger TV. Pharmacoepi[INVESTIGATOR_184205]: Attitudes toward nicotine 
replacement therapy in smokers and ex -smokers in the general public. Clinical Pharmacology Therapy 
2001;69:175 -83. 
75. Hammond D, McDonald P, Fong G, Borland R. Do smokers know how to quit? Knowledge and 
perceived effectiveness of cessation assistance as predictors of cessation behaviour. Addiction 2004;99:1042 -
8. 
76. Borland R, Cooper J, McNeill A, O'Connor R, ., Cummings KM. Trends in beliefs about the harmfulness 
and use of stop -smoking medications and smokeless tobacco products among cigarettes smokers: Findings 
from the ITC four -country survey. Harm Reduct J 2011;8:21.  
77. Giardina TD, Hyland A, Bauer UE, Cummings KM. Which population- based interventions would 
motivate smokers to think seriously about stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_60115]? Am J Health Promot 2004;18:405 -8. 
78. Borland R, Yong HH, O'Connor RJ, Hyland A, Thompson ME. The reliability and predictive validity of 
the Heaviness of Smoking Index and its two components: findings from the International Tobacco Control Four 
Country study. Nicotine & tobacco research : official journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine and 
Tobacco 2010;12:S45- S50. 
Page 17 of 17 ; Version 11 (08.10.2022 ) 
 
79. Benowitz NL, Jacob Iii P, Ahijevych K, et al. Biochemical verification of tobacco use and cessation. 
Nicotine & Tobacco Research 2002;4:149 -59. 
80. Fix B, O'Connor R, Hammond D, et al. ITC "spit and butts" pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]: The feasibility of collecting saliva 
and cigarette butt samples from smokers to evaluate policy. Nicotine & Tobacco Research 2010;12:185- 90. 
81. Attebring M, Herlitz J, Berndt AK, Karlsson T, Hjalmarson A. Are patients truthful about their smoking 
habits? A validation of self -report about smoking cessation with biochemical markers of smoking activity 
amongst patients with ischaemic heart diseas e. Journal of Internal Medicine 2001;249:145- 51. 
82. Murray RP, Connett JE, Istvan JA, Nides MA, Rempel -Rossum S. Relations of cotinine and carbon 
monoxide to self -reported smoking in a cohort of smokers and ex -smokers followed over 5 years. Nicotine & 
Tobacco Research 2002;4:[ADDRESS_686307], Adams AM, Berg CD, et al. Reduced lung- cancer mortality with low -dose computed 
tomographic screening. The New England journal of medicine 2011;365:395- 409. 
84. Tanner NT, Kanodra NM, Gebregziabher M, et al. The Association Between Smoking Abstinence and 
Mortality in the National Lung Screening Trial. American journal of respi[INVESTIGATOR_4447] 2015.  
 
 