1 
 
PROTOCOL  
for The “ improving ATTEND ance in cardiac rehabilitation  trial” =  iATTEND Trial ” 
 
 
 
 
 
Authors:  Khaled Abdul -Nour, Clinton A. Brawner, Jonathan K. Ehrman, Jack Jordan, 
Steven J. Keteyian, David Lanfear , Edward Peterson , Matt Saval  
 
Document Type:  Clinical Protocol  
 
Document Status:  Versio n 04 
 
Release Date:   June 25, 201 9 
 
Funding  Source :  NIH/HLBI Grant Number  1R61HL143099  
 
2 
 Signature [CONTACT_549494]: The improving ATTEND ance in cardiac rehabilitation Trial 
 
Protocol Version:  [ADDRESS_719194] Start Date: August 1, 2018  
 
Approved by [CONTACT_270503]: 
 
        
Steven J. Keteyian, PhD    Date  
Principal Investigator  
 
 
 
        
[INVESTIGATOR_549408], MD     Date  
Chair  
Data Safety Monitoring Board  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[ADDRESS_719195] of Abbreviations            5 
1. Overview of iATTEND           6 
2. Specific Aims            6 
 2.1 Primary Aim  
 2.2 Secondary Aim  
 2.3 Exploratory  Aims  
3. Background             7 
 3.1 Secondary prevention in vulnerable, at risk patients with cardiovascular disease  8 
3.2 Cardiac rehabilitation as a secondary prevent ion therapy … role and clinical                8 
effectiveness  
3.3 Alternate delivery models … and home -based cardiac rehabilitation    [ADDRESS_719196] erable, at risk population with            12    
cardiovascular disease  
3.6 Safety of home -based cardiac rehabilitation       13 
4. Investigational Plan            14 
 4.1 Overview            14 
4.2 R61 -Year 1 - Formative or Start -up Plan        14 
4.3 R33 – Years 2 -5 – Clinical Trial Phase        [ADDRESS_719197] follow -up          25 
5. Trial Endpoints            26 
 5.1 Primary endpoint           26 
 5.2 Secondary endpoints          26 
6. Safety             27 
6.1 Safety assessment           27 
7. Study Organization            28 
 7.1 Steering committee          28 
 7.2 Program management plan /team         28 
 7.3 D ata safety monitoring plan/board        [ADDRESS_719198] of Abbreviations.  
 
6MW =  Six minute wal k 
AE =   Adverse event  
AHA =  American Heart Association  
ACC =  American College of Cardiology  
AACVPR =  American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation  
CPX =  Cardiopulmonary exercise  
CBCR =  Center based cardiac rehabilitation  
CVD =  Cardiovascular disease  
COOP =  Cooperative functional assessment  
DSMB/P =  Data safety monitoring board/plan  
HYCR =  Hybrid Cardiac rehabilitation   
iPAQ =  International Physical Activity Questionnaire  
METs =  Metabolic equivalents of task  
PAST =  Past-day Adult Sedentary Time Questionnaire  
PHQ -9 =  Patient health questionnaire  
PMT =  Project management team  
QOL =  Quality of life  
REDC ap =  Research Electronic Data Capture  
RPE =   Ratings  of perceived exertion  
SAE =   Serious adverse event  
SF-12 =  Short form  health survey -12 
SC =   Steering committee  
SRRSA =  Subject recruitment and retention and staff a dherence committee  
TM =   Telemedicine  
VO 2 =  Oxygen  uptake  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
  
7 
 1. Overview of iATTEND  
The benefits of cardiac rehabilitation are well known.  However, d espi[INVESTIGATOR_549409] (CBCR) representing guideline -based care for patients with  cardiovascular disease, 
most patients do not complete the maximum number of sessions allowed by [CONTACT_549448]. As such, many patients may not be receiving the full clinical benefit ascribed to CR. 
Several  studies suggest that the number of CR sessions completed is directly and independently 
associated with lower  mortality (an ~1% to 2% observed decrease in risk for each additional 
session of CR completed). The barriers  to attendance in CBCR include those at the patient, 
program, policy, and system -levels. Among African  Americans, participation and attendance to 
CR and adoption of healthier lifestyle changes are less likely. The  iATTEND ( improving 
ATTEND ance to cardiac rehabilitation) Trial will assess the effectiveness of an innovative  
approach to CR delivery on attendance. The intervention group combines CBCR and remote -
/home -based CR  (i.e., Hybrid CR, HYCR) and is tailored to the individual needs of each patient, 
accomplished with the  assistance of an easy -to-access telecommunications methodology 
(telemedicine). iATTEND is also unique  because it focuses on patients residing within (or 
proximal to) Detroit, MI., representing a predominately at -risk cohort (e.g., 79% African 
American) that often cannot regularly attend CR due to social (e.g., dependent care)  and 
economic challenges. In addition to being understudied and likely associated with disparity in 
CR utilization, our cohort provides an opportunity to examine the adoption and effect ivenss  of an 
innovative model to  deliver CR, one that otherwise mimics traditional CBCR in terms of 
delivered content and expected outcomes.   During the R61 start -up phase of iATTEND (year 
one), we will  prepare to operationalize a  clinical trial, including finalizing protocol, developi[INVESTIGATOR_549410], establishing data  safety monitoring board, confirming 
partnerships, and demonstrating the ability to screen and enroll patients in  to the trial.  During the 
R33 clinical trial phase (years 2 -5) we w ill assess the effect  of a HYCR program on patient 
attendance, exercise capacity and quality of life. The  design of iATTEND is a single -site, 
prospective, controlled Phase II clinical trial that will randomize 270 urban  patients to CBCR 
only or HYCR. Both groups will be scheduled to attend 36 CR sessions within 6 months.  Patient 
assessments will be conducted at baseline, within 10 days after completing CR, and 6 months 
after completing CR. To strengthen the generalizability of iATTEND, for b oth study groups we 
plan to (a) deliver the  same secondary prevention elements and (b) measure the common 
program outcomes expected of traditional  CBCR .  
 
2. Specific Aims  
2.1 Primary Aim  
R61 Phase (Year 1 , Formative Phase) : In conjunction with study investigators,  
stakeholders, and NHLBI staff, prepare and operationalize a clinical trial that evaluates the effect 
of a HYCR  program on attendance to CR. This includes finalizing the protocol, obtaining any 
institutional review board  approved amendments, developi[INVESTIGATOR_549411], 
[ADDRESS_719199], hiring  and training CR and research staff, and 
demonstrating the ability to screen and enroll patients into the trial.  
R33 Phase  - Primary Aim (Years 2 – 5, Trial Phase) : Assess the effect of HYCR on over -all 
patient attendance . 
Primary Hypothesis : The number of CR sessions completed within 6 months will be 
significantly  greater in patients randomized to HYCR vs. patients randomized to traditional 
CBCR (usual care).  
Hypothesis 2 : The percentage of patients completing 36 CR sessions within 6 months will be 
significantly  greater among patients randomized to the HYCR program vs. patients randomized 
to the CBCR program.  
 
2.2 Secondary Aims  
R33 Phase : Assess the effect of HYCR on exercise capacity and quality of life.  
Hypothesis 3 : The improvement in exercise capacity, as measured by  [CONTACT_549449] (6MW) test, in patients  randomized to HYCR will be equivalent (not inferior) to 
patients randomized to CBCR.  
Hypothesis 4 : The improvement in exercise capacity, as measured by [CONTACT_208185] (VO 2), 
in patients  randomized to HYCR will be equivalent (not inferior) to patients randomized to 
CBCR.  
Hypothesis 5: The improvement in quality of life  (QOL) , as measured by [CONTACT_549450] , 
in patients randomized to HYCR will be equivalent (not inferior) to patients randomized to 
CBCR.  
 
2.[ADDRESS_719200] of a HYCR on (a) exercise capacity, (b) 
QOL , (c) self -engaged purposeful exercise , and (d) total phy sical activity habits,  Also, e xplore 
the cost effectiveness of a HYCR program  
 
3. Background  
Although the age -standardized death rate attributable to cardiovascular disease (CVD) has 
decreased over the past decade (1), it remains our nation’s number one killer.  In 2017, almost 
700,000 American’s will have a new coronary heart disease -related even t (myocardial infarction 
[MI] or death) with another 325,000 people experiencing a recurrent coronary heart disease  
(CHD) related -event.  In addition, there are approximately 960,000 new cases of heart failure 
diagnosed annually, ~53% of which are due to r educed ejection fraction (1).  Among survivors 
[ADDRESS_719201] go on to experience increasing disability, a reduction in 
quality of life (QOL), and morbidity ( 11-13).  For example, re -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_549412] 10% to as high as 20% 
or 30% ( 12-15).  Finally, in addition to the burden that CVD places on health, functional 
capabilities and QOL, the recurrence of CVD -related problems carries a heavy economic burden 
as well.  The cost of re -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_549413] $19,000 ( 16) and if a procedure is 
required, the cost is increased further.  
There are numerous effective therapi[INVESTIGATOR_549414] -related event including lipid - and blood pressure lowering -drugs, exercise training, 
after-load reduction and/or beta -adrenergic blockade agents, smoking cessa tion programs, and 
anti-platelet drugs ( 17,33).  However, despi[INVESTIGATOR_549415] (AHA), The American College of Cardiology (ACC), and the 
American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation (AACVPR) ( 17,18 ), 
greater than 15% of patients still smoke cigarettes, compliance to cardioprotective drugs is not 
optimal (31% stop taking > 1 drug), regular exercise is only 40%, and obesity is common 
(1,10,19-22,91). Additionally, the simultaneous adherence to proven secondary prevention 
strategies is reported to be less than 10% (2 2); yet most all of these strategies are addressed 
through a comprehensive cardiac rehabilitation (CR) serv ice and its use of disease management, 
clinical surveillance, supervised exercise, and patient education.  
3.1. Secondary Prevention in Vulnerable, at Risk Patients with Cardiovascular Disease  
Patients of lower socio -economic status (SES) experience a disparate or disproportionate 
level of morbidity and recurrent events following an initial heart problem, a portion of which can 
be explained by [CONTACT_549451]  (e.g., cigarette cessation, 
blood pressure and lipid control, physical activity, and compliance  to prescribed medication) 
(1,10,20,23,24 ).  Additionally, following a cardiac event annual mortality is lower among 
Caucasians versus others ( 4,6).   
  Much of the research to date that pertains to CR has involved patients that were healthier 
and socially and financially better able to adhere to CR and; therefore, able to participate in CR -
related research.  Limited prior research suggests lower participa tion rates and fewer CR sessions 
completed among minor ities and people of lower SES (3,9 ).  The cardiovascular health care 
needs of these patients are real (and grossly understudied).  Advancing and evaluating CR and its 
associated se condary prevention s trategies (17,18 ) in a predominately urban, vulnerable cohort 
of at-risk patients represents an ideal opportunity to potentially impact their health care outcomes 
... and is worthy of further investigation ( 3). 
3.2.  Cardiac Rehabilitation  as a Secondary Prevention Therapy… Role and Clinical 
Effectiveness  
Today, more so than ever before, the majority of CR programs in the US no longer 
represent an “exercise -only” intervention.  CR is now a multidisciplinary and multifaceted 
secondary prevention service that addresses the core components of CR as defined by [CONTACT_34129], 
AACVPR and ACC ( 17,18 ).  Therefore, the deliverables from CR should be the same, regardless 
10 
 if provided in center -based C BCR or a combination of CBCR and remote -/home -based CR 
(“hybrid” CR, HYCR).  
The evidence supporting the clinical effectiveness of traditional, CBCR is well -
established and as a result, CR is a class 1 recommendation following MI, coronary artery by[CONTACT_13786], or percutaneous coronary intervention ( 25-29).  Additionally, CR is recommended for 
patients who have undergone cardiac transplantation or heart valve surgery and those with 
chronic stable angina and stable chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction ( 30-33). 
Briefly, CR is associated with a 10% to 24% reduction in total mortality over 1 to 3 years and an 
~ 30% decrease in re -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_149701] 1 year ( 3,4,25,34-39).  We recently estimated that if 
CR participation was increased to 70% among eligible patients, ~25,000 lives would be saved 
and 180,000 hospi[INVESTIGATOR_549416] (25 ).  In addition, quality of life and 
functional capacity are improved ( 25,39,40 ,83) and much of the abnormal physiology that 
accompanies CVD is improved [e.g., coronary artery endothelial function, autonomic function, 
insulin resistance] ( 25,41-43).  Finally, mood is also favorably influenced ( 44,45 ).  Taken in 
sum, CR is a cost effective means to deliver and advance secondary prevention to patients with 
known CVD via a multidisciplinary and patient -centered approach.  
3.2.[ADDRESS_719202] patients attend 25 or fewer CR sessions ( 2-5,9), less than what is typi[INVESTIGATOR_549417] (e.g., Medicare allows 36 visits), potentially diminishing the 
functional and clinical benefits ascribed to CR.  Hammill and co -workers ( 6) observed that a 6 
session increase in number of CR sessions completed was associated with an ~ 6% decrease in 
risk of mortality (HR: 0.94, p < 0.001).  Martin et al ( 7) reported a 1% decrease in risk for each 
additional CR session attended (HR: 0. 99, 99% CI: 0.98 -0.99).  Finally, Doll et al. (8 ) reported a 
13% reduction in risk for mortality for each increase of 5 CR sessions (HR: 0.87, 95% CI: 0.83 –
0.92).  We previously showed, that (a) the number of sessions completed is associated with the 
magnitude of the increase in exercise capacity (45) a nd (b) higher achieved MET level at 
discharge from CR is related to a reduction in risk for mortality (HR:0.60; 95% CI: 0.51 –0.70) 
(46).   
Last year the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) recognized the 
importance of the relationship between the number of visits completed and outcomes, when they 
proposed a model that linked level of reimbursement to the number of CR attended. Al thoug h 
that project was rescinded (47 ), it did indicate that CMS acknowledged the value associated with 
maximizing the number of CR sessions attended. Finally, there is biologic plausibility 
underpi[INVESTIGATOR_549418]. Hundreds of 
exercise trials over the past 30 years involving healthy people and patients with CVD 
demonstrate that, to an extent, the “dose” of regular exercise delivered is related to the 
magnitude of the improvement (48 ).   
 
 
11 
 3.3.  Alternate Delivery Methods …. And Home -Based Cardiac Rehabilitation  
Million Hearts is a national initiative led by [CONTACT_549452] (49 ), with an aim to improve use of evidence -based practices (e.g., aspi[INVESTIGATOR_549419], blood pressure to goal), especially in priority populations. Recognizing the important role of 
CR in secondary prevention, in 2015 Million Hearts established the CR Collaborative , which set 
a target goal to increase participation in CR to 70% by 2022 and advocated that “patients 
complete all 36 se ssions of the CR protocol …” (2 5).  Consistent with the above, two AHA 
advisories ( 50,51 ) called for the development and deployment of new delivery models to improve 
the utilization  of CR services .  Both advisories recognized that the CBCR programs of today are 
insufficient to meet the needs of CR nat ionally. In fact, Pack et al (52 ) estimated that if all CBCR 
programs currently in the U.S. operated at full capacity, such an accomplishment would 
accommodate <50% of qualifying patients.   
Various types of home -based CR have been evaluated (5 3-75). What has not been fully 
investigated is an industry -standard, hybrid CR model, one that tailors program offerings to the 
individual needs of each patient, while at the same time demonstrating generalizability by 
[CONTACT_549453]  (not separate from) a CBCR program. Helpi[INVESTIGATOR_549420] e barriers to 
regular attendance in CBCR is possible through a patient -centered HYCR model and; therefore, 
has the potential to increase the number of CR visits attended.    
  Home -based CR has not flourished to date, likely for two reasons .  First, and of great 
importance, is that home -based CR is not a covered benefit by [CONTACT_545796] (e.g., Medicare or 
commercial payers such as Blue Cross and Blue Shield) across the U.S. Therefore, home -based 
CR is not viewed by [CONTACT_549454]. That said, the technology used 
today for the remote or home delivery of telehealth (e.g., video synchronized telemedicine),  
which is insurance covered in most states in the US, has not been applied and tested on a larger 
scale as a means to secure reimbursement for remote -based CR.   
      Second , most research studies that tested home -based CR were conducted using 
additional or assigned clinical research staff that operated independently or outside of the daily 
function of CR. This can be a source of frustration for existing CBCR programs who are  unsure 
how to integrate schedules, allocate and parse limited staff, and remotely deliver patient 
education. CR programs that strive to “improve patient attendance” by [CONTACT_14659] a HYCR 
program need to be assured of not only equivalency of outco mes (between CBCR and HYCR) 
but ease of adoption within their setting  as well.   
      To help the field of CR take an evolutionary step forward, we believe it is important to 
test a HYCR model that addresses all of the industry -standard elements of contemporary CR, and 
does so by [CONTACT_549455] (a) operates via the virtual 
private network (VPN) within the ele ctronic medical records (EMR) that serve hospi[INVESTIGATOR_549421] 
(e.g., EPIC, Cerner, Allscripts) and (b) only requires hardware that is already accessible by [CONTACT_549456]’s. This approach represents a model for CR to meet existing telemedicine (TM) statutes 
for reimbursement in most States (like Henry Ford has tested in Michigan)  
12 
 (http://cchpca.org/state -laws -and-reimbursement -policies ).  [TM is defined here -in as video 
synchronized telecommunications for the remote delivery of patient care .] 
3.3.1 .  Telemedicine (TM) Today .  TM uses devices and technology to deliver patient care 
when the patient and provider are separated by [CONTACT_477447]. TM is used by [CONTACT_549457], cost effec tiveness, and 
quality of care (76 ). Patient satisfaction ranks high with TM, evidenced by a recent survey of 
1700 U.S. adults in which 94% reported being “very satisfied” with all aspects of their TM visit 
and only ~ 1% rated the expe rience confusing/co mplicated (77 ). Current estimates are that 63% 
of health care providers use some form of TM, and that 44% of health systems ind icate TM is a 
“top priority” (78) in their strategic planning. Currently, 48 states provide Medicaid 
reimbursement for TM via some form  of live, synchronized video (79 ) and [ADDRESS_719203] “Parity 
Laws” requiring commercial insurers (e.g., Blue Cross/Blue Shield) to reimburse for TM at the 
same rate as in -person encounters (80 ).    
3.3.[ADDRESS_719204] Health System in Detroit, TM visits are conducted with the 
patient using a mobile device (smart phone or tablet) and software integrated within their patient 
portal of our EMR [EPIC (i.e., MyChart/Vidyo, VidyoMobile, Vidyo, Inc. Hackensack, NJ)], 
ensuring a secure, two -way, real time video interaction between the patient and the provider.  
The other commercial EMR’s offer similar capabilities.  
 
3.[ADDRESS_719205] of changes in CR programmatic 
operations on number of CR visits completed ( Table 1 ). Pack et al. (81 ) used as tailored 
welcoming video and non -monetary motivational incentives and showed that both incrementally 
increased the number of sessions completed.  Among Medicaid b eneficiaries, Gaalema et al. (82 ) 
showed that the use of monetary incentives resulted in the completion of more CR sessions.  An 
Australian -based  study is (74 ) particularly relevant because it employed synchronized TM , and 
reported a greater number of sessions with home CR versus CBCR.  I ATTEND  is the first large, 
US-based, prospective randomized trial to use TM and assess the effect of a comprehensive, 
individualized HYCR program on the number of CR sessions attended.  If iATTEND 
successfully demonstrates the effectiveness  of a HYCR program using TM on a larger scale, then 
it can be advanced as a model to CR programs in other health systems, as well as to health 
insurers in other sta tes.  
 
Table 1: Comparison of Studies Using an Administrative or Programmatic Intervention to 
Increase Attendance in CR  
 Design  Sample  Intervention  Primary Finding  
13 
 Pack et al 
(81) 
2013  Retrospective  N=1103, 
Age=64+13, 
70% men, 92% 
Caucasian  • Policy change 
defining 
completion at ≥ 
30 sessions  
• Monetary 
motivational 
incentives for 
patients and 
staff (e.g. 
packing pass, t -
shirt)  
• Descriptive 
video  • Overall 
completion rate 
increased  
• The addition of 
each 
intervention 
associated with 
a 3-4 visit 
increase in 
number of visits  
Gaalema et 
al (82 ) 
2016  Convenience 
group compared 
to historical 
controls  N=10  
Age=59 ± 10 yr, 
69% men, 80% 
Caucasian  Increasing 
financial incentives 
per each session 
attended  • 31 sessions for 
incentivized 
patients vs 13.6 
sessions for 
controls  
Hwang et al 
(74) 
2017  Randomized 
parallel (non -
inferior), home -
based vs center -
based  N=53, mean age 
67±12 yr, 75% 
men, 75% 
Caucasian  Real-time video 
teleconferencing  • 20 visits for 
home -based vs 
14 visits for 
center -based  
• Equivalent 
gains in six 
minute walk  
      
Securing insurance reimbursement for HYCR via synchronized TM  has the potential to 
attenuate concerns from hospi[INVESTIGATOR_549422] -based CR because it is viewed 
as a negative financial endeavor. Importantly, HYCR may help overcome common attendance 
barriers by [CONTACT_549458]’s home or closer to where they live, and at a mutually agreed 
upon time.   
 
3.5 Applying HYCR to a Vulnerable, at Risk Patients with Cardiovascular Disease  
Per the 2016 US census, the City of Detroit, MI is a major city in the US, with >670,000 
residents. The main demographics for Detroit are: 79% African American (AA), 8% Hispanic; 
13% age 65 yr or older; and a median annual household income < $27,000… repre senting a 
priority population that is vulnerable to some of the social and economic challenges that HYCR 
14 
 is aimed at overcoming.  In 2016, ~ 80% of the patients cared for in the Henry Ford Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_549423], indicating that the patient population we serve at our Detroit site is 
indeed consistent with the population of the City.  Unfortuna tely, AA are less likely to use CR 
(3,9) and adopt lifestyle changes aimed at the  secondary prevention of CVD (10 ); iATTEND will 
provide  them with improved access to CR and its secondary prevention capabilities using a 
convenient approach to increase atten dance.  
3.5.[ADDRESS_719206] “real -world” operations in CR, minimize CR staff burden, and still test effectivenss,  
iATTEND will enroll patients referred to  the Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s Detroit -based program that have access 
to the  needed equipment; specifically, (a) a smart phone or tablet (via self or a “willing to assist” 
family member/friend) with int ernet access and (b) stationary exercise equipment (treadmill, 
elliptical or bike) at home, work, place of worship, or in the community; and would be willing to 
periodically use both for their CR efforts.   
3.6.  Safety of home -based CR  
It is important to emphasize that the level of incremental risk for major unexpected 
adverse events (death, events requiring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]) that are probably related to a subject’s 
participation in this project will likely be extremely low.  Specifically, c enter -based cardiac 
rehabilitation (CR) is known to be safe for patients that participate, with reported rates of 1 major 
event per 750,000 to 900,0 00 patient -hours of training (88 ).  Concerning home -based CR, it is 
important to first emphasize that mos t all patients that participate in center -based programs 
today are already asked to “exercise on their own on non -rehab days”; therefore, iATTEND  is 
mainly giving some structure and supervision to that recommendation.  Numerous studies have 
looked at the safety of home based CR and have show n no apparent increased risk (53 -62,64,66 -
68,72 -74).  
 
The Heart Failure: A Controlled Trial Investigating Outcomes of Exercise Training (HF -
ACTION) Study is the largest study to assess the safety of exercise training, with the vast 
majority of the exercise training complete d outside of center -based CR (38 ).  In HF -ACTION, 
patients with stable, chronic heart failure and NYHA class II to IV symptoms (n -2331) were 
enrolled. In that study, participants were prescribed 9 or more months of home based CR. A 
heart rate monitor (chest/wrist heart rate -watch) and da ily exercise records were used to guide 
and monitor exercise intensity at home. No significant difference was reported between the 
exercise and usual care groups for the overall rate of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] (1.9% vs 3.2%, respectively) 
or death (0.4% versus 0.4%, r espectively) during or within 3 hours after exercise. Furthermore, 
the investigators identified 1,053 patients from the HF ACTION trial who had an implantable 
cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) at baseline and were randomized to the exercise intervention vs.  
control. Study participants had a median ejection fraction of 24% at baseline. During 2.2 years of 
follow -up, 20% of the 546 exercise patients experienced a shock vs. 22% of the 507 usual care 
patients. Exercise training was not associated with the increa sed occurrence of ICD shock (HR 
0.9, 95% CI, 0.7 – 1.2) ( 89).  
 
15 
  4. Investigational Plan   
4.1. Overview.  
The iATTEND Trial is a single -site, prospective, randomized controlled  Phase 2  clinical trial 
that will assess the effectiveness of a patient -individualized HYCR program, one that is provided 
either remotely (home and/or in the community) and includes 1 or more sessions of CBCR. 
iATTEND tests thi s paradigm in a vulnerable, urban cohort that often cannot maintain 
participation in CR due to personal (e.g., dependent -care) and financial challenges. To strengthen 
the generalizability of our findings, in both study groups we plan to (a) deliver the same key 
secondary prevention elements and (b) measure the same program outcomes that are e xpected of 
an industry -standard CR program.  Clinical op erations at the Henry Ford  Detroit CR site  are to 
be revised  (including its staffing matrix) in a manner that allows the site to offer both CBCR 
only and HYCR, using existing CR staff (research staff will not be involved in direct patient 
care).  Therefore, the only difference between the two study groups will be t he method of 
program delivery (CBCR vs. HYCR).  HYCR will be delivered with the periodic use of 
synchronous TM, which will be billed to and is covered by [CONTACT_549459] [or billed to the project’s budget, if the patient’s 
health insurer (e.g., Medicare) has not yet agreed to cover HYCR delivered via TM.]  
 
4.2. R61 – Year 1 – Formative or Start -Up Phase.  
The first [ADDRESS_719207] Manager (Matt 
Saval) will meet to discuss potential collaborations and begin to finalize the scientific aspects of 
the study protocol (e.g., recruitment, retention).  Any amendments to the protocol will be drafted 
and submitted to the institutional review board (IRB) for approval.  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_549424].  
     Months [ADDRESS_719208] Management Team  (PMT) , begin the development of case report forms for data 
collection, draft the manual of operations around study protocol, establish the trial’s dataset 
template using the REDCap system, and interview and hire the research staff.   
     Involving patients currently in the Detroit CR program, conduct a  survey to describe access to 
a telecommunications device (smart phone, tablet) and exercise equipment, as well as ascertain 
willingness to participate in a trial like iATTEND , best hours of accessibility , and potential 
barriers with usage. Using this information, develop/test strategies aimed at preventing 
interruption in CR operations during the R33 phase. If survey data  indicates potential difficulty 
recruiting subjects over the [ADDRESS_719209] messages that empowers to “think through” other 
16 
 options for accessing the equipment (i.e. willing to assist family member, fellow church 
parishioner, friend, community center). Codify any learnings for use by [CONTACT_16133].  
     Months 5 -9 of year 1 . Train all Detroit CR staff to work within a framework of having some 
patients in a CBCR only model and others in the HYCR model. In conjunction with feedback 
provided by [CONTACT_549460], modify program orientation materials, class sizes and format (e.g., 
open gym), computers, and staff matrixes to allow both the CBCR and HYCR program models 
to operate in an integrated manner.  Because some patients will now be receiving their CR care 
remotely, the number of sessions held at our Detro it center will decrease proportionately. This 
increased availability of staff time will be used by [CONTACT_549461] , with the new delivery model “stress  tested” within mock environments to 
ensure that all disciplines of the staff are sufficiently trained on the technology and procedures 
associated with simultaneously offering both CBCR -only and HYCB with TM. Procedures will 
be revised based on user feedback and the manual of operations near -finalized. Any form s, 
training, or procedures associated with subject testing and follow -up will be finalized and 
codified. Finally, the data safety monitoring plan will be developed,  including the appointment of 
the internal  data safety monitoring board (DSMB).  
     Months 8 and 10 of year 1 . Interface  the in -patient and out -patient processes that refer 
patients to the Detroit CR program with the screening and recruiting processes for iATTEND. 
Register the trial on clinicaltrials.gov.   Secure all approvals of the trial’s protocol.  
     Months [ADDRESS_719210] screening, recruitment, consenting, and baseline testing, 
and enroll subjects (~4% of 270 total). Hold the first of annual in -person meetings with NHLBI 
to review progress and scientific and protocol integrity; revise milestones as needed. Secure 
approval to proceed to R33 phase.  
4.2.[ADDRESS_719211], including but not li mited to patient satisfaction, duration of patient engagements, 
language barriers , adoption/sustainability of TM in CR by [CONTACT_549462], and reliability of 
TM operations.  
 
4.3. R33 – Year s 2-5 – Clinical Trial Phase.  
 4.3.1. Study Population  
270 patients with an index event that qualifies for CR will be recruited ( a) prior to 
discharge from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] , (b) soon after hospi[INVESTIGATOR_549425], or 
(c) from screening appointment schedules for physicians that will be seeing patients in an 
[ADDRESS_719212] a sufficient number of patients eligible and enrolled in CR to consent to trial 
participation.  
 4.3.1.a. Inclusion Criteria  
1) Has agreed to participate in CR and has experienced a cardiac event (myocardial 
infraction, coronary revascularization, heart valve surgery, or cardiac transplant in the 
past 6 months; diagnosed with chronic, stable AHA/ACC stage B or C heart failure or  
Canadian class 0 -2 stable angina pectoris)  
2) Lives in or plans to remain in the greater Detroit, MI area for the next year  
3) Age 18 -85 years of age  
4) Agrees to attend at least one CBCR session  
5) Agrees to scheduling at least 2, up to 3, CR sessions (either CBCR or HYCR) /wk 
6) Has demonstrated to research staff their ability to access and connect to the internet via 
smart phone or tablet and already has access to satisfactory home - or community -based 
exercise equipment  
 
4.3.1.b. Exclusion Criteria  
1) Received a left ventricular assist device, receiving continuous inotropic support (e.g., 
milrinone), or undergoing hemodialysis  
2) Angina at rest or with a low functional capacity (< 2 METs)  
3) Advanced cancer, advanced risk for falling, limiting cognitive impairment, or other 
advanced disorder that limits participation in CR  
a. Advanced risk for falling  will be assessed by 5X sit-to-stand test, with a cut-off 
score of >15 seconds  
b. Cognitive assessment will be completed using the Mini -Cog instrument, with a 
cut-off score < 3 used to exclude potential subjects.  
4) Severe arrhythmia unless adequately treated (e.g., implantable cardiac defibrillator)  
5) Pregnant or plan to become pregnant in the next year.  
6) Major cardiovascular procedure or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_549426] 6 months  
7) Exercise testing results that preclude safe exercise training, including abnormal blood 
pressure response, early ischemic changes or unexpected life -threatening arrhythmia  
8) Participation in another clinical trial that interferes with iATTEND participation, 
follow -up, data collection, exercise capacity or quality of life.  
18 
 9) Participation in a cardiac rehabilitation program within one year.   
 4.3.2. Background Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_549427], device and surgical care for a patient’s cardiovascular  disease  
will be managed solely by [CONTACT_549463].  While a patient is participating in the iATTEND trial we recognize 
that some patients may be or become candidates for current or new th erapi[INVESTIGATOR_549428].  Patients in whom their physician considers a procedure or 
placement of a device to be probable within [ADDRESS_719213] Enrollment  
 4.3.3.a. Screening  … from in-patient and EMR  
 Using census data from the EMR for in-patient cardiology units , as well as the out-patient 
preventive cardiology unit work que in the EMR, potential subjects will be identified/screened 
by [CONTACT_549464].  The names of potential candidates will 
be forwarded to the research staff who will then conduct a detailed screening of eligibility using 
the EMR and a telephone call.  If the patient meets the enrollment criteria and agrees to 
participate after having discussed study pu rpose, procedures, risks and responsibilities, a baseline 
appointment will be made , ideally on the same day the  patient will be scheduled to attend CR 
orientation ; 7-[ADDRESS_719214] manager  to undergo 
further screening and receive a verbal explanation of the trial and sign informed consent.  
 
 4.3.3.b. Baseline Clinic Visit  
 The baseline testing required in this protocol should be completed as soon as possible 
after signed consent , but may be completed  up to 4 weeks after consenting , if necessary .  All 
baseline testing will be completed prior to a patient ’s first session in CR.  For any study visit that 
includes a QOL assessment and a symptom -limited cardiopulmonary exercise (CPX) test, the  
quality of lif e (QOL) instrument (s) (Dartmouth COOP, and/or EuroQOL -5D) must be completed 
prior to the CPX  test.  Also, the 6 min walk  (6MW) test must be completed , per standardized 
procedures (84),  [ADDRESS_719215]; therefore, during any clinic  visit the order 
of these tests is as follows : (a) 6MW, (b) QOL tools  and other assessments (PHQ -9, Rate your 
Plate , mini-cog), (c) 5x repetition sit-to-stand test , and (d) CPX  test.  The 6MW and the CPX  test 
will be complet ed per procedures as specified and overseen by [CONTACT_549465] (“Exercise Core Lab) ; and case report forms for 6MW and QOL 
surveys and data collected from the CPX  test will be forwarded to the Exercise Core lab or data 
entry/ management as indicated.  
 
19 
  4.3.3.c.  Baseline Testing  
 The written questionnaires ( EuroQOL -5D, Dartmouth COOP, Rate Your Plate, and PHQ -
9) will be administered per the standardized instructions associated with each instrument.  
Advanced risk for falling will be assessed by [CONTACT_549466] 5X Sit -to-Stand test and cognitive 
status will be assessed by [CONTACT_11605] -Cog screening tool .  Those patients meeting the exclusion 
criteria based in advanced risk for falling  or cognitive status will be excluded from participating 
in the  trial, but still allowed to participate in CR . 
 The Exercise Core Lab will oversee staff training, quality control, procedural conduct, 
and all data analysis for both the 6MW and CPX test.  The primary modality for CPX testing will 
be the motor driven treadmill; however, a stationary bike can be used if indicated.  Patients must 
use the same t esting and exercises protocol for all CPX testing completed during the trial.  For 
any bike tests, a ramped protocol will be used that starts at 0 watts and work rate is increased 10 
watt/min.   For all treadmill te sts, the modified Naughton protocol will be used for testing:  
Table 2.  
Stage  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Time (min)  2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 
Speed (mph)  1.0 1.5 2.0 2.0 2.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.5 
Grade (%)  0 0 3.5 7 10.5 7 10 12.5 15 14 
Estimated METs  2.3 3.3 4.5 5.5 6.5 7.5 8.5 9.5. 10.5 11.5 
 
Patients will be excluded from the study i f exercise testing results preclude safe exercise training 
in CR as defined by [CONTACT_118992]/AHA guidelines, including abnormal blood pressure response, early 
ischemic changes and unexpected life -threatening arrhythmia.  If an exercise -induced arrhythmia 
is identified  as life -threatening, the exercise  test will be stopped .  If the patient is performing a 
baseline exercise  test, he/she will not be randomized in to the study.  If the patient is performing 
a follow -up exercise t est immediately after CR or at 6 month,  he/she will be asked to sto p any 
exercise training and his/her physician will be notified of the results; the se patients will be 
followed per protocol for the duration of the study and no further exercise test ing will be 
performed.  Patients who have a non -life-threatening arrhythmia that stops the test can re -take 
the test or re -start CR after it is treated.  
 For patients taking a beta-adrenergic blocking agent, they should participate in exercise 
testing and training between three hours and [ADDRESS_719216] rong encouragement to achieve a 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_17864] >1.10 and a Borg rating of perceived exertion >16; however, nei ther 
of these criteria will serve as a stop pi[INVESTIGATOR_549429].  Ventilatory threshold, peak oxygen 
uptake (VO 2), and other test variables will be determined per Core lab procedures.  After the 
baseline CPX test, intentional attempts will be made to blind the person supervising all 
subsequent follow -up tests to a patient’s study group assignment through isolation of test 
materials, patient instructions , and restricted conversation with testing staff.  The exercise testing 
lab will undergo quality control testing every [ADDRESS_719217] (i.e ., CPX).   A one -to-one r andomization scheme will be computer generated and 
will be balanced on random accrual points and stratified by [CONTACT_113215].  
 
 4.3.5.  Study groups .  
Patients in both arms of iATTEND  will receive CR.  Participation in CR will begin as 
soon as possible after randomization, with a goal of initiating training no more than 10 days  after 
randomization.  
 4.3.5.a. Usual care.  Patients in this  arm of the trial will receive the following:  
 1. Industry s tandard , facility -based CR, in accordance with current Henry Ford policies 
and procedures; attending CR 2 -3 days per week.  Briefly, t ransportation issues will be resolved 
per current practices using family and community resources. Individual treatment plans (ITPs) 
will be established upon enrollment into CR; revised per patient progress; and uploaded in to the 
EMR upon entry and 30, 60,  and 90 days and upon completion of CR. Current guidelines for 
prescribing exercise (type, frequency, durati on, intensity) will be in accordance with Unit 
procedures, as ada pted from published guidelines (85) .  Any ECG telemetry or blood pressure 
measurement during exercise will be used as clinically indicated, and in accordance with 
program policies and procedures.  Health insurance coverage will be verified per Unit protocol 
and CR visits billed in accordanc e with a patient’s policy and per hospi[INVESTIGATOR_338310]. To avoid 
any effect that co -payments or differing co -payment amounts might have on attendance (and thu s 
induce a potential  source of bias between groups), all co -payments will be charged to the project. 
For those patients without health insurance, their CR sessions will charged to proposed project 
budget. CBCR subjects will be encouraged to engage in purposeful exercise ad libitum on their 
own each week.     
 2. Upon (a) completion of 36 sessions, (b) having stopped attending CR due to medical/ 
personal reasons or non -compliance  (defined per current Henry Ford polices and procedures) , or 
(c) [ADDRESS_719218] CR session,  subjects will be deemed having 
“completed ” CR and  follow -up visit [ADDRESS_719219] testing (QOL, CPX test, 6MW test , and all 
standard CR surveys ) will be scheduled and completed  within [ADDRESS_719220] retention/engagement in the trial. The coordinator will remind patients about 
their scheduled follow -up visit 2 (at 6 months). The coordinator will also equally speak with 
subjects in both groups about any barriers/is sues they might be experiencing relative to proper 
self-care or disease management behaviors, and assist with resolution strategies using an open, 
21 
 problem -solving approach.  Subjects that were administratively “dropped” from CR will still be 
contact[CONTACT_549467] -up testing visits [ADDRESS_719221] 
testing (QOL, CPX test, 6MW test , and all standard CR survey ) will be scheduled and 
completed . 
 4.3.5.b.  Intervention  Group (HYCR)  
 This group of iATTEND involves a hybrid design, with the  frequency of CBCR visits 
and HY CR visits individualized and modified based on the subject’s personal preferences  and 
their family , transportation and work constraints.  Per study eligibility criteria, patients in HYCR 
will engage in at least one CBCR visit.  For those with no pr eferences  as to their number  of TM 
visits, they will be scheduled to complete 12 of their 36 visits as HYCR -TM, with the remainder 
being home -based without TM (up to one time per week) and /or CBCR 1 or more per week.  
Immediately  following  CR visit 1 (which will be CBCR), p atient in HYCR will have the video 
app loaded to their smart phone or tablet (or that of a “ willing  to assist” family member or 
friend).  HYCR patients receive a chest  strap/wrist heart rate device to document HR before, 
during, and/or after exercise  during  the TM session.  After CBCR visit 1, if the patient opts to 
complete  the remainder  of the CR session as HYCR, they will be provided  with a home blood 
pressure unit for the regular reporting of resting blood  pressure prior to each HYCR visit.  
HYCR subjec ts will be encouraged to engage in purposeful exercise ad libitum on their own 
each week.  
Since b oth Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Michigan and Health Alliance Plan  already 
cover CBCR and HYCR , only the co -payments  will be covered by [CONTACT_46776] ’s budget . For 
patients randomized to HYCR that have an insurer that does not  yet cover CR delivered using 
TM (e.g., Medicare), their CR visits will be covered by [CONTACT_46776]’s budget.   For all patients 
randomized to CBCR, their co -payments  will be covered by [CONTACT_46776] ’s budget .  
Program education for patients in HYCR will be delivered using the twenty -eight, 7 -15 
min audio PDF’s that are free to access from the Health System’s  web site . For patients in the 
HYCR group, 1 -3 of the audio PDF’s will be “assigned” (based on their ITP) for viewing before 
their next CR visit, with content discussed with the appropriate CR staff person during their next 
remote or center -based visit.    
The following table (Table 3) provides a descriptive summary of the CR protocol for 
subjects in the two study groups of iATTEND.  
Table 3.  Summary of the CR protocol for subjects  in the two study groups of iATTEND.  
 Hybrid CR  Center -Based CR  
Staff :  Subject ratio 
(contact [CONTACT_5586], setting)  1:1 (12 to 15 min, individual 
setting)  4:1 (60 min, group setting)  
22 
 Programming for CR 
session  • 2 to 3 sessions each week  
• At least 1 and no more than 12 
of the sessions will be center -
based  
• Remainder of 36 sessions will be 
remote -/home -based with TM  All sessions will be center -based 
sessions, 2 to 3 sessions each week  
Recommended total 
number of sessions  36 36 
Exercise intensity 
range (85)  60%-80% of heart rate reserve or RPE 
11-14 60%-80% of heart rate reserve or 
RPE 11 -14 
Recommendation for 
purposeful exercise 
outside of formal CR  Encouraged, ad libitum  Encouraged, ad libitum  
Patient monitoring  ECG telemetry and resting and exercise 
blood pressure monitoring for 1 -6 
center -based visits, with HR monitors 
provided for all home/remote 
telemedicine visits.   ECG telemetry and resting and 
exercise blood pressure monitoring 
for 3 -6 center -based visits.  
Additional monitoring based on 
clinical indications  
Patient education  28, 7 -15 min audio PDFs  8, 45-60 min  group lectures  
Completion of 
individual treatment 
plan  At baseline; 30, 60 and 90 days; at 
discharge  At baseline; 30, 60 and 90 days; at 
discharge  
Outcomes routinely 
assessed before and 
after CR, and used for 
iATTEND  • Nutrition: Rate Your Plate  
• QOL: Dartmouth COOP  
• Functional Capacity: MET level*  
• Depression: PHQ -9 • Nutrition: Rate Your Plate  
• QOL: Dartmouth COOP  
• Functional Capacity: MET level*  
• Depression: PHQ -9 
RPE = ratings of perceived exertion; COOP = cooperative functional assessment; TM=telemedicine  
*Change in MET (metabolic equivalent of task) level during training from week 1 to final week of CR  
 
4.4.  Program Operations.  
One concern with any home -based CR program that periodically incorporates some form 
of synchronized communications might be that “the use of staffing resources per patient 
encounter is less efficient”. To minimize potential inefficiencies in iATTEND, a sch edule for 
HYCR at Henry Ford Main Campus will be adopted that allocates up to  4, one hour blocks of 
23 
 time each day (up to 3 patients per block), with 1 hour blocks allotted to the early morning, late -
morning, mid -afternoon and the early evening. This approach will provide staff coverage for up 
to 20 hours (4 hours per day, 5 days per week; 0.5 FTE) of HYCR each week (or up to 60 
synchronized HYCR visits/week).  Assuming [ADDRESS_719222] facilitate 
helpi[INVESTIGATOR_549430] (via self or a “willing to assist” family 
member or friend) to both the technology (smart phone, tablet with internet access) and exercise 
equipment (elliptical, treadmill, bike) needed to exercise while using a synchronized video.   
Regarding c ontingency plans for the few patients  that might lose access to exercise 
equipment during the intervention period (up to 36 CR sessions), the research staff will work 
closely with these few  patients to identify and secure a nearby [CONTACT_549468], in door path (mall, school hallway), school track, park, or public 
community -center for them to conduct their planned exercise (e.g., walking) sessions regardless 
of the weather; this includes the identification of a partner support person to assist with safe ty 
and transportation (if needed).  For the few patients for which free -walking in a community 
setting is needed for their exercise plan, maintaining a video link via the internet during free -
walking may be difficult.  For these individuals a standard audi o phone call will be established 
while they walk.  Concerning the video synchronized visits,  for the rare occasion where the 
video link is lost due to a poor Wi -Fi connection, we will simply rel y on the audio portion or 
connected via a standard phone call.  
 
4.5. Adherence.  
Since a dherence is the primary end point for this trial (defined as the number of 
scheduled CR sessions completed within 6 months  after starting CR ), careful instruction will be 
provided to all staff that surrounds ensuring no differential overt or cover t attempts are 
undertaken to overly or unduly influence attendance in either study group .  A five person sub -
committee of the Project Management Team (called the Subject Recruitment and Retention and 
Staff Adherence [SR RSA] sub -committee) will monitor the above to ensure that only normal and 
customary program procedures that are normally used to enhance attendance are uniformly 
engaged across all patients.  These normal and customary procedures include (a) calling those 
patients who miss one or more scheduled CR appointments, (b) providing patients with a 
calendar of all future scheduled appointments, and (c) administratively discharging those patients  
that exhibit no CR a ppointment activity for 6 weeks . 
 
24 
 4.5.1.  Family/Friend Involvement  
In addition to the above normal and customary, and because spouses, partners, significant 
others, or friend who support patients in an exercise program influence attendance, patients in 
both study groups will be encouraged to bring such a person(s) to the orientation session/first CR 
session and this person will be viewed and relied upon as a primary source of social support.  
4.5.2. Logistical Assistance and Incentives.  
Patients  will be thoroughly interviewed and screened to identify potential barriers  to 
adherence.  The study coordinator  will ensure that partic ipants  have sufficient logistical  
assistance to attend  the screen ing visits, baseline testing, CR sessions , and follow -up visits.  
Common barriers/ issues that impact attendance  will be addressed for resolution per standard CR 
program practices ( equally in both study groups ) and include the following ; (a) transportation 
(countered by [CONTACT_549469], taxi ,  and GoRide ), (b) 
return to work conflict ( countered  by [CONTACT_549470] -time or temporary flexible  hours), 
and (c) family care needs ( countered  by [CONTACT_549471] (s) to assist with such 
and offering convenient  hours of operation) . 
No structured system for providing patients  with incentives to attend CR sessions will be 
used.  To facilitate delivery , all patients HYCR will be given a chest strap/wrist HR monitor; 
patients in HYCR that are scheduled  to attend less than one CR session per week will also be 
given a home blood pressure monitoring unit.  Gas cards will be made equally available to 
patients in both study arms to facilitate retention to scheduled study baseline and follow -up 
appointments.  
 
4.6. Retention  
Retention for iATTEND is defined as compliance with scheduled testing sessions 
(baseline and follow -up visits 1 and 2 ), as well as  compliance with scheduled follow -up 
telephone calls with the study coordinator (at months 2 and 4 after completing  CR).  A main 
reason for the telephone calls at months [ADDRESS_719223] 
retention/engagement in the trial. The coordinator will remind patients about their scheduled 
follow -up visit 2 (at 6 months). Also, t he coordinator will eq ually speak with subjects in both 
groups about any barriers/issues they might be experiencing relative to proper self -care or 
disease management behaviors, and assist with resolution strategies using an open, problem -
solving approach.  Subjects that are administratively “dropped” from CR will still be contact[CONTACT_549472] -up testing visits [ADDRESS_719224] measures (telephone calls by [CONTACT_549473], email, and U.S. mailed 
letters) to help ensure fidelity to the specified protocol for testing.  Project budgeted gas cards 
($10 each) can be provided to help defray subjects’ travel costs associated with baseline testing 
and follow -up visit 1 and 2 testi ng.   
25 
 The SR RSA sub -committee will (a) track and report on project issues that impact patient 
retention to the above testing events and follow -up telephone calls , as well as  (b) staff 
compliance to protocol procedures.   The later includes the SRRSA committee periodically (every 
6 months) conducting shadow -evaluat ions (using video and  observation)  of CR staff for the 
uniform conduct of patient assessments and the uniform delivery of CR per  protocol standards.  
 
4.7 Drop outs.  
 4.7.1. Drop out recovery.    
Relative to study retention, the following definitions will be applied:  
1. Integrated subjects are those attending all appointments  as scheduled, or re -
scheduling any missed appointments or cancellations  
2. Poorly compliant  subjects are those who cancel, do not  show and fail to reschedule 2 
of their 4 follow -up responsibilities (follow -up visit 1 or 2 and telephone encounter 1 
and 2).  
3. Refusals/drop -outs are those that state, in no uncertain terms, that they do not want to 
participate any longer in the trial, and refuse any further contact [CONTACT_85551] . 
iATTEND will use a systematic  approach in an attempt to recover poorly compliant subjects, 
especially those that either (a) inquired about or expressed interest in droppi[INVESTIGATOR_33096] (b) or appear to 
be “moving toward” droppi[INVESTIGATOR_549431].  Since most drop outs are due 
to life changes (e.g., divorce, illness of family member, change in jobs) and/or 
misunderstandings with research staff, a planned recovery approach will be used that addresses 
the following.  
1. Be sure that subjects are NOT pushed to the point that they refuse to participate /all 
contact  
2. Stay in touch with the patient though email, phone  calls or being present at planned clinic 
visits they may have with their physicians.  All of this is aimed at showing support, as 
well as provides an opportunity to garner subject concerns such that problem solving and 
barrier resolution techniques  can be applied to I prove participation.  
3. To foster continued, planned contact [CONTACT_549474]… even if it is something as 
simple as to schedule  another c[INVESTIGATOR_2394]tact [INVESTIGATOR_2394] a specific day and time.  
Engaging patients at risk for droppi[INVESTIGATOR_549432] a dynamic endeavor that also can vary with time, especially among those subjects 
where challenging life circumstances (e.g., transportation, work, family care) change improve … 
such that it then becomes more feasible for them to re -engage in the project.  
 4.7.2. Other important  drop out recovery  considerations .  
 A. Attempts to re -integrate a participant shou ld be discontinued as soon as an adamant 
refusal is communicated.  
26 
  B. A patient will be considered “lost to follow -up” only after all means of contact [CONTACT_549475].  The status of the patient at the last visit or contact [CONTACT_549476].  The 
vital status of these patients will be followed by [CONTACT_549477].  
 C. For patients that formal ly withdraw consent, vital status will be followed by 
[CONTACT_549478].  
 
4.8.  Subject Follow -Up 
 After completing CR or a subject ’s last CR visit, follow -up visits [ADDRESS_719225] CR visit and the latter scheduled at 6  
months  + [ADDRESS_719226] CR visit.  Data collected at follow -up visit one will be nearly the 
same as that gathered during baseline.  This includes both QOL  instruments (Dartmouth COOP, 
EQOL ), a CPX test, the 6MW, PHQ -9, Rate your Plate, and 5x sit -to-stand .  Dat a collected at 
follow -up visit two  includes both QOL  instruments (Dartmouth COOP, EQOL ), a CPX test, the 
6MW, PHQ -9, Rat e your Plate, and frailty assessment.   
 
Table 4.  Schedule of Trial Events  and Time line  
Patient Care Event  Screening 
and 
Baseline  Week s 1-
26 or CR 
visits 1 -
36* F/up visit [ADDRESS_719227] 
CR visit  F/up visit  [ADDRESS_719228]  X  X X X X 
       
Training        
  Exercise sessions   X     
       
Telephone calls     X X  
*Patients will have 6 mo to complete 36 visits ; iPAQ= International  Physical Activity 
Questionnaire ; PAST = Past -day Adult Sedentary Time Questionnaire  
 
5. Trial Endpoints  
[ADDRESS_719229], 
hiring and training CR and research staff, and demonstrating the ability to  screen and enroll 
patients into the trial.  
R33 Phase.   The number of CR sessions completed within 6 months  
 
5.2. Secondary Endpoints.   
R33 Phase only.   
1. Percentage of patients completing 36 CR sessions within 6 months  
2. Change in exercise capacity upon completion of CR  
 a. Peak VO 2 
 b. Six minute walk distance  
3. Change in quality of life upon completion of CR  
4. Exploratory endpoints  
a. Change in exercise capacity at 6 mo after completion of CR  
i). Peak VO 2 
  ii). Six minute walk distance  
  b. Change in quality of life at 6 mo after completion of CR  
c. Change in sedentary behavior and physical activity habits (home, work, recreation), the 
latter of which does not include exercise in CR  
d. Economics and resource utilization associated with of CR .   
Home- or hybrid approach to CR (with or without telemedicine) is often viewed as a 
“negative” financial business model due to lack or revenue (and increased patient care 
expenses and staff time).  The cost effectiveness , economics and resource utilization of 
the HYCR program will be  determine and compared to the similar data for CBCR .  In 
both CR models we will collect and calculate costs associated with program 
implementation (staff time, HR monitors, and upgrading desk tops for telemedicine) as 
gathered from both administrative data within the CR unit and from the Health System’s 
Corporate Accounting/ Financial Services Department.  We will also collect costs from 
participants at follow -testing, including direct nonmedic al and medical costs (including 
value of time of the participants attending a program, waiting, and travel).  In a subset of 
[ADDRESS_719230]’s full cohort, for patients insured Health Alliance Plan or Blue Cross and 
Blue Shield of Michigan, we will iden tify and compare   reimbursement and health care 
utilization during CR and for the 6 month  period of time after CR is completed   
 
6. Safety  
Consistent with what is known today about the practice of cardiac rehabilitation, t he level of 
incremental risk for major unexpected adverse events (death, events requiring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]) 
that are probably related to a subject’s participation in this project is anticipated to be extremely 
low.   
6.1. Safety assessment.  
Safety assessments will consist of the recording and monitoring of a ll safety related 
events.  Results from patient assessments (e.g., CPX results, ECG  rhythm strips [if any] ) that 
include safety parameters performed as part of the patient evaluation or trial protocol will be 
maintained in the patient’s res earch chart and considered to be  source  documents.  
 
6.1.1 .  Adverse and  Serious Adverse Events or Experience  
An adverse event  (AE) is defined as any untoward medical occurrence (new onset or 
change in disease state) in a patient that is unfavorable and unintended (e.g., new onset chest 
pain, near syncope , new onset atrial fibrillation) , regardless of whether or not it is considered to 
be related to the intervention.   A serious adverse event (SAE) is defined as any untow ard medical 
occurrence that results in any of the following: death ; persistent or significant 
disability/incapacity ; hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] ; stroke; fall requiring medica l attention; is life threatening ; 
or requires  or is considered serious such that the patient may require medical or surgical 
intervention to prevent any of the previously listed events.   
For the purposes of iATTEND, the project will follow all policies and procedures set 
forth by [CONTACT_549479][INVESTIGATOR_307], its Office of Research Administration, and its Institutional Review 
Board (IRB).  SAEs and AEs of interest  will be collected after randomization and through 
follow -up visit [ADDRESS_719231] management team ( PMT ) will forward this 
safety data to the DSMB on a regular basis  (e.g., quarterly ), which will perform routine  
evaluations  of such. 
Additionally, a lthough likely very rare, unexpected  SAEs that are possibly attributable to 
rehabilitation, as determined by [CONTACT_28831] (e.g., occurring during or within 3 hours after 
exercising ), will b e reported to the IRB and DS MB within 10 days of occurrence.    
 
6.1.2.   Assessment of A ctionable Events  Immediately Proximal to CR 
A secondary analysis  is planned of actionable  events  (both AE and SAE) sustained  
immediately prior  to, during , or immediately after ( during recovery ) an exercise training session .  
These represent both major events that may require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] (e.g., myocardial infarction, 
fall) or an emergency room visit, as well as events that often occur in CR and may lead to with -
29 
 holding a patient from starting exercise, stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a patient from continuing to exercise , or 
requiring notification of the patient’s a physician  (e.g., symptomatic hypoglycemia requiring oral 
glucose supplementation, new onset or worsening angina /ischemia , falls , persistent hypotension ). 
 
7. Study Organization  
7.1. Steering Committee  
The Steering Committee (SC) is responsible for overseeing and maintaining the scientific and 
operational integrity of the project.  Duties include a pprov ing the final trial protocol; o versee ing 
the scientific direction of the trial ; review and approv al of case report forms, assessment 
questionnaires and manual of operations ; review and approv al of main analysis plan ; review and 
vote on any proposed protocol amendments ; review, comment  on and vote on any presentations, 
publications or recommendations of the Publications sub -committee ; and a ct on any 
recommendations from the DSMB  
The SC will meet annually.  
 
 7.1.1. Publications Sub-Committee  
A Publications subcommittee  will be established , comprised of up to 4 individuals (two 
of which will be from the SC) who will initially meet quarterly to give direction and timelines to 
the expected writings , publications, presentations and pronouncements from this project.   The 
publications committee will be responsible to review and comment on proposals for papers made 
by [CONTACT_431], review trial press releases, approve secondary databases analyses, address any 
issues pertaining to authorship of publications and presentations, and ensure that NHLBI 
publications approval procedures are followed.  It will also assist the research staff with 
registering the project with clincaltrials.gov and establish a schedule for the submission of trial 
results to clinicaltrials.gov (within 12 months after study completion).  
 
7.2. Project Management Team ( Plan). 
Under the guidance and leadership of the S C, the PMT will plan and implement/conduct 
the project in a manner that adheres to the approved protocol and manual of operations.  The 
PMT will be established during month [ADDRESS_719232] Manager ( to be determined), in concert with the 
project PI.  Any and all financial and operational issues that might require input from the full 
PMT will be added to the agenda for the next meeting of the PMT.  The agenda will follow a 
standardized format for each meeting to address on -going business (screening report, enrollment 
report, retention report, assessments, process initiatives, and financial issues), new business, and 
action items.  
Responsibilities for the PMT include, but are no t limited to, telecommunication issues , 
patient education, data collection and entry, retention and adherence, maintenance of staff skills 
for testing, effective integration of both the center -based and hybrid programs, project 
[ADDRESS_719233]’s to -be-
hired research coordinator, the Coordinator for CR at the Detroit campus, the registered dietician 
for the Detroit CR program, the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s Director of the Office of Performance Excellence and 
Quality  or h/er designee, a behavioral medicine  specialist , a former (recent) patient from our 
Detroit -based CR program, and a staff person from the System’s Virtual Care Unit.  To ensure 
that the objectives of the trial are being met, the PMT will adopt an approach that is both 
proactive  and rapid -response reactive .  The former approach will actively survey/identify 
potential “pi[INVESTIGATOR_820] -points’ for trial operations (based on team planning discussions and experience 
gained from the years of operating CR, clinical trials in CR, and home -based CR) and design 
accordingly the  study operations and schedule staff for the effective achievement of objectives.  
The latter approach (i.e., rapid -response reactive) involves both the regula r review of operational 
report data (e.g., weekly enrollment reports, retention to follow -up testing, time elapsed between 
data collection and data entry) and collecting CR staff feedback on trial operations and milestone 
achievement.  If problems are iden tified that threaten achievement of study objectives, the PMT 
will adjust trial procedures using a rapid -cycle, data -driven methodology.  
 
 7.2.1. Subject Recruitment and Retention and Staff Adherence [SR RSA] sub -committee  
During month [ADDRESS_719234] staff will begin the real-time tracking of key indicators of 
patient engagement in the study (e.g., adherence to testing).  This will be done equally in both 
study groups to aid in identifying favorable/unfavorable implementation issues ; it may include 
surveying and tracking the adoption and acceptability of changes to CR delivery by  [CONTACT_549480], as well as assessing sustainability of the over -all model.  A sub -committee of the PMT 
(called the  Subject Recruitment and Retention and Staff Adherence [SR RSA] sub -committee ) will 
be convened and charged with the above duties, as well as track, report and help intervene on 
other global project issues such as : ensuring convenient hours for testing, ensuring available 
hours for delivery of both CBCR and HYCR, ensuring equivalent delivery of educational 
content, and the timely completion of the patient’s individual treatment plans. The SR RSA will 
also periodically (every 6 months) shadow -evaluate (using video and observation) CR staff for 
the uniform conduct of patient assessments a nd the uniform delivery of CR per protocol 
standards.  Finally, the SR RSA committee will conduct a systematic, standardized rapid -cycle 
review of any patient (from either study group ) that did not complete follow -up visit [ADDRESS_719235] ied to  in a manner to 
avoiding future retention issues . 
 
7.3. Data Safety Monitoring Plan/ Board (DSMB ) (See also Appendix A for additional details)  
The Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) for this trial will be an “internal DSMB”, 
comprised of 4 individuals that are independent of the NHLBI, trial investigators and trial 
management.  The NHLBI will approve the membership of the DSMB and the DSMB serve s in 
an advisory capacity to both the NHLBI and the trial’s Steering Committee.  The DSMB will be 
comprised of two senior staff from within Henry Ford Health System, one of which will be a 
senior physician -scientist with NIH funding and the other will be a  clinical cardiologist 
experienced with clinical trials from the Division of Cardiovascular Medicine (who will also 
serve as chairperson).  The third DSMB member will be a n external (to HFHS) cardiac 
31 
 rehabilitation professional (clinical exercise physiologist ) that is actively working in the field of 
CR.  The fourth member will be a biostatistician (other than [CONTACT_140530]) from the HFHS 
Department of Public Health Sciences. It will be the responsibility of the study coordinator and 
project manager, in conjunct ion with the [CONTACT_549496], to ensure that unexpected SAEs 
associated with exercise training (defined as occurring during or within 3 hours after exercising ) 
will be reported to the IRB and DSMB wi thin 10 days of occurrence.   The DSMB will meet  bi-
annually, of which a portion of each meeting will be with study investigators.  
The primary endpoint for this study is number of CR sessions attended (versus a clinical 
endpoint such as death or re -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3094]); therefore, the DSMB will not have to address the 
issue of trial continuation relative to clinical endpoint futility.  All subjects will be evaluated for 
the specified duration of the trial for all primary and secondary outcomes measures.  A subject’s 
participation in  the trial can also be stopped upon their formal request for withdrawal.  The 
number of subjects that withdra w consent from trial participation will be tracked and reported to 
the DSMB.   
The monitoring for unexpected major  SAE’s,  as well as patient withdrawals, will occur 
continuously through the study by [CONTACT_549481].  The DSMB 
will meet every six months during the trial, and at the end of the trial, to review all trial -related 
reports and study fi ndings.  All records of AE and SAE will be available to the DSMB chair and 
the entire DSMB at any time, upon request.  
All relevant unexpected and major SAE that occur during or within 3 hours after exercise 
will be collected, summarized and reported within 10 days to the local IRB and to the DSMB.  
Although the occurrence of these SAE ’s is extremely rare in the CR setting, any such events that 
do occur will be investigated and discussed jointly between the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_549433].  Any policy or procedural changes that arise from such discussion will be 
incorporated  into a revised study protocol.  Subjects that withdraw consent from trial 
participation will also be tracked by [CONTACT_549482].   
The primary and secondary analyses will be conducted by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Peterson (biostatistician) 
from Public Health Sciences and he will possess a copy of the treatment codes for 
randomization.  
 
8. Data Management  
8.1. The data needed to test the primary hypothesis from this proposed project will be gathered 
from [ADDRESS_719236], clinical CR care, a nd laboratory 
assessments.  The three main time points for laboratory assessments are upon entry in to the trial, 
immediately after the patient completes CR (follow -up visit 1), and at 6 months after completing 
CR (follow -up visit 2).  The primary out come measure is attendance to CR; secondary outcome 
measures are quality of life and exercise capacity.  
32 
 Data from the above mentioned sources will be collected on case report forms (CRFs) 
and entered in an ongoing manner (and within 2 weeks of collection) by [CONTACT_549483], and they will follow 
entry and validation processes that are consistent with the Health  System’s Department of Public 
Health Sciences (Research Informatics Unit).  Study data will be collected in and then managed 
using REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture, Vanderbilt University, Tennessee)  electronic 
data capture tools (90) . A thorough, study -specific data dictionary, defined by [CONTACT_549484], self -documenting process , will be compi[INVESTIGATOR_42602] . The baseline data form 
and the final visit (follow -up visit 2) data forms will require the signature [CONTACT_549495]. Keteyian.    
The final data base will be stripped of identifiers (de -identified) and secured and hosted 
on a HIPAA -compliant server managed by [CONTACT_549485]. REDCap will be used for gen erating the 
shared dataset.  It will be used to remove identifiers, export data in a format that SAS can read, 
and create the SAS code needed to read the data in SAS.  REDCap will also export PDF’s of the 
case report forms and the data dictionary (codebook ).  The data base will be made available to 
the NHLBI.  It will also be made available to others (upon request), under the auspi[INVESTIGATOR_26338] a data 
sharing agreement that includes a commitment to (a) use the data for research purposes only, (b) 
not attempt to id entify any one individual, and c) secure the data using appropriate computer 
technology and back -up.  The dataset (and an accompanying data dictionary and other 
documentation) will be prepared to share in accordance with NHLBI data repository 
requirements,  and consistent with other repository (BioLINCC) and NHLBI policy requirements.  
 
9. Manual of Operations  
A manual of operations (MOO) will be developed for all key aspects of the trial and will provide 
objectives, scope, design and operational policies and procedures beyond that spelled out in this 
clinical protocol.  The manual will detail instructions  for completing CRF s (e.g., baseline 
medical history data), baseline and follow -up questionnaire and clinical assessments, retr ieval of 
primary endpoint data, and exercise training in CBCR and HYCR.  The MOO will detail the 
follow -up testing/assessment schedule  and survey tools , the follow -up phone calls to be 
completed at [ADDRESS_719237], quality assurance 
assessments/training, data handling/transfer,  and any variable -specific data calculations or 
manipulations will be addressed in the existing manual of operations/procedures found within the 
CPX Core lab.  
 
10. Statistical Analysis Plan  
[CONTACT_140530] (biostatistician) will oversee and conduct the data analysis for this trial.  He will 
also assist with the development of enrollment and retention reports sent to the NHLBI and will 
also assistant with preparing materials for the DSMB meetings  that are held every 6 months.   
33 
  
10.1. Randomization Procedure  
 Using computer generated randomization, the r andomization process will be stratified by 
[CONTACT_549486]. Lists were compi[INVESTIGATOR_549434] 
4 sex -race specific strata.  As new participants are added to the study they will be assigned the 
next available treatment assignment (CB CR, HYCR) based on the lists provided.  The project 
manager will be responsible for treatment assignment as all other staff involved in the study will 
be blinded as to the randomization lis ts to avoid bias.  
 
10.2. Sample size and power calculations.    
We propose to enroll a total of 270 patients evenly randomized into two groups of 135 
patients each.  To determine power for Hypothesis 1 , we will use a Student’s t -test approach. 
From recent data from our administrative CR data base, we believe that the CBCR group will 
complete 21 ±13 (mean + sd) visits over the course of the study. The test, with a two -sided 0.[ADDRESS_719238] 80 % power to detect an increase of 4.5 visits. We believe this to be a 
clinically significant difference (5) . 
      Also, for Hypothesis 2 , our recent administrative data indicates that 24% of patients in 
our CBCR program complete [ADDRESS_719239] 80% power to detect an increase to 39.8% or more in the 
HYCR group (effect size=15.8 percentage point increase).  
      Hypothesis 3, [ADDRESS_719240] to follow -up will occur at follow -up testing point number 2. If we 
assume that no more than 20% will be lost, our sample size for this analysis will be at lea st 108. 
We anticipate a standard deviation of the change in meters walked in the 6 -minute walk to be 
107 meters (based on data from the Henry Ford Core Exercise Laboratory) When the sample size 
in each group is 108, a two group [ADDRESS_719241] in excess of 90% power to 
reject the null hypothesis that the CBCR and HYCR groups are not equivalent (the difference in 
means is 50 meters or farther), in favor of the alternative hypothesis that the means in the two 
groups are equivalent.  
      The measured of peak VO [ADDRESS_719242] deviation near 6 (86) .  With a sample 
size of [ADDRESS_719243] greater than 80% power to reject the 
null hypothesis that the CBCR and HYCR groups are not equivalent (the difference in means is 
2.0 mL/kg/min or farther), in favor of the alternative hy pothesis that the means in the two groups 
are equivalent.   
      Based on Campbell, et al. (87) , we anticipate that the standard deviation of the Short 
Form Health Survey (SF -12) physical component summary will be [ADDRESS_719244] 80% power to reject the null hypothesis that the 
34 
 CBCR and HYCR are not equivalent (the difference in means is 7.5 or further from zero in the 
same direction), in favor of the alternative hypothesis that the means of the two groups are 
equivalent. The power for the mental component summary will exceed 90% . 
 
10.3. Data Analysis Plan.   
Data analysis will begin with prepatory activities such as checking for complete data 
entry, identification of outliers, and other such data cleaning tasks.  Once the above tasks are 
completed, the data base will be “locked” for analyses.  The Statistical Analysis System, (SAS, 
version 9.4) will be used for data analysis. A detailed descriptive analysis of all quantitative data 
will be performed involving the summarization of data and the use of inferential and graphical 
exploratory analytic techniques. The  information obtained from this preliminary investigation 
will be used to: 1) describe univariate and bivariate sample distributions of the data; 2) identify 
the interrelationships between variables (i.e., need for covariate adjustment); and 3) check for 
violations of assumptions underlying identified statistical techniques (e.g. independence, 
linearity, homoscedasticity, normality). In the event that statistical assumptions are severely 
violated, data transformations or nonparametric methods will be employ ed.  An intention to treat 
approach will be utilized for all analyses. For hypothesis [ADDRESS_719245] to follow up will be used and for hypothesis 2 a yes/no response will be generated based on 
the observed data.  
 
R33- Primary Aim : Assess the effect of a HYCR program on over -all patient attendance  
For the Primary Hypothesis (number of sessions completed), if the distribution of the 
number of sessions completed is normal then a Student’s t -test will be used for comparison of the 
two groups. In the likely event it is skewed a two -sample Wilcoxon with a Fligner -Policello 
correct ion for unequal variances will be used.   Hypothesis 2  (percentage of patients completing 
36 CR sessions) will be addressed using a Chi -squared test for comparison of proportions.  
 
     R33- Secondary Aim:  Assess the effect of HYCR on exercise capacity and quality of life.  
Hypotheses 3 and 4  (both address measures of exercise capacity) and Hypothesis 5  
(QOL) all involve assessing if the two group responses are equivalent. A two one -sided test 
approach will be used to demonstrate equivalence between the two groups.  
 
There are several identified exploratory aims  for this project , including but not limited to:  
(a) short -term (6 month) retention of CR -related outcomes [e.g., exercise capacity, QOL, 
and self -engaged (not CR) purposeful exercise and total physical activity habits]  
(b) program cost effectiveness.   
35 
  
Analyses of the exploratory aim associated with the short -term retention of CR -related 
outcomes will be analogous to the analyses described above, such that Student’s t -test, Chi -
squared tests or their nonparametric alternatives will be utilized.   
Concerning cost effectiveness , we have included it as an exploratory aim because some 
view a home - or hybrid approach to CR (with or without telemedicine) as a “negative” financial 
business model due to lack or revenue (and increased patient care expenses and staff time).  The 
cost ef fectiveness of the HYCR program will be explored to determine the cost differential 
between the two CR approaches.  In both CR models we will collect and calculate costs 
associated with program implementation (staff time, HR mo nitors, and upgrading desk tops for 
telemedicine) as gathered from both administrative data within the CR unit and from the Health 
System’s Corporate Financial Services Department.  We will also collect costs from participants 
at follow -testing, including direct nonmedical and medical costs (including value of time of the 
participants attending a program, waiting, and travel).  In collaboration with our colleagues at 
both Health Alliance Plan and Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Michigan, the two Michigan –based 
insurers that agree to cover hybrid CR for their subscribers in this project, we also have the 
unique opportunity to partially track and compare the potential impact of HYCR and CBCR on 
health care utilization and costs during the 6 months after CR is co mpleted (and afterwards).   
Finally, the CR -outcomes and behaviors that Henry Ford normally assesses before and 
immediately after CR (e.g., Rate Your Plate, Dartmouth COPOP for QOL) will again be assessed 
at the [ADDRESS_719246] -program follow -up 2 visit (for short -term retention).  In a ddition, reasons for 
stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_549435] [ADDRESS_719247] be reviewed and approved (initially and then 
annually) by [CONTACT_549487]’s Institutional review Board (IRB).  A signed and dated document that 
the protocol and informed consent have been approved by [CONTACT_549488] -place before study 
initiation.  Any amendments to the protocol, other than adminis trative, must be approved by [CONTACT_5040].  
 
11.1. Informed Consent (IC)  
 The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_549436] (or legally 
authorized representative) the nature of the study, its purpose, the procerus involved, the 
[ADDRESS_719248] be informed that participation is voluntary and that  s/he may withdraw from  
the study at any time and that withdrawal  of consent will not affect his/her subsequent  treatment  
or relationship with their treating physician . 
 The IC should  be given by [CONTACT_118696], written in non -technical 
language.  The subject should read and consider the statement before signing and dating, and 
should be given a copy of the signed document.  If written consent is not possible, oral consent 
can be obtained if witnessed by a signed statement from one or more person not involved in the 
study that mentions why the patient was unable to sign the form.  No pa tient can enter the study 
before his/her IC has been obtained.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[ADDRESS_719249], Mackey RH, Matsushita K, 
Mozaffarian D, Mussolino ME, Nasir K, Neumar RW, Palaniappan L, Pandey DK, 
Thiagarajan RR, Reeves MJ, Ritchey M, Rodriguez CJ, Roth GA , Rosamond WD, 
Sasson C, Towfighi A, Tsao CW, Turner MB, Virani SS, Voeks JH, Willey JZ, Wilkins 
JT, Wu JH, Alger HM, Wong SS, Muntner P; American Heart Association Statistics 
Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistic s-
2017 Update: A Report From the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2017;135:e146 -e603.  
2. Suaya JA, Shepard DS, Normand SL, Ades PA, Prottas J, Stason WB. Use of cardiac 
rehabilitation by [CONTACT_549489]. Circulation. 2007;116:[ADDRESS_719250] 11;6(10). pii: e006260.  
4. Suaya JA, Stason WB, Ades PA, Normand SL, Shepard DS. Cardiac rehabilitation and 
survival in older coronary patients. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:25 –[ADDRESS_719251] DS. System ‐level factors and use 
of cardiac rehabilitation. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 2008;28:380 –385 
6. Hammill BG, Curtis LH, Schulman KA, Whellan DJ. Relationship between cardiac 
rehabilitation and long -term risks of death and myocardial infarction among elderly 
Medicare beneficiaries.  Circulation. 2010;121:[ADDRESS_719252] LD, Galbraith PD, Lewin AM, Knudtson ML, 
Ghali WA, Stone JA, Aggarwal SG.  Cardiac rehabilitation attendance and outcomes in 
coronary artery disease patients. Circulation. 2012;126:677 -87. 
8. Doll JA, Hellkamp A, Thomas L, Ho PM, Kontos MC, Whooley MA, Boyden TF, 
Peterson ED, Wang TY. Effectiveness of cardiac rehabilitation among older patients 
after acute myocardial infarction. Am Heart J. 2015;170:855 -64. 
9. Sun EY, Jadotte YT, Halperin W. Disparities in Cardiac Rehabilitation Participation in 
the [LOCATION_002]: A Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 
2017;37:2 -10.  
10. Lauffenburder JC, Robinson JG, Oramasionwu C, Fang G.  Racial/ethnic and gender 
gaps in the use of and adherence to evidence -based preventive therapi[INVESTIGATOR_549437] 
38 
 Medicare part D beneficiaries after acute myocardial infarction.  Circulation.  
2014;129:754 -63 
11. Lewis EF, Li Y, Pfeffer MA, Solomon SD, Weinfurt KP, Ve;azquez M, Rouleau JL, 
Kober L, White HD, Schulman KA, Reed SD.  Impact of cardiovascular events on 
change in quality of life and utilities in patients after myocardial infarction.  JACC: 
Heart Failure .  2014;2:159 -65. 
12. Farmakis D, Filippatos G, Parissis J, Karavidas A, Sideris A, Trikas A, Triposkiadis F, 
Karvounis C, Adamopoulos  S.  Structured discharge instructions for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_549438].  Int J 
Cardiol. 2016;220:143 -5 
13. Farmakis D, Stafylas P, Giamouzis G, Maniadakis N, Parissis J.  The medical and 
socioeconomic burden of heart failure: A comparative delineation with cancer.  Int J 
Cardiol. 2016;203:279 -81.  
14. Chen HY, Tisminetzky M, Yarzebski J, Gore JM, Goldberg RJ. Decade -long Trends in 
the Frequency of 90 -day Rehospi[INVESTIGATOR_549439]. Am J Cardiol.  2016117:743 -8. 
15. Chaudhry SI, Khan RF, Chen J, Dharmarajan K, Dodson JA, Masoudi FA, Wang Y, 
Krumholz H.  National Trends in Recurrent AMI Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602] 1 Year After Acute 
Myocardial Infarction in Medicare Beneficiaries: 1999 –2010 J Am Heart Assoc. 
2014;3:e000522.  
16. Korsnes JS, Davis KL, Ariely R, Bell CF, Mitra D. Health care resource utilization and 
costs associated with nonfatal major adverse cardiovascular events.  J Manag Care Spec 
Pharm. 2015;21:443 -50. 
17. Smith SC Jr, Benjamin EJ, Bonow RO, Braun LT, Creager MA, Franklin BA, Gibbons 
RJ, Grundy SM, Hiratzka LF, Jones DW, Lloyd -Jones DM, Minissian M, Mosca L, 
Peterson ED, Sacco RL, Spertus J, Stein JH, Taubert KA; World Heart Federation and 
the Preventive Car diovascular Nurses Association.  AHA/ACCF Secondary Prevention 
and Risk Reduction Therapy for Patients with Coronary and other Atherosclerotic 
Vascular Disease: 2011 update: a guideline from the American Heart Association and 
American College of Cardiology  Foundation. Circulation. 2011;124:[ADDRESS_719253] D; American Heart Association Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, 
and Prevention Committee, the Council on Clinical Cardiology; American Heart 
Association Counc il on Cardiovascular Nursing; American Heart Association Council 
on Epi[INVESTIGATOR_21893]; American Heart Association Council on Nutrition, 
Physical Activity, and Metabolism; American Association of Cardiovascular and 
Pulmonary Rehabilitation.  Core components of cardiac rehabilitation/secondary 
prevention programs: 2007 update: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, and Prevention Committee, the Council on 
39 
 Clinical Cardiology; the Councils on Cardiovascular Nursing, Epi[INVESTIGATOR_30210], and Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism; and the American 
Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation.  Circulation. 
2007;115:2675 -82. 
19. Teo K, Lear S, Islam S, Mony P, Dehghan M, Li W, Rosengren A, Lopez -Jaramillo P, 
Diaz R, Oliveira G, Miskan M, Rangarajan S, Iqbal R, Ilow R, Puone T, Bahonar A, 
Gulec S, Darwish EA, Lanas F, Vijaykumar K, Rahman O, Chifamba J, Hou Y, Li N, 
Yusuf S and Pur e Investigators. Prevalence of a healthy lifestyle among individuals with 
cardiovascular disease in high -, middle - and low -income countries: The Prospective 
Urban Rural Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623] (PURE) study. JAMA. 2013;309:1613 -21. 
20. Mathews R, Wang TY, Honeycutt E, Henry TD, Zettler M, Chang M, Fonarow GC, 
Peterson ED.  Persistence with secondary prevention medications after acture 
myocardial infarction; insights from the TRANSLATE -ACS study.  Am Heart J.  
2015;170:62 -9 
21. Brawner CA, Churilla JR, Keteyian SJ.  Prevalence of Physical Activity Is Lower 
among Individuals with Chronic Disease.  Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2016;48:[ADDRESS_719254] of 
sustaining lifestyle modifications (nonsmoking, weight reduction, physical activity, and 
Mediterranean diet) after healing of myocardial infarction, percutaneous intervention, or 
coronary by[CONTACT_6476] (from the REasons for Geographic and Racial Differences in Stroke 
Study). Am J Cardiol. 2014;113:1933 -1940.  
23. Shah ND, Dunlay SM, Ting HH, Montori VM, Thomas RJ, Wagie AE, Roger VL. 
Long -term medication adherence after myocardial infarction: experience of a 
community. Am J Med. 2009;122:[ADDRESS_719255] of Socioeconomic 
Status on Propensity to Change Risk Behaviors Following Myocardial Infarction: 
Implications for Healthy Lifestyle Medicine. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2017;60:[ADDRESS_719256] DS, Thomas 
RJ.  Increasing Cardiac Rehabilitation Participation From 20% to 70%: A Road Map 
From the Million Hearts Cardiac Rehabilitation Collaborative.  Mayo Clin Proc. 
2017;9:234 -242. 
26. Anderson JL, Adams CD, Antman EM, Bridges CR, Califf RM, Casey DE, Jr., Chavey 
WE, 2nd, Fesmire FM, Hochman JS, Levin TN, Lincoff AM, Peterson ED, Theroux P, 
Wenger NK, Wright RS, Jneid H, Ettinger SM, Ganiats TG, Lincoff AM, Philippi[INVESTIGATOR_476911], Zidar JP and A merican College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. 2012 ACCF/AHA focused update 
incorporated into the ACCF/AHA 2007 guidelines for the management of patients with 
unstable angina/non -ST-elevation myocardi al infarction: a report of the American 
40 
 College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines. Circulation. 2013;127:e663 -828. 
27. O'Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, Casey DE, Jr., Chung MK, de Lemos JA, 
Ettinger SM, Fang JC, Fesmire FM, Franklin BA, Granger CB, Krumholz HM, 
Linderbaum JA, Morrow DA, Newby [CONTACT_170284], Ornato JP, Ou N, Radford MJ, Tamis -
Holland JE, Tommaso CL, Tracy CM, Woo YJ , Zhao DX, Anderson JL, Jacobs AK, 
Halperin JL, Albert NM, Brindis RG, Creager MA, DeMets D, Guyton RA, Hochman 
JS, Kovacs RJ, Kushner FG, Ohman EM, Stevenson WG, Yancy CW and American 
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST -elevation myocardial 
infarction: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2013;127:e362 -425. 
28. Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, Bailey SR, Bittl JA, Cercek B, Chambers CE, 
Ellis SG, Guyton RA, Hollenberg SM, Khot UN, Lange RA, Mauri L, Mehran R, 
Moussa ID, Mukherjee D, Nallamothu BK, Ting HH, American College of Cardiology 
Foundation, American H eart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions. 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline 
for percutaneous coronary intervention: a report of the American College of Cardiology 
Foundation/American Heart A ssociation Task Force on Practice Guidelines and the 
Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 
2013;82:E266 -355. 
29. Hillis LD, Smith PK, Anderson JL, Bittl JA, Bridges CR, By[CONTACT_15807], Cigarroa JE, Disesa 
VJ, Hiratzka LF, Hutter AM, Jr., Jessen ME, Keeley EC, Lahey SJ, Lange RA, London 
MJ, Mack MJ, Patel MR, Puskas JD, Sabik JF, Selnes O, Shahian DM, Trost JC, 
Winniford MD , American College of Cardiology Foundation, American Heart 
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic 
Surgery, Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. 
2011 ACCF/AHA Guideline for Coronary Artery By[CONTACT_60488]. A report of the 
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines. Developed in collaboration with the American Association for 
Thoracic Surgery, Society of Cardiova scular Anesthesiologists, and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:e123 -210. 
30. Smith SC, Jr., Allen J, Blair SN, Bonow RO, Brass LM, Fonarow GC, Grundy SM, 
Hiratzka L, Jones D, Krumholz HM, Mosca L, Pasternak RC, Pearson T, Pfeffer MA, 
Taubert KA and AHA/ACC National Heart Lung and Blood Institute. AHA/ACC 
guidelines for secondary pr evention for patients with coronary and other atherosclerotic 
vascular disease: 2006 update: endorsed by [CONTACT_572], Lung, and Blood 
Institute. Circulation. 2006;113:[ADDRESS_719257] B, Iung B, Bjornstad H, Leport C, Hall RJ, Vahanian A, Working Groups 
41 
 on Valvular Heart Disease, Thrombosis and Cardiac Rehabilitation and Exercise 
Physiology and European Society of Cardiology. Recommendations for the management 
of patients after heart valve surgery. Eur Heart J. 2005;26:[ADDRESS_719258] of Exercise in Heart Transplant Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]. Am J 
Transplant. 2013;13:527 -527. 
33. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, Butler J, Casey DE, Jr., Drazner MH, Fonarow GC, 
Geraci SA, Horwich T, Januzzi JL, Johnson MR, Kasper EK, Levy WC, Masoudi FA, 
McBride PE, McMurray JJ, Mitchell JE, Peterson PN, Riegel B, Sam F, Stevenson LW, 
Tang WH, Tsai EJ  and Wilkoff BL. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of 
heart failure: executive summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology 
Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines. Circulation. 
2013;128:[ADDRESS_719259], Zwisler AD, Rees K, Martin N and Taylor RS. 
Exercise -Based Cardiac Rehabilitation for Coronary Heart Disease: Cochrane 
Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:1 -12. 
35. Dunlay SM, Pack QR, Thomas RJ, Killian JM and Roger VL. Participation in cardiac 
rehabilitation, readmissions, and death after acute myocardial infarction. Am J Med. 
2014;127:[ADDRESS_719260] DS. Benefits and costs of intensive lifestyle modification programs for 
symptomatic coronary disease in Medicare beneficiaries. Am Heart J. 2013;165:[ADDRESS_719261] Rev. 2011;7:CD001800.  
38. O'Connor CM, Whellan DJ, Lee KL, Keteyian SJ, Cooper LS, Ellis SJ, Leifer ES, Kraus 
WE, Kitzman DW, Blumenthal JA, Rendall DS, Miller NH, Fleg JL, Schulman KA, 
McKelvie RS, Zannad F, Piña IL; HF -ACTION Investigators.  Efficacy and safety of 
exercise traini ng in patients with chronic heart failure: HF -ACTION randomized 
controlled trial.  JAMA. 2009;301:1439 -50.  PMCID: PMC2916661  
39. Ades PA. Cardiac rehabilitation and secondary prevention of coronary heart disease. N 
Engl J Med. 2001;345:892 -902.  
40. Keteyian SJ, Kerrigan DJ, Ehrman JK, Brawner CA.  Exercise Training Workloads 
Upon Exit From  Cardiac Rehabilitation in Men and Women: THE HENRY FORD 
HOSPI[INVESTIGATOR_549440].  J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 2017;37:[ADDRESS_719262] 
of exercise on coronary endothelial function in patients with coronary artery disease.  N 
Engl J Med. 2000342:454 -60.  
42 
 42. Roveda F, Middlekauff HR, Urbana M, et al. The effects of exercise training on 
sympathetic neural activation in advanced heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol.  
2003;42:854 -860.   
43. Ades PA, Savage PD, Toth MJ, Harvey -Berino J, Schneider DJ, Bunn JY, Audelin MC, 
Ludlow M.  High -calorie -expenditure exercise: a new approach to cardiac rehabilitation 
for overweight coronary patients. Circulation. 2009;119:2671 -8 
44. Blumenthal JA, Baby[CONTACT_173152], O'Connor C, Keteyian S, Landzberg J, Howlett J, Kraus 
W, Gottlieb S, Blackburn G, Swank A, Whellan DJ.  Effects of exercise training on 
depressive symptoms in patients with chronic heart failure: the HF -ACTION 
randomized trial.  J AMA. 2012;308:465 -74  PMCID: PMC2690699  
45. Blumenthal JA, Sherwood A, Baby[CONTACT_173152], Watkins LL, Smith PJ, Hoffman BM, 
O'Hayer CV, Mabe S, Johnson J, Doraiswamy PM, Jiang W, Schocken DD, and 
Hinderliter AL. Exercise and pharmacological treatment of depressive symptoms in 
patients with coronary heart di sease: results from the UPBEAT (Understanding the 
Prognostic Benefits of Exercise and Antidepressant Therapy) study. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2012;60:1053 -63. 
46. Brawner CA, Abdul -Nour K, Lewis B, Schairer JR, Modi SS, Kerrigan DJ, Ehrman JK, 
Keteyian SJ Relationship Between Exercise Workload During Cardiac Rehabilitation 
and Outcomes in Patients With Coronary Heart Disease.  Am J Cardiol. 2016;117:1236 -
41 
47. Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Medicare Program, Cancellation of 
Advancing Care Coordination Through Epi[INVESTIGATOR_549441]; Changes to Comprehensive Care for Joint Replacement 
Payment Model (CMS -5524 -P) [Internet].  Washington: Department of Health and 
Human Services; 2017.  https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2017/08/17/2017 -
[ZIP_CODE]/medicare -program -cancellation -of-advancing -care-coordination -through -epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865] -
payment -and-cardiac   Accessed October 5, 2017  
48. Ehrman JE, Kerrigan DJ, Keteyian SJ.  Advanced Exercise Physiology … Essential 
concepts and applications.  Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics; 2017.  
49. Wright JS, Wall HK, Briss PA, Schooley M. Million hearts -where population health and 
clinical practice intersect. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2012;5:589 -591. 
50. Balady GJ, Ades PA, Bittner VA, Franklin BA, Gordon NF, Thomas RJ, Tomaselli GF, 
Yancy CW and American Heart Association Science Advisory Coordinating Committee. 
Referral, enrollment, and delivery of cardiac rehabilitation/secondary prevention 
programs at clinical centers and beyond: a presidential advisory from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation. 2011;124:2951 -60. 
51. Arena R, Williams M, Forman DE, Cahalin LP, Coke L, Myers J, Hamm L, Kris -
Etherton P, Humphrey R, Bittner V, Lavie CJ, American Heart Association Exercise 
43 
 Cardiac Rehabilitation and Prevention Committee of the Council on Clinical 
Cardiology, Council on Epi[INVESTIGATOR_549442]. Increasing referral and participation rates to outpatient cardiac 
rehab ilitation: the valuable role of healthcare professionals in the inpatient and home 
health settings: a science advisory from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2012;125:1321 -9. 
52. Pack QR, Squires RW, Lopez -Jimenez F, Lichtman SW, Rodriguez -Escudero JP, Zysek 
VN, Thomas RJ. The current and potential capacity for cardiac rehabilitation utilization 
in the [LOCATION_002].  J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 2014;34:[ADDRESS_719263] of traditional versus 
modified cardiac rehabilitation. Am J Cardiol. 2000;86:17 -23. 
54. Cowie A, Thow MK, Granat MH and Mitchell SL. Effects of home versus hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] -
based exercise training in chronic heart failure. Int J Cardiol. 2012;158:[ADDRESS_719264], Leighton RF, Franklin BA and 
Haskell WL. Effectiveness of three models for comprehensive cardiovascular disease 
risk reduction. Am J Cardiol. 2002;89:1263 -8. 
56. Miller NH, Haskell WL, Berra K and DeBusk RF. Home versus group exercise training 
for increasing functional capacity after myocardial infarction. Circulation. 1984;70:645 -
9. 
57. Sparks KE, Shaw DK, Eddy D, Hanigosky P and Vantrese J. Alternatives for cardiac 
rehabilitation patients unable to return to a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] -based program. Heart Lung. 
1993;22:298 -303. 
58. Dalal HM, Zawada A, Jolly K, Moxham T and Taylor RS. Home based versus centre 
based cardiac rehabilitation: Cochrane systematic review and meta -analysis. BMJ. 
2010;340:b5631.  
59. JM B. A comparison of a multi -disciplinary home based cardiac rehabilitation 
programme with comprehensive conventional rehabilitation in post -myocardial 
infarction patients. 1998;  
60. Jolly K, Taylor R, Lip GY, Greenfield S, Raftery J, Mant J, Lane D, Jones M, Lee KW 
and Stevens A. The Birmingham Rehabilitation Uptake Maximisation Study (BRUM). 
Home -based compared with hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] -based cardiac rehabilitation in a multi -ethnic 
population: cost-effectiveness and patient adherence. Health Technol Assess. 2007;11:[ADDRESS_719265] SH, Gustad K, Lockra V, Stensen A, Berg AT, Dalen H, Karlsen T 
and Stoylen A. Home -based versus hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] -based high -intensity interval training in 
cardiac rehabilitation: a randomized study. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2014;21:1070 -8. 
44 
 62. Moholdt T, Bekken Vold M, Grimsmo J, Slordahl SA and Wisloff U. Home -based 
aerobic interval training improves peak oxygen uptake equal to residential cardiac 
rehabilitation: a randomized, controlled trial. PLoS One. 2012;7:e41199.  
63. Daskapan A, Arikan H, Caglar N, Tunali N and Ataman S. Comparison of supervised 
exercise training and home -based exercise training in chronic heart failure. Saudi Med J. 
2005;26:842 -7. 
64. Karapolat H, Demir E, Bozkaya YT, Eyigor S, Nalbantgil S, Durmaz B and Zoghi M. 
Comparison of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] -based versus home -based exercise training in patients with heart 
failure: effects on functional capacity, quality of life, psychological symptoms, and 
hemodynamic parameters. Clin Res Cardiol. 2009;98:635 -42. 
65. Arthur HM, Smith KM, Kodis J and McKelvie R. A controlled trial of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_549443] -based exercise in cardiac patients. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2002;34:1544 -50. 
66. Grace SL, Midence L, Oh P, Brister S, Chessex C, Stewart DE and Arthur HM. Cardiac 
Rehabilitation Program Adherence and Functional Capacity Among Women: A 
Randomized Controlled Trial. Mayo Clin Proc. 2016;91:[ADDRESS_719266] LT and Prescott E. 
Home -based cardiac rehabilitation is as effective as centre -based cardiac rehabilitation 
among elderly with coronary heart disease: results from a randomised clinical trial. Age 
Ageing. 2011;40:78 -85. 
68. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_549444] E, Baranowski R, Bilinska M, Stepnowska M, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_351959] M, Wojcik A, 
Korewicki J, Chojnowska L, Malek LA, Klopotowski  M, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_206920] W and Pi[INVESTIGATOR_549444] 
R. A new model of home -based telemonitored cardiac rehabilitation in patients with 
heart failure: effectiveness, quality of life, and adherence. Eur J Heart Fail. 2010;12:164 -
71. 
69. Kassaian M MM, Noohi F, Eftekharzadeh M, Arya A, Roshanall F, Momtahen M. 
Comparing effects of supervised versus home -based cardiac rehabilitation. Iranian Heart 
Journal. 2000;1:95 -100. 
70. Varnfield M, Karunanithi M, Lee CK, Honeyman E, Arnold D, Ding H, Smith C and 
Walters DL. Smartphone -based home care model improved use of cardiac rehabilitation 
in postmyocardial infarction patients: results from a randomised controlled trial. Heart. 
2014 ;100:1770 -9. 
71. Wu SK, Lin YW, Chen CL and Tsai SW. Cardiac rehabilitation vs. home exercise after 
coronary artery by[CONTACT_10956]: a comparison of heart rate recovery. Am J Phys 
Med Rehabil. 2006;85:711 -7. 
72. Marchionni N, Fattirolli F, Fumagalli S, Oldridge N, Del Lungo F, Morosi L, Burgisser 
C and Masotti G. Improved exercise tolerance and quality of life with cardiac 
rehabilitation of older patients after myocardial infarction: results of a randomized, 
contr olled trial. Circulation. 2003;107:2201 -6. 
45 
 73. Kraal JJ, Peek N, Van den Akker -Van Marle ME and Kemps HM. Effects of home -
based training with telemonitoring guidance in low to moderate risk patients entering 
cardiac rehabilitation: short -term results of the FIT@Home study. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 
2014;21:2 6-31. 
74. Hwang R, Bruning J, Morris NR, Mandrusiak A, Russell T.  Home -based 
telerehabilitation is not inferior to a centre -based program in patients with chronic heart 
failure: a randomised trial.  J Physiother. 2017;63:[ADDRESS_719267] Rev. 2017 Jun 30;6:CD007130  
76. American Telemedicine Association.  Telemedicine Benefits [Internet].  Washington: 
American Telemedicine Association; 2017.  
http://www.americantelemed.org/main/about/about -telemedicine/telemedicine -benefits  
Accessed October 7, 2017  
77. Polinski JM, Barker T, Gagliano N, Sussman A, Brennan TA, Shrank WH.  Patients' 
Satisfaction with and Preference for Telehealth Visits.  J Gen Intern Med. 2016;31:269 -
75 
78. REACH Health. 2016 U.S. Telemedicine Industry Benchmark Survey Report [Internet].  
Alpharetta, GA: Reach Health, The Telemedicine Software Company. 
http://reachhealth.com/resources/telemedicine --‐industry --‐survey.  Accessed October 3, 
2017.  
79. Center for Connected Health Policy. 50 State Scan of Telehealth Reimbursement Laws 
and Medicaid Policies (Internet]. Sacramento, CA: The national Telehealth Policy 
Center. 
http://www.cchpca.org/sites/default/files/resources/50%20State%20Summary%20FACT
SHEET%20FINAL%20April%202017_0.pdf     Accessed September 24, [ADDRESS_719268] passed telehealth parity laws, but fine print holds 
back adoption (Internet].  Newton, MA: Questex, LLC.  
http://www.fiercehealthcare.com/regulatory/more -states -have -passed -telehealth -parity -
laws-but-fine-print -holds -back -adoption?utm_medium=nl&utm -
source=internal&mrkid=688579&mkt_tok=eyJpljoiT1RnMU5USTFNV00xTXpZMSIsl
nQiOilwUDVMWdxSDZYMnZ5eUc0ODFiTDZuWmd1Zjh   Accessed October 3, 
2017.  
81. Pack QR, Johnson LL, Barr LM, Daniels SR, Wolter AD, Squires RW, Perez -Terzic 
CM, Thomas RJ. Improving cardiac rehabilitation attendance and completion through 
quality improvement activities and a motivational program.  J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 
2013;33:[ADDRESS_719269], Ades PA. Financial 
incentives to promote cardiac rehabilitation participation and adherence among 
Medicaid patients.  Prev Med. 2016;92:[ADDRESS_719270] cardiac rehabilitation setting.  J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 2014;34:98 -
105 
84. American Thoracic Society. ATS statement: guidelines for the six -minute walk test.  Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002166:111 -7 
85. American College of Sports Medicine.  Guidelines for Exercise Testing and 
Prescription. 10th ed.  Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer, 2018.  
86. Ades PA, Savage PD, Brawner CA, Lyon CE, Ehrman JK, Bunn JY, Keteyian SJ.  
Aerobic capacity in patients entering cardiac rehabilitation.  Circulation. 2006;113:2706 -
12. 
87. Campbell TS, Stevenson A, Arena R, Hauer T, Bacon SL, Rouleau CR, Cannon C, 
Stone JA.  An investigation of the benefits of stress management within a cardiac 
rehabilitation population.  J Cardiopulmonary Rehabil and Prev.  2012;32:296 -304. 
88. Leon AS, Franklin BA, Costa F, Balady GJ, Berra KA, Stewart KJ, Thompson PD, 
Williams MA, Lauer MS.   Cardiac rehabilitation and secondary prevention of coronary 
heart disease.  An American Heart Association scientific statement from the Council on 
Clinica l Cardiology (Subcommittee on Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, and Prevention) 
and the Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism (Subcommittee on 
Physical Activity), in collaboration with the American Association of Cardiovascular 
and Pulmon ary Rehabilitation. Circulation. 2005;111:369 –376. 
89. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_8376], Hellkamp AS, Whellan DJ, Ellis SJ, Keteyian SJ, Kraus WE, Hernandez AF, 
Daubert JP, Piña lL, O'Connor CM; HF -ACTION Investigators.  Exercise training and 
implantable cardioverter -defibrillator shocks in patients with heart failure: results from  
HF-ACTION (Heart Failure and A Controlled Trial Investigating Outcomes of Exercise 
TraiNing).  JACC Heart Fail. 2013;1:142 -8.  PMCID: PMC3735226  
90. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, et al. Research electronic data capture (REDCap) --a 
metadata -driven methodology and workflow process for providing translational research 
informatics support. J Biomed Inform. 2009;42:377 -381  
91. Naderi SH, Bestwick JP, Wald DS.   Adherence to drugs that prevent cardiovascular 
disease: meta -analysis on 376,162 patients.  Am J Med. 2012;125:[ADDRESS_719271] (IRB). 
Additionally, all defined unexpected adverse events and unanticipated problems will be reported 
to the system’s IRB, data safety monitoring board (DSMB), and other applicable regulatory 
agencies.  
To help ensure subject safety, the following procedures will be followed:  
a) Based on review of the System’s EMR and/or in -person interview/examination with study 
staff, potential subjects will be carefully “screened -out” during the trial’s screening processes for 
known contraindications to exercise testing and exercise training  (e.g., receiving continuous 
inotropic support therapy).  
b) All study -eligible subjects will complete a symptom -limited graded cardiopulmonary exercise 
(CPX) test at baseline, prior to randomization. This test has the ability to identify and screen 
patients for rare exercise -induced contraindications to exercise  training (e.g., abnormal blood 
pressure response, significant dysrhythmia).  
Concerning home -based CR, it is important to emphasize that most all patients that participate 
in center -based programs today are already asked to “exercise on their own on non -rehab 
days”; therefore, this study is mainly giving some structure and supervis ion to that 
recommendation.  
c) All subjects will also attend at least one exercise session in center based CR, during which 
their gait, balance and stability on their preferred exercise modality will be evaluated to ensure 
the patient will be safely able to use the equipment on their  own.  
d) Published guidelines for prescribing exercise in the CR setting will be followed, such as 
progressing exercise duration and frequency before intensity, reinforcing proper warm -up and 
cool down procedures, the periodic screening for exercise -related sign s or symptoms, and 
progressing and maintaining exercise training intensity to stay within prescribed levels based on 
heart rate or rating of perceived exertion.  
e) At the beginning of each remote telemedicine CR session, we will document the patient’s 
exact current street address/location (e.g. home, community fitness center, workplace), for the 
rare instance that an untoward event occurs that requires interventio n by [CONTACT_549490].  
 
The Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB).   For this trial the DSMB will be an “internal 
DSMB”, comprised of 4 individuals that are independent of the NHLBI, trial investigators, and 
trial management. The NHLBI will approve the membership of the DSMB and the DSMB is 
advisory to the NHLBI and the t rial’s Steering Committee.  
48 
 The primary endpoint for this study is number of sessions attended (not a clinical outcome such 
as mortality). However, trial safety is always a concern. Therefore, rare, untoward, unexpected 
major events related to exercise training or exercise testing (i .e., during or within three hours) 
may occur and will be monitored, such as death or events requiring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] (e.g., 
myocardial infarction, syncope, arrhythmia, fall). These events will be reported to both the IRB 
and DSMB per existing institutiona l and protocol requirements (i.e., within 10 days) and 
documented in the subject’s study file.  
Monitoring of events.   A DSMB meeting will be held in -person (with teleconference 
capabilities) every six months, during which a comparison will be made of any excess, untoward 
events.  If needed, the DSMB will advise the NHLBI and Steering Committee accordingly.  
Minor events , such as falls not requiring emergency care, angina, and ST segment changes 
during testing that are suggestive of myocardial ischemia will be documented in the subject’s 
study file.  
Relative to suspending or discontinuing a specific subject’s participation in CR and/or the trial 
assessments due to a clinical indication (worsening symptoms, compromising arrhythmia), [CONTACT_549497] will consult with co -investigators Drs. Lanfear or Nour t o ensure that all applicable and 
relevant Henry Ford Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_549445] - and patient -level clinical 
policies and procedures are followed. With the subject’s permission, and to assist with their care, 
their own physician will be  contact[CONTACT_549491]. The Steering 
Committee will be informed of the above.  
Since a clinical endpoint such as death or re -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_549446] a trial endpoint or 
outcome measure for this project, the DSMB will not have to address the issue of trial 
continuation relative to endpoint futility. All subjects will be eva luated for the specified duration 
of the trial for all primary and secondary outcomes measures. The number of subjects that 
withdraw consent from trial participation will be tracked and reported.  
The monitoring for unexpected major adverse events and minor events, as well as patient 
withdrawals, will occur continuously through the study by [CONTACT_549492]. Major events will be discussed within the project management tea m.  
It will be the responsibility of the study coordinator, in conjunction with [CONTACT_549496], to ensure 
that unexpected serious/major adverse events that occur within 3 hours of exercise are collected, 
summarized and reported within 10 days to the local IRB and to the DSMB. Although the 
occurrence of an unexpected, major adverse events is not anticipated and felt to be extremely 
rare, any such events that do occur will be investigated and discussed jointly between the 
principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_549447]. Any policy or procedural changes that arise 
from such discussion will be incorporated into a revised study protocol. Subjects that withdraw 
consent from trial participation will also be tracked by [CONTACT_549493].  