Official title:  Docosahexaenoic Acid (DHA) For The Treatment of Pediatric 
Concussion Related to Sports Injury  
 NCT number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
IRB Protocol approval  date : 8/3/2017  
Page 1 of 11   
 
Doco sahexae noic Acid (DHA) for the Tr eatment o f Pediatric 
Concu ssion Relat ed to Sports Inj ury 
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator: S hane Mi ller, M D 
Co-Inv estigator s: Robert Dime ff, MD
Page 2 of 11  1. Introduc tion and Purpose:  
In  recent  years,  m edia a ttention has focused  on  the  long-term  sequel ae  of  r epeat ed  conc ussiv e 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_837109]. T he growi ng underst anding of t he damage done by [CONTACT_837119] a “di ng” during a game or match, and t he neurologic cons equences  of “playi ng through” o r 
returni ng to pl ay too so on has led to additi onal interest in and conc ern f or pediatric athlet es (18 or 
under ) who ex perience sport s-relat ed concussi ons during game or practice play. 
 
Because it has only been in r ecent  years that th e full scope  of damag e done by [CONTACT_837120] e 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_837110], very little r esear ch has  been done on treatment of concussi on in eithe r adults 
or children.  Brain injuri es in ch ildren can be espec ially problematic, as the brai n may conti nue t o develop 
until t he ch ild re aches  the age of 24 or ol der, so concuss ion du ring this time of devel opment may be 
particularly damaging. 
 
Docosahex aenoic acid (DHA ) is an omega-3 fatty acid co mmonly f ound  in both fish o ils and algae . 
DHA is k nown to impr ove devel opment of the ey es and brain in y oung children.  It is t hought t o be an 
effective anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant, and since it occurs natura lly and causes  very f ew harmfu l 
side effects, i t may be a useful compound in t he treatm ent of pediatric concussi on. 
 
This is a feasib ility trial of DHA for t he treatment of spo rts concussi on in a pediatric populati on. Our 
primar y aim is to determi ne accept ability of randomizati on for this com pound as well as rate o f enro llment 
given our clinical populati on.  Our secondary aim is to exami ne pre liminary outcomes . We hypothesize 
that subj ects who take 2 g of DHA daily for 3 mont hs will see a sho rter tim e to full recover y and retur n to 
play and a sho rter tim e to resolve balance distur banc e.   These  are good, albeit unvali dated, clinical 
indicators of concuss ive recovery. 
 
 
 
2. Backgr ound:  
Current estimate s sug gest t hat 300,000 to 3.8 million recreation- and spo rts-relat ed concuss ions occur 
each y ear in the U.S., and that 8.9% of all hig h school  athletic injuri es are concuss ions. Other reports 
indicate that conc ussion accoun ts for 3-5% of injuri es in all hig h school sport s, but self-r eport data 
suggests a significantly hig her incidence of unreport ed concuss ion. A dditionally, girls have a highe r 
report ed rate of con cussion than boys in sim ilar spo rts.  The athlet es at highest risk of concuss ion ar e 
boys participating in high school  football and girls participating in soccer a nd basketba ll. Approximately 
50% of hig h  school  and colleg e football players r eport ex periencing concussi on-like symptoms each 
season.  Other high cont act sports, such as ice hockey and rugby, also pl ace athlet es at risk, but 
participation in these  sports is o ften limited to cl ub sport s, so data are limited. Due to a paucity of data 
in young er athlete populati ons, no estimat es of concuss ion rate are ava ilable. 
 
Research into this populati on is comp licated by [CONTACT_837121], i ncluding  a  parent and athlet e 
percepti on th at it was “just a little bump t o the head;” growi ng com petitiveness  among y ounger athlet es 
and athletic org anizati ons; and the unde r-reporting of injur y or symptoms t hat result from this l ack of 
underst anding of t he serious nature of concussio n, com pounded  with a d esire not to be taken out o f 
play due to t he com petitive envir onment. O ur underst anding of concuss ion is still somew hat limited, but 
most sports m edicine doctors curr ently agr ee that even  a minor hit t o the he ad may be a seri ous 
concuss ion, and that rati ng how seri ous a concussi on is cannot  truly be done until well after t he injur y 
has occu rred.  Consequently, t he eval uation and  management of al l con cussions must proceed with a 
very conservative approach.  
 
Omega-[ADDRESS_1161959] there is m ounti ng evidence t hat 
omega- 3  supplem entation,  particularl y  the  omega- 3  fatty  acid  docosahex aenoic  acid  (DHA ),  may
Page [ADDRESS_1161960] not because o f actual anti-inflammatory pr ocesses, but by [CONTACT_837122] r the omega-6 fatty acids, thus slowing down t he inflammatory processes. 
 
Omega-3 fa tty acids, and spec ifically DHA , are also an essen tial com ponent  of neuronal structur es in 
the brain and ar e thought to be an esse ntial part of memor y and  cogn ition processes.  2006  Dietary 
Refer ence  Intak es for Omega- 3 fatty acids are f or 1.1g/ day (female adolescents) and 1.6 g/ day (male 
adolescents) .  These  values  are  based  on  si milar  adult  values  and  are  minim um  recommended 
amounts, and are spec ified for al pha linoleic aci d, with t he recommendati on that 10% of t hese fa tty 
acids be DHA and EPA.  Because DHA is necessary for pr oper f uncti on of the brain, and its po tential 
for reduc ing inflammatio n and increasing memory, w e propose a s tudy to exami ne the effects of DHA 
supplem entati on in adolescents a fter a concussive sports injury. 
 
The neuroprot ective eff ects of fish oil have been st udied and document ed in ex perim ental models, 
howev er the effects of DHA a fter TBI have not been st udied.  To date, there have been  no clinical trials 
investigati ng the effects of DHA and/or EPA dietar y supplem entati on on the treatm ent or prev ention of 
TBI.   A recen t  report s hows  t hat  DHA supplem entati on for  30  days can  reduce  axonal  injury i n 
brainstem white ma tter tracts in a r odent head accelerati on injury m odel (Bailes and Mi lls, 2010). 
 
Sever al studies have demonstrated the safety of high doses of DHA in ch ildren. For exampl e, Sorgi , 
Hallowell, Hutchi ns, and Sears ( 2007)  studied the effects of an open-l abel pi[INVESTIGATOR_837111]/ DHA  concentrate s  on  pl asma  phospholipi [INVESTIGATOR_837112]  8-[ADDRESS_1161961] udy participants wer e administer ed a dose of  EPA/ DHA 
concentrate per  day based on the ratio o f  arachi donic  acid  (AA)  to EPA  in  the  isolat ed  p lasma 
phospholipi [INVESTIGATOR_316216] 4 weeks.  All subjects were initiall y supplem ented wit h 16. 2 g of long- chain omega- 3 fatty 
acids (10 .8 g EPA and 5.4 g DHA ) per day. After f our weeks,  if the AA:EPA ratio w as below 1.0, the 
dosage w as decreased to 5.4 g EPA and  2.7 g DHA per day. If t he AA: EPA ratio w as between 1. 0 and  
1.5 the dosage w as decreased to 8. 1 g EPA and 4 g DHA per day. T he assigned dosage w as conti nued 
for eig ht weeks (t he durati on of t he study). Fi ndings suggest ed that high- dose  EPA/DHA supplem entation 
may improve behavi or in ch ildren with ADHD . No adverse e ffects on b leeding were reported. One 
participant r eported loose st ools w hen taki ng the initial dose  of 10.[ADDRESS_1161962] ill et al. ( 2006) 
randomiz ed tw enty subjects, ag es 8 to 20 years ol d, to receive 50mg/kg/d ay of  DHA ([ADDRESS_1161963] per day) or placebo for eight w eeks. This high dose of DHA w as shown to be well-tolerat ed 
and safe with no adverse e ffects. 
 
A study targeting t he effect of DHA on deteriorati on of nutritional stat us in ch ildren with acute 
lymphobl astic leukemi a, in which enrollment is cu rrently ongoing, provi des a dose of 100 mg/kg/ day DHA , 
which translates to approximatel y 5-6 g per day,  to ch ildren ag es 4 to 15 years for a peri od of three 
mont hs (NCT 01051154).
Page [ADDRESS_1161964] udying memor y and cogniti on in retir ed NFL athlet es with cogn itive im pairmen t. The athlet es 
receiv e eit her DHA (2 g per day) or placebo for ni ne months whilst undergoing inte rmittent 
neuropsychologi cal testing. At Virginia T ech, participating adult mal es currently fo llow a  prot ocol of [ADDRESS_1161965] udy  of  inflammati on,  soreness  and  s trength .  And  fi nally,  the  Tex as  A&M f ootball program 
is conduc ting a study of  infla mmation, power and cardiov ascular risk in t heir participati ng players w ho are 
randomiz ed to 2 grams per day of  DHA or placebo. T he study runs from su mme r training through t he end 
of fal l camp. 
Regarding dos age, a DRI has not y et been  established for DHA . An Ac ceptable M acronutri ent 
Distribution Range (AM DR) t hat has been  set. T he AMDR is t he current mean intake in t he Unit ed 
States, which for EP A and DHA is approximatel y 100mg/ day, which is m uch low er than r esearch i s 
recomm ending . While side effects such as blood thinning may be seen  at very high dosa ges, doses as 
high as 11.5 mg/kg DHA are recomm ended to treat asthma symptoms i n childr en, which translates to 
approximatel y 575- 750 mg/ day DHA f or an average high school  male. Our suggest ed dose in thi s protocol 
is only sli ghtly higher. In adult s, recommended  doses  for prev enting bl ood clots is as high as 6 g fish oil 
per day, which is approximatel y 6000 mg DHA per day, more th an  twice our prot ocol dose.  
(http://
www.nl m.nih.gov/m edlinepl us/druginfo/ natural/ 993.h tml). A dditionally, t he studies we have 
discussed above show  that research has demonstr ated - and conti nues  to ut ilize - high doses  of DHA i n 
children and adults safely with minim al or no  side effects. 
 
 
 
3. Concise Summary of Proj ect: 
This is a double-b lind, randomiz ed, placebo-con trolled feasibility trial of DHA for t he treatment of ped iatric 
concuss ion related to sports-injury. T he definiti on used for conc ussion is from t he Consensus Statem ent 
on C oncuss ion in S port: the 3rd Inter national Conference  on C oncuss ion in S port ( Br J Sports Med 
2009;43:Sup pl 1 i76-i84 doi:10. 1136 /bjsm. 2009. 058248) and  will meet the fo llowing criteri a: 
 
a) Direct b low to the head,  face, neck or a blow elsew here on the body  with 
an “im pulsiv e” force tr ansmitted to t he head.  
b) Rapid on set of short- lived im pairment of neurologic f uncti on in one o r more o f the 
following clinical domai ns that resolv es spon taneous ly: 
1. symptoms :  somatic (eg , hea dache) , cognitive (eg, f eeling like in a fog ) and /or 
emoti onal s ymptoms (eg , lability). 
2. physi cal signs (eg, loss of consci ousness, am nesia). 
3. behavi oural chan ges (eg, irritability). 
4. cognitive im pairment (eg, slowed reacti on tim es). 
5. sleep distur bance (eg , drowsi ness ). 
c) No abnorma lity on standard str uctural neuroimaging st udies, if such neuroimagi ng 
studies are complet ed for a clinica lly-indicat ed reason. Note: neuroimaging is no t a 
part o f this st udy protocol. Study participants wil l not undergo neuroimaging as part 
of this study. 
 
Subjects will be rando mized in a 1:[ADDRESS_1161966] ace. 
Martek Biosciences  provi des an alg ae-based DHA com pound  which minimiz es the side effects o f 
“fishi ness”  in bot h flavor and “fish burps.” T he DHA pr oduced by [CONTACT_837123] t he US. DHA and i denti cal placebo  will be pr ovided by [CONTACT_837124].
Page [ADDRESS_1161967] astic bottles containi ng 100-200 caps ules per bottle, dependin g 
on dose.  Each bottle has t he lot number stamp ed on it. T he capsul es will be stor ed in a dry, l ocked 
compartment at room tem peratur e (60 to 75 F). Ma rtek’s Q uality Assurance depar tment complet es 
regularl y schedul ed chemical and l ong-term stab ility analyses on each l ot of capsul es.  If shipments wil l 
occur  during wa rmer mont hs, arrangem ents will be m ade for capsul es to be shi pped  with ice packs or 
other temporar y refrigerati on.  Capsu les will be di spensed  to subj ects in sepa rate b ottl es in quantities 
suffici ent to l ast until their next appoin tment.   Any unused capsu les will be retur ned to t he PI [INVESTIGATOR_837113]’s regulati ons. 
 
Subjects will be randomiz ed to [ADDRESS_1161968] s will receive 2 950 mg ca psules twice a day.  Subj ects who cannot  tolerate th e 
divided dose of 2000  mg per day  will be disconti nued from the study. 
 
Although much of our knowledge of t he pathophysiolog y of concuss ion com es from anim al models, it i s 
believ ed that the mechani cal trauma t o the brain causes  a sudden disr uption in the ionic balan ces, leading 
to an increase in calci um and an increase in gl ucose met abolism  as cells try to com pensa te for the 
potassium/calci um imbalance.  This is fo llowed by a period of decreased glucose met abolism  which may 
last up to 4 w eeks in humans, resulting in continued high levels of calci um which interfer e with 
mitochondri al oxidative met abolism .  This decre ase in mit ochon drial oxida tive met abolism appears t o 
be bi phas ic, with improvem ent seen  at 2, fo llowed by a decrease which bottoms out on day 5 and r ecovers 
around day 10. Other important aspects of t he concuss ive trauma i nclude free radical produc tion, initiati on 
of infla mmatory r esponses, a nd alter ed neurotransmissi on. 
 
DHA has sever al importa nt functions in the brain with relatively f ew side effects, making i t a good opti on 
for  concuss ion  tr eatment.  DHA  is  helpf ul  in  modulatin g  ion  channels;  hig her  levels  o f  DHA  are 
assoc iated with hig her levels of sodium pump activity, so it is poss ible that providi ng DHA pos t-injur y may 
help t he ce lls reduce t he calci um balance  more quickl y or effici ently .  DHA also has an appar ent anti-
inflammatory action. DHA interfer es with t he inflammatory ar achidonic acid cascade by [CONTACT_837125] 2/PGH 2  recept or for its ligand. Additionally, hig her levels of DHA in t he 
cerebral cortex cause  significantl y higher levels of t he anti-oxi dant enzym es catal ase, glutathione and 
glutathi one peroxi dase -- resulti ng in decreased cerebral levels of lipid peroxi des. DHA reduces formati on 
of the perox ynitrite free radical and reduces  formati on of pro-inflammatory cytokines by [CONTACT_837126]−κB   and  induc ible ni tric oxi de synt hetase. Finally, DHA is highl y concentrat ed in 
synapses,  indicati ng a role in synaptic sig nal transducti on. DHA appea rs  to address many differ ent 
aspects of how we believe concuss ive injury affects t he brain. 
 
The primar y outcom es of  this f easibility trial are to determi ne the willingness  of patients to be randomiz ed, 
the ex pected rate of enrollment bas ed on the clinic populati on, and prot ocol adhere nce o f enro lled study 
participants. We antici pate the results from this st udy will provi de data to inform a larg er randomiz ed trial 
of DHA f or the treatm ent of pedia tric sports conc ussion. Secondary outcom es are  tim e to clearance  to 
return t o play (in days) and improvem ent in balance,  as assessed by [CONTACT_837127] E rror Scori ng System 
(BESS ) which is a com ponent of t he Sport C oncu ss i on Assessment T ool 3 (SCAT-3). Time to clearance 
to return to play was chos en as a clinically signifi cant measurement f or medical professionals in t he sports 
medicine field. The investigators will determine clearance for return to ful l competitiv e  gam e  play  (Stag e  
6  of  gradua ted  retur n  to  play  p rotocol )  accordin g  to  Consensus Statem ent guidelines  and fo llowing 
the law in Tex as, House Bill 2038.  Criteria for return to pl ay include complete clini cal recovery from t he 
concussi on including returni ng to base line symptoms, ex am and
Page [ADDRESS_1161969] Concussion 
Assessment and Cognitive T esting (ImPACT) com puteriz ed neurocognitive t esting programs wil l be used  
to eval uate r ecovery .   T he SCAT-[ADDRESS_1161970] s will be discon tinued. Subjects 
who choose to withdraw consent  will be disconti nued early. 
 
 
 
4. Study Procedur es: 
Subjects pr esenti ng with a new concuss ion within 4 days of their initial injury will be identifi ed and 
screened for eligibility from the investigators’ regularly schedul ed clinic patients. O nce a patient has been 
identifi ed, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_837114] .  Patients w ho choose not to 
participate wil l con tinue to r eceive clinica lly indicat ed care. 
 
Subjects  who  enrol l  will  complet e  [ADDRESS_1161971] s will be randomiz ed to eit her DHA or placebo  in a 1: 1 
ratio, and receive enough DHA or placebo  caps ules to reach the target d ose of 2 g of DHA per day (or 
placebo)  until the day  of their next appointment. Subjects w ill be instructed to take [ADDRESS_1161972] 
and 2  capsules at dinner (wit h food). S ubjects will tak e their first dose  in the office to assur e their ability 
to swallow t he p ills.  Subjects will be instructed to bri ng their p ill bottle with any remaini ng pi[INVESTIGATOR_837115] r esea rch visit. This visit w ill last approximately 90 mi nutes.
Page 7 of 11  Visit 2 will occur  7 days after enrollment (+/- 2 days) .  Subjects will complete t he SCAT-[ADDRESS_1161973] approximatel y 90 mi nutes. 
 
Visit 3 will occur  at 2 weeks a fter enrollment (+/- 2 days) .  Subjects will again undergo t he SCAT-[ADDRESS_1161974] approximately 90 minutes. 
 
Visit 4 will occur  at 4 weeks after enro llment (+/- 2 days). S ubject s will complete t he SCAT-[ADDRESS_1161975] approx imately 90 mi nutes. 
 
Visit 5/Exit, t he final visit, w ill occur at 12 weeks (+/- 2 days) .  Subj ects will complete t he SCAT-3, and 
ImPACT t est. Research personnel  will count  the capsul es retur ned, and any unused capsul es will be 
stored until t he expi[INVESTIGATOR_837116], whi chev er com es first, t hen all retur ned s tock will be 
turned ov er to the pharmacy for destruction. If subjects choose to wit hdraw earl y or are termi nated fo r 
lack  of  protocol  co mpliance,  they  will  be  asked  to  retur n  for  this  fi nal  visit.  This  visi t  will  last 
approximately [ADDRESS_1161976] s (DHA or placebo capsul es), but will be respons ible f or the port ions 
of their visits t hat are cli nically indicat ed (Visit [ADDRESS_1161977] tes ting if clini cally indicat ed). S ubjects (or their i nsurance com panies) 
will be charged for visits that are clinica lly indicated  (i.e., Visits 1-4) but w ill not be char ged for the DHA 
or placebo  capsul es, or Visit 5 unless that visit is clinically i ndicat ed by [CONTACT_102]’s cour se of recovery. 
 
In additi on, subjects w ho are rel eased to pl ay prior to Visit 4 ([ADDRESS_1161978]-enro llment) will n ot be 
asked to retur n for additi onal weekly visits, b ut instead w ill be asked  to complete a sympt om questi onnair e 
and ans wer questi ons about  side effects online v ia MyChart i n lieu of  these visits. O nce pati ents have 
returned to t heir baseline  and are retur ned to play, t here is no need  for additional visits f or well subjects. 
As a safet y precaution, subjects will fill out sympt om questi onnair es and a side effects sca le so t hat if a 
patient does  worsen, additional c linical follow-up may be  schedul ed. This does not pl ace the patient at 
additi onal risk, and enco urages prot ocol comp liance  as subjects will not  be requir ed to miss additi onal 
school or  other activities for appointments that are not c linically necessary .  Subjects will receive fo llow-
up phone  calls to remi nd them t o complet e these forms online.  Subjects w ill still be as ked to return f or 
visit 5, but w ill not  be charg ed for this visit if i t is not clinica lly indicat ed.
Page 8 of 11  5. Criteria for Inclusi on of Subjects: 
1.  Male or femal es age 14-18 inclusive 
2.  Diagnosed with concuss ion due to sports-relat ed injury. C oncussion is defi ned as: 
a)  Direct blow to the head,  face, neck or a bl ow elsew here on the body  with an “im pulsiv e” 
force tr ansmi tted to the head. 
b)  Rapid onset  of short- lived im pairment of neurologic functi on in one or more of t he following 
clinical domai ns that resolv es spont aneous ly: 
i.  Symptoms :  somatic  (e g,  headache) ,  cognitiv e  (eg,  feeling  like  in  a  fog  and/or 
emoti onal s ymptoms (e g, lability). 
ii.  Phys i cal signs (eg, loss of consci ousness, a mnesia) . 
iii.   Behavior al chan ges (eg, i rritability). 
iv.   Cognitive im pairmen t (eg, slow ed reaction times). 
v.    Sl eep distur bance (eg , drowsi ness ). 
c)  No abnorm ality on standard str uctural neuroimagi ng studies, if such neuroimaging st udies 
are complet ed for a clinically-i ndicat ed reason.  Note: neuroimagi ng is n ot a part of this 
study protocol. St udy participants w ill not  undergo neuroimaging as part of this st udy. 
3.  Concuss ion within 4 days  of enrollment 
4.  Presenting f or treatmen t to the Spo rts Medicine Center at Children's M edical Center 
 
 
 
6. Criteria for Exclusion of Subjects: 
1.  Subjects not actively participating in an organized sport at time of enro llment 
2.  Subjects who received a concussi on from an event other than playi ng a sport (motor vehicle 
accident, fa ll, etc.) 
3.  Subjects who participate in or receiv ed a conc ussion during participation in motoriz ed sports 
(i.e., motorcr oss, d irt biking, jet skiing, etc.) 
4.  Subjects with r adiographic evi dence of trauma tic brain injury (i.e., skull fracture, intr acranial 
hemorrhag e, ce rebral contusion, etc). 
5.  Sub jects with a prior diag nosed  concuss ion in the previ ous 6 months. 
6.  Preg nant wom en. 
7.  Subjects sens itive to aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248] 
8.  Subjects diag nosed  with high bl ood pressure and curr ently being treated with bl ood pressur e 
medicati ons 
9.  Subjects allergic to soy b ean oi l or co rn oil. 
10. Subjects cu rrently taki ng fish oi l or DHA supp lements. 
 
  
7. Sources of Resear ch Material:  
Data co llected for this r esearch w ill com e from t he SCAT-3, concuss ion asses sment questi onnaire, 
ImPACT testing r esult s, and the medical record. All of the assessments used for this r esearch ar e 
routinely co llected during regul ar clinic visits f or pedia tric concussi on subjects. As such, there is no 
additi onal burden on patients or families for tim e to complete asse ssments. Data w ill be pr ospec tively 
collected, after consent and enrollment, from bo th patient medical recor ds and directly from patient s. 
 
  
8. Recruitm ent Methods and C onsenti ng Proc ess: 
Patients w ill be recruited from t he po pulati on pr esenting t o the Spo rts Medicine C enter located at 
Children’s M edical Center. Pati ents will be recruit ed from all clini cal locati ons including Dallas, Legacy, 
and S outhlak e. All eligible patients w ill be patients of t he investigator s, as they are the primar y physicians 
at the Sports Medici ne C enter.
Page 9 of 11  Each morni ng, the pati ent schedule w ill be review ed by r esearch pers onnel  and any new pot ential 
concuss ion patients i dentified.  A HI PAA waiv er will be obtai ned f or the pur poses  of scr eening so tha t 
researchers m ay pre-scr een based on any histor y provided (i.e., m echanism of injury, MR I/CT results , 
allergi es on file, da te of injury if ava ilable) and age. 
 
Once i dentifi ed, pati ents will be seen f or their regul ar appointm ent. If a diag nosis of concuss ion is 
made, either the inv estigator or t he resear ch coordi nator will approach  the family in the ex am or 
consultati on room to ascertain if t here is interest in t he research st udy. The inform ed conse nt form wil l be  
fully  explai ned  to  both  the  parent  and  the  ch ild,  and  if,  after  readi ng  the  consent  form  and 
cons idering the st udy, the fam ily wishes  to participate, both parent al consent  and ch ild assent  will be 
obtai ned. Non-Eng lish speaking subject s may be consent ed using the Spanish s hort form and an 
interpreter. 
 
All informati on gather ed during the scr eening process w ill be either destroyed upon  screen fa ilure or the 
patient’s choice not to pa rticipate, or stored in t he patient’s r esearch file.  Paper files are stored in a 
locked filing cabinet in a locked, res tricted access room. Electronic f iles will be stor ed in RedCap, which 
is a secure data capturing web-based application. The login is password protected and the study can 
only be accessed by [CONTACT_837128]. . In order to ensure the priv acy of patients duri ng 
consent ,  the  researchers  wil l  speak  to  the  families  in  either  a  privat e  exam  room  or  a  privat e 
consultati on room. 
 
Although pati ents m ay be  approached to participate by [CONTACT_837129], it will be m ade cl ear to both 
the pati ent and the fam ily that participation is vol untary and that the decision not to pa rticipate does  
not impact their lev el of care a t the S ports Medici ne C enter or Children’s M edical Center. There i s no 
monetary i ncentiv e for participation in this study, and the asses sments ar e the same as t he routinely used  
asses sments  for  this  cli nic.  N one  of  the  investigators  has  a  financ ial  interes t  in  Martek Biosciences,  
nor is Mart ek Biosciences  providi ng any mone tary f unding fo r this re search. 
 
As m entioned  previ ously, ch ildren wil l be required to provi de wri tten assent  before participating in this 
research .  The i nclusion criteri a for this st udy includes  only ch ildren ol der than 10.  Children w ho are 1 8 
at the time of t heir appoin tment may provi de inform ed con sent for themselv es. 
 
 
 
9. Poten tial Ri sks: 
Burpi [INVESTIGATOR_837117]-taste have been  infrequently r eport ed. In clini cal studies with D HASC O, these 
mild gastrointesti nal side effects may be re duced by [CONTACT_837130] f ood. Other mild gastrointesti nal 
symptoms such as diarrhea have been  report ed in frequently, but the incidence of these AEs is not 
differ ent from that observed in subjects receiving pl acebo.  DHA supplem entati on may result in modest  
elevati ons of LDL-C and non-HDL-C in some i ndividuals. However, t he increased lev el of LDL-C w as 
assoc iated with a shif t of lipop rotein particle size t oward larger, l es s atherog enic su bfracti ons. In 
summary, adverse ev ent monito ring revealed an exce llent safet y and toler ability profile for DHASC O. 
 
There are no known seri ous side effects from taki ng DHA .  However, based on the ex periences  of 379 
men and wom en, both ch ildren and adult s, the following side effects occurred at a great er rate th an in 
placebo and in gr eater t han 2%  of participants: burpi [INVESTIGATOR_007] (17.7%), head ache (8.97%), bad taste in the 
mouth (7. 65%) , back pain (3. 43%) , abdomi nal dist ension (2. 11%) , and  weight i ncrease (2.11%). 
 
Patients taki ng placebo may also ex perience si de effects .  These s ide effects occurred more frequently 
than DHA and in great er than 2% of participants, and are based  on the experiences  of [ADDRESS_1161979] acebo during cli nical trials of DHA : diarr hea (10%) , flatul ence 
(excessive g as; 8.5%), comm on cold (7%), upper  respi[INVESTIGATOR_631946] (6%), upset  stom ach
Page 10 of 11  (4%), nausea  (3.5%), r ash (3.5%), i ncreased blood triglyceri des (3%), freq uent bowel movements 
(2.5%), cough (2.5%) , stom ach flu (2%) , influenza (2%), and contact [CONTACT_81290] (2%). 
 
 
 
10. Subject Safety and Data Mon itoring: 
All pa tients will r eceive st andard clini cal treatment for concussi on. Participation in this st udy does not 
preclude additi onal treatment fo r  concussi on a s  indicat ed,  including, but  not  limited to,  additi onal 
medicati ons for headac he, refe rrals f or neurologi cal or neuropsychologi cal consultati ons, or othe r 
medicati ons or consultati ons as deem ed clinicall y appr opriat e. Patients with no diag nostic imagin g studies 
for the cu rrent c oncuss ion who are lat er referred for imagi ng and found  to have r adiographi cal e vidence 
of acute traumatic brain injur y may conti nue on the study, but will also be referred fo r  appr opriate care as 
necessary based on imagi ng (i.e., refe rrals to neurology, neurosurgery, etc, a s clinically i ndicat ed). 
 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_1318] m onitor the safety of this prot ocol by [CONTACT_837131]. T he patient or patient 
guardi an(s) may request remov al from the study, and this req uest w ill be honor ed. 
 
In additi on, a data safety m onitoring board c onsisting of [CONTACT_837132], a pediatric emerg ency 
medicine physici an at  Children’s M edical Center, and a second Children’s Medical Center physici an 
appoint ed by [CONTACT_6283]. Okada and M iller. T he Board w ill meet to revi ew protocol comp liance and safety dat a 
at the 50% and 100% enro llment point s. An additi onal meeting will be trigger ed by a ny patient 
experiencing a severe adverse ev ent. Statistics a nd reports will be prepared by a staff statistici an. 
 
  
11. Procedur es to Maintain C onfidentiality:  
An y information obtained in connec tion with this r esea rch that can potentia lly identif y a subject wil l remain 
confi dential and be  discl osed only with the permissi on of t he sub ject or his/her parents or guardi ans.;.  
Data forms w ill be kept in lock ed file cabinets. Subj ect data will be entered into a password-secur ed 
database that can be accessed only by [CONTACT_473]. Data will be deidentified at the time of data 
analysis, and In order to maintain confidentia lity, each subject will be given a unique identificati on number. 
Keys linking subject nam es with i dentificati on num bers w ill be kept in a locked fil e within t he Sports 
Medicine C enter at TSRH.  Informati on will be di sclosed in a de-identifi ed m anner to the following study 
members: pharmacy staff and data analysis personnel. Collected informati on will be used excl usively in 
the context o f this st udy. 
 
  
12. Poten tial Benefit s: 
Patients w ho receive DHA m ay experience a fast er recover y from concuss ion and a quick er return t o 
play time, or they may experience no benefit .   This st udy may inform future treatment st udies f or 
pedia tric conc ussion, which could benefi t future p ediatric conc ussion patients. 
 
 
 
13. Biostatisti cs: 
This  wil l be a pil ot study with [ADDRESS_1161980] for con tinuous  variables.
Page 11 of 11  14. Refer ences : 
Concuss ions: Advice f or Parents. Spo rts Leg acy Institute. www. sport slegac y.org/i ndex. php/educ ation- 
a-events/ concussi on-fa q. Accessed Apri l 18, 2011. 
Giza  CC,  Hov da  DA.  The  Neuromet abolic  Cascade  of  Concuss ion.  Journal  of  Athleti c  Traini ng 
2001; 36(3):228– 235. 
Halst ead ME , Walter KD, The Counc il on S ports M edicine and Fit ness.  Clinical Report -Sport-relat ed 
concuss ion in ch ildren and adolescents. P ediatri cs 2010; 126 (3):597-615. 
Herring SA, Bergfel d JA, Bol and A, et al. Co ncuss ion (mild traumati c brain injury) and the team physici an. 
Ameri can Orthopaedic S ociety f or Sports medicine 2008. 
Komatsu W, Ishi ha ra K, Murata M, et al. D ocosahex aenoic acid supp resses  nitric oxi de produc tion and 
induc ible ni tric  oxide s ynthase expr ession in interferon- γ  plus  lipopolys acchari de-stimulate d 
murine macr ophag es by i nhibiti ng the oxidative str ess. Fr ee Radical Biology and M edicine 
2003;  34(8): 1006- 1016. 
Kris-Et herton PM, Ha rris WS, A ppel LJ, for t he Nutrition Committee. AHA Sci entific Statem ent: Fish 
consumpti on, fish o il, omega-3 fatty acids and cardiovascul ar disease.  Circulati on 2002;  106: 
2747- 2757.  
Lloyd-St ill JD, Powers CA, Ho ffman DR, et al. Bioava ilability and safety of a high dose o f 
docosahex aenoi c   ac id triacylglycer ol of algal origin in cystic fibr osis pa tients: A r andomiz ed, 
contr olled st udy. Nutrition 2006; 22(1) : 36-46. 
Mac Lean CH, Issa AM, New berry SJ, et al. Effects of Omega-3 Fa tty Aci ds on Cognitive Func tion with 
Aging, Dem entia, and N eurologi cal Diseases.  Evidence R eport s/Technology Assessm ents, No. 
114. Rockv ille (MD): Age ncy for H ealthcare R esearch and Q uality (US) ; 2005 Feb. 
Ruggiero C, Lattanzio F, Lauret ani F, Gasperi ni B, A ndres-Lacueva C, C herubini A.  Fatty ac ids from 
fish: t he anti-inflammatory potential of long- chain omega-3 fatty acids. Curr P harm D es 2009; 15 
(36): 4135–48. 
Salem, N. Jr., et al . Mechanism of action of d ocosahex aenoic acid in t he nervous system. Lipi [INVESTIGATOR_805]. 
36(9): 945 -959, 2001. 
Sorgi PJ, Ha llowell EM, Hutchi ns HL, Sears B. E ffects of an open-lab el pi[INVESTIGATOR_139778]- dose 
EPA/ DHA concentr ates on pl asma phospholipi [INVESTIGATOR_837118] a ttenti on defici t 
hyperactivity disor der. Nu trition 2007 ; 13: [ADDRESS_1161981],  Hulbert  AJ.  Docosahex aenoic  acid  (DHA )  content  of  membr anes  determi nes 
molecular  activity  of  the  sodium  pump:  implications  for  disease  states  and  metaboli sm. 
Naturwissenschaft en 2003; 90(11):521-523. 