 
 
Clinical Outcomes of Hamstring ACL Reconstruction 
Augmented by [CONTACT_172361]/Osteoinductive Compound 
 
 
NCT 04993339 
 
Version:7  
 
3/30/2017 
  
 
1) Protocol Title  
Clincal  outcomes of ACL reconstruction augmented by [CONTACT_172362]/osteoinductive compound 
 
2) Objectives * 
The goal of this study is to determine whether the use of injectable 
osteoinductinve/osteoconsuctive compounds (OOC) during ACL reconstructive surgery, combined with an accelerated rehabilitation protocol (ARP) provides 
clinical outcomes superior to those attained via traditional ACL reconstruction and delayed rehabilitation protocols. 
 
3) Background * 
Injury in anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is common and often requires reconstructive surgery to restore normal stability to the knee [1]. The process of rehabilitation after ACL injury can last for several months or even years, and 
represents a significant psychological and economic burden for the athl ete [2]. 
Although several surgical techniques are available for ACL reconstruction (see for 
instance [3, 4]) and many rehabilitation protocols have been implemented (see reviews [5 -7]), there is no unanimous consensus on which types of operative 
procedure and rehabilitation routine can provide the shortest time of recuperation for 
the injured athlete.   Osteoconductive/osteoinductive compounds (OOC) are biomaterials characterized by [CONTACT_172363]: they provide an appropriate scaffold for bone formati on 
(osteoconductivity); also, OOCs are able to bind and concentrate endogenous bone morphogenetic proteins in circulation, thus promoting osteogenesis (osteoinductivity) [8]. The faster ossification mediated by [CONTACT_172364], allowing the knee joint to adapt to bearing physiological mechanical loads sooner.  
 
To test our research hypothesis we will perform a longitudinal analysis aimed at comparing clinical outcomes in  athletes undergoing ACL reconstruction with 
injected OOC followed by [CONTACT_5640] a delayed rehabilitation program (DRP) or ARP to that of athletes receiving a standard ACL reconstruction followed by [CONTACT_172365]. During the time frame of one year, tunnel expansion and graft -tunnel 
incorporation attained with the four different treatments administered will be periodically assessed via MRI scan.    
 If our central hypothesis is confirmed by [CONTACT_172366], we will have delineated a new treatment for ACL in jury which can guarantee a faster postoperative 
recovery, thus reducing both the economic and psychological burden of the athlete.   
4) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria*  
Inclusion criterion is any adult (male or female)  undergoing a surgical 
procedure for hamstring ACL reconstruction.        
Note:  In this study, subjects belonging to the following populations will be 
EXCLUDED:   
• Adults unable to consent 
• Individuals who are not yet adults (infants, children, teenagers)  
• Pregnant women 
• Prisoners  
 
5) Procedures Involved*  
 Surgical Procedures – Surgical procedures will be performed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. J an Pi[INVESTIGATOR_172355]. For all the surgical approaches investigated, 2 different graft options will be utilized 
including 1) the patients’ own hamstrings tendons or an 2) allograft tendon. Following standard surgical practices, the graft  will be anchored to the bones without 
using cortical fixation buttons. More specifically, a bone tunnel matching the diameter of the graft will be reamed in the femur and tibia.  Subsequently, the graft will be passed and docked into the femoral and tibia tunnels with suspended fixation on the external cortices with Arthrex BTB Tightrope 12mm or 15mm metallic buttons (Arthrex, Naples, FL). In procedures involving the use of OOC, the bioactive compound (StimuBlast®, Arthrex, Naples, FL ) will be mixed with 5cc of platelet 
rich plasma (PRP) harvested from the patient as per Arthrex protocol. Subsequently, the mixture will be injected using a syringe into  both tibia and femoral tunnels prior 
to the docking of the graft within the femur and tibia tunnels. Note that mixing of StimuBlast® and autologous PPR is an FDA approved procedure which is highly recommended from Arthrex in order to get best results from  the use of their OOC 
(see StimuBlast® brochure). In fact, it has been reported that PRP enhances bonw healing and regeneration [9]. 
 Rehabilitation protocols – Delayed rehabilitation protocol  consist in the use of a knee 
brace for the first [ADDRESS_202006] of: a knee brace 
for 3 weeks postoperatively utilized at night time only in full extension; crutches for three weeks until gait normalizes; closed chain and isometric kinematic exercises; open chain kinematics hamstring strengthening within a range of motion of 60 and 90 degrees. 
 
Evaluation of clinical outcomes and biomechanical performance – In order to assess 
the effectiveness of the combination of the proposed surgical approach together with 
rehabilitation protocols, clinica l, diagnostic and biomechanical relevant outcomes 
pertaining to the four subjects’ groups investigated will be evaluated at several time points during the rehabilitation process.  
Radiographic and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) – Radiographic tunnel 
meas urements will be made at the initial post- operative evaluation followed by 3, 6, 
and [ADDRESS_202007]- certified orthopedic surgeon ([CONTACT_172368]) using digital measurements.  
Tunnel diameter sizes measured at the widest diameter for the femur and tibia will be compared to the size of the tunnels drilled at the time of surgery.  MRI scan imaging will be performed at [ADDRESS_202008]- surgically. Grafts will be rated as 1) no 
signs of incorporation, 2) partial incorporation, 3) complete incorporation, 4) signs of tunnel cyst formation, 5) no evidence of tunnel cyst formation, 5) evidence of tunnel expansion, 6) no evidence of tunnel expansion 7) intact graft, 8) stretched graft, 9) evidence of graft failure.  Alongside with these qualitative metrics, a quantitative image analysis will be performed to evaluate ACL reconstruction. More specifically, to quantify the normalized signal intensity of the ACL graft (related to ligament vascularization), the signal/noise quotient (SNQ) will be calculated using a region of interest (ROI) technique with the following equation: 
 SNQ = (signal of ACL graft - signal of quadriceps tendon)/signal of background  A custom -made image analysis software will be used for this analysis. The intra -
articular signal of the ACL grafts will be divided into 3 zones to analyze the signal 
intensity. The distal (tibial), middle, and proximal (femoral) thirds will be  defined as 
the first, second, and third zones, respectively. The signal from the tendon of the quadriceps femoris will be measured with the ROI in the patellar upper limit level to normalize the signal intensity of the ACL graft.  
The MRI will be performed on a single MRI scan machine with the knee placed in 
the neutral position in an extremity coil. No contrast agent will be used. The coronal and sagittal images will be acquired using fast spin -echo (FSE) proton density–
weighted imaging (PDWI), sagittal F SE T2 -weighted imaging, and axial and ACL 
oblique fat -saturated FSE PDWI. The repetition time (TR) range and echo time (TE) 
values were variable (3000 -4000/10- 30 milliseconds for PDWI and 3000 -5000/100 
milliseconds for T2 -weighted imaging). The other imaging parameters w ill be  as 
follows: matrix, 220 3 247 (axial and coronal) and 304 3 301 (sagittal); field of view, 16 cm; slice thickness, 5 mm; and acquisition number.  
Biomechanical outcomes - Aimed at evaluating patients ’ recovery after ACL injury, 
previous studies have investigated gait characteristics and lower limb muscular 
activation during walking and dynamic balance. Similar analyses will be performed 
in this study. More specifically, gait characteristics during walking will be measured 
via lower limbs motion capturing analysis in combination with EMG analysis: kinematics, forces, moments, and power at each lower limb joint will be measured together with extent of muscular contraction of vastus medialis, vastus lateralis, bicep femoris, gluteus maximus, soleus and gastrocnemius. All the  biomechanical  
experiments will be performed at the Biomechanics Research Lab of the University of Miami, under the supervision of [CONTACT_172369] (PI) and [CONTACT_172370] (co- PI) at 3 
weeks, 3 months, 6 months and 12 months af ter surgery.  Note that, in order to 
perform this biomechanical analysis, the already approved IRB protocol 20110778 (Motion Capture and Clinical Gait Analysis  – PI: [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Asfour) will be used. 
 
Statistical analysis – The question of interest is whether the uses of OOC will have 
any effect on bone tunnel expansion. We will have two  groups: standard surgical 
procedure (control) and OOC -based s urgical procedure (treatment) . Each tunnel 
measurement will be treated as a paired observation (i.e., postoperative change of 
sclerotic margins of the bone tunnel compared wit h the initially drilled tunnel size). 
A 2-sample t -test will determine statistical significant differences between treatment 
and control. 
A similar statistical approach will be followed for all the other clinical and 
biomechanical measurements performed in this study (i.e., quantitative image analysis of graft incorporation, lower joints kinetics, kinematics, and energetics, and activation of lower limb muscles) at the prescribed time points (i.e., at 3 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and 12 months). 
 
6) Data and Specimen Banking*  
Data collected will include patient s’ post- operative MRI images , together with type 
of surgical procedure received  and rehabilitation protocol. 
The data collected will be anonymized and recorded in form of DICOM  on a portable 
storage device by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Hommen. Subsequently, either [CONTACT_172368] will personally 
deliver the storage device to [CONTACT_172369] (PI), who will transfer the data onto  a 
remotely accessible computer located in Hungar Building at University of Miami 
(Coral Gables, FL) . Only [CONTACT_172369] and the Co-Investigator (D r. Asfour) will 
have the credentials for accessing the data, which will be stored for the duration of the entire study (estimated to be up to 5 years) .  
Access of data for immediate or future use will be only granted by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_172356]-Investigator to the ir staff members, provided that the intended use is  within the scope 
of this study. 
 
7) Data Management*  
The question of interest is whether the uses of OOC will have any effect on bone 
tunnel expansion. We will have tunnel expansion measurements divided into two 
groups: standard surgical procedure (control)and OOC -based surgical procedure 
(treatment). . Each tunnel measurement will be treated as a paired observation (i.e., 
postoperative change of sclerotic margins of the bone tunnel compared with the 
initially drilled tunnel siz e). A 2-samples t -test will determine statistical significant 
differences between treatment and control . 
A similar statistical approach will be followed for all the other clinical measurements performed in this study. 
From the location of data collection (Hommen Orthopedic Institute  or Orthopaedic 
& Sports Medicine Center of Miami), data will be delivered to the Biomechanics Research Laboratory in an anonymized format. Data banking and access will be controlled by [CONTACT_978] ([CONTACT_172369]) and the Co-Investigator ([CONTACT_172370]) as described 
in section 6 ‘Data and Specimen Banking’, see above.  
 
8) Risks to Subjects*  
OOC injection: Adverse effects specific to the use of StimuBlast® have not been reported. However, adverse events, such as inflammation or infection, have been reported in orthopaedic procedures which involved use of osteoconductive/osteoinductive compounds. 
PRP extraction and administration: Minimal risks are associated with PRP 
extraction and administration. A bruise may form at the location where the blood sample is extracted. Risks (minimal) associated to its administration are no different from those associated with conventional cortisone injections. 
MRI scan: There are some risks associated with MRI. For instance, patients 
with pacemaker cannot get an MRI. In addition, i mplanted medical devices 
that contain metal could not work well or heat up during the exam. Moreover, skin irritations or burn can occur in patients with tattoos or having medication patch es. Finally, some patients may feel  claustrophobic or scared of being in 
a very small space while get ting the MRI done.  
 
9) Potential Benefits to Subjects*  
Possible benefits include a faster incorporation of the ACL graft into the knee 
if the injection of osteoconductive/osteoinductive compound is performed . This 
may lead to a faster post -operative recuperation o f the function of the knee.  
 
10) Vulnerable Populations * 
This research does not involve individuals belonging to vulnerable populations. 
 
11) Setting 
Patients’ medical images will be collected by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Hommen ’s staff at Hommen 
Orthopedic Institute . Data  collected will be analyzed at the Biomechanics 
Research Laboratory of the University of Miami, Coral Gables Campus, 
under the supervision of the PI ([CONTACT_172369]), and the Co-Investigator ([CONTACT_172371]).   
 
12) Resources Available  
[CONTACT_172372] (PI) i s Assistant Professor at the Department of Industrial 
Engineering of University of Miami. He has a strong experimental and theoretical 
background in connective tissue biomechanics with specific training in biomedical 
image analysis and articular cartilage.  As an R&D engineer in a company producing 
navigation systems for robot assisted orthopaedic surgery (MAKO Surgical Corp.), he developed novel techniques for radiographic image analysis to be used for intraoperative robot navigation. This acquired expertis e will be fundamental for the 
medical image analysis planned in this study. As a PI [INVESTIGATOR_72188], [CONTACT_172369] will lead and supervise all the aspects of the data analysis.   
[CONTACT_172373] (Co -Investigator) is Professor and Chair of the Department of  
Industrial Engineering and Associate dean of College of Engineering at the University of Miami. He has been working for more than [ADDRESS_202009]. J an Pi[INVESTIGATOR_172357], M.D. (Surgeon/Co -Investigator ) is the director of the 
Hommen Orthopaedic Institute. He is a surgeon specialized in comprehensive 
injuries and pain of the shoulder, hip, knee and ankle. The Hommen Orthopaedic Institute provides a unique scientific environment with a wea lth of expertise with 
whom the PI [INVESTIGATOR_172358]. In addition, within the scope of this study, [CONTACT_172368] will be in charge of performing surgical procedures on patients, and of providing clinic al insights.   
 
13) Prior Approvals  
This research is currently supported by [CONTACT_172367].  Also, we are currently applying for funding to 
Foundation for PM&R.  
14) Recruitment Methods   
Subjects will be recruited at any time during the next two year s, also based on their 
availability.  
 
Subjects will be recruited from  both [CONTACT_172368] ’s existing patients .  
 
Potential candidates as s ubjects for this study will be selected by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Hommen  
according to matching criteria for this study (i.e., subjects must  receive surgical 
treatment  for ACL reconstruction ). 
 No recruitment material will be used in this study. 
 
There is no remuneration for participation in this study. 
 
15) Local Number of Subjects  
We estimate that, during the course of the duration of the project (up to 5 years, 
depending on funding resources), data form a total of 200 subjects will be collected . 
 
16) Confidentiality  
Data will be archived in a remotely accessible computer located Hungar Building of 
University of Miami (Coral Gables, FL). Only the PI ([CONTACT_172369]) and the Co-Investigator ([CONTACT_172370]) will have the credentials for accessing the data.  
Data will be store d indefinitely. 
Access of data for immediate or future use will be only granted by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_172356]-Investigator . Data access will be only granted to PI’s staff members, provided that 
the intended use of the data is within the scope of this study. 
17) Provisio ns to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
We anticipate that there are no foreseeable conflicts of privacy for the individual s 
who participate in this study. Moreover, subjects’ information will remain stored in 
a password -protected computer, as described in detail in section 6 ‘Data and 
Specimen Banking’. Any personal information that could present a conflict to a 
subject’s privacy will not be stored or published since archived data will be 
anonymized, see section 7 ‘Data Management’  for details.  
 
18) Consent Process  
In order to participate to this study, subjects will have to sign a consent form (see HRP 502 – Consent Form - Travascio  attached). In addition, they will be asked to 
complete a HIPAA Authorization form (see HIPAA Authorization Form attached) . 
The signing of both consent form and HIPAA authorization will take place in 
presence of your othopaedic surgeons. 
 Only English- speaking subjects will participate in this study.  
 Only adults will participate in this study.  
 
19) Process to Document Consent in Writing  
Experimental research for this study presents no more than minimal risk of harm to 
subjects. In order to participate to this study, s ubjects are required sign a consent  form 
and a HIPAA authorization form (see attached  files ). 
 
References  
[1] Lyman, S., Koulouvais, P., Sherman, S., Do, H., Mandl, L. A., and Marx, R. G., 2009, "Epi[INVESTIGATOR_172359]," The Journal of Bone & Joint Surgery, 91(10), pp. 2321-28. 
 [2] Wiese -Bjornstal, D. M., Smith, A. M., Shaffer, S. M., and Morrey, M. A., 1998, 
"An Integrated Model of Response to Sport Injury: Psychological and Sociological 
Dynamics," Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 10(1), pp. 46-69. 
 [3] Spi[INVESTIGATOR_172360], K. P., Kuhn, J. E., Freedman, K. B., Matthews, C. E., Dittus, R. S., and 
Harrell, F. E., 2004, "Anterior Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction Autograft Choice: Bone-Tendon- Bone Versus Hamstring D oes It Really Matter? A Systematic 
Review," The American journal of sports medicine, 32(8), pp. 1986-95. 
 [4] Crawford, C., Nyland, J., Landes, S., Jackson, R., Chang, H. C., Nawab, A., and 
Caborn, D. N., 2007, "Anatomic Double Bundle Acl Reconstruction: A Literature Review," Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy, 15(8), pp. 946-64. 
 
[5] Wright, R. W., Preston, E., Fleming, B. C., Amendola, A., Andrish, J. T., 
Bergfeld, J. A., Dunn, W. R., Kaeding, C., Kuhn, J. E., Marx, R. G., Mccarty, E. C., Parker, R. C., Spi[INVESTIGATOR_172360], K. P., Wolcott, M., Wolf, B. R., and Williams, G. N., 2008, "Acl Reconstruction Rehabilitation: A Systematic Review Part I," Journal of Knee Surgery, 21(3), pp. 217-224. 
 [6] Wright, R. W., Preston, E., Fleming, B. C., Amendola, A., Andrish, J. T., 
Bergfeld, J. A., Dunn, W. R., Kaeding, C., Kuhn, J. E., Marx, R. G., Mccarty, E. C., 
Parker, R. C., Spi[INVESTIGATOR_172360], K. P., Wolcott, M., Wolf, B. R., and Williams, G. N., 2008, "Acl Reconstruction Rehabilitation: A Systematic Review  Part Ii," Journal of Knee 
Surgery, 21(3), pp. 225-234. 
 [7] Saka, T., 2014, "Principles of Postoperative Anterior Cruciate Ligament 
Rehabilitation," World journal of orthopedics, 5(4), pp. 450. 
 [8] Legeros, R. Z., 2002, "Properties of Osteoconductive Biomaterials: Calcium 
Phosphates," Clinical orthopaedics and related research, 395(pp. 81-98. 
 [9] Sanchez, M., Anitua, E., Cugat, R., Azofra, J., Guadilla, J., Seijas, R. and Andia, 
I., 2009. Nonunions treated with autologous preparation rich in growth factors. Journal of orthopaedic trauma, 23(1), pp.52-59. 
 
[10] Chhabra, A., Kline, A. J., Nilles, K. M., and Harner, C. D., 2006, "Tunnel Expansion after Anterior Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction with Autogenous Hamstrings: A Comparison of the Medial Portal and  Transtibial Techniques," 
Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopy and Related Surgery, 22(10), pp. 1107-12. 
 