POISED IRB Protocol May 10, 2021  
Study Number: 16 -[ZIP_CODE]  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_285168]: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
PURPOSE OF STUDY AND BACKGROUND  
 
Objective  
Dementia is a common problem for older patients presenting to emergency departments (EDs) 
and for their family caregivers who often lack the support, understanding, and skills to manage 
the myriad of problems that may be related to the need for that ED vis it. The purpose of the 
Program of Intensive Support in Emergency Departments for Care Partners of Cognitively 
Impaired Patients (POISED -CPCIP, hereon referred to as POISED)  randomized controlled trial 
is to use previously established quality improvement m ethods of root cause analysis to uncover 
reasons for ED use and to focus on caregiver (CG) activation within a program of dementia care 
management. Study goals are to reduce recurrent ED visits and improve caregiver symptoms of 
depression, anxiety and need  for social support. POISED, a [ADDRESS_348304] whether a 
novel care management intervention for family CGs of ED users with cognitive impairment and 
likely Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias will reduce ED use at [ADDRESS_348305] whether CGs exposed to the intervention 
will experience  greater improvements (compared to controls) in family caregiving confidence in 
managing the healthcare needs of the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841] (CR), and im proved anxiety,  depression 
and sense of social support.  
 
Background  
The [LOCATION_002] spends more than $100 billion providing care for the millions of individuals 
and their family caregivers (CGs) affected by [CONTACT_7351]’s disease and related dementias 
(ADRD ).1,2 By 2050, 11 –[ADDRESS_348306] visit the emergency department (ED) mo re often, are more likely 
to return within [ADDRESS_348307] as a factor in ED use is likely unrecognized, not typi[INVESTIGATOR_285169], and may 
be much larger than anticipated.10,11 
 
An ED visit represents a “sentinel event” —either a failure in managing a chronic condition or the 
occurrence of new symptoms or problems —and is typi[INVESTIGATOR_285170].12-14 Although the presenting symptom provides a sharp foc us for ED care and is 
usually addressed before the patient is sent home, EDs do not deploy strategies to uncover or 
address symptom precipi[INVESTIGATOR_285171] —those key contextual factors that contribute to 
ED use. Among those contextual factors are the presence of unrecognized dementia or 
cognitive impairment in the patient and the caregiving situation at home. In general ED care 
does not address the needs of CGs (used here to mean key family and friends of persons with 
ADRD) in managing the presenting problem and the ED discharge plan at home. Concerns 
about the needs of CGs of persons with ADRD have motivated the development of dementia 
care management progra ms. However, such programs do not focus specifically on high -risk or 
high-need patients, do not use the need for ED care of patients with comorbid chronic disease 
as an organizing principle to engage and empower CGs in their healthcare management, and 
do not view CGs as care partners.  Moreover, care management programs are not typi[INVESTIGATOR_285172] -point of an ED visit. Whereas some EDs now use cognitive assessment as 
part of their routine evaluation, the efficacy of dementia care management init iated at the point 
of an ED visit has not been tested.  
 
This proposal benefits from the recent decisions of two large academic institutions to include 
cognitive screening as part of ED care for older patients.  
 
Of note, cognitive screening is not part of  the experimental design ; thus, patients are not being 
consented to undergo cognitive screening.  
 
We propose to conduct a randomized controlled trial of care management,  POISED, for 
caregivers of patients who fail a cognitive screening test at the point of  an ED visit and are 
discharged to home. We will randomize dyads —family caregivers and their care -recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841] (CR) 
patients —to POISED or to a usual care control group. Within POISED, we will identify root 
causes of ED visits (using root cause analysis , RCA ) and apply this to focused care 
management protocols and interventions.  
 
Specific Aims  
The specific a ims of this proposal  are to:  
 
1) Test whether the POISED intervention will reduce recurrent acute care use over [ADDRESS_348308] -ED care for dyads without POISED.  We hypothesize 
that recurrent acute care use over 6 months will be less for CRs whose family CGs 
participate in POISED.  
 
2) Test whether the 6 -month POISED intervention will improve family caregiver 
“activation” in managing the healt h care of care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285173] -ED 
care without POISED at 3 and 6 months.  We hypothesize that POISED  will improve family 
CG activation in managing the health care of CRs.  
 
3) Test whether POISED will improve caregiver psychosocial outcomes compar ed with 
post -ED care without POISED at [ADDRESS_348309]:  Studying this approach may lead to low cost strategies to reduce high cost 
acute care use and related improvements in CG ability to assist in chronic disease management 
for CRs with dementia. Related impacts are improved health of CRs and psychosoci al well -
being of CGs.  
 
METHODS  
 
Setting: The study will be conducted in two cities, [LOCATION_001] and Indianapolis, in the EDs of their 
respective academic institutions —NYU Langone Medical Center and Indiana University Health 
University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. The NYU Ronald O. Perelman Center for Emergency Services sees 
>60,000 patients annually. In 2015 the numbers of ED patients >75 years who were discharged 
to home were >[ADDRESS_348310] EDs.  
 
Aim1: Recruit and randomize a sample of  900 patient -caregivers (CGs) dyads 
(1800people total) presenting to the ED and t est whether the POISED intervention will 
reduce recurrent acute care use over [ADDRESS_348311] -ED care for 
patients and CGs  without POISED.  
 
Study Design : We will randomize subjects to either usual care or interventional groups where 
we will perform an initial assessment and provide a  novel care management  intervention for 
family CGs of ED users with cognitive impairment and likely ADRD . 
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  for Care Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840] :  
Inclusion criteria for participation in care management or usual care are as follows:  
1) Must be 75 years and older  
2) Must be in the emergency department for care at the point of recruitment  
3) Must be English - or Spanish -speaking  
4) Must have a family member or friend who provides caregiving assistance   
5) Must have a plan to be discharged to home   
6) Must have scored < [ADDRESS_348312] be > 3.4  
7) Must have capacity to consent or have a proxy.  
 
Exclusion criteria for participation in care management or usual care are as follows:  
1) Care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841] (CR) is a resident of a nursing home or other supportive facility  
2) CR s cores > 3 on the MiniCogTM or the caregiver assessment by [CONTACT_285245] < 3.4  
3) Caregiver (CG)  declines participation  
4) CR is not being discharged to home  
CR does not allow their family member or emergency contact  [CONTACT_285246]: If the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285174], we will 
not access those data or include them in any analyses. Please note that a caregiver can still 
participate in the study with the assent of the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841], without the use of the health care 
data.  
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  for Care Givers of Affected Patients:  
Inclusion criteria for telephone survey and potential care management are as follows:  
• Family or informal caregiver (herein described as “caregiver”) of a person must be  
identified by [CONTACT_285247] -identifie d as that individual who provides most of assistance 
among potentially other family  members o r friends of the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841] (pat ient in the ED)  
• For a caregiver to be eligible for inclusion the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285175]; however, later  facility placement will not exclude that caregiver from continued 
participation.  
• Caregiver must be English - or Spanish -speaking  
• Caregiver must be able to speak on a telephone to be eligible for randomization  
• Caregiver must have adequate hearing to communicate by [CONTACT_648]  
• Caregiver must demonstrate capacity to consent to research participation.  
• Caregive r must be at least 21 years old  
 
Exclusion criteria for potential telephone survey are as follows:  
1) Caregiver does not have adequate knowledge of identified patient and/or does not 
participate in that  member’s healthcare decisions  
2) Caregiver is not English or Spanish speaking  
3) Caregiver does  not have adequate hearing to participate in telephone survey and is 
therefore not eligible  for randomization.  
4) Caregiver is not able to speak on a telephone  
5) Caregiver is less than 21 years old  
 
Recruitment: Potential subjects will be identified from the ED  on the basis of the cognitive state 
of the ED patient. Family caregivers will be identified and approached in the ED and if not 
present, will be contact[CONTACT_285248]. Potential subjects 
(caregivers) are identified by t he treating team who have no direct involvement in the research. 
As is typi[INVESTIGATOR_285176], the treating team, using clear inclusion and 
exclusion criteria will ask potential subjects whether or not a research assistant (RA) (from th e 
POISED team) can speak with them to tell them about an opportunity to participate in a study.  
The treating team is never informed as to whether a potential subject agrees to participate or 
refuses after meeting with the RA. Caregivers and/or care recipi [INVESTIGATOR_285177] (the POISED team) are given permission from the ED staff who will 
alert the research assistant of a potential caregiver -care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_48428]. Caregivers and their 
care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285178].  
 
After ED staff have completed cogn itive assessment using the Mini -CogTM and given us 
permission for to speak to the dyad, we will approach and offer participation to CGs and ED 
patients > [ADDRESS_348313] scored <=3/[ADDRESS_348314] plans to be discharged 
home . A score of >3.4 on the Short IQ -CODE (a proxy tool used by [CONTACT_175302]) will identify those 
few who cannot complete the Mini -CogTM. We will consent CGs and care -recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285179]. (See Recruitment, Conse nt, and Assent). If the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285180], we will 
attempt to consent to identify and consent the Care Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285181] a proxy (See Recruitment, 
Consent and Assent) If there is no available or identified CG, we will attempt to identify and 
consen t the CG at a later date either by [CONTACT_648] (using an IRB approved verbal consent 
telephone script with waiver of written documentation of consent) or in person using an IRB 
approved consent form to obtain written consent. Please note that the study team will  maintain a 
deidentified record (using a linking code) of who had been approached (in person or by [CONTACT_648]), 
whether they had declined or accepted to participate in the research, and at what time and on 
what date this conversation took place.  
 
Phone Recruitm ent: In the event that ED recruitment and assessment cannot be done in 
person, a Phone Recruitment Protocol will take effect. Potential subjects will be identified from 
the ED on the basis of a recent admission to a participating ED site location, using th e EMR.   
Family caregivers will be identified by [CONTACT_102], or via the EMR  (i.e. Emergency Contact). In 
order to contact a family caregiver, the person who was the ED patient will need to be called by 
[CONTACT_285249], If the patient gives any indication o f not wanting research staff to call their family 
member or emergency contact, research staff will not attempt to call that person and the patent 
and care partner will no longer be eligible to participate. A recruiter will attempt to contact [CONTACT_285250] [ADDRESS_348315] a Care Partner (if no refusal  by [CONTACT_285251]) and will conduct the IQCODE with that care partner.  After assessment for eligibility, 
informed consent will be obtained over the phone.  
 
Randomization : A web -based randomization scheme will be used to randomize participants to 
intervention or usual care groups in blocks of four or six stratified by: [CONTACT_3725] (NYU or  
IU), English or Spanish speaking, whether the care partner lives with the CR, and Mini -CogTM 
score less than or equal to 3 (or IQCODE of >3.4).  
. We ass ume a positive IQ -CODE score (>3.4) with an inability to complete a Mini - CogTM is 
equivalent to a Mini -CogTM score of 0.  
 
Initial assessment phase : The POISED care management team consisting of specially -trained 
nurses functioning as care managers (CMs) a nd para -professionals in the role of care manager 
assistants (CMAs) will conduct a biopsychosocial/environmental needs assessment by [CONTACT_285252] 48 hours of emergency room discharge if not possible during the ED stay. These team 
members are clinical professionals delivering a clinical service. They are not research staff or 
delivering experimental procedures. This assessment includes a demographic and psychosocial 
interview focused on achieving problem identification. The program uses sta ndardized 
assessment tools including “Managing Your Loved One’s Health” (MYLOHTM) for chronic 
disease management22 and BEHAVE 5+ to identify problem behaviors common in advancing 
dementia that  have been associated with caregiver strain, challenges to  careg iving at  home  and 
in long-term care. BEHAVE 5+ also identifies proven behaviors common in prescribing of 
psychotropic medications to people with dementia.23 (See Appendix 3) If the consented CG is 
not available, we will attempt to complete the CG questions  at a later date either by [CONTACT_12941].   
 
Root Cause Analysis: Starting with the ED visit and working backwards in time, the team will 
explore and identify problems or branch -point situations that progressed to the need for ED 
care. Using a logic tr ee as a cause and effect approach to create a timeline of events leading to 
ED visit24,25 and asking the question, “how could this occur?” or “why” based on the “Five -Whys” 
strategy,26 the CM team will ask “why” for each successive answer, starting with “w hy did you 
come to the ED.” Answers will be applied to medical record review looking for other possible 
triggers and opportunities for intervention. This brainstorming/investigative process to improve 
quality is also deployed by [CONTACT_285253].  
 
Usual Care Group:  The comparison group, those randomized to usual care (UC), will receive 
referrals to services at the time of enrollment. The usual care group will not receive the POISED 
structured assessment, attention to chronic disease management, or RCA related to the ED 
visit. Similar to intervention group, we will provide UC patients with a laminated card showing 
the Stress ThermometerTM 23 (Appendix 5) for use in follow -up interview assessments.  
 
Specific Aim 1 Measu res – Emergency Department (ED) Use: We will obtain consent from 
patients to enable review of their medical records. We will identify all ED visits for the year prior 
to the index ED visit/study enrollment and for one year after enrollment. We will also se arch all -
payer databases (APD) [LOCATION_001] and the Indiana State Network for Patient Care to identify any 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_285182] 6 months of enrollment (6 -month 
intervention and 6 -month follow -up) and the 12 months prior to enrollment. Using the Care 
Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285183], we will determine any prior diagnoses of dementia. We will also use 
the Care Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]’s medical records to determine comorbidity and root cause for ED use.  
 
A one -item survey question will identify  any additional visits that might have occurred outside 
the indicated state regions. For descriptive purposes, ICD discharge diagnoses will be included 
for any ED use. We will structure continuous variables that describe the number of ambulatory 
and/or acu te care epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841].  
 
Aim 2: Develop a collaborative care plan with the interventional group and schedule 
follow up testing to assess whether the 6 -month POISED intervention will improve family 
caregiver “activation” in managing the health care of care recipi [INVESTIGATOR_285173] -
ED care without POISED at 3 and 6 months.  
 
Strategy : The POISED care management team consisting of specially -trained nurses 
functioning as care managers (CMs) and para -professionals in the role of care manager 
assistants (CMAs) will  work to create an individualized care plan through the lens of cognitive 
impairment with an emphasis on coordinating care with the patient’s primary care provider 
(PCP) and achieving relevance with the goals and capacity of the family CG and CR.  
 
First Follow up Visit: After review of all findings from prior data and the first encounter, the CM 
and CMA create an initial plan and identify areas needing further assessment at the first home 
visit (within 2 weeks after enrollment). That visit enables t he CM team to conduct some 
additional cognitive and functional testing while the RN uses the time to address more sensitive 
issues that the CG may be uncomfortable discussing in the presence of the CR. The results of 
this in itial assessment and home visit are forwarded to the CR’s PCP with requested feedback 
and further direction as needed  
 
Collaborative Care Plan Development Phase: After the initial assessment is completed by [CONTACT_285254], any urgent issues are addressed, and consulting with the 
program geriatrician ([CONTACT_200443] at NYU and [CONTACT_285304] at Indiana University)  and the PCP 
as needed, the CM rules in or out the diagnosis of dementia and its subtypes. The CM team 
maps out a proposed care plan and schedules a second home visit.  
 
During the second home visit, the CM team reviews the identified problem list and seeks input 
from the CR and CG on this list and prioritizing those problems, issues or topi[INVESTIGATOR_285184]. From this consensus, the CM discuss es a proposed plan of care 
and tailors interventions to the patients, and then explains the diagnosis, natural history, and the 
prognosis of dementia; implements care protocols; reviews, explains, and distributes 
corresponding educational handouts for the dyad; and connects patients and family CGs to in -
home services and community resources as needed.  
 
Specific Aim 2 Measures – CG Activation in Health Care Management of CR: After 
consenting the CG, we will measure caregiver activation, a multi -dimensional c onstruct 
developed by [CONTACT_285255], skills, and confidence to 
manage a range of tasks and tackle challenges common to dementia health care 
management.27 Domains include recognizing, anticipating, and managing day -to-day symptoms 
and challenges for CR health; managing CR medications; recognizing and managing sudden 
changes in CR health; accessing health services and advocating for the CR in the health care 
space; and managing CG self -care. Four -level item responses range f rom “agree completely” to 
“disagree completely” with an additional option, “not my job”. We will use the total score to 
measure activation.  
 
Aim 3: Test whether POISED will improve caregiver psychosocial outcomes compared to 
post -ED care without POISED at 3 and 6 months.  
 
Strategy: Follow -up regularly in a scheduled manner with resources and interventions to 
continue supporting CG and CR  
 
The follow -up phase : During the follow -up phase, the POISED care management team 
(primarily the CMA) will continue to interact with the CG and CR either face -to face at their 
home, through video, telephone, email, fax, or mail. The minimum amount of CMA contact 
[CONTACT_285256] h, twice monthly calls 
during the second and third months, and monthly calls for the following 3 months.  
 
Interaction intensity will be dictated by [CONTACT_285257]. During these 
interactions, the CM or CMA will answer any questions gener ated from previous visits; collect 
CR and family CG feedback; have the family CG complete a brief assessment to identify need 
for specific care protocols; and facilitate family CGs’ participation in an array of community 
services that are already available  in either the [LOCATION_001] or Indianapolis areas. The CM (nurse) 
will reconcile medications and review medication adherence at the initial and second home visit. 
Medication questions will be referred to the study pharmacist.  
 
Throughout the duration of the f ollow -up phase, the team will continue to work with the CG/CR 
and the patient’s primary care provider to monitor, implement, and adjust the individualized care 
plan as needed. Both NYU and IU have significant caregiver support resources, such as CG 
support  groups, respi[INVESTIGATOR_4594], and individual telephone counseling support. The programs benefit 
from already developed field -tested services from prior work by [CONTACT_285258] 
(and in clinical application by [CONTACT_285259] ). Specific POISED features are highlighted 
here and included in Appendix 4  
 
Specific Aim 3 Measures – Psychosocial States as Important Predisposing and Time -
Varying Enabling and Need Characteristics: These include CG depression, anxiety, 
experience of social support, and stress.  We will use the Patient Health Questionnaire –9 (PHQ -
9)28-30 and Generalized An xiety Disorder Scale (GAD -7)31,[ADDRESS_348316] of the 
POISED intervention on CGs’ mood and anxiety at baseline, 3 months,  and 6 months.  
 
Experience of social support will be measured using the Medical Outcomes (MOS) Social 
Support Survey — Abbreviated.[ADDRESS_348317] for dementia symptom severi ty.34 The HABC -Monitor is 
a CG survey tool for monitoring three CR symptom  domains (cognitive, functional, and 
behavioral/psychological) and a CG quality of life measure.  
 
PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 
Risk to Subjects  
Patients with cognitive impairment / likely dementia and their family / informal caregivers are a 
vulnerable  group; however, the procedures employed in this clinical trial are low risk and have 
been successfully  employed without incident in a number of other studies by [CONTACT_285260]. In some parts of the country, dementi a care 
management is a standard of care practice. The procedures are non -experimental but have 
never been tested in an ED -based population as the point of entry. This study poses minimal 
risk to subjects, since the study does not involve tests or treatment s beyond that which they 
would normally receive as part of their normal care.  
 
Care management programs are now considered non -experimental. However it is not known  
whether using the ED as the point of initiation will cause any undue stress or burden to th e 
families or caregivers. Research coordinators will be trained in order to minimize any 
foreseeable risk.  
 
Recruitment, Consent  and Assent  
Cognitive assessment is a usual care procedure for these emergency departments as part of 
the evaluation of patients  75 years and older who present to their emergency department. 
Eligible caregivers provide care for patients to be discharged home who perform poorly on the 
screening assessment defined by [CONTACT_285261] -points as abnormal ( MiniCogTM < 3). If the patient 
is unable to be assessed but identified by [CONTACT_285262]  (IQCODE > 3.4 )  the caregiver will be considered eligible (see 
inclusion/exclusion criteria above , see page 3 ). 
 
The first stage of recrui tment and consent is to determine  the eligibility of the caregiver. The 
caregivers of the eligible patients are considered for study recruitment and the caregivers will be 
approached in the ED or by [CONTACT_648] (if Phone Recruitment in effect) and offered resear ch 
participation. Only caregivers of those patients scheduled to be discharged home will be 
considered eligible for participation. If a caregiver is not present in the ED and a patient provides 
permission to contact [CONTACT_285263], we will conduct consent pro cedures by [CONTACT_756].  
 
The second  stage of recruitment and consent is consent of the Care Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285185]. After it is determined that the Care Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285186], the Care 
Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285187] . Capacity is determined for the CR for consent  using a common sense procedure. This 
is possible b ecause the request in question  is easy to und erstand   procedure (collecting 
information from the health record) . We anticipate that most will demonstrate capacity  to decide 
regarding use of their medical records . For those who do not, we will use a proxy consent –the 
caregiver if that person is next of kin (defined based on hierarchy: spouse, child, sibling, nephew 
or niece) in the absence of a DPOA for healthcare or by [CONTACT_285264], which again will require discussion of the consent process via telephone using an 
IRB approved script and mailing the original consent for to be signed or returned via mail , fax, or 
SendSafe email procedure for e -consent If the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285188] t want us to use his/her 
medical records we will of course not do so and for those subjects, and this will be missing data. 
This is a minimal risk study with a chart review being completed 6 months later; we will not 
require capacity to be reassessed at th e end of the [ADDRESS_348318] consent at the 
beginning of the study because this is an element of the research protocol and both caregivers 
and care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285189]. Loss of 
capacity after gi ving permission does not negate this consent and require a new consent 
procedure but a caregiver (legal healthcare proxy)  under these circumstances,  can ove rride the 
consent at any point in the study if in the future , the proxy  does not want us to have acc ess to 
the chart at the end of [ADDRESS_348319] stage of consent is for p articipation in care management or usual care and 
randomization into one of two treatment arms – receipt of the Program of Intensive Support in 
Emergency Departments for Care Partners of Cognitively Impaired Patients (POISED -CPCIP) 
or usual care. The Caregiver can be included  regardless of CR health record consent. 
Randomization will occur after  completion of the baseline interview. Here, the caregiver will 
consent for himself or herself. Capacity will be deter mined for the Caregiver. For the care 
recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841], we will use an assent procedure, in which the Care Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285190].  
 
Vulnerable Populations  
Care Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]: The study will involve care givers of p atients with cognitive impairment and the 
healthcare data of those with cognitive impairment. The risk for care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285191], which is limited to a chart review. To protect individuals 
with cognitive i mpairment, the research assistant will require consent from the caregiver and will 
assent the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285192] a care management program, 
and care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285193] . If the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841] r efuses participation 
through any form of rejection, then that dyad will n ot be considered for the study.  Care 
recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285194].  Because we are working w ith family caregivers, care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285195]. Although we have 
never been required to involve the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285196] s as participants in other similar funded trials, we are offering (out of 
respect to these individuals) the opportunity to have them decline our involvement with their 
caregiver even if the caregiver wants to participate. However, because we are collecting  
information from their chart, a consent procedure will be necessary for this small component. 
The Care Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285197].  Moreover, they  can decline participation at any time 
during the study duration and we will no longer include that caregiver in our research 
procedures or use their data. This approach is in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_285198] i ndividuals.  
If the caregiver does not have the capacity to consent , we will not enroll that dyad. Please see 
the approach to addressing capacity to consent in the evaluation consent form and in additional 
text below (“Subject Capacity”). Protection of vuln erable subjects includes utilizing highly -trained 
RAs who will be available to answer all questions and who will provide written  materials that are 
at a 6th grade reading level.  Assessment of capacity is a common -sense procedure that does 
not require professional level expertise. This is a minimal -risk study and the approach, as 
articulated in the “evaluation to sign consent” form, is a well -worn procedure used in countless 
studi es where some subjects may have some degree of cognitive impairment. Several studies 
of subjects even with early to moderate Alzheimer’s disease have demonstrated the 
appropriateness and validity of this approach and for many, their capacity to decide abou t 
research participation. We do not anticipate significant levels of cognitive impairment among 
caregivers given their caregiving roles. Capacity determination is conducted by [CONTACT_285265] -approved 
studies.  
 
Protection Against Risk   
We will obtain all data by [CONTACT_285266] (CATI) that enable all 
answers (data) to be stored in electronic files. These files are physically separate from any 
identifia ble data. These data will be kept on password -protected encrypted servers stored and 
protected under the supervision of NYU DataCore staff until transferred to the study statistician 
at Indiana University. Data transfer will be done through encrypted passw ord protected discs 
with a unique linking ID kept by [CONTACT_285267]. In the event that NYU has completed its plans for an 
information portal that enables direct data acquisi tion within a secure encrypted environment, 
we will amend our IRB application accordingly and request that this on -line system be utilized.  
 
Data collected by [CONTACT_285268]’ homes is specific to 
the care management and not the research study per se. Nonetheless, care managers (who are 
also research credentialed) will protect these data (clinical information) on encrypted, password 
protected tablet computers using encrypted files. Care management data will be download ed to 
site servers on a weekly basis.  
 
All electronic data will be entered into and stored on a secure NYU School of Medicine server 
that will be accessible only by [CONTACT_79443]. The secure server is maintained 
by [CONTACT_285269]’s IT de partment and protected by [CONTACT_285270]. Hard 
copy data will be double -locked and accessible only to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_183856]. Only 
group -level information without personal identifiers will be included when presenting results or 
submitt ing manuscripts for publication.  
 
Potential Benefits to Subjects  
We anticipate that participants will receive some benefit  either from dementia care 
management or usual care.  Subjects in either arm will be offered social services and facilitated 
access t o receipt of services. Subjects in either arm will have greater opportunity to receive 
additional evaluation for their care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285199]. 
Caregivers (subjects) are often isolated and suffer from loneliness and  partipating in this study 
will mitigate that isolation to greater or lesser degrees. Therefore, we anticipate that all 
participants will receive some potential benefit regardless of the arm into which they are 
randomized. All subjects will be offered refe rral for diagnostic assessment regardless of 
treatment assignment and the ED assessments will be sent to primary care physicians.  
 
Process of Consent  
Potential subjects will be identified from the ED on the basis of the cognitive state of the ED 
patient. Family caregivers will be identified and approached in the ED and if not present, will be 
contact[CONTACT_285248]. Caregivers and/or care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285200] a potential caregiver -care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841].  Should phone recruitment be in effect, 
the family caregiver will be identified through the EMR or via patient and will complete the 
IQCODE to determine eligib ility. Should the family caregiver screen into the study via IQCODE, 
they will be offered participation in the study.  
 
Trained Research Associates (RAs) will approach caregivers  presenting to the Emergency 
Department with eligibility criteria. The RAs will also provide the caregiver and care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285201], and will describe 
the nature of the study to the dyad . The care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285202] (ESC) form, and then verbally consented to participate. Because this 
is a simple pro cedure to understand, we anticipate that most will demonstrate capacity. For 
those who do not, we will use a proxy consent – typi[INVESTIGATOR_285203] (defined based on hierarchy: spouse, child, sibling, nephew or niece) in the absence of a 
DPOA for healthcare or by [CONTACT_285271], which will 
require telephone and waiver of written consent.  This will require telephone verbal consent with 
waiver of written documentation of consent, as well as writ ten authorization submitted via mail 
or fax.  If the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285204]/her medical records we will of course not 
do so and for those subjects, and this will be missing data.   
The caregiver  will be asked to summarize the study , using  the Evaluation Signed Consent 
(ESC) form,  and consent to participate. The RAs will determine if the caregiver  understands the 
study and that participation is voluntary and will not affect the care the  Care Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285205] s 
in the Emergency Department . 
This procedure for both the Care Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285206] (Phone Recruitment Protocol).  
 
In the case that in -person documentation is limited, (for example, when all contact [CONTACT_285272] r 
phone) an e -consent process will be in effect. In this process, the research staff will complete 
the same verbal informed consent process with CG and CR. If informed consent is obtained, the 
research staff will e -sign the PDF or Word document to indicate  that informed consent was 
obtained. The research staff will offer the CG and CR to receive a copy of their signed consent 
form by [CONTACT_285273].  
 
Family CGs will receive the care management. CGs are research subjects  and will therefore be 
consented. Permission to use healthcare data ( See Emergency Department Patient Assent 
Form ) will be obtained from care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_198182] a consent  process.  The Caregiver may  
participate regardless of the Care Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285207], Therefore the Care Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285208]. The care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285209]. If the care 
recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285210], then that individual does not assent to the study. 
We will thank both individuals for their time and remove them from eligibility as research 
subjects. This process is an ap proach we have used for over [ADDRESS_348320] research.  
 
Caregiver consent covers participation in four evaluation survey/interviews and agreement to be 
randomly assigned to receive care management ( POISED) or continue with care  as usual.  
The baseline survey will be either in person or by [CONTACT_285274], 
depending upon the availability of the caregiver. We will conduct subsequent [ADDRESS_348321] Capacity  
After going through the consent process with the caregiver and care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841], we wi ll determine  
capacity. The RA will ask the following questions:  
 
 
Capacity Assesment for CG  
“We have just reviewed what it means to participate in this study.  I am going to ask you a few 
questions just to make sure you understand what we will be doing once we begin.  
 
1. What would you be doing if you agree to take part in this study?  (Examples of 
acceptable answers: “Take part in an interview/survey,” or “Answer questions about 
hearing.”)  
 
oPerson is able to answer this    oPersonisnotabletoanswerthis  
 
 
2. What can you do or ask me to do if you are uncomfortable with a particular question in 
the survey? (Examples of acceptable answers: “Ask to skip the question.”  “Ask you to 
read another question.”)    
 
o Person is able to answer this   oPersonisnotabletoans werthis  
 
 
3. What can you do if you decide after we start that you do not want to participate in the 
study?  (Examples of acceptable answers: “Tell you that I do not want to answer any 
more questions.”)   
 
oPerson is able to answer this   oPersonisnotabletoans werthis  
 
Capacity Assesment for CR  
“We have just revie wed what it means to take part  in this study.  I am going to ask you a few 
questions just to make sure you understand.  
 
1. What will the researchers  be doing if you agree to take part in this study?  (Exa mples of 
acceptable answers: “ Taking information from my medical record ,” or “ Going into my 
records .”)  
 
oPerson is able to answer this    oPersonisnotabletoanswerthis  
 
 
2. What can you do or ask me to do if you are uncomfortable being a subject in the  study ? 
(Examples of acceptable answers: “Ask to leave the study .”  “Ask  to speak to the 
principal investigator ”)    
 
o Person is able to answer this   oPersonisnotabletoanswerthis  
 
 
3. What can you do if you decide after we start that you do not want to participate in the 
study?  (Examples of acceptable answers: “Tell you that I do not want to be in the 
study .” Or “Tell you t o delete my information from the study.” )   
 
oPerson is able to answer this   oPersonisnotabletoanswerthis  
 
 
Subject/Representative Comprehension  
Caregivers themselves may have cognitive impairment. To determine that the subject/subject’s 
authorized represe ntative understood the information presented , the investigator will ensure the 
representative has  a factual u nderstanding of information presented to them assessed through 
the Evaluation to Sign Consent (ESC)  described above. If the legally authorized representative 
is determined by [CONTACT_285275], he/she 
will be able to consent that patient. However, if the representative is not deemed to have the 
capac ity to consent the patient the patient will be excluded from enrollment in this study.  
Documentation of Consent  
Documentation of consent will be obtained through the consent form.  Otherwise if consent is 
obtained verbally, written documentation of consent will be waived.  
 
Costs to the Subject  
There are no expected costs to subjects related to the study.  
 
Payment for Participation  
Caregivers will receive a $[ADDRESS_348322] 
consultation. These data will provide us with extensive information on the process and content 
of care for those randomized to POISED. This system  is specifically designed to support and 
monitor clinical care and was used in prior clinical trials. We will add fields that support the care 
processes of the POISED intervention, including the results of assessment instruments, the 
content of the tailore d intervention, and clinical observations such as dyads’ level of 
participation.  
 
Second, we will obtain data on health services use including all diagnostic testing and 
medication use and use of inpatient and outpatient services from 1 year prior to study 
enrollment to 1 year after enrollment (2 -year duration) from NYU’s EPIC system and the Indiana 
Network for Patient Care (INPC). Data are obtained from  the electronic medical record by a 
team of data managers employed by [CONTACT_58703] (DataCore) and Regenstrief  Institute in support of 
clinical research, including demographic information and date of birth..  
 
Third, primary outcome measures will come from telephone interviews and will be entered in 
REDCap.[ADDRESS_348323] complete telephone survey data from 
CGs at baseline, 3 months and 6 months using a 30 -minute survey (Appendix 3). Some 
baseline CG interviews will be conducted in person at both sites, depending on CG availability 
prior to CR discharge. The RA will enter de -identif ied survey data from each survey wave into a 
HIPAA -compliant REDCap electronic database hosted at NYU.  REDCap baseline data will be 
electronically linked to care manager software so that specific relevant data fields can populate 
the POISED RN care manage r pre-visit data and limit redundancy in questions and CG 
interview burden. DataCore —a resource launched by [CONTACT_285276] 
(NYULMC), housed within the NYULMC IT Department and formed in collaboration  with the 
Clinical and Translational Scie nce Institute (CTSI), the Biomedical Informatics and Translational 
Library Programs, and the Department of Population Health —will provide enterprise level 
support to ensure the integrity of electronic data during its capture, storage, management, 
extractio n, and sharing. DataCore will merge these three data streams using unique identifiers 
assigned to the study participants and provide regular backups onto a secure server.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan:  
Our study team will monitor all adverse events and  accumulated study data through weekly 
meetings to review enrollment progress and identify any adverse events. We will evaluate any 
adverse effects related to recruitment, enrollment, interview process and the care management 
intervention (including the po ssible issues of severe caregiver depression and unsafe home 
situations). Adverse events will be reported to the study IRBs and will include any medical event 
regardless of its relationship to the study intervention. All such events will be recorded but 
blinded (where possible) except for the IRB who will be unblinded and notified immediately of 
any serious and unexpected event. In such instances, the IRB will determine appropriate action 
with respect to reporting and additional steps. For more urgent situa tions, the study interviewer 
or the Care Management team may contact [CONTACT_285277] 911 in the case of an inhome emergency. Any adverse 
event will be reported to the IRB within 72 hour s, which includes Caregiver or Care Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285211], death or Care Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285212].  As is required by 
[CONTACT_1201], the research team will submit an annual report for the data safety monitoring with 
continuing review.  
 
Statis tical Plan  
We will compare randomization results to the pre -planned schedule, to ensure randomization 
integrity. To verify the comparability of the randomized groups, we will compare dyads to identify 
differences between their baseline characteristics (ag e, gender, race, education), CR comorbid 
medical conditions, and the Charlson comorbidity index. We will also look for differences in the 
number of primary care visits and acute care use during the year prior to enrollment between 
POISED and the usual care  group by [CONTACT_285278] (ANCOVA) models for 
continuous variables and the Cochran -Mantel -Hansel statistic for categorical variables. We will 
control for stratification variables: recruitment site (NYU or IU), English vs Spanish (at NYU site),  
living arrangement (CG lives with CR or not), and cognitive status (Mini -CogTM score of a 3 or 
less). A cutoff of 0 or 1 is more strongly associated with functional disability than a cutoff of 3. 
Subjects requiring the IQ -CODE with scores >3.4 will be inc luded with those with MiniCogTM 
scores =[ADDRESS_348324] inference procedures in cases of 
zero or small cell size. We will use SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute, Carey, North Carolina) for all 
analyses.  
 
Specific Aim 1: We will use logistic regression models to compare the rates of ED admissions 
during the 6 -month intervention period following the index (recruitment) ED visit. ED 
readmission within 6 months will be used as a binary outcome in the logistic model and 
randomization group will be the independent variable while adjusting for all stratifying variables 
including site, language, living arrangement and CR cognitive status. Baseline characteristics 
that are shown to be unbalanced in univariate compar isons between the two groups will also be 
adjusted.  
 
Specific Aim 2: We will use mixed effects models with CG activation scores at 3 months and 6 
months as the outcome measure and randomization group as the independent variable while 
controlling for basel ine activation score and stratification variables (site, language, living 
arrangement and CRs’ cognitive status). We will conduct post -hoc comparisons of the activation 
scores between the POISED group and the usual care group at [ADDRESS_348325]. To explore what 
changes are responsive to the POISED intervention, we will also use the mixed effects model to 
examine differences in activation domain scores between the two grou ps. The mixed effects 
model will account for potential correlations between repeated measures from the same 
individual and deal with missing data appropriately when the probability of missing data is 
unrelated to the missing observation.  
 
Specific Aim 3: We will use mixed effects models with repeatedly measured PHQ -9, GAD -[ADDRESS_348326] -hoc analysis to determine group differences in these measures between the two 
groups at the 3 - or 6-month evaluations. The modeling approach resembles that for Ai m 2. 
 
Sensitivity analysis for missing data: The analysis plan outlined above assumes that outcome 
measures at follow up are missing at random with respect to demographic characteristics and 
baseline results. We will compare baseline characteristics of sub jects with missing outcomes 
due to death or withdrawal to detect potential violation of the missing -at-random assumption. 
Further sensitivity analyses will involve various imputation methods or a full parametric 
likelihood approach that assumes various pat terns of missing data86.  
 
Sample Size and Power Consideration: Sample size for the proposed study is estimated for 
achieving 80% power in reducing acute care use in the POISED group compared with the usual 
care group in Specific Aim 1. A previous study ha d reported a 30 -day readmission rate of 58% 
in dementia patients as compared to 38% in those without dementia. Given that our patient 
sample may include less severe cognitive impairment with less ED use, we assume, 
conservatively, that the rate of ED visit s in the usual care group is 40%. With [ADDRESS_348327] 82% power to detect an odds ratio of 0.62 for repeat ED visits 
in the POISED group compared to the usual care group at the 0.05 significance level. This 
detectable odds ra tio is equivalent to reducing the ED visit rate to 29% or lower in the POISED 
group compared with the 40% assumed for the control group. The use of stratified 
randomization ensures that patients in the intervention and control groups are similar on the 
stratification variables, thus reducing the variance of the difference between the two group 
means and resulting in greater power than simple randomization. Therefore, actual power for 
our study will be higher than projected here. Since we will be using EMR f or acute care data and 
phone follow -up to supplement out of network use, we anticipate complete data from all study 
participants for this aim.  
  
For Aims 2 and 3, assuming that 205 (64%) dyads will complete the 6 -month evaluation (see 
Figure 2), we will have 80% power to detect an effect size of 0.[ADDRESS_348328] found a mean PHQ -9 score of 4.4 
(SD=5.6), and a mean GAD -7 score of 3.2 (SD=3.5). Thus our projected effect size will allow us 
to detect a change as small as 1.6 on the PHQ -9 and 1 on the GAD -7. As described above, the 
use of stratified randomization will provid e greater power than those projected here.  
 
 
 
References  
1. Alzheimer Association. Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. 
http://www.alz.org/facts/downloads/facts_figures_2015.pdf . Updated 2015. Accessed January 
12, 2016.  
2. Hurd MD, Martorell P, Delavande A, Mullen KJ, Langa KM. Monetary cos ts of dementia in the 
united states. N Engl J Med . 2013;368(14):1326 -1334.  
3. Ferri CP, Prince M, Brayne C, et al. Global prevalence of dementia: A delphi consensus 
study. Lancet . 2005;366(9503):2112 -2117.  
4. Hebert LE, Scherr PA, Bienias JL, Bennett DA,  Evans DA. Alzheimer disease in the US 
population: Prevalence estimates using the 2000 census. Arch Neurol . 2003;60(8):1119 -1122.  
5. Chodosh J, Petitti DB, Elliott M, et al. Physician recognition of cognitive impairment: 
Evaluating the need for improvemen t. J Am Geriatr Soc . 2004;52(7):1051 -1059.  
6. Chodosh J, Seeman TE, Keeler E, et al. Cognitive decline in high -functioning older persons is 
associated with an increased risk of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. J Am Geriatr Soc . 2004;52(9):[ADDRESS_348329] and recognition of cognitive impairment 
among hospi[INVESTIGATOR_71113]. J Hosp Med . 2010;5(2):69 -75.  
8. Chan DC, Kasper JD, Black BS, Rabins PV. Presence of behavioral and psychological 
symptoms predicts nursing home placement in  community -dwelling elders with cognitive 
impairment in univariate but not multivariate analysis. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci . 
2003;58(6):548 -554.  
9. Smith GE, O'Brien PC, Ivnik RJ, Kokmen E, Tangalos EG. Prospective analysis of risk factors 
for nursing  home placement of dementia patients. Neurology . 2001;57(8):[ADDRESS_348330] . 2015.  
11. Han JH, Schnelle JF, Ely EW. The relationship between a chief complaint of "altered mental 
status" and delirium in older emergency department patients. Acad Emerg Med . 
2014;21(8):937 -940.  
12. Kasper JD, Freedman VA, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_6258]. Disability and care ne eds of older americans by 
[CONTACT_285279]: An analysis of the 2011 national health and aging trends study. 
www.aspe.hhs.gov/daltcp/reports/2014/NHATS -DS.cfm . Updated 2014.  Accessed January 10, 
2016.  
13. Gillespie R, Mullan J, Harrison L. Managing medications: The role of informal caregivers of 
older adults and people living with dementia. A review of the literature. J Clin Nurs . 2014;23(23 -
24):3296 -3308.  
14. Lowthian J, S traney LD, Brand CA, et al. Unplanned early return to the emergency 
department by [CONTACT_285280]: The safe elderly emergency department discharge (SEED) 
project. Age Ageing . 2016.  
15. Borson S, Scanlan J, Brush M, Vitaliano P, Dokmak A. The mini -cog: A co gnitive 'vital signs' 
measure for dementia screening in multi -lingual elderly. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry . 
2000;15(11):[ADDRESS_348331] dementia: A 
systematic review and meta -analysis. JAMA Intern Med . 2015;175(9):1450 -1458.  
17. Borson S, Scanlan JM, Watanabe J, Tu SP, Lessig M. Improving identification of cognitive 
impairment in primary care. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry . 2006;21(4):349 -355.  
18. Borson S, Scanlan JM, Chen P, Ganguli M. The mini-cog as a screen for dementia: 
Validation in a population -based sample. J Am Geriatr Soc . 2003;51(10):1451 -1454.  
19. Patel A, Parikh R, Howell EH, Hsich E, Landers SH, Gorodeski EZ. Mini -cog performance: 
Novel marker of post discharge risk among patie nts hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14850]. Circ Heart 
Fail. 2015;8(1):8 -16.  
20. Jorm AF, Jacomb PA. The informant questionnaire on cognitive decline in the elderly 
(IQCODE): Socio -demographic correlates, reliability, validity and some norms. Psychol Med . 
1989;19 (4):1015 -1022.  
21. Jorm AF. The informant questionnaire on cognitive decline in the elderly (IQCODE): A 
review. Int Psychogeriatr . 2004;16(3):275 -293.  
22. Sadak, T., Wright, J., & Borson, S. (2016). Managing Your Loved One’s Health 
Development of a New C are Management Measure for Dementia Family Caregivers. Journal of 
Applied Gerontology , 733464816657472. https://doi.org/10.1177/0733464816657472  
23. Borson S, Scanlan JM, Sadak T, Lessig M, Vitaliano P. Dementia services mini -screen: A 
simple method to identify patients and caregivers in need of enhanced dementia care services. 
Am J Geriatr Psychiatry . 2014;22(8):[ADDRESS_348332] PJ. Effectiveness and efficiency of root cause analysis in 
medicine. JAMA . 2008;299(6):685 -687.  
25. Latino RJ. Patient safety: The PROACT root cause analysis approach. Boca Raton, FL: 
Taylor and Francis; 2008.  
26. Five Whys Technique. http://www.adb.org/publications/five -whys -technique . Updated 2009. 
Accessed January 25, 2016.  
27. Sadak, T., Wright, J., & Borson, S. (2016). Managing Your Loved One’s Health 
Development of a New Care Management Measure for Dementia Family Caregivers. Journal of 
Applied Gerontology , 733464816657472. https://doi.org/10.1177/0733464816657472  
28. Kroenke K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Williams JBW. The PHQ -9: Validity of a brief depression severity 
measure. Journal of General Internal Medicine . 2001;16(9):606 -613.  
29. Kroenke K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280]. The PHQ -9: A new depression and diagnostic severity measure. 
Psychiatric Annals . 2002;32:509 -521.  
30. Lowe B, Unutzer J, Callahan CM, Perkins AJ, Kroenke K. Monitoring depression treatment 
outcomes with the patient health questionnaire -9. Med Care . 2004;42(12):1194 -1201.  
31. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Kroenke K, Williams JB, Lowe B. A brief measure for assessing generalized 
anxiety disorder: The GAD -7. Arch Intern Med . 2006;166(10):1092 -1097.  
32. Kroenke K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Williams JB, Monahan PO, Lowe B. Anxiety disorders in primary 
care: Prevalence, impairment, comorbidity, and detection. Ann Intern Med . 2007;146(5):317 -
325.  
33. Sherbourne CD, Stewart AL. The MOS social support survey. Soc Sci Med . 1991;32(6):705 -
714.  
34. Monahan PO, Boustani MA, Alder C, et al. Practical clinical tool t o monitor dementia 
symptoms: The HABC -monitor. Clin Interv Aging . 2012;7:143 -157.  
35. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research electronic data 
capture (REDCap) --a metadata -driven methodology and workflow process for providin g 
translational research informatics support. J Biomed Inform . 2009;42(2):377 -381.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices:  
1) List of variables  
2) Chronic Management Guide Example  
3) Research Survey  
4) Poised Detailed Care Management Strategies  
Appendix 1: Data Variables  
 

References  
1. Katz S. Assessing self -maintenance: Activities of daily living, mobility, and instrumental 
activities of daily living. J Am Geriatr Soc . 1983;31(12):721 -727.  
2. Monahan PO, Boustani MA, Alder C, et al. Practical clinical tool to monitor deme ntia 
symptoms: The HABC -monitor. Clin Interv Aging . 2012;7:143 -157.  
3. Borson S, Scanlan JM, Sadak T, Lessig M, Vitaliano P. Dementia services mini -screen: A 
simple method to identify patients and caregivers in need of enhanced dementia care services. 
Am J Geriatr Psychiatry . 2014;22(8):746 -755. 
4. Charlson ME, Pompei P, Ales KL, MacKenzie CR. A new method of classifying prognostic 
comorbidity in longitudinal studies: Development and validation. J Chronic Dis . 1987;40(5):373 -
383.  
5. HCAHPS: Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_285213]. 
http://www.hcahpsonline.org/home.aspxd . Accessed January 23, 2016.  
6. Sadak, T., Wright, J., & Borson, S. (2016). Managing Your Loved One’s Health Development 
of a New Care Manag ement Measure for Dementia Family Caregivers. Journal of Applied 
Gerontology , 733464816657472. https://doi.org/10.1177/0733464816657472  
7. Sherbourne CD, Stewart AL. The MOS social support survey. Soc Sci Med . 1991;32(6):705 -
714.  
8. Dour HJ, Wiley JF, Roy -By[CONTACT_7943] P, et al. Perceived social support mediates anxiety and 
depressive symptom changes following primary care intervention. Depress An xiety. 
2014;31(5):436 -442.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 2:  
POISED intervention Chronic Disease -Specific Care Management 
Guides: Dementia and Diabetes  
 
CARE MANAGEMENT MATTERS  
 
The basics :  
Following a prescribed diet plan, monitoring blood sugar regularly, using medications correctly, 
keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a daily log, recognizing when diabetes is getting out of control, and keepi[INVESTIGATOR_285214] – all are  important for 
successful management of diabetes. Team -based care management can help assure that 
caregivers have the support they need to accomplish these tasks. Care managers can also spot 
trends that indicate that a problem may require caregiver coachin g, or more intensive medical 
care.  
 
Know how dementia affects diabetes:  
• People with dementia may have problems with eating and drinking properly, and this can 
make diabetes harder to control. Problems can include under -eating, overeating, eating 
too few different foods, eating things that are not foods, and refusing to eat or drink 
fluids.  
• Dementia may alter activity (exercise) patterns – higher or lower levels of activity may 
occur and can affect diabetes management.  
• People with dementia need help managing medications. When dementia is mild, 
sometimes it’s enough for a famil y member to watch over a loved one’s self care, or help 
organize a schedule and make sure the log is completed accurately to monitor food, 
fluids, testing, and medications. Caregivers need to look for warning signs that more 
help is needed – since most peo ple with any level of dementia benefit from more active 
help from family caregivers. In many cases caregivers will need to take over all aspects 
of diabetes care, and some will need coaching to assure that the person with dementia 
allows this transition to  happen.  
 
Understand how diabetes affects dementia :  
Big fluctuations in blood sugar – either too high or too low – cause people with dementia to have 
more trouble with confusion and erratic behavior, and reduce their ability to function. Long 
periods of poor control of blood sugar can lead to long -term, permanent worsening in brain 
function. Assuring good control of diabetes gives people the best chance to live well with 
dementia and diabetes.  
 
Make and monitor a plan for everyday home care and caregiver  coaching:  
MANAGING FOOD AND FLUID INTAKE  
• Know the individual’s prescribed diet. Identify and problem solve any specific difficulties 
patients and caregivers have in understanding or following it.  
• Record food and fluid intake on a log. This helps avoid blood sugar that is too low 
(hypoglycemia) or too high (hyperglycemia).  
• Record weight on a log, and note trends over time.  
 
TESTING BLOOD SUGAR AND GIVING MEDICATIONS  
• Know how to use the blood sugar meter and the blood sugar log (‘daily glucose tracker’ ).  
• Know how often to test and record blood sugar levels.  
• Know when and how to adjust medication (if home adjustments are prescribed by [CONTACT_124803]).  
• Take time to prepare the person with dementia before each test and each time 
medication is to be given – don’t assume he remembers why this is important or 
what is happening.  
• Identify caregivers who need coaching with any of these steps. Some caregivers 
may have trouble learning what to do, keepi[INVESTIGATOR_285215], or approaching the person 
with dementia in a way t hat ensures cooperation.  
 
Red flags:  
• Blood sugar readings below 80 mg/dl  
• Sweating and shakiness (early warnings of hypoglycemia)  
• Weight loss or gain of 5 or more pounds  
 
People with dementia may not notice or tell you about these symptoms.  
 
Tips for smarter caregiving:  
Giving medication:  
• People with dementia may forget to take their medication.  
• They are also at risk of taking too much medication because they forgot the y already did. 
Medication boxes (MediSets) and blister packs help for medications given by [CONTACT_1966].  
• Caregivers should use a log or calendar to check off when medications are given 
(caregivers get busy).  
• All medications and over -the-counter medications shou ld be kept safely out of reach to 
reduce the chance of mistakes.  
• Some people with dementia may resist taking medications or have trouble swallowing. 
Ask the doctor about crushing the oral medication or disguising in food like pudding that 
the person will accept.  
• Insulin injections: easiest when the routine is the same as before cognitive impairment 
developed, as long as this is medically recommended.  
 
Exercise:  
• Provide a predictable, regular, and pleasurable routine for daily exercise and rest (for the 
caregiver too!).  
 
Eating and food preparation:  
• When feeding becomes a problem, break it down:  
• Is lighting adequate in the dining area?  
• Is it quiet or is light music helpful?  
• Is the type and amount of social interaction conducive to eating? Some people 
may prefer to eat alone.  
• Is the person distracted by [CONTACT_285281], TV or radio, noise in another room?  
• Is there enough time allowed to chew and swallow?  
• Are foods the proper s ize?  
▪ Chop foods small enough to grasp, chew and swallow.  
▪ Puree foods when whole foods are not possible to eat due to the inability 
to chew or lack of teeth.  
• People who put food in their mouths and forget to swallow may be cued by [CONTACT_285282].  
 
• Caregivers should be taught the Heimlic h maneuver to assist a choking person.  
• Foam handles on utensils can facilitate graspi[INVESTIGATOR_007].  
• For people who cannot use a spoon, a cup may be used to drink soup.  
• Rubberized placemats may help to keep the food plate from slippi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  
• Are the food items distingui shable on a white or lightly colored plain plate. 
(People with dementia may not be able to distinguish food items from 
decorations embedded in the plate). A plain plate with dividers (as in a child’s 
plate) may be helpful by [CONTACT_285283] a “wall” against which 
foods may be pushed.  
• Is the food at a reasonable temperature (not too hot or too cold)?  
• People with severe dementia may “forget” how to eat. These people may be able 
to be coaxed by “following the leader.”  
• Dental disease, gum infl ammation or soreness, mal -fitting dentures may interfere 
with eating.  
• Visual impairment may impede eating. (Check that eye glasses are clean and in 
place)  
• Constipation or bladder fullness may cause diminished eating.  
▪  Offer fluids every 2 hours; offer th e bathroom an hour later.  
▪ Offer the bathroom ½ hour after eating a meal.  
▪ Acute refusal may indicate the need to defecate or void. Clues to this are 
resistance to sitting at the table or tugging at clothes.  
• Because of amnesia associated with dementia, pe ople may forget they have just 
eaten and request more food.  
• Provide a standard and predictable routine for eating meals.  
• Food preparation is a process that may require too many steps for a person with 
dementia living alone. An intermittent caregiver can prepare foods that are easy to open 
and do not require preparation. Consider home -delivered meals that do not require 
refrigeration or heating.  
 
Working with the doctor:  
• Caregivers need to know when to contact [CONTACT_106224]. Schedule a conversation to get  those 
questions answered. Provide caregivers with a card they can post in a prominent place, 
with red flags, warning signs, and information about when and whom to call.  
• Examples:  
o No bowel movement in [ADDRESS_348333] of medications (including additional herbs and over -the-counter 
medications) to the doctor.  
 
• Have a plan that all caregivers know about, including part -time and intermittent 
caregivers.  
• Work with the doctor to simplify routines and medication plans.  
• For every doctor visit: Bring a written list of caregiver’s concerns, the full up -to-date list of  
medications (prescriptions, over the counter, supplements, and herbal medications) daily 
glucose tracker , and food and fluid intake and weight logs.  
 
 
Appendix 3:  
POISED Research Evaluation Survey  
POISED  STUDY  
RESEARCH EVALUATION SURVEY  
SURVEY OVERVIEW  
Notes to IRB:  
The POISED Study research evaluation survey is the baseline evaluation survey that will be 
modified for follow -up surveys.  Text will be adjusted to orient the respondent to the follow -up 
survey time frames (3 months and 6 months). Also, demographic charac teristic questions will 
not be repeated.]   
The study research assistant will administer the baseline survey either in person at the 
Emergency Department visit if is practical and feasible without disrupting patient care as 
delivered by [CONTACT_285284][INVESTIGATOR_285216], or at a time by [CONTACT_285285].  
The research assistant will administer the follow -up surveys by [CONTACT_756].  
FOR TELEPHONE:  
• Hello, my name [CONTACT_832] [ interviewer name ] from the POISED study. May I speak with [ Insert 
name [CONTACT_285295]]?   
**Caregiver comes to telephone**  
• Hello, my name [CONTACT_832] [ interviewer name ]. I am from the POISED research study. You may 
remember that you spoke with me  
o when we did [the consent] or [the other survey about 3 months ago  (if this is a 
follow -up survey) ].  
• I am calling you as part of the evaluation of this research study.   
• Is it okay if we talk now?  
 INSTRUCTIONS TO INTERVIEWER:  
 If ‘No’, ask about another time that is more convenient.  
 If the person refuses to participate in the survey interview, thank the person.  
 If ‘Yes’, continue… → 
• The program looks at ways to improve care for people with memory or thinking problems. 
The program is also for those family members or friends who provide help to the person 
with memory problems.  We refer to individuals who provide help as caregivers or care 
partners.  
  
• Your participation in the program and interview will help us understand how best to help 
people with memory loss. Your participation will also help us understand how to help 
caregivers or care partners.  
Introduce Survey:  
• The interview will take about 30 minutes to complete.  We will keep all of your answers 
confidential.  Participating in this telephone interview is completely voluntary.   
• If you feel uncomfortable answering specific questions, you can refuse to answer any  or 
all questions.  You may stop the interview at any time and continue it later.  You may 
end the interview at any time and not continue.   
• At the end of this interview, we will mail you a $[ADDRESS_348334] for your time.   
• Your decision to participate does n ot in any way affect the health care that either you or 
[name [CONTACT_285296][INVESTIGATOR_841]]  receives.  None of the doctors that you or [name [CONTACT_285297][INVESTIGATOR_841]]  see will know whether or not you have participated in this survey.   
• Do you have any questions about the st udy or about your participation?”  
IF YES: RESPOND TO ALL QUESTIONS BEFORE PROCEEDING.  
Now I’m going to ask you a few questions to make this call as easy as possible.  
1a. Are you in a quiet and comfortable location?  
 Yes 
 No (wait for respondent)  
   1b. Am I speaking loudly and clearly enough for you to understand me?  
 Yes 
 No (go to 1c)  
1c. (INTERVIEWER SPEAKING LOUDER) is this better?  
 Yes 
 No (code Hearing Impaired)  
[If “No,” thank the subject and end the interview explaining that you cannot conduct the 
interview because of difficulty hearing on the telephone. Immediately Contact [CONTACT_285286].  If the interviewer thinks the difficulty hearing  is because of a bad 
connection (due to cell phone) offer to call at another time.]  
May I start the interview?  
 No/Refused   End Interview: Thanks very much for listening.  Goodb ye. 
[REASON: 
_________________________________________________________________]  
GENERAL QUESTIONS  
 
First, I would like to start this interview by [CONTACT_285287].  
 
1. How old are you today?  _____ years old  
 
2. What is your gender?     Male        Female  
 
3. What is your race/ethnicity?  You may answer yes to mor e than one.  
  White           Black    Asian  
  Hispanic      Other  
 
4. What is your highest level of education?   
  Less than high school       Completed High school  
  Some college     College graduate+  
 
5. What is your relationship to  [name [CONTACT_285298] R ecipi[INVESTIGATOR_841] ], your Care Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]?  
  Spouse        Child  
  Other relative     Friend/other  
 
6. How many years have you been his/her caregiver? _____ years  
 
7. What is your marital status?  
  Single/never married     Married  
  Divorced  
 
8. What are your current living arrangements?  
  Live with Care Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285217]? _____miles  
  Other (please specify: __________________________)  
 
9. How hard is it for you to pay for the very basics like food, housing, medical care, and heating? 
Would you say it is…  
  Very hard     
  Somewhat hard    
  Not hard at all   
 
Now I am going to ask you some questi ons about [ insert name [CONTACT_285296][INVESTIGATOR_841] ], the 
person you care  for.  
  
1. Where does he/she live? (ex. private home, assisted living, nursing home, other?)  
  Apartment/home/condo  
  Assisted living/  Board and Care  
  Nursing home  
  Other (please specify: __________________________)  Financial  Strain:  Study of Women’s Health across the Nation (SWAN) and the 
Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults (CARDIA) studies (see, for 
example, Hall et al. [2009] and Puterman et al. [2013])  
 
 
 
2. Has [ name [CONTACT_285296][INVESTIGATOR_841] ] ever received a diagnosis of dementia?  
 Yes       No 
 
3. If Yes,  
About what year did he/she receive that diagnosis?  ______   
Or, about how many years ago? ______  
 
4. Has [insert name [CONTACT_285296][INVESTIGATOR_841] ] had a change in his/her primary care provider in the 
last year?    Yes       No 
 
5. Does [insert name [CONTACT_285296][INVESTIGATOR_841] ] have health care insurance?   Yes       No 
 
6. We have to ask for our study whether  [insert name [CONTACT_285296][INVESTIGATOR_841] ] has a history of 
substance abuse, including alcohol?   
 Yes       No     Don’t know/refused  
 
7. Does he/she currently have a substance abuse problem?   
 Yes   No    Don’t know/refused  
 
8. Has [insert name [CONTACT_285296][INVESTIGATOR_841] ] received a diagnosis of any of the following conditions:  
  Depression      PTSD        Schizophrenia     
  Other  (please specify: ___________________)  
 
Now I will ask you a few questions about traveling.  
9. We have [ insert name [CONTACT_285296][INVESTIGATOR_841] ] address as [Fill In]. Is this correct?  
 
10. What is the primary mode of transportation you use?  
  Personal car         Taxi 
  Train     Bus 
  Walk                Other  ( please specify: ________________________)  
 
11. Where do you go when you have to bring [ insert name [CONTACT_285296][INVESTIGATOR_841] ] to see the 
doctor, meaning the doctor’s office or clinic (usual source of care – USC) ? Do you have 
the location or address?   ____________________________  
 
12. Where do you usually go if you need to travel to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_285218] 
(ED)?  ____________________________  
 
(For Calculating Miles and Difference in distanc e between ED vs. USC )  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Next, I want you to think about the last [ADDRESS_348335] provided to 
[insert name [CONTACT_285296][INVESTIGATOR_841] ].  It might help to get a calendar.  
 
NOTE: FOR FOLLOW -UP SURVEYS, REPLACE “12 MONTHS” WITH THE 
CORRESPONDING TIME FRAME SUCH AS 3 MONTHS, 6 MONTHS  
 
1. How many times did [insert name [CONTACT_285296][INVESTIGATOR_841] ], the person you care for, visit his/her 
Primary Care Provider or PCP) in the last year?  #____ times  
 
2. For each time, please indicate the primary reason for going to the PCP”  
 
2a. Was the visit for a new symptom or for a change  in a         Yes     No  
symptom that [insert name [CONTACT_285299][INVESTIGATOR_841] ]’s had previously?  
 
2b. A fall or other injury?                             Yes       No    
 
2c. A symptom that has been present for more than the past      Yes       No    
month?  
  
2d. A medication refill?                             Yes       No 
 
2e. Other (please specify: ____________________________)  
 
3. Have you had any difficulty getting medication refills for [ insert name [CONTACT_285296][INVESTIGATOR_841] ]  
Yes    No 
 
4. Over the past [ insert time frame ] has [care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285219]] had any new medical 
problems or illness?  Yes    No 
 
5. Over the past [ insert time frame ] has [ insert name [CONTACT_285296][INVESTIGATOR_841] ] had any injuries?  
Yes    No 
 
6. How many times did he/she use the Emergency Department?  #____ times  
 
7. How many times did he/she stay in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_285220]?   
#____ times  
7a. For each stay in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], I want you to tell me, to the best of your knowledge, 
the month and number of days he/she was in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]?  
i. Stay number  1:  Month: _____.      #______days  
ii. Stay number 2:  Month: _____.      #______days  
iii. Stay number 3:  Month: _____.      #______days  
iv. Stay number 4:  Month: _____.      #______days  
v. Stay number 5:  Month: _____.      #______days  
vi. Stay number 6:  Month: _____.      #______days  
 
8. Over the past [ insert time frame ], has [name [CONTACT_285300]]  received help from the “In -Home 
Supportive Services” Program?  This program helps pay for services to help keep [name 
[CONTACT_285300]] safely in [his/her] home.  Services include  personal care and household tasks 
such as housecleaning, meal preparation , laundry, and grocery shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_007].   
 Yes    No     
8a. If Yes, how many months?  _____     Acute use  
 Non-acute use  
 Non-acute use  
8b. How hours per week on average   ______  
HCAHP S1 COMPONENT  
 
Using any number from [ADDRESS_348336] 
health care possible, what n umber would you use to rate ___________________’s  health care?  
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
 
HABC -M2 COMPONEN T 
 
Now I am going to ask you some questions about [ insert name [CONTACT_285301][INVESTIGATOR_841] ]’s memory, mood, 
behaviors, and day -to-day activity.  I will also ask questions about your overall health.  When 
answering these questions please keep in mind the following:  
1. Answer each questions based on your first reaction – evidence of actual change is not as important 
as your gut instinct.  
2. There are no formal definitions for the symptoms you are being asked to ra te, although, in some 
cases, examples of the symptom are included. In general, whatever the term means to you in a 
reasonable and acceptable definition.  
3. Rate the frequency of the symptoms over the past two weeks using a scale of:  
a. Not at all (0 ‐1 day)  
b. Several days (2 ‐6 days)  
c. More than half the days (7 ‐11 days)  
d. Nearly every day (12 ‐14 days)  
4. First, how well do you know [ insert name [CONTACT_285296][INVESTIGATOR_841] ]?  
  Not at all      Somewhat well                   Well             Very well  
 
Over the past two weeks , how often did [insert name [CONTACT_285302][INVESTIGATOR_841]] have problems with  the following items :  
 Not at all  
(0-1 Day)  
0 Points  Several 
days  
(2-6 Days)  
1 point  More than 
half the days  
(7-11 Days)  
[ADDRESS_348337] 
daily  
(12-14 
days)  
 3 points  
Judgment or decision ‐making      
Repeating the same things over and over such as questions or 
stories      
Forgetting the correct month or year      
Handling complicated financial affairs such as balancing 
checkbook, income taxes & paying bills      
Remembering  appointments      
Thinking or memory      
Learning how to use a tool, appliance, or gadget      
Planning, preparing, or serving meals      
Taking medications in the right dose at the right time      
Walking or physical ambulation      
Bathing      
Shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_285221]/her alone      
His/her safety      
His/her quality of life     
Falling or trippi[INVESTIGATOR_285222], hobbies or activities      
Feeling down, depressed, or hopeless      
Being stubborn, agitated, aggressive or resistive to help from 
others      
Feeling anxious, nervous, tense, fearful or panic      
Believing others are stealing from them or planning to harm 
them      
Hearing voices, seeing things or talking to people who are not 
there      
Poor appetite or overeating      
Falling asleep, staying asleep, or sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_285223], without thinking through the consequences 
of her/his actions      
Wandering, pacing, or doing things repeatedly      
Over the past two weeks , how often did you have problems 
with: (Use √ to indicate your answer.)  Not at all  
(0-1 Day)  
0 Points  Several 
days  
(2-6 Days)  
1 point  More than 
half the days  
(7-11 Days)  
[ADDRESS_348338] 
daily  
(12-14 
days)  
3 points  
Your quality of life      
Your financial future      
Your mental health      
Your physical health      
 Cognitive subscale:  
Functional subscale:  
Behavioral and mood subscale:  
Caregiver stress subscale:  
Total score:  
 
 
 
  
I would like to ask you some questions about how YOU, the care partner/caregiver, are 
managing with your own day -to-day activities.  Do you need assistance with any of the 
following?  
ACTIVITIES OF DAILY LIVING (ADL S)3 
 Needs no 
help  Needs 
some help  Unable to 
do at all  
A. Bathing  2 1 0 
B. Dressing  2 1 0 
C. Toileting  2 1 0 
D. Transferring, (use explanatory text as necessary: “Transferring 
means changing positions such as going from bed to standing, 
standing to sitting,  2 1 0 
E. Continence  2 1 0 
F. Feeding  2 1 0 
 
INSTRUMENTAL ACTIVITIES OF DAILY LIVING (IADL S)[ADDRESS_348339] 2 weeks.  
Possible answers are: Not at all; Several days; More than half the days; or Nearly every day  
 
GAD -[ADDRESS_348340] 
you been bothered by [CONTACT_285288]?  Not at all  Several 
days  More than 
half the 
days  Nearly 
every day  
1. Feeling nervous, anxious, or on -edge  0 1 2 3 
2. Not being able to stop or control worrying  0 1 2 3 
3. Worrying too much about different things  0 1 2 3 
4. Trouble relaxing  0 1 2 3 
5. Being so restless that it’s hard to sit still  0 1 2 3 
6. Becoming easily annoyed or irritable  0 1 2 3 
7. Feeling afraid as if something awful might 
happen  0 1 2 3 
 
How often is each of the following kinds of support available to you if you need it?  
Possible answers are: None of the time; A little of the time; Some of the time; Most of the 
time; or All of the time.  
SOCIAL SUPPORT “SS-5” [ADDRESS_348341] of 
the time  All of 
the 
time  
A. Someone to confide in or talk to about 
problems.  1 2 3 4 5 
B. Someone to get together with for relaxation.  1 2 3 4 5 
C. Someone to help you with daily chores if you 
were sick.  1 2 3 4 5 
D. Someone to turn to for suggestions about how 
to deal with a personal problem.  1 2 3 4 5 
E. Someone to love and make you feel wanted.  1 2 3 4 5 
 
 
 
 
 
Patient Health Questionaire -9 (PHQ -9)[ADDRESS_348342] you been 
bothered by [CONTACT_33687].   Possible 
answers are: Not at all; Several days; More than 
half the days; or Nearly every day  Not 
at all  Several 
Days  More 
than 
half the 
days  Nearly 
every 
day 
1.  Little interest of pleasure in doing things  0 1 2 3 
2.  Feeling down depressed or hopeless  0 1 2 3 
3.  Trouble falling asleep, staying asleep or 
sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_33606]  0 1 2 3 
4.  Feeling tired or having little energy  0 1 2 3 
5.  Poor appetite or overeating  0 1 2 3 
6.  Feeling bad about yourself – or that you have 
been a failure or let yourself or your family 
down  [ADDRESS_348343] noticed. Or the opposite – being so 
fidgety or restless that you have been moving 
around a lot more than usual  [ADDRESS_348344] ** [ADDRESS_348345] those problems made it for you to 
do your work, take care of things at home, or get 
along with other people   Not difficult at all  
 Somewhat difficult  
 Very difficult  
 Extremely difficult  
 
**Refer to local site Suicide Prevention Protocol  
 
 
 
MYLOH© COMPONENT7 
 
Now I am going to ask you some questions about any problems you might have in 
helpi[INVESTIGATOR_007] [ name [CONTACT_285296][INVESTIGATOR_841] ]. Many of the questions are very similar to what has 
already been asked.  
Please keep in mind the following definition s when answering these questions:  
• The terms “ He/She , Him/Her ” refer to your care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841].  
• The term “ Health Care Providers”  refers to  doctors, nurse practitioners, physician 
assistants, nurses, social workers, pharmacists, medical specialists (ex. cardiologist, 
psychiatrist), and other healthcare staff.  
• The term “ Care Partner ” refers to YOU.  
o Primary Care Partner : Live with or nearby [CONTACT_285289]. Regularly 
provide care and assist with daily and medical decisions and care tasks . 
o Helper Care Partner : Live with or nearby. Help a primary care part ner when 
needed.  
o Long -distance Care Partner : Live further away. Visit when they can and assist 
with making decisions.  
What kind of Care Partner are you?  Please answer questions below . 
 
The primary  person responsible for 
care  
A helper  who assists with 
care  
A person who assists with  care 
from a long -distance  
From a score of 1 to 5; “1” being ‘Not difficult’ and “5” being ‘Extremely difficult’, please 
tell me…  
How difficult is it for you to pay for all of the basic needs* for the person with dementia?:  
1                              2                              3                                   4                                5  
NOT DIFFICULT         EXTREMELY 
DIFFICULT  
 
*Basic Needs ex. food, medical & other supplies, medications  
 
 
Next I want to understand what his/her problems are.  I will name [CONTACT_285303][INVESTIGATOR_285224]. Possible answers to the questions are: Agree 
completely; Agree;  Disagree ; Disa gree completely; or Not my job.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Agree 
Completely  Agree  Disagree  Disagree 
Completely  Not 
My Job  
1. I understand WHAT his/her problems are:  
A. With Memory   
(ex. remembering, planning, making 
decisions)       
B. With Mood/Behaviors   
(ex. anger, sadness,  irritation, poor 
sleep)       
C. With Medical Issues   
(ex. illnesses, pain, headaches)       
D. With Self-Care  
(ex. eating, dressing, showering, 
using the toilet)       
2. Right now, I can deal with DAY -TO-DAY problems he/she has:  
A. With Memory   
(ex. remembering, planning, making 
decisions)       
B. With Mood/Behaviors   
(ex. anger, sadness, irritation, poor 
sleep)       
C. With Medical Issues   
(ex. illnesses, pain, headaches)       
D. With Self-Care   
(ex. eating, dressing, showering, 
using the toilet)       
3. I know, or can get  information about:  
A. What medications his/her 
health  care provider 
recommends (prescription and 
non-prescription )       
B. What dose , when and how 
these medications should be 
taken (ex.10  mg tablet twice a 
day)      
C. What conditions  these 
medications are used for (ex. 
blood pressure, blood sugar, 
dementia)       
4. I watch to be sure that he/she 
takes medications correctly and  
provide help when needed       
5. If I have concerns  about his/her  
medications (ex. I worry about the 
safety or value of what is 
prescribed ) I tell the clinician 
about them       
 
 Agree 
Completely  Agree  Disagree  Disagree 
Completely  Not  
My Job  
6. I can tell when there are NEW or RAPI[INVESTIGATOR_285225]/her:  
A. Memory   
(ex. remembering, planning, 
making decisions)       
B. Mood/Behaviors   
 (ex. anger, sadness, irritation, 
poor sleep)       
C. Medical Issues  
(ex. illnesses, pain, headaches)       
D. Self-Care   
(ex. eating, dressing, show ering , 
using the toilet)       
7. When NEW or RAPI[INVESTIGATOR_285226], I know:  
A. What to watch for  and what to 
report  to his/her healthcare 
provider       
B. What I can deal with on my 
own       
C. When to contact  [CONTACT_5657]/her 
health care provider       
D. Which health care provider  I 
should contact  
     (ex. doctor, nurse, pharmacist)       
E. When I need immediate 
assistance  and I should call 
911 or other emergency 
medical help  
      
8. In helpi[INVESTIGATOR_285227]  (ex. start new medication, go to a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], 
have surgery),  
    I understand:  
A. What would be important to the 
person I care for       
B. How to speak up on his/her 
behalf       
C. The responsibilities of a person 
who has a Power of Attorney 
for Medical Decision Making       
9. In regards to CAREGIVING RIGHT NOW:  
A. I can do everything  needed to 
ensure that his/her care needs 
are met       
B. I am taking care of myself  so 
that I can continue to care  for      
him/her (ex. I take a break 
when needed ) 
C. When I need help  with 
caregiving , I know how to get it       
D. I know what to do  if I have a 
personal crisis and cannot 
provide care  or help with care 
as I usually do .      
 
Based on all  the questions you just answered, please tell me the [ADDRESS_348346] important questions  
to discuss with a healthcare provider now:  
INSTRUCTIONS TO PERSON ADMINISTERING SURVEY: (enter descriptor text and the 
question number after rereading the question to be sure you have it right)  
The question you would   like to discuss first:   Question# _____  
The question you would   like to discuss second :  Question# _____  
The question you would   like to discuss third :  Question# _____ 
Is there anything else we did not ask about that a healthcare provider could help you with in 
caring for your loved one?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BEHAV5+[ADDRESS_348347] month.  
1.  AGITATION/AGGRESSION  
Does your care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285228]?  
Resist care from others?  ☐ Yes     ☐ No 
2.  HALLUCINATIONS  
Does your care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285229]/or hear things that no one else can see or 
hear?  ☐ Yes     ☐ No 
3.  IRRITABILITY/ FREQUENTLY CHANGING MOOD  ☐ Yes     ☐ No 
Does your care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285230]? Does his or her mood 
frequently change for no apparent reason?  
4.  SUSPI[INVESTIGATOR_285231]/PARANOIA  
Does your care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285232] (example: 
believes that others are stealing from him or her, or planning to harm him or 
her in some way)?  ☐ Yes     ☐ No 
5.  INDIFFERENCE/SOCIAL WITHDRAWAL  
Does your care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285233]?  ☐ Yes     ☐ No 
6. SLEEP PROBLEMS  
Does your care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285234]?  ☐ Yes     ☐ No 
 
STRESS THERMOMETER COMPONENT8 
 
1. Will you please tell me how stressed you are feeling? *   
  Extremely stressed     Very stressed  
  Moderately stressed    A little stressed  
  Not stressed at all                    Don’t know  
 
 
 
*STRESS: Feeling tense, nervous, anxious, restless, or unable to sleep because your 
mind is troubled all the time .  
[End of Interview Questions]  
In about [ADDRESS_348348] your 
participation in another interview.  At that time, we will go through the same process that 
we went through today.  Your participation in any future surveys is voluntary and you 
can decide at that time if you would like to speak with us.   
1. May we call you in about 3 months from now ?” 
 Yes, Go Q . 2 
 No, Skip to “Address Confirmation”  
2. Which are  the best day s and times to reach you about 3  months fro m now?  What do you 
prefer?  
During the week:  
 Morning          Afternoon   Evening  
 Telephone:  ___ ___ ___ -- ___ ___ ___ -- ___ ___ ___ ___  
 

On Saturdays:  
 Morning          Afternoon   Evening  
 Telephone:  ___ ___ ___ -- ___ ___ ___ -- ___ ___ ___ ___  
 
ADDRESS CONFIRMATION  
For the purpose of sending you a $[ADDRESS_348349] that we are giving to you in appreciation of your 
time with this interview, I need to verify your mailing address:  
 
Address:  _______________________________________________________________  
 
Pleas e call our Study Coordinator, [ insert full name ] at [insert hospi[INVESTIGATOR_285235] ] at [insert telephone 
number ] if you should have new your contact [CONTACT_285290].  Again, that number is [insert telephone numbe r]. 
If you have any other questions or concerns about the research, please feel free to 
contact [CONTACT_079], [insert site PI [CONTACT_2300] ] at [Insert telephone number ] 
 
If you wish to ask questions about your rights as a research participant or if you wish to voice 
any problems or concerns you may have about the study to someone other than the 
researchers, you may contact [CONTACT_941] [insert head of IRB ] at [insert site ]. The tel ephone number is 
[Insert telephone number ].         Thank you again!  
  
References:  
1. HCAHPS: Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_285236]. 
http://www.hcahpsonline.org/home.aspxd . Accessed January 23, 2016.  
2. Monahan PO, Boustani MA, Alder C, et al. Practical clinical tool to monitor dementia 
symptoms: The HABC -monitor. Clin In terv Aging . 2012;7:143 -157.  
3. Katz S. Assessing self -maintenance: Activities of daily living, mobility, and instrumental 
activities of daily living. J Am Geriatr Soc . 1983;31(12):721 -727.  
4. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Kroenke K, Williams JB, Lowe B. A brief measure fo r assessing generalized 
anxiety disorder: The GAD -7. Arch Intern Med . 2006;166(10):1092 -1097.  
5. Dour HJ, Wiley JF, Roy -By[CONTACT_7943] P, et al. Perceived social support mediates anxiety and 
depressive symptom changes following primary care intervention. Depress A nxiety . 
2014;31(5):436 -442.  
6. Kroenke K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280]. The PHQ -9: A new depression and diagnostic severity measure. 
Psychiatric Annals . 2002;32:509 -521.  
7. Sadak, T., Wright, J., & Borson, S. (2016). Managing Your Loved One’s Health Development 
of a New C are Management Measure for Dementia Family Caregivers. Journal of Applied 
Gerontology . 
8. Borson S, Scanlan JM, Sadak T, Lessig M, Vitaliano P. Dementia services mini -screen: A 
simple method to identify patients and caregivers in need of enhanced dementia care services. 
Am J Geriatr Psychiatry . 2014;22(8):746 -755.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 4:  
POISED Detailed Care Management Strategies  
 
 
POISED includes:  
1. Initial Assessment : The POISED care management team is structured to maximize 
the skill sets of specially -trained nurses functioning as care managers (CMs) and 
para-professionals in the role of care manager assistants (CMAs) in a collaborative 
model to maximize effectiveness and decrease cost. The CM and CMA conduct a 
biopsychosocial /environmental  needs assessment by [CONTACT_1382] 48 hours of 
emergency room discharge if not possible during the ED stay. This initial 
assessment (in person or by [CONTACT_648]) includes a briefer demographic and 
psychosocial interview (compared with the home visit) focused on achi eving most 
urgent problem identification. The program uses standardized assessment tools 
including “Managing Your Loved Ones Health” (MYLOHTM) for chronic disease 
management1 and BEHAVE 5+4 . If the consented  CG is not available , we will 
attempt to complet e the CG questions at a later date either by [CONTACT_48052]. 
The CM’s interview also uses principles of root cause analysis (RCA) (further 
described below) to better understand the events and potential causes leading to the 
ED visit. The CM team then f ocuses on initial problem clarification and reviews the 
assessment findings, the medical record, medication lists, ED discharge plans and 
pharmacist consultation. The CM also reviews any diagnostic testing, any brain 
imaging results, and functional details  of the assessment to determine the presence 
or absence of a likely dementia diagnosis, identifying any reversible and co -morbid 
conditions and, for complex cases, the need for referral for further evaluation at 
either NYU’s or IU’s well -developed dementia  assessment centers.  
 
2. First Home Assessment : After review of all findings from prior data and the first 
telephone encounter, the CM and CMA create an initial plan and identify areas 
needing further assessment to be conducted at the first home visit (withi n 2 weeks 
after enrollment). That visit enables the CM team to conduct some additional 
cognitive and functional testing while the POISED RN uses the time to address more 
sensitive issues that the CG may be uncomfortable discussing in the presence of the 
CR. The results of this initial assessment and home visit are forwarded to the CR’s 
PCP with requested feedback and further direction as needed.  
 
3. Root -Cause Analysis of Emergency Department Visit or Repeat Visit / 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] : Both CM and CMA members of  the care management team will be 
well versed in the strategies of Root Cause Analysis. Starting with the ED visit and 
working backwards in time, the team will explore and identify problems or branch -
point situations that progressed to the need for ED care . Using a logic tree as a 
cause and effect approach to create a timeline of events leading to ED visit2 and 
asking the question, “how could this occur?” or “why” based on the “Five -Whys” 
strategy3 they will ask “why” for each successive answer starting with “why did you 
come to the Emergency Department.” Answers will be applied to medical record 
review looking for other possible triggers and opportunities for intervention. This 
brainstorming/investi gative process is a successfully used quality improvement 
strategy and is also deployed by [CONTACT_285291].  
 
4. Self-Management/Caregiver Skills Enhancement : Prior to the second home visit, the 
CM prepares the various releva nt materials to enhance patient self -management or 
caregiver skills. These materials (the Patient or Caregiver Care Manual) can include: 
chronic disease specific self -management strategies and medical information 
focused on identifying “red -flag” signs or symptoms, medication effects and proper 
use, enhanced information based on RCA investigation relevant to the sentinel ED 
visit, information on legal and financial planning with referrals made to elder law 
specialists and legal services programs in the comm unity; specific behavioral 
interventions techniques to help manage, reduce or avoid care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285237]; and/or copi[INVESTIGATOR_285238]’ emotional and physical 
health remain intact. These materials are provided to dyads via various face -to-face 
or home counseling sessions. If the dyad’s needs are particularly complex, the 
counseling can take place over more than one face -to-face and/or telephone 
session.  
 
5. Informal Telephone Support : Dyads will have access to telephone consul tation with 
the care team. Any Family members participating in the patient’s care can initiate the 
telephone contact. Offering access to the care team empowers caregivers to more 
readily try different interventions.  
 
6. Problem Solving Process : Using data co llected from the structured caregiver 
interview or during face -to-face visits, the care team uses standardized protocols to 
manage behavioral and psychological symptoms related to dementia. The care team 
educates the caregiver on implementing these protoco ls and monitors the success of 
such implementation via face -to-face or telephone follow -up interactions.  
 
7. Reducing the Anticholinergic Cognitive Burden : Using the Anticholinergic Cognitive 
Burden Scale (ACBS), developed by [CONTACT_285292], t he care team 
reviews the over -the-counter and prescribed medications taken by [CONTACT_285293] (PCP) to identify the presence of any 
anticholinergic medication in efforts to balance their benefits and harms.  
 
8. Prescribing FDA -Approved Medications : The care team, in coordination with the 
PCP, discusses the indications, benefits and expectations of using FDA -approved 
medications for dementia.  
 
9. Managing High Vascular Disease Burden : The care team will review the care 
recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285239] -pharmacological approaches.  
 
10. Monitoring and Support of the Caregiver’s Emotional and Physical Health : The care 
team will use brief assessments to monitor care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285240], functional, 
behavioral and psychological symptoms; and caregiver stress using the caregiver 
Stress Thermometer.4  
 
11. Managing Transitional Care : Starting with the ED visit or within [ADDRESS_348350] -
discharge care plans.  
 
12. Managing Acute Care Problems : There are times when a care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_285241]. 
To avoid a potentially unnecessary ED visit, the care team may make a home visit, 
inform the PCP, and address the problem accordingly.  
 
13. Care Prioritization : Under circumstances where patients have significant needs that 
exceed the capacity of the clinical program, the care team will utilize established 
guidelines to prioritize addressing these needs to ensure the most vulnerable 
patients (those who require a  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_285242] -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_285243]) receive 
timely care coordination by [CONTACT_285294] a home visit within 72 hours of 
discharge from a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_285244] y department.  
 
14. Discharge Criteria : The care team will discharge the patient and caregiver if they 
meet any of the following criteria: 1) patient expi[INVESTIGATOR_6054]; 2) patient and/or 
family/caregiver decline to continue in the program; 3) primary care provider 
reque sts patient discharge from the program; 4) patient transitions to another health 
care system or move outside Marion County; 5) patient’s living situation/environment 
becomes unsafe for patient and/or staff and therefore requires long -term skilled 
nursing h ome care; or 6) complete the 6 -month study.  
 
 
 
1. Sadak T, Korpak A, Borson S. Measuring caregiver activation for health care: 
Validation of PBH -LCI:D. Geriatr Nurs . 2015;36(4):284 -292.  
 
2. Latino RJ. Patient safety: The PROACT root cause analysis approach. Boca Raton, 
FL: Taylor and Francis; 2008.  
 
3. Five Whys Technique. http://www.adb.org/publications/five -whys -technique . Updated 
2009. Accessed January 25, 2016.  
 
4. Borson S, Scanlan JM, Sadak T, Lessig M, Vitaliano P. Dementia services mini -
screen: A simple met hod to identify patients and caregivers in need of enhanced 
dementia care services. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry . 2014;22(8):746 -755. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 5:  
POISED Laminated Information Card  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
