Version 3 , 8/31/2021  
1 
 Postpartum weight loss for women at elevated cardiovascular risk: a 
randomized controlled trial  
 
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_213777], MD, MPH  
    Assistant Professor of Medicine  
    Division of Cardiovascular Medicine  
    Perelman Center for Advanced Medicine  
    [ADDRESS_256595]  
    Philadelphia, PA [ZIP_CODE]  
    Phone: 267 -588-2327  
 
Co-principal investigator : [INVESTIGATOR_213778], PhD  
    Professor of Psychology  
    Department of Psychiatry  
 
  
Version 3 , 8/31/[ADDRESS_256596] privacy  
 11.4 Data disclosure  
 11.5 Data safety and monitoring  
 11.6 Risk/benefit  
  11.6.1 Potential study risks  
  11.6.2 Potential study benefits  
  11.6.3 Risk/benefit assessment  
  
Version 3 , 8/31/2021  
3 
 STUDY SCHEMA  
 
A. Enrollment strategies  
 
 
  

Version 3 , 8/31/2021  
4 
 B. Intervention allocation and follow -up 
 
  

Version 3 , 8/31/[ADDRESS_256597] increase in obesi ty rates of any group. (1) Obesity during reproductive 
years is a risk factor for pregnancy complica tions and higher risk of mortality later in life. (2) Women 
with cardiovascular (CV) risk factors, such as hypertension (HTN) or diabetes (DM) are at high er risk 
of obesity -related CV complications, as are women with pregnancy complications such as 
gestational hypertension, preeclampsia, and diabetes. The Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) is  an 
intensive in -person program resulting in sustained weight loss. (3,4)  Behavioral weight los s (BWL)  
programs modeled after DPP and adapted to online platforms have shown success  in different 
settings. An online  behavioral weight loss program modelled after the DPP may be attractive to 
postpartum  women, who may have difficulty attending in -person sessions due to competing 
demands of caring for a newborn. (5) The objective of this study is to use a randomized clin ical 
trial t o test the feasibility and effectiveness of a [ADDRESS_256598] rategies to recruit postpartum 
women to the study. We will be partnering with collaborators at the University of Connecticut 
(UConn) who have extensively evaluated this platform in different population s. 
 
2. Overall objectives  
The objective of this study i s to evaluate the feasibility  of an online behavioral weight loss 
program on weight loss among postpartum women at increased cardiovascular risk. A 
secondary objective is to evaluate the effectiveness of different behavioral strategies to recruit 
a diverse  population of women to enroll in the study.  
 
3. Aims  
 3.1 Aim 1 : To understand feasibility and compare weight loss between postpartum  
women  participating in an  online behavioral weight loss intervention compared to usual care .  
 
3.2 Aim 2 : To compare recruitment and enrollment strategies in enrolling postpartum 
women in a weight loss intervention.  
 
4. Background  
Pregnancy represents a life transition when many women become at risk for unhealthy lifestyle 
habits, such as excess weight gain and limited physical activity. At one year postpartum, nearly 
one-half of lower -income women will weigh [ADDRESS_256599] will develop  new overweight or obes ity onset . Overweight and obesity are risk 
factors for cardiovascular risk (CV) factors, such as hypertension and diabetes, as well as 
maternal complications in future pregnancies.  
 
The Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) is one of the most successful behavioral programs for 
weight loss and diabetes prevention, however the program is designed to be in -person which is 
challenging for many women with young children at home. Efforts to de velop an on -line version 
of the DPP program have been successful in motivating weight loss among individuals from 
Version 3 , 8/31/[ADDRESS_256600] of an online 
BWL program (intervention) to usual care on weight loss after 16 weeks. The enrollment 
process and intervention will all be conducted remotely. All interested participants will be 
asked to complete a 7 -day run -in per iod during which time they will complete surveys and 
submit a daily food log. Participants will be randomized 2:[ADDRESS_256601] recently delivered at the Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_213779]. We will recruit women who are  6 weeks – [ADDRESS_256602]  1 CV risk factor.   
 
Trial arms  
Arm 1. Usual care : Participants will receive educational resources on weight loss  and a digital 
scale.  
 
Arm 2. Online behavioral weight loss: Participants will receive educational resources on weight 
loss and a digital scale. Participants will participate in  a “Weight Loss 101” virtual session, where 
they are introduced to successful components of weight loss. They will be enrolled in a 16 -week 
online program tha t is based on the Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) and involves weekly 
brief videos, a self -monitoring platform, and automated feedback .(3,6–8)   
 
Intervention  
Participants in all arms will attend a virtual Information session, undergo a 1 -week behavioral 
run-in period, and attend a virtual Kick -off session. (see Study Schema) . After completing these 
steps, all participants will be asked to complete a virtual weigh -in at the start and end of the 16 -
week intervention. In addition, the intervention arm  will rece ive: 
 
a. Weight loss and physical activity goals as part of the Weight Loss 101 session.  All 
participants will be asked to lose 10% of their body weight, corresponding to 1 -2 
lb/week over the 16 -week study. Participants will be enrolled in the online behavioral 
weight loss program. The program involves the following components and describ ed in 
more detail in Appendix 1 : 
b. Weekly multimedia videos  (lesson plan) : These illustrated videos are  < 5 minutes in 
length and include topi[INVESTIGATOR_213780] c ontrol, goal setting, and problem solving. 
Version 3 , 8/31/2021  
7 
 Each video is accompanied by [CONTACT_213783].  
c. Self-monitoring platform  (daily log): Participants are asked to track their daily weight, 
total calories, and exercise minutes and enter it on the website. These can be entered 
daily or at the end of the week. As long as values are entered before 11:59pm on 
Sunday night, the part icipant will receive automated feedback.  
d.  Automated feedback : Based upon the metrics entered into the daily log, participants 
will receive automated feedback by [CONTACT_213784]. This may focus on reinforcing daily weights, encouraging adherence 
calorie or exercise goals, or resetting goals. The overall messaging of the automated 
feedback is supportive.  
e. Access to health coach : Participants will be able to contact [CONTACT_213785] t o following the lesson plan or meeting their weight loss goals.  
 
 5.2 Study duration  
This is a 16-week intervention that starts after the 1 -week behavioral run -in and attending the  
Weight Loss 101 session. Overall duration of study from enrollment to final evaluation is 20 
weeks.  
 
 5.3 Target population  
Postpartum women  with  overweight or obesity,  age ≥ 18 years with  
1 CV risk factor, including chronic hypertension or diabetes mellitus, or a 
pregnancy complication placing them at increased CV risk, such as 
hypertensive disorder of pregnancy  or gestational diabetes.  
 
 5.4 Accrual  
The study population will be drawn from  adult postpartum women  at 
Penn ( the Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_71971]  (HUP)  or 
Pennsylvania Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (PAH) ).  We will aim to randomize 60 
participants , 2:1 in the intervention and usual care groups (40 in the 
intervention and 20 in usual care). As some participants will be 
excluded during the run-in period (e.g. because they did not 
complete  the daily food log or BMI < 27),  we will plan  to consent 85 
patients to reach our goal randomization.   Approximately 8,400 
deliveries occur annually at Penn.  Assuming about 30% will have 
any hypertensive disorder or diabetes, 60% will have a BMI ≥ 27 
kg/m2, and up to 20% may be excluded for other reasons, we 
estimate that approximately 1,200 women will be pot entially eligible (see Figure 1 ) 
 
 5.5 Key inclusion  criteria   
1) Age ≥18 years;  
2) Delivered a baby  [CONTACT_213786] 8 weeks -12 months  prior to study enrollment;  
3) BMI ≥ 27 kg/m2  
Fig 1 : Estimated sample size  
Version 3 , 8/31/2021  
8 
 4) Diagnosis  of one of the following medical conditions: chronic hypertension, gestational 
hypertension, preeclampsia, eclampsia, gestational diabetes, or diabetes mellitus (type 
1 or 2) based on diagnosis codes  in the EMR  
5) Has online access through smartphone or computer and has email address  
6) Ability to read and provide informed consent to participate in the study  
 
 5.6 Key exclusion criteria   
1) Delivered prior to 3 2 weeks gestation  in the EMR  
2) Documentation of fetal demise or neonatal demise in the EMR  
3) Currently pregnant or p lanning to get pregnant within the next 5 months  
4) Does not speak English  
5) Answers yes to any of the following questions:  
o Are you currently participating in any other weight loss or physical activity 
studies?  
o Do you have any medical conditions or other reasons why y ou could not 
participate in a 1 6-week weight loss or physical activity program?  
6) Participants will be excluded after completing the run-in period if they do not complete 
the daily food log or their baseline B MI is < 27  kg/m2 
 
6. Subject recruitment  
We will use EPIC to identify a cross -sectional  cohort of potentially eligible patients. Given the 
lag time between identifying potentially eligible patients and enrollment, we will identify 
women with a d elivery occurring between the time of the data pull and 365 days prior . We will 
identify women bas ed on the inclusion and exclusion criteria above. In order to optimally 
recruit women with a BMI ≥ 27 kg/m2 at time of enrollment, we will use the following BMI 
criteria as documented in EMR:  
a. Pregravid  BMI ≥ 30, regardless  of delivery  BMI 
b. Pregravid  BMI 28-29.9  and delivery  BMI ≥ 33 
c. If pregravid  BMI missing,  will include  delivery  BMI ≥ [ADDRESS_256603] their current address, phone number, email address , 
demographics , and clinical history  abstracted. We will compare two approaches  to patient 
recruitment  (see study schema above, enrollment strategies)  
a. Email: For patients meeting inclusion criteria with a documented email address, 
we will randomize them to one of two recruitment emails that test behavioral 
approaches to engaging patie nts. Group 1 (reserved a spot) will receive an email 
notifying them that we reserved a spot for them in the upcoming online 
information session for a weight loss program designed for postpartum women. 
Group 2 (commit today) will receive an email asking par ticipants if they are ready 
to commit to their health.  Participants will be able to click on an embedded link 
in the email which will take them to a secure Redcap survey that will allow them 
to sign up for the virtual information session. Once participant s sign up, they will 
receive a text reminder prior to the information session with the Zoom link. See 
Version 3 , 8/31/2021  
9 
 Appendix  2 for text of  recruitment email s. For participants who do not respond, 
a reminder email will be sent 48 hours after the initial email.  
b. Mailer: We  will combine participants who received an email but did not respond 
and patients who do not have an email address documented in the EMR. We will 
then randomize them to one of two mailer strategies: study mailer alone versus 
mailer plus gift. The mailer al one group will receive a flyer and mailer that 
focuses on achieving a healthy lifestyle postpartum and explaining the weight 
loss study ( see Appendi ces 3 and 4). The mailer plus gift group will receive a 
mailed package containing the flyer and mailer plus a baby [CONTACT_213787]. Recruitment materials will be sent in waves until the expected 
number of participants are enrolled.  
 
Patients will be able to sign up for the virtual information session hosted on Zoom through the 
study website  (Redca p). Information on how to sign -up will be included on the mailer. In 
addition, patients will be able to call or text the study phone number to talk to a clinical 
research coordinator (CRC) in the Maternal and Child Health Research Center (MCHRC) to learn 
more about the study and/or sign up for an information session. We will try to accommodate 
patients who cannot make any of the scheduled sessions by [CONTACT_213788].  In 
order to sign up, participants will need to provide their name , contact [CONTACT_3031], and date of 
birth . 
 
As of 9/25/2021, we have reach target randomization using email recruitment  alone . In order 
to compare the mailer versus mailer plus baby [CONTACT_213789] 2 , we will continue 
recruitment using the mail strategy  (see Study Schema, enrollment strategies above) . When 
participants click on the Redcap link to sign up for a virtual information session , they will be 
informed that study enrollment is full. They will have  the option to watch a [ADDRESS_256604] compensation  
All eligible participants wil l receive a scale  if they complete the 1 -week behavioral run -in period . 
Participants will receive $ [ADDRESS_256605] name [CONTACT_213794].  
Version 3 , 8/31/[ADDRESS_256606] the research team via phone 
at any time if they subsequently wish to withdraw from the study.  Participants will be asked to 
electronically sign the consent form via Redcap when they receive the surveys as part of the 
behavioral run -in period and prior to randomization.  
 
8.2 Procedures  
a) Virtual information  session : All potentially eligible and interested participants will first 
complete this session. At the end of the session, participants  will provide  verbal  informed 
consent and will be invited to complete the behavioral run -in period .  
 
b) Behavioral run-in: participants will be emailed a link to a secure Redcap survey and asked to 
complete the following steps:  
 Electronic consent  
 Survey to determine eligibil ity 
 Profile with contact [CONTACT_3031], including correct address to send scale  and contact 
[CONTACT_66178] (email or text)  
 Online W9 form to facilitate delivery of incentives  
 Baseline demographic and study specific surveys  (see Appendix 5) 
 
Participants will be asked to c omplete 5 days of food logging. Participants can log food in 
MyFitnessPal (MFP), a free app for food tracking, and share with research staff or they can keep 
a food diary on paper and send in screenshots via text or email. Participants who pro vide 
informed consent and complete the run -in period will be sent a digital scale along with 
handouts in preparation for the virtual kick -off session .  
 
c) Virtual kick -off session: Once participants have received the scale, they will be eligible to sign 
up for a virtual kick -off session, during which participants will be randomized. Participants can 
sign up through the study website (via Redcap) or by [CONTACT_13172] a CRC. This session will be 
conducted by [CONTACT_213790]. Randomization will occur at the beginning of the 
session and participants will be placed in one of two breakout rooms for the intervention or 
control arm.  
 Control ar m: study staff member  will inform participants that they are in the control 
arm. 
Version 3 , 8/31/2021  
11 
  Intervention  arm: study staff will lead the Weight Loss 101 session . This session will 
review weight, calorie, and physical activity goals and evidence -based weight loss 
strategies, including food logging  and daily weights. All participants will be asked to lose 
10% o f their body weight, corresponding to 1 -2 lb/week over the 16 -week study. 
Participants will receive a brief introduction to the online BWL study  website. The 
session will also include information about weight loss and exercise while breastfeeding.  
 
d) Vir tual weigh -in: All participants will be asked to complete a virtual weigh -in on the Monday 
following the kick -off session. Their weight on the Monday morning will serve as their baseline 
weight for the program. Participants in both arms will be asked to ta ke a photo of the scale with 
the morning weight and send it to study staff by [CONTACT_173137] .  The number stays on the scale  
for 3 seconds after steppi[INVESTIGATOR_58448] . 
 
e) Health coach: A study staff member will be trained as a weight loss coach by [CONTACT_7676]. I f 
participants in the intervention arm are having trouble using the platform, reaching their 
weight loss goals, or have stopped logging into the platform, research staff will reach out to 
help triage and troubleshoot any barriers.  
 
g) At the end of the 16 -week intervention, all participants will be asked to complete their final 
virtual weigh in  and send a photo of the scale to study staff by [CONTACT_173137] . At the end of the 
study, participants will be asked to complete an exit survey. In addition, particip ants will be 
offered an opportunity to participate in an online group feedback session on Zoom.  
Participants will receive $ [ADDRESS_256607] 
data on demographics, clinical comorbidities, and health care utilization. The collection of th ese 
data will obviate the need to further burden participants by [CONTACT_213791].   
 
9. Analysis plan  
Primary outcomes include:  
 Enrollment rate, comparing email recruitment strategies (reserved a spot versus commit 
to health) and comparing mail strategies (mailer versus mailer plus gift)  
 Change in weight from baseline to 16 -week follow -up  
 Proportion of participants losing  5% of weight  
 
Secondary outcomes:  
 Study completion rate between 2 arms  
 In the intervention arm, engagement with online BWL platform, including number of 
total logins, number of weeks with  [ADDRESS_256608] 5 of the 7  days  
 
Exploratory outcomes  
Version 3 , 8/31/2021  
12 
  Differences in any of the primary or secondary outcomes according to race/household 
income  
 
To compare sample characteristics between arms we will use t -tests or Wilcoxon rank -sum 
tests  for continuous variables  and Pearson chi square tests or Fisher ’s exact tests for categorical 
variables.  Generalized linear mixed effects models  will be used to assess for differences in 
weight, given repeated  observations . We will use fixed effects to adjust for study arm, baseline 
weight, and calendar month, which may reflect seasonal variations that make weight loss 
harder or easier. We will conduct a number of sensitivity analyses to evaluate the robustness  of 
our findings. All hypothesis tests will be two -sided  using a two -sided alpha of 0.05 as our 
threshold for statistical significance . We will use Stata and/or SAS to analyze the data.   We will 
use multiple imputation for missing data.   
 
10. Investigators  
Jennifer Lewey, MD, MPH is the co -Principal  Investigator (PI) and is  an Assistant Professor of 
Medicine at the Perelman School of Medicine .  She is Director of the Women’s Cardiovascular 
Health Program. She has experience running lifestyle interventions a mong postpartum women.  
 
Kelly Allison , PhD is the co -Principal Investigator (PI) and is a Professor of Psychology in 
Psychiatry  at the Perelman School of Medicine. She is Director of the Center for Weight and 
Eating Disorders . She has extensive experience designing and running behavioral weight loss 
clinical trials . 
 
Tricia Leahey, PhD is a co -investigator. She is Associate Professor in the Department of Allied 
Health Sciences and Co -Director of the Weight Management Research Group  at the University 
of Connecticut (UConn). She developed the online BWL platform along with collaborators at the 
University of North Carolina.  
 
The Clinical Research Coordinator has experience with administering studies involving 
interventions  with pregna nt and postpartum populations and also has experience training 
Research Assistants to follow study protocols.  
 
11. Human research protection  
 11.[ADDRESS_256609] information (name, email address, and phone number) provided at the 
beginning of the study. The platform was designed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Tricia Leahey (co -I) and collaborators 
and is being provided to the Penn study team to use as part of the st udy at no cost. Research 
staff working with [CONTACT_213795] at UConn will be responsible for enrolling participants into the 
platform. Penn study staff will be provided a login and password to securely access any data 
entered into the platform by [CONTACT_213792]. Penn study staff will not be able to enroll 
participants directly into the platform because this requires an administrator account, which 
would permit access to all studies that are ongoing within the platform at UConn. The 
participant information nee ded for enrollment (name, email, and phone number) will be 
Version 3 , 8/31/[ADDRESS_256610] confidentiality  
Research material will be ob tained from participant surveys  and clinical data abstracted from 
the EMR .  All participants will provide informed consent for access to these materials. The data 
to be collected include demographic data (e.g., age, sex, self -identified race)  and outcome data.  
Research material that is obtained will be used for research purposes  only. The same procedure 
used for the analysis of automated data sources to ensure protection of patient information will 
be used for the survey data, in that patient identifiers will be used only for linkage purposes or 
to contact [CONTACT_1962]. The stud y ide ntification number, and not  other identifying information, will 
be used on all data collection instruments. All study staff will be reminded to appreciate the 
confidential nature of the data collected and contai ned in these databases.  
 
 11.[ADDRESS_256611] privacy.  
 
 11.4 Da ta disclosure  
The following entities, besides the members of the research team, may receive  protected 
health information  (PHI) for this research study in order to enroll patients in the online platform 
(intervention group only). Th ese data will be limited to: participant’s name, email address, and 
cell phone number, in addition to any data entered into the online platform (limited to daily 
weight, caloric intake, and exercise duration).  
 
- The research team of [CONTACT_213796] (co -I) at the University of Connecticut  
 
 11.5  Data safety and monitoring  
At the time of enrollment in the study , all patients are given anticipatory guidance on when to 
seek medical attention.  In addition, participants will be asked to report to the study team any 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_213781] , light -headedness,  or other changes during periods of exercise.  
They will be instructed to call the study team .  The study  coordinator will call the participant to 
Version 3 , 8/31/[ADDRESS_256612] information regarding the issue and then the PI [INVESTIGATOR_213782], further investigation is needed, or the participant should stop the study.   
 
 11.6 Risk/benefit  
  11.6.[ADDRESS_256613] tremendous benefits for society if adopted on a wide scale to help 
women  lose weight  after delivering a baby . It is expected that other people will gain knowledge 
from this study and that participation could h elp understand how to effectively deliver a virtual 
program for weight loss in a variety of populations . Participants may also receive no benefit 
from their participation in the study.  
 
  11.6.3 Risk/benefit assessment  
Anticipated risks of this study shoul d be minimal and the risk/benefit ratio is very favorable. To 
minimize the chance for serious and unexpected adverse events, study participants will be 
screened through exclusion criteria for any health conditions that may be exacerbated by 
[CONTACT_114363] i n a weight loss  study.  
 
12. References  
Version 3 , 8/31/2021  
15 
 1.  Ladabaum U, Mannalithara A, Myer PA, Singh G. Obesity, abdominal obesity, physical 
activity, and caloric intake in US adults: 1988 to 20 10. Am J Med. 2014 Aug;127(8):717 -
727.e12.  
2.  Chen C, Ye Y, Zhang Y, Pan X -F, Pan A. Weight change across adulthood in relation to all 
cause and cause specific mortality: prospective cohort study. BMJ. [ADDRESS_256614] 16;367:l5584.  
3.  Knowler WC, Barrett -Conn or E, Fowler SE, Hamman RF, Lachin JM, Walker EA, et al. 
Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin. N 
Engl J Med. 2002 Feb 7;346(6):393 –403.  
4.  Ali MK, Echouffo -Tcheugui J, Williamson DF. How effective were li festyle interventions in 
real-world settings that were modeled on the Diabetes Prevention Program? Health Aff Proj 
Hope. 2012 Jan;31(1):67 –75.  
5.  Phelan S, Hagobian T, Brannen A, Hatley KE, Schaffner A, Muñoz -Christian K, et al. Effect of 
an Internet -Based Program on Weight Loss for Low -Income Postpartum Women: A 
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA. 2017 Jun 20;317(23):2381 –91.  
6.  Leahey TM, Subak LL, Fava J, Schembri M, Thomas G, Xu X, et al. Benefits of adding Small 
Financial Incentives or Optional Group Meetings to a Web -based Statewide Obesity 
Initiative. Obes Silver Spring Md. 2015 Jan;23(1):70 –6.  
7.  Leahey TM, Thomas G, Fava JL, Subak LL, Schembri M, Krupel K, et al. Adding evidence -
based behavioral weight loss strategies to a statewide wellness camp aign: a randomized 
clinical trial. Am J Public Health. 2014 Jul;104(7):1300 –6.  
8.  Thomas JG, Leahey TM, Wing RR. An Automated Internet Behavioral Weight -Loss Program 
by [CONTACT_213793]: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Diabetes Care. 2015 Jan;38(1):9 –15.  
 
 