  Ambient Independence Measures for Guiding 
Care Transitions Study Protocol and Statistical 
Analysis Plan [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 11/26/2014   
IRB#9944 Protocol:  Ambient Independence Measures for Guiding Care Transitions (AIMs) 
 Page 1 of 10  AMBIENT INDEPENDENCE  MEASURES FOR  
GUIDING CARE TRANSIT IONS  
OBJECTIVES 
Aim 1:  Develop a pervasive computing system tuned to identify trends in AIMs data that are predictive of 
health decline. Implement a software tool for automatically generating these data on a regular basis for 
review by [CONTACT_286566].  
Aim 2:  Develop an automated system and reference platform for presenting AIMs data to care teams on 
an as -needed basis.  
Aim 3:  Assess the efficacy of using  the AIMs metrics and the computer -based  tool in senior community 
settings  to improve care transition decisions . 
BACKGROUND  
Substantial revolutions in care were introduced in the 1990’s. Changes in reimbursement schemes 
(explicitly paying for rehabilitation services and through home and communit y-based waivers), the 
adoption of new home -like or home- based care models (in -home care, adult foster homes and assisted 
living), and improved medical management of some conditions essentially averted the forecasted disaster 
of millions of additional nursi ng home residents entering care since 1994. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_286563] a population basis declined from 1982 through 2004, there is concern 
that this trend may be reversed with large increases in the number of people  with  chronic conditions or 
poor health. As a result it has not been clear how one might build on the success of community care by [CONTACT_286567].  
Key to this needed innovation is t he ability to proactively forestall trends and events that result in major 
care transitions, since once critical functional or cognitive thresholds are reached, future risk of 
institutional care increases substantially. The weight of evidence suggests that  intervention at earlier 
stages of a chronic disease trajectory may help to delay nursing home entry. However, in order to provide 
these early interventions one needs reliable data beyond basic static  predictors (e.g., age, gender, current 
health condition ). Unfortunately, only rarely have changes  in functional or health status been examined in 
predicting future transitions to more intense levels of care.  Further, conventional static functional 
predictors (including impaired cognition, high medication load, and compromised ability to perform 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_286564]) predict long -term nursing home residence, but these higher 
order functional activities and behaviors are d ifficult to directly assess in home; frequent self- report is not 
feasible for most domains .  
It has been suggested that continuous in- home monitoring may be better able to capture such trends. 
However, little longitudinal research has been done to identify what metrics are most useful and how 
they might best be used in real world care decisions. Prior promising studies using pervasive or 
continuous computing metrics have been small and developmental.  The proposed research fills this gap 
by [CONTACT_286568] 240 individuals to gather continuous activity data as people go about their daily lives. These 
IRB#9944 Protocol:  Ambient Independence Measures for Guiding Care Transitions (AIMs) 
 Page [ADDRESS_349415], grounded by [CONTACT_286569], we now contemporaneously and continuously will 
acquire fundamental physiologic al measures (weight and walking speed), activity and behavioral 
measures, thereby [CONTACT_286570]. Using existing  in-home activity data collected longitudinally in an agi ng population 
combined with simulated data from additional new sensed measures  (phone use, medication taking, body 
compos ition) we will generate  derived novel metrics - AIMs – to provide objective dynamic measures  of 
activity and behaviors that are essent ial to maintaining independence.  These metrics will be used to 
develop prediction  algorithms  based on documented transition outcomes from the original data set to be 
used by [CONTACT_286571] (Aim 1) .  Working care transition professionals  will be iteratively qu eried for the 
refinement of these objective measures (Aim 2). These care providers’ expertise and understanding of key changes that impact independence is invaluable to identification of ambient independence measures that 
matter, and lead to meaningful car e implementation pathways . The efficacy of the final set of measures 
chosen and built into a user friendly interface for the care team to use (Aim 2) will then be tested (Aim 3) by [CONTACT_286572]: 1 ) installed technology, 
from which AIMs data will be extracted and provided to the  care transition team  to aid in transition 
decisions; 2) installed technology, from which AIMs data will be extracted but will not be available to the 
transition team; and 3)  no technology.  
The approach we propose is intentionally constrained to a well -defined research population: senior 
communities with care transition teams. This provides a level of control and design efficiency that 
facilitates our ability to demonstrate f easibility and early efficacy in this specific care setting. However, the 
AIMs and assessment approach developed through this research are immediately transferable and 
modifiable to many other populations as well, making our proposal novel in a broad sense . Although we 
will collect informal caregiver data in this proposal (via on -line questionnaire, email, phone use), we chose 
to initially focus on the professional care community at this time. Future research using our open tools 
will be able to address inf ormal caregiver input as well as other stakeholders such as physicians or seniors 
themselves, with consideration of how these various stakeholders would best use the data in concert with 
each other.  
 
 
IRB#9944 Protocol:  Ambient Independence Measures for Guiding Care Transitions (AIMs) 
 Page 3 of 10  INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
Aim 1  Inclusion :  
1. Existing,  independently- living participants from the ORCATECH Life Lab (IRB#2765)  
2. Participants must live alone  
3. Participants must live in a partner community ( Willamette View, Rose Villa, Terwilliger Plaza, Mirabella 
and Mary’s Woods , Holladay Park Pl aza) 
Aim 1/Experiment 3  Inclusion :  
1. Staff at partner communities who participate in the community’s transition team meetings.  
Aims 2&3 Transition Team Inclusion:  
1. Staff at partner communities who participate in the community’s transition team meetings . 
Aim 3  Inclusion :  
1. Age 75 or older  
2. Living alone in a larger than one -room apartment  
3. Not demented (CDR scale score < 0.5);  Mini -Mental State Examination (MMSE) score > = 24)  
4. Of average health for age. Medical illnesses that would limit physica l participation (e.g., wheelchair use) 
or likely lead to untimely death over 36 months (such as certain cancers) are exclusions.  
5. Must  have a computer and a broadband internet connection 
NUMBER OF SUBJECTS  
Aim 1: Up to 66 participants recruited from exi sting ORCATECH Life Lab cohort.  
Aim 1/Experiment 3: Up to 100 transition team members from partner communities.  
Aims 2&3 Transition Teams: Up to 100 transition team members from partner communities.  
Aim 3: 100 participants (including any continuing partici pants from Aim 1) will be enrolled into the 
technology arms. 50 additional participants for the non- technology arm of Aim 3 will be tracked through 
the ORCATECH repository (IRB#6845) and consented to complete occasional surveys.  
RECRUITMENT METHODS  
Aim 1: Current p articipants in Life Lab have consented to be contact[CONTACT_286573]. All eligible Life Lab participants will be contact[CONTACT_286574] 1 of the AIMs study.  
Aim 1 /Experiment 3: We will contact [CONTACT_286575] (s) at partner communit ies and have 
them bring together their transition team for a focus group session.  
Aims 2&3 Transition Teams: We will contact [CONTACT_286575](s) at partner communities and 
have them provide us a list of transition team members.  
IRB#9944 Protocol:  Ambient Independence Measures for Guiding Care Transitions (AIMs) 
 Page 4 of 10   
Aim 3: Presentations about the project will be given at partner sites. Both potential and existing (Aim 1) 
participants will be invited to the presentations. Interested parties will be consented into Life Lab first and 
then, if they meet all eligibility criteria, consented into AIMs.  
PROCEDURES INVOLVED  
Aim 1: Develop a pervasive computing system tuned to identify trends in AIMs data that are predictive 
of health decline. Implement a software tool  for automatically generating these data on a regular basis 
for review by [CONTACT_286566].  
In this a im, we will identify AIMs data most likely to inform care transition decisions. Using data collected 
from the Layton Center/ORCATECH Repository IRB#68 45, and working with the care transition 
professionals from partner communities, we will develop algorithms to derive key AIMs data from our 
sensor data in a form easily interpreted by [CONTACT_286576].  
The AIMs to be developed were chosen based on severa l principles: 1) the measure or a close surrogate 
has been shown in prior studies to predict loss of independence or institutionalization; 2) our discussions 
with the care provider s and transition teams in our partner  communities indicated that the measures 
would be of value to them; and 3) the continuous unobtrusiv e assessment of that measure can be 
inherently more precise than usual methods (e.g., self -report of activity vs. objective measure of activity). 
Based on these principles we will focus on 5 domains that tap behaviors and health changes that are 
known to p lace seniors at risk for a loss of independence: mobility, patterns of sleep, medication 
adherence, weight change, and socialization.  
COLLECTION OF NEW DA TA FOR  AIM [ADDRESS_349416] for additional study opportunities. For each of the enrolled subjects, we will install MedTrackers  (medication a dherence -tracking pi[INVESTIGATOR_16582]) , weight scales, and phone monitors (if not 
already installed in the home under the Life Lab protocol) , which subjects will be asked to use daily.  
These additional data, will be used to ensure functionality of the entire syste m (augmented with the new 
measures) in conjunction with the historical data from ISAAC  and Life Lab , will be used in our experiments 
below.  
EXPERIMENT 1: MODELS  FOR DERIVING NEW AI MS METRICS  
In Experiment 1 we will develop models to derive metrics for the behaviors we will be tracking. We anticipate using mixture models, Support V ector Machines  (SVM), and other related approaches that have 
been show to assist with behavior classification. Training data will come from data collected from participants consent ed and installed with the AIMs platform. For example, we will use number and 
duration of outgoing phone calls and of outings from the home, the duration of intervals between outings and phone calls as the feature space for a non -linear SVM.  
EXPERIMENT 2: I DENTIFYING TRENDS IN  THE DATA  
IRB#9944 Protocol:  Ambient Independence Measures for Guiding Care Transitions (AIMs) 
 Page [ADDRESS_349417] to present to 
care transition teams . Building on our previous wor k and drawing on an extensive body of work in process 
control , we will model each individual’s behavior as a number of  ergodic random processes whose mean 
and variance may change over time. The basic approach is to (1) develop a baseline model of typi[INVESTIGATOR_286565], over multiple -week periods; and (2) monitor these measures on a regular 
basis (e.g., week ly) for trends away from the norm – these trends are the AIMs .  
The primary outcome of interest in Specific Aim 1 is the number of transitions to higher levels of care; secondary outcomes of interest are cognitive changes based on yearly memory testing , and the FAQ IADL 
score. Logistic regression will be used to determine which measures are most predictive of changes in the 
outcomes of interest. We will use multivariate multiple regression to look at how our continuous 
assessment indicators predict transiti ons, cognitive change , and IADL scores.  
EXPERIMENT 3: IDENTI FYING USEFUL METRICS  FOR CARE TRANSITION  PROFESSIONALS  
The first step in creating a tool to examine the AIMs data is to understand the needs of the caregiver s who 
make transition decisions. We wi ll work with community transition teams to preview ways of displaying 
our available metrics to ensure we have usable displays for feeding back the AIMs metrics to transition 
teams in Aim 3.  
EVALUATION OF THE AC CEPTABILITY OF SHARI NG DATA WITH THE TRA NSITIO N TEAM  
Focus group sessions will be conducted with staff care transition teams at retirement communities to 
better understand the current process of making decisions about when residents need escalated care. The interview schedule will include open -ended questions followed by [CONTACT_203935], probing questions. Focus 
groups will last approximately 1.5 hours each, and participants will not be paid for participation. Focus 
group size will vary according to the community contact[CONTACT_286577]. Each focus group 
will begin with a review of the study aims and obtaining consent from the participants. Each group will then be presented with examples of actual data to be shared with the transition teams, presented anonymously.  Focus group participants will  be asked (a) if the data shows information that is meaningful 
to them; (b) if they believe participants would be willing to have that type of data shared with the transition teams; (c) who else, if anybody, it might be helpful to share the data with; and (d) if there are other types of data they would like to see.  
APPROACH FOR SPECIFI C AIM 2  
Aim 2: Develop an automated system and reference platform for presenting AIMs data to care teams on 
an as -needed basis.  
In Specific Aim 2, we create a software tool t hat tracks AIMs data, identifies outliers and trends requiring 
attention, and allows the care professionals to access expanded views of d ata at a variety of timescales.  
EXPERIMENT 4: DEVELO PI[INVESTIGATOR_1645] A TOOL FOR CONT INUOUS REPORTING OF AIMS DATA  
The web -based reporting tool that we will develop to support care transition decisions will be designed to 
present the data in the formats identified as most useful in Experiment 2. Since there will be a large 
number of subjects for which AIMs data will be available, an im portant part of the tool will be to flag 
IRB#9944 Protocol:  Ambient Independence Measures for Guiding Care Transitions (AIMs) 
 Page 6 of 10  those subjects whose data indicate a relevant trend, change point, or outlier (as defined by [CONTACT_286578] 1).  
We will start development with the AIMs data representations deemed most useful during Experim ent 2. 
Once we have a working prototype which uses some real data, we will ask consented members of the 
partner community transition teams to test the site and provide feedback.  
EXPERIMENT 5: CREATI ON OF THE REFERENCE PLATFORM  
The current ORCATECH platform  consists of equipment and software deployed to individual homes in the 
community. In experiment 4, we will augment this system to include the automated generation of AIMs 
data for assisting transition decisions. Creating a sharable tool will require addit ional modularization, 
since ORCATECH’s has grown organically over the past five years. Extensive documentation of how to 
install, configure, and use the system will be created for new users . 
PLANS FOR DISSEMINAT ION 
Documentation for our system will be made publicly available through the ORCATECH website. We will 
put into place an electronic system for tracking and controlling access to the data and artifacts, where they will be shared according to the Layton Aging & Alzheimer’s Disease Center and ORCATECH R esearch 
Repository Protocol. This protocol defines procedures for protecting patient and subject confidentiality in 
compliance with OHSU and HIPAA guidelines, for accessing limited data sets, and for protecting the 
integrity of original work contributed to  the database.  
The in -home sensor data is fully annotated with extensive clinical assessments, as well as weekly reports 
of health changes. We will share derived anonymized AIMs data  with the appropriate research 
community .  
APPROACH FOR SPECIFI C AIM 3  
Aim 3: Validate the AIMs metrics and the computer -based tool in senior community settings.  
In this aim we will gather data to determine if the proactive use of AIMs data in a senior community 
setting leads to changes in levels of care needed . Within each of our partner communities, there is a team 
of health services professionals who track the health and ability to live independently of every resident, at 
all levels of care. Part of their job is to determine if a resident needs additional in -home care (e.g., home 
care service or medication assistance), or a transfer to a higher level of care (e.g., from independent to assisted living  or a nursing home setting ). Thus, our outcomes of interest in this aim are:  
1) The number of transfers to higher (or lower) levels  of care. Levels of care to be considered will 
include living independently, assisted living, and skilled nursing;  
2) Percentage of days for which medication assistance was provided (where staff set up 
medications for the resident); and  
3) Number of days in which the senior received in -home care for ADL or IADL assistance, by [CONTACT_5640] a 
professional or informal caregiver  
IRB#9944 Protocol:  Ambient Independence Measures for Guiding Care Transitions (AIMs) 
 Page 7 of 10  4) Quality of life as reported by [CONTACT_2299], as measured by [CONTACT_286579]'s Quality of Life 
(OPQOL) Questionnaire.  
We hypothesize that the  AIMs data will result in fewer transfers to higher levels of care, an increase in 
average level of home assistance (because problems are identified early), more days in which medication assistance is provided, and improved quality of life for the participant. We chose to focus our study on individuals living alone, since this group is at high risk for loss of independence . 
EXPERIMENT 6: LONGIT UDINAL EVALUATION OF THE USE OF AIMS IN MAKING TRANSITION 
DECISIONS  
STUDY POPULATION  
We will begin enrollment for t he validation study in the second year of the award. One hundred and fifty 
subjects living at a partner community (Willamette View, Rose Villa,  Terwilliger Plaza,  Mirabella  and 
Mary’s Woods , Holladay Park Plaza) will be eligible for inclusion in Specific Aim 3. The study will use a 
pseudo -randomized design. The 150 subjects will be enrolled into one of three groups of 50:  
1) installed technology, from which AIMs data will be extracted and provided to the transition team at the facility to aid in transition de cisions;  
2) installed technology, from which AIMs data will be extracted but will not be available to the transition team; and  
3) no technology.  
Groups 1 and 2 will be comprised of existing AIMs participants as well as new recruits from the partner 
communities. Participants will be randomized into the 2 technology arms.  
Group 3 will come from residents at the partner communities who are already being tracked through the ORCATECH repository and will not be approached about the study, except to ask them to fill out the quarterly Older People's Quality of Life (OPQOL) Questionnaire.  
Groups (2) and (3) will receive the “standard of care” at their facility –  that is, transition decisions will be 
made without reference to AIMs data.  
PROCEDURES  
One hundred and fifty subjects will be followed over a thirty month period. The protocol will consist of 4 parts:  
1) Subject enrollment. (see above)  
2) Provide  AIMs data (using the web tool from experiment 4 ) for the transition  teams . Data will 
include a summary of the past week and will highlight trends over time including outliers.   
3) Ongoing assessment of subjects’ health status and need for assistance by [CONTACT_286580]. The procedures for this are: (1) Regular  meetings by [CONTACT_286581] (as currently are done) 
to review re sident health status. For those subjects in group 1, this will include review of the 
AIMs data as well; (2) Decisions about changes in support or living status for the resident, as are 
IRB#9944 Protocol:  Ambient Independence Measures for Guiding Care Transitions (AIMs) 
 Page 8 of 10  normally made in these meetings; and (3) Completion of a questionnaire by [CONTACT_286582], if any, of the AIMs data influenced their decisions. Changes in support may include 
increased or decreased assistance with managing medications, additional or reduced home care, 
and/or a transfer to a different level of assisted living. The date and outcome of each intervention made will be recorded for later analysis. Care transition team members will consent 
to participate in this way.  
4) Annual in- person clinical assessments as per the clinical protocol, as well as quarterly Qua lity of 
Life assessments (using the Older People's Quality of Life (OPQOL) Questionnaire).  
DATA AND SPECIMEN BA NKING  
All data created in this study will be stored in the Layton Center/ORC ATECH repository (IRB #6845).  
DATA MANAGEMENT  
Sensor data are time -stamped and stored locally on the sensor computer in a secure, password- protected 
MySQL (relational) database. Data are encrypted and uploaded from the homes to the OHSU research server on a regular basis, but may als o be pulled on demand. Research staff access the data from the  
central data server at OHSU as well as through the router directly to the sensor and user computers using 
secure commercial remote -connection software. The data, study cohorts, and remote installations are 
managed using the ORCATECH Management Console (OM C), which is a password -protected multi -tiered 
remote monitoring application built from Open Source tools, including Adobe Flex, PHP, and MySQL. This 
tool allows staff to view subject and home information, track recruitment and subject contacts, track inve ntory, generate alerts for upcoming scheduled visits, view the “health” of the system ( e.g., outages), 
and look at summaries of the data over time.   
WITHDRAWAL OF SUBJEC TS 
If participants transition into a living situation that we cannot adequately sensor , they will be withdrawn 
from the study.  
Any participants withdrawing from the study may be asked to complete an exit survey.  
RISKS TO SUBJECTS  
As we share AIMs data with the transition teams, our goal is to assess if and how transition teams might 
natura listically use AIMs data. We will limit who we directly share data with, but will not require the 
transition team to keep the AIMs data confidential  among themselves  (except as per each facility’s own 
policy protecting the private information about their r esidents). There is a chance  that the transition team 
might share AIMs data with others in the course of their natural transition decision process, and as a 
result there is a risk t hat s tudy participants may have their AIMs metrics shared with people they don’t 
anticipate seeing the data. This risk will be explained in the consent form. We do not know what effect (if 
any) sharing AIMs data with the transiti on team at a facility may have related to that team’s care 
transition decisions, and as a result it is  possible some unknown risks may exist.  
IRB#9944 Protocol:  Ambient Independence Measures for Guiding Care Transitions (AIMs) 
 Page [ADDRESS_349418] (if any) sharing AIMs data with the transition team at a 
facility will have. We believe it’s possible that p articipants in group [ADDRESS_349419] access to the key linking the code number to identifiable information.  
Findings from the study will be completely anonymized or reported as aggregate. Data may  only be 
shared with approved others according to the Layton Center/ORCATECH Repository protocol (OHSU IRB 
#6845.)  
During the course of the research, results will  not be shared with the study participants by [CONTACT_5984]. 
It is possible that transition teams may share the information they receive from the secure web portal in compliance with the policy at their facility –  this means some information may be shared with the study 
participant or the participant’s family member, depending on the policies of the facility which were agreed to by [CONTACT_286583].  