NEW YORK STATE PSYCHIATRIC INSTITUTE  
INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD  
MEMORANDUM  
 
Signed copy on file at IRB.  
EN/AW/sc2432  
  
May 02, 2022  
TO:  Michael Compton, MD  
FROM : [CONTACT_121722], Co -Chair, IRB  
[CONTACT_121723], Co -Chair, IRB  
SUBJECT : EXPEDITED APPROVAL OF PROTOCOL AMENDMENT  
 
 
 
The amendment to your protocol #7771 entitled: REDUCING DURATION OF UNTREATED 
PSYCHOSIS THROUGH EARLY DETECTION IN A LARGE JAIL SYSTEM  (In the HIPAA form, to 
remove "Rikers Island Jails" and add "Representatives of regulatory and government 
agencies, insti tutional review boards, representatives of the Researchers and their 
institutions to the level needed to carry out their responsibilities related to the conduct of 
the research", as per the 4/29/2022 memorandum) has been approved by [CONTACT_858848] - Columbia University Department of Psychiatry Institutional Review Board.  
 
Please note that this does not change the IRB's cycle of review. A progress report and an 
application for continuing review will be required 2 months before the study's approval  is 
due to expi[INVESTIGATOR_1312]: (4/21/2023).  
 
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 1 of 28
Protocol Title:
Reducing Duration  of Untreated Psychosis 
through Early Detection in a Large Jail System
Protocol Number:
[ADDRESS_1196858] Approval:
05/13/2019
Expi[INVESTIGATOR_5952]:
04/21/2023Version Date:
05/02/[ADDRESS_1196859] Principal Investigator:
[INVESTIGATOR_528387],  MD,  MPH
Email: [EMAIL_16271]
Telephone: 404-375-9231Co-Investigator(s):
Lisa Dixon, MD,  MPH
Genevra Jones
Leah Pope, PHD
Research Chief:
Lisa Dixon, MD,  MPH
Cover Sheet
Choose ONE  option from  the following that is applicable to  your study
If you are creating  a new protocol, select "I am submitting a new protocol." As 5 Year Renewals are no 
longer required,  this option  remains  for historical  purposes.
I am proposing an  amendment only to an  existing protocol
Department & Unaffiliated Personnel
Department
What Department does the PI [INVESTIGATOR_40348]?PsychiatryWithin the department, what Center  or group are  you affiliated with,  if any? 
Division of Behavioral  Health Services  and Policy Research
Unaffiliated Personnel
List investigators, if any,  who will be participating in this protocol but  are not affiliated with  New  York 
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 2 of 28
State Psychiatric  Institute or Columbia University. Provide: Full  Name, Degrees and Affiliation.
Jason Tan de Bibiana, M.Sc.,Vera Institute of Justice
Amy Watson, Ph.D., University of  Illinois  at Chicago
Nev Jones, Ph.D., University of  South [LOCATION_012]
Bipin Subedi, M.D.,  [LOCATION_001] City Health and  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_858826], M.D., Center  for Alternative Sentencing and Employment Services (CASES)
Jessica Pollard, Ph.D.,  Yale University
Beth Broussard, M.P.H., C.H.E.S., Emory University
Amendment
Describe the change(s) being made  
In the HIPAA form,  we are requesting to change the  entities  to which we might disclose participants' health 
information. Specifically, we have  removed  "Rikers Island Jails" and  added  "Representatives of regulatory 
and government agencies, institutional review boards, representatives  of the Researchers and their  
institutions to the level needed to carry out their responsibilities related to  the conduct of the research." See 
the uploaded HIPAA form for this update.
Provide the rationale for the change(s)  
We will only use this HIPAA form  when interviewing released detainees. Neither the participant nor us will 
have any contact [CONTACT_858849].
Comment on the  extent to  which the proposed  change(s)  alter  or affect risks/benefits  to subjects 
This change will better  protect participants'  health  information and protect them from any  consequences 
resulting from disclosing health information to researchers or staff at Rikers Island  Jails.
Comment on if the  proposed change(s)  require a  modification to the Consent Form (CF)
The change  does not require any modifications to the Consent Form.
Procedures
To create the protocol summary form,  first indicate if this research will include  any of the following  
procedures
   Audio or Videotapi[INVESTIGATOR_100539]-based Data Collection  or Transmission
   Psychiatric Assessment
Population
Indicate which  of the following populations  will be included  in this  research
   Prisoners
   Medically and Psychiatrically  Healthy  Subjects
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 3 of 28
   Adults
   Adults  over 50
   Employees or Students
   Individuals with Psychosis
Research Support/Funding
Will an existing internal account be used to support the project?NoIs the project  externally funded  or is external funding planned?
YesSelect the number of external  sources of funding that  will be applicable to  this study
2
Funding Source #1
Is the PI  [INVESTIGATOR_40349]/contract the same  as the PI [INVESTIGATOR_40350]? 
YesSelect one of the followingThe grant/contract is currently fundedSource of FundingFederalInstitute/AgencyNational Institute  of Mental Health
Grant NameReducing Duration  of Untreated  Psychosis  through Early Detection in a Large Jail System
Grant NumberR34 MH117766Select one of the followingSingle SiteBusiness OfficeCUDoes the grant/contract involve a  subcontract? 
YesSubcontracted?ToName [CONTACT_14189](s)
University of Illinois at  Chicago
Research Foundation for  Mental Hygiene
University of South [LOCATION_012] 
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 4 of 28
Funding Source  #2
Is the PI  [INVESTIGATOR_40349]/contract the same  as the PI [INVESTIGATOR_40350]? 
YesSelect one of the followingThe grant/contract is currently fundedSource of FundingFoundationSponsorVAN AMERINGEN  FOUNDATION
Select one of the followingSingle SiteBusiness OfficeRFMHDoes the grant/contract involve a  subcontract? 
YesSubcontracted?ToName [CONTACT_14189](s)Grant is awarded  to RFMH and subcontracted to CU.
Study Location
Indicate if the  research  is/will be conducted at any  of the  following
   NYSPI
[INVESTIGATOR_60492]/locations
Yes
   Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], clinics and other healthcare facilities
   Prison system
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600],clinics and other  healthcare  facilities  
Select from the listor type in  location(s).. 
Bellevue Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_858827] (both are operated by [CONTACT_858850])  
Prison System(Includes Parole)
Type in  location(s) 
Rikers Island  Jails (Anna M. Kross Center,  Rose M. Singer Center,  and Robert N. Davoren  Complex)
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 5 of 28
Lay Summary of Proposed  Research 
Lay Summary of Proposed ResearchPersons with serious mental illnesses  are overrepresented in jails.  Criminal justice (CJ) involvement,  
including jail detention, is  common among those with  first-epi[INVESTIGATOR_557113] (FEP) and frequently precedes 
psychiatric treatment engagement. Yet, no documented interventions currently exist specifically  to identify/ 
engage such individuals while in jail and connect them to  Coordinated Specialty Care (CSC)  in the 
community upon release. Expansion of CSC programs  across  the U.S. provides  an opportunity for  
partnership with  the CJ  system —one that has the potential to  reduce  the duration  of untreated  psychosis 
(DUP) and thus improve  outcomes. To detect FEP  and reduce DUP among  detainees in a large, urban  jail, 
we propose to implement: (1) a “Targeted Educational Campaign” (TEC), and  (2) a Specialized Early 
Engagement Support Service (SEE SS) in 3 jails on Rikers Island in  [LOCATION_001] City  (NYC): Anna M.  
Kross Center (AMKC), Rose M.  Singer  Center  (RMSC) and Robert N.  Davoren  Complex  (RNDC). We 
expect the multi-media TEC to generate  referrals to the Correctional  Health Services (CHS), and to  reduce  
our DUP-1 (psychosis onset to antipsychotic  initiation). Then, the jail-based SEE SS (a Social Worker  and 
Peer Specialist) will link those identified to community-based CSC (primarily OnTrackNY sites in NYC), thus reducing DUP-2 (psychosis  onset  to CSC enrollment). We  will examine  a set of hypothesized 
targets/mediators (the “how’s”). These  are key ingredients that  underpin  the intervention’s  ability to  reduce 
DUP. The  multi-media  TEC will generate  referrals to the CHS. How will it do that? By [CONTACT_858851], expectations, and self-efficacy (constructs from Social Cognitive Theory) of the Correction Officers trained. The SEESS will then  link detainees with  FEP, using tenets of person-centered  
treatment and shared decision-making, and the Critical Time Intervention model, to  community-based CSC. 
How will this occur?  Through engagement of detainees while in jail, and telephonically (when possible)  
after release, which we will  measure  with measures  of engagement.  We will assess feasibility and 
acceptability to lay the groundwork for  a multi-site, definitive effectiveness  trial.
Background, Significance  and Rationale
Background, Significance and Rationale
Treatment delay, or longer DUP, is linked to poorer  outcomes (e.g., greater symptom  severity, less 
remission, poorer quality of life)  in FEP patients [1-4]. Early intervention for psychosis, as exemplified by 
[CONTACT_528399], leads  to improved outcomes,  especially when DUP is shorter. The NIMH RAISE-ETP study found 
that young people  who initiate treatment within 1.5 years of  symptom  onset remain in  treatment longer and 
show improved  quality  of life and work/school functioning [5]. An international  movement is underway to 
determine ways to reduce DUP; however,  it has largely neglected those  with FEP who have become 
entangled in the CJ  system.
   Even with  mounting  evidence about the importance of early intervention, early detection  programs  have  
been concentrated mainly  in mental health  (e.g., inpatient psychiatric units), primary  care (e.g., clinics), and 
educational settings (e.g., colleges) to date,  and thus continue to  miss a  significant number of young people 
who do not traverse traditional pathways  to care.  Pathways  for FEP patients are often  delayed or 
bottlenecked by [CONTACT_858852]. 
Additionally, social factors like unemployment,  residing in public housing, ethnic minority status, being 
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 6 of 28
underinsured, and—central to our intervention—a history of being locked up, can postpone  accessing care 
and lengthen DUP  [6-8]. There is very little  literature worldwide  on this,  but there is evidence that CJ 
involvement is common  in many  FEP  samples  prior to treatment engagement [9-13]. In the PI’s study of 
191 urban, disadvantaged, predominantly African  American  FEP  patients—the only study  that has 
examined the link between DUP and jail detention history—59%  had a history of detention (primarily in  
jails for  misdemeanors) prior to their  first treatment and 37% had been detained at some point during  their 
DUP [14]. Prior detention predicted a much longer  DUP [14]. Further, national  estimates show that 24% of 
people in jail have had  psychotic symptoms in  the past 12 months  [15]. Large jails have become “public  
health outposts” in screening and, if appropriate, treating, large  numbers of individuals who might not 
otherwise seek or be  exposed to care in the community. Jails likely have an enriched  population  for the 
detection of  FEP, and  thus need  to collaborate  with community-based CSC.
   The development and  implementation of a TEC and SEET in 3 jails seeks to reduce DUP for detained 
young people with FEP through “supply side”  approaches. The TEC will educate  Correction Officers about 
early signs and  referring to correctional health services  (CHS)  staff. The SEET will forge referral networks 
that fast-track  the initiation of CSC  upon release from jail. The SEET will be comprised  of two people: one 
professional social worker and  one peer worker. [CONTACT_528414],  Co-Investigator, will serve as an expert 
in peer  support  theories. [CONTACT_251289] will advise  on all aspects of the training and supervision  of the peer  
specialist. Four interrelated bodies of knowledge guide this work. Three guide our TEC +  SEET 
intervention: (1) the Scandinavian Early  Treatment and Intervention  in Psychosis (TIPS)  model, (2) person-
centered treatment and shared decision-making, and  (3) Critical Time Intervention;  and one guides our 
selection of  targets/mediators (and  thus  intervention  development): (4) Social  Cognitive Theory.  
   Our intervention is critically informed by [CONTACT_858853], the largest experimental study of  
early detection to date. TIPS successfully reduced  median  DUP  in FEP  patients from  15 weeks  to 4.5 using  
two core  strategies:  intensive, multi-media  public information campaigns, and easy-access, low-threshold 
mobile early  detection teams [16]. A wide body of  literature attests  to the pi[INVESTIGATOR_858828] [17]. TIPS  developed a mass media campaign to both enhance the public’s knowledge of 
psychiatric disorders in general and  early  signs of psychosis  in particular, and  to reduce stigma associated 
with schizophrenia and  psychiatry. Information  was tailored to 3 target  groups: the general  public, general 
practitioners and healthcare  workers,  and teachers. Information was distributed systematically and 
repeatedly over several  years. Notably, when a  lack of funding interrupted the campaign for a  period  of 
time, the rate of referrals dropped (particularly  from general practitioners) and  DUP  increased  again, further 
showing the  importance  of information campaigns  in reducing DUP [18]. The success  of the TIPS campaign  
has led to  efforts to replicate the  approach  in other places. In the US, the Specialized Treatment  Early  in 
Psychosis (STEP) clinic implemented the STEP-ED campaign that  includes:  public  education, outreach to  
and academic detailing of professionals, and rapid  access  to the STEP clinic [19]. Our  proposed  intervention 
will take place in an  urban jail setting rather than  in the  community; as  such, it will focus on the same two 
interlocking strategies (TEC and  SEET) used by [CONTACT_858854], but  
tailored within the confines of the  jail. The NYC jail system has over 55,000 admissions and roughly  the 
same discharges each  year, with high correctional staff turnover; a  continuous and broad-reaching “Targeted 
Education Campaign” is essential to ensure the messaging works.
   Studies show that person-centered communication (e.g., asking  open-ended questions,  involving  patients 
in treatment decisions)  has positive effects on satisfaction, treatment  adherence,  and health status [20-22].  
Both the content of communication(e.g., creating  space for the person’s interpretations of illness) and  the 
context of communication  (e.g.,  clinicians’  interpersonal behaviors, expectations about communication 
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 7 of 28
style, use of simplified  language) influence treatment  initiation and participation [23]. Clinician 
communication behaviors, such as building rapport,  using open-ended  questions,  and answering  questions, 
are a key  mechanism for  engagement.  Communication functions that are key to promoting improved  health 
outcomes include: establishing and maintaining the provider-patient relationship, exchanging information, validating and  responding to emotions, managing  uncertainty, sharing in  making  treatment decisions, and 
enabling patient self-management. Some of the pathways through which  effective communication  may lead 
to better health outcomes  include improved patient  knowledge and  shared understanding, improved  access 
to care, improved  therapeutic alliances,  and improved patient  agency [24].  Even though the health  care 
provided in  the jail  system is not necessarily  person-centered or oriented around shared decision-making, 
the work of the SEET—trained  by [CONTACT_858855], Co-Investigators, and Consultants—will be framed by [CONTACT_858856]-based CSC.
   Our SEET will use  a Critical Time Intervention (CTI) model to mobilize  support for people  with FEP 
during a  period of transition from jail  to the community.  CTI was developed in  the US in the 1990s  based  on 
the principles  of case management and Assertive  Community Treatment. CTI has been used with persons  
with mental illnesses, as well as those who are incarcerated. It has been evaluated extensively, with good evidence for its efficacy  [25-26]. In a study of CTI among men with  a serious mental illness who  were 
leaving prison, CTI was  effective at increasing engagement with  services at 6 weeks; differences between 
the intervention and control group  persisted through 6  months [27]. CTI will organize  the activities of our 
SEET in that it is time-limited,  focused, and designed to  enhance support and engagement in  services during 
critical periods of transition. Assertive  outreach  and ongoing engagement in  jail, combined with  brokering 
relationships with CSC leading up to and upon release (and telephonic support after release until CSC  
engagement) will ensure that individuals are adequately supported while detained and following their  return 
to the community.
   The jail-based TEC (and our targets/mediators)  are also heavily influenced by [CONTACT_858857]  (knowledge and skills), self-efficacy, and expectations. Social  
Cognitive Theory, developed by [CONTACT_347131] [28-29], posits that behavior  is underpi[INVESTIGATOR_528389] 
(cognitive, affective,  and biological), behavioral,  and environmental  factors that interact  and influence each 
other bidirectionally.  As applied to the field  of health promotion, Social  Cognitive Theory  specifies  a core 
set of determinants, the mechanisms  through which they work,  and the optimal ways  of translating them into 
health practices. Five determinants are  central:  (1) behavioral capabilities —or knowledge  and skills  about 
health risks  and benefits—that create the preconditions for change;  (2) perceived self-efficacy about  one’s 
ability to successfully  perform tasks; (3)  expectations about the outcomes of certain actions or health habits; 
(4) personal goals for  change; and (5)  perceived  facilitators and  barriers to change [30]. As described in  
more detail  below, the  TEC  is an  intervention  that will target Correction  Officers' knowledge about the early 
symptoms of  psychosis,  and how to make a  referral to  the CHS, their self-efficacy to  detect symptoms  of 
psychosis and make referrals, and  their expectations about their ability to be successful  in making that  
referral (and  for referrals to result in beneficial  outcomes). All aspects of the TEC will be designed to 
improve behavioral capabilities, expectations, and  self-efficacy. That is,  regardless of the media  (e.g.,  
poster, flyer, brief  roll-call training for  Correction Officers), all TEC materials will target  very  specific  
knowledge and skills,  increase expectations about  the benefits of the SEET and CSC/OnTrackNY, and  
increase self-efficacy  about one’s ability to make a referral. Messaging  will be  specific,  straight-forward, as 
simple as  possible, and  repetitive, so that we can  effectively improve  knowledge/skills, expectations, and 
self-efficacy in a  focused way. These  changes  will ultimately influence rates of identifying detainees with  
undetected FEP and  referral to CHS. Social Cognitive Theory,  as well as everyday experience, suggests that 
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_1196860] the necessary knowledge/skills, the beliefs that 
what is expected to occur  actually will occur, and the self-confidence to carry  out that  specific  behavior. In 
targeting these mediators, our TEC will therefore  have the  greatest chances of generating referrals  to the 
CHS (especially referrals of quietly psychotic young people who would have otherwise  gone  undetected and 
thus not  referred to CHS).
   Abundant evidence documents racial and  ethnic  disparities in  access to  mental health services  [31-33]. 
While the underlying root causes  of these disparities  are complex—explained by [CONTACT_4676]-level,  provider-
level, and system-level  factors—studies show that they persist even when controlling for differences in 
socioeconomics [32]. Racial and ethnic  disparities  also occur  in pathways to care  in FEP patients.  Stigma 
remains a significant barrier  to treatment and African Americans are  more likely to experience negative 
routes to psychiatric care such as through the CJ system or involuntary hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602] [34-38]. Given that the population in the  NYC jail system is 87% Black and Hispanic and  that no specialized FEP  treatment 
services currently exist within  the jail system, our intervention has the potential to  significantly improve 
treatment access for a population of young minorities with FEP who traditionally experience significant barriers to care.
Specific Aims and Hypotheses
Specific Aims and  Hypotheses
Aim A.  Implement  a Targeted Educational Campaign (TEC) within 3 jails at NYC's Rikers  Island. The TEC 
is designed  to lead to referrals of  detainees (previously not  detected as having potential mental health 
concerns) to Correctional  Health Services (CHS) by [CONTACT_528406]. We  expect that referral  will occur 
via changes in scores on behavioral capability  (knowledge/skills), expectations, and self-efficacy (among 
Correction Officers). Although this R34 feasibility  study  is meant  to determine likely effect sizes  rather than 
demonstrate statistical significance  (which would be the goal of a subsequent,  larger, multi-site study), using 
the data that we  collect, we hypothesize  that the number of referrals  to CHS will be associated with: 
cumulative changes in Correction Officers'  survey  scores on behavioral capability, expectations, and  self-
efficacy.
Aim B. Implement a Specialized Early Engagement Support Service (SEESS ) in the same three jails. The 
SEET will increase the likelihood that referred individuals found to have first-epi[INVESTIGATOR_858829]. Although this R34 feasibility study is meant to determine  likely effect sizes rather than 
demonstrate statistical significance,  using  the data that we collect, we hypothesize  that the SEE SS's extent 
of engagement and working alliance  with referred individuals as measured by [CONTACT_858858]-related  and 
clinician-related engagement and working alliance will be  associated  with likelihood of CSC engagement. 
This will be tested using logistic  regression  (modeling the odds of enrollment  in CSC on measures  of 
service engagement  and working alliance. We will also consider several patient- level variables (age,  
gender, offense severity, duration detained, and symptom severity) as they all could potentially  have  an 
effect on enrollment in CSC
Aim C.  Assess the acceptability and feasibility  of the  jail-based TEC and SEESS  in advance of a  larger, 
multi-site, definitive  trial. Regarding  acceptability, we will conduct stakeholder interviews and focus groups 
with all relevant end-users of the  new intervention (TEC+SEESS). In terms of feasibility data in advance of 
a larger trial,  metrics of interest will include,  among  others: (1) the number of detainees  referred to  the 
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 9 of 28
SEESS, (2) the number of those referred  who have  FEP, (3) the DUP for  this sample, and  (4) the  proportion 
who later  engage in CSC. Carefully evaluating acceptability and feasibility of the TEC and SEE SS will give 
us the information needed for a definitive  effectiveness trial (for example, through  a future  R01). 
Aim D.  Prepare an  intervention manual  for broader deployment and further formal research. The 
intervention manual could  be used by [CONTACT_858859].
Description of Subject Population
Sample #[ADDRESS_1196861]  population
over 21
Sample #[ADDRESS_1196862]  population
18-30
Sample #[ADDRESS_1196863]  population
over 18
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 10 of 28
Gender, Racial and  Ethnic Breakdown
Sample #1
 
 Ethnic Categories
 Not Hispanic or Latino
 Hispanic or Latino
 Racial Categories
 Female  Male  Female  Male Total
 American Indian/
Alaska Native  15  12  3  3 33 
 Asian  12  12  0  0 24
 Native Hawaiian orOther Pacific Islander
 12  9  0  0  21
 Black or African
American 102  87  21  27 237
 White  69  66  18  18  171
 More than One Race  27  24  0  3  54
 Total  237  210  42  51  540
 
 Sample # 2
 Ethnic Categories
Not Hispanic or Latino
 Hispanic or Latino
 Racial Categories
Female  Male  Female  MaleTotal 
Black or AfricanAmerican
 3  12  0  0  15
White  1  4  0  0  5
 Total  4  16  0  0  20
 
Sample #[ADDRESS_1196864] population
Sample #1: Correction Officers
The implementation of the  Target Educational Campaign (TEC)  will involve  Correction Officers  working at  
three jails:  the Anna M. Kross Center (AMKC), the Rose  M. Singer  Center (RMSC), and the Robert N. 
Davoren Complex (RNDC), all located on Rikers Island in New  York City. Correction Officers in these 
three jails will  be  approached to complete  brief surveys.  The study will need 540 completed surveys over 
the course of the three  time points (180 surveys at each). Since  identifying  information is not being collected 
from the Correction Officers, it is possible that some  of Correction Officers will participate more than once, 
meaning less than  540 Officers total will participate.
 
Sample #2: Detainees
Detainees receiving  services from  Correctional Health Staff for a first  epi[INVESTIGATOR_858830].
 
Sample # 3: Stakeholders
We will conduct interviews  with the following  key groups of people: (1) SEESS staff  (Social Worker  
and Peer  Specialist); (2) Department of Correction Leadership; (3) Formerly  detained individuals  
who participated in the  project and  who  are now living in the community. We will also do focus  
groups with (1) Correction  Officers;  and (2) Correctional Health Service (CHS)  staff.
Recruitment Procedures
Describe settings where recruitment  will occur
Study 1: Surveys of Correction Officers
Recruitment of the study sample will take  place in  3 jails on Rikers  Island in [LOCATION_001] City (NYC):  Anna 
M. Kross Center  (AMKC), Rose M. Singer Center (RMSC), and  the Robert N.  Davoren Complex (RNDC).
 
Study 2: Clinical Interviews with Detainees Referred by  [CONTACT_858860][INVESTIGATOR_63104].
Recruitment of the study sample will take  place in  3 jails on Rikers  Island in [LOCATION_001] City (NYC):  Anna 
M. Kross Center  (AMKC), Rose M. Singer Center (RMSC), and  the Robert N.  Davoren Complex (RNDC). 
Additionally, since many patients with FEP get referred to Bellevue Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_858831] (for  males)  and 
Elmhurst Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_858831] (for females) for  stabilization, we will be  accepting referrals from those 
facilities as  well.
 
Study 3:Interviews with Key Stakeholders  to Assess Acceptability
Recruitment will  take place in different settings, including the Anna M.  Kross Center (AMKC), the Rose M. 
Singer Center (RMSC), the Robert  N. Davoren  Complex (RNDC) and community  settings.
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 12 of 28
 How and by [CONTACT_60504]/or recruited? 
Study 1: Surveys of Correction Officers
Correction Officers in these three jails will be exposed to the Targeted  Educational Campaign (TEC). 
Correction Officers will be approached and recruited during  roll call  and in the staff canteen where they take 
their meal  breaks,  or at a time/location agreed upon by [CONTACT_528407],  to complete  brief 
surveys to assess engagement of Target C  at three  different times: pre-exposure, after [ADDRESS_1196865]. Compton, will approach Correction Officers briefly presenting the study and asking  for 
completion of the survey. 
 
In the event that social distancing guidelines pertaining COVID-19 prevent the research team  for going  to 
the jails  to survey the Officers at the  6 and 12-month follow-up time periods, we will coordinate with  our 
study partners to administer the anonymous survey.  The Deputy Wardens and/or Captains at the jails  will 
introduce the survey during the  daily roll-call  meetings, and they will distribute the participant information  
document and  survey to each Officer  for their review.  The Deputy  Wardens and Captains  will tell the 
Officers that the survey is voluntary and  anonymous, but  if they wish to complete it, they can  put their 
completed survey in a container  in the Officer's canteen or other  communal  space.  
 
Study 2: Clinical Interviews with Detainees Referred by  [CONTACT_858860][INVESTIGATOR_63104].
All subjects referred to the  research team by [CONTACT_858861], coordinated and supervised by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Pope and  [CONTACT_528415].  The assessors will describe the study, and 
if the subject  agrees and  signs the informed consent, he/she will be assessed in  a 90-minute clinical 
interview using standard materials already  in use at OnTrackNY, as well as instruments to  measure 
symptom onset and thus duration of  untreated psychosis  (DUP).
During times  of social  distancing related to COVID-19, [CONTACT_858881] de Bibiana and [CONTACT_858882] will do the 
interview process over phone or HIPAA-compliant video software, depending on the technical capacity of the Correctional Health Services clinic  where the individual is located. Since interviewing over phone  or 
video might  make  engaging with the individual  more challenging,  the 90-minute interview may  be broken 
up over several  phone or video calls.
 
Study 3: Interviews with Key Stakeholders  to Assess Acceptability
For detainees that  were engaged by [CONTACT_858862] , after the individuals are released from  jail, Jason Tan de 
Bibiana, coordinated and supervised  by [INVESTIGATOR_124].  Pope and [CONTACT_858883], will recruit  participants through 
telephone and/or email. All  interviews will take place in the community  or via  telephone or Zoom and  
individuals will be  remunerated $50 for taking  part in an interview. For the focus  groups  Jason Tan de  
Bibiana will recruit participants from SEESS  staff,  Correction Officers/leadership, Correctional  Health 
Service staff through face-to-face contacts, word  of mouth, and  snowball  sampling.  Focus groups  will take 
place during regular business hours and participants will not be remunerated (on-duty employees cannot be remunerated at these agencies).The eligibility criteria for interviews and  for individuals to be members  of 
focus groups will include:  (1) age ≥18,  and (2) willing to give  consent.
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 13 of 28
How will the study be  advertised/publicized? 
N/A
Do you have ads/recruitment material requiring  review at this time? 
NoDoes this study involve a  clinical trial?
YesPlease provide the NCT Registration Number03962348
Concurrent Research Studies
Will subjects in this  study participate in or be recruited from other studies? 
No
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
Name [CONTACT_40443]/sub sampleCorrection OfficersCreate or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and  methods  to ascertain them
 
 Inclusion Criteria Methods to  ascertain  
them
1) Exposure to the Targeted  Educational  
Campaign 
2) Aged at least 21 years  Staff Reports
Create or insert table to describe the exclusion criteria and methods to  ascertain them
 
Exclusion Criteria  Methods to  ascertain  them
 Children under the age of 21  Staff Reports
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria #[ADDRESS_1196866] group/sub sampleDetainees Referred to the Specialized Early  Engagement Team
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 14 of 28
Create or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and  methods  to ascertain them 
 Inclusion Criteria Methods to  ascertain  
them
1) have  been referred by [CONTACT_858863]-course or first-
epi[INVESTIGATOR_858832]
2) be between the ages of 18  and 30 yearsReports from  
Correctional Health Services
3) (a) have a Mini-Mental State Examination  
(MMSE) score of >23
OR (b) for phone or video interviews,  correct 
responses to first 5 orientation questions of MMSE(a) Administration of  the 
MMSE
OR (b) Administration  
of first 5 questions of MMSE 
4) have  the capacity to provide informed  consent 
for the study.Reports from
Correctional Health Services
Interaction with assessor  
5) able  to understand and  speak EnglishInteraction with the  
assessor
Create or insert table to describe the exclusion criteria and methods to  ascertain them 
 Exclusion Criteria  Method to  ascertain them
Children under the age of 18 years
Reports from  Correctional  Health  
Services
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria #[ADDRESS_1196867] group/sub sampleStakeholdersCreate or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and  methods  to ascertain them 
 Inclusion Criteria Methods to ascertain them
 1) age  ≥18,Individuals Reports
2) Willing  to share contact  [CONTACT_858864]
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 15 of 28
CSC program prior to or  after release  from jail  in case of 
detaineesReports 
  3) Willing  and able to give informed  consents Individuals Reports
Create or insert table to describe the exclusion criteria and methods to  ascertain them 
 Exclusion Criteria  Methods to ascertain them
 Children under 18 yearsIndividuals Reports
Waiver of Consent/Authorization
Indicate if you are requesting any of the following consent waiversWaiver of consent for  use of records that include protected health information (a HIPAA waiver of 
Authorization) YesWaiver or alteration of consentNoWaiver of documentation of consent YesWaiver of parental consent No
Consent Procedures
Is eligibility screening  for this study conducted under a different IRB protocol?
NoDescribe procedures  used  to obtain consent  during  the screening  process 
Jason Tan de Bibiana, and  Adria  Zern will obtain verbal  consent from  subject during the screening process, 
after identified as potentially eligible  to participate  in the study.
Describe Study Consent Procedures
Consent from Correction  Officers
Correction Officers staff will receive an information sheet at the beginning of the questionnaire explaining the study, confidentiality, and possible risks  and benefits. Continuing  on to the questionnaire will imply that  
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_1196868] consents to take  part to the study. The survey takes about 10 minutes. We will not  be using a 
signed informed consent form so that this study can be  anonymous in  addition  to being confidential. 
 
Consent from Detainees
 
During the informed consent process,  Jason Tan de Bibiana or Adria Zern will explain the study, 
confidentiality, and  possible risks and  benefits, and will answer all questions. Jason  Tan de  Bibiana  and 
Adria Zern, who will be certified by [CONTACT_100618]’s  IRB, will carry out  the informed consent process with 
detainees. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_858833]. 
Participants will be  provided with a thorough description of  the risks, benefits, and  alternatives  to 
participating in  the research project. The informed consent document will be read to detainees, and 
questions about any  aspect of the  research  will be encouraged and answered. Jason Tan  de Bibiana and 
Adria Zern will emphasize that participation  is completely voluntary and  will in no way affect their 
employment status, medical care,  legal  status, or benefits. During the informed consent process, all 
participants will  be informed  that they may withdraw  from the study at any time without negative 
consequences to their employment  status, medical care, legal status, or  benefits.   Upon  completion of a 
thorough review of the Informed Consent Form, we will administer a  5-item true/false  questionnaire to  
assess participants’  understanding of the most crucial aspects of  the Informed Consent Form.  Only if the 
participant can verbalize understanding of the questions  correctly will they be eligible to provide  consent 
and move toward study participation. In case of incorrect answers,  the assessor will explain again those  
portions of the  Consent Form and will re-assess  the understanding. Each individual has up to  3 attempts to  
respond correctly to all of the 5 questions.
 
For any  participants who are interviewed over video/phone and through  which  verbal consent is obtained, 
the research team will add  a dated  note  to their research file stating that  the consent discussion occurred  and 
the participant verbally consented. The research staff who obtained the  verbal  consent  will sign  the note. 
When reading the  consent form to the participants, the research staff will explain that the HIPAA-
compliance of the video software offers  the same privacy as discussions with  their  care  providers  or 
clinicians. Since private rooms  will be  scheduled  ahead of the interview  time, privacy should not  be a  
concern, but the  participants will be  asked during the consent discussion if they are comfortable with the 
level of privacy  they  have in order to proceed.  Their response to  their feelings  about the  privacy  will be 
documented in  their research file along with the  attestation that  verbal consent was obtained. They will be 
encouraged to  tell the research team if they  feel like they don't have  enough  privacy at any time during the 
interview. If  they don't  feel comfortable with the  level of privacy at any time, the interview will be stopped.
 
Consent from Stakeholders (Individuals engaged by [CONTACT_858865], SEE SS staff, Correction Officers, 
Correctional Health Services  staff,  and criminal  justice  professionals)
During the informed consent process,  the Jason Tan de Bibiana will explain the study, confidentiality, and 
possible risks and benefits,  and will answer all  questions. [CONTACT_187295] and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_858834]. Participants  will be provided with a  
thorough description of the risks, benefits, and  alternatives to  participating  in the research project. Questions 
about any aspect of  the research will be encouraged and answered. Jason  Tan de Bibiana will emphasize that 
participation is completely voluntary and will in no way affect their employment status, medical  care, legal 
status, or benefits. During the informed  consent  process, all  participants  will be  informed that they may 
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 17 of 28
withdraw from  the study at any time without negative consequences to their employment status, medical  
care, legal status, or benefits.
 
The risk of  travel for in-person visits during covid-19 will be discussed during the consent discussion.  
A consent procedure note will also be provided  to participants who need to travel for the study:
"You should exercise caution when traveling in public and  follow public health guidelines, such as 
wearing masks in public an avoiding  crowds. It is important for  you to stay informed about public 
health recommendations  and guidelines  regarding COVID-19, such as  those issued by [CONTACT_858866] (CDC.gov) and  local government guidelines and directives. If you have any  questions  
about how  you will travel for appointments, or do not feel safe traveling, please  let us know,  and know 
that you can call to reschedule visits."  
Indicate which of  the following are employed  as a part of screening or main  study consent  procedures
   Consent Form
   Information Sheet
Waiver of Consent for use of Protected  Health Information
What records do you wish to review?  
Prior to obtaining informed  consent,  the only protected health  information  we seek to obtain  is related to  the 
referral process for detainees from Correctional Health Services  (CHS). In order to  refer the individuals, 
CHS will need to tell  the research team  the individuals' diagnoses, name,  and age to  determine  eligibility.
What information are you seeking access to?Individuals' age, name, and diagnoses. The information that we collect  will not increase or change.
Describe your plan  to protect identifiers  from improper use and disclosure
We will not need to use any health  information linked to  identifiers after data collection is complete. If a 
potential participant  declines to participate, his or her identifying  information will be shredded  in a secure  
location by [CONTACT_3647].Describe your plan  to destroy the identifiers as soon as  possible  consistent with  the conduct of the research, 
or provide a health  or research justification  for retaining the identifiers or explain how  retention is required  
by [CONTACT_858867].Explain why the research  could not be practicably  carried out  without the information (for which you are 
requesting access) We would be unable to verify the eligibility of potential participants who have been referred  to the study 
without access to protected  health  information (e.g.,  diagnosis,  age and name). Once this basic  information 
is obtained,  the research  assessors will then  talk to the  patient (if the patient has given verbal consent to the 
treating clinician) to do a more  intensive screening that covers all of the study’s  eligibility criteria. Once it is 
determined that the participant meets eligibility  criteria, the informed consent process will begin before any 
additional information is  collected.
Explain why the research  cannot be practicably carried out  without the waiver  
It is not feasible  to meet with every patient  from  CHS to obtain  consent/authorization, especially given the 
difficulty of traveling to Rikers Island  and accessing the facilities. 
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 18 of 28
Explain how/if subjects  will be provided  with additional pertinent information after participation 
Subjects will only be  provided with additional information after participation if  they give consent  to be 
contact[CONTACT_49496]. If they  do not  give  informed consent, they will not be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530].
Waiver of Documentation of Consent
Would the consent form signature [CONTACT_60510]’s identity and the research data?YesIs breach of confidentiality the main study risk?NoDescribe the study component(s) for which  waiver  of documentation is  requested.
Survey of  Correction Officers
We will not be  collecting  any identifiable information from survey participants (Correction  Officers);  the 
surveys will  be anonymous. Our plan to use a “Participant Information Document” (rather  than signed  
Informed Consent  Form) will allow us to not collect  name [CONTACT_120254].
 
Clinical Interviews with Detainees
During times  when  it is not possible to conduct interviews in-person  because  of COVID-19,  we will obtain 
verbal consent over phone  call or video  software,  rather than having the individual sign the informed 
consent form.  We will still read the informed  consent form  to the individual and  will conduct the consent 
form questionnaire. The only change  is that,  at the end of the consent process, the individual will provide 
verbal consent to participating, rather  than signing the document. The research  team will add a  dated note to 
their research file stating that the consent discussion occurred and the participant verbally  consented.  The 
research staff who obtained the verbal  consent will sign the note.
 
Key Stakeholder Interviews  and Focus Groups
We will obtain verbal consent from  individuals agreeing to participate in  interviews  or focus  groups 
for Study 3, whether they are  in person  or conducted over the phone or Zoom. A member of the 
research team will go through the consent process.  At the end,  the individual will provide verbal 
consent to  participating, rather than  signing  the document.  The research  staff  who obtained the 
verbal consent  will sign  the form.
Persons designated to discuss and document  consent
Select the names of persons designated  to obtain consent/assent
Compton, Michael,  MD
Pope, Leah,  PHD
Type in  the name(s)  not found in the  above  list
Jason Tan de Bibiana, M.Sc., completed NIH's "Protecting Human Research Participants Online Training" 
on 09/06/2018. Certification Number: 2912938.
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_1196869] indicated  that your study  involves  subjects who  MAY  LACK capacity to  consent.
Does this study require an  independent assessment of capacity?
No
Study Procedures
Describe the procedures required for this study
Study 1: Surveys of Correction Officers
We will collect pre-Targeted Educational  Campaign (TEC) and during-TEC  (at 6 months and 12 months) 
survey data, which will be  used to test engagement  of Target C: changes  in mean scores for behavioral 
capability, expectations, and self-efficacy, which  are three key constructs from  Social Cognitive Theory. 
The brief (10-minute) survey will assess knowledge and skills (behavioral capability),  expectations,  and 
self-efficacy. It  will be  offered to any staff  in the jail, regardless  of whether  they have received an in-person 
(e.g., in roll call) training,  since the various types of  TEC  materials  are hypothesized to influence behavior, 
expectations, and self-efficacy.
 
Study 2: Clinical Interviews with Detainees Referred by  [CONTACT_858868][INVESTIGATOR_63104].
 
Jason Tan de Bibiana or Adria  Zern  will conduct  a 90-minute interview with detainees referred by 
[CONTACT_858869]-epi[INVESTIGATOR_557113]. After completing the screening process  and 
having received informed consent,  the assessors will complete the sociodemographic assessment and  a 
substance use survey. The assessors will do the  Structured Clinical Interview for the  Positive  and Negative 
Syndrome Scale (SCI-PANSS) to better understand the participants' symptoms.  The assessors  will also 
rigorously measure  age at onset of psychosis, and  thus duration  of untreated  psychosis  (DUP),  based  on [CONTACT_858884]'s expertise in this area.  DUP will be operationalized as duration in  weeks from onset  of 
hallucinations/delusions to initiation  of an antipsychotic medication (DUP-1),  as well as  duration  in weeks 
from onset to  enrollment in CSC  (DUP-2).  During the  second year  of the project, when the Specialized  
Early Engagement Support Service (SEESS ) is implemented, the assessor will meet with  the participant 
again after a week to measure the level  of engagement of the individual with the SEE SS. For all interview 
participants, we will ask them if they  would like to be interviewed again  within two months  of their release 
from jail. For individuals who  engaged  with the SEESS, this will accomplish the aims of Study 3. If the 
individuals did not engage  with the SEESS, we will ask them basic questions  about  the treatment they've 
engaged with since being released.
 
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_1196870]. Compton (PI) will also  be 
notified right away before  resuming the assessment to discuss the  case and the clinician’s response. In 
summoning a clinician (who will be readily available since the assessment is being done in the clinical area), the assessor will share this with the  participant,  in a manner  such as: “Because I feel concerned  about 
[your safety] based on what we have been  discussing, I want to  make  sure  that we talk to a mental health 
worker about it. We can talk to them together. I want to  make sure that [you are safe] before we continue 
with the interview.” The assessors will be trained  that if at any  point in  the interview they have  reason  to 
believe that the participant  has homicidality or the intention to  harm a child, an  elderly  person, or anyone 
else, they are required  to report it to both the clinical team and  the PI.
 
While conducting phone or video  interviews with participants, the same protocol will be in  place. NYSPI 
[INVESTIGATOR_858835]/phone calls. The individuals will be in Correctional Health 
Services clinics or similar areas during  the interview, so  clinic  or DOC staff will be readily available in the  
event that the individual requires immediate  attention. Working with our partners, it was determined  that the  
best space would be the  discharge planning and competency evaluation rooms, which already  have  HIPAA-
compliant video  call capacity  and offer privacy.  It is standard practice for DOC Correction  Officers to stand 
outside these rooms during the interviews,  so they are  able  to intervene if there  are any safety  concerns.  This 
same protocol will be followed  for our clinical  interviews. In  addition to having the DOC staff member 
outside, the research team will  have the phone number of a Correctional  Health Services clinician who will  
be ready to step in if there  are any technical issues or clinical  concerns. The CHS staff members will help 
set up the  video, just as they normally would for the  discharge planning or competency  evaluation  
calls.Additionally, the interview  may  be broken up over multiple phone or video calls  to minimize 
participants' fatigue. 
 
Study 3: Interviews with Key Stakeholders  to Assess Acceptability
We will carefully assess acceptability to all end-users of the TEC and SEE SS by [CONTACT_858870]-recorded  and then transcribed for qualitative analysis.
 
I attest to follow the  COVID-19 Safety Guidelines for columbia Psychiatry and NYSPI [INVESTIGATOR_40372]-Entry  
outlined in the NYSPI [INVESTIGATOR_40373]'s June  1st memo,  which include but are not  limited  to:
Infection Control/PPE  - Guidelines
Research participants will only  come on-site if absolutely necessary for study procedures.
Research participants need to complete the online screening  the day they come to  the NYSPI [INVESTIGATOR_858836]/clinical staff in order to enter.
COVID/COVID-like symptoms of participants will be reported to the IRB via  PRISM  as an SAE. 
You can upload charts or diagrams if any
Assessment Instruments
Create a table or give a brief  description  of the  instruments  that will be used for assessment
Study 1: Surveys of Correction Officers
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 21 of 28
Correction Officer Surveys: will measure three constructs from Social  Cognitive Theory  (behavioral 
capabilities (knowledge/skills), expectations, self-efficacy), as well as social distance stigma, while keepi[INVESTIGATOR_858837] 10 minutes.
 
Study 2: Clinical Interviews with Detainees Referred by  [CONTACT_858868][INVESTIGATOR_858838]  (MMSE) (attached) Since  some aspects of the 
MMSE include visual components  or physical movements (i.e.  folding  a pi[INVESTIGATOR_196609]), during phone 
or video assessments, only the first 5 questions  of the MMSE  on orientation will be read.
 
Assessment Packet (attached), will be  used to collect  sociodemographic  information, and history of previous 
arrests.  
 
A slightly modified version of  the Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test 
(ASSIST) will  be used to ascertain information  about participants' substance use behaviors.
 
Structured Clinical Interview for the  Positive  and Negative Syndrome  Scale (SCI-PANSS)  will be 
conducted to better  understand the severity  of the participants' symptoms, which is necessary  fundamental 
knowledge to be able to  assess the  dates required in the SOS below.
 
Symptom Onset in Schizophrenia  (SOS) inventory SOS criteria will be  used to determine  when  
hallucinations and/or delusions met the threshold  for psychosis. The interview-based date identifies the 
onset of symptoms, specifically when  the severity of  the symptom met clinical criteria, and  the symptom 
occurred often enough to meet or exceed  the required frequency.
 
Year 2: Working Alliance Inventory  - Short Revised  (WAI-SR): The clinician version is a  10-item measure 
and the client version is a  12-item measure. Items measure agreement on goals, tasks, and  development  of 
an effective bond between  client  and therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]. Clinicians and  detainees  will rate  working  alliance by 
[CONTACT_858871][INVESTIGATOR_858839] 2: Service Engagement Scale  (SES): Is a 14-item measure that asks clinicians about their client's 
availability (being available for  arranged  appointment),collaboration (participating in  the management  of 
illness), help seeking  (seeking help when  needed), and treatment adherence (client’s  attitude toward taking 
medication).
 
Year 2: Singh O’Brien Level  of Engagement (SOLES): Is  a 13-item client-rated scale measuring 
engagement with mental health services in people with psychosis.
Study 3: Interviews with Key Stakeholders  to Assess Acceptability
Interviews and focus groups will be designed  to answer the following two overarching research questions: 
(1) To what extent is the new  intervention suitable and satisfying to  users?  and (2) What barriers and  
facilitators do  users of the intervention report  experiencing? Specific interview  and focus group questions  
will be targeted to the specific stakeholder  groups but will focus on content  and mode of delivery,  
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_1196871]  instruments are used
Research Related Delay to Treatment
Will research procedures result in a delay to treatment?NoTreatment to be  provided at the  end of the study
N/A
Risks/Discomforts/Inconveniences 
Risks that  could be  encountered during the study period
Study 1: Surveys of  Correction Officers
We do not foresee any risks for Correction Officers. Their participation is  completely voluntary and the 
information collected will be confidential and  anonymous, and will not be disclosed outside of the research 
team.
 
Study 2: Clinical Interviews with Detainees Referred by  [CONTACT_858868][INVESTIGATOR_63104].
 
Participants will be  asked to notify the assessor  of any  physical or psychological discomfort during  the 
interview. Additionally, the research assessors will be trained to identify for  signs of distress. There is a risk 
that information  about the patient  may be disclosed to other people outside of the research study. Protections 
of confidentiality guard against this risk, thereby [CONTACT_858872]. An important 
ethical concern that  we will seriously attend to is the possibility that identified detainees could perceive 
coercion to  participate. During the consent  process,  we will clearly explain that their  decision to participate 
or not will not be  reported  to anyone  at any  correctional agencies  or mental health facilities and will not  
impact their  legal  status or relationship with service providers in any  way.
 
Study 3: Interviews with  Key Stakeholders to Assess Acceptability 
We do not foresee any risks to participants taking part in  interviews  or focus  groups  for this  qualitative 
study. Their participation is completely voluntary  and the information  collected will be confidential and will  
not be disclosed outside of the research team. 
 
 
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 23 of 28
Describe procedures  for minimizing risks
Study 1: Surveys of Correction Officers
Any risk of  perceived coercion  will be addressed by [CONTACT_858873]. We (or in  the event 
that we cannot distribute the surveys  due to social distancing, the Deputy Wardens and  Captains) will 
explain that their decision  will in no way  impact  their relationship with  their employer or  others.  Risks to 
confidentiality also will be minimized. Participants’ names and other potential identifiers will not  be 
included in the  dataset  and each participant will be assigned a unique ID number. Surveys will be made 
anonymous by [CONTACT_2329] a unique code  created by [CONTACT_2299], as in  [CONTACT_528415]’s  prior  survey-based 
research. For example,  on the front page  of the  survey, respondents will be  asked:
• What is the first letter of your middle name?• What is the first letter of the street  you live  on?
• What is the last digit of the year you were born?• What is the last two digits of your Social Security  Number?
Doing so will create a  unique identification code for each participant (e.g., JB223, TF189) to  ensure 
anonymity, while allowing us to match any participants who complete  a later  survey (at 6 months  or 12 
months).
 
 
Study 2: Clinical Interviews with Detainees Referred by  [CONTACT_858868][INVESTIGATOR_63104].
The potential  minor risks of physical or psychological  distress will  be protected against using measures 
taken to ensure that participants are comfortable during enrollment. If enrollment causes detectable distress, breaks will be given or enrollment will be postponed/rescheduled. Before  beginning  a phone  or video 
interview (during times where social distancing guidelines are  in place), the assessors  will ensure they have 
the phone number of clinical staff currently in the clinic area, in  case there is a need for a clinician to  check 
in on the participant at any time. Any risk of perceived  coercion  will be addressed by [CONTACT_858874]. We will explain that their  decision will in no way  impact  their relationship with  mental 
health service  providers or  others.  Risks  to confidentiality also  will be minimized. Consent forms with  
participants’ signatures  will be securely stored in a  locked file cabinet in  a locked research office in a secure 
building at the university.  Participants’ names  and other potential identifiers will not  be included in the 
dataset and  each participant will be  assigned a unique ID number. All initial  screenings and interviews  will 
be conducted in the same interview rooms or spaces that Correctional  Health Services staff use for their 
meetings/counseling sessions with patients.  Information pertaining to  individual participants will only  be 
released with their informed  and written consent, except  in unusual cases  where withholding  such 
information might pose a serious risk or danger to the participant or others. Publications and  presentations  
will not report names, initials, or descriptors that could  in any way violate  confidentiality.  These efforts to 
protect against potential risks are expected to be  very effective, as they have been  for our prior research.
Study 3:  Interviews with Key Stakeholders  to Assess Acceptability
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_1196872] such information. All information collected will be 
confidential and will not be disclosed outside of the research  team. We will keep all records private and 
confidential to  the extent permitted  by [CONTACT_2371].
All initial screenings and interviews  will be conducted in the same private interview  rooms/spaces used by 
[CONTACT_858875]. Consent  forms with participants' 
signatures will be  securely stored in a locked  file cabinet in  a locked research office in  a secure building.
Subjects' name [CONTACT_858880], and each 
participant in the study will  be assigned a unique ID  number.  The only  link between identifying information 
and the unique  ID number will be  the paper  consent forms. Information pertaining to  individual  participants 
will only be released  with their informed and written consent, except  in unusual cases  where withholding  
such information might pose a serious risk or danger to the participant or others. Publications and presentations will not report names, initials, or  descriptors that could in  any way violate confidentiality. 
These efforts to protect against potential  risks are expected to  be very effective,  as they have been for our 
prior research.  
 
Will the  study be  conducted under  a certificate of confidentiality?
Yes, we have already received a Certificate  of Confidentiality
Direct Benefits to Subjects  
Direct Benefits to Subjects
There may be no definite direct benefits  to individual  participants of the proposed  study.  Given the minimal 
risks and  potential  benefits of the proposed  research  to participants  and the significant potential benefit  of 
knowledge gained, there is  no evidence that the risk-benefit ratio would suggest changes to the research plan 
at the present time.
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 25 of 28
Compensation and/or  Reimbursement  
Will compensation or reimbursement  for expenses  be offered to subjects?
YesPlease describe  and indicate total amount and schedule of  payment(s).  
Include justification for compensation amounts and indicate  if there are bonus  payments.
Study 1 - Surveys of Correction Officers:  there is no  monetary  compensation for this study, but  officers  
will be offered  a small pi[INVESTIGATOR_858840]  a snack item as a  thank  you for participating.
Study [ADDRESS_1196873] 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_63104]: there is no compensation for  this study
 
Study 3 - Interviews with Key Stakeholders  to Assess Acceptability: Subjects who  participate in  
interviews, who were previously engaged  by [CONTACT_858876], will be  compensated $50 for  their  
time and effort. Other subjects who participate in focus groups  (SEESS staff,  Correction  Officers and  
leadership, and Correctional Health  Service staff) will not be compensated (on-duty employees cannot be 
compensated at the agencies).
 
References
References1. Marshall M, Lewis  S, Lockwood A (2005) Association Between Duration of Untreated Psychosis and  
Outcome in Cohorts  of First-Epi[INVESTIGATOR_858841]: A Systematic  Review.  Archives  of General Psychiatry 
62:975-983.2. Norman RMG, Lewis  SW, Marshal M (2005) Duration of untreated psychosis and its relationship to
clinical outcome. The British Journal  of Psychiatry 187(48):s19-s23.
3. Perkins DO, Boteva  GH,  Lieberman  JA (2005) Relationship Between Duration of Untreated Psychosis 
and Outcome in  First-Epi[INVESTIGATOR_150960]:  A Critical Review  and Meta-Analysis. The  American  Journal 
of Psychiatry 162(10):1785-1804.4. Addington J, Van Mastrigt S, Addington D (2004) Duration of untreated psychosis: Impact on 2-yearoutcome. Psychological Medicine  34:277–84.
5. Gonzalez G, Goperlund E, Shern D (2016)  Coordinated Specialty  Care – First epi[INVESTIGATOR_858842]: Why  specialty early intervention  programs are  a smart  investment.  Policy Brief. 
https://www.nasmhpd.org/sites/default/files/Policy_Brief-Coordinated_Specialty_Care_First_Epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865]_Psychosis_Programs.pdf
6. Singh SP, Grange T (2006) Measuring pathways  to care in first-epi[INVESTIGATOR_16743]:  A systematic
review/ Schizophrenia Research 81:75-82.7. Compton MT, Broussard B (2011) Conceptualizing the Multifaceted  Determinants  of the  Duration of
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 26 of 28
Untreated Psychosis. Current  Psychiatry  Reviews 7(1):1-11.
8. Broussard B, Kelley ME,  Ramsay Wan  C, Cristofaro SL, Crisafio A,  Haggard PJ, Myers NL, Reed T,
Compton MT (2013) Demographic,  socio-environmental,  and substance-related predictors  of duration
of untreated psychosis. Schizophrenia Research 148:93-98.9. Marion-Veyron R,  Lambert M, Cotton SM,  Schimmelmann BG, Gravier B,McGorry PD,  Conus  P (2015) 
History of  offending  behavior in first epi[INVESTIGATOR_858843]:  a marker of specific  clinical needs  and a 
call for early detection strategies among young offenders. Schizophrenia Research  161(2-3):163-168.
10. Munker R, Haastrum S, Joergensen T, Kramp P  (2003) The  Temporal  Relationship between
Schizophrenia and  Crime Social Psychiatry and  Psychiatric Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623] 38:347-353.
11. Wallace C, Mullen PE,  Burgess P  (2003)  Criminal Offending in Schizophrenia Over  a 25-Year Period 
Marked by [CONTACT_858877]. 
American Journal  of Psychiatry 161:716-727.
12. Hodgins S,  Calem M, Shimel R, Williams A, Harleston D, Morgan C, Dazzan  P, Fearon P, Morgan K, 
Lappin J,  Zanelli J,  Reichenberg A, Jones P (2011) Criminal offending and distinguishing features  of
offenders among persons  experiencing a  first epi[INVESTIGATOR_114332],” Early Intervention in Psychiatry
5:15-23.13. Prince JD, Akincigil  A, Bromet E (2007) Incarceration rates of persons with  first-admission psychosis.  
Psychiatric Services 58(9):1173-1180.14. Ramsay Wan C,  Broussard B, Haggard  P, Compton MT (2014) Criminal justice settings as possible
sites for early detection  of psychotic disorders and  reducing treatment delay. Psychiatric Services  65:758–
764.15. James DJ, Glaze  LE (2006) Mental health problems of prisoners and jail inmates. Bureau of Justice
Statistics Special Report.  NCJ 213600. Washington,  DC: U.S. Department of Justice. 
16. Joa  I, Johannessen  JO, Larsen  TK, McGlashan  TH (2008) Information Campaigns: The Experience in 
the Early Treatment and  Intervention in Psychosis (TIPS)  Study. Psychiatric  Annals 38(8):512-520.
17. Grilli R, Ramsay C, Minozzi S (2002) Mass Media Interventions: effects on health services utilization.  
Cochrane Database  of Systematic Reviews 1:CD000389.
18. Joa  I, Johannessen  JO, Auestad B, Friis S,  Opjordsmoen S, Simonsen  E, Vaglum P,  McGlashan  TH,
Larsen TK  (2007). Effects  of referral  patterns  of reducing intensive informational campaigns  about first-
epi[INVESTIGATOR_16743]. Early Intervention in  Psychiatry  1(4):340-345.
19. Srihari VH,  Tek C, Pollard  J, Zimmet S, Keat  J, Cahill JD, Kucukgoncu S, Walsh BC, Li Gueorguieva 
R, Levine N, Mesholam-Gately RI, Friedman-Yakoobian M,  Seidman  L, Keshavan MS,  McGlashan T, 
Woods SW (2014) Reducing the duration of  untreated psychosis and its impact in the U.S.: the STEPED 
study. BMC Psychiatry  14:335-349.
20. Laplan SH,  Greenfield S, Ware JE (1989) Assessing the effects of physician-patient interactions  on the  
outcomes of chronic disease. Medical Care  27:S110–S127.
21. Stewart MA (1995)  Effective physician-patient communication and health outcomes: a review.
Canadian Medical Association Journal  152:1423-1433.
22. Kreyenbuhl  J, Nossel IR,  Dixon LB (2009) Disengagement from mental  health  treatment among 
individuals with schizophrenia and strategies  for facilitating connections to care:  A review of the
literature. Schizophrenia Bulletin 35(4):696-703.23. Aggarwal  NK, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_528393], Dixon L,  Guarnaccia P,  Alegria M, Lewis-Fernandez R (2016) Clinician
descriptions of communication strategies  to improve treatment engagement  by [CONTACT_98680]/ethnic minorities
in mental health services:  A systematic  review. Patient Education and  Counseling 99(2):198-209.
24. Duggan A,  Street  RL (X) Interpersonal communication  in health and illness. In:  Glanz  K, Rimer BK, 
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 27 of 28
Viswanath K (Eds)  Health Behavior:  Theory,  Research, and  Practice,  5th Edition. Wiley. 243–267.
25. Herman DB, Conover S, Gorroochurn  P, Hinterland K,  Hoepner L, Susser E  (2011) Randomized trial of 
Critical Time Intervention  to prevent homelessness after hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47850]. Psychiatric Services, 62:713-
719.26. Jarrett  M, Thornicroft  G, Forrester A, Harty M, Senior J,  King C, Huckle S, Parrott J,  Dunn G,  Shaw  J 
(2012) Continuity of care for recently released  prisoners with  mental illness:  a pi[INVESTIGATOR_858844] a Critical Time Intervention. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_858845], 21:187-[ZIP_CODE]. Shaw J, Conover S, Herman D, Jarret  M, Leese M, McCrone P, Murphy C, Senior  J, Susser E,
Thornicroft G, Wright N, Edge  D, Emsley R, Lennox C,  Williams  A, Cust H,  Hopkin G, Stevenson  C
(2017) Critical  time intervention  for Severely  mentally ill Prisoners (CrISP) : a randomised controlled
trial. Health  Services  and Delivery Research 5(8).
28. Bandura A (1986) Social foundations of thought and action: A social  cognitive theory. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ:  Prentice-Hall.
29. Bandura A (1999) Social cognitive  theory: An agentic perspective.  Asian Journal  of Social Psychology 
2:21-41.30. Bandura, A (2004). Health  promotion by [CONTACT_858878]. Health education  & behavior, 31(2), 
143-164.31. U.S. Department of  Health and Human Services  (2001) Mental  Health: Culture, Race, and Ethnicity—A 
Supplement to Mental  Health: A Report of the  Surgeon  General.  Rockville,  MD:  U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services, Substance  Abuse  and Mental Health Services  Administration,  Center for Mental 
Health Services.32. Smedley BD, Stith  AY, Nelson AR (2003) Unequal Treatment: Confronting Racial  and Ethnic 
Disparities in  Health Care. Washington,  DC: National Academies Press.
33. McGuire TG, Miranda J (2008) Racial and ethnic  disparities  in mental health care: Evidence and  policy 
implications. Health Affairs  27(2):393-403.
34. Burnett R, Mallett  R, Bhugra  D, Hutchinson G, Der G, Leff J  (1999) The first contact [CONTACT_858879]: social factors and pathways to care in  a multi-ethnic population. 
Psychological Medicine 29:475–483.35. Morgan C, Mallett  R, Hutchinson G, Leff J (2004) Negative pathways to psychiatric care and ethnicity: 
the bridge between social  science and psychiatry. Social Science and Medicine 58:739–752.
36. Compton MT, Esterberg ML, Druss BG, Walker  EF, Kaslow  NJ (2006) A descriptive study of pathways 
to care among  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_858846]-epi[INVESTIGATOR_34923]-spectrum patients. Social 
Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623] 41:566–573.37. Archi S, Akhtar-Danesh N, Norman  R, Malla A, Roy  P, Zipursky  RB (2010) Ethnic  Diversity and
Pathways to  Care for a First Epi[INVESTIGATOR_858847]. Schizophrenia Bulletin 36(4):688-701.
38. Franz L, Carter T,  Leiner AS, Bergner  E, Thompson  NJ, Compton MT (2010) Stigma and  treatment
delay in first-epi[INVESTIGATOR_16743]: a grounded  theory study. Early Intervention in  Psychiatry 4(1):47-56.
Uploads
Upload copy(ies) of unbolded Consent Form(s)Upload copy(ies) of bolded Consent Form(s)Upload copy(ies) of unbolded Information  Sheet(s)
Protocol Summary  Form
7771
Compton, Michael
Page 28 of 28
Upload copy(ies) of bolded Information  Sheet(s)
Upload a copy of Certificate of ConfidentialityUpload copy(ies) of the  HIPAA form
hipaa form 4.29.22.pdfUpload any additional documents that  may be related to  this study
Form #PP2: HIPAA Authorization for Research 4.14.14 [LOCATION_001] State Psychiatric Institute (NYSPI)  
Authorization to Use or Disclose Health Information  during a Research Study  
Protocol Number:  Principal Investigator:  
[CONTACT_5627] o
f Study:  
Bef
ore researchers can use or share any identifiable health information  (“Health Information ”) about you  as part of the 
above stud
y (t
he “Research”), the [LOCATION_001] State Psychiatric Institute (NYSPI) is required to obtain your authorization. Y ou agree  
to allow the following individuals and entities to use and disclose H ealth Information  about you as described below:  
• [LOCATION_001] S
tate
 Psychiatric Institute (NYSPI) , your doctors and other health care providers,  if any, and
• The Prin
cipal Inv
estigator and  his/her staff (together “Researchers”).   Researchers may include staff of NYSPI, the New  York
State Office of Mental Health (OMH), Research Foundation for Mental Hygiene, Inc. (RFMH), and Columbia University (CU) ,
provided such staff is a part of  the study, and
• Providers of service s for the Research at CU, NYSPI [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or RFMH,  such as MRI or PET,  or  Central  Reference Laboratories 
(NKI), if indicated in the consent form.
1. The Hea
lth Information that may be used and /or disclosed for this Research includes:
All i
nformation collected during the Research as told to you in the Informed Consent Form .   
Health  Information in your  clinical research record which include s the resul ts of  physical exam s, medical and 
psychiatric hi
story, laboratory or diagnostic tests, or H ealth Information relating to a particular condition that is related  to 
the Research.  
Additional information may include:  
2. The Hea
lth Information listed above may be  disclosed to:
Researchers  and their staff at the following organizations involved wi th this Research : 
The S
ponsor of t
he Research , 
and it
s agents and contractors (together, “Sponsor”); and  
Repr esentatives of regulatory and government  agencies, institutional review boards, representatives of the Researchers 
and their institutions to the level needed  to carry out their responsibilities  related to the conduct of the research .   
Private laboratories and other persons and organizations that analyze your health information in connection with 
this study 
Othe
r (family members or significant others, study buddies,  outside agencies  etc.)  Specify:  
3. By [CONTACT_100617], you  unders tan d that your  Health
Information may be
 disclosed to individuals or entities which  are not required to comply with the federal and state privacy laws
which govern the use and disclosure of personal Health Information  by [CONTACT_100618].    This means that on ce your  Health
✔
National Institute of Mental Health
✔
✔
✔
Reducing Duration of Untreated Psychosis through Early Detection in a Large Jail System
Michael T. Compton
7771
Form #PP2: HIPAA Authorization for Research 4.1.[ADDRESS_1196874] to  follow these laws (e.g., a drug company or the Sponsor  
of the Research), it may no longer be protected  under the HIPAA or NYS Mental Hygiene Law requirements but is  subject to the 
terms of the consent form and may be subject to other state or federal privacy laws or regulations .  
4. P
lease note that:
• You do not have to sign this Authorization  form, but if you do not, you may not be able to participate in the study or
receive study related care .  You may change your mind at any time and for any reason. If you do so, you  may  no
l
onger be
 all
owed to participate in the study.  I f you withdraw  this Authorization the  research staff and  the Sponsor, if this
is sponsored research, may still use or disclose Health  Information  containing identifying information they already have
collected about  you as needed  to maintain the reliability of the research.   Any reques t to withdraw this  Authorization
must  be made in writ
ing to  (enter name [CONTACT_3669] [CONTACT_100619]):
• W
hile the Research is going on , you may not be allowed to review the Health Information in your clinical research
record that has been created or collected by [CONTACT_100618] .   When this research has been completed  you may be allowed to  see
t
his information.  If it is needed  for your care, your H ealth Inform ation will be given  to you or your  Doctor .
5. T
hi
s Authori
zation does not have an end date.
6. Y
ou will be given a copy of this form after you have signed it.
I
 agree to the use and disc losure of Health Information about me as described above:  
__
________________________________________                _____________________  
Signature [CONTACT_2385] / Legal Representative    Date  
________
____________
__________________  
Printed Name [CONTACT_2385]  
__
____________________________________  
Relationship of Legal Representative to Participant (if applicable) 
We also ask you or your legal representative to initial the statements below:  
I
 have received a copy of the NYSPI/OMH  Notice of Privacy Practices. 
Michael T. Compton, M.D., M.P.H., [ADDRESS_1196875], Box 100, [LOCATION_001], NY, [ZIP_CODE]