Study Title: Study of Time -restricted Eating on Weight Loss. A Randomized Controlled Trial of 
the Effects of Time -restricted Eating on Weight Loss in Obese Subjects.  
NCT:  03393195  
Date:  May 14th , 2019  
Experimental Design : 
This is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_665744] /obese humans.  
100+  overweight/ obese (BMI> 27,<43 kg/m2) male and female subjects over the age of 18 will be 
recruited to participate in this study.  Participants will receive an iHe alth Bluetooth connected 
scale to use during the study.  Participants will be randomized to one of two eating plans. 1) 8-
hour eating window : TRF group instructed to limit daily calorie intake between 12:00pm and 
8:00pm each day (only water and black coffee/tea permitted outside of eating window); or 2) 
Consistent meal timing : participants are instructed to eat three structured meals each day 
during specified eating windows (7:00am -11:00am, 11:00am -3:00pm, 4:00pm -10:00pm) Group 
allocation will be provided to subjects using the Eureka mobile research platform, and no 
recommendation on total calorie or macronutrient intake was provided.  Particip ants will be 
instructed to use their iHealth scales daily, preferably in the morning before their first meal 
(Table 1). The Eureka app will also send adherence surveys, sleep questionnaires , and food 
attitude surveys to participants throughout the study.  
 
Participants who live within 60 miles of UCSF were invited to participate in in -depth metabolic 
testing at UCSF. Immediately prior to study start , participants will go to the Clinical and 
Translational Science Institute (CTSI) clinical research center at t he University of [LOCATION_004], San 
Francisco (UCSF) in order to collect baseline values for the measurements listed in Table 2.  
Since fasting glucose and insulin measurements will be collected, participants will be instructed 
to fast from 8:00pm the night b efore.   Additionally, iPhone users will be given the option to use 
the Oura ring for sleep and activity tracking.  After 1 2 weeks, participants will come to the CTSI 
clinic to  repeat the baseline measurements .   
 
 
Table 1. Measurements to be collected by [CONTACT_304004].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Measurement  Mode of Collection  Frequency  
Weight  Bluetooth Scale  Daily  
Adherence Survey  Eureka  Daily  
Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_285816] (PSQI)  Eureka  Monthly  
Food Attitudes (RED Scale)  Eureka  Monthly  
 
 
 
Table 2. Measurements to be acquired at baseline and 12 -week follow -up (local subjects only)  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan : 
The primary outcome will be percent change in weight since baseline, measured daily via 
iHealth, in the overall cohort of [ADDRESS_899162] of 
treatment assignment, we will use a linear mixed model (LMM) with fixe d effects for treatment 
assignment, days since baseline (as a continuous variable), and their interaction, and random 
effects for participant and day, with unstructured covariance matrix. The treatment effect will be 
estimated by [CONTACT_665745] t reatment by [CONTACT_90083], capturing the between -group 
divergence in weight loss trajectories. In sensitivity analyses, we will repeat the analysis after 
Winsorizing outliers, which will be defined as points more than 1.5 times the interquartile range 
below the 25th or above the 75th percentile of the overall distribution.  No adjustment will be 
made to p -values or confidence intervals for multiple comparisons for the primary outcome.  Questionnaire : Age, Sex, Ethnicity, SES, BMI,  
Physical Anthropometry : Waist Circumference, Waist -to-Hip-Ratio (WHR), Mid -thigh girth, 
bicep girth  
DXA Direct Adiposity Mea sures : Fat mass (arms, legs, trunk, total), Lean mass (arms, legs, 
trunk, total), percent fat (arms, legs, trunk, total), Volumes (arms, legs, trunk, total), muscle 
mass (appendicular, total)  
DXA Derived Adiposity Measures and Indices : Visceral Adipose Ti ssue (VAT), 
Subcutaneous Abdominal Adipose Tissue (SAT), Trunk fat to leg fat ratio, Trunk to leg 
volume ratio, fat mass index (FMI), fat -free mass index (FFMI)  
DXA Bone Measures : Bone mass (arms, legs, lumbar spi[INVESTIGATOR_050], total), Bone Mineral Density 
(spi[INVESTIGATOR_050], t otal) 
Biochemical and Hormonal Markers in Fasting Blood  
Albumin, amylase, bilirubin, BUN, CO2, CPK, creatinine, GGT, LDH, total protein, uric acid  
Insulin Resistance & IGFs: glucose, insulin, HbA1C , BHBA  
Lipid Profile & Lipid -soluble Micronutrients: TG, total cholesterol, HDLC, LDLC, Ca, Cl, Fe, K, 
Mg, Na, Phosphate,  
Liver Enzymes: ALT , AST, ALK  
Questionnaire -based Behaviors on Dietary Intake, Physical Activity, and Cognitive 
Eating  
Dietary Intake (MEC Quantitative Food Frequency Questionnaire): nutrients, food items, food 
groups  
Physical Activity (MEC Physical Activity Questionnaire): total METs, METs for 
moderate/vigorous activities  
Cognitive/Psychological Eating Behaviors (Weight -Related Eating Ques tionnaire): scores for 
emotional eating, eating in response to external cues, eating with compensatory restraint 
(eating less before/after a big meal), eating with routine restraint (holding back at meals, 
counting calories, dieting)  
Meal frequency and ti mes 
Weight cycling history and parental body shape information  
Strength Isokinetics and Isometrics : peak torque, average peak torque, total work, average 
power, AGON/ANTAG ratio  
Hangrip Strength  
Doubly labeled water technique : Total energy expenditure  
Resting Metabolic Rate  
 
Our secondary outcomes will include body fat, lean mass, fasting gluco se, insulin, and HbA1c 
levels, resting metabolic rate, and total energy expenditure, assessed at the baseline and [ADDRESS_899163] will be estimated by [CONTACT_665746]. In sensitivity 
analyses, w e will repeat these analyses Winsorizing any outliers, defined as in the primary 
analysis.  P -values and confidence intervals will be Bonferroni -corrected for 7 comparisons.  
 
All other outcomes measured at the baseline and 12 -week clinical visits will be c onsidered 
exploratory and analyzed using the methods described for the secondary outcomes, without 
penalization for multiple comparisons.  
 