Protocol version August [ADDRESS_639717] ON REINFORCEMENT VALUE AND USE IN CURRENT SMOKERS  
 
Protocol History:   Original Dated 3/17/2020  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  
  
[INVESTIGATOR_464308], PhD  
Medical University of South Carolina  
Hollings Cancer Center  
Charleston, SC [ZIP_CODE]  
e-mail: [EMAIL_8895]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Protocol version August [ADDRESS_639718]  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  4 
2 OBJECTIVES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  4 
2.1 Objectives ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  4 
3 BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  4 
3.1 Intervention to be studied (Use of HTP)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  [ADDRESS_639719] (HTP)  IQOS. IQOS 
may be less harmful than cigarettes, and there are some reports that it may produce more rewarding subjective effects compared to e -
cigarettes . The approval of IQOS provides a unique opportunity to gather preliminary data surrounding IQOS. The goal of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_497403], including its downstream effects on ciga rette smoking. 
Current smokers  will complete a one -week baseline period where they smoke as normal before attending an in -person lab visit . During 
the in -perso n lab visit, participants (n=10)  will sample a traditional cigarette and a novel IQOS tobacco pro duct. Participants will answer 
questionnaires about each product they sample and then complete a preference assessment in which they choose between the IQOS  and 
their own cigarette . Finally, participants will take home a tobacco product they sampled to use  ad libitum (1 -week sampling). During 
the at -home baseline and sampling weeks, participants will complete electronic daily diaries cataloging their tobacco use. Biomarker s 
(i.e., expi[INVESTIGATOR_33514], cotinine) will corroborate self -reported indices of use.  
[ADDRESS_639720] (IQOS) vs. combustible cigarettes on subjective effects  and reinforcement value  as well as 
test the impact of IQOS on tobacco use patterns  (i.e., cigarettes per day)  among current smokers . 
 
Hypothesis: Given that there are no existing data comparing IQOS to traditional cigarettes, we make no a priori  hypothesis about which 
product will have greater subjective effects or reinforcement value. We make no a priori  hypothesis about the impact of IQOS on 
tobacco use.  
3 BACKG ROUND  AND SIGNIFICANCE  
 
In April of 2019, the FDA approved the sale of IQOS, a novel HTP  that has been available for some time in other countries. IQOS heats 
disposable tobacco sticks (Heat Sticks) which are inserted into a holder and heated with an electric blade at 350ºC [1]. IQOS is currently 
available in Japan, Italy, Switzerland, South Korea, and has been increasing in prevalence in these countries. IQOS is being marketed 
as an alternative to smoking for current smokers. Existing data suggest that it likely does provide reduced toxicant exposure  compared 
to smoking for current smokers, although the lev els of toxicant exposure may be greater for IQOS than they are for e-cigarettes  [2]. If 
IQOS proves to be a more appealing product than e-cigarettes  and produces greater uptake and greater downstream effects on cigarette 
Protocol version August [ADDRESS_639721] UDIED (USE OF HTP)  
Heated Tobacco Products (HTPs, sometimes called Heat Not Burn or HNB) are quite different from both e -cigarettes and traditional 
cigarettes . HTPs heat reconstituted tobacco at a temperature below combustion of the tobacco rod as is the c ase for a conventional 
cigarette. Because the tobacco is not directly burned, exposure to the many harmful chemicals generated by [CONTACT_497407]  [3]. Because actual tobacco is used (vs glycerin liquid within e-cigarettes ), HTPs products may provide a 
superior sensory experience to e-cigarettes  [3]. However, the tobacco is singed within HTPs, and thus these products most likely result 
in increased exposure to harmful chemicals compared to e-cigarettes , though still less than combustibles.  
Tobacco Products are regulated by [CONTACT_1622]. An Investigational Tobacco Product (ITP) application to the FDA is not required because 
both products are approved for commercial sale in the US. An Investigational New Drug (IND) applicati on would be required if we 
were testing the impact of IQOS  on smoking cessation but is not required in this case because we are interested in the naturalistic impact 
of these products on tobacco use generally. We have conducted multiple studies of this typ e and have strong confidence that we are on 
safe regulatory ground in conducting the study without an ITP/IND.  
[CONTACT_84135] has three recently completed or ongoing trials investigating the impact of providing other non -cigarette  products to smokers 
on tobacco use patterns. These trials are very similar to the proposed project in that smokers are recruited to receive an e-cigarette , which 
is provided in a naturalistic way to be used as much or as little as the smoker wishes. While  [CONTACT_84135] has not led trials of IQOS, neither 
has any other US investigator.  
[ADDRESS_639722]  meet  all of the following criteria:  
 
1. have been smoking at least five cigarettes daily for the past year (baseline  carbon monoxide  > 8ppm)  
2. rate their interest in using non-cigarette tobacco products  as >[ADDRESS_639723] an e -mail accoun t they check daily 
(necessary for daily diary completion).  
4.2 EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
To be eligible for this study, the participan t CANNOT meet any of the following criteria:  
 
1. purchasing a  heated tobacco product within the last six months  
2. weekly use of heated tob acco product over the last six months  
3. any heated tobacco product use in the past [ADDRESS_639724] three months  
8. history of a seizure disorder  
9. household member currently enrolled.  
5 PROCEDURES  
Design Overview: After completing a screening/baseline session, current smokers will complete a one -week baseline period. 
Participants will then attend a lab -reinforcement session where they will sample the IQOS product  and a traditional cigarette . We will 
provide transpor tation via a taxi cab company (Yellow Cab) for participants who are eligible, but do not have reliable transportation to 
in-person visits. We will pay the cab company directly, the participant will not need to contribute.  Participants will complete 
questi onnaires that assess subjective effects and reinforcement value of these products. Participants will complete a preference 
assessment designed to assess the relative reinforcement value of these products (see below for details). At the end of the s ession 
participants will receive an IQOS  to take home with them for a one -week sampling period. Across the at -home baseline and sampling 
weeks, participants will complete electronic daily diaries cataloging their tobacco use.  
The HTP  device used will be the IQOS device. Participants will receive a rechargeable IQOS device and charger. Each Heat Stick is 
considered to be similar in nicotine delivery to a cigarette. Thus, to ensure participants have a full supply for the one-week period , we 
will provide [ADDRESS_639725] that the majority of participants will not do so.  Heat sticks will be avai lable in both traditional 
tobacco and menthol flavors (participant ’s choice).  
Experimental Design:  
Protocol version August 18 , 2020  
7 
 Study design for both studies follows our prior and ongoing studies, and all procedures  including diaries , are well established . Prior to 
attending the in -person screening session, participants will complete an online screening questionnaire to determine preliminary 
eligibility and  may be consented remotely (see below for details). If consent is not completed remotely, it will be co mpleted in person 
at the Screening/Baseline Session prior to collection of any data.  
1) Screening/ Baseline session and Baseline Smoking Phase:  Participants  will attend a n in-person  screening session in which they 
complete a battery of assessments to deter mine eligibility. Eligible participants will then complete a series of baseline questionnaires. 
At the end of the baseline session, participants will be instructed to smoke as normal for a one -week baseline period . Participants will 
enroll in daily electro nic diaries documenting their tobacco use and will complete the first diary in the lab with help of study staff. 
Participants will provide a urine sample for baseline assessment of cotinine (the primary metabolite of nicotine).  
2) Laboratory Reinforcement  Session:  Participants will attend a lab session in which they sample the IQOS product  and a traditional 
cigarette and complete questionnaires about each product they sample  (see below) .  
Sampling and Product Questionnaires:   
Participants will sample the IQOS product (n=10) and a traditional cigarette (traditional cigarette first). For each product, participants 
will take four puffs at their own pace, and then complete a series of questionnaires assessing the subjective effects  and reinforcement 
value of the product (see below). There will be a [ADDRESS_639726] and when to start/stop 
questionnaires.  
Preference Assessment:   
At the end of the [ADDRESS_639727] at their own pace. For each trial, participants may also choose not to take any puffs.  
3) At -home sampling period  and Follow -up Session : Participants will be provided with an IQOS product  to take home with them for a 
one-week sampling  period. Participants will receive the IQOS product and a supply of Heat Sticks. Participants will be instructed to use 
their assigned product as much as they would like over the week. Participants will continue to complete the daily electronic diaries 
during this time period and  will report use of their assigned product.  The primary p urpose of the daily diaries is to capture daily tobacco 
use more effectively than retrospective recall of tobacco use at a lab session. Participants will return to the lab following  the sampling 
period  for a follow -up session  to complete additional assessm ents and collect expi[INVESTIGATOR_33514]. A urine sample will be collected 
for cotinine analysis at this follow -up session.  
Protocol version August 18 , 2020  
8 
 Compensation:  Participants will receive $25 for the screening visit, $75 for the lab reinforcement session, and $50 for the follow -up 
session ($150 total). Participants can earn up to $25 per week for the daily diaries ($50 total). Participants who complete a ll sessions 
and all diaries can earn up to $200. Participants who are not eligible at the screening visit will receive $15 for th eir time. Participants 
who are not eligible do not receive the full $25 payment for that visit because the visit will be shorter (no additional base line measures).  
5.[ADDRESS_639728] up to date CITI Certification for Protection of Human Subjects and  will keep this training current 
throughout the course of the study.  Study participants will be recruited through local media outlets (e.g., craigslist, flye rs, print ads, 
Facebook ).  Participants will complete a n online  redcap survey to  determine initial eligibility. When participants click the link for this 
survey, they will see a brief description of the research study . Once participants have been determined to be initially eligible, they will 
be invited to participate in the consent p rocess.  
The consent process will take place via one of the following modalities: 1) Remote electronic consent (e -consent) via REDCap 
facilitated with a discussion over the phone, 2) Remote consent via doxy.me, or 3) in -person consent (in -person visit at s tart of Visit 
1). Options 1 and 2 are functionally the same  (remote teleconsent  prior to attending Visit 1 ), but utilize different platforms (doxy.me 
vs. REDCap), and we have built in the option to use both platforms in case of technical ity difficulties with one platform. During the 
COVID -19 restrictions, all consenting will be done remotely (not in -person). We have included the option  for electronic consent to 
reduce the length of the first in -person visit , while still providing ample time  for the consent process. During the teleconsent process, 
the participant and staff member will be able to talk with each other and review the consent form together. When participants sign the 
consent form (details below), the form can be downloaded by [CONTACT_497408] a secure REDCap/Box folder (details below).  
All participants will be provided with a hard copy and/or electronic copy of the consent form. Participants will be given tim e to review 
the consent documents, as well as a detailed overview  of the consent documents by [CONTACT_464]. After participants have read the 
documents and the documents have been described by [CONTACT_5984], participants will demonstrate that they understand key as pects of 
the study by [CONTACT_497409] (e.g., “Can you tell me what the risks of participation 
are?”). Participants will sign the consent form only after both the participant and the study staff member are confident that  the 
participant understands their particip ation and the risks associated with participating. Consent/HIPAA signatu res may be collected  
electronically. When consent is collected electronically  in person , our study team has a combination laptop/tablet that will be used for 
the eProcess. No informati on will be stored locally on the laptop/tablet; all information will be stored securely in REDCap/Box folder 
if captured electronically. Instead of signing on paper, a participant will enter his/her name, date, and sign electronically  (with mouse 
or finger ) in REDCap.   [CONTACT_84135] will supervise all aspects of the recruiting process. During the COVID -[ADDRESS_639729] . We currently use this lab space for a number of other lab -based studies. This space includes four 
testing rooms for conducting participant visits, and these tes ting rooms are ventilated to allow smoking /tobacco use  inside the room. 
The lab also has a bathroom for collecting urine specimens, and a control room where staff can see and talk to participants w hile they 
complete smoking procedures in the testing rooms.  
5.[ADDRESS_639730] recruitment methods (craigslist, TV , radio, 
newspaper, social media)  using IRB -approved flyers and ads . Potential p articipants will  be directed to a REDCap screening 
questionnaire for determination of preliminary eligibility . All appropriate approvals will be obtained if/as needed prior to posting any 
flyers/advertising in the community.  
5.[ADDRESS_639731] sp ot urine samples at baseline and the follow up visit. These urine samples  are collected for the purposes of pregnancy 
testing, and for testing urinary cotinine (the primary metabolite of nicotine) to assess nicotine exposure. Each specimen will be 
transfer red to the Clinical Neurobiology Laboratory within the Institute of Psychiatry for the cotinine analysis. Specimens will be 
identified using participant ID, and the lab report will include the specimen ID, which can be linked back to the remainder o f the 
participant data by [CONTACT_30165]. The report will be stored on a password protected server. Urine specimens will be destroyed after 
cotinine analysis.   
5.5 MODIFIED PROCEDURES TO BE IMPLEMENTED DURING COVID -19 RESTRICTIONS:  
After passing initial screening, all participants will be consented into the study through our established remote procedures via RedCap, 
instead of having the option to complete the conse nt process in person. All in -person screening questionnaires that can be administered 
over the phone prior to the visit will be completed over the phone (demographics questionnaire, physiological & medical histo ry, & 
tobacco use history). Participants who are ineligible based on these questionnaires will be paid for the visit, but not required to come 
into the lab to complete the remaining screening assessments. If the participant is still eligible after completing these questi onnaires, 
we will then schedul e them to come into the laboratory to complete the remainder of the visit . For visits [ADDRESS_639732] (for CO collection and e -cigarette disbursal), at least six feet of distance will be 
maintained by [CONTACT_464327] a desk/table six feet away from the participant and then staff steppi[INVESTIGATOR_497404] y while the participant 
approaches to retrieve materials. All surfaces will be sanitized prior to the visit and after the visit.  
  
Protocol version August 18 , 2020  
11 
  
6 STUDY  
 
Timepoints  Screening / Baseline  Lab Session [ADDRESS_639733] for Nicotine Dependence  X  X 
Penn State Cigarette Dependence Index  X  X 
Penn State Dependence –Assigned Product    X 
Brief Wisconsin Inventory of Smoking Dependence Motives  X  X 
Electronic Daily Diaries  Enroll→ → →Unenroll  
*Cigarette Evaluation Scale   X  
*Purchase Task (UB)   X  
*Perceived Health Risks (UB)   X  
*Product Evaluation Scale (IQOS)   X  
*Purchase Task (Cig + IQOS)   X X 
*Purchase Task (IQOS)   X X 
*Perceived Health Risks (IQOS)   X X 
Preference Task   X X 
Protocol version August [ADDRESS_639734]  that they may offer reduced harm.  Questionnaires and 
interviews are all non -invasive and involve minimal risk to study participants.  
 
7.1 RISKS TO SUBJECTS  
Potential risks are as follows:  
1) Use of HTP  
2) Concurrent Use of HTP and smoking  
3) Potential for underminin g cessation  
4) Non-smokers in the home (i.e., children) experimenting with non -cigarette tobacco 
products  
5) Loss of confidentiality  
Use of HTP. HTP are not fully combusted, and therefore levels of carcinogens are markedly 
reduced, if not eliminated, comparable to trace levels seen in nicotine replacement products [2]2. 
HTP contain reconstituted tobacco, and therefore, toxicant exposure appears to be greater than it 
is for exclusive use of e-cigarettes  [2]. Thus, for current smokers who are provided with an HTP, 
such as IQOS, use of this product is less harmful than continuing to u se their current tobacco 
product. We will verify smoking status and study onset, and thus, we will not provide an HTP to 
anyone to whom it would present increased risk.  
There is little information about likely AEs for use of HTP or the IQOS product. In a randomized 
trial conducted by [CONTACT_497410], there were fewer AEs among smokers who were randomly 
assigned to switch to IQOS than among smokers who were randomly assigned to continue smoking 
their usual brand [4]. However, the incidence of cough was higher among the participants assigned 
to switch to IQOS (20%) [4].  
 
Concurrent use of HTP and smoking. If smokers engage in dual use, the major concern will be 
intake of nicotine, and too much of it.  Symptoms of nicotine intoxication include nausea, 
dizziness, headache, and stomachache [5]. In a randomized trial conducted by [CONTACT_497410], 
smokers who were randomly assigned to switch to IQOS sometimes used both IQOS and 
cigarettes, and there was no reported evidence of nicotine intoxication , nor were there any serious 
adverse events [4]. The bulk of the evidence surrounding these products suggests that smokers who 
engage in dual use with HTP are able to titrate their nicotine intake. That is , they reduce their use 
of one product when they increase use of another product in order to avoid excessive nicotine 
intake. In the same randomized IQOS trial discussed above, smokers who used both IQOS and 
smoked cigarettes did not have significantly cha nged exposure to nicotine  [4]. Thus, it is unlikely 
that concurrent use of cigar ettes along with the IQOS product would result in nicotine intoxication.  
Undermining cessation. Another potential risk is that the sampling intervent ion will decrease 
rather than increase future cessation. We do not know of any studies to examine this research 
question for IQOS. All participants will be told at the outset that quitting use of all tobacco products 
Protocol version August [ADDRESS_639735]. Carpenter’s recently completed snus trial in which he mailed 
tins of smokeless tobacco to smokers all over the country, such “diversion” was not a problem, nor 
has it been observed in his ongoing R01 of e -cigarettes.  We will verify smoking status at the study 
outset and will advise participants who receive HTP to keep them out of reach of children and pets.  
Confid entiality.  A final risk is breach of confidentiality.  
2. Adequacy of protection against risks.  
2.[ADDRESS_639736] up to date CITI Certification for Protection of 
Human Subjects and will keep this training current throughout t he course of the study.  Study 
participants will be recruited through local media outlets in each recruitment city (e.g., crai gslist, 
flyers, print ads, tv, F acebook).  Participants will be directed to an online REDCap screening 
questionnaire for determina tion of initial eligibility. We have a system in place for REDCap to 
flag potential duplicate entries, ensuring we are able to exclude participants who might try to 
complete the screener multiple times to gain entry to the study. Participants who are deter mined 
to be eligible will be sent the informed consent document to review on their own before scheduling 
an informed consent teleconsent session  or coming to the lab to review the consent document in 
person. During the consent session, study staff will rev iew the consent document with participants, 
and answer any questions the participants may have. Participants will demonstrate that they 
understand key aspects of the study by [CONTACT_497411] (e.g., “Can you  tell me what the risks of participation are?”). Participants will sign 
the consent form only after both the participant and the study staff member are confident that the 
participant understands their participation and the risks associated with participati ng. Consent 
signatures will be collected electronically  during teleconsent or on our study tablet if in person . 
No information will be stored locally on the laptop/tablet; all information will be stored securely 
in REDCap. We will abide by [CONTACT_464330].  [CONTACT_84135] will 
supervise all aspects of the recruiting process.    
2.[ADDRESS_639737] risk . 
Use of  HTP. At screening, p articipants will be screened for general medical precautions by [CONTACT_6270] -
report (cardiovascular disease, seizure disorders), and all participants will be monitored for adverse 
events during the study period. W e will clearly advise against use of any tobacco product during 
pregnancy and breastfeeding. Participants will be educated about potential risks of tobacco use, 
including risks specific to HTP, and concurrent use of these products with cigarettes. Any seri ous 
or unexpected adverse events will be reported to the IRB. The most likely adverse event (potential 
for nicotine overdose) is anticipated to be rare (<5%) and mild (mouth/throat irritation, cough, 
headache, nausea, headache), and will be handled quickly  (i.e., advice to participant to reduce or 
stop HTP). Lab studies of toxin exposure (above) suggest that HTP confer no greater risk to health 
than do conventional cigarettes. It is unlikely that HTP users will become addicted to the product 
in the 1 -week s ampling period.  All participants will be provided with cessation information 
(referrals to Quitline) as part of this study.  
Concurrent use of HTP and smoking. Per above, the most common effects from too much 
nicotine are nausea, headache, and disturbed sl eep. The sampling period  is one week  in duration, 
Protocol version August [ADDRESS_639738] a toll -free number available for participants to call if they experience 
an adver se event (AE).  All study contacts will remind participants of this number. Participants 
will be encouraged to contact [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Smith as soon as possible for serious events. If they wish, they 
may contact [CONTACT_497412].  
Undermining cessation. We emphasize that this is not a cessation trial, though we will collect 
various cessation outcomes. Nonetheless, it  is possible that use of  HTP will undermine quitting 
(though this would be contrary to existing literature).  At study outset and at the end of the study, 
participants will be reminded that quitting all tobacco products is best for their health, although 
completely switching to a less harmful product is likely to improve their health.  
Diversion of or IQOS. We wi ll verify smoking status prior to enrollment  in order to ensure that 
we do not provide IQOS to a non -smoker for whom these products would represent increased 
health risks. We will strongly advise participants that they are not to share the study product wi th 
others, and that they should store the product in a secure area that is out of reach of children and 
pets. We cannot directly assess any diversion/uptake from the perspective of adolescents, since 
that would require separate consent, and is a separate r esearch question.  
Confidentiality. We will use the participant’s name [CONTACT_497414]/HIPAA documents and these will be kept  in electronically in REDCap, a secure database.  
Instead of signing on paper, a participant will enter his/her name, date, and sign electronically 
(with mouse or finger) in REDCap.   REDCap is a secure, password -protected database. Any 
research materials collected on paper will be kept in locked files at the Cancer Control Program of 
the Hollings Cancer Center, with limited access to the study personnel. All database files will 
include password protection to further ensure confidentiality.  
7.[ADDRESS_639739] to 
regulate tobacco products with the goal of improving public health.  
8 DEFINITION OF ENDPOINTS  
Screening : A variety of questionnaires and assessments will be used for the purpose of determining 
eligibility. This includes a Demographics Questionnaire , expi[INVESTIGATOR_497405], Physiological and Medical History Questionnaire , urinary pregnancy test , and a detailed 
Tobacco Use History Questionnaire .  
Base line: For participants who have been determined to be eligible, additional baseline 
questionnaires will be administered including a Stages of Change Questionnaire which assesses a 
participant’s interest in quitting, smoking dependence questionnaires includ ing Fagerstrom Test 
for Nicotine Dependence , Penn State Cigarette Dependence Index , and the Brief Wisconsin 
Inventory of Smoking Dependence Motives .  
Daily Diaries:  Daily diaries will assess the number of cigarettes used each day, as well as the 
number of IQOS Heat Sticks  used. We will assess which product (cigarette or IQOS ) was preferred 
and which was used first each day. Participants will be enrolled in these dail y diaries at the baseline 
session and will continue to complete them each day until the Follow up session when they are 
Protocol version August 18 , 2020  
15 
 unenrolled. The primary outcome obtained using the daily diaries is the average number of 
cigarettes smoked during the baseline and samp ling weeks.  
Lab Session 2: Sampling:  Participants will sample a traditional cigarette and the IQOS product. 
Participants will sample each product (four puffs at their own pace), and then wait [ADDRESS_639740] or beginning the pre ference assessment (i.e., [ADDRESS_639741] interval). During the interproduct interval, participants will complete questionnaires 
about the product they just sampled, each designed to assess the subjective effects and 
reinforcement value of the produ ct they just sampled. After sampling the traditional cigarette, 
participants will complete three questionnaires. 1) The Cigarette Evaluation Scale, which assesses 
the sensory characteristics of the cigarette. Five subscales can be created from this assessm ent as 
previously described [6]: Satisfaction subscale, Psychological Reward subscale, Aversion 
subscale, Enjoyment of the Sensations in the Respi[INVESTIGATOR_497406], and Craving subscale. 2) 
the Cigarette Purchase Task which assesses how many cigarettes participants estimate they would 
smoke at a variety of prices . As previously described [7], the following parameters can be 
calculated from thi s questionnaire: Intensity, or the number of cigarettes participants estimate they 
would smoke if cigarettes were free; Omax, or the maximum amount of money participants report 
they would spend in a single day; Pmax, or the price that produces Omax, Breakp oint, or the 
highest price at which participants report they would continue to smoke, and alpha, or the elasticity 
of demand for smoking. 3) the Perceived Health Risks scale, which assesses personal health risks 
associated with smoking. After sampling the IQOS product  participants will complete four 
questionnaires.:  1) the Product Evaluation Scale , adapted from the Cigarette Evaluation Scale, 
which asks participants to rate the product on sensory characteristics (e.g., tasted good, 
immediately reduced cravi ng for cigarettes) . This questionnaire is analyzed in the same way as the 
Cigarette Evaluation Scale.  2) a modified Cigarette Purchase Task , in which participants estimate 
how many cigarettes they would smoke at a variety of prices if IQOS  were also availa ble (a test 
of whether the product reduces the reinforcement value of cigarettes), 3) a Product Purchase Task  
in which participants  estimate how many Heat Sticks they would use across a series of prices if it 
were the only tobacco product available (a test of the reinforcement value of IQOS .  Both the 
modified Cigarette Purchase Task and the Product Purchase Task are analyzed in the same way as 
the Cigarette Purchase Task. 4) a Perceived Health Risks  scale, which assesses personal health 
risks associated with IQOS , and is the same scale used for traditional cigarettes .  
Lab Session 2: Preference Assessment: After completing the sampling portion of this session, 
participants will c omplete the preference assessment. Preference Assessments have been used in a 
variety of contexts to determine reinforcement value. Across a series of trials, participants will 
have the option to choose either a traditional cigarette or IQOS . The primary o utcome is the 
product most preferred.  
Lab Session 3: Follow -up Questionnaires: After participants have taken home and sampled their 
assigned product for one week, they will return to the lab to complete a variety of follow -up 
questionnaires. This includes expi[INVESTIGATOR_33514] (an objective marker of changes in smoke 
exposure compared to baseline), and the four questionnaires they completed about each product 
during the sampling session, this time completed about the product they took home with them for 
the week (Product Ev aluation Scale, modified Cigarette Purchase Task, Product Purchase Task, 
Perceived Health Risks).  
Protocol version August [ADDRESS_639742] identified clear risks associated with the trial, 
which are related to potential breaches of  confidentiality and use of HTP .  
 
Risks associated with this study include:  
1) Use of HTP  
2) Concurrent Use of HTP and smoking  
3) Potential for undermining cessation  
4) Non-smokers in the home (i.e., children) experimenting with non -cigarette tobacco 
products  
Protocol version August 18 , 2020  
17 
 5) Loss of confidentiality  
 
When a serious AE occurs, [CONTACT_84135] will review it prior to the participant's next scheduled visit.  
If a death occurs, study staff will n otify [CONTACT_84135] immediately and she will notify the IRB.  
 
[ADDRESS_639743] and monitoring of clinical investigations; they also repr esent sound research 
practice:  
12.1 INFORMED CONSENT  
The principles of informed consent are described by [CONTACT_60836] 
(Federal Register Vol. 46, No. 17, January 27, 1981, part 50) and the Office for 
Protection from Research Risks Reports:  Protection of Human Subjects (Code of Federal 
Regulations 45 CFR 46).  They must be followed to comply with FDA regulations for the 
conduct and monitoring of clinical investigations.  
12.2 INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW  
Adverse events will be handled in accordan ce with MUSC Human Research Protection 
Program (HRPP) policies. Any event that is unexpected, related or possibly related, and 
suggest that the research places participants at greater risk than was previously known  will 
be reported to MUSC IRB . Serious adv erse events (SAEs) are  defined in Section 4.7 of 
MUSC HRPP as any adverse event temporarily associated with a participant’s participation 
in research that results in death, is life -threatening, requires inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], 
results in significant dis ability/incapacity, results in a congenital anomaly, or any other 
adverse event that requires  immediate m edical or surgical intervention. Consistent with 
IRB policy, any unexpected death will be reported within 24 hours and any unanticipated 
problem involv ing risk to subjects or others  will be reported within 10 days .  
REFERENCES  
1. Auer, R., et al., Heat -Not-Burn Tobacco Cigarettes: Smoke by [CONTACT_497413].  
JAMA Intern Med, 2017. 177(7): p. 1050 -1052.  
2. Leigh, N.J., et al., Tobacco -specific nitrosamines (TSNA) in heated tobacco product 
IQOS.  Tob Control, 2018. 27(Suppl 1): p. s37 -s38. 
3. Tobacco Meets Technology .  December 26, 2017]; Available from: 
https://www.pmi.com/smoke -free-products/iqos -our-tobacco -heating -system . 
4. Ludicke, F., et al., Effects of Switching to a Heat -Not-Burn Tobacco Product on 
Biologically -Relevant Biomarkers to assess a Candidate Modified Risk  Tobacco 
Product: A Randomized Trial.  Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_1948], 2019.  
5. Benowitz, N.L., Nicotine Safety and Toxicity . 1998, [LOCATION_001]: Oxford University 
Press.  
6. Arger, C.A., et al., Preliminary validity of the modified Cigarette Evaluation 
Questi onnaire in predicting the reinforcing effects of cigarettes that vary in nicotine 
content.  Exp Clin Psychopharmacol, 2017. 25(6): p. [ADDRESS_639744] of smoking reduced nicotine content cigarettes on 
sensitivity to cigarette price: further results from a multi -site clinical trial.  
Addiction, 2017. 112(2): p. [ADDRESS_639745] 18 , 2020  
18 
  