Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 Page 1 of 43 STUDY SYNOPSIS  
Title:  An Open- Label,  Proof -Of-Concept, S tudy of 
Ixekizumab in the Treatment of Pyoderma 
Gangrenosum   
 
Protocol number:   
Phase:  II 
Indication:  Pyoderma Gangrenosum  
Study drug and 
comparator:  Ixekizumab SQ  
No comparator is used in this study.  
Main Objectives:  Primary Objective : the proportion of subjects achieving 
a two point reduction in the five -point investigator global 
assessment (IGA) for the target ulcer from baseline to 
week 12 
Secondary  Objectives :  
-Analysis of f requency of total closure of target /total 
ulcers from baseline to week 12  
-Analysis of c hange in total surface area of target/total 
ulcers from baseline to week 12  
-Analysis of c hange Patient Global Assessment (PGA) 
from baseline until week 12  
-Analysis of c hange in patient pain perception using 10-
point visual analog scale from baseline to week 12  
-Analysis of c hange in patient quality of life using the 
dermatology life quality index (DLQI) from baseline to 
week 12 
 
Study design:  This is a Phase II study that will be open label and include 
a total of five patients  who will receive the investigational 
product . These patients will have histological testing to 
rule out competing etiologies and require 3rd party 
adjudication/confirmation on agreement of the diagnosis. 
These patients will undergo 12 weeks of ixekizumab dosed 
every 2 weeks with follow -up until week 16.  
Major 
inclusion/exclusion 
criteria:  For the complete list of inclusion/exclusion , criteria refer 
to Section 4.  
Major inclusion criteria:  
- Have a clinical diagnosis of classic PG for at least [ADDRESS_405387] a PG ulcer characterized by ‘item a’ 
AND 3/5 features in ‘item b’ OR 2/5 features in ‘item b’ with support from one of the conditions listed in c.   
a. Stable or increasing size within 2 months preceding screening by [CONTACT_328405], Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 Page 2 of 43 b. Features such as violaceo us border, 
undermining, cribriform scarring, pustules, 
peristomal location  
c. Identifiable secondary systemic condition, such as IBD, arthritis, MGUS, noncancerous hematologic disease, streptococcal carriage, levamisole- tainted cocaine, Bruton’s 
agammaglob ulinemia  
 
- Have a PG target ulcer that has an area ≥ 2 cm
2 and ≤ 
200 cm2 at screening   
- Initial IGA of 3 or higher on a 5 point scale (0 -4) 
 
Major exclusion criteria:  
1. Any condition (e.g., psychiatric illness, severe 
alcoholism, or drug abuse) or situation that may compromise the ability of the subject to give written informed consent, may put the subject at significant risk, may jeopardize the subject’s safety after exposure to the study drug, may confound the study results, or may interfere signi ficantly with the subject’s 
participation in the study  
2. History of malignancy within 2 years of screening other 
than carcinoma in situ of the cervix or adequately treated, non- metastatic, squamous or basal cell 
carcinoma of the skin  
3. History of seropos itivity for HIV antibody; active or 
carrier status of hepatitis B [surface antigen (HBsAg) positive, or core antibody (anti -HBc) positive with 
negative surface antibody]; active hepatitis C (i.e. not treated or not cleared spontaneously, as confirmed by [CONTACT_328406])  
4. History of severe allergic or anaphylactic reaction to  
    monoclonal antibodies  
5. Systemic infection (excluding wound colonization) 
requiring oral antibiotics within 2 weeks of Day 0 
6. History of the following treatments: 
a. Anti -TNF or oth er biologic therapi[INVESTIGATOR_6523] 5  
    half -lives of screening  
b. Changes (addition, discontinuation, or changes 
in dose) in immunosuppressive medication 
(including cyclosporine, azathioprine, 
methotrexate, mycophenolate mofetil, 
apremilast, dapsone, or cortic osteroids ) within 2 
months of Day 0  
c. Systemic corticosteroids > 20 mg per day 
(prednisone or prednisone equivalent) within 8 
weeks of Day 0, or change in dose within 8 
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 Page 3 of 43 weeks of Day 0. Steroids may be tapered 
(although not increased above the Day 0 dose)  
during the trial as determined by [CONTACT_1275].  
d. Intralesional corticosteroids within 8 weeks of 
day 0; topi[INVESTIGATOR_328390].  
e. Wound debridement within 2 weeks of Day 0; 
dressing changes allowed per investigator discretion.  
g. Systemic antibiotics within 2 weeks of Day 0 h. Live, attenuated vaccines within 3 months of 
Day 0; or live, seasonal -flu- or H1N1 vaccines 
within 2 weeks of Day 0. Note: recombinant - 
and/or killed vaccines are permitted.  
i. Hyperbaric treatment within [ADDRESS_405388] any stabilization/response is exclusionary. This potentially indicates the disease is not PG.  
 
Endpoints:  • Change in IGA between baseline and week 12  
Safety plan:  Enrollment and toxicities on this trial will be monitored by 
[CONTACT_458] [INVESTIGATOR_328391] (DSMC )  
Study treatment:  Ixekizumab subcutaneous injection [ADDRESS_405389] do se at week 12.  
Concomitant therapy 
and clinical practice:  As PG is a disease responsive to immunosuppression, use of concomitant medications will be carefully monitored, and patents will be required to have stable or worsening disease on a consistent dose of immunosuppression at screening.  
1. Mycophenolate mofet il, azathioprine, cyclosporine, 
leflunomide, dapsone, apremilast and methotrexate will be allowed, but the patient is required to have 
stable/worsening disease for 4 weeks prior to screening, 
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 Page 4 of 43 while on a stable dose of immunosuppression for > 8 
weeks prior to baseline.  
2. Anti -TNF or other biologic therapi[INVESTIGATOR_328392] 5 half -lives before screening, or during the 
study.  
3. Oral corticosteroids above 20 mg daily of prednisone 
(or equivalent) are excluded. Lower doses are allowed provided they are prescribed at stable doses for two months prior to baseline and are 20 mg or less per day of prednisone or other equivalently- dosed corticosteroids.  
4. Intralesional corticosteroids within 4 weeks of  
screening and during the study  are not permitted  
5. Other therapi[INVESTIGATOR_328393]- immunosuppressive and 
non-investigational can be started or continued at 
physician discretion provided the medicine has no history of association with progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. Antibiotics may  be used as ne eded 
for evidence of superinfection, positive culture results, malodor, green discharge, etc.  
 
Statistical methods:  The primary objective of a two- point IGA decrease in the 
target ulcer will be analyzed as the difference from baseline, with the null hypothesis that no patients will obtain the specified improvement if the investigational product does not have efficacy. The endpoint will be analyzed using the Fisher Exact test. The secondary and exploratory objectives will be analyzed in comparison to basel ine measurements and at each time point to evaluate 
for efficacy using either the Fisher Exact test/Chi -square 
test or the Wilcoxon Rank Sums test. We anticipate that the basic statistics will be completed within [ADDRESS_405390] patient completing h is/her week 12 visit. 
Analyzing the interferon multiplex assay and microbiome will take longer, but will primarily be descriptive at the different time points and be analyzed by T -testing for 
continuous variables .  
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 Page 5 of 43 1.0 BACKGROUND INFORMATI ON 
 
Pyoderma Gangrenosum (PG) (Figure 1) is a neutrophilic inflammatory condition that 
results in ulcerations, classically over the lower extremity, which can be disfiguring and disabling. M ost often, this disease is associated with inflammatory bowel disease or 
hematologic diseases such as MG US, myelodysplastic syndrome, multiple myeloma, or 
acute myelogeneous leukemia
1.  Less frequently, it has been associated with underlying 
conditions such as streptococcal infections/carriage, seronegative arthritis, hidradenitis suppurativa, and Bruton’s agammaglobulinemia.  
Unlike most 
dermatologic 
diseases, PG poses a significant mortality 
risk, with an 8 -year 
mortality rate as high 
as 16%
1. IL-1, IL -6, 
TNF, and other acute phase inflammatory cytokines have been 
shown to be elevated
[ADDRESS_405391] demonstrated efficacy in treating pyoderma 
gangrenosum
3,4. These cytokines are elevated in a wide variety of in flammatory skin 
diseases though. More specific cytokines, such as Interleukin -23, a critical cytokine for 
T-helper 17 cell (Th17) expression, has been found to be elevated in patients with 
pyoderma gangrenosum5. Furthermore, in a study of [ADDRESS_405392] incurable 
comorbidities that are driving their disease (i.e. if immunosuppression is withdrawn, the 
underlying disease will worsen and PG will intensify concurrently) . Further, w hen 
corticosteroids were compared with cyclosporine, neither was shown to be superior, 
although corticosteroids were shown to be associated with more infectious side -effects8. 
Both therapi[INVESTIGATOR_328394]; they 
are effective treatments but they are overly broad in their immunosuppression, less specific to the disease and, therefore, may present a greater than needed patient risk when 
compared to new biologic therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. Based on the chronic nature of the disease, the 
Figure [ADDRESS_405393] successfully been completed, with others still in progress. There is an IL -1 modulator still 
in progress (MABp1), as well as  a secukinumab investigator -initiated trial (IIT) in 
progress in Europe (ClinicalTrials.Gov). While the data are not published for these trials, or for a recently terminated IL -1 modulator trial (gevokizumab), several randomized 
controlled trials have been  previously conducted. In the IBD patient, infliximab has been 
compared to placebo and was shown to successfully treat PG
3. Similarly to this current 
proposed study, the infliximab trial did not use complete closure, but rather an 
investigator global scale as the primary endpoint3. A recently published British study 
compared cyclosporine to prednisolone but did not determine a difference in 
improvement between the groups, although more infections in the were noted in the prednisolone group
8. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_328395], PG is in the same position that that psoriasis 
was [ADDRESS_405394] ended/are ending, so no competing trials are anticipated.  
 
1.1 STATEMENT ON COMPLIANCE 
 
This study will be conducted in compliance with this protocol, GCP, Declaration of 
Helsinki, and all applicable national and local regulations governing clinical studies.  
 
2.0 STUDY OBJECTIVES AND PURPOSE  
 
2.1 STUDY PURPOSE  
Pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) is a neutrophilic dermatosis with a multitude of 
presentation s extending from pustules to vegetative lesions. It most consistently presents 
as an ulceration of the lower extremities with deep, undermining, and violaceous borders. The disease is an orphan disease without any FDA approved treatments. Classically, it i s 
associated with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), chronic streptococcal infections, acute myelogeneous leukemia (AML), myelodysplastic syndrome, or monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance (MGUS). Corticosteroids and cyclosporine have been the prima ry treatments for patients; however, biologics also appear to be effective. 
The most closely studied is infliximab, an inhibitor of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
3. A 
subcutaneous injection of an interleukin- 1 (IL -1) modulator recently went through a 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_328396]; however, the trial was stopped short and the data has not been published, leaving an open horizon for finding the 
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, [ADDRESS_405395] on neutrophil numbers and function, suggesting the likely 
benefit of ixekizumab. Similarly, secukinumab, an alternate IL -17 inhibitory monoclonal 
antibody is currently being studied for the treatment of PG in an ongoing trial in [LOCATION_013]  (ClinicalTrials.Gov).  
 
Methodologically, this study will be conducted as an open- label, non- randomized, proof -
of-concept s tudy in patients with confirmed pyoderma gangrenosum. Patients will be 
initiated with psoriasis dosing of ixekizumab and will continue q2 week dosing to week 
12. The primary endpoint for this study will be the proportion of subjects achieving a two-point i mprovement in the five -point investigator global scale (IGA). This is a simpler 
endpoint than the use of complete resolution of target ulcers and will allow for demonstration of benefit in a much shorter interval than complete resolution of ulcers. In addition, this endpoint may be more familiar to clinicians because dermatologists 
implicitly perform this grading every office visit as opposed to measuring and 
mathematically calculating an improvement with each visit.  
 
2.2 OBJECTIVES  
 
PRIMARY OBJECTIVE  
The prim ary objective of this study is the proportion of subjects achieving a two point 
reduction in the five -point investigator global assessment (IGA) for the target ulcer from 
baseline to week 12. We hypothesize that ixekizumab, started at psoriasis dosing until 
ulcer closure will allow for healing of target a nd additional ulcers. However, 12 weeks is 
a short period to allow for complete ulcer resolution. Because of this, the use of an IGA 
endpoint was chosen as opposed to complete target ulcer healing. Thus , target and total 
ulcer complete healin g between week 0 and 12 will be secondary objectives. There is no 
comparative group as this is a proof -of-concept study without a placebo.  
 
SECONDARY OBJECTIVES  
In addition to the primary objective, further secondar y objectives include:  
-Analysis of f requency of total closure of target and total ulcers from baseline to week 12  
-Analysis of c hange in total surface area of target/total ulcers from baseline to week 12  
-Analysis of c hange Patient Global Assessment (PGA) from baseline until week 12 
-Analysis of c hange in patient pain perception using 10- point visual analog scale from 
baseline to week 12 
-Analysis of c hange in patient quality of life using the dermatology life quality index 
(DLQI) from baseline to wee k 12 
 EXPLORATORY OUTCOMES  
-Evaluation of an [IGA x Ulcer Area] scoring metric for target ulcer at each time -point  
-Change in microbiome of ulcer between baseline and week 12  
-Change in inflammatory markers between baseline and week 12:  C-reactive protein  
(CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), absolute neutrophils  and total leukocytes  in 
serum ; IL-1, IL -6, IL -8, and TNF in target lesion tissue .  
-Change in serum biomarker (if can be ascertained), depending on underlying cause (i.e. 
perinuclear anti -neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (pANCA) and anti -saccharomyces 
cerevisiae antibodies (ASCA) in patients with IBD, anti- streptolysin -O (ASO) in patien ts 
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 Page 8 of 43 with streptococcus-  driven disease, or levels of monoclonal/polyclonal protein in patients 
with MGUS/elevated IgA levels.  
 
3.0 STUDY DESIGN  
 
1. Intent:  
The intent of this study is to demonstrate evidence for the use of ixekizumab in the 
treatment of PG.  Ixekizumab is an IL -[ADDRESS_405396] 
will be valuable in treating PG: IL -23, a critical cytokine for activation of Th17 and 
subsequent IL-17 production, has been found to be elevated in patients with pyoderma 
gangrenosum5, as has the expression of Th17 cells themselves6.  
 
2. Location  
The study will be conducted in Columbus , OH, at T he Ohio State University (OSU) 
dermatology clinical trials center. Both the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_328397] -sponsored clinical trials in 
PG, having completing two trials in 2015- 16. At  this time, we anticipate no competing 
trials in PG, and we estimate that [ADDRESS_405397] been pr operly excluded (i.e. trigger a screen failure). This is an important 
step because PG is a diagnosis of exclusion that even experts can misdiagnose and, 
subsequently, potentially publish data erroneously
9. Having the unbiased expert agree to 
the diagnosis will not only add credibility to both the trial and the eventual publication, 
but it will also ensure validity and the homogeneity of pathogenesis among the patients 
enrolled. [CONTACT_328412] will not be sent PHI. Laboratory results will be obtained through the 
OSU Wexner Medical Center at predefined research discounts in the budget. 
Complications, unforeseen events or additionally- needed hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], medicines, or 
office visits will be outside of the scop e of the trial and will be funded by [CONTACT_102]’s 
health insurance. Institutional Review Board approval will be obtained from  the OSU 
Biomedical  IRB.  
 
3. Population 
Patients with a diagnosis of pyoderma gangrenosum for at least [ADDRESS_405398] may be enrolled in the study. Prisoners, children 
< [ADDRESS_405399] Recruitment:  
Patients will be recruited to this trial based on the diagnosis of pyoderma gangrenosum 
from the principle investigator’s clinic, as well as through the use of the OSU Wexner 
Medical C enter patient database for patients who have been seen in the past four years 
with an encounter diagnosis code of 686.01. Specific advertisement wil l be targeted 
towards local community dermatologists, and will consist of letters and emails for 
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 Page 9 of 43 notification of the study and referral options. Once patients are identified through the 
information query or through investigator records, the investigator wi ll review the 
patient’s chart from multiple encounters to ensure that the patient has the diagnosis of PG 
(per chart review), as the diagnosis can be difficult even for expert clinicians9. After the 
screening visit, an unassociated expert ([CONTACT_328412]) will c onfirm the diagnosis before 
patients undergo a baseline visit or start the investigational medicine.  
 
5. Treatment Groups:  
We have received  funding for only a small pi[INVESTIGATOR_328398] a benefit from IL -17 
inhibition in PG. Therefore, there is only one tre atment arm. The primary outcome will 
be a comparison of week 12 to baseline regarding a two- point improvement in the IGA.  
  6. Assignment strategy : 
There will be only one treatment group, so there is no assignment strategy.  
 
7. Subjects per Treatment Group:  
We anticipate consenting and screening a maximum of [ADDRESS_405400].  
  
3.1 PRIMARY ENDPOINTS  
 
The proportion of subjects achieving a two point reduction in the five -point investigator 
global assessment (IGA) for the targe t ulcer from baseline to week 12. 
 
3.2 SECONDARY ENDPOINTS  
-Frequency of total closure of target and total ulcers from baseline to week 12  
-Change in total surface area of target  and total ulcers from baseline to week 12 
-Change Patient Global Assessment (PGA) from baseline until week 12  
-Change in patient pain perception using 10- point visual analog scale from 
baseline to week 12  
-Change in patient quality of life using the dermatology life quality index (DLQI) 
from baseline to week 12  
 
3.3 EXPLORATORY ENDPOINT  
 
-Evaluation of an [IGA x Ulcer Area] scoring metric for target ulcer at each time -
point  
-Change in microbiome of target ulcer between baseline and week 12  
-Change in inflammatory markers between basel ine and week 12: C -reactive    
  protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), absolute neutrophils  and  
  total leukocytes  in serum ; IL-1, IL -6, IL -8, and TNF in target lesion tissue .  
-Change in serum biomarker (if can be ascertained), depending on underlying 
cause (i.e. perinuclear anti -neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (pANCA) and 
anti-saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies (ASCA) in patients with IBD, anti -
streptolysin -O (ASO) in patients with streptococcus - driven disease, or levels of 
monoclonal/ polyclonal protein in patients with MGUS/elevated IgA levels ).  
 
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 Page 10 of 43 4.0 SELECTION AND WITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS  
 
4.1 INCLUSION CRITERIA 
 Inclusion:  
1. Have given written informed consent before participating in any study- specific activity  
2. Have a clinical diagnosis of classic PG as determined by [CONTACT_328407], histological and laboratory 
assessments  
3. Have a PG ulcer characterized by ‘item a’ AND 3/5 features in ‘item b’ OR 2/5 
features in ‘item b’ with support from one of the conditions listed in c.   
a. Stable or increasing size within 2 months preceding screening by [CONTACT_328408]  
b. Features such as violaceous border, undermining, cribriform scarring, pustules, 
peristomal location  
c. Identifiable secondary systemic condition, such as IBD, arthritis, MGUS, noncancerous hematologic disease, streptococcal carriage, levamisole- tainted 
cocaine, Bruton’s agammaglobulinemia  
 
4. Have a PG target ulcer that has an area ≥ 2 cm
2 and ≤ 200 cm2 at screening  
5. Initial IGA of 3 or higher on a 5 point scale (0- 4) at screening 6. Age at least 18 years 
at screening  
7. Negative quantiferon tuberculosis (TB) test, or normal chest x- ray with previous 
treatment for latent TB in the previous [ADDRESS_405401] (for females of childbearing potential) at both screening and   
at Day 0  
9. For subjects with reproductive potential, a willingness to use methods * of 
contraception that will prevent the subject or the subject’s partner from becoming 
pregnant during the study. 
 
*Acceptable methods of contraception include proper use of condoms, cervical caps, 
diaphragms, hormonal contraceptive pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353] , contraceptive  implants, intrauterine devices, 
or total abstinence  
 
4.2 EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
 
1. Any condition (e.g., psychiatric illness, severe alcoholism, or drug abuse) or situation 
that may compromise the ability of the subject to give written informed consent, may put the subject at significant risk, m ay jeopardize the subject’s safety after exposure to 
the study drug, may confound the study results, or may interfere significantly with the 
subject’s participation in the study  
2. History of malignancy within 2 years of screening other than carcinoma in s itu of the 
cervix or adequately treated, non- metastatic, squamous or basal cell carcinoma of the 
skin 
3. History of seropositivity for HIV antibody; active or carrier status of hepatitis B 
[surface antigen (HBsAg) positive, or core antibody (anti -HBc) posi tive with negative 
surface antibody]; active hepatitis C (i.e. not treated or not cleared spontaneously, as 
confirmed by [CONTACT_328406])  
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 Page 11 of 43 4. History of severe allergic or anaphylactic reaction to monoclonal antibodies  
5. Systemic infection (excluding wound colonization) requiring oral antibiotics within 2 
weeks of Day 0 
6. History of the following treatments: 
a. Anti -TNF or other biologic therapi[INVESTIGATOR_6523] 5 half -lives of screening  
b. Changes (addition, discontinuation, or changes in dose) in immunosuppressiv e 
medication (including cyclosporine, azathioprine, methotrexate, 
mycophenolate mofetil, apremilast, dapsone, or corticosteroids within 2 
months of Day 0  
c. Systemic corticosteroids > 20 mg per day (prednisone or prednisone equivalent) 
within 8 weeks of D ay 0, or change in dose within 8 weeks of Day 0. Steroids 
may be tapered (although not increased above the Day 0 dose) during the trial 
as determined by [CONTACT_093].  
d. Intralesional corticosteroids within 8 weeks of day 0; topi[INVESTIGATOR_328399] a re permitted.  
e. Wound debridement within 2 weeks of Day 0; dressing changes allowed per 
investigator discretion.  
g. Systemic antibiotics within 2 weeks of Day 0 h. Live, attenuated vaccines within 3 months of Day 0; or live, seasonal -flu- or 
H1N1 vaccines within 2 weeks of Day 0. Note: recombinant - and/or killed 
vaccines are permitted.  
i. Hyperbaric treatment within [ADDRESS_405402] any 
stabilization/response is exclus ionary. This potentially indicates the disease is not PG.  
 
4.[ADDRESS_405403] WITHDRAWAL F ROM TREATMENT OR FOLLOW UP  
 
Patients will be withdrawn at his/her request at any point during the study. Patients 
becoming pregnant on therapy or no longer agreeing to contraception will be withdrawn 
from the study. Patients with SAEs will be withdrawn with the exception of patients 
admitted for pain control/pain management or wound infections at the discretion of the investigator, as these are both known complications of severe PG and do not necessarily represent worsening of disease.   
   
 
 
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, [ADDRESS_405404] and methotrexate are  allowed  if the dosage has been stable for >8 weeks prior to 
screening and  the patient has had  stable/worsening disease for 4 weeks prior to screening . 
2. Oral corticosteroids up to  20 mg daily of prednisone (or equivalent) are allowed  if the 
dosage has been stable for >8 weeks prior to screening and  the patient has had 
stable/worsening disease for 4 weeks prior to screening.  
3.  Other therapi[INVESTIGATOR_328400]- immunosuppressive and non- investigational may  be 
started or continued at physician discretion. Antibiotics may  be used as needed for 
evidence of superinfection, pos itive culture results, malodor, green discharge, etc.  
 
5.2.2 Prohibited Concomitant Therapy  
1. Intralesional corticosteroids are not permitted within 4 weeks prior to  screening and /or 
during the study. 
2.  Anti -TNF or other biologic therapi[INVESTIGATOR_328401] 5 half -lives prior to 
screening or during the study. 3. Oral corticosteroids above 20mg daily of prednisone (or equivalent) are not permitted during the study.    Aside from that which is administered during the study, a ny chemotherapy, 
immunotherapy, medications associated with PML , experimental therapy, or radiotherapy 
are prohibited.    
6.0 STUDY PROCEDURES  
 The schedules of events are shown in Table 6.1
.  Descriptions of the scheduled evaluations 
are outlined b elow and complete information on study drug and dosing is provided in 
Section 5.0. 
 Before study entry, throughout the study, and at t he follow -up evaluation, various clinical 
and diagnostic laboratory evaluations are outlined.  The purpose of obtaining these detailed measurements is to ensure adequate safety and tolerability assessments.  Clinical evaluations and laboratory studies may be repeated more frequently if clinically indicate d.
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 13 of 43 Table 6- 1.  Schedule of Assessments  
  Treatment Period  Follow Up  
  Screening  Baseline  Week 2  Week 4  Week 6  Week 8  Week 10  Week 12  Week 16  
Windows (Days)  -28 to -1 0 ±2 ±2 ±2 ±2 ±2 ±2 ±2 
Informed consent  X                
Medical History  X                
Disease History  X                
Inclusion  and Exclusion Criteria  X                
Demographics  X                
Study Drug Dispensation*    X X X X X X X  
Confirm PG Diagnosis  X                
Investigator Global Scale of PG 
severity    X           X X 
VAS   X           X X 
DLQI    X           X X 
PGA   X      X X 
Lesion Assessment  X X X X X X X X X 
Adverse Events  X   X X X X X X X 
Con Meds  X   X X X X X X X 
Vital Signs  X  X X X X X X X X 
Physical Exam  X  X  X X   X X X  X X 
Photography  X X      X    X X 
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 14 of 43  
  Treatment Period  Follow Up  
  Screening  Baseline  Week 2  Week 4  Week 6  Week 8  Week 10  Week 12  Week 16  
Windows (Days)  -28 to -1 0 ±2 ±2 ±2 ±2 ±2 ±2 ±2 
General Labs if not < x mo                   
Biopsy for exclusion if <12 mo  X                
CBC and Edif =1 mo  X X   X   X   X  
Complete Metabolic Panel = 1 
mo X                
HIV = 12 mo  X                
Hepatitis Panel = 12 mo  X                
Quantiferon TB -Gold = 12 mo  X                
General Bacterial Culture  X X      X      
Urine hCG (if of childbearing 
potential) = 1mo  X X   X   X   X  
          
 End Point Related Labs                   
C-Reactive Protein** X X    X    X  
Erythrocyte Sedimentation 
Rate** X X    X    X  
Saccharomyces Cervisae 
Antibodies** X X     X      
Antistreptolysin -O** X X     X      
Rheumatoid Factor** X X     X      
Serum protein 
electrophoresis** X  X         X  
Serum protein 
immunofixation**  X  X         X  
Biopsy for Analysis of Th17  and 
Inflammatory Cytokines  ***   X           X  
Microbiome of target  ulcer   X   X   X  
 
*Drug dispensation: 160mg at Week 0, then 80mg at subsequent dosing visits.  
**End-point related labs: only repeat after baseline if baseline labs are elevated.  
 ***Includes immunohistochemistry of tissue expression;  Inflammatory cytokines include IL -1, IL -6, IL -[ADDRESS_405405] (IRB)- approved combined informed consent form 
(ICF) and HIPAA authorization to confirm his or her willingness to participate in this  study and grant 
permission to use protected health information, respectively .  
 
Medical History  
Screening  
The subject’s complete history through review of medical records and by [CONTACT_328409] .  Concurrent medical signs and symptoms must be documented to establish baseline severities.  
All medications and therapi[INVESTIGATOR_328402] [ADDRESS_405406] of prior treatments, and responses and duration of response to these treatments  (if 
available) , will also be recorded.   
 
Adverse Events  
At all visits  
The accepted regulatory definition for an AE is provided in Section [ADDRESS_405407] be recorded. SAEs occurring prior to therapy will not be considered dose -limiting to xicities ( DLTs ). Important additional requirements for 
reporting SAEs are explained in 
Section  7 as well.  
 
Physical Examination & Vital Signs & Weight 
At all visits  
The physical examination will include, at a minimum, t he general appearance of the subject, height 
(screening only) and weight, as well as examination of the skin, nose, throat, lungs, heart, abdomen, 
extremities, and lymphatic system.  
Symptom -directed physical exams will be done during the treatment period and at the termination and 
safety follow -up visit.  
Vital signs (blood pressure, heart rate, respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], and body temperature) will be measured at every visit.  
 
Urine Pregnancy Test  
Monthly (Females of Pregnancy Potential)  
Pregnancy tests are required only for women with childbearing potential  at screening , and Weeks 0, 4, 8, 
12.  
Lesion Assessment  
Ulcerative l esions will be examined and measured during each study visit. T he length and width of up to 
5 ulcers will be measured at each study visit and the total surface area will be calculated. Additional 
assessment will include:  
• Photography - Ulcers will be imaged by [CONTACT_328410], and W eeks 0, 6, 12  and 16.  
• Biopsy - Biopsy will be performed of an inflammatory edge of the target ulcer. A 4mm punch 
biopsy will be used under local anesthesia, and the site will be closed with gel foam. This procedure is considered minimal risk by [CONTACT_1201]. Immunohistochemistry for Th17 and related inflammatory 
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 16 of 43 cytokines will be performed on biopsied tissue collected during Weeks 0 and 12. Biopsy may also 
be performed during screening to rule out other possible etiologies of the ulcer.  
• Swab - General culture swabs will be performed at Screen ing, and Weeks [ADDRESS_405408] of monitoring and recording AEs and SAEs; measurements of protocol -
specified hematolog y, clinical chemistry, urinalysis, and other laboratory variables; measurement of 
protocol -specified vital signs; and other protocol -specified tests that are deemed critical to the safety 
evaluation of the study drug(s).  
7.1.1 Serious Adverse Event  
The terms “severe ” and “serious” are not synonymous.  Severity (or intensity) refers to the grade of an 
AE (see below).  “Serious” is a regulatory definition and is based on subject or event outcome or action criteria usually associated with events that pose a threat t o a subject’s life or functioning.  Seriousness (not 
severity) serves as the guide for defining regulatory reporting obligations from the Sponsor to applicable regulatory authorities.  
An AE should be classified as an SAE if it meets any 1 of the following criteria:  
 
• It results in death (i.e . the AE actually causes or leads to death).  
• It is life -threatening (i. e. the AE, in the view of the investigator, places the subject at immediate risk 
of death.  It does not include an AE that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused 
death).  
• It requires or prolongs inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].   Exception will be admission due to inability to 
complete therapy as a consequence of limited clinic hours.  
• It results in persistent or significant disability/incapac ity (i.e . the AE results in substantial disruption 
of the subject’s ability to conduct normal life functions).  
• It results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect in a neonate/infant born to a mother exposed to the investigational product.  
• It is considered a significant medical event by [CONTACT_13656] ( i.e. may 
jeopardize the subject or may require medical/surgical intervention to prevent one  of the outcomes 
listed above). 
 
7.2 DOCUMENTING AND REPO RTING OF ADVERSE AND SERIOUS ADVERSE 
EVE NTS  
The investigator is responsible for ensuring that all AEs and SAEs that are observed or reported during the study, as outlined in the prior sections, are recorded on the electronic CRF (eCRF).  All SAEs also must be reported  within [ADDRESS_405409]’s medical record and on the AE eCRF and, when applicable, on an 
SAE/Product Compliant form.  
Each recorded AE or SAE will be described by [CONTACT_13662] (i.e . start and end dates), severity, regulatory 
seriousness criteria, i f applicable, suspected relationship to the investigational product (see following 
guidance), and any actions taken.  
To ensure consistency of AE and SAE causality assessments, investigators should apply the following 
general guideline:  
 
Fatal:  Adverse event resulted in death.  
 
Unrelated:  Another cause of the adverse event is more plausible; a temporal 
sequence cannot be established with the onset of the adverse event and 
administration of the investigational product; or, a causal relationship is considered biologically implausible.  
 
Possibly Related:  There is a clinically plausible time sequence between onset of the adverse 
event and administration of the investigational product, but the adverse event could also be attributed to concurrent or underlying disease, or the use of other drugs or procedures. Possibly related should be used when the investigational product is one of several biologically plausible adverse 
event causes.  
 
Definitely Related:  The adverse event is clearly related to use of the investigational product.  
 
7.2.[ADDRESS_405410]’s partner becomes pregnant 
from the time of consent to [ADDRESS_405411]/Chi -square test or  the 
Wilcoxon Rank Sums test. We anticipate that the basic statistics will be completed within [ADDRESS_405412] patient completing his/her week 12 visit. Analyzing the interferon multiplex assay and 
microbiome will take longer, but will primarily be descriptive at the different time points and be 
analyzed by T -testing for continuous variables.  
 
8.2 ANALYSIS AND PUBLICATION PLAN:  
 
The goal of the study will be a publication in a high- impact international dermatology journal such as 
the Journal of the Ame rican Academy of Dermatology , JAMA Dermatology  or British Journal of 
Dermatology . We aim for a national level presentation at the American Academy of Dermatology 
annual meeting.  
Sample Size:  8 with 3 anticipated screen failures  
 
Proposed Enrollment and Study Completion Plan:  
 
Total number of patients to be enrolled  [ADDRESS_405413] patient visit  3/1/[ADDRESS_405414] patient visit  3/1/18  
Anticipated date of final study report submission to Lilly  5/31/18
 
Anticipated publication date  12/31/2018  
 
9.0 STUDY ADMINISTRATION AND INVESTIGATOR OBLIGATIONS  
 This study will be performed with support from Eli Lilly and Company.  Eli Lilly and Company retains 
the right to terminate the study from the  study site at any time. Specific circumstances that may precipi[INVESTIGATOR_328403]:  
• Unsatisfactory subject enrollment with regard to quality or quantity  
• Significant or numerous deviations from study protocol requirements, such as failures to perform  
required evaluations on subjects and maintain adequate study records  
• The incidence and/or severity of AEs in this or other studies indicating a potential health hazard caused by [CONTACT_104841] . 
 
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, [ADDRESS_405415] AND INDEPENDENT ETHICS COMMI TTEE  
 
The protocol, informed consent, prescribing information , and any other relevant supporting information 
(i.e. recruitment and advertising materials) will be submitted to the IRB for review and approval before 
study initiation.  A letter confirming IRB  approval of the protocol and informed consent , and a statement 
that the IRB is organized and operates according to GCP and the applicable laws and regulations  must  be 
forwarded to Eli Lilly and Company before screening subjects for the study.  Amendments to the protocol 
must also be approved by [CONTACT_328411], as appropriate, before the implementation of changes in this study.  
 
9.[ADDRESS_405416] the purpose and nature of the study, 
the study procedures, the possible adverse effects, and all other elements of consent as defined in § 21CFR 
Part 50, and other applicable national and local regulations governing informed consent.  Each subject must provide a signed and dated informed consent before enrollment into this study.  Subjects who are incapable of providing inf ormed consent will be ineligible for the study.   
In accordance to individual local and national subject privacy regulations, the investigator or designee must  explain to each subject that for the evaluation of study results, the subject’s protected health  
information obtained during the study may be shared with Eli Lilly and Company and its designees, 
regulatory agencies, and IRBs.  Eli Lilly and Company will not use the subject’s protected health 
information or disclose it to a third party without applica ble subject authorization.  It is the investigator’s 
or designee’s responsibility to obtain written permission to use protected health information from each 
subject. If a subject withdraws permission to use protected health information, it is the investigator’s 
responsibility to obta in the withdrawal request in writing from the subject and to ensure that no further 
data will be collected from the subject.  Any data collected on the subject before withdrawal will be used 
in the analysis of study results.  
 
9.[ADDRESS_405417] files (source documentation) that substantiate entries in eCRFs, all 
relevant correspondence and other documents pertaining to the conduct of the study.  
 
An investigator shall retain records for a period of at least [ADDRESS_405418] marketing 
application is approved for the drug for the indication for which it is being investigated; or, if no 
application is to be filed or if the application is not approved for such indica tion, until [ADDRESS_405419] from the stud y site so that they can be returned sealed 
to the investigator for audit purposes.  
 
9.4 PROTOCOL AMENDMENTS  
 
The investigators will initiate any change to the protocol in a protocol amendment document.  Prior to 
IRB submission, this will be reviewed by [CONTACT_105410]. The amendment will be submitted to 
the IRB together with, if applicable, a revised model ICF.  Additionally under this circumstance, 
information on the increased risk and/or change in scope must be provided to subjects already actively 
participating in the study, and they must read, understand, and sign any revised ICF confirming willingness 
to remain in the trial.  
 
9.[ADDRESS_405420] ensure that:  
1. He or she will personally conduct or supervise the study.  
2. His or her staff and all persons who assist in the conduct of the study clearly understand their responsibilities and have their names included in the Delegation of Authority Log.  
3. The study is conducted according to the protocol and all applicable regulations.  
4. The protection of each subje ct’s rights and welfare is maintained.  
5. Signed and dated informed consent and permission to use protected health information are obtained from each subject before conducting nonstandard of care study procedures.  If a subject or subject’s legal guardian wit hdraws permission to use protected health information, the 
investigator will obtain a written request from the subject or subject’s legal guardian and will 
ensure that no further data be collected from the subject.  
6. The consent process is conducted in compl iance with all applicable regulations and privacy acts.  
7. The IRB complies with applicable regulations and conducts initial and ongoing reviews and 
approvals of the study.  
8. Any amendment to the protocol is submitted promptly to the IRB. 
9. Any significant protocol deviations are reported to Eli Lilly and Company and the IRB according 
to the guidelines at each study site.  
10. All IND Safety Reports are submitted promptly to the IRB.  
11. All SAEs are reported to Eli Lilly and Company  Drug Safety/Desig nee within 24  hours of 
knowledge and to the IRB per their requirements. 
 
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 21 of 43 10.0 REFERENCES  
1.  Binus AM, Qureshi AA, Li VW, Winterfield LS. Pyoderma gangrenosum: A retrospective review 
of patient characteristics, comor bidities and therapy in 103 patients. Br J Dermatol . 
2011;165(6):1244- 1250.  
2.  Marzano A V, Ceccherini I, Gattorno M, et al. Association of pyoderma gangrenosum, acne, and suppurative hidradenitis (PASH) shares genetic and cytokine profiles with other autoinflammatory diseases. Medicine (Baltimore) . 2014;93(27):e187.  
3.  Brooklyn TN, Dunnill MGS, Shetty A, et al. Infliximab for the treatment of pyoderma gangrenosum: a randomised, double blind, placebo controlled trial. Gut . 2006;55(4):505- 509. 
4.  Kolios  AGA, Maul JT, Meier B, et al. Canakinumab in adults with steroid- refractory pyoderma 
gangrenosum. Br J Dermatol . 2015;173(5):1216 -1223. 
5.  Guenova E. Interleukin 23 Expression in Pyoderma Gangrenosum and Targeted Therapy With Ustekinumab. Arch Dermatol . 2011;147(10):1203.  
6.  Caproni M, Antiga E, Volpi W, et al. The Treg/Th17 cell ratio is reduced in the skin lesions of patients with pyoderma gangrenosum. Br J Dermatol . 2015;173(1):275 -278.  
7.  Al Ghazal P, Dissemond J. Therapy of pyoderma gangrenosum i n [LOCATION_013]: results of a survey 
among wound experts. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2015;13(4):317- 324.  
8.  Ormerod AD, Thomas KS, Craig FE, et al. Comparison of the two most commonly used treatments for pyoderma gangrenosum: results of the STOP GAP randomised cont rolled trial. 
BMJ . 2015;350:h2958.  
9.  Weenig RH, Davis MDP, Dahl PR, Su WPD. Skin ulcers misdiagnosed as pyoderma gangrenosum. N Engl J Med. 2002;347(18):[ADDRESS_405421] ever experienced?     
 
  
                               
 
Make a mark on the line which best correlates with your pain level . 
 
            

Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, [ADDRESS_405422] WEEK.  Please tick ➾  one box for each question.  
  
1. Over the last week, how itchy , sore ,           Very much ❒   
 painful  or stinging  has your skin            A lot ❒   
 been?                         A little ❒   
                      Not at all ❒   
  
2. Over the last week, how embarrassed          Very much ❒     or 
self conscious  have you been because                   A lot ❒      of your 
skin?                                           A little ❒  
                           Not at all ❒   
  
3. Over the last week, how much has your                     Very much ❒   
skin interfered with you going                       A lot ❒     
shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_78436]                            A little ❒   
  garden ?                            Not at all ❒    
                                                                                             Not relevant ❒   
  
4. Over the last week, how much has your                     Very much ❒  
skin influenced the clothes  you wear?           A lot ❒   
                                   A little ❒   
                       Not at all ❒  
                                                                               Not relevant ❒   
  
5. Over the last week, how much has your                     Very much ❒       
skin affected any so cial or leisure           A lot   ❒ 
activities?                                 A little  ❒   
                              Not at all ❒                                                                                                                                                 
              Not relevant ❒  
 
6. Over the last week, how much has your                      Very much ❒        
skin ma de it difficult for                       A lot    ❒  
you to do any sport ?                     A little  ❒   
                      Not at all ❒                                                                                                                                                 
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 24 of 43                        Not relevant ❒  
  
7. Over the last week, has your skin prevented         Yes ❒  
  you from working  or studying ?                                 No ❒    
     Not relevant ❒   
    
  If "No", over the last week how much has        A lot   ❒  
                 your skin been a problem at                 A little ❒   
  work  or studying ?                 Not at all ❒   
  
8. Over the last week, how much has your                    Very much ❒   
skin created problems with your                                A lot ❒        
partner or any of your close friends                         A little ❒   
  or relatives ?                     Not at all ❒       
           Not relevant ❒   
  
9. Over the last week, how much has your                     Very much ❒   
skin caused any sexual   difficulties?                    A lot ❒  
                                                    A little ❒   
                      Not at all ❒  
                                                                                Not relevant ❒   
  
10. Over the last week, how much of a            Very much ❒   
problem has the treatment  for your                  A lot   ❒  
skin been, for example by [CONTACT_7328]                            A little ❒   
           your home messy, or by [CONTACT_78469]?              Not at all ❒    
                                                                              Not relevant ❒   
Please check you have answered EVERY question. Thank you.    
 
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 25 of 43 Appendix 3 Investigator Global Assessment  
 
 
 
INVESTIGATOR’S GLOBAL ASSESSMENT (IGA)  
How you would assess the Subject’s current level of pyoderma gangrenosum disease activity?  
 
                None (0)  
   Mild (1)  
   Moderate (2)  
   Severe (3)  
   Extreme (4)  
 
Grade  Improvement from Baseline  
[ADDRESS_405423] completely healed ulcers with only minimal signs 
of active PG  
2 Evidence of ulcer healing which involves >50% of 
ulcer/margin  
3 Evidence of ulcer healing which involve 25 -50% of 
ulcer/margin  
4 Evidence of ulcer healing which involves <25% of 
ulcer/margin  
5 No evidence of ulcer healing  
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 26 of 43  
Appendix 4 Lesion Assessment  
 
PG 
Lesion #  Location and Description 
1  
 
2  
 
3  
 
4  
 
5  
 
 
Lesion #  1 2 3 4 5 
Length (cm)   
     
Width (cm)   
     
Surface Area (cm2)  
     
 
  
   
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 27 of 43  
  
 
Appendix 5 Patient Global Assessment  
 
 
 
Patient Global Assessment 
How do you feel your pyoderma gangrenosum is doing overall , where 0 equals remission of disease and 10 equals 
very severe disease?     
 
 
                   
 
Make a mark on the line which best correlates with your disease severity . 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 

Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 28 of 43  
 
 
 
   
 
 
Protocol: Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum,  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Benjamin Kaffenberger  
Protocol number: 2017H0045 Trial Type: OSU -IIT   
Date document written: May 14, 2018  End of Study Report  
 
    
 
          
 
 
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 29 of 43  
Summary of Patients Screened/Enrolled  
  
  
Pt  Age  Sex  Comorbidity  Disease 
length  Previous 
Treatments  Concomitant 
Treatments  Enrolled?  
01  62  M  MGUS  2yrs  Cyclosporine, 
gevokizumab,  
prednisone,  
RA-18C3  ASA, atorvastatin, 
carvedilol, cilostazol, 
clopi[INVESTIGATOR_7745], mupi[INVESTIGATOR_19190], 
omeprazole, oxycodone,  
prednisone, spi[INVESTIGATOR_8407], 
triamcinolone, Bactrim DS.  Yes  
02  23  M  Bruton’s 
agammaglobulinemia  2yrs  Prednisone, 
gevokizumab  Ibuprofen, vancomycin, 
Zosyn, morphine, 
Levaquin, Motrin,  
Benadryl, ampi[INVESTIGATOR_10312], 
APAP, prednisone, 
Hizentra, Claritin D,  
Asmanex, tramadol, Paxil, 
omeprazole  Yes  
03  55  F  +ASO, minor  
MGUS  20yrs  Debridement, 
prednisone, 
vein ablation  Tramadol, Zosyn, dilaudid, 
vancomycin, cefepi[INVESTIGATOR_048], 
KCl, Hylenex, gadoterate 
meglumine, minocycline, 
senokot, naproxen,  
morphine, metronidazole, 
heparin,  
Ca-VitD, docusate, 
pentoxifylline, maxipi[INVESTIGATOR_048], 
APAP, doxycycline,  
prednisone  Yes  
04  49  F  IgA  
vasculitis  3yrs  Debridement, 
dapsone, MMF,  
fluocinonide, 
silversulfadiazene    No  
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 30 of 43 05  58  M  Presumptive  
Crohns (based on 
Prometheus  
testing)  50yrs  Skin grafting, 
hyperbaric tx, 
debridement,  
collagen/silver 
dressings, 
mafenide 
cream   Lipi[INVESTIGATOR_17133], dexamethasone, 
Benadryl,  
Allegra, Lopid, Norco, 
Combivent,  
Syntroid, multiVit, 
probiotic,  
Januvia, Cozaar, 
mafenide,  
Metformin, Actos, Dakins 
soln,  
APAP, Immodium, 
Flonase, lidocaine 1% 
inj, fluconazole,  
meropenem, docusate -
senna, GoLytley, 
daptomycin, vancomycin, 
Alteplase,  
metronidazole, MgSO4, 
heparin,  
Lispro, gadoterate 
meglumine, dilaudid,   Yes  
  
1.1  PRIMARY ENDPOINTS  
  
The proportion of subjects achieving a two point reduction in the five -point investigator global assessment (IGA) for the target 
ulcer from baseline to week 12.  
  
Pt  Baseline IGA  Completion IGA  Notes (or completion 
wk)  
01  3  3    
02  3  N/A (not captured at Wk 2)   Lost to FU after Wk 2  
03  3  4  EOT visit at Week 6   
05  4  4  EOT visit at Week 6   
Mean  3.25  3.67    
  
1.2  SECONDARY ENDPOINTS  
-Frequency of total closure of target and total ulcers from baseline to week 12   
Pt  Closure of Target?  Closure of Any?  Notes (or completion 
wk)  
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, [ADDRESS_405424] to FU after Wk 2  
03  No  No  ET visit at Week 6   
05  No  No  ET visit at Week 6   
Mean  No  No    
  
-Change in total surface area of target/total ulcers from baseline to week 12  
Pt  Baseline Area  Completion Area  Notes (or completion 
wk)  
[ADDRESS_405425] to FU after Wk 2  
03  23.4 cm2  41.4 cm2  ET visit at Week 6   
05  20.48 cm2  32 cm2  ET visit at Week 6   
Mean  15.18 cm2  24.19 cm2    
  
-Change Patient Global Assessment (PGA) from baseline until week 12  
Pt  Baseline  PGA  Completion PGA  Notes (or completion 
wk)  
01  3  3    
02  3  N/A (not captured at Wk 2)   Lost to FU after Wk 2  
03  8  7  ET visit at Week 6   
05  10  6  ET visit at Week 6   
Mean    5.33    
  
-Change in patient pain perception using 10 -point visual analog scale from baseline to week 12  
Pt  Baseline Pain VAS  Completion Pain VAS  Notes (or completion 
wk)  
01  6  6    
02  5  N/A (not captured at Wk 2)   Lost to FU after Wk 2  
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 32 of 43 03  10  8  ET visit at Week 6   
05  4.5  4  ET visit at Week 6   
Mean  6.37  6    
  
-Change in patient quality of life using the dermatology life quality index (DLQI) from baseline to week 12  
  
  
Pt  Baseline DLQI  Completion DLQI  Notes (or completion 
wk)  
[ADDRESS_405426] to FU after Wk 2  
03  15  17  ET visit at Week 6   
05  18  6  ET visit at Week 6   
Mean  10.5  5.75    
  
1.3  EXPLORATORY ENDPOINT  
  
-Evaluation of an [IGA x Ulcer Area] scoring metric for target ulcer at each time -point   
-Change in microbiome of ulcer between baseline and week 12  
-Change in inflammatory markers between baseline and week 12 – C -reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
(ESR), absolute neutrophils, total leukocytes, IL -1, IL -6, IL -8, and TNF in serum.   
-Change in serum biomarker (if can be ascertained),  depending on underlying cause (i.e. perinuclear anti -neutrophil cytoplasmic 
antibodies (pANCA) and anti -saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies (ASCA) in patients with IBD, anti -streptolysin -O (ASO) in 
patients with streptococcus-  driven disease, or levels of  monoclonal/polyclonal protein in patients with MGUS/elevated IgA 
levels.   
  
Due to few patients and only one patient completing a full [ADDRESS_405427] treatment in the skin demonstrating diminished inflammatory pathways. Data attached. 
Unfortunately, there were very few genes showing consistent changes in regulation and of th ose, the change in expression 
was small.  
  
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 33 of 43   
Clinical Image and Timeline:   
(Note: As Subject 02 only completed visit 2, there are no photographs to compare to baseline)  
  
      BASLINE          Subject 01     EOT (W16)  
  
  
  
          
      BASLINE          Subject 03     EOT (W6)  

Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, [ADDRESS_405428] 05     EOT (W6)  
  
  
  
      
ANALYSIS AND PUBLICATION PLAN:   
  

Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, [ADDRESS_405429] international dermatology journal such as the Journal of the American 
Academy of Dermatology , JAMA Dermatology  or British Journal of Dermatology . We aim for a national level presentation at the 
American Academy of Dermatology annual meeting.   
Sample Size: 5  
  
Proposed Enrollment and Study Completion Plan:  
  
Total number of patients to be enrolled  
Number of investigative sites  
Total study length  
Enrollment period    
Treatment period  
STUDY SYNOPSIS   
Title:  An Open- Label, Proof -Of-Concept, Study of Ixekizumab 
in the Treatment of Pyoderma Gangrenosum   
  
Protocol number:    
Phase:  II  
Indication:  Pyoderma Gangrenosum  
Study drug and 
comparator:  Ixekizumab SQ  
No comparator is used in this study.   Anticipated date of first patient visit  
Anticipated date of the last patient visit  3/1/17   
Anticipated date of final study report 
submission to Lilly  
Anticipated publication date   
  
  
Study Synopsis:   5/31/18   
5 
  
1 
  
16 
 weeks  
  
Up to 6 weeks  
  
12 
 weeks  
  
3 
/1/ 
18 
  
12/31/2018  
  
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 36 of 43 Main Objectives:  Primary Objective : the proportion of subjects achieving a 
two point reduction in the five -point investigator global 
assessment (IGA) for the target ulcer from baseline to week 
12  
Secondary  Objectives :   
-Analysis of frequency of total cl osure of target and total 
ulcers from baseline to week 12   
-Analysis of change in total surface area of target/total  
ulcers from baseline to week 12  
-Analysis of change Patient Global Assessment (PGA) from 
baseline until week 12  -Analysis of change in patient pain perception using 10point 
visual analog scale from baseline to week 12 - Analysis of 
change in patient quality of life using the dermatology life quality index (DLQI) from baseline to week 12  
  
Study design:  This is a Phase II study that will  be open label and enroll a 
total of five patients. These patients will have histological 
testing to rule out competing etiologies and require 3rd  
 
 party adjudication/confirmation on agreement of the 
diagnosis. These patients will undergo 12 weeks of 
ixekizumab dosed every 2 weeks with follow -up until week 
16.   
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 37 of 43 Major  
inclusion/exclusion 
criteria:  For the complete list of inclusion/exclusion, criteria refer to 
Section 4.  
Major inclusion criteria:  
 Have a clinical diagnosis of classic PG for at least [ADDRESS_405430] a PG ulcer characterized by ‘item a’ AND 3/5 features in ‘item b’ OR 2/5 features in ‘item b’ with support from one of the conditions listed in c.    
a. Stable or increasing size within 2 months preceding screening by [CONTACT_328408]   
b. Features such as violaceous border, underm ining, 
cribriform scarring, pustules, peristomal location  
c. Identifiable secondary systemic condition, such as IBD, arthritis, MGUS, noncancerous hematologic disease, streptococcal carriage, levamisole- tainted 
cocaine, Bruton’s agammaglobulinemia  
  
 Have a PG target ulcer that has an area ≥ 2 cm2 and ≤ 200 
cm2 at screening   
 Initial IGA of 3 or higher on a 5 point scale (0 -4)  
  
Major exclusion criteria:   
1. Any condition (e.g., psychiatric illness, severe alcoholism, or drug abuse) or situation that may compromise the ability of the subject to give written informed consent, may put the subject at significant risk, may jeopardize the subject’s safety after exp osure to the study drug, may 
confound the study results, or may interfere significantly with the subject’s participation in the study  
2. History of malignancy within 2 years of screening other than carcinoma in situ of the cervix or adequately treated, non-metastatic, squamous or basal cell carcinoma of the 
skin  
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 38 of 43 3. History of seropositivity for HIV antibody; active or 
carrier status of hepatitis B [surface antigen (HBsAg) 
positive, or core antibody (anti -HBc) positive with 
negative surface antibody]; active hep atitis C (i.e. not 
treated or not cleared spontaneously, as confirmed by [CONTACT_328406])   
4. History of severe allergic or anaphylactic reaction to   
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 39 of 43  
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 40 of 43      monoclonal antibodies   
5. Systemic infection (excluding wound colonization) 
requiring oral antibiotics within 2 weeks of Day 0  
6. History of the following treatments:  
a. Anti-TNF or other biologic therapi[INVESTIGATOR_6523] 5     
half-lives of screening  
b. Changes (addition, discontinuation, or changes in 
dose) in immunosuppressive medication (including 
cyclosporine, azathioprine, methotrexate, 
mycophenolate mofetil, apremilast, dapsone, or corticosteroids within 2 months of  
Day 0   
c. Systemic corticosteroids > 20 mg per day (prednisone or prednisone equivalent) within 8 weeks of Day 0, or change in dose within 8 weeks of Day 0. Steroids may be tapered (although not increased above the Day 0 dose) during the trial as determined by [CONTACT_941] i nvestigator.   
d. Intralesional corticosteroids within 8 weeks of day 0; topi[INVESTIGATOR_328390].   
e. Wound debridement within 2 weeks of Day 0; 
dressing changes allowed per investigator 
discretion.   
g. Systemic antibiotics within 2 weeks of Day 0  
h. Live, attenuated vaccines within 3 months of Day  
0; or live, seasonal -flu- or H1N1 vaccines within 
2 weeks of Day 0. Note: recombinant - and/or 
killed vaccines are permitted.  
i. Hyperbaric treatment within [ADDRESS_405431] any stabilization/response is exclusionary. This potentially indicates the disease is not PG.  
  
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 42 of 43 Endpoints:  • Change in IGA between baseline and week 12  
Safety plan:  Enrollment and toxicities on this trial will be monitored by  
 [CONTACT_458] [INVESTIGATOR_328391] (DSMC)   
Study treatment:  Ixekizumab subcutaneous injection [ADDRESS_405432] dose at week 12.   
Concomitant therapy 
and clinical practice:  As PG is a disease responsive to immunosuppression, use of 
concomitant medications will be carefully monitored, and 
patents will be required to have stable or worsening disease 
on a consistent dose of immunosuppression at screening.   
1. Mycophenolate mofe til, azathioprine, cyclosporine, 
leflunomide, dapsone, apremilast and methotrexate will be allowed, but the patient is required to have stable/worsening disease for 4 weeks prior to screening, while on a stable dose of immunosuppression for > 8 weeks prior  to baseline. 2. 
Anti-TNF or other biologic therapi[INVESTIGATOR_328404] 5 half -lives before screening, or during the study.   
 Oral corticosteroids above 20 mg daily of prednisone (or equivalent) are excluded. Lower doses are allowed provided they are prescribed at stable doses for two months prior to baseline and are 20 mg or less per day of prednisone or other equivalently -dosed corticosteroids.   
 Intralesional corticosteroids within 4 weeks of screening and 
during the study  are not permitted  
 Other therapi[INVESTIGATOR_328393] -immunosuppressive and 
noninvestigational can be started or continued at physician 
discretion provided the medicine has no history of association with progressive multifocal leukencephalopathy. Antibiotics may be used as needed for evidence of superinfection, positive culture results, malodor, green discharge, etc.   
  
Taltz for Pyoderma Gangrenosum, Kaffenberger, OSU -IIT November, 4, 2016  
 
                                                    Page 43 of 43 Statistical methods:  The primary objective of a two -point IGA decrease in the 
target ulcer will be analyzed as the difference from baseline, 
with the null hypothesis that no patients will obtain the specified improvement if the investigational product does not have efficacy. The endpoint will be analyzed using the Fisher Exact test. The secondary and exploratory objectives will be analyzed in comparison to baselin e measurements 
and at each time point to evaluate for efficacy using either the Fisher Exact test/Chi -square test or the Wilcoxon Rank 
Sums test. We anticipate that the basic statistics will be completed within 1- [ADDRESS_405433] patient completing 
his/her week 12 visit. Analyzing the interferon multiplex 
assay and microbiome will take longer, but will primarily be descriptive at the different time points and be analyzed by T -
testing for continuous variables   
   