Confidential  Protocol: TRB2013/MIRROR Trial  08-March -2016  
  Page 1 of 17    
 
 
Protocol Title: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_162743]  (MIRROR ) 
 
 
 
 
Protocol No.:   TRB201 3 
 
Phase:    IV 
 
Investigators:   Theodore R. Brown, MD, MPH1 
Virginia I.  Simnad, MD, M.Sc1 
 
 
Date:    08-March -2016  
   Version 2 
 
Affiliation:   1EvergreenHealth MS Center, EvergreenHealth Neuroscience Institute  
   EvergreenHealth, Kirkland, WA  
 
 
Contact:   [INVESTIGATOR_84403] R. Brown, MD, MPH  
   Director of Neurorehabilitation  
   Evergre enHealth MS Center  
   Suite [ADDRESS_188868] 
   Kirkland, WA [ZIP_CODE]  
   [LOCATION_003]  
   Ph: 425 -899-5350  
   Fax: 425 -899-5354 
   [EMAIL_3261]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Confidential  Protocol: TRB2013/MIRROR Trial  08-March -2016  
  Page 2 of 17    
 
Protocol Summary  
 
STUDY DRUG  
 Mirabegron  25-50mg daily  
TITLE  
 Pi[INVESTIGATOR_162744]  (MIRROR ) 
STUDY OVERVIEW  A multi -center, randomized 1:1 placebo controlled 10-week study o f 
mirabegron  as add -on therapy to an educational intervention on behavioral 
modification including pelvic floor exercise (BM-PFE) to a cohort of 40 
MS subjects with overactive bladder (OAB).  
Active drug will be mirabegron 25mg daily with optional up -titrat ion to 
50mg daily after approximately [ADDRESS_188869] the time of each 
micturition and/or urgency epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865], urine  volume with each void (when 
available) , any epi[INVESTIGATOR_162745],  and the severity of urgency  
(Overactive Bladder Symptom Composite Score, OAB -SCS): 1 = no  
urgency  (normal voiding);  2 = mild (could postpone voiding  for as long as  
necessary without fear of incontinence ); 3 = moderate (could  postpone 
voiding  for a short while without fear of  leakage ); 4= severe ( could not 
postpone, had to rush to the toilet ); 5= urgency incontinence (could not 
make it to the toilet without some leakage)  Each voiding event is 
multiplied by [CONTACT_162755] s are summed to 
generate a total daily OAB -SCS cumulative score) . 
Primary outcome will be average daily OAB -SCS total score , Final Visit  
vs. Baseline.  This accounts for the frequency , urgency and incontinence 
components of OAB . 
RATIONALE  This design will demonstrate the  effects of behavioral modification, 
including  pelvic floor exercise  on OAB through the placebo arm of the 
study.  Adding mirabegron may yield greater results than BM-PFE alone.  
The standard starting do se is 25mg daily.  An optional up -titration to 50mg  
is included , since some patients may respond better to the higher dosage.  
This titration will occur at about 5 weeks to allow a balanced period of 
time for recording response to the two dosages.  
STUDY HYPOTHESIS  
 
 Treatment with Mirabegron  will improve urinary urgency  control beyond 
that achieved with  pelvic floor exercises  alone . 
STUDY SUBJECTS  
 40 subjects with multiple sclerosis and OAB complaints .   
DESIGN  Multiple -dose, randomized, placebo -controlled prospective, single -site, 
investig ator-initiated trial.  
DURATION OF STUDY  
 Approximately 10 weeks (active treatment)  
Confidential  Protocol: TRB2013/MIRROR Trial  08-March -2016  
  Page 3 of 17   TREATMENT REGIMEN  
 Group A will receive Mirabegron  25mg daily  
Group B will receive placebo  
Group A and B will receive the same baseline education in pelvic floor 
exercise based on viewing of an instructional presentation plus take -home 
printed material.  
TRIAL  PERIOD S 
 Screening Period  
 Screening  to Baseline  
Treatment Period  
 Baseline to Final Visit (or Study Drug Discontinuation), includes 
Baseline,  Phone Visit 1, Titration  Visit , Phone Visit 2 and Final 
Visit  
INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION 
CRITERIA  Inclusion Criteria  
 Confirmed diagnosis of MS (no sub -type restrictions)  
 Age ≥18 
 No change in disease modifying therapy in 60 days.  
 Patient willing and able to complete micturition diary   
 Urinary u rgency ( 8 or more entries of bladder urgency score ≥2) in 
72hr voiding diary  recorded during screening period  
 Micturition frequency ≥ 8  / day  or incontinence ≥ 2 epi[INVESTIGATOR_11630] 72  
hour voiding diary  recorded during screening period  
 At least 36 hours of voiding activity recorded in 72 hour voiding 
diary during screening period  
 Non-antimuscarinic  medications  that are likely to  influence bladde r 
function may not be initiated between screening and study 
completion.  They may be  continued with no dose changes during 
the study.   
 Discontinued use of antimuscarinics at least two weeks prior to 
screening  
 Able to give informed consent  
 
Exclusion Criter ia 
 Females who are breast -feeding, pregnant or have potential to 
become pregnant during the course of the study (fertile and 
unwilling/unable to use effective contraceptive measures)  
 MS e xacerbation within 30 days of screening  
 Cognitive deficits that would  interfere with the subject’s ability to 
give informed consent or perform study testing  
 Screening blood pressure > 16 5 systolic or 100 diastolic  
 History of allergy to Mirabegron  
 Screening post -void residual > 200ml  
 Evidence of urinary tract infection at sc reening  
 Evidence of chronic inflammation such as interstitial cystitis, 
bladder stones, previous pelvic radiation therapy, or previous or 
current malignant disease of the pelvic organs  
 Intravesical botulinum toxin treatment within the previous six 
months o f screening.  
 Presence of InterS tim device  
 Use of indwelling catheter or self -catheterization  
Confidential  Protocol: TRB2013/MIRROR Trial  08-March -2016  
  Page 4 of 17    Concurrent use of thioridizine  (Mellaril® or Mellaril -S®, flecainide  
(Tambocor®), propafenone  (Rythmo l®) or digoxin  (Lanoxin®) 
 Concurrent use of antimuscarinics: o xybutynin (Ditropan®, 
Ditropan XL ®), tolterodine  (Detrol®, Detrol LA®), fesoterodine 
extended -release  (Toviaz®), solifenacin  (Vesicare®), trospi[INVESTIGATOR_1890]  
(Sanctura®, Sanctura XR®), darifenacin extended release  
(Enablex®) 
 Screening estimated glomerular filtration  rate (eGF R) < 60, AST  
or ALT > 2x upper limit of normal  
 Any other serious and/or unstable medical condition  
NO. OF SUBJECTS  
 N= 40.  This will include 20 subjects taking mirabegron  and 20 subjects 
taking placebo .   
EFFICACY  
(Outcome measures)  
 Primary Outcome Measure : 
 Primary outcome will be Average daily OAB -SCS total score , 
Baseline vs . Final Visit  
 
Secondary Outcome Measures  based on voiding diary , compared to 
Baseline : 
 Titration Visit : Average daily OAB -SCS total score  
 Titration and Final Visit : A) mean # of micturitions /day; B) Mean 
number of incontinence epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841] /day; C) Mean volume 
voided /micturition   
 
Secondary Outcome Measures based on the following assessments at 
Titration Visit and Final Visit compared to Baseline:  
 Qualiveen Questionnaire  
 Subject Global Impression (single question)  
 PFE adherence question  
 Bladder Management Difficulties Questionnaire – Short Form 
(SCI -QOL v1.0)  
 
Exploratory Outcome Measures based on the following assessments at 
Titration Visit and Final Visit compared to Baseli ne: 
 Bowel  Management Difficulties Questionnaire – Short Form  
      (SCI -QOL v1.0)  
STATISTICAL METHODS  See Statistics section  
Confidential  Protocol: TRB2013/MIRROR Trial  08-March -2016  
  Page 5 of 17   SAFETY  
 All subjects will undergo baseline blood testing, CBC and CMP.  Subjects 
with screening estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) < 60, or AST or  
ALT > 2x upper limit of normal will be excluded.  At screening, subjects 
reporting dysuria, fever or abdominal pain will undergo urine analysis,  
culture and sensitivity at the discretion of the princip al investigator.  
Subjects  with blood pressure > 165 systolic or > [ADDRESS_188870] -void residual > 200ml will be excluded.  
Symptoms of urinary retention will be monitored throughout the study and 
may lead to early discontinuation of study drug; however, such subjects 
may complete other elements of the study.  Subjects with a range of health 
condition s that may put the patient at risk for adverse outcomes will be 
excluded, as listed under Exclusion Criteria.  Female subjects will undergo 
urine pregnancy testing if they are deemed to have any risk of being 
pregnant or becoming pregnant during the study.    
ESTIMATED BUDGET  
 A budget estimate will be provided separately  
SCHEDULE OF EVENTS  Refer to the Schedule of Study Assessments, Appendix 2  for timing of 
procedures  
STUDY TIMELINE  Start -up 2 months, period of enrollment 22 months, data analysis and fin al 
report 3 months  
 
Appendices  
Appendix 1: Subject Diary  
Appendix 2: Schedule of Study Assessments  
Appendix 3:  Prohibited medications and  medication s that may not be initiated between 
screening and study completion , but may  be continued with no dose chan ges during the 
study.    
 
Objective  
To assess the effect of pelvic floor exercise  education with or without mirabegron (MBG) on 
overactive bladder symptoms in  people with multiple sclerosis (MS)  based on the OAB 
Symptom Composite Score.  
 
Background  
There a re 400,[ADDRESS_188871] and current surveys indicate that more than 
80% report some bladder dysfunction , including 61% with urinary urgency .1,2,3  In MS, 
immune dysregulation and neurodegeneration in the central nervous system impairs normal 
micturition .  Symptoms include f requency and/or urgency of urination, hesitancy in starting 
urination, nocturia and incontinence . Urological studies have shown the mo st common 
complaint is urinary urgency due to overactive bladder  (OAB) , with urinary reten tion less 
common .  This is supported by [CONTACT_162756] 68% of a 
MS cohort .4,[ADDRESS_188872] markedly 
negative impacts on physical functioning and mental -functioning health -related quality of life 
metrics in MS .7  
Confidential  Protocol: TRB2013/MIRROR Trial  08-March -2016  
  Page 6 of 17   Potential treatments for OAB  include behavioral modification, pelvic floor rehabilitation, oral 
or intravesical anticholi nergic medications, desmopressin, duloxetine, intravesical injection 
of botulinum toxins, medicinal cannabis , or placement of external or indwelling 
catheters .8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15 Mirabegron (MBG) is the first beta -[ADDRESS_188873] drug 
indicated for OAB tr eatment with symptoms of urge urinary incontinence, urgency and 
urinary frequency (see prescribing information).  This was based on studies conducted in 
general populations having OAB symptoms and not stress incontinence. 16,17,[ADDRESS_188874] -party payer coverage, availability of 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_162746].  Behavioral modification, including  pelvic floor exer cise (BM -PFE)  may be 
provided in a clinical setting using relevant educational materials .  The BM-PFE component 
will offer an important educational benefit to all subjects interested in this study .  Our center 
has a strong pelvic rehabilitation program wit h three therapi[INVESTIGATOR_162747] -suited to 
produce  the educational component of this study.  
Adding MGB may yield greater results than BM-PFE alone.  The standard starting dose is 
25mg daily.  An optional up -titration to 50mg is proposed, since some patients  may respond 
better to the higher dosage , based on a Phase III trial including 25mg and 50mg daily 
treatment arms .  This titration will occur  at visit 3;  32-[ADDRESS_188875] of BM -
PFE with and without MBG  in reducing the OAB Symptom Composite Score  (OAB SCS) .  
The OAB SCS is a validated me asure  that incorporates urinary frequency, urgency and 
incontinence epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]. 22,[ADDRESS_188876] differences in efficac y and 
tolerability between 25mg and 50mg doses of MB G. 
Methodology  
We propose a p arallel -group, randomized, double -blind placebo -controlled trial  of MBG  as 
add-on therapy to an educational pelvic floor exercise ( BM-PFE) intervention to a cohort of 
40 MS su bjects with overactive bladder (OAB).     
Active drug will be MBG 25mg daily with optional up -titration to 50mg daily at Titration 
(visit 3) .  Subjects will be enrolled at Baseline (visit 2) based upon scores for urinary urgency 
and micturition frequency i n subject diary  recorded during screening period.   
Voiding diaries  of a [ADDRESS_188877] 
the time of each m icturition and/or urgency epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865], urine  volume with each void, any 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_162748],  and the severity of urgency  using the OAB -SCS.  This score 
accounts for frequency and the urgency components of OAB, including incontinence 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841].  
 
Number of c enters & patients  
Multicenter  study with subject number = 40  
 
Confidential  Protocol: TRB2013/MIRROR Trial  08-March -2016  
  Page 7 of 17   Population  
  Inclusion criteria  
 Confirmed diagnosis of MS (no sub -type restrictions)  
 Age ≥18 
 No change in disease modifying therapy in 60 days  
 Patient willing and able to complete micturition diary  
 Urinary urgency  (8 or more entries of bladder urgency score ≥2) in 72hr voiding 
diary  recorded during screening period  
 Micturition frequency ≥ 8 /  day or incontinence ≥ 2 epi[INVESTIGATOR_11630] 72hr voiding diary  
recorded during screening period  
 At least 36 hours of voiding activity recorded in 72 hour voiding diary recorded 
during screening period  
 Non-antimuscarinics  medications  that are likely to  influence b ladder function may 
not be initiated between screening and study completion.  They may be  continued 
with no dose changes during the study.   
 Discontinued use of antimuscarinics at least two weeks prior to screening  
 Able to give informed consent  
 
   Exclusio n criteria  
 Females who are breast -feeding, pregnant or have potential to become pregnant 
during the course of the study (fertile and unwilling/unable to use effective 
contraceptive measures).  
 MS e xacerbation within 30 days of screening  
 Cognitive deficits t hat would interfere with the subject’s ability to give informed 
consent or perform study testing.  
 Screening blood pressure > 165 systolic or 100 diastolic  
 History of allergy to Mirabegron .   
 Screening post -void residual > 200ml  
 Evidence of urinary tract in fection at screening  
 Evidence of chronic inflammation such as interstitial cystitis, bladder stones, 
previous pelvic radiation therapy, or previous or current malignant disease of the 
pelvic organs  
 Intravesical botulinum toxin treatment within the previous  six months of 
screening.  
 Presence of InterS tim device  
 Use of indwelling catheter or self -catheterization  
 Concurrent use of thioridizine, flecainide , propafenone  or Digoxin  
 Concurrent use of antimuscarinics: oxybutynin (Ditropan®, Ditropan XL ®), 
tolterodi ne (Detrol® , Detrol LA ®), fesoterodine extended -release (Toviaz®), 
solifenacin (Vesicare®), trospi[INVESTIGATOR_1890] (Sanctura®, Sanctura XR ®), darifenacin 
extended release (Enablex®)  
 Screening estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) < 60, AST  or ALT > 2x 
upper limit  of normal  
 Any other serious and/or unstable medical condition  
 
Behavioral Modification with Pelvic Floor Exercise (BM -PFE) Educational Material  
We will utilize a [ADDRESS_188878] , utilizing a power 
point  presentation .  Slides will include images such as pelvic floor anatomy as well as 
Confidential  Protocol: TRB2013/MIRROR Trial  08-March -2016  
  Page 8 of 17   outlines of key points.  Participants will be given a  paper copy  of the power point 
presentation  to take home for reference and to help them with a home bladder exercise 
regimen.  
The following topi[INVESTIGATOR_162749]:    
 
 Bladder health: What’s normal?  
 Bladder dietary irritants  
 Bladder retraining and urge delay techniques  
 Pelvic floor anatomy and function  
 How to perform a “ Kegel”  
 “Kegel” home exercise program  
 Pelvic floor exercises with functional activities  
 Maintaining your home exercise program  
Subjects will have the opportunity to ask the study physician follow -up questions as needed.   
 
Investigational drug  
The study medication and matching placebo will be provided by [CONTACT_162757] .  The 
active medication will be mirabegron (MBG) 25mg po daily from Baseline Visit to Titration 
Visit. At  the Titration Visit  subjects will be asked to choose to up -titrate  to 50mg (or 
matching placebo) or to continue at 25mg dose (or matching placebo) , while remaining 
blinded to treatment.  The research pharmacist will dispense the active or placebo medication 
at randomization and again at the Titration Visit .  An extra 5 day supply of medication will be 
provided for each stud y period to allow a window for scheduling of appointments.    
 
Randomization  
 Randomization will occur at the research pharmacy of EvergreenHealth (EH).   
 Non-EH research sites will submit  a randomization request to the EH Research 
Pharmacist.  
 EH Research Pha rmacist will assign randomization to placebo vs. active drug and 
record in randomization code book.  
 EH Research Pharmacist will send the  randomization assignment (placebo or active 
drug assignment) back to un -blinded staff at the enrolling site.    
 Un-blind ed staff at the enrolling site will dispense medication based on EH provided 
randomization assignment.    
 The investigating physician, nurse and research coordinator will be blinded as to 
treatment arm until the code is broken.  The randomization code may b e broken by [CONTACT_162758] a medical emergency. The reasons for this have to be documented 
carefully.  
 
Concomitant therapy  
All concomitant therapy will be documented.  Prohibited will be concurrent use of 
antimuscarinics  listed in Appendix 3 : oxy butynin (Ditropan®, Ditropan XL ®), tolterodine 
(Detrol® , Detrol LA ®), fesoterodine extended -release (Toviaz®), solifenacin (Vesicare®), 
trospi[INVESTIGATOR_1890] (Sanctura®, Sanctura XR ®), and darifenacin extended release (Enablex®)  within 
the previous 2 weeks of screenin g. Also prohibited will be concurrent use of thioridizine , 
flecainide, propafenone or Digoxin and intravesical botulinum toxin treatment within the 
Confidential  Protocol: TRB2013/MIRROR Trial  08-March -2016  
  Page 9 of 17   previous six months.  Medication s that are likely to influence  bladder function may not be 
initiated between  screening and study completion.  They may be  continued with no dose 
changes during the study.   This is listed as Appendix 3  and includes anticholinergic 
medications and drugs used in treatment of benign prostatic hypertrophy . 
 
Interruption or discontinuat ion of treatment  
Every patient has the right to discontinue study participation at any time, and every patient 
may be discontinued from the study  by [CONTACT_978]  [INVESTIGATOR_162750]/her wellbeing  
or any other reason.  All data generated up to the tim e of discontinuation from the study will 
be analyzed and the reason(s) for discontinuation will be recorded.  
 
Treatment Compliance  
Patients will be asked to return all unused medication  and all medication bottles, including 
empty bottles , at each visit an d at the end of the study and the quantity of returned medication 
will be documented.  
 
Blinding  
The subjects will receive identical appearing active or placebo study medication tablets , with 
identification  known only to the research pharmacist.   
Visit sch edule and assessments  
See schedule of  assessments , Appendix 2 
 
Enrollment  
Subjects who may qualify for this study will be identified in the context of clinical care at the 
participating centers .  Such eligible patients may receive a copy of the informed c onsent  form 
at the time of their clinic visit.  Recruitment may also occur through local promotional 
opportunities (doctor’s programs, patient education programs).  P atients may contact [CONTACT_162759] a no tice about the study on the 
center s’ website s or other online postings, or after referral from an outside medical 
practitioner for study consideration.  Such subjects will be offered the chance to undergo a 
telephone screening using an institutional review  board (IRB) approved telephone screening 
text.  Subjects will be requested to send pertinent outside medical records for chart review by 
[CONTACT_162760] a screening visit.   
 
Screening Visit  
At this visit, subjects will be given ample time to read, review and ask questions about the 
study and the content of the informed consent form.  After subjects have signed the informed 
consent form, they will undergo the following  assessments : 
 Review of  Medical History  
 Review of MS H istory  
 Study Eligibility (Inclusion/Exclusion)  
 Review of Concomitant Medications  
 Physical E xamination  
 Vital Signs : Blood Pressure, Heart Rate and Temperature  
 General and Neurological Evaluation   
 Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS)   
 Laboratory Testing: C omplete Blood Count and Comprehensive Metabolic Panel  
 Urine Pregnancy Testing for Female Subjects of Childbearing Potential  
Confidential  Protocol: TRB2013/MIRROR Trial  08-March -2016  
  Page 10 of 17    Urine Analysis, including Culture and Sensitivity for Subjects Reporting Dysuria, 
Fever and/or Abdominal Pain (at the discretion of  the princip al investigator ) 
 Post-void Residual Urine V olume Using Ultrasound Scanner  
 Subject Diary Training  
 Void Volume Measurement Training  
 
Subjects  who meet all inclusion criteria will receive a diary with instructions to record 
information in their d iaries for 72 continuous hours prior to Baseline Visit , during the 
screening period . Subjects will receive a urine receptacle (“hat” or hand -held urinal, patient 
preference) and will be trained on how  to measure urine volume and record in diary 
whenever po ssible during the [ADDRESS_188879] S creening Visit.  The following assessments 
will be performed:  
 Study Eligibility (Inclusion/Exclusion)  
 Review of Concomitant  Medications  
 Adverse Event Assessment   
 Vital Signs: Blood Pressure, Heart Rate and Temperature  
 Physical Examination (if deemed necessary by [CONTACT_1697])   
 Subject Diary Review   
 
Subjects who meet all inclusion criteria will complete the following assessments:  
 Qualiveen Questionnaire  - pages #1 -6 & #9 -10 (pages #7 -8 are N/A)  
 Subject Global Impression  
 Bladder Management Difficulties Questionnaire – Short Form (SCI -QOL v1.0)  
 Bowel Management Difficulties Questionnaire – Short Form (SCI -QOL v1.0)  
 Pelvic Floor Exercise Adherence Question  
 Pelvic Floor Exercise Presentation  
 Randomization to Group A or Group B   
 Drug Dispensing and Training  
 Subject Diary Training (if needed)  
 Void Volume Measurement Training (if needed)  
 
Phone Visit [ADDRESS_188880] Rando mization Visit . The following 
assessments will be performed:  
 Adverse Event Assessment    
 Prompting to Resume Subject Diary  
 Subject Diary Training (if needed)  
 Void Volume Measurement Training (if needed)  
 
Subjects will be instructed to complete the [ADDRESS_188881] Randomization  Visit.  The following assessments 
will be performed :  
Confidential  Protocol: TRB2013/MIRROR Trial  08-March -2016  
  Page 11 of 17    Review of Concomitant Medications  
 Adverse Event Assessment  
 Vital Signs: Blood Pressure, Heart Rate and Temperature  
 Physical Examination (if deemed necessary by [CONTACT_1697])  
 Urine Pregnancy Testing for Female Subjects of Childbearing Potential (if deem ed 
necessary by [CONTACT_1697])  
 Subject Diary Review  
 Qualiveen Questionnaire  - pages #1 -6 only  
 Subject Global Impression  
 Bladder Management Difficulties Questionnaire – Short Form (SCI -QOL v1.0)  
 Bowel Management Difficulties Questionnaire – Short Form (SCI -QOL v1.0)  
 Pelvic Floor Exercise Adherence Question  
 Subject Diary Training (if needed)  
 Void Volume Measurement Training (if needed)  
 Drug Dispensing and Training  
 Drug Return and Accountability  
 Up-Titration Option Question  
Subjects may receive increased  dose of 50mg of MBG or matching placebo, or remain at 
25mg of MBG or placebo , at the ir discretion and in consultation with the investigator .  
 
Phone Visit [ADDRESS_188882] Randomization Visit . The following 
assessments wi ll be performed:  
 Adverse Event Assessment    
 Prompting to Resume Subject Diary  
 Subject Diary Training (if needed)  
 Void Volume Measurement Training (if needed)  
Subjects will be instructed to complete the [ADDRESS_188883] Randomization Visit . The following assessments 
will be performed:  
 Review of Concomitant Medications  
 Adverse Event As sessment  
 Vital Signs: Blood Pressure, Heart Rate and Temperature  
 Physical Examination (if deemed necessary by [CONTACT_1697])  
 Urine Pregnancy Testing for Female Subjects of Childbearing Potential (if deemed 
necessary by [CONTACT_1697])  
 Subject Diary Review  
 Qualiveen Questionnaire  - pages #1 -6 only  
 Subject Global Impression  
 Bladder Management Difficulties Questionnaire – Short Form (SCI -QOL v1.0)  
 Bowel Management Difficulties Questionnaire – Short Form (SCI -QOL v1.0)  
 Pelvic Floor Exercise Adherence Question  
 Drug Return and Accountability  
 
 
Confidential  Protocol: TRB2013/MIRROR Trial  08-March -[ADDRESS_188884] ing will be performed at Screening Visit and off ice visits thereafter, as 
indicated by [CONTACT_162761].  
 
Screen failures / Rescreening   
Subjects who screen fail due to not meeting inclusion criteria or due to certain exclusions, 
e.g. presence of urinary tr act infection, may rescreen in 30 days at the discretion of the 
investigator.  
 
Early Termination  
Criteria for early termination include, but are not limited to < 36 hours of time covered in a 
bladder diary, poor adherence to study medication (less than 70 % of study medication 
consumed), safety issues related to study -related or non -study related adverse events, and at 
the request of the subject or at the discretion of the investigator.  
 
Efficacy Assessment  
Primary Outcome M easure   
Average daily OAB -SCS to tal score  based on OAB SCS at Final Visit  vs. Baseline  Visit .  
Every toilet void or incontinence epi[INVESTIGATOR_162751] a diary based on the OAB -SCS 
system : 1 = no urgency  (normal voiding);  2 = mild (could postpone voiding  for as long as  
necessary wit hout fear of incontinence ); 3 = moderate (could  postpone voiding  for a short 
while without fear of  leakage ); 4= severe ( could not postpone, had to rush to the toilet ); 5= 
urgency incontinence (could not make it to the toilet without some leakage) .  Every  
incontinence epi[INVESTIGATOR_162752] 5.  Each voiding event is multiplied by [CONTACT_162762] a total daily OAB -SCS cumulative score .   
Each daily total score is averaged to generate the Average daily OAB -SCS t otal score.  For 
incomplete days (e.g. went out for [ADDRESS_188885] voids) the sum score will be 
adjusted as follows: total score over 24 hours X 24 / actual #  of hours included in 
document ation  (see reference Zinner et al).    
 
Secondary Outco me M easures  based on diaries  compared to Baseline Visit : 
 Average daily OAB -SCS total score based on OAB SCS reviewed at Titration Visit   
 Titration Visit  and Final Visit mean number of micturition/day * 
 Titration Visit and Final Visit  mean number of incontin ence epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]/day * 
 Titration Visit and Final Visit mean volume voided/micturition *  
*missing blocks of time will not be included in the scoring   
 
Secondary Outcome Measures based on Titration Visit and Final Visit  compared to 
Baseline  Visit : 
 Qualiveen Ques tionnaire   
 The English version of the Qualiveen has been found to be a valid and 
responsive measure of bladder function in MS. 24. Site will use pages 
Confidential  Protocol: TRB2013/MIRROR Trial  08-March -2016  
  Page 13 of 17   #1-6 & #9 -10 at baseline and only pages #1 -6 at other visits. Pages #7 -
8 will not be used as they are not a pplicable.  
 
 Subject Global Impression  
 This is a single question: “ How would you rate your level of bladder 
control during the past week ?”  Please circle your choice:   
o Extremely good, Quite good, Better than average, 
Average, Below Average, Quite bad, Ext remely bad ”   
 
 Pelvic Floor Exercise Adherence Question  
 This is a single question: “ How many days did you perform pelvic 
floor exercises during the  past two week s? Please circle your choice :   
o Never , 1 day, 2 days, 3 days, 4 days, 5 days, 6 days, 7 
days, more than once a day ” 
 
 Bladder Management Difficulties Questionnaire – Short Form (SCI -QOL v1.0)  
 8 multiple choice questions  
 
Exploratory  Outcome Measures based on Titration Visit and Final Visit compared to 
Baseline Visit:  
 Bowel Management Difficulties Qu estionnaire – Short Form (SCI -QOL v1.0) 25  
 9 multiple choice questions  
 
Questionnaires will be administered by [CONTACT_162763].  See Schedule 
of Assessments above for timing of testing.  
 
Safety Measures  
All subjects will undergo bas eline blood testing, CBC and CMP.  Subjects with screening 
estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) < 60, or AST or  ALT > 2x upper limit of normal 
will be excluded.  At screening, subjects reporting dysuria, fever or abdominal pain will 
undergo urine an alysis, culture and sensitivity at the discretion of the princip al investigator.  
Subjects with blood pressure > [ADDRESS_188886] -void residual > 200ml 
will be excluded.  Symptoms of urinary retention will be monitored throughout the study and 
may lead to early discontinuation of study medication;  however, such subjects may complete 
other elements of the study.  Subjects with a range of health conditions that may put the 
patient at risk for adverse outcomes will be excluded, as listed under Exclusion Criteria.  
Female subjects will undergo urine pregnancy te sting if they are deemed to have any risk of 
being pregnant or becoming pregnant during the study.   
 
Subjects will be monitored for adverse events throughout the trial. The occurrence of adverse 
events will be ascertained by [CONTACT_4171], telephone monitor ing and questioning by [CONTACT_1275]. Safety assessments will consist of monitoring and recording all adverse events, 
including serious adverse events.  
 
Adverse events include adverse drug reactions, illness with onset during the study, 
exacerbations o f pre-existing conditions or clinically significant changes in physical 
examination or significantly abnormal objective test findings.  Medical conditions/diseases 
Confidential  Protocol: TRB2013/MIRROR Trial  08-March -[ADDRESS_188887] aff wil l be blinded 
towards randomization of active drug versus placebo until after completion of study.   
 
Adverse events that arise between the Baseline Visit and Final Visit  will be classified as 
acute therapy phase adverse events.   
 
A serious adverse event i s an undesirable sign, symptom or medical condition which: 1. is 
fatal or life -threatening, 2. required or prolonged hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], 3. results in persistent or 
significant disability/incapacity, 4. constitutes a congenital anomaly or a birth defect, 5. i s 
medically significant, in that it may jeopardize the subject and may require medical or 
surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed above.  If any serious adverse 
events occur, the treatment status of the subject(s) may be revealed, as cli nically indicated.  
Subjects who discontinue medication use will be followed for adverse events until reaching 
the termination of adverse events.  No interim analysis of safety data is planned because the 
entire study will be conducted over 2 months.  Howe ver, the frequency of adverse events 
(AE) will be under continuous scrutiny during the observation with comparison to AE rates 
that have been recorded in published MS fatigue drug trials.   
 
Serious Adverse Events Reporting  
The FDA will be informed of seri ous unexpected adverse reactions (SAEs) as  soon as 
possible or within 15 calendar days. In addition, the Investigator will notify the FDA of any 
unexpected, fatal or life -threatening experience associated with the use of the drug as soon as 
possible, or wi thin 7 calendar days, by [CONTACT_130153]. When the principal 
investigator [INVESTIGATOR_147758] a Serious Adverse Event requires reporting to the FDA 
(unexpected and possibly related to study drug), the following actions will be taken:  
 
1. Telephone t he FDA immediately (day of awareness), in the case of reportable death or life 
threatening events.  
2. Complete FDA Form 3500.  
3. Send the completed Form 3500 to the FDA (preferably by [CONTACT_60839] 1 -800-FDA -0178) within  
the timelines mentioned above.  
4. Attach t he photocopy of all examinations, medical notes and records related to the Serious  
Adverse Event and document the dates these were made. For laboratory results, include the  
laboratory normal ranges. For hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], Admission H&P, Discharge Summary,  
Consultative reports, etc. could be very helpful. In the case of a fatal event, provide an  
autopsy report, when it becomes available.  
 
Any symptoms or signs that could be due to an MS exacerbation will prompt an unscheduled 
visit with the investigating phys ician to confirm or refute an MS exacerbation.  Any 
confirmed exacerbations will be noted in the results, but will not lead to removal from the 
study unless it is deemed by [CONTACT_162764]’ 
best interest to do so.  Treatment of exacerbation with IV methylprednisolone 1gm daily for 
three days with oral steroid taper may be provided at the investigator’s discretion.   
 
 
 
Confidential  Protocol: TRB2013/MIRROR Trial  08-March -[ADDRESS_188888] a 
hypothesis in a preliminary fashion and to assess for safety  in this population with a specific 
neurological disease .  As such, a power calculation may be irrelevant.  However, a small 
number of subjects (e.g.) less than 10, may cau se significant sampling error to miss a 
treatment effect or common  safety issue.  Some entities that establish criteria for level of 
evidence consider a sample size of 20 subjects in each arm to be a minimum representative 
population to be considered for Class III or better classification of Level of Evidence.  
Therefore, a  sample size of 40 subjects is a reasonable number for a pi[INVESTIGATOR_162753].   
 
Statistical Analys is 
Demographics and baseline disease characteristics , including age, gender, MS t ype and 
duration of disease, level of disability (EDSS), and disease modifying therapy status will be 
compared between study groups.  
Summary and analysis of primary and secondary outcome measures will include  
1. Summary statistics (n, mean, standard deviatio n, median, minimum and maximum) at 
baseline and week 5 and week 10  by [CONTACT_3148]  
2. Summary of % change from baseline to week 5 and 10.  
3. Significance testing  
For the primary outcome measure, Average daily OAB -SCS, e ach voiding event is multiplied 
by [CONTACT_82774] f or the event and then all events are summed to generate a total daily OAB -SCS 
cumulative score .   Each daily total score is averaged to generate the Average daily OAB -
SCS total score.  For incomplete days (e.g. went out for [ADDRESS_188889] voi ds) 
the sum score will be adjusted as follows: total score over 24 hours X 24 / actual # of hours 
included in documentation (see reference Zinner et al).  
 
Mean OAB -SCS score at Baseline Visit  will be included in the model as  an independent 
variable. The pr imary time points  for all comparative measures will be Baseline Visit, 
Titration Visit and Final Visit.  Outcome measures will be compared between groups using 
analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) or other method.  Demonstration of superiority will 
depend on ach ieving statistical significance for the primary endpoint.  Level of significance 
will be defined as p=0.05.  All statistical tests will be two -sided.  Statistical assistance wil l be 
provided by a statistician consultant whose company is contracted with Eve rgreen Health  and 
whose services we have used on two recent MS studies.  
 
Aggregate, de -identified data from the Bladder and Bowel Management Difficulties Short 
Form Questionnaires (SCI -QOL v1.0) will be shared with the University of Washington  in 
Seattle, W A. This will be done as a courtesy for giving the investigator permission to use 
these questionnaires in this protocol.   
 
Ethics and Good Clinical Practice  
This study will be performed according to the principles of Good Clinical Practice [Chapter 2 
of the  ICH Harmonized Tripartite Guideline for Good Clinical Practice (GCP)], the 
declaration of Helsinki, and national laws and regulations about clinical studies. The study 
may not start without written Institutional Review Board/Independent Ethics 
Committee/R esearch Ethics Board approval and the written informed consent of the patient.  
                                                 
 
Confidential  Protocol: TRB2013/MIRROR Trial  08-March -2016  
  Page 16 of 17                                                                                                                                                           
 
1 National MS Society website, accessed June 19, 2013. 
http://www.nationalmssociety.org/about -multiple -sclerosis/what -we-know -about -
ms/symptoms/bladder -dysfunction/index.aspx  
 
2 Fowler CJ. The cause and management of bladder, sexual and bowel  symptoms in multiple 
sclerosis. Baillieres Clin Neurol 1997 6:[ADDRESS_188890] ELJ, Ui tdehaag BMJ, et al. Relation between objective and 
subjective measures of bladder dysfunction in multiple sclerosis. Neurology 2004 
63:1716 -1718.  
 
5 Ciancio, SJ, Mutchnik SE, Rivera VM, et al. Urodynamic pattern changes in multiple 
sclerosis. Urology 2001 57:239 -45. 
 
6 Lemack GE, Frohman EM, Zimmern PE, et al. Urodynamic distinctions between idiopathic 
detrusor overactivity and detrusor overactivity secondary to multiple sclerosis. Urology 
2006 67(5):[ADDRESS_188891] Symptoms on 
Health -Related Quality of Life Among Patients with Multiple Sclerosis. Neurourology 
and Urodynamics 2016 35:48 -54 
 
8 van Rey F, Heesakkers J. Solifenacin in multiple sclerosis patients with overactive bladder: 
a prospe ctive study.  Adv Urol. 2011 2011:834753  
 
8 Landis JR, Kaplan S, et al. Efficacy of Antimuscarinic therapy for overactive bladder with   
        varying degrees of incontinence severity. J Urol. 2004 171:752 -6   
 
10 Chapple C, Van Kerrebroeck P, Clinical Eff icacy, Safety, and Tolerability of Once -Daily 
Fesoterodine in Subjects with Overactive Bladder. Eur Urol 2007 52:[ADDRESS_188892] of cannabis on urge 
incontinence in patients with multiple sclerosis: a mu lticentre, randomised placebo -
controlled trial (CAMS -LUTS). Int Urogneecol J 2006 17:636 -41. 
 
12 Schulte -Baukloh H, Schobert J, Stolze T, et al. Efficacy of botulinum –A toxin bladder 
injections for the treatment of neurogenic detrusor overactivity in multi ple sclerosis 
patients: an objective and subjective analysis. Neurourol Urodyn 2006 25:110 -5. 
 
13 Fader M, Glickman S, Haggar V, et al. Intravesical Atropi[INVESTIGATOR_162754]: A Double -Blind, Randomized 
Cross over Trail. J Urol 2007 177:208 -13. 
 
Confidential  Protocol: TRB2013/MIRROR Trial  08-March -2016  
  Page 17 of 17                                                                                                                                                           
14 Bosma R, Wynia K, Havlikova E, et al. Efficacy of desmopressin in patients with multiple 
sclerosis suffering from bladder dysfunction: a meta -analysis. Acta Neurol Scand 2005 
112:1 -5. 
 
15 Di Rezze S, Frasca V, Inghille ri M, et al. Duloxetine for the treatment of overactive 
bladder syndrome in multiple sclerosis: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Clin Neuropharmacol . 2012 
35:[ADDRESS_188893], in Overactive Bladder. Eur Urol 2013 63:296 -305. 
 
17 Nitti VW, Auerbach S, Martin N, et al. Results of a Randomized Phase III trial of 
Mirabegron in Patients with Overactive Bladder. J Urol. 2013 189:1388 -95 
 
18 Khullar V, Amarenco G, Angulo JC, et al. Efficacy and tolerability of mirabegron, a β(3) -
adrenoceptor agonist, in patients with overactive bladder: results from a randomised 
European -Australian phase 3 trial. Eur Urol 2013 63(2):283 -95 
 
19 Smith AL, Wein AJ. Contemporary manag ement of overactive bladder. Postgrad Med. 
2012 124:104 -16 
 
20 Lúcio AC, Perissinoto MC, Natalin RA, et al. A comparative study of pelvic floor muscle 
training in women with multiple sclerosis: its impact on lower urinary tract symptoms 
and quality of life.  Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2011 66:1563 -8 
 
20 Vahtera T, Haaranen M. Pelvic floor rehabilitation is effective in patients with multiple  
         sclerosis. Clin Rehabil. 1997 11(3):211 9.  
 
22 Starkman JS, Dmochowski, RR. Urgency Assessment in the Evaluation of Overactive  
Bladder (OAB). Neurourol Urodynam 2008 27:13 -21 
 
23 Zinner N, Harnett M, Sabounjian L, et al. The Overactive Bladder -Symptom Score of 
Toilet Voids, Urgency Severity and Urge Urinary Incontinence in Patients with 
Overactive Bladder. J Urol 2005 17 3:1639 -43. 
 
24 Bonniaud V, Bryant D, Parratte B, et al. Qualiveen: A Urinary Disorder - Specific 
Instrument for Use in Clinical Trials in Multiple Sclerosis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 
2006 87:[ADDRESS_188894] injury (SCI) measure 
to collect patient -reported outcome data about bowel and bladder symptoms in multiple 
sclerosis. [P327] Abstract presented at the European Committee on Treatment and 
Research in Multiple Sclerosis 2013 Annual Meeting, Denmark.  
 