TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 1 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022Telemedicine Enhanced Asthma Management – Uniting Providers 
(TEAM-UP)
Investigators:
Jill S. Halterman, MD, MPH
Tamara T. Perry, MD
Jessica Stern, MD
Background:
Asthma is one of the most common chronic illnesses of childhood, affecting nearly 10% of children in 
the US.1,[ADDRESS_433662]; direct health care costs from asthma exceeded $14 billion annually.3 In the US, 
children from impoverished and minority ethnic and racial backgrounds suffer disproportionately from 
asthma.1,4,5 The US has made a commitment to eliminate health disparities between Black and White 
Americans, yet numerous studies document disparities in medication use, health care utilization and 
outcomes in poor and minority patients.6-11 The goal of asthma therapy is to maintain long-term control 
(accounting for both the impairment and risk domains) with minimal risk for adverse effects. Inhaled 
corticosteroids are the most effective long-term therapy for patients with persistent asthma, and are 
recommended by [CONTACT_349043].12-[ADDRESS_433663] poor control despi[INVESTIGATOR_349025] a daily inhaled corticosteroid should receive: 1) 
evaluation and treatment for co-morbid conditions, 2) guideline-based step-ups in treatment, 3) 
assessment for allergies, with subcutaneous allergen immunotherapy if required, and 4) referrals to 
community resources for trigger reduction.12  Children with moderate-severe persistent asthma require 
‘Step 3’ care, with an additional step-up of at least 1 step if asthma remains uncontrolled. The preferred 
medical treatment for Step 3 care (or higher) is a daily inhaled corticosteroid combined with a long 
acting beta [ADDRESS_433664] (LABA) or leukotriene receptor antagonist (LTRA), or a medium-dose inhaled 
corticosteroid.14-[ADDRESS_433665],31 suggesting delays and disparities in accessing care. There is a clear need 
for increased access to specialists to optimize guideline based management in urban minority 
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 2 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022populations.  In our work we have found that adherence to medications is very low,[ADDRESS_433666] care is underutilized. 
School-based programs represent a promising strategy for asthma management because of the ability to 
optimize children’s care in the setting in which they spend most of their day.  Further, collaborations 
with schools provide the opportunity to reach high-risk children and target those in greatest need, 
regardless of their contacts with the health care system.[ADDRESS_433667] 
allowed us to implement and evaluate programs for urban children with asthma.35-37  Our prior work 
demonstrates that school-based directly observed therapy (DOT) of preventive asthma medications can 
improve outcomes in pediatric asthma, and there is substantial evidence in other therapeutic settings 
that treatment that is directly observed can be effective.38-[ADDRESS_433668] demonstrated reduced morbidity, decreased school 
absenteeism, and fewer exacerbations.42-44 We subsequently incorporated communication technology 
(telemedicine) to enhance the sustainability of this system of care.36,45 Importantly, there are multiple 
sites around the country implementing similar models of school-based and even video supported 
DOT,46-50 in both research and ‘real world’ settings, and in [COMPANY_002]ster many providers and families now 
initiate school-based DOT of preventive asthma medications independent of the research program. 
While these school-based programs consistently improved outcomes for children with persistent 
asthma, to our concern we have found that not all children benefit to the same degree.  Specifically, 
among the children with moderate-severe persistent or difficult to control asthma at baseline, the 
majority did not achieve control despi[INVESTIGATOR_349026].  We realize that our existing 
programs may be insufficient for these children, since specialist consultation for optimization of 
medication management or identification and treatment of co-morbid conditions and triggers is not 
included. In fact, very few of the children in our programs received care from a specialist, trigger 
exposure was common, and despi[INVESTIGATOR_349027]-up assessments with PCP prompting for guideline-based 
step-ups in treatments, many of these children were under-treated.  We now aim to test a novel school-
based program to address these gaps.
Our existing community-wide telemedicine program receives referrals for visits from parents or 
providers. A Clinical Telehealth Assistant (CTA) collects medical data and images from the child at their 
school, daycare, or home using mobile units, and stores the data for the provider in a secure internet 
system.  The stored data enable clinicians to provide assessments based on a full complement of 
clinically-important information.  Equally important, providers can engage parents in counseling through 
remote audiovisual technology.  The provider can complete visits from their office at their convenience, 
and communicate with the caregiver by [CONTACT_349044].  Visits can also be done in ‘real-time’; connecting parties via videoconference.  The 
system enables children to be seen by a provider without making a trip to the office, thus eliminating a 
significant barrier to care.51,52  Telemedicine visits are reimbursed by [CONTACT_349045], including Medicaid 
Managed Care (which covers 75% of [COMPANY_002]ster’s children), making it sustainable. Telemedicine is 
efficient, cost-effective, and safe, and is now used in urban and rural areas worldwide.53-[ADDRESS_433669] allowed us to implement and evaluate programs for urban 
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 3 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022children with asthma.  Similar to our prior school-based studies, this current intervention uses a system 
change to improve the delivery of asthma care. However, it is unique because it targets a particularly 
high-risk population for whom advanced treatment is needed (urban children with moderate-severe, 
poorly controlled asthma), and uses telemedicine technology to facilitate access to optimal specialist-
directed guideline based step-wise care, in partnership with PCPs and the child’s medical home to 
ensure coordination of care. We will use school-based and video supported DOT to ensure adherence to 
prescribed therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014].  We anticipate that uniting care across settings will optimize treatment for 
traditionally underserved children with asthma, and ultimately reduce disparities. 
This research study is an innovative school-based program for urban children with moderate to severe 
persistent or difficult-to-control asthma. The Telemedicine Enhanced Asthma Management-Uniting 
Providers (TEAM-UP) program enhances our school-based, primary care directed asthma program with 
specialist-supported care to ensure optimal guideline based treatment.  This study is a full-scale 
randomized trial of TEAM-UP versus an enhanced care comparison group.  We will prompt PCPs of all 
enrolled children (n=360, 4-12 yrs.) to initiate preventive asthma medication and to make a specialist 
referral.  For children in TEAM-UP, the specialist visits will be facilitated via telemedicine.  The 
telemedicine specialist visit will be scheduled after [ADDRESS_433670] visits to 
assess the child’s response to treatment and make needed adjustments.  We will capi[INVESTIGATOR_349028]-based and/or video 
supported DOT, and maintaining collaboration with PCPs.  
We will also test the feasibility of conducting the TEAM-UP intervention with a small subset of teens (12-
16 years) in secondary schools.  For this subgroup, we will not prompt PCPs to initiate DOT, but will 
initiate up to [ADDRESS_433671] provider.
Study Objectives:
This study has the following objectives:
1. To identify and recruit an urban sample of young children, aged 4-12 years (subset 12-16 years), 
with moderate-to-severe or uncontrolled asthma from preschool and elementary (subset 
secondary) schools throughout metro [COMPANY_002]ster school districts and from primary care offices 
that serve children in metro [COMPANY_002]ster. 
2. To collect baseline morbidity data to characterize this group of children with asthma and to 
determine risk factors for the frequency and severity of recurrent symptoms.
3. To randomly allocate subjects into either: 1) TEAM-UP intervention group (directly observed 
administration (DOT) of preventive asthma medications and ongoing monitoring and tailoring of 
the care regimen using telemedicine directed by [CONTACT_349046]) or 2) a control condition 
including enhanced care (EC) (Report of symptoms to PCP, recommendations to initiate 
preventive medications and make a specialist referral).  (Subset of 12-[ADDRESS_433672] care through telemedicine.)
4. To follow subjects prospectively throughout one year for endpoints defined by [CONTACT_208860] 
(symptom severity, asthma control, and health care use), functional outcomes (absenteeism, 
quality of life), airway inflammation (FeNO), FEV1, and healthcare utilization. (Subset of 12-16 
year olds will be followed for approximately 3 months.)
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 4 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.[ZIP_CODE]. To assess the effectiveness of the TEAM-UP intervention in reducing asthma morbidity 
(including symptom-free days post-intervention as the primary outcome) compared to an 
enhanced care (EC) comparison group in school age children with moderate-severe asthma.  
6. To assess the effectiveness of TEAM-UP in improving guideline-based asthma care (corrective 
actions; step-wise medication adjustments, identification and treatment of allergies or other co-
morbid conditions) vs. EC.
7. To establish the cost-effectiveness of the intervention with a specific focus on ultimate 
sustainability and dissemination.  
8. To evaluate the process of program implementation (i.e., convenience, scheduling, satisfaction, 
etc.)
Study Overview:
The overall goal of this project is to test a novel school-based program that links our effective school-
based, primary care directed asthma management program with specialist-supported care for children 
requiring Step [ADDRESS_433673] care will be facilitated 
via telemedicine, with management based on a tiered guideline-based stepwise approach.  We will link 
children to existing community resources and will use school-based and/or video supported DOT to 
ensure adherence to therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014].  This study includes a 2-group randomized trial to test TEAM-UP 
(Telemedicine Enhanced Asthma Management - Uniting Providers).  All enrolled children (ages 4-12 
yrs.) will be referred to their PCP for initiation of preventive asthma medication.  Children randomly 
assigned to TEAM-UP will also have a telemedicine visit with a specialist provider after 4 weeks of 
initiating DOT as well as 2 follow-up visits to ensure optimal response to treatment. Collaboration with 
the PCP and the child’s medical home will occur throughout the study period.  We will enroll 360 
children over four years from schools and primary care offices.  We will assess the effectiveness of the 
program in reducing morbidity and improving guideline-based asthma care (primary outcome: 
symptom-free days at 3, 5, 7, and 12 months).  At the study’s completion, the effectiveness of this novel 
system of care will be better defined as a sustainable means to improve care and reduce morbidity for 
the highest risk children with difficult to control asthma.  A subset of children (approximately 10-30 
teens) ages 12-[ADDRESS_433674] the feasibility of TEAM-UP in older children.
Study Design:
This study includes a two-group randomized trial. Children referred to the study (through school medical 
alert forms and healthcare provider referrals) will be systematically screened for asthma severity or 
control, and 360 eligible children will be assigned randomly to either the TEAM-UP intervention (directly 
observed administration of preventive asthma medications and ongoing monitoring and tailoring of the 
care regimen using asthma specialist-directed telemedicine visits) or the EC comparison condition 
(asthma screening with symptom reports and guideline-based recommendations for preventive 
medications, as well as systematic feedback to the PCP and caregiver to promote appropriate follow-up 
care). Randomization will be stratified by 1) ever seeing an asthma specialist and 2) use of a preventive 
asthma medication at baseline. A permutated block design will be used to assure an equal balance of 
children in each group over time. Following randomization, children will be followed prospectively and 
systematically for one year. 
Subjects and Setting:
Children 4-12 years of age living in the City of [COMPANY_002]ster and surrounding suburbs will be screened for 
eligibility.  A total of 360 children will be recruited into the study at the beginning of each school year 
over 4 years. Children from approximately 50 or more schools will participate and each child will 
participate over 1 year.  
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 5 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022In addition to the [ADDRESS_433675] providers, for a total of approximately 770 subjects. For the subset of teen children, we will 
also enroll 10-30 teens (12-16 years) and their caregivers.  The updated total will be approximately 830 
subjects.
Inclusion Criteria [1 AND 2 AND 3 AND (4 OR 5) must be met]:
1. Physician-diagnosed asthma (based on parent report with validation from the child’s physician).
2. Age >4 and <12 years. (Subset of 12-16 year olds)
3. Residence in the City of [COMPANY_002]ster and surrounding suburbs, with a primary residence within the 
following zip codes: [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], 
[ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], 
[ZIP_CODE].
4. For referrals from medical practices, if any of the 3 criteria below are met based on data 
obtained from a referral, then the child will be considered eligible due to their history of 
significant asthma and risk for future acuity, regardless of whether the caregiver-reported NHLBI 
symptom criteria (listed in #5 below) are met. 
i.≥2 asthma exacerbations (resulting in ED, urgent Care, or acute clinic visits) in 
the prior year
ii.≥2 oral prednisone (systemic steroid) epi[INVESTIGATOR_349029].≥1 hospi[INVESTIGATOR_260980]
5. Moderate-severe persistent severity (requiring Step 3 or higher care) or difficult to control 
asthma despi[INVESTIGATOR_116175] (based on age-specific NHLBI guidelines10).
Moderate-Severe Persistent Severity (for children not taking a preventive medication)
a. Age 4: Any 1 of the following: 
i. Daily asthma symptoms (in prior 4 weeks)
ii. >2 days per month with nighttime awakenings  
iii. Daily use of rescue medications for symptom control (in prior 4 weeks)
iv. >[ADDRESS_433676] 6 months that required systemic 
corticosteroids*
b. Age 5-11: Any 1 of the following: 
i. Daily asthma symptoms (in prior 4 weeks)
ii. >1 day per week with nighttime awakenings 
iii. Daily use of rescue medications for symptom control (in prior 4 weeks)
iv. >[ADDRESS_433677] 6 months that required systemic 
corticosteroids*
c. Age 12: Any 1 of the following: 
i. Daily asthma symptoms (in prior 4 weeks)
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 6 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022ii. >1 day per week with nighttime awakenings  
iii. Daily use of rescue medications for symptom control (in prior 4 weeks)
iv. >[ADDRESS_433678] 6 months that required systemic 
corticosteroids*
*adapted from NHLBI guidelines and based on specialist recommendations
Not Well Controlled (for children taking a preventive medication)
a. Age 4: Any 1 of the following: 
i. >2 Days/week with asthma symptoms (in prior 4 weeks)
ii. >1 day per month with nighttime awakenings  
iii. >2 Days/week use of rescue medications for symptom control (in prior 4 weeks)
iv.≥[ADDRESS_433679] year that required systemic corticosteroids
b. Age 5-11: Any 1 of the following: 
i. >2 Days/week with asthma symptoms or multiple times a day on ≤2 
days/week (in prior 4 weeks)
ii.≥2 days per month with nighttime awakenings 
iii. >2 Days/week use of rescue medications for symptom control (in prior 4 
weeks)
iv.≥[ADDRESS_433680] year that required systemic 
corticosteroids
c. Age 12: Any 1 of the following: 
i. >2 Days/week with asthma symptoms (in prior 4 weeks)
ii.≥1 day per week with nighttime awakenings  
iii. >2 days/week use of rescue medications for symptom control (in prior 4 
weeks)
iv.≥[ADDRESS_433681] year that required systemic 
corticosteroids
Exclusion Criteria:
1. Inability to speak and understand English. (*Parents unable to read will be eligible, and all 
instruments will be given verbally.)
2. Current participation in an asthma study.
3. Planning to leave the [COMPANY_002]ster area in fewer than [ADDRESS_433682] for the study, they will be excluded. (For the subset of teens, this 
will not be an exclusion factor.
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 7 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.[ZIP_CODE]. Having other significant medical conditions, including congenital heart disease, cystic fibrosis, or 
other chronic lung disease, that could interfere with the assessment of asthma-related 
measures.
6. In foster care or other situations in which consent cannot be obtained from a guardian.
Based on our prior studies, we anticipate <10% of subjects to be excluded based on these criteria. 
Study Procedures:
Flagging and Screening Procedures:
Potentially eligible children will be identified through a variety of sources, including school asthma alert 
lists, school nurse referrals, and medical practices. We have used each method of recruitment 
successfully, with consistently high participation rates (>75%). The city school district routinely compi[INVESTIGATOR_108726] 
“medical-alert” forms at the start of the school year, which include listings of children with asthma.  
School nurses or health aides will make referrals based on these lists or on frequency of visits to the 
nurse’s office for rescue medication. In compliance with the Family Education Rights and Privacy Act, we 
have a Non-Disclosure Agreement with the school district that allows our study team to actively 
participate in this screening process.  
Children also will be referred by [CONTACT_349047], or by [CONTACT_349048]. Referral forms will be available to each of 
the major practices in the city, and will be solicited monthly starting in the mid-summer. Once identified, 
someone from the practice (e.g., nurse, care coordinator, etc.) will introduce the study team to the 
family.  For children in the study investigators’ medical practices, TEAM-UP staff will contact [CONTACT_349049]. We will also 
request a HIPAA waiver, allowing research staff access to medical records to review children’s records 
and provider schedules to identify potentially eligible children.  We have previously recruited from all of 
these practices. 
Lastly, the study team may call families that have agreed to be contact[CONTACT_7678] 
(RSRB#[ZIP_CODE]) to assess eligibility for the current study. This system of recruitment has been successful 
in our prior work and has allowed us to reach traditionally underserved children throughout the 
community.  Enrollment will occur from mid-summer through January.  
Baseline Assessment: 
Following screening we will schedule a home visit to obtain informed consent from the caregiver and 
assent from children >[ADDRESS_433683] family and health history variables and a home environmental assessment.  The 
interview survey includes questions adapted from several validated scales (see below).  An asthma 
symptom diary, developed using the school calendar, will be given to the family for tracking of 
symptoms throughout the school year.  We will obtain height and weight measurements, as well as, 
saliva samples to measure smoke exposure through the biomarker cotinine.  Lastly, we will obtain 
exhaled nitric oxide measurements using a portable NIOX VERO machine, to objectively measure airway 
inflammation, and will measure FEV1 using a portable spi[INVESTIGATOR_14007].  All surveys and questions will be read 
aloud.  
For home interviews in which the child is not present, we will obtain the parent’s permission to meet 
with the child at the school nurse’s office to obtain assent (if necessary) and collect cotinine, spi[INVESTIGATOR_038], 
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 8 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022and exhaled nitric oxide measures. The baseline assessment will include a detailed asthma medication 
reconciliation and verification of the child’s insurance information.  
In instances where a caregiver states that their child (age ≥8 years) is unable to provide assent to the 
study (e.g., a child with autism), the assent form will be waived and the research assistant will document 
the reason for the assent waiver in the subject’s study chart.   
If we are unable to conduct a home visit (e.g., concerns for COVID-19, safety, scheduling) to obtain 
consent, we will obtain the informed consent using electronic consent (eConsent) through REDCap.  If 
eConsent is utilized, we will email or mail the consent, assent, and other forms to the family ahead of 
the baseline for their review.  A study team member will use Zoom to meet with caregivers and children 
(with the option of telephone for caregivers of children younger than 8 years) to describe the study in 
detail, answer questions, and walk the family through the eConsent on REDCap (link sent via email or 
text messaging per family preference).  If a family cannot access REDCap or Zoom, we will conduct a 
brief in-person visit either at the home or mutually agreed upon location, maintaining social distancing 
and using PPE for the family and the study staff (as outlined in the UR’s Research Guidelines). For 
eConsent, we will collect child and caregiver names, dates of birth, and will establish a 4-digit pin with 
the family to confirm their identity on REDCap. We will email or mail (per family preference) the PDFs of 
the signed Caregiver Permission Consent Form, Verbal Assent Script, and other documents needed for 
the study (SH419TELE MR Telehealth Consent Form, Golisano Pediatric Telemedicine Consent Form, SH 
48 GPED MR ARMI for Telemedicine, BOCES RCSD Permission to Administer Medication Form, and 
optional SH48GP Photo Image Release Form.)  
In instances when the caregiver who provided consent is unavailable for follow-up and a different 
caregiver would prefer to respond to the follow-up assessments, the study will be described in detail 
and verbal consent will be obtained over the telephone from the new caregiver for completion of the 
follow-up survey. In rare instances where the child’s primary caregiver changes, written consent will be 
obtained from the new caregiver.
Participants will be given the option to allow future contact [CONTACT_349050].  All participants who provided permission will be added to a future contact [CONTACT_349051] (RSRB #[ZIP_CODE]).  
For the teen subgroup, we have requested a waiver of documented consent, as the data collection will 
be minimal, the intervention is to implement guideline-based care with specialists via telemedicine, and 
we will not be implementing directly observed therapy (DOT) in school, as we do for the younger 
children. We will obtain verbal approval from both the caregiver (screening script) and teen (assent 
script) for this subgroup.
Randomization:
After the baseline assessment, each child will be randomly assigned to either the TEAM-UP or EC group.  
Randomization will be stratified by 1) ever seeing an asthma specialist and 2) use of a preventive asthma 
medication at baseline.  Due to the seasonality of asthma, we will use a permutated block design to 
assure an equal balance of children in each group over time.  The randomization scheme will be 
independently developed by [CONTACT_349052], and will be implemented via REDCapTM.  All 
families will receive an educational packet including asthma information, smoking cessation resources, 
and information about local asthma and community resources.  Once randomized, the research team 
will send a symptom report and notification of enrollment to each child’s PCP (see below) 
All Study Children:
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 9 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022For all enrolled children, we will contact [CONTACT_349053] a referral to an asthma specialist.  We will encourage the use of 
pharmacies with delivery (several local pharmacies routinely provide delivery services) with instructions 
indicating one canister of preventive medication, with a spacer and mask as appropriate, to be 
dispensed for home doses on weekends and days the child does not attend school, and a second 
canister for supervised medication administration at school on school days if needed. This system has 
been successful >95% of the time in our prior studies.  We include the recommendation for daily 
preventive medication for all children, including those in the EC group, because we have established the 
effectiveness of consistent preventive medication use in our prior studies and it is well accepted as a 
care measure nationally.  The specialist referral is consistent with guideline recommendations for 
children with this level of severity.
TEAM-UP Intervention:
Children randomly assigned to TEAM-UP will have a telemedicine assisted specialist visit scheduled after 
4 weeks of initiating school-based and/or video supported DOT, as well as [ADDRESS_433684] in pediatric asthma.  Appointments will be scheduled in 
conjunction with the child’s caregiver. If the visit is able to be prepared at school, health data will be 
collected by [CONTACT_349054] (CTAs) who already work in the district. In these instances 
the CTA will bring the mobile telemedicine unit and meet with the child at school. If conditions allow, 
the CTA will obtain spi[INVESTIGATOR_349030], and then enter information regarding symptoms and 
triggers (collected at screening) into the system.  Physical examination data will be uploaded (medical 
images, height/weight, breath sounds). Visits will either be conducted in real time using 
videoconferencing or information will be securely stored in the telemedicine system’s “virtual waiting 
room” until a provider is ready to complete the visit.
Initial Telemedicine Asthma Control Assessment - The first telemedicine specialist visit will occur after 4 
weeks of initiating school-based and/or video supported DOT to parallel routine scheduling processes 
(approx. [ADDRESS_433685] visits) and to allow for an accurate assessment of medication 
and care needs once adherence with a daily controller medication has been established.  The specialist 
provider will log on to the telemedicine system from their office and perform the visit by [CONTACT_349055], viewing images, and listening to breath sounds.  The provider will communicate 
with the caregiver by [CONTACT_349056]’s asthma and conduct a needs 
assessment.  The primary goal of the initial visit will be to optimize the medication regimen based on 
guideline-recommended stepwise care. These children will already be receiving some form of DOT of a 
preventive asthma medication (most commonly an inhaled corticosteroid), however as per NHLBI 
guidelines for Step 3 or higher care, many will require a ‘step-up’ to a combined anti-inflammatory 
medication with a LABA (i.e.; Advair®), or addition of a LTRA15-[ADDRESS_433686] provider will also deliver 
asthma education (trigger avoidance, symptom monitoring, adherence promotion, proper medication 
administration technique) and an asthma action plan (AAP), and provide targeted referrals to 
community resources.  
If the specialist has difficulty contact[CONTACT_349057], 
they can request that the CTA or the primary care practice’s care coordinators assist with 
communications.  If the child is not attending school when a telemedicine visit is due, the visit may be 
prepared at the child’s home,  another childcare setting, or entirely remotely.  This is consistent with the 
current telemedicine program’s clinical protocol. The telemedicine assessments approximate care at an 
outpatient specialist visit; visits take approximately 30 mins. 
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 10 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022Any new medications that are prescribed will be sent to pharmacies that routinely provide delivery 
services.  Children will receive one medication dose daily through school if this is possible;[ADDRESS_433687] a full time nurse, schools are prepared for daily medication administration when in 
session for in-person learning.  In our prior study, medications were administered >95% of the time 
children were in school. All children will be instructed to rinse their mouth with water after each 
medication dose.  Medication administration logs (school-based and/or video supported DOT) will be 
used for tracking.  
 A telemedicine visit summary will be sent to the PCP, with requests for feedback and input, and the PCP 
will continue to coordinate the care. The 3 major practices serving urban children in [COMPANY_002]ster are 
certified as Patient Centered Medical Homes, and include care coordinators to assess barriers and 
facilitate access to services. Maintaining care through this system is critical to ensure continuity and 
unification of services.  A visit summary and AAP will also be sent to the caregiver.  
Follow-Up Telemedicine Asthma Control Assessments – Follow-up specialist-directed telemedicine 
assessments will occur twice during the study period; 4-[ADDRESS_433688] will also assess for medication-related side effects (oral thrush, 
growth monitoring). Further, many of these children will have allergic asthma and may benefit from 
initiation of antihistamine medications, specific allergy testing, and possibly the use of a biologic 
medication (Omalizumab or Meplizumab). If allergy testing or a biologic medication are needed, an in-
person visit will be recommended (allergy/laboratory testing cannot be feasibly conducted in schools).  
If a possible co-morbid condition is identified, visits for additional evaluation (i.e.; sleep studies, upper GI 
evaluation, etc.) will be scheduled. The specialist may also refer to community resources as needed (i.e.; 
Healthy Home Partnership for trigger assessment, [LOCATION_001] State quit line for smoking cessation 
support, care coordination from the medical home for transportation assistance). Information regarding 
any changes in the regimen will be sent to the PCP through the telemedicine system.  
Children who continue to have poor control at the final telemedicine visit will be referred for an in-
person specialist visit for further evaluation and management.  These visits will be facilitated as needed 
with the support of the child’s PCP and medical home.  We do not anticipate the opportunity to step-
down therapy, since all children will have moderate to severe persistent symptoms at the start of the 
trial and guidelines recommend several months of optimal anti-inflammatory therapy.  A natural time 
for discontinuing or steppi[INVESTIGATOR_007]-down therapy occurs at the end of the school year when the children will 
no longer be receiving medications through school and/or video supported DOT. Approximately, two 
weeks prior to the close of the school year, we will notify specialist providers, PCPs and families that 
children receiving preventive medications at school no longer will receive medications through the 
study.  
Monitoring for Treatment Fidelity:  
The study team nurse will review telemedicine visit records after each visit to ensure completion by [CONTACT_349058] [ADDRESS_433689] provider.  We will track delivery of medications, DOT, and show rates at 
needed in-person visits.  We will also ensure ongoing communication with the PCP. 
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 11 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022Subgroup of Teens
For a small subgroup (approximately 10-30 teens), we will test the feasibility of conducting the TEAM-UP 
intervention with teens. This subgroup will not be randomized.  For all teens, we will initiate a 
telemedicine visit conducted within the school (or home) with an asthma specialist. Two follow-up visits 
will occur either with an asthma specialist or with an asthma nurse educator, to re-assess symptoms and 
ensure guideline-based care is implemented appropriately.  As routine within the Telemedicine 
Program, the teen’s PCP will be notified of all visits, severity of child as documented within the 
telemedicine visits, and any changes in care that are recommended through this program. Unlike the 
study for younger children, we will not implement DOT of medications as part of the program for teens, 
although the telemedicine provider may suggest DOT in their asthma care recommendations. 
Enhanced Care (EC) Comparison Condition: 
Similar to the TEAM-UP group, children in the EC group will receive a symptom assessment and asthma 
education materials at baseline, and we will contact [CONTACT_349059] a referral to specialist.  However specialist visits will not 
be facilitated through the study.  We will also give providers a summary of the national asthma 
guidelines and a list of community resources including the Healthy Homes Partnership and the [LOCATION_001] 
State quitline.  We will provide systematic reminders to the family and PCPs to schedule recommended 
healthcare visits at the same intervals as the TEAM-UP group’s telemedicine visits.  Participants will not 
be blinded to group allocation; they will be told that they are randomly assigned to 2 different ways of 
approaching asthma management.  In all of our prior studies, the EC group improved over time, creating 
a conservative bias.
Follow-Up Assessments:
The intervention will continue for 12 months.  The effectiveness of the study will be assessed by 
[CONTACT_57245] (telephone and in-person) with caregivers, objective measures, school data (absenteeism, 
medication administration, nurse visits, academic performance), and medical record review. Research 
assistants who are blinded to the subject’s group allocation will conduct telephone calls with caregivers 
at 3, 5, and [ADDRESS_433690] verbal permission 
from the caregiver prior to collecting survey data. We may also send reminders and schedule 
appointments through text messages and emails.  Text messages will be formatted in a manner that 
provides research relevance in the absence of personal health information (PHI).  We may use a limited 
data set when sending text messages that can include dates and times for visits or telephone call 
reminders.  
Evaluations may be conducted with school health staff members who administered directly observed 
therapy to children enrolled in the program.  Surveys will be distributed prior to the end of the study. 
Respondents will be asked to complete the survey within a 2 week window and return via fax, email or 
web-based survey with email invitation. 
Healthcare providers whose patient(s) were enrolled in the program will also be asked to complete a 
short evaluation asking for feedback on the process. These surveys will be administered on paper and 
returned via fax and as a web-based survey with an email invitation.  We will also conduct semi-
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 12 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022structured interviews with participating school health staff and healthcare providers to gather additional 
information on program acceptability.
At the conclusion of the study, we will ask school nurses, health aides, administrators, staff, primary care 
providers, and specialist providers to complete a brief survey and semi-structured interview regarding 
their views of pediatric asthma, child health, and study processes. We will request a waiver of 
documentation of consent for these participants. Approximately [ADDRESS_433691] providers will be asked to participate.
For the subgroup of teens, we will follow the families for approximately 3 months.  We will assess for 
symptoms and healthcare utilization, as well as feasibility, acceptability and satisfaction with the 
program.
Qualitative Assessment:
After completion of their final primary study follow-up at [ADDRESS_433692] a subset of children 
and caregivers (approximately 30 child-caregiver dyads), to conduct semi-structured interviews via 
telephone, Zoom or in-person.  Caregivers and children ≥10 at the time of the interview will complete a 
verbal consent prior to the in-depth interview.  The 30-60 minute interviews will be audio recorded and 
participants will be paid $[ADDRESS_433693] a similar semi-structured interview with approximately 20-30 health care providers of 
child participants from the primary study. The healthcare providers will receive an email introduction 
and/or phone call introducing the study.  A verbal consent will be read to the providers prior to the 
interview, and the providers will be given a $[ADDRESS_433694] (e.g., Starbucks, Amazon, etc.) for their 
participation. 
Measures: 
The table below summarizes the outcome measures and covariates that will be collected for this study.  
It includes how the data will be collected, validated scales/instruments used, and times of 
administration.
Clinical Outcomes Measurement Strategy Time of Administration
Symptom Severity Caregiver interview, NHLBI guideline-based 
items
Asthma Control Test (ACT)Baseline, each follow-up
Baseline,  7 month follow-
up
Health Care 
UtilizationCaregiver interview – health care utilization 
survey
Review of medical chart and pharmacy recordsBaseline, each follow-up
Conclusion of Study
Airway Inflammation Objective measurement:  FeNO Baseline, 7 month follow-
up
Pulmonary Function Spi[INVESTIGATOR_349031], 7 month follow-
up
Functional Outcomes
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 13 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022School Absenteeism Caregiver interview
School record reviewBaseline, each follow-up
Conclusion of study
Quality of Life Caregiver interview-PACQLQ Baseline, each follow-up
Potential Mediators
Adherence Caregiver interview-Horne Adherence Scale Baseline, each follow-up
Communication with 
Providers Caregiver interview-PEPPI [INVESTIGATOR_31975], 7 month follow-
up
Satisfaction with 
Medical CareCaregiver interview-PSQ-18 Baseline, 7 month follow-
up
Independent 
Variables
Demographic, 
Medical VariablesCaregiver interview Baseline
Caregiver 
Depression*Caregiver interview-CES-D Baseline, 7 month follow-
up
Environmental 
AllergensEnvironmental survey Baseline
Secondhand Smoke Caregiver interview
Salivary Cotinine measurementBaseline, each follow-up
Baseline, 7 month follow-
up
Process Evaluation
Training of School 
Nurses, CTAs, and 
ProvidersTime to train nurses to deliver DOT with 
proper inhaler technique, train CTAs for 
asthma assessments, and providers for 
reinforcement of guideline based asthma careOngoing tracking log
Medication Delivery 
to SchoolTracking log of days required to deliver 
medications to school and home and initiate 
DOT; both at beginning of the study and for 
follow-up adjustments Ongoing tracking log
Percent of Days 
Children Receive 
Medications via DOTNurse medication administration and video 
supported DOT recordsCollected at the end of the 
school year
RE-AIM Metrics 
Reach, 
Effectiveness, 
Adoption, 
Implementation, 
Maintenance Response rate, participant characteristics 
Primary analysis (symptoms, absenteeism, 
quality of life)
Semi-structured interviews: parents, nurses, 
administrators, PCPs, specialists
Perceived Attributes scale (for school nurses, 
health aides, and administrators)Ongoing tracking log, 
screening/baseline 
Conclusion of study
Conclusion of study
Conclusion of study
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 14 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022Medical record review
Response rate and attrition trackingTracking log
*All Families will be provided a list of local mental health resources at the beginning of this study. 
Fraction of Exhaled Nitric Oxide (FeNO):
Fraction of Exhaled Nitric Oxide (FeNO) measurement is a non-invasive measure of lung inflammation.  
This inflammation could be caused by [CONTACT_349060], pollutant exposures, and asthma. 
FeNO will be measured using the NIOX VERO® Airway Inflammation Monitor, an electrochemical hand-
held device that instantly analyzes exhaled air for NO concentration.  Children will be asked to first fully 
exhale and then to take a fast and deep inhalation through a disposable mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_349032]. Then, we will ask children to exhale slowly and steadily through the mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_13959].  If done 
correctly, a reading will appear on the screen which will be recorded manually. FeNO will be measured 
at the baseline visit and then again at the [ADDRESS_433695] difficulty with this 
procedure; we will only include data for children who are able to perform the procedure accurately.   
Pulmonary Function:
To assess pulmonary function, we will use the EasyOne® Air portable spi[INVESTIGATOR_14007], which meets American 
Thoracic Society standards for FEV 1, FEV 1 % predicted, PEF, and FVC at baseline and [ADDRESS_433696] difficulty performing spi[INVESTIGATOR_349033]; we will only 
include data that meet standard quality criteria.  
Secondary Smoke Exposure: Saliva Sample Collection for Measurement of Cotinine:
Exposure to secondhand smoke will be assessed by [CONTACT_349061].  
At the beginning and at the [ADDRESS_433697] cotinine samples for the teen 
subgroup. 
Compensation:
Each participating parent will be paid $[ADDRESS_433698]; 
direct deposit; or mailed paper checks. Subjects will also receive $[ADDRESS_433699] after 
each of the telephone follow-up surveys and $[ADDRESS_433700] after the 7-month follow-
up assessment.  Total payment will be no more than $160. Payment to participants will be in the form of 
a reloadable VISA gift card through Advarra Participant Payments.  Healthcare providers who complete 
an evaluation at the end of the program will be mailed a $[ADDRESS_433701] to thank them for their 
time.  The subgroup of teens and caregivers will receive $25 after their baseline surveys and final 
surveys (up to $50 each). For a subgroup of children and caregivers, they will be paid $[ADDRESS_433702] of the same amount (e.g., 
Walmart).  
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 15 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022There may be some cost to participate in this study. Participants will be responsible to purchase 
medications and spacers during the study, including those used for DOT of asthma therapy.  Participants 
may be charged for using data on their smartphone in accordance with their personal phone data plan 
and rates.  Participants randomized to the TEAM-UP group will also be responsible for any fees 
associated with telemedicine visits (e.g., co-pays etc.) completed through the study (these are medical 
processes that should occur according to the national guidelines regardless of the child’s participation in 
the study). Based on our prior work with this population, we anticipate that most of the children will 
have some form of health insurance to cover the costs of visits and medications with minimal or no co-
pay fee.  In our prior studies we found that approximately 70% of families in the RCSD were insured with 
Medicaid which often eliminates co-pay fees for medications and care.  If a child (in either group) does 
not have insurance, the study team will help the family secure health insurance.  If a child in either 
group is unable to obtain health insurance and reports difficulty with associated medication costs, the 
study team will pay for the participant’s medication and spacer for the program, as needed.  If there is 
no insurance reimbursement for the telemedicine visit, subjects will not be asked to pay any additional 
costs. Participants and their insurance company will be responsible for the costs of all standard of care 
office visits and additional medications prescribed by [CONTACT_145482]. 
 
Data Storage and Confidentiality:
To maintain the integrity, security, and confidentially of study data, the data will be maintained in a 
secure and encrypted web-based database and/or a password protected database on a secure 
university network drive. No subject data will be stored on the internal hard drives of any University of 
[COMPANY_002]ster computers. After data validation and analysis, subject information will be de-identified.  All 
consent forms, paper surveys and additional correspondence will be stored in a locked filing cabinet in a 
locked hallway or locked office, and will only be accessible by [CONTACT_5984]. 
Baseline, follow-up, and chart review data will be entered into a password-protected Microsoft Access 
database.  This database is stored on a secure university network drive that is only accessible by [CONTACT_349062].  Data may also be 
collected using REDCap, which is a secure, password protected database (using University NetID’s and 
passwords) hosted through the University of [COMPANY_002]ster.
Portions of the assessments with caregivers, nurses, and healthcare providers may be tape recorded.  
These recordings will be saved on a University network drive that is only accessible by [CONTACT_349063].  Once the recordings have 
been transcribed, they will be deleted from the network drive.
The [COMPANY_002]ster City School District has partnered with the University of [COMPANY_002]ster study team for 
this study, and all of the procedures follow the school district’s rules of privacy and 
confidentiality.  As deputies of the school district, the study team is granted permission to 
review limited student information and contact [CONTACT_349064].
Safety:
This intervention is designed to ensure guideline-based asthma care for children with uncontrolled 
asthma. This is not a drug investigational study since the effectiveness and safety of the recommendation 
medications are not being tested.  The guideline-directed specialist visits and the preventive medications 
are recommended as the standard of care for children with the degree of symptom severity required for 
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 16 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022enrollment into the program.  The most common side effects of inhaled corticosteroids, including yeast 
infection of the mouth and facial rash, will be assessed during each follow-up interview.  Any significant 
concerns will be relayed promptly to the study coordinator, the principal investigator, and the child’s 
healthcare providers, the Institutional Review Board, the Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB, see 
below) and the NIH.  There is a potential risk of adverse effects on linear growth from the use of inhaled 
steroids;60 however, this risk is felt to be outweighed by [CONTACT_349065]/development and improved lung function.  In general, these 
medications are well tolerated and safe.61-[ADDRESS_433703] agree to monitor the child’s growth during the study 
period.  Specialist providers may suggest additional testing and treatments for consideration. The 
specialist providers will review the risks and benefits of the any additional testing and treatments, and 
will ask for the caregiver’s permission before initiating additional asthma treatments.  Any child (in either 
group) experiencing an acute asthma exacerbation or experiencing worsening asthma symptoms at the 
time of a home visit or follow-up phone call will be referred immediately for medical care and will be 
referred to emergency services (e.g., 911) if symptoms are severe.  As part of training, all research 
associates will be familiar with asthma medical alert symptoms. In either treatment arm, if the research 
associate observes acute asthma symptoms (consistent with yellow or red action zones on the Asthma 
Action Plan), the appropriate “action” (based on recommended asthma action plans) would be reviewed 
with the family and documented.  In addition, school nurses are expected (per district school health 
services policies) to contact [CONTACT_349066]’s office with acute symptoms 
and refer them promptly to their medical provider. 
Further potential risks for families include breach of confidentiality as encountered with any study.  We 
will take specific measures with data collection and storage to minimize any risks to the families. 
During visits and telephone surveys, research assistants will make efforts to protect subject privacy and 
confidentiality.  The research assistants will ensure that the subject is comfortable answering questions 
and discussing the study prior to completion of consent/assent or any study measures.  If it is suspected 
that someone in the home may cause serious harm to themselves or others, the study team will report 
these issues to the study coordinator and the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_349034]. There is also a risk that the study team may discover an 
unknown medical condition.  If this is to occur, we will refer the family to their PCP or another 
appropriate health care professional for evaluation and treatment. 
Patient privacy and the security of personal health information are important. Because the telemedicine 
application is browser-based, strong security has been implemented at both the originating (patient) 
sites and the provider sites. The telemedicine system utilizes the University of [COMPANY_002]ster Medical 
Center’s secure Electronic Medical Record (EPIC eRecord) and AMD Global Telemedicine’s Telehealth 
Consult with AGNES Interactive software for media collection, transmission, and storage.  Both the 
URMC’s EMR and the AMD software meet or exceed security and confidentiality standards and are 
HIPAA compliant.  The telemedicine software, data and server applications are encrypted, including file 
transfers, to protect the privacy of patients and ensure that application data are protected.  The clinical 
telehealth assistants and providers are required to login to the mobile telemedicine unit, the EMR, and 
the AMD software using their own unique logins to maintain security and privacy of the data.
Video supported DOT will be accomplished through emocha® an established HIPAA compliant mobile 
app platform.  This system uses virtual communication (e.g. asynchronous video technology and secure 
2-way messaging) to support and encourage adherence through timely feedback and positive 
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 17 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022reinforcement.  The emocha® system allows for secure, temporary storage of encrypted videos on 
smartphones until a network connection is made to a secure server.  Access to the emocha® app is 
protected by a secure password or PIN login and videos are not viewable in a phone’s general media 
galleries.  Only approved project staff from URMC and emocha® will have access to patient data. At the 
end of the study, the data will be stored with emocha® systems and the research team will be able to 
access data collected for up to 7 years for HIPAA compliance.  
The study team will receive safety training yearly from key study personnel, and safety plans for home 
visits will be created (including traveling in pairs, safe words for emergency situations, and procedures 
for notifying and updating coordinators about whereabouts). These procedures are outlined in a team 
training manual given to all employees. The study team will also receive cultural awareness training 
from key study personnel prior to completing home visits. 
We will protect the information provided by [CONTACT_349067].  Additionally, we will 
try our best to speak with the teen separate from caregiver (over the phone, or separate rooms), but 
this may not always be possible. 
Data and Safety Monitoring:
Data Quality Monitoring
The research associates will be responsible for all data collected during the home assessments.  They 
will receive training from key study personnel regarding asthma terminology, symptoms, and 
medication understanding.  They also will be trained on the use of equipment for cotinine 
measurements, the EasyOne® Air spi[INVESTIGATOR_14007], and the NIOX VERO® instrument for collection of exhaled 
nitric oxide.  Baseline data forms will be completed electronically on laptop or tablet computers during 
the home visit.  All data collected on laptops/tablets are entered using a secure and encrypted online 
database supported through the University of [COMPANY_002]ster, and are only accessible to research staff using 
their University account login.  For the safety of private subject information, no data will be stored on 
the laptops/tablets.  For all of the follow-up interviews, data will also be collected using the same secure 
online database, and paper surveys will be used as back-up, if needed.  Data forms will be returned with 
a cover sheet and other source documentation support materials (informed consent, contact 
[CONTACT_3031], etc.).  Pre-intervention training of study staff will be conducted to increase knowledge 
about asthma, asthma medications, and other important information in order to reduce the number of 
“real-time” data collection errors.  Through this training, staff will note any inconsistencies in parent 
reported data and will discuss them with the parent at the time of the interview.
A separate team of researchers will perform all follow-up interviews and follow-up data management.  
This group will work independently from the “enrollment team” and thus will be able to perform blinded 
assessments of outcomes.  Our team, including the principal investigator, senior project coordinator, 
and recruitment and follow-up project coordinators, has an extensive record of high-quality data 
collection and management.  We have tracked over 1,000 children in our prior randomized trials, and 
completed follow-ups with more than 90% of subjects. Randomization information will not be included 
with any follow-up materials in order to assure blinding of the outcome assessment.
Surveys will be reviewed by [CONTACT_289743], and any inconsistencies (misspellings, incorrect dates, 
etc.) will be corrected using telephone interviews with the parents.  Simple range checks as well as 
cross-form validation checks will be performed to ensure the accuracy and completeness of the data.  A 
list of all data checks performed will be maintained and any errors detected by [CONTACT_349068] (initials and date of change).  In addition, data forms, valid informed 
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 18 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022consent documents for each enrolled patient, and supporting source documentation materials will be 
reviewed by [CONTACT_349069].  Required regulatory documents (IRB 
approval, updates to the protocol, data monitoring documents) will be maintained by [CONTACT_349070].  All events during the course of the trial including study enrollments, adverse events and 
study terminations will be reported to the senior coordinator.  
Safety Monitoring Plan
Potential risks related to participation in this study are described in detail in the informed consent 
document.  No investigational treatments or devices are used as part of this study.  The risks of guideline 
recommended treatments include the risks of side effects with inhaled corticosteroids, as well as any 
treatments that will potentially be recommended by [CONTACT_349071].  
This intervention is designed to ensure guideline-based asthma care for children with uncontrolled 
asthma. This is not a drug investigational study since the effectiveness and safety of the 
recommendation medications are not being tested.  The specialist visits and the preventive medications 
are recommended as the guideline-directed standard of care for children with the degree of symptom 
severity required for enrollment into the program.  The most common side effects of inhaled 
corticosteroids, including yeast infection of the mouth and facial rash, will be assessed during each 
follow-up interview.  There is a potential risk of adverse effects on linear growth from the use of inhaled 
steroids; however, this risk is felt to be outweighed by [CONTACT_349065]/development and improved lung function.  In general, these 
medications are well tolerated and safe. Primary care providers and asthma specialist providers will 
prescribe all medications and must agree to follow the child for any potential side effects during the 
course of the study. Specialist providers may suggest additional testing and treatments for consideration. 
If allergy testing or immunotherapy is recommended, the specialist provider will review the risks and 
benefits of these procedures or treatments upfront.  If a biologic therapy is recommended, the specialist 
providers will obtain written informed consent prior to any administration of these agents.  
For all enrolled children, we will help families access medical care for the child’s asthma if the family 
does not have a primary care provider.  All study personnel who interact with families will explain their 
role (specifying that their role is not a substitute for medical care) at their initial meeting with the family 
and continue to encourage families to obtain care throughout the course of the intervention.  We also 
will have a safety plan in place for any caregiver reporting that the child (in either group) has worsening 
asthma symptoms.  These children will be referred immediately for medical care and will be referred to 
emergency services (e.g., 911) if symptoms are severe.  As part of training, all research associates will be 
familiar with asthma medical alert symptoms. In either treatment arm, if the research associate observes 
acute asthma symptoms (consistent with yellow or red action zones on the Asthma Action Plan), the 
appropriate “action” (based on recommended asthma action plans) would be reviewed with the family 
and documented.  In addition, school nurses are expected (per district school health services policies) to 
contact [CONTACT_349066]’s office with acute symptoms and refer them 
promptly to their medical provider. 
Any significant adverse events will be flagged by [CONTACT_6591]-up team and relayed promptly to the study 
coordinator, the principal investigator, and the Institutional Review Board within 24 hours, and to the 
DSMB and NIH as per protocol.  All study records will be kept strictly confidential as required by [CONTACT_349072], processed, or reported.  
The family can discontinue their participation at any time during the study.
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 19 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022If a caregiver reports significant depressive symptoms or unusual circumstances (i.e., difficulty providing 
food or shelter for the family), we will offer the caregiver mental health or community resources and 
encourage the caregiver to contact [CONTACT_9682], a resource, or other trusted party.  If at any time 
during the study a child or caregiver expresses active suicidal or homicidal ideation, this information will 
be promptly reported to the proper authorities, and mental health referrals will be given to the family as 
is appropriate. 
All records will be kept strictly confidential as required by [CONTACT_349073], processed, or reported.  
A Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) including a pulmonary specialist (Elizabeth Allen, MD; Division 
of Pulmonary Medicine, Nationwide Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]), a general pediatrician and health services 
researcher (Ian Paul, MD, MPH; Division of General Pediatrics, Penn State College of Medicine), and an 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_47561] (Susan Fisher, PhD; Temple University), has been assembled to provide ongoing oversight 
of the study. The DSMB will meet at least annually to review study procedures and data.  The 
intervention will enhance access to care by [CONTACT_349074]-based treatments for the children, and will only suggest daily medications that are routinely 
recommended by [CONTACT_349075].  The risks of any recommended treatments will be 
discussed in detail with the caregivers.  In our previous school and office-based asthma programs, which 
included more than 1,[ADDRESS_433704] and recommend termination of the trial if significant risks 
develop or the trial is unlikely to be concluded successfully. 
Potential Benefits:
Potential benefits of this intervention exist for both groups of children (TEAM-UP and EC).  Children in 
the TEAM-UP group will be receiving an intervention to promote appropriate, step-wise, guideline-
based care for their asthma.  They may experience a reduction in respi[INVESTIGATOR_349035]-
based preventive actions (prescription of medications, counseling regarding triggers, treatment of 
comorbid conditions, etc.).  Although families in the EC group will not receive telemedicine visits 
through the study, the families and primary care providers will receive reports about the child’s severity 
and a recommendation for specialist care, and families will receive 3 reminders that their child should 
be seen for ongoing asthma care.  Furthermore, children in both groups will be recommended to receive 
daily preventive asthma medications.  At follow-up, any child with persistent symptoms or poor control 
will be referred back to their provider for ongoing care.  It is possible that discussions with the study 
team may increase the parent’s awareness of symptoms and actions may be taken resulting in reduced 
morbidity for these children.
Analysis:
Sample Size and Power Justification:  
This study is designed to have adequate power to test the primary hypothesis that children in TEAM-UP 
will have more symptom-free days at 3, 5, 7, and 12-months compared to EC.  Based on our prior data of 
patients with moderate to severe persistent symptoms, we estimate a pooled standard deviation (SD) of 
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 20 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022SFD to be 3.[ADDRESS_433705] correlation (ICC) of 0.3. We calculated power for the intervention effect 
on SFD while justifying repeated assessments for outcomes. 64,65 A sample size of 150 subjects per group 
will obtain 90% power to detect a difference of 0.8 SFD, and 80% power to detect a difference of 0.7 SFD 
at a two-sided 5% significance level.  This difference would be clinically meaningful and consistent with 
prior successful interventions. 7,66-68 We found that 194 of the children from our prior SB-TEAM study 
had moderate-severe persistent or difficult to control asthma at baseline, and would be eligible for 
TEAM-UP. In addition, in our prior office-based study we enrolled >400 children with moderate-severe 
asthma from the main primary care practices in urban [COMPANY_002]ster over 4 years.  Our prior studies 
enrolled >70% of eligible subjects. Thus, we can conservatively enroll 90 subjects/year, which is more 
than adequate for sample size requirements.  We anticipate <15% attrition (attrition <5% in prior 
studies). We therefore expect complete data on at least 150 children per group.  
Primary Analysis: 
The primary analysis of this study aims to assess the effectiveness of the TEAM-UP intervention in 
reducing asthma morbidity (including symptom-free days post-intervention (follow-ups at 3 mo, 5 mo, 7 
mo and 12 mo as the primary outcome) compared to an enhanced care comparison group in school age 
children with moderate-severe persistent asthma or uncontrolled asthma.  We will use graphs and 
descriptive statistics to summarize the primary and secondary outcomes by [CONTACT_349076] (baseline, 3, 5, 7 and 12 mos).  We will assess for differences between groups at 
baseline despi[INVESTIGATOR_349036] (i.e.; age, race, ethnicity, insurance, caregiver 
education, smoke exposure.)  These comparisons will enable the identification of covariates to be 
controlled when evaluating the treatment effect.  If distributional assumptions associated with a 
particular statistical procedure are violated, appropriate transformations will be made or non-
parametric alternatives used.  In accordance with the intention-to-treat principle, 69 all randomized 
subjects will be analyzed within the group to which they were assigned.  Minimal crossover is expected.  
Hypothesis-driven comparisons will be made to control the family-wise type I error rate at 0.05 (two-
sided) for the primary hypothesis.
For the primary outcome analysis, the time-course of treatment effect on SFD during the follow-up 
period will be evaluated using a linear mixed model (LMM) accounting for repeated measures within 
each subject to test the intervention effect of TEAM-UP over time, with SFD as the dependent variable, 
and intervention group and group by [CONTACT_349077]. [ADDRESS_433706] measures such as residual plots will check goodness-of-fit of the regression 
model assumptions and identify outliers.  We will calculate intraclass coefficient (ICC) within providers 
(specialist and PCP); if autocorrelation is significant, provider will be included as another level of random 
effect in the mixed model to account for the nested data structure.  If the outcome measure violates the 
normal assumption required by [CONTACT_349078], we will evaluate the intervention effect using Generalized 
Estimating Equations (GEE). [ADDRESS_433707] estimates but does not require specification of a 
fully parametric distribution.  Other continuous outcomes (days/nights with symptoms, quality of life, 
etc.) will be analyzed similarly. Discrete outcomes will be analyzed by [CONTACT_349079]. Appropriate link functions and response probability distributions will be specified. 
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 21 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022We will also consider whether certain process measures from our conceptual framework (guideline-
based corrective actions, adherence, patient/provider communication, satisfaction with care) act as 
mediators in the relationship between the intervention and outcomes. [ADDRESS_433708] through mediators.  For each 
purported mediator, we will use structural equation models (SEM)73  to model its relationship to 
treatment and primary outcome.  Maximum Likelihood (ML) will be used for estimation.  Goodness-of-
fit will be assessed in a two-level process.  In the first level, the fit of the unrestricted model will be 
tested using standard diagnostic measures for linear regression.  In level two, the appropriateness of 
assumption of the proposed structural equation model will be investigated by [CONTACT_349080].  The following indicators will be used:74 (a) Comparative Fit Index (CFI), (b) Non-
Normed Fit Index and (c) Root Mean Square Error of Approximation.75We will use chi-square statistics 
for the structural invariance tests to determine effect modifiers.  These analyses will aid in our 
understanding of pathways by [CONTACT_349081]-UP impacts outcomes.
The primary analyses will include all randomized subjects.  Substantial attention will be invested in 
participant retention; reasons for any withdrawals that may occur will be documented.  Missing data 
patterns will be examined by [CONTACT_349082].  Inference based on the proposed methods GEE and/or LMM is valid provided that missing data 
follows the missing completely at random (MCAR) assumption.  However, if the occurrence of missing 
data depends on the observed response but is independent of unobserved data (MAR), weight GEE 
(WGEE) will be used.  Sensitivity analysis to the MAR assumption will also be carried out by [CONTACT_349083]-group difference using WGEE.76,[ADDRESS_433709] Effectiveness Analysis: 
We will consider the total cost of initiating and maintaining the program as well as the incremental cost-
effectiveness ratio (ICER) of TEAM-UP versus EC.  The ICER is the difference in cost between the 2 study 
groups relative to the difference in the number of SFDs gained between the 2 groups.  The main 
outcome for the analysis from the societal perspective will be the ICER, defined as: 
Medical+ Productivity+$Program)/ SFD, where =(TEAM-UP)-(EC).  We will bootstrap78 the ICER to 
estimate standard error and to evaluate uncertainty around the point estimate. We will compare the 
ICER to similar estimates from the literature. 79,[ADDRESS_433710] of the 
program (Net Monetary Benefit= Medical-$Program).
Process Evaluation: 
Descriptive statistics will be used for the process evaluation, looking in particular at the efficiency of the 
program implementation along with the responses from parents, PCPs, specialists, and school nurses 
and administrators about convenience, scheduling, satisfaction, and sustainability. 82,83  We will evaluate 
RE-AIM (Reach, Effectiveness, Adoption, Implementation, Maintenance) metrics to evaluate the 
program. To estimate Reach we will determine the proportion of eligible children with moderate-severe 
persistent asthma who participate, and will use data from screening forms to characterize those who do 
and do not participate. To estimate Effectiveness, we will conduct intent to treat analyses of the primary 
outcome (SFD), absenteeism, and quality of life.  We will use school data as well as surveys from PCPs, 
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 22 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.2022specialists, and school members to evaluate Adoption. We will conduct a survey of providers and school 
staff following the intervention to gauge their reaction to the intervention components and their 
willingness to support them in the future. To assess Implementation we will use check-lists, tracking 
logs, surveys and chart reviews to measure the extent to which participants partook in each program 
component (telemedicine visits, guideline-based adjustments, % medication doses delivered at school, 
and/or through video supported DOT). To assess Maintenance we will use surveys and open-ended 
questions to evaluate plans for continuation (or modification) of each intervention component post-
study, and we will use 12-month follow-up data to analyze long-term effects on primary outcomes and 
QOL.
COVID-19
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we will follow the Human Subjects Research guidelines outlined 
by [CONTACT_349084].  Please find the following link for 
these guidelines:  https://www.urmc.rochester.edu/coronavirus/coronavirus-research/guidance-for-
researchers/human-subjects-research.aspx.  We will minimize in-person contacts to only those tasks 
necessary to conduct the research (e.g., obtaining consent, review medications and forms).  We will 
ensure that team members are appropriately trained in safety measures, maintain social distancing 
when possible, use personal protective equipment for themselves and research subjects (and family 
members), and will ensure proper cleaning/sanitizing of hands, equipment and workstations.  We will 
continue to monitor and follow the updated guidelines put forth by [CONTACT_349085]. 
The intervention may look different during the COVID-19 pandemic. If schools are open, participants in 
the Intervention group may receive directly observed therapy (DOT) of their preventive asthma 
medication supervised by [CONTACT_349086].  Additionally, they may receive telemedicine 
visits at school.  However, if schools are not fully open or by [CONTACT_349087], we will support families 
with  ongoing medication adherence, which will include school-based and/or video supported DOT. 
Additionally, providers may conduct telemedicine visits without the data obtained by [CONTACT_349088].  
During the COVID-[ADDRESS_433711] breathing measurements (spi[INVESTIGATOR_349037]) as planned during the baseline or 7-month survey time point.  When the pandemic has 
subsided, we will submit a protocol modification to re-start these collections.
We’ve included a brief, optional survey to assess how the COVID-19 pandemic is affecting children with 
asthma and their families.  We will ask the caregivers if they would be willing to answer these questions 
at the end of follow-up surveys that we are already conducting. 
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 23 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.[ZIP_CODE]. Akinbami LJ, Moorman JE, Garbe PL, Sondik EJ. Status of Childhood Asthma in the [LOCATION_002], 1980-2007. Pediatrics. 
2009;123:S131-S145.
2. Centers for Disease C, Prevention. Vital signs: asthma prevalence, disease characteristics, and self-management education: United 
States, 2001--2009. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2011;60(17):547-552.
3.National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.  Chartbook on cardiovascular, lung, and blood diseases. US Department of Health and 
Human Services, Public Health Service, National Institutes of Health. Washington (DC). 2007.
4. Smith LA, Hatcher-Ross JL, Wertheimer R, Kahn RS. Rethinking race/ethnicity, income, and childhood asthma: racial/ethnic 
disparities concentrated among the very poor. Public Health Rep. 2005;120(2):109-116.
5. Bloom B, Cohen RA, Freeman G. Summary health statistics for U.S. children: National Health Interview Survey, 2009. Vital Health 
Stat 10. 2010(247):1-82.
6. Diaz T, Sturm T, Matte T, et al. Medication use among children with asthma in East Harlem. Pediatrics. 2000;105(6):1188-1193.
7. Ortega AN, Gergen PJ, Paltiel AD, Bauchner H, Belanger KD, Leaderer BP. Impact of site of care, race, and Hispanic ethnicity on 
medication use for childhood asthma. Pediatrics. 2002;109(1):E1.
8. Akinbami LJ, LaFleur BJ, Schoendorf KC. Racial and income disparities in childhood asthma in the [LOCATION_002]. Ambul Pediatr. 
2002;2(5):382-387.
9. Cabana MD, Lara M, Shannon J. Racial and Ethnic Disparities in the Quality of Asthma Care. CHEST Journal. 
2007;132(5_suppl):810S-817S.
10. Akinbami LJ, Moorman JE, Simon AE, Schoendorf KC. Trends in racial disparities for asthma outcomes among children 0 to 17 
years, 2001-2010. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology. 2014;134(3):547-553.
11. Capo-Ramos DE, Duran C, Simon AE, Akinbami LJ, Schoendorf KC. Preventive asthma medication discontinuation among children 
enrolled in fee-for-service Medicaid. J Asthma. 2014;51(6):618-626.
12. National Asthma Education and Prevention Program (NAEPP).  Expert Panel Report 3 (EPR-3): Guidelines for the Diagnosis and 
Management of Asthma-Summary Report 2007. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007;120([ADDRESS_433712]):S94-138.
13. Wennergren G, Kristjansson S, Strannegard IL. Decrease in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_349038], despi[INVESTIGATOR_349039]. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1996;97(3):742-748.
14. Childhood Asthma Management Program Research G, Szefler S, Weiss S, et al. Long-term effects of budesonide or nedocromil in 
children with asthma. N Engl J Med. 2000;343(15):1054-1063.
15. Russell G, Williams DA, Weller P, Price JF. Salmeterol xinafoate in children on high dose inhaled steroids. Ann Allergy Asthma 
Immunol. 1995;75(5):423-428.
16. Zimmerman B, D'Urzo A, Berube D. Efficacy and safety of formoterol Turbuhaler when added to inhaled corticosteroid treatment in 
children with asthma. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2004;37(2):122-127.
17. Simons FE, Villa JR, Lee BW, et al. Montelukast added to budesonide in children with persistent asthma: a randomized, double-blind, 
crossover study. J Pediatr. 2001;138(5):694-698.
18. Masoli M, Weatherall M, Holt S, Beasley R. Systematic review of the dose-response relation of inhaled fluticasone propi[INVESTIGATOR_16847]. Arch 
Dis Child. 2004;89(10):902-907.
19. Halterman JS, Aligne CA, Auinger P, McBride JT, Szilagyi PG. Inadequate therapy for asthma among children in the [LOCATION_002]. 
Pediatrics. 2000;105(1 Pt 3):272-276.
20. Bauman LJ, Wright E, Leickly FE, et al. Relationship of adherence to pediatric asthma morbidity among inner-city children. 
Pediatrics. 2002;110:e6-e6.
21. Halterman JS, Auinger P, Conn KM, Lynch K, Yoos HL, Szilagyi PG. Inadequate therapy and poor symptom control among children 
with asthma: findings from a multistate sample. Ambul Pediatr. 2007;7(2):153-159.
22. Lee MG, Cross KJ, Yang WY, Sutton BS, Jiroutek MR. Frequency of asthma education in primary care in the years 2007-2010. J 
Asthma. 2016;53(2):220-226.
23. Scadding G, Walker S. Poor asthma control?--then look up the nose. The importance of co-morbid rhinitis in patients with asthma. 
Prim Care Respir J. 2012;21(2):222-228.
24. Diaz J, Farzan S. Clinical implications of the obese-asthma phenotypes. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am. 2014;34(4):739-751.
25. Vollmer WM, O'Hollaren M, Ettinger KM, et al. Specialty differences in the management of asthma. A cross-sectional assessment of 
allergists' patients and generalists' patients in a large HMO. Arch Intern Med. 1997;157(11):1201-1208.
26. Schatz M, Zeiger RS, Mosen D, et al. Improved asthma outcomes from allergy specialist care: a population-based cross-sectional 
analysis. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2005;116(6):1307-1313.
27. Tay TR, Lee J, Radhakrishna N, et al. A Structured Approach to Specialist-referred Difficult Asthma Patients Improves Control of 
Comorbidities and Enhances Asthma Outcomes. The journal of allergy and clinical immunology. In practice. 2017;5(4):956-[ADDRESS_433713] 
physicians as usual source of asthma care for children. Pediatrics. 2001;108(2):432-437.
29. Sperber K, Ibrahim H, Hoffman B, Eisenmesser B, Hsu H, Corn B. Effectiveness of a specialized asthma clinic in reducing asthma 
morbidity in an inner-city minority population. J Asthma. 1995;32(5):335-343.
30. Harish Z, Bregante AC, Morgan C, et al. A comprehensive inner-city asthma program reduces hospi[INVESTIGATOR_349040]. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2001;86(2):185-189.
31. Mitchell SJ, Bilderback AL, Okelo SO. Racial Disparities in Asthma Morbidity Among Pediatric Patients Seeking Asthma Specialist 
Care. Acad Pediatr. 2016;16(1):64-67.
32. Flores G, Snowden-Bridon C, Torres S, et al. Urban minority children with asthma: substantial morbidity, compromised quality and 
access to specialists, and the importance of poverty and specialty care. J Asthma. 2009;46(4):392-398.
33. Halterman JS, Yoos HL, Kaczorowski JM, et al. Providers underestimate symptom severity among urban children with asthma. Arch 
Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2002;156(2):141-146.
34. Halterman JS, Yoos HL, Sidora K, Kitzman H, McMullen A. Medication use and health care contacts among symptomatic children 
with asthma. Ambul Pediatr. 2001;1(5):275-279.
35. Halterman JS, Borrelli B, Fisher S, Szilagyi P, Yoos L. Improving care for urban children with asthma: design and methods of the 
School-Based Asthma Therapy (SBAT) trial. J Asthma. 2008;45(4):279-286.
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 24 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.202236. Halterman JS, Tajon R, Tremblay P, et al. Development of School-Based Asthma Management Programs in [COMPANY_002]ster, [LOCATION_001]: 
Presented in Honor of [CONTACT_349089]. Acad Pediatr. 2017;17(6):595-599.
37. Halterman JS, Sauer J, Fagnano M, et al. Working toward a sustainable system of asthma care: development of the School-Based 
Preventive Asthma Care Technology (SB-PACT) trial. J Asthma. 2012;49(4):395-400.
38. Al-Dossary FS, Ong LT, Correa AG, Starke JR. Treatment of childhood tuberculosis with a six month directly observed regimen of 
only two weeks of daily therapy. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2002;21(2):91-97.
39. Borgdorff MW, Floyd K, Broekmans JF. Interventions to reduce tuberculosis mortality and transmission in low- and middle-income 
countries. Bull World Health Organ. 2002;80(3):217-227.
40. Mitty JA, Stone VE, Sands M, Macalino G, Flanigan T. Directly observed therapy for the treatment of people with human 
immunodeficiency virus infection: a work in progress. Clin Infect Dis. 2002;34(7):984-990.
41. Steiner KC, Davila V, Kent CK, Chaw JK, Fischer L, Klausner JD. Field-delivered therapy increases treatment for chlamydia and 
gonorrhea. Am J Public Health. 2003;93(6):882-884.
42. Halterman JS, Szilagyi PG, Fisher SG, et al. Randomized controlled trial to improve care for urban children with asthma: results of the 
School-Based Asthma Therapy trial. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2011;165(3):262-268.
43. Halterman JS, Fagnano M, Montes G, et al. The school-based preventive asthma care trial: results of a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. J Pediatr. 
2012;161(6):1109-1115.
44. Halterman J, Riekert K, Bayer A, et al. A pi[INVESTIGATOR_349041]. 
Journal of Asthma. 2011;48(5):523-530.
45. Halterman J FM, Tajon R, Tremblay P, Wang H, Butz A, Perry TT, McConnochie KM. Results of the School-Based Telemedicine 
Enhanced Asthma Management (SB-TEAM) Program:  A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA pediatrics. 2017;in press.
46. Gerald LB, McClure LA, Harrington KF, et al. Design of the supervised asthma therapy study: implementing an adherence 
intervention in urban elementary schools. Contemp Clin Trials. 2008;29(2):304-310.
47. Gerald L, McClure L, JM M, et al. Increasing adherence to inhaled steroid therapy among schoolchildren: Randomized, controlled 
trial of school-based supervised asthma therapy. Pediatrics. 2009;123:466-474.
48. Allen EM. Nationwide Children's School-Based Asthma Therapy Program. 2017; http://www.nationwidechildrens.org/asthma-
therapy-program. Accessed 9/29/17, 2017.
49. Holmes L. Program IMPACT in schools to prevent asthma symptoms. 2017; https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]. 
Accessed 9/29/17, 2017.
50. Bryant-Stephens T. West Philadelphia Asthma Care Collaborative; Community Asthma Prevention Program 2017; 
http://www.chop.edu/centers-programs/community-asthma-prevention-program-capp/about. Accessed 9/29/17, 2017.
51. Miller E. Solving the disjuncture between research and practice: telehealth trends in the 21st century. Health Policy. 2007;82:133-141.
52. McConnochie K. Potential of telemedicine in pediatric primary care. Pediatrics in Review. 2006;27(9):e58-e65.
53. McConnochie K, Wood NE, Herendeen NE, et al. Acute illness care patterns change with use of telemedicine. Pediatrics. 
2009;123:e989-e995.
54. McConnochie KM, Tan J, Wood NE, et al. Acute illness utilization patterns before and after telemedicine in childcare for inner-city 
children:  A cohort study. Telemedicine and e-Health. 2007;13:381-390.
55. McLean S, Chandler D, Nurmatov U, et al. Telehealthcare for asthma: a cochrane review. Cmaj. 2011;183(11):E733-E742.
56. Reynolds CA, Maughan ED. Telehealth in the school setting: an integrative review. The Journal of school nursing : the official 
publication of the National Association of School Nurses. 2015;31(1):44-53.
57. Portnoy JM, Waller M, De Lurgio S, Dinakar C. Telemedicine is as effective as in-person visits for patients with asthma. Ann Allergy 
Asthma Immunol. 2016;117(3):241-245.
58. Bergman DA, Sharek PJ, Ekegren K, Thyne S, Mayer M, Saunders M. The use of telemedicine access to schools to facilitate expert 
assessment of children with asthma. Int J Telemed Appl. 2008:159276.
59. LaForce CF, Pearlman DS, Ruff ME, et al. Efficacy and safety of dry powder fluticasone propi[INVESTIGATOR_349042]. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2000;85(5):407-415.
60. Kelly HW, Sternberg AL, Lescher R, et al. Effect of inhaled glucocorticoids in childhood on adult height. N Engl J Med. 
2012;367(10):904-912.
61. Barnes PJ, Pedersen S. Efficacy and safety of inhaled corticosteroids in asthma. Report of a workshop held in Eze, [LOCATION_009], October 
1992. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1993;148(4 Pt 2):S1-26.
62. Kamada AK, Szefler SJ, Martin RJ, et al. Issues in the use of inhaled glucocorticoids. The Asthma Clinical Research Network. Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med. 1996;153(6 Pt 1):1739-1748.
63. Wolthers OD. Long-, intermediate- and short-term growth studies in asthmatic children treated with inhaled glucocorticosteroids. Eur 
Respir J. 1996;9(4):821-827.
64. Diggle PJ, Heagerty P, Liang KY, Zeger SL. The analysis of Longitudinal Data. Second Edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 
2002.
65. Liu HaW, T. Sample Size Calculation and Power Analysis of Time-Averaged Difference. Journal of Modern Applied Statistical 
Methods. 2005;4(2).
66. Morgan WJ, Crain EF, Gruchalla RS, et al. Results of a home-based environmental intervention among urban children with asthma. N 
Engl J Med. 2004;351(11):1068-1080.
67. Wilson SR, Latini D, Starr NJ, et al. Education of parents of infants and very young children with asthma: a developmental evaluation 
of the Wee Wheezers program. J Asthma. 1996;33(4):239-254.
68. Halterman JS, Fagnano M, Tremblay PJ, et al. Prompting asthma intervention in [COMPANY_002]ster-uniting parents and providers (PAIR-UP): 
a randomized trial. JAMA pediatrics. 2014;168(10):e141983.
69. Fisher LD, Dixon DO, Herson J, Frankowski RK, Hearron MS, Peace KE. Intention to treat in clinical trials. In: Peace KE, ed. 
Statistical Issues in Drug Research and Development. [LOCATION_001]: Marcel Dekker; 1990:331-350.
70. Signorini DF. Sample-Size for Poisson Regression. Biometrika. 1991;78(2):446-450.
71. Liang KY, Zeger SL. Longitudinal data analysis using generalized linear models. Biometrika. 1986;73:13-22.
72. Cole DA, Maxwell SE. Testing mediational models with longitudinal data: questions and tips in the use of structural equation 
modeling. J Abnorm Psychol. 2003;112(4):558-577.
73. Bollen JL. Structural Equations with Latent Variables. [LOCATION_001], NY: John Wiley and Sons; 1989.
TEAM-UP RSRB#: [ZIP_CODE] Page 25 of 25 Protocol - Version Date: 11.7.202274. Hu L, Bentler P. Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure analysis: Conventional criteria versus new alternatives. 
Structural Equation Modeling. 1999;6(1):1-55.
75. Browne MW, Cudeck R. Alternative ways of assessing model fit. In: Boolen K, Long JS, eds. Testing Structural Equation Models. 
Newbury Park: Sage Publications; 1993:136-162.
76. Robins JM, Rotnitzky A, Zhao LP. Analysis of Semiparametric Regression-Models for Repeated Outcomes in the Presence of Missing 
Data. J Am Stat Assoc. 1995;90(429):106-121.
77. Scharfstein DO, Rotnitzky A, Robins JM. Adjusting for nonignorable drop-out using semiparametric nonresponse models - Rejoinder. 
J Am Stat Assoc. 1999;94(448):1135-1146.
78. Efron B, Tibshirani R. Bootstrap methods for standard errors, confidence intervals, and other measures of statistical accuracy. Stat Sci. 
1986;1(1):54-77.
79. Sullivan SD, Weiss KB, Lynn H, et al. The cost-effectiveness of an inner-city asthma intervention for children. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 2002;110(4):576-581.
80. Rutten-van Molken MP, Van Doorslaer EK, Jansen MC, Kerstjens HA, Rutten FF. Costs and effects of inhaled corticosteroids and 
bronchodilators in asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1995;151(4):975-982.
81. Briggs A. A Bayesian approach to stochastic cost-effectiveness analysis. Health Econ. 1999;8:257-261.
82. Rogers E. Diffusion of Innovations Fifth Edition. [LOCATION_001]: Free Press; 2003.
83. McCormick L, Tompkins N. Diffusion of CDC's guidelines to prevent tobacco use and addiction. Journal of School Health. 
1998;68(2):43-44.