Date: May 18, 2021 
 
 
 
Title: Peer Online Motivational Interviewing and Affirmative Care for Sexual and Gender Minority 
Male Sexual Abuse Survivors: A Randomized Clinical Trial 
 
 
 
ClinicalTrials.gov ID: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
This work was supported through a Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) Project 
Program Award (AD-2018C1-110989). All statements in this report, including its findings and 
conclusions, are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Patient-
Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI), its Board of Governors or Methodology Committee.  
 
 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/[ZIP_CODE]
     
HRP-503E– Protocol for Social or Behavioral Science or Educational Research
(2017-1)
Protocol Title: 
Peer Online Motivational Interviewing for Sexual and  Gender Minority Male 
           Survivors
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_60400] M. Cook, Ph.D.
Version Date: 11.20.2018 (Version 1)
(If applicable) Clinicaltrials.gov  Registration #: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
INSTRUCTIONS
This template is intended to help investigators prepare a protocol that includes all of the necessary 
information needed by [CONTACT_121391] a study meets approval criteria. Read the following 
instructions before proceeding:
1. Use this protocol template for a PI [INVESTIGATOR_79613]. Additional templates for
 other types of research protocols are available in the system 
Library: 
 If the study involves genetic testing, blood draws, or MRIs, do not use this form. Use the 
biomedical protocol template
.
 If the study involves secondary analysis of data, use the Secondary Analysis of Data 
protocol.
 For activities that may qualify as exempt research, use the Request for Exemption form 
(which includes a decision tree  to determine whether or not your study qualifies as exempt).
2. If a section or question does not apply to your research study, type “Not Applicable” underneath.
3.
Once completed,  upload your protocol in the “Basic Information” screen in IRES IRB system. 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/20212SECTION I: GENERAL INFORMATION
1. Probable Duration of Project:  State the expected duration of the project, including all follow-up and 
data analysis activities.  
The active phase of the study will take place over three  years (i.e., no data collection past year 3). However, 
we anticipate data analysis will occur for two additional years making the entire duration of the study 5 
years.
2. Study location:  State  where the study will take place and in what setting. 
The study will include peer leaders from  two non-profit organizations, MaleSurvivor and Men Healing, as 
well as emotionally distressed sexual and gender minority male survivors who have not recently engaged in 
mental health care. The study will largely take place in online discussion groups and via 
telephone/teleconferencing calls.  
This is the second Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI)-related grant that we have had in 
partnership with MaleSurvivor, a non-profit trauma
 survivor organization that provides resources to male 
abuse survivors and their loved ones worldwide. Their website currently sees hundreds of thousands of 
visits annually from persons all over the world, and their social media platforms reach millions every month 
with news and messages of hope, healing, and support. MaleSurvivor has over 5,[ADDRESS_136126]  (http://your.yale.edu/policies-
procedures/forms/450-ch-1-international-research-checklist) Note: If your  research involves interactions 
with any embargoed countries you should contact [CONTACT_121392] ([EMAIL_2428] or call [PHONE_2767]) for guidance on how to proceed.   
3. Help us categorize your research. Are you using any of the following?
☐
 Class Project
☐
 Participant Observation
☒ Interviews
 Surveys
☐ Focus groups (study is not anonymous)
☐ Research in K-12 schools (submit a  School Agreement form for the study)
☐ Deception (submit a Debriefing sheet)
 Audiotapi[INVESTIGATOR_007], videotapi[INVESTIGATOR_121367] (study is not anonymous)
☐ Public viewing of videotapes  or photographs 
☐ Yale Psychology Pool (study does not qualify for exemption)
☐
 International research sites (attach the International Checklist)
 Online (web-based) activities
☒
 Social networks
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/20213SECTION  IV: RESEARCH P LAN
1. Statement of Purpose: State the scientific aim(s) of the study, or the hypotheses to be tested. 
This study builds on the  findings from our Eugene Washington PCORI Engagement Award, 
entitled, “Facilitating Male Trauma Survivors’ Meaningful Involvement in Health Research.” Together with 
our non-profit
 community partner, MaleSurvivor, we tailored an evidence-based psychological treatment, 
motivational interviewing (MI; Miller & Rollnick, 2013) with trauma-informed, sexual and gender minority 
(SGM) affirmative care in order to encourage formal engagement in mental health treatment and reduce 
health disparities for SGM male sexual abuse survivors. 
We then applied for and  received a comparative effectiveness trial funded through PCORI (AD-
2018C1-[ZIP_CODE]) entitled, “Peer Online Motivational Interviewing for Sexual and Gender Minority Male 
Survivors.” The first specific aim is to train peer leaders to competently deliver MI in both its original and 
tailored versions. The second specific aim is to conduct a randomized controlled trial (n=356) to determine 
the comparative effectiveness of MI versus MI with trauma-informed SGM-affirmative care delivered by 
[CONTACT_121393]. Our first hypothesis is that peer leaders will be able to 
effectively deliver both versions of MI. Our second hypothesis is that SGM male survivors who are 
randomized to tailored MI will significantly increase their engagement in formal mental health treatment, 
and reduce trauma-related symptoms as compared to SGM survivors who participate in traditional MI.
2. Background: Describe the background  information that led to the plan for this project. Provide 
references to support the expectation of obtaining useful scientific data. 
One in six men are sexually abused before their 18th birthday (Dube et  al., 2005) and this number 
rises to one in four men who are sexually abused across their lifespan (Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, 2018). Survivors of sexual abuse and assault are at risk for a wide range of medical, 
psychological, behavioral, and sexual disorders (Maniglio, 2009). Indeed, sexual trauma is related to 
numerous psychiatric disorders, including PTSD, substance abuse and dependence, depression, anxiety, and 
suicidal behavior (Dube et al, 2005; Mohar, Buka, & Kessler, 2001). Men with histories of childhood and 
adult sexual victimization are more likely to report greater numbers of sexually transmitted infections, 
increased sexual risk for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), higher sexual compulsivity, and greater 
gay-related stigma beliefs than men with no history of sexual assault (Hequembourg, Bimbi, & Parsons, 
2011). In addition, men who have experienced sexual abuse report significantly greater educational, 
occupational and relationship difficulties than non-abused men (Lisak, & Luster, 1994). Sexual trauma is 
also linked to medical illnesses, increased health care utilization and poor quality of life (Kartha et al., 
2008; Maniglio, 2009; Paras et al., 2009). 
SGM male survivors of sexual trauma  face significant health disparities. They are exposed to 
traumatic events, particularly sexual violence, at higher rates than the general population (Brown & 
Pantalone, 2011; Rothman et al., 2011). In addition, SGM male survivors exhibit significantly more 
negative psychological outcomes related to their sexual identities, including lower self-esteem (Smith, 
Cunningham, & Freyd, 2016), sexual identity formation disturbances, and difficulties forming healthy adult 
intimate relationships (Williams, Kisler, Glover, & Sciolla, 2011). The cumulative traumatic impact of 
sexual abuse, in conjunction with individuals’ SGM status, also appears to result in higher rates of sexual 
re-victimization (Aosved, Long, & Voller, 2011), and anti-gay violence and discrimination (Badgett, 1995; 
Herek & Berrill, 1992; Human Rights Watch World Report, 2018; McLaughin, Hatzenbuehler, Xuan, & 
Conron, 2012; Safe Schools Coalition Annual Report, 2018).
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/20214In addition to higher rates of sexual victimization, SGM males also experience significant minority 
stress, a term used to describe the
 sociopolitical stressors placed on individuals as a result of their minority 
status. Sexual orientation mental health disparities start relatively early in development. SGM individuals 
are disproportionately exposed to day-to-day discrimination, peer and parental rejection, unsupportive or 
hostile work or social environments, and unequal access to opportunities afforded to heterosexuals, 
including marriage, adoption and employment non-discrimination (Balsam, Rothblum, & Beauchine, 2005). 
Chronic expectations of rejection, internalized homophobia, alienation, and lack of integration with the 
community, can understandably lead to problems with self-acceptance (Hatzenbuehler, 2009; Meyer, 2003). 
As a result, SGM men may feel deficient, inferior or impaired. Further, they may view themselves as 
shameful, undesirable, underserving, or incapable of forming a loving relationship. Indeed, SGM 
individuals are significantly more likely than heterosexual males to report experiencing mental health 
problems, like depression and anxiety, as well as several behavioral health risks, such as alcohol use and 
risky sexual behavior (Hequembourg et al., 2011).
Preliminary studies suggest the acceptability, feasibility and potential ameliorative effects of peer-
based online support for trauma
 survivors (Hundt, Robinson, Arney, Stanley, & Cully, 2015; Watson & 
Andrews, 2017) as well as SGM individuals (Westra, Aviram, & Doell, 2011).
Motivational Interviewing to Engage SGM Male Survivors in Mental Health Treatment
Increasing SGM male sexual abuse survivors’
 formal entry into mental health  services may serve to 
address an important healthy disparity by [CONTACT_121394], increasing quality of life, and 
helpi[INVESTIGATOR_121368]. Motivational interviewing could help in 
assisting SGM men to enter mental health treatment. Motivational Interviewing is an evidence-based, 
patient-centered approach that explores and develops patients’ motivation and commitment to change 
within a collaborative, highly empathic patient-clinician relationship (Miller & Rollnick, 2013; Miller & 
Rose, 2009). Clinicians blend a combination of fundamental patient-centered counseling techniques (e.g., 
reflective listening) with advanced strategic methods (e.g., develop discrepancies between important life 
goals and current behavior) to elicit patient statements that favor change, called “change talk” and diminish 
those that argue against change, called “sustain talk.” The proficient use of MI methods has been shown to 
increase change talk and decrease sustain talk, which in turn has predicted behavior change (Apodaco et al., 
2014).
Originally empi[INVESTIGATOR_121369], MI is now used to help  
individuals develop motivation to change a variety of other health-related problem behaviors (e.g., 
treatment non-adherence, poor weight management) and mental health issues highly comorbid with trauma, 
such as depression, anxiety, and eating disorders (Burke, Arkowitz, & Menchola, 2003; Rubak, Sandbaek, 
Lauritzen, & Christensen, 2005). MI has also been used as stand-alone or adjunct intervention to help 
people engage in more intensive mental health services (Seal et al., 2012). For example, in a sample of Iraq 
and Afghanistan veterans with mental health difficulties, four sessions of telephone-delivered MI increased 
intent to engage in mental health services and resulted in some improvements in mental health symptoms 
(Seal et al., 2012). In addition, among depressed and anxious college-age men, MI had a small to moderate 
effect on both professional and non-professional help-seeking behavior (Syzdek, Green, Lindgren, & Addis, 
2016.
Though most often tested as an individually-delivered  intervention, MI is also delivered in a group 
format (Westra et al., 2011), and a few randomized controlled trials have shown significant group MI 
treatment effects (Seal et al., 2012; Murphy & Rosen, 2006). Moreover, MI can be taught to a broad range 
of healthcare providers, including general practitioners (Soderlund, Madson, Rubak, & Nilsen, 2011), 
physician assistants (McLaughlin, Fasser, Spence, & Holcomb, 2010), and nurses (Lane, Johnson, Rollnick, 
Edwards, & Lyons, 2003). Thus, MI can be flexibly tailored and delivered to meet the needs of different 
populations and settings in which helpi[INVESTIGATOR_121370] a core mission. In 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/20215addition, a recent national initiative found that  peer specialists can be successfully trained to deliver MI in 
the Department of Veterans Affairs health care system (Tsai et al., 2017). Thus, MI interventions can be 
taught to peers and can be easily integrated into usual care, facilitating dissemination and improving 
sustainability of the intervention.
The efficacy and effectiveness of MI has  also been studied when delivered online. In fact, MI has 
also been adapted for online formats for weight loss (Webber, Tate, & Quintilliani, 2008; West et al., 2016), 
substance abuse, and eating disorders (Hotzel et al., 2014). In fact, some clients reported that, the web-
based program felt less shameful, embarrassing, and uncomfortable than in-person treatments (Osilla, 
D’Amico, Diaz-Fuentes, Lara, & Watkins, 2012). 
3. Research Plan:  Summarize the study design and research procedures using non-technical language 
that can be readily understood by [CONTACT_20894]. If working with a Non-Government 
Organization (NGO) or other organization, be sure to highlight which are research-only activities and which 
activities would occur regardless of the research. If working with survey firms, please specify what research 
activities the research firm will be responsible for. 
We will conduct a randomized comparative effectiveness trial  of peer-facilitated, online, 6-week 
group MI vs. MI with a trauma-informed SGM affirmative care approach. Randomization will be 
counterbalanced by [CONTACT_121395]: treatment naive versus treatment-experienced (prior treatment not 
within the past 60 days). Randomization will be based on a list of computer-generated random numbers. We 
will randomize [ADDRESS_136127]-intervention, and at 60- and 120-day follow-ups, from the end of the intervention.  
Comparators. Traditional MI will be compared to MI with trauma-informed  SGM affirmative care (MI+). 
Groups will take place 1.[ADDRESS_136128] of approximately 8-10 members and be closed for the duration of the 
group. It is anticipated that new groups will begin every other month (allowing for a two week break 
between groups) to reduce burden on peer specialists and supervisors. 
Traditional MI groups. Six traditional MI groups will take place  for 1.5 hours online facilitated by [CONTACT_121396]. 
Trauma-informed, SGM+ affirmative care  MI groups. Six tailored MI groups will take place for 1.5 hours 
online facilitated by [CONTACT_121397]. Please see Appendix A for a detailed overview and outline of the 
major supplemental MI modules aimed at SGM minority stress, traditional masculinity, and male sexual 
abuse.
Through workshops and ongoing supervision/consultation,  we will train peer leaders to 
competently deliver both versions of MI and conduct a randomized controlled trial comparing the two 
versions of MI to enhance treatment engagement in SGM male survivors with mental health problems. All 
SGM male survivors who meet inclusion criteria, including significant emotional distress, will complete 
pre-test measures and be randomized to 6-week traditional MI delivered by [CONTACT_121398] 6-
week MI with trauma-informed, SGM affirmative care delivered by [CONTACT_121399]. Randomization 
will be counterbalanced by [CONTACT_121395]: treatment naive versus treatment-experienced (prior treatment 
but not within the past 60 days). This same procedure of counterbalancing by [CONTACT_121400] (Burke et al., 2003) to help Iraq and Afghanistan 
veterans with mental health difficulties engage in more mental health services. Participants will complete 
pre-intervention (baseline), end of the 6-week intervention, 60- and 120-days follow-up assessments via an 
online survey platform, to determine if there was an increase in formal mental health treatment engagement, 
and any significant changes in mental health symptomology (i.e., PTSD, depression, high-risk drinking, and 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/20216illicit substance use). Peer leaders will co-facilitate groups throughout the  study. It is anticipated that a peer 
leader  will run between 1-3 groups throughout the study.
Parent Study Screening and Participant Eligibility Criteria.  
Once recruitment advertisements are  posted on the various websites (listed in detail below), those 
interested in finding out more information, will be directed to a website that contains the informed consent 
and Frequently Asked Questions about participation. Participants will then be asked to complete a short 
questionnaire including demographic questions with their contact [CONTACT_121401] a member of the 
research team to set up a screening appointment via telephone with the interested participant. 
Screening
Demographics and SGM Identification.  Participants will be asked about their age, gender at birth, 
current gender identification, race/ethnicity, sexual orientation, marital status, highest level of education, 
and employment status at screening. Participants will also be asked about their treatment status to ensure 
eligibility (not currently in mental health treatment and/or have not been in treatment for past 60 days). 
Across post-interventions and follow-ups, participants will be asked if there are any changes to their 
employment, education, or marital status.  
Sexual Abuse Characteristics. Participants will be asked about the age of onset of sexual abuse; 
type of 
abuse (e.g., penetration, non-penetration); number of perpetrators; relationship to their 
perpetrator(s); and the frequency of the abuse. Participants will also be asked if someone had found out 
about the abuse while it was occurring, and if they received any kind of psychotherapy or counseling as a 
result. 
Current Experiences of Distress  will be measured using the Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_60106] (CES-D; Radloff, 1977), a 20-item questionnaire that asks about experience and 
frequency of depressive symptoms over the past week. A score of [ADDRESS_136129] (Blake et al., 1995) is a self-report  measure that screens for 16 potentially 
traumatic events across individuals’ lifetimes. Participants note whether the event happened to them 
personally, they witnessed it happen to someone else, they learned about it happening to someone close to 
them, or if it does not apply or does not fit. 
MINI (Sheehan et al., 1998) is a structured interview  that takes approximately 15-20 minutes to 
administer. The MINI is used extensively in research studies to make fairly quick and accurate diagnoses of 
psychiatric disorders and will be used here to assess, in part, for exclusion criteria.
The Telephone-Assessed Mental  State (TAMS; Lanska et al., 1993) is a brief, easily administered, 
easily scored cognitive assessment tool which can be administered by [CONTACT_756]. The TAMS uses 4 items 
from the extensively used Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) to assess for orientation to time and 
place, attention, and memory. In the population sample of Alzheimer’s disease patients, TAMS scores 
correlated strongly with those of instruments administered face to face, including the MMSE.
The Service Use and  Resource Form (SURF; Rosenheck et al., 2016) is a questionnaire assessing 
current living situation, use of inpatient and outpatient mental health and alcohol or drug treatments, 
psychotropic medication use, and use of other support services. The SURF will be administered during 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/20217screening, baseline, post-intervention and  follow-up. This measure takes approximately 10-15 minutes to 
complete. 
The Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS; Posner et al., 2011)  is a widely used 
measure of suicidality that has been successfully implemented across many settings (e.g., military, primary 
care, etc.). It has demonstrated good convergent and divergent validity with other multi-informant suicidal 
ideation and behavior scales and has high sensitivity and specificity for suicidal behavior classifications. It 
is also sensitive to change over time. The C-SSRS is available in several versions free of charge, including a 
brief 6-item screener which can be used as a self-report or interview measure. The C-SSRS screener will be 
administered during the phone screening interview and at baseline, post-intervention and follow-up 
assessments. Any participants endorsing “high-risk” responses (i.e. those coded in red) will be flagged, and 
Drs. Cook, Ellis, or Simiola will conduct a follow-up phone assessment to determine their suicide risk and 
make a final eligibility determination. 
Outcomes
Those participants who meet inclusion criteria will be provided  a link to the online surveys for 
baseline assessment. Measures will include prior and current mental health treatment engagement, barriers 
and beliefs around seeking formal mental health treatment, as well as measures assessing symptomatology 
(e.g., substance use, depression, PTSD).  At the completion of the 6-week group, participants will complete 
post-intervention assessments and 60- and 120-day follow-up assessments on the various outcome 
measures. A summary of the timing and purpose of assessments is shown in Table 1. 
Baseline, Post-Intervention and Follow-up Outcomes
Primary Outcome: Mental Health  Treatment Engagement. The primary outcome here will be the 
binary distinction between those who initiated mental health treatment/reinitiated mental health treatment 
versus those who did not. Mental health treatment engagement will be operationally defined as having ≥1 
visit(s) or scheduled appointments to any mental health services within [ADDRESS_136130] online group. 
Primary Outcome: Depression. Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_121371] (CES-D; 
Radloff, 1977) is a 20-item questionnaire that asks about experience and frequency of depressive symptoms 
over the past week. A score of 16 or higher identifies those individuals who are at risk for major depression. 
Secondary Outcome(s): will include PTSD, alcohol and drug abuse, quality of life, and service 
utilization.
PTSD Checklist for DSM-5
 (PCL-5;  Weathers et al., 2013) is a 20-item instrument that 
corresponds to the current psychiatric diagnostic criteria for PTSD.  
Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test  (ASSIST; WHO ASSIST Working 
Group, 2002; Humeniuk et al., 2008) is an 8-item measure of participants’ use of alcohol, tobacco 
products, and other drugs across their lifetime and in the past three months. 
Inventory of Psychosocial Functioning (IPF-B; Rodriguez, Holowka, & Marx, 2012)  is a brief 7-
item scale that assesses functional impairment or quality of life related to trauma and PTSD. 
The Service Use and  Resource Form (SURF; Rosenheck et al., 2016) is a questionnaire assessing 
current living situation, use of inpatient and outpatient mental health and alcohol or drug treatments, 
psychotropic medication use, and use of other support services. The SURF will be administered during 
screening, baseline, post-intervention and follow-up. 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/20218The Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS; Posner et al., 2011)  is a widely used 
measure of suicidality that has been successfully implemented across many settings (e.g.,  military, primary 
care, etc.). The C-SSRS is available in several versions free of charge, including a brief 6-item screener 
which can be used as a self-report or interview measure. The C-SSRS screener will be administered during 
the phone screening interview and at baseline, post-intervention and follow-up assessments. Any 
participants endorsing “high-risk” responses (i.e. those coded in red) will be flagged, and Drs. Cook, Ellis, 
or Simiola will conduct a follow-up phone assessment to determine their suicide risk and make a final 
eligibility determination. 
The Brief Dissociative Experiences Scale (DES-B Modified; Dalenberg & Carlson, 2010) is a 
brief 8-item self-report measure that
 assesses the severity of dissociative experiences in individuals aged [ADDRESS_136131]-intervention, and follow-up assessments.
Potential Moderators:
Barriers to Help Seeking Scale (BHSS; Mansfield, Addis, & Courtenay, 2005) is a 31-item scale 
measures several
 barriers to help-seeking (e.g., need for control and self-reliance, minimizing problem and 
resignation, concrete barriers and distrust of caregivers, privacy, and emotional control). 
Conformity to Masculine Norms Inventory (CMNI-46; Parent & Moradi, 2009 ) assesses 
conformity to the following masculine norms: winning, emotional control, primacy of work, risk-taking, 
violence, heterosexual self-presentation, sexual activity, self-reliance, and power over women. 
Minority Stress Scale (MSS; Norcini  Pala et al., 2017) is a 43-item questionnaire that assesses 
individuals’ experiences of stigmatization, discrimination, and internalized homophobia due to their sexual 
orientation. 
Working Alliance Inventory (WAI; Horvath & Greenberg, 1989),  is  a well-established measure of  
the therapeutic relationship. The measure contains three subscales (i.e., agreement on the goals of therapy, 
agreement on the tasks of therapy, and bond between client and therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]). 
Adult Resilience Measure – Revised (ARM-R; Resilience Research Centre, 2018; Jefferies, 
McGarrigle, &
 Ungar, 2018) is a 17-item scale of social-ecological resilience designed to measure the 
resources (individual, relational, communal and cultural) available to individuals that may bolster their 
resilience. 
Preferences Interview.  A sample subset of  the sample (N = 110) will be invited for a telephone 
interview where we will ask questions about treatment preferences (e.g., group versus individual, telehealth 
versus in person, etc.) to gain additional information from patients about their needs and wants for mental 
health treatment. Participants will be selected randomly from each intervention. Sampling will occur until 
[ADDRESS_136132]-intervention 
assessment and all interviews will be completed within three months (to allow for scheduling) of the 
participant completing the intervention.
Peer Specialists
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/20219Peer Training/Treatment Integrity. We will utilize the Independent Tape Rater Scale (ITRS; 
Martino, Canning-Ball, Caroll, & Rounsaville, 2011),
 a 39-item measure with items rated on a 7-point 
Likert scale, to monitor adherence to and competence in MI concepts. The ITRS will assess the degree to 
which peer leaders delivered both interventions with fidelity (i.e., with adherence and competence). The 
ITRS includes items that cover therapeutic strategies that are MI consistent (e.g., reflections) or inconsistent 
(e.g., unsolicited advice). For this trial, we will add 15 items that detail key aspects of trauma-informed, 
SGM affirmative care (e.g., avoiding gendered language, affirming healthy expressions of sexual 
orientation and identity, affirming and validating strengths of SGM males, and reframing help-seeking as a 
focus on regaining control over one’s life).  For each item, raters evaluate the peers for adherence (i.e., the 
extent of intervention delivery) and competence (i.e., the skill/quality of intervention delivery) along 7-
point Likert scales. Namely, at least half the MI consistent items rated average or above for both adherence 
and competence. In addition, we will evaluate the degree to which peers addressed trauma-informed, SGM 
affirmative care during the session. Our investigative team has documented experience training ITRS raters 
to perform reliable ITRS session process ratings in randomized trials (Martino, Ball, Nich, Frankforter, & 
Carroll, 2008).
Fidelity monitoring will occur ad hoc by [CONTACT_121402]-recordings of intervention 
sessions. At least 30% of
 the sessions (traditional MI and trauma-informed MI) will be coded (n =90). 
Three coders will rate each session. [CONTACT_121452] will host a training with the raters to familiarize them 
with the rating scales and interventions. The three raters will conduct the fidelity ratings over a six to eight 
month period (approximately) between June 2021 and February 2022. The three raters (Karen Hunkele, 
Tami Frankforter and Joanne Corvino) have previous experience conducting this task and will be 
supervised by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Martino. Audio recordings of selected group sessions will be sent to the raters using 
Yale’s secure file transfer (FileLocker).
Assessment Measures. Peer specialists will also be asked to complete a reflective journaling 
exercise (see attached) after
 each treatment cycle they co-facilitate. In addition, they will complete several 
assessments measures (see attached) prior to their attendance at the MI training then again after they attend 
the MI training. Peer specialists will be asked to answer approximately three open-ended questions at the 
end of the study.
Table 1: Assessment Schedule
Assessment Name [CONTACT_121447]-
intervention60-Day
Follow-
up120-Day 
Follow-up
Peer 
SpecialistsIndependent Tape Rater Scale x
Demographic and SGM 
identificationx x x x x
Sexual abuse characteristics x
Life Events Checklist x
Mini International 
Neuropsychiatric Interview
 x
Telephone-Assessed Mental 
State (TAMS)xMale
Survivors
Columbia-Suicide Severity 
Rating Scale (C-SSRS)x x x x x
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/202110Brief Dissociative Experiences 
Scale (DES-B Modified for
 
DSM-5)x x x x
Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_48413]-Depression Scale x x x x x
PTSD Checklist for DSM-[ADDRESS_136133] (ASSIST)x x x x
Inventory of Psychosocial 
Functioning x x x x
Barriers to Help Seeking Scale x x x x
Conformity to Masculine 
Norms Inventoryx x x x
Minority Stress Scale x x x x
Working Alliance Inventory x
Service Use and Resource 
Form (SURF)x x x x x
Adult Resilience Measure – 
Revised (ARM-R)x x x x
Participant Population: Provide a detailed description of the types  of participants who will be recruited 
into this study. 
The study will include peer leaders from  MaleSurvivor and Men Healing as well as emotionally distressed 
SGM male survivors who have not recently engaged in mental health care and will largely take place in 
online discussion groups.  
4. Describe how access to the population will be gained in the study.
 As an organization, MaleSurvivor and Men Healing have been active in trying to dispel  societal 
prejudice that keeps male survivors
  from engaging in research and participating more actively in health 
care decision-making. As such, we will establish a community-based research advisory board to facilitate 
the identification and enlistment of participants. In conducting focus groups with male survivors through 
our PCORI Engagement Award, we met a number of survivors who expressed an interest in working with 
us on future research studies. We will enlist and collaborate with them on how best to approach survivors. 
We will also work with these survivors to develop plans to share the study progress and results in formats 
most useful to the different communities involved, including SGM participants, other survivors and their 
families. 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021115. Participant classification: Check  off all classifications of participants that will be specifically 
recruited for enrollment in the research project. Will participants who may require additional safeguards or 
other considerations be enrolled in the study? If so, identify the population of participants requiring special 
safeguards and provide a justification for their involvement.
☐Children ☐ Healthy ☐ Fetal material, placenta, or dead fetus
☐Non-English Speaking ☐ Prisoners ☐ Economically disadvantaged persons
☐Decisionally Impaired ☐ Employees ☐ Pregnant women and/or fetuses
☐Yale Students ☐ Females of childbearing potential
 X No special populations will
 be specifically recruited  for enrollment.
NOTE: Is this research proposal designed to enroll children who are wards of  the state as potential 
participants? ☐Yes No 
6.Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria: What are the criteria used to determine  participant inclusion or    
exclusion? 
Inclusion criteria will include 18+ age or older;  English-speaking; men who have sex with men or 
individuals identifying as SGM males; individuals who report a history of sexual abuse; and individuals 
who self-report a minimum cut-off score of 16 or higher on depression, using a 20-item depression 
inventory. Similar to previous investigations with SGM males, we are using minimum distress scores to 
ensure that the sample adequately represents the population of SGM males who would be more inclined to 
seek intervention. A member of the research team will also administer the Mini International 
Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) to assist in determining participants’ eligibility. 
Exclusion criteria will include individuals who endorse  active psychosis or cognitive impairment per the 
MINI and TAMS, respectively. We will also exclude SGM men who report that they are currently in formal 
mental health counseling. Participants who are actively suicidal will be excluded. The Columbia-Suicide 
Severity Rating Scale will be used to measure suicidal behavior and ideation. If a participant screens high 
risk a study psychologist will follow-up to assess imminent danger and provider resources as appropriate 
and noted in the protection of human subjects  section.  
SECTION V: R ECRUITMENT/CONSENT AND ASSENT PROCEDURES 
1. Recruitment Procedures: 
a.
Describe how potential participants will be identified and contact[INVESTIGATOR_530], and by [CONTACT_20898].
In addition
 to posting recruitment advertisements on the MaleSurvivor website and discussion 
boards, participants will also be recruited through
 social and informational networking websites and mobile 
applications, and affiliate websites. The following male sexual abuse survivor websites will be used for 
recruitment: MaleSurvivor; 1in6; and Ark of Freedom Alliance. The following SGM websites will be used 
for recruitment: GLBT National Help Center, and The Association for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual & 
Transgender Issues in Counseling. A full list of potential recruitment sites/organizations provided as an 
Appendix A. Flyers were created that target different populations and organizations (Appendix B). The 
flyers will direct interested persons to our study website for additional information, contact [CONTACT_3031], 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/202112further eligibility requirements and procedures for enrollment. Flyers will be provided to organizations as a 
recruitment tool. Flyers will also
 be used in listserv distributions/mass e-mails through the organizations. 
We will also recruit on social media and sexual networking websites (e.g., Facebook, Twitter). A list of 
potential social media messages is included in Appendix C. These will be posted on the social media pages 
of sites/organizations included in Appendix A. We anticipate snowballing recruitment through social media 
(sharing of posts). Research suggests that strategies that involve photos related to the target population, and 
that modalities such as Facebook may be the most promising due to its ability to select criteria such as 
relationship interests (men interested in men), gender, and ethnicity in recruiting SGM males online. The 
flyers will be attached to social media posts. We will also utilize op-ed pi[INVESTIGATOR_121372] a 
recruitment strategy. 
Study personnel including  the investigators, research coordinator, research assistants will contact [CONTACT_121403]. Consent will be obtained prior to screening patients. 
Are you collecting any information about the individuals prior to their signing  a consent form? 
Yes ☐     No
If yes, indicate what information  you will be collecting and how it will be gathered (phone screen, paper 
questionnaire, etc.)  Click or tap here to enter text.
2. Indicate recruitment methods below.  Attach copi[INVESTIGATOR_20881].
☒Flyers ☒ Internet/web postings ☐ Radio
☐ Posters ☒ Mass email solicitation ☐ Telephone
☐ Letter ☐ Departmental/Center website ☐ Television
☐ Through local NGO or other local contact ☐ Departmental/Center research boards ☐ Newspaper
☐ Table set-up / in-person recruitment  of public                  ☒ Snowball sampling
☐ Classroom recruitment ☒ Social Media (Twitter/Facebook): Facebook, Twitter, 
Instagram
☐ Other: 
3. Targeted Enrollment: Give the number of participants:
a.
  Targeted for enrollment at Yale for this protocol: 356 for the online groups. 
b.    If this is a multi-site study, give the
 total  number of participants targeted across all sites.  
4.   How was this estimate derived? 
Because this study examines repeated measures outcomes with the two treatment conditions, assigned 
at the individual level, power analysis makes several  assumptions: continuous outcomes, a linear link 
function, random effects covariance structure, and homogeneous covariance structure (within treatment 
groups). These analyses also assume testing for  HTE effects. Conservatively assuming an effect size of .35, 
with a power of .80 and an  alpha of .05, 137 subjects per group would be required. This represents a total 
completed sample of 274. Assuming a dropout rate  of 20% (rounded up to 70, for nearest multiple of 2), 
this requires a recruited sample of at least 344. In a meta-analysis of [ADDRESS_136134]-intervention, was quite high (d = .77). However, the  strength of the effect decreased 
over time, with effect sizes of .39 at 1-3 months, and .31 at 6-12 months.
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021135. Process of Consent/Assent  (NOTE: When a study  includes minors, parent provide permission [not 
consent] for the child’s participation, and the child provides assent for participation)
Informed consent is an ongoing process  that is best suited by [CONTACT_121404]. Thus, participants will give consent in the initial online screening contact [CONTACT_121405]. Participants will be provided with information about the nature of the study, as well as 
the expected time and energy commitment required to complete the assessments. It will also be explained to 
participants that they are consenting to be randomly assigned to one of two MI interventions (with brief 
explanation about content as well as frequency and length of sessions). 
Participants will be asked to provide informed consent online, prior to completing  in the screening 
questionnaires. Consent will be required in order to access the assessment measures. If a participant does 
not provide consent, they will not engage in the screening assessment or be enrolled in the study. 
Peer specialists will also be asked to provide consent  for participation in a research study (see 
attached form). They will also be asked to complete an attestation form (see attached) to ensure they agree 
to all requirements/commitments required to serve as a peer specialist (see attached). Information will be 
collected on peer specialists (e.g. demographic information such as age, race/ethnicity, education level, 
etc.). In addition, peer specialists will be asked to complete assessment measures (as documented above) 
and a reflective journaling exercise to capture their experiences leading the groups (see attached).  
If a participant informs the study staff that they are  no longer able to participate in the group intervention 
(e.g. participant was randomized and then unable to complete all six online group sessions) the study staff 
will contact [CONTACT_121406] (see example of outreach language with submission). Similarly, if a 
participant stops attending group, without explicitly informing the study staff of their inability to complete 
the six sessions we will contact [CONTACT_121407]-up 
assessment measures. If a participant withdraws from the study entirely, we will not contact [CONTACT_121408]. 
Participants who engage in the online groups will be offered the  opportunity to share their e-mail 
address with their fellow group participants and the two peer leaders for their group. Participants will be 
informed by [CONTACT_121409] 6th session that they will be provided a link to a consent form that 
will allow them to choose if they would like to share their e-mail address with fellow group members and/or 
peer leaders. They will be informed both during the 6th session (by [CONTACT_76066]) and in the online 
consent form (sent by [CONTACT_5984]) that sharing their information is completely voluntary. We will 
require that each participant provide written consent indicating 1) their preferred name [CONTACT_121448], 2) their e-
mail address, and 3) to whom they provide permission to share their information with (see attached form). If 
a participant does not provide signed consent, or complete the form in its entirety, their information will not 
be shared. 
6. Evaluation of Participant(s) Capacity to  Provide Informed Consent/Assent: Indicate how the 
personnel obtaining consent will assess the potential participant’s ability and capacity to consent to the 
research being proposed, if applicable.
All potential participants will be administered the MINI during the screening process. The  MINI is 
a structured interview that takes approximately 15-20 minutes to administer. The MINI is used extensively 
in research studies to make fairly quick and accurate diagnoses of psychiatric disorders and will be used 
here to assess, in part, for exclusion criteria and capacity evaluation.
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021147. Documentation of  Consent/Assent: Specify the documents or verbal scripts that will be used 
during the consent/assent process. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_25156], in the same 
format that they will be given or spoken to participants. 
Please refer to the consent  form included in this submission.
8. Non-English-Speaking Participants:  Explain provisions in place to ensure comprehension for 
research involving non-English speaking participants. Translated copi[INVESTIGATOR_121373]. Do you speak the local language? Will you require a translator? (If 
so, please elaborate on how the translators will be trained).
Non-English speakers will be excluded from this study.
9. Are any of the study procedures likely to yield information subject to mandatory reporting 
requirements? (e.g. HIV testing – reporting of communicable diseases; parent interview
 -incidents of child 
abuse, elderly abuse, etc.). Please verify to whom such instances will need to be reported. 
Not applicable. However, we have a data  safety monitoring board in place:
General description of a monitoring plan: To ensure confidentiality, we have instituted a range of 
protocols. We will not include names and other protected health information in our publications, reports, or 
presentations. Wherever possible, we will refrain from using participants’ names and other protected health 
information. We will use standard research procedures for coding data and referring to participants by [CONTACT_121410].  The document containing key decipher code will be destroyed immediately following 
the conclusion of the intervention.  
We will also have a data and safety monitoring plan for the study. [CONTACT_121453]-Rotem,  an 
Associate Professor in the Department of Psychiatry at Yale, will serve as the internal monitor for our study 
to ensure that we are approaching the participants in ways that are not coercive. In addition, [CONTACT_121454]-
Rotem will serve as the psychological safety monitor and will detect patterns of possible adverse events and 
report these to the PI, who will notify the IRB in a timely fashion. Serious adverse events that are 
immediately reportable to the IRB would be death, a life-threatening experience (e.g., suicide attempt), and 
inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. [CONTACT_121455] will oversee the data entry process to ensure that data is entered to 
maintain confidentiality and security. We do not anticipate a need for an interim analysis of the data.
Plans for ensuring necessary intervention in the event of adverse effects:  [CONTACT_121456], a 
primary care
 physician and Associate Professor from the University of North Carolina has agreed to serve 
as an external safety officer. [CONTACT_121457] will receive reports prepared by [CONTACT_978]’s at 6-month intervals and 
review data on number of missing forms, number of potential participants excluded from participation, 
number of adverse events and serious adverse events, and number of terminations from the study. [CONTACT_121457] 
will prepare a report for the IRB every [ADDRESS_136135]. Cook, will be responsible for 
following established procedures for reporting adverse events to the Yale Human Investigations Committee, 
the funding source for this study, and other federal agencies as required by [CONTACT_2371].  
10. Waiver of Consent/Documentation  of Consent: In certain circumstances, the IRB may grant a 
waiver of documentation of consent, or a full waiver of consent, depending on the study. If you will 
request either a waiver of consent, or a waiver of signed consent for this study, complete the appropriate 
section below.  
☐Not Requesting any consent waivers 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/202115☐Requesting a waiver of signed  consent (e.g., verbal or online consent only):
☐ Recruitment/Screening only (if for recruitment, the questions in the box below will 
apply to recruitment activities
 only)
☐ Entire Study ( Note that an information sheet  may be required.)
 For a waiver of signed consent, address the following:
Would 
the signed consent form be the only record linking the subject and the research?  YES ☐  NO ☐ 
Does a breach of confidentiality constitute the principal risk to subjects? YES ☐  NO ☐
 
OR
Does the research pose greater than minimal risk? YES ☐    NO☐ 
Does the research include any activities that would require signed consent in a non-research context? 
YES ☐   NO ☐
 
☐ Requesting a waiver of consent  (if you are not obtaining ANY consent):
☐ Recruitment/Screening only (if for recruitment, the questions in the box below will 
apply to recruitment activities only)
☐
 Entire Study 
For a waiver of consent, please address all of the following:
Does
 the research pose greater than minimal risk to subjects?  
☐ Yes    If you answered yes, stop. A waiver cannot be granted.   
☐ No
Will the 
waiver adversely affect subjects’ rights and welfare? YES ☐    NO☐
Why would the research be impracticable to conduct without the waiver? 
Click or tap here to enter text.
Where appropriate, how will pertinent information be returned to, or shared with subjects at a later 
date? Click or tap here to enter text.
Request for waiver of HIPAA authorization: (When requesting a waiver of HIPAA Authorization for either 
the entire study, or
 for recruitment purposes only. Note: if you are collecting PHI as part of a phone or 
email screen, you must request a HIPAA waiver for recruitment purposes.)
Choose one: 
☐ For entire study 
 For recruitment/screening purposes only 
☐
 For inclusion of non-English speaking subject if  short form is being used and there is no translated 
HIPAA research authorization form available on the University’s HIPAA website at hipaa.yale.edu.
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/202116i. Describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the subject’s authorization for use/disclosure of this 
data: 
ii. If requesting a
 waiver of signed authorization,  describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the 
subject’s signed authorization for use/disclosure of this data: 
In order to contact [CONTACT_121411] a waiver of HIPAA Authorization 
is needed. Due to the nature of the recruitment taking place online we will obtain
 participant’s names, e-
mail addresses and phone numbers prior to obtaining informed consent. 
SECTION VI: P ROTECTION OF RESEARCH PARTICIPANTS
1. Confidentiality & Security of Data: Describe the steps that will be taken to secure the data during 
storage, use and transmission as outlined in the below sections.  NOTE: Data can include paper files, data 
on the internet or websites, computer files, audio/video files, photographs, etc. and should be considered in 
the responses to the below sections.   Click or tap here to enter text.
We will take several steps to protect  participant confidentiality as well as reduce burden. Methods 
of contact [CONTACT_121412], web and computer-based measurement as well as online-based discussion 
groups at the participants’ convenience. According to MaleSurvivor, peers who currently lead discussion 
groups, there have been no complaints of grievances or reports of emotional hardship. On the contrary, 
many have expressed appreciation for the opportunity to participate in the current peer-led support groups. 
We will minimize risks to participants by [CONTACT_121413]. Participants’ first names or preferred nicknames/pseudonyms will only be 
used during the discussion groups to build rapport. In publications or presentations, we will report data in 
aggregate form and/or change names and disguise the identity of any persons we describe or quote for 
purposes of illustration or example. The audio-files will be labeled only by a non-identifying code and sent 
to the professional transcriptionist via a secure website. Pseudonyms will be used in all transcribed files, 
removing all subject names. A confidentiality agreement, BAA, and consultant agreement will be executed 
with the transcription company prior to transfer of any files. Interview recordings will be sent to the 
transcriptionist using a unique identifier and through Kaiser Permanente’s Secure File Transfer system. 
Audio files will be sent using Kaiser Permanente’s Secure File Transfer program which is powered by [CONTACT_121414]. The 
Secure File Transfer program has SSL/TLS 1.[ADDRESS_136136] will de-identify and names (including nicknames) recorded in the audio file 
with the pseudonym such as “Moderator” and “Participant” or “interviewer” and “interviewee”. To 
delineate between the persons the transcriptionist will label each individual with a number e.g. “Participant 
1” or “Participant 5”. Audio files will be sent to a professional transcriptionist within one week of the 
completed recording. Audio files will be destroyed as soon as the transcribed files are received back from 
the professional transcriptionist and reviewed by [CONTACT_121415]. The review 
of the transcribed files will occur within one week of receiving the files from the transcriptionist.
Confidentiality of data files will be achieved by [CONTACT_121416]-based survey
 responses and transcribed interviews. All identifying information will be kept in 
secure locked files, accessible only to the study team and will be destroyed at the end of a five-year period. 
Responses to the web-based measurements will be stored on a Yale-approved secure server, behind the 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/202117firewall. This information will be protected to the fullest extent possible using modern encryption 
technology, thus reducing the risk of unauthorized data
 interception.
A data use agreement will be fully executed between  Yale University and Nova Southeastern 
University ([CONTACT_121458]’ primary institution) prior to any data transfer. Similarly, a data use agreement 
will be fully executed with Kaiser Permanente, Center for Health Research prior to any data transfer. Secure 
file transfer, approved by [CONTACT_121417], will be the sole method for data transfer. 
2. What participant information will you be collecting?  Describe the identifiers that will be included 
or associated with the data and/or specimens (e.g., names, addresses, telephone/fax numbers, email 
addresses, dates (date of birth, admission/discharge dates, etc.), medical record numbers, social security 
numbers, health plan beneficiary numbers, etc.) Names, telephone number, e-mail address, date of birth, 
and postal address for those who request payment via postal mail. 
Other potentially identifying information to be collected:
☒Audiotapes
☒Videotapes
☐Faces (focus groups, photographs or other way that an individual would be physically recognized)
☐
Potential for identification from the bulk of  the information, even if direct identifiers are not collected 
(deductive disclosure).
3. How will the research data be  collected and recorded? 
Training videos will be created. While we will do our best to only video record the trainer, it is possible that 
other persons in the room will be included in the video. Therefore, we will obtain consent to video record at 
the time of invitation to the training event to explicitly inform participants that by [CONTACT_121418]. Individuals who decline consent will not attend the training event. 
Similarly, to measure fidelity we will audio record a small subset of the intervention groups. Participants will 
be provided information about the audio recording prior to consenting to the study. Participants unwilling to 
be audio recorded will be excluded from participation. 
4. If identifiers will be associated with the data and/or specimens, describe whether a record or list 
containing a code (i.e., code number, pseudonyms)
 will be used, where the list will be stored, who will have 
access to the list and when it will be destroyed.
Participants’ first names or preferred nicknames/pseudonyms will only be used during the discussion groups 
to build rapport. In publications or
 presentations, we will report data in aggregate form and/or change 
names and disguise the identity of any persons we describe or quote for purposes of illustration or example. 
The audio-files will be labeled only by a non-identifying code and sent to the professional transcriptionist 
via a secure website. Confidentiality of data files will be achieved by [CONTACT_121419]-based survey responses and transcribed interviews. 
5. Describe where,  how and for how long the data (hardcopy (paper) and/or electronic data) and/or 
specimens will be stored.
 All identifying information  will be kept in secure locked files, accessible only to the study team and will be 
destroyed at the end of a five-year period. Responses to the web-based measurements will be stored on a 
Yale-approved secure server, behind the firewall. This information will be protected to the fullest extent 
possible using modern encryption technology, thus reducing the risk of unauthorized data interception. Drs. 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/202118Cook, Ellis, and Simiola along with the project coordinator will have access to individually identifiable 
private information. Raw data will be stored
 in a double locked file cabinet located in data storage that only 
they will have access to. All electronic data will be password protected and stored on a secured, encrypted 
server which has limited access restricted to the research team. First names and any information volunteered 
during the course of the MI interventions will be known by [CONTACT_121420].
Audio files will be sent to a  professional transcriptionist within one week of the completed recording. Audio 
files will be destroyed as soon as the transcribed files are received back from the professional 
transcriptionist and reviewed by [CONTACT_121415]. The review of the 
transcribed files will occur within one week of receiving the files from the transcriptionist.
All portable devices must contain encryption software, per University Policy 5100.  If there is a technical 
reason 
a device cannot be encrypted please submit an exception request to the Information Security, Policy 
and Compliance Office by [CONTACT_121421]://its.yale.edu/egrc or email [EMAIL_364]  
 
6.Identify who will have access to the data and/or specimens. If the data and/or specimens will be 
transferred to and/or from
 outside collaborators, identify the collaborator to whom the data and/or 
specimens will be transferred and how the data and/or specimens will be transferred.   
Drs. Cook, Simiola and Ellis along with the project coordinator will have access to individually 
identifiable private information.
7.
What will be done with the data when the research is completed? Are there plans to destroy the 
identifiable 
data or the link to personal identifiers? If yes, describe how, by [CONTACT_121422]. If no, describe how the data and/or identifiers will be secured. Identifiable data will be destroyed 
at the earliest date based on federal and local regulations. [CONTACT_8367] will work with Yale ITS to ensure that 
data is destroyed in an appropriate manner. 
8. Will a Certificate of Confidentiality be needed? (See also the NIH Certificate of Confidentiality Kiosk, 
http://grants.nih.gov/grants/policy/coc/index.htm
) We received a Certificate of Confidentiality from the NIH 
on April 25, 2019, and have submitted all appropriate documentation to the IRB.
SECTION VII: P OTENTIAL RISKS AND BENEFITS
1. Risks: Describe the reasonably foreseeable risks,  including risks to participant privacy, discomforts, or 
inconveniences associated with participants participating in the research. Note: All studies have the 
potential for risk, if not physical, there  may be psychological, reputational, or financial risks or risks 
to breach of confidentiality.
There are no foreseeable physical or medical risks to participants in this study. There is extensive 
research showing that assessing study
 participants’ trauma history or subsequent mental health difficulties 
does not unduly upset participants. The general findings across research studies in non-psychiatric samples 
are that distress responses are infrequent, mild, and transitory. Although, some studies have found that those 
with more severe trauma histories or those with PTSD symptoms had more distress reactions (Galea et al., 
2003; Institute of Medicine, 2007). Interestingly, emotion or temporary distress in trauma studies is, at 
times, reported to correlate positively with perceived importance and general positive evaluation of the 
research (Griffin, Resick, Waldrop, & Mechanic, 2003). This underlines that research that involves 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/202119disclosure of trauma, although difficult, can be beneficial. Indeed, disclosure of trauma has been associated 
with empi[INVESTIGATOR_121374] (Kluemper & Dalenberg, 2014; 
Lutgendorf & Antoni, 1999).
However small these risks may be, we will include in the consent form  that, it is possible that some 
people will be upset by [CONTACT_121423]. Further, we will 
make it clear that participants may stop the research process at any time and that any question can be 
skipped at any time. In the event that participants wish to talk further about any such difficult experiences, 
they will be given the telephone numbers of study staff, a local hotline, and information for mental health 
providers in their area. A breach of confidentiality is also possible, but not likely, and the data coding 
process will be used to help protect participant confidentiality. 
2. Minimizing Risks:  Describe the manner  in which the above-mentioned risks will be minimized.
We will take several steps to protect  participant confidentiality as well as reduce burden. Methods of 
contact [CONTACT_121412], web and computer-based measurement as well as online-based discussion 
groups at the participants’ convenience. According to MaleSurvivor, peers who currently lead discussion 
groups, there have been no complaints of grievances or reports of emotional hardship. On the contrary, 
many have expressed appreciation for the opportunity to participate in the current peer-led support groups. 
We will minimize risks to participants by [CONTACT_121424]. Participants’ first names or preferred nicknames/pseudonyms will only be 
used during the discussion groups to build rapport. In publications or presentations, we will report data in 
aggregate form and/or change names and disguise the identity of any persons we describe or quote for 
purposes of illustration or example. The audio-files will be labeled only by a non-identifying code and sent 
to the professional transcriptionist via a secure website. Audio-files will be sent to a professional 
transcriptionist within one week of the completed recordings. Audio-files will be destroyed as soon as the 
transcribed files are received back from the professional transcriptionist and reviewed by [CONTACT_121425]. The review of the transcribed files will occur within one week of receiving 
the files from the transcriptionist. The video recording of the motivational interviewing training will be 
limited to the trainers as much as possible. Prior to distributing the training video to peer moderators unable 
to attend the training we will work with the video editor to ensure that all participant’s identity is disguised 
(e.g. through blurring images or using black out techniques). The video file will be sent via e-mail to peer 
moderators. The video will require a password to access it. Raw footage from the training will be deleted 
within [ADDRESS_136137] extent possible using modern encryption technology, thus 
reducing the risk of unauthorized data interception.
A data use agreement will be fully executed between  Yale University and Nova Southeastern 
University ([CONTACT_121458]’ primary institution) prior to any data transfer. Similarly, a data use agreement 
will be fully executed with Kaiser Permanente, Center for Health Research prior to any data transfer. Secure 
file transfer, approved by [CONTACT_121417], will be the sole method for data transfer. 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/202120A confidentiality agreement will be signed and executed with  the professional transcription company 
and the videography company (CinemaSmith).
If, during the phone  screening interview, any participant endorses a “high-risk” response on the C-
SSRS screener (i.e., any response coded in red suggesting high risk of suicide), this will be flagged by [CONTACT_121426] [INVESTIGATOR_116116]. Drs. Cook, 
Ellis, or Simiola will then conduct a follow-up phone assessment to determine the participant’s suicide risk. 
If the participant is actively suicidal (i.e., has imminent suicidal intent and plan), they will be advised to go 
to their local hospi[INVESTIGATOR_121375]. If a participant reports significant emotional distress, passive or active suicidal 
ideation, or thoughts of hurting someone else during the study protocol, they will be provided with 
information for seeking additional help including being advised to go to their local hospi[INVESTIGATOR_121376]. (Please see attached resources sheet that provides the minimum information that will be posted: 1) 
during each intervention meeting (online) and reviewed at the start of the session and; 2) at the end of each 
online assessment (screening, baseline, post-intervention, 60-day follow-up, 120-day follow-up)). 
Peer leaders  will be trained during  a 3-day in-person meeting specifically on identifying and 
managing emotional distress. They will also get ongoing training during weekly supervision where 
supervising psychologists will check in weekly with peer specialists about any distress observed or noted in 
their group(s). Peer leaders  will be required to alert the study PI [INVESTIGATOR_121377] e-mail within [ADDRESS_136138] emergency room, based on the participants stated 
location. 
3. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan:  Include an appropriate Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) 
based on the investigator’s risk assessment stated
 below. (Note: the HSC will make the final 
determination of the risk to subjects.).
a. What is your assessment of the overall risk level for subjects participating in this study? 
More than minimal risk.
b.
If children are involved, what is your assessment of the overall risk level for the children 
participating in this study? Not applicable.
c. Include an appropriate  Data and Safety Monitoring Plan. Examples of DSMPs are  
 available here http://your.yale.edu/policies-procedures/other/data-and-safety-monitoring-
plan-template  for
i. Minimal risk
ii. Greater than  minimal/moderate risk
1. Personnel responsible for the safety review  and its frequency:
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_22413], assuring protocol  compliance, and conducting 
the safety reviews at the specified frequency, which must be conducted at a minimum of every 6 months 
(including when re-approval of the protocol is sought). During the review process, the PI (monitor) will 
evaluate whether the study should continue unchanged, require modification/amendment, or close to 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/202121enrollment. Either the PI [INVESTIGATOR_121378].
2. The risks associated with the current study are deemed greater than minimal for the following 
reasons: 
(choose those that apply)
We do not view the risks associated with the online interventions as minimal risks. Although we  have 
assessed the proposed study as one of greater than minimal risk, the potential exists for anticipated and/or 
unanticipated adverse events, serious or otherwise, to occur since it is not possible to predict with certainty 
the absolute risk in any given individual or in advance of first-hand experience with the proposed study 
methods. Therefore, we provide a plan for monitoring the data and safety of the proposed study as follows:
 To ensure confidentiality, we have instituted a range of protocols. We will not include names and 
other protected health information in our publications, reports,
 or presentations. Wherever possible, we will 
refrain from using participants’ names and other protected health information.  We will use standard 
research procedures for coding data and referring to participants by [CONTACT_121427].  The document 
containing key decipher code will be destroyed immediately following the conclusion of the intervention.  
We will also have a data and safety monitoring plan for the study. [CONTACT_121453]-Rotem  will serve 
as the internal monitor for our study to ensure that we are approaching the participants in ways that are not 
coercive. In addition, [CONTACT_121454]-Rotem will serve as the psychological safety monitor and will detect 
patterns of possible adverse events and report these to the PI, who will notify the IRB in a timely fashion. 
Serious adverse events that are immediately reportable to the IRB would be death, a life-threatening 
experience (e.g., suicide attempt), and inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. [CONTACT_8367] will oversee the data entry 
process to ensure that data is entered to maintain confidentiality and security. We do not anticipate a need 
for an interim analysis of the data.
Plans for ensuring necessary intervention  in the event of adverse effects:  As mentioned above, 
[CONTACT_121456] has agreed to serve as an external safety officer. [CONTACT_121457] will receive reports prepared by 
[CONTACT_978]’s at 6-month intervals and review data on number of missing forms, number of potential participants 
excluded from participation, number of adverse events and serious adverse events, and number of 
terminations from the study. [CONTACT_121457] will prepare a report for the IRB every [ADDRESS_136139]. Cook, will be responsible for following established procedures for reporting adverse events to the 
Yale Human Investigations Committee, the funding source for this study, and other federal agencies as 
required by [CONTACT_2371].
3. Attribution of Adverse Events:
Adverse events will be monitored for each subject participating in the  study and attributed to the study 
procedures / design by [CONTACT_978], [CONTACT_8367], according to the following categories:
a.) Definite: Adverse event is clearly related to the study.
b.) Probable: Adverse event is likely related to the study.
c.) Possible: Adverse event may be
 related  to the study.
d.) Unlikely: Adverse event is likely not to be related to the study.
e.) Unrelated:
 Adverse event is  clearly not related to the study.
4. Plan for Grading Adverse Events:
The following scale will be
 used in grading  the severity of adverse events noted during the study:
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021221. Mild adverse event
2.
Moderate adverse event
3.
Severe adverse event
5. Plan
 for Determining Seriousness of Adverse Events:
Serious Adverse
 Events:
In addition
 to grading the adverse event, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_121379] a Serious Adverse Event (SAE).  An adverse event is considered serious if it results in any of the 
following outcomes:
1. Death;
2. A life-threatening experience in-patient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081]; 
3.
A persistent or significant disability or incapacity; 
4.
A congenital anomaly or birth defect; OR
5.
Any other adverse event that, based upon appropriate medical judgment, may jeopardize the 
subject’s health
 and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the other 
outcomes listed in this definition. 
An adverse event may be  graded as severe but still not meet the criteria for a SAE.  Similarly, an 
adverse event may be graded as moderate but still meet the criteria for an SAE.  It is important for the PI [INVESTIGATOR_121380] “seriousness” when determining whether reporting to the IRB 
is necessary.
6. Plan for reporting UPI[INVESTIGATOR_20865] (including Adverse Events) to the IRB
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_121381]: 
Any incident, experience or outcome that meets ALL  3 of the following criteria:
1. Is unexpected (in terms of nature, specificity, severity, or frequency) given (a) the research 
procedures described in the
 protocol-related documents, such as the IRB-approved protocol and 
informed consent document and (b) the characteristics of the subject population being studied; 
AND 
2. Is related or possibly related to participation in the research (possibly related means there is a 
reasonable possibility that the incident, experience, or
 outcome may have been caused by [CONTACT_9156]); AND
3. Suggests that the  research places subjects or others at greater risk of harm (including physical, 
psychological, economic, legal, or social harm) than was previously known or recognized.
Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks  to Subjects or Others (UPI[INVESTIGATOR_20865]) may be medical or non-
medical in nature and include – but are not limited to – serious, unexpected, and related adverse events 
and unanticipated adverse device effects .  Please note that adverse events are reportable to the IRB as 
UPI[INVESTIGATOR_22417] 3 criteria listed above.
These UPI[INVESTIGATOR_20865]/SAEs will be reported to the IRB in accordance with IRB Policy 710, using the appropriate 
forms found on
 the website. All related events involving risk but not meeting the prompt reporting 
requirements described in IRB Policy [ADDRESS_136140] occurred 
at the expected frequency and level of severity as previously documented .  In lieu of a summary of external 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/202123events, a current DSMB report can be submitted for research studies that are subject to oversight by a 
DSMB (or other monitoring entity that is monitoring the
 study on behalf of an industry sponsor).
7. Plan for reporting adverse events to co-investigators on the study, as appropriate the protocol’s 
research monitor(s),
 e.g., DSMBs, study sponsors, funding and regulatory agencies, and regulatory 
and decision-making bodies.
For the current study, the  following individuals, funding, and/or regulatory agencies will be notified (choose 
those that apply):
 All Co-Investigators listed on the protocol.
□ National Institutes of Health
□ National Science Foundation
 Study Sponsor
Other Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) or  Committee (DSMC)
The PI, [CONTACT_121459], will conduct a review of all adverse events upon completion of every study subject. 
[CONTACT_8367] will evaluate the frequency
 and severity of the adverse events and determine if modifications to 
the protocol or consent form are required.
d. For multi-site studies for which the Yale PI [INVESTIGATOR_121382]:
i. How will adverse events and unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others be 
reported, reviewed and
 managed? Click or tap here to enter text.
ii. What provisions are in place for management of interim results? Click or tap here to enter 
text.
iii.
What will the multi-site process be for protocol modifications? Click or tap here to enter text.
4. Potential
 Benefits:  Identify any benefits that may be reasonably expected to result  from the 
research, either to the participant(s) or to society at large. (Payment of participants is not considered a 
benefit in this context of the risk benefit assessment.) 
In general, we believe that participants who take part in this research  are contributing towards the 
care, treatment and well-being of countless numbers of people who have experienced sexual abuse or 
assault across their lifespan and have resulting emotional distress. In addition, participation contributes 
towards the advancement of science and may benefit those who experience sexual assault at some time in 
the future. Potential other benefits include taking an active role in one’s own healthcare; exercising one’s 
autonomy and helpi[INVESTIGATOR_121383]; having the possibility of trying a promising 
adapted evidence-based psychotherapy that is not yet widely available; and having the chance to potentially 
improve one’s own mental health, psychological functioning, and quality of life. Some participants in this 
clinical research study may benefit from the extra attention from a dedicated team and community that is 
specifically focused on their health care and carefully monitoring any potential side effects. 
         SECTION  VIII: R ESEARCH ALTERNATIVES AND ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
1. Alternatives: What other alternatives, if any, are available to the  study participants outside of the 
research?
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/202124Other than declining participation, there are no alternatives to the proposed  study of which we are 
aware.  
2. Payments for  Participation (Economic Considerations): Describe payments that will be made to 
participants, if any, the amount and timing of payments, and the conditions for receiving this compensation 
(if applicable). If you plan to hold a drawing, be sure to include the following on any consent or recruitment 
materials mentioning the lottery: 1) the value of the prize; 2) the sponsor of the prize (this cannot be a 
federal funding source); 3) the odds of winning; and 4) that there are no restrictions to winning.
Research subjects will be paid for their participation in assessment. For each completed assessment 
they will receive
 $20 for their participation.
Peer leaders will receive $180.00 for each group they co-facilitate. Specifically, they will receive  $60.[ADDRESS_136141] group session and another $60.00 at the end of the sixth group session they co-facilitate.  
Peer leaders  will receive an additional $60.00 at the completion of the end of the 8th supervision session. 
This makes the total compensation for the peer leaders co-facilitating a group $180.00 per group. In 
addition, peer leaders  will also be asked to participate in either an in-person or online (previously recorded) 
training for the intervention for which you they are co-leading. If attending in person travel expenses (e.g. 
train, airfare, ground transportation) will be covered by [CONTACT_121428], 
Connecticut. Lodging and per diem expenses will also be covered by [CONTACT_121429] 3 days. In addition 
as a token of our appreciation you they will be compensated $100.00 per day (maximum 3 days) for their 
attendance in the training.
Participants will be given a  choice regarding how they would like to receive payment: either by [CONTACT_121430] e-mail. Checks will be mailed to participants, if this is their preferred method. Electronic gift cards 
will be e-mailed to those who prefer an e-mail delivery. 
3. Costs for Participation (Economic Considerations):  Clearly describe the participant’s costs 
associated with participation in the research, if any, and the interventions or procedures of the study that 
will be provided at no cost to participants.    
Interventions will be at no cost to the participant. A travel stipend will be provided for peer 
specialists attending various
 trainings.  
References
Alsan, M., Stantcheva, S., Yang, D., & Cutler, D. (2020). Disparities in Coronavirus 2019 Reported 
Incidence, Knowledge, and Behavior Among US Adults. JAMA network open , 3(6), e2012403-
e2012403.
Aosved, A. C., Long, P. J., & Voller, E. K. (2011). Sexual revictimization and  adjustment in college men. 
Psychology of Men & Masculinity, 12(3), 285-296.
Apodaca, T. R., Borsari,  B., Jackson, K. M., Magill, M., Longabaugh, R., Mastroleo, N. R., & Barnett, N. 
P. (2014). Sustain talk predicts poorer outcomes among mandated college student drinkers  
receiving a brief motivational intervention. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 28(3), 631-8.
Badgett, M. V. (1995). The wage effects of sexual orientation discrimination. ILR Review, 48(4), 726-39. 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/202125Balsam, K. F., Rothblum, E. D., & Beauchaine, T. P. (2005). Victimization over the life span: A 
comparison of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and heterosexual  siblings. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 73(3), 477-87. 
Blake, D. D., Weathers, F. W., Nagy, L. M. Kaloupek, D. G., Gusman,  F. D., Charney, D. S., & Keane, T. 
M. (1995). The development of a Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 
8, 75-90.
Brown, L. S., & Pantalone D. (2011). Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender issues in trauma psychology. 
Traumatology, 17, 
1-3.
Butler, S. F., Budman, S. H., Goldman, R. J., Newman, F. L., Beckley, K. E., Trottier, D. ,& Cacciola, J.S. 
(2001). Initial validation of a
 computer-administered Addiction Severity Index: The  ASI-MV. 
Psychol Addict Behav, 15(1), 4-12.
Burke, B. L., Arkowitz, H., & Menchola,  M. (2003). The efficacy of motivational interviewing: A meta-
analysis of controlled clinical trials. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 843-861.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 (2017). National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence 
Summary Reports . Retrieved  from 
https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/nisvs/summaryreports.html 
COVID-19 and Mental Health Measurement Working Group. Correspondence dated March 18, 2020. 
[Received April 12, 2020].
Dalenberg, C., & Carlson,
 E. (2010, November). New versions of the Dissociative Experiences Scale: The 
DES-R (revised) and the DES-B (brief).  In Annual Meeting of the International Society for 
Traumatic Stress Studies, November, Montreal, Quebec.
Dube, S. R., Anda. R. F., Whitfield,  C. L., Brown, D. W., Fellitti, V.J., Dong, M., & Giles, W. H. 
(2005). Long-term consequences of childhood sexual abuse by [CONTACT_121431]. American Journal 
of Preventative Medicine 28(5), 430-438. 
Galea S, Vlahov D, Resnick H, et  al. Trends of probable post-traumatic stress disorder in [LOCATION_001] City 
after the September [ADDRESS_136142] attacks. Am J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541].  2003; 158(6):514-524. 
Grasso DJ, Briggs-Gowan MJ, Ford JD, Carter AS. The Epi[INVESTIGATOR_901] – Pandemic Impacts Inventory (EPII). 
2020.
Griffin MG,
 Resick PA,  Waldrop AE, Mechanic MB. Participation in trauma research: is there evidence of 
harm? J Trauma Stress. 2003; 16(3):221-27. 
Hatzenbuehler, M.L. (2009). How does sexual minority stigma
 “get under the skin”? A psychological 
mediation framework. 
Psychological Bulletin, 135(5), 707-30. 
Hequembourg, A. L., Bimbi, D., & Parsons,  J. T. (2011). Sexual victimization and health-related 
indicators among sexual minority men. Journal of LGBT Issues in Counseling, 5 (1), 2-20. 
Herek, G. M., & Berrill, K. T. (1992). Hate crimes: Confronting violence against lesbians and gay men. 
[LOCATION_004]: SAGE Publications.
Horvath AO, Greenberg LS. (1989). Development and validation of the Working Alliance Inventory.  
Journal of Counseling 
Psychol
ogy = 36, 223–233. 
Hötzel K, von Brachel R, Schmidt
 U, et  al. An internet-based program to enhance motivation to change in 
females with symptoms of an eating disorder: a randomized controlled trial.  Psychol Med. 2014; 
44(9);1947-63.
Human Rights Watch. (2001). Human Rights  Watch World Report. Retrieved from 
https://www.hrw.org/legacy/wr2k1/usa/index.html.
Humeniuk, R.E., Ali, R.A., Babor, T.F., Farrell, M., Formigoni,  M.L., Jittiwutikarn, J., …Simon, S. (2008). 
Validation of the Alcohol Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test  (ASSIST). 
Addiction 103(6), 1039-1047. 
Hundt, N. E., Robinson, A., Arney, J.,  Stanley, M. A., & Cully, J. A. (2015). Veterans’ perspectives on 
benefits and drawbacks of peer support for posttraumatic stress disorder. Military Medicine, 180(8), 
851-6.  Doi:10.7205/MILMED-D14-[ZIP_CODE]
Institute of Medicine (2007). Treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder: an assessment of the evidence. 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/202126Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2007. 
Jefferies, P., McGarrigle,
 L., & Ungar, M. (2018).  The CYRM-R: a Rasch-validated revision of the Child 
and Youth Resilience Measure. Journal of Evidence-Informed Social Work, 1-24. 
Kartha, A., Brower, V., Saitz, R.,
 Samet,  J. H., Keane, T. M., & Liebschutz, J. (2008). The impact of trauma 
exposure and post-traumatic stress disorder on healthcare utilization among primary care patients.  
Medical Care, 46(4), 388-93. 
Kluemper NS, Dalenberg C. Is the dissociative adult  suggestible? A test of the trauma and fantasy models 
of dissociation. J Trauma Dissociation . 2014; 15(4):457-76.
Lane, C., Johnson, S., Rollnick, S., Edwards, K., & Lyons, M. (2003). Consulting about lifestyle change: 
evaluation of
 a training  course for specialist diabetes nurses. Pract Diabetes Int., 20(6), 204-8. 
57. 
Lanska, D. J., Schmitt, F.  A., Stewart, J. M., & Howe, J. N. (1993). Telephone-assessed mental state. 
Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders , 4(2), 117-119.
Lisak, D., & Luster, L. (1994). Educational, occupational and  relationship histories of men who were 
sexually and/or physically abused as children.  Journal of Traumatic Stress, 7(4), 507-23. 
Lutgendorf, S. K., & Antoni, M. H. Emotional and cognitive processing in a trauma disclosure paradigm. 
Cognitive Therapy and Research. 1999; 23(4):423-40. 
Maniglio, R. (2009).
 The impact of child  sexual abuse on health: A systematic review of reviews. 
Clinical Psychology Review, 29(7), 647-657. 
Mansfield AK,
 Addis  ME, Courtenay W. Measurement of men’s help seeking: development and evaluation 
of the barriers to help seeking scale.  Psycho Men Masculinity. 2005; 6(2):95-108.
Martino S, Ball SA, Nich C, Frankforter TL, Carroll KM. Community program  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_121384]. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2008;96(1-2):37-48. 
Martino S, Canning-Ball M, Carroll KM, Rounsaville BJ. A criterion-based  stepwise approach for training 
counselors in motivational interviewing.  Journal of Substance Abuse Treat ment 2011;40(4):357-65. 
Mclaughlin, K. A., Hatzenbuehler, M. L., Xuan, Z., & Conron,  K.J. (2012). Disproportionate exposure to 
early-life adversity and sexual orientation disparities in psychiatric morbidity. Child Abuse & 
Neglect, 36(9), 645-55. 
McLaughlin, R. J., Fasser,  C. E., Spence, L. R., & Holcomb, J. D. (2010). Development and 
implementation of a health behavioral counseling curriculum for  physician assistant cancer 
education. Journal of Cancer Education, 25(1), 9-15.
McLellan, A. T., Luborsky, L., O’Brien, C. P., & Woody, G. E. (1980). An improved  diagnostic instrument 
for substance abuse patients: The  Addiction Severity Index. Journal of Nervous & Mental Disease, 
168(1), 26-33. 
Meyer, I. H. (2003). Prejudice, social stress, and mental health in lesbian, gay, and bisexual populations: 
conceptual issues and
 research  evidence. Psychological Bulletin, 129(5), 674-97. 
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2013). Motivational interviewing: Helpi[INVESTIGATOR_9984] (3rd ed.). 
[LOCATION_001], NY: Guilford Press.
Miller, 
W. R., & Rose, G. S. (2009). Toward a theory of motivational interviewing. American Psychologist, 
64
(6), 527-37.
Molnar, B. E., Buka,  S. L., & Kessler, R. C. (2001). Child sexual abuse and subsequent psychopathology: 
results from the National Comorbidity  Survey. American Journal of Public Health, 91(5), 753-760.
Murphy, R. T., & Rosen, C. S. (2006). Addressing readiness to change PTSD with a  brief intervention. 
Journal of Aggression, Maltreatment, & Trauma , 12(1-2), 7-28.
Norcini Pala A, Dell'Amore F, Steca P, Clinton  L, Sandfort T, Rael C. Validation of the Minority Stress 
Scale among Italian gay and bisexual  men. Psychology of Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity. 
2017; 4(4): 451-459. 
Osilla, K. C., D'Amico, E. J., Díaz-Fuentes, C. M., Lara, M., & Watkins, K. E. (2012).  Multicultural web-
based motivational interviewing for clients with first time DUI offense. Cultural Diversity and 
Ethnic Minority Psychology, 18(2),192-202.
Paras, M. L., Murad, M. H., Chen, L. P., Goranson, E. N., Sattler, A. L., Colbenson, K. M., …Zirakzadeh, 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/202127A. (2009). Sexual abuse and lifetime diagnosis of somatic disorders: A systematic  review and meta-
analysis. JAMA, 302(5), 550-61. Doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.1091
Parent MC, Moradi B.  An abbreviated tool for assessing conformity to masculine norms: psychometric 
properties of the Conformity to Masculine Norms Inventory-46. Psycho Men Masculinity. 2009; 
12(4):339-353.
Posner, K., Brown, G. K., Stanley, B., Brent, D. A., Yershova, K. V., Oquendo, M. A., ... & Mann, J. J. 
(2011). The Columbia–Suicide Severity Rating Scale: initial validity and internal consistency 
findings from three multisite studies with adolescents and 
adults. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
168(12), 1266-1277.
Radloff, L. S. (1977). The CES-D Scale: a self-report depression scale for research in the general 
population. Applied Psychological Measurement, 1, 385-401. 
Resilience Research Centre. (2018). CYRM and ARM user manual. Halifax, NS: Resilience Research 
Centre, Dalhousie
 University. Retrieved from http://www.resilienceresearch.org/ 
Rodriguez P, Holowka DW, Marx BP.
 Assessment of  posttraumatic stress disorder-related functional 
impairment: A review. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2012; 49(5):649-65. 
Rosenheck, R. A., Leslie, D., Sint, K., Lin, H., Robinson,  D. G., Schooler, N. R., …Kane, J. M. (2016). 
Cost-effectiveness of comprehensive, integrated care for first epi[INVESTIGATOR_121385]. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 42(2), 896–906.
Rothman, E. F., Stuart, G. L., Greenbaum,  P. E., Heeren, T., Bowen, D. J., Vinci, R., Baughman, A. L., & 
Bernstein, J. (2011). Drinking style and dating violence in a sample of urban, alcohol-using youth. 
Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs,
 72 (4), 555-66.
Rubak, S., Sandbaek, A., Lauritzen,  T., & Christensen, B. (2005). Motivational interviewing: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. British Journal of General Practice, 55(513), 305-312.
Safe Schools
 Coalition.  (2008). Safe Schools Coalition Annual Report. Retrieved from  
http://www.safeschoolscoalition.org/sitemap.html
Sheehan, D. V., Lecrubier, Y., Sheehan, K. H. Amorim,  P., Janavs, J., Weiller, E., …Dunbar, G. C. (1998). 
The mini-international neuropsychiatric  interview (M.I.N.I.): the development and validation of a 
structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM-IV and ICD-10. J Clin Psychiatry, 59, 22-33. 
Soderlund, L. L., Madson, M. B.,  Rubak, S., & Nilsen, P. (2011). A systematic review of motivational 
interviewing training for general health care practitioners. Patient Counselling and Health 
Education, 84
(1), 16-26.
Seal, K. H., Abadjian, L., McCamish,  N., Shi, Y., Tarasovsky, G., & Weingardt, K. (2012). A randomized 
controlled trial of telephone motivational interviewing to enhance  mental health treatment 
engagement in Iraq and Afghanistan  veterans. General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_33595], 34, 450-59. 
Smith C. P., Cunningham, S. A., & Freyd,  J. J. (2016). Sexual violence, institutional betrayal, and 
psychological outcomes for LGB college students. Translational Issues in Psychological Science, 
2(4), 351-360. 
Syzdek, M. R., Green, J. D., Lindgren, B. R., & Addis, M. E. (2016). Pi[INVESTIGATOR_121386]-based 
motivational interviewing for increasing mental health service use in
 college  men. Psychotherapy, 
53(1), 124-129. 
Taylor, S., Landry, C., Paluszek, M.,  Fergus, T. A., McKay, D., & Asmundson, G. J. (2020). Development 
and initial validation of the COVID  Stress Scales. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 102232.
Tsai, J., Klee, A., Shea, N., Lawless, M., Payne, K. A., Goggin, E., …Martino, S. (2017). Training peer 
specialists with mental  illness in motivational interviewing: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation Journal, 40(4), 354-360.
Watson, L., & Andrews, L. (2017). The effect of a trauma  risk management (TRiM) program on stigma and 
barriers to help-seeking in the police. International Journal of Stress Management, 25 (4), 348-356. 
Weathers, F. W., Litz, B. T., Keane, T. M., Palmieri, T., Marx, B. P., & Schnurr, P. P. (2013). The PTSD 
Checklist for DSM-5 (PCL-5). Scale available from the National Center for PTSD at 
www.ptsd.va.gov
.
Webber, K. H., Tate, D. F., Quintiliani, L. M. (2008). Motivational interviewing in internet groups: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_121387] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/202128study for weight loss. J Am Diet Assoc , 108(6),1029-32.
West, D.
 H., Harvey, J. R., Krukowski, R. A., Prewitt, T. E., Priest, J., & Ashikaga, T. (2016). Do 
individual online motivational interviewing
 chat sessions enhance weight loss in a group online  
weight control program? Obesity, 24(11), 2234-2340.
Westra, H. A., Aviram, A., & Doell, F. K. (2011). Extending motivational interviewing to the treatment of 
major 
mental health problems: Current directions and evidence. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 
56(11): 643-650. Doi: 10.1177/[ADDRESS_136143] Working  Group. (2002). The Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test 
(ASSIST): development, reliability and feasibility. Addiction, 97(9), 1183-1194.
Williams, J.
 K., Kisler, K. A., Glover, D., & Sciolla,  A. (2011). Exploring childhood sexual experiences 
and vulnerability to intimate partner violence among African American MSMW: Was that abuse  or 
love? [LOCATION_001]: Nova Science Publishers.
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 5/18/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 2/20/2020Yale University
Page 1 of 4Research Study Summary:
We are asking you to join a  research study. The purpose of this research study is to examine how 
different types of online peer support can help male survivors reduce their emotional struggles. 
In addition, we are interested in seeing if the interventions we are testing can be effectively 
delivered by [CONTACT_121432], such as yourself. Study activities will include co-leading at least 
two online discussion groups for male
 survivors of sexual assault, which occur for [ADDRESS_136144] of this document. Ask the study staff  questions about 
anything you do not understand. Once you understand the  study, we will ask you if you wish to 
participate; if so, you will have to sign this form.
Verbal/Online Informed Consent Script for Participation  in a Research Study
HSC # [PHONE_2768]
Hi, my name [CONTACT_78919]. Joan Cook and I am a psychologist and an  associate professor from Yale 
University. I am conducting a research study to examine how different types of online peer 
support can help male survivors cope with trauma-related emotional struggles and feel more 
comfortable seeking help for related issues. In addition, our study team is interested in seeing if 
the interventions we are testing can be effectively delivered by [CONTACT_121432], such as yourself.
Participation in this study will involve co-leading  at least two online discussion groups for male 
survivors of sexual assault, which occur for [ADDRESS_136145] about your experience. As a peer moderator, you will also be asked to 
participate in one hour of weekly supervision per week with two psychologists. Your 
involvement will require approximately 20 hours over the course of each group cycle. While we 
cannot compensate you on at an hourly rate you will receive $180.00 for each group you co-
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 2/20/2020
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 2/20/2020Yale University
Page 2 of 4facilitate. Specifically, you will receive $60.[ADDRESS_136146] group session and another 
$60.00 at the end of the sixth group session you co-facilitate.  You will receive an additional 
$60.00 at the completion of the end of the 8th supervision session. This makes the total 
compensation for co-facilitating a group $180.00 per group. According to the rules of the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), payments that are made to you as a result of your participation 
in a study may be considered taxable income. Payment for co-facilitating groups and your 
participation in supervision will be in the form of a check, mailed directly to you at the address 
you provide to the research staff. Alternatively, you may request your payment in the form of an 
electronic gift card, which will be e-mailed to you. 
We hope to enroll [ADDRESS_136147] 
three years of the study only.
You will also be asked to  participate in either an in-person or online (previously recorded) 
training for the intervention for which you will be co-leading. If attending in person your travel 
arrangements will be paid for and made by [CONTACT_74009], in compliance with Yale’s travel 
policies and those of the funder, to host you in New Haven, CT. Lodging and per diem expenses 
will also be covered by [CONTACT_121429] 3 days. In addition as a token of our appreciation you 
will be compensated $100.00 per day (maximum 3 days) for your attendance in the training. 
Attendance at the in person training  requires your agreement to be video recorded. The in-person 
training will be video recorded for distribution to those who are unable to attend in person. The 
video will focus primarily on the trainers, however it is possible that you will also appear in the 
video. A professional videographer from the company, CinemaSmith, will record the training 
and edit the footage to remove images of attendees other than the trainers (such as yourself) as 
best as possible.  The videographer and video editor from CinemaSmith will complete a 
confidentiality agreement prior to the tapi[INVESTIGATOR_121388]. While we cannot guarantee that your 
image will not appear in the video, we will do everything we can to blur your face. The video 
recording will only be shared with other potential peer moderators, such as yourself, and will be 
password protected. Raw footage from the training will be deleted within [ADDRESS_136148]. 
There are no known or anticipated risks associated with this study.  However, some questions 
may 
make you uncomfortable and there is the possible risk of loss of confidentiality.  Every 
effort will be made to keep your information confidential; however, this cannot be guaranteed. 
You may withdraw your consent for participation in this research study at any time by [CONTACT_121433]:
[INVESTIGATOR_121389], Ph.D.
Yale University
Department of Psychiatry
[ADDRESS_136149] [ZIP_CODE]
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 2/20/2020
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 2/20/2020Yale University
Page [ADDRESS_136150] you are contributing towards the care, treatment and 
well-being of countless numbers of men (and women) who have experienced sexual abuse or 
assault across their lifespan. In addition, participation contributes towards the advancement of 
behavioral science and may benefit those who experience sexual assault at some time in the 
future.
Participation in this research study requires your permission to  be audio-recorded. Your name [CONTACT_121449]-file, which will be transcribed by a 
professional transcriptionist. Audio recordings will be used to measure adherence to the content 
of the group treatment. By [CONTACT_121434]- recording of the 
group intervention sessions.  The audio recordings will be sent outside of Yale for transcription. 
A confidentiality agreement will be executed with the transcription company prior to transfer of 
any files. The transcriptionist will de-identify and names (including nicknames) recorded in the 
audio file with the pseudonym “Moderator” and “Participant”. To delineate between the persons 
the transcriptionist will label each individual with a number e.g. “Participant 1” or “Participant 
5”. Audio files will be sent to the professional transcriptionist within one week of the completed 
recordings. Audio files will be destroyed as soon as the transcribed files are received back from 
the professional transcriptionist and reviewed by [CONTACT_121415]. 
The review of the transcribed files will occur within one week of receiving the files from the 
transcriptionist.
All of your responses will be held in confidence.  Only the researchers involved in this study and 
those responsible for research
 oversight (such as representatives of the Yale University Human 
Research Protection Program, and the Yale University Human Subjects Committee, and offices 
responsible for fiscal monitoring) will have access to any information that could identify that you 
provide. We will ask you to identify yourself in groups using a nickname [CONTACT_121450] 
(not to include surname/last name). We will use a coding system to randomly assign a number 
associated with any information we get from you. Only the investigative team (Drs. Cook Amy 
Ellis, and Vanessa Simiola and their project coordinator) will have access to the key. This means 
that identifiable data such as your name, telephone number and e-mail address will be shared 
amongst the investigative staff. Drs. Ellis and Simiola are not affiliated with Yale University. 
They will conduct portions of this research study including the screening interview and post-
intervention telephone interview from their respective organizations. Drs. Ellis and Simiola are 
associated Nova Southeastern University and Kaiser Permanente, Hawaii, respectively. Any 
exchange of protected health information (such as your name, telephone number, or e-mail 
address) or coded data will take place behind the Yale firewall using a secure file transfer 
program. Identifiable data (including the code key) will be destroyed as soon as permitted by 
[CONTACT_2371].  All information will be stored on a password protected and encrypted computer. 
This research is covered by a Certificate  of Confidentiality from the National Institutes of 
Health. The We are applying for a Certificate of Confidentiality from the National Institutes of 
Health. Once it is obtained, the researchers with this Certificate, may not disclose or use 
information, documents, or biospecimens that may identify you in any federal, state, or local 
civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other action, suit, or proceeding, or be used as 
evidence, for example, if there is a court subpoena, unless you have consented for this use. 
Information, documents, or biospecimens protected by [CONTACT_121435] 2/20/2020
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 2/20/2020Yale University
Page 4 of 4anyone else who is not connected with the research except, if there  is a federal, state, or local law 
that requires disclosure (such as to report child abuse or communicable diseases but not for 
federal, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other proceedings); if you 
have consented to the disclosure, including for your medical treatment; or if it is used for other 
scientific research, as allowed by [CONTACT_92452]. The Certificate 
of Confidentiality will not be used to prevent disclosure as required by [CONTACT_1032], state, or local law 
of child abuse and neglect, elder abuse or neglect, or harm to self or others.
Please remember that while we (the researchers) will keep your information confidential and will 
remind all participants
 that what is said in the group should not be repeated outside of the group, 
we have no control over what happens outside of the group. You are reminded to not share 
anything you would not want repeated outside of this group. Also, as a peer moderator your are 
agreeing not to repeat anything you hear during the group outside of the group, with the 
following exceptions:
1. Study related supervision with designated supervisors
2.
If a group participant reports significant emotional distress, passive or active suicidal 
ideation thoughts
 of hurting someone else during the study protocol you will alert the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_121377] e-mail within [ADDRESS_136151] [ZIP_CODE] or via phone at ([PHONE_2769]. 
If you would like to talk with someone other than the researchers to discuss problems or 
concerns, to discuss situations in the event
 that a member of the research team is not available, or 
to discuss your rights as a research participant, you may contact [CONTACT_121436], [PHONE_2770], [EMAIL_2429]. Additional information is 
available at https://your.yale.edu/research-support/human-research/research-participants/rights-
research-participant
By [CONTACT_18943] “accept” below, you are agreeing to participate in this study.
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 2/20/2020
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 2/7/2021Yale University 
Page [ADDRESS_136152]  
200 FR 2 (2017-1)
Study Title: Peer Online  Motivational Interviewing for Sexual and Gender Minority Male Survivors
Investigator: Joan M. Cook, Ph.D.
Funding Source: Patient Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI)
HSC #: [PHONE_2768]
Research Study Summary:
We are asking you to join a  research study. The purpose of this research study is to examine how different types 
of online peer support can help male survivors reduce their emotional struggles. Study activities will include a 
confidential phone interview with a member
 of the study team asking questions about your emotional well-
being, completion of several online questionnaires, and participation in one of two online discussion groups, led 
by [CONTACT_121432] (men who have had similar lived experiences as you). Your involvement will require 30-[ADDRESS_136153] of this document. Please ask the study staff 
questions about anything you do not understand. Once you understand the study, we will ask you if you wish to  
participate; if so, you will have to sign this form.
Purpose:
You are invited to participate in a research  study designed to examine how different types of online peer support 
can help male survivors reduce their emotional struggles and feel more comfortable seeking help for issues 
related to their emotional health. You have been asked to take part because you are: a) 18 years of age or older; 
b) English-speaking; c) reporting a history of sexual abuse or assault at some point in your lifetime; d) identify 
as male; e) identify as at least one of the following: gay, bisexual, transgender, attracted to men, or have sex 
with men; f) experiencing emotional distress; and g) have not received any psychotherapy or formal mental 
health counseling in the past [ADDRESS_136154] approximately 3 years. 
Procedures:
If you agree to take part in this study, your participation will involve a confidential phone interview with a 
member of
 the study team asking questions about your emotional well-being, and completion of several online 
questionnaires to determine eligibility for the study. Participation in the study will involve completion of a 6-
week peer-led online group and follow-up questionnaires. The questionnaires and interview will ask you basic 
demographic questions about your age, ethnicity, gender identification, and sexual orientation identification. 
We will also ask you more personal questions about the nature of your sexual abuse and a few short questions 
asking symptoms of anxiety, depression, and posttraumatic stress. You’ll also be asked to complete some 
questionnaires (all online) that ask about different emotional health symptoms you may be experiencing. 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 2/7/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 2/7/2021Yale University 
Page 2 of 5After completion of the questionnaires, you will be randomly assigned  to participate in either of two online 
discussion groups. Both groups will be led by [CONTACT_121432] (men who have had similar lived experiences as 
you). The groups will last for 1.5 hours and meet weekly, online, for 6 consecutive weeks.
At the end of the 6-week  group, and at two other times (two and four months post-group) we’ll again ask you to 
complete online questionnaires about your emotional well-being. Finally, we will ask a small subset of 
participants (60 people) to complete a telephone interview following the completion of the treatment to get your 
feedback about the treatment as well as preferences for potential future mental health treatment.
We anticipate that your involvement in the entire study will require approximately 15-20 hours  of your time 
spread across approximately 6 months.  You will receive $[ADDRESS_136155] of questionnaires you 
complete (before the start of the treatment, immediately following the end of the 6-week treatment, at two 
months follow-up, and at four months follow-up) for a total possible amount of $80. If you participate in the 
final telephone interview you will receive an additional $30. 
Participation in this research study requires your permission to  be audio-recorded. Your name [CONTACT_121451]. Audio-recordings will be used to measure the peer 
moderators’ adherence to the interventions well as to provide us more detailed data on the therapeutic process 
(e.g., what interventions have the most positive impact and which do not). By [CONTACT_121437]-recording of the intervention sessions. The audio-recordings will be sent outside of Yale for 
transcription. A confidentiality agreement will be executed with the transcription company prior to transfer of 
any files. The transcriptionist will de-identify and names (including nicknames) recorded in the audio-file with 
the pseudonym “Moderator” and “Participant”. To delineate between the persons the transcriptionist will label 
each individual with a number e.g. “Participant 1” or “Participant 5”.  Audio-files will be sent to the professional 
transcriptionist within one week of the completed recordings. Audio-files will be destroyed as soon as the 
transcribed files are received back from the professional transcriptionist and reviewed by [CONTACT_121438]. The review of the transcribed files will occur within one week of receiving the files 
from the transcriptionist.
A description of this research study is available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. 
This Web site will not include information that can identify you. At most, the Web site will include a summary 
of the results. You can search this Web site at any time.
Risks and Benefits:
There are no known or anticipated risks associated with this study.  However, some questions may make you 
uncomfortable 
and it is possible that you may become upset or experience increased anxiety talking about some 
of these difficult past personal experiences. There is also the possible risk of loss of confidentiality.  Every 
effort will be made to keep your information confidential; however, this cannot be guaranteed. If you are 
deemed to be at high risk of suicide during the confidential phone interview with a member of the study team, 
one of the licensed clinical psychologists on the study team will follow up with you via a separate phone call to 
determine your risk and to provide you with tailored resources and referrals for immediate help.  You may 
withdraw your consent for participation in this research study at any time by [CONTACT_121439]:
[INVESTIGATOR_121389], Ph.D.
Yale University
Department of Psychiatry
[ADDRESS_136156]
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 2/7/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 2/7/2021Yale University 
Page [ADDRESS_136157] [ZIP_CODE]
[EMAIL_2430]
By 
[CONTACT_121440], treatment and well-being of 
countless numbers of men (and women) who have experienced sexual abuse or assault across their lifespan. In 
addition, participation contributes towards the advancement of behavioral science and may benefit those who 
experience sexual assault at some time in the future.
Confidentiality:
All of your responses will be held in confidence.  Only the researchers involved in this study and those  
responsible for research oversight (such as representatives of the Yale University Human Research Protection 
Program, and the Yale University Human Subjects Committee, and offices responsible for fiscal monitoring) 
will have access to any information that could identify you. We will ask you to identify yourself in groups using 
a nickname [CONTACT_121450] (not to include surname/last name). We will use a coding system to 
randomly assign a number associated with any information we get from you. Only the investigative team ([CONTACT_121460], [CONTACT_121458], [CONTACT_121461] and the project coordinator) will have access to the key. This means 
that identifiable data such as your name, telephone number and e-mail address will be shared amongst the 
investigative staff. Drs. Ellis and Simiola are not affiliated with Yale University. They will conduct portions of 
this research study including the screening interview and post-intervention telephone interview from their 
respective organizations. Drs. Ellis and Simiola are associated with Nova Southeastern University and Kaiser 
Permanente, Hawaii, respectively. Any exchange of protected health information (such as your name, telephone 
number, or e-mail address) or coded data will take place behind the Yale firewall using a secure file transfer 
program. Identifiable data (including the code key) will be destroyed as soon as permitted by [CONTACT_2371]. All 
information will be stored on a password protected and encrypted computer. 
Please remember that while we (the researchers) will keep your information confidential and will remind all 
participants that what is said in the group
 should not be repeated outside of the group, we have no control over 
what happens outside of the intervention groups. You are reminded to not share anything you would not want 
repeated outside of this group. Although all participants in the group must agree to not disclose any of the 
information discussed within the group, ultimately, we cannot guarantee that all participants will maintain this 
confidentiality. You must be aware that there is the possibility that personal information may be discussed 
outside of the confines of the study.
This research is covered by a Certificate  of Confidentiality from the National Institutes of Health. The 
researchers with this Certificate may not disclose or use information, documents, or biospecimens that may 
identify you in any federal, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other action, suit, or 
proceeding, or be used as evidence, for example, if there is a court subpoena, unless you have consented for this 
use. Information, documents, or biospecimens protected by [CONTACT_121441], if there is a federal, state, or local law that requires disclosure 
(such as to report child abuse or communicable diseases but not for federal, state, or local civil, criminal, 
administrative, legislative, or other proceedings); if you have consented to the disclosure, including for your 
medical treatment; or if it is used for other scientific research, as allowed by [CONTACT_55824]. The Certificate of Confidentiality will not be used to prevent disclosure as required by 
[CONTACT_1032], state, or local law of child abuse and neglect, elder abuse or neglect, or harm to self or others.
Note, however, that your records may be  reviewed by [CONTACT_121442], Yale University Human Subjects Committee or 
representatives of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services or the sponsor (Patient Centered 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 2/7/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 2/7/2021Yale University 
Page 4 of 5Outcomes Research Institute). The information about your health that will be collected in this study includes: 
Name, date of birth, telephone number, and e-mail address. We will also collect information about your emotional 
health and well-being.
Information may be re-disclosed if the recipi[INVESTIGATOR_121390].  At the conclusions of this study, any identifying information related to your research participation 
will be destroyed, rendering the data anonymous. 
By [CONTACT_3368], you authorize the use and/or disclosure of the information described above for this 
research study.  The purpose for
 the uses and disclosures you are authorizing is to ensure that the information 
relating to this research is available to all parties who may need it for research purposes.
This authorization to use and disclose your health information collected during your participation in this study 
will never expi[INVESTIGATOR_1312].
Voluntary Participation:
Your participation in this study is voluntary.  You are free  to decline to participate, to end your participation at 
any time for any reason, or to refuse to answer any individual question without penalty. Your decision whether 
to participate or not will have no effect on your relationship with Yale University or MaleSurvivor.
 
You may withdraw or take away your permission to use and  disclose your health information at any time.
 
If you are assigned to a peer-led online group, you may stop your participation in the group  at any time. You 
can do this by [CONTACT_121443]. If you stop your participation in groups, you 
will be asked to complete the remaining study assessments, but again, this is voluntary, and you will not be 
penalized for declining.
 
You may also withdraw your permission to be in this study by [CONTACT_121444]. If you withdraw your 
permission, 
you will not be able to participate in this study. When you withdraw your permission, no new health 
information identifying you will be gathered after that date.  Information that has already been gathered may 
still be used and given to others until the end of the research study, as necessary to insure the integrity of the 
study and/or study oversight. 
Questions:
If you have any questions about this study, you may contact [CONTACT_458], Joan Cook, Ph.D., Yale 
University, Department of 
Psychiatry, [ADDRESS_136158] [ZIP_CODE], via phone at (203) 
856-2782 or email our study team at [EMAIL_2430]. 
If, after you have signed this form, you have any questions  about your privacy rights, please contact [CONTACT_121445] [PHONE_2771].
If you would like to talk with someone other than the researchers to discuss problems or concerns, to discuss 
situations in the event that a member
 of the research team is not available, or to discuss your rights as a research 
participant, you may contact [CONTACT_121446], [PHONE_2770], 
[EMAIL_2429]. Additional information is available at http://your.yale.edu/research-support/human-
research/research-participants
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 2/7/2021
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 2/7/2021Yale University 
Page 5 of 5Agreement to Participate:
I have read the above information, have had the opportunity to have any questions about this study answered 
and agree
 to participate in this study.
By [CONTACT_31300], you are agreeing to participate in this study.
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_20891] 2/7/[ADDRESS_136159] estimators were used to address non-normal data.  
Variables were assessed for amount and pattern of missing data. Full information maximum 
likelihood estimation was used in subsequent analyses to address missingness. Inclusion of informative 
variables were included as needed. Analyses were conducted in SP SS 28.0 (IBM, 2021). For outcome 
analyses, linear mixed models  (LMM) of mental health symptoms were modeled as a repeated measures 
outcome variable, nested within participants. Baseline demographic, clinical variables, and sexual abuse 
experiences were included as time-invariant covariates (between participants), as was treatment group. 
Thus, for each outcome, the primary analysis included all observations nested in persons and cohorts, controlling for baseline clinical and demographic variables .  
Before examining the potential role of any mediators, LMM was conducted to determine any 
main or interaction effects condition and/or time may have had on these mediators as outcomes. To 
assess heterogeneity of treatment effects, the potential moderating impact that participant demographic 
variables and significantly correlated cov ariates had on the relationship between condition and primary 
outcomes was examined by [INVESTIGATOR_3086] a moderator x condition interaction term in models.  
Inclusion of demographic and clinical variables in mixed models allowed for testing of 
heterogeneity of treatment effects (HTE), with adjusted  p-values. Specifically, in addition to the primary 
analyses, subsequent supplementary analyses tested potential moderators by [INVESTIGATOR_3086] a treatment group 
X demographic interaction (race, comorbidity, and education) as these are the most likely candidates for 
HTE effects. Potential moderating effects of baseline values of minority stress, conformity to masculine 
norms and barriers to help seeking were also examined using SPSS PROCESS, which provides 
estimates of conditional effects of focal predictor (treatment condition) at different values of the 
moderator.  
 