Time Restricted Eating Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] – Bariatric s 
NCT0400636 [ADDRESS_1137251] -bariatric surgery patients who are interested in losing or 
stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_820537]. They would participate in weekly sessions for 4 week s, followed by 
[CONTACT_820538] 8 weeks, for a total of 8 sessions/[ADDRESS_1137252] the effects of a 10 -hour time restricted eating intervention before and after the 12 weeks of 
treatment on weight (primary ), caloric and macronutritent intake, and a variety of psychosocial 
measures, including sleep, physical activity, blood pressure and eating behaviors (all secondary).  
Primary outcome variable(s)  
Aim 1: (Primary Outcome): To compare changes in body weight over [ADDRESS_1137253] completed the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  
 
Hypothesis: Participants will achieve weight reduction at 12 weeks.  
Secondary outcome variable(s)  
Aim 2: (Secondary Outcomes): To compare chan ges before and after the 12 -week intervention in 
caloric and macronutrient intake, eating behavior, sleep behavior, physical activity, psychosocial 
outcomes, and metabolic disease risk factors.  
 
Hypothesis: Participants will report lower caloric intake, mo re favorable changes in macronutrient 
intake and eating behavior, more positive changes in sleep quality, participate in more physical 
activity, and experience more favorable improvements in relevant psychosocial variables at 
treatment end as compared to b aseline.  
  
Background  
Bariatric surgery is an increasingly utilized treatment for persons with a body mass index (BMI) 40 
kg/m2 or 35 kg/m2 in the presence of obesity -related comorbidities . Early results tend to be good, 
with most patients losing 20 -35% of their weight in the first 6 -24 months after surgery and 
experiencing improvements in obesity -related comorbidities. These outcomes, however, are not 
universal and vary between patients an d across surgical procedures. It is estimated that 20 -30% of 
patients experience significant weight regain within the first few postoperative years. Individuals 
from minority groups appear to be at increased risk for these outcomes. Among individuals who 
underwent Roux -en-Y gastric by[CONTACT_6476] (GB), for example, non -Hispanic black and Hispanic patients 
experienced smaller weight losses than their non -Hispanic white counterparts. Reasons for these 
suboptimal outcomes are not fully understood, but likely involve b oth physiological processes and 
behavioral factors (e.g., failure to make sustained dietary and physical activity changes necessary 
for weight maintenance). Evidence suggests that preoperative psychosocial status and functioning 
can contribute to suboptima l weight losses and/or postoperative psychosocial distress. Much of the 
work in this area has focused on formal psychopathology with particular emphasis on mood 
disorders as well as binge eating disorder (BED). Individuals who present for bariatric surgery  also 
have high lifetime rates of substance use disorders. Some studies have suggested that the presence 
of preoperative psychopathology is associated with suboptimal weight losses and less positive 
psychosocial outcomes.  
 
Participants would be invited to volunteer from our ongoing, lonigitudinal assessment study of 300 
bariatric surgery patients (Psychopathology, Disordered Eating, and Impulsivity as Predictors of 
Outcomes of Bariatric Surgery, Protocol #823735), 65% of whom come from underserved groups. 
At Penn Medicine's Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery Program, patients undergo a mental health 
evaluation and are educated about the dietary and behavioral changes required for success prior to 
surgery. Postoperatively, they are encouraged to return to the ba riatric program for annual follow -
up visits, attend support groups, and continue with ongoing care from their primary physicians. 
Unfortunately, these strategies appear to be insufficient in providing many patients with the dietary 
and behavioral instructi on as well as the social support needed for sustained success. Weight regain 
threatens the health benefits achieved with bariatric surgery and there is great need for the 
development of postoperative interventions to promote long term success following bar iatric 
surgery.  
 
Time restricted feeding is emerging as one such approach that may help individuals lose weight 
and improve metabolic functioning. There are several forms of this approach, but emerging from 
the pack is promoting an 8 -10 hour eating window.  This is in comparison to an adult's average 
eating window, which typi[INVESTIGATOR_437773] [ADDRESS_1137254] -bariatric surgery patients who are interested in losing or 
stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_820537]. They would participate in weekly sessions for 4 weeks, followed by 
[CONTACT_820538] 8 weeks, for a total of 8 sessions. Weights will be 
monitored at  each meeting. Participants will complete an ASA24 food recall weekly to calculate 
caloric intake and times of eating. They will complete a daily query to report the number of hours 
they ate within for the previous day throughout the intervention.  
  
Study  Design  
Phase*  
 Not applicable   
  
 
Design  
Non-controlled, single arm intervention study  
Study duration  
 Estimated length of time to enroll all subjects and complete the study  
 Length of a subject's participation time in study  
 Project date of the proposed study  
The study should last [ADDRESS_1137255]. Allison's postdoctoral fellow, will also be trained to deliv er the 
intervention as a back -up interventionist. This will be adequate staffing to complete this brief trial.  
  
Analysis Plan  
 
We will use paired t -test analysis to compare the change in weight, blood pressure, calorie 
and macronutrient intake, and the change in the survey measures before and after the 
intervention.  
 
 