 
 
 
  
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
Modulation of the Intestinal Microbiome by a High 
Protein Diet  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document date : April 5, 2018   
STUDY PROTOCOL: Modulation of the Intestinal Microbiome by a 
High Protein Diet  
 
A. Design of randomized, controlled study comparing high and normal protein isocaloric 
calorie restriction diets for obesity.  
 
Rationale and h ypothesis : Based on my preclinical rodent model data, I hypothesize that a high 
protein diet will shift the composition of  the microbiome of obese subjects , including increased 
Akkermansia , and that this will be associated with alterations of the metagenome (bacterial 
genes)  and metabolome . 
Study design:  This hypothesis will be investigated in  a randomized controlled study of the 
intestinal microbiome of  an estimated 216 obese Veterans  assigned 1:1 to isocaloric high 
protein (HPD) or normal protein (NPD) diets. The study will be advertised by [CONTACT_102219] f lyers in the 
West Los Angeles VA Medic al Center MOVE obesity clinic. MOVE physicians will provide 
interested patients with information about the study. P articipants will undergo an initial screening 
visit in the clinical research unit after their MOVE appointment or on a later date. Once enrolled, 
participants  will return to the clin ical research unit for a  baseline visit and follow -up visits on 
weeks 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, and [ADDRESS_1237199] 3 years of the study . 
Inclusion criteria:  Men and women between 20 and 75 years of age, BMI  27 to 40 kg/m2, non-
smoker or stable smoking habits for at least 6 months prior to screening and agree ment not to  
change such habits during the study ; subjects on non- obesity prescription medication may be 
included.              
Exclusion criteria : Weight change of > 3.0 kg in the month prior to screening, weight loss of > 10 
kg in the 6 months prior to screening , calorie restriction diet (< 1500 kcal/day) for a period of 4 
months or more in the 12 months prior to screening, u se of any other investigational drug(s) 
within 8 weeks prior to screening, abnormal baseline laboratory parameters (serum creatinine > 
1.6 mg/dl;  ALT, AST, total bilirubin > 2 .0 times the upper limit of normal; t riglycerides > 500 
mg/dl, total cholesterol > 350 mg/dl, TSH outside of normal range), consumption of  more than 1 
alcoholic beverage per day, pregnancy or intention to become pregnant.  
Consent : Veterans will be consented during their screening visit. They must sign the VA GLAHS 
Institution al Review Board -approved written informed consent prior to t he initiation of any study 
specific procedures or randomization.  
Enrollment  and r andomization:  Date of birth, sex, race, medi cal history, current medications, 
smoking and alcohol history will be obtained by [CONTACT_884298]. 
Eligible subjects will be  assigned an enrollment number after sig ning the informed consent form 
then will be randomized to one of two diet groups.  
Dietary intervention:  Participants  will be randomized to a HPD  (30% protein, 40% carbohydrate, 
30% fat) or a NPD (15% protein, 55% carbohydrate, 30% fat ) with matched fatty acid profiles 
and fiber content. The diet will be implemented in two phases: an initial macronutrient 
standardized diet without calorie restriction for [ADDRESS_1237200] their intake to 1500 c alories . Pea-based protein supplements will 
be provided to the HPD group to achieve the target of 30% calories from protein in the HPD 
group.   
Nutritional assessments:  Participants will complete a three -day food record (3DFR) and the 
Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ)  at every study visit to assess adherence to the prescribed 
macronutrient composition and calorie limit of the two dietary groups . The 3DFR consists of 
detailed documentation of food eaten on three days. FFQ is a self -administered, semi -
quantitative tool that queries the average frequency of consumption over the prior one month of 
a list of food items.  It will be modified to cover only [ADDRESS_1237201] other FFQs . The extensive nutrient composition database that 
supports the questionnaire allows estimations of the intake of macronutrients (e.g. fats), micronutrients (e.g. carotenoids), and specific food groups such as fruits, vegetables and grains.  
 
B. Measurement of clinical response to the dietary interventions.  
    
Primary and secondary endpoints : The primary clinical endpoint for response to dietary 
intervention will be weight loss. Secondary measures of clinical response will include change in 
fat mass, liver steatosis, lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], and HgbA1c.  
Clinical data collection:  The following parameters will be obtained on each of 7 study visits:  
baseline, week 2, week 4, week 6, week 8, week 12, and week 16.  
1) Physical examination: The study coordinator will measure height, weight, and waist/hip 
circumference.  
2) Bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA):  Electrodes attached to a BIA device will be 
placed on the wrists and ankles. A brief electrical current will be passed to measure resistance and reactance, which can be used to calculate lean body mass  and fat mass . 
One BIA device will  be dedicated to this study.  
3) Liver transient elastography (FibroScan): Hepatic steatosis and fibrosis will be evaluated 
by [CONTACT_331436], a non- invasive  test that can be performed in 5 minutes using 
equipment that will be available down the hall from the clinical research unit where study 
visits will occur. Steatosis will be assessed by [CONTACT_884299].  
4) Laboratory studies: Blood samples will be collected by [CONTACT_40196] 8- 14 hours of 
fasting. C omplete blood count , chemistry panel, lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805] (total cholesterol, LDL, HDL, 
triglycerides), and hemoglobin A1c (H gbA1c)  will be measured by [CONTACT_884300].  
Statistical analysis:  Patient c haracteristic s (physical measurements, lean body mass, 
laboratories, demographic traits) at baseline will be compared using a [ADDRESS_1237202] (for 
numerical variables) or chi -square test (for categorical variables) to evaluate the randomization. 
3DFR and FFQ performed at each time point  will be used to assess the predicted protein 
content of the patient’s diet compared to baseline to evaluate the success of the dietary intervention. The significance of differences between the two groups  in the primary and 
secondary outcome measures  will be assessed using a 2- sided t -test.  
 
C. Kinetic analysis of shifts in microbial composition in obese subjects (BMI 27 -40) on a 
high protein diet compared to an isocaloric normal protein diet.   
 
Fecal sam pling : Participants will be provided with kits for home sampling. The subjects will 
urinate first then defecate into the Fisherbrand Commode Specimen Collection System. 
Subjects will use a spoon to transfer freshly defecated feces to a Para- Pak stool collection cup 
prefilled with 95% ethanol to fix the samples, allowing storage at room temperature for up to 2 weeks . Ethanol -fixed and fresh frozen samples give comparable metagenomics results to 
samples stored in preservatives such as RNALater while minimizing subjects’ risk of exposure 
to toxic chemicals. The remaining feces will be frozen. This involves removing the cup from the 
toilet hat, tightly closing the lid, and transferring the cup to a Ziploc bag for storage in the 
subject’s freezer. Frozen samples will delivered to the VA clinic during scheduled study visits 
using a Styrofoam box containing U -tek freezer packs designed to maintain a temperature of -
20°C as was performed for a recent study. Reminder calls will be made 4 days before each study visit. Subjects who forget to bring in samples will be asked to either bring them in at the 
next visit or send them via overnight FedEx delivery. Samples will be stored at - 80°C.  
Microbiome analysis : DNA will be extracted from fecal samples collected in ethanol at baseline, 
day 3, day 7, week 2, day 17 (3 days after calorie restriction) , day 21 (7 days after calorie 
restriction) , week 4, week 6, week 8, week 12, and week 16 using the M O BIO  Powersoil  kit. 
Sequencing of the 253 base pair V4 region of 16S ribosomal DNA will be performed using the 
Illumina HiSeq 2500 to a depth of 25 0,000 reads per sample. Microbial diversity  (alpha diversity)  
will be compared between the two dietary groups at each time point using the Chao1 index, 
Shannon index, and Faith’s phylogenetic diversity. Significance will be determined using a non-
parametric test (Mann- Whitney U) . Microbial composition (beta diversity) will be compared 
across all samples using weighted UniFrac ( a phylogenetic distance metric) and visualized by 
[CONTACT_884301]  (PCoA) . Significance of differences in composition at each time 
point will be determined using Adonis , a permutation- based method.  Baseline data will be 
analyzed to confirm that randomization had successfully eliminated pre- existing microbial 
differences between the two dietary groups.  
 Abundance of individual bacteria will then be fitt ed to multivariate model s using DESeq2 . 
This algorithm performs normalization using size factors estimated by [CONTACT_498361]- of-ratios 
method, employs an empi[INVESTIGATOR_884293], and fits the data to 
negative binomial models. Diet group, time point, interaction between diet and time point, 
baseline BMI, age, sex, and smoking status will be  covariates  in the model . Diet composition 
parameters derived from the nutritional instruments ( 3DFR, FFQ) may also be included. This 
model will be compared to a reduced model that does not include the diet:time point interaction. 
A likelihood ratio test will be used to identify microbes with differential abundance by [CONTACT_884302]. Estimates of significance will be adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing  to 
calculate q- values, which represents the false discovery rate.  Q-values less than 0.[ADDRESS_1237203] kinetic patterns of microbial change.  
 
D. Risk/benefit analysis 
 
1. RISKS TO SUBJECTS  
 
a. Human subjects involvement and characteristics  
Human subjects will be recruited from the MOVE Obesity Clinic at the West Los Angeles 
VA Medical Center within the VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System  (GLAHS) . 
They will be referred for study enrollment if they meet the inclusion criteria and do not 
meet any provisions of the exclusion criteria. The inclusion criteria include: men and 
women between 20 and 60 years of age, BMI 27 to 40 kg/m2, non -smoker or stable 
smoking habits for at least 6 months prior to screening and agreement not to change such habits during the study. The exclusion criteria include weight change of > 3.0 kg in 
the month prior to screening, weight loss of > 10 kg in the 6 months pri or to screening, 
calorie restriction diet (< 1500 kcal/day) for a period of 4 months or more in the 12 
months prior to screening, use of any other investigational drug(s) within 8 weeks prior to 
screening, abnormal baseline laboratory parameters (serum creatinine > 1.6 mg/dl; ALT, 
AST, total bilirubin > 2.0 times the upper limit of normal; triglycerides > 500 mg/dl, total 
cholesterol > 350 mg/dl, TSH outside of normal range), consumption of more than [ADDRESS_1237204] (IRB). All information will be retained 
electronically behind the VA’s electronic firewall except for regulatory documents and 
printed informed consent forms. All subjects will receive a unique researc h identifier 
number with the identities of the subjects retained only in a code key kept in a secure 
directory behind the firewall. Stool will be collected by [CONTACT_884303] 1 of 
the Research Plan. Demographic and medical data will be collected for all of the 
subjects according to the study protocol. Only the principal investigator (PI, Jacobs)  and 
study coordinator will have access to confidential patient information.  
c. Potential risks  
1. Venipuncture - There may be some discomfort associated with obtaining peripheral 
blood. Rarely, venipuncture may result in the development of a hematoma. Venipuncture will be performed by a certified phlebotomist in the VA’s Laboratory 
Medicine department.  
2. Stool collection - This will be done privately by [CONTACT_884304]. There are no risks 
associated with self -stool collection.  
3. Confidentiality - Aspects of the subjects’ medical history will be obtained by [CONTACT_71510]. All data will  be retained within the VA’s electronic firewall to ensure the 
greatest confidentiality.  
 
2. ADEQUACY OF PROTECTION AGAINST RISKS 
 
a. Recruitment and informed consent - Subjects will be recruited from patient populations 
being followed clinically at the VA’s MOVE Obesity Clinic. Ap proved fly ers will also be 
distributed. Inquiries by [CONTACT_884305]. Informed consent will be performed in a confidential and private manner. 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_884294] b e able to answer any questions or concerns by [CONTACT_884306]. Although most patients being seen at the VA speak fluent English, in the event that a translator is needed one will be 
provided.  
b. Protection against risks 
1. Venipuncture - Collection of blood at baseline and during the course of the study will 
be conducted by [CONTACT_884307]. Every effort will be made to minimize the number of times that 
venipuncture is performed. Following disinfection of the skin surface, standard 
venipuncture techniques will be performed using a [ADDRESS_1237205] ored either in the subjects’ freezers or at room temperature (after 
fixation with 95% ethanol ). Subjects will be warned not to consume the ethanol in the 
specimen cups. Samples will be returned in person to the study coordinator.  
3. Confidentiality - All stud y related data will be managed in a confidential manner. The 
Department of Veterans Affairs has instituted a secure server system with 256- bit 
encryption that requires the use of a Personal Identity Verification (PIV) card to 
access the secure server or co mputer systems. In addition, our IT department will 
create space on the server for the entry and management of secure patient data. 
Only the PI [INVESTIGATOR_1238] a study coordinator will have access to the secure data through their 
PIV cards . Each of these individuals have been certified by [CONTACT_41309]’s Research and 
Development Committee to access human data following the completion of 
mandatory training, including HIPAA training.  
 
3. POTENTIAL BENEFITS OF  RESEARCH TO HUMAN SUBJECTS AND OTHERS  
 The proposed research may directly benefit Veterans participating in the research by [CONTACT_884308] (normal or high 
in protein) that may result in weight loss. The study will benefit others by [CONTACT_884309] a high protein diet. This knowledge 
may result in new strategies to improve the effectiveness of dietary intervention for obesity and 
the development of novel microbial therapi[INVESTIGATOR_884295] y. 
    
4. IMPORTANCE OF KNOWLEDGE TO BE GAINED  
 
Obesity is a national health care crisis that is a critical issue for the VA as over three quarters of 
Veterans are overweight or obese. Strategies to help overweight and obese V eterans lose 
weight would decr ease their long-term morbidity and mortality and would save the health care 
system the costs of treating the  medical complications of obesity.  
  
E. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
 
a. Adverse events –  Patients will be monitored and questioned regarding the occurrence 
and nature of any adverse events . An adverse event is any change in the physiological 
or psychological state, other than the primary condition, that qualifies the patient for this 
study. Adverse events are first graded according to seriousness and then severity.  
Additionally, the PI  [INVESTIGATOR_884296]. A description of the event and its relationship to study product must be 
reported on the adverse events case report form for each adv erse event recorded in the 
patient's chart.  
b. Definition of serious adverse event –  A serious adverse event, as defined in Title 21 of 
the code of federal regulations, Part 312, subpart ID, Section 312.32, means any 
adverse experience occurring at any dose t hat results in any of the following outcomes: 
death, a life -threatening adverse drug experience, inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_8448], a persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or 
a congenital anomaly/birth defect.  Important medical events that may not result in death, 
be life -threatening, or require in- patient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3767] a serious 
adverse experience when, based on appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the subject and may require m edical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the 
outcomes listed in this definition. An adverse event is usually considered to be serious if 
severity for the event is graded as 3 (severe) or 4 (immediately life- threatening or fatal).  
c. Data safety monitoring procedure – Any adverse event (AE) will be recorded as 
described below. All AEs will be reviewed by [CONTACT_978]. If it is deemed to be a serious AE, 
these will be recorded and submitted to the IRB for review.  
1. Severity – For evaluation and reporting purposes, the clinical severity of the 
event is stratified into four classes. The four classes of severity are 1- Mild, 2 -
Moderate, 3- Severe, or 4 -Immediately Life- Threatening/Fatal.  
2. Life-threatening adverse event  – A life -threatening adverse event is defined as 
any adverse experience that places the subject, in the view of the investigator, at 
immediate risk of death from the reaction as it occurred, i.e., it does not include a 
reaction that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caus ed death.  
3. Association with the use of s tudy product (high or normal protein calorie 
restriction diets) – Association with the use of the study product means that there 
is a reasonable possibility that the adverse event may have been caused by [CONTACT_316787]. All adverse events are graded with regard to their 
association with the use of the study product. The classifications used include 
Not Related, Unlikely Related, Probably Related and Definitely Related.  
4. Unexpected adverse e vent – An unexpected adverse event is any adverse 
product experience that is not consistent with the current nutritional product insert in specificity or severity.  
5. Adverse event reporting procedure – The PI [INVESTIGATOR_884297], regardless of relationship to study product, or the first 
occurrence of any unexpected or previously unknown clinical event (regardless 
of Grade). A written report (Report for Serious/Life Threatening Events) of the 
event must be faxed within [ADDRESS_1237206].  
 