 
 
Effect of a Vibratory Stimulus on Mitigating Nociception- specific Responses to 
Skin Puncture in Neonates  
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
  
December 19, 2018 
Summary  – We aim to fill existing knowledge gaps in neonatal pain mitigation by [CONTACT_258302] ( RCT) using a novel non -pharmacological approach to 
decrease the nociceptive response to skin puncture.  In addition to validating the effectiveness 
of our intervention, time-locked electroencephalographic ( EEG ) methods will provide an 
objective measure to which behavioral responses will be compared.  This project will allow the 
development of a battery of quantitative and  accurate tools for neonatal pain assessment, 
translate neuroscientific theory of gating into a bedside application in the intensive care unit, and 
facilitate future  investigation by  [CONTACT_258303]. Because of the established associations between nociceptive experiences in the neonatal period and worse developmental, neurological and behavioral consequences, our current line of rigorous research can be broadly 
developed, leading to more positive long- term outcomes  for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_151405] . 
Overall Aim  – Optimizing the developmental potential of neonates requires appropriate pain 
control that depends on accurate pain assessment .  For  pediatric anesthesiologist s, this 
remains challenging due to the lack of self -reporting of subjective experiences in nonverbal 
patients .  Many current uni - and multidimensional pain assessment tools for neonates fail to 
consider developmentally important cues and have incomplete psychometric testing
1. In a 
research setting,  neonatal pain responses can be accurately measured at the cortical level.  Our 
overall goal is to establish founding principles on which to build objective, clinically practical 
tools that will guide the development of effective pain management  in infants .  As validation of 
behavioral components of the pain response is best performed  in a non- pharmacological 
setting, we propose a non- invasive technique using a standardized vibratory stimulus  (V) to 
mitigate the nociception- specific response to heel lance (HL).  Our brain -oriented measurement 
approach us es EEG -based analysis time- locked to painful or vibratory stimuli , and masked 
coding of facial expression and withdrawal reflex  video segments ( after reliability training). To 
prove the efficacy of using a Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) -safe vibration approach  in 
decreasing pain during common  skin punctures, we will leverage our expertise of EE G methods 
through  an RCT in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_151405]  (n= 134) with the following aims.  
Aim 1: Demonstrate that amplitude of cortical nociceptive response (EEG -based) during 
skin puncture decreases in infants treated with controlled  vibration prior to puncture, 
compared to those who receive standard care.  
Aim 2: Establish the feasibility of a novel, evidence- based bedside assessment tool to 
quantify pain responses in infants with and without the intervention, by [CONTACT_258304].  
Hypotheses – Our hypotheses will be tested using  
prospectively  designed experiments with stimulus 
conditions  sequentially administered (see Table).   
First, w e hypothesize that during the 350- 700ms 
post-stimulus window, there will be a decrease in 
mean amplitude of the EEG nociceptive response at 
the group level ( treatment  vs. control ), as measured 
by [CONTACT_258305] (C vs. D). There  
should also be a decrease in video- coded behavioral scores.   We will then examine 
assoc iations between nociceptive amplitude and behavioral responses across the entire cohort, 
with and without adjustment for post -menstrual age at testing time.   
Secondly, we hypothesize that EEG will allow measurement of the effect size of vibration on 
amplitude of the nociceptive response at the individual level (pair wise, B vs. D); behavioral 
scores may  or may  not allow this  measurement  if a partial reduction of the nociceptive response 
is below the threshold of bedside scales, but not below that of EE G.   
Finally, we hypothesize that there will be significant differences both in the EEG -based and 
the behavioral response s between baseline and HL (A vs. C). Conversely,  responses to non-
nociceptive stimulus (A vs. B), will be detectable via EEG  response amplitude and frequency, 
but not  by [CONTACT_258306] . 

Background, Significance, and Relevance  –  
Among the [ADDRESS_313820] two weeks of life in the NICU, each newborn may undergo an average of 8 to 17 
invasive procedures daily2.  In preterm infants, this may result in 14 painful procedures per day, 
up to 80% of which are not preceded by [CONTACT_258307]3.  An exposure rate of up to [ADDRESS_313821] in pain assessment tools, is in line with other  published findings : 
a considerable number of health professionals do not assess the level of pain based on scales 
developed for this purpose
3.  Finding an accurate means of pain assessment and its appropriate 
treatment in neonates is of particular importance to pediatric anesthesiologists who are often 
called upon to assist in neonatal procedures involving skin breaks, or to mitigat e pain 
experienc ed during necessary operations. Therefore, projects aiming to safely and 
effectively reduce neonatal pain from skin- puncturing procedures can have a broad 
impact on clinical practice, especially if they are based on rigorous mechanistic principles and accurate measurements of neonatal pain.  
 
An initial gap in knowledge we plan to address is the lack of feasible, standardized non-
pharmacological interventions to mitigate pain during routine skin- breaking procedures in the 
NICU. Mitigation of neonatal pain during skin -breaking has been achieved using 
pharmacological means, such as general anesthesia, for complex surgical operations or more 
recently, regional anesthesia through indwelling catheters. Minor neonatal procedures usually 
employ systemic analgesic and sedative administration, but needless administration of these 
agents (from opi[INVESTIGATOR_858], to benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], to sucrose) are associated with multiple concerns 
including prolonged need for mechanical ventilation, delayed feeding, impaired brain growth, 
poor socialization skills, and impaired performance in short -term memory tasks
11,12.  Current 
effective non -pharmacological methods include skin- to-skin care and facilitated tucking, but they 
are difficult to implement without parental presence or additional personnel resources. A mechanistically -based alternative would be to leverage the “gate -control” properties of the 
peripheral nervous system by [CONTACT_258308] -noxious stimuli
13. Two 
proposed mechanisms for gate control of nociception are either the stimulation of inhibitory 
interneurons by [CONTACT_258309] A β fibers by [CONTACT_50407], or the induction of low frequency 
(9-20 Hz) “interfering” oscillations by [CONTACT_258310]14,15. The concept of “vibration 
anesthesia” has been applied to reduce discomfort in adults undergoing injections16,17, but has 
not been used in the neonatal population. This approach does not simply mask the behavioral 
signs of pain or act as a sedative, it decreases the amplitude of a signal being transmitted to the 
somatosensory cortex. Therefore, delivering a controlled vibration prior to skin -breaking 
could decrease amplitude of the pain response.  
 
In order to ensure the feasibility of implementing novel pain mitigation approaches, a second 
critical gap in knowledge that must be addressed is the lack of quantitative bedside pain 
measures that have been rigorously validated against brain -based methodologies.  The first 
infant behavioral pain measure was developed [ADDRESS_313822] integrate mechanistic knowledge of nociceptive 
processing with brain- based measurement methodologies.  This will allow the development 
of more practical, effective and accurate bedside tools.  Our current study leverages our 
anesthesiology  team's  extensive experience with pain management in the NICU, our 
laboratory’s expertise in EEG and behavioral video- coding and robust preliminary data to 
develop a bedside pain -mitigation approach, and independently, a validated measurement of its 
effectiveness. 
Preliminary Results  –  
 
O
ur preliminary data as a whole demonstrate the feasibility of our proposed study as well 
confirm the functionality of our cus tomized vibratory device.  The primary weakness noted in the 
review of our initial proposal pertained to the dependence of a study design on a prototype that 
was yet to be manufactured.  We addressed this concern by [CONTACT_258311] -based data for proof of concept.   These pi[INVESTIGATOR_258291], preceded by [CONTACT_258312] a brain -oriented approach.  
 
We have shown that our team can conduct accurate and specific measurement of pain and 
touch using high- density time- locked EEG ( Figure 1) in cohorts of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_258292]
21,22.  
Figure [ADDRESS_313823] also developed a system for objective video- coding of 
behavioral responses in infants with reliability >90% using a highly manualized approach
24. 
 
The device that will provide the intervention in our proposed study has been constructed and 
trialed successfully in a healthy adult male volunteer.  The device has been tested to provide a vibration frequency of 178 Hz, with a free- hanging 0.24 mm range of motion and a power output 
of less than 5 watts.  The internal electronic customizations of the device were tested and work well in terms of labelling the EEG data to allow for appropriate time -locking with the vibratory 
and/or skin puncturing stimulus. While lancet -based blood sampling in adults is conventionally 
done using one of the upper extremity digits, we emulated a heel lance more closely by [CONTACT_258313].  For the purposes of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_258293], we analyzed data from a single male adult in front o-central regions under the various conditions (A 
through D) listed in our study design and specific aims section.  
Figure 1 – Cortical Responses to Somatosen sory Stimuli in  
[ADDRESS_313824], the background oscillations smoothed out in the grand averaged figure above ( Figure 1) can still be noted 
and measured. We found distinctive waveform patterns after stimulation that varied in terms of mean amp-litude and mode frequency.  In Figure 3, the mean  amplitude of  
these evoked responses over the fronto- central locations can be quantified in the time window 
of [ADDRESS_313825] conditions are identified.  (A) 
Baseline (white bars), mean amplitude of three averaged segments and mode of background 
frequency is very low. (B) After vibration (gray bars), mean amplitude 
of three averaged segments increases and a regular 13 Hz frequency is detected. (C) After heel lance without prior vibration (black bars), mean amplitude is elevated and irregular high- frequency oscillations occur. (D) 
After heel lance with concurrent vibration (striped bars), mean amplitude of the response is visibly lower than compared to heel lance alone, and high frequency oscillations are no longer apparent. 
  

Experimental Plan, Methods and Statistical Plan – We will conduct an RCT in term and 
preterm infants  that are to undergo heel- lancing as part of their routine clinical care.  We 
contracted a group of biomedical engineers (Actuated Medical LLC) to construct a prototype 
that can provide a non- noxious vibratory stimulus in addition to a standard heel -lance.  The 
function of this device has been time -locked with EEG signal acquisition and video of facial 
expression along with limb withdrawal.  Allocation concealment and blind- to-assignment 
conditions for EEG and video examiners will minimize bias. The process flow is depi[INVESTIGATOR_3075] 5 with each component of the protocol described in more detail below.  
 
Process Flow  
 
 
Figure 5  
 
Study Population  
 
Inclusion criteria:  The study population will be comprised of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_258294]’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (NCH). Because the specific pain response is not 
mature until [ADDRESS_313826] -menstrual age (PMA)25, only infants [ADDRESS_313827] a heel lance as part of 
their routine medical care.  
 Exclusion criteria:   
• Patient is over 3 months corrected age  
• Infants who receive sucrose (SweetEase) or other analgesic or sedative prior to their 
procedure  
• Infants with congenital brain abnormalities  
 
Withdrawal criteria:  Infants can be withdrawn from the study at any time at parent’s 
request or if the medical team determines that study participation is not in the patient’s best 
interest.  
  
Recruitment and Informed Consent  
 
Recruitment: The research coordinator will identify prospective participants from the electronic 
census of infants admitted to the NCH NICU. Informed consent will be obtained from parents 
using Internal Review Board (IRB) approved documents. Parents will be consented in their 
native language with the use of translated forms and translators when required.  Parents will be 
given information about the study as well as explanations of risks and benefits. Parents will be 
given a signed copy of the informed consent; a second signed copy will be placed in a locked cabinet in the Principal Investigator’s locked office. No waivers of informed consent will be sought.  
  
Intervention  
 
After a resting baseline measurement, each subject 
will undergo three vibration sequences (V) to determine 
an averaged response.  The vibration sequence will be 
provided by a prototype device that connects directly to 
EEG equipment for synchronization purposes.  Output signals occur 1 -2 milliseconds after manual button 
pushes, one that serves to start/stop the vibration, and the other that deploys the lancet ( Figure 6).  The device’s 
power output is  under 5 watts and provides a vibration of 
178 Hz over a free -hanging distance of 0.24 mm.  The Unistik 3™ Gentle lancets are single- use,  
disposable, 30 gauge needles that penetrate to a depth of 1.5 mm.  Respective control and 
experimental infants will be either treated or not treated with this vibration immediately 
preceding the heel lance (HL).  The V and HL will be time- locked to set video and EEG 
segments for analysis.  Similarly, synchronized video segments will be recorded and coded for facial and r eflex components.  A schematic of this is outlined in Figure 7. 
Fidelity of intervention monitoring  will be assessed by [CONTACT_258314] a checklist developed prior to study start. The 

reviewer will verify a random sample of 10% of unsegmented videos throughout the course of 
the study and note any deviations on the checklist. If any deviations from the intervention 
protocol are observed, the reviewer will notify the research coordinator to correct the deviation 
before the next procedure.  
 
 
Facial Expression Coding and Limb Withdrawal  
 
Facial expression will be scored following the Neonatal Facial Coding System (NFCS)26.  
Components of this scale include the following: brow bulge, eye squeeze, naso- labial furrow, 
open lips, horizontal mouth stretch, vertical mouth stretch, lip purse, taut tongue, chin- quiver, 
tongue protrusion.  Each is assigned one point for its presence then summed for a total score.  
Coding will be based on time- locked video segments that have been processed for the 
purposes of blinding examiners to the condition.  Each video segment will be evaluated by [CONTACT_258315]. Video coders on the research team will undergo reliability training to achieve 
>90% inter -rater reliability in each domain of assessment on a subset of [ADDRESS_313828] more than a 15% score discrepancy between the first two reviewers over the entire assessment. The third reviewer’s score will then be averaged with the 
other two scores to minimize discrepan cies.   
Limb withdrawal will be assessed in a similarly blinded, randomized fashion and using a 
third coder as needed to address any discrepancies.  Limb movement will be assessed based on the following: no movement, ipsilateral withdrawal, contralateral withdrawal or bilateral 
movement.  
  
Electroencephalography procedure  
 
Recording: A high- density array of 128 electrodes embedded in soft sponges ( Electrical 
Geodesics, Inc. ( EGI); Eugene, Oregon, [LOCATION_003]) soaked in warm saline and applied to the infant’s 
head will be used to record event related potentials (ERPs) as previously described27,28, with a 
sampling rate of [ADDRESS_313829] been electronically engineered to label the EEG stream for time-
locking purposes to analyze equivalent time windows for the vibratory stimuli and heel lance.   
 

Processing and analysis: ERP data will be filtered using a 0.3– [ADDRESS_313830] (F3, F4, C3, C4) will be selected for analysis, defined using clusters 
of electrodes identified in published studies of somatosensory stimuli 
(Figure 8)
31. Averaged mean amplitude data will be extracted in pre -
specified time windows corresponding to nociceptive specific activity (350- 700 ms).   
 
 
Statistical Plan  
 
Sample size and power : Based on our previous data21, setting α  at 0.[ADDRESS_313831] size 
(Cohen's d = 0.57).  This translates into a reduction of mean amplitude of the pain response 
from 5.[ADDRESS_313832] -free cortical 
responses and data loss during heel lance, we plan to enroll a total of 134 subjects into the 
study to account for a possible attrition rate of 28 percent.  
 
A
nalysis: Results will be summarized by [CONTACT_258316]. Paired t- tests will be used to compare 
the within -patient change in EEG response and facial response scores, while McNemar tests 
will be used to compare change in extremity response and change in each individual subcomponent of the facial response score (A vs. B).  A similar analysis will compare baseline 
to heel lance responses among the control group subjects (A vs. C), as well as vibration to heel 
lance with vibration among the intervention group subjects (B vs. D).   
 
For conditions of skin puncture with or without a vibratory stimulus (between control and 
intervention groups), a two- sample t -test will be used to compare EEG and total facial response 
scores after heel lance by [CONTACT_105150], while chi -square or Fisher’s exact tests will be used 
to compare extremity response and individual subcomponents of the facial response tool.  For the secondary analysis of these conditions, EEG response will be treated as the dependent variable and PMA, intervention group, facial response score, and extremity response w ill be 
considered as independent variables. Interactions between PMA and intervention group, facial response score, and extremity response will also be tested for this secondary analysis, in order 
to determine whether the association between each variable and EEG response varies with 
post-menstrual age; if a significant interaction is found, results will be summarized within PMA 
strata to aid interpretation.   
 As a final analysis spanning all four experiments, we will use linear and binomial mixed 
effects models to evaluate change in response across each stimulus segment among all 
patients, change in response within each intervention arm, and to compare response in each 
stimulus segment by [CONTACT_105150].  All analyses will be conducted using SAS 9.4 with two-
sided p- values<0.05 considered statistically significant.  
   

Dealing with potential problems:  
 
• Attrition and sample size: should the attrition due to motion artifact be higher than expected, 
we can easily increase our recruitment and still remain within the projected timeline. The 
NCH NICU has 140 beds with over 3,000 annual admissions, with infants  having multiple 
skin breaking procedures during hospi[INVESTIGATOR_258295].  
• Fidelity of intervention and of behavioral coding will be monitored rigorously as described 
above.  
• Diffusion effects between patients are unlikely as only one vibration device exists, for research purposes.  
• Differential treatment effect considerations: We do not assume that our treatment will affect all participants equally. Our analysis plan includes secondary exploratory analyses 
determining the  differences in effect as a function of selected variables measured prior to 
randomization.  
• Random assignment of infants to one of two groups, masking of all personnel analyzing 
data to study group and statistical control of key pre- randomization covariates will minimize 
selection bias.  
• Intent -to-treat analysis is not possible in this design as mechanistic inferences on brain 
responses can only be made based on time- locking to the actual stimulus.  
Approvals for Human Subjects, Potential Problems and  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_30207], and Risk Mitigation  – 
Our study has been approved by  [CONTACT_258317] .  The ERP protocols in our study have also 
been approved previously  for other studies that are actively taking place at NCH.  Each section 
of our  protocol is in alignment with the Office of Human Research Protections Category 1 (45 
CFR 46.404; 21 CFR 50.51) requirements, the custom device is exempt under 21 CFR 
812.2(c), and the FDA -approved heel lancets will be used in accordance with labelling. A ll heel 
sticks will be those required for routine clinical care and none of the blood will  be used for 
research purposes.  
Informed consent will be obtained from parents using IRB approved documents. An 
experienced research coordinator will initiate the informed consent process according to the Good Clinical Practice guidelines. Parents will be given information about the study as well as explanations of risks and benefits.  The equipment and protocol pose minimal risk to 
participants, and are reasonable in relation to the anticipated benefits to research participants 
and others.  
ERP paradigm minimal risk rationale: The EGI system used to record the brain responses  is 
electrically isolated from the participant, eliminating the risk of any current flowing to t he 
participant under all conditions, including a ground fault. In the event of a worse- case equipment 
failure where the participant would be grounded, and current paths are reversed to move towards the participant, no current beyond 0.[ADDRESS_313833] s will be taken before, during, and after the procedure. The study 
coordinator and other NCH study personnel who are blinded to the infant’s identity will be the 
only people to view the videos, and all video material will be destroyed after six years from s tudy 
completion. The video material will be kept in a folder within a secure, NCH -managed Dropbox 
account and the only people who will have access to this folder are the personnel involved in the study.  
Risk minimization includes adherence to the procedural guidelines to maintain standard of 
care, following unit protocols and infection control procedures, and utilization of RedCap 
database for data storage. Study data will be stored using REDCap, which is a secure, web -
based application designed to support  data capture for research studies by [CONTACT_258318]. Study video material will be stored using an NCH -
managed Dropbox account, and the only people who will have access to the study folder will be 
the personnel involved in the study. Infants will be continuously monitored, not only by [CONTACT_25617], but also by [CONTACT_58076]'s bedside nurse during all steps of the protocol, to mitigate any 
possible risk. Study personnel will be the only people to view the videos, and all video material 
will be destroyed after six years from study completion.  
We do not anticipate withdrawal due to safety or toxicity concerns. Should the participant 
become medically unstable and participation not be in the patient's best interest, he or  she will 
be withdrawn from the study.
References – 
1. Holsti, L., R.E. Grunau, and E. Shany, Assessing pain in preterm infants in the neonatal intensive care unit: moving to 
a 'brain- oriented' approach.  Pain Manag, 2011. 1(2): p. 171-179. 
2. Cruz, M.D., A.M. Fernandes, and C.R. Oliveira, Epi[INVESTIGATOR_258296]: A systematic review of observational studies.  Eur J Pain, 2016. 20 (4): p. 489- 98. 
3. Carbajal, R., et al., Epi[INVESTIGATOR_258297].  JAMA, 
2008. 300(1): p. 60- 70. 
4. Porter, F.L., C.M. Wolf, and J.P. Miller, Procedural pain in newborn infants: the influence of intensity and 
development.  Pediatrics, 1999. 104(1): p. e13.  
5. Anand, K.J. and F.M. Scalzo, Can adverse neonatal experiences alter brain development and subsequent behavior? Biol Neonate, 2000. 77(2): p. 69- 82. 
6. Grunau, R.E., Neonatal pain in very preterm infants: long- term effects on brain, neurodevelopment and pain reactivity.  
Rambam Maimonides Med J, 2013. 4 (4): p. e0025.  
7. Page, G.G., Are there long- term consequences of pain in newborn or very young infants?  J Perinat Educ, 2004. 13 (3): 
p. 10- 7. 
8. American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on, F., et al., Prevent ion and management of pain in the neonate: an 
update.  Pediatrics, 2006. 118(5): p. 2231- 41. 
9. Sposito, N.P.B., et al., Assessment and management of pain in newborns hospi[INVESTIGATOR_42868] a Neonatal Intensive Care 
Unit: a cross -sectional study.  Rev Lat Am Enfermagem, 2017. 25: p. e2931.  
10. Cong, X., C. Delaney, and V. Vazquez, Neonatal nurses' perceptions of pain assessment and management in NICUs: a national survey.  Adv Neonatal Care, 2013. 13(5): p. 353- 60. 
11. de Graaf, J., et al., Long- term effects of routine morphine infusion in mechanically ventilated neonates on children's 
functioning: five- year follow -up of a randomized controlled trial.  Pain, 2011. 152(6): p. 1391- 7. 
12. Ferguson, S.A., et al., A pi[INVESTIGATOR_258298]: effects on head circumference, social behavior, and response latencies in early childhood.  Neurotoxicol Teratol, 2012. 34(1): p. 47- 55. 
13. Moayedi, M. and K.D. Davis, Theories of pain: from specificity to gate control.  J Neurophysiol, 2013. 109(1): p. 5- 12. 
14. Melzack, R. and P.D. Wall, Pain mechanisms: a new theory.  Science, 1965. 150(3699): p. 971- 9. 
15. Dinse, H.R., et al., Low -frequency oscillations of visual, auditory and somatosensory cortical neurons evoked by 
[CONTACT_258319].  Int J Psychophysiol, 1997. 26(1-3): p. 205- 27. 
16. Smith, K.C., et al., Vibration anesthesia: a noninvasive method of reducing discomfort prior to dermatologic 
procedures.  Dermatol Online J, 2004. 10(2): p. 1.  
17. Park, K.W., et al., Th e efficacy of 95- Hz topi[INVESTIGATOR_258299]: a placebo-
controlled, prospective, randomized trial.  J Hand Surg Am, 2014. 39(11): p. 2203- 7. 
18. de Melo, G.M., et al., [Pain assessment scales in newborns: integrative review].  Rev Paul Pediatr, 2014. 32(4): p. 
395-402. 
19. Hartley, C., et al., The relationship between nociceptive brain activity, spi[INVESTIGATOR_258300].  Scientific Reports, 2015. 5: p. [ZIP_CODE].  
20. Jevtovic- Todorovic, V., General Anesthetics and Neurotoxicity: How Much Do We Know? Anesthesiol Clin, 2016. 
34(3): p. 439- 51. 
21. Maitre, N.L., et al., Cry presence and amplitude do not reflect cortical processing of painful stimuli in newborns with 
distinct responses to touch or  cold.  Archives of Disease in Childhood: Fetal and Neonatal Edition, 2017. 102(5): p. 
F428- F433.  
22. Maitre, N.L., et al., The Dual Nature of Early -Life Experience on Somatosensory Processing in the Human Infant 
Brain.  Curr Biol, 2017. 27(7): p. 1048- 1054.  
23. Relland, L.M., A. Gehred, and N.L. Maitre, Behavioral and Physiological Signs for Pain Assessment in Preterm and 
Term Neonates during a Nociception- Specific Response: A Systematic Review.  Pediatric Neurology, 2018. In Press . 
24. Emery, L., et al., Pro tocolized music therapy supports developmental progression in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_151405]: a 
comparative effectiveness study.  Acta Paediatrica, 2018. Accepted . 
25. Fabrizi, L., et al., A shift in sensory processing that enables the developi[INVESTIGATOR_258301].  Curr Biol, 2011. 21(18): p. 1552- 8. 
26. Grunau, R.E., et al., Bedside application of the Neonatal Facial Coding System in pain assessment of premature 
neonates.  Pain, 1998. 76(3): p. 277- 86. 
27. Maitre, N.L., Z.P. Barnett, and A.P. Key, Novel assessment of cortical response to somatosensory stimuli in children 
with hemiparetic cerebral palsy.  J Child Neurol, 2012. 27(10): p. 1276- 83. 
28. Mai
tre, N.L. and A.P. Key, Quantitative assessment of cortical auditory -tactile processing in children with disabilities.  J 
Vis Exp, 2014(83): p. e51054.  
29. Michail, G., et al., Neuronal Oscillations in Various Frequency Bands Differ between Pain and Touch.  Front Hum 
Neurosci, 2016. 10: p. 182.  
30. Schulz, E., et al., Neurophysiological coding of traits and states in the perception of pain.  Cereb Cortex, 2011. 21(10): 
p. 2408- 14. 
31. Worley, A., et al., Multi- modal pain measurements in infants.  J Neurosci Methods, 2012. 205(2): p. 252- 7. 
 