 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
for 
 
Improving Therapeutic Learning in Depression: Proof of Concept  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Date of Document: November 15, 2013  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D. RESEARCH DESIGN A ND METHODS  
We propose to study cognitive function and memory perfor mance o ver 4 study  sessions in 77 men and 
women  with major depression , who , in a double -blind fashion,  will be randomly assigned to either: (1) 250mg 
DCS, ( 2) 100mg modafinil, or ( 3) placebo administered on Study Weeks 2 and 3. The design calls for baselin e 
assessment  (Week 1) , followed by [CONTACT_886404] n randomized study drug is administered, and a 
final week (Week 4) when retention is assessed under the conditi ons of no study drug. The drugs under study 
may have differential effects on immediate recall at the time the drug is taken vs. retention effects one week 
later.  As such, the memory tests include both items unique to a given study week (i.e., the ICAT, digits 
backward, and HVLT), and memory tasks that are repeated over time  (i.e., narrative  memory tasks and  the 
cognitive therapy content ). Primary outcome s will be cognitive therapy conten t and retention of logical memory 
(with exploratory examination of CBT skill use).  
Design Considerations  
Why Investigate Baseline Cognitive Impairment?   Cognitive (including verbal memory) impairments have 
been documented in unipolar depression (e.g., Castaneda e t al., 2008; Otto et al., 1994 ), with poorer 
neuropsychological functioning predicting poorer antidepressant (e.g., Dunkin et al., 2000; Kampf -Sherf e t al., 
2004 ; Withall et al., 20 09) as well as CBT response (Dobkin et al., 2012; see also Caudle et al., 2007) .  
Because there is a potential for stronger cognitive enhancement effects among individuals with greater 
cognitive dysfunction  (e.g., such effect s have been reported for modafinil administration in  healthy participants; 
Finke et al., 2010) , baseline cognitive functioning will be examined as a potential moderator of augmentation 
effects in the present study.  In addition, these baseline measures wil l serve as covariates , providing potentially 
greater power for detection of drug effects.   
Why Utilize 2 Drug Administration Visits and A Follow -Up Visit?  As noted in the “Context... ” section 
above, this study examines the effects of study drugs on the da y of administration and during subsequent 
weeks .  By [CONTACT_9377][INVESTIGATOR_886403] -free, we will be able to examine retention of memory when individuals 
are drug -free (across drug -cue contexts ).  Use of two isolated  administration s of study drug matches the 
original and subsequent  application s of DCS for specific phobia (Ressler et al. , 2004;  Smits et al., in press).   
Why Assess Mood and Fatigue During the Trial and Include  SSRI  Use?  Given evidence that modafinil 
may interact with antidepressants to enhance  mood effects  (see “Modafinil ” section above)  we carefully 
considered the inclusion of individuals on antidepressants in the trial .  In clinical practice, patients taking 
antidepressants are frequently referred for CBT; hence, to exclude this cohort would limit the generalizability. 
Including patients on antidepressants raises the possibility of mood interactions with modafinil (previous DCS 
studies have not noted significant differences among those taking and not taking antidepressants  with single 
dose DCS  administrations; e.g., Otto et al., 2010 a; but see Poleszak et al., 2011 ), but this possible effect is 
targeted in the analysis  plan.   We will examine the link between any mood changes  occurring during the trial 
(as assessed by [CONTACT_886405] ) and cogni tive enhancement effects.   We will also examine whether 
cognitive  modafinil effects are specific to (moderated by) the fatigue that can co -occur  with depression.  
Why Utilize the Specific Cognitive Tests And CBT Skill Assessments Proposed Below ? The frequen cy and 
quality of CBT skill use is a predictor of response to CBT for depression and protection from relapse (see 
Hundt et al., 201 3; Strunk et al., 2007). Given that retention of session material is a logical prerequisite to recall 
and application of this  material, our assessment of recall of session material with the CTAS  is fully in line with 
the goal of assessing a core mechanism behind  CBT – recall of CBT concepts. We also now use the SoCT 
(Jarrett et al., 2011) to provide a broader assessment relevant  to CBT skill use (e.g., restructuring negative 
cognitions) ; such assessment would be most appropriate to a treatment outcome study (which this proof -of-
concept study is not), but nonetheless, spontaneous application of CBT principles from the computerized  
program is of interest as an exploratory outcome .  Also,  the standardized cognitive tests administered across 
weeks represent many of those utilized in our previous study of verbal memory enhancement in response to 
50mg DCS (Otto et al., 200 9a) as well as  the core test used by [CONTACT_886406] . (2010 ), as well as select tests 
shown to be sensitive to mo dafinil use. The test battery is not design ed to be a comprehensive assessment , 
but to hone in on the sort of cognitive functions that may affect retention of CBT .  
Randomization and Study Drugs  
Participants will be block randomized (by [CONTACT_886407] ) to one of the [ADDRESS_1240398] in our studies of DCS augmentation; and 
is appropriate to the  absorption and h alf-life of modafinil (Darwish et al., 2010 ). 
Study Participants  
We plan to recruit [ADDRESS_1240399] a DS M 
diagnosis of major depression as determined by [CONTACT_886408] (SCID), must be free of 
psychotropic medications other than SSRIs for at least [ADDRESS_1240400] no current suicidal ideation. 
Additional e xclusion criteria  include: (1) DSM diagnosis of dementia, neurodegenerative disease, or other 
organic mental disorder ; substance use disorder other than nicotine or caffeine in the last 3 months ; bulimia or 
anorexia within the last 3 months ; lifetime history of psychotic d isorder, bipolar disorder , or developmental 
disorder; medical illness including hypertension, cardiac disease, liver disease, pulmonary diseases, central 
nervous system disease, and epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] ; (2) recent (1 year) suicidal attempts; (3) for women, currently  pregnant, 
plans to be pregnant in the next 2 months, or currently breastfeeding ; (4) treatment with phenytoin , isoniazid, 
or propranolol or known sensitivity to modafinil  or cycloserine ; (5) history of head trauma causing loss of 
consciousness, seizure or  ongoing cognitive impairment ; (6) use of psychotropic medication other than SSRI s; 
(6) CBT in the last 5 years ; or (7) insufficient command of the English language (i.e., cannot carry on a 
conversation with an interviewer in the English language or read a ssociated text).  
Recruitment and Feasibility  
Recruitment . Recruitment strategies will be based upon those employed in our previous studies of 
depressed individuals in the [LOCATION_011] University catchment  area,  including  referrals directly from the Center for 
Anxiety and Related Disorders  at BU and the BU Medical Center  (BUMC) .  Our recruitment strategies  will 
include area advertisements as well as advertisements/ direct referrals from these treatment centers.  Across all 
assessments and study procedures, particip ants will be compensated a total of $200 for complete adherence.  
Feasibility :  [CONTACT_488132] has evidence of adequate recruitment rates of depressed individuals for 
augmentatio n studies. For example,  [CONTACT_488132]’s team recruited 48 non -treatment -seeking depressed adults over 
a 17-month period  (Calkins et al., 2013) .  Likewise, using  strategies  similar to those proposed here , in 2 .5 
months his team has recruited 12 individuals for participation in a study combining cognitive control training for 
depression with brie f behavioral activation treatment. The study team also has the added resource of being 
able to study patients during their waiting period for treatment (often 8 weeks) at the Center for Anxiety and 
Related Disorders, or from patients at BUMC . Hence, given our recent recruitment history, we anticipate no 
difficulties meeting our recruitment goals  
Procedures  
 Visit 1:  Screening and Baseline Assessment:  Following phone screening, patients will be scheduled for an 
evaluation session where informed consent will be obtained. The psychiatric evaluation begins with the 
Structured Clinical Interview (SCID) to evaluate the presence of psychiatric inclusion and exclusion criteria. 
Patients will also complete a medical history form and interview with the study physician . If inclusion criteria 
are met, baseline questionnaires and cognitive assessment  :administration of the WMS --Logical Memory 
(Story A), Digit Span,  Hopkins Verbal Learning Test, Trails A and B, and the Controlled Oral Word 
Association Test  (see below). Pa rticipants will then be scheduled for [ADDRESS_1240401] to receive one of the 4 
study conditions. Randomizations will be blocked by [CONTACT_886409] 2 . 
 Visit 2 : Study Drug Administration and Assessment . At this visit, patients will first complete the BDI and FSS 
followed by [CONTACT_886410] [ADDRESS_1240402] study session . For cognitive  testing, participants  will listen to the WMS 
Logical Memory story B, followed by [CONTACT_886411].  Similar procedures will then be followed for the 
Emotional Logical Memory Task. Participants will then complete unique  versions (to the study week) of  Digit 
Span -Backwards, HVLT , and ICAT . Finally, participants will complete a 45min portion  of computerized CBT 
providing an overview of cognitive therapy and experience with cognitive errors.  
 Visit 3: Study Drug Administration and Assessment.  Study drug adminis tration and assessment p rocedures 
match  Visit 2, but with the addition of one-week delayed recall of both the WMS Logical Memory story B and 
the Emotional Logical Memory Task.  CTAS and SoCT are specific to the previous week ’s content, and a 
novel 45min po rtion of computerized CBT  (cognitive schema work ) is presented . 
 Visit 4: Final Assessment . No study drug is administered. Participants will first complete the BDI and FSS 
followed by [CONTACT_31806] -week delayed recall of the WMS Logical Memory story B, followed by [INVESTIGATOR_2394] e week delayed 
recall of the Emotional Logical Memory Task. Then, in turn, each story will be retold, and followed by [CONTACT_886412]. Participants will then complete the Cognitive Therapy Awareness Scale (for the 
previous weeks C BT content)  and SoCT  followed by a unique Digit Span -Backwards, HVLT, and ICAT.   
Core Cognitive Assessments  – Delayed Recall  
 Cognitive Therapy Awareness Scale  (CTAS; Wright et al., 2002). A modified CTAS will be used to assess 
delayed memory for cognitive therapy conten t from the computerized CBT.  The CTAS will be modified to 
enhance specific content from the computerized CBT and to delete extraneous content. We have 
successfully used the CTA in previous study of computerized CBT (Wright et al., 2005).  
 Skills of Cognit ive Therapy (SoCT; Jarrett et al., 2011) at the same assessment points as the CTAS, to 
provide a broader assessment relevant to CBT skill use (e.g., restructuring negative cognitions).   
 WMS -Logical Memory Test . For the assessment of therapy -relevant  learn ing of verbal material , the Wechsler 
Memory Scale ––Revised Logical Memory paragraphs  will be used as per Otto et al. (200 9a). This test 
assesses me mory for a brief story passage; two  stories are available (forms A and B of the test). For 
baseline assessmen t, Form A of the story will be  used  for immediate and 30 min delayed recall.  Form B w ill 
be subsequently administered, with assessment of 1 -week delayed recall at Weeks 3 & 4).   
 Emotional Logical Memory Test . For the assessment of “therapy -relevant” learni ng of emotional verbal 
material the Wechsler Memory Scale ––Revised Logical Memory paragraphs) w ill be used . This test 
assesses memory for a brief  emotional story passage; the study team has constructed a scoring method 
similar to that used by [CONTACT_886413].  
Covariates and Weekly Immediate Memory Assessment Tasks  
 Digit Span T est.  The Digit Span test is the most commonly used measure of immediate/working verbal 
recall .  Scores for Digits Forward and Digits Backward will be used as a baseline c ovariate and digits 
backwards will be used as a unique weekly memory task.  
 Hopkins Verbal Learning Test (HVLT).  The HVLT is a test of verbal memory.  Participants receive three 
consecutive trials of the presentation of a list of [ADDRESS_1240403] for each subsequent weekly session.  
 Item-Category Association Task.  This task identified differences between 250mg DCS and placebo in the 
study by [CONTACT_886406]., For the task participants wi ll make computer key  press responses to judge the 
category membership (A or B)  of three -digit numbers presented repeatedly on screen. Visual feedback is 
provided for correct and incorrect categorizations, allowing participants to improve across trials.  
 Controlled Oral Word Association Test (COWAT).   The COWAT  is one of the most commonly used 
measures of verbal fluency . The task employs a word -list generation procedure during which subjects are 
asked to produce a list of words according to some linguistic ru le or category in a limited amount of time. 
The total number of correctly generated words will serve as a covariate.  
 Trail Making Test (TMT) ( Trails A and B).   This task consists of Part A and Part B of the paper/pencil trail -
making test of the Halstead –Reitan Neuropsychological Test Battery. It is a measure of psychomotor 
speed and mental flexibility. Trails B will be used as a covariate indexing executive functioning.   
Adverse Events.  The assessment of adverse events will occur at Weeks 2 and 3 , and retr ospectively at 4 . 
Mood and Fatigue . Depressed mood will be assessed with the BDI -II (Beck et al., 1996), other moods with the 
POMS ( McNair et al., 1971 ), and fatigue with the Fatigue Survey Schedule (Krupp et al., 1989).  
Quality Control Procedures for Miss ing Data .  As formalized in Wisniewski et al.  (2006 ), we will follow our 
own recommendations in [ADDRESS_1240404], 
data entry & management, pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299], and communication —for reducing missing trial data.  
[ADDRESS_1240405] size in all Aims.  