 
Title: Dissemination and Implementation of the Safe Environment for Every Kid (SEEK) Model for 
Preventing Child Abuse and Neglect  
 
NCT #:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document Dat e: 6/29/2017  
  
Introduction to Proposal  
We greatly appreciate the reviewers’ feedback  and respond here to the weaknesses noted. The review 
highlighted favorably the public health significance and innovative features as well as strengths of the 
investigative team and environment.  
1. Clarify importance of screening for child maltreatment (CM) in primary care, feasibility of 
implementing SEEK. SEEK targets major risk factors for CM, rather than directly screening for the 
problem. Over 7 million children are reported annually for CM, with many costly consequences for 
individuals, families and society.1 Relationships between primary care professionals (PCPs) and parents 
offer an excellent opportunity for prevention by [CONTACT_849958].[ADDRESS_1181667] in addressing social determinants of health;  3,4 it is a priority of the American Academy 
of Pediatrics (AAP).  [ADDRESS_1181668] input, while recognizing time constraints in busy practices. SEEK II was effective in 18 
private practices 6 and has been implemented in over 100 practices, confirming its feasibility.  
2. Changes to the SEEK model, “not really implementation of an evidence based practice.” We 
clarified that the core c omponents of SEEK remain . This project examines effectiveness of new 
implementation (not intervention) strategies to facilitate scale -up of the evidence -based SEEK model.  
3. Need to measure CM to assess SEEK’s impact.  We added a specific aim (Aim 3) in this regard and a 
measure of CM -related ICD -[ADDRESS_1181669] builds upon growing support for  online training’s effectiveness when blended with 
interpersonal modalities such as webinars and collaborative learning; these are included in our MOC 
approach.7-[ADDRESS_1181670] of this learning 
approach on PCP behavior. We agree that CME credits are  a minor incentive, but it is still worth offering.  
5. Need to better describe Implementation strategies, theoretical or empi[INVESTIGATOR_849941], and mechanisms for change. The training and implementation strategies are both 
more clearly d escribed and rationalized . These were guided by [CONTACT_490184].  10 For example, role 
plays demonstrate how PCPs can address a targeted problem. Implementing the approach in one’s practice 
and participating in collaborative learning via webinars further foster self -efficacy. The transtheoretical 
model  11 helps PCPs use Motivational Interviewing to plan jointly with parents.12 By [CONTACT_849959], SEEK aims to support parents, strengthen families, promote children’s health and 
safety, and thus prevent CM.2 
6. Need to better address risk of improved screening and detection of CM. SEEK only screens for 
risk factors rather than for CM. Our experience in 2 RCTs and with over 100,000 families has been that CM 
very rarely emerges as a concern – when discussing discipline. This is similar to what PCPs typi[INVESTIGATOR_849942]. The  only direct contact [CONTACT_849960]; we have developed our response to detecting possible CM then (see Human Subjects).     
7. Develop data analysis re. parent and EHR data, and power analyses. We now provide more 
details on analysis of the parent and EHR data, and more de tailed power calculations . We also address the 
comparison of the SEEK online  vs. the Traditional paper and pencil implementation strategies an d 
implementation outcomes . Limitations to our design, and the rationale for allowing selection versus 
randomization of service delivery facilitation (i.e., SEEK online  vs. Traditional ) are described .  
8. Need questions of PCPs specific to SEEK. We clarify in our Measures section, several assessments of 
PCP perceptions specific to SEEK. The PCPQ probes thinking and practice related to the targeted problems. 
The PCP survey assesses their experience implementing SEEK. We also evaluate their training  experience, 
and qualitative interviews will probe in depth their e xperience delivering SEEK .  
9. Focus on online training not innovative. We cut this as an innovation. However, despi[INVESTIGATOR_849943], there has been rather little evaluation of the effectiveness of this modality in physician training.  
10. Efficacy of SEEK uncertain, no tests of effectiveness. The 2nd RCT in18 private pediatric practices 
demonstrated SEEK’s effectiveness.  Findings replicated key findings from  the initial efficacy trial . The 
current study aims to evaluate SEEK’s effectiveness under two different training conditions as part of a 
Hybrid III effectiveness trial. SEEK’s effectiveness has been recognized by [CONTACT_27388],  [ADDRESS_1181671] made clear that the training 
strategies will be randomized, and that practices will choose between SEEK online  and the Traditional 
implementation strategy.   Some measures involve observation of SEEK’s implementation.
Specific Aims  
Child maltreatment (CM) is a major public health problem, affecting many lives, in the short -and long -term, 
and costing individuals, families and our society dearly. In 2015, CM reports were made to child welfare on 7.[ADDRESS_1181672] 
implementation of evidence -based interventions, including in healthcare systems. One evidence -based practice 
(EBP) is the Safe Environment for Every Kid (SEEK) model, developed for pediatric primary care, and 
recogn ized by [CONTACT_6750], AHRQ, the AAP and the [LOCATION_004] Evidence -Based Clearinghouse.  6,19 -21 Primary 
healthcare offers an excellent opportunity to help address prevalent psychosocial problems (e.g., parental 
depression) that are risk factors for CM. By [CONTACT_4205][INVESTIGATOR_849944], SEEK can 
strengthen families, support parents, a nd help build safe, stable and nurturing relationships. These promote 
children’s health, development and safety, help prevent CM,  6,[ADDRESS_1181673] adopted SEEK. To facilitate SEEK’s uptake, we aim to test the 
effectiveness of two pragmatic training strategies, while retaining the core elements of the model.  Medical 
practitioners are increasingly engaged in distance learning , such as online offerings.  7-[ADDRESS_1181674] become popular. One example is 
the Mai ntenance of Certification (MOC ) quality improvement (QI) project22 for SEEK, approved by [CONTACT_849961]. The effectiveness of this collaborative 
learning approach vs. self -directed training regarding SEEK’s implementation has yet to be evaluated.  
To further facilitate ease of adoption, SEEK online  was developed to assist primary care professionals 
(PCPs) deliver the model consistently, with fidelity. This software guides PCPs through the steps of SEEK 
during a regular primary care visit, enables parents and PCPs to participate electronically, offer s real time 
decision support and facilitates documentation. The effectiveness of this software in facilitating start -up and 
delivery with fidelity, relative to the  “Traditional” paper and pencil  approach  (as in the original RCTs) has not 
yet been examined. In addition, a third of US children receive their primary care from family medicine 
practitioners, making it important to evaluate SEEK in these settings too.23 
Proposed  Study. This randomized Type III hybrid design24 leverages a commitment by 5 major healthcare 
systems to implement SEEK, enabling a rigorous evaluation of implementation strategies to optimize the 
adoption and delivery of SEEK in primary care settings, and subsequent prevention of CM: the (1) independen t 
online (IND)  25-27versus in -depth structured (MOC) training 22,28,29  and (2) use of SEEK online  vs. the Traditional 
approach to guide fidelity of model delivery. Further, SEEK will be examined in pediatric and family medicine 
settings, increasing the generalizability of findings. As in PAR -16-238, this proposal targets “strategies to 
implement healt h promotion, prevention, screening, early detection, and diagnostic interventions, as well as 
effective treatments, clinical procedures, or guidelines into existing care systems”  through these aims:  
 
Aim 1: Evaluate the effectiveness of targeted implementation strategies on the implementation 
of SEEK in primary care settings.  PCPs will be randomly assigned to one of two training conditions (IND 
or MOC). H1. MOC training will lead to more positive attitudes, comfort level and competence in addressing 
risk factors for CM. H2. Users of SEEK online  will deliver the intervention more often, achieving a higher rate 
of penetration, and will report higher levels of provider and parent satisfaction than the Traditional mode of 
delivery. H3.  MOC training and SEEK online  will together optimize adoption and sustainment of SEEK.  
Aim 2. Evaluate the impact of inner context variables (e.g., variation between pediatric and 
family medicine) on the SEEK implementation process and understand associated barriers and 
facilitators to successful service start -up and sustainment of SEEK deli very. Using a mixed 
methods approach, standardized measures of the implementation process (Stages of Implementation 
Completion; SIC) and associated cost (Cost of Implementing New Strategies; COINS), will be integrated with 
qualitative interview data focusi ng on barriers and facilitators during implementation from exploration to 
sustainment. Variations in adoption, model fidelity, and sustainment, and the economic ramifications of each 
of the SEEK training and implementation strategies will be examined.    
Aim 3. Examine the effectiveness of the intervention strategies in preventing CM. CM will be 
measured via prevalence of ICD -[ADDRESS_1181675] lower incidences of CM 
than with the IND approach. We will also probe the influence of SEEK online  and the Traditional ap proach on 
CM rates. Additionally, implementation success, will be examined in relation to CM prevalence rates.  
A. SIGNIFICANCE      
Prevalence. Child maltreatment (CM) is a major public health problem in the US, affecting many lives, in the 
short -and long -term, and costing individuals, families and our society dearly. In 2015, 7.2 million children were 
reported to Child Protective Services (CPS)  1 Of these, 683,000 children (i.e., 9.2 per 1000) were 
“substantiated” victims of child abuse and neglect. Yet, reported cases capture only the tip of the iceberg. The 
National Incidence Study (NIS -4), using observations by [CONTACT_849962], estimate d that 1.26 million 
children (i.e., 17.1 per 1,000) were maltreated in 2005 -06, and the more inclusive “Endangerment Standard” 
estimated nearly 3 million victims (i.e., 40 per 1,000). 30 Outcomes.  The consequences of CM can be 
devastating - in the short - and long -term. In addition to injuries and physical health problems, child and 
adolescent sequelae include many psychological and behavioral problems.  31-35 CM has also been linked to an 
array of adult outcomes such as substance use disorders, HIV/AIDS -related sexual risk behaviors36-42 and being 
a victim and/or perpetrator of intimate partner violence (IPV).  43-48 Other problems in adulthood include 
depression, suicide, criminal behavior, interpersonal problems, and academic and vocational difficulties , 49-58 as 
well as multiple physical health problems.59-62 Costs. The f inancial costs of CM are immense. The costs 
associated with injuries due to physical abuse far exceed the per -child costs of non -inflicted injuries of 
comparable severity.63  Two -thirds of the medical costs of CM are paid through Medicaid.64 Additional costs are 
incurred by [CONTACT_849963], educational, mental health, and judicial systems, with estimated U.S. costs of 
$103.[ADDRESS_1181676] implementation of evidence -based practices (EBPs).  
Need for and Potential of Primary Prevention of CM.  Despi[INVESTIGATOR_849945], few 
interventions other than home visiting programs (e.g., SafeCare) have been rigorously evaluated and found to 
be effective. Further, programs have not been developed for the healthcare system with the exceptio n of 
preventing abusive head trauma, an important but small component of CM. The Safe Environment for Every 
Kid (SEEK) model, developed for pediatric primary care, was found to have helped prevent CM in tw o large 
federally f -funded, randomized controlled trials(RCTs),  and is the focus of this proposal. 6,[ADDRESS_1181677] implement this model. 
The overall aims of the proposed study are to exam ine technology -driven approaches to implementing the 
model and to understand facilitators and barriers regarding its implementation and short -term sustainment, 
while also examining the effectiveness of these strategies. Doing so will advance knowledge in implementation 
science related to primary care and the prevention of CM.  
The prevention of CM requires strengthening families, and supporting parents and parenting, thus 
fostering safe, stable, nurturing relationships (SSNRs).66 SSNRs in turn are important for promoting children’s 
health, development, and safety, and, for preventing CM. Ordway et al pointed out the critical role that 
healthcare professionals can play in promoting healthy relationships, stating “this requires a sh ift in pediatric 
healthcare’s focus to include families and communities, as well as a shift to include children’s social and 
emotional health.”  [ADDRESS_1181678], mothers in the SEEK practices reported after 12 
months fewer physical assaults by [CONTACT_849964] (13% vs. 18%, p=.045). This helped explain 
the relationship between SEEK and fewer physical assaults of children by [CONTACT_391924] (1R49CE000588 ). 
Thus, the prevention of CM involves health promotion – for the child and family.   
Linking CM Prevention and Pediatric Primary Care.  The delivery of pediatric care by [CONTACT_242447] (PCPs; i.e., pediatric and family medicine physicians, nurse practitioners and physician assistants) is 
via regularly scheduled checkups. As outlined by [CONTACT_65746], “the foundation of Bright Futures he alth supervision 
is health promotion – not just preventing or treating illness or injury but actively promoting the physical, 
emotional, mental, and social well -being of children, adolescents, and their fami lies.” 71 Pediatric primary care 
is well positioned to play a valuable role: 1) it is well institutionalized, 2) prevention is a priority, 3) PCPs 
usually enjoy trusting relationships with families, 4) there are 12 visits from 0 – 5 years, 5)  there is a 
longstandi ng concern with children’s safety, 6) PCPs  often are the only professionals having contact [CONTACT_849965], and 7) there is a broad commitment to children’s overall health, development and 
safety. 72,73 Haggerty et al.,  73 in "The New Morbidity,” drew attention to major psychosocial problems, such as 
divorce, substance abuse and CM, jeopardizing children’s health and wellbeing. Bright Futures translated these 
ideas into practice guidance, urging consideration of a child’s e nvironment. 71,72  Parents also are interested in 
PCPs playing this broader role. 74 Pediatric primary care’s potential was shown by  [CONTACT_849966].  75 where 40% of 
mothers who screened positive for depression accepted referrals for evaluation. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_6831], there only have 
been modest shifts in practice. Sharpe et al. 76 found that although psychosocial concerns were raised in 88% of 
checkups, pediatricians intervened in only 40%, partly due to feeling incompetent. 77 The SEEK model was 
developed to fill this critical gap and take advantage of the excellent opportunity in primary care to help PCPs 
address common psychosocial problems known to be risk -factors for CM. Given the parameters of busy 
practice settings, the need for a low -burden, yet effective intervention was cle ar. Working with an Advisory 
Committee of neighbor hood health center physicians, we factored in the time constraints and other screening 
efforts while developi[INVESTIGATOR_849946].  The two SEEK RCTs demonstrated the model’s feasibility, with over [ADDRESS_1181679] children receive primary care in pediatric offices, about 1/3 
receive this care by [CONTACT_487613]. More than 2/[ADDRESS_1181680] an entire family. 
These PCPs already encounter the problems by [CONTACT_40700], and need to be equipped  to address them.  
Implementation Science (IS) in Pediatric Primary Care Research. T he field of implementation 
science has recently experienced an “explosion” in the quality and quantity of research . 78 Yet, a review of the 
Cochrane Effective Practice and Organization of Care (EPOC; http://epoc.cochrane.org/our -reviews)  website 
under Implementation Strategies revealed no systematic reviews regarding primary prevention in pediatric 
care and none on screening related to CM. The proposed research will therefore contribute to implementation 
science in critical areas . Proctor, Landsverk and colleagues introduced the distinction between “intervention 
strategies” and “implementation strategies,” and the concept of “implementation outcomes” distinct from 
“service outcomes” and “client outcomes.” 79 The current study aims are guided by [CONTACT_849967] , 78 including 
training and mode of delivery as implementation strategies, and examining implementation outcomes (e.g.,  
adoption, feasibility, fidelity, penetration, acceptability, short -term sustainment, and costs), as well as SEEK’s 
effectiveness in preventing CM. The study will also contribute to the IS understanding of sustainment of 
innovations in service systems (e.g., pediatri c primary care), an important yet little understood area in IS.80 
    Common barriers to implementing and sustaining new interventions like SEEK include costs, time 
constraints, PCP attitudes, and failure to anticipate barriers to widespread implementation. The logistics in 
gathering PCPs for in -person training are formidable. Thus, many EBPs for primary care “die on the vine,” ripe 
fruit that is never pic ked. Webinars and online training, however, offer convenience and appear promising.  22,[ADDRESS_1181681] be addressed. This is done by [CONTACT_849968]. The use of technology to facilitate accessibility, r eliability, and fidelity of model 
components is an implementation strategy that increasingly fits with the workflow in primary care practices. It 
also helps integrate services into existing administrative activities  (e.g., billing). Knowing the opportunity cost 
afforded by [CONTACT_849969] a new 
intervention, even if an EBP, without knowing the impact on practice resources. Thus, quantifying the 
impl ementation cost of SEEK is needed.  
The Safe Environment for Every Kid (SEEK) Model (see Figure 1)  
    Scientific Basis. Two theories 
guided SEEK’s development. 
Ecological -developmental 
theory81,82 recognizes the multiple 
and interacting systems 
surrounding a child. Pediatric care 
has focused narrowly on the child; 
SEEK was based on understanding 
the strong influence of family and 
parental functioning on children’s 
health, development and safety, 
and on CM. SEEK was also guided 
by [CONTACT_849970]83-85 

that links an understanding of a person’s stage of change (e.g., pre - contemplative) with an intervention 
tailored to the individual. Principles of Motivational Interviewing (MI) too have been incorporated .12,86 
Prevention science,  Prevention science, integrating multiple disciplines, also guided SEEK’s development.[ADDRESS_1181682] such 
changes by [CONTACT_849971]’ abilities to address the targeted problems, working with professionals in other 
disciplines and agencies.  The SEEK model also has been guided by  [CONTACT_490184].10 For example, role 
plays demonstrate how PCPs can address problems. Implementing these approaches, interacting with parents 
and behavioral health professionals and gaining confidence foster self -efficacy. In addition, the US Preventive 
Services Task Force recommends screening for intimate partner violence (IPV), depression , and alcohol 
misuse. 88 SEEK provides a structured approach to follow this recommendation, and help prevent CM.      
   The SEEK Model. Core components include: 1) t raining PCPs  to identify and help address targeted   
psychosocial problems that are prevalent risk factors for CM:  parental depression and major stress, substance 
abuse, IPV, harsh discipline and food insecurity;  2) the evidence -based  SEEK Parent Questionnaire  (PQ) to 
screen for the problems at well child visits 89-94 (see Appendix) ; 3) the Reflect –Empathize –Assess –Plan (REAP) 
approach to help PCPs assess and address problems; 4)  principles of Motivational Interviewing; 5)  SEEK 
Parent Handouts  for each targeted problem, customized with local resources ;  and 6 ) a method for referring to 
community resources for identified problems –by [CONTACT_849972] . Regarding the last 
component, SEEK practices in the RCTs had access to a social worker, although often problems were addressed 
by [CONTACT_849973]. A similar situation will apply in the proposed study where 60% of practices ha ve 
behavioral health. In others, this will be done by [CONTACT_849973]. We think the "who" is not as important 
as the "what.  This illustrates retaining core components while using strategies for scale -up in the “real world.”                                                                                                                              
     Facilitation of Implementation of SEEK  to be Examined in the Proposed Study. The SEEK 
intervention has demonstrated effectiveness, but its widespread adoption by [CONTACT_849974]. To help facilitate its implementation, 
two pragmatic technology driven platforms 
have been developed to increase the 
convenience and accessibility of the model to 
busy PCPs: 1) an interactive web-based training 
that utilizes webinars and individualized 
guidance during service delivery start -up and 
(2) a SEEK online  software to facilitate delivery 
of SEEK within regular primary care chec kup 
visits. T his study will examine the effectiveness of these implementation strategies.  
    Training. Two training strategies will be tested (see Table 1),  both increasingly used with PCPs, and 
developed in accordance with principles of adult leaning.  22,[ADDRESS_1181683], SEEK Maintenance of Certification 
(MOC -4) is an example of a structured Quality Improvement (QI) project approved by [CONTACT_849975], required of physicians to maintain Board certification. It includes viewing 
the training videos and implementing SEEK in o ne’s practice and conducting the QI Plan -Do-Study -Act cycle. 
This PDSA cycle involves learning from data collected before and during SEEK’s implementation to assess and 
improve the process. Four  95 one-hour webinars over 4 months enable collaborative learning and mentoring.  
Second, Independent online (IND) training is a student -centered approach; it involves viewing the training 
videos over [ADDRESS_1181684] state licensure. Although both are convenient, we hypothesize that 
the interactive MOC -4 training will  lead to more efficient and competent adoption of SEEK.    

        Facilitation of Service D elivery.  SEEK online  is software to efficiently implement SEEK via a secure 
web-based system interfacing with a 
practice’s EHR. SEEK online  has been 
developed and is currently being beta 
tested. Its effectiveness in improving 
implementation outcomes compared to 
the Traditional paper -and-pencil 
approach has yet to be examined. Data 
are stored in a Microsoft SQL Server 
Database, in an isolated, secure, private 
cloud environment, behind a fully 
HIPAA -certified network security device.  
SEEK online enables parents to privately 
comple te the SEEK PQ before a child’s 
checkup. Responses are available to PCPs  
at the start of the visit and there is real time decision support for PCPs (e.g., how to respond to a parent who 
thinks counseling is useless) vs. the Traditional paper -and-pencil approach.  Selected documentation is sent to 
the child’s EHR. In addition, S EEK online  provides aggregate data for needs assessments and QI projects. 
Nevertheless, some practices will choose the Traditional approach ; they too will include SEEK -related 
informat ion in a child’s EHR (see Table 2).  
 
Summary. Primary care offers an excellent opportunity to  help address psychosocial problems, promote 
children’s wellbeing, and help prevent CM by [CONTACT_849976]. The proposed study aims 
to use technology to facilitate the accessibility and implementation of SEEK and to evaluate its effectiveness in 
helpi[INVESTIGATOR_849947]. This  fits well with NICHD’s vision for translational research  to promote sustainable 
behavioral change in the context of social factors, and “to transform this knowledge into effective interventions 
to improve health across different setti ngs and populations.” 96 
 
B. INNOVATION  
This proposed study involves a rigorous hybrid III design to address both implementation and effectiveness 
aims, integrating knowledge from pediatric primary care, family medicine, CM prevention, implementation 
science and health economics, to examine how technology driven implementation strategies can enhance 
SEEK’s scalability.  
Prevention in primary healthcare settings.  The proposed study will offer a new understanding of the 
barriers to and facilitators of the adoption and optimal implementation of SEEK, the only EBP for the 
prevention of CM developed for primary healthcare. 6,[ADDRESS_1181685] only been in pediatric practices.  
The use of technology driven implementation strategies.  As medicine transitions to electronic 
approaches, this study will provide valuable information regarding online and distance learning as well as the 
SEEKonline web -based software, and how theses influences PCPs’ practice.   
Understanding PCPs’, behavioral health professionals’, office staffs’ and parents’ experiences 
implementing SEEK. The study aims to understand participants’ experiences regarding modalities 
developed to help implement the model, including the SEEK website, online training videos, and SEEK online . 
In addition to quantitative measures, qualitative interviews with multiple groups of participants will be 
conducted to examine the effectiveness of different training and intervention strategies, in varied settings.   
Assessment of implementation process and associated costs within primary care settings.  
Although successfully implemented in our previous RCTs and [ADDRESS_1181686] the SEEK’s 
implementation in real -world settings. The Stage s of Implementation Completion (SIC)  [ADDRESS_1181687] to characterize the implementation process. This framework enables a refined understanding of 
the implementation process and outcomes. The associated COINS (i.e., Cost of Implementing New Strategies) 
measures implementation costs . 98 We will look at these implementation outcomes in relation to organizational 
factors such as leadership and climate —known correlates of implementation success  [ADDRESS_1181688] -partum depression, 
SEEK is one of few screens for social determinants of health based on evidence from pediatric settings.  6,19 -21               Table 2. SEEK Intervention Strategies  
 
SEEK online  Traditional  
Parent completes SEEK PQ online  Parent completes SEEK PQ with paper and 
pencil  
SEEK PQ adds probes for positive screens  Probes are conducted during the visit, orally  
PCP has parent’s info at start of visit  PCP has parent’s info at start of visit  
Electronic decision support for PCP  PCP has SEEK algorithms as Word documents  
Auto documentation  PCP needs to document  
Info sent to private Care portal  N/A  
Parent Handouts readily printed  Parent Handouts need to be printed in advance  
Information readily integrated into EHR  Information less readily integrated into EHR  
Aggregate data readily available for QI 
projects  Aggregate data not readily available for QI 
projects  
 
Guidance for dissemination and implementation strategies.  The above information should guide the 
development of new strategies to disseminate and implement evidence -based interventions such as SEEK in 
primary healthcare systems, and help build the knowledge base in IS. If successful, outcomes will be applicable 
to add ressing social determinants of other child physical and behavioral health problems.  
 
C. APPROACH  
Preliminary Studies - Evidence from Two RCTs Supporting the Effectiveness of SEEK  
Two federally -funded RCTs have been conducted on SEEK over the last 15 years.  6,19 -21  
Studies’ Aims. There were 2 main aims: 1) to examine whether training in SEEK would significantly 
enhance PCPs’ awareness, attitudes, level of comfort, perceived competence and practice behavior  with regard 
to addressing the targeted risk factors (e.g., parental depression, substance abuse, food insecurity) for CM and 
2) to examine whether SEEK would reduce the rate of CM, compared to standard pediatric primary care.     
Studies’ Samples. The SEEK I  sample of 558 families was high risk, very low income, urban, mostly 
African American , and served by [CONTACT_849977], and involved 95 physicians.  19,21   SEEK 
II involved 105 pediatricians and nurse practitioners and 1,119 relatively low risk, mostly white, middle -income 
families recruited from 18 suburban private pediatric practices in central Maryland.  6,20        
Studies’ Design. Practices in both studies were randomized to either SEEK or standard care. 
Following baseline evaluations of the PCPs, those randomized to SEEK received in -person training on how to 
address targeted risk factors for CM within a primary care visit. Parents were recruited from all practices with 
initial and follow -up assessments at 6 (SEEKI) or 12 (SEEK II) months. PCPs were evaluated at [ADDRESS_1181689] the end of the studies, after 30 -43 months (SEEK I and II) , the children’s 
medical records were reviewed for CM -related diagnoses, before and after implementing SEEK. Data were 
gathered from the state agency on possible Child Protective Services (CPS) involvement. We assessed parents’ 
satisfaction with the child’s PCP. In SEEK II, medical students observed PCPs during 3 checkups, at baseline 
and at study end, to observe their approach to and time spent on the targeted problems.  
Studies’ Findings  
Impact on PCPs.  In both studies, PCPs in SEEK practices reported significantly greater comfort and perceived 
competence in addressing the targeted risk factors, compared to controls. 6,[ADDRESS_1181690] 
observation; screening increased on average across practice s from less than 5% to 62% of visits. In SEEK I, 
parents in SEEK clinics reported more favorable views of their child’s PCP. [ADDRESS_1181691] on CM.  Three measures from three sources assessed CM: 1) parent self -report on the Conflict Tactics 
Scale, 101 2) review of children’s medical records for abuse or neglect, and 3) CPS reports. Parent self -report.  
SEEK I parents reported fewer “severe physical assaults” than controls (0.11 vs. 0.33, p = .04).  19  SEEK II 
parents reported fewer instances of Psychological Aggression (p = .02) and Minor Physical Assaults (p <.05) 
than did controls.  [ADDRESS_1181692] than did controls. 19 
There was less “non -compliance” with medical care (4.6% vs. 8.4%, p = 0.05), and fewer delayed 
immunizations (3.3% vs. 9.6%, p = 0.002). CPS reports.  In SEEK I, fewer families were reported to CPS (12% 
vs. 19.7%, p = .04). 19 A report was prevented in one of every 13 such families exposed to SEEK.                                                                                                                                                                                              
Time Required.  SEEK did not require significantly more time, on average, for PCPs to address psychosocial 
problems.  20 Parents completing the PQ before visits saved time; this was offset when addressing problems.                                                                                                                                                                           
Cost.  SEEK II  cost $3.38 per child per year and $[ADDRESS_1181693] per case of CM at $2,908, providing SEEK in all practices would have saved 
society between 1.[ADDRESS_1181694] to a practice of implementing 
SEEK.  Of note, CPT code [ZIP_CODE] enables PCPs to bill each time the SEEK Parent Questionnaire is administered.  
                            
Strengths and Limitations of the Extant Research on SEEK        
            Strengths. Improvements in PCP thinking and practice regarding the targeted psychosocial problems 
to be known determinants of CM were sustained in both RCTs. Indeed, there was significantly less CM 
associated with SEEK  - in both RCTs. Moreover, SEEK II demonstrated effectiveness in a sample that 
otherwise , would be considered to be relatively low risk, representing many American families, suggesting the 
potential for widespread bene fit from scaling up SEEK.  
Limitations Addressed in the Proposed Research. The studies did not probe what facilitated or 
challenged practices’ and PCPs’ adoption and implementation of SEEK. In addition, SEEK was only tested in 
pediatric settings; there is a need to examine it in family medicine practices. Further, the labor -intensive in -
person training used in the RCTs reduces the capacity for widespread scale -up. Evaluation of easily accessible  
methods for training and guidance in implementing SEEK including online training and  SEEK online  decision 
support have the potential to increase adoption and implementation of SEEK with fidelity more broadly.  
 
Strong Multidisciplinary Team                                                                                                                                           
[CONTACT_849995] (PI) is internationally known in the field of CM and has worked closely with Drs. Landsverk, 
Magder and H err. [CONTACT_849996] is expert in software for healthcare settings. Drs. Landsverk, Saldana, and Palinkas 
have collaborated across multiple implementation studies, including Landsverk’s P30 Center focused on 
implementation methods ( P30MH074678 ). They are well known dissemination and implementation 
researchers, including Saldana’s development and testing of the SIC and COINS procedures, and [CONTACT_849997]’ 
expertise in mixed -methods in implementation research. [CONTACT_849998] is a family medicine phys ician and 
experienced researcher. [CONTACT_849999] is a health economist with extensive experience in mental health services 
research and helped develop the COINS. [CONTACT_850000] is a developmental child psychologist with extensive 
expertise in the imple mentation of screening tools in primary care.  
 
Strategy and Design Overview (Figure 2).    
The proposed study, based on SEEK I and II findings is designed to study the effectiveness of technology driven 
training strategies to facilitate use of SEEK in helpi[INVESTIGATOR_849948].  The 
adoption and 
implementation of EBPs 
may be even more 
challenging than their 
development and testing. 97 
This may apply especially  to 
healthcare systems and 
preventive psychosocial 
interventions such as SEEK.      
Implementation 
framework: EPIS 
model. The 
implementation approach is 
anchored in four stages of 
the EPIS conceptual model:  
103 Exploration, 
adoption/Preparation, 
Implementation, and Sustainment. The strong evidence for SEEK’s effectiveness has been underscored by [CONTACT_849978], AHRQ, AAP,  and by [CONTACT_849979] -Based 
Interventions in Child Welfare. Early adopters are increasingly implementing SEEK in primary care settings, 
including in Sweden. Four of the [ADDRESS_1181695] integrated behavioral health. Given that early adopters are estimated to be 10% of those 
eligible and that medical innovations can take 17 years to be adopted,  104 it is unlikely that SEEK’s potential 
public health benefit will be realized without better methods for scaling up.     
      Design. The proposed implementation study is the first involving SEEK. We selected a rigorous Hybrid 
Type III design which is an approach to examine implementation outcomes while also examining SEEK’s 
effectiveness in preventing CM, measured by [CONTACT_849980].[ADDRESS_1181696] 4 years, over 80 papers reported use of hybrid designs. 105 Practices will be randomized to one of the two 
training strategies (IND vs. MOC). Practices, however, will be able to select the facilitation  strategy  
(SEEK online or Traditional) as we are not able to require this of participants . The design accounts for 
heterogeneity in geography, size of healthcare systems, type of primary care (pediatric and family medicine), 
and presence of integrated behavioral health (see strong support letters from  healthcare systems in [LOCATION_007], 
Ohio, Utah, Wisconsin and North Carolin a). As shown in Figure 2, professionals, office staff and parents are  

nested within practices which are nested within the [ADDRESS_1181697] start date, beginning with one pediatric and 
one family medicine system (cohort 1 ). Staggering the start time addresses the capacity limitations of the 
training and research staff . 
Sample. We will offer SEEK to the 5 healthcare systems. Inclusionary criteria are: 1) practices not already 
implementing SEEK, 2) practices providing primary care to children, and 3) agreement to participate. The 
systems have indicated a general commitment to this  project; they include 59 practices with 306 PCPs. Our 
recruitment efforts in SEEK II were very successful with 75% (18/24) of practices agreeing to participate, 
including all the PCPs in those practices.  We plan to study [ADDRESS_1181698] 48 choosing to participate. In the unlikely event that fewer 
than 48 are interested, we will approach other healthcare systems. In addi tion to 5 system leaders, we will 
recruit 5 groups of participants: 1) all 48 practice leaders,  2) 275 PCPs, 3) 16 behavioral health professionals, 4) 
96 ancillary staff, and 5) 288 parents (6 per practice). These estimates are based on current staffing. S maller 
subsamples will be purposively selected for qualitative interviews according to practice type, training strategy 
and presence of integrated behavioral health.  
We will also request limited consent from practice leaders and PCPs who opt out to briefly probe their 
decision. We will ascertain aggregated ICD -10CM -related diagnoses on all children 0 -5 attending the practices 
(N~90,000). Based on our experience , we anticipate 60% of practice leaders and PCPs will be female as will be 
most of the other participants. Different regions provide diversity in terms of urban, suburban and rural 
locations, and racial/ethnic diversity (e.g., 2 systems serve a predominant ly Latin o population). Three systems 
have integrated behavioral health professionals. These contextual factors will be considered in all analyses.  
Recruitment. Leaders in the [ADDRESS_1181699] online survey, participant consent will be ob tained.   
 
Timeline (See Table 3 for timing of data collection)  
Month 1 -8:  Hire and train project coordinator and research assistant. Randomly select first 2 healthcare 
systems (one pediatric, one family medicine). Recruit practices and randomly assign to SEEK 
training strategies; complete training. Practices select SEEK online  or Traditional strategy, 
SEEK online  connected to practices’ EHRs, computerize study protocol, obtain IRB approvals  
Month 5 -48: Periodic webinars with PCPs and evaluation of participants, develop papers and presentations  
Month 9:  Begin implementing SEEK model in cohort 1 of healthcare systems and practices  
Month 11 -15:   Repeat above process with cohort 2 of healthcare systems and practices  
Month 16:  Begin implementing SEEK model in cohort 2  
Month 46 -48: End of observation period, practices decide whether to continue using SEEK, final surveys  
Month 49 -60: Data will be obtained from practices’ EHRs re. implementation (e.g., rate of screening,  
CM-related ICD -10 codes), f inal data analyses, prepare Final Report and papers  
Procedures  
Pre-implementation Phase (5 months).  Recruitment will begin and we will identify a physician “champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394]” 
and an office staff member to lead implementation in each practice. Practices will choose by [CONTACT_24473] 4 
SEEK online or the Traditional paper and pencil approach. T o ease introduction of the SEEK model, we will 
address logistical issues such as for which checkups parents will complete the SEEK PQ and documentation in 
the EHR. SEEK Parent Handouts will be customized with information on local resources and PCPs will 
complete the SEEK Primary Care P rovider Questionnaire (PCPQ) prior to the SEEK training.                                                                
Implementation Phase. In month 5, practices in cohort 1 will be randomized to one of the two SEEK 
training strategies (MOC or IND), stratified by [CONTACT_792032] (pediatric or family medicine). At the end of 
training in month 8, PCPs will evaluate it. After the training, PCPs wil l be asked to participate in [ADDRESS_1181700] baseline regarding their 
thinking, feeling, behavior and experiences (see Table 3) to help inform understanding of SEEK’s 
implementation and sustainment. At months 41 and 48, the observation period will end for cohorts 1 and 2. 
Final surveys and phone interviews will assess participants’ thoughts  and plans about continued use of SEEK. 
Following the grant period, practices that wish to continue utilizing the implementation strategi es will be 
guided through the process of establishing real -world, not -grant funded contracting.  
Final 12 months. De-identified aggregate data will be obtained from practices’ EHRs on all children (0 -5) for 
the periods prior to and during SEEK implementation: rate of eligible visits where screening occurred, types of 
problems identified, types of actions taken, receipt o f services, as well as  CM -related diagnoses using ICD -10 
codes. This will be facilitated by 4 of the 5 systems using EPIC as their EHR and having in -house IT. The data 
will be analyzed, the Final Report prepared, and presentations and papers will continue to be developed.  
 
Measures (See Table 3)  
Measurement will include survey -based assessments, targeted qualitative interviews, observational 
implementation assessment, and EHR data on service delivery of SEEK (e.g., rate of screening) and CM.  
Organizational Assessment  
Organizational measures will be administered at baseline regarding the opportunity to adopt SEEK. Practice 
leaders and PCPs who decide to participate in the study will be recruited; those who opt out will be asked to 
complete the one -time brief online SEEK  Adoption Survey and the following 4 measures. A subsample will 
undergo a semi -structured, 30 -minute phone interview.  
Demographics Form.  This includes the healthcare system and practice structure, annual budget, number of 
practices, number and characteristics of PCPs, presence of behavioral health and  patient demographics.  
Evidence -Based Practice Attitude Scales  (EBPAS). 106  The 15 -item EBPAS measures 4 domains of 
service providers’ attitudes toward adopting EBPs: appeal  (the extent to which one would adopt an EBP if it is 
appealing), requirements  (willingness to adopt an EBP if required to do so), openness  (general openness to 
new interventions), and divergence  (the degree to which one believes that EBPs are less important than clinical 
experience). Subscales have adequate internal consistency (Cronbach’s α = .67 -.91) 107  and convergent validity.  
Implementation Leadership Scale (ILS). 99 The 12 -item ILS assesses leader support for EBPs within an 
organization (5 -point Likert scale). Four subscales - proactive, knowledgeable, supportive,  and perseverant 
leadership - have excellent internal consistency (α = .95 to .96), and convergent and discriminant validity.  
Implementation Climate Scale (ICS).  108  The 18 -item ICS assesses how the organization views new 
interventions. Implementation climate is defined as shared perceptions of policies, practices, procedures and 
behaviors that are rewarded, expected and supported. The measure has strong psychometrics with internal 
consistency (α = .81 -.91), convergent validity, and validation in a sample of child  welfare professionals. 108      
Implementation Process and Outcomes  
The Stages of Implementation Completion (SIC)  is an observational assessment tool developed in a 
large randomized implementation trial. 38,97,109  The SIC has 8 stages, each including sub -activities, extending 
from Engagement with the developers to achievement of practitioner Competency. Each stage maps onto 3 
phases of implementation (Pre -Implementation, Implementation and Sustainment). Competency is viewed as 
entering  into the Sustainment phase. Sustainment is an ongoing process toward achievement of Stage 8.   
 The SIC has been adapted for over 20 different implementation strategies involving varied interventions. 
These multiple adaptations led to the development of the empi[INVESTIGATOR_849949] , with items found 
to be relevant and reliably utilized across each of the adaptations, regardless of service sector or population 
(e.g., child welfare, primary care, prevention). The Universal SIC spans the [ADDRESS_1181701], the time that a practice takes for a stage is 
calculated (Duration Score). Because the implementation process is nonlinear, the Duration Score takes into 
account activities that may not be completed s equentially within a stage. If a site completes only one activity in 
a stage, the Duration Score for that stage is a single day. Duration Scores are calculated separately for each 
stage due to the potential for overlap across stages; the total Duration Score does not necessarily equal the 
summation of each stage’s Duration.  Rather, the total Duration Score is calculated from the date of the first 
completed SIC activity to the final activity completed, regardless of the stage in which it occurred. Second, the 
percentage of activities completed within a stage is calculated Pro portion Score). Similar to Duration,  
Proportion Scores are calculated 
separately for each stage. The total 
Proportion Score is based on the 
number of activities completed out 
of the number that could be 
completed – for each stage. 
Finally, the SIC Stage Score marks 
the final stage that a site  reaches. 
SIC scores are calculated within 
each of the three Implementation 
Phases: Pre -implementation 
(stages 1 -3), Implementation 
(stages 4 -7), and Sustainment 
(stage 8).  
SEEK Targeted Adoption, 
Training, Implementation 
Assessment                                                                  
SEEK Adoption Survey. This 
survey will capture key 
considerations regarding decisions 
whether to adopt SEEK, including 
perceived barriers and strengths.                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
SEEK PCP Training Evaluation Form. This online survey will be developed to evaluate PCPs’ perceptions 
of the training approaches and solicit input as to how the training might be improved.                                                                                             
SEEK PCP Questionnaire.  (PCPQ). The PCPQ, used in both SEEK RCTs  20,21, has 5 vignettes, with 7 -12 
statements assessing PCPs’ thinking and practice with regard to addressing the targeted CM risk factors. Each 
vignette is followed by [CONTACT_849981] “I know how to motivate parents who may be resistant to 
suggestions” rated o n a Likert scale. Items were grouped conceptually into 4 topi[INVESTIGATOR_849950] (e.g., Substance 
Abuse) and also cross -cutting themes (e.g., Perceived Competence).  Cronbach’s  [ADDRESS_1181702] scales: Depression (.76), IPV (.80), Major Stress (.80) and Substance Abuse (.58), and for most themes: 
Attitudes (.77), Knowledge (.55), Comfort (.68), Competence (.74) and Practice (.70).                                                                                                                         
SEEK  PCP  Survey.  This 19 -item measure uses a 5 -point Likert scale to assess PCPs’ experience 
implementing SEEK including their  perceptions of its relevance, ease of delivery, helpfulness and 
training.                                                                                                                                             SEEK Office Staff 
Survey . This 23 -item measure uses a 5 -point Likert scale to assess staff experiences with SEEK, including how 
they understood their roles and perceived competenc e in implementing SEEK.                                                                        
Rate of Screening. EHR data on the proportion of eligible visits where screening occurred, in a given period. 
Receipt of Services. EHR data on referrals and receipt of services by [CONTACT_849982].                                                                                                                                                                
SEEK Parent View of Child’s PCP . Parents rate their child’s PCP on this measure adapted for pediatric 
practice from the Patient -[CONTACT_850001] tion Scale; reliability and validity are good. 110  The Likert scale was 
changed to a yes -no response. Individual scores range from 0 – 20; higher scores indicate greater satisfaction.   
Child Maltreatment  
EHR CM -related Diagnoses . ICD -[ADDRESS_1181703] study end for all children 0 -5 attending  the practices during 
the study – for up to 2 years prior to and during the study.  
Qualitative Assessment : Phone Interviews                                                                                                               
To assess feasibility and acceptability and potential barriers and facilitators of the SEEK intervention, we will 
conduct 30 -minute semi -structure d phone interviews with purposively selected (based on role, practice type, 
training strategy and presence of behavioral health) subsamples of 5 groups: practice leaders, PCPs, behavioral 
health professionals, office  staff and parents, at [ADDRESS_1181704] 3 groups, these will be around the 
start of the intervention (probing adoption) and [ADDRESS_1181705] of Implementing New Strategies (COINS) framework which 
provides a structure for measuring and categorizing costs. [ADDRESS_1181706] statistical methods for calculating point estimates, confidence intervals, 
and p -values require the assumption of independence. However, due to participants being clustered within 
healthcare systems and within practices, this assumption cannot be  made. To account for the lack of 
independence among multiple measures within the same system or practice, we will use random effects (i.e., 
hierarchical) models. In these models, we will include a random effect for system and for pr actice. In analyses 
involving multiple measures from the same person, we will include a random effect for each one. These models 
can be fitted using SAS Proc GLIMMIX, which fits models for both quantitative and binary outcomes. There 
will be diverse analys es based on the data. Below we highlight the main analyses for each Aim. The qualitative 
data (see below) will inform the models through processes of convergence (i.e., triangulation) and expansion 
(i.e., explanation of unexpected findings from analyses of  quantitative data).[ADDRESS_1181707] for sex d ifferences; when differences are noted, additional analyses will examine the influence of 
additional contextual factors on these outcomes.  
Aim 1.  Compare alternative approaches to implementation of SEEK with respect to clinical and 
implementation outcomes.  To address aim 1a, we will compare practices randomized to MOC to practices 
randomized to IND with respect to clinical and implementation outcomes.  These include perceptions of the 
training from the PCPs’ evaluations, scales from the SEEK PCPQ (e.g., Competence in addressing problems) 
and the PCP Survey (e.g., Ease of Delivery. We will also compare the groups with respect to rates of scree ning 
and parents’ receipt of services and satisfaction with the PCP. For quantitative outcomes, statistical inference 
will be based on linear regression models; for binary outcomes, inference will be based on logistic regression 
models, accounting for repe ated measures within PCP and system. For example, for PCPs reported 
Competence we will fit this model: E(Competence ijkl) = β 0 + s i + p j + i k + β 1(POST) + β 2(POST)(MOC -4) where 
Competence ijkl stands for the competence score measured at the lth time point (l=1 or 2 for baseline or follow -
up respectively) of the kth PCP in the jth practice of the ith system, and  s i , pj , ik are random effects for system, 
practice and PCP respectively; POST=[ADDRESS_1181708] -training measure and 0 otherwise, MOC = 1 if the PCP was 
trained using MOC and 0 if IND, and β’s are parameters to be estimated. Note this model assumes that the 
mean bas eline scores are the same in both groups, as recommended for randomized  studies. 113 This model can 
be fitted using restricted maximum likelihood. To avoid possible biases due to selective attrition from the 
training, the primary analysis will follow the “intention to treat” principle including all those randomized.  
Secondary analyses wi ll be based on groups defined by [CONTACT_849983].  To address Aim 1b we will compare 
practices who choose SEEK -online to practices who choose the traditional approach using the same statistical 
methods as described for Aim 1a. Outcomes of interest will i nclude staff satisfaction, costs, rates of screening, 
receipt of services, and parental satisfaction.                                                                                                                                            
Aim 2. Examine variations in SEEK’s implementation process and impacts and understand 
associated barriers and facilitators in pediatric and family medicine practices. We will determine 
the proportion of practices that agree to adopt SEEK. We will then quantitatively assess the relationship 
between practice characteristics (e.g., demographics, EBP attitudes) and willingness to adopt SEEK. The most 
important independent p redictors will be determined using multivariable logistic regression models. Among 
those that do adopt SEEK, we will assess their degree of completeness, speed, and quality of implementation 
using the SIC.  Completeness will be summarized using the final stage attained (0 -8).  Speed will be 
summarized by [CONTACT_849984], and quality  by [CONTACT_849985], 
and overall. The distribution of these variables will be determined, overall and separately, based on the type of 
practice. The distribution of time to achieve each phase will be estimated using the Kaplan -Meier approach. 
Barriers and facilitators to implementing SEEK will be probed quantitatively and qualitatively (see below). 
Among practices adopting SEEK, we will e xamine the association between practice characteristics and 
measures of completeness, speed, and quality of implementation from the SIC. We will examine relationships 
between practice characteristics and implementation by [CONTACT_849986]. Finally, the most important predictors of degree of implementation will be 
determined using multivariable regression models with practice characteristics as predictors and SIC measures 
as outcomes. In a ddition to studying implementation at the practice level, we will analyze the relationship 
between PCP level measures of implementation (e.g., screening rates) and PCP characteristics, facilitators and 
barriers.  These models will account for clustering of  PCPs within practices, as described above.   
Aim 3. Examine the effectiveness of SEEK in reducing CM. As in our previous studies,  6,19 we will 
identify CM -related diagnoses, now via EHRs.  We will review the EHR for each child (0 -5) in each practice for 
two years prior to implementing SEEK and during implementation.  The presence of CM -related ICD -[ADDRESS_1181709] for site, similarly to Aim 1 .  
Sample Size Considerations. Our projected sample sizes (numbers of practices, professionals within each 
practice, and children in the practices) should provide good precision to estimate parameters and ample power 
to detect moderate associations. Table [ADDRESS_1181710] sizes of about 1.0 regarding 
Competence and Comfort in SEEK II. For Aim 2, assuming 90% of practices provide organizational 
information, we wi ll estimate the rate of adoption of SEEK accurately, + [ADDRESS_1181711] of implementation will be 
calculated for both training arms (IND 
and MOC). Cost effectiveness ratios will 
be calculated as the cost per average SIC 
compo nent completed, and per average 
Competence scale and Practice Behavior 
scale scores. Standard time discounting 
methods will be applied to cost 
estimates. [ADDRESS_1181712] errors for 
use in mean comparisons will be 
estimated, using bootstrappi[INVESTIGATOR_164577]. 114 
Qualitative/Mixed Methods Analysis.  An audit trail of data collected and memos, team meetings 
indicating time, place, source of data, and persons collecting or analyzing information, will be kept. Procedures 
for data collection and the role of the investigator collecting the data will be det ailed and reviewed with each 
member of the research team. We will analyze interview transcripts using a thematic content analysis 
methodology . [ADDRESS_1181713]’s aims and to identify topi[INVESTIGATOR_849951]. During this and  subsequent steps, investiga tors will prepare short descriptive statements or 
“memos” to document initial impressions of topi[INVESTIGATOR_849952], and to define the 
boundaries of specific codes (i.e., the inclusion and exclusion criteria for assigning a specific code ). 116 Second, 
transcripts will be independently coded to condense the data into analyzable units. Segments of text ranging 
from a phrase to several paragraphs will be assigned codes based on a priori (i.e., from the interview guide) or 
emergent themes (or, open  coding  117). Codes will be assigned to describe connections between categories and 
between categories and subcategories (i.e., axial coding  117). Codes will also be assigned to reflect the social and 
demographic characteristics of study participants. Lists of codes developed by [CONTACT_849987] a single codebook. Third, each text will be independently coded by  [CONTACT_849988]. Disagreements in assignment or description of codes will be resolved through discussion  

between investigators and by [CONTACT_849989]. The final list of codes or codebook, constructed 
through team consensus, will consist of a numbered list of themes, issues, accounts of behaviors, and opi[INVESTIGATOR_849953]. With the final coding structure, two investigators will 
separately review transcripts to determine level of agreement in the codes. A level of agreement ranging from 
66-97% depending on level of coding (general, intermediate, specific), indic ates good reliability in qualitative 
research.  118  Fourth, based on these codes, the computer program QSR NVivo  119 will generate a series of 
categories arranged in a treelike structure connecting text segments grouped into separate categories of codes 
or “nodes.” These nodes and trees will be used to further the process of axial or pattern coding to examine the 
associ ation between different a priori and emergent categories. They will also be used in selective coding of 
material to identify the existence of new, previously unrecognized categories. The number of times these 
categories occur together, either as duplicate codes assigned to the same text or as codes assigned to adjacent 
texts in the same conversation, will be recorded, and specific examples of co -occurrence illustrated with 
transcript texts. Fifth, by [CONTACT_849990], th e different categories will be 
further condensed into broad themes using a format that places SEEK’s effectiveness and implementation 
within the framework of the system characteristics.  120   Finally, the theme will be compared with the results of 
the analysis of quantitative data relating to PCP experiences specific to SEEK and its implementation to 
identify points of convergence and divergence (triangulation) and to explain or account for pot entially 
unanticipated findings (expansion).  
Sample Size Considerations. Since this qualitative analysis involves no hypothesis testing using statistical 
procedures, the number of subjects necessary to produce sufficiently valid and reliable results cannot be 
calculated using standard formulas for statistical analysis. Neverthe less, previous studies relying upon this 
methodology have typi[INVESTIGATOR_849954] [ADDRESS_1181714], we considered random izing SEEK online  vs. the Traditional approach , but think 
this may be difficult for some practices. Nevertheless, we will be able to compare outcomes related to these 
approaches , and, we are positioned to assess this intervention in real world circumstances . Second, while  SEEK 
originally included a social worker, the core element was a means of facilitating referrals to community 
resources – often done by a PCP and office staff, and that remains. We think the “what” gets done is more 
important than the “who.” We will be abl e to qualitativel y assess the role of behavioral health; the numbers 
however  preclude doing so quantitatively. Third, medical records clearly offer only a partial view of possible 
CM, although they are a means of detecting abuse and neglect that may not be reported to CPS. Given the 
multiple regions and logistics of this study, ga thering CPS and parental self -report data on CM are not feasible.  
 
Summary . This innovative hybrid III implementation trial examines two technology driven implementation 
strategies to scale -up SEEK in primary care practices. Using technology to facilitate quality training and service 
delivery of the SEEK model has the potential to  increase efficiency and acceptability. Understanding how to 
best implement SEEK should enhance primary care in both pediatric and family medicine settings by [CONTACT_849991]. Doing so can improve the wellbeing of  families and parents and 
thereby [CONTACT_849992]’s health, development and safety, and help prevent CM. Outcomes can provide 
valuable lessons for other implementation efforts that address social determinants of child health problems.   
  
 
References  
1. U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, Administration on Children, Youth and Families, 
Children’s Bureau. Child Maltreatment 2015. 2017.  
2. Dubowitz H. The Safe Environment for Every Kid Model: Promotion of Children’s Health, 
Development, and Safety, and Prevention of Child Neglect. Pediatric Annals. 2014;43(11):e271 -e277.  
3. Alberti PM, Sutton KM, Cooper LA, Lane WG, Stephens S, Gourdine MA. Communities, Social Justice, 
and Academic Health Centers. Academic Medicine. 2017;20:00 -00. 
4. Pettignano R, Bliss L, McLaren S, Caley S. Interprofessional Medical -Legal Education of Medical 
Students: Assessing the Benefits for Addressing Social Determinants of Health. Academic Medicine. 
2017.  
5. American Academy of Pediatrics. Screening Technical Assistance & Resource (STAR) Center. 2017. 
Available at: aap.org/screening. Accessed on 6/15/[ADDRESS_1181715] WG, Semiatin JN, Magder LS. The SEEK model of pediatric primary care: can child 
maltreatment be prevented in a low -risk population? Academic Pediatrics. 2012;12(4):259 -268.  
7. Anglin GJ, Morrison GR. An analysis of distance education research: Implications for the instructional 
technologist. Quarterly Review of Distance Education. 2007;1(3):189 -194.  
8. Thompson MM, Irele ME. Evaluating distance education programs. In: MG Moore WA, ed. Handbook 
of distance education . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum; 2003:567 -584.  
9. Yang F, Wang M, Shen R, Han P. Community -organizing agent: An artificial intelligent system for 
building learning communities among large numbers of learners. Computers & Education. 
2007;49(2):131 -147. 
10. Bandura A. Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective. Annual review of psychology. 2001;52(1):1 -
26. 
11. Prochaska JO, DiClemente CC, Norcross JC. In search of how people change: Applications to addictive 
behaviors. American Psychologist. 1992;47(9):1102.  
12. Miller WR, Rollnick S. Motivational interviewing: Helpi[INVESTIGATOR_9984] . 3rd ed: Guilford press; 
2013.  
13. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/can -
prevention -technical -package.pdf . Accessed 6/15/17.  
14. U.S. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 
http://www.innovations.ahrq.gov/content.aspx?id=3205 .  Accessed 6/15/17.  
15. American Academy of Pediatrics. http://brightfutures.aap.org/tool_and_resource_kit.html . 
Accessed 6/15/17.  
16. [LOCATION_004] Evidence -Based Clearinghouse. http://www.cebc4cw.org/program/safe -environment -for-
every -kid-seek -model/detailed . Accessed 6/15/17 . 
17. Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. www.healthypeople.gov . Accessed 6/19/17.  
18. Surgeon General's Workshop on Making Prevention of Child Maltreatment a National Priority: 
Implementing Innovations of a Public Health Approach: Lister Hill Auditorium, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, March 30 -31, 2005 . Office of the S urgeon General (US). Rockville (MD).  
19. Dubowitz H, Feigelman S, Lane W, Kim J. Pediatric primary care to help prevent child maltreatment: 
the Safe Environment for Every Kid (SEEK) Model. Pediatrics. 2009;123(3):[ADDRESS_1181716] WG, Semiatin JN, Magder LS, Venepally M, Jans M. The safe environment for every 
kid model: impact on pediatric primary care professionals. Pediatrics. 2011;127(4):e962 -e970.  
21. Feigelman S, Dubowitz H, Lane W, Grube L, Kim J. Training pediatric residents in a primary care clinic 
to help address psychosocial problems and prevent child maltreatment. Academic Pediatrics. 
2011;11(6):[ADDRESS_1181717] JC, Reed BD, Locke A. Using Maintenance of Certification as a Tool to Improve 
the Delivery of Confidential Care for Adolescent Patients. Journal of Pediatric and Adolescent 
Gynecology. 2017;30(1):76 -81. 
23. Makaroff LA, Xierali IM, Petterson SM, Shipman SA, Puffer JC, Bazemore AW. Factors influencing 
family physicians’ contribution to the child health care workforce. The Annals of Family Medicine. 
2014;12(5):427 -431. 
24. Curran GM, Bauer M, Mittman B, Pyne JM, Stetler C. Effectiveness -implementation hybrid designs: 
combining elements of clinical effectiveness and implementation research to enhance public health 
impact. Medical Care. 2012;50(3):217.  
25. Dolan BM, Yialamas MA, McMahon GT. A randomized educational intervention trial to determine the 
effect of online education on the quality of resident -delivered care. Journal of Graduate Medical 
Education. 2015;7(3):376 -381.  
26. Donovan AK, Wood GJ, Rubio DM, Day HD, Spagnoletti CL. Faculty Communication Knowledge, 
Attitudes, and Skills Around Chronic Non -Malignant Pain Improve with Online Training. Pain 
Medicine. 2016;17(11):1985 -1992.  
27. Lannon CM, Peterson LE. Pediatric collaborative networks for quality improvement and research. 
Academic Pediatrics. 2013;13(6):S69 -S74.  
28. Peterson LE, Blackburn B, Puffer JC, Phillips RL. Family physicians’ quality interventions and 
performance improvement for hypertension through maintenance of certification. Journal for 
Healthcare Quality. 2014.  
29. Wiggins RE, Etz R. Assessment of the American Board of Ophthalmology’s Maintenance of Certification 
Part 4 (Improvement in Medical Practice). JAMA Ophthalmology. 2016;134(9):[ADDRESS_1181718] (NIS -4). Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services. 
Retrieved on July. 2010;9:2010.  
31. Bennett EM, Kemper KJ. Is abuse during childhood a risk factor for developi[INVESTIGATOR_849955]? Journal of Developmental & Behavioral Pediatrics. 1994;15(6):426 -429.  
32. Brown GR, Anderson B. Psychiatric morbidity in adult inpatients with childhood histories of sexual and 
physical abuse. The American journal of psychiatry. 1991;148(1):55.  
33. Duncan RD, Saunders BE, Kilpatrick DG, Hanson RF, Resnick HS. Childhood physical assault as a risk 
factor for PTSD, depression, and substance abuse: Findings from a national survey. American Journal 
of Orthopsychiatry. 1996;66(3):[ADDRESS_1181719] histories among clients receiving 
substance abuse treatment. Journal of Counseling & Development. 1995;73(4):475 -480.  
35. Ireland T, Widom CS. Childhood victimization and risk for alcohol and drug arrests. International 
Journal of the Addictions. 1994;29(2):235 -274.  
36. Johnsen LW, Harlow LL. Childhood sexual abuse linked with adult substance use, victimization, and 
AIDS -risk. AIDS Educ Prev. Feb 1996;8(1):[ADDRESS_1181720] of child abuse victimization among substance -
using women in treatment. Journal of Interpersonal Violence. 1999;14(6):657 -670.  
38. Morrow KB, Sorell GT. Factors affecting self -esteem, depression, and negative behaviors in sexually 
abused female adolescents. Journal of Marriage and the Family. 1989:677 -686.  
39. Rotheram ‐Borus MJ, Mahler KA, Koopman C, Langabeer K. Sexual abuse history and associated 
multiple risk behavior in adolescent runaways. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry. 1996;66(3):390 -
400.  
40. Runtz M, Briere J. Adolescent “acting -out” and childhood history of sexual abuse. Journal of 
Interpersonal Violence. 1986;1(3):326 -334.  
41. Sansonnet -Hayden H, Haley G, Marriage K, Fine S. Sexual abuse and psychopathology in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_368919]. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry. 1987;26(5):753 -757. 
42. Sheridan MJ. A proposed intergenerational model of substance abuse, family functioning, and 
abuse/neglect. Child Abuse & Neglect. 1995;19(5):519 -530.  
43. Alexander PC. Childhood trauma, attachment, and abuse by [CONTACT_849993]. Psychological Trauma: 
Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy. 2009;1(1):78.  
44. Banyard VL, Williams LM, Saunders BE, Fitzgerald MM. The complexity of trauma types in the lives of 
women in families referred for family violence: Multiple mediators of mental health. American Journal 
of Orthopsychiatry. 2008;78(4):394 -404.  
45. Ehrensaft MK, Cohen P, Brown J, Smailes E, Chen H, Johnson JG. Intergenerational transmission of 
partner violence: a 20 -year prospective study. Journal of consulting and clinical psychology. 
2003;71(4):741.  
46. Halpern CT, Spriggs AL, Martin SL, Kupper LL. Patterns of intimate partner violence victimization 
from adolescence to young adulthood in a nationally representative sample. Journal of Adolescent 
Health. 2009;45(5):[ADDRESS_1181721]. Pathways from physical 
childhood abuse to partner violence in young adulthood. Violence and Victims. 2004;19(2):123 -136. 
48. Lang AJ, Stein MB, Kennedy CM, Foy DW. Adult psychopathology and intimate partner violence among 
survivors of childhood maltreatment. Journal of Interpersonal Violence. 2004;19(10):1102 -1118.  
49. Chapman DP, Whitfield CL, Felitti VJ, Dube SR, Edwards VJ, Anda RF. Adverse childhood experiences 
and the risk of depressive disorders in adulthood. Journal of Affective Disorders. 2004;82(2):217 -225.  
50. Malinosky -Rummell R, Hansen DJ. Long -term consequences of childhood physical abuse. 
Psychological Bulletin. 1993;114(1):68.  
51. Perez CM, Widom CS. Childhood victimization and long -term intellectual and academic outcomes. 
Child Abuse & Neglect. 1994;18(8):617 -633.  
52. Dube SR, Anda RF, Felitti VJ, Chapman DP, Williamson DF, Giles WH. Childhood abuse, household 
dysfunction, and the risk of attempted suicide throughout the life span: findings from the Adverse 
Childhood Experiences Study. JAMA. 2001;286(24):[ADDRESS_1181722] management in 
romantic relationships in early adulthood. Journal of Family Psychology. 2005;19(2):252.  
54. Smith PH, White JW, Holland LJ. A longitudinal perspective on dating violence among adolescent and 
college -age women. American Journal of Public Health. 2003;93(7):[ADDRESS_1181723], Martin SL. Continuity of adolescent and early adult partner violence 
victimisation: association with witnessing violent crime in adolescence. Journal of Epi[INVESTIGATOR_849956]. 2009;63(9):[ADDRESS_1181724], Schumm JA, Marshall AD, Panuzio J, Holtzworth -Munroe A. Family -of-origin maltreatment, 
posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms, social information processing deficits, and relationship abuse 
perpetration. Journal of Abnormal Psychology. 2008;117(3):637.  
57. White HR, Widom CS. Intimate partner violence among abused and neglected children in young 
adulthood: The mediating effects of early aggression, antisocial personality, hostility and alcohol 
problems. Aggressive Behavior. 2003;29(4):332 -345.  
58. Whiting JB, Simmons LA, Havens JR, Smith DB, Oka M. Intergenerational transmission of violence: 
The influence of self -appraisals, mental disorders and substance abuse. Journal of Family Violence. 
2009;24(8):639 -648.  
59. Arnow BA, Hart S, Scott C, Dea R, O’connell L, Taylor CB. Childhood sexual abuse, psychological 
distress, and medical use among women. Psychosomatic Medicine. 1999;61(6):[ADDRESS_1181725] of adverse childhood experiences on 
health problems: evidence from four birth cohorts dating back to 1900. Preventive Medicine. 
2003;37(3):268 -277.  
61. Farley M, Patsalides BM. Physical symptoms, posttraumatic stress disorder, and healthcare utilization 
of women with and without childhood physical and sexual abuse. Psychological Reports. 
2001;89(3):595 -606.  
62. Felitti VJ, Anda RF, Nordenberg D, et al. Relationship of childhood abuse and household dysfunction to 
many of the leading causes of death in adults: The Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study. 
American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 1998;14(4):245 -258.  
63. Libby [CONTACT_162702], Sills MR, Thurston NK, Orton HD. Costs of childhood physical abuse: comparing inflicted 
and unintentional traumatic brain injuries. Pediatrics. 2003;112(1):58 -65. 
64. Florence C, Brown DS, Fang X, Thompson HF. Health care costs associated with child maltreatment: 
impact on Medicaid. Pediatrics. 2013;132(2):[ADDRESS_1181726] MR, Webb D, Sadler LS, Slade A. Parental reflective functioning: an approach to enhancing 
parent -child relationships in pediatric primary care. Journal of Pediatric Health Care. 2015;29(4):325 -
334.  
67. Wolfe DA, Reppucci ND, Hart S. Child abuse prevention: Knowledge and priorities. Journal of Clinical 
Child Psychology. 1995;24(sup1):[ADDRESS_1181727] of prenatal and infancy home visitation by [CONTACT_849994], childhood injuries, and repeated childbearing: a randomized controlled trial. 
JAMA. 1997;278(8):644 -652.  
69. Olds DL, Henderson Jr CR, Kitzman HJ, Eckenrode JJ, Cole RE, Tatelbaum RC. Prenatal and infancy 
home visitation by [CONTACT_39137]: Recent findings. The Future of Children. 1999:44 -65. 
70. Margolis PA, Stevens R, Bordley WC, et al. From concept to application: the impact of a community -
wide intervention to improve the delivery of preventive services to children. Pediatrics. 
2001;108(3):e42 -e42.  
71. Hagen JF, Shaw JS, Duncan PM. Bright futures: Guidelines for health supervision of infants, children, 
and adolescents, Third Edition. Elk Grove Village, Il. American Academy of Pediatrics. 2008.  
72. Green M. Bright Futures: Guidelines for Health Supervision of Infants, Children, and Adolescents. 
Arlington, VA: National Center fo Education and Maternal and Child Health, 1994 . 
73. Haggerty RJ, Roghmann KJ, Pless IB. Child health in the community. [LOCATION_001], John Wiley & Sons. 
1975: 94 -116. 
74. Kahn RS, Wise PH, Finkelstein JA, Bernstein HH, Lowe JA, Homer CJ. The scope of unmet maternal 
health needs in pediatric settings. Pediatrics. 1999;103(3):576 -581.  
75. Olson AL, Dietrich AJ, Prazar G, et al. Two approaches to maternal depression screening during well 
child visits. Journal of Developmental & Behavioral Pediatrics. 2005;26(3):169 -176. 
76. Sharp L, Pantell RH, Murphy LO, Lewis CC. Psychosocial problems during child health supervision 
visits: eliciting, then what? Pediatrics. 1992;89(4):619 -623.  
77. Horwitz SM, Storfer -Isser A, Kerker BD, et al. Barriers to the identification and management of 
psychosocial problems: changes from 2004 to 2013. Academic Pediatrics. 2015;15(6):613 -620.  
78. Brownson RC, Colditz GA, Proctor EK. Dissemination and implementation research in health: 
translating science to practice . [LOCATION_001]: Oxford University Press; 2012.  
79. Proctor EK, Landsverk J, Aarons G, Chambers D, Glisson C, Mittman B. Implementation research in 
mental health services: an emerging science with conceptual, methodological, and training challenges. 
Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research. 2009;36(1):24 -34. 
80. Chambers DA. Advancing sustainment research: challenging existing paradigms. Journal of Public 
Health Dentistry. 2011;71(suppl 1):S99 -S100.  
81. Belsky J. Etiology of child maltreatment: A developmental€ cological analysis. Psychological Bulletin. 
1993;114(3):413.  
82. Brofenbrenner U, Morris PA. The ecology of developmental processes. In: Lerner R, ed. Theorectical 
models of human development . [LOCATION_001]: Wiley; 1998:993 -1028.  
83. Prochaska J, Diclemente C. Stages and procesess of self -change of smoking: toward an integrative 
model of change. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 1983;51(3):390 -395.  
84. Prochaska JO, DiClemente CC. Transtheoretical therapy: Toward a more integrative model of change. 
Psychotherapy Theory Research & Practice. 1982;19(3):276 -288.  
85. Prochaska JO, DiClemente CC, Velicer WF, Rossi JS. Criticisms and concerns of the transtheoretical 
model in light of recent research. British Journal of Addiction. 1992;87(6):825 -828.  
86. Williams AA, Wright KS. Engaging families through motivational interviewing. Pediatric Clinics of 
North America. 2014;61(5):[ADDRESS_1181728] W, Ludwig S. Child abuse prevention. Current Opi[INVESTIGATOR_22637]. 2001;13(5):388 -
401.  
88. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 2016. Available from: 
http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/ . 
89. Dubowitz H, Feigelman S, Lane W, et al. Screening for depression in an urban pediatric primary care 
clinic. Pediatrics. 2007;119(3):[ADDRESS_1181729] W, Kim J. Screening for intimate partner violence in a 
pediatric primary care clinic. Pediatrics. 2008;121(1):e85 -e91. 
91. Feigelman S, Dubowitz H, Lane W, et al. Screening for harsh punishment in a pediatric primary care 
clinic. Child Abuse & Neglect. 2009;33(5):[ADDRESS_1181730] W. Comparison of 3 data collection methods for gathering 
sensitive and less sensitive information. Ambulatory Pediatrics. 2008;8(4):[ADDRESS_1181731] WG, Dubowitz H, Feigelman S, et al. Screening for parental substance abuse in pediatric primary 
care. Ambulatory Pediatrics. 2007;7(6):[ADDRESS_1181732] WG, Dubowitz H, Feigelman S, Poole G. The effectiveness of food insecurity screening in pediatric 
primary care. International Journal of Child Health and Nutrition. 2014;3(3):130 -138.  
95. Institute for HealthCare Improvement. 
http://www.ihi.org/resources/Pages/Tools/PlanDoStudyActWorksheet.aspx . Accessed 5/15/17 . 
96. The NICHD Scientific Vision: The Next Decade. Vision Themes: Behavior Workshop and White Paper, 
February 17 -18, 2011. https://www.nichd.nih.gov/vision/vision_themes/behavior/Pages/behavior.aspx  
Accessed September 2, 2016.  
97. Chamberlain P, Brown CH, Saldana L. Observational measure of implementation progress in 
community based settings: the stages of implementation completion (SIC). Implementation Science. 
2011;6(1):116.  
98. Saldana L, Chamberlain P, Bradford WD, Campbell M, Landsverk J. The Cost of Implementing New 
Strategies (COINS): A method for mappi[INVESTIGATOR_849957]. Children and Youth Services Review. 2014;39:177 -182.  
99. Aarons GA, Ehrhart MG, Farahnak LR. The implementation leadership scale (ILS): development of a 
brief measure of unit level implementation leadership. Implementation Science. 2014;9(1):45.  
100.  Palinkas LA, Aarons GA, Horwitz S, Chamberlain P, Hurlburt M, Landsverk J. Mixed method designs in 
implementation research. Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services 
Research. 2011;38(1):[ADDRESS_1181733] Tactics Scales: Development and psychometric data for a national sample of 
American parents. Child Abuse & Neglect. 1998;22(4):[ADDRESS_1181734] W, Dubowitz H, Frick K, Semiatin JN, Magder LS. The Safe Environment for Every Kid (SEEK) 
Program: A Cost -Effective Analysis.  139th Annual Meeting of the American Public Health Association 
Washington, D.C. 2011.  
103.  Aarons GA, Hurlburt M, Horwitz SM. Advancing a conceptual model of evidence -based practice 
implementation in public service sectors. Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental 
Health Services Research. 2011;38(1):4 -23. 
104.  Boren SA, Balas AE. Evidence ‐Based Quality Measurement. The Journal of Ambulatory Care 
Management. 1999;22(3):17 -23. 
105.  Landsverk J, Brown CH, Smith JD, et al. Design and analysis in Dissemination and implementation 
research.  (Editors)  Brownson, R., Colditz, G., Proctor, E., Oxford University Press.  Brownson RC, 
Colditz GA, Proctor EK (eds). Dissemination and Implementation Research in Health: Translating 
Science to Practice. 2nd Edition. [LOCATION_001]: Oxford University Press; 2018 (in press) . 
106.  Aarons GA. Mental health provider attitudes toward adoption of evidence -based practice: The 
Evidence -Based Practice Attitude Scale (EBPAS). Mental Health Services Research. 2004;6(2):61 -74. 
107.  Dubowitz H, Black MM, Kerr MA, et al. Type and timing of mothers' victimization: effects on mothers 
and children. Pediatrics. 2001;107(4):728 -735.  
108.  Ehrhart MG, Aarons GA, Farahnak LR. Assessing the organizational context for EBP implementation: 
the development and validity testing of the Implementation Climate Scale (ICS). Implementation 
Science. 2014;9(1):157.  
109.  Saldana L, Chamberlain P, Wang W, Brown CH. Predicting program start -up using the stages of 
implementation measure. Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services 
Research. 2012;39(6):[ADDRESS_1181735], Smith JK. Assessing residents' behavioral science skills: Patients' views of physician –patient 
interaction. The Journal of Family Practice. 1983.  
111. McDonell JR, Ben -Arieh A, Melton GB. Strong Communities for Children: Results of a multi -year 
community -based initiative to protect children from harm. Child Abuse & Neglect. 2015;41:79 -96. 
112.  Aarons GA, Palinkas LA. Implementation of evidence -based practice in child welfare: Service provider 
perspectives. Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research. 
2007;34(4):[ADDRESS_1181736] NM, Ware JH. Applied Longitudinal Analysis, 2nd edition : Wiley and Sons; 
2011.  
114.  Drummond MF, Sculpher MJ, Claxton K, Stoddart GL, Torrance GW. Methods for the economic 
evaluation of health care programmes : Oxford University Press; 2015.  
115.  Hsieh H -F, Shannon SE. Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qualitative Health 
Research. 2005;15(9):1277 -1288.  
116.  Miles MB, Huberman AM. Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebook . 2nd ed. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: sage; 1994.  
117.  Strauss AL, Corbin J. Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developi[INVESTIGATOR_582493] . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 1998.  
118.  Boyatzis R. Transforming qualitative information: Thematic analysis and code development.  
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 1998.  
119.  Fraser D. QSR NVivo NUD* IST Vivo Reference Guide. Melbourne: QSR International. 2000.  
120.  Glaser BG, Strauss AL. The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research . New 
York: Aldine de Gruyter; 1967.  
121.  Guest G, Bunce A, Johnson L. How many interviews are enough? An experiment with data saturation 
and variability. Field Methods. 2006;18(1):59 -82. 
122.  Patton MQ. Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods . 4th ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 2015.  
 