Effects of Awe on Health
11/22/2016
8.9 * PROCEDURES / METHODS: (REQUIRED)
Describe the research methods and study activities taking place at each site (e.g. what will participants be asked to
do and what will members of the study team do?). If there will be multiple participant groups or study sites, explainwhat will happen with each group or study sites.   If some of the activities would occur even if the person were notin the study, as in the case of treatment or tests performed for diagnostic purposes, clearly differentiatebetween those activities that will be done solely for research purposes and those that are happening as partof routine care.   Please call our office at [PHONE_399] and ask to speak to someone on the Expedited Reviewteam if you need help differentiating between what parts are research and what parts aren't.
Aim 1.  TTo examine the relationship that emotional reactivity has with mental health symptoms in older adults
Methods
Laboratory Assessment of Emotion
Tasks. We will use a laboratory-based approach to measure emotional reactivity (i.e., ANS reactivity, facial
expression, and subjective experience) in response to film clips. After sitting quietly through a 60-second
pre-film resting baseline period, participants will watch a 90-second film clip that elicits either a negative orpositive emotion. For example, the film clips will depi[INVESTIGATOR_21373] a doctor cleaning earwax from a girl's ear (disgust),babies playing (love), sweepi[INVESTIGATOR_834778] (awe), and a woman reading a sad letter from anadmirer (sadness). After film viewing, participants will be asked questions about their subjective experience.IRB approval date: 11/22/2016
ANS Physiology. We will obtain continuous recordings of the following ANS measures: (1) skin conductance
level, (2) pre-ejection period, (3) respi[INVESTIGATOR_25570], (4) heart rate, (5) finger pulse amplitude, (6)
finger pulse transmission time, (7) respi[INVESTIGATOR_91888], (8) respi[INVESTIGATOR_834779], and (9) finger temperature. Theparticipant will sit in a chair while the study staff first cleans the area where the EKG sensors will be placedwith rubbing alcohol and light exfoliating gel. This is done to remove dead skin cells from the area that thesensors will be placed. Then electrode gel will be placed on the back of the sensors, and the sensors will beplaced on the participant. For measures of breathing, a breathing belt will be placed around the participant'smidsection, ensuring it is not too tight for the participant. For sensors placed on the hand, electrodes andelectrode gel will be placed on the fingers. Mean baseline levels will be used to investigate resting ANSactivity, and reactivity scores will be calculated by [CONTACT_834782] a restingbaseline period from the mean level during a trial.
Facial Expression. Participants will be videotaped using a remote-controlled, high-resolution video camera in
the experiment room. Trained coders will use a modified version of the Emotional Expressive Behaviorcoding system. Coders, who will be unaware of the nature of the trial, will code each second for tenemotional behaviors (anger, disgust, happi[INVESTIGATOR_008]/amusement, contempt, sadness, embarrassment, fear,surprise, sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008], confusion, and interest) on an intensity scale ranging from 0 (not present) to 3(maximum intensity). We will sum the intensity scores for each emotional code during the most intense 30seconds of each film.
Subjective Experience. Participants will be asked to report on their subjective experience before the testing
session begins and after each trial. They will be asked, “Did you feel ___ while watching the movie?” and willbe given the following response choices: 0= no, 1= a little, 2= moderately, 3= quite a bit, or 4= extremely.
Baseline questions
Physical Health
Physical Symptoms. Participants will indicate whether they have experienced any of the following
sensations: headaches, faintness/dizziness, stomachache/pain, shortness of breath, chest pain, acne/skin
irritation, runny/congested nose, stiff or sore muscles, stomach upset/nausea, irritable bowels, hot or coldspells, poor appetite, coughing/sore throat, or other in the past month. Previous studies have found thisapproach is a reliable and valid index of self-perceived health status. We will sum the [ADDRESS_1159439] week. Body MassIndex will be calculated from height and weight measurements obtained during the laboratory visit.
Sleep. Selected questions from the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_834780], duration, calculated sleep efficiency, and overall sleep quality.
Mental Health
Emotional Symptoms. Participants will complete questionnaires to assess the following domains: anxiety
(i.e., Generalized Anxiety Disorder- 7 Item Scale and State-Trait Anxiety State subscale), depression (i.e.,Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_6328]), obsessions and compulsions (i.e., Yale-BrownObsessive Compulsive Scale), mania (i.e., Altman Self-Rating Mania Scale), emotion dysregulation (i.e.,Difficulty in Emotion Regulation Scale), irritability (i.e., Irritability Subscale of the Buss Durkee HostilityInventory), lability (i.e., Center for Neurological Study Lability Scale), rumination (i.e., Rumination-ReflectionQuestionnaire), subjective emotional experience (i.e., Positive and Negative Affect Schedule), and intensityof emotional experience (i.e., Affect Intensity Measure Simplified).
Well-Being.  Participants will complete measures that assess their social network size and complexity (i.e.,
Social Network Index), loneliness (i.e., The Revised UCLA Loneliness Scale), subjective happi[INVESTIGATOR_008] (i.e.,Subjective Happi[INVESTIGATOR_7110]), and life satisfaction (i.e., The Satisfaction With Life Scale).
Prosociality.  We will measure trait levels of positive emotional experience (i.e., Dispositional Positive
Emotions Scale), compassion (i.e., compassion subscale of the Big Five Inventory-2), and empathy (i.e.,Empathic Concern subscale from the Interpersonal Reactivity Index).
Aim 2.  TTo determine whether a novel awe intervention improves subjective experience and reduces
symptoms in older adults
Methods
Awe Walk Intervention
After the laboratory assessment, participants will be randomized into one of two 8-week conditions: (1) awe
condition or (2) control condition. All participants will be instructed to take a weekly 15-minute walk. In theawe condition, participants will be instructed to pay attention to the vastness and novelty of the environmentaround them. In the control condition, participants will receive no additional instructions.
Daily questions
Daily Emotional Experience, Life Satisfaction, Prosociality
Emotional Experience. On each day of the 8-week intervention, participants will report how much they
experienced awe, wonder, and amazement in addition to admiration, amusement, anger, annoyance,appreciation, anxiety, compassion, fear, happi[INVESTIGATOR_008], pride, sadness, relaxed, and warmth. Items will bemeasured on 10-point Likert scales (1= not at all, 10= as much as I’ve ever felt).
Life Satisfaction and Prosociality. Participants will also respond on a daily basis to statements assessing
their life satisfaction (“Today I felt that my life was... terrible to terrific”) and prosociality (“How much did youengage in acts today that involved helpi[INVESTIGATOR_834781] a good cause?”). Bothitems will be measured on 10-point Likert scales (1= not at all, 10= as much as I’ve ever felt/done). At thebeginning of the study, participants will recreive an email from study staff to an address the participantsdesignate as an email in which they would like to maintain study correspondance. In this first email, there willbe a personalized link in which they will open and it will direct them to the secure UCSF-supported Qualtricsplatform where they can access all study questionnaires. All answers will be securely stored on the private,secure Qualtrics account managed by [CONTACT_464].
Post-Intervention Follow-Up Assessment
At the conclusion of the 8-week intervention and at 3- and 6-months post-intervention, participants will againcomplete the physical and mental health questionnaires that they completed during their baseline visit.