 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SMART 2.0: Social Mobile Approaches to Reducing 
weighT in Young Adults  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
Date of Document 2/1/2019  
Submitted 02/27/[ADDRESS_832381] Updated: February 1, [ADDRESS_832382] TITLE  
SMART 2.0: Social Mobile Approaches to Reducing weighT in Young Adults  
 
2. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR   
[INVESTIGATOR_624774], PhD  
 
3. FACILITIES  
The Center for Wireless and Population Health Systems (CWPHS)  and the Exercise and Physical Activity 
Resource Center (EPARC) , located within  the [LOCATION_004] Institute for Telecommunications and Information 
Technology (Calit2) at UCSD.  
 
4. DURATION OF THE STUDY  
The estimated duration of this study is February 1, 2019 – February 1, 202 4.  
 
5. LAY LANGUAGE SUMMARY OR SYNOPSIS (no more than one paragraph)  
Weight gain and the retention of gained weight is an important issue for young adults. Through out the transition 
from adolescence to early adulthood, young adults encounter multiple stressors and influences that  can contribute 
to weight gain. In turn, weight gain leads to increased risk of cardiovascular disease, diabetes , and other health 
issues.  Thus, there is a  critical  need to advance our understanding of how to develop and deploy  multimodal, 
technology -based weight -loss interventions that  have the potential for  long-term effects and  widespread 
dissemination among young adults. In the present study , we will test the impact  of an intervention, SMART 
2.0, designed to  promote weight loss through  increased energy expenditure, decreased energy intake, and 
adequate sleep  among young adults in a university setting. Evidence and theory -based content in SMART  2.0 
will be delivered using a consumer -level wearable and scale,  text messaging, social media , and technology -
based  health coaching  over the course of two years.  
 
6. SPECIFIC AIMS  
The primary  aim of the study is to determine the efficacy of SMART 2.0 with technology and personal health 
coaching or with technology alone to improve objectively measured weight in kg over 24 months  (96 weeks)  
compared to a control group.  
 
Secondary  aims will be to evaluate the following:  
1. Anthropometric and physiological outcomes , physical activity, diet, sleep, self -esteem, body image, 
anxiety, depression, and the frequency and composition of participants’ online communication about 
weight -related behaviors between groups at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months  
2. The dose response (i.e., quantified engagement with technological modalities) of the intervention  
3. The usability and acceptability of the intervention  
4. Potential mediators and moderators of the intervention effects (e.g., social network connectivity, 
contamination, etc.)  
5. Patterns of change in physical activity, diet, and sleep  
Given that SMART 2.[ADDRESS_832383] the potential for long -term effects and widespread dissemination among young adults. 
SMART 2.0 is designed to maximize efficacy in a scalable manner. By [CONTACT_624795], 
this study will inform intervention dissemination to campus wellness programs should th e findings warrant it.  
7. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
Overweight and obesity are major public health concerns in the [LOCATION_002]1,2. Recent data from the  
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention indicate that the extent of this problem is great even among young  
adults, as approximately 60.3% of those 20 to 39 years old are overweight or obese (defined as a body mass  
index (BMI) ≥25 kg/m2).[ADDRESS_832384] rapi[INVESTIGATOR_624775];4-6 cardiovascular risk factors such as hypertension, dyslipi[INVESTIGATOR_035], and  
diabetes;7 and psychological distress.8 Additionally, more than half of young adults in the [LOCATION_002] are 
enrolled in tertiary education,9,10 and an estimated 40% of students are overweight or obese.11 This represents a 
period of time when students undergoing the transition from adolescence to young adulthood often adopt 
unhealthy weight -related behaviors, such as decreased physical activity (PA),12,13 poor diet quality (e.g., increased 
fast food consumption and decreased fruit and vegetable consumption ),13-15 and poor sleep hygiene.13,16 
Consequently, students typi[INVESTIGATOR_624776] a significant amount of weight while in school (meta -analyses estimate it is 
between 1.31 and 1.79 kg),17-19 and there is a critical need for behavioral weight loss interventions that target this 
population.17-19 
 
One potential strategy is to deploy interventions designed to promote weight loss through healthy changes in PA, 
diet, and sleep (an important behavior that is often overlooked in the study of weight loss)20-23 via mobile and 
social technologies that are highly pervasive in the US. For example, approximately 86% of young adults own a 
smart phone and 75% of them use it to get information about their health.24,25 Furthermore, ownership of activity 
trackers and smart watches that monitor health -related outcome s has more than doubled among all adults since 
2014 (currently 49% own at least one device), and it is likely to continue increasing.26 Social media use among 
young adults is also ubiquitous, with an estimated 90% using at least one platform regularly and no differences in 
use by [CONTACT_624796].27,[ADDRESS_832385] popular platform and overall engagement is 
increasing, with approximately 70% using it daily.[ADDRESS_832386] majority of technology -based behavioral weight loss studies (76 
out of 84) have been conducted exclusively among middle -aged and older adults.[ADDRESS_832387] the norm of using multiple technologies in daily life, 60.4% of interventions identif ied 
used only one modality, 33.8% two, 5.0% three, and only one u sed five.37 Moreover, technology based behavioral 
interventions targeting weight loss were often lacking substantial theory - and evidence -based content,35,38 and 
very few were implemented for longer than 18 months (13.9%).37 Despi[INVESTIGATOR_74603], on average, 
interventions achieved moderate weight loss (between -1.4 and -2.7 kg).[ADDRESS_832388] sizes and widespread dissemination among college students.  
Additionally, o ur multidisciplinary investigative team has extensive experience studying the efficacy of 
interventions that rely on ubiquitous technologies to meet young adults in the virtual spaces they frequently 
inhabit and use these venues to promote weight loss. The  original  SMART study was one of seven randomized 
controlled trials (RCT) comprising the Early Adult Reduction of weight through LifestYle intervention 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 4 (EARLY) trials, a consortium funded by [CONTACT_15792] (U01 HL096715; Principal Investigator (PI): Patrick; Co -
Investigators (Co -Is): Godino, Calfas, Rock, and Weibel).39-[ADDRESS_832389] in the consortium to 
integrate mobile and social technologies within the intervention.39 In SMART, 404 overweight or obese college 
students (aged 18 to 35 years) from three universities in San Diego, CA were randomized to receive either the 
intervention (n=202) or general information about health and wellness (control grou p, n=202). The 2 -year 
intervention was innovative primarily because it 1) was remotely delivered via 6 technological modalities (i.e., 
mobile apps, text messaging ( SMS ), Facebook, emails, a website, and brief ad -hoc technology mediated 
communication with a health coach) and 2) leveraged participants’ existing as well as study engineered social 
networks to remotely deliver theory -based BCTs and evidence -based strategies f or weight management 
(SWMs). The primary outcome was objectively measured weight in kg a t 24 months, and differences between 
groups were evaluated using linear mixed -effects regression. Participants’ mean (standard deviation [SD]) age 
was 22 .7 (3.8) years. They were 70% female and 31% Hispanic. Mean (SD) body mass index was 29 .0 (2.8) 
kg/m2. At 24 months, weight was assessed in 341 (84%) participants, but all 404 were included in analyses. 
Weight, adjusted for sex, ethnicity, and college, was significantly less in the intervention group compared to the 
control group at 6 months (1.51%; -1.33 k g difference, 95% confidence interval (CI) = -2.36 to -0.30, p = 
0.011) and 12 months (1.57%; -1.33 kg difference, 95% CI = -2.30 to -0.35, p = 0.008). However, differences 
between groups at 18 months ( -0.67 kg difference, 95% CI = -1.69 to 0.35, p = 0.200)  and 24 months ( -0.79 kg 
difference, 95% CI = -2.02 to 0.43, p = 0.204) were not significant.41 
 
Although the intervention was well -received (80.4% would recommend it to others), modalities were not fully 
integrated and engagement declined over time.41,[ADDRESS_832390] declined, 
we interviewed 38 participants (n=20 intervention; n=18 control) throughout the final months of the study.43 
Participants in both study groups reported using non -study designed, consumer -level devices and apps to help 
them meet their weight -loss goals (e.g., Fitbit and MyFitnessPal). Additionally,  although Facebook emerged as 
the primary modality through which dynamic content was delivered at the group level and over half (56%) of 
participants had at least one Facebook friend in the study,41,43 intervention participants expressed a desire for 
greater online interaction with other participants.43 This finding aligns with our preliminary quantitative 
analysis of online communication about weight -related behaviors .44 Specifically, intervention participants 
spoke more about PA and diet with their existing online social networks than did control participants. 
Furthermore, a 20% increase in social support for talking about PA and diet on Facebook (defined as likes and 
comments) was associated with a we ight loss of 4.[ADDRESS_832391] 
exclusively via SMS (NCI R01 CA138730; PI: [INVESTIGATOR_109062]; Co -Is: Godino and Rock).45 The study built upon the 
success of an earlier 4 -month trial of interactive SMS on weight outcomes,46,47 and 298 overweight adults (aged 
21-60 years) were allocated to one of three conditions: 1) a control condition; 2) SMS only; or 3) SMS+Health 
Coach (brief monthly phone calls). The SMS interventions offered 1 -4 messages/day which were personalized 
and tai lored using baseline SWMs and then reiteratively and interactively using ecological momentary 
assessment of PA and diet, goal setting and performance, and “like” or “unlike” messaging controls.48 The 
primary outcome was objectively measured weight at 12 months, and differences between groups were 
evaluated using linear mixed -effects regression. Participants were 77% female and 41% Hispanic. At 12 
months, weight was assessed in 253 (85%) participan ts, but all [ADDRESS_832392] 1.20% more weight (p = 
0.214); and the SMS+Health Coach group lost 2 .99% more weight (p = 0.003). Importantly, both SMS 
interventions were well received, and the results indicate that a weight loss intervention delivered via daily 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page [ADDRESS_832393] efficacious when messages were combined with  brief 
monthly communication with a health coach.45 
 
Given that 1) the interventions in the SMART and ConTxt studies have evidence  of short -term efficacy and can 
be merged because of their similar theory - and evidence -based content (i.e., BCTs and SWMs); and 2) there is  
evidence that the incorporation of consumer -level devices and apps along with increased social media and  
social network connectivity will enhance engagement, we believe that the proposed  research is a logical, 
innovative, and important extension of our previous work . 
8. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
Overview  
The SMART 2.0 study is a 24 -month  (96 week)  parallel -group randomized control trial designed to evaluate 
the efficacy of the intervention with technology and personal health coaching or with technology alone to improve 
objectively measured weight in kg over 24 months compared to a control group. We will recruit 642 
overweight/obese young adults aged 18 -35 at the  University of C alifornia, San Diego (UCSD), San Diego State 
University (SDSU) and [LOCATION_004] State University, San Marcos (CSUSM) in San Diego. Participants will be 
assigned to one of three groups for a 24 -month study period. The three groups include:  
 
1. SMART 2.0 with technology , social media , and personal health coaching (T1)  
2. SMART 2.0 with technology  and social media  alone (T2)  
3. Control group  
 
SMART 2.0 improves upon its predecessor by [CONTACT_2329] a fully integrated system of modalities that includes 1) a 
popular consumer -level wearable activity tracker  (Fitbit Charge 3) , wireless scale  (Aria Scale) , and apps 
(Fitbit); 2) a highly tailored and interactive text messaging system (described in detail below) 45, 23; 3) multiple 
social media streams including Facebook, Facebook Messenger, Instagram and Twitter, and 4) enhanced social 
network mechanisms of influence. Consumer -level devices and apps will be u sed to self -monitor behavior, and 
their data will be passively acquired in real -time. Algorithms will be used to automatically deliver interactive 
text messages to support individually tailored goal setting, performance feedback, and goal review in a highl y 
dynamic style that reflects participants’ behavioral progress towards achieving a minimum goal of 5% weight 
loss. Participants will be encouraged to share their data and behavioral progress with others via social 
networking tools built into the apps. Soc ial network mechanisms of influence will be used both within the 
study -space, to elicit participant -to-participant  and health coach -to-participant support, as well as outside the 
study -space, to invoke social support and accountability from strong ties known to be important for long -term 
behavior change.49-52 Additionally, one  group will receive monthly technology -mediated, real -time personal 
health coaching that is theory - and evidence -based.53–56 
 
Subjects assigned to the SMART 2.0 with technology and personal health coaching treatment group (T1) will 
receive the following  during the 24 -month  (96 week)  intervention period:  1) Fitbit Charge 3 activity tracker and 
Aria scale, 2) daily text messages related to physical activity, diet, sleep and weight loss/maintenance, 3) access 
to SMART 2.0 social media pages and content through an online group with 6 to12 participants total, and 4) 
technology -mediated, real -time individual health coaching. Subjects wi ll receive  [ADDRESS_832394] with their online group via social media as frequently as possible, and speak with their health coach 
at a predetermined session schedule.  
 
Subjects assigned to the SMART 2.0 technology alone treatment group (T2) will receive  the following 
activities during the 24 -month  (96 week)  intervention period:  1) Fitbit Charge 3 activity tracker and Aria scale, 
2) daily text messages related to physical activity, diet, sleep , resilience  and weight loss/maintenance, and 3) 
access to SMART 2.[ADDRESS_832395] with their online group via social media as 
frequently as possible.  
 
Subjects assigned to the control group will simply  receive a Fitbit Charge 3 and Aria scale  to use at their 
discretion.  
 
Theoretical Framework and Rationale  
 
Unlike many technology -based interventions wherein theory has only been used superficially,35 the SMART 
2.0 intervention content is mapped directly onto theory -based behavioral change techniques (BCTs). 
Specifically, the intervention is informed by [CONTACT_624797]’s taxonomy of [ADDRESS_832396] effective BCTs were self -regulatory and included intention formation,  
goal setting, self -monitoring, feedback, and goal review.58 Therefore, content supporting these will be  
delivered via all modalities, along with content supporting BCTs that target social network mechanisms of  
influence (e.g., social support, comparison of behavior, restructuring the social environmental, etc.). All BCTs  
included in the intervention will be classified prior to delivery and the specific features of a given modality will  
determine which are best delivered via a given modality. We acknowledge that participants will vary in the  
frequency and depth of their utilization of BCTs across modalities. Our ability to measure this variation is a  
strength. Table 1 provides examples of how these will optimally be delivered.  
 
Intervention content will also be derived from the strategies for weight management (SWMs), which comprise 
[ADDRESS_832397] common evidence -based approaches to achieve weight loss (e.g., reduce portion sizes, avoid 
processed foods, eliminate sugar sweetened beverages, etc.). The SWMs were successfully integrated into 
previous studies showing efficacy, and our team has published two papers on the psychometric characteristics 
of the SWM questionnaire.59,60 Additional intervention content is drawn from comprehensive lifestyle 
interventions that teach stimulus control, problem solving, time management, stress management, etc.61,62 
Overall, our approach to the delivery of theory - and evidence based content in SMART 2.0 is flexible and lends 
itself well to complex and adaptive technology -based interventions that are responsive to an individual’s 
behavioral progress and ever -changing context.62-[ADDRESS_832398] a single overarching theoretical framework, 
rather  the intervention content reflects numerous theoretical orientations (e.g., operant conditioning,66 theories 
of social comparison,67 theories of social support,68 ecological theory,69 etc.). This represents  a strength of our 
approach.62-65 
 
Table 1. Examples of how intervention content will be delivered in SMART 2.0  
Content  Modalities  Description of Delivery  
Intention formation and 
goal setting  Health coaching/ 
email, SMS, social 
media / online 
groups  - Health coach will facilitate long - and short -term goal setting with participant 
during each session followed by [CONTACT_624798].   
- Activity, dietary , and weight data collected by [CONTACT_624799].  
- Health coach will moderate online group discussion so that each group 
develops and works toward goals. In turn, the health coach will post social 
media content tailored toward each groups’ goals.  
Self-monitoring  Fitbit, Aria scale, 
SMS, social media  - Participant monitors physical activity, sleep, and diet with Fitbit and Fitbit app 
and weight with Aria scale. Ongoing self -monitoring is supported by [CONTACT_624800].  
Feedback  Health coaching, 
Fitbit / Fitbit app , 
Aria scale, SMS, - Health coach will provide feedback on participant’s progress toward reaching 
his/her individual goals.  
- Feedback is provided in real time on devices and in Fitbit app.  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 7 social media / 
online groups  - A data driven automated SMS containing a summary of individual progress 
toward reaching tailored weekly goals is sent along with a message of 
encouragement or positive reinforcement.  
- Participant posts about progress and/or challenges on social media and in 
online group and receives feedback from their social network, other 
participants and health coach.  
Goal review  Health coaching, 
SMS  - During health coaching sessions, participants will discuss goals and barriers 
and facilitators for achieving them.  
- Automated SMS will be sent suggesting a new goal and providing feedback.  
Social support and 
comparison of behavior  Health coaching, 
SMS, social media/ 
online groups  - Health coach will provide social support during sessions and suggest ways in 
which participant can seek out support.  
- General SMS content will contain ways in which participants can leverage 
social support in order to reach activity and weight goals.  
- Participant is directly connected to other participants in structured online 
groups that will provide positive reinforcement and encouragement in response 
to participant’s posts about weight loss progress.  
Restructuring the social 
environment  Social media/ 
online groups  - Social media and online groups are used to encourage participants to plan 
exercise dates or go grocery shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_624777]/ 
online groups  - Information about where to exercise, eat well and seek mental health resources 
on campus sent via social media and online groups  
 
 
Description of the Weight Loss Intervention  
 
In the SMART 2.0 study, participants of both treatment groups (T1 and T2) will be encouraged to set a 
minimum weight loss goal of 5 -10% of their baseline weight. Additionally, participants will be encouraged to 
lose 1 -2 lbs/wk70 until they reach a BMI at or below 25 kg/m. Once a participant reaches a BMI  25 kg/m2 the 
goal will be to maintain their weight loss.  
 
The primary behavioral goals of the weight loss program relate to physical activity, diet , and sleep:  
1. Physical activity goals : Consistent with recent evidence -based recommendations for physical activity 
for weight loss71, participants will be prescribed stepped physical activity goals per week starting at 
their baseline exercise minutes building to 225 active min/wk, as measured by  [CONTACT_624801]. 
Consistent accumulation of 225 -420 min/wk of  moderate and vigorous physical activity  (MVPA ) is 
associated with [ADDRESS_832399] week of the intervention will be calculated and 
used as their individual baseline. Weekly physical activity goals will be stepped from each participant’s 
baseline levels using a conservative progression of 20 minutes  per week from the previous week’s 
minutes  of MVPA . This progression will continue until  a participant reaches an average of >=225 
min/wk  of MVPA  and 5% weight loss. Once a part icipant reaches both MVPA  and weight loss goals, 
the physical activity goal will be to maintain at least 225 min/wk  of MVPA  to prevent weight regain. 
The weekly progression was chosen to maximize adherence and reduce the risk of discomfort and 
musculoskeletal injury. Physical activity accumulation will be encouraged across multiple domains 
(leisure, transportation, lifestyle, etc.) and in bouts lasting at least 10 minutes.  
2. Dietary recommendations:  Consistent with the [ADDRESS_832400] 500 kcal per day, consume a variety of nutrient -dense foods , and to limit caloric 
consumption from added sugars and saturated fats. Energy restriction of 500 kcal/d is associated with 
weight loss of approximately 0.5 -0.9 kg/wk (1 pound/wk)72.Once a participant reaches a BMI  25 
kg/m2 the goal will be  for their caloric consumption to match  their caloric expenditure to support weight 
maintenance.   
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 8 3. Sleep recommendations:  Consistent with the NHLBI recommendations of sleep duration for adults73, 
participants will be prescribed stepped sleep duration goals per week starting at their baseline sleep 
duration building to a minimum of 7 hours of sleep per night, as measure by  [CONTACT_624801]. 
Sleep is an important behavior that is often overlooked in the study of weight loss  20-23. Additionally, 
less sleep is associated with a greater likelihood of overweight/obesity and the consumption of high -
caloric foods. To calculate baseline sleep duration, participants will be instructed to wear their Fitbit for 
the first week of the intervention to bed at least four nights each week. The average nightly sleep 
duration for the week  will be calculated and used as their individual baseline. Weekly sleep duration 
goals will be stepped from each participant’s baseline levels using a progression of 20 min/wk from the 
average of the previous week’s nightly  sleep duration. This progression will continue until the 
participant reaches an average of   [ADDRESS_832401] 7 hrs of sleep per night.  
 
Intervention Components  
 
The intervention will be delivered using our four principal intervention modalities: ( 1) consumer -level wearable 
and scale  (Fitbit Charge 3 and Aria Scale), ( 2) mobile text messages, ( 3) online social media pages and groups,  
and (4) individual health coaching (T1 only). Modalities will incorporate the theory -based behavioral change 
techniques (BCTs) and strategies for weight management (SWMs) mentioned  in Table 1. 
 
Consumer -level wearable and scale : Fitbit Charge 3 and Aria Scale  
 
Figure 1. Fitbit Charge 3  
 
A Fitbit Charge 3 (https://www.fitbit.com/charge3 ) and Fitbit Aria 2 scale  
(https://www.fitbit.com/aria2 ) will be provided to all participants in the study.  The 
Fitbit Charge 3 is not considered to be a medical device or a significant risk device. 
It is made of flexible, durable elastomer material similar to that used in many sport 
watches, and it has a surgical grade stainless steel buckle. It is lightweight  (1.06 
oz), 0.[ADDRESS_832402] the ability to monitor physical activity, sleep and diet 
with the Fitbit Charge 3 and weight with the Aria scale. Additionally, participants in both intervention groups 
(T1 and T2) will receive feedback on physical activity, sleep , diet activity , and weight collected through these 
devices via SMS messaging, as described in the following section . 
 
Data from the devices will be passively and securely streamed to the Fitbit website.  It will then be retrieved 
using software developed by [CONTACT_624802], LLC and Fitabase Inc ( https://www.fitabase.com ) and stored 
securely on their servers. All data that is subsequently downloaded from Fitabase Inc. servers for analytic 
purposes will remain de -identified and will be stored on secure, password -protected CWPHS/ EPARC servers. 
There are two instances when researchers will contact [CONTACT_624803]. in order to delete data associated with 
participants in this study: 1) anytime that a participant chooses to withdraw from the study and 2) at the 
completion of the study (w hen all data analysis has been completed).  Researchers will contact [CONTACT_624804], 
CEO of Small Step Labs, LLC and creator of Fitabase  ([EMAIL_11918]) and he will initiate a deletion of 
the data from live servers and all data will be phased out  of offline backups within [ADDRESS_832403] no data associated with the study on their servers.  
 

 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 9 SMS Component  
 
Participants of both treatment groups (T1 and T2) will receive a behavioral weight loss messages through  1 to 2  
tailored SMS daily. The messages will follow the same four-week  format, detailed in Table 3, but will 
incorporate more advanced content and goals as the intervention progresses. This will be dependent on 
participants weight loss progress and progress in meeting weekly physical activity, dietary and sleep behavior 
goals. Tailored SMS messages wil l require participants to use all five core self -regulation strategies: self -
monitoring, feedback on performance, behavioral intention formation, goal setting, and goal review.  
 
Table 3. Four -week schedule of text messages to be delivered in SMART 2.0 Intervention  
 
Week #  Sunday  Monday  Tuesday  Wednesday  Thursday  Friday  Saturday  
1 Sleep 
Feedback & 
Sleep Tip  Exercise 
Feedback  Monthly Diet 
Feedback & 
Diet Tip  Weight 
Feedback & 
Weight Tip  Diet Tip  Mid-week 
Exercise 
Feedback & 
Exercise Tip  Resilience 
Tip 
2 Sleep 
Feedback & 
Sleep Tip  Exercise 
Feedback  Diet Tips (2)  Weight 
Feedback & 
Weight Tip  Diet Tip  Mid-week 
Exercise 
Feedback & 
Exercise Tip  Resilience 
Tip 
3 Sleep 
Feedback & 
Sleep Tip  Exercise 
Feedback  Mid-month 
Diet 
Feedback & 
Diet Tip  Weight 
Feedback & 
Weight Tip  Diet Tip  Mid-week 
Exercise 
Feedback & 
Exercise Tip  Resilience 
Tip 
4 Sleep 
Feedback & 
Sleep Tip  Exercise 
Feedback  Diet Tips (2)  Weight 
Feedback & 
Weight Tip  Diet Tip  Mid-week 
Exercise 
Feedback & 
Exercise Tip  Resilience 
Tip 
 
We will deliver SMS messaging using our previously developed text message system for weight loss and 
weight management. Based on data collected from a participant’s use of Fitbit and Aria Scale, we will push 
tailored text messages from our SMS library (> 3 000 messages). Messages will be time -based (e.g., occur at 
convenient time for participant  every day) or data -based (e.g., in response to data collected from Fitbit and 
Aria). Most messages will be directly related to the participant’s weekly weight, physi cal activity, caloric intake 
and sleep goals (tailored messages) and some will be general behavioral change strategies, depending on 
weekly behavioral goals. Messages based on weight, physical activity, caloric intake and sleep will be in 
response  to data received from participants’ use of Fitbit and Aria. For example, after weighing themselves, a 
message will be sent praising the participant for losing 2 pounds. Additionally, after a participant reaches a 
BMI < 25 kg/m2 goals related to weight, caloric int ake and physical activity will be automatically adjusted to 
reflect weight maintenanc e. For example, if a participant records a caloric intake that is equal to their caloric 
expenditure, their diet feedback will praise the participant and suggest continued caloric intake to maintain their 
healthy weight.  
 
A sample of a week of text messages to the user are in Table 4. Participants will receive 1 -2 messages each day 
and will be able to choose the timing of messages (e.g., mornings and evenings).  
 
Table 4. Example of weekly text messages to be used in SMART 2.[ADDRESS_832404] 4 nights to get a better pi[INVESTIGATOR_624778].  
Sunday  7pm Sleep Tip  Sleep tip: Try reading from a book or using a blue light filter on your 
laptop/phone when studying or reading before bedtime.  
Monday  12pm  Exercise 
Feedback  Good work getting in [ADDRESS_832405] week. But, your goal was to 
complete 140 minutes. Try to set a new goal of 130 minutes for this week. 
You can do it!  
Tuesday  12pm  Diet Feedback  Terrific job tracking your calories this month. On average, you are eating 
as much as you burn. To lose 1 lb, you should be in a deficit of 500 
calories per day. Continue to make progress by [CONTACT_624805] 
3 days this month!  
Tuesday  7pm Diet Tip  When you’re at the grocery store, make the healthiest choice by [CONTACT_624806]. When in doubt, 
choose the option with less calories.  
Wednesday  12pm  Weigh Reminder  Wednesday Weigh -day reminder! Time to step on the scale and see what 
progress you've made.  
Wednesday  1pm Weight 
Feedback  Great work! This week, you lost 1.5 lb(s). You got this! This week, your 
goal is to lose another [ADDRESS_832406] from food temptations is to be active. Next time 
you're craving something, go for a run or swim!  
Thursday  12pm  Diet Tip  Eventually aim towards having only healthy items stored in your pantry 
and fridge! Do this by [CONTACT_624807] -for-you alternatives.  
Friday  12pm  Exercise 
Feedback  You're more than half way there! Good job getting to 90 active minutes so 
far. Your goal is to get 130 minutes by [CONTACT_185454], keep on going!  
Friday  7pm Fitness Tip  Do whatever makes exercise most enjoyable for you. Music? A podcast? 
You are much more likely to exercise consistently if you enjoy it.  
 
Saturday  12pm  Resilience Tip  It’s Saturday and time to release some stress! Press two fingers in the 
center of your other palm and hold for ten seconds.  
 
 
Online Group/ Social Media  
 
After randomization, participants in T1 and T2 intervention -arms will be sorted by [CONTACT_624808]  6 to 12 total participants  through Facebook messenger. Current literature suggests that 
small, mixed -gender groups constructed based on a common characteristic (e.g. physical activity preference) 
result in improved outcomes in health interventions74,75.  
 
Each participant will “friend” the  study  health coach  on Facebook , who will then add participants to their 
respective, private groups  on Facebook Messenger . Content shared in the groups will only be accessible to the 
members of each group and the health coach. The health coach will post content  and facilitate group discussion  
that follows a behavioral weight loss curriculum organized as a series of 24 -week (6 -month) cycles. Table [ADDRESS_832407] 6 -month cycle. Each subsequent cycle wi ll follow the same format but will 
incorporate more advanced content and goals, dependent on group’s progress. Health coaches will also monitor 
all group interactions, respond to inquiries from participants, and elicit interactions using the following grou p-
coaching methods:  
 
1. Mission statement formation: Health coaches will work with group members at start of intervention 
(week 1) to establish ground rules and roles for participants and health coach. This mission statement 
will be revisited every 6 -months and revised as necessary.  
2. Informational content and resources: Health coaches will provide relevant informational content and 
resources applicable to the weekly curriculum topic as well as the group’s interests, recommendations 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 11 and goals. This includes, but is not limited to, local bike/running maps, healthy eating options on or near 
campus, recipes and exercise routines.  
3. Knowledge check -ins: Health coaches will frequently assess group knowledge of weekly curriculum 
topi[INVESTIGATOR_624779] Q&A’s. The intent is to give participants an opportunity to ask the health 
coaches questions relevant to weight loss and health behaviors.  
4. Shared experiences:  To elicit group cohesion and social support, health coaches will present open -
ended questions designed to encourage participants to share their experiences with adopting and 
maintaining health behaviors and reaching personal weight loss goals. For example , a health coach may 
ask the group to share their favorite on -the-go healthy snack option.  
5. Goal -setting:  Through motivational interviewing techniques55,56, health coaches will work with 
participants to create individual and group goals relating to the week’s topic area and overall weight -
loss goals. Additionally, health coaches will provide feedback on individual and group progress on 
meeting set goals.  
 
Table 5. The SMART 2.0 behavioral weight loss curriculum  
 
Week  Weekly Topic  Example  
1 Intro to SMART 2.0  Building a roadmap of the program; modalities/technology; 6 -month and 
2-year goal -setting  
2 Self-monitoring  Tracking calories with Fitbit; Checking sleep stats and active minutes 
using the Fitbit app; Weekly weighing  
3 Understanding diet and calories  2015 -2020 Dietary Guidelines; calories; reading food labels; visual 
calorie comparisons  
4 Boosting active minutes  Strategies for increasing active minutes each day; fitting in exercise with 
a busy schedule; exercise routines you can do anywhere  
5 Getting and staying healthy on campus  Healthy guide to each campus; meeting goals with a busy class/work 
schedule; dorm/apartment/commuting healthy living tips  
6 Eating healthy made easy  Easy recipes you can make anywhere; recipe videos; grocery -list guide  
7 Take 10 to exercise  Short breaks in sitting; environmental rearrangement; how -to get in 10 -
min bouts of exercise throughout your day  
8 Sleep and mental health  Sleep hygiene tips; stress management tips  
9 Portion control & smart food options  Skills for portion control; choosing and finding low -calorie; nutrient -
dense foods  
10 Organization & planning  Meal and exercise planning; suggestions for healthy cooking; exercise 
routines; creating a bedtime routine  
11 Social support  How to get support for a healthy lifestyle; importance of mental health in 
getting healthy; fostering group support  
12 Personal strategies for weight loss 
behaviors & problem solving  Reviewing 3 -month progress; seeing what works; identifying barriers and 
solutions  
13 Cardiovascular exercise  Cardio for any fitness level; gauging intensity and setting goals for 
progress; safety tips; get a buddy  
14 Substitution & replacement  Healthy swaps; “eat this not that”; ways to make any recipe healthy  
15 Strength training for a healthy body  Benefits of resistance training; sets/ reps; safety; getting a buddy; home - 
and gym -based calisthenics  
16 Eating out, on -the-go & convenience 
food eating  Becoming menu -wise; indemnifying healthy options on - and off-campus; 
stimulus control; becoming aware of what is in the environment  
[ADDRESS_832408] harmful thoughts with helpful thoughts; link between 
negative affect and weight (re)gain  
18 Managing social eating situations  Alternatives and tips for social eating (counter conditioning)  
[ADDRESS_832409] -effective food choices when eating out 
or shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_624780]  
20 Getting enough sleep  Ways to get enough sleep with time constraints; Importance of sleep for 
overall health and weight loss/management  
21 Vigorous intensity physical activity  Benefits of VPA; gauging intensity; safety; how to get VPA anywhere  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page [ADDRESS_832410] healthy food you enjoy  Brainstorm enjoyable, healthy options; switching up your meal plan to 
stay on track  
23 Staying active  Tips to stay active while on break/vacation and with schedule constraints; 
ways to get back on track with exercise  
24 Maintaining a healthy lifestyle  Reviewing 6 -month progress; seeing what works; identifying barrier and 
solutions; 6 -month goal -setting; planning for next [ADDRESS_832411] general content related to weight loss/management, 
physical activity, healthy eating, sleep and resilience to the study’s various pages on the following commonly 
used social media platforms76: Facebook, Instagram and Twitter. Participants will be required to at least “like” 
the SMART 2.0 Facebook page and will be encouraged to also “follow” the study’s Instagram and Twitter 
accounts. By “liking” and “following” these respective pages, SMART 2.0 content will appear on their 
individual social media feeds and participants will be able to “like” and “comment” on each post, communicate 
with other  participants through each post, and “save” any content.  
 
Health Coaching  
 
Participants randomized into the T1 intervention arm will receive individual technology -mediated, real -time 
personal health coaching that is theory - and evidence -based. Health coaching sessions will consist of 
components of effective health coaching interventions including motivational interviewing (MI), partici pant 
determined behavioral goal setting , accountability for behaviors, and health education as part of an active 
learning process77-79. Additionally,  the health coach will utilize behavioral change t echnique s (BCTs) 
appropriate for individual coaching  80,59. These BCTs include goal setting (behavior and outcome), action 
planning, problem solving, feedback on behavior, social support  and instruction on how to perform a 
behavior80. All health  coach es will have Master -level training in public health and at least two years’ 
experience with individual health coaching. Sessions will last 10-[ADDRESS_832412] over the phone 
and/or through Google/Facetime/ Skype /Zoom  video -calls, depending on each participant’s preference. 
Following each session, the health coach will send a session recap via e -mail that includes an outline of what 
was discussed, summary of behavioral and weight loss goals, and date/time of next session.  
 
During year one of the intervention, the health coaching curriculum will follow the CDC’s Prevent T2 Lifestyle 
Change Program  (https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/prevention/index.html ). The Prevent T2 program’s goals 
include weight loss of 5 -7% of participants’ baseline weight in the first six months and continued weight loss 
until participants reach their goal weight. Prevent T2 is a year -long program with curriculum outlined in Table 
6. The program emphasizes self -monitoring, self -efficacy, and problem solving and requires weigh -ins at each 
session and the self -monitoring of diet and physical activity. Health coaches will receive this feedback digitally 
through the Fitbit activity track er and Aria scale. Health coaches will cover the curricula provided by [CONTACT_624809] e -mail prior to each 
session. The Prevent T2 session topi[INVESTIGATOR_624781] (e.g., replacing in -
person  group -based activities with related discussion topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]) and for the young adult population (e.g., 
discussing causes and ways to mitigate stress applicable to participants’ lifestyles , such as during finals ). Table 
6 outlines the original Prevent T2 topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102], SMART 2.0 topic revision  and an outline of content in each session.  
 
Table 6. The SMART 2.0 health coaching curriculum, year one  
 
Session 
Number  Session 
Frequency  T2 Original 
Topic  SMART 2.0 Revision  Content Outline  
1 
Weekly  Introduction to 
the program  Intro to SMART 2.0  Participant’s motivations/reasons for joining; set 
short - and long -term weight/PA/diet/sleep goals  
2 Track your food  Using Fitbit to track 
calories  Benefits of tracking; Fitbit tracking how -to; portions 
& food labels  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 13 3 Track your 
activity  Using Fitbit to track active 
minutes  Benefits of tracking; Fitbit tracking how -to; review 
baseline activity data  
4 Manage stress  Stress and tracking sleep 
with Fitbit  Sources of stress; link between stress and sleep and 
weight; stress and sleep tips  
5 Eat well to 
prevent T2  Eating well basics  Dietary guidelines; tips  
6 Get active to 
prevent T2  Getting started getting 
active  Benefits of PA; ways to get PA; challenges/ barriers  
7 Burn more 
calories than you 
take in  Balancing what you eat 
and do  Caloric deficit and weight loss  
8 Shop and cook to 
prevent T2  Meal planning 101  Planning and preparing healthy meals  
9 Get more active  Get more active  Ways to increase active minutes  
 
10 Cope with 
triggers  Navigating triggers to eat 
unhealthily (social 
pressure)  Overcoming triggers to eat unhealthily; reducing 
social pressures  
11 Find time for 
fitness  Find time for fitness  Challenges and solutions to finding time to exercise  
12 Keep your heart 
healthy  Maintaining a healthy 
lifestyle  3-month review; progress/challenges so far; develop 
solutions  
13 Take charge of 
your thoughts  Take charge of your 
thoughts  Mental health; helpful versus harmful thoughts  
14 Get support  Social support  How to get social support from family/friends/etc. to 
lead healthy lifestyle  
[ADDRESS_832413] 
from home  Eating well while eating 
out & on -campus  Challenges and solutions to eating well away when 
dining out and on -campus  
16 Stay motivated to 
prevent T2  Staying motivated  Ways to stay motivated to exercise, eat well, and 
sleep  
 
17 
Bi-weekly  When weight 
loss stalls  Weight loss progress/ 
plateaus  Ways to overcome weight loss plateaus and to 
continue to lose weight  
18 Get enough sleep  Sleep hygiene  Benefits of adequate sleep; challenges and solutions 
to getting at least [ADDRESS_832414] healthy 
food you enjoy  Eating healthy on a budget  6-month review; ways to eat healthy on a budget  
21 
Monthly  More about T2  General health information  Participant guided – work on areas where there are 
the most challenges  
22 Take a fitness 
break  Quick exercise ideas  10-minute exercise ideas; ways to stay active with 
any schedule  
[ADDRESS_832415] 
from home  Staying on track while on 
break/ vacation  Challenges and solutions during school breaks/ 
vacations  
24 More about carbs  More about 
macronutrients/ nutrient -
density  Macronutrient information; benefits of nutrient 
dense foods  
25 Get back on track  Get back on track  Staying positive after getting off -track; 5 steps to 
problem solving  
26 Prevent T2 for 
life Continuing progress in 
year two of SMART 2.0  1-year goal review; progress/challenges so far; 
action plan for year 2  
 
During year two of the intervention, participants will continue with monthly 15-20-minute  sessions with the 
health coach. Sessions will be guided by [CONTACT_4317]’ unique behavioral goals , rather than pre determined topi[INVESTIGATOR_624782] . Each session will also consist of effective health coaching components77,79and BCTs80. 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 14  
Comparison Condition  
The comparison condition will also receive a Fitbit Charge 3 and Aria Scale  to use at their discretion . This will 
allow participants to access the Fitbit smartphone application which includes physical activity, dietary and sleep 
tracking .  
The study is implementing mechanisms for preventing comparison group subjects from accessing the 
intervention components of the SMART 2.0 study. For example, tailored content, goal and behavior feedback , 
and participant -to-participant and participant -to-health coach interactions will be reserved only for private, 
invitation -only online groups for participants in the two treatment groups.  
 
Standardizing Delivery of the Intervention  
The SMART 2.0 intervention is comprised of  four inter- and independent components: 1) Fitbit Charge 3 and 
Aria scale, 2) mobile text messages, 3) online social media pages and groups, and 4) individual health 
coaching (T1 -arm only).  We will standardize the delivery of the intervention using the following four 
strategies.  
1. Intervention content will be delivered using all components throughout the intervention.  
• To reduce the possibility of bias caused by [CONTACT_624810], the SMART 2.0 will use all platforms throughout the two -year intervention. Although 
exposure to each platform is expected to differ (for example, some  participants may prefer  to interact 
more so via the online group than mobile text messages), we plan to “push” all platforms equally.  
• To reduce bias that may be caused by [CONTACT_624811] (e.g., use of a smart 
phone vs. regular cell phone that receives text messages only), all participants will be required to own a 
smart phone, as part of the study’s inclusion cri teria, to ensure accessibility to all intervention 
components.  
2. Ground all intervention content in common theory -driven principles of behavior change.  
• The SMART 2.[ADDRESS_832416] one behavioral self -regulation strategy will not be delivered.  
3. Standardize intervention fidelity by [CONTACT_624812] -mediated content delivery through mobile text 
messaging and online social media pages and groups and conducting regular fidelity -checks on health 
coaches’ interactions with participants via online groups and individual coaching sessions.  
• All content delivered via mobile text messaging and through online social media pages and groups will 
be standardized so that each participant in the intervention arms (T1 and T2) will receive the same 
content and feedback  on Fitbit activity and Aria weight data .  
• Health coach interactions with participants through online groups will be regularly checked to 
standardize intervention fidelity. This will be done by [CONTACT_245825] -recording a random sample of 5% of all 
health coaching calls and having an independent reviewer on the study team observe to ensure that 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page [ADDRESS_832417] 
will be recorded to measure each participants’ dose.  
• To standardize h ealth coach es’ interactions with participants through individual coaching session s (T1-
arm only),  we will aim to deliver the same amount of sessions for  each participant and conduct regular 
and random fidelity checks . Each participant will be prescribed the same number of sessions (26 in 
year one, 12 in year two) and sessions will be scheduled at a day and time convenient for the 
participant. In the event that a session is missed, the session will be rescheduled, if pos sible. If 
rescheduling  is not possible (e.g., no other available days/times before next allotted session), the health 
coach will send session materials to the participant via e -mail and suggest session goals based on 
participant’s weight loss progress. Each completed session and e -mail will be recorded to measure 
participants’ dose. For the two-year intervention, the fidelity checks will ensure adherence to health 
coaching components  and BCTs described above. For year one of the intervention, the checks will also 
ensure adherence to the modified Prevent T2 curriculum.  
4. Intervention content will be tailored to how well participants are doing with their weight loss.  
• Baseline physical measurements, collected at the first measurement visit, and baseline behavioral 
measures, collected through Fitbit activity trackers during the first week of the intervention, and 
ongoing physical and behavioral measures collected through  Fitbit activity trackers and Aria scales 
will be used to reiteratively tailor the program’s offerings. For example, if participants are making 
good progress then the intervention content delivered will acknowledge and reward this. If, on the 
other hand, i f participants are finding it difficult to lose weight and adhere to healthy behaviors, 
alternative messaging with different content designed to encourage progress  specific to each 
participant will be provided.  
Measurement Overview and Schedule for the RCT  
All participants  will attend  in-person measurement visits  at baseline, 6, 12, 18 and 24 months. To maximize 
the likelihood that participants will continue with measurement visits and stay in the study, we will offer 
financial incentives for attending measurement visits and these will increase over time. All meas ures will be 
conducted at EPARC. Participants from SDSU and CSUSM will reimbursed $15 for travel expenses . The 
baseline measurement is expected to take approximately 3 hours and all other measurement  timepoints are 
expected to take approximately 2 hours . Measures and collection time points are summarized below.  
Demographic information  
Age, sex, ethnicity, race, household income, tobacco and alcohol use, and medical history will be measured 
through self -report.  
Anthropometric and Physiological Measures  
• Body weight  will be measured  to the nearest 0.1 kilograms using a calibrated digital scale. Height  
(without shoes) will be measured to the nearest 0.[ADDRESS_832418] a wall with heels close to the wall. Both weight and height will be measured with participants 
wearing lightweight clothes but without shoes, and two separate measurements will be averaged. Body 
mass index (BMI)  will be calculated from the height and weight as kg/m2. Seca703  (Seca GmbH & Co. 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 16 KG., Hamberg, DE) , a combined digital scale and stadiometer, will be used for body weight and height 
measurements.  
• Waist, arm , and hip circumference will be measured following standardized procedures  implemented 
by [CONTACT_32341] . Waist circumference will be measured from the approximate midpoint between the lower 
margin of the last palpable rib and the top of the iliac crest. Hop circumference will be measured from the 
widest portion of the buttocks. Arm circumference will be measu red from the approximate midpoint 
between the acromion process and the olecranon process. Waist, hip, and arm circumference will be 
measured to the nearest 0.1 cm using a stretch resistance measuring tape and two separate measurements 
of each will be averaged.   
• Blood pressure  and heart rate  will be measured by a trained staff with a digital monitor (Critikon 
Dinamap 8100, GE Healthcare, Chalfont, [LOCATION_006]) . Two measures of blood pressure and corresponding 
measures of heart rate will be averaged. After [ADDRESS_832419] measure will be taken and the average of the two measures that differ by [CONTACT_4736] 10.0 mmHg or 6.0 mmHg, respectively, will be taken. Heart rate variability will be measured from 
an electrocardiogram recording taken with a Biopac MP150 system (Biopac Systems Inc., Goleta,  CA). 
After [ADDRESS_832420] in a supi[INVESTIGATOR_2547], 5 consecutive minutes of recording will be taken and data 
will be processed using AcqKnowledge version 4.0 or later (Biopac’s proprietary software platform). 
This is an impor tant measurement, because it is marker of autonomic nervous system function which is 
influenced by [CONTACT_53439], diet, and sleep; alcohol, tobacco, and drug use; and anxiety,81 and it is a marker of 
cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_17863].82  
• Body composition  and bone density  will be measured with Dual -energy X -ray Absorptiometry 
(DXA) . Bone density scans of the anterior -posterior (AP) spi[INVESTIGATOR_050] (L1 – L4), hip, forearm, and total body 
will be conducted on all participants. Total body and regional (arms, legs, trunk, and abdomen) body 
composition (fat mass, including an estimate of visceral adipose tissue, and lean mass) will be assessed 
by [CONTACT_624813] a Lunar Prodigy Advance densitometer (GE/Lunar Corp, Madison, WI)  or a Horizon DXA 
system (Hologic Inc.,  Marlborough, MA) . Quality assurance (QA) tests will be performed each morning 
of use. QA will be conducted using a standard with tissue -equivalent material with 3 bone -simulating 
chambers of known bone mineral content. In vivo  BMD precision in our laboratory is 1.05% for the 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_050], 0.805% for the total hip, 0.85% for total body BMD, 1.46% for fat mass and 0.55% for lean tissue 
mass. The time required for this assessment is approximately 20 -25 minutes; actual scan time is <[ADDRESS_832421] all scans.  Partici pants will be given a report of their results.  
Due to recent changes in DXA scan speeds recommendations, approximately 25% of total participants 
that receive scans in express mode at the baseline measurement appointment will have the proximal 
femur and AP spi[INVESTIGATOR_624783] 12 -month measurement timepoint. Once to 
match the previous scan speed (express) to establish longitudinal change, and once to create a new 
baseline scan in the new/proper mode (fast array).  We expect that this will result in additional radiation 
exposure of 1 5µSv or less, or an amount similar to two days of exposure to San Diego sun.  
Behavioral Measures  
• Eating Behaviors Inventory (EBI) will be used to examine eating behaviors and is a widely used self -
report assessment of behaviors related to weight loss and weight management (e.g., self -monitoring, 
refusing offers of food, eating in response to emotions). The measure has been used in ov er 20 weight 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 17 loss interventions. Reliability and validity of the 26 -item total score has been demonstrated and the 
measure has been shown to be sensitive to change in weight management interventions . 
• Physical activity  and sleep  will be measured objectively for 10 to 12 days consecutively after each 
measurement visit using the ActiGraph Link (ActiGraph Inc., Pensacola, FL), a previously validated, 
wrist -worn  and waist -worn  tri-axial accelerometer comparable to the device used in National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey.83-[ADDRESS_832422] practices for the assessment of habitual PA and result in high levels 
of acceptability and compliance among participants (>90%).87–90 After each wear period, data will 
immediately be downloaded and screened for wear time using ActiLife version 6.11.8 or newer 
(ActiGraph’s proprietary software platform). Participants who do not wear the device for a minimum of 
[ADDRESS_832423] irregularities in their data indicative of a device 
malfunction, will be asked to re -wear the device for another period of 10 consecutive days. PA will be 
defined as cumulative activity “counts” (ActiGraph’s proprietary metric) per day. This metric 
incorporates intensity, frequency, and duration of acceleration into a single  metric and is recommended 
for assessing the total volume of PA in a 24 -hour period.91 Sleep will be defined as total sleep time, sleep 
onset latency, wake after sleep onset, and number of awakenings after sleep onset per day determined by 
[CONTACT_624814].92,93 Participants will also be measured using the Fitbit devices, 
which provide data on PA (i.e., intensity, energy expenditure, steps, distance traveled, and flights of 
stairs) and sleep (equivalent to those previously mentioned) at 1 -minute epochs, and heart rate at epochs 
ranging from 1 to 15 seconds.  
• Diet will be measured for 3 days (2 weekdays and 1 weekend day) after each measurement visit using the 
Automated Self -administered 24 -hour Dietary Recall (ASA24) , a previously validated web -based tool 
developed by [CONTACT_29630].94–[ADDRESS_832424] consumed during the previous 24 -hour period. 
The program calculates kcal and macronutrients (e.g., fats, protein, carbohydrates), as well as 90 
micronutrients (i.e., vitamins and minerals), food groups (e.g., grains, vegetables), and other dietary 
constituents (e.g., added sugars). It also facilitates the calcul ation of the Healthy Eating Index, a measure 
of diet quality that can be used to assess compliance with the Dietary Guidelines for Americans.97 ASA24 
data will be collected via computer through HTML screen and directly formatted and stored in tables  on 
the study’s REDcap database.   
• The Global Physical Activity Questionnaire (GPAQ) and Paffenbarger Exercise Habits 
Questionnaire  will be the methods used to estimate physical activity. The GPAQ was developed by [CONTACT_38771]. The Paffenbarger was developed for the Harvard Alumni Study to assess 
leisure -time physical behavior. The time reference for the GPAQ will be “in a typi[INVESTIGATOR_3711]”. The time 
reference for the Paffenbarger will be “in the past week”. GPAQ and Paffenbarger data will be collected 
via survey through the stu dy’s REDcap secure database.  
• Sedentary behaviors will be measured with the Last 7 Day Sedentary Behavior Questionnaire (SIT -Q-
7d), which was developed and validated by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Godino and colleagues.98 The SIT -Q-7d assesses sitting 
or lying down in five domains (meals, transportation, occupation, non -occupational screen time, and 
other sedentary time), thus facilitating the calculation of domain -specific and total sedentary time. 
Strategies for weight m anagement will be measured with a 35 -item questionnaire that assesses the 
frequency of us ing evidence -based strategies to achieve decreased energy intake and increased energy 
expenditure for weight management (e.g., “Recorded or graphed my weight”).60,[ADDRESS_832425] 30 days is assessed on a 5 -point response scale,  ranging from “never or hardly ever” to “always or 
almost always”.  
• The Quality of Well -Being Scale (QWB -SA) will be used to assess general quality of life and for the 
subsequent cost -utility analyses. The QWB -SA is a comprehensive measure of health -related quality of 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page [ADDRESS_832426] -
worn heart rate monitor (Polar, Finland) that will be used for real -time monitoring by [CONTACT_624815]. Participan ts will then be instructed to step up and down from a single step [ADDRESS_832427].  
Psychological Measures  
• The Rosenberg Self -Esteem Scale , a well -established 10 -item questionnaire, will assess self -esteem. 
items concerning positive and negative feelings about the self (e.g., “On the whole, I am satisfied with 
myself.”).99 Agreement with an item is evaluated on a 4 -point response scale, ranging from “strongly 
disagree” to “strongly agree”.  
• Body image will be assessed with the body dissatisfaction subscale of the Eating Disorder Inventory 
(EDI) . This 9 -item scale reflects the belief that specific parts of the body associated with increased 
‘fatness’ are too large (e.g., hips, thighs, buttocks)  (e.g., “I think my stomach is too large.”).100 Items 
are evaluated on a 6 -point response scale, ranging from “never” to “always”.  
• Depression will be measured with the short form of the Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_33547] , which consists of 10 items designed to assess depression in the general population 
(e.g., “I felt depressed.”).101 Items are evaluated on a 4 -point response scale, ranging from “rarely or 
none of the time” to “most or all of the time”.  
• Anxiety  will be measured using the short -form of the state scale of the Spi[INVESTIGATOR_624784] (STAI) , which consists of [ADDRESS_832428] highly correlated 
anxiety -present and anxiety -absent items from the full -form of the STAI (e.g., “I feel calm.”).102 Items 
are evaluated on a 4 -point response scale, ranging from “not at all” to “very much”.  
• Social Support  will be measured using the Social Support and Eating Habits Survey  and the Social 
Support and Exercise Survey124. The surveys consist of items that assess the level of support 
individuals making changes to their eating habits and exercise are receiving from their family and 
friends.   
 
Other Measures  
 
• Homelessness will be assessed  at each measurement visit after baseline with item A6 of the RAND 
Homelessness Survey . This item asks respondents to recall how many nights in the past week they 
spent in a non -permanent residence (e.g., shelter, car/vehicle, etc.)  
 
Social Media and Network Connectivity Measures  
We will collect participants’ Facebook , Twitter  and Instagram  data via the application programming interfaces 
of the respective platforms, if possible according to the rules and regulations of the platforms. We have done 
this in previous studies,41,103,104 while successfully maintaining participants’ privacy and complying with 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page [ADDRESS_832429]. These data will allow us to measure the frequency 
and composition of participants’ online communication about healthy -active -living (HAL). Broadcasted posts 
(e.g., a status update or tweet) that includ e text will be classified with a dictionary consisting of PA (e.g., 
swimming) and diet (e.g., fruits) unigrams that was developed by [CONTACT_6283]. Weibel and Patrick.105  
Existing and study -engineered online social network connections (e.g., friends and followers) will be tracked, 
which will allow for the generation of a number of social network statistics that describe the local structural 
features (e.g., centrality, tie s trength, transitivity) that previous research suggests could be important for health 
behavior change.[ADDRESS_832430] 
friends regardless of whether they are connected online and respond to 5 questions about the friendship (e.g., 
“How often do you interact with the friend in real life?”). This measure will be used to determine how real 
world tie strength may be inferred from easily quantifiable online social network interactions.[ADDRESS_832431] of state -of-the-science methods to accomplish this.108 Among 
intervention group participants, quantitative markers of engagement will include usage of Fitbit, SMS sent and 
replied to, interactions on Facebook and Twitter related to study content (e.g., a post or tweet, like or favorite), 
website log -ins and c lick-throughs, emails sent and replied to, and communication with the health coach.  
Because this approach does not take into account the depth of interactions (e.g., liking a post is quantitatively 
the same as writing a post) nor the common practice of lurking (i.e., passively consuming content but not 
interacting in a visible way),[ADDRESS_832432] qualitative markers of engagement. A previously used 
questionnaire that includes eight questions (e.g., “In the past week, on average, approximately how many 
minutes per day have you spent on Facebook?”) meant to measure the intensity  with which participants use a 
device or app will be adapted for use in the present study.109 Importantly, the qualitative markers of engagement 
will be measured in both the intervention and control groups. These data, combined with the data from online 
social network connections, will allow us to explore the influence that contamination (i.e., co ntrol participants 
inevitably will use weight -related devices and apps and be connected to and interact with intervention 
participants on social media) has on intervention effects.   
Usability and Acceptability  
We will conduct audio recorded exit interviews of intervention participants to gain an understanding of which 
modalities, content areas, SWMs, and BCTs were used and how the overall user experience of the intervention 
was perceived. Our approach will be similar to that used in the SMART study.[ADDRESS_832433] social network connections, 
quantitative and qualitative markers of engagement, contamination  X X X X X 
Other measures ( homelessness )  X X X X 
Body  composition (DXA)  X X X X X 
Three -minute Step Test  X X X X X 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 20 Usability and acceptability      X 
Device - and app -based measures of weight, PA, sleep, diet, heart rate will be measured 
continuously among all participants  → → → → → 
 
 
Additionally, the study team may recontact [CONTACT_624816]/or inquire about participation in other research. Participants will indicate whether they agree to 
be recontact[CONTACT_624817]. Only participants who agree to be recontact[CONTACT_624818].  
 
Data Entry and Management  
 
All measures will be collected and managed using the secure, web -based tool Research Electronic Data  
Capture (REDCap) hosted at UCSD.110 REDCap provides an intuitive interface for data entry; audit trails for  
tracking data manipulation and export procedures; automated export procedures for seamless data downloads  
to common statistical packages; and procedures for importing data from external sources (e.g., all study  
anthropometric and physiological measures).  
 
Statistical Considerations  
 
Power and Sample Size  
 
In order to ensure that the RCT has adequate power to determine the efficacy of the SMART 2.[ADDRESS_832434] with 80% 
power at a significance level of 2.5% (a Bonf erroni correction to account for two tests). In the SMART study, 
the standard deviation (SD) of change in weight at [ADDRESS_832435] increase in the between group 
difference ( -1.60 kg), then we will need [ADDRESS_832436] 
size of 0.33. Thus, we will randomize 642 participants (214 per group ac counting for a 15% attrition rate).  
 
Overall Approach  
 
Analyses will be conducted using the latest version of the statistical software platform R and will be based on 
the intention -to-treat principle. All tests of significance will be two -sided and a p -value of 0.05 will be 
considered statistically significant. Summary statistics (e.g.,  mean, standard deviations, proportions) will be 
calculated for all variables of interest. Outliers will be assessed and variables whose distributions depart 
significantly from normality will be transformed. Appropriate non -parametric alternatives will be considered if  
parametric assumptions fail. No planned interim analyses for efficacy or futility will be conducted in this 
study.  
 
• Primary aim analysis : The primary outcome of the study is change in objectively measured weight in kg, 
and the SMART 2.0 intervention groups will be compared to the control group using a mixed model of 
repeated measures (MMRM).[ADDRESS_832437] -
baseline visit (i.e., 6, 12, 18, and 24 months) as the dependent variable. Fixed effects will include study 
group, visit, study group -by-visit interaction, weight at baseline, and any vari ables determined to be 
confounders. Visit will be treated as a categorical variable, and an unstructured variance -covariance 
structure will be used. Results will be reported as point estimates (mean differences between groups) and 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 21 interval estimates (95% confidence intervals). An intervention effect will be concluded if the p -value for 
the study group -by-visit interaction contrast in the model at 24 months is statistically significant. Holm's 
method will be used to adjust the two p -values for multiple comparisons.[ADDRESS_832438] to data missing at random (MAR).111,113 However, two additional approaches 
may be employed to examine the influence of missing data on the primary outcome analysis (whi ch takes a 
likelihood -based approach to estimation, but does not directly impute data). First, we will model the 
probability of missingness as a function of baseline covariates and previous outcomes (using logistic 
regression). The inverse of the resulting  probabilities will serve as propensity scores that will be included 
in the model of the primary outcome. If data are MAR or the probability of missingness can be fully 
explained by [CONTACT_215416], this approach produces asymptotically unbiased estimates.  Second, in order 
to allow for the possibility that the MAR assumption may not hold (an assumption that is not empi[INVESTIGATOR_624785]), we will use pattern mixture models in which the distribution of the primary outcome is assumed 
to follow a mixture of two distributions: one for those who complete follow -up and another for those who 
do not. These approaches will allow us to quantify the robustness of the study findings to missing data 
assumptions.  
• Secondary aim analyses : Secondary aim 1 will be achieved by [CONTACT_624819] 2.0 intervention groups and the control group at 6, 12, 
18, and 24 months in anthropometric and physiological outcomes, PA, diet, sleep, bod y image, anxiety, 
depression, and the frequency and composition of participant’s online communication about weight -related 
behaviors (all of these measures are continuous). Secondary aim 2 will examine the dose response (i.e., 
engag ement with intervention modalities) of the SMART 2.0 interventions on outcomes at 6, 12, 18, and 
24 months. Engagement variables will be included as independent variables in multiple regression models 
with the study outcomes as the dependent variable adjus ting for covariates. Secondary aim 3 will examine 
the usability and acceptability of the intervention using the framework advanced by [CONTACT_572254].114,115 Transcribed audio recordings will be analyzed in three stages: open, axial, and selective 
codin g.[ADDRESS_832439] of the SMART 2.0 interventions on study outcomes. Mediators (e.g., PA, diet, 
social support) will inform how the intervention may have worked to change the outcome, while 
moderators (e.g., sex, age, social network connectivity, contamination) wil l illuminate for whom and under 
what conditions the intervention may have been efficacious. Mediation will be tested via path analysis with 
regression paths from randomized group to change in the mediator and from change in the mediator to 
change in the ou tcome, along with a direct path from the intervention to change in the outcome. Adding 
interaction terms to the models assessing the intervention effects will test moderation. Secondary aim [ADDRESS_832440], no adjustments for multiple 
comparisons will be made and a p -value of 0.05 will be considered statistically significant.  
 
 
9. HUMAN SUBJECTS  
Up to a  total of 642 young adults will participate in the proposed research.  
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 22 Inclusion criteria:  a) age 18 to 35 years; b) intending to be available for a 24 month intervention; c) affiliated 
with either UCSD, SDSU or CSUSM as a student, faculty or staff; d) willing  and able  to use Facebook  and 
follow at least one of study’s Facebook, Instagram or Twitter pages ; e) willing  and able to use a smartphone 
and text messaging; f) willing  and able  to use the Fitbit devices and app; g) willing  and able  to attend 
measurement visits at UCSD over the [ADDRESS_832441]; h)  willing and  able to engage in moderate to vigorous 
physical activity; i) overweight or obese, but not severely obese  (25  BMI < 40 kg/m2).   
 
Exclusion criteria:  a) any comorbidities of obesity that require a clinical referral including eating disorders, 
pseudotumor cerebri, sleep apnea or hypoventilation syndrome, orthopedic problems, and meeting American 
Diabetes Association criteria for diabetes;122 b) psychiatric or medical conditions that prohibit compliance with 
the study protocol; c) had a cardiovascular event (heart attack, stroke, epi[INVESTIGATOR_407757], or 
revascularization procedure) within the last 6 months; d) currently being treated for a malignancy (other than 
non-melanoma skin cancer); e) currently being treated and/or have an eating disorder; f) planning to have a 
weight loss surgery in the next 24 months (e.g., liposuction, lap band, gastric by[CONTACT_6476]); g) pregnant , gave birth 
within the  last [ADDRESS_832442] 3 months, or actively planning 
pregnancy within the next 24 months . This will be determined by [CONTACT_38767] -report. ; h) prescribed PA and 
dietary changes; i) prescribed medications that alter weight; j) enrolled in or planning to enroll in a weight loss 
program during the study period ; k) lost more than [ADDRESS_832443] 3 months.  
 
We will recruit young adults, including students, faculty and staff, from three institutions  in San Diego County 
enrolling approximately 86,000 students  and with over 40,000 faculty and staff members. The University of 
[LOCATION_004], San Diego (UCSD)  enrolls 36,624 students: 28 ,587 undergraduates (mean age: 21  years ), 8,037 
graduate students. Undergraduate students are 49.1% female, 37.6% Asian, 19.1% White, 17.8% Mexican -
American or Latino, 2.5% African American, with the remainder other or not stated. San Di ego State 
University (SDSU)  enrolls 33,870 students: 29,513 undergraduates (mean age: X years), 4,357 graduate 
students (mean age:  22 years). Among all students, 55.1% are female, 13.4% are Asian/ Pacific Islander, 34.7% 
are White, 28.9% are Hispanic/ Latino, 3.9% are African American, with the remainder as other, multiple 
ethnicities, or not stated. [LOCATION_004] State University, San Marcos (CSUSM)  enrolls 13,893 students (mean 
age: 22.6 years). Among all students, 61.1% are female, 9.6% are Asian, 27.2% are  White, 44.2% are Hispanic/ 
Latino, 3.0% are African American, with the remainder as other, two or more races or not stated. These 
campuses enroll a diverse group of students in terms of race, ethnicity and SES background rendering the 
results of this stud y generalizable to a broad range of young adults nationwide.  
 
10. RECRUITMENT AND PROCEDURES PREPARATORY TO RESEARCH  
We will develop an enrollment strategy to ensure that we enroll students, faculty and staff across the broad age -
range targeted in this initiative (18 -35 years). Subjects will be recruited from three college and university 
settings within San Diego County including: UCSD, SDSU and CSUSM.  
 
Participants will be recruited through the following channels: (1) digital advertisements in college e -
newsletters; (2) targeted social media advertisements; (3) posting of print and digital flyers at UCSD and 
CSUSM; (4) e -mails sent by [CONTACT_624820]; (5) campus -wide events via tabling.  
 
Interested individuals  will be directed to complete an online screening form through the study’s secure REDcap 
database . Once the subject arrives at the screening form, he/she will have an opportunity to read and learn more 
about the study. At this point, the subject will be explained that in order to determine whether he/she meets the 
criteria for participating, he/she will  be asked a few eligibility questions (see eligibility criteria described 
above). After the participant completes the form, study staff  will follow up accordingly. Participants who do not 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page [ADDRESS_832444] still 
qualified, he/she will  be invited to schedule an appointment at the research office . There  they will be re -
screened for inclusion and exclusion criteria, provide written informed consent, and complete the baseline 
measurement. After eligibility and consent are confirmed and baseline measurements are completed, 
participants randomized at a ratio  of 1:1 :1. The biostatistics team will generate the electronic randomization list 
using the latest version of the statistical sof tware platform R (currently version 3.3.2, http://www.r -project.org ) 
 
11. INFORMED CONSENT  
Written informed consent will be obtained in -person from each enrolled subject prior to completing the baseline 
measure s.  However, there are several steps, as described in section 11, Recruitment, that the subjects will 
navigate through before the first in -person baseline visit.  
 
Potential participants who view recruitment materials and/or contact [CONTACT_624821]. The study purpose, procedures, risks and benefits will be 
described to them. If the potential participant expresses interest in participating in the study, he/she will be 
asked to complete an online screening form. Because the screening form poses no more than minimal risk of 
harm to subjects  and involves no procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the 
research context,  we are seeking a waiver of signed documented consent for the online screening form. For 
those individuals who mee t the online screening criteria, their inquiry will be followed up by a phone call to 
verify the data submitted via the online screening form. Since we are simply verifying information provided in 
the online screening form via phone call verbally  and it involves no more than minimal risk of harm to the 
subjects and no procedures for which written  consent is normally required outside the research context , we are 
requesting a waiver of written and verbal consent for the phone call . We have included a script for the oral 
consent as an attachment. We are not collecting any additional research data by [CONTACT_648]; we are simply verifying 
the information that is provided in the online interest form. Once the potential participant has met screening 
criteria over the phone, he/she will be asked to set -up a baseline visit appointment. The SMART study staff will 
obtain written informed consent in person prior to beginning the RCT study , and  it will be kept in a separate 
locked cabinet in EPARC /CWPHS . 
 
12. ALTERNATIVES TO STUDY PARTICIPATION  
The alternative to participation is to not participate.  
 
13. POTENTIAL RISKS  
Potential risks are psychological, social and physical.  
 
During the RCT subjects may experience 1) anxiety or embarrassment related to one’s personal exercise and 
nutrition practices and sharing this information with others via social media  and health coaching, and when 
answering questions during the measurement questionnaires ; 2) feelings of inadequacy or embarrassment if 
unable to succeed at agreed upon diet, physical activity, sleep and/or weight goals; 3) concern for privacy 
related to divulging personal information and security of providing personal informat ion over the Internet  and 
through Fitbit Charge 3 and Aria scale ; 4) injury during physical activity; 5) rare occurrence of cardiovascular 
event during physical activity ; 6) physical discomfort related to wearing the Fitbit device . Judging from our 
past experience and the current literature, the risks are relatively slight or low of likelihood.  
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 24 During the measurement process subjects the potential risks are deemed by [CONTACT_624822]. Potential risks include: 1) anxiety when ans wering personal questions on medical and lifestyle 
history; 2) falling during the [ADDRESS_832445]; 3) light headedness or dizziness, nausea, dehydration, fatigue, 
delayed -onset muscle soreness  and injury during the [ADDRESS_832446]; and 4) the effective dose of radiation to 
an individual  received during the five to six scans that each par ticipant will receive.  The total amount of 
radiation projected for these scans of the spi[INVESTIGATOR_050], hip, and total body scan combine d is approximately 0.2 85 to 
0.305  mSv. This amount is less than a participant would receive from one year of natural exposure in the San 
Diego area, which is approximately 1.6 mSv. Additionally, approximately 25% of the total population that 
received the DXA express scan speed at the baseline measurement appointment will be exposed to an 
additional radiation exposure of 15µSv or less at the 12 -month measurement appointment. This is because these 
participants will need a scan of the proximal femur and AP spi[INVESTIGATOR_624786]; o nce to match the previous 
scan speed (express) to establish longitudinal change, and once to create a new baseline scan in the new/proper 
mode (fast array).   
 
Additionally, participants will be responsible for contact[CONTACT_624823](s) are lost 
stolen, or damaged. The research team will handle the issue on a case -by-case basis and may determine that the 
participant is financially resp onsible.  
 
The risks involved in this study are no more than minimal and are reasonable in relation to the potential 
knowledge that may result from this study.  
 
14. RISK MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES AND ADEQUACY OF RESOURCES  
The Human Research Protections Program of UCSD approve d all methods utilized. Participants will be given 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_624787]. The study is supervised by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Job Godino, experienced in 
conducting clinical and population health research.  
 
Risks of embarrassment and/or anxiety will be minimized by [CONTACT_624824][INVESTIGATOR_624788], e.g. participation in online groups, before they agree to 
participate. Subjects will be informe d that they can discontinue their participation at any time, with no impact to 
the incentives previously received. Research staff will be trained to provide a very positive and supportive 
context for the intervention and assessments. Subjects will be told that all responses are confidential. Risks to 
privacy will be minimized by [CONTACT_624825] -identified and treated confidentially.  Written informed consent  will be kept in locked files cabinets  
separate from participant data which will be kept on the study’s secure REDcap database. This way  individuals 
are not easily connected to the study results.  All data from the Fitbit Charge 3 and Aria Scale  will be 
continuously, passively, and  securely streamed to the Fitbit website. It will then be retrieved using software 
developed by [CONTACT_624803]. (https://www.fitabase.com) and stored securely on their servers.  All data that is 
subsequently downloaded from Fitabase Inc. servers for analytic purposes will remain de -identified and will be 
stored on secure, password -protected CWPHS/ EPARC servers. There are two instances when researchers will 
contact [CONTACT_624826]: 1) anytime that a 
participant chooses to withdraw from the study and 2) at the completion of the study (when all data analysis has 
been completed).  Researchers will contact [CONTACT_624804], CEO of Small Step Labs, LLC and creator  of 
Fitabase ([EMAIL_11918]) and he will initiate a deletion of the data from live servers and all data will be 
phased out of o ffline backups within [ADDRESS_832447] no data associated with 
the study on their servers.  
 
Numerous privacy issues regarding the use of social networking platforms will be addressed with safeguards at 
multiple levels throughout the system. We will use Secure Socket Layer (SSL) protocol for communications 
with the Facebook, Instagram and Twitter servers. Engagement data collected from study’s posts on social 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 25 media platforms will be collected using Sendible ( https://www.sendible.com/ ), a social media management 
tool. Sendible collects social media reports which aggregates participants’ engagement via “likes”, “comments” 
and “shares” . In turn, engagement of individual participants will not be collected reducing concerns for privacy.  
 
The study’s Facebook, Instagram and Twitter pages will protect user data and honor privacy choices. 
Participants will be issued guidelines as to appropriate information to publish and reveal on the social media 
pages and within their online groups. To ensu re that all participants are aware of Facebook, Instagram and 
Twitter privacy policies and how they can control and/or change their privacy settings, each participant will be 
provided with a handout prior to the start of their participation in the study on  how to set their privacy 
preferences. The SMART Health Coach will be a “friend” of all participants on Facebook in order to invite 
them to online groups on Facebook messenger. The Health Coach will monitor the Facebook, Instagram and 
Twitter study pages a nd each Facebook Messenger group and alert participants to any observed privacy risks.  
Risks of anxiety, embarrassment, or feelings of inadequacy  during the measurement process  will be minimized 
by [CONTACT_624827] a laboratory test . Participants will also be informed 
that the Fitbit Charge [ADDRESS_832448] 
results will be de -identified and treated confidentially. Written consent forms  will be kept in separate locked 
files cabinets separate from participant data on the study’ secure REDcap database so that individuals are not 
easily connected to the study results. Audio recordings of health coaching sessions will be kept for the duration 
of the study and IRB approval and will be destroyed after all analysis is complete. Audio files will then be 
removed from the password protected server. All data from the Fitbit Charge HR will be continuously, 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 26 passively, and  securely streamed to the Fitbit website.  It will then be retrieved using software developed by 
[CONTACT_624803] ( https://www.fitabase.com ) and stored securely on their servers. All data that is subsequently 
downloaded from Fitabase Inc. servers for analytic purposes will remain de -identified and will be stored on 
secure, password -protected EPARC servers.  There are two instances when resear chers will contact [CONTACT_624828]: 1) anytime that a participant chooses to 
withdraw from the study and 2) at the completion of the study (when all data analysis has been completed).  
Researc hers will contact [CONTACT_624804], CEO of Small Step Labs, LLC and founder of Fitabase Inc 
([EMAIL_11918]) and he will initiate a deletion of the data from live servers and all data will be phased out 
of offline backups within [ADDRESS_832449] protocol.  Research data will not be shared with Fitbit.   
 
16. POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
The risks to participants are both unlikely and minor. By [CONTACT_438191], we will obtain accurate 
information related to the efficaciousness of a theory -based intervention that utilizes multiple technological 
modalities to promote weight loss in young adults. Participants will receive feedback on their phy sical activity, 
diet, and sleep, however they may or may not benefit from their participation in the study. Long term benefits 
to society include helpi[INVESTIGATOR_624789] d ue to cardiovascular disease, cancer, and other health problems.  
 
17. RISK/BENEFIT RATIO  
The risks involved , including exposure to radiation from the 5 total DXA scans,  are minimal and reasonable in 
relation to the importance of the knowledge that may be expected to result from the study. As addressed above 
in Background and Significance , efficacious technology -based behavioral interventions aimed at improving 
weight in young adults are critical for improving the health status of our country. Given the magnitude of the 
public health burden associated with overweight and obesity, it is impo rtant to evaluate whether real -time 
communication at critical point -of-decision moments will translate into decreased weight and improved health 
behaviors. There is very little research on how multiple modalities can be used to improve health behavior, yet 
these technologies are highly popular with young people. This study will advance health behavior research by 
[CONTACT_624829], smart phones, and social media and social networking to promote 
healthy weight -related behaviors. Moreover, because this research will be anchored in health behavior theory, it 
will permit us to examine cognitive, social, and ecological constructs and their role in mediating or moderating 
intervention effects.  
 
18. EXPENSE TO PARTICIPANT  
There will be no costs to the participants.  
 
19. COMPENSATION FOR PARTICIPATION  
To maximize the likelihood that participants will continue with measurement visits and stay in the study, we 
will offer incentives for attending measurement visits as follows:  Fitbit Charge 3 and Aria Scale (valued at 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 27 $300 total) at baseline, $20 at 6 months, $25 at 12 months, $25 at 18 months and $30 at 24 months. Subjects 
affiliated with SDSU and CSUSM will receive an additional $15 for each measurement visit to compensate for 
additional travel costs.  
20. PRIVILEGES/CERTIFICATIONS/LICENSES AND RESEARCH TEAM RESPONSIBILITIES  
1. Job Godino, Ph.D., Principal Investigator : [INVESTIGATOR_624790], coordination, implementation, and monitoring of program activities. He will also lead 
the analyses, preparation of manuscripts, and dissemination of results. [CONTACT_624832] holds a Masters and 
PhD in Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], is an Assistant Professor and Research Associate at the Center for Wireless and 
Population Health Systems (CWPHS) and Department of Family Medicine and Public Health at 
UCSD, and is the Directo r of Research and Applied Technology at the Exercise and Physical Activity 
Resource Center (EPARC) and the [LOCATION_004] Institute of Telecommunications and Information 
Technology’s Qualcomm Institute (Calit2) at UCSD. He has obtained in -depth research traini ng and 
experience in the primary and secondary prevention of obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. 
He has worked on 19 research studies (funded by [CONTACT_18121], RWJF, and MRC of the [LOCATION_006]) in different 
capacities, [ADDRESS_832450] been randomized controll ed trials. The majority of his current research 
focuses on the development and evaluation of interventions that utilize mobile and wearable 
technology to promote healthy changes in physical activity, sedentary behavior, diet, and sleep for the 
prevention o f chronic disease.  
2. Eric Heckler, Ph.D., Co -Investigator : holds a Masters in Clinical Psychology and a PhD in Clinical 
Health Psychology. He is an Associate Professor and Director in the Department of Family Medicine 
and Public Health and CWPHS at UCSD, respectively. His research focuses on the development of 
personalized digital health interventions for behavior change. Additionally, he has expertise in and 
will provide input on the overall direction of the project as it relates to the use of control systems 
engineering methods for behavioral interventions, just -in-time adaptive interventions, human -centered 
design methods and processes for advancing health behavior change, and mobile health (mHealth) 
interventions.  
3. Kevin Patrick, MD, MS, Co -Investigator : holds a MD and a Masters in Community Medicine. [CONTACT_624833] will serve as the study physician and will be on the study steering committee. He will also 
contribute to the intervention development and implementation, interpretation of findings, and will 
assist in the preparation of manuscripts and disseminati on of results.  He has extensive experience in 
formative research, survey methodology, measurement technologies, behavioral interventions and 
informational technology. His work focuses on the use of text messaging, smartphone apps, mobile 
video, the mobile web and social media to measure health states and promote health behavior change.  
4. Cheryl Rock, Ph.D., Co -Investigator : hold a Masters of Medical Science and a PhD in Nutritional 
Sciences. She will contribute to this project as a nutritional scientist with extensive knowledge and 
experience in conducting diet and weight loss intervention studies, biomarker measures, and cl inical 
nutrition research. [CONTACT_523625]  has previously developed, led, and conducted several dietary and weight 
loss interventions and clinical trials focused on the role of nutritional and dietary factors in the 
development  and progression of disease. Currently, she directs the Diet and Physical Activity Shared 
Resource at the UC San Diego Moores Cancer Center and is a co -investigator on other studies that are 
focused on diet, obesity, weight loss intervention, and behaviora l and metabolic risk factors and 
disease management.  
5. Nadir Weibel, Ph.D., Co -Investigator : holds a Masters and PhD in Computer Science and is a 
research faculty member in the department of Computer Science and Engineering at UCSD. 
Additionally, he is one of the faculty and an active member of the UCSD DesignLab, the UCSD’s 
CWPHS, the Center for  Microbiome Innovation, and the UCSD Interface and interdisciplinary 
program in multiscale biology. He is also appointed as Research Health Science Specialist at the VA 
San Diego. His research focuses on capturing, stor ing, managing and visualizing multimodal data 
from behavioral activity in real -world settings. He is skilled in a broad variety of computer science 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 28 techniques from information management to human -computer interaction, software engineering, and 
data visualization . He has a total 80+ publications, including 60+ published peer -reviewed articles 
both in renowned journals and in the most important venues in Human -Computer Interaction and 
Pervasive Healthcare during his [ADDRESS_832451]. Weibel will contribute to the intervention 
development and implementation and the assessment of usability and acceptability of the intervention.  
6. Sonia Jain, Ph.D., Co -Investigator : holds a Masters and PhD in Statistics and is a Professor in the 
Division of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics in the Department of Family Medicine and Public Health 
at UCSD. [CONTACT_137279] will contribute to the interpretation of findings and will assist in the preparation of 
manuscripts and dissemination of results.  
7. Shadia J. Assi, MPH , Study Manager : holds a Masters in Public Health and has 4 years’ experience  
working in academic health research. She will serve as the study manager for the project and will 
assist the PI [INVESTIGATOR_624791], development, coordination, implementation and monitoring 
program activities. Her previous research and training include  health promotion, behavioral science, 
and individual and group -based behavioral change interventions.  
8. Natalie Golaszewski, Ph.D., Postdoctoral Scholar : holds a Masters in Health Education and PhD in 
Health Behavior and Health Promotion. [CONTACT_624834] has a wide array of research experiences 
from managing and conducting large -scale, multi -year randomized control trails, lab -based validation 
studies, and qualitative studies. Currently, her research focuses on the social influences of phys ical 
activity, diet, and weight loss. She will contribute to the theoretical development of the project as well 
as unders tanding the meaning of online social behaviors in the small, online groups and whether these 
have an impact on physical activity and diet behaviors.  
9. David Wing, MS, Measurement Coordinator : holds a Masters in Exercise Physiology, and has 
been involved in multiple studies of physical activity and function. Additionally, [CONTACT_624835] is a 
member of CWPHS and serves as the Laboratory Director for EPARC. In this capacity he has 
developed extensive experti se in the objective measurement of physical activity, fitness, function, 
sleep, and overall health utilizing a variety of accelerometers, heart rate monitors, and other biological 
sensors individually and in co ncert. Under the direction of [CONTACT_624832], [CONTACT_624835] will oversee all 
anthropometric and physiological measurements in the study. He will help train, supervise, and 
schedule Research Assistants.  
1. Victoria Costello, MPH, Health Coach : will work under the Direction of [CONTACT_624832] and in 
conjunction with [CONTACT_624836]. The Health Coach will have a masters -level education, experience in 
motivational interviewing relevant to weight loss interventions, and a history of using health -related 
devices , apps, and multiple social media streams. The Health Coach will be responsible for the 
anonymous delivery of intervention content via multiple social media streams,  email, and personally 
in one -on-one, real -time techn ology mediated health coaching sessions with relevant participants.  
2. Research  Assistants  (TBN):  will assist with recruitment, screening, measurement and data 
collection.  In addition, they will assist the Study Manager and Health Coach in managing online social 
media pages.  
21. BIBLIOGRAPHY  
1. Institute of Medicine. Accelerating Progress in Obesity Prevention: Solving the Weight of the Nation. 
Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press; 2012.  
2. Flegal KM, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Ogden CL. Prevalence of obesity and trends in the distribution of body 
mass index among US adults, 1999 -2010. JAMA. 2012;307(5):491 -497. 
3. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of childhood and adult obesity in the United 
States, 2011 -2012. JAMA. 2014;311(8):[ADDRESS_832452], McCreath H, Kiefe CI, Schreiner PJ, Smith DE, Williams OD. Weight gain 
continues in the 1990s: 10 -year trends in weight and overweight from the CARDIA study. Coronary 
Artery Risk Development in Young Adults. American Journal of Epi[INVESTIGATOR_82331]. 2000;151(12):1172 -
1181.  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 29 5. Sheehan TJ, DuBrava S, DeChello LM, Fang Z. Rates of weight change for black and white Americans 
over a twenty year period. International Journal of Obesity. 2003;27(4):498 -504. 
6. Malhotra R, Ostbye T, Riley CM, Finkelstein EA. Young adult weight trajectories through midlife by 
[CONTACT_624830]. Obesity. 2013;21(9):1923 -1934.  
7. Lloyd -Jones DM, Liu K, Colangelo L a., Yan LL, Klein L, Loria CM, Lewis CE, Savage P. Consistently 
stable or decreased body mass index in young adulthood and longitudinal changes in metabolic 
syndrome components: The coronary artery risk development in you ng adults study. Circulation. 
2007;115(8):1004 -1011.  
8. Carr D, Jaffe K. The psychological consequences of weight change trajectories: evidence from 
quantitative and qualitative data. Economics and human biology. 2012;10(4):419 -430. 
9. Bureau of Labor Statistics. College Enrollment and Work Activity of 2015 High School Graduates. 
Washington, D.C.; 2016.  
10. Ryan C, Buaman K, U.S. Census Bureau. Educational Attainment in the [LOCATION_002]: 2015. 
Washington, D.C.; 2016.  
11. American College Health Association. American College Health Association -National College Health 
Assessment II: Reference Group Executive Summary Spring 2014. Hanover, MD; 2014.  
12. Nelson MC, Neumark -Stzainer D, Hannan PJ, Sirard JR, Story M. Longitudinal and Secular Trends in 
Physical Activity and Sedentary Behavior During Adolescence. PEDIATRICS. 
2006;118(6):e1627e1634.  
13. Nelson MC, Story M, Larson NI, Neumark -Sztainer D, Lytle LA. Emerging Adulthood and College -
aged Youth: An Overlooked Age for Weight -related Behavior Change. Obesity. 2008;16(10):[ADDRESS_832453] -food consumption among US 
adults and children: Dietary and nutrient intake profile. Journal of the American Dietetic Association. 
2003;103(10):1332 -1338.  
15. Larson NI, Neumark -Sztainer D, Hannan PJ, Story M. Trends in Adolescent Fruit and Vegetable 
Consumption, 1999 –2004. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2007;32(2):147 -150. 
16. Vargas PA, Flores M, Robles E. Sleep Quality and Body Mass Index in College Students: The Role of 
Sleep Disturbances. Journal of American College Health. 2014;62(8):[ADDRESS_832454] Three Years of College. Journal of obesity. 2012;2012:634048.  
18. Vella -Zarb R a, Elgar FJ. The “freshman 5”: a meta -analysis of weight gain in the freshman year of 
college. Journal of American College Health. 2010;58(2):161 -166.  
19. Fedewa M V, Das BM, Evans EM, Dishman RK. Change in weight and adiposity in college students: A 
systematic review and meta -analysis. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2014;47(5):641 -652. 
20. Bailey BW, Allen MD, LeCheminant JD, Tucker LA, Errico WK, Christensen WF, Hill MD. 
Objectively Measured Sleep Patterns in Young Adult Women and the Relationship to Adiposity. 
American Journal of Health Promotion. 2013;29(1):46 -54.  
21. Wirth MD, Hébert JR, Hand GA, Youngstedt SD, Hurley TG, Shook RP, Paluch AE, Sui X, James SL, 
Blair SN. Association between actigraphic sleep metrics and body composition. Annals of 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. 2015;25(10):773 -778.  
22. Van Cauter E, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_16614] K, Tasali E, Leproult R. Metabolic consequences of sleep and sleep loss. Sleep 
Med. 2008;[ADDRESS_832455] 1:S23 -8.  
23. Magee L, Hale L. Longitudinal associations between sleep duration and subsequent weight gain: A 
systematic review. Sleep Medicine Reviews. 2012;16(3):231 -241. 
24. Anderson M, Rainie L, Page D. Technology Device Ownership: 2015. Washington, D.C.; 2015. 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/10/29/technology -device -ownership -2015.  
25. Smith A, Page D. U.S. Smartphone Use in 2015. Washington, D.C.; 2015. 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/04/01/us -smartphone -use-in-2015/ . 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 30 26. Bothun D, Lieberman M. The Wearable Life 2.0: Connected Living in a Wearable World. [LOCATION_001], 
[LOCATION_001]; 2016.  
27. Perrin A. Social Media Usage: 2005 -2015. Pew Research Center.  
28. Duggan M, Ellison NB, Lampe C, Lenhart A, Madden M. Social Media Update 2014. Washington, 
D.C.; 2015. http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/01/09/social -media -update -2014/ . 
29. Booth HP, Prevost TA, Wright AJ, Gulliford MC. Effectiveness of behavioural weight loss 
interventions delivered in a primary care setting: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Family 
practice. 2014;31(6):643 -653.  
30. Wadden TA, Butryn ML, Hong PS, Tsai AG. Behavioral treatment of obesity in patients encountered in 
primary care settings. JAMA. 2014;312(17):1779 -1791.  
31. Dombrowski SU, Knittle K, Avenell A, Araújo -Soares V, Sniehotta FF. Long term maintenance of 
weight loss with non -surgical interventions in obese adults: systematic review and meta -analyses of 
randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 2014;348(May):g2646.  
32. Terranova CO, Brakenridge CL, Lawler SP, Eakin EG, Reeves MM. Effectiveness of lifestyle -based 
weight loss interventions for adults with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta -analysis. 
Diabetes, Obesity & Metabolism. 2015;17(4):371 -378.  
33. Laska MN, Pelletier JE, Larson NI, Story M. Interventions for weight gain prevention during the 
transition to young adulthood: A review of the literature. Journal of Adolescent Health. 2012;50(4):324 -
333. 
34. Pagoto S, Bennett GG. How behavioral science can advance digital health. Translational Behavioral 
Medicine. 2013;3(3):271 -276.  
35. Okorodudu DE, Bosworth HB, Corsino L. Innovative interventions to promote behavioral change in 
overweight or obese individuals: A review of the literature. Annals of Medicine. 2015;47(3):[ADDRESS_832456] J, DiPi[INVESTIGATOR_52468] L, Lei KY, Klein CJ. The Feasibility of an 
Email –Delivered Intervention to Improve Nutrition and Physical Activity Behaviors in African 
American College Students. Journal of American College Health. 2 015;63(2):109 -117. 
37. Hutchesson MJ, Rollo ME, Krukowski R, Ells L, Harvey J, Morgan PJ, Callister R, Plotnikoff R, 
Collins CE. eHealth interventions for the prevention and treatment of overweight and obesity in adults: 
a systematic review with meta -analysis. Obesity Reviews. 2 015:n/a -n/a. 
38. Pagoto S, Schneider K, Jojic M, DeBiasse M, Mann D. Evidence -based strategies in weight -loss mobile 
apps. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2013;45(5):576 -582. 
39. Lytle L a, Svetkey LP, Patrick K, Belle SH, Fernandez ID, Jakicic JM, Johnson KC, Olson CM, Tate 
DF, Wing R, Loria CM. The EARLY trials: a consortium of studies targeting weight control in young 
adults. Translational Behavioral Medicine. 2014;4(3):304 -313. 
40. Patrick K, Marshall SJ, Davila EP, Kolodziejczyk JK, Fowler JH, Calfas KJ, Huang JS, Rock CL, 
Griswold WG, Gupta A, Merchant G, Norman GJ, Raab F, Donohue MC, Fogg BJ, et al. Design and 
implementation of a randomized controlled social and mobile weight los s trial for young adults (project 
SMART). Contemporary Clinical Trials. 2014;37(1):10 -18. 
41. Godino J, Merchant G, Norman G, Donohue M, Marshall S, Fowler J, Calfas K, Huang J, Rock C, 
Griswold W, Gupta A, Raab F, Fogg B, Robinson T, Patrick K. Results of a two -year randomized 
controlled social and mobile weight loss trial for overweight and obese  young adults (Project SMART). 
The Lancet Diabetes & Endocrinology. 2016;In Press.  
42. Gupta A, Calfas KJ, Marshall SJ, Robinson TN, Rock CL, Huang JS, Epstein -Corbin M, Servetas C, 
Donohue MC, Norman GJ, Raab F, Merchant G, Fowler JH, Griswold WG, Fogg BJ, et al. Clinical trial 
management of participant recruitment, enrollment, engagement, and retention in the SMART study 
using a Marketing and Information Technology (MARKIT) model. Contemporary Clinical Trials. 
2015;42:185 -195. 
43. Merchant G, Weibel N, Patrick K, Fowler JH, Norman GJ, Gupta A, Servetas C, Calfas K, Raste K, 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_28947] L, Donohue M, Griswold WG, Marshall S. Click “like” to change your behavior: a mixed methods 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 31 study of college students’ exposure to and engagement with Facebook content designed for weight loss. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research. 2014;16(6):e158.  
44. Merchant G, Weibel N, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_28947] L, Griswold WG, Fowler JH, Ayala GX, Gallo LC, Hollan J, Patrick K. 
Faceto -Face and Online Networks: College Students’ Experiences in a Weight -Loss Trial. Journal of 
Health Communication. 2017;22(1):75 -83. 
45. Patrick K, Godino J, Raab F, Rock C, Norman G, Griswold, WG Kolodzeijczyk J, Arredondo E, 
Marshall S, Dillon L, Donohue M. Outcomes of a one -year text message intervention for obese English 
and Spanish speaking adults: ConTxt. In: The International Society  for Research on Internet 
Interventions. Valenicia, Spain; 2014.  
46. Patrick K, Raab F, Adams MA, Dillon L, Zabinski M, Rock CL, Griswold WG, Norman GJ. A Text 
Message –Based Intervention for Weight Loss: Randomized Controlled Trial. Journal of Medical 
Internet Research. 2009;11(1):e1.  
47. Kolodziejczyk JK, Norman GJ, Barrera -Ng A, Dillon L, Marshall S, Arredondo E, Rock CL, Raab F, 
Griswold WG, Sullivan M, Patrick K. Feasibility and effectiveness of an automated bilingual text 
message intervention for weight loss: pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. JMIR research protocols. 2013;2(2):e48.  
48. Kolodziekczyk, Julia K. Dillon L, Barrera -Ng A, Raab F, Sullivan M, Griswold W, Patrick K, Norman 
GJ. An innovative methodology to tailor text -messages based on user preference in a weight loss 
randomized controlled trial. In: International Society for Res earch on Internet Interventions. Chicago; 
2013.  
49. Poncela -Casasnovas J, Spring B, McClary D, Moller AC, Mukogo R, Pellegrini CA, Coons MJ, 
Davidson M, Mukherjee S, Nunes Amaral LA. Social embeddedness in an online weight management 
programme is linked to greater weight loss. Journal of The Royal Society 
Interface.2015;12(104):20140686 -20140686.  
50. Centola DM, Macy M. Complex contagions and the weakness of long ties. American Journal of 
Sociology. 2007;113(3):702 -734. 
51. Raghavan S, Pachucki MC, Chang Y, Porneala B, Fox CS, Dupuis J, Meigs JB. Incident Type 2 
Diabetes Risk is Influenced by [CONTACT_624831]: a Social Network Analysis. 
Journal of General Internal Medicine. 2016;31(10):[ADDRESS_832457] JN, 
Murabito J, Fowler JH, et al. The spread of alcohol consumpt ion behavior in a large social network. 
Annals of internal medicine. 2010;152(7):426 -433, W141.  
53. Pagoto S. The current state of lifestyle intervention implementation research: Where do we go next? 
Translational Behavioral Medicine. 2011;1(3):401 -405. 
54. Pagoto SL, Kantor L, Bodenlos JS, Gitkind M, Ma Y. Translating the Diabetes Prevention Program into 
a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] -based weight loss program. Health Psychology. 2008;27([ADDRESS_832458]):S91 -8.  
55. Rollnick S, Miller WR. What is Motivational Interviewing? Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy. 
1995;23(4):325.  
56. Miller WR, Rollnick S. Ten things that motivational interviewing is not. Behavioural and cognitive 
psychotherapy. 2009;37(2):[ADDRESS_832459] KM, Demark -Wahnefried W, Prokhorov A V., Barrera S, Baru 
C, Farcas E, Krueger I, Palmer D, Raab F, Rios P, Ziftci C, Peterson S. CYberinfrastructure for 
COmparative effectiveness REsearch (CYCORE): Improving data from c ancer clinical trials. 
Translational Behavioral Medicine. 2011;1(1):83 -88. 
58. Michie S, Richardson M, Johnston M, Abraham C, Francis J, Hardeman W, Eccles MP, Cane J, Wood 
CE. The behavior change technique taxonomy (v1) of 93 hierarchically clustered techniques: building 
an international consensus for the reporting of behavior chang e interventions. Annals of Behavioral 
Medicine. 2013;46(1):81 -95. 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 32 59. Michie S, Abraham C, Whittington C, McAteer J, Gupta S. Effective techniques in healthy eating and 
physical activity interventions: A meta -regression. Health Psychology. 2009;28(6):690 -701. 
60. Kolodziejczyk JK, Norman GJ, Roesch SC, Rock CL, Arredondo E, Madanat H, Patrick K. Exploratory 
and confirmatory factor analyses and demographic correlate models of the Strategies for Weight 
Management measure for overweight or obese adults. American Journ al of Health Promotion. 2014;In 
press.  
61. Kolodziejczyk JK, Norman GJ, Rock CL, Arredondo EM, Madanat H, Roesch SC, Patrick K. Strategies 
that Predict Weight Loss among Overweight/Obese Young Adults. American Journal of Health 
Behavior. 2014;38(6):871 -880. 
62. Patrick K, Hekler EB, Estrin D, Mohr DC, Riper H, Crane D, Godino JG, Riley WT. The pace of 
technological change: Implications for digital health behavior intervention research. American Journal 
of Preventive Medicine. 2016;51(5):816 -824. 
63. Hekler EB, Klasnja P, Froehlich J, Buman MP. Mind the Theoretical Gap: Interpreting, Using, and 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_624792]. CHI’13. 2013:3307 -3316.  
64. Riley WT, Rivera DE, Atienza AA, Nilsen W, Allison SM, Mermelstein R. Health behavior models in 
the age of mobile interventions: are our theories up to the task? Translational behavioral medicine. 
2011;1(1):53 -71.  
65. Spruijt -Metz D, Hekler E, Saranummi N, Intille S, Korhonen I, Nilsen W, Rivera DE, Spring B, Michie 
S, Asch DA, Sanna A, Salcedo VT, Kukakfa R, Pavel M. Building new computational models to 
support health behavior change and maintenance: new opportunities in behavioral research. 
Translational Behavioral Medicine. 2015;5(3):335 -346. 
66. Skinner BF. About Behaviorism. [LOCATION_001], [LOCATION_001]: Knopf; 1974.  
67. Festinger L. A Theory of Social Comparison Processes. Human Relations. 1954;7(2):117 -140.  
68. Berkman LF, Glass T, Brissette I, Seeman TE. From social integration to health: Durkheim in the new 
millennium. Social Science & Medicine. 2000;51(6):843 -857.  
69. Stokols D. Translating Social Ecological Theory into Guidelines for Community Health Promotion. 
American Journal of Health Promotion. 1996;10(4):[ADDRESS_832460] CP, Church TS . The role of exercise and physical activity 
in weight loss and maintenance. Progress in Cardiovascular Diseases . 2014; 56:441-447.  
72. 2015 –2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans.  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and 
U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2015;8.  
73. Your Guide to Healthy Sleep. National Institutes of Health. 2005.  
74. Hoddinott P, Allan K, Avenell A, Britten J. Group interventions to improve health outcomes: A 
framework for their design and delivery. BMC Public Health. 2010;10 (1):800.  
75. Burlingame G, Fuhriman A, Mosier J. The differential effectiveness of group psychotherapy: A meta -
analytic perspective. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research & Practice. 2003;7(1): 3 –12.  
76. Smith A, Anderson M. Social Media Use in 2018. Pew Research Center. [ADDRESS_832461] ME, Kennedy M, 
Vosloo J, Yang N. A systematic review of the literature on health and wellness coaching: Defining a 
key behavioral intervention in health care. Global Advances in Health and Medicine .  2013;2 (4):38-57.  
78. Huffman MH. Advancing the practice of health coaching: Differentiation from wellness coaching. 
Workplace Health and Safety. 2016;64 (9):400 -403.  
79. Wolever RQ, Jordan M, Lawson K, Moore M. Advancing a new evidence -based professional in health 
care: Job task analysis for health and wellness coaches. BMC Health Services Research. 2016;16(1) .  
80. Hill B, Richardson B, Skouteris H. Do We Know How to Design Effective Health Coaching 
Interventions: A Systematic Review of the State of the Literature. American Journal of Health 
Promotion. 2015;29(5).  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 33 81. Acharya UR, Joseph KP, Kannathal N, Lim CM, Suri JS. Heart rate variability: A review. Medical and  
Biological Engineering and Computing. 2006;44(12):1031 -1051.  
82. Lee D, Artero EG, Sui X, Blair SN. Mortality trends in the general population: the importance of  
cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_17863]. Journal of psychopharmacology (Oxford, England). 2010;24([ADDRESS_832462]):27 -35. 
83. Troiano RP, Berrigan D, Dodd KW, Mâsse LC, Tilert T, McDowell M. Physical activity in the United  
States measured by [CONTACT_6317]. Medicine and science in sports and exercise. 2008;40(1):181 -188. 
84. Warren JM, Ekelund U, Besson H, Mezzani A, Geladas N, Vanhees L. Assessment of physical activity 
- A review of methodologies with reference to epi[INVESTIGATOR_7306]: A report of the exercise  
physiology section of the European Association of Cardiovascular Prevention and Rehabilitation.  
European Journal of Cardiovascular Prevention and Rehabilitation. 2010;17(2):[ADDRESS_832463] SG. Comparison of three generations of ActiGraphTM activity monitors in children 
and adolescents. Journal of sports sciences. 2012;30(13):1429 -1435.  
86. John D, Freedson P. ActiGraph and Actical physical activity monitors: a peek under the hood. Medicine  
and science in sports and exercise. 2012;44([ADDRESS_832464] 1):S86 -9. 
87. Matthews CE, Hagströmer M, Pober DM, Bowles HR. Best practices for using physical activity 
monitors  in population -based research. Medicine and science in sports and exercise. 2012;44([ADDRESS_832465] 
1):S68 -76. 
88. Freedson P, Bowles HR, Troiano R, Haskell W. Assessment of physical activity using wearable  
monitors: recommendations for monitor calibration and use in the field. Medicine and science in sports  
and exercise. 2012;44([ADDRESS_832466] 1):S1 -4. 
89. Troiano RP, McClain JJ, Brychta RJ, Chen KY. Evolution of accelerometer methods for physical 
activity  research. British journal of sports medicine. April 2014:[ADDRESS_832467] -worn accelerometer protocol in the International Study of Childhood  
Obesity, Lifestyle and the Environment (ISCOLE). International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and  
Physical Activity. 2015;12(1).  
91. Bassett DR, Troiano RP, McClain JJ, Wolff DL. Accelerometer -based physical activity: Total volume 
per day and standardized measures. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise. 2014:833 -838. 
92. Cole RJ, Kripke DF, Gruen W, Mullaney DJ, Gillin JC. Automatic sleep/wake identification from wrist  
activity. Sleep. 1992;15(5):461 -469. 
93. Van de Water ATM, Holmes A, Hurley D a. Objective measurements of sleep for non -laboratory 
settings  as alternatives to polysomnography --a systematic review. Journal of sleep research. 2011;20(1 
Pt 2):183 -200. 
94. Subar AF, Kirkpatrick SI, Mittl B, Zimmerman TP, Thompson FE, Bingley C, Willis G, Islam NG,  
Baranowski T, McNutt S, Potischman N. The Automated Self -Administered 24 -Hour Dietary Recall  
(ASA24): A Resource for Researchers, Clinicians, and Educators from the National Cancer Institute.  
Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. 2012;112(8):1134 -1137.  
95. Kirkpatrick SI, Subar AF, Douglass D, Zimmerman TP, Thompson FE, Kahle LL, George SM, Dodd 
KW,  Potischman N. Performance of the Automated Self -Administered 24 -hour Recall relative to a 
measure of  true intakes and to an interviewer -administered 24 -h recall. American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition.  2014;100(1):233 -240. 
96. Thompson FE, Dixit -Joshi S, Potischman N, Dodd KW, Kirkpatrick SI, Kushi LH, Alexander GL,  
Coleman LA, Zimmerman TP, Sundaram ME, Clancy HA, Groesbeck M, Douglass D, George SM,  
Schap TE, et al. Comparison of Interviewer -Administered and Automated Self -Administered 24 -Hour  
Dietary Recalls in 3 Diverse Integrated Health Systems. American Journal of Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623].  
2015;181(12):970 -978. 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 34 97. Guenther PM, Casavale KO, Reedy J, Kirkpatrick SI, Hiza HAB, Kuczynski KJ, Kahle LL, Krebs -
Smith  SM. Update of the Healthy Eating Index: HEI -2010. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and 
Dietetics.  2013;113(4):[ADDRESS_832468] 7 -d sedentary time questionnaire. Medicine and Science in Sports  
and Exercise. 2014;46(6):1248 -1260.  
99. Rosenberg M. Society and the Adolescent Self -Image. Princton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 1965.  
100. Garner DM, Olmstead MP, Polivy J. Development and validation of a multidimensional eating 
disorder  inventory for anorexia nervosa and bulimia. Internationa l Journal of Eating Disorders. 
1983;2(2):15 -34. 
101. Radloff LS. The CES -D scale: A self -report depression scale for research in the general population.  
Applied Psychological Measurement. 1977;1(3):385 -401. 
102. Marteau TM, Bekker H. The development of a six -item short -form of the state scale of the Spi[INVESTIGATOR_624793] -Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI). The British Journal of Clinical Psychology. 1992;31:301 -306. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1393159.  
103. Jones JJ, Settle JE, Bond RM, Fariss CJ, Marlow C, Fowler JH. Inferring Tie Strength from Online  
Directed Behavior. PLoS ONE. 2013;8(1).  
104. Thangarajan N, Green N, Gupta A, Little S, Weibel N. Analyzing social media to characterize local 
HIV at-risk populations. Proceedings of the conference on Wireless Health - WH ’15. 2015:1 -8. 
105. Merchant G. With a little help from my friends: How social networks help college students trying to 
weight. 2015. http://escholarship.org/uc/item/56r5k1qd.  
106. Christakis C, Nicholas JAH, Fowler. Social Network Visualization in Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. Norsk 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_53069].  2009;19(1):5 -16. http://www.ntnu.no/ojs/index.php/norepid/index.  
107. Wilcox K, Stephen AT. Are Close Friends the Enemy? Online Social Networks, Self -Esteem, and 
Self- Control. Journal of Consumer Research. 2013;40(1):[ADDRESS_832469]  A. Understanding and Promoting Effective Engagement With Digital Behavior Change 
Interventions.  American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2016;51(5):833 -842. 
109. Ellison NB, Steinfield C, Lampe C. The benefits of facebook “friends:” Social capi[INVESTIGATOR_624794]’ use of online social network sites. Journal of Computer -Mediated Communication.  
2007;12(4):1143 -1168.  
110. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research electronic data capture 
(REDCap) -A metadata -driven methodology and workflow process for providing translational research 
informatics support. Journal of Biomedical Informatics. 2009;42 (2):377 -381. 
111. Donohue MC, Aisen PS. Mixed model of repeated measures versus slope models in Alzheimer’s 
disease clinical trials. The journal of nutrition, health & aging. 2012;16(4):[ADDRESS_832470] Procedure. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics. 
1979;6(2):65 -70. 
113. Mallinckrodt CH, Sanger TM, Dube S, Debrota DJ, Molenberghs G, Carroll RJ, Potter WZ, Tollefson 
GD. Assessing and Interpreting Treatment Effects in Longitudinal Clinical Trials with Missing Data. 
2003;3223(3).  
114. Strauss A, Corbin J. Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory Procedure and Techniques. 3rd 
ed. (Sage Publications I, ed.). London; 2007.  
115. Glaser BG, Strauss AL. The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research. 
Chicago: Aldine Pub. Co.; 1967.  
116. Walker D, Myrick F. Grounded theory: an exploration of process and procedure. Qualitative health 
research. 2006;16(4):547 -559. 
117. Birks M, Chapman Y, Francis K. Memoing in qualitative research: Probing data and processes. 
Journal of Research in Nursing. 2008;13(1):68 -75.  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Protocol  
Page 35 118. MacKinnon DP, Fairchild AJ, Fritz MS. Mediation analysis. Annual Review of Psychology. 
2007;58:593614.  
119. Kraemer HC, Wilson GT, Fairburn CG, Agras WS. Mediators and moderators of treatment effects in 
randomized clinical trials. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2002;59(10):[ADDRESS_832471] ed. Boca Raton, FL: 
Chapman and Hall/CRC; 2014.  
121. Tan X, Shiyko MP, Li R, Li Y, Dierker L. A time -varying effect model for intensive longitudinal data. 
Psychological Methods. 2012;17(1):61 -77. 
122. American Diabetes Association. Diagnosis and classification of diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care.  
2013;[ADDRESS_832472] 1:S67 -74. 
123. Lewis MK, Blake GM, Fogelman I. Patient dose in dual x -ray absorptiometry. Osteoporosis 
international: a journal established as result of cooperation between the European Foundation for 
Osteoporosis and the National Osteoporosis Foundation of the [LOCATION_003].  1994 Jan;4(1):[ADDRESS_832473] # R01HL136769: “SOCIAL MOBILE APPROACHES TO 
REDUCE WEIGHT (SMART) 2.0”  
23. BIOLOGICAL MATERIALS TRANSFER AGREEMENT  
NA 
 
24. INVESTIGATIONAL DRUG FACT SHEET AND IND/IDE HOLDER  
NA 
 
25. IMPACT ON STAFF  
NA 
 
26. CONFLICT OF INTEREST  
There are no known conflicts of interest.  
 
27. SUPPLEMENTAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR CANCER -RELATED STUDIES  
NA 
 
28. OTHER APPROVALS/REGULATED MATERIALS  
NA 
 
29. PROCEDURES FOR SURROGATE CONSENT AND/OR DECISIONAL CAPACITY ASSESSMENT  
NA 
 
 
 
 