[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
 Enhancing Cognitive Restructuring  with Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation : A 
Proof of Concept Study  
Study Protocol and Statistical Plan  
 
Objects and Significance  
This study was based on the overall hypothesis that an integrating high frequency (HF) 
rTMS with an evidence based psychotherapeutic intervention (cognitive restructuring - CR) while 
engaging a neural mechanism that is impaired in adults with psychopathology (the dlPFC -
amygdala circuit), will lead to quick improvements (after one session ) in emotion dysregulation 
that will have long -lasting effects. This short intervention we hypothesized would be feasible, 
tolerable and acceptable to patients who have difficulties with managing their emotions.  
 
Design and Procedures  
This protocol was des igned to provide preliminary data for the efficacy of a TMS/CR 
approach to emotion dysregulation. [CONTACT_85564] received three sources of funding for the study: 
a Brain and Behavior young investigator award (NARSAD), the Duke PRIDe award, and a 
CTSA KL2 awar d. The NARSAD grant application included an N of 40 subjects; the Duke 
PRIDe award added additional 20 participants to this study; the KL2 award added an additional 
40 participants. Therefore, we planned for the target enrollment of 100 eligible subjects t hrough 
study completion. The NARSAD and PRIDE projects were combined, aiming to examine the 
differences in administering neurostimulation over the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
(dlPFC) versus left dlPFC versus sham, in conjunction with cognitive res tructuring practice. The 
KL2 project was a supplement where the specific neurostimulation targeting was done using 
functional neuroimaging  over the left dlPFC only . Recruitment for these two studies proceeded 
in parallel, and participants were given the ch oice for the study as available or the PI [INVESTIGATOR_142328] a participant. Therefore, participants were not randomly assigned to 
one of the two studies. Nevertheless, they were randomly assigned to a condition once they 
were enrolled in one of the two studies.  
  Interested participants complete an online or a phone screen. If eligible after the screen, 
participants were invited to a baseline assessment session where inclusion/exclusion was 
evaluated, and baseline measurements were  collected. KL2 participants were called back for a 
brain imaging session where the ideal target for neurostimulation was identified with the use of 
an emotion regulation paradigm. The target was established using the 10 -20 system for 
NARSAD/PRIDE particip ants. All participants returned for a one -time CR/TMS intervention 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /[ADDRESS_161741] completed training from the Department of Obstetr ics and Gynecology (OB -GYN). 
The urine pregnancy test used is a commercially available test kit specified by [CONTACT_142355] -GYN (Quidel 
Quick Vue one -step HCG test; Product #: B6775 -26DU).  
 
Study Flow    
Online/Phone Screening : Participants were recruited between 4/27/ 2016 and 2/17/2020 
through online websites (e.g., Craigslist), flyers, and physician referrals. Interested participants 
completed an online screen and were subsequently called for additional screening if they did not 
report meeting any exclusion criteria. We aimed to recruit 20 participants in each of the five 
conditions across the two studies to align with other neurostimulation studies where 6 -20 
individuals per condition were sufficient to demonstrate proof of concept for novel treatments (1-
3).Participants who meet cri teria were scheduled for a clinical screening interview and baseline 
assessment session.  
Clinical Screening Interview and Baseline Assessment  (~4 hours) :Participants went 
through a consent process and, for those who consented, the UWRAAMP was administered.  
  UWRAAMP.  The University of Washington Risk Assessment and Management Protocol 
(UWRAAMP) is a paper and pencil established protocol to identify increased distress that may 
result from clinical interviewing and offers appropriate interventions as needed. Study staff who 
was involved in assessments was trained in the UWRAAMP by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_142329] [ADDRESS_161742] hospi[INVESTIGATOR_9487], (e.g. Duke ER). The UWRAAMP 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
 was used during the initial assessment, and during the 1 -week and 1 -month follow -up 
assessments. No hospi[INVESTIGATOR_142330].  
Clinical Interviews.  Next, inclusion/exclusion criteria was reviewed.  First, the participant 
completed the Emotion Regulation Questionnaire (ERQ) and the Difficulties in Emotion 
Regulation Scale  (DERS).  Low use of CR was operationally defined as a mean sc ore lower 
than 4.7  on the cognitive reappraisal subscale (range: 1 -7) of the Emotion Regulation 
Questionnaire (ERQ) (4) at the intake assessment.  This cutoff was computed by [CONTACT_142356] 18 studies (N = 4331 participants) published before 2014 that examined 
the ERQ on US samples (4-21). The pooled mean across these studies was 4.70 ( SD pooled = 
0.99). We considered adults who scored below this pooled mean to have “low use” of CR 
strategies and  therefore to be the optimal candidates for a one -time CR intervention. ITT 
participants scored an average of 3.35 (SD = 0.81) on the ERQ cognitive reappraisal subscale, 
with no significant difference in scores between treatment conditions ( F(2, 43) = 0.29 , p  = .75).  
High emotional dysregulation was defined as a score of 89 or higher on the DERS to align with 
prior studies done by [CONTACT_27156].  
Participants qualified for the main study only if their ERQ score was less than 4.7. 
Participants qualified for th e neuroimaging sub -study only if their DERS score was above 89, 
indicating moderate emotion dysregulation. For those above the DERS threshold in the KL2 
study, the ERQ score was used to decide if participants could be included in the study or not. 
We plann ed to enroll 14 low ERQ participants (score <=4.7), 13 moderate ERQ participants 
(4.66 < score <= 5.8), and 13 high ERQ participants (score >5.8).  
If these criteria were  met, a member of the study team would  then interview the subject 
about current and past psychiatric disorders, using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -5 
Disorders (SCID -5). From the SCID modules, we administer ed the modules relevant to 
exclusion first, followed by [CONTACT_142357] s if the participant did not meet exclusion 
criteria. Therefore, the manic, psychotic, and substance disorders modules were  administered 
first. Intelligence Quotient (IQ) was assessed with the Peabody Pi[INVESTIGATOR_17122] —Third 
Edition (PPVT -III). Parti cipants with a PPVT score of <70 were  excluded. For included 
participants, the assessor continued  with the mood, anxiety, personality disorders and all other 
remaining modules. Excluded participants were  paid for their partial assessment and referred to 
other treatment resources as needed.   
Next, the assessor conducted  a brief interview examining medical and treatment history. 
A Medical History Questionnaire (MHQ), the TMS Adult Safety Screen (TASS) and an 
abbreviated version of the Treatment History Inter view (THI) were  used to assess previous and 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
 ongoing psychiatric services received. The modified THI was administered at the initial 
assessment visit and at the 1 -month follow up. An MRI screening form was also used to assess 
safety  for participants in the neuroimaging sub -study . 
Personally -Relevant Emotional Stressor.  Qualified participants underwent an interview to 
identify four autobiographical stressors to be used for emotional induction. Using the method 
developed by [CONTACT_25715][INVESTIGATOR_142331] (22) and used in studies of adults with affective disorders 
(23), we created four negative emotional arousal scripts,  three of which were used in a random 
order during the intervention day and one during the [ADDRESS_161743] baseline data about demographics handedness , 
emotional dysregulation, copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], functional impairment, and psychopath ology (see measures) . 
These se lf-reports could be  administered via a Qualtrics link on one of the study computers or 
on the study tablet.  
Emotional Memory Selection task  (Participants in the neuroimaging sub -study 
only) . Following the methods of Kr oss, Davidson, Weber, & Ochsner  (24), participants were  
asked to generate a set of negative and neutral autobiographical experiences and to rate the 
extent to which thinking about them feels a) negative and b) arousing. A short questionnaire 
about each memory was then answered. These cues and memories were  subsequently  used in 
the neuroimaging task.   
Assessment location and video recording.  All assessments were  conducted in the PI’s 
office, or in her staff’s  office. For the subjects who consent to record, their assessments were  
video/audio recorded for reli ability purposes and recordings. These video files will be  destroyed  
6 years after the study completion date.  
At the end of the clinical interview/baseline assessment day participants were  scheduled 
for the intervention day or for the baseline imaging session depending on the study that they 
were assigned  to. The baseline imaging and the intervention session had to  happen within 1 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
 month of the initial assessment. The intervention day/baseli ne imaging day were  planned for at 
least one day later, and at most 1 month later (time at which the assessment was no longer be 
valid).  
  
Randomization procedures:  Following intake, participants from the main study were 
randomly assigned to active right d lPFC stimulation, active left dlPFC stimulation, or sham 
stimulation.  Participants were matched according to sex and use of psychotropic medication as 
dichotomous variables. When a participant withdrew before the intervention, they were 
unrandomized and th eir randomized condition reassigned to a new participant with the same 
matching specifications to maintain balance between the ITT groups. Randomization was done 
using a minimization algorithm (25, 26)  using the QMinim software 
(http://rct.mui.ac.ir/q/index.php ) by [CONTACT_142358] f member and kept blind from the 
assessor, PI [INVESTIGATOR_142332]. A parallel clinical trial design was used with equal ratio assignment 
to each condition. The randomization information was saved in a password protected database 
to which only the staff member responsible for randomization had the password. Two sealed 
envelopes were created for each participant, one to be opened at the end of the study by [CONTACT_142359], and one to be opened by [CONTACT_142360]. 
Sham participants were further randomized to receive TMS to either the right or left DLPFC. 
From the 15 participants in the sham treatment condition, 8 had the TMS coil placed over t he 
left dlPFC and 7 over the right dlPFC.  
Participants in the neuroimaging sub -study  were  randomized to one of two treatment 
conditions (sham, left dlPFC stimulation) matching for gender (M/F), use of psychotropi[INVESTIGATOR_1102] 
(Yes/No), and ERQ CR score (low/moderate/high ) using the same randomization and blinding 
procedures . 
Medical Screen:  After the int ervention, a de -identified copy of the medical history 
questionnaire and the TASS was sent to the study doctor, [CONTACT_89878]. He review ed these 
documents and inform ed the study team if the participant could  be cleared to do rTMS. In the 
event that the partici pant was deemed inappropriate the participation ended  at that point and the 
subject was compen sated. If the participant passed  the medical screen, the participant 
proceed ed to the next appointment.   
  Baseline Brain Imaging Session  (participants in the ne uroimaging sub -study only ): 
The session took approximately 2 hours, with 1 hour in the scanner itself. The MRI Session 
include d:    
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
  Training in the emotion regulation task to be performed in the scanner, in cluding practice 
in reappraisal, distraction , and feel strategies . 
 A memory cue assessment to rehearse cuing of memories selected in the Emotional 
Memory Selection Task at the Assessment Session.  
 Female participants of childbearing potential had a urine pregnancy test  on the day of 
the MRI scan to ensure that the participant was not pregnant.  Urine pregnancy tests 
was completed using QuickVue+ One -step hCG test. The QuickVue One -Step hCG 
Urine test is a sensitive immunoassay for the qualitative detection of human chorionic 
gonadotropin (hCG) in urine for the early detection of pregnancy with >99% accuracy 
and 20mIU/mL sensitivity in urine.  This pregnancy test was administered by [CONTACT_142361]. The test 
was conducted at the MRI Center where the scan took place, and subjects were not  
allowed to participate until the pregnancy test was completed and a negative reading 
was determined by [CONTACT_142362] r staff.  
 A “mock scan” was administered to participants who had not had a previous research 
brain MRI.  This procedure familiarizes the participant with the scan environment.  
 The MRI Safety Screening was administered and reviewed by [CONTACT_142363] (implanted metal, etc)  
 Both structural and functional MRI images were  collected.  
 During the functional MRI scanning, participants complete d an emotion regulation task, 
where they were  asked to recall an emotional mem ory from the Emotional Memory 
Selection task, and then were  cued to reappraise, distract, or allow for unregulated 
experience of emotions. At the end of each trial, participants were  asked to rate their 
current emotional state. Strategies were  blocked (e.g ., 3-4 trials of reappraise followed 
by 3-4 trials of distance), and each trial began  with a brief non -emotional control task 
(e.g., indicate the direction of an arrow.)   
Personalized target identification (participants in the neuroimaging sub -study only):  Following 
the intake session, fMRI analyses were performed to define, for each subject, the TMS target as 
the spot within the dlPFC showing the strongest activation in the “Restructure vs. Feel Negative” 
contrast. To obtain this contrast, data were first preprocessed with fMRIprep (27).  
Separate events were then modeled for the attentional task (duration: 10 seconds), the negative 
and neutral cues (duration: 5 seconds), for distancing, reframing, and feel of negative o r neutral 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
 cues, (duration = 10 seconds), and for the ratings of their emotional state on the SUDS 
(duration: 10 seconds). The onset of each event was recorded by [CONTACT_142364]. A weight of [ADDRESS_161744] level, 
functional data were analyzed as individual runs, using a general linear model (GLM) in which 
trial events were convolved with a double -gamma hemodynamic response function. The 
‘Restructure’ contrast defined as the combination of di stancing and reframing instructions was 
contrasted with the ‘Feel Negative’ contrast. This contrast was then used to generate Level [ADDRESS_161745] sulcal wall. When this orientation was not feasible (e.g., coil handle 
in front of participant’s face), the symmetric orientation was used and the current was reversed.  
Intervention Day  (all participants) : Participants returned for the 3.[ADDRESS_161746], and was focused on learning CR and 
practicing on standardized and personal examples . Skills training used standardized procedures  
blending psychotherapeutic approaches (28, 29)  with instructions in CR that matched prior 
neuroimaging studies (30). Participants were told that one validated way to change emotional 
experiences is by [CONTACT_142365] (29, 31 -33) or 
by [CONTACT_142366] (34).  
Following Gross’s model (35), we defined CR as interpreting emotional stimuli in a way 
in which the target emotional relevance is de -emphasized or the interpretation leads to a 
differe nt emotion (36). First, participants were taught to adopt a detached and unemotional 
attitude as they thought about their autobiographical situation (37). Detachment was instructed 
by [CONTACT_142367]. We called this strategy distancing  (38). 
Second, participants were taught reframing using an adapted version of existing 
paradigms (30, 39, 40) . Specifically, we emphasized with pi[INVESTIGATOR_142333], identified helpful ways of thinking, and instructed participants 
to find interpret ations that are less toxic in order to be effective rather than right when upset.  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /[ADDRESS_161747] -case 
scenario, the probability of it occurring, and the likelihood of survival if it occurred. The CR 
training ended with a quiz that included definitions  as well as hypothetical scenarios for practice 
purposes.  
rTMS Parameters.  Active or sham rTMS was performed with a figure -8 coil (A/P Cool -
B65) and a MagPro X100 stimulator with MagOption (MagVenture, Denmark). The TMS device 
was configured to biphasic p ulses with the electric field current flowing in the normal direction 
(AP-PA). For the main study, s timulation was delivered over the left or right dlPFC (depending 
on randomization), defined according to the 10 -20 system (41). For the neuroimaging sub -study, 
active or sham stimulation (depending on randomization) was delivered over the functionally 
derived left dlPFC target.  A stereotaxic neuronavigation system was used (Brainsight, Rogue 
Research), and a template brain (MNI) was registered to each participant’s head using 
anatomical landmarks. These procedures allowed for online monitoring and adjustment of TMS 
coil position throughout the session to ensu re proper targeting.  
 rTMS was performed with standard FDA -approved parameters (42, 43) . Twenty trains of 
10 Hz stimulation were delivered over 4 s with a 26 -s inter -train interval at 120% of the resting 
motor threshold (rMT). To determine rMT, electrodes (Neuroline 720, Ambu) were placed in a 
belly-tendon montage on the participant’s opposite from the site of stimulation hand to record 
activity in the first dorsal interosseous (FDI) muscle, and motor evoked potentials (MEP) were 
recorded in  Brainsight. The motor hot spot was defined as the position over the left/right motor 
cortex that elicited the largest MEP, and rMT was then defined as the TMS pulse intensity that 
induced, on average, a MEP of 50 µV amplitude, using a maximum likelihood e stimator (TMS 
Motor Threshold Assessment Tool, MTAT 2.0, clinicalresearcher.org /software.html). If the 
participant could not tolerate full intensity of the intervention, we dropped the intensity to rMT 
and ramped up during habituation to target intensity.  Only participants who received the majority 
of stimulation above rMT were included in the analyses leading to 5 participants (including the 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_142334]) to be excluded.  
Each TMS session was conducted by [CONTACT_458] (PI; first author)  with the 
assistance of a TMS technician. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_142335], decided on dose 
adjustments and course of action for any protocol deviations, and stayed blinded to the 
active/sham manipulation . The technician was not blind to the assigned condition and prepared 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /[ADDRESS_161748].  
Sham stimulation was delivered using the opposite face of the same A/P coil, which 
included a magnetic shield to greatly attenuate the induced field. When  positioned in the sham 
configuration, the coil also produced electrical current through two electrodes placed 
approximately one centimeter apart near the participant’s hairline on the side of the stimulation. 
This electrical current was matched in intensi ty to create a somatosensation similar to the active 
stimulation, thereby [CONTACT_40397] a reliable sensory blinding to the two conditions. The electrodes 
were put near the hairline for all participants and were only activated for sham participants. 
Therefore, t he presence of the sham electrodes, the scalp stimulation, the sounds and the coil 
position over the identified target, and the pre -determination of the motor threshold were all 
elements of the neurostimulation procedure that were identical between the tre atment 
conditions. The difference was the presence or absence of HF rTMS.   
Combined rTMS -CR Intervention.  First, a 600 s habituation period was performed when 
participants received active or sham rTMS alone while listening to white noise via headphones. 
Participants were not instructed to think of anything in particular during this time. Then, the 
intervention proceeded as follows: (1) participants sat quietly for a 300 s baseline while listening 
to white noise, (2) participants were instructed to imagine  as vividly as possible one of the 
stressful experiences constructed at intake, (3) the stressor was heard via headphones followed 
by [CONTACT_142368] (120 s 
total), and (4) instructio ns in reducing distress using CR followed. The rTMS began within [ADDRESS_161749] 
administration of the stressor task using the procedures outlined above, but with a different 
personalized stressor recording each time presented in a randomized order.  After each 
baseline, stress induction, and regulation period, the participant was asked to rate subjective 
units of distress (SUDS; 0 -9 scale). At the end of the intervention, manipulation check questions 
ensuring compliance with the instructions and aski ng participants to guess the blinded condition 
assignment were administered.   
Physiological Measurements.  Psychophysiological measurements were collected 
continuously during the intervention using the BIOPAC MP -150 recording system (Goleta, CA). 
Electrodes  recording heart rate (HR) were placed on the participant’s wrist, ankle, and fingers. 
Amplified analog data recorded with a 200 Hz sampling rate were converted to digital recording 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
 and filtered using BIOPAC’s AcqKnowledge 4.1 software.  
Introduction of th e Ambulatory Assessment.  At the conclusion of the intervention, the 
experimenter orient ed participants to the follow up assessments including the ambulatory 
assessment week. Over the following week, participants would receive eight calls each day 
(approximately one call every two waking hours), with each call lasting 30 - 60 seconds. For all 
experimental conditions, calls were  used to assess daily psychological distress (SUDS; 0 -9), 
and use of CR since the previous call (Y/N). Calls were  randomly generated and automatically 
placed for 7 days. Participants used  their own phones for this portion of assessment. If 
participants miss ed a call, they were  encouraged to call into the study server where they were  
prompted for the same information. All calls were  conducted using a dedicated server and 
existing software at the CBRTP (Telesage, Inc., Chapel Hill, NC). Before programing the 
random calls, we asked  participants of their typi[INVESTIGATOR_142336].  
   
Ambulatory Assessment Week:  Calls started  the day following the intervention day and 
stopped after 7 days of daily calls. In addition, as in our previous trials, participants were  paid (at 
the end of the study)  to complete calls they answer each day ($0.25 per call; maximum of $2 
per day). Participants receive d compensation for the calls at the 1 -month follow -up assessment. 
If more than 8 calls/day occur, participants were  only be compensated for a maximum of 8 calls. 
Each call (either placed or initiated) asked  the participant to: 1) enter their study id, 2) enter their 
current level of distress (SUDS, 0 -9), 3) enter [ADDRESS_161750] once since  the previous call.  
  
One Week Follow -up: At the conclusion of the ambulatory assessment week, 
participants had the option to complete the battery of self -reports assessed at intake online on a 
Qualtrics questionnaire or via phone with a study coordinator.  Participants received  an e-mail 
with the link to the questionnaires. A self -report was included to assess compliance with 
medication, changes in medication, and any other changes in treatment in the past week. 
Participants had up  to 2 weeks to complete th is assessment. Participants in the neuroimaging 
substudy could  choose to complete the 1 week questionnaire packet during the follow up MRI 
session.  
 
Follow up Brain Imaging Session  (participants in the neuroimaging substudy only) : The 
session took approximately 2.5 hours, with 1 hour in the scanner itself. This session was 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
 identical to the intake MRI session.  
  
1-Month Follow -up: Upon arrival, all subjects went  through the UWRAAMP followed by 
[CONTACT_142369] -report packet as gi ven during the initial assessment. These 
self-reports were  administered via a Qualtrics link on one of the study computers or on the study 
tablet.  Participants were  then connected to physiological recording equipment (BIOPAC) and, 
after [ADDRESS_161751] stressor followed by [CONTACT_142370]. SUDS and dissociation was assessed 
before the procedure, after baseline, after induction, and after a 5 -minute regulation p eriod. 
Participants were  asked what they did during the regulation period and were  debriefed and 
guided  through the relaxation procedure if distr ess continued  to be high. The behavioral emotion 
regulation task follow ed where participants were  asked to resp ond to emotion cues on the 
screen. Next, the participant was asked a series of questions about feasibility and acceptability 
of procedures (exit interview), were  debriefed with regards to the blind treatment assignment 
and were  offered referrals for other mental health services as needed. At this point, participants 
were  compensated up to $50 for their participation including $10 for having completed the 1 -
week follow up, $26 for completing the 1 -month follow up, and up to $14 for the ambulatory 
assessment component (exact sum depending on the # of calls completed). Sub-study  
participants were  also compensated $50 for each MRI session.  
 
Study Inclusion Criteria  
1. Age between 18 -65 
2. DERS/ERQ cutoffs:  
a. For main study: ERQ reappraisal subscale <=4.7  
b. For neuroimaging sub -study: DERS score >= 89 & ERQ reappraisal subscale 
<=4.7  for 14 participants; 4. 7< reappraisal score <= 5.8 for 13 participants; 
reappraisal score > 5.8 for 13 participants.  
3. Meets diagnostic criteria for a current DSM -5 depressive, anx iety, obsessive -
compulsive, somatic, personality, eating, or trauma and stress -related disorders 
(including in partial remission): major depressive disorder, bipolar II disorder, other 
bipolar disorder, persistent depressive disorder, cyclothymic disorder,  premenstrual 
dysphoric disorder, panic disorder, agoraphobia, social anxiety disorder, specific phobia, 
generalized anxiety disorder, obsessive -compulsive disorder, trichotillomania, 
excoriation disorder, hoarding disorder, body dysmorphic disorder, other  specified, or 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
 unspecified obsessive -compulsive disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, acute stress 
disorder, adjustment disorders, somatic symptom disorder, conversion disorder, 
anorexia nervosa (unless severe and requiring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]), bulimia ner vosa, binge -
eating disorder, adult attention -deficit and hyperactivity disorder, intermittent explosive 
disorder, gambling disorder, illness anxiety disorder, borderline personality disorder, 
narcissistic personality disorder, histrionic personality disord er, antisocial personality 
disorder, paranoid personality disorder, schizoid personality disorder, schizotypal 
personality disorder, avoidant personality disorder, dependent personality disorder, 
obsessive -compulsive personality disorder, personality disor der NOS, other depressive 
disorder, other anxiety disorder.  
4. Willing to provide informed consent.  
5. Subjects are willing and able to participate in the intervention and all required study 
visits, stay on the same dose of psychiatric medication (if any) throu ghout the study, not 
participate in cognitive -behavioral therapy throughout their participation in the study.  
6. Has cellphone that can be used during the ambulatory assessment portion of the study.  
  
Study Exclusion Criteria  
1. Current or recent (within the pas t 6 months) substance dependence disorder  (excluding 
nicotine and caffeine)  
2. Current serious medical illness, includ ing current migraine headaches  
3. Currently on psychotropic medications with dosage unchanged for less than  four weeks  
prior to study entry OR p lan to make changes in medication within [ADDRESS_161752] (childhood febrile 
seizures are acceptable and these subjects may be included in the study), history of 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_142337], stroke, brain surgery, head injury, cranial metal 
implants, known structural brain lesion, devices that may be affected by [CONTACT_7712] 
(pacemaker, medication pump, cochlear implant, implanted brain stimulator).  
5. Subjects are unable or unwilling to give informed consent.  
6. Diagnosed with the following conditions (current unless otherwise stated):  
a. psychotic symptoms.  
b. Any DSM disorder secondary to a general medical condition, or substance -
induced.  
c. Bipolar I disorder (current or lifetime),  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
 d. Life-threatening anorexia or any other disorder requiring immediate 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]  
e. High-risk for suicidal behavior, including current suicidal ideation with a method 
and plan, or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_142338] 1 year before the study.  
f. Subjects  currently engaged or planning to engage in other treatment during the 
course of the study (including behavior therapy, or other types of individual, 
family, or group psychotherapy/counseling).  
7. Subjects with a clinically defined neurological disorder including, but not limited to:  
a. Any condition likely to be associated with increased intracranial pressure.  
b. Space occupying brain lesion.  
c. History of stroke.  
d. Transient ischemic attack within two years.  
e. Cerebral aneurysm.  
f. Dementia.  
g. Parkinson’s disease.  
h. Huntington’s disease  
i. Multiple sclerosis.  
8. Increased risk of seizure for any reason, including prior diagnosis of increased 
intracranial pressure (such as after large infarctions or trauma), currently taking 
medication that lowers the seizure threshold (incl uding Welbutrin, Aderall, Clorzaril)  
9. Subjects with any of the following treatment histories:  
a. TMS treatment at any point in their lifetime.  
b. Use of any investigational drug or device within [ADDRESS_161753] a mobile phone or is unwilling to use mobile phone for  ambulatory 
assessment  
15. Does not speak/understand English enough to benefit from the psychotherapeutic 
intervention  
16. Verbal IQ <70  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
 Measures  
Diagnostic Assessment : The SCID -5 (44) and SCID -PD (45) were used to assess DSM -
[ADDRESS_161754] author 
(76.4% of cases) or one of three trained diagnostic assessors under the supervision of the first 
author. In the cases where the f irst author did not conduct the interview, she reviewed in detail 
with the assessor the questions asked to confirm diagnostic profile. In case of disagreement, 
she reassessed the disorder at the next visit.  
Self-reports : 
Emotion Regulation Questionnaire (ERQ).  The ERQ (4) is a 10‐item self‐report inventory 
that assesses the routine use of two cognitive emotion regulation strategies: expressive 
suppression and cognitive reappraisal. The items use a 7 ‐point Likert scale with responses 
ranging from one ( strongly disagree ) to 7 ( strongly agree ). In our study, Cronbach alpha at 
intake for ERQ Reappraisal was .87. The correlation between phone screen and intake 
reappraisal scores for 98 participants was .57. ERQ suppression scale scores were collected 
but not examine d for the current study.  
Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale (DERS).  The DERS (46) is a 36 -item self -report  
measure of individuals’ typi[INVESTIGATOR_142339]. Participants 
respond on a Likert scale ranging from 1 ( almost never ) to 5 ( almost always ), and  the total sum 
score indicates high dysregulation. In the present study, Cronbach’s alpha  for the total score at 
intake was .89. The correlation between phone screen and intake total DE RS scores for 93 
participants was .66.  
Outcome Questionnaire -45 (OQ -45). The OQ -45 (47) is a 45 -item self -report measure 
used to track severity of psychopathology throughout treatment. It consists of subscales that 
identify three types of problems that lead to general stress: psychological symptoms, 
interpersonal conflicts, and problems with social roles (48). Items are rated on a Likert scale 
ranging from 0 ( never ) to 4 ( almost always ). At pretreatment, Cronbach’s alpha for the total 
score was .83.  
The Work and Social Adjustment Scale (WSAS). The WSAS (49) is a 5 -item self -report 
inventory examining the functional impairment attributable to an identified problem. In this study, 
we asked participants to rate the level of impairment that was r elated to their emotional 
dysregulation (e.g., “Because of my difficulties managing emotions, my ability to work is 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
 impaired”). These questions are rated on a 9 -point Likert scale (0 = my problem does not affect 
this at all ; 8 = my problem affects this ver y seriously ) A total WSAS score above 10 suggests 
clinical levels of functional impairment. At pretreatment, Cronbach’s alpha for the total score 
was .71.  
Subjective Units of Distress Scale (SUDS).  During the experimental sessions and 
ambulatory assessment s we asked participants to rate their current distress on a scale from 0 – 
no distress to 9 – extreme distress (50).  
Manipulation Check.  After each baseline and regulation period we exami ned dissociation 
during that segment using a 4 -item scale (51). At the end of the intervention and at the 1 -week 
and 1 -month follow -up assessments, participants rated their confidence in the assigned 
condition to which they were kept blind (1 = “I am certain I received sham stimulation” to 9 = “I 
am certain I received active stimulation”). We also asked after the intervention for participants to 
give their best guess whether they received real or sham neurostimulation (forced - choice 
question).   
Tolerability Questionnaire.  Before and after the intervention session, participants rated 
on a scale from 0 –3 (absent, mild, moderate, severe) the intensity of their headache, neck pain, 
scalp pain, seizure (as observed by [CONTACT_142371]), hearing impairment and any other side effect 
that they might have experienced from the TMS treatment.  
Exit Interview.  We refined a previously developed in -house interview (52) to examine 
feasibility and acceptability as directly relevant to the study and to collect participant feedback 
(available upon request). The interview was administered at the 1 -month follow up, and it 
included open -ended questions about the overall experience, positives, and issues with the 
current treatment, as well as Likert -type questions about feasibility of the intervention (e.g., 
difficulty with limiting movement, level of comfort, ability to concentr ate given the TMS noise, 
distress about the procedures, ease to hear and understand clinician, connection with clinician, 
and session engagement), acceptability (of session length, skills training, TMS procedures, 
personalized stressors use, ambulatory pho ne assessment) and overall satisfaction (i.e., 
likelihood to recommend to someone else). Feasibility and acceptability questions were rated on 
a scale from 0 (not at all) to 9 (extremely) and averaged to compute an overall feasibility and 
acceptability sco re. Satisfaction was rated on a 0 (low) to 100 (high) continuous scale.  
Psychophysiological Measures : Raw ECG data were visually inspected and artifacts 
cleaned prior to calculation of HF -HRV following established guidelines (53, 54) . The 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
 AcqKnowledge software tool detects R -waves in the cleaned ECG to create a series of inter -
beat intervals that is converted to a continuous, time -domain representation of HR using cubic -
spline interpolation, which is resampled at 8 Hz. Spectral analys is yields summary report values 
for HRV frequency bands. Each session period (e.g., baseline, habituation, stressor, regulation) 
was divided into [ADDRESS_161755] as primary because of an administrative omission at the beginning.  
The ‘Find Rate’ function of AcqKnowledge was used to transform the ECG signal into 
beats per minute o r heart rate (HR), using a moving average with a window of [ADDRESS_161756] minute not a true representation of physiological 
baseline. In cases where there was a clear spi[INVESTIGATOR_142340] (e.g., because the participant coughed, 
talked, moved abruptly, etc), the average baseline HR was calculated from the maximum time 
available excluding any amount of time with disruptions.  
Regulation Duration . Time to return to one’s heart rate baseline (regulation duration) was 
defined for each regulation period as the amount of time it took from the beginning of regulation 
for the continuously monitored HR to reach a value that was lower or equal to the average 
baseline HR. If the person started the regulation period below t he average baseline, we coded 
the return to baseline as “never stressed” and did not include it in analyses. If the participant 
never returned to baseline in the 600 s allocated to the regulation period, we set the return to 
baseline time to be 600. This d ata was analyzed with mixed models ANOVA which requires 
covarying the baseline measurement of the outcome. To create a baseline value for regulation 
duration, we measured the time it took during the habituation period for the person to return to 
HR baselin e after increased arousal induced by [CONTACT_142372]. If the person was not above 
HR baseline at the beginning of neurostimulation, this covariate was set to 0. If the person never 
returned to HR baseline during habituation, the covariate was set to 600. At follow up, regulation 
duration was defined identically. Because only one measurement of regulation duration was 
achieved, a simpler ANOVA model was planned and a baseline value for this outcome was not 
needed. An additional difference was that the maxim um value the variable could take was 300 
s.  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /[ADDRESS_161757] of sham to active rTMS over the left and right dlPFC  in 
the main study and active rTMS versus sham in the neuroimaging sub -study . Preliminary 
analyses includ ing analysis of variance (ANOVA) and chi square tests were conducted to 
assess demographic differences between groups. We also examined any differences between 
groups on randomization variables (gender, use of medication) and other potential confounding 
variables like presence of a depressive disorder, dissociation during regulation, or arousal 
induced by [CONTACT_142373]. Significant differences were included in subsequent analyses as 
covariates. Planned covariates included baseline measurements of the outcomes.  Analyses 
were conducted using SPSS version 25.0.  
Mixed -effects hierarchical linear models (MMANOVA) with analytically determined  
covariance structures were used to analyze the repeated measures data (55). All MMANOVA 
models used a restricted estimated maximum likelihood model to account for missing data (56) 
(i.e., cases with missing data were not discarded, but slopes for each participant were computed 
with the data available ). Estimated marginal means (EMMs) were compa red using LSD 
corrections for significant main and interaction effects. Effect sizes for these models were 
computed using Feingold’s formula (57)  and interpreted using Cohen’s (58) specifications.  
To test immediate effects of the intervention,  we conducted three analyses in each study 
examining HF -HRV, regulation duration, and SUDS. The treatment condition (active left, active 
right, or sham), the experimental condition (regulation 1, 2, and 3), the time within each 
experimental condition (code d 0-4 for each 120 s segment within that period) were used to 
predict HF -HRV. Baseline HF -HRV was measured at the beginning of the experiment (session 
baseline) and right before each autobiographical stressor presentation (pre -stimulus baseline). 
Because a ctive rTMS may have cumulative effects (59) that could influence the pre -stimulus 
baselines we included both session baseline and pre -stimulus baseline as covariates in the 
analyses. Because the two HF -HRV values extracted from each baseline (o ne from the last 120 
s, one from the middle 120s) were very highly correlated ( rs ranging from .93 to .98, ps < .001), 
we only included one of the values for each session and pre -stimulus baseline, corresponding to 
the last 120 s of the baseline. A MMANOVA  examining regulation duration during each 
regulation period was also conducted using treatment condition, experimental condition, and 
return to emotional baseline during habituation as predictors  in each study .  
SUDS data were collected and analyzed with two main questions in mind: (a) were the 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
 procedures successful in getting participants to feel increased distress after the 
autobiographical stressors presentation and decreased distress after regulation, and (b) did 
participants experience lower distress after rTMS enhanced CR when compared to CR alone. 
Therefore, all SUDS values collected after each pre -stimulus baseline, stressor, and regulation 
period during the combined intervention were included in the analysis. SUDS after habituation 
were covaried as  the closest ‘baseline’ measurement before the intervention began. Treatment 
condition, time period of the experiment (post -baseline, post -habituation, post -stressor 1, post -
regulation 1, etc.), were used to predict SUDS throughout the experiment. Two gene ralized 
estimated equations models (GEE) (60) using ordinal logistic models and an independent 
covariance structure examined differences between trea tment conditions in side effects.  
To test near -term effects of the intervention two hierarchical linear models (HLM) (61) 
were used to examine condition differences in SUDS and use of CR during the ambulatory 
assessments  in each study . Data was aggregated by [CONTACT_142374] a mean (SUDS) or a sum 
(use of CR – yes/no) for that day’s data. To include a baseline covariate in the SUDS model, we 
utilized the SUDS rating at the beginning of the intervention day (before any procedures were 
conducted) which was also the day before the ambulatory assessment started. We used intake 
ERQ reappraisal as the baseline for the ambulatory CR use analysis.  
To test the long -term effects of the intervention, six MMANOVA models were conducted  
in each stud y: four examining between -condition differences at the 1 -week and 1 -month follow -
up assessments in ERQ, DERS, OQ -45, and WSAS; and two examining HF -HRV and SUDS 
during the follow -up stressor task. An ANCOVA examined differences in time period to return to 
baseline at follow up  in the main study and a t -test examined between condition differences for 
this outcome in the neuroimaging sub -study . For the longitudinal self -reports (DERS, OQ -45, 
WSAS, and ERQ Reappraisal), intake measurements were used as covaria tes in the analyses. 
HF-HRV was extracted from the first 120 s period and the next 120 s period out of the total 300 
s regulation period. T he treatment condition and baseline HF -HRV (extracted from the last 2 -
min of baseline) were added as covariates. Trea tment condition, time period in the follow -up 
stressor task (post -baseline, post stressor, post regulation), SUDS baseline (collected at the 
beginning of the 1 -month follow -up day) were used to predict SUDS at follow up. In the 
regulation duration analyses  at follow up, no  covariates were included.   
fMRI processing for group analysis (participants in the neuroimaging substudy only). The 
first hypothesis of the neuroimaging  sub-study stated  that the self -reported difficulties with 
cognitive restructuring would be  inversely correlated with activation in the right and left 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
 dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) and the amygdala during the emotion regulation task . 
Therefore, parameters estimate from each subject in these regions were  extracted from the 
indivi dualized statistical map obtained for TMS targeting, using ‘featquery’  and correlated with 
the self -reported difficulties.  
The second hypothesis stated that the functional connectivity between the dlPFC and 
the amygdala would positively correlate  with beh avioral self -reported difficulties. To test this 
hypothesis, a psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analysis was conducted, using the dlPFC as 
the seed. First, the time serie s of the dlPFC was extracted using “fslmeants”, and used as the 
physiological reg ressor. Three intermediary PPI [INVESTIGATOR_142341], and: the “Reframe Negative” event, the “Distance Negative” event, 
and the “Feel Negative” event as the task regressor. At the contrast level, the PPI [INVESTIGATOR_142342] 
(“Reframe vs. Feel Negative”) was generated as the combination between reframe and distance 
events, both contrasted with the Feel event (reframe + distance – 2* feel). This method was 
used for all subject and each run. Statistical PPI [INVESTIGATOR_142343] h of the four runs were then 
combined into a second level analysis using a fixed -effect model. To test our hypothesis, the 
parameter estimate of the amygdala obtained from this PPI [INVESTIGATOR_142344] -reported difficulties.  
To assess whether  active rTMS increased dlPFC activation compared to sham, during 
the second imaging visit compared to the intake one, a group analysis was performed. The 
same process used for the targeting approach (see above) was performed on the follow -up 
images in order to generate the ‘Restructure vs. Feel Negative’ contrast for each subject and 
each run. For the second level analysis, this contrast obtained for the four runs of the Follow -up 
and the four runs of the Intake visits were included in the mod el and contrasted with a mixed -
effect model to generate a ‘Follow -up > Intake’ contrast at the subject level. This follow -up > 
Intake contrast was then entered into a third level analysis assessing the differences between 
active and sham rTMS.  
The third hy pothesis of this sub-study concerned rTMS effects on functional connectivity: 
it was expected when compared to baseline, participants treated with active rTMS  in conjunction 
with CR  will show greater increases in dlPFC -amygdala connectivity during the emot ion 
regulation task, compared to participant receiving sham rTMS and CR . To compare the effects 
of active and sham rTMS on functional connectivity a psychophysiological interaction (PPI) 
analysis was performed. First, a bilateral functional dlPFC mask was generated. To do so, the 
group activation in the “Restructure vs. Feel Negative” contrast obtained during the intake 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
 session was binarized to only keep significant activations (z > 1.96). The thresholded statistical 
map was then multiplied by [CONTACT_142375] l mask of the dlPFC available on Mindboggle, to only 
display significant activation in the bilateral dlPFC. The time series from this functional mask 
were then extracted and used as the physiological regressor. To generate the PPI [INVESTIGATOR_142345]. feel negative, three intermediary PPI [INVESTIGATOR_142346]. The first PPI 
[INVESTIGATOR_142347] ‘reframe’ event as the psychological regressor, the second one used the ‘distance’ 
event, and the third one used the ‘feel negative’ event. For all, the PPI [INVESTIGATOR_142348]. At the contrast level the PPI [INVESTIGATOR_142349] (restructure vs. feel negative) was defined as the combination between reframe and 
distance events, both contrasted with the feel event (re frame + distance – 2* feel). This method 
was performed for each subject and for each run. A second level analysis was performed to 
obtain the pre -post TMS -CR statistical map for each subject, and a third level analysis was then 
performed to assess the diff erences between participants receiving active and sham rTMS.  
  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
 REFERENCES:  
1. Steele VR, Maxwell AM, Ross TJ, Stein EA, Salmeron BJ. Accelerated intermittent 
theta -burst stimulation as a treatment for cocaine use disorder: a proof -of-concept study. Front 
Neurosci. 2019;13:1147.  
2. Bentwich J, Dobronevsky E, Aichenbaum S, Shorer R, Peretz R, Khaigrekht M, et al. 
Beneficial effect of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation combined with cognitive training 
for the treatment of Alzheimer ’s disease: a proof of concept study. J Neural Transm. 
2011;118(3):463 -71. 
3. Cunningham DA, Varnerin N, Machado A, Bonnett C, Janini D, Roelle S, et al. 
Stimulation targeting higher motor areas in stroke rehabilitation: A proof -of-concept, 
randomized, dou ble-blinded placebo -controlled study of effectiveness and underlying 
mechanisms. Restor Neurol Neurosci. 2015;33(6):911 -26. 
4. Gross JJ, John OP. Individual differences in two emotion regulation processes: 
Implications for affect, relationships, and well -being. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology. 2003;85(2):348 -62. 
5. Aldao A, Nolen -Hoeksema S, Schweizer S. Emotion -regulation strategies across 
psychopathology: A meta -analytic review. Clinical Psychology Review. 2010;30(2):217 -37. 
6. Amstadter A. E motion regulation and anxiety disorders. Journal of anxiety disorders. 
2008;22(2):211 -21. 
7. Melka SE, Lancaster SL, Bryant AR, Rodriguez BF. Confirmatory factor and 
measurement invariance analyses of the emotion regulation questionnaire. Journal of clinic al 
psychology. 2011;67(12):[ADDRESS_161758], 
difficulties in emotion regulation, and features of borderline personality disorder. Journal of 
Psychopathology and Behavioral Asses sment. 2012;34(2):260 -7. 
9. Dennis TA. Interactions between emotion regulation strategies and affective style: 
Implications for trait anxiety versus depressed mood. Motiv Emot. 2007;31(3):200 -7. 
10. Fresco DM, Moore MT, van Dulmen MH, Segal ZV, Ma SH, Teas dale JD, et al. Initial 
psychometric properties of the experiences questionnaire: validation of a self -report measure of 
decentering. Behavior Therapy. 2007;38(3):[ADDRESS_161759], psycho social 
functioning, and well -being in hemodialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis. 2008;51(4):651 -62. 
12. Matsumoto D, Yoo SH, Nakagawa S. Culture, emotion regulation, and adjustment. 
Journal of personality and social psychology. 2008;94(6):925.  
13. Haga SM, Kr aft P, Corby E -K. Emotion regulation: Antecedents and well -being 
outcomes of cognitive reappraisal and expressive suppression in cross -cultural samples. 
Journal of Happi[INVESTIGATOR_122086]. 2009;10(3):271 -91. 
14. Zuurbier LA, Nikolova YS, Åhs F, Hariri AR. Uncina te fasciculus fractional anisotropy 
correlates with typi[INVESTIGATOR_142350]. Emotion. 2013;13(3):385.  
15. Vanderhasselt M -A, Baeken C, Van Schuerbeek P, Luypaert R, De Raedt R. Inter -
individual differences in the habitual use of cog nitive reappraisal and expressive suppression 
are associated with variations in prefrontal cognitive control for emotional information: an event 
related fMRI study. Biological Psychology. 2013;92(3):433 -9. 
16. Swart M, Kortekaas R, Aleman A. Dealing with f eelings: characterization of trait 
alexithymia on emotion regulation strategies and cognitive -emotional processing. PLoS One. 
2009;4(6):e5751.  
17. Li Z, Sang Z, Zhang Z. Expressive suppression and financial risk taking: A mediated 
moderation model. Persona lity and Individual Differences. 2015;72:35 -40. 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
 18. Egloff B, Schmukle SC, Burns LR, Schwerdtfeger A. Spontaneous emotion regulation 
during evaluated speaking tasks: associations with negative affect, anxiety expression, memory, 
and physiological respondin g. Emotion. 2006;6(3):356.  
19. Orgeta V. Avoiding Threat in Late Adulthood: Testing Two Life Span Theories of 
Emotion. Experimental Aging Research. 2011;37(4):449 -72. 
20. Joormann J, Gotlib IH. Emotion regulation in depression: Relation to cognitive inhibi tion. 
Cognition and Emotion. 2010;24(2):281 -98. 
21. Moore SA, Zoellner LA, Mollenholt N. Are expressive suppression and cognitive 
reappraisal associated with stress -related symptoms? Behaviour Research and Therapy. 
2008;46(9):993 -1000.  
22. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_116186], Orr S P, Forgue DF, de Jong JB, Claiborn JM. PSychophysiologic 
assessment of posttraumatic stress disorder imagery in vietnam combat veterans. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry. 1987;44(11):970 -5. 
23. Schmahl CG, Elzinga BM, Ebner UW, Simms T, Sanislow C, Vermetten E, et al. 
Psychophysiological reactivity to traumatic and abandonment scripts in borderline personality 
and posttraumatic stress disorders: a preliminary report. Psychiatry Res. 2004;126(1):33 -42. 
24. Kross E, Davidson M, Weber J, Ochsner K. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_142351] t: the neural bases 
of regulating affect associated with negative autobiographical memories. Biol Psychiatry. 
2009;65(5):361 -6. 
25. Scott NW, McPherson GC, Ramsay CR, Campbell MK. The method of minimization for 
allocation to clinical trials. a review. Cont rol Clin Trials. 2002;23(6):[ADDRESS_161760]. Minimization: a new method of assigning patients to treatment and control 
groups. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1974;15(5):443 -53. 
27. Esteban O, Markiewicz CJ, Blair RW, Moodie CA, Isik AI, Erramuzpe A, et al. fMRI Prep: 
a robust preprocessing pi[INVESTIGATOR_142352]. Nature methods. 2019;16(1):111.  
28. Linehan M. DBT? Skills training manual: Guilford Publications; 2014.  
29. Beck A, Emery G, Greenberg R. Anxiety Disorders and Phobias: A Cognitive 
Perspective Basi c Books. [LOCATION_001]. 1985.  
30. Shurick AA, Hamilton JR, Harris LT, Roy AK, Gross JJ, Phelps EA. Durable effects of 
cognitive restructuring on conditioned fear. Emotion. 2012;12(6):1393 -7. 
31. Katz L, Epstein S. Constructive thinking and copi[INVESTIGATOR_142353] y-induced stress. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 1991;61(5):789.  
32. Lazarus RS, Folkman S. Stress, appraisal, and copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]: Springer publishing company; 
1984.  
33. Meichenbaum D. Stress inoculation training: Pergamon; 1985.  
34. Brock TC. Cogni tive restructuring and attitude change. The Journal of Abnormal and 
Social Psychology. 1962;64(4):264 -71. 
35. Gross JJ. Antecedent - and response -focused emotion regulation: Divergent 
consequences for experience, expression, and physiology. Journal of Perso nality and Social 
Psychology. 1998;74(1):224 -37. 
36. Speisman JC, Lazarus RS, Mordkoff A, Davison L. EXPERIMENTAL REDUCTION OF 
STRESS BASED ON EGO -DEFENSE THEORY. J Abnorm Psychol. 1964;68:367 -80. 
37. Beck AT, Dozois DJ. Cognitive therapy: current status a nd future directions. Annu Rev 
Med. 2011;62:397 -409. 
38. Powers JP, LaBar KS. Regulating emotion through distancing: A taxonomy, 
neurocognitive model, and supporting meta -analysis. Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews. 
2019;96:155 -73. 
39. Ochsner KN, Bun ge SA, Gross JJ, Gabrieli JDE. Rethinking feelings: an FMRI study of 
the cognitive regulation of emotion. J Cogn Neurosci. 2002;14(8):1215 -29. 
40. Kendall PC. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_142354]: Workbook Pub; 2006.  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
 41. Herwig U, Satrapi P, Schönfeldt -Lecuona C. Using the  International 10 -20 EEG System 
for Positioning of Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation. Brain Topography. 2003;16(2):95 -9. 
42. Rossi S, Hallett M, Rossini PM, Pascual -Leone A, Group SoTC. Safety, ethical 
considerations, and application guidelines for the use  of transcranial magnetic stimulation in 
clinical practice and research. Clin Neurophysiol. 2009;120(12):2008 -39. 
43. Wassermann EM. Risk and safety of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation: report 
and suggested guidelines from the International Wor kshop on the Safety of Repetitive 
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation, June 5 –7, 1996. Electroencephalography and Clinical 
Neurophysiology/Evoked Potentials Section. 1998;108(1):[ADDRESS_161761] MB, Williams JB, Karg RL. Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -5 Disorders 
(Research Version: SCID -5-RV). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing; 2015.  
45. First MB, Williams JB, Benjamin LS, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280]. SCID -5-PD: Structured clinical interview 
for DSM -5® personality disorders: American Psychiatric Associatio n Publishing; 2016.  
46. Gratz KL, Roemer L. Multidimensional Assessment of Emotion Regulation and 
Dysregulation: Development, Factor Structure, and Initial Validation of the Difficulties in Emotion 
Regulation Scale. J Psychopathol Behav Assess. 2004;26(1): 41-54. 
47. Lambert MJ, Burlingame GM, Umphress V, Hansen NB, Vermeersch DA, Clouse GC, et 
al. The reliability and validity of the Outcome Questionnaire. Clinical Psychology & 
Psychotherapy: An International Journal of Theory and Practice. 1996;3(4):249 -58. 
48. Wells MG, Burlingame GM, Lambert MJ, Hoag MJ, Hope CA. Conceptualization and 
measurement of patient change during psychotherapy: Development of the Outcome 
Questionnaire and Youth Outcome Questionnaire. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, 
Train ing. 1996;33(2):275.  
49. Mundt JC, Marks IM, Shear MK, Greist JM. The Work and Social Adjustment Scale: a 
simple measure of impairment in functioning. The British Journal of Psychiatry. 
2002;180(5):461 -4. 
50. Wolpe J. The practice of behavior therapy. [LOCATION_001], NY <etc.>: Pergamon Press; 
1969.  
51. Stiglmayr C, Schmahl C, Bremner JD, Bohus M, Ebner -Priemer U. Development and 
psychometric characteristics of the DSS -4 as a short instrument to assess dissociative 
experience during neuropsychological experiments. Psychopathology. 2009;42(6):[ADDRESS_161762]. 2018;34(4):266 -73. 
53. Camm A, Malik M, Bigger J, Breithardt G, Cerutti S, Cohen R, et al. Heart rate variability: 
standards of measurement, physiological interpretation and clinical use. Task Force of the 
European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and 
Electrophysiology. Circulation. 1996;93(5):1043 -65. 
54. Berntson GG, Bigger JT, Jr., Eckberg DL, Grossman P, Kaufmann PG, Malik M, et al. 
Heart rate variability: origins, methods, and interpretive cav eats. Psychophysiology. 
1997;34(6):623 -48. 
55. Molenberghs G, Verbeke G. Linear mixed models for longitudinal data: Springer; 2000.  
56. Gibbons RD, Hedeker D, DuToit S. Advances in analysis of longitudinal data. Annu Rev 
Clin Psychol. 2010;6:[ADDRESS_161763] sizes for growth -modeling analysis for controlled clinical trials in the 
same metric as for classical analysis. Psychol Methods. 2009;14(1):43.  
58. Cohen J. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences Rev. ed. ed. [LOCATION_001], 
NY: Academic Press; 1977.  
59. Bäumer T, Lange R, Liepert J, Weiller C, Siebner HR, Rothwell JC, et al. Repeated 
premotor rTMS leads to cumulative plastic changes of motor cortex excitability in humans. 
Neuroimage. 2003;20(1):550 -60. 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   10/20 /2019  
 60. Liang K -Y, Zeger SL. Lo ngitudinal Data Analysis Using Generalized Linear Models. 
Biometrika. 1986;73(1):13 -22. 
61. Raudenbush SW, Bryk AS. Hierarchical linear models: Applications and data analysis 
methods: Sage; 2002.  
 