 BAC  for Alzheimer’s Disease  or Vascular Dementia  
(Project Number: BAC -02) Version: 2.0 
Date: 24APR 2017 
 
Sponsor: Charsire Biotechnology Corp.  Page 1 of 9  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Randomized, Double -Blind, Vehicle -
Controlled, Parallel, Phase II Study to Evaluate 
Efficacy and Safety of BAC in Patient with 
Alzheimer’s Disease or Vascular Dementia  
 
 
 
 
NCT Number  NCT 02886494  
Document Version  V2.0 
Document Date  24APR2017  
Sponsor  Charsire Biotechnology Corp.  
 
  
 BAC  for Alzheimer’s Disease  or Vascular Dementia  
(Project Number: BAC -02) Version: 2.0 
Date: 24APR 2017 
 
Sponsor: Charsire Biotechnology Corp.  Page 2 of 9 PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
Full Title  
 A Randomized, Double -Blind, Vehicle -Controlled, Parallel, Phase II 
Study to Evaluate Efficacy and Safety of BAC in Patient with 
Alzheimer’s Disease or Vascular Dementia  
Short Title  BAC for Alzheimer’s Disease or  Vascular Dementia Phase II Study  
Project No  BAC -02 
Study Phase  Phase II  
Sponsor  Charsire Biotechnology Corp.  
Objectives   To evaluate the efficacy and safety of BAC in patients with 
Alzheimer’s disease or vascular dementia  
Study Design  Randomized, double -blind, vehicle -controlled, parallel study  
Study Population  Patient aged at least 40 years old in [LOCATION_002] diagnosed with 
Alzheimer’s disease or vascular dementia  
Number of Patients  The sample size is determined to be 45 versus 15 patients (3 :1 ratio) 
for Treatment versus Control groups, 60 patients in total. To ensure 
the completion of 60 evaluable (per -protocol population) patients, 
around [ADDRESS_1000786], Dose, 
Route, Regimen  BAC (vapor fraction from seeds of Glycine max (L.) Merr . and 
composition thereof), topi[INVESTIGATOR_732505], 
scalp, and neck, 2 times daily, 30g/day  
During the treatment period, patients may continue to receive 
routinely used medications or treatments for Alzheimer’s disease or 
vascular dementia.  
Duration of 
Administration  Twelve weeks  
Study Visits  Screening, Randomization (Baseline) Treatment (Weeks 2, 4, and 8 
compared to Baseline), Final (Week 12)  
Patient Assignment  In each study site, patients who meet all eligible requirements for 
entry into the study will be randomized and stratified into 1 of 2 
dementia types (Alzheimer’s disease and non - Alzheimer’s disease) 
into treatment group or vehicle control group in 3:1 ratio as shown 
below:  
 
 BAC  for Alzheimer’s Disease  or Vascular Dementia  
(Project Number: BAC -02) Version: 2.0 
Date: 24APR 2017 
 
Sponsor: Charsire Biotechnology Corp.  Page 3 of 9 Treatment Group:  
BAC  
Control Group:  
Matched vehicle  
Note: Dementia types (Alzheimer’s disease and non - Alzheimer’s disease) are 
classified as follows:  
1. Alzheimer’s disease: Alzheimer's disease according to the NIAAA criteria + 
"Mixed" dementia (possible Alzheimer's disease  with cerebrovascular disease) 
according to the NIAAA criteria  
2. Non - Alzheimer’s disease: Vascular dementia according to the NINDS -AIREN 
International Workshop criteria  
Patients Inclusion 
Criteria  A patient is eligible for the study if all of the follo wing apply:  
1. With either gender aged at least 40 years old  
2. With a diagnosis of one of the following disease  
i. Vascular dementia according to the NINDS -AIREN 
International Workshop criteria or  
ii. Alzheimer's disease according to the NIAAA criteria  
iii. "Mixed" dementia (possible Alzheimer's disease with 
cerebrovascular disease) according to the NIAAA criteria  
Note:  
a. NINDS -AIREN: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke 
and Association Internationale pour la Recherche et l'Enseigne ment en 
Neurosciences  
b. NIAAA: National Institute on Aging -Alzheimer's Association  
3. With mild -to-moderate dementia (score of the Mini -Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) defined as between [ADDRESS_1000787] 12)  
4. Able to communicate and understand cognitive testing 
instructions  
5. Having a responsible caregiver who spends at least 4 hours daily 
with the patient. The caregiver will accompany the patient to all 
study visits, supervise administration of study drug, and be able 
to assess the pat ient’s condition  
 BAC  for Alzheimer’s Disease  or Vascular Dementia  
(Project Number: BAC -02) Version: 2.0 
Date: 24APR 2017 
 
Sponsor: Charsire Biotechnology Corp.  Page [ADDRESS_1000788] a personal legally authorized representative  
giving written informed consent to their participation.  
Patients Exclusion 
Criteria  Any patient meeting any of the exclusion criteria will be excluded 
from study participation.  
1. With large vessel thrombosis (thrombotic stroke occurring in 
large arteries)  
2. With radiological evidence of other brain disorders (subdural 
hematoma, post -traumatic / post -surgery)  
3. With dementia caused by [CONTACT_732508]’s 
disease and vascular dementia (e.g. Parkinson's disease, 
demyelinated disease of the cen tral nervous system, tumor, 
hydrocephalus, head injury, central nervous system infection 
including syphilis, acquired immune deficiency syndrome, etc.)  
4. With clinical evidence of pulmonary, hepatic, gastrointestinal, 
metabolic, endocrine or other life threa tening diseases judged by 
[CONTACT_732509]  
5. With clinically unstable hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and 
cardiac disease for the last 3 months  
6. Ever hospi[INVESTIGATOR_732506] 3 month s prior to screening  
7. Drug or alcohol abuse within the previous 12 months of 
screening.  
8. With one of the following abnormal laboratory parameters: 
hemoglobin < 10 mg/dL or platelet < 100*109/L; creatinine or 
total bilirubin more than 1.5 times the upper limit value; alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 
alkaline phosphates (ALP), γ -glutamyl transferase (γ -GT) more 
than 2 times the upper limit of normal, or thyroid -stimulating 
hormone (TSH) more than 2.5 times the upper limit va lue or less 
than the lower limit value of normal  
 BAC  for Alzheimer’s Disease  or Vascular Dementia  
(Project Number: BAC -02) Version: 2.0 
Date: 24APR 2017 
 
Sponsor: Charsire Biotechnology Corp.  Page 5 of 9 9. With severe depression graded by [CONTACT_732510], Fifth Edition (DSM -5) and Cornell 
Scale for Depression in Dementia (CSDD)  
10. With any uncontrolled illness  (including, bu t not limited to, 
any of the following: ongoing or active infection including 
hepatitis B, C, and HIV, active bleeding, symptomatic 
congestive heart failure, uncontrolled hypertension, unstable 
angina pectoris or, cardiac arrhythmia)  judged by [CONTACT_732511]  
11. With known or suspected hypersensitivity to any ingredients of 
study product and vehicle  
12. Pregnant or lactating or premenopausal with childbearing 
potential but not taking reliable contracepti ve method(s) during 
the study period  
Note: Reliable contraceptive methods will consider as below:  
a. Established use of oral, injected or implanted hormonal methods of 
contraception > 3 months prior to baseline.  
b. Placement of an intrauterine device (IUD) or intrauterine system (IUS) > 3 
months prior to baseline.  
c. Barrier methods of contraception: Condom or Occlusive cap (diaphragm 
or cervical/vault caps) with spermicidal foam/gel/film/cream/suppository  
d. Partner male sterilization (i.e., vasectomy ) > [ADDRESS_1000789] three months before Screening visit  
a. medications/treatments for Alzheimer’s disease or vascular 
dementia  
b. antipsychotic medications including but not limited to 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), 
benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_050] (BZD)  
c. Vitamin B12  
d. drugs for thyroid disease  
 BAC  for Alzheimer’s Disease  or Vascular Dementia  
(Project Number: BAC -02) Version: 2.0 
Date: 24APR 2017 
 
Sponsor: Charsire Biotechnology Corp.  Page 6 of 9 15. Current antiplatelet drug (antiaggregant) e xcept dosage 
including but not limited to aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248]  100mg/day, clopi[INVESTIGATOR_7745]  
75mg/day, ticagrelor  180mg/day, dipyridamole  400mg/day  
16. Caregivers who have psychotic symptoms, are imminently 
suicidal, have an unstable medical condition (e.g. recent heart 
attack, recent stroke, epi[INVESTIGATOR_222267], fainting attacks) or 
significant orthopaedic problems.  
Primary Endpoint  Efficacy :  
Change in Alzheimer Disease Assessment Scale -cognitive (ADAS -
cog) score at Week 12 visit compared to baseline  
Secondary Endpoints  Efficacy : 
1. Change in ADAS -cog score at all post treatment visits (except 
Week 12 visit) compared to baseline  
2. Clinician's Interview Based Impression of Change -Plus 
Caregiver Input (CIBIC -plus) score at all post treatment visits  
3. Change in Alzheimer' s Disease Cooperative Study Activities of 
Daily Living (ADCS -ADL) score at all post treatment visits 
compared to baseline  
4. Change in MMSE  score at all post treatment visits compared to 
baseline  
5. Change in Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI)  score at all post 
treatment visits compared to baseline  
Safety : 
1. Adverse event incidence  
2. Change in physical examination results  
3. Net change from baseline in laboratory test results  
4. Net change from baseline in vital signs  
Statistical Analysis  Analysis Population  
Two data sets will be introduced for statistical analysis.  
Intent -to-treat (ITT) population:  
– All randomized patients who have received at least one dose 
study medication.  
Per-protocol (PP) population:  
 BAC  for Alzheimer’s Disease  or Vascular Dementia  
(Project Number: BAC -02) Version: 2.0 
Date: 24APR 2017 
 
Sponsor: Charsire Biotechnology Corp.  Page 7 of 9 – A subset of ITT population  
– Fulfill all inclusion and exclusion criteria  
– Accumulatively dosed with at least [ADDRESS_1000790] 75% of dosing compliance during treatment period  
– With ADAS -cog score  evaluation at or after Week 8 visit  
– Did not receive any prohibited treatment during the study  
Efficacy endpoints will be analyzed on ITT and PP population. 
Demographics, baseline characteristics, and s afety endpoints will be 
analyzed on ITT population. The conclusion of efficacy will be 
made according to the results of ITT population analysis.  
 
Analyses  
Demographics and baseline characteristics will be summarized for 
each group by [CONTACT_74305].  
The efficacy endpoints will be compared between the BAC group 
and vehicle group. The primary endpoint of this study is c hange in 
ADAS -cog score at Week [ADDRESS_1000791] -
treatment visits (except Week 12 visit) compared to baseline will be 
analyzed by [CONTACT_732512]. Same statistical analysis 
methods will be applied for other secondary endpoints such as 
changes in ADCS -ADL score, MMSE score, and NPI [INVESTIGATOR_732507].  The CIBIC -plus score at 
all post treatment visits will be presented by [CONTACT_732513].  
All treatment group comparisons will be conducted with 
significance level of 0.05, using [ADDRESS_1000792]. 
 BAC  for Alzheimer’s Disease  or Vascular Dementia  
(Project Number: BAC -02) Version: 2.0 
Date: 24APR 2017 
 
Sponsor: Charsire Biotechnology Corp.  Page [ADDRESS_1000793] deviation, maximum, minimum, median, inter -
quartile range (IQR), and 95% two -sided confidence interval will be 
calculated for continuous measurements.  
 
  
 BAC  for Alzheimer’s Disease  or Vascular Dementia  
(Project Number: BAC -02) Version: 2.0 
Date: 24APR 2017 
 
Sponsor: Charsire Biotechnology Corp.  Page 9 of 9  
SCHEDULE OF ASSES SMENTS  
Visit  Screening  Randomization1 
(Baseline)  Treatment  Final  
Visit No.  1 2 3 4 5 6 
Week s relative to Baseline visit  -2~0 0 2 4 8 12 
Visit Window (days)  NA NA 4 4 4 4 
Informed consent signed and given  X      
Screening  number assignment  X      
Randomization   X     
Demographic data & medical history  X      
Inclusion and exclusion criteria  X X     
Pregnancy test for applicable patient s X      
Imaging ( CT/MRI)  X5      
ADAS -cog X X  X X X 
CIBIS/ CIBIC -plus2  X  X X X 
ADCS -ADL   X  X X X 
MMSE  X X  X X X 
NPI  X  X X X 
Vital signs  X X X X X X 
Physical examinations  X X  X X X X 
Laboratory test X3 X4     X 
Record concomitant medication(s)  X X  X X X X 
Record AE   X X X X X 
Dispense trial medication   X X X X  
Dispense Subject D iary  X X X X  
Return trial medication    X X X X 
Return Subject D iary   X X X X 
Complete exit form       X  
Dismiss patient      X  
 
1. Can be on the same day of Screening visit if patient meet s entry criteria  
2. Randomization visit: CIBIS; Other Visits: CIBIC -plus 
3. Laboratory t est results within [ADDRESS_1000794]/MRI ( computed tomography / magnetic resonance imaging ) obtained within 12 months before 
Screen ing visit are acceptable  