  
 1	 
 
Connecting Youth and Young Adults to Optimize PrEP 
Adherence and Care: Testing the Efficacy of the PrEP iT! 
Intervention  
 
Short Title:  PrEP it Together  
 
Funding provided by:  
[CONTACT_186441] (NIMH)  
of the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH); R34MH116878  
 
Regulatory/Ethics Review: 
San Diego State University Human Research Protection Program (HRPP): # HS-2019-0291 
 
HHRI HIV Research Program Protocol # PCC-012 
 
Protocol Team Members:   
Keith Horvath, Marcelino Alcorta, Kelly Garcia -Myers, Jon Klaphake, and Jason V 
Baker  
 
Protocol Date: 14- SEPT- 2020 
Revision Date(s):  
Version Number:  v1.0 
Approval Date:  TBD 
          
 
     
  
 [ADDRESS_1172079] OF ABBREVIATIONS 3	
II.	 PROTOCOL SUMMARY 4	
III.	 GENERAL STUDY DESIGN SCHEMATIC: 5	
1.	INTRODUCTION 	 6	
1.1.	Background	and	Rationale	 6	
1.2.	Objectives	and	Hypotheses	 7	
2. METHODOLOGY 8	
2.1.	Trial	Design 	 8	
2.2.	Study	Population	 8	
2.3.	Eligibility	Criteria 	 8	
2.4.	Recruitment 	 9	
2.5.	Study	Intervention	( PrEP- iT!	mobile	intervention)	 9	
2.6.	Outcomes 	 10	
2.7.	Study	Visit	Procedures 	 11	
2.8.	Participant	Retention 	 12	
3. DATA COLLECTION AND CLINICAL MANAGEMENT 12	
3.1.	Case	Report	Forms 	 12	
3.2.	Clinical	Data	Collection	 13	
3.3.	Survey	Data	Collection	 13	
3.4.	Data	Collection	via	the	PrEP	iT!	Web	Application 	 13	
3.5.	Dried	Blood	Spots	(DBS)	for	Tenofovir	Diphosphate	(TFV -DP)	Levels. 	 14	
3.6.	Blood	Collection	for	Plasma	and	Serum	Storage	 14	
3.7.	Clinical	Management	of	Adverse	Events	or	Other	Disease	Events 	 14	
3.8.	Study	Withdrawal 	 15	
3.9.	Study	Data	Storage	and	Retention	 15	
4. SAFETY AND ADVERSE EVENTS 15	
4.1.	Adverse	Event	Definitions 	 15	
4.2.	Adverse	Event	Data	Collection	and	Documentation	 16	
4.3.	Relationship	to	Study	Participation 	 16	
4.4.	Review	and	Reporting	of	Adverse	Events	 16	
5. STATISTICAL METHODS 17	
5.1.	Sample	Size	Considerations 	 17	
5.2.	Randomization	Procedures 	 17	
5.3.	Analysis	Plan 	 18	
6. REFERENCES: 18	
APPENDIX A: [ADDRESS_1172080] OF ABBREVIATIONS 
AE:   Adverse Event  
ARV: Antiretroviral  
ART: Antiretroviral Therapy  
CAB: Community Advisory Board  
CDC: Centers for Disease Control  
CFR: Code of Federal Regulations  
CRF: Case Report Form  
CLIA: Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments  
CONSORT : Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials  
CQMP : Clinical Quality Management Plan  
DAIDS: Division of AIDS  
FDA:  U.S. Food and Drug Administration  
FTC: emtricitabine 
FTC- TDF: emtricitabine- tenofovir disoproxil fumarate  (or ‘Truvada’)  
FTC- TAF: emtricitabine- tenofovir alafenamide  (or ‘Descovy’)  
FWA: Federalwide Assurance  
GCP: Good Clinical Practices  
HH: Hennepin Healthcare  
HHRI:  Hennepin Healthcare Research Institute  
HHS: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services  
HIV: Human Immunodeficiency Virus  
HSRC: Human Subject Research Committee  
IC: Informed Consent  
ICF: Informed Consent Form  
ICH: International Conference on Harmonization  
IoR: Investigator of Record  
IRB: Institutional Review Board  
ISO: International Organization for Standardization  
LoA: Letter of Amendment  
MOP : Manual of Operating Procedures  
MSM:  Men who have sex with men  
NIAID: National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases  
NIH: National Institutes of Health  
NIMH: National Institute of Mental Health  
OHRP: U.S. Office for Human Research Protections  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_1816]: Pharmacokinetic  
PrEP: Pre-exposure prophylaxis 
PrEP iT!:  the ‘PrEP it together’ mobile intervention  
SAE: Serious Adverse Event  
SDSU:  San Diego State University  
SOP: Standard Operating Procedure  
STI: Sexually Transmitted Infection  
S[LOCATION_003]R: Suspected, Unexpected Serious Adverse Reaction  
TDF: T enofovir disoproxil fumarate 
TAF: T enofovir alafenamide 
WHO : World Health Organization  
YMSM:  Young men who have sex with men   
  
 4	ii. PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
 
Category Description 
Full Title  Connecting Youth and Young Adults to Optimize PrEP 
Adherence and Care: Testing the Efficacy of the PrEP iT! 
Intervention  
Short Title Prep it Together  
Clinical Trial Phase  Phase 2 
IND Sponsor  N/A 
Conducted By [CONTACT_843356] (PhD), Jason Baker (MD, MS) 
Sample Size  85 participants  (5 Usability, 80 trial)  
Study Population Younger men who have sex with men (MSM), ages 18-29 years 
Accrual Period  Anticipated enrollm ent 1 year  
Study Design Randomized Clinical Trial 
Study Duration 6 months 
Intervention  PrEP mobile intervention vs. Usual Care 
Primary Objective 
 Feasibility (via recruitment and study retention) and acceptability 
(via System Usability Scale) of the PrEP iT! intervention 
Key Secondary 
Objectives Adherence, as self-reported in the mobile intervention 
Adherence, objective as measured via TFV blood levels Linkage and follow-up with PreP medical care 
Stigma -related concern s 
  
 
 
  
  
 5	iii. GENERAL STUDY DESIGN SCHEMATIC:  
 
 
 
 
     
  Screening/Enrollment	Visit	
(Screen	for	Eligibility à
ConsentàBaseline	Survey)
PrEP iT!	+	Usual	
Care
(50%	 DBS)Usual	Care
(50%	 DBS)
3-Month	Visit
(Survey,	DBS	sub-study,	Medical	chart	
extraction)
6-Month	Visit
(Survey,	DBS	sub-study,	Medical	chart	
extraction)Randomization
  
 [ADDRESS_1172081] sex with men (YMSM), especially those who are Black and 
Hispanic/Latino, are disproportionately 
impacted by [CONTACT_10840]. In 2016, persons 15-
29 years old account ed for 41% of new 
HIV infections in the US (Figure 1 ), of 
which 82% are attributed to male-to-
male (including MSM/IDU) sexual 
contact.
[ADDRESS_1172082] rates of HIV infection among 
any age group, having risen from 30.0 to 34.7 per 100,000 between 2011-2016.1 When 
restricted to new HIV infections among MSM (including MSM/IDU) in 2016, 40% were among 
Hispanic/Latino and  black MSM ages 20-29 years.1 The US National HIV/AIDS Strategy 
emphasizes the need for HIV prevention specifically among MSM, and to implement behavioral approaches that “take into account the complex interplay of individual behavior , 
social structure, and biomedical factors on continuum of care outcomes.”
2 Similar 
recommendations were made by [CONTACT_48036]/AIDS Policy and the CDC.2-4 The PrEP iT! 
intervention studied here attempts to address these recommendations.   
PrEP is highly effective at preventing the acquisition of HIV infection. In 2012, daily oral 
emtricitabine-tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (FTC-TDF), or ‘Truvada’, was approved by [CONTACT_843357], based on randomized controlled trial (RCT) data demonstrating efficacy for 
HIV prevention (Table 1 ).
5-10 
These findings prompted 
recommendations by [CONTACT_291171]-
[LOCATION_003] and CDC for PrEP 
provision.3, 4 Since that time, 
the combination of FTC plus tenofovir alafenamide (TAF), or 
‘Descovy’, was found to be 
non-inferior to FTC-TDF
13 has 
been approved by [CONTACT_843358]. Additional strategies 
beyond daily PrEP are being 
studied. For example, the use 
of PrEP before and 
immediately after a sexual 
exposure (or ‘on-demand’ 
PrEP) was shown to reduce 
risk for HIV infeciton by 86%.
11 Table 1: Summary of PrEP Trials and Prevention Rates 
STUDY Population  Risk 
Reduction in 
HIV Infection  Study Drug 
iPrEx5 MSM 44% PO Truvada 
TDF26 Heterosexual  62% PO Truvada 
Partners 
PREP7 Sero- discordant 
couples  67% 
75% PO tenofovir  
PO Truvada 
FemPREP8 Women  No efficacy  PO Truvada 
VOICE9 Women  No efficacy  PO TFV or 
Truvada  
Bangkok10 IVDU  49% PO daily 
tenofovir  
iPERGAY11 MSM 97% ‘on demand’ 
Truvada  
PROUD12 MSM 86% PO Truvada 
DISCOVER13 MSM Non- inferior  PO Truvada vs 
Descovy  	
5% 5%
4% 4% 4% 4%17% 17%18% 18%
18%
17%
15%16%17%18%19%20%
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016Figure 1: % of estimated new HIV infections, by [CONTACT_843359], 2011 -2016 - [LOCATION_002] 
15-19 year olds
20-24 year olds
25-29 year olds
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. HIV Surveillance Report, 2016; vol. 28. 
http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/library/reports/surveillance/. Published November 2017. Accessed March 21, 2017.
  
 7	 
The effectiveness of PrEP for HIV prevention requires adherence and retention along the 
PrEP Continuum of Care.14 In the iPrEx study, new HIV infections were reduced by >90% 
among participants with detectable drug in blood, compared to a 44% reduction overall in 
intention to treat analyses. Refinement through pharmacologic analyses show a risk 
reduction of 76% for two doses per week and 96% for four doses per week.15 Furthermore, in 
two studies where PrEP was not efficacious (Table 1),8, [ADDRESS_1172083]. Data from 2 PrEP 
trials with YMSM by [CONTACT_843360]16, 17 inform this study. In ATN 110,17 200 18 -22 
year olds were provided PrEP and followed for 48 weeks, with monthly visits through week 12, followed by [CONTACT_843361]. Protective drug levels (>4 doses per week) 
decreased from 56% at week 4 to 34% at week 48, with a noticeable drop-off when quarterly visits were implemented. The ATN 113
16 trial showed that among 76 15-17 year olds, 
protective adherence decreased from 60% at week 4 to only 28% by [CONTACT_5875] 48. Similar to ATN 110, the drop in protective TFV levels was apparent after youth transitioned from monthly to 
quarterly visits. Youth in both studies reported typi[INVESTIGATOR_843343] (e.g., pi[INVESTIGATOR_406010], too 
busy, forgetting, change in routine). Additionally, they reported PrEP-related stigma concerns, 
such as worrying that others will think they are HIV+ or find out that they are having sex with 
men. This study protocol will evaluate the PrEP-iT mobile intervention as a youth-specific 
strategy to improve PrEP adherence and retention in PrEP care.   
 Summary of the scientific premise: 
• YMSM are at the  highest risk for HIV acquisition in the US, and are the focus of this 
study. 
• PrEP is a highly effective prevention strategy, but requires adherence and retention to 
care. 
• YMSM require frequent, developmentally-appropriate supports that address traditional 
and stigma-related barriers to achieve full PrEP adherence and retention in care 
  
1.2. Objectives and Hypotheses 
 The long -term goal of this research is to create an effective and sustainable program to 
support PrEP adherence and retention in PrEP care among YMSM. The intervention in this study is a mobile device peer support platform tailored to YMSM, called “PrEP it Together” (or 
PrEP iT!). Grounded in the principles of the Technology Adoption Model
18 and the Information 
(I), Motivation (M), and Behavioral Skills (B) model,19, 20 the primary components of PrEP iT! 
are: PrEP adherence, appointment and sexual activity self-monitoring; tailored PrEP 
information; text messages for PrEP adherence and healthcare appointments; and an “ask 
the expert” feature. The objective of this study protocol is then to evaluate the PrEP iT! 
intervention experimentally, to characterize the potential utility and efficacy as a strategy for improving PrEP adherence and retention in care among YMSM at risk for HIV infection.  
 
  
 8	Primary Aim: Conduct a pi[INVESTIGATOR_688476], 
acceptability and preliminary impact of the PrEP iT! mobile intervention for YMSM  
 Hypotheses: The PrEP iT! intervention will be a feasible strategy to implement and highly 
acceptable among YMSM using PrEP. The intervention will also improve adherence to PrEP dosing, timely engagement in routine PrEP medical care, and reduce stigma-related barriers. 
 
 
2. METHODOLOGY 
 
2.1. Trial Design  
 We propose to evaluate the feasibility, acceptability and preliminary impact of PrEP iT! using 
a randomized controlled trial (RCT) study design. Young men who have sex with men (YMSM) recently (re)initiating PrEP will be randomized to receive either PrEP iT! plus usual 
care or usual care alone, and followed for 6 months. Assessments and study data collection will occur at entry (‘baseline’), and then again at 3-and 6 -months in-person or online via an 
online HIPPA-complaint teleconferencing platform such as Zoom. A total sample size of n=80 
participants will be enrolled in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_189914].  
 
The purpose of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_843344] a subsequent clinical 
trial to more definitely establish the potential benefit of the PrEP iT! mobile intervention. A 
RCT study design was chosen to most closely mimic the procedures and process of the larger efficacy trial by [CONTACT_843362]. 
 
 
2.2. Study Population 
 The target population will include YMSM (age 18-29) who have started PrEP for HIV 
prevention.  Participants will either be initiating PrEP for the first time, or re-initiating PrEP 
after having not taken PrEP for ≥[ADDRESS_1172084] PrEP adherence. This 
study will focus on cis-gender (i.e., are assigned male at birth and currently identify as male) 
MSM. Transgender women are also a priority risk group for HIV prevention initiatives, but 
stigma and barriers to PrEP adherence likely differ from cis-gender MSM.  In addition, the 
sample size of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_843345]. Additional detailed eligibility criteria are listed below.   
  
2.3. Eligibility Criteria 
 Inclusion criteria:  
1) Prescribed PrEP by a healthcare provider;  2) Self-reported 18-29 years of age;  
3) Assigned male at birth;  
4) Current male gender identification;  
5) Gay, bisexual or other non-heterosexual identity or has had sex with a man in the past 
year;  
6) HIV negative (HIV negative test in the past 3 months)  
  
 9	7) Either started or restarted PrEP in the past [ADDRESS_1172085] 30 days;  
8) English-speaking (as the intervention will be built in English);  
9) Able to meet with project staff at baseline and follow-up visits;  
10) Regular access to SMS or the internet, either through a mobile device, tablet computer, 
and/or desktop or laptop computer.  
 
Additional exclusion criteria:  
• Not prescribed PrEP by a healthcare provider;  
• HIV positive (by a reactive HIV antibody or detectable HIV RNA level) ;  
 
 
2.4. Recruitment  
 Participants will be recruited from clinical settings where PrEP care is delivered as well as via 
social media advertisement that targets potential PrEP users within the MSM community.  In 
Minneapolis, specific settings that will be a focus of recruitment efforts include the Hennepin 
County Public Health clinic (‘Red Door’ clinic), the Hennepin Healthcare HIV clinic (‘Positive 
Care Center’) as well as HIV prevention organizations within the Twin Cities (e.g., Youth 
AIDS Project). Recruitment and enrollment of study participants will be concurrent with their 
PrEP clinical visits when possible, or online via a HIPPA-compliant teleconferencing platform 
such as Zoom. Whether recruited within these facilities or via social media advertisements, 
HHRI research staff will interview candidate participants to assess for potential eligibility. 
Following this, interested participants will undergo informed consent procedures, both verbal 
and written, followed by [CONTACT_843363].  Additional detail ou tlining 
participant recruitment, including digital and paper recruitment materials, is provided in the study MOP. 
 
 
2.5. Study Intervention (PrEP-iT! mobile intervention) 
Ø PrEP Adherence, PrEP Appointment, and Sexual Activity Self-Monitoring: Participants will 
be able to report their daily adherence to PrEP and their healthcare attendance through a 
simple interface in the app homepage. Participants will regularly receive messages that 
reflect their level of PrEP adherence. For example, if they have taken PrEP 5 days in a row, 
they would get a message stating “Great job [username], you’ve taken PrEP 5 days in a 
row!”. If, for example, they missed their PrEP doses for 2 days, a message would appear 
stating, “Looks like you haven’t taken PrEP in a few days – tell us reasons why?” The 
participant would then see a list of the most common reasons he may be missing doses, 
including: 
o I forgot 
o I didn’t have it on me when I usually take it o I ran out of PrEP o Having trouble paying for it o I’m not having sex o I was traveling and didn’t bring it o I was drinking or using a drug and forgot to take it o I’m in a monogamous relationship 
o I don’t like the way it makes me feel 
  
 [ADDRESS_1172086] their confidentiality. Finally, 
participants will be given the option to self-monitor their sexual activity. If they choose to, 
then this interface will appear below the PrEP adherence interface (if they do not activate 
this option, then they will not see it). The sexual activity self-monitoring will use the same 
simple interface as the adherence self-monitoring.  
Ø PrEP iT! Tips : We will develop PrEP iT! “tips” to provide YMSM with information, motivation, 
and behavioral skills related to PrEP knowledge, attitudes, and stigma profile; PrEP 
healthcare engagement; and sexual risk. As we have done in prior studies, research staff 
created approximately 150 “tips,” which are pi[INVESTIGATOR_843346], videos, 
GIFs, and links. Participants can browse these tips through a simple interface or through a 
key word search. 
Ø Text Messages for PrEP Adherence and Healthcare Appointments: Text messages will be 
sent as reminders to log into the site when a participant hasn’t done so in the prior week. 
Text messages are generic to minimize any potential disclosure. If the participant chooses, 
they may also receive a generic SMS reminders to attend their upcoming appointment.  
Ø Ask the Expert: Participants will be able to send an anonymous question within the PrEP iT! 
app (that will send an email to research staff with no identifying information about the user) 
about PrEP, PrEP care, sexual health, or other health topi[INVESTIGATOR_843347]. Research staff will triage the question to the investigator with expertise in that area who will 
respond within 48 hours by [CONTACT_843364].  This feature is similar to the “Ask the 
Expert” feature commonly used on health websites.  
Ø Levelling Up: Gamification components will be used to motivate participants to engage with 
PrEP iT! Users will move to higher levels as they interact with PrEP iT! With each new level, users will be able to unlock new features (e.g., color themes) to motivate them to engage 
with PrEP iT! Users will be able to see what level they are currently at and how many points 
they need to reach the next level in the profile area. 
 
Possible risks associated with the PrEP iT! mobile intervention, or study participation more 
broadly, are outlined with the study ICF (appendix A). 
 
 
2.6. Outcomes 
Primary Outcome 
• Feasibility 
• Acceptability 
 
Secondary Outcomes 
• Utilization of individual features of mobile intervention 
• Adherence, self-report to PrEP • Adherence, objective via tenofovir diphosphate (TFV-DP) levels in dried blood spots 
(in 50% of participants) 
• Clinical visits for PrEP care 
  
 11	• Stigma-related barriers 
• HIV seroconversion 
 
 
2.7. Study Visit Procedures  
Study candidates, whether referred by [CONTACT_843365]-referred from recruitment materials, will be assessed for potential eligibility through a self-directed online screening 
survey, or through research staff who can assess eligibility by [CONTACT_843366].  All interested candidates will then undergo a 
study visit, during which their eligibility will be confirmed followed by [CONTACT_187916]. After consent procedures, participants will complete a computer-assisted baseline survey and 
complete enrollment visit procedures .  
 After enrollment, participants are randomized 1:1 to either the intervention (PrEP iT! + usual 
care) or control (usual care) arm. All participants will be provided usual PrEP educational 
information encouraged to attend their regular healthcare visits.  Participants randomized to 
the intervention arm will be guided through setting up their user account and user profile, 
provided with basic training on how to navigate and use intervention components, and given the opportunity to ask questions.  
 
Both control and intervention participants will be offered an optional blood draw at their 
enrollment and [ADDRESS_1172087] that their samples be destroyed at any time by [CONTACT_843367]. 
 
YMSM will undergo a follow-up assessment at both 3- and 6 -month visits. The follow-up visits 
include ascertainment of clinical information that was conducted as part of usual PrEP care (e.g., repeat testing for HIV and other STIs), completion of a computerized survey 
assessment, and collection of a dried blood spot specimen for the TFV-DP analyses. If visit is 
in person, a finger prick will be done to collect several drops of blood. If visit is online, a self-
collection kit will be mailed to participants home where they collect blood by [CONTACT_843368], and then mailing the blood sample to a lab in a pre-paid mailer. See Clinical 
Management below for procedures for procuring care for diagnoses or disease events that 
are identified during study conduct. 
 
A complete list of study visit procedures, data collection, and evaluations performed at 
Screening, Enrollment and/or Follow-up study visits is listed below in Table 2 . 
 Table 2:  Study Visit Procedures and Evaluations 
Measure  Screening  
Assessment  Enrollme nt 
Visit  [ADDRESS_1172088] online screener  X    
Informed Consent   X   
Verification of eligibility   X   
Randomization   X   
  
 12	Participant and clinical data      
Demographic information  X    
HIV status  X X X X 
PrEP  medications and strategy   X X X 
Medical history   X X X 
Clinical labs   X X X 
Disease or clinical events   X X X 
Surveys  Items/Scales      
Demographics and Baseline 
Characteristics   X   
Technology Use Questions   X X X 
eHealth Literacy   X X X 
HIV Negative Cascade   X X X 
U=U Questions   X X X 
Substance Use   X X X 
Sexual Risk Behavior   X X X 
Mental Health   X X X 
Social Support   X X X 
Technology Use Questions    X X 
Intervention Acceptability    X X 
Exit Interview     X 
Specimen collection      
Dried Blood Spot Collection   X X X 
Blood for Storage   X  X 
 
 
2.8. Participant Retention 
Every attempt will be made to complete follow-up study procedures and data collection for all randomized participants.  Our retention process will leverage the use of multiple contact 
[CONTACT_41528] - including telephone calls, text messages, e-mail reminders, and social media – 
and ask permission for the use of each.   
3. DATA COLLECTION  AND CLINICAL MANAGEMENT 
 3.1. Case Report Forms 
All participant and clinical data collected will be entered into Qualtrics and/or web-based case 
report forms (CRFs) using REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) open software.  
REDCap provides a secure, web-based, flexible system to enter data within CRFs including 
real time validation rules that also facilitates audit trails and reporting. This data management 
system is fully compliant with all GCP and U.S. DHHS OHRP, NIH, FDA, ICH, and HIPAA 
regulations.  The REDCap study database will be stored on secure servers at the Hennepin 
Healthcare Research Institute.  Qualtrics data will be securely stored on servers at San Diego 
State University. 
 
Each participant will be assigned a participant identification (PID) number, which will be used 
as the sole identifier within CRFs and the study database. No data will be collected or stored 
on any individual participant devices. A key linking the PID to identifying information on the 
participant will be stored within the primary study materials, and kept in a secure location (i.e., 
locked storage behind a locked door) within HHRI.   Paper source documentation will also be 
collected as needed to assist with visit conduct, and verify eligibility and clinical data as part 
  
 [ADDRESS_1172089] 
(EMR).  Permission to access clinical and protected health information (PHI) is included 
within the ICF (Appendix A).  For participants receiving PrEP care at Hennepin County Public 
Health clinical and Hennepin Healthcare, the same EMR system is used for all clinics that 
can be accessed by [CONTACT_843369].  For participants receiving PrEP care at other outside community clinics, a release of information will be obtained to access clinical source 
documentation.  In addition, direct access of health records by [CONTACT_4317] (e.g., via MyChart 
or other patient access software) may be used to verify clinical health data that is entered into 
study database CRFs. 
 
3.3. Survey Data Collection 
All computer-assisted surveys will utilize Qualtrics, a HIPPA-compliant platform. Survey data collection may occur on a desktop/laptop or tablet computer, and will be housed on the San 
Diego State University server.  
 
3.4. Data Collection via the PrEP iT! Web Application 
The research team has developed a sophisticated back-end content management system (for content creation and editing), as well as a real-time intervention use data capture and 
reporting system, to assess how PrEP iT! is accessed and what components are used most 
often to inform future optimization.  
 Data reports will include the following: 
TBD information about each report and the variables that will be assessed in each report.  
 Data will be housed on physical servers residing in a secure facility that is audited to SOC3 
SSAE-16 standards. Data security protections include: 
Server  
The website databases and application will reside in a single tenant “private cloud” under the 
exclusive control of our partner, Radiant Digital. The website databases and application will 
be logically segmented in virtual private servers, ensuring that data may not be accessed by 
[CONTACT_843370].  
 
Data Privacy  
To promote confidentiality of participant data, each participant will be assigned a study PIN 
login to the program during the evaluation. Users will access the system via this study PIN and an associated user-selected password. All communication between the app and server-
side systems will be conducted using secure methods (e.g., SSL). All server-side systems will 
  
 [ADDRESS_1172090] a single identifier-the user’s phone number-for the purpose of sending 
out SMS texts as part of the intervention. Thus, we anticipate that the program will be 
classified as collecting PII (Personally Identifiable Information). 
 
3.5. Dried Blood Spots (DBS) for Tenofovir Diphosphate (TFV-DP) Levels. 
Tenofovir (TFV) is a primary component of the PrEP medication, and TVF drug levels will be assessed in a random subset of participants (≥50%) to evaluate objective adherence. TFV is 
phosphorylated in cells to TFV-diphosphate (TFV-DP), which is both pharmacologically active 
(in relevant cells) and demonstrates a longer intracellular half-life compared with the parent 
drug in plasma. The presence of TFV-DP in red blood cells (RBCs) can be measured within a 
dried blood spot (DBS) analysis. TFV-DP levels in DBS will be measured by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Peter 
Anderson’s Laboratory using established standardized protocols.
[ADDRESS_1172091].  After blood is 
applied, the cards are air dried for several hours (overnight is acceptable) and then stored in 
low gas-permeability bags. DBS card specimens are then stored under frozen conductions 
(20°C, or -80°C) until analysis. Specimens will be labeled with PID, study, date, and visit type, 
but will not include any individual identifying information.   Please see the study MOP for 
additional step by [CONTACT_843371], processing to DBS cards, storage and shippi[INVESTIGATOR_3931]. 
 
3.6. Blood Collection for Plasma  and Serum Storage 
Participant blood samples will be collected by [CONTACT_843372]. For efficiency, all plasma and serum specimens will be processed 
in the same manner.  After blood draw procedures, specimens will be centrifuged within 60 
minutes of collection, with plasma or serum aliquoted into 2.0mL cryovials for storage at -
80˚C.  Specimens will be labeled with PID, study, date, and visit type, but will not include any 
individual identifying information. Please see the study MOP for additional step by [CONTACT_843373], storage and shippi[INVESTIGATOR_3931]. 
 
3.7. Clinical Management of Adverse Events or Other Disease Events 
Clinical events and side effects related to PrEP will typi[INVESTIGATOR_843348], and will not involve study staff.  However, if 
symptoms or events are identified during the context of study visits, research staff will refer 
participants for clinical care at HH clinical facilities or their primary provider. HHRI research 
visits occur in the same clinic that HH HIV and PrEP services are delivered, and across the 
street from the Hennepin County Public Health Clinic. Similarly, for any event unrelated to 
PrEP care research staff will also refer participants for clinical evaluation. If urgent or 
emergent care is required, participants will be referred to the HH urgent care or emergency 
department, which are located in the same facility that HHRI research visits are conducted. 
  
 15	 
In the event that HIV acquisition were to occur during the study, research staff would support 
immediate referral to an HIV clinic with rapid access to care and treatment (e.g., this would 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_843349]).   Participants will be undergoing 
routine HIV testing at regular intervals as part of usual PrEP care.  If participants have missed 
routine PrEP care visits, HIV testing will be offered in the context of any research visit upon 
request. The clinical context where HIV testing is performed will typi[INVESTIGATOR_843350], but research study staff will facilitate this referral and linkage to HIV 
care if it has not occurred when participants are seen in research visits. S hould any  
participant test positive for HIV in another community setting during the study, the  study team 
will also assist with any resource information or direct referral to an HIV clinic. 
 
3.8. Study Withdrawal 
Participants may withdraw from study participation at any time.  If participants elect to withdraw from the study, they will be asked if the study information and specimens collected 
up to that point can be used in analyses.  In addition, participants will be asked if information 
related to their ongoing PrEP care (e.g., if they are continuing to engage in and receive care) 
may continue to be collected through the medical record for the duration of their previously 
anticipated study participation.  Every attempt will be made to minimize missing data. 
 
3.9. Study Data Storage and Retention 
The original paper study 
data records will be archived for 7 years  following  completion  of the study. 
Plasma from the optional  blood draw will be stored  for 20 years . 
 
4. SAFETY AND ADVERSE EVENTS  
 4.1. Adverse Event Definitions  
 Adverse Event (AE):  Any untoward medical occurrence in a clinical research participant 
administered an investigational product and which may or may not have a causal relationship 
with study participation. If a preexisting condition worsens post-enrollment (frequency and/or 
severity grade increases), it should be reported as an adverse event.  
Serious Adverse Event (SAE): An AE that results in any of the following:  
i. Death,  
ii. A life-threatening condition,  
iii. A congenital anomaly/birth defect, 
iv. Inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081],  
v. Persistent or significant disability/incapacity,  
vi. An important medical event that, based upon appropriate medical judgment, 
may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed above. 
 Grading Adverse Events:  There are five severity grades that can be assigned to adverse 
events, which are defined as follows:  
i. Grade 1 = Mild  
ii. Grade 2 = Moderate  
iii. Grade 3 = Severe  
  
 16	iv. Grade 4 = Potentially life-threatening  
v. Grade 5 = Death 
 
 
4.2. Adverse Event Data Collection and Documentation 
 
Data Collection: In addition to a medical history, clinical laboratory data will also be 
collection at enrollment.   Following enrollment, information will then be collected on any new 
adverse event that occurs within 30 days following study visit procedures.  
 
Documentation: Information on adverse events will be recorded on study visit CRFs 
(through the online REDCap interface).  An assessment will be made by [CONTACT_843374] (see 4.2 
below).   
 
Additional information ascertained for each adverse event includes:  a) date of onset, b) relationship to study participation (see section 4.3 below), c) any action taken on study 
procedures, d) the outcome of the adverse event (e.g., resolved or ongoing), and e) whether 
the adverse event qualifies as a serious adverse event (including the SAE criteria fulfilled).  
 
A narrative is required and is to be included in source documentation for all serious adverse 
events, as well as any other untoward events involving risks to participants that is 
unanticipated or unexpected and are reasonably believed to be related to research participation.   The circumstances surrounding these events should be reported using the 
serious adverse event CRF, and reviewed with the principle investigator as soon as the event is known. 
 
NOTE : information on adverse event do NOT need to be reported if ≤ grade 2. 
  
4.3. Relationship to Study Participation 
 For all adverse events that occur within 30 days of study visit procedures, study 
investigator(s) will assess the potential relationship of the event to the study and designate 
one of the following :  
 
i. Definitely or Probably Related:  the adverse event is reasonably related in time, and 
the adverse event is more likely, or definitely, explained by [CONTACT_843375]. 
ii. Possibly Related. The adverse event is reasonably related in time, and the adverse 
event could be explained by [CONTACT_843376].  
iii. Not Related. The adverse event is clearly explained by [CONTACT_843377]. 
 
 
4.4. Review and Reporting of Adverse Events 
 
  
 17	NOTE :  All adverse events that are collected and documented, whether or not they are 
serious or related to study participation, are reviewed weekly by [CONTACT_1704](s) for 
determination of grade, severity, relationship to study participation, and need to refer for 
additional medical evaluation.  
 
The SDSU IRB will receive safety reports for all adverse events that are: serious and  
unexpected.   Time frame for reporting will be: 
i. Reports for serious adverse events that are definitely, probably, or possibly related to 
study participation will be sent within 2 working days  of knowledge of the event.   
ii. Serious adverse events not related to study participation will be reported as part of 
usual study reports at pre-specified intervals (e.g., bi-annually, annually).  
 
Aggregate annual reports will also be created and submitted to the IRB , which will include 
information on unexpected adverse events or any unanticipated problem that poses risks to participants, and is believed to be related to research participation.   
   
5. STATISTICAL METHODS  
 5.1. Sample Size Considerations 
The sample size for this proof-of-concept study (n=40 per group; n=80 total) is consistent with 
recommendations of sample sizes for pi[INVESTIGATOR_843351].
22 Power calculations are 
presented for the two adherence outcomes: TFV-DP levels and the adherence score. For the TFV-DP levels (n=20 in each arm), prior research suggests that approximately 40% will have 
levels TFV-DP levels >700 fmol/punch at 3 months. Assuming a type I error of 5% and using 
a chi-square test statistic, we have 80% power to detect a relative risk of 2.0 or larger (i.e., 
that the intervention group is 2.[ADDRESS_1172092] high levels of TFV-DP as the control 
group). Adherence may decrease by [ADDRESS_1172093]. If we 
assume 30% adherence at [ADDRESS_1172094] 80% power to detect a relative risk of 2.4 or 
higher. For the adherence score derived from Wilson et al.’s
[ADDRESS_1172095] deviation among PrEP users and a type-1 error rate of 5%, we have 80% 
power to detect a difference in adherence scores of 12.[ADDRESS_1172096] deviation change, and should provide good preliminary 
evidence to inform future trials. 
 
5.2. Randomization Procedures 
Participants will be randomized in a 1:1 allocation to either:  a)  the mobile intervention of 
PrEP iT! in addition to  usual care, or b) a control condition that consists only of usual care.  
The randomization sequence will be stratified by [CONTACT_654] (18-24 v. 25-29 yrs) and use blocks of four.  Given the nature of the intervention, treatment allocation will not be blinded following 
randomization. 
 
All study staff and participants will be unaware of randomized group allocation until 
enrollment and randomization procedures are completed.  Following screening and 
enrollment, participant eligibility will be re-confirmed. After completion of the randomization 
CRF, the treatment allocation will be revealed within the study database.  Research staff will 
  
 [ADDRESS_1172097] participants on their study group, and participants within the mobile intervention 
arm will be guide through setup of the PrEP iT! web application. 
 
 
5.3. Analysis Plan 
 Feasibility of delivering the intervention will be assessed by [CONTACT_843378]. Chi-square tests (or Fisher’s exact test, for small cell 
counts) will be used to compare the intervention and control groups in the proportions of 
participants retained at both 3- and 6 -month follow-up. We will use the following retention cut-
off percentages to assess feasibility: a) 90+ = strong feasibility; b) 80-89% = acceptable feasibility; c) 70-79% = modest feasibility with a need for improvement; d) <70% = 
unacceptable feasibility.  
 Acceptability will be measured using a 10-item self-report System Usability Scale (SUS)
24 
computed in the intervention arm over time (at 3- & 6-months). The average SUS score across 400 studies was 68
24 (possible range 0-100); therefore, an average score of >68 will 
be considered acceptable and >80 highly acceptable. We will estimate overall acceptability 
and changes over time. Acceptability will further be assessed by [CONTACT_843379]! interaction (average number of uses per week) over follow-up time.  
 
The preliminary impact of the mobile intervention will specifically be evaluated.  We will focus 
on two adherence measures to estimate the preliminary efficacy of the PrEP iT! intervention. 
Objective adherence will be assessed via TFV-DP levels in DBS samples (n≥20 per treatment arm). TFV-DP data will be dichotomized into high levels ( ≥700 fmol/punch) vs low 
levels (<700 fmol/punch) and the difference in proportion of high levels of TFV-DP between treatment arm will be estimated using chi-square or Fisher’s exact test at both [ADDRESS_1172098].  
 
6. REFERENCES: 
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. HIV Surveillance Report, 2016. 2017. 2. Office of National AIDS Policy. National HIV/AIDS Strategy:  Update of 2014 Federal 
Actions to Achieve National Goals and Improve Outcomes Along the HIV Care Continuum. 
2014.  
3. Centers for Disease C and Prevention. Interim guidance: preexposure prophylaxis for the prevention of HIV infection in men who have sex with men. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep. 2011;60:[ADDRESS_1172099], Cohen MS, Kalichman SC, Mayer KH, 
Montaner JS, Wheeler DP, Grant RM, Grinsztejn B, Kumarasamy N, Shoptaw S, Walensky 
RP, Dabis F, Sugarman J, Benson CA and International Antiviral Society [LOCATION_003]P. HIV 
  
 19	prevention in clinical care settings: 2014 recommendations of the International Antiviral 
Society-[LOCATION_003] Panel. JAMA. 2014;312:[ADDRESS_1172100] sex with men. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:2587 -99. 
6. Thigpen MC, Kebaabetswe PM, Paxton LA, Smith DK, Rose CE, Segolodi TM, Henderson FL, Pathak SR, Soud FA, Chillag KL, Mutanhaurwa R, Chirwa LI, Kasonde M, 
Abebe D, Buliva E, Gvetadze RJ, Johnson S, Sukalac T, Thomas VT, Hart C, Johnson JA, 
Malotte CK, Hendrix CW, Brooks JT and Group TDFS. Antiretroviral preexposure prophylaxis 
for heterosexual HIV transmission in Botswana. N Engl J Med. 2012;3 67:423-34.  
7. Baeten JM, Donnell D, Ndase P, Mugo NR, Campbell JD, Wangisi J, Tappero JW, Bukusi EA, Cohen CR, Katabira E, Ronald A, Tumwesigye E, Were E, Fife KH, Kiarie J, 
Farquhar C, John-Stewart G, Kakia A, Odoyo J, Mucunguzi A, Nakku-Joloba E, Twesigye R, 
Ngure K, Apaka C, Tamooh H, Gabona F, Mujugira A, Panteleeff D, Thomas KK, Kidoguchi 
L, Krows M, Revall J, Morrison S, Haugen H, Emmanuel-Ogier M, Ondrejcek L, Coombs RW, 
Frenkel L, Hendrix C, Bumpus NN, Bangsberg D, Haberer JE, Stevens WS, Lingappa J R, 
Celum C and Partners Pr EPST. Antiretroviral prophylaxis for HIV prevention in heterosexual men and women. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:[ADDRESS_1172101] J, Kapi[INVESTIGATOR_99331] S, Malahleha M, Owino F, Manongi R, Onyango J, Temu L, Monedi MC, Mak'Oketch P, Makanda M, Reblin I, 
Makatu SE, Saylor L, Kiernan H, Kirkendale S, Wong C, Grant R, Kashuba A, Nanda K, 
Mandala J, Fransen K, Deese J, Crucitti T, Mastro TD, Taylor D and Group FE-PS. 
Preexposure prophylaxis for HIV infection among African women. N Engl J Med. 
2012;367:411 -22. 
9. Marrazzo JM, Ramjee G, Nair GB, Palenee T, Mkhiza B, Nakabiito C and et al. Pre-
exposure Prophylaxis for HIV in Women: Daily Oral Tenofovir, Oral Tenofovir/Emtricitabine, 
or Vaginal Tenofovir Gel in the VOICE study (MTN 003). Paper presented at: 20th 
Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections; 2013; Atlanta, GA, [LOCATION_003]. 
10. Choopanya K, Martin M, Suntharasamai P, Sangkum U, Mock PA, Leethochawalit M, 
Chiamwongpaet S, Kitisin P, Natrujirote P, Kittimunkong S, Chuachoowong R, Gvetadze RJ, McNicholl JM, Paxton LA, Curlin ME, Hendrix CW, Vanichseni S and Bangkok Tenofovir 
Study G. Antiretroviral prophylaxis for HIV infection in injecting drug users in Bangkok, 
Thailand (the Bangkok Tenofovir Study): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2013;381:[ADDRESS_1172102] G, Lorente N, 
Preau M, Rooney JF, Wainberg MA, Thompson D, Rozenbaum W, Dore V, Marchand L, 
Simon MC, Etien N, Aboulker JP, Meyer L, Delfraissy JF and Group AIS. On-Demand 
Preexposure Prophylaxis in Men at High Risk for HIV-1 Infection. N Engl J Med. 
2015;373:2237 -46. 
12. McCormack S, Dunn D and on behalf of the PROUD Study group. Pragmatic Open-
Label Randomised Trial of Preexposure Prophylaxis: The PROUD Study. 22nd Conference 
on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infection . 2015;abstract #22LB. 
  
 [ADDRESS_1172103] D and McCalister S. The 
phase 3 DISCOVER study: daily F/TAF or F/TDF for HIV preexposure prophylaxis. 
Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections . 2019.  
14. Nunn AS, Brinkley-Rubinstein L, Oldenburg CE, Mayer KH, Mimiaga M, Patel R and 
Chan PA. Defining the HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis care continuum. AIDS. 2017;31:[ADDRESS_1172104] sex with men: a cohort study. Lancet 
Infect Dis. 2014;14:820 -9. 
16. Hosek S. L, R., Rudy, B., Kapogiannis, B., Siberry, G., Rutledge, B., Liu, N., Brothers, 
J., Rooney, J.,  Wilson, C. M., and The Adolescent Trials Network for HIV/AIDS Interventions (ATN),. An HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) demonstration project and safety study for 
adolescent MSM ages 15-17 in the [LOCATION_002] (ATN 113). . Paper presented at: 21st 
International AIDS Conference; 2016; Durban, South Africa. 
17. Hosek SG, Rudy B, Landovitz R, Kapogiannis B, Siberry G, Rutledge B, Liu N, 
Brothers J, Mulligan K, Zimet G, Lally M, Mayer KH, Anderson P, Kiser J, Rooney JF and Wilson CM. An HIV Preexposure Prophylaxis Demonstration Project and Safety Study for 
Young MSM. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2017;74:21 -29. 
18. Venkatesh V and Bala H. Technology Acceptance Model 3 and a Research Agenda 
on Interventions. Decision Sciences. 2008;39:273 -315.  
19. Fisher JD, Amico KR, Fisher WA, Harman JJ, Fisher JD, Amico KR, Fisher WA and 
Harman JJ. The information-motivation-behavioral skills model of antiretroviral adherence 
and its applications. Current HIV/AIDS reports. 2008;5:193 -203.  
20. Fisher JD, Fisher WA, Amico KR and Harman JJ. An Information-Motivation-
Behavioral Skills Model of Adherence to Antiretroviral Therapy. : Health Psychology. Vol 25(4) 
Jul 2006, 462-473.; 2006.  
21. Castillo-Mancilla JR, Zheng JH, Rower JE, Meditz A, Gardner EM, Predhomme J, 
Fernandez C, Langness J, Kiser JJ, Bushman LR and Anderson PL. Tenofovir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir diphosphate in dried blood spots for determining recent and cumulative drug 
exposure. AIDS research and human retroviruses . 2013;29:384 -390.  
22. Hertzog MA. Considerations in determining sample size for pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602]. Res Nurs 
Health. 2008;31:180 -191.  
23. Wilson IB, Lee Y, Michaud J, Fowler FJ, Jr. and Rogers WH. Validation of a New 
Three-Item Self-Report Measure for Medication Adherence. AIDS Behav. 2016;20:2700 -
2708.  
24. Brooke J. SUS: A quick and dirty usability scale. In: P. W. Jordan, B. Thomas, B. A. 
Weerdmeester and I. McClellend, eds. Usability Evaluation in Industry London: Taylor and 
Francis 1996. 
25. Rosenbaum PR. Interference Between Units in Randomized Experiments. Journal of 
the American Statistical Association. 2007;102:191 -200.  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 21	APPENDIX A: 
 
PrEP iT!: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_7447] a Mobile Peer Support Intervention to Optimize PrEP 
Adherence and Retention in PrEP Care 
 
IMPORTANT THINGS TO KNOW ABOUT THIS STUDY:  
 
We are inviting you to join this research study. The purpose of the research is to understand ways in 
which technology can be used to support young adults who are taking pre -exposure prophylaxis 
(PrEP)  to prevent HIV infection.  
 
We are asking people who join this study to attend 3 study visits (in -person or online via a 
teleconferencing platform such as Zoom) over a period of [ADDRESS_1172105] your access to PrEP o r your current healthcare for PrEP. These are the reasons you might want 
to join this study: 1) you may experience positive feelings about participating in a study that could lead 
to new ways to help persons like you manage PrEP and 2) you may learn new strategies for 
managing PrEP. These are the reasons you might not want to join this study: 1) it may lead to emotional discomfort; 2) there is a small risk that someone could find out that you have sex with other 
men or that you are on PrEP; 3) we will ask you to provide a small amount of blood through a finger 
prick which may be slightly painful.   
 
We will give you details about the purposes, procedures, risks and possible benefits related to this 
study. We will explain other choices you have. We will also give you any other information that you 
need to make an informed decision about joining this study.   
The following information is a more complete description of the study. Please read this description 
carefully. We want you to ask us any questions that wi ll help you decide whether you want to join this 
study. If you join the study, we will give you a signed copy of this form to keep for reference in the 
future.  
 
   
  
 [ADDRESS_1172106] QUESTIONS or Concerns?  
 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_325768] J. Ho rvath 
SDSU Department:  Psychology  
Address:  [ADDRESS_1172107]; San Diego, CA [ZIP_CODE]  
Phone:  [PHONE_17558] 
Email:  [EMAIL_2220]  
 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_65148] V. Baker  
Institution:  Hennepin Healthcare Research Institute (at Hennepin Healthcare)  
Address: [ADDRESS_1172108] (mail code G5); Minneapolis, MN [ZIP_CODE] 
Phone:  [PHONE_10635] (research program)  
Email:  [EMAIL_15995]  
 
WE ARE INVITING YOU TO JOIN THIS RESEARCH STUDY.  
 We are inviting you to participate in this research study because you have told us that you are on PrEP and identify as gay, bisexual or a man who has sex with men.  
 Up to 80 participants will be included in this study.  
 
Research is not the same as treatme nt, or other medical or psychological care or therapy. The 
purpose of research is to answer scientific questions.  
 WHY ARE WE DOING THIS STUDY?  
 We are doing this study to find out if it is possible to provide men like you with access to online informatio n, activities, and resources related to PrEP and, for those who agree to join the study, what 
they think about the website. We also want to know if men who are on PrEP find the online information, activities, and resources helpful for managing PrEP.  
 In the study we want to compare a group of men who are on PrEP and are provided access to a 
website with a group of men who are on PrEP but who are not provided access to the website. 
Persons who join the study have a 50% chance of being assigned to the websit e group and a 50% 
chance of being assigned to the no website group.  
 
WHAT IS THE TIME COMMITMENT IF I JOIN THIS RESEARCH STUDY?  
 
Your participation will last approximately 6 months. You will either come to the research office or 
teleconference with research staff for three (3) study visits about [ADDRESS_1172109] could stop your participation in the research study at any time even if you want 
to still be in the study. This would happen if:  
 
• They think it is in your best interest to stop being in the study.  
• You are not willing or able to do all the things needed in the study. 
• The whole study stops.  
 
If you stop being in the study, your information collected before you stopped being in the study will  be 
included in the study unless you request that your data be removed. You may request in writing by 
[CONTACT_843380].  
  
 23	WHAT WILL I BE ASKED TO DO IN THIS RESEARCH STUDY?    
 
To determine if you can join the study, we will ask you some questions. If your answers indicate you 
can participate, we will ask you to participate in the training and testing portion of this study. If you are 
not eligible to participate, your information  will be destroyed to keep your information private.  
 
If you choose to be in the study, you will be asked to sign this consent form before you begin the 
study. This initial visit will last about [ADDRESS_1172110] 
information will be used to remind you to come in for your study visits and to help you with transportation to your study visits, if needed. You also can choose not to giv e any information that you 
do not want to give. However, you will need to provide a working email in order to use the website resources, and provide a form of communication (for example, your telephone number) in order for us to communicate with you during  the study.  
 
The following is the schedule of study visits and what will be done at each visit:  
 
Today: 1
st study visit  
1. You will be asked to answer questions on a computer or a tablet by [CONTACT_843381]. The survey will take about 35 -45 minutes and we will ask you questions about PrEP, your 
attitudes and feelings about PrEP, substance use, internet use, and general information about 
yourself (race, ethnicity, income, education).  
2. If you are randomly assigned to use the website (meaning you have a 50/50 chance , like flippi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a 
coin, of being in this group), a study staff member will give you a unique username [CONTACT_843395], and take you on a brief tour of the website. You will have the opportunity to ask questions about the website. Please use as many of the website features as possible. You may 
use the website on a computer, smart phone, or both.   
3. If your visit is in person, we will do a finger prick to collect several drops of blood. If your visit is 
virtual, we will be mailing a self -collection kit that will be mailed to your home where you collect 
blood by [CONTACT_843382], and then mailing the blood sample to a lab in a pre -paid mailer. Four 
to five drops of your blood will then be stored on a paper card until the end of the study, when it will be used to measure levels of medications that are used as PrEP. This is like getting poked 
with a needle and may cause discomfort.  
4. You may be asked to provide additional blood draw to be stored for future research studies. This is optional and, if you agree, may result in discomfort.  
 
About three months from today: 2
nd study visit  
1. You will be asked to answer questions on a computer o r a tablet by [CONTACT_843381]. The survey will take about 35 -45 minutes and we will ask you questions about PrEP, your 
  
 24	attitudes and feelings about PrEP, substance use, internet use, and general information about 
yourself (race, ethnicity, i ncome, education).  
2. If your visit is in person, we will do a finger prick to collect several drops of blood. If your visit is 
virtual, we will be mailing a self -collection kit that will be mailed to your home where you collect 
blood by [CONTACT_843382], and then mailing the blood sample to a lab in a pre -paid mailer. Four 
to five drops of your blood will then be stored on a paper card until the end of the study, when it will be used to measure levels of medications that are used as PrEP. This is like getting poked with a needle and may cause discomfort.  
 About six months from today: 3
rd study visit  
1. You will be asked to answer questions on a computer or a tablet by [CONTACT_843381].  The survey will take about 35 -45 minutes and we will ask you questions about PrEP, your 
attitudes and feelings about PrEP, substance use, internet use, and general information about yourself (race, ethnicity, income, education).  
2. If your visit is in person, we will do a finger prick to collect several drops of blood. If your visit i s 
virtual, we will be mailing a self -collection kit that will be mailed to your home where you collect 
blood by [CONTACT_843382], and then mailing the blood sample to a lab in a pre -paid mailer.  Four 
to five drops of your blood will then be stored on a  paper card until the end of the study, when it 
will be used to measure levels of medications that are used as PrEP. This is like getting poked with a needle and may cause discomfort.  
3. You may be offered the opportunity to participate in a short optional i nterview with clinic study staff 
about your experience in the study for additional compensation. This interview may be recorded 
so the content discussed can be captured in detail for the study.  The recording will be destroyed within one month of the inter view. 
4. You may be asked to provide additional blood draw to be stored for future research studies. This 
is optional and, if you agree, may result in discomfort.  
 
Some of your blood taken with the optional blood draw at the 1st  and 3rd study visits may be stored. 
Your stored samples and the information collected about you during the study may be used by [CONTACT_4530], its research partners or companies for additional testing of Tenofovir and metabolites. At the end of this study, th ese samples may be held in storage by [CONTACT_843383] [ADDRESS_1172111] page 
of this form. 
  
Additional Blood Specimen Collection Consent  
1) Collect, store and use blood samples and data collected from the study for future research. I agree 
to allow my blood to be used for future research.  
  
      Yes _______  (initial)                No _______  (initial)   
  
 
Signature [CONTACT_843396]?  
• You may feel uncomfortable or embarrassed by [CONTACT_843384], including 
your PrEP use, drug use, or other information while answering surveys or speaking with research 
staff. You are free to provide as little or as much information as you like during the survey. If any of the topi[INVESTIGATOR_843352], you can stop at any time, and we can refer you to a counselor who may be able to help you.  
  
 25	• The collection of a small amount of blood t hrough a blood draw or finger prick may cause 
discomfort, bruising, or bleeding. Rarely people faint as a result of this procedure.   
• Potential risks of loss of confidentiality. There is some potential risk of disclosure of being on PrEP 
or other personal behaviors if someone sees the website on your phone, tablet, or computer. You will have a unique password -protected login to access the website and the connection will time out 
after a period of inactivity.  The default text message is a generic text message that will serve as a weekly reminder, but will not contain any text about “medications,” “dose,” or “PrEP.”  
There is a chance that some users could engage in hostile communication in comments on the 
website. We will post general rules for using the webs ite. The website will be monitored daily by 
[CONTACT_3647]. Comments that are considered hostile may be removed by [CONTACT_464]. Additionally, if 
participants continue to engage in hostile communication, they may be removed from the study.  
 We will make ev ery effort to protect your confidentiality, but there is a small possibility that your name, 
PrEP use, or sexual orientation identity could become known to others.  
 
We may discover new information during this research study. This new information my affect  whether 
or not you want to still be in the study. We will tell you so that you can decide if you still want to be in 
the research.  
 ARE THERE ANY BENEFITS TO PARTICIPATION?  
 
If you join the study, you may experience positive feelings about participating in a study that could 
lead to new ways to help persons like you manage PrEP. You may learn new strategies for managing 
PrEP. However, we cannot be certain that you will receive  any benefits by [CONTACT_55825].  
 
AUTHORIZATION TO DISCLOSE PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION  
Your privacy is important to us, and we want to protect it as much as possible. By [CONTACT_3368], 
you authorize your Study Doctors, nurses and other research assistants at Hennepin Healthcare  and 
San Diego State University  to use and disclose information created or collected in the course of your 
participation in this research protocol. This information might be in different places, including your original medical record, but we will only disclose information that is related to this research protocol for the purposes listed below.   
  This information will be given out for the proper monitoring of the study, checking the accuracy of study data, analyzing  the study data, and other purposes necessary for the proper conduct and 
reporting of this study. If some of the information is reported in published medical journals or scientific discussions, it will be done in a way that does not directly identify you.  
  
This information may be given to ot her researchers in this study, or to private entities such as 
academic research institutions, academic associated start-ups, and nonprofit companies. This 
information may also be given to state and/or federal government  parties, or to regulatory authorities 
in the [LOCATION_003] and other countries responsible for overseeing this research. These may include the Office 
for Human Research Protections, or other offices within the Department of Health and Human 
Services, and the Office  of Human Subject Research Committee at Hennepin Healthcare.  
  
Any information that could be used to identify you will be treated in strict confidence to the extent 
allowed by [CONTACT_2371].   Nevertheless, some uses and disclosures of your information are necessary to 
conduct the study.   If you agree to be part of this study, you will also be allowing the uses and 
disclosures of your private health information as needed for the purposes of this study as described in this consent.  
  
“Private health information” means information that identifies you and is collected:  
• during this study; 
  
 26	• from your past and current medical records maintained by [CONTACT_843385] 
(including, if applicable, HCMC), to the extent the information is relevant to this study or to  your 
eligibility for this study; or 
• from any payment records relating to items or services furnished to you during this study.  
 By [CONTACT_30112], you are agreeing that your private health information may be disclosed to and 
used by:  
• the doctors and  other health care providers involved in this study; 
• their staff;   
• the research center (Hennepin Healthcare Research Institute);  
• members of the San Diego State University  Human Subjects Research Committee/Institutional 
Review Board;  
• research staff at San D iego State University; 
• the sponsor of this study and its agents; and  
• representatives from the [LOCATION_002] Government and/or Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  
 The findings of this study may be used for scientific meetings, written reports, and publications, but no 
information that could be used to identify you will be disclosed for these purposes.  
 Private health identifiers might be removed and the de -identified information or biospecimens used for 
future research or distributed to another inve stigator without additional informed consent from you  
  Once your private health information has been disclosed to a third party, federal privacy laws may no longer protect it from re -disclosure.   However, anyone obtaining access to your private health 
information under this consent must agree to  protect your information as required by [CONTACT_57036].   
  This consent to use your private health information as d escribed above expi[INVESTIGATOR_843353] 31, 
2023. However, if you later change your mind, you can revoke t his consent by [CONTACT_843386], 
MD, MS saying that you no longer wish to allow your private health information to be used for this 
study.  If you revoke your cons ent, you will  no longer be able to participate in the study.  Moreover, we 
cannot undo uses or disclosures of your private health information that have already taken place in reliance on your prior consent.  
 
I authorize the release of HIV test results  
 
ARE THERE ANY ALTERNATIVES TO JOINING THIS RESEARCH STUDY?  
 
There all no alternatives to joining this research study. However, you may choose not to participate in 
the research.  
 
WILL MY INFORMATION BE PRIVATE?    
 
Your participation in this study will be kept confidential and private as permitted by [CONTACT_2371]. This incl udes 
information you provide on the survey, the audio recording of the interview, and anything you enter on 
the website.  
 Every effort will be taken to protect your identity as a participant in this study. You will not be identified by [CONTACT_843387], report or publication of this study or its results. Instead, you will be 
known only through a study ID number.  Any data linking your name [CONTACT_843397] a locked cabinet in a locked room at the study site , but separate from where your study 
records are stored. Staff members involved in this  study are required to sign a form stating that they 
will protect and keep private all information on every  person in the study. 
 
  
 [ADDRESS_1172112] s will be identified in any report or publication about 
this study.  However, there are things that the law does not allow us to keep private. If we think that a 
child or older person is being harmed, we are required to report any suspected harm to authori ties. In 
some cases, your information in this research study could be reviewed by [CONTACT_843388] , San Diego State University, research sponsors, or government 
agencies for purposes such as quality control or safety.    
 At the end of the study, the electronic information from the study will be coded and stored on secure 
servers at the participating sites:  San Diego State University, San Diego, CA  and the Hennepin 
Healthcare Research Institute, Minneapolis MN.  None of this study database information will identify you by [CONTACT_2300] . 
 A description of this study will be available on http://clinicaltrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. This 
website will not  include information that can identify you. At most, the website will include a summary 
of the results. You can access this website at any time. 
To help further protect your privacy, we have obtained a Certificate of Confidentiality from the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS).  It adds special protection for research 
information that identifies you. It says that we do not have to identify you, even under a court order or subpoena. With this Certificate, the researchers cannot be forced to d isclose information that may 
identify you, even by a court subpoena, in any federal, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other proceedings. The researchers will use the Certificate to resist any demands for information that would identify you, except as explained below.  
The Certificate cannot be used to resist a demand for information from personnel of the [LOCATION_002] Government that is used for auditing or evaluation of federally funded projects or for information that 
must b e disclosed in order to meet the requirements of the federal Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA).  
Still, we may report medical information (if you need medical help), probable harm to yourself or 
others, or probable child abuse or neglect, and the governmen t may see your information if it audits 
us. This Certificate does not mean the government approves or disapproves of our project. You should understand that a Certificate of Confidentiality does not prevent you or a member of your family from voluntarily r eleasing information about yourself or your involvement in this research. If an 
insurer, employer, or other person obtains your written assent/consent to receive research 
information, then the researchers may not use the Certificate to withhold that information.  
 
 
In addition, your records may be reviewed by [CONTACT_843389]. Under the guidelines of the Federal Privacy Act, the spons oring agency at the National Institutes of Health 
(NIH) and San Diego State University may look at your records. If your study records are reviewed, your identity could become known to them. However, these persons are expected to maintain your individual c onfidentiality. This means that they will not tell others information about you or that you are 
in the study. De- identified information will be shared with the sponsoring agency at the NIH without 
obtaining additional informed consent. By [CONTACT_3368] , you are allowing such access.  
 Any paper research records will be stored in a locked office in a locked file cabinet and will only be 
accessible to research staff listed on the first page of this consent form. All electronic data will be 
encrypted and stored on a password -protected computer behind a firewall to ensure access is 
provided only to those involved directly in data collection or analysis.  
 
  
 28	At the end of the study, the identifying information (participants’ names and contact [CONTACT_3031]) is 
destroyed. The original data records will be archived for 7 years, and three copi[INVESTIGATOR_112468] -identified 
dataset will be maintained (one working copy and two archived at different sites). 	 
 
Data on what features of the website that participants in this study  use will be collected and housed 
on physical servers residing in a secure facility that is audited to SOC3 SSAE -16 standards. The 
website databases and application will reside in a single tenant “private cloud” under the exclusive control of our partner, Radiant Digital. The website databases and application will be logically 
segmented in virtual private servers, ensuring that data may not be accessed by [CONTACT_843390]. To promote confidentiality of participant data, each participant wil l be assigned a study 
PIN login to the program during the evaluation. Users will access the system via this study PIN and an 
associated user -selected password. All communication between the app and server -side systems will 
be conducted using secure methods (e.g., SSL). All server -side systems will utilize a database -level 
encryption scheme to store data. No data will be collected or stored on any individual participant 
devices.  
 Your private information and bio -specimen(s) collected as part of this research  study will not be used 
or distributed for future research studies  or used for commercial profit.  
 The exit interview may be recorded so the content discussed can be captured in detail for the study.  The recording will be destroyed within one month after  the interview once the information is collected. 
You will only be identified on written information from the interview with a unique study ID number. The information from the recordings will not be used for any other purposes outside of this research 
study. 
 
We will use the information we learn to for published articles or for presentations to other scientists. 
We will keep your information private. Others will not be able to identify you in those papers or 
presentations.  
WHAT WILL HAPPEN IF I AM HURT OR INJURED WHILE I AM IN THE STUDY ?  
If any injury arises as a direct result of participation in this study, we will assist you in obtaining 
appropriate attention. If you need treatment or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_843354], you are responsible for payment of the cost for that care. If you have insurance, you may bill your insurance 
company. You will have to pay any costs not covered by [CONTACT_123864]. San Diego State University, 
San Diego State University Research Foundation, and Henn epin Health will not pay for any care, lost 
wages, or provide other financial compensation. However, if you feel you have a claim that you wish 
to file against the State  or the Foundation, please contact [CONTACT_843391] - Division of 
Research Administration at (619) [ADDRESS_1172113] TO JOIN THIS STUDY?  
 
No, you do not have to join this research study. Even if you agree to join, you can decide later that 
you do not want to be in the research. If you choose not to join or later decide that you do not want to 
be in the study, there is no penalty or loss of benefits to which you are otherwise entitled   
WILL I BE TOLD ABOUT THE RESEARCH RESULTS?  
 
If you choose to be informed, we will contact [CONTACT_843392].  
 
WILL IT COST ME ANYTHING If I Join the Research?  
  
 29	There are no costs if you choose to join the research study.  
WILL I BE PAID IF I JOIN THE RESEARCH?  
You will be compensated the following for each study activity to help cover the cost of your time:  
• Enrollment visit: $[ADDRESS_1172114]  
• 3-month visit: $[ADDRESS_1172115]  
• 5-month visit: $[ADDRESS_1172116]  
If you complete all of the study activities listed above, you will receive a total of $150  in gift cards.   
 
If you are asked to participate in an online interview during the 6 -month visit and choose to do so, you 
will receive an additional $[ADDRESS_1172117] QUESTIONS OR CONCERNS?  
If you have questions now, please ask. If you have questions later about the research, you may 
contact [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Keith Horvath at [ADDRESS_1172118] the Division of Research 
Affairs at San Diego State University  (telephone: 619 -594-6622; email: [EMAIL_15996] ).  At any time 
during the research, you can contact [CONTACT_843393], to discuss problems, 
concerns, give suggestions, or to offer input.  
CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE :  
The San Diego State University  Institutional Review Board has approved this consent form, as 
signified by [CONTACT_164950]'s stamp.  The IRB must review the consent form yearly. The IRB approval 
expi[INVESTIGATOR_843355] -hand corner of this document.   
Your signature [CONTACT_843398]. You have had a chance to ask any questions you have about the 
research. By [CONTACT_3368], you are agreeing to join the stu dy. You have been told that you can 
change your mind and stop participating in the research at any time. The researcher or a member of 
his/her research team has provided you with a copy of this consent form. This form includes contact [CONTACT_843394].  
The researcher or member or his/her research team has provided you with a copy of this consent form and the Authorization to Disclose Protected Health Information.  
 
 
Name [CONTACT_2385] (please print)        Date 
  
 
  
Signature [CONTACT_843399]  
 