 
1 
PROTOCOL  
Proprietary and confidential property of UnitedHealth Group. Do not distribute.  OHRA Template V.04/2021   
 
  
Breath  Monitor  Study  
Protocol  
KELLY CARPENTER, PH.D.  
  
 
 
2 
PROTOCOL  
Proprietary and confidential property of UnitedHealth Group. Do not distribute.  OHRA TEMPLATE V.04/2021  Version  Date  Notes  Initials  
1.0 8/6/21 Version 1 draft  kc 
1.1 9/24/21  Response to IRB feedback  kc 
1.2 9/29/21  Update study name [CONTACT_304826] 
1.3 04/19/22  Update recruitment to up to 350 from 300  CC 
 
 
SYNOPSIS  
Tracking IDs OHRA protocol number, 2021 -0056  
Full Title  
(Scientific)  Breath Monitor Carbon Monoxide Monitoring Study  
Short Title  
(Public Facing)  Breath Monitor Study  
Type of Project 
Description  Interventional Research   
 
Focus 
Area/Category  Product Development  
Primary Objective  Conduct a  3-arm randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_304783]  (with and without financial incentives)  to standard  Quit For Life tobacco 
cessation  service offerings.    
  
Anticipated 
Duration  Launch : 10/2021   -- Publication : 06/2023  
Primary Target 
Population  Quitline callers who 18+ years old  from participating states who are current smokers  
 
PERSONNEL  – FULL NAME , CREDENTIALS , AFFILIATION , EMAIL ADDRESS  
Principal 
Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_304784], Ph.D., Optum Health, [EMAIL_5975]  
Owner/Primary 
Contact  [CONTACT_304798] , MPH, Optum Health, [EMAIL_5976]  
Clinical Lead  Etta Short , MS, Optum Health/Rally, [EMAIL_5977]  (She will be moving to 
Optum proper 9/26/21)  
Data S cientist  TBD 
Operations 
Architect  NA 
Internal  
Sub-Investigators  Etta Short, MS  
External  
Sub-Investigators  None  
 
  
 
 
3 
PROTOCOL  
Proprietary and confidential property of UnitedHealth Group. Do not distribute.  OHRA TEMPLATE V.04/2021   
 
 
 
 
 
 
COLLABORATING  ENTITIES  
Study Sponsor  Quit For Life, Coaching Prevention and Wellness  (internally sponsored)  
Funding Sponsor  Internally funded  with additional funding provided by [CONTACT_304799]  N/A 
Partners  Vincere Health  
Vendors  Vincere Health  
Research Sites  Conducted remotely via phone by [CONTACT_304800]’s Quit  For Life 
(Tobacco Quitline) Product and Optum Center for Wellbeing Research  and via the 
Vincere Health CO monitoring app.  
 
1. SPECIFIC AIMS 
Aim 1 + Hypothesis 1 : 
Conduct a  3-arm randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_304785] ( CO) monitoring  (with 
and without financial incentives)  to standard  Quit For Life tobacco cessation  service offerings.  We 
hypothesize  that the  CO monitoring  will be feasible  and acceptable  to deliver (measured by  [CONTACT_304801]) . 
Aim 2 + Hypothesis 2 : 
Conduct a  3-arm randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_304786]  (with and without 
financial incentives)  to standard  Quit For Life tobacco cessation  service offerings.  We hypothesize  that the  CO 
monitoring  will increa se engagement in  quitline  treatment (measured by [CONTACT_304802]) . 
Aim 3 + Hypothesis 3 : 
Conduct a  3-arm randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_304786]  (with and without 
financial incentives)  to standard  Quit For Life tobacco cessation  service offerings.  We hypothesize  that the  CO 
monitoring  will increase tobacco cessation  and satisfaction  rates compared with treatment as usual (TAU) .  We 
will also examine cost effectiveness of the intervention as compared to TAU.   
2. BACKGROUND & SIGNIFICANCE  
Carbon Monoxide (CO) is an invisible, odorless, but toxic gas that is formed during tobacco smoking and can be 
measured in the exhaled air of smokers using CO monitors. CO levels, measured as par ticles per million (ppm), 
can help distinguish between different levels of smoking, with levels below 10 ppm commonly used as indicators 
of abstinence. CO testing  acts as a n objective  non-invasive measure of harm from exposure to smoking  and 
conveys more information than that provided by [CONTACT_304803] (e.g., CO levels can be 
affected by [CONTACT_304804]). Exposure to CO  via smoking is associated with 
incidents of stroke and other cardiovascular diseases. CO levels are not affected by [CONTACT_304805] -
containing products such as e -cigarettes or nicotine replacement  which increases its value as a testing tool for 
smoking cess ation studies  and, thus, CO testing is widely used in research  as an outcome measurement .  
  
 
 
4 
PROTOCOL  
Proprietary and confidential property of UnitedHealth Group. Do not distribute.  OHRA TEMPLATE V.04/[ADDRESS_373071] made CO monitoring feasible for home use . The iCOTM Smokerlyzer® 
manufactured by [CONTACT_304806]® Scientific Ltd. (Harrietsham, [LOCATION_006]) is currently the o nly such device available for 
purchase. It connects to smartphones  via bluetooth  and requires a dedicated app to compute and display CO 
levels . This provide s momentary feedback on behavioral outcomes, which are important self -regulatory and 
behavior change  techniques in smoking cessation . Preliminary research suggests that personal use of CO 
monitors is acceptable, valued and potentially highly motivating for smokers.  No large scale studies of CO 
monitoring as a component of a comprehensive tobacco cessatio n program have been published.  
Vincere Health  (VH; www.vincere.health ) is a small business who joined  United Healthcar e’s (UHC) 
Accel erator program in 2020. VH has developed a proprietary smartphone app that transforms data from the 
Bedfont CO monitor (cited above)  into user -friendly pi[INVESTIGATOR_304787]. Th e app also  connects to 
coaches, offers notifications /reminders for CO monitoring and can deliver monetary incentives (see below for 
screenshots).  The UHC Accelerator program connected the VH business leads to the Quit For Life  (QFL)  
smoking cessation program operated by [CONTACT_8419]. Optum’s QFL business has noted competitors who use CO 
monitoring as a cessation tool ( e.g., Carrot , Inc.) and clients have asked why  QFL does not offer CO monitoring 
as part of its program.  
While there is preliminary research showing  that smartphone -based CO monitoring is feasible , there is limited 
evidence that adding CO monitoring to a comprehensive cessation program increases cessa tion rates, 
engagement or satisfaction. The purpose of the present study  is to conduct a pi[INVESTIGATOR_304788] (“breath pen”) and app as a n adjunct to the evidence -based QFL program. Results from the 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_304789] a grant 
application to conduct a larger RCT .  
The state of Marylan d’s tobacco cessation quitli ne is operated by [CONTACT_304807]’s participants. They have signed an agreement to 
that effect . The participant pool for this pi[INVESTIGATOR_304790] a quit smoking program.  
This study is funded by [CONTACT_8419]’s QFL p rogram and participating states (currently Maryland) . Scientific oversight is 
provided by [INVESTIGATOR_304784], PhD, Principal sc ientist at the Optum Center for Wellbeing Research .  
3. PRELIMINARY STUDIES  
1. Dallery J, Raiff BR, Grabinski MJ. Internet -based contingency management to promote smoking 
cessation: a randomized controlled study.  J Appl Behav Anal. 2013;46(4):750 -764. doi:10.100 2/jaba.89  
 Showed that home/internet -based CO monitoring decreased compliance barriers.  
2. Kendzor DE, Businelle MS, Waring JJC, et al. Automated Mobile Delivery of Financial Incentives for 
Smoking Cessation Among Socioeconomically Disadvantaged Adults: Feasibility Study.  JMIR Mhealth 
Uhealth. 2020;8(4):e15960. Published 2020 Apr 15. doi:10.2196/[ADDRESS_373072] R. Smokers' Views on Personal Carbon Monoxide Monitors, 
Associated Apps, and Their Use: An Interview and Think -Aloud Study.  Int J Environ Res Public Health. 
2018;15(2):288. Published 2018 Feb 7. doi:10.3390/ijerph15020288  
 Qualitative study of smartphone -based CO monitor use found wide variation among smokers ’ motivations  
  and preferences.   
 
  
 
 
5 
PROTOCOL  
Proprietary and confidential property of UnitedHealth Group. Do not distribute.  OHRA TEMPLATE V.04/[ADDRESS_373073] R, McNeill A. A randomized, controlled trial of adding expi[INVESTIGATOR_304791]: evaluation of cogniti ve and behavioral effects. Health Psychol. 
2011 Jan;30(1):49 -57. doi: 10.1037/a0021821. PMID: 21299294.  
 CO monitoring increased salience  to health impacts of smoking  but did not impact cessation rates . Those  
  with high self -efficacy did have improved cessation rates with the CO monitoring intervention.   
5. Seijo -Bestilleiro R, Seoane -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_231143] T, Pertega -Diaz S, et al. Randomized clinical trial to determine the 
effectiveness of CO -oximetry and anti -smoking brief ad vice in a cohort of kidney transplant patients who 
smoke.  Int J Med Sci. 2020;17(17):2673 -2684. Published 2020 Sep 23. doi:10.7150/ijms.[ZIP_CODE] CO 
monitoring did not increase cessation rates in kidney transplant patients.  
4. RESEARCH DESIGN & METHODS  
4.1. General Design  
Quitline  registration agents  will screen  callers for  study eligibility criteria  during the state  quitline  enrollment 
process. Interested and eligible participants will be transferred to  a research  trained  quitline  coach who will 
conduct the informed consent discussion.  After  giving verbal consent, participants  will complete the baseline 
assessment and be randomized  to one of 3 arms:  quitline  treatment as usual,  quitline  plus CO monitoring 
or quitline  plus CO monitoring and financial incentive s. Participants will complete coaching calls. 
Approximately  [ADDRESS_373074] to determine smoking status.  
Interventions -There will be  three  treatme nt arms  in this trial : 
 
Arm 1 :  Standard  quitline  (treatment as usual: TAU). This arm consists of  the state  quitline  services as offered by 
[CONTACT_304808]  (currently MD) .  These state  quitlines  offer five proactive coaching calls, mailed support 
mate rials, access to text messaging and web -based supplemental programs, plus at least two weeks of free 
nicotine replacement (NRT).   This arm will  be mailed a  personal  CO monitor  device  and be instructed to 
download the  Vincere  Health smartphone app  60 days a fter randomization  in order to complete the  final 
outcome  assessment.   
  
Arm 2:  TAU plus CO monitoring. Participants in this arm will receive  all treatment component of TAU. They will 
also receive a personal CO monitor by [CONTACT_304809]. The app will  lead participants through a 2x/day CO 
monitoring  program  via the  Vincere  Health Breath Monitor - CO Monitoring device  used in conjunction with the 
smartphone a pp. The app includes providing CO monitoring results and visualizations of CO results over time as 
well as  reminders and reinforcement for compliance with the CO monitoring program.    
 
Arm 3 : TAU plus CO monitoring plus financial incentives.  Participants in this arm will received all intervention 
components described above for Arms 1 & 2. In  addition , they will receive financial incentives for engagement 
with the CO monitoring program. They will receive  up to $1.50 for each use of the CO monitor (up to 2x per day 
for up to 60 days). Incentives will accrue and be visible on the app. Incentives will be delivered by [CONTACT_304810]’s choice.  
  
4.2. Study Measures  & Methods  
SCREENING - Participant s will answer questions if interested in study participation.  If eligible , participant s will be 
transferred to a research trained coach.   
INFORMED CONSENT  – If interested and eligible, participant will hear the consent form read to them by 
[CONTACT_304811]. The participant may ask questions before giving their consent. The  coach will 
note the participant has provided their verbal informed consent.    
BASELINE SURVEY  – Participant will spend approximately  [ADDRESS_373075] of their choice  for $15 after completing the baseline survey.  
 
  
 
 
6 
PROTOCOL  
Proprietary and confidential property of UnitedHealth Group. Do not distribute.  OHRA TEMPLATE V.04/2021   
Table 2. Measures    Screen   Baseline   Program 
utilization  2-month follow -
up  
Demographics (gender, age, race/ethnicity, 
pregnancy/breastfeeding status)   x       
Tobacco/E -Cigarette/Cannabis  use    x   x  
Self-efficacy & motivation for quitting tobacco     x   x  
Cessation medication use        x  
Nicotine dependence (cigarettes per day, time to 
first cigarette)   x     x  
Outcomes          
Program satisfaction and acceptability 
(usefulness, would recommend the program to 
others)        
x  
7- and 30 -day point prevalence tobacco 
abstinence. CO -verified tobacco abstinence        x  
Treatment Engagement    x  
 
 
Study inclusion/exclusion criteria  
 Callers to the MD state quitline 18+, daily smokers, not pregnant/post -partum, enrolling into an English 
quitline program, are not offered or in another study managed by [CONTACT_304812], and have not been 
previously offered this study  will be offered study screening.  
 If callers agree to be screened for the study: inclusion criteria include possession of a smartphone with a 
data plan (needed for use of the Vincere app), agreement to download the app onto their phone, agreement to 
use a personal CO monitoring device.   
 
Days 1 -55  
 
Tobacco Cessation Coaching  Calls 1-5 – Participant s will engage in coaching calls  about quitting 
smoking.  There will be brief discussion of the CO monitoring program and smartphone app for Arms [ADDRESS_373076] quitline 
procedures.  Participants will be referred to Vincere’s technology helpline for questions ab out the app and CO 
device.  
 
CO monitoring program (Arms 2 and 3) . Participants will be  sent a Vincere “breath pen” CO monitoring 
device and  given instructions to download the Vincere Health smartphone app. The app also has an 
incentive/gift card feature where money earned is tallied and participants will receive a gift  card through text 
message . This is how  incentives will be delivered.  Arm 2 and 3 participants will be asked to take 2 CO tests 
per day;  only Arm [ADDRESS_373077] as Arms 2 and 3.  
 
Day 60   
Follow -up Survey : Participants will be sent  information for completing the follow up survey via the Vincere 
app. $[ADDRESS_373078] total on the app after survey is completed.    
Biochemical  Verification : If participant  self-reports being quit from tobacco at follow up,  they will be asked 
to complete a final CO monitoring test (or tests) to verify  quit status. Those who complete this final test will be 
given an additional $20  via the app.   
  
  
 
 
7 
PROTOCOL  
Proprietary and confidential property of UnitedHealth Group. Do not distribute.  OHRA TEMPLATE V.04/2021   
4.3. Drugs & Devices Being  Studied  
Participants will be provided access to the Vincere Health smartphone app available for Apple or Android 
devices. The app will b e used for CO monitoring and compliance reminders and delivering survey  questions (at 
end of study) . Additionally, participants are sent in the mail an iCOquit “Breath Pen” personal Bluetooth CO 
monitor with a user guide . The device is classified as a low risk 'general wellness device'. As such, we make no 
claims that the device will help participants quit; it's only used as a (helpful) tool to monitor p rogress. There are no 
restrictions on use. 
Nicotine replacement (NRT) is provided by [CONTACT_304813]. NRT is not 
under investigation in this study.  
 
4.4. Intervention or Observation Procedures  
All participants will receive the standard quitline coaching intervention. Coaches will review and discuss CO 
monitoring compliance and readings with participant  in Arms 2 and 3.  Arm 2 and 3 participants will be asked to 
take 2 CO tests per day; only Arm [ADDRESS_373079] procedure for all 
quitline calls. Calls are reviewed to ensure coaches are following study protocols.  
4.5. Data Sources and Variables  
Research Question/Aim/Objective:  Data Variables:  Data Source  
• To determine eligibility  • Enrollment 
screening  • Service utilization 
(Apollo  – Clinical 
Management 
System ) 
 
• To determine tobacco quit outcomes  • Baseline and 
follow -up survey  
• CO readings   • Datstat  (Survey 
software)  
• VH app & CO 
monitor   
• To determine satisfaction with  the program  
 • Follow up 
survey  
• Data from VH 
App • Service utilization 
(Apollo  – Clinical 
Management 
System ) 
• VH app  & CO 
monitor  
 
• Treatment Engagement  • Call completion  • Service utilization 
(Apollo – Clinical 
Management 
System)  
  
See screening and s urvey documents for full outline of data variables.  
4.6. Justification of Sample Size & Power  
For the study there will be 300 up to 350 individuals  per participating Optum state quit line  (currently only 
Maryland is participating) . The target recruitment was selected based on estimates regarding how many 
  
 
 
8 
PROTOCOL  
Proprietary and confidential property of UnitedHealth Group. Do not distribute.  OHRA TEMPLATE V.04/[ADDRESS_373080] a significant 
difference , but outcomes will be used to determine the need for continued study . 
4.7. Statistical Methods  
For the proposed pi[INVESTIGATOR_304792] w ith confidence intervals (CIs), means with 
standard errors (SE) and graphical displays (histograms, pie charts, Box plots, etc.) as appropriate to describe 
participant self -reported demographic characteristics, use of tobacco and other variables measured a t baseline 
and at  2 months. We will use logistic or linear regression analyses to compare intervention and control groups on: 
mean number of calls completed; proportion completing at least two calls and, at  2 months, mean satisfaction 
ratings, mean change in cigarettes per day (cpd)  and smoking cessation rates. We will conduct sensitivity 
analyses to determine the potential range of treatment effects on abstinence taking into account 1) different 
assumptions concerning the probability of relapse among surve y non -responders, 2) substitution of biochemical 
results for those who claimed abstinence in the absence of agreement, and 3) the application of biochemical 
validation confirmation rate of  abstinence to individuals who claimed abstinence but did not return  their 
biochemical test results. Our analyses will include independent variables for state and gender to increase 
precision. We stratified randomization by [CONTACT_304814]. We will address missing values in three ways; 
1) we will analyze responders only, 2) we will impute missing tobacco use as ‘smoking’ and 3) we will conduct 
sensitivity analyses (as discussed above) by [CONTACT_304815] -respondents, and 
the applying of biochemical validation results to individuals who stated that they were abstinent.   
 
4.8. Control of Bias & Confounding  
State quitlines may differ in the services that are provided (e.g. amount of NRT and coaching calls) that are 
provided. There might also be variability that gender has on treatment engagement and tobacco cessation.  
Randomization will be stratified by [CONTACT_304816].   
Follow up survey is collected via the app, so there is no bias in follow up data collection.  
4.9. Primary & Secondary Endpoints  
Approximately  [ADDRESS_373081] (or tests) to verify quit 
status.   
4.10.  Interim Analysis and Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_1869]  
N/A this is a minimal risk study.  
4.11.  Case Ascertainment for Synthetic Controls  
N/A 
4.12.  Duration  
Projected Start of Recruitment Date (month/yea r) : October 2021  
Projected Enrollment Period (days, weeks, months, accrual driven)  : Accrual driven  
Active Participation time (time for 1 participant to complete activity)  : Participation will last about 3 months.  
Projected Data Collection Cut off (month/year)  :  est. Sept 2022 ( based on recruitment ending in June  2022)  
4.13.  Intended Use of Learnings  
4.13.1 Internal use of findings plan and relevant enterprise segments:  Research findings will be used to 
inform product development if found compliance and satisfaction rates are high and results indicate a 
potential for improved tobacco quit rates, treatment engagement , and/ or program satisfaction.  
 
  
 
 
9 
PROTOCOL  
Proprietary and confidential property of UnitedHealth Group. Do not distribute.  OHRA TEMPLATE V.04/2021  4.13.2 External presentat ion or publication plan:  Research findings will be disseminated as peer -reviewed 
publications and conference presentations. If applicable, findings may be used to secure funding for 
additional research.  
 
4.[ADDRESS_373082]  resulting from this research . 
5. HUMAN SUBJECTS  
5.1. Participant Safety, Risks and Risk Mitigation  
The primary risk of participating in this study is the risk of breach of confidentiality. A breach could potentially 
occur, for example, if an unauthorized individual accesses the study’s database records.    Quitline calls are 
recorded as standard procedure. Voice recording s are considered identifiable. Additionally, some participants 
may experience emotional discomfort that might occur during di scussion of smoking  and impacts on their own 
health. Persons who quit smoking may experience temporary discomfort associated with nicotine withdrawal 
symptoms such as irritability, mood changes, headaches, trouble sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007], and cravings to smoke.     
 
Risks  of NRT .  NRT is provided as part of standard  QUITLINE  protocol and not specific to the study. These 
are detailed by [CONTACT_304817], and so are not listed in the consent form.  As part of 
standard service offerings from their state or district quitline, nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) in the form of 
the nicotine patch, gum or lozenge will be offered to participants in this trial. The study will follow standard NRT 
protocols as provided through the quitlines. For each participant who opts to use NRT, Optum coaches will 
assess their medical safety to use NRT and then determine the appropriate dose according to clinical practice 
guidelines. Optum will then mail the NRT to the participant along with instructions on how to use the 
medicati ons. The NRT in this trial is being used for its FDA -approved purpose and will be offered to all 
participants, and therefore, the effect of NRT is not being evaluated as part of the trial, although use of NRT will 
be assessed at follow -up. As part of stand ard quitline services, coaches ask about possible side -effects of its use 
during telephone counseling sessions. According to the FDA -approved product insert, possible side effects 
associated with the patch include headache, dizziness, lightheadedness, drow siness, stomach upset, nausea, or 
flushing the first few days as a user adjusts to the medication. The area around the patch may become red, itchy 
or irritated. Rarely, users may experience breathing difficulties, chest pain, irregular heartbeat, nervousne ss, 
anxiety, or tremors. Very rarely, a user of the patch may experience an allergic reaction such as a rash, itching, 
swelling, dizziness, or trouble breathing. Side effects will be disclosed in the study consent form. Optum 
distributes NRT to 65,000 of i ts 250,000 callers per year and has established protocols for addressing side effects 
with callers.   
 
Risk of using the Breath Montior  (personal CO monitoring device .  The device used in this study is the 
Beford  iCOquit® Smokerlyzer® , a personal Bluetooth carbon monoxide  monitor  that has been in use since 
2015  and is a low risk device.   Intended Use : The iCOquit® Smokerlyzer® breath carbon monoxide (CO) monitor 
is intended for single patient use by [CONTACT_304818], notifying the indi vidual user of the amount of 
CO on their breath produced as a consequence of smoking activity.  Safety Information:  Participant will receive a 
user manual with their device. The user manual includes  the following: “Please do  not attempt to modify the 
equipm ent in any way or use accessories not specified by [CONTACT_3455]. Any attempt to do so will invalidate 
the warranty and may compromise the safety of the device”. For additional safety information and GMP 
information,  participants are referred to  the "Sa fety Information" section located on page 27 of the iCOquit User 
Manual.  https://www.icoquit.com/wp -content/uploads/2021/01/LAB806 -iCOquit -manual -issue -2.pdf  
  
Alternatives to these risks include not participating in the study.   
  
Protections against Risk   
Protection against breach of confidentiality:    
  
 
 
10 
PROTOCOL  
Proprietary and confidential property of UnitedHealth Group. Do not distribute.  OHRA TEMPLATE V.04/2021  o Security at Optum.  Optum’s quitline business is a HIPAA -covered entity and complies with all HIPAA 
regulations regarding data security. The Optum offices provide physical and electronic access security, 
automated backup power for the servers, isolated environmental controls, and fault -warning systems to 
maintain a stable production environment for their quitline services. Servers, storage appliances and 
network components are housed in a dedicated server room at the corporate headquarters. All electronic 
and paper records , including voice recordings , that contain identifiable health information are secured 
and their use is limited to persons with a direct business -related need for access to this information. All 
hardware is handled as if it contains protected health information (PHI). Hardware that is no lo nger used 
is electronically and physically destroyed. The same security standards that apply to Optum normal 
business practices will be used to secure data collected for this study. Paper measures will be stored in 
locked file cabinets.   All Service Delive ry and Research Staff Members receive biannual Human Subjects 
training, yearly HIPAA training, sign a confidentiality statement, and are required to adhere to 
confidentiality and security policies and procedures.   
o Security at Vincere Health.  Vincere Health , Inc. is a HIPAA -covered entity and complies with all HIPAA 
regulations regarding data security. Of note, Vincere does not physically house any systems used by [CONTACT_304819] – all Vincere systems and servers are deployed on secure AWS  and Azure 
Cloud services hosted in AWS / Azure -controlled facilities. Vincere does not store or host PHI on any 
workstations or mobile devices – all Vincere -maintained PHI is hosted and stored within our private and 
secure AWS cloud infrastructure as requ ired by [CONTACT_304820]'s System Access Policy. All Vincere offices 
provide physical access security in accordance with Vincere's Facility Access Policy.  All electronic 
records and paper records that contain identifiable health information are secured or stored in  locked file 
cabinets, and their use is limited to persons with a direct business -related need for access to this 
information according to Vincere's Restricted Internal Access to Protected Health Information (PHI) 
Policy. All hardware is handled as if it c ontains protected health information (PHI) – Hardware that is no 
longer used is electronically and physically destroyed according to Vincere's Disposable Media 
Policy.  The same security standards that apply to Vincere's normal business practices will be us ed to 
secure data collected for this study.  All Vincere  employees receive yearly HIPAA training, sign a 
confidentiality statement, and are required to adhere to confidentiality and security policies and 
procedures according to Vincere's  Employees Policy.  For the purposes of this study,  all Vincere Health 
employees who  may see study participant data   and any coaches  who may talk to a participant have 
taken Human Subjects training from CITI  (certificates available upon request).    
  
Distress due to participation in the study intervention or assessment.  It is possible that some 
participants may be upset or embarrassed by [CONTACT_304821]. Consent scripts will 
advise potential participants about the study intervention and their r ight to terminate participation at any time 
without risk or penalty. Participants are free to refuse to participate in any element of the study or treatment 
and to refuse to answer any question during the assessments. Expert clinicians are available to cou nsel any 
participant who becomes distressed, including [CONTACT_212893]  a licensed clinical psychologist, and the clinical 
supervisory team s at Optum  and Vincere Health.   
 
Nicotine withdrawal . Nicotine withdrawal symptoms are temporary and balanced by [CONTACT_304822]. NRT can help mitigate nicotine withdrawal. Coaches are trained to help participants 
cope with short -term effects of quitting/reducing tobacco and/or adjust their dose of NRT.    
 
NRT side effects  (Standard service -Not part of study intervention) . Participants enrolled in state quitlines 
have access to nicotine replacement therapy (NRT). Before recommending any medication or dosage, a 
participant’s health condition is assessed with a series of screening questions. Coaches ass ess medical 
safety for NRT use by [CONTACT_304823] (UE) factors. Use Exclusions include: diagnoses of heart 
attack, stroke, or TIA within the past two weeks; being told by a health care provider within the past 6 months 
of a rapid or irregular h eartbeat that required a change in activities or medication; being told by a health care 
provider in the past [ADDRESS_373083] serious or worsening angina; or a previous reaction to patch 
medication or adhesive tape that caused a rash or hives over the body, swelling of face or throat, wheezing 
or shortness of breath, or high fever, or that required the participant to discontinue use, or caused irritation 
that continued after rotating the patch and/or using hydrocortisone cream. If a participant is n ot eligible for 
NRT due to a UE, then a Medical Doctor (MD) Override Letter is sent to the participant. Once Optum receives 
the completed MD Override form from the participants MD and confirms NRT dosing with the participant, 
Optum sends the participant’s NRT shipment.   The screening questions were designed by [CONTACT_8419]’s medical 
  
 
 
11 
PROTOCOL  
Proprietary and confidential property of UnitedHealth Group. Do not distribute.  OHRA TEMPLATE V.04/2021  team and they are intended for use by [CONTACT_105] -clinical staff to exclude any individuals with specific conditions. 
Quit Coaches will also educate participants on the utilization of the prod ucts and related side effects. 
Manufacturers’ information about side effects is given to participant in written form and via a 1 -800 number 
that has recorded information.   Quit coaches help participants problem solve around minor side effects (such 
as mino r rash at site of the patch) and recommend that participants seek medical help for more serious side 
effects.   
 
Study Benefits.  Study participants may be offered intervention components that are hypothesized to 
increase success in quitting smoking. Interactions with coaches may facilitate the development of new skills 
and habits leading to a healthier lifestyle. Participants may also benefit from knowing that they are 
contributing to the advance of knowledge leading to better understanding of how smo kers respond to 
smoking cessation treatment and may lead to improvement in future cessation programs.  
5.2. Recruitment Plan  
Optum’s participant record/ treatment management  system will use answers to standard enrollment questions to 
determine who should receive the study invitations/screening offer. O nly daily cigarette smokers  from 
participating quitlines who are  18+ years old , speak English,  and are not pregnant/post -partum will be  screened 
for the study. Registration agents will ask three additional screening questions . These questions include: 
possession of a smartphone with a data plan, willingness to download an app onto their phone , and willingness to 
use a CO monitor . Eligible participant s who  have an interest in study participation  will be called by a  research -
trained quitline coach  who will describe the study in more detail, obtain informed consent and deliver the baseline 
assessment and the post -randomization script.   
5.3. Enrollment Plan, Consent & HIPAA Authorization  
Research -trained coaches will describe the study, read  aloud  the information/consent document verbatim, 
answer questions,  and obtain verbal informed consent.   A copy of the consent form will be sent to participants.  
 
The informed consent will include authorization for use and disclosure of HIPAA protected health information. As 
all study activities will be conducted remotely, obtaining a signed consent form will not be possible . A partial 
waiver of HIPAA authorization is requested for this study.  
5.4. Eligibility Screening & Medical Clearance  
Study participants will be daily tobacco smokers aged  [ADDRESS_373084] call 
program.  Participants are only eligible to be screened for  the study once.  
5.5. Participant Engagement, Results, & Withdrawal  
All counseling calls will be attempted at least five times over differen t days. We will increase retention at 
the 2 month follow up survey by [CONTACT_304824] (on the app)  that their survey is due.  For 
those who do not complete the survey  via the app, we will mail participants a print version of the surv ey along 
with a stamped return envelope . Print surveys will be mailed by [CONTACT_304825]. Incentives will be given for survey completion.  Strategies such as these have 
proven to be effective in our  quitline research studies resulting in higher recruitment and retention rates.   
 
Noted previously,  participants are free to refuse to participate in any element of the study or treatment and to 
refuse to answer any question during the assessments  with no repercussions. Study participants must request in 
writing to be withdrawn from the study  and/or revoke their authorization to use their data. This information is 
outlined in the informed consent.  
 
Participants will be restricted from re -enrolling i nto standard state quitline programs until their study activity is 
completed ( whichever comes first of completion of final assessment and breath test , 90 days, or withdrawal from 
the study ). 
  
 
 
12 
PROTOCOL  
Proprietary and confidential property of UnitedHealth Group. Do not distribute.  OHRA TEMPLATE V.04/2021  5.6. Compensation / Remuneration / Reimbursement  
Research  Incentives : Participants will receive $ 15 for completing the baseline survey, $20 for completing  the 
outcome survey and  $[ADDRESS_373085] (biochemical verification of  smoking status ). These 
incentives will be provided to all par ticipants.   
Intervention incentives : Participants in Arm 3 will also  be able  to earn incentives for CO monitoring 
compliance.  They will earn $1.[ADDRESS_373086] s per day ($3 per day). During the [ADDRESS_373087] about 55 days of CO monitoring in which to earn incentives (we anticipate 
approximately  5 days for mailing the device). 55 days  with $3 per day  incentives means Arm 3 participants could 
earn up to  $165  for CO monitoring compliance. This amount is in line with previous financial incentive for tobacco 
cessation research.    
 
5.7. Diversity Considerations:  
TARGETED/PLANNED ENROLLMENT: Number of Subjects  
Ethnic Category  Females  Males  Total  
Hispanic or Latino  67 45 1012 
Not Hispanic or Latino  178207 112131 290338 
Ethnic Category: Total of All Subjects *  184214 116136 300350 
Racial Categories   
American Indian/Alaska Native  2 1 3 
Asian  1214 89 2023 
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander  1 1 2 
Arab or Arab American  1 12 23 
Black or African American  8599 5262 137159 
White  8498 5260 136158 
Racial Categories: Total of All Subjects *  185215 115135 300350 
 
These estimates are representative of the target population : existing callers into a single state quitline  (Maryland) .  
5.8. Protected Populations:  
The following populations are being targeted for participation and are necessary for this project (Check all that 
apply):  
☐ UnitedHealth Group Employees -- (Requires Human Capi[INVESTIGATOR_304793])  
☐ United Healthcare Members -- (Requires UHC support. Please specify targeted plan types below. Protocol 
requires UHC specific intake form ) 
 ☐ Medicare & Retirement Plan Members (M&R)  
 ☐ Employer & Individual Plan Members (E&I)  
  
 
 
13 
PROTOCOL  
Proprietary and confidential property of UnitedHealth Group. Do not distribute.  OHRA TEMPLATE V.04/2021   ☐ Community & State Plan Members (C&S)  
 ☐ Global Markets  
 
☐ Children – (Requires age range justification, assent & parental permission process / materials. OHRA must 
apply additional regulations)  
☐ Pregnant Women - project is specific to pregnancy or in cludes intervention that may affect the fetus (OHRA 
must apply additional regulations)  
☐ Intellectually / Cognitively / Developmentally Disabled Persons (requires LAR considerations for recruitment, 
enrollment & all procedures)  
☐ Economically Disadvant aged Persons (requires careful consideration of compensation amounts)  
☐ Prisoners (Requires convened review & must include qualified prisoner representative. OHRA must apply 
additional regulations.)  
Protected Populations Justifications : For each populati on please provide justification for why their involvement 
is necessary and explain how the project is designed to appropriately accommodate and protect them from undue 
influence and risk of harm.  
6. ADMINISTRATION , QUALITY CONTROL , MONITORING & REPORTING  
6.1. Materials for Internal Development & Procurement  
The system used to manage and deliver services to quitline  participants will be modified to selectively offer the 
study to those who answer enrollment questions  indicating eligibly and deliver s tudy procedures and coaching 
calls.  
6.2. Research Site Management Plan , Delegation  & Training  
Service Delivery registration staff,  Quit Coaches and all study staff are required to complete the appropriate 
version of the CITI Human Subjects Research Training. Select  coaches will be utilized for  research procedures 
for this project. Breath Monitor  coaches will receive additional training in research methods .  Study coaches are 
trained Tobacco Specialists.   
 
Quality assurance protocols.  Under the guidance of the principal investigator, OCWR grant managers and 
research assistants perform regular checks to ensure that all processes are working as intended. This includes 
reviewing reports to ensure the correct people are being offered screen ing, reviewing screening calls to ensure 
enrollment agents are asking questions appropriately and choosing the current answer choice in the participant 
record system, reviewing consent/baseline/randomization calls to ensure all procedures are being followe d 
correctly, reviewing randomization as it occurs to ensure the system is utilizing randomization tables correctly, 
and reviewing treatment calls to ensure coaches are following study protocols . Feedback  on performance  is sent 
to supervisors of enrollment agents and coaches  as needed .  
 
6.3. Deviations & Adverse Events Recording and Reporting  
Our research team follows G ood Clinical Practice  guidelines for documenting research procedures, including the 
development of a Standa rd Operating Procedures (SOP) manual to document standard practices and daily 
processes conducted to assure execution of research tasks in accordance with institutional, state and federal 
guidelines. During a study, all changes in procedures and deviations  are documented in the SOP. Human 
Subjects training from CITI  are also completed (certificates available upon request).    
Any participant adverse or health events reported during coaching calls are recorded in the clinical management 
system as part of the standard or care. Any reported health events that are outside of expected side effects 
  
 
 
14 
PROTOCOL  
Proprietary and confidential property of UnitedHealth Group. Do not distribute.  OHRA TEMPLATE V.04/2021  related to NRT use will be escalated and reviewed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_874] 2 business days. Any deemed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_304794].  
6.4. Data Handling : Security, Protection, Storage and Transfer Plan  
  
Any personal information will be stored as electronic data in password -protected secure computer files, secured 
from unauthorized access. Data will be kept for at least 6 years after the stud y ends and related reports are 
published. Data will be completely destroyed once it is no longer needed.    
Any published results will take the form of summary results; they will not report anything that would identify a 
specific person.   The research team at Optum will have access to the study data Only the minimal data required 
to complete the research will be accessed and analyzed.   
 
Some study data may be shared with research partners and regulatory bodies.   This includes:    
o Study team at Optum  
o Partners  at Vincere Health   
o Office of Human Research Affairs (OHRA) at United Health Group, who oversees our research, 
and; the parties named above may need to look at study records for this research study and related 
quality assurance, survey completion, or data analysis.    
6.5. Financial Conflicts of Interest Reporting  
Optum employees conducting this research may  participate in the Employee Stock Purchase Program. 
Otherwise, there are no Financial Conflicts of Interest to declare.  
7.  LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  
Application  (App)   
Carbon monoxide (CO)  
Carbon monoxide monitoring (COM)  
Cigarettes per day (CPD)  
Confidence intervals (CIs)  
Medical Doctor (MD)  
Nicotine Replacement Therapy (NRT)  
Office of Human Research Affairs (OHRA)  
Principal Investigator (PI)  
Quit For Life (Q4L)  
Research  Implementation  Unit (RIU)  
Standard Operating Procedures (SOP)  
Standard Errors (SE)  
Treatment as usual (TAU)  
 
7. REFERENCES  
Goldstein A.O., Gans S.P., Ripley -Moffitt C., Kotsen C., Bars M. Use of Expi[INVESTIGATOR_304795]. Chest. 2017 doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2017.11.[ADDRESS_373088]. 2000;117:758 –
763. doi: 10.1378/chest.117.3.758.  
West R., Hajek P., Stead L., Sta pleton J. Outcome criteria in smoking cessation trials: Proposal for a common 
standard. Addiction. 2005;100:299 –303. doi: 10.1111/j.1360 -0443.2004.[ZIP_CODE].x.  
  
 
 
15 
PROTOCOL  
Proprietary and confidential property of UnitedHealth Group. Do not distribute.  OHRA TEMPLATE V.04/[ADDRESS_373089] of reducing the threshold for carbon monoxide validation of 
smoking abstinence —Evidence from the English Stop Smoking Services. Addict. Behav. 2013;38:2529 –2531. 
doi: 10.1016/j.addbeh.2013.04.006.  
Beard E., West R. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_304796]. J. Smok. Cessat. 2012;7:12 –17. doi: 10.1017/jsc.2012.1.  
Jarvis C.M., Russell M.A., Feyerabend C. Absorption of nicotine and carbon monoxide from passive smoking 
under natural conditions of exposure. Thorax. 1983;38:829 –833. doi: 10.1136/thx. 38.11.829.  
Shahab L., West R., McNeill A. A randomized, controlled trial of adding expi[INVESTIGATOR_304797]: Evaluation of cognitive and behavioral effects. Health Psychol. 2011;30:49 –57. doi: 
10.1037/a0021821.  
8. APPENDI CES 
N/A 
 