Official Title: Radiofrequency Hyperthermia Safety Study (RHySS)
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
IRB-Approved: 4/5/23
Version 2/5/2021 Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery  
Radiofrequency Hyperthermia Safety Study (RHySS)  
Principal Investigator :  [INVESTIGATOR_519783]-investigators: Lucian G. Vlad, MD  
Background, Rationale  and Context  
Th
ere is increasing evidence that mild hyperthermia (MH) may have  a posi tive effect on  wound 
healing.  Currently, MH  is clinically used to facilitate recovery from chronic pain and soft tissue maladies, 
including sports injuries. MH has been used for thousands of  years  to improve blood flow to tissues and aid 
lymphatic drainage. MH is commonly employed to augment the delivery of chemotherapeutic agents, for 
example, the HIPEC procedure. Localized hyperthermia may be classified as mild (T < 45°C) or ablative 
(T>45°C).  The time of application is also critical, with most MT being applied for between 30 and 120 
minutes.[1]  Although the complete mechanisms are not yet understood, there is substantial evidence that 
MH may be beneficial in many diseases, including cancer and wound healing.[1,2]    
In s
pi[INVESTIGATOR_519784], MH  has been slow to be established, approved and adopted as 
therapy, possibly due to wide variations in technica l specifications of the heating devices, including 
frequency and duration, recovery time between treatments and the total number of treatments delivered .  
One of the challenges of applying MH to tissue is that the penetration depth may not be suf ficient due to 
the modality of heating (for example, a heating pad from the drugstore is not efficient at elevating hyperthermia deep into tissue).  
A m
ajor bene fit of the vast literature on MH  is the conclusion that applicati on of MH  does not  
cause any harm. Radiofrequency heating is routinely used clinically, although most often for ablation.[3]  
Although RF can heat tissue precisely and deeply, its application in MH therapi[INVESTIGATOR_519785] . There is currently no standard 
of care for treating specific wound types with MH therapy due to the multiple variables that have been 
included in previous studies.   
One
 of the challeng es has been development of heating  devices that can control  temperature over 
time.  Within the past few  years, Thermofield has developed a novel radiofrequency heating  device with 
temperature control. They have established a set of clinical veterinary guidelines for applying MH for 
augmenting cancer treatments in animals and have demonstrated safety in these models. [4,5] These 
guidelines have been utilized by [CONTACT_519788] .  In addition to these  
benefits , some wounds appeared to have better  healing.  It is hypothesized that MH application should 
benefit wound healing.  The use of superficial hyperthermia for the adjuvant treatment of soft tissue tumors 
has been used in veterinary medicine. [6] These studies demonstrated improved  in outcomes, but 
hyperthermia devices have are still large and cumbersome to use with adequate precision of heating and 
temperature control at depth in tissue. Thermofield has collected safety and performance data following the 

Version 2/5/2021 treatment of >200 canines, 50 cats, and 20 horses with a novel superficial hyperthermia and demonstrated 
the optimized thermal dosimetry, ease of use, and safety of the system .   
The
rmofield has developed a  lightweight, portable radiofrequency heating  system  that can apply 
heat topi[INVESTIGATOR_223456] a controlled feedback loop to maintain a specific temperature.[7]   This development is 
critical to ensure that there is no burning of  the skin during the applied heating. Having a feedback loop 
such that the applied heating is con sistent over time is also vit al for the future development of standardized 
MH treatments, and such a feature has not been available until now. Applications of MH to the skin for heating of underlying tissues needs consistent, safe, temperature application in order to demonstrate the full 
spectrum of clinical utility.  Thermofield has developed an appropriate device that may be beneficial in 
aiding multiple disea se and the first step is to demonstrate that it may be applied safely in healthy individuals 
with intact skin. This device has not yet been approved by [CONTACT_519789], 
although similar heating devices have been approved for elevat ing tissue temperature and  providing 
temporarily relief of pain and stiffness associated with arthritis. In this clinical trial we propose to  
demonstrate the safety and good tolerability of the Thermofield device.  This information will be used for 
a future clinical trial for application of FDA approval.  
To validate the thermal field generated by [CONTACT_519790], we used both non-invasive and intratumoral thermocouples in 
spontaneous canine tumors. The non- invasive 
surface thermocouple incorporated into the 
multilayer antenna construct allows for thermal 
measurements in the central/surface portion of 
the electric field. Feedback from the surface 
thermocouple was used to control power 
output, automatically achieving and 
maintaining programme d target temperatures. 
Intratumoral thermocouples were placed 
parallel to the surface at a depth of 
approximately 4cm through the central portion 
of the electric field. Digital readouts were 
continuously monitored during therapy and 
used for thermal dose c alculations.  
A tim
e-temperature profile from a single 60 -
minute treatment is shown above. Thermal doses were expressed in the equivalent number 
of minutes. Exposure to 43°C intratumoral 
temperature is achieved as previously described [34]. Actual temperature measurements are shown on the left axis, while cumulative equivalent minutes at 43°C (CEM43°C) are shown on the right axis. A thermal 
gradient of 3 –4°C is seen between non -invasive and invasive temperature measurements resulting in a 
significant diffe rence between CEM43°C as determined from non- invasive and invasive measurements. 
Times to reach effective surface treatment temperatures of ≥39°C ranged from 6 to 15 minutes 
Intratumoral temperatures averaged 3 -5 °C higher than surface temperatures, documenting a relative skin -
sparing effect. These data show that this method of thermometry considerably reduces the risk of thermal burns. There was no observed skin toxicity for surface treatment temperatures of ≤41°C (intratumoral temperatures ≤45 °C).  

Version 2/5/2021 Objectives  
Pri
mary: To demonstrate that application of the Thermofield temperature controlled radiofrequency device 
is safe for dermal application for generating elevated temperatures.  
Se
condary: To ensure that participants will adhere to a weekly MH prog ram. 
Methods and Measures  
Desig
n 
This s tudy will include [ADDRESS_674232] skin on their lower legs  that meet inclusion criteria 
below. Participants will serve as their own control, by [CONTACT_519791].  The radiofrequency 
device consists of a 4 by 6 inch heating pad connected to a temperature controller.  The pad will be applied 
to the back of the leg (calf) .  The other leg will receive a pad , but radiofrequency will not be applied (no 
heating).   
At th
e first visit, subjects will be asked to fill out a healthcare questionnaire. If patients meet the inclusion 
criteria t hey will also be asked to provide their date of birth for access to their  medical records, if associated 
with Atrium Health Wake Forest, can be reviewed to ensure that the participant does not have under lying 
health concerns that could lead to vascular or skin compromise. With each weekly treatment, subjects will 
be evaluated to  assess how their legs feel on a scale of 1 -10, with 1 being no discomfort and 10 being intense 
pain.  Their legs  will be photographed before and after radiofrequency MH to examine any visible changes 
to the tissue. Study team will then use a PeriScan PIM 3 System Laser Doppler scanning for blood perfusion 
before the Thermofield treatment.  The radiofrequency will be set to achieve 4 0°C/10 4°F) and maintain this 
temperature consistently during the application time.  This temperature is mild and may feel like a drugstore 
heating pad.  The device will be turned on on one leg and will remain off on the other.  The time for the 
heating will be 40 minutes, during which participants will remain in a reclined position, with their legs 
elevated.  The device takes approximately 7 minutes to achieve a tissue temperature of 40.0°C, with a 
goal temp erature  of 40°C, or an average between 39.7 and 40°C .  The treatment time with consistent 
temperature application will be [ADDRESS_674233] a pain level of 5 (on a scale of [ADDRESS_674234]) the device settings will be 
modified as follows.  Normally, the device operates in a continuous wave mode with no time for thermal relaxation of the tis sue.  However, the applied energy can be modulated using a pulsatile mode, to provide 
RF energy at  2 pulses per second, which reduces the energy input; however, the set temperature can still be 
achieved, although it may take [ADDRESS_674235] concluded.   Subjects  will be 
excluded from the study if they develop any kind of intolerance to the MH treatment, like increased pain or  
Version 2/5/[ADDRESS_674236] University  Plastic Surgery clinic area  
Subjects selection criteria  
Inclusion Criteria  
•18 yo or older
•Healthy
•20<BMI<40
Exclusion Criteria  
•Pr
egnant, nursing or child bearing potential
•Active infections of the skin in the lower leg
•Ope
n or healing wounds on the lower leg
•Autoimmune disorder
•40<BMI <20
•History of blood clots
•History of lower limb edema
•Tattoos and metal h ardware in the leg
Sample Size  
Samples size is 20 su bjects  
Interventions and Interactions  
•Informed consent
•Medical history
•Health and healthcare questionnaires
•Height and weight
•Use of Laser D oppler scanning for blood perfusion
•Radiofreque ncy treatment
•Use of thermal imaging photographs
•Measuring the circumference of the calf
Outcome Measure(s)  
Pr
imary endpoints: 
-Safety
Secondary endpoint:
-Subject tolerability of the treatment time and weekly application
Version 2/5/[ADDRESS_674237] the ability to enroll in the study. 
The sponsor will receive no information about the subjects prior to their consenting for the study, so there 
is no concern of confidentiality/privacy protection before ascertaining desire to participate.  
Informed Consent  
Signed informed consent will be obtained from each subject. Informed consent will be obtained after the study has been fully explained to each subject and all questions and concerns have been properly addressed.  
The investigators or  a member of the study team will obtain informed consent. Informed consent will take 
place in a private examination area of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery clinical areas. 
After signing the ICF, the subject will be given a signed copy. 
Confidentiality  and Privacy 
Confidentiality will be protected by [CONTACT_117689], 
minimizing to the fullest extent possible the collection of any information that could directly identify 
subjects, and maintaining  all study information in a secure manner .  To help ensure subject privacy and 
confidentiality, only a unique study identifier will appear on the data collection form.  Any collected p atient 
identifying information corresponding to the unique study identifier will be maintained on a linkage file, store separately from the data .  The linkage file  will be kept secure, with access limited to designated study 
personnel.  Following data collection subject identifying information will be destroyed three years after 
closure of the study, and the data files will be deleted,  consistent with data validation and study design, 
producing an anonymous analytical data set.  Data access will be limited to study staff.  Data and records 
will be kept locked and secured, with any computer data password protected.  No reference to any individual 
participant will appear in reports, presentations, or publications that may arise from the study.  
Data and Safety  Monitoring  
The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_519786].  The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_128550].  
Reporting of Unanticipated Problems, Adve rse Events or Deviations  
Any unanticipated problems, serious and unexpected adverse events, deviations or protocol changes will 
be promptly reported by [CONTACT_458] [INVESTIGATOR_519787].  
Re
ferences  
[1] M.D. Hurwitz, Today’s thermal therapy: Not your father’s hyperthermia: Challenges and
opportunities in application of hyperthermia for the 21st century cancer patient, American Journal ofClinical Oncology. 33 (2010) 96–100.
[2] G. Hoffmann, Improvement of wound healing in chronic ulcers by [CONTACT_519792] A induced localized hyperther mia, in: Oxygen Transport to Tissue XV,
Springer, 1994: pp. 181–188.
Version 2/5/2021 
 [3] S.A. Curley, Radiofrequency ablation of malignant liver tumors, Annals of Surgical Oncology. 10 
(2003) 338–347. 
[4] R.J. MacKay, Treatment options for melanoma of gray Horses, Veterinary Clinics: Equine Practice. 
35 (2019) 311–325. 
[5] J.C. Phillips, L.M. Lembcke, Equine melanocytic tumors, Veterinary Clinics: Equine Practice. 29 (2013) 673–687. 
[6] S.M. Gillette, M. Dewhirst, E. Gillette, D. Thrall, R. Page, B. Powers, S. Withrow, G. Rosner, C. 
Wong, D. Sim, Response of canine soft tissue sarcomas to radiation or radiation plus hyperthermia: a randomized phase II study, International Journal of Hyperthermia. 8 (1992) 309–320. 
[7] G. Clark, T. Otten, Apparatus and method for hyperthermi c treatments, (2017).  
 
 
Appendix  
 
1. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_289179] 
2. Consent form   