Study  Protocol  and Statistical  Analysis  Plan 
 
Title:  The Influence of Topi[INVESTIGATOR_503395] o n Thermoregulatory and Perceptual Outcomes During Exercise 
Within the Heat   
NCT#: 05302804   
Unique Protocol ID 0111 -22-FB 
Date : [ADDRESS_648231] of applying  a 
commercially  available  menthol  gel (BioFreeze)  to the skin prior to moderate intensity walking 
under heated conditions. Eligible participants will be aged [ADDRESS_648232] no previously 
known adverse reactions to menthol (active ingredient in BioFreeze) based upon a self -report, 
no adverse reactions  to BioFreeze as  determined through gel application to a small forearm 
area, and cleared for physical activity via the 2022 Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire 
(PARQ). There will be a total of [ADDRESS_648233] for 
adverse BioFre eze reaction by [CONTACT_2931] a small amount of gel to the forearm (~2 x 2 in). 
Anthropometric and body composition data will also be collected at this time. Visits [ADDRESS_648234] of 30 min of treadmill walking at a moderate pace (3.5 mph, 5% grade) under  hot 
conditions (38°C, 60%RH). Visits 2 and 3 will be randomized  and counterbalanced for 
BioFreeze or a hypoallergenic gel (control) application. Gels will be applied to areas 
commonly exposed during outdoor activity in warm conditions (shoulder to wrist, mid-thigh to 
ankle). Accordingly, participants will wear shorts and a tank top shirt during exercise. Core 
temperature, skin temperature, galvanic skin response, laser doppler blood flow, and heart 
rate will be continuously recorded throughout the exercise  bout via an integrated analog to 
digital converter. Sweat will be collected during exercise using commercially available 
absorbent patches. Thermal sensation will be assessed throughout  exercise  via the ASHRAE  
thermal  sensation  likert  scale  (cold  to hot). Lastly, nude body weight will be recorded pre and 
post exercise for sweat rate determination. The BioFreeze and control trials will be separated 
by a [ADDRESS_648235] of applying a menthol -based gel to the skin 
on human thermoregulation and thermal percepti on during exercise in the heat.  
Transient receptor potential (TRP) channels are a family of membrane proteins evolved to 
interpret environmental stimuli through ion channels. One of these channels, the TRP 
melastatin 8 (TRPM8), is responsible for th e sensation of innocuous cool temperatures and it 
might be responsible for noxious cold temperatures [1,2]. When applied topi[INVESTIGATOR_897], menthol 
acts upon a cold transduction enzyme to decrease the thermal sensitivity of TRPM8. This 
decreased thermal sensitivit y allows activation of TRPM8 at warmer temperatures, mimicking 
a cool sensation in warm environments. This cool menthol feeling is used widely in everyday 
commercial products, but most popular when used as an analgesic in medicated pain -
relieving gels/crea ms. 
Current recommendations suggest menthol can be used as an ergogenic aid resulting in an 
improved performance within heated environments [1]. By [CONTACT_503396]8 receptors, menthol exerts a physiological response that is perceived  as external 
cooling. The most salient response is an increase in heat conservation, resulting in a reduced 
exercise capacity due to fatigue associated with a rise in core body temperature [3]. It seems 
the application and concentration strength of menthol  application to the skin may be the most 
obvious influential factors. As such, researchers have used proprietary menthol solutions with 
varying intensities (0.05 - 10%) [1], yet, to our knowledge, no one has investigated widely 
available, over -the- counter products. Indeed, the translation from proprietary formula to over -
the-counter application is unknown. Furthermore, it is unclear if currently available menthol 
products may also aid in performance. This incongruence requires further investigation into 
the effect of menthol on exercise performance.  
Participants  
12-15 subjects , age 19 to 45 years,  will be needed to complete the study.  Nineteen is the age 
of majority at the study site . The 2022 physical activity readiness questionnaire (PARQ) 
requires that adults aged >[ADDRESS_648236] of the 
physical activity readiness questionnaire (PARQ), adverse reaction to BioFreeze, and body 
composition (hydrostatic weigh, bioelectrical impedance). Visits 2 and 3 will be separated by 
7-14 days, randomiz ed, and counterbalanced for experimental (BioFreeze) and control 
(hypoallergenic cream) trials. Both the experimental and control visits will follow the same 
protocol.  
Participants will arrive following an overnight fast state while also refraining from s trenuous 
activity, alcohol consumption, tobacco use, and recreational drugs for the previous [ADDRESS_648237] and mid -thigh to ankle (areas outside of the clothin g). A hypoallergenic cream will be 
applied during the control visit.  
Exercise will consist of 30 min of moderate intensity treadmill walking (3.5 mph at 5% grade) 
within a heated temperature/humidity -controlled chamber (38°C, 60% relative humidity).  
Participants will be weighed before, and after completion of the exercise calculate sweat rate. 
Prior to the exercise session, participants will sit for 5 min in an ambient room temperature 
environment as a baseline. During baseline and during the exercise core  temperature, skin 
temperature, laser doppler blood flow, galvanic skin response, and heart rate will be collected 
continuously. Sweat patches will be adhered to the forehead during exercise at minute 10 for 
collection of sweat composition over the next 10 -20 minutes.  
Thermal perception using the ASHRAE scale (cold to hot) will be assessed pre and during 
exercise.  
 
VISIT 1  
Visit 1 will take approximately 1 hour. Informed consent will be given. Participants will then 
complete the physical activity readiness questionnaire (PARQ) to be cleared for physical 
activity. Participants will have a small amount of the BioFreeze cream a pplied to a small area 
of the forearm (~2 x 2 in) to test for any adverse reaction over a period of [ADDRESS_648238] is not a part of the research protocol. Then, resting blood pressure will 
be taken. Those without a reaction, an d a resting blood pressure lower than 140/90, will have 
height, weight, and body fat composition measured. Height and weight will  be measured using 
a medical scale and stadiometer, respectively. Body fat will be assessed with hydrostatic 
weighing using a n electronic load cell -based system (Exertech, Dresbach, MN) correcting for 
residual lung volume or via a bio -electrical impedance analyzer (InBody[LOCATION_003], Cerritos, CA).  
 
VISITS [ADDRESS_648239], forearm, and calf thermistors can be adhered to the skin with tape.  
Laser doppler flow (forearm and or/finger) will be adhered with tape and galvanic skin 
response (fingers) will be adhered us ing Velcro straps to the skin. Measuring instruments will 
be recorded using an integrated digital to analog converter (ADInstruments, Colorado 
Springs, CO).  
Following instrumentation, subjects will sit for [ADDRESS_648240] and mid -thigh to ankle. 
Subjects will then enter the heat chamber (38°C, 60% relative humidity) and immediate ly 
begin a 30 -minute walk on a treadmill (3.5 mph, 5% grade). Subjects will be intermittently 
asked to hold their arm steady for laser doppler flow collection (10, 20, 30 minutes). Subjects 
will also briefly pause at minute 10 in order to adhere an absorbe nt patch to their forehead for 
sweat collection over the following 10 -20 minutes. Thermal perception using the ASHRAE 
scale (cold to hot) will be assessed pre and during exercise. After [ADDRESS_648241] ANOV A (Time x condition) will be used for the dependent 
variables. If the F -ratio values are found to be significant, a Fisher's Least Significant 
Difference post hoc analysis will be conducted. A type I error probability of < 5% will be 
considered significan t (p< 0.05). All data will be analyzed using a combination of Microsoft 
Excel and the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS).  