IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-18-0337 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL1DoAf 1T7E: 10/15/2021  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VALES+Tú: Targeting Psychosocial Stressor s to Reduce Latino Day Laborers Injury 
Disparities  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 10/15/2021  
  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-18-0337 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL2DoAf 1T7E: 10/15/2021  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   Protocol  Title:  VALES+Tú: Targeting Psychosocial Stressors to Reduce Latino Day Laborers 
Injury  Disparities  
 
Principal  Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_875631] -Esquer  
 
Co-Investigators:  Louis Brown, Casey Durand, Craig Field, Andrew  Springer  
 
Study  Coordinator:  TBA 
 
Population:  Latino  day laborers,  N= 300,  males,  ages  18 and older,  ordinary  health  status 
living in the Houston metropolitan area  location  
Number  of Sites:  Single  site 
 
Study  Duration:  Five years July 1st 2018 – June 30th, [ADDRESS_1222949]  Duration:  From baseline to post -test is one month  approximately.  
 
 
 
General Information  
Our project, VALES+Tú (VALES Más Tú, You are worthy of more) is a [ADDRESS_1222950], “Prevention Program to Reduce Injury Disparities 
among Latino Day Laborers,” an R34 grant funded by [CONTACT_875645] -MD-12-006 (CBPR Initiative 
to Eliminate or Reduce Health Disparities).  
 
Background Information  
 
The construction boom in Houston has resulted in historically high rates of LDL injury, and the need 
to address their worsening conditions and risks grow s ever more urgent. [LOCATION_007], where a 
disproportionate number of construction workers are LDL, has the highest US injury fatality rate in 
the industry, and within [LOCATION_007], Houston is the epi[CONTACT_384].16,[ADDRESS_1222951] risk 
reduction programs with evidence of effectiveness in the language LDL un derstand (Spanish), from 
people they trust (peers), that are portable to the corners where they wait for work. The need for 
effective  interventions  has never  been  greater.  In the aftermath  of Hurricane  Harvey,  the exposure  of 
LDL in the Houston  area  to hazardous  and precarious  work  conditions  was exacerbated  by [CONTACT_875646].  
 
Program content . The content of the VALES+Tú emphasizes workers’ ability to assess their own 
stressors and act on risk redu ction priorities that fit their personal circumstances and the norms of 
their  peers  at the corner.  The program  includes  the following  intervention  strategies:  (a) an individual 
intervention approach based on the principles of Motivational Interviewing to e ncourage LDL to 
formulate a personal risk reduction plan, and (b) a group intervention approach that emphasizes a 
group’s  ability  to use problem  solving  skills  to formulate  a risk reduction  plan  to reduce  the workplace 
risks of its members. The program is also based on the workers ability to formulate a safety plan  that 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-18-0337 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL3DoAf 1T7E: 10/15/[ADDRESS_1222952] necessary changes and that other people will support  them.  
 
The VALES+Tú  program  developed  and tested  in the Phase  I pi[INVESTIGATOR_27041],  relies  on two complementary 
strategies to reduce the risk for injury at work. The program content encourages evidence -based 
safety awareness and risk reduction priorities. The interpersonal delivery strategies selected by [CONTACT_875647] -based  participatory  strategies  previously  tested  in 
this population. The purpose of these strategies is to (i) validate workers’ experience of multiple 
stressors,  (ii) their  ability  to act upon  personally  chosen  hazardous  exposures  and (iii) encourage  social 
cohesion among corner LDL peers to reinforce peer safety norms, reduce isolation, stress and its 
associated dangers at work. The content of this program is based on a key CBPR principle: the right 
and ability of individuals to act on their own behalf t o gain control of problems and to use of their 
skills to resolve  them.  
 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_875632].  The content  of the program  developed  in Phase  I was tested  in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_875633] 2015. Prior to implementing the study, we assessed the prevalence of injury and exposure to 
hazardous working conditions in a corner survey with 329 LDL seeking work at 28 randomly selected 
corners.  We tested  the content  of the program  in three  conditions:  (1) Brief  Motivational  Intervention,  
(2) Group problem -solving and (3) a standard -of care control group which received OSHA [ADDRESS_1222953] -intervention (17 days 
on average)  65 participants  (88%)  were  re-contact[CONTACT_875648] -test. 
Results indicate that exposure to workplace hazards decreased significantly for all study participants 
from  pretest  to post -test (PRE  17.7,  POST  15.7,  N=63,  t 4.26,  p<.001).  The subgroup  analysis  revealed 
that across  groups,  these  decreases  were  significant  only  for the Brief  Motivational  Intervention  (BMI) 
group. Reported risk reduction practices and reducing workplace da ngers significantly increased for 
all participants (PRE 32.2, POST 34.0, N=61, t 2.00, p<.05), especially for the (BMI)  group.  
 
We also tested the influence of the intervention program on stressors. There were no significant 
reductions in immigration stres s, situational stress or depression at post -test. However, there was a 
significant increase in perceived group cohesion in the group problem -solving condition only (PRE 
9.68, POST 10.47, N=19, p<.035). These results suggest that both the Brief Motivational  Intervention 
and the Group Problem Solving approaches offer promising strategies that have evidence of helpi[INVESTIGATOR_875634]. In the proposed study, we will determine whether these two 
approaches significantly reduce hazardous exposures at work among LDL in a fully powered cluster 
randomized trial.  
 
Objectives  
 
There are two specific aims of this study.  
AIM1: Determine the efficacy of VALES+Tú in reducing hazardous exposures at work  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-18-0337 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL4DoAf 1T7E: 10/15/2021  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   Hypotheses : 
 
a. Latino day laborers participating in the Brief Motivational Intervention condition will report 
fewer hazardous exposures at work at post -test compared to the standard -of-care control 
group.  
 
b. Latino day laborers participating in the Group Problem Solving co ndition will report fewer 
hazardous exposures at work at post -test compared to the standard -of-care control  group.  
 
AIM [ADDRESS_1222954] of psychosocial stressors on VALES+Tú primary outcomes  
 
Research question : 
 
a. How do situational and i mmigration stressors mediate the impact of the intervention program 
on hazardous exposures at work?  
 
The short -term goal of VALES+Tú is to reduce LDL exposures to workplace hazards by [CONTACT_875649] a corner -based  safety  program  that effectively  addresses  situational  and immigration  related  stress. 
These psychosocial factors are seldom targeted in safety programs but evidence indicates that they 
increase hazardous exposures at work. Our long -term goal  is to reduce the high rates of injury in the 
Latino  day laborer  population.  If successful,  we will prepare  VALES+Tú  for future  dissemination  among 
LDL who look for work at day labor corners in other areas of the [LOCATION_002] with large Latino 
enclaves.  
Activities to be conducted prior to the start of  the clinical Trial  
 
I. Rapid Needs  Assessment  
 
Prior  to the implementation  of the clinical  trial,  we will also conduct  a Rapid  Needs  Assessment  (RNA). 
The purpose of the RNA is to gather information related to workers’ current personal characteristics, 
work conditions, and injury experiences. Due to the amount of time that has elapsed since the 
culmination  of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_27041],  conducting  this rapid  need  assessment  is a critical  step  in ensuring  our 
clinical trial reflects current trends and dynamics among day laborers. The RNA will be conducted 
with  LDLs  at randomly  selected  corners.  The assessment  will be administered  electronically  by [CONTACT_875650]. The assessment will validate psychosocial and other measures used in our 
previous studies as well as newly developed items. The assessment will allow us to make any 
necessary adjustments to our study measures before conduc ting the clinical  trial.  
 
RNA participant selection and Recruitment:  
 
In order to participate in the RNA, a day laborer must be [ADDRESS_1222955] the RNA at corners identified in our previous 
study.  
 
The LDL interviewers  will visit the selected  corners  and approach  LDL about  participating  in our study. 
After  explaining  the purpose  of the study  and verifying  requirements,  the interviewer  will obtain  oral 
informed consent and administer the  Assessment.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-18-0337 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL5DoAf 1T7E: 10/15/2021  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines    
Obtaining Informed Consent for the RNA:  
 
Participants will be asked to provide oral informed consent to take part in the sur vey. Potential 
participants will be told the purpose of the RNA, that they can refuse to answer any item and that 
they can pause the assessment to talk to potential employers or attend a job. The interviewer will 
explain that the study has been granted a C ertificate of Confidentiality and that all responses will be 
protected. If the potential study participant does not provide informed consent, he will be thanked 
for his time but will not be able to take part in the survey.  
 
RNA  Compensation:  
 
Participants will receive a one -time $[ADDRESS_1222956] after completing the survey. Interviewers 
will be responsible for the distribution of the incentives. An incentives log will be kept to track the 
distribution  process.  
 
II. Corner Observation and Group  Conversation  
 
Prior to the implementation of the clinical trial, a corner observation and data collection activity will 
be conducted at local day labor corners. The purpose of this activity will be to update clinical trial 
procedures pertaining to partici pant recruitment and selection. The corner observation and data 
collection will be completed by a team of promotores (Latino outreach workers) to be coordinated 
jointly by [CONTACT_875651] y Justicia Workers Center. These promotores will be trained by [CONTACT_1268] [INVESTIGATOR_875635] y Justicia, both parties with prior experience in collecting data at local 
day labor corners.  
 
The corner observation and data collection will consist of two parts: (1) observe and record 
information about corner characteristi cs and worker activities, and (2) a brief group conversation 
about current events relevant to day laborers to be held with workers present. This second activity 
does not require specific recruitment procedures as it is intended to get a general impression of 
events that may influence recruitment, selection and retention of workers during the trial and it may 
also inform interview procedures. Thus, this activity may involve one or multiple informants whose 
comments will be recorded anonymously.  
 
III. Latino Day L aborers Virtual COVID -19 Focus  Group  
 
Rationale.  
 
The purpose of this research activity will be to engage a group of Latino Day Laborers (LDL) in biweekly 
discussions  about  the impact  of COVID -19 on (1) their  daily  life, (2) social  relationships,  (3) work  practices 
and (4) personal  wellbeing.  Latino  Day Laborers  are a vulnerable  population  with  limited  access  to health 
care and personal protective equipment. Given the current crisis, this activity is important to chronicle 
the impact  of the pandemic  on their  lives,  as we expect  that it will impact  them  personally  and collectively.  
 
In addition, we need to document the way this unprecedented crisis has altered the dynamics at the 
corners and disrupted the lives of the Latino Day Laborers in order to anticipate the impact of the 
pandemic on the eventual implementation of our currently planned community randomized trial.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-18-0337 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL6DoAf 1T7E: 10/15/[ADDRESS_1222957] of 6 -8 LDL who are members of the Vales+Tu Community Advisory Board (CAB) 
and/or volunteers of the Fe y Justicia Workers Center, our community partner.  
 
Prior to the start of the conversations, research staff members will set a time to teach each participant 
how  to use Zoom  and to help  them  get connected.  At this time,  participant  consent  will also be obtained. 
Potential participants will be told the purpose of the virtual focus groups, that they can refuse to answer 
any questions and that they can stop participating in the discussions at any time. If the pot ential study 
participant  does  not provide  informed  consent,  he will be thanked  for his time  but will not be able  to take 
part in the focus  group.  
 
The group conversations will be held in Spanish and facilitated by [CONTACT_183120] ([CONTACT_502361] -Esquer). General prompts related to the above -mentioned topi[INVESTIGATOR_875636]. Examples provided in this document are meant to start the initial conversation and will be 
used again as appropriate. As researchers and participants become more accustomed to the topi[INVESTIGATOR_875637],  the prompts  will be adjusted  and probing  will be used  to solicit  meaningful  responses  according 
to the participants’ familiarity and  concerns.  
 
Audio recordings of the conversation will be transcribed through a professional transcription service. 
Project  staff  will collect  and maintain  both  the audio  and the transcribed  conversation  data.  Data  storage 
and qualitative analysis will utilize ATLAS.ti (8.1). The collected information will be confidential, and 
participants will only be identified by a number assigned to each group member prior to the start of the 
conversations.  A research  assistant  will take  detailed  ethnographic  field  notes  during  these  conversations 
to assess degree of participation and general content of the meeting in order to supplement the content 
of the group conversation during data  analysis.  
 
Participant Compensation  
 
Each  participant  will receive  a gift card  from  Walmart  ($75)  for attending  each  meeting  for a total  of $450 
over the course of the six meetings. This stipend amount has been regularly provided to Latino Day 
Laborers that participate in our CAB meetings; this was part of an agreement that was voted by [CONTACT_875652]+Tu CAB membership in the previous pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] (2013 -2015). This incentive is justified as CAB 
members weigh the benefit of participating in research activities against time spent away from work. 
Given the si gnificance of the information that will be gathered during this research activity and its 
implication for the implementation of the clinical trial, this also justifies this  incentive.  
Qualitative analysis.  
Once  the conversations  are transcribed,  the information  will be entered  and coded  in Atlas  TI. A codebook 
with key themes related to the four topi[INVESTIGATOR_875638] a team of bilingual 
researchers and students who will later content analyze the conversations. Once all conver sations have 
been transcribed, the original audio files will be destroyed to protect participants’ confidentiality. 
Information will be stored in a password -protected electronic  folder.  
 
 
IV. Small Pi[INVESTIGATOR_875639]. 
These include approaching LDL at locations where they congregate to seek employment, explaining the 
purpose of the study, and assessing the eligibility of interested individuals. Methods also i nclude the  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-18-0337 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL7DoAf 1T7E: 10/15/[ADDRESS_1222958] been previously hired to work at a corner.  
Ten LDL will be recruited f rom each corner following the Recruitment Strategy presented below in the 
Clinical Trial Description. Participants will be presented with an informed consent electronically on an 
iPad and will signal their consent by [CONTACT_875653]. Using  an iPad, interviewers will 
administer the baseline described under Study Procedures. The survey has been revised to include a 
section of participants’ experiences with the coronavirus outbreak. Following administration of the 
baseline survey, participants  at one corner will receive the Brief Motivational Interview intervention and 
participants at the other corner will receive the Group Problem Solving intervention described below.  
 
Participants will be contact[CONTACT_875654] -up survey. 
Participants will receive a $[ADDRESS_1222959] for completion of the baseline survey. Participants will receive a  
$[ADDRESS_1222960] for completion of the baseline  survey and the individual/group activity. Participants will 
receive an additional $[ADDRESS_1222961] for completion of the follow -up survey.  
 
We will assess the feasibility of implementing safety measures to mitigate the risk of disease 
transmission. These wil l include the use of masks/face shields, gloves, and hand sanitizer by [CONTACT_25617]. We will also provide these materials to LDL. Social distancing will be observed. We will use 
tape and traffic cones to delineate “rooms” in which surveys and interventi ons will be delivered.  
Distancing and the use of masks and hand sanitizer will also be observed by [CONTACT_875655]. We will follow departmental guidelines in the case any study personnel exhibits symptoms 
of infection.  
 
 
 
Clinical Tr ial Description  
 
Study Design  
 
We will conduct a cluster randomized trial of the intervention to determine its efficacy as 
implemented among Houston LDL. We will use an experimental and control group design with three 
conditions randomly assigned at the st reet-corner level, and the intervention delivered at the 
individual  (LDL)  level.  The treatment  arm will include  two conditions:  (1) individual  (Brief  Motivational 
Intervention)  and (2) group  (Group  Problem  Solving)  interventions.  The standard  of care  control  group 
will consist of (3) a distribution of OSHA 10 safety cards. This will be a five -year study. An  individual’s  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-18-0337 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL8DoAf 1T7E: 10/15/2021  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   participation would be approximately six months and would comprise a baseline and two -follow -up 
surveys.  
 
Clinical  Trial  
 
Selection of the study population . The study population will be LDL present at study corners.  
 
Inclusion/exclusion criteria . To be eligible to participate in the study, a day laborer must be [ADDRESS_1222962] been previously hired to work at a  corner.  
 
Recruitment Strategy . The Outreach Coordinator and the LDL interviewers will visit the selected 
corners and approach LDL about participating in our study. After explaining the study and eligibility 
requirements, the interviewer will emphasize to the participant that the inter view can stop at any 
time so that he can attend to job recruitment activities. S/he will also inform the laborer that 
arrangements can be made to complete the interview at a later time if he wishes to continue. After 
obtaining  oral informed  consent,  the participant  will be asked  to complete  the Pre-test survey,  which 
should take no more than 45 minutes to  complete.  
 
A screener  form  will be used  to assess  participant’s  eligibility  to take  part in our study  (including  during 
pre-clinical trial activities such  as the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]). In order to be eligible, an LDL must be at least 18 
years  old; identify  as Hispanic  or Latino;  be at the corner  for the purpose  of looking  for work;  and have 
been previously hired at a corner. LDL not meeting these requirements will be thanked for their time 
and informed they are not eligible to participate. LDL will also be asked if they have experienced 
symptoms of COVID -19 in the previous 48 hours (feve r, cough, sore throat, fatigue, etc.). Those 
reporting symptoms will be thanked for their time and informed they are not eligible to participate 
and will be given a brochure with COVID related  resources.  
 
Study Procedures  
 
After enrollment into the study, participants will complete a baseline survey. The survey will be 
administered electronically via an iPad and each participant will complete the survey in private, with 
assistance  from  study  personnel  if desired.  The baseline  survey  should  take  approximatel y [ADDRESS_1222963] sociodemographic information and information related to their 
recent work history and any injuries or “near misses” experienced. The survey will also include 
psychosocial measures related to general anxiety  and depression as well as stressors related to 
specific situations and status as an immigrant, risk reduction practices, and self -efficacy. We will also 
ask about recent alcohol  use. 
 
Participants will be randomly assigned to one of three study conditions  as described below.  
 
OSHA [ADDRESS_1222964] fatalities in [LOCATION_007]: falls, struck by, heat exposure and cuts. The laminated cards are 
adapted  from  OSHA’s  website  publicly  available  materials  in Spanish  for workers  with  limited  literacy.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-18-0337 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL9DoAf 1T7E: 10/15/2021  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines    
Brief Motivational Intervention (BMl). This intervention is a person -centered, brief yet directive 
method for enhancing intrinsic motivation change by [CONTACT_487840]. Effective 
use of BMl necessitates the definition of a target behavior, in this case, formulating a plan to reduce 
injury -related risk behaviors. Sessions will be initiated by [CONTACT_875656]  (perceptions  of injury  risk, social  norms  and self-efficacy)  that may  influence  risk 
for work  related  injuries.  If the LDL is motivate d to change  the target  behavior,  a 'change  plan'  will be 
developed. Change plans involve identifying reasons for change, goals in making change, specific 
actions and timelines, and others who may help the person change. BMI has been shown through 
clinic -based randomized control trials to increase behavior changes. The goal of the BMI session is to 
get workers to focus on aspects of their shifting work experience that they feel is within their control 
in increasing their workplace safety. BMI sessions to be implemented during the VALES+Tú trial are 
expected to last [ADDRESS_1222965]  risks  and a discussion  of the following  topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]:  (a) how  they  will know  if their  plan  is 
successful, (b) potential obstacles, and (c) what the worker can do if the plan does not work. Finally, 
each worker will be asked to write and sign a personal pledge (“Mi Promesa”) to implement his own 
safety plan. Fidelity of BMI implementation will be  based on two criteria: 1) adherence, or whether 
the LDL promotor carried out specified procedures as indicated in the manual of procedures, and; 2) 
competence, based on the skills of the promotor in implementing the  intervention.  
 
Group problem -solving di alogue . This intervention activity is based on participatory methodology 
and on our observation that small groups are the natural organization of Latino day laborers, who 
congregate in groups of [ADDRESS_1222966] of a discussion between 3 -4 LDL and a promotor (a peer 
LDL) trained as a group facilitator. The sessions are expected to last 30 -45 minutes and are intended 
to provide  an opportunity  for the participants  to work  on a safety  problem  together,  get to know  each 
other, and enhance their mutual safety through mutual support. The ultimate goal of the activity  will 
be to generate a safety plan that participants can implement at  work.  
 
Follow -up surveys will be conducted  by [CONTACT_875657]. Oral informed 
consent will be obtained prior to each follow -up survey. The follow -up surveys will reassess 
participants’ work and injury experiences and experiences with the safety intervention they were 
provi ded – safety cards, change plan, or safety plan.  
 
No invasive procedures will be employed, and no biological specimens will be collected. 
Clinical Trial Compensation:  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   Participants will receive a $[ADDRESS_1222967] after completing the baseline surve y, and a $[ADDRESS_1222968] for 
completing the follow -up survey.  
 
Forms  
Additional forms will be used in the field to help track recruitment and other procedures in the field. 
Interviewer forms:  
• Recruitment & Selection Tracking Form #2.  The purpose of this form is to keep track of:  1) 
the total number of LDLs approached at each corner for study participation, 2) the number 
of LDLs who agreed to participate in the study, 3) the number of LDLs who refused to 
participate in the study, 4) th e reasons for non -participation, 5) the number of LDLs who are 
eligible to participate in the study, and 6) for those ineligible, the reason for exclusion.  
• Recruitment Script #17.  The purpose of this forms is to assess jornaleros’ eligibility to 
participat e in our study.  Interested  candidates  who  meet  the inclusion  criteria  outlined  in 
this form will then be asked to provide informed consent using our consent  forms.  
• Survey Completion Tracking form #3.  The purpose of this form is to track all survey 
participants. This form allows interviewers to keep track of all individuals who have 
attempted or completed the survey, and provides a written record of date of consent, 
participant  contact  [CONTACT_875658],  and re-schedule 
dates.  
 
Supervisor forms:  
 
• Corner  Sample  Count  Form  # 13. The purpose  of this form  is to document  the labor  pool  at each 
corner by [CONTACT_875659].  
• Summary of Daily Participation.  The purpose of this form is to track the number of the field data 
collectors who surveyed the corner, the start and end time for each field data collector’s shift, 
and the total number of completed interviews for each field data collector, and the total 
number of interviews completed that day. This form allows field supervisors to keep track of  the 
work of all field data  collectors.  
 
 
 
Data and Safety Monitoring  
 
Data Safety and Monitoring Plan  
 
Several  procedures  will be used  to maintain  the integrity  of the data.  All databases  will be stored  in a 
centralized  location  on an UTSPH  server,  which  is backed  up daily,  with  access  limited  to specific  users 
at the discretion of the principal investigators. The PIs will monitor security of the data throughout 
the study and will work with the project director and data manager to monitor data collection 
activities and the transfer of personal data collecte d during interviews to our password protected 
computer  drive.  Privacy  safeguards  will include  appropriate  password  protection  and physical  security 
for all computer systems. There will be no personal names to be stored in data  files.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-18-0337  
UT Houston Protocol Template  IRB APPR OPaVgAeL9DoAf 1T7E: 10/15/2021  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-18-0337 
IRB APPRPOagVeA1L0DoAf 1T7E: 10/15/[ADDRESS_1222969] -Follow -up survey data from the Vales+Tú clinical trial will be maintained on a secure server 
that is password protected and accessible only to study staff who are engaged in data analytic 
activities. The survey data will be collected by [CONTACT_875660]. Data will be 
downloaded from the tablets on a regular bases by [CONTACT_875661]; the encryption 
is another level of  security in case a tablet is lost. When not in use, tablets will be stored in a double 
locked cabinet. If we need to transfer files, identifying information will be deleted and the new file 
will be encrypted before transmission, in accordance with HIPPA a nd University policy. Survey data 
will not be associated with personal identifiers since each participant will be assigned a  
study number at the time of consent.  
 
The Institutional Review Board (IRB) for the Protection of Human Subjects at University of Te xas 
Health  Science  Center  at Houston  will review  and approve  all aspects  of the proposed  study,  including 
protecting  the confidentiality  of study  participants  and informing  participants  of the potential  benefits 
and risks of taking part in the study. The IRB will continue to monitor the study throughout and will 
conduct  mandatory  annual  assessments.  The IRB requires  that the confidentiality  of study  participants 
be protected and that procedures be impleme nted to securely collect and process data. Principal 
Investigators are required by [CONTACT_738771] a condition of conducting the 
research. The IRB also requires that principal investigators inform study participants of this 
requirem ent and provide them with the principal investigator’s and the IRB’s phone numbers. If 
members of the IRB have questions, investigators are required to provide written responses. The IRB 
must approve any changes to study protocols before changes can be  implemented.  
 
Study investigators will be responsible for creating the survey instrument and the guidelines for its 
administration.  The Project  Director  will be responsible  for overseeing  and coordinating  field  activities 
and supervision  of interviewers  and follow -up activities.  The principal  investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_875640]. All field personnel 
(interviewers and promotores) will be appropriately trained in all aspects of the study and will 
complete  a Human  Subjects  certification  available  in Spanish.  They  will be introduced  to the goals  and 
significance of the project and to the procedures for recruitment, tracking and retention, and follow - 
up of participants. They will also sign a confidentiality agreement. All interviewers will be Latino men 
fluent in Spanish. Study investigators will require field personnel to inform the project director if any 
adverse events are reported during survey  administration.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-18-0337 
IRB APPRPOagVeA1L1DoAf 1T7E: 10/15/2021  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   Adverse events  
Should any unintended or adverse events occur, we will follow procedures for reporting  
adverse events which is required by [CONTACT_875662] s Health Science Center Committee for the 
Protection of Human Subjects.  
 
The research team will utilize the following response procedures for adverse events:  
 
1. Research team members will immediately report any breaches of data security or confidentiality  
directly to all other research team members and to members of the CAB via  email.  
 
2. Research team members will immediately report any perceived distress related to program 
activities  as well as the response of the team member to that distress such as provid ing a specific 
referral.  These  reports  will be further  discussed  at team  meetings  and with  the CAB to insure  that our 
current procedures are minimizing the risk and are working as  desired.  
 
3. Research team members will immediately report any perceived loss of a work opportunity  related 
to program  activities  as well as the response  of the team  member  to that situation.  These  reports  will 
be further discussed at team meetings and with the CAB to insure that our current procedures are 
minimizing the risk and working as  desired.  
 
4. For all events listed above, the PI (Drs. Fernandez -Esquer ) will complete a Problem Report Form  
and submit the form to the Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects (CPHS) at UTSPH. The 
form is reviewed by [CONTACT_875663]/Coordinator.  
 
5. Upon receipt of the Problem Report Form and appropriate level of review by [CONTACT_3655], CPHS will make 
a determination about whether further action may be required. Available actions may  include:  
 
a. Modification to the  protocol.  
b. Notificati on to past participants by [CONTACT_738762].  
c. Modification of the continuing review  schedule.  
d. Monitoring of the  research.  
e. Suspension or termination of the research according to IRB SOP on “Suspension  or 
Termination of IRB Approved  Research”.  
f. Referral to legal counsel, risk management or the institutional  official.  
g. Other appropriate action as determined by [CONTACT_36985]. 
 
Statistics  
 
Corner selection and assignment . Our recent corner needs assessment study mapped [ADDRESS_1222970] emer ged using 
the methodology of our Phase I pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. The Workers Center Outreach Coordinator will be 
responsible  for visiting  and mappi[INVESTIGATOR_875641].  A “corner”  is a) a labor  hiring  public  location  such  as 
a street corner, bus stop, gas station or home i mprovement stores within the designated geographic 
area, b) an independent hiring site (independence as defined by [CONTACT_2669] [ADDRESS_1222971]  corner),  and c) a hub for day laborers  observed  seeking  employment  at that location. 
Locally,  corners  range  in size from  quite  small  (5 to 10 men)  to very  large  (> 75 men),  with  the majority  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-18-0337 
IRB APPRPOagVeA1L2DoAf 1T7E: 10/15/[ADDRESS_1222972] an 
average  of 10 LDL at each  corner  to enroll  in the study.  As corner  sizes  vary,  we may  enroll  fewer  LDL 
at some  corners  than  at others.  The number  of corners/clusters  sampled  will be kept  to the sampling 
design of 10 per group (total of 30) to maximize statistical  power.  
 
Sample size . Sample size was estimated using Monte Carlo simulation procedures. For purposes of 
the simulation, we made the following assumptions: a cluster randomized design, an  intervention 
condition  at the cluster  (i.e. street  corner)  level,  20 interventions  corners,  split  equally  across  the two 
intervention conditions, 10 control corners, an intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) of 0.02, an 
across -time  correlation  of outcome  measures  of 0.5 (derived  from  our pi[INVESTIGATOR_123704]),  a nominal  alpha  of 
0.05,  desired  power  of at least  80%,  three  measurement  waves  (one  pre-test and two post -test),  and 
attrition between baseline and wave 3 of 30%. A group by [CONTACT_875664], with a minimum desired detectable interaction parameter estimate  of 
1.5 units (a value also derived from our pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299]) on the workplace hazards scale. Based on these 
parameters, we require an average of 10 part icipants from each of the 30 corners, for a total of 300 
participants at baseline.  
 
Analyses . AIM1:  Determine  the efficacy  of VALES+Tú  in reducing  hazardous  exposures  at work . Our 
primary method of longitudinal data analysis will be growth curve modeling using multilevel models 
(MLM).  MLM  is a flexible  technique  that can accommodate  individually -varying  times  of observation, 
and time -variant and invariant variables as needed. To  develop the MLM, we specify a three -level 
model, with repeated measures nested within individuals nested within corners, thus accounting for 
the clustered  nature  of our study  design.  Using  matrix  notation,  this model  takes  the form  y =XB + Zu 
+ e for cont inuous  outcomes,  where  y is n x [ADDRESS_1222973] interaction between intervention status (intervention or control) 
and time located in the X vector, with random intercepts at the individual and corner levels, both 
located in the Z vector. The X vector will also contain important covariates as needed. The two -way 
interaction  will indicate  whether  the intervention  has an effect  on workplace  hazards  during  the study 
period,  as compared  to controls.  Consistent  with  Aim 1, the two treat ment  groups  (Brief  Motivational 
Intervention and Group Problem Solving) will be compared separately against a common control 
group. Models will be estimated using maximum likelihood  estimation.  
 
To explore the possibility that the effect of the intervention depends on certain other variables (i.e. 
moderation or effect modification), we will examine whether potential moderators statistically 
interact with the intervention condition, resulting in di fferential intervention effects. This is 
accomplished  by [CONTACT_1583]  a third  term  to the group  by [CONTACT_875665],  creating  a three -way interaction 
term. The multilevel model can accommodate moderators at the individual or cluster level (e.g. a 
cross -level int eraction). Consistent with the FOA we are responding to, a moderator of particular 
interest is Latin American country of origin. Given the composition of the day labor pool in Houston, 
with a predominant Mexican population, we will examine country of origi n as Mexico v. Central 
America. These methods are applicable for other potential moderators, like individual characteristics 
(e.g.  demographic  variables,  anxiety,  alcohol  use)  and characteristics  of the street  corners  (e.g.  size).  
 
AIM  [ADDRESS_1222974]  of psychosocial  stressors  on VALES+Tú  primary  outcomes . To 
determine  whether  situational  and immigration  stress  mediate  the relation  between  the intervention 
and outcome  (i.e. whether  these  variables  “carry”  the intervention  effect),  we will use cross -level  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-18-0337 
IRB APPRPOagVeA1L3DoAf 1T7E: 10/15/[ADDRESS_1222975] greater statistical power than the Baron and 
Kenny causal steps method. In the three -level operationalization of mediation analysis, two models 
are specifi ed: 1) A three -level model (street corners, individuals, and repeated measurements) with 
the mediator  as the dependent  variable  and intervention  condition,  time  and the intervention  by [CONTACT_26072] (path a) as the predictors; and 2) a separate three -level model with the outcome (e.g. 
workplace hazards) as the dependent variable, and intervention condition, time, the mediator 
(treated as a time -varying covariate; path b), and the intervention by [CONTACT_875666]. 
The product of paths a (intervention effect to mediator) and b (mediator to outcome) from model [ADDRESS_1222976]. Bootstrap resampling methods are then used to 
compute bias -corrected 95% confidence intervals for purposes of significance  testing.  
 
 
Ethics  
 
IRB approval will be sought from CPHS. State whether IRB approval will be sought from CPHS or 
another IRB (under UT System Reciprocity Agreement).  
 
Study personnel will explain the nature of the study and the benefits and risks of participating. L DL 
will be assured that they can pause the interview if they are offered a job and resume the interview 
later.  Consent  will be sought  after  this process,  and eligible  LDL wishing  to participate  will signify  their 
consent  by [CONTACT_875667].  
 
Data handling and record keepi[INVESTIGATOR_875642]. 
Electronic records will be stored on password protected personal c omputers and on the University 
server. Records will be retained in accordance with applicable regulations. Paper records will be 
stored in locked cabinets.  
 
Participants  will be assigned  a unique  study  number.  This number  will be used  to track  data  and other 
records.  It will be necessary  to collect  names  and contact  [CONTACT_3031]  (including  that for selected  

IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-18-0337 
IRB APPRPOagVeA1L4DoAf 1T7E: 10/15/2021  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   friends and family) so that participants can be reached to schedule their follow -up interviews. This 
information will be stored in separat ed files and will be accessed on a need to know basis.  
 
Surveys will be conducted using iPads. When not in use, iPads will be stored in locked cabinets. 
Completed surveys will be downloaded on a regular basis by [CONTACT_58047].  
 
Quality control and assurance  
 
All data collection procedures and instruments will be pi[INVESTIGATOR_875643]. 
Computerized surveys will be programed to minimize out of range, inconsistent, or missing date.  
 
The data manager will regularly au dit data for problematic entries and provide feedback to the 
Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_875644].  
 
We do not have plans to employ third party monitoring.  
 
 
Publication Plan  
 
Manuscripts will be prepared for submission to relevant peer reviewed journ als. Anticipated 
manuscripts will address participants’ characteristics at baseline and the significance of changes in 
workplace  injury  and psychosocial  items  from  baseline  to follow -up within  and between  intervention 
groups.  
 
We do not anticipate retuning  results to participants.  
 
ATTACHMENTS  
 
1. Schematic of Study  Design  
2. Study  Schedule  
3. Consent  Document  
4. Case Report  Form  
 
 
COVID -19 Supplemental Study  
Background and Rationale  
 
The Vales+ Tu injury prevention study was awarded a supplemental grant from the National 
Institute on Minority health and Health Disparities (3R01MD012928 -03S1). The purpose of the 
supplemental study is to assess the impact of the COVID -[ADDRESS_1222977] been intensified by [CONTACT_25963] -19 pandemic as evidenced by [CONTACT_875668]’s high COVID -19 mortality and morbidity rate.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-18-0337 
IRB APPRPOagVeA1L5DoAf 1T7E: 10/15/2021  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   Objectives  
The study will address this question: How do s tressors and protective factors experienced in the context 
of the COVID -[ADDRESS_1222978] their ability to 
adhere to COVID -19 mitigation practices? To answer this question, our research will be guided  by [CONTACT_875669]:  
1. Describe Latino day laborers’ adherence to COVID -[ADDRESS_1222979] two focus groups stratified by [CONTACT_875670] (i.e. public hiring location) with 
[ADDRESS_1222980] of social, psychological and 
economic stressors on LDL mental health and their compliance with COVID -19 mitigation 
practices.  
 
a. The Measurement Model : Use Aim [ADDRESS_1222981] a confirmatory  factor 
analysis to develop good -fitting measures of stressors, protective factors, mental health 
and adherence to COVID -19 mitigation  practices.  
b. The Structural Model : Use structural equation modeling to test hypothesized 
relationships among and between th e latent variables to identify mediators and 
moderators that will point to plausible intervention strategies to increase compliance 
with COVID -19 mitigation  practices.  
 
 
Survey Approach  
 
Study Population and sampling. We plan to recruit approximately 300 L DL, a size comparable to our 
samples in previous studies. We will recruit participants in the field at locations (“corners”) where LDL 
congregate to seek employment. We will recruit from corners identified from our previous studies.  
 
Corner selection . Fiel d team will visit randomly selected corners identified in our parent study. We will 
follow the same corner selection procedure specified in the parent study to recruit participants. Our 
total sample size will be 300 participants.  
 
Participant eligibility: Eligible participants will be [ADDRESS_1222982] experienced sympto ms of COVID -19 in the previous 48 
hours (fever, cough, sore throat, fatigue, etc.). Those reporting symptoms will be thanked for their time 
and informed they are not eligible to participate and will be given a brochure with COVID related 
resources.  
 
Obtaining Informed Consent: Participants will be asked to provide oral informed consent to take part in 
the survey. Potential participants will be told the purpose of the assessment, that they can refuse to  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-18-0337 
IRB APPRPOagVeA1L6DoAf 1T7E: 10/15/[ADDRESS_1222983] experience with, approaching and recruiti ng 
potential participants, determining eligibility, obtaining informed consent, and administering surveys.  
However, they will receive additional training and get familiar with administering the current survey 
before recruitment starts.  
 
Compensation : Parti cipants who complete the COVID -19 survey will receive a one time incentive 
payment of $[ADDRESS_1222984] that the interview will be long (60 -75 minutes), and it may p revent some participants 
from getting hired for the day. Even when they will be encouraged to attend to their job search 
activities and return to the interview the following day, many day laborers may choose to attend to the 
interview with the unclear expe ctation that they will get a job later in the day. The incentive will partly 
cover the possible loss of partial or full employment for that day. Gift card distribution will be tracked 
and properly documented.  
 
Survey measures. The survey to be administered  to study participants will include an array of measures 
to answer our proposed aims. Some of the measure include, but are not limited to, COVID -[ADDRESS_1222985] 
recent changes in the pandemic.  
 
Initially, we will look for evidence of variability and patterns of missing data, and check for data accuracy 
and adherence to the assumptions of planned statistical procedures. T he primary statistical analyses to  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-18-0337 
IRB APPRPOagVeA1L7DoAf 1T7E: 10/15/2021  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   be conducted to satisfy AIM 1 will be descriptive (means, frequencies, correlations) in order to 
understand how participants vary by [CONTACT_738775], age, corner type, and other critical factors. We will 
look  at frequency distributions or calculate means and standard deviations for responses to all questions 
on the questionnaire, and evaluate differences in proportions or means by [CONTACT_875671]. A significance leve l of 0.[ADDRESS_1222986] of social, 
psychological and economic stressors on LDL mental health and their compliance with COVID 19 
mitigation practices. We understand the determinants of COVID 19 mitiga tion practices as a set of 
conditions, behaviors, cognitions and exposures that lead to health inequalities as proposed by [CONTACT_875672]’s Pathways to Health framework. This model posits that structural conditions in the lives of 
individuals facilitate  or constrain their access to environmental resources, shape their psychological 
makeup and influence exposure to pathogens, stress responses and performance of health behaviors.  
While this model describes distal and proximal influences on health, we are a dapting it to address the 
COVID 19 pandemic as a current event that has multiple and simultaneous influences on the structural, 
social and psychological stressors experienced by [CONTACT_875673] 19 mitigation practices.  
 
We intend to use basic demographic, mental health (stressors, depression, isolation and substance use) 
data collected during the current injury trial to inform the model of the determinants of COVID 
mitigation practic es. 
 
Hypotheses. The proposed project will identify individual risk and protective factors (stressors related to 
immigration status; familiarity with COVID -19 and its transmission modes and familiarity with the types 
of actions that are recommended to mini mize exposure to COVID -19). We hypothesize that the added 
stress of the pandemic, coupled with their pre -existing vulnerabilities (e.g. high levels of stress related to 
their immigration status) will have a negative impact on LDLs’ mental health. This will  render them less 
capable of adhering to CDC’s COVID -19 prevention guidelines thus putting them at a higher risk of 
contracting the virus. We also propose that the protective factors identified above may help mitigate 
the influence of stressors on mental h ealth during the current pandemic. Using a Structural Equation 
Modeling approach to explore these relationships will allow us to answer fairly complex questions about 
the associations of multiple constructs at one time. The results will provide a better un derstanding of 
the social and personal assets that can be instrumental and serve as intervention targets for this 
population in the current  pandemic.  