1 
Vesrion  2 July28, 2017 Version  3 January  4, 2018  
 RESEARCH  PROTOCOL  
1) Title: 
“Emergence  agitation  (EA ) and  pain  scores  in pediatric  patients  following  sevoflurane  
anesthesia  for adenoidectomy  and  tonsillectomy  with  or without  adenoidectomy  
comparing  opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480] -only , analgesia  with  eith er IV or oral  acetaminophen  plus  opi[INVESTIGATOR_237828],  a multi -center  double -blind ed study”  
  
Vesrion  2 July  28, 2017 Version  3 January  2018  
 
2) Primary  Investigator s:  Carlos  A. Archilla,  MD, Robert  B. Bryskin,  MD 
 
3) Co-Investigator s:  Julie  Wei,  MD,  Anuja  Mehta,  MD,  Jeremy  Driscoll,  BS, Brian  Bender,  CRNA , 
Carol  Klim , MD, Stefanie  Schrum,  MD, Joseph  Dayan,  MD,  Timothy  M. Maul,  PhD  
 
4) Study  Coordinator s-  Kristin  McCrary , MS, CCRP  -Orlando  
                                                   Nancy  Archer , RN, BSN,  CPN - Jacksonville  
 
5) Introduction /Background : Emergence  agitation , (EA) , is a state  of aggressive  agitation  that  
occurs  temporarily  during  the early  stages  of emergence  from  anesthesia . Also  referred  to as 
emergence  delirium,  emergence  agitation  occurs  in both  adults  and children;  however,  it has 
been  known  since  1960  that  the incidence  is higher  in pediatric  patients  (9). Emergence  
agitation  is a major  source  of dissati sfaction  for parents,  nurses,  and others  taking  care  of these  
children.  Patients  who  experience  EA may  suffer  secondary  harm  due to displacement  of 
surgical  dressings,  removal  of catheters,  and disruption  of surgical  closure.  These  patients  
frequently  requ ire additional  interventions  and may  have  a prolonged  length  of stay  in the 
post -anesthesia  care  unit  (PACU),  even  after  short  surgical  procedures.  
 
The etiology  of EA after  general  anesthesia  with  volatile  anesthetics  in children  remains  
unclear.  Numerous  studies  exist  in the literature  that  have  attempted  to correlate  EA with  the 
use of a particular  anesthetic  agent  or technique.   Specifically,  the newer,  volatile  anesthetics,  
sevoflurane  and desflurane,  have  been  implicated  in a 20-80%  increased  incidenc e of adverse  
effects,  including  inconsolable  crying,  restlessness,  and agitation  unrelated  to pain  (10) . 
However,  many  of these  studies  did not use a validated  scoring  system  to assess  emergence  
agitation  appropriately.  In 2004,  the Pediatric  Anesthesia  Emergence  Delirium  (PAED)  scale  
was  validated  as a measure  of emergence  agitation . In this validation  study,  the PAED  scale  
correlated  positively  with  the former  post -operative  behavior  questionnaire  and the scale  
results  correlated  with  clinical  observation s. This  study  also  showed  that  patients  receiving  
newer  volatile  anesthetics  (sevoflurane)  had a higher  incidence  of EA compared  to those  
receiving  halothane  and this correlated  with  clinical  observations  (12) . 
 
Sevo flurane  is a suitable  volatile  anesthetic  for mask  induction  because  of its pleasant  scent  
and lack  of irritation.  It offers  rapid  induction  of anesthesia,  hemodynamic  stability,  and fast 
emergence.   Although,  Anesthesiologists  prefer  these  characteristics  for pediatric  use,  EA 
remains  a considerable  side  effect  of this anesthetic  that  demands  increased  resources  in the 
PACU.   
[ADDRESS_288135]  on EA.   When  considering  intra -operative  analgesic  modalities;  co-
administration  of acetaminophen  in addition  to the standard  opi[INVESTIGATOR_237829] , allows  for 
improvement  of pain  control  without  change  in sensorium , as this non -opi[INVESTIGATOR_237830].   By [CONTACT_237856],  while  holding  the type  of procedure  and 
sedation  cons tant,  we hope  to demonstrate  a decrease  in the incidence  of EA.  Of additional  
interest  is whether  the rate  at which  acetam inophen  achieves  peak  CSF penetration  affects  EA 
outcomes.   It is known  that  the primary  site of action  of acetaminophen  is within  the CNS  and 
that  its pharmacodynamic  effect  is dependent  on achieving  a sufficient  Plasma/CSF  level.   The 
rate  of CSF penetra tion  has been  demonstrated  to occur  earlier , and at a greater  concentration , 
in patients  with  IV administrat ion compared  to PO or PR (16).  PR route  of administration  was  
excluded  in this study  based  on observation  by [CONTACT_237857]. in pediatric  post -tonsi llectomy  
patients  (17) .  The PR plasma  acetaminophen  Tmax  of 3 to 4 hours  was  not effective  in 
achieving  the threshold  plasma  acetaminophen  level  of 10 mcg/mL  in the immediate  post -
operative  phase.  
 
In this study,  we plan  to compare  the incidence  of EA in [ADDRESS_288136] ized  measurement  tool,  the PAED  scale,  to compare  EA in those  receiving  opio id-only  
based  analgesia , (IV fentanyl),   to patients  receiving  multi -modal  analgesia  consisting  of opi[INVESTIGATOR_237831] .  
 
 The inclusion  of adenoidectomy,  or tonsillectomy  with  or without  adenoidectomy  procedures  
was  chosen  due to the known  observation  in clinical  experience  and previou s studies  that  
patients  undergoing  these  specific  ENT  procedu res are at higher  risk  for EA. In a 
comprehens ive review  of EA published  in Anesthesia  and Analgesia , ENT  surgery  was  
identified  as a risk  factor  for increased  incidence  of EA (15).  Some  hypothesize  that  upper  
airway  procedures  may  produce  a sense  of suffocation  when  patients  emerge  from anesthesia . 
It is also  hypothesiz ed that  the short  duration  of and fast emergence  from  the anesthetic  are 
contributing  factors.  The accurate  incidence  of EA in ENT  patients  is hard to quantify,  as 
studies  tend  to report  more  often  on patients  undergoing  ear procedures  that  are known  to be 
of short  duration.  The incidence  of EA reported  by [CONTACT_237858],  showed  the incidence  of EA for adenoidectomy  and adenotonsillectomy  surgery  to be 
between  34.8%  and 43.5%  (7). 
 
[ADDRESS_288137] -operative  pain  scores  and 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_237832] y, (14).  
Recent  studies  have  shown  improved  pain  scores  when  an analgesic  adjunct  is administered  
(6). Acetaminophen  is the safest  and most  commonly  used  analgesic  in the US and worldwide . 
Acetaminophen  is also  the standard  therapy  for post -op discharge  pain management  in 
patients  with  routine  ENT  procedures.  Recent  studies  have  evaluated  the benefits  of adding  IV 
acetamin ophen  or PO acetaminophen  to current  pain regimen s to assess  the effect s of 
lowering  post -operative  pain  scores  and the reduction  in use of rescue doses  of opi[INVESTIGATOR_237833] .  It has been  reported  that  the route  of administration  of acetaminophen  may  
have  an effect  in the duration  of analgesia  in adenotonsillectomy  patients  (13) . This  particular  
work  showed  the duration  of analgesic  effect  was  longer  in patients  receiving  rectal  
acetaminophen . The optimum  route  of administration  of acetaminophen  maybe  unclear  but is 
known  that  different  routes  of administration  can be associated  with different  analgesic  
effects.  Intravenous  acetaminophen  has a faster  onset  and more  predictable  
pharmaco dynamics  than  oral  or rectal  acetaminophen,  which  may  present  a theoretical  
benefit . 
 
 
IV acetaminophen  is approved  for the management  of mild  to mode rate pain  in pediatric  
patients  and the man agement  of moderate  to severe  pain as an adjunctive  to opi[INVESTIGATOR_237834]  [ADDRESS_288138]  between  4 and 6 hours.  Dosing  depends  on patient  
weight  and age,  as well  as the intended  frequency  of administration.  (For all patients  2 to12  
years  of age,  and any patient  weighing  less than  50 kg, the dose  is 12.5  mg/kg  per dose  if using  
an every -4-hour  schedule,  or 15 mg/kg  per dose  if using  an every -6-hour  schedule.  The 
maximum  single  dose  for these  patients  is 15 mg/kg.  The maximum  daily  (24-hour)  dose  for 
these  patients  is 75 mg/kg  (8).)  Acetaminophen  is metabolized  via glucuronidation  and 
sulfation  in the liver.  In neonates  and younger  children , studies  have  shown  preferential  
metabolism  via sulfation,  possibly  indicating  a decreased  risk  of hepatotoxicity  because  
hepatotoxicity  is primarily  due to metabolites  that  arise  from  the glucuronidation  process . 
There  are still concerns  about  hepatotoxicity  primarily  due to the more  bioavailability  of the IV 
formulation  compared  to rectal  and oral  administration s. In addition,  the IV formulation  is 
considera bly more  expensive  compared  to either  the PO or PR routes.    Adverse  reactions  are 
rare  for effects  such  as malaise,  nausea,  abdominal  pain,  rash,  hypotension,  and increased  
levels  of hepatic  transaminases .  Studies,  met -analyses , and literature  review s show that  
appropriate  IV acetaminophen  dosing  compared  to placebo  is not associated  with  
hepatotoxicity.  In general,  most cases  of hepatotoxicity  have  been  associated  with  doses  
greater  than  recommended  and with  concomitant  administration  of acetaminophen -
containing  products  (4, 5). 
 
A recent  study  using  similar  numbers  of patients  per group  as proposed  in this study,  showed  
lower  pain  scores  in groups  receiving  adjunct  administration  of IV acetaminophen  and rectal  
acetaminophen  especially  in the first  few hours  of the post -operative  period (1). Another  study  
4 
Vesrion  2 July28, 2017 Version  3 January  4, 2018  
 showed  no difference  of multi -modal  analgesia  in decreasing  incidence  of EA in routine   ear-
nose -throat  surgery  (2) but did not use standardized  PAED  scale , used  Versed  premedication  
in all patients , and studied  only  short  lasting  ENT  procedure s (Bilateral  Myringotomies  and 
Tube  Placement) .  Our previous  leading  research  study by [CONTACT_237859] , published  in the 
European  literature , showed  no difference  between  the incidences  of EA when  comparing  the 
two  most  commonly  used  volatile  anesthetics , sevoflurane  and desflurane .  Both groups  
recei ved multi -modal  analgesia  using  opi[INVESTIGATOR_237835].  Clinical  observat ions  from  
this study  showed  upon  study  termination  and thus  the decline  in use of adjunct  IV 
acetaminophen,  the incidence  of overt  EA resulted  in a resurgence  of needed  rescue  treatment . 
This  led us to suspect  the improvement  in pain  control  using  adjunct  IV acetaminophen  may  
have  contributed  to the diminished  incidence  of emergence  agitation/delirium  (EA) (7).  
 
6) Objective : The purpose  of the proposed  research  study  is to optimize  postoperative  outcomes  
in children  undergoing  adenoidectomy  or tonsillectomy  with  or without  adenoidectomy,  by 
[CONTACT_237860].  We aim to generate  knowledge  
regarding  the impact  of multi -modal  analgesi a in pediatric  patients  undergoing  the above -
mentioned  surgeries  on the incidence  of EA and post -operative  pain . This  information  will 
assist  anesthesiologists,  parents,  children  and surgeons  when  determining  the most  
appropriate  perioperative  analgesia  to be administered . 
7) Hypothesis:   
The Primary  Hypothesis  is: The incorporation  of acetaminophen  in addition  to standard  opi[INVESTIGATOR_237836] a decreased  incidence  of EA. This  will be evaluated  using  a 
standardized  EA measurement  tool,  the Pediatric  Anesthesia  Emergence  Delirium  (PAED)  
scale  [Appendix  1].  
The Secondary  Hypothesis  is: The route  of acetaminophen  administration  (IV vs PO), will not 
have  an effect  on post-operative  EA or pain management.  This  will be evaluated  by [CONTACT_237861][INVESTIGATOR_237837],  using  the FLACC  score  for patients  24 months  of age to 4 years  of 
age and/ or sedated  patients  at time  of assessment , Wong -Baker  FACES  for patients  between  4 
and 7 years  of age and non -verbal  patients , and the Numeric  Pain  Score  for patients  
equal/ greater  than  7 years  of age.  
The findings  of this study,  which  will assess  common  neurobehavioral  and neurocognitive  
disturbances  after  anesthesia/surgery,  and assessment  of immediate  post -operative  pain  in 
adenoidectomy  or tonsillectomy  with  or without  adenoidectomy , can serve  as an investigative  
platform  for future  studies  invo lving  other  types  of surgery.   
8)  Aims:  In order  to test our hypotheses,  we propose  a prospective,  randomized,  blinded  study  
in pediatric  patients  24 months  through  7 years  of age,  undergoing  adenoidectomy  or 
tonsillectomy  with  or without  adenoidectomy,   with two  specific  aims:   
 
5 
Vesrion  2 July28, 2017 Version  3 January  4, 2018  
  
Specific  Aim  1: To compare  the incidence  of EA in pediatr ic patients  undergoing  
adenoidectomy  or tonsillectomy  with  or without  adenoidectomy  surgery  under  sevoflurane  
anesthesia  when  using  opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480] -only  based  intraoperative  analgesia , (IV fentanyl),   versus  multi -
modal  analgesia  consisting  of IV opi[INVESTIGATOR_237838] . A standardized  EA measurement  tool,  the Pediatric  Anesthesia  
Emergence  Delirium  (PAED)  scale  [Appendix  1] will be the used.  The  primary  endpoint  of this 
aim is the incidence  of EA defined  as PAED  score  >12.  
Specific  Aim  2:  To assess  the effectiveness  of acetaminophen  plus  standard  IV opi[INVESTIGATOR_237839] -operative  pain  management  using  an age-
appropriate  validated  pain  scale . We will accomplish  this by [CONTACT_237862][INVESTIGATOR_237840],  using  the FLACC  Score  for patients  24 months  to 4 years  of age and 
sedated  patients  at time  of assessment , Wong -Baker  FACES  for patients  between  4 and 7 years  
of age,  and Numeric  Pain Scores  for patients  equal/ greater  than  [ADDRESS_288139]  60 minutes  of recovery.  
 
9) Benefits:   Potential  benefits  of this research  study  include  understanding  patients‘  response  to 
their  assigned  perioperative  analgesic  modality  and the possibility  of designing  an analgesic  
plan  for future  surgeries  or painful  procedures  by [CONTACT_237863].    This  study  may  help  us identify  which  perioperative  medicat ion regimen  is more  
beneficial  to use in children  undergoing  adenoidectomy  or tonsillectomy  with  or without  
adenoidectomy   in order  to decrease  agitation,  provide  better  pain  control , and decrease  
exposure  to multiple  opi[INVESTIGATOR_237841].   
10) Place  of Study:   
Nemours  Children’s  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307],  Orlando,  [LOCATION_012]  (Primary  Site)  
Wolfson  Children’s  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307],  Jacksonville,  [LOCATION_012]  (Nemours  Jacksonville  Satellite  Site)  
11) Study  Design:  
a) Prospective  Randomized  Study  
b) Study  Period : October  2017 -March  2018  
c) Potential  participants:  375  – 475  based  on 20-25%  of 4,459  ENT  patients  in 2016  
d) Study  Population:  50 pediatric  patients  in each  group  between  24 months  through  7 years  
of age undergoing  adenoidectomy  or tonsillectomy  with  or without  adenoidectomy  
Total  Number  of Patients:  150  
e)   Based on the preliminary  data based  on study  from  Bedirli  et al. in other  areas  of emergence     
delirium,  we find that a 3-armed  study  with equal  enrollment  in each arm would  provide  
sufficient  power  (90%)  to detect  an effect  size of 0.3 (moderate  effect)  at alpha=0.05.  The 
secondary  hypothesis  would  require  over double  the effect  size (0.7)  at the same  power  (90%)  to 
detect  any differences  in the delivery  route . We recognize  that this aim will be greatly  
underpowered  given  the expected  effect  size of administration  route.  However,  the knowledge  
6 
Vesrion  2 July28, 2017 Version  3 January  4, 2018  
 gained  from  this portion  of the study  will provide  valuable  information  to form  the basis  of a 
larger  multi -centered  trial. 
 
12) Methods  and  Materials:   [ADDRESS_288140]  for pediatric  induction  anesthesia.  These  three  groups , (study  arms) , are identified  as 
follows:  
Group  A: multi -modal  analgesia  of IV fentanyl  plus  IV acetaminophen  and oral  place bo 
Group  B: multi-modal  analgesia  of IV fentanyl  plus  PO acetaminophen  and IV placebo  
 
Group  C: single  modal  analg esia  of IV fentanyl  plus oral  placebo  and IV placebo  
 
Pre-operative  procedures:   The Research  Pharmacy  will have  the followi ng standards  for 
randomization:  prior  to patient  surgery  date;  the pharmacy  will assemble  study  kits to contain  
the appropriate  drug  products  based  on the 3 randomization  scenarios:   A. IV Tylenol  and Oral  
Placebo,  B. IV Placebo  and Oral  Tylenol,  or C. IV Placebo  and Oral  Placebo.   The kits will be kept  
in the pharmacy  and identified  in a blinded  fashion  from  other  study  team  members.   On the 
day of surgery,  (patient  dosing  day) , blinded  study  team  member  will provide  the signed  study  
consent  to pharmacist,  along with  the patient’s  weight  to be used in calculating  dosa ges of 
study  drug.   The pharmacist  will then  assign  the patient  to 1 of 3 study  arms,  in a random  
approach.  Randomization  will be performed  by [CONTACT_2329]  a method  based  on the biased  coin  
method  using  a dynamic  urn technique  (11).  Once  the study  arm  has been  determined,  a study  
number  will be assigned  and the corresponding  kit will be used  to prepare  the study  drugs  by 
[CONTACT_237864].  The blinded , randomized  study  kit information  will be kept  in a locke d Excel  
spreadsheet,  with  password  access , only  available  to pharmacy  team  members.   All study  
drug s will be checked  and verified  by a licensed  pharmacist  prior  to dispensing  to a blinded  
study  team  member.  
 
None  of the study  patients  will receive  premedication  for sedation.  Premedication  is not a 
standard  treatment  at Nemours  Children’s  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]  (NCH)  as NCH  allows  parental  presence  
during  induction  of anesthesia  to facilitate  the transport  of the patient  to the operating  room  
and decrease  separation  anxiety.  Wolfson  Children’s  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_237842].  Parental  presence  is an appropriate  substitute  for sedation  premedication.   In 
the pre-operative  area,  all patients  will receiv e a de-identified  PO syrup.   The syrup  will be 
prepared  by [CONTACT_237865]  (15 mg/kg  -160mg/5mL  
Manufacturer:  Major  Pharmaceuticals),  for the PO acetaminophen  group  and placebo  flavored  
syrup  (Manufacturer:  Humco,  Ingredients:  Sucrose  82.3%,  Purified  Water,  Artificial  Flavors,  
0.1%  Sodium  Benzoate  as a preservative,  Critic  Acid,  FDC  Red  #40,  and inert  ingredients),  for 
the other  two  groups.   This  approach  will maintain  blindness  of the peri -operative  staff,  and 
patients/parents/g uardians.  
7 
Vesrion  2 July28, 2017 Version  3 January  4, 2018  
  
Intraoperative  Procedures  and  Administration  of intra -op analgesia:   Before  induction  of 
anesthesia  the pre-induction  vital  signs  will be reviewed  and ASA  standard  monitors  will be 
applied.  Standard  ASA  monitors  include  blood  pressure,  ECG,  pulse  oxymetry,  etCO2  
measurement,  respi[INVESTIGATOR_237843].  Induction  of anesthesia  will be accomplished  
via inhalation  of sevoflurane  (8 vol%)  in nitrous  oxide  (70%)  and oxygen  (30%)  at a fresh  gas 
flow  of 10 Lpm.  An IV will be established  and propofol  2mg/Kg  will be administered  to 
facilitate  endotracheal  intubation.  After  intubation,  all children  will receive  fentanyl  (West -
Ward  Pharmaceuticals)   2 mcg/kg.    IV Fentanyl  is considered  standard  of care  for analgesia  
regimen  for these  types  of surg ery. Intra -op anesthesia  team  will be blinded  to the use of non -
opi[INVESTIGATOR_237844]  a pharmacy  prepared  de-identified  infusion  (pharmacy  
will blind  the IV formulation  of acetaminophen  and all pharmacy  formulations  will follow  
regulation  797  compounding  standards),  following  intubation  that  will consist  of 0.9%  normal  
saline  (Baxter  Pharmaceuticals),  placebo  for control  groups  and IV acetaminophen  (15 mg/kg,  
- 1000mg/100  cc Mallinckrodt  Pharmaceuticals)  for the IV acetaminophen  group.  The 
maximum  single  dose  will be [ADDRESS_288141]  will infuse  for 15 minutes  as recommended  by [CONTACT_13989].  For maintenance  of anesthesia,  children  will receive  sevoflurane  (maxi mum  of 
2.0±0.2  MAC,  age adjusted)  with  a constant  fresh  gas flow  of 2 L/min  (maximum  FIO2  of 30%  
air mixed  with  oxygen),  using  a semi -closed  circle  breathing  system.  Ventilation  will be 
controlled  to maintain  normocapnia  (ET-CO2  32-38 mmHg).  Additional  doses of fentanyl  can 
be administered,  per anesthesiologist’s  discretion,  in all groups  by [CONTACT_237866] 0.5 mcg/Kg  
IV per dose  for hemodynamic  response  to surgical  stimulation  greater  than  20%  above  
baseline.   Removal  of the mouth  gag for tonsillectomy/tonsi llectomy  and 
adenoidectomy/adenoidectomy  will be defined  as the end of surgery.  At this point,  inhalation  
anesthetic  will be discontinued.  Fresh  gas flow  will be increased  to a minimum  of 8 Lpm,  100%  
oxygen.  Tracheal  extubation  will be performed  when  norma l ventilation  is achieved  and cough  
or gag reflex  is regained.    
 
13) Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria:   
 
Inclusion  Criteria:  
 
a) Patients  who  are 24 months  through  7 years  of age 
b) Patients  who  weigh  <50 kg 
c) Patients  who  are able  to take  PO medications  
d) Patients  who  are ASA  Classification  I and II 
e) Patients  who  are found  to be a candidate  after  clinical  review  of detailed  History  and 
Physical  Exam,  review  of Polysomnogram  or Pediatric  Sleep  Questionnaire  
f) Patients  who  are scheduled  for routine  adenoidectomy  or tonsillec tomy  with  or without  
adenoidectomy  not in conjunction  with  another  invasive  or diagnostic  procedure          
g) Patients  who  meet  clinical  indications  for surgery                                                                                  
 
 
 
       Exclusion  Criteria:  
8 
Vesrion  2 July28, 2017 Version  3 January  4, 2018  
 a) Children  with  a history  of developmental  delay  or psycholog ical disorders  that  may  be at higher  
risk  for EA as determined  by [CONTACT_237867]  
b) Patients  with  previous  hypersensitivity  to oral  or intravenous  acetaminophen , fentanyl   or 
any    of its components  or ingredients  in placebo , 
c) Patients  with  severe  hepatic  impairment  or sever e active  hepatic  disease  
d) Patients  with  previous  history  of Maligna nt Hyperthermia  or susceptibility  to volatile  
anesthetics    agents  like sevoflurane   
e) Any  patient  who  weighs  >50 Kg.  
f) Any  patient  that  require s premedication . Versed  may  contribute  to an increase  in EA. 
Premedication  is reserved  when  parental  presence  is not feasible  or for very  anxious  
children.   
g) Patients  unable  to take  PO (acetaminophen  or placebo)  will be excluded  from  the study.   
h) Children  with  severe  symptomatic  sleep  apnea  that  require  post -operative  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] . 
i) Severe  symptomatic  sleep  apnea  is defined  as a- patients  who  has a pre-operative  
polysomnogram  and a calculated  Apnea -Hypoxia  Index  greater  than  10 b- patients  with  
high  scoring  in Pediatric  Sleep  Questionnaire  (PSQ )  
j) Patients  with  severe  symptoms  and findings  in physical  exam  that  require  post -operative  
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_105904].   
k) Participant  is currently  participating  or has within  the previous  30 days,  participated  in 
another  clinical  trial/research  study  
 
14) Screening/Con sent  Process :   Potential  participants  will be identified  and receive  basic  
 
Bring ing the consent  form  home  to review,  allows  the family  time  to discuss  study  
participation  among  themselves,  reach  out to other  family  members  or physicians  for advice.  
Providing  this form  in advance  will help  the participants  and parents/guardians  to distinguish  
the difference  between  the study  cons ent and surgery -related  consent.  The research  team  will 
obtain  consent  the day of surgery.  The potential  participants  will be brought  to the pre-
operative  area  two  hours  prior  to scheduled  procedure  to allow  ample  time  to review  the 
research  study  consent  once  more  and have  any additional  questions  answer ed prior  to 
signing  the consent . The research  team  will assure  that  the child,  (as appropriate),  and parent  
or guardian  has the capacity  to understand  and make  a decision  about  their  child’s  
participation  in a resea rch study.  The study  investigators,  (P.I.’s/Co -I.’s),  study  
anesthesiologists , will obtain  PP consent  and Assent  for eligible  children.   A signed  and dated  
copy  of all consents  forms  will be given  to the parents.  
 
15)14) Intraoperativ e Standardization  and  Procedures :  The surgical  technique  will be 
standardized  and a limited  group  of three  surgeon s per clinical  site that  share  same  
surgical  technique  which  will be agreed  upon  at the start  of the clinical  phase.  This  technique  
will consist  of only  Teflon  blade  cautery  and will require  no peri -tonsilar  local  anesthetic  
injection . The number  of anesthesia  providers  involved  in the study  will be limited  to two  
anes thesiologists  per clinical  site.  The  anesthesiologists  involved  on the clinical  component  of 
9 
Vesrion  2 July28, 2017 Version  3 January  4, 2018  
 the protocol  are those  who are part  of the research  study  team.   Sevoflurane  will be used  for 
induction  and maintenance  of anesthesia  for all groups.  Study  participants  will receive  one of 
the three  analgesia  regimens  per their  indivi dual  randomized  treatment:  
1- IV fentanyl  plus  oral  placebo  and IV placebo  
2- IV fentanyl  plus  IV acetaminophen  plus  oral  placebo  
3- IV fentanyl  plus  PO acetaminophen  and IV placebo  
16)15) Post -Operative  Standardization  and   Measurements:   The post -operative  pain  
manageme nt approach  will be restricted  to fentanyl  (0.5  mcg/Kg  IV/dose  titrated  to effect)  for 
moderate  to severe  pain.   Ibuprofen  (10mg/Kg)  PO will be ordered  for mild  to moderate  post -
op pain.  Post -op recovery  staff  will be limited  to a maximum  of three  trained  PACU  nurses  per 
site and will use FLA CC Scale  for age 24 month  to 4 years  of age and sedated  patients  at time  of 
assessment , Wong -Baker  FACES  for patients  4 to 7 years  of age and non -verbal  patients  and 
Numeric  Pain  Score for patients  equal/greater  than  7 years  of age to assess  level  of pain.  
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865] s of clinical  emergence  agitation/delirium  (EA),  will receive  rescue  treatment.  This  
treatment  will consist  of 0.5 – 1.0 mcg/Kg  IV dexmedetomidine.  Our UCF  psychiatry  faculty  
will review  all case s of clinical  EA.  This  member  of our team,  who  is an expert  in EA, will 
assess  every  case  to exclude  organic,  pharmacologic  and situational  causes  for EA.  This  
analysis  will be conducted  on a quarterly  basis  and will assist  us in making  necessary  study  
adjustments.  
Age, gender,  height,  weight,  procedure,  duration  of surgery,  intra -op agents  used,  exposure  and 
time  of discontinuation  of anesthesia  to extubation  will be documented  for each  patient.  A 
blinded  PACU  nurse  will monitor  the patient.  The Post -anesthesia  unit  monitoring  standards  
consist  of HR, Blood  Pressure,  pulse -oxymetry  and respi[INVESTIGATOR_237845]  [ADDRESS_288142]  the pain  scores  
using  either  the FLACC  for patients  24 months  to 4 years  of age and patients  who  are sedated  
at time  of assessment , Wonk -Baker  FACES  for patients  4 to 7 years  of age and non -verbal  
patients  and Numeric  Pain  Scores  for patients  equal/greater  than  [ADDRESS_288143].  These  nurses  will all be experienced  in 
the use of PAED  scale.  There  will be three;  two -hour  study  training  sessions  at each  clinical  site 
for PACU  participating  nurs es. PACU  nurses  assigned  to this study  will be selecting  the 
Modified  Aldrete  scores  (respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516],  O2saturation,  consciousness,  circulation,  activity)  and 
documenting  adverse  events  (nausea,  vomiting,  shivering,  breath -holding,  excessive  
secretions,  laryngospasm,  excessive  bleeding)  which  will be recorded.  Children  will be 
considered  discharge  ready  with  an Aldrete  score  ≥9, and this will be recorded  as previously  
stated . 
 
17)16) Adverse  Even ts (AE) /Data  Safety  Monitoring:   
10 
Vesrion  2 July28, 2017 Version  3 January  4, 2018  
       Oversight  Responsibilities : Oversight  of the trial  is provided  by [CONTACT_45822]       
      (PI)  and Co-Investigators.  
 
     Monitoring  Procedures : 
 The investigative  team  assures  that  informed  consent  is obtained  prior  to performing  any 
research  procedures,  that  all subjects  meet  eligibility  criteria,  and that  the study  is conducted  
according  to the IRB-approved  research  protocol.   Study  data  are accessible  at all times  for the 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_44293].  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_6254]-investigators  review  study  conduct  accrual,  dropouts , protocol  
deviations , interim  results  and potential  protocol  modifications  on a monthly  basis.   The PI [INVESTIGATOR_21547]-investigators  review  AEs individually  in real -time  and in aggregate  on a monthly  basis.  The 
research  team  can decide  to terminate  the study  at any time  when  analyzing  report s of adverse  
events.  The possibility  of adverse  events  is very  low.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_237846],  
AEs,  and SAEs  are reported  to the sponsor  (UCF  or Baptist  Health ) IRB and FDA  (under  IND  
Safety  Report  312.32)  according  to the applicable  regulatory  requirements.  
 
There  will be a mandatory  progress  report  to UCF  on July 1st, October  1st and December  15th 
2017 , this will be reported  to all study  sites .  
 
       Collection  and  Reporting  of SAEs  and  AEs : 
       For this study,  the following  standard  AE definitions  are used:  
 
Adverse  event:   Any  unfavorable  and unintended  sign,  symptom  or disease  temporally  
associated  with  the use of a medical  treatment  or procedure,  regardless  of whether  it is 
considered  related  to the medical  treatment  or procedure.  
 
Serious  Adverse  Event:   Any  AE that  results  in any of the following  outcomes:  
 
• Life-threatening  event  
• Event  requiring  inpatient  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_141065]  
• Death  
• Congenital  anomaly  
• Persistent  or significant  disability/incapacity  
• Required  intervention  to prevent  permanent  impairment/damage  
          Criteria  for Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_237847] : 
 
• Any  number  of deaths   
• After  2 non -fatal  SAEs  
• After  any severe  neurological  event  
• After  any 3 events  where  there  is a moderate  neurologic  adverse  event  which  is 
alleviated  with  simple  therapeutic  treatments  
AEs are graded  according  to the following  scale:  
 
 Mild:   An experience  that  is transient,  and requires  no special  treatment  or intervention.  
The experience  does  not generally  interfere  with  usual  daily  activities.   
11 
Vesrion  2 July28, 2017 Version  3 January  4, 2018  
 Moderate:   An experience  that  is alleviated  with  simple  therapeutic  treatments .  
 
Severe :  An experience  that  requires  therapeutic  intervention.  If overnight  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_237848],  it becomes  an SAE.   
 
The study  uses  the following  AE attribution  scale :  
 
Not related:   The AE is clearly  not related  to the study  procedures  or treatments  (i.e.,  
another  cause  of the event  is most  plausible  and/or  a clinically  plausible  temporal  
sequence  is inconsistent  with  the onset  of the event).    
 
Possibly  related:   An event  that  follows  a reasonable  temporal  sequence  from  the 
initiation  of study  procedures,  but that  could  readily  have  been  produced  by a number  of 
other  factors.  
 
 Definitely  Related:   The AE is clearly  related  to the study  procedures.    
 
AEs identified  will be captured  in real  time  as they  become  known . AEs that  result  in visits  to 
the ED and/or  outpatient  clinic s will be monitored  at each  site through  their  readmission -
monitoring  program  and reported  to the department  of Anesthesiology  by [CONTACT_237868].  In addition,  all AEs are reported  in Orlando  according  to the Nemours  IRB AE 
reporting  guidelines  and in Jacksonville,  according  to the Baptist  Health  IRB AE guidelines.  
 
Treatment  of AEs:  
In case of a symptomatic  event  where  a severe  adverse  event  or any SAE  is noticed , the 
blinding  can be broken  by [CONTACT_163459]  a sealed  envelope  that  contains  the assigned  drugs  in the 
randomization  process  and appropriate  treatment  will be institu ted. These  patients  will be 
withdrawn  from  the study  but the clinical  and research  team  will continue  to collect  safety  
information .  This data  will be included  in the safety  database  and reported  during  monthly  
meetings.   Nem ours  will assure  that  the part icipant  receives  treatment,  if needed  , for study -
related  injuries.  Neither  Nemours  nor the study  doctor  has a program  to pay for medical  care  
provided  to treat  the injury.  If the participant  has health  insurance,  it may  , or may  not, pay for 
the cost  of treatment  resulting  from  a study -related  injury.  If the participant’s  insurance  does  
not pay,  or if the participant  does  not have  insurance,  the participant’s  parent/legal  authorized  
representative  may  be responsible  for paying  for the cost  of treatment.  The 
investigator/institution  will ensure  that  adequate  medic al care  is provided  to a research  
participant  for any adverse  events,  including  clinically  significant  laboratory  values,  related  to 
the trial.  The investigator/institution  will inform  the subject  when medical  care  is needed.  All 
AE/SAEs  will be followed  through  their  resolution  or until  the investigator  attributes  the 
AE/SAEs  to a cause  other  than  the study  drug  or assesses  them  as chronic  or stable.   
 
Ameliorating  Measures : 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_237849]/ delirium  (EA),  will receive  rescue  treatment.  This  
treatment  will consist  of 0.5 – 1.0 mcg/Kg  IV dexmedetomidine  as previously  stated .  
 
[ADDRESS_288144]  
 
A. Scientific Significance:  This study protocol is designed to address the scientific necessity 
of intra -op and post -op pain management options that are most appropriate in children 
undergoing common surgical procedures. This protocol addresses one of the most common 
risks associated with anesthetics in children less than 7 years of age, emergence agitation (EA).  
Evidence and clinical knowledge have shown that  pain and emergence agitation negatively 
affect children’s well -being in the post -operative period. This protocol will likely yield 
generalizable knowledge about subjects’ post -operative pain and agitation  that is of vital 
importance for the understanding and amelioration of these two conditions.  
 
B. Risk/Benefit Assessment:  As defined by [ADDRESS_288145]’s future surgical or painful 
invasive procedure,  while studying the indirect beneficial science of knowing whi ch pain 
regimen is most affective  for patients undergoing adenoidectomy or tonsillectomy with or 
without adenoidectomy  surgery , while  offering adequate pain relief with  a lower incidence of 
adverse events  including EA . As defined in our intro duction, patients of the study  age range 
and type of surgery are at high est risk for EA . When balancing the direct and indirect benefits, 
the investi gative team feels that these benefits present an acceptably low risk that is at 
minimal  or slightly more than minimal risk given adult testing and clinical experience and 
pediatric stud ies of this FDA -approved drug. The research  team feels that the balance  between 
anticipated direct and indirect benefits versus  expressed risks is favorable.  
Plan for Data Management :  
• Compli ance  of regulatory  documents  as well  as study  data  accuracy  and completeness , will 
be monitored  through  an internal  study  team  quality  assurance  process.   
• Confidentiality  throughout  the trial  is maintained  by [CONTACT_237869],  limited  access  locations  or password  protected  computer  files  on the Nemours  
server.  Hard  copy  records  will be stored  in a protecte d and limi ted access  location  at each  
individual  site.    
Withdrawal  Considerations : 
[ADDRESS_288146]  can withdraw  at any time  from  participati ng in the 
research  study . 
 
1) Participants  are to be withdrawn  when  a participant /parent/guardian  does  not consent  to 
continu ed voluntary  study  participation.  
2) Participants  and/or  parents/guardians  can request  withdrawal  at any time  during  the 
research  study . Data  collected  up to point  of withdrawal  will remain  part  of the study  
database  and subject  to confidentiality  protections . When  voluntary  withdrawal  is 
requested,  the research  team  will honor  this request  immediately  and completely  as 
allowed  by [CONTACT_2371]. Understanding  the fact that  this is a one-time  intervention,  a withdr awal  
request  will result  in permanent  study  withdrawal.  
3) Participants  can be withdrawn  from  protocol  if during  the course  of the protocol:  a newly  
discovered  clini cal aspect  increases  the participant’s  risk;  the participant  experiences  an 
unexpected  adverse  event  that  the research  physician  feels  would  require  study  
withdrawal,  the participant  experiences  any seriou s adverse  events;  or the participant  no 
longer  qualifies  for research  study  participation . 
4) All clinical  study  data  will be maintained,  per regulat ions,  including  data  on participants  
who  withdraw  voluntarily  or participants  withdrawn  by [CONTACT_237870].  All 
withdrawn  participants  will be notified  of their  termination.  The obtained  data  will be 
recorded  on the CRF  and may  include  demographic  information,  vital  function  monitoring , 
drugs  administered  and recovery  room  observations  including  emergence  agitation  and 
pain  assessment  scores.  
5) The research  team  does  not plan  to replace  participants  who  withdraw.  
6) Participants  who  withdraw  prior  to the interventional  portion  or who  will not consent  for 
follow  up, will have  their  protected  health  information  maintained  as private  and not 
assessed  by [CONTACT_237871] .  
7) Follow -up: If the participant  agrees  with  follow  up after  withdrawal,  the follow -up may  
include  obtaining  a 24-hour  post -operative  call to assess  side  effects  or adverse  event  
during  the immediate  post -operative  period.  This  post -withdrawal  assessment  will follow  
clinical  guidelines  and the research  team  members  who  are treating  physicians  must  clarify  
their  role  as a clinician.  Information  obtained  after  withdrawal  during  follow -up 
proceedings  will not be used  for research  considerations  unless  there  is separate  consent.  
8) The total  number  of participants  who  complete  the entire  study  protocol  will be at least  
150.  
  
18)17) Statistical  Analysis /Outcome  Measures,  Sample  Size  Rationale :  All statistical  
analysis  will be performed  in SPSS  v23 (IBM  Corp.).  Data  will be assessed  for normal  
distribution  via Kolmogorov -Smirnov  test.  For continuous  variables,  normally  distributed  data  
will be analyzed  using  t-test and ANOVA . Non -normal  distributions  will be analyze d with  non -
parametric  methods  (Mann -Whitney  U). For discrete/categorical  variables,  Chi-squared  and 
gamma  testing  will be performed  as appropriate.  Time -dependent  data  will be analyzed  via 
ANOVA  with  repeated  measures  or Wilcoxon -Ranked  Sum  testing  as appro priate  based  normal  
distribution  testing.  All testing  will be performed  with  α=0.05  to determine  statistical  
significance.   
14 
Vesrion  2 July28, 2017 Version  3 January  4, 2018  
 Outcomes  measure s from  this study  are based  upon  the PAED  assessment  scale  and pain  
scores.  The primary  hypothesis  is that  multi -mod al analgesia  reduces  PAED.  The secondary  
hypothesis  postulates  that  there  is no diffe rence  in PAED  or pain  scores  dependent  on the 
route  of acetaminophen  administration.  We will assume  that  the data  is normally  distributed  
for the purposes  of this study,  and all comparisons  will be made  using  simple  ANOVA  testing.  
This  requires  two  separate  computations  of estimated  sample  size.   
The sample  size  estimation  is based  on data  from  Bedirli  et al.(18)  which  compared  the effects  
of Tramadol  (N=39)  vs dexmedetomid ine (Dex;  N=38)  in pediatric  patients  undergoing  
tonsillectomy  and adenoidectomy  (T&A). They  found  that  Tramadol  had an arrival  EA score  of 
14 (3-17),  while  the Dex  patients  had an EA score  of 15 (0-17).  They  also  found  an 
observational  pain  score  (OPS)  of 3 (2-5) for Tramadol,  and 5 (3-8) for Dex;  and the Ramsay  
sedation  scores  were  2 (2-2) and 4 (2-5) after  15 minutes  in the PACU  for Tramadol  and Dex,  
respectively.  The  authors  concluded  that  the EA and OPS  were  not statistically  different  
(p>0.05),  but that the Dex group  had a higher  sedation  score  after  15 minutes  in the PACU  
(p<0.05).  
 
Using  the results  from  their  study,  the effect  size  on EA was  0.08;  finding  a difference  in EA 
between  these  two  drugs  for a two -tailed  analysis  with  alpha=0.05  and beta=0 .2 (Power  80%)  
would  require  a total  sample  size  of 4192.  The effect  size  on OPS  was  0.51,  requiring  [ADDRESS_288147] with  alpha=0.05  and bet=0.2  
(Power  80%).  For Sedation  score,  the effect  size  was  1.3, requiring  [ADDRESS_288148] at alpha=0.05  and beta=0.2  (Power  80%).   
Regardless  of the outcome  measure,  it is simple  to calculate  the necessary  population  for 
which  this study  can be done  using  GPower  (v 3.0.10).  The first  aim of the study is a three -
armed  blinded  study,  which  can be estimated  using  an ANOVA  analysis  for 3 groups.  The plot  
below  depi[INVESTIGATOR_237850]  (assuming  equal  numbers  of patients  in each  
group)  for a two -tailed  analysis  at alpha=0.[ADDRESS_288149]  size  of 0.3 is reasonable  for a study  such  as 
this and would  still provide  high  power  (>90%)   (Figure  1).  
 
[ADDRESS_288150] for 
alpha=0.[ADDRESS_288151]  size  of 0.7 would  be 
required  to achieve  a study  power  of 90%,  which  indicates  that  a stark  difference  in route  
of administration  would  be required  for detection  at sufficient  power  levels  to consider  the 
difference  real.  A small  effect  (0.2)  would  require  almost  5,00 0 patients,  which  is beyond  
the expectations  of a single -center  study.  
Overall,  based  on the preliminary  data  based  on study  from  Bedirli  et al. in other  areas  
of emergence  delirium,  we find  that  a 3-armed  study  with  equal  enrollment  in each  
arm  would  prov ide sufficient  power  (90%)  to detect  an effect  size  of 0.3 (moderate  
effect)  at alpha=0.05.  The  secondary  hypothesis  would  require  over  double  the effect  
size  (0.7)  at the same  power  (90%)  to detect  any  differences  in the delivery  route.  We 
recognize  that  this  aim  will  be greatly  underpowered  given  the expected  effect  size  of 
administration  route.  However,  the knowledge  gained  from  this  portion  of the study  
will  provide  valuable  information  to form  the basis  of a larger  multi -centered  trial.  
 
 
 
Figure  1: Plot of sample  size vs study  power  using  ANOVA  fixed  effects  for a 3-
armed  study.  Each  curve  is based  upon  an individual  effect  size.  
16 
Vesrion  2 July28, 2017 Version  3 January  4, 2018  
  
 
 
19)18) References:  
(1)-Paediatric  Anaesthesiology  2010  Nov;20(11):[ADDRESS_288152]  H, Seidel  K, Lynn  A. 
 
(2)- Duggan  ST, Scott  LJ. Intravenous  paracetamol  (acetaminophen).  
Drugs.  2009;69(1):[ADDRESS_288153]  Journal  of Anaesthesio gly, 2016  June;  23(5):543 -8. 
Comparison  of the effects  of preemptive  intravenous  and rectal  acetaminophen  on pain  
management  after  inguinal  herniorrhaphy  in children:  a placebo -controlled  study.  
 
Khalili  GR, Shafa  A, Yousefi  R. 
 
(3)- Allegaert  K, Anderson  BJ, Naulaers  G, et al. Intravenous  paracetamol  
(propacetamol)  pharmacokinetics  in term  and preterm  neonates.  European  
Journal  of Clinical  Pharmacology  2004;60(3):191 -197.  
 
(4)- Allegaert  K, Rayyan  M, De Rijdt  T, Van  Beek  F, Naulaers  G. Hepatic  
Figure 2:  Plot of sample size vs study power using t -test difference for means with equal 
group size. Each curve is based upon an individual effect size.  
17 
Vesrion  2 July28, 2017 Version  3 January  4, 2018  
 tolerance  of repeated  intravenous  paracetamol  administration  in neonates.  
Paediatric  Anaesthesiology  2008;18(5):388 -392.  
 
(5)- Palmer  GM, Atkins  M, Anderson  BJ, et al. I.V. acetaminophen  
pharmacokinetics  in neonates  after  multiple  doses.  British  Journal  of Anaesthesiology  
2008;101(4):523 -530.   
 
(6)- Tobias  JD. Weak  analgesics  and nonsteroidal  anti -inflammatory  
agents  in the management  of children  with  acute  pain.  Pediatric  Clinician  
North  America.  2000;47(3):527 -543.  
 
(7)- Jeremy N. DRISCOLL, Brian M. BENDER,  Carlos A. ARCHILLA, Carol M. KLIM, J. HOSSAIN, 
George MYCHASKIW II,  Julie L. WEI   
Comparing  incidence  of emergence  delirium  between  sevoflurane  and desflurane  in children  
following  routine  otolaryngology  procedures,  Minerva  Anestesiologica  , 2016;  NOV  30 
 
(8) Ofirmev  Production  Information,  Mallinckrodt  Pharmaceuticals,  2017  OFV  1683  02/17  
 
(9) Smessaert  A, Schehr  CA, Artusio  JF Jr. Observations  in the immediate  postanaesthesia  period.  
II. Mode  of recovery.  British  Journal  of Anaesthesiology  1960;32:181 –5.  
(10)  Welborn  LG, Hannallah  RS, Norden  JM, Ruttimann  UE, Callan  CM. Comparison  of emerg ence  
and recovery  characteristics  of sevoflurane,  desflurane,  and halothane  in pediatric  ambulatory  
patients.  Anesthesia  and Analgesia  1996;83:917 –20.  
(11)  Schulz  KF, Grimes  DA. Generation  of allocation  sequences  in randomised  trials:  chance,  not 
choice.  The Lancet  2002;359:515 -519.  
 
(12)  Development  and Psychometric  Evaluation  of the Pediatric  Anesthesia  Emergence  Delirium  
Scale  
Nancy  Sikich,  M.Sc.,  R.N. ; Jerrold  Lerman,  B.A.Sc.,  M.D.,  F.R.C.P.C.,  F.A.N.Z.C.A.  
Anesthesiology  5 2004,  Vol.100,  1138 -1145.   
 
(13)  Capi[INVESTIGATOR_37180]  F, Ingelmo  PM, Davidson  A, et al. Randomized  controlled  trial  of duration  of analgesia  
following  intravenous  or rectal  acetaminophen  after  adenotonsillectomy  in children.  British  
Journal  of Anaesthesiology  2008;100:251 –255.  
(14) Opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480] -sparing  effects  of perioperative  paracetamol  and nonsteroidal  anti -inflammatory  
drugs  (NSAIDs)  in children  
Ivan  Wong ,1,[ADDRESS_288154] John -Green ,2 and Suellen  M Walker 1,3 
Paediatric  Anaesthesiology : 2013  Jun;  23(6):  475 –495.  
Published  online  2013  Apr 9. doi:  10.1111/pan.[ZIP_CODE]  
 
18 
Vesrion  2 July28, 2017 Version  3 January  4, 2018  
 (15) Emergence delirium in children: many questions, few answers : Vlaikovic, GP, Sindielic, RP, 
Anesth esia and  Analg esia  2007 Jan ; 104 (1):84-91 
(16)  Plasma and cerebrospi[INVESTIGATOR_237851] -dose administration 
of intravenous, oral, or rectal acetaminophen.  
Singla NK1, Parulan C , Samson R , Hutchinson J , Bushnell R , Beja EG , Ang RRoyal MA  
Pain  Practice.  2012  Sep;12(7):523 -32. doi:  10.1111/j.1533 -2500.2012.[ZIP_CODE].x.  Epub  2012  Apr 
24. 
(17) Analgesic efficacy of paracetamol in children using tonsillectomy as a pain model.  
Anderson  B1, Kanagas undarum  S, Woollard  G.   
 
Anaesthesia  Intensive  Care . 1996  Dec;24(6):669 -73. 
 
(18)  Tramadol vs dexmedetomidine for emergence agitation control in pediatric  
patients undergoing adenotonsillectomy with sevoflurane anesthesia: prospective  
randomized controlled clinical study  
Nurdan Bedirli* , Mehmet Akçabay and Ulku Emik  
BMC Anesthesiology (2017) 17:41  
DOI 10.1186/s12871 -017 -0332 -4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
Vesrion  2 July28, 2017 Version  3 January  4, 2018  
 APPENDIX  1: Pediatric  Anesthesia  Delirium  (PAED)  Scale  
SCORE  
1. The child  makes  eye contact  [CONTACT_237872].  
 
2. The child’s  actions  are purposeful.  
 
3. The child  is aware  of his or her surroundings.  
4.  4 = Not at all 
3 = Just  a little  
2 = Quite  a bit 
1 = Very  much  
0 = Extremely  
5.4. The child  is restless.  
 
6.5. The child  is inconsolable.  0 = Not at all 
1 = Just  a little  
2 = Quite  a bit 
3 = Very  much  
4 = Extremely  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Formatted:  Indent:  Left:  0.5",  No bullets  or numbering
20 
Vesrion  2 July28, 2017 Version  3 January  4, 2018  
  
CRF  
 
Name:  
[CONTACT_34579]:  
Height:  
Patient  #: 
Date:  
History:  
Diagnosis:  
Operation:  
Surgeon  : 
 Age:  
MRN:  
Weight:  
BMI:  
Group:  (circle  below)  
Opi[INVESTIGATOR_237852]  - 
Opi[INVESTIGATOR_237835] - 
Opi[INVESTIGATOR_237853] - 
Anesthesiologist:  
  
 
21 
 Anesthesia  Induction:  
Time:    MAP:    HR:    SpO 2: 
Hypnotic:  Sevo           % 
Analgesia:   Fentanyl           µg,     
IV acetaminophen              mg,      
PO acetaminophen             mg 
Postoperative  analgesia:  
Intubation  Time  :  
Surgical  Start  Time : 
 
 
Anesthesia  Maintenance:  
Sevo:                    MAC  
Time:    MAP:    HR:    SpO 2: 
Time  End  of Surgery:    Time  End  of Sevo:  
Time  End  of Extubation:   FGF:   L/min  
 
Time:    MAP:    HR:    SpO 2: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[ADDRESS_288155]  (Time:                   to                     ) 
 Admissi
on to 
PACU  15 min  30 min  45 min  60 min    Discharg
e from  
PACU  
PAED  
Scale          
Modified  
Aldrete  
Scores          
FLACC           
Wong -
Baker  
FACES          
Numeric  
Pain  
Score          
Pain  
Meds  
Used   
(Fentany
l Dose;  
Ibuprofe
n)         
 
Adverse  events  to be documented:   
Nausea  
Vomiting  
Shivering   
 
23 
 Breath -holding  
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_237854]  – rash  
Skin  reaction  – discoloration  including  jaundice  
Abdominal  Pain  
Hypotension  
Death  
Unplanned  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_237855]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 