Version 4.[ADDRESS_934499] Update: 28 May 2019  Implementing and Evaluating Computer-Based Interventions for Mental Health: Testing an Implementation Strategy for VA Outpatient Care  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
Version 4.[ADDRESS_934500] 2018 Page 2	 1. Purpose: The purpose of this study is to evaluate the preliminary (1) effectiveness of an implementation strategy for Internet-based Self-help Interventions and (2) clinical outcomes of a specific Internet-based self-help program for insomnia, SHUTiTM, in VACT outpatient primary care. Internet-based self-help programs are personalized, self-guided interventions delivered over a computer, mobile device, or other Internet platform and focused on improving knowledge, awareness, or behavior change for a mental or physical health problem.[ADDRESS_934501] (protocol EH0002), we are developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a general strategy for implementing Internet-based Self-help programs in VA primary care, specifically among Patient Aligned Care Teams (PACT) and Primary Care Mental Health Integration (PCMHI) teams. An implementation strategy is defined as a systematic intervention to integrate evidence-based health innovations into usual care.[ADDRESS_934502] consists of four core components: (1) a clinical intermediary for patient support, (2) provider/staff facilitation and education, (3) patient education, and (4) stepped-care for those requiring additional treatment. Our currently approved protocol (EH0002) involves interviewing VA providers, administrators, and staff in order to expand and modify the components of this strategy. In the proposed study, we will compare this strategy to an enhanced usual care (control) strategy with respect to the implementation related outcomes of patent engagement, provider adoption through referral to the program, and patient completion, over a eight-month active implementation period. There are evidence-based Internet-based self-help programs for many mental and behavioral health problems common in primary care such as depression, anxiety, problematic alcohol use, etc.  We will target insomnia and use the SHUTiTM program, a 6-week self-guided program utilizing standard cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) techniques for the treatment of chronic insomnia. The program has been shown to improve insomnia severity and other sleep related outcomes in multiple randomized controlled trials.3-5 The clinical effectiveness of SHUTiTM will be evaluated using clinical insomnia outcomes obtained on all patients enrolled over the two 8-month active implementation periods.   2. Background  Insomnia Treatment: A Prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_688792]-diagnosed in routine care.[ADDRESS_934503] Veterans receive treatment for insomnia (and other common mental health conditions) in primary care, where psychotropic medications such as sedative-hypnotics are the primary treatment.7,[ADDRESS_934504] risks such as accidents, falls, and abuse potential. Medications are also of limited efficacy for the extended treatment of insomnia.9 Several non-pharmacologic evidence-based practices (EBPs), including CBT for insomnia, have equal or better effectiveness and far fewer risks.10,[ADDRESS_934505]/PCMHI teams distribute mental healthcare activities across a range of providers, including physicians, psychologists, nurses, care managers, and health technicians, who use a collaborative care model to treat a range of mental health conditions, most commonly mild to moderate depression, anxiety, and insomnia.   Internet-Based Self-Help Interventions Internet-based interventions are personalized, self-guided programs delivered over a computer, mobile or other Internet access device and are focused on improving knowledge, awareness, or behavior change.[ADDRESS_934506] are designed around a “self-help” format and are accessed at a pace and in a setting chosen by [CONTACT_28024], but are also available with varying levels of professional support.  The potential health services benefits of Internet-based self-help interventions are extensive. They can (1) reduce travel barriers, providing treatment for individuals who cannot visit a clinic during business hours, (2) reduce barriers associated with the stigma of seeking mental health care and increase self-care, (3) increase clinic productivity, and (4) reduce costs associated with provider time.12-14 As a result, Congress mandated that VA implement Internet-based interventions through the Veterans’ Mental Health and Other Care Improvements Act of 2008.[ADDRESS_934507]/PCMHI leaders and providers indicated that they would like to target insomnia, one of the most common conditions encountered in primary care, for intervention via Internet-based self-help. Multiple Internet-based self-help programs for the treatment of insomnia have shown efficacy in randomized controlled trials. We will use the SHUTiTM program, based on its effectiveness in trials involving over [ADDRESS_934508]/PCMHI.   Past Pi[INVESTIGATOR_688793]-based Self-Help At VACT  In 2014, we completed a pi[INVESTIGATOR_688794]-based self-help in VA outpatient care.20 In this study an evidence-based program for insomnia (RESTORETM) was implemented in the VACT substance abuse clinic using provider and patient education sessions, on-site Internet access, and clinician telephone support. The feasibility of this strategy was evaluated by [CONTACT_688804]/completion rates, participant reported acceptability, and clinical outcomes. Please see the abstract from the published article in the appendix of this proposal for the results of this study. These findings demonstrate the ability of our team to perform research on the implementation of Internet-based self-help in VA clinical care, as well as the feasibility of the strategy we propose in this study.   3. Significance   The proposed project has major innovations:  1. The development of a general strategy for the implementation of evidence-based Internet-based self-help programs in VA primary care, independent of the target condition, specific program, or treatment site is a novel undertaking.  2. The testing of an implementation strategy for such interventions compared to an enhanced usual care strategy has not been attempted. Specific aspects of our proposed strategy have 
Version 4.[ADDRESS_934509] codified core components into a defined strategy as they pertain to Internet-based self-help implementation.   Positive benefits for Veterans and VA care include: 1. Better access to effective mental health care, especially among Veterans from more recent conflicts who may find Internet-based self-help a more attractive treatment modality. 2. Provision of mental health treatment earlier in the course of illness. 3. Intervention-related improvements in health outcomes (insomnia severity). 4. Greater self-care associated with the use of self-help programs. 5. The ability to access care 24/7. 6. Improved clinic productivity. 7. Potentially reduced the risks associated with long-term use of sedative-hypnotic medications, such as benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651].   In addition to providing a safer alternative for treating insomnia, the insights gained from developi[INVESTIGATOR_688795]-based self-help programs are currently available, such as depression, generalized anxiety, problematic alcohol use, smoking cessation, chronic pain, diabetes management, etc.  4. Research Plan  A. Study Design and Procedures  Table 1. Timeline of Research Activities   Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 Implement Program Using Enhanced Usual Care X X           Finalization of Experimental Implementation Strategy   X          Identification and Training of Support Clinician   X          Provider/Staff Training for Experimental Strategy   X          Pi[INVESTIGATOR_688796]    X X         Implement SHUTi Using phase 1 Exp. Strategy    X X        Implement SHUTi using Phase 2 Exp. Strategy      X X      Analysis of Data from active Implementations      X X X X     As described by [CONTACT_584837]. (2012), we will employ a hybrid type [ADDRESS_934510] the effectiveness of the experimental implementation strategy we are developi[INVESTIGATOR_688797].21 We will use a quasi-experimental pre-/post-cohort design whereby [CONTACT_688805] (control) strategy, followed by [CONTACT_688806]. The program’s association with clinical response will be evaluated in an uncontrolled pre-/post-format. The timeline of events for this study is described in Table 1.   SHUTiTM will initially be implemented using an enhanced usual care (control) strategy (described in detail below), over a eight-month period. For this strategy, VACT PACT/PCMHI providers will be given a 30-min education session on how to refer to and use SHUTiTM in clinical practice. This education will be followed by a eight-month period in which VACT PACT/PCMHI patients will be recruited to use SHUTiTM using this strategy. PACT/PCMHI providers will identify patients with insomnia who are appropriate for SHUTiTM, and recruit 
Version 4.[ADDRESS_934511] 2018 Page 5	them through the normal course of clinical interactions. During recruitment, patients will be given a pamphlet with information about the SHUTiTM program including: educational information about insomnia and CBT treatment for insomnia, information about the content of the program, as well as website, login, privacy and provider contact [CONTACT_3031]. Individuals will then meet with the research assistant for the application of final inclusion/exclusion criteria and research consent. Individuals who do not meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria will be referred back to the PACT/PCMHI provider. The research assistant will also provide a de-identified user name [CONTACT_688825], password resets, and will collect paper and pencil baseline measures. Subjects will then engage in the program at their own convenience. The research assistant will not provide program education or support directly to patients. Patients will be explicitly instructed on how to use regular PACT/PCMHI follow-up channels or the Veteran’s crisis line in the case of emergency, as they would do in the course of typi[INVESTIGATOR_688798]/PCMHI treatment. Patients will be contact[CONTACT_688807] [ADDRESS_934512] either face-to-face or over the phone. Subjects will be compensated $10.[ADDRESS_934513] Visits  Phase Visit Visit description Context Location Duration (Min) Payment Enhance Usual Care (Control) Provider Initial Contact 1. Identification of Insomnia 2. Discussion of program with patient 3. Provider gives pamphlet 4. Provider/Patient Contacts Research Staff As part of regular treatment encounter VACT PACT Offices 5-15 None Baseline Visit with Research Personnel 1. Application of Inclusion/Exclusion criteria 2. Informed Consent 3. Baseline measures 4. Issue userID and temporary password Individual contact[CONTACT_688808]-person visit VACT PACT Offices 10-25 $10  Provider Follow-up As need support contacts to address issues that arise, coordinated by [CONTACT_48368]/patient Provider: In-person or phone Phone or PACT Offices As needed None Research Follow-up Complete final follow-up measures 10-weeks after baseline visit Research Assistant: In-person or phone Phone or PACT Offices 5-15 $10 Experimental Strategy (Phases 1&2) Provider Initial Contact 1. Identification of Insomnia 2. Discussion of program with patient 3. Provider/patient contacts support clinician As part of regular treatment encounter VACT PACT Offices 10-[ADDRESS_934514] Offices 30-45 None Baseline Visit, Research Personnel 1. Application of Inclusion/Exclusion criteria 2. Informed Consent 3. Baseline measures  Research assistant contact[CONTACT_688809]. Visit takes place prior to support clinician visit	VACT PACT Offices 10-20 $10 Support Clinician Follow-up Scheduled and as needed support contacts to address issues that arise. Coordinated by [CONTACT_688810]: In-person or phone Phone or PACT Offices As needed none Research Follow-up Complete final Follow-up measures 10-weeks after baseline visit. Research assistant: In-person or phone Phone or PACT Offices 10-15 $[ADDRESS_934515]/PCMHI will stop for three to four months. During this critical period, several activities will take place:  
Version 4.[ADDRESS_934516] 2018 Page 6	(1) Focus groups consisting if VACT PACT/PCMHI staff will take place, as described in our other protocol (EH0002). (2) Final specific modifications to the experimental implementation strategy using information from interviews with VA-wide providers and administrators as well as the focus groups. (A final description of the implementation strategy will be supplied to the VACT HSC via a protocol amendment during this period.) (3) Identification and training of the support clinician (described in the experimental implementation strategy below). (4) Provider education for the experimental strategy (described in the experimental implementation strategy below). (5) Pre-pi[INVESTIGATOR_688799]-two individuals using this strategy.  After this period, patients will be recruited to participate in SHUTiTM using the experimental implementation strategy over a period of eight months. The experimental implementation strategy is described at length in the intervention section below. First, a provider education session will take place. Then over a 8-month period, providers will identify and recruit PACT/PCMHI patients to participate in the program. Providers will refer patients they recruit to the support clinician for an initial education session. The support clinician will also provide patients with user names, password resets, and privacy information. As part of this initial session, research staff will meet with the patient and apply final inclusion/exclusion criteria, consent individuals, and complete baseline measures. Subjects will then engage in the program at their own convenience with support from the support clinician. The research assistant will not provide program education or support directly to the patient. Patients will be instructed on how to use the support clinician, regular PACT/PCMHI follow-up channels, or the Veteran’s crisis line in the case of emergency or with any questions about the program. Patients will be contact[CONTACT_688811]. Patients will be contact[CONTACT_688807] 10 weeks for the purpose of follow up measure completion which will happen either face-to-face or over the phone. Subjects will be compensated $10.[ADDRESS_934517] experimental implementation period, patients will be recruited to participate in SHUTiTM using a modified experimental implementation strategy over another period of 8 months, the phase 2 experimental strategy. No changes to the core components of the experimental implementation strategy will be made (table 2), only to the individuals who will provide the clinical support, who will be psychologists, nurses, and peers in the West Haven VA PCMHI clinic. Providers will continue to identify and recruit PACT/PCMHI patients to participate in the program and refer patients they recruit to the support clinician for an initial education session. Referrals will be made through a modification to the PCMHI consult request form in CPRS. Research staff will still apply the same final inclusion/exclusion criteria, review project information documents, and complete baseline measures. Subjects will engage in the program at their own convenience with support from the support clinician. As in the other phases, subjects will be instructed on how to use the support clinician, regular PACT/PCMHI follow-up channels, or the Veteran’s crisis line in the case of emergency or with any questions about the program. Patients will still be contact[CONTACT_688811]. Patients will be contact[CONTACT_688807] 10 weeks for the purpose of follow up measure completion which will happen either face-to-face or over the phone. Subjects will be compensated $10.00 for participation in each of two visits with the research team.   B. Subjects. Participants will include individuals from three different groups: West Haven VACT PACT/PCMHI providers and staff, a clinical intermediary for patient support who will be a VACT PACT/PCMHI staff member, and West Haven VACT PACT/PCMHI patients. Please 
Version 4.[ADDRESS_934518] sample, roles, recruitment, inclusion/exclusion criteria, and consent procedures. Roles, recruitment, inclusion/exclusion criteria, and consent procedures will remain the same for the additional phase 2 experimental implementation strategy.   C. Interventions   The Experimental Implementation Strategy. Components of the experimental implementation strategy consists of (1) a clinical intermediary for patient support, (2) provider/staff facilitation and education to empower adoption, (3) patient education to facilitate engagement and completion, and (4) a process of stepped-care to identify and refer individuals requiring a higher level of care. The components of this strategy, especially the educational content, will be expanded and modified using results from our ongoing work in protocol EH0002.  1. Clinical Intermediary for Participant Support (Support Clinician) The support clinician will accept provider referrals to the program and provide support to patients as they engage in the Internet-based self-help program. This position is consistent with research showing that engagement and completion with Internet-based self-help programs is higher when such programs are supported,16,17,19,[ADDRESS_934519] of collaborative care models on the treatment of mental health disorders in primary care,23 as well as implementation research recognizing the need for “Technical Assistance” and “Program Champi[INVESTIGATOR_5458]” who can provide direct support.[ADDRESS_934520] six duties: (1) interacting with providers to facilitate referrals, (2) performing face-to-face introductory patient education sessions, (3) encouraging program engagement and completion, (4) resolving technical problems such as log-on issues and password loss, (5) resolving clinical questions associated with insomnia treatment, and (6) identifying individuals who require elevated levels of care. In our prior work, 96% of support contacts were for encouragement, 3% for technical issues, and 1% for insomnia treatment-related questions, with no emergent clinical issues identified.[ADDRESS_934521]/PCMHI staff member, such as a nurse, case manager, tele-case-management clinician, health-technician, or peer support individual will be identified in the 3-[ADDRESS_934522] HSC protocol (EH0002) and discussion with VACT PACT/PCMHI and case management leadership. Such leaders (Drs. Chris Ruser, Kirsten Wilkins, and Donna Vogel) have already agreed to carve out four hours per week in this person’s schedule to support this work (see support letter). When selected, this person will be identified to the VACT HSC through an amendment to this protocol.   For the second phase of the experimental implementation strategy, [CONTACT_688827] will no longer be providing clinical support duties. We have identified individuals in the PCMHI clinical group as being willing to perform SHUTi clinical support tasks. We had previously identified a peer support specialist within PCMHI, [CONTACT_688828], to share “internal champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394]” duties with [CONTACT_688827]. Both Anne Klee and Nicole Campbell, leasers of the Peer Support program at West Haven, and Lisa Osborne, [CONTACT_688829]’s supervisor, have agreed to allow him to take part. Lisa Osborne will continue to supervise his clinical duties 
Version 4.[ADDRESS_934523] agreed to take on these duties as well.   These specific activities are as follows:  A. Provide academic detailing: PCMHI personnel will liaise with providers in individual meetings, team meetings, and larger meetings to educate them on program content and the referral process.  B. Patient education: PCMHI personnel will discuss the availability of the program with patients during the normal course of his clinical duties. Referrals to the program will come from providers as per the original project description. Once patients are referred, PRMHI personnel will discuss the content of the program with them and answer questions. Per the original project description, the research team will provide informed consent and access codes to the program.  C. Patient motivational enhancement and educational support for engagement and completion: After subjects have been consented, PCMHI personnel will provide follow-up phone (and as needed face-to-face) contact. He will encourage patients to engage in the program and answer program related questions that are within his skill level. Clinical questions or safety concerns during these contacts which are beyond his skill level will be referred to the appropriate clinician, in accordance with current clinic protocol.   D. Using VA clinical quality improvement databases to identify patients who may be appropriate for the program: The VA Central Office, Offices of Academic Detailing and the Psychotropic Drug Safety Initiative have developed informatics dashboards which identify patients who are treated with recurrent prescriptions of sedative-hypnotics (https://vaww.portal2.va.gov/sites/ad/SitePages/Chronic%20Insomnia.aspx). The dashboards can be searched by [CONTACT_159580], clinic, team and provider to identify patients who may be appropriate for evidence-based non-pharmacologic treatment of insomnia (such as the SHUTiTM program).  VACT academic detailing and PCMHI personnel will use this dashboard to identify patients who may benefit from non-pharmacologic treatment of insomnia. Patients identified through these dashboards will be mailed a letter describing the reason they are being contact[INVESTIGATOR_530], the potential benefits of behavioral treatment for insomnia, and the treatment options (either face-to-face or online versions of this treatment).	The letter will include the name [CONTACT_3669] [CONTACT_688812], Greg Dante, who will be able to describe behavioral treatment for insomnia, answer questions, and mediate referrals to treatment through providers, if the patient is interested. The SHUTi information brochure, will be included with the letter. This brochure has information about insomnia, behavioral treatment, and the SHUTi program, as well as Greg Dante’s contact [CONTACT_3031]. E. Audit and feedback to support provider champi[INVESTIGATOR_688800]. We will identify the WHVA primary care providers who have made the most referrals to the program since it began and identify the outcomes of the patients these providers referred. Three providers will be identified in Firms A and B, respectively, and one in the Woman’s clinic. The following outcomes will be identified:  (a) the number of referrals they have made to the program, (b) the number of those referred who went on to engage, (c) the number of those referred who completed the program,  and (d) the change in insomnia level and sedative hypnotic use after using the program in those who engaged and 
Version 4.[ADDRESS_934524] 2018 Page 9	completed the program. This information will be given to the respective providers in a deidentified and pooled format in the form of an encrypted email (using the WHVA outlook encryption system) and face to face discussions. No patient personally identifying information will be shared with the provider. The aim will be to recruit providers to become program champi[INVESTIGATOR_5458], communicating the success they have seen with the program to other providers in order to get more patients referred.    As an additional point of clarification, the above activities are clinical activities related to the care of patients within the primary care clinic in West Haven. Research activities will remain the same as described in the original project description.   A. The research team will educate the PCMHI team as to aspects of the SHUTiTM program allowing them to perform the provider academic detailing, patient education, and patient support contacts. B. The research team will continue to perform informed consent on those referred to the program as described in the original project description. C. The research team will educate the PCMHI team as to aspects of the VACO insomnia dashboard in order to allow him to identify WHVA primary care patients with insomnia.  D. The research team will have weekly meetings with the PCMHI team to provide coaching, answer questions, and track activities.  2. Provider/Staff Facilitation and Education PACT/PCMHI providers will be given a 30-minute educational session by [CONTACT_3462], which will include a discussion of (1) insomnia prevalence, diagnosis, and treatment options; (2) efficacy and content of CBT for insomnia and specifically the SHUTiTM program; (3) program referral; and (4) the role of the support clinician and the shared responsibility for identifying those who require a step-up in care. The use of this program as part of a menu of treatment options for insomnia and as a potential alternative to long-term sedative-hypnotic use will also be emphasized. These sessions will take place during regularly scheduled PACT/PCMHI meetings. The support clinician will receive two separate hour-long educational sessions focusing on training for the key duties described above. The content of these sessions will be developed in collaboration with Dr. DeViva and influenced by [CONTACT_688813] (HSC EH0002). To facilitate implementation during the experimental period, research staff will be available during regularly scheduled PACT/PCMHI meetings and day-to-day (in person or by [CONTACT_756]) to answer questions and troubleshoot problems. The support clinician will meet with research staff bi-weekly to review progress and troubleshoot.  3. Patient Education and Facilitation  Patients enrolled in the program during the experimental implementation phase will be provided an initial short education session with the support clinician in the experimental phases. This session will allow for relationship development and is hypothesized to be essential to support patient engagement. The session will include information on: (1) CBT concepts; (2) SHUTiTM program content and components; (3) program access (website, username, passwords, privacy, etc.); and (4) access to clinical support for the program 
Version 4.[ADDRESS_934525]. DeViva and influenced by [CONTACT_688814] (EH0002).   4. Stepped-Care Stepped-care refers to adjusting the intensity of treatment in stages according to factors such as changes in symptomatology or lack of engagement or efficacy. In short, patients who fail a less intense level of treatment should be offer progressively more intense treatment services. This approach is derived from the extensive literature available on the efficacy of collaborative care approaches for mental health treatment in primary care, which forms the basis of the PACT/PCMHI teams and has been used for the implementation of Internet-based self-help interventions within the U.K.’s National Health Service.66-[ADDRESS_934526] noted three general categories of clinical issues during the course of Internet-based self-help program participation that would trigger a change in care: (1) consideration of droppi[INVESTIGATOR_688801] a lack of efficacy, dissatisfaction, or competing demands; (2) new psychiatric and/or medical problem interfering with participation; and (3) a clinical question related to participation in Internet-based self-help such as how to manage specific stimulus control or sleep timing issues. The support clinician will monitor participants for these issues as part of phone contact [CONTACT_688815]. Referrals may include time-limited consultation with PCMHI providers (psychologists) to address a low-intensity problem or referral back to PACT/PCMHI providers after treatment failure, drop out, or identification of additional clinical concerns. These processes will be further developed in our current study (EH0002) and consultation with Dr. DeViva, an expert in CBT for insomnia.  Enhanced Usual Care (Control) Implementation Strategy. Currently, Internet-based self-help interventions are not widely utilized in U.S. healthcare organizations, including VACT. This fact prohibits a “treatment as usual” competitor developed from the literature. Therefore, we developed a “low-intensity” enhanced usual care strategy, which minimizes aspects of the four core components of the experimental strategy, to serve as a control strategy.  This strategy can also be thought of as “enhanced usual care,” because it represents the process by [CONTACT_688816]-based self-help programs can be implemented using a method with the lowest logistical impact on the current PACT/PCMHI treatment process.  The enhanced usual care strategy will consist of (1) a 30-minute introductory session with providers to explain the SHUTiTM program and how it will be used; (2) provider use of a referral pamphlet that includes website, login, and clinic contact [CONTACT_688817]; and (3) clinical support provided by [CONTACT_225827]/PCMHI providers. Research staff will consent patients, provide log-in information/password resets, and collect measures only. They will not provide program education or support. Patients will be explicitly instructed on how to use regular PACT/PCMHI follow-up channels or the Veteran’s crisis line in the case of emergency, as they would do in the course of typi[INVESTIGATOR_688798]/PCMHI treatment.   Internet-based Self-help Insomnia Intervention. We will use the program, SHUTiTM for the treatment of insomnia. SHUTiTM was developed by [CONTACT_6283]. Lee Ritterband, Francis Thorndike, and Charles Morin. It is currently openly available for a fee as a self-help program at http://www.myshuti.com/ and marketed for healthcare delivery by [CONTACT_688818], LLC. The intervention is a CBT-based 6-week, self-administered course accessed via the Internet on mobile, desk-top, and other devices. The program is split into six modules, completed weekly, which include instruction on psycho-education, stimulus control, relaxation training, 
Version 4.[ADDRESS_934527] engagement, symptom assessment outcomes, and sleep log data abstracted into commonly used sleep indices such as sleep onset latency and sleep efficiency.   SHUTiTM has been empi[INVESTIGATOR_688802]. In addition to the specific trials listed below, there are four other ongoing International trials involving the program.  (1) NIH-R34 Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]. This project studied 45 adults with chronic insomnia. After 8 weeks and again at eight months following the intervention, SHUTiTM users demonstrated statistically significant sleep improvements (insomnia severity, sleep efficiency, and wake after sleep onset) compared to wait-list controls.26  (2) Study of Cancer Survivors. This project studied [ADDRESS_934528] controls.4 (3) Australian Study Evaluating Depression Prevention. This project studied 1149 Australians with depression and insomnia recruited over the Internet. Compared to an Internet-based information control group, SHUTiTM users demonstrated lowered depression symptoms on the PHQ-9 and improved insomnia severity at 6 weeks and 6 months compared with the control group.5 (4) NIH ROI Study (Currently Under Review). This project is studying [ADDRESS_934529] 2018 Page 12	a. Summative Implementation Outcomes. For the two 8-month control and experimental strategy implementation periods, data will be collected by a research assistant who will not play a role in intervention delivery.  i. Program Engagement (Primary Outcome). Engagement will be defined in two ways in order to encompass the breadth of the construct: (1) completion of the first module of the SHUTiTM program (binary) and (2) the number of modules completed (counts). ii. Program Completion (Secondary Outcome). Completion of all six modules of the program will serve as a secondary outcome (binary). iii. Provider Adoption (Secondary Outcome). This measure will be operationalized as a PACT/PCMHI provider referring a patient with insomnia to the program. In the enhanced usual care (control) implementation condition, the referral will be to the research assistant for the purposes of informed consent and assessments. In the experimental implementation strategy condition, referral will be to the support clinician. The support clinician will then perform the education session and involve the research assistant to obtain written informed consent and assessments. Referral will be logged by [CONTACT_688819]. The support clinician in the experimental condition will capture this outcome. iv. Exploratory Implementation Outcomes. SHUTiTM also allows the tracking of homework completion and para-data (screens viewed, log-in frequency, etc.). This data will be used to explore the level of interaction with the program and whether there are associations between program interaction and clinical outcomes. b. Insomnia Treatment Outcomes. Clinical outcomes will be collected by [CONTACT_688820] (following informed consent) and at follow-up (10-weeks after baseline) during the two eight-month implementation periods. Follow-up measures will be completed during face-to-face meetings by [CONTACT_55473], including those who do not engage or drop out prior to completion. i. The Insomnia Severity Index (ISI). The ISI will be the primary clinical outcome and is a self-report seven-item measure that targets the subjective symptoms and functional consequences of insomnia.27,28 ii. Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). The BDI II is a self-report measure of depression.29,[ADDRESS_934530] week.  iv. Sleep Indices. Change in sleep indices (total sleep time, sleep onset latency, sleep efficiency, wake time after sleep onset, and nocturnal awakenings) will be measured in sleep logs, which are integral to the SHUTiTM program. Such measures can only be completed by [CONTACT_688821], therefore, cannot be used as the primary clinical outcome.  c. Implementation Process Outcomes. Implementation process outcomes will have two functions: (1) to identify mediators of summative outcomes and (2) to evaluate fidelity to the experimental implementation strategy. The measures used in this project are developed from validated measures of technology acceptance and use, derived from the Unified Theory or the Use and Acceptance of Technology (UTAUT).[ADDRESS_934531]-intervention assessment time points. ii. Providers and staff. Providers will complete process measures (1) prior to the initial enhanced usual care implementation phase, (2) following the enhanced usual care implementation phase, and (3) following the experimental implementation. iii. Support Clinician. The support clinician’s fidelity to the experimental implementation strategy will be measured during the 8-month experimental implementation period by [CONTACT_688822]’s clinical log. This log will track interactions the support clinician has with PACT/PCMHI patients referred to the program. This log will 
Version 4.[ADDRESS_934532] 2018 Page 13	track patients via user name [CONTACT_688826]. Information tracked will include: date of referral, date of education session, date of support contacts, date of completion, date patient indicated he or she were droppi[INVESTIGATOR_41248], last module and date completed, and whether the individual required a step-up in care. Specific measures developed from this log will include: (a) The proportion of individuals referred who attend the initial education session with the support clinician, (b) The proportion of individuals referred who receive weekly phone calls during their participation, (c) The number and content of clinical and technical help sessions with the support clinician during participation.  E. Data Analysis. Please see the appendix for a full discussion of the statistical analysis plan.  a. Summative Implementation Outcomes. For the three active 8-month implementation periods, four separate but related dependent variables representing both the patient and provider levels of implementation will be analyzed. Summative implementation outcomes will be analyzed by [CONTACT_688823]. Co-primary outcomes will include: (1) the proportion of participants engaging in the program (completing at least one module) among the unique Veterans treated in VACT primary care over the respective time periods; (2) the mean number of modules completed among all participants enrolled (Poisson mean as the distribution is expected to be non-normal, heavy skewing with large numbers of zeroes and ones).Secondary outcomes will include: (1) The proportion of individuals completing all six modules among all individuals enrolled. (2) The proportion referred to the program (whether they engaged or not) among all unique Veterans treated in VACT primary care over the respective time periods. b. Clinical Outcomes. Pre- and post-intervention total ISI scores obtained for all participants in each implementation period will be calculated and treated as a continuous variable for the primary dependent variable of the clinical outcome. A 7-point change pre-post will be considered clinically meaningful. A secondary dependent variable representing sedative-hypnotic use will be calculated as the mean number of total weekly sedative-hypnotic doses. Exploratory continuous variables representing sleep indices developed from sleep logs internal to the SHUTiTM program will also be analyzed, but only in participants who engage in the program. In exploratory analyses, clinical outcome data will be evaluated by [CONTACT_688824], such as medical and mental health diagnoses as well as prescribed medications.  c. Implementation Process-Level Outcomes i. Patients. Process-level outcomes will be analyzed as ordinal variables in frequencies and proportions based on Likert responses. Responses will be compared between the enhanced usual care and the two experimental conditions using chi-square tests. The association between process-level and primary summative implementation outcomes will be analyzed using chi-square tests and multivariable  ii. Providers. Process-level outcomes at the provider level will be analyzed as ordinal variables in frequencies and proportions based on Likert responses. For providers, the change in responses over three periods (prior to the enhanced usual care implementation, following the control phase, and following the 8-month active facilitation of the experimental Implementation) will be analyzed using Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel and GEE marginal models. The association between changes in process-level provider outcomes and provider referral will be analyzed using chi-square. iii. Support Clinician. Fidelity of the support clinician to the experimental implementation strategy will be analyzed as the proportion of patients (1) who attend the initial education session among those referred, and (2) who receive weekly phone calls during the experimental implementation phase among enrollees. Bivariate associations between these proportions and key patient level outcomes as well as baseline characteristics will be analyzed.  
Version 4.[ADDRESS_934533] (West Haven) PACT/PCMHI clinics. The intervention will be accessed via the Internet using a computer or other device of the participant’s choosing at a time and in a location of their choosing. Research records will be located in the PI’s office. The PI’s office is located in the New England MIRECC offices located in Building 35, lower level.  B. Payment. Subjects who are VACT PACT/PCMHI patients will be paid $10.[ADDRESS_934534]/PCMHI providers or staff such as the support clinician (See Table 2). PACT/PCMHI providers and the support clinician will not be compensated for their participation.   C. Funding Source. VA Office of Research and Development, HSR&D, via a carrier development award to the PI, Eric Hermes, MD, as well as New England Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Center (MIRECC) and/or funds from the VACREF.  D. Duration. The expected duration is 5 years.   6. References 1. Marks IM, Cavanagh K, Gega L. Hands-on help: Computer-aided psychotherapy. Psychology Press; 2007. 2. Powell BJ, McMillen JC, Proctor EK, et al. A compi[INVESTIGATOR_311443]. Medical Care Research and Review. 2012;69(2):123-157. 3. Ritterband LM, Thorndike FP, Gonder-Frederick LA, et al. Efficacy of an Internet-based behavioral intervention for adults with insomnia. Archives of general psychiatry. 2009;66(7):692-698. 4. Ritterband LM, Bailey ET, Thorndike FP, Lord HR, Farrell-Carnahan L, Baum LD. Initial evaluation of an Internet intervention to improve the sleep of cancer survivors with insomnia. Psycho-Oncology. 2012;21(7):695-705. 5. Christensen H, Batterham PJ, Gosling JA, et al. Effectiveness of an online insomnia program (SHUTi) for prevention of depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841] (the GoodNight Study): a randomised controlled trial. The Lancet Psychiatry. 2016;3(4):333-341. 6. Hermes ED, Rosenheck RA. Prevalence, Pharmacotherapy, and Clinical Correlates of Diagnosed Insomnia Among Veterans Health Administration Service Users Nationally. Sleep medicine. 2014. 7. Hermes E, Sernyak M, Rosenheck R. Use of second-generation antipsychotic agents for sleep and sedation: a provider survey. Sleep. 2012;36(4):597-600. 8. Hermes E, Sernyak M, Rosenheck R. The use of second generation antipsychotics for post-traumatic stress disorder in a US Veterans Health Administration Medical Center. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_68687]. 2013:1-8. 9. Glass J, Lanctôt KL, Herrmann N, Sproule BA, Busto UE. Sedative hypnotics in older people with insomnia: meta-analysis of risks and benefits. Bmj. 2005;331(7526):1169. 10. Morgenthaler T, Kramer M, Alessi C, et al. Practice parameters for the psychological and behavioral treatment of insomnia: an update. An American Academy of Sleep Medicine report. SLEEP-NEW YORK THEN WESTCHESTER-. 2006;29(11):1415. 11. Morin CM, Hauri PJ, Espie CA, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_81358], Buysse DJ, Bootzin RR. Nonpharmacologic treatment of chronic insomnia. An American Academy of Sleep Medicine review. Sleep. 1999;22(8):1134-1156. 
Version 4.[ADDRESS_934535] 2018 Page 15	12. Cucciare MA, Weingardt KR, Humphreys K. How Internet technology can improve the quality of care for substance use disorders. Current Drug Abuse Reviews. 2009;2(3):256-262. 13. Berger M, Wagner TH, Baker LC. Internet use and stigmatized illness. Social science & medicine. 2005;61(8):1821-1827. 14. McCrone P, Knapp M, Proudfoot J, et al. Cost-effectiveness of computerised cognitive–behavioural therapy for anxiety and depression in primary care: randomised controlled trial. The British Journal of Psychiatry. 2004;185(1):55-62. 15. Carroll KM, Ball SA, Martino S, et al. Computer-assisted delivery of cognitive-behavioral therapy for addiction: a randomized trial of CBT4CBT. The American journal of psychiatry. 2008;165(7):881. 16. Griffiths KM, Christensen H. Review of randomised controlled trials of Internet interventions for mental disorders and related conditions. Clinical Psychologist. 2006;10(1):16-29. 17. Kaltenthaler E, Sutcliffe P, Parry G, Beverley C, Rees A, Ferriter M. The acceptability to patients of computerized cognitive behaviour therapy for depression: a systematic review. Psychological medicine. 2008;38(11):1521. 18. Wantland DJ, Portillo CJ, Holzemer WL, Slaughter R, McGhee EM. The effectiveness of Web-based vs. non-Web-based interventions: a meta-analysis of behavioral change outcomes. Journal of medical Internet research. 2004;6(4). 19. Cavanagh K, Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_2152] D, Berg S, Swain S, Barkham M, Proudfoot J. The effectiveness of computerized cognitive behavioural therapy in routine care. British Journal of Clinical Psychology. 2006;45(4):499-514. 20. Hermes E, Rosenheck R. Implementing Computer-Based Psychotherapy Among Veterans in Outpatient Treatment Using a Supported Strategy. Psychiatric Services. 2015;In press. 21. Curran GM, Bauer M, Mittman B, Pyne JM, Stetler C. Effectiveness-implementation hybrid designs: combining elements of clinical effectiveness and implementation research to enhance public health impact. Medical care. 2012;50(3):217. 22. Foroushani PS, Schneider J, Assareh N. Meta-review of the effectiveness of computerised CBT in treating depression. BMC psychiatry. 2011;11(1):131. 23. Hedrick SC, Chaney EF, Felker B, et al. Effectiveness of collaborative care depression treatment in Veterans' Affairs primary care. Journal of General Internal Medicine. 2003;18(1):9-16. 24. Kilbourne AM, Neumann MS, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_62113], Bauer MS, Stall R. Implementing evidence-based interventions in health care: application of the replicating effective programs framework. Implementation Science. 2007;2(1):42. 25. Hermes ED, Rosenheck RA. Implementing Computer-Based Psychotherapy Among Veterans in Outpatient Treatment for Substance Use Disorders. Psychiatric Services. 2015. 26. Ritterband LM, Thorndike FP, Gonder-Frederick LA, et al. Efficacy of an Internet-based behavioral intervention for adults with insomnia. Archives of general psychiatry. 2009;66(7):692-698. 27. Morin CM, Belleville G, Bélanger L, Ivers H. The insomnia severity index: psychometric indicators to detect insomnia cases and evaluate treatment response. Sleep. 2011;34(5):601. 28. Bastien CH, Vallières A, Morin CM. Validation of the Insomnia Severity Index as an outcome measure for insomnia research. Sleep medicine. 2001;2(4):297-307. 29. Beck AT, Steer RA, Brown GK. Beck depression inventory-II. San Antonio. 1996;78(2):490-498. 30. Dozois DJ, Dobson KS, Ahnberg JL. A psychometric evaluation of the Beck Depression Inventory–II. Psychological assessment. 1998;10(2):83. 31. Duyck P, Pynoo B, Devolder P, Voet T, Adang L, Vercruysse J. User acceptance of a pi[INVESTIGATOR_688803]. Applying the unified theory of acceptance and use of technology in a radiological setting. Methods of information in medicine. 2007;47(2):149-156.  