200 Clinpro™ -Protocol  Page 1 of 16 
Rev. 2/23/2011  
 Human Subjects Protocol (HSP)  
Form Version: October 15, 2008  
  
 You are applying for IRB review  of the research described in this form.  
 To avoid delay , respond to all items in order and include all required approvals and documents.  
 To complete the form , click the underlined areas and type or paste in your text; double -click 
checkboxes to check/uncheck. For more tips, see www.uab.edu/irb/forms . 
 Mail or deliver all materials to AB [ADDRESS_1274137] South, Birmin gham, AL [ZIP_CODE] -0104.  
Indicate the type of review you are applying for:  
 Convened (Full) IRB or 
 Expedited —See the Expedited Category Review Shee t, and indicate the category(ies) 
here: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
1. IRB Protocol Title:  Comparison of Clinpro™ 5000 1.1% Sodium Fluori de Anti -Cavity 
Toothpaste, Clinpro™ Tooth Crème, and MI -Paste Plus  for the 
Prevention and Reduction of White Spot Lesions in Orthodontic 
Treatment  
2. Investigator, Contacts, Supervisors  
a. Name [CONTACT_789]:  [INVESTIGATOR_907757] (s)/Title: BDS, MScD, MBA, PhD, FDS, FAMS(Ortho), FFD (Ortho)/Professor & Chair   
 Dept/Div: Orthodontics  Mailing Address: SDB 305  UAB ZIP: 0007  BlazerID: ckau 
 Phone:  4-1289 Fax: 5-7590 E-mail:[EMAIL_17308]  
b. Name [CONTACT_74993] [CONTACT_6451]:  Teri Baginski  Title: Research Coordinator  
 Phone:  4-4547 Fax: 5-7590 E-mail: [EMAIL_17309]  
Mailing Address (if different from that of PI, above): SDB 307, zip 0007  
INVESTIGATOR ASSURANCE STATEMENT & SIGNATURE  
[CONTACT_74994] [CONTACT_74975], I acknowledge my responsibilities for this Human 
Subjects Protocol, including:  
 Certif ying that I and any Co -Investigators or Other Investigators comply with reporting 
requirements of the UAB Conflict of Interest Review Board;  
 Certifying that the information, data, and/or specimens collected for the research will be 
used, disclosed and mai ntained in accordance with this protocol and UAB policies;   
 Following this protocol without modification unless (a) the IRB has approved changes prior 
to implementation or (b) it is necessary to eliminate an apparent, immediate hazard to a 
participant(s);  
 Verifying that all key personnel listed in the protocol and persons obtaining informed 
consent have completed initial IRB training and will complete continuing IRB training each 
year;  
 Verifying that all personnel are licensed/credentialed for the procedur es they will be 
performing, if applicable;  
 Certifying that I and all key personnel have read the UAB Policy/Procedure to Ensure 
Prompt Reporting of Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects or Others to the 
IRB, Institutional Officials , and Regulatory Agencies  and understand the procedures for 
reporting;  
 Applying for continuing review of the protocol at least annually unless directed by [CONTACT_74976];  
 Conducting the protoco l as represented here and in compliance with IRB determinations 
and all applicable local, state, and federal law and regulations; providing the IRB with all 
information necessary to review the protocol; refraining from protocol activities until 
receipt of initial and continuing formal IRB approval.  
 
 
Signature [CONTACT_7919]:   Date:   
200 Clinpro™ -Protocol  Page 2 of 16 
Rev. 2/23/[ADDRESS_1274138], and reporting of the research, their 
degree(s) and job title, and any additional qualifications. Include ind ividuals who will be involved in 
the consent process. Repeat the table below for each individual.  
Note.  For studies involving investigational drugs, include all investigators who will be listed on FDA 
Form 1572 and attach a copy, if applicable. Send the IR B a copy of Form 1572 anytime you update 
the form with the FDA.  
Role:  Co- -OR- Other –AND/OR - Consent Process  
 Full Name:  [CONTACT_907772].:  
(Employer if not UAB)  Orthodontics   
Degree(s) / Job Title:  Research Coordinator  
Additional Qualifications 
pertinent to the study:        
 
d. Is the principal investigator a student, fellow, or resident?  Yes No 
 If Yes , complete items below and obtain signature [CONTACT_86746]:  
Supervisor's Name:        
[CONTACT_38392](s) / Job  Title:       
Additional Qualifications 
pertinent to the study:        
Telephone:        
E-Mail:       
Signature:   
 
e. Describe the principal investigator's activities related to this protocol and provisions made 
by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_74943]:  
 [CONTACT_907776] will compare Clinpro™ 5000 1.1% Sodium Fluoride Anti -Cavity Toothpaste, 
Clinpro™ Tooth Crème, and MI -Paste Plus  for the prevention and reduction of white spo t 
lesions during orthodontic treatment.  
 
f. Is medical supervision required for this research?  Yes No 
 If Yes , who will provide the supervision?  
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_9042] -OR- Name:      [CONTACT_10880]:       
 If other than PI, obtain signature [CONTACT_75003]:  
Signature:   
 
g. Describe the process that ensures that all persons assisting with the research are 
adequately informed about the protocol and  their research -related duties and functions: 
IRB Training Certification  
 
3. Funding  
Is this study funded?  Yes No 
If No,  specify that costs of the study will be covered by [CONTACT_907765]:       
If Yes , attach one copy of completed application or request for funding sent to sponsor, and 
complete a -d.  
a. Title of Grant or Contract: Comparison of Clinpro™ 5000 1.1% Sodium Fluoride Anti -
Cavity Toothpaste, Clinpro™ Tooth Crème, an d MI-Paste Plus  for the Prevention and 
Reduction of White Spot Lesions in Orthodontic Treatment  
b. PI [INVESTIGATOR_74944]: Chung How Kau  
c. Office of Grants & Contracts Administration Link or Tracking Number: T____________  
 (or enter "Pending" and provide upon receipt from OGCA ) 
d. Sponsor, Funding Route ( check and describe all that apply ): 
 Governmen t Agency or Agencies —Agency name(s):       
 NIH Coop. Group Trial —Group name:       
200 Clinpro™ -Protocol  Page 3 of 16 
Rev. 2/23/2011   Private Nonprofit (e.g., Foundation) —Name:       
 [CONTACT_75006], investigator -initiated —Name: [CONTACT_907773]: See Exhibit B of Clinical Trial Agreement 
between the Board of Trustees and Indiana Nanotech (attached)   
 Note.  Western IRB  reviews industry -sponsored protocols unless the inv estigator 
initiated the research, or the study qualifies for expedited review or involves gene 
therapy.  
 UAB Departmental/Division Funds —Specify:       
 
4. Conflict of Interest —Human subjects research involving a disclosed financial 
interest is subject to IRB review following review by [CONTACT_907766].  
The following definitions are used for Item #4:  
Immediate family  means spo use or a dependent of the employee. Dependent  is any 
person, regardless of his or her legal residence or domicile, who receives 50% or more of his 
or her support from the public official or public employee or his or her spouse or who resided 
with the publi c official or public employee for more than [ADDRESS_1274139] and reporting of the 
research (2a. and c.) answer the questions below: (Repeat the section below for each 
individual)  
Name:  [CONTACT_907774]? ( check all that apply)  
 An ownership interest, stock options, or other equity interest related to the research of any 
value.  
  Compensation related to the research unless it meets two tests:  
 Less than $10,[ADDRESS_1274140] y ear when aggregated for the immediate family.  
 Amount will not be affected by [CONTACT_74979].  
 Proprietary interest related to the research including, but not limited to, a patent, trademark, 
copyright, or licensing agreement .  
 Board of executive relationship related to the research, regardless of compensation.  
Name:  [CONTACT_907775]? (check all that apply)  
 An ownership i nterest, stock options, or other equity interest related to the research of any 
value.  
  Compensation related to the research unless it meets two tests:  
 Less than $10,[ADDRESS_1274141] year when aggregated for the immediate family.  
 Amount w ill not be affected by [CONTACT_74979].  
 Proprietary interest related to the research including, but not limited to, a patent, trademark, 
copyright, or licensing agreement.  
 Board of executive relationship related to the research, regardless of compensation.  
If you checked  any of the above , a financial interest disclosure has to be submitted to or currently be 
on file with the CIRB. A completed CIRB Evaluation has to be  available before the IRB will conduct its 
review.  
 
5. Locations Involved  
a. Describe the facilities available for the conduct of the research. For research on UAB 
campus, include building names and room numbers:  UAB Orthodontics Clinic, Schoo l of 
Dentistry Building third floor, SDB 305  
 
b. Indicate all "performance sites" that will provide space, services, facilities, potential or 
actual participants, or other support for this protocol.  
 The Kirklin Clinic (TKC)  
200 Clinpro™ -Protocol  Page 4 of 16 
Rev. 2/23/2011   University of Alabama Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (UAHosp)  
 The Children's Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_74945] (TCHA)  
 Callahan Eye Foundation Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (CEFH)  
 UAB Highlands  
 Jefferson County Dept. of Health (JCDH)  
 Birmingham Veterans Affairs Medical Center (BVAMC)  
 General Clinical Research Center (GCRC) —inpatient  
 General Clinical Research Center (GCRC) —outpatient  
 General Clinical Research Center  (GCRC) at The Kirklin Clinic (TKC)  
 Other (i.e., A ny performance site not listed above, including those covered by 
[CONTACT_74980]) —Describe:       
 
c. Is this study a clinical trial requiring clinical services at one of the performance sites listed 
in Item b above?  Yes No 
If Yes , Fiscal Approval Process (FAP) -designated units complete a FAP submission and 
send to [EMAIL_1507] . For more on the UAB FAP, see www.uab.edu/ohr .  
 
d. Is this a field study?  Yes No 
If Yes , describe the community:   
 
e. Is the study to be undertaken within a school, business, or other institution that does not 
have an institutional review board?  Yes No 
If Yes , attach a statement of any contacts with and approvals from the appropriate 
institution officia ls.  
 Note.  Documentation of all such approvals must be received by [CONTACT_907767].  
 
f. Has this protocol or project been reviewed by [CONTACT_52699], similar review board, or departmental 
review committee(s) that authorizes th e use of its patient populations?  Yes No 
 If Yes , provide name [CONTACT_75015](s):        
 and for each board listed, enter either the date of latest approval(s)  or “PENDING”:       
 or reasons not approved:      . 
 If this protocol is subsequently rejected or disapproved by [CONTACT_74982], the UAB IRB mu st 
be notified promptly.  
 Attach copi[INVESTIGATOR_74946]/disapprovals.  
 
g. Will any of the participants be from the Birmingham Veterans Affairs Medical Center?  Yes No 
If Yes , attach VA IRB approval or notification from the VA Research and Development Department 
that the study has been submitted to the VA IRB for review.  
 
h. Will the study be conducted at or recruit participants from the Jefferson County 
Department of Public Health (JCDH)?  Yes No 
If Yes , attach notification that the protocol has been approved by [CONTACT_907768].  
 
6. Multi -Site Studies  
a. Is the investigator the lead investigator of a multi -site study?  Yes No 
b. Is UAB a coordinating site in a multi -site study?  Yes No 
c. If you answered Yes to a or b, describe the management of information obtained in multi -
site research that might be relevant to the protection of participants.  Include, at a 
minimum, the following items:  
o IRB approvals from other sites  
200 Clinpro™ -Protocol  Page 5 of 16 
Rev. 2/23/2011  o Unanticipated problems involving risks to participants or others. (For example, if 
there is an unanticipated problem involving risks to participants or others, which 
site is respo nsible for reporting it?)  
o Interim results.  
o Protocol modifications.  
      
 
7. Drugs:  Will any drugs or supplements be used/studied in this protocol?  Yes No 
If Yes , attach the Drug Review Sheet .  
 
8. Devices: Will any device s be studied in this protocol or used for a purpose other than for 
which they were approved by [CONTACT_1622]?   Yes No  
If Yes , attach the Device Review Sheet . 
 
9. Special Approvals  
a. Does this project involve the use of radioisotopes?  Yes No 
If Yes , attach documentation of approval from the Radiation Safety Division.  
 
b. Does this project include patients with contagious infecti ons (e.g., mumps, measles, 
chickenpox, TB, meningitis)?  Yes No 
If Yes , attach documentation of approval from Chairman of the Infection Control 
Committee of the appropriate facilities.  
 
c. Does this project involve obtaini ng remnant biopsy or surgical material from the 
Department of Pathology or any other source?  Yes No 
If Yes , attach documentation of approval from the entity or individual providing the 
materials (e.g., the UAB Division of Anatomic Pathology Release of Pathologic Materials ). 
 
d. Does this project require obtaining any remnant  clinical laboratory specimens,   Yes No 
body fluids, or microbiological isolates from the Department of Pathology or any other 
source?  If Yes , attach documentation of approval from the entity or individual providing 
the materials (e.g., the UAB Division of Laboratory Medicine Release of Pathologic 
Materials ). 
 
e. Does this project use stored (existin g) specimens from a repository?  Yes No 
If Yes , attach documentation of approval for use of specimens, and describe how existing 
specimens are labeled:        
 
10. Use of Specimens  
Does this project involve collecting specimens from participants and st oring them for future 
research?  Yes No 
If Yes , complete a -h. If no, skip to Item 11  
a. How will specimens be obtained, p rocessed, distributed, and stored?  
      
 
b.  How will specimens be labeled (e.g., unique identifier, medical record number, Social 
Security number, name, date of birth)?  
      
 
c.  How will clinical data associated with the s pecimens be collected and stored?  
      
 
d.  What participant -identifying information will be collected and linked to the specimens?  
      
200 Clinpro™ -Protocol  Page 6 of 16 
Rev. 2/23/2011   
e.  What steps will be taken to maximize the confidentiality of linked identifiers?  For 
example, procedures could include using a password -protected computer database to 
link identifiers, with limited personnel knowledgeable of the password, or coded 
identifiers released without the ability to link to clinical data (also called "stripped" o r 
"anonymized" specimens).  
      
 
f.  Will specimens be shared with other investigators in the future?  Yes No  
If Yes , what identifiers, clinical information and demographic information will be 
shared; or will the specimens be stripped of identifi ers (i.e., anonymized)? Also if yes , 
outline your procedure for assuring IRB approval for release and use prior to release of 
specimens.  
      
  Note.  Investigator s who receive and/or use these specimens must document approval 
from the appro priate IRB(s) before the specimens may be released.  
 
g.  Will biological samples be stored for future use?  Yes No 
If Yes , indicate whether they will be used for the disease under study in this protocol 
or research on other  diseases.  
      
 
h. Is genetic testing planned?  Yes No 
If Yes , describe the planned testing here and see "DNA/Genetic Testing" in the 
Guidebook for consent requirements.  
      
 
 
11. Gene Therapy  
Does this project in volve gene therapy or admi nistering recombinant materials  Yes No 
to humans?  
 If Yes , submit the Gene Therapy Project Review Panel Report  –OR- If this is a vaccine 
trial t hat is exempt from the NIH Guidelines For Research Involving Recombinant DNA 
Molecules, submit the Protocol Oversight Review Form For Clinical Vaccine Trials . 
 
12. HIPAA Privacy and Security  
 Will the PI [INVESTIGATOR_74948], review, or make other use of participants' "personal health 
information" (i.e., information, whether oral or recorded in any form or medium that (a) is 
created or received by a health care provider and (b) relates to past, pr esent, or future 
physical or mental health or condition of an individual; or provision of health care; or 
payment for provision of heath care)?  Yes No 
 
 If Yes , complete a -e as described.  
 a. Will the data/information be stored or managed electronically  Yes No 
(on a computer)?  
 
b. Is the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_907758] (e.g., insurance compa ny, 
collaborating institution). If Yes , attach copy of privacy notices from institution/entity, 
and provide the name [CONTACT_3621]/entity:        
200 Clinpro™ -Protocol  Page 7 of 16 
Rev. 2/23/2011   
c. Indicate which, if any, of the listed entities below would provide information or maintain 
health information collected for this protocol and/or where health information that been 
collected will be stored/maintained.  
 The Kirk lin Clinic  
 University of Alabama Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_74950]’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_907759] - UAB Health System Affiliate  
 Health System Information Systems:  
 HealthQuest  
 Cerner Millennium (Lab, Radiology, UED, Surgery)  
 EMMI - Master Member Index  
 Horizon - IPV (IVR/CDA/CRIS)  
 CareFlow Net  
 Eclipsys (PIN)  
 IMPACT  
 None—If None, skip to Item 13.  
 
d. Indicate which of the listed identifiers would be associated/linked with the protected health 
information (PHI) used for this protocol.   
  Names  
 Geographic subdivisions smaller than a State  
 Elements of dates (except year) related to an individual  
 Telephone numbers  
 Fax numbers  
 Email addresses  
 Social security n umbers  
 Medical record numbers  
 Health plan beneficiary numbers  
 Account numbers  
 Certificate/license numbers  
 Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers  
 Device identifiers and serial numbers  
 Biometric identifiers  
 Web universal resource locators (URLs)  
 Internet protocol address numbers  
 Full-face photographic images  
 Any o ther unique identifying number —Describe:        
200 Clinpro™ -Protocol  Page 8 of 16 
Rev. 2/23/2011   Note.  Codes are not identifying as long as the researcher cannot link the data to an 
individual  
 None—If None, skip to Item 13.  
 
e. Choose one plan to describe your use of the p ersonal health information:  
 The data collected meet the specifications for a “ limited data set ” 
—Attach Data Use Agreeme nt or Business Associate Agreement  
 
 Research staff will obtain authorization from each patient to use the information  
 —Attach Patient Authorization  form, co mplete except for patient name [CONTACT_75017] [INVESTIGATOR_74952]  
 —Attach Waiver of Authorization and Informe d Consent  form 
 
PROPOSED RESEARCH  
• The IRB will not accept grant applications and/or sponsor's protocols in lieu of the items as 
outlined below.  
• Do not separate responses from items. Instead, insert your response to each item below the 
item, keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007] t he information in the order of this form.  
• Number each page of the Human Subjects Protocol (i.e., Page X of Y). 
 
13. Purpose —in nontechnical, lay language   
Summarize the purpose and objectives of this protocol, including any related pr ojects, in one 
short paragraph.  
The purpose of the study is to determine if Clinpro™ 5000, Clinpro™ Tooth Crème, 
or MI -Paste Plus has an effect on the formation and resolution of white spot lesions 
for patients undergoing orthodontic treatment . This study will include 90 patients in 
the UAB Orthodontic Clinic.  
14. Background —in nontechnical, lay language  
Summarize in [ADDRESS_1274142] experimental and/or clinical findings leading to the 
formulation of this study. Include any relevant past or current research by [CONTACT_11097]. For drug and device studies summarize the previous results (i.e., Phase I/II 
or III studies).  
During the course of orthodontic treatment, the practitioner normally faces two 
common iatrogenic treatment side effects: root resorption and ename l decalcification, with 
the latter occurring at a much higher frequency. While the processes that lead to enamel 
demineralization are understood, methods to diminish or perhaps eliminate degradation of 
enamel surfaces are being searched for. Several approa ches have been formulated to 
counteract demineralization of tooth structure. One approach involves patient compliance 
and consists of in -depth oral hygiene instructions, in -office fluoride applications, and at -
home fluoride rinses, gels, and varnishes. An alternative approach, which possesses 
potential benefit regardless of patient compliance, includes the use of fluoride -releasing 
agents, such as composites, glass ionomers, sealants, and elastomeric ties.  
Enamel decalcification or white spot formation, is a phenomenon occurring primarily on 
smooth enamel surfaces of teeth, notably within the gingival third of the crown. 
Demineralized enamel, the precursor to caries formation, can be attributed to fixed 
orthodontic appliances, and prolonged exposure to bacte rial plaque. Bacterial plaque 
promotes the accumulation of acidic by[CONTACT_907769]. 
Progression to clinically detectable white spot lesions may occ ur as early as one month 
following the placement of orthodontic appliances.  
200 Clinpro™ -Protocol  Page 9 of 16 
Rev. 2/23/[ADDRESS_1274143] proposed 
fluoride treatment and fluoride -releasing materials at the commencement of therapy. 
Recommended solutions include oral hygiene instruction and reinforcement, fluoridated 
toothpastes, varnishes and mouthwashes, and fluo ridated water supply. Lack of patient 
compliance hinders these efforts.  
Two new anti -cavity toothpastes, Clinpro™ 5000 with 1.1% Sodium Fluoride and 
Clinpro™ Tooth Crème with 0.21% Sodium Fluoride, are currently available and have been 
shown in some initia l case reports to be useful in the reduction of white spot lesions. 
Clinpro™ restores minerals and helps you produce saliva. Both the Clinpro™ products are 
advanced formulas containing an innovative tri -calcium phosphate ingredient. They are 
available excl usively from 3M ESPE. Clinpro™ contains fluoride as well as calcium and 
phosphate, which are components naturally found in saliva.  
This proprietary formula successfully integrates these components, enhancing, rather 
than compromising, the product’s perform ance. During the manufacturing process, a 
protective barrier is created around the calcium allowing it to coexist with the fluoride 
ions. Think of this as a bubble that transports the Tri -Calcium Phosphate to the teeth. As 
the toothpaste comes in contact w ith saliva during brushing, the barrier breaks down and 
makes the calcium, phosphate and fluoride readily available to the tooth. The tooth 
naturally absorbs these components, helpi[INVESTIGATOR_907760] d allowing remineralization to occur.  
15. Participants (Screening and Selection)  
a. How many participants are to be enrolled at UAB? 90  
If multi -center study, total number at all centers:       
 
b. Describe the characteristics of anticipated or planned participants.  
Sex: both males and females  
Race/Ethnicity:  all races  
Age: patients age 12 -60 with adult dentition, i.e., permanent teeth (including 
adolescents)  
Health status:  medically fit and well  
 
Note.  If data from prior studies indicate differences between the genders or among 
racial/ethnic groups in the proposed research or if there are no data to support or to 
negate such differenc es, Phase 3 clinical trials will be required to include sufficient and 
appropriate entry of gender and racial/ethnic subgroups so that trends detected in the 
affected subgroups can be analyzed. If ethnic, racial, and gender estimates are not 
200 Clinpro™ -Protocol  Page 10 of 16 
Rev. 2/23/[ADDRESS_1274144] be provided for exclusion of this 
information. If prior evidence indicates that the results will not show gender or racial 
differences, researchers are not required to use gender or race/ethnicity as selection 
criteria fo r study participants. They are, however, encouraged to include these groups. 
See Section II. Policy of the NIH POLICY AND GUIDELINES ON THE INCLUSION OF 
WOMEN AND MI NORITIES AS SUBJECTS IN CLINICAL RESEARCH – Amended, October, 
2001) for further details.  
 
c. From what population(s) will the participants be derived?  
patients coming to clinic for orthodontic treatment  
Describe your ability to obtain acce ss to the proposed population that will allow 
recruitment of the necessary number of participants:  
orthodontic clinic  
Describe the inclusion/exclusion criteria:  
INCLUSION CRITERIA  
1. Permanent dentition  
2. Patients that in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_907761]  
3. Patients who have not used extensive fluoride regimes  
4. [ADDRESS_1274145] use a non -fluoridated toothpaste (such as Tom’s of Maine) 
for a one -week period prior to starting this trial.  
EXCLUSIO N CRITERIA  
1. Any medical or dental condition that in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_907762].  
2. Patient is currently using any investigational drug.  
3. Patient plans to relocate or move within six months of enrollment.  
4. Patients who have or are currently undergoing fluoride treatment for 
white spot lesions.  
5. Patients with IgE Casein Allergy  
d. If participants will comprise more than one group or stratification, describe each group 
(e.g., treatment/interventi on, placebo, controls, sham treatment) and provide the 
number of participants anticipated in each group.  
Three groups of 30 subjects (one group with Clinpro™ 5000, one group with MI -Paste 
Plus, and one group with Clinpro™ Tooth Crème) each will be evaluate d as a protocol for 
the reduction of white spot lesions at the start of orthodontic treatment. Subjects will be 
recruited through the Orthodontic Postgraduate Clinic at the University of Alabama at 
Birmingham School of Dentistry.  
In order to fully evaluate  each of the products, the selected product will be brushed on 
for two minutes twice daily for [ADDRESS_1274146] expectorate (spit) so they 
don’t clear out t he actives from the product. Patient should also not eat or drink for [ADDRESS_1274147] (i.e., Clinpro™ 5000, MI -Paste 
Plus, or Clinpro™ Tooth Crème) will be written. Each su bject will receive product based 
upon the treatment type written on the paper selected by [CONTACT_208125].  
200 Clinpro™ -Protocol  Page 11 of 16 
Rev. 2/23/2011  e. Indicate which, if any, of the special populations listed below will be involved in the 
protocol. Include the Special Populations Review Form (SPRF) if indic ated. 
 Pregnant Women: Attach SPRF—Pregnant Women, Fetuses, Neonates/Nonviable 
Neonates  
 Fetuses: Attach SPRF—Pregnant Women, Fetuses, Neonates/Nonviable Neonates  
 Neonates/Nonviable Neonates: SPRF—Pregnant Women, Fetuses, Neonates/Nonviable 
Neonates  
 Prisoners : Attach SPRF—Prisoners   
 Minors (<19 years old): Attach SPRF—Minors  
 Employees or students at inst itution where research conducted  
 Persons who are te mporarily decisionally impaired  
 Persons who are permanently decisionally imp aired (e.g., mentally retarded)  
 Non-English Speakers  
For each box checked, describe why the group is included and the additional 
protections provided to protect the rights and welfare of these participants who are 
vulnerable to coercion:       
 
f. List any persons other than those directly involved in the study who will be at risk. If none, 
enter "None": None 
 
g. Describe the process (e.g., recruitment, chart review) that will be used to seek potential 
participants (e.g., ind ividuals, records, specimens). Research recruitment by [CONTACT_105] -treating 
physicians/staff may require completion of Partial Waiver of Authorization for 
Recruitment/Screening. (See http://main.uab.edu/show.as p?durki=[ZIP_CODE] .) 
All orthodontic patients who meet the inclusion criteria will be invited to participate.  
 
h. If you will use recruitment materials (e.g., advertisements, flyers, letters) to reach 
potential participants, attach a copy of each  item. If not, identify the source (e.g., 
databases) from which you will recruit participants.  
No, clinic patients only.  
 
i. Describe the procedures for screening potential participants.  
All orthodontic patients who meet the in clusion criteria will be invited to participate.  
 
16. Protocol Procedures, Methods, and Duration of the Study —in nontechnical 
language  
a.  Describe the study methodology that will affect the participants —particularly in regard to 
any inconvenience, danger , or discomfort.  
We will require all patients a two weeks washout period , during which time we will give 
them very specific brushing instructions for using a non -fluoridated product such as Tom’s 
of Maine toothpaste. These are the same instructions that we  will require them to follow 
with whichever product that the patient will later be randomized to use in the trial, i.e. 
Clinpro™ 5000, Clinpro™ Tooth Crème, or MI -Paste Plus . This will ensure that all patients 
will use the same application technique, even though not all patients would be of the 
same level of potential decay. This washout period will last the same length of time for all 
patients, even though it will not begin simultaneously for all patients.  
Patient will brush on randomized  product for two m inutes twice daily for [ADDRESS_1274148] expectorate (spit). Patient should also not eat or drink for 30 minutes 
following the treatment.  No other inconvenie nce, danger, or discomfort is expected as a 
result of study methodology.  
b. What is the probable length of time required for the entire study (i.e., recruitment through 
data analysis to study closure)?  
200 Clinpro™ -Protocol  Page 12 of 16 
Rev. 2/23/2011  16 weeks  
c. What is the total amount of time each participant will be involved?  
Subjects will be reviewed every 4 weeks. Subjects will be reviewed on four weekly 
intervals.  
d. If different phases are involved, what is the duration of each phase in which the 
participants will be inv olved? If no phases are involved, enter "not applicable."  
not applicable  
200 Clinpro™ -Protocol  Page 13 of 16 
Rev. 2/23/[ADDRESS_1274149] the procedures, the length of time each will take, and the frequency of repetition, and 
indicate whether each is done solely for research or would already be p erformed for 
treatment or diagnostic purposes (routine care) for the population. Insert additional table 
rows as needed.   
Procedure  Length of Time 
Required of 
Participants  Frequency of 
Repetition  Research (Res)  
–OR- 
Routine Care  
A caries risk assessment will be 
used to determine the caries risk of 
all patients enrolled into the study.  ~10 minutes  once, at start of 
treatment  Res Routine  
Patient brushes on study paste at 
home. 2 minutes twice daily  Res Routine  
Patients will be review ed every 4  
weeks  twice, every 4 weeks  Res Routine  
Patient answers Patient 
Satisfaction Questionnaire in UAB 
Orthodontic  Clinic. 10-15 minutes  twice, at each 
follow-up visit Res Routine  
Patients will be evaluated for 
reduction of white spot lesions . ~10 minutes  once, at end of 
treatment  Res Routine  
 
f.  Will an interview script or questionnaire be used?  Yes No 
 If Yes , attach a copy.  
 
g. Will participants incur any costs as a result of their participation?  Yes No 
If Yes , describe the r eason for and amount of each foreseeable cost.  
      
 
h.  Will participants be compensated?  Yes No 
If Yes , complete i -v:  
i. Type: (e.g., cash, check, gift card, merchandise): Visa gift card  
ii. Amount or Value: $25.00 
iii. Method (e.g., mail, at visit): one-time issuance per patient, at clinic visit  
iv. Timing of Payments: (e.g., every visit, each month):  upon completion of clinical trial  
v. Maximum Amoun t of Payments per Participant: $25.[ADDRESS_1274150] resulting from this study. Research 
carried out on your results may lead to the development of marketable proce dures , 
and any benefit from the commercial products will remain with the sponsor.  
200 Clinpro™ -Protocol  Page 14 of 16 
Rev. 2/23/[ADDRESS_1274151] the known risks —physical, psychological, social, economic, and/or legal —that 
participants may encounter as a result of procedures required in this protocol . Do not list 
risks resulting from standard -of-care procedures. Note: Risks included in this protocol 
document should be included in the written consent document.  
 Skin allergic reaction (such as hives, swelling of the face, lips, tongue and/or throat 
which may cause difficulty in breathing or swallowing, and if not treated promptly 
could become life -threatening) due to contact [CONTACT_907770]. The 
types of materials that may come into contact [CONTACT_907771], 
polycarbon ate, neoprene, nylon, and styrene -butadiene. No latex is included in the 
OrthoPuls e™. 
• If you are, or will be, using any medication, herbal or “natural” remedy, during the 
course of this study, please inform your study orthodontist immediately. Please check  
with the study orthodontist before you begin taking a new medication while in this 
study.  
• Low level laser light exposure to the eye (if the Face Frame is not properly worn during 
the treat ment). Do not stare directly at the light, and close your eyes when taking the 
headset on and off.  
• By [CONTACT_166354] e Informed Consent , parent or guardian agree s to be present at (and 
monitor) all device applications of their child.  
b. Estimate the frequency, severity, and rev ersibility of each risk listed.  
upon contact, mild, discontinue contact  
 
c. Is this a therapeutic study or intervention?  Yes No 
 If Yes , complete the following items:  
i. Describe the standar d of care in the setting where the research will be conducted:       
ii. Describe any other alternative treatments or interventions:  You may choose not 
participate in the Clinpro™/MI -Paste Plus™ study and still receive routine ort hodontic 
treatment in the UAB Orthodontic Clinic.  
iii. Describe any withholding of, delay in, or washout period for standard of care or 
alternative treatment that participants may be currently using:  none 
 
d. Do you foresee that participants  might need additional medical or psychological resources 
as a result of the research procedures/interventions?  Yes No 
If Yes , describe the provisions that have been made to make these resources available.  
      
 
e. Do the benefits or knowledge to be gained outweigh the risks to participants?  
If No,  provide justification for performing the research:        Yes No 
 
19. Precautions/Minimization of Risks (If stud y involves drugs or devices complete the 
Drug or Device Review Sheet and skip to question #20)  
a. Describe precautions that will be taken to avoid risks and the means for monitoring to 
detect risks.  
 Patient education and examination at regularly -scheduled  follow -up visits  
• By [CONTACT_491502], parent or guardian agrees to be present at (and 
monitor) all device applications of their child.  
b. If hazards to an individual participant occur, describe (i) the criteria that will be used to 
decide whet her that participant should be removed from the study; (ii) the procedure for 
removing such participants when necessary to protect their rights and welfare; and (iii) 
200 Clinpro™ -Protocol  Page 15 of 16 
Rev. 2/23/[ADDRESS_1274152] if adverse effects occur. This will be 
reported to PI [INVESTIGATOR_907763].  
c. If hazards occur that might make the risks of par ticipation outweigh the benefits for all 
participants, describe (i) the criteria that will be used to stop or end the entire study and 
(ii) any special procedures, precautions, or follow -up that will be used to ensure the safety 
of currently enrolled parti cipants.   
• Excessive whitening of teeth  
• Inflammation of tissues  
 
20. Informed Consent  
a. Do you plan to obtain informed consent for this protocol?   Yes No 
If Yes,  complete the items below.  
If No,  complete and include the Waiver of Informed Consent  or Waiver of Authorization 
and Informed Consent , as applicable.  
 
b. Do you plan to docum ent informed consent for this protocol?   Yes No 
If Yes,  complete the items below.  
If No,  complete the items below and include the Waiver of Info rmed Consent 
Documentation .  
 
c. How will consent be obtained?  by [CONTACT_30230]  
 
d. Who will conduct the consent interview? PI [INVESTIGATOR_907764]  
 
e. Who are the persons who will provide consent or permission? patients or their parents  
 
f. What steps will be taken to minimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence? 
Patients will neither be encouraged nor discouraged to participate in the trial.  
 
g. What language will the prospective participa nt or the legally authorized representative 
understand? English only  
 
h. What language will be used to obtain consent? English only  
 
i. If any potential participants will be, or will have been, in a stressful, painful, or drugge d 
condition before or during the consent process, describe the precautions proposed to 
overcome the effect of the condition on the consent process. If not, enter "no such effect."  
no such effect  
 
j. If any project -specific instruments will be  used in the consenting process, such as flip 
charts or videos, describe the instrument(s) here, and provide a copy of each. If not, 
enter "not used."  
not used  
 
k. How long will participants have between the time they are told about the study  and the 
time they must decide whether to enroll? If not [ADDRESS_1274153] the privacy interests of 
participants (e.g., others will not overhear your conversation with potential participants, 
individuals will not be publicly identified or embarrassed).  
200 Clinpro™ -Protocol  Page 16 of 16 
Rev. 2/23/[ADDRESS_1274154], 
or any group, i ncluding coordinating centers and sponsors?  Yes No  
 If Yes , complete i -iii. 
 i. To whom will the information be given?       
 ii. What is the nature of the information?       
 iii. How will th e information be identified, coded, etc.?       
 
23. Additional Information  
In the space below, provide any additional information that you believe may help the IRB 
review the proposed research, or enter "None."  
None 