EFFECT OF ELECTRICAL STIMULATION OF THE AURICULAR 
BRANCH OF THE VAGUS NERVE  (ABVN)  ON CERVICAL VAGUS 
NERVE COMPOUND ACTION POTENTIALS - Phase 2   
 
   Principal Investigator:  [CONTACT_19617] V. Nowak, MD  
     Professor of Medicine  
  Department of Medicine   Indiana University School of Medicine  
 
     
Co-Investigators:         Matthew Ward, PhD  
               Research Scientist  
               Department of Biomedical Engineering  
             Purdue University 
 
 
 
Funding Source:  National Institutes of Health        
       
                  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740616] o f the Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version 6  
3.17.2021  Page 2  
 BACKGROUND  It is known that the vagus nerve is one of the main determinants of gastrointestinal motility and gastric emptying.  For example, truncal vagotomy produces gastroparesis in both animals as well as human subjects.  It is speculated but never proven that neuropathy of the vagus nerve is the cause of the delay in gastric emptying that is characteristic of that disorder.  
 The typi[INVESTIGATOR_740617], vomiting, weight loss, early satiety, abdominal pain and bloating.  The initial medical treatment consists of dietary alterations and medications such as phenothiazines (Phenergan), 5HT3 receptor agonists ( Zofran) 
and cannabinoids (Marinol).  Treatment with prokinetic agents such as metoclopramide, domperidone, erythromycin and cisapride can be considered but the prolonged use of these agents is limited by [CONTACT_740636] -effects of these agents.  
In severe cases patients require placement of a gastrojejunostomy feeding tube (GJ) tube which by[CONTACT_740637] (TPN) in which the patient’s entire nutrition is d ependent on 
intravenous fluids.    Gastric electrical stimulation (GES) has been shown to be an effective treatment of nausea and vomiting in patients with gastroparesis (1).  However, how GES works is unclear, as patients who undergo GES show resolution of nausea and vomiting before any improvement in gastric emptying is recognized.  It has been proposed, but never proven, 
that GES may influence vagal outflow via afferent fibers that terminate in the CNS.     
The vagus nerve is composed of both myelinated and unmyelinated fibers and one of the specific unknown factors is precisely which elements of the nerve are activated by [CONTACT_740638]. Stimulation of a peripheral or cranial nerve with a mixed fiber population generates a compound nerve action potential (CNAP) composed of various nerve fibers which conduct the electrical impulse at various 
rates.  
 
Our current investigations show that it is possible to measure vagus nerve CNAPs during gastric electrical stimulation with cutaneous ECG electrodes placed on the neck.  Our studies show that gastroparetic patients who exhibit high- amplitude CNAPs show 
significant improvement in symptoms such as nausea, vomiting and early satiety than patients who demonstrate lower amplitude vagal nerve CNAPs.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_740618] ( IRB# [PHONE_15461]). Another study that is 
currently undergoing is the effect of the ABVN stimulation on the vagal nerve CNAPs (IRB number [PHONE_15462]). These investigations indicate that generation of vagus nerve CNAPs appear to be factorial in symptom control in gastroparetic patients. The study in healthy volunteer is still under data analysis, but the preliminary results do look promising. 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740616] o f the Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version 6  
3.17.2021  Page 3  
  Despi[INVESTIGATOR_740619], gastric electrical stimulation of the stomach has its drawbacks.  These are 1) its expense; 2) it is an invasive procedure and requires surgical implantation of a foreign body into the patient’s abdomen; 3) it is not universally effective and it is difficult to predict with any precision which patient will respond to treatment and which will not; 4) the device battery life is finite and patients typi[INVESTIGATOR_740620]; 5) as the device is metallic, patients are unable to undergo MRI scans for any other medical conditions.  Given these considerations another less invasive modality to electronically stimulate the vagus nerve would be highly desirable.  Recent investigations have demonstrated the feasibility of physiological access to the vagus nerve through its auricular branch; namely, the auricular branch of the vagus nerve (ABVN) which in human subjects is located near the external auditory meatus.  B oth the 
nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) and the spi[INVESTIGATOR_740621] (2 -4) and neuroimaging studies show that 
transcutaneous stimulation of the ABVN modulates brainstem and cortical areas i n a 
manner similar to classical vagal nerve stimulation (5 -7).  A recent clinical trial suggested 
that auricular branch vagal nerve stimulation (ABVN)) also reduces the frequency of migraine epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841] (2), while another independent investigation demonstrate d that 
stimulation of the ABVN influences respi[INVESTIGATOR_740622] (8).  This finding supports the notion that this technique can be useful in modulating parasympathetic outflow of the vagus nerve.  
  
 COLLABORATIVE ARRANGEMENTS  
 The current proposal is generated at the behest of [CONTACT_740648] of the NIH Office of Strategic Coordination.  Both the PI [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Nowak and [CONTACT_740649] (Indiana University and 
Purdue University, respectively) have active funding from the NIH SPARC program 
(Stimulating Peripheral Activity to Relieve Conditions) to evaluate vagally mediated 
compound nerve action potentials in gastroparetic patients.  The other coinvestigators named in this proposal, Drs Napadow, Hubbard and Kuo, all from Harvard University, likewise have active research support from the NIH.  Their research involves electrical stimulation of the auricular branch of the vagus nerve as described in the paragraphs above.  As one of the goals of the SPARC program is to promote collaborative researc h 
among institutions [CONTACT_740650] suggested that Indiana, Purdue and Harvard University combine their efforts to evaluate the effects of noninvasive ABVN stimulation on vagal nerve function.    Both the PI [INVESTIGATOR_7706]- PI (Drs Nowak and Ward) travelled to [LOCATION_011] in July [ADDRESS_1012389] investigators and to formulate a study plan and a cooperative effort.  The technique of ABVN stimulation as described above is adapted from the protocol in 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740616] o f the Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version [ADDRESS_1012390]. Napadow is included with this application (Appendix 2).   
  STUDY OBJECTIVES  
 The research described in this protocol is an extension of our current protocols which is designed to measure cervical compound vagal nerve action potentials in patients who have an implanted gastric electrical stimulation device ( IRB# [PHONE_15461] ) and also the 
protocol to measure the effect of ABVN stimulation and vagal maneuvers in healthy volunteers.  Healthy volunteer subjects and gastroparetic subjects will be recruited and studied for this project, volunteer subjects will undergo transcutaneous stimula tion of the 
auricular branch of the vagus nerve (ABVN) to determine whether this modality will also produce cervical vagus nerve compound action potentials and changes in the gastric hormones. Gastroparetic subjects who have not had a gastric stimulator pl aced will also 
undergo the ABVN stimulation to look for changes in vagal nerve CNAPs and gastric hormones.     Additionally, as there are currently no physiological methods that can record and measure gastric vagal activity in human subjects, a separate component of this study will be to measure the gastric vagal activity in humans. If the proposed study shows that  it is indeed 
possible to record a vagal “signature” in response to electrical stimulation, then we anticipate further investigations which examine the vagal response to other gastric stimuli.  
 Due to the low signal -to-noise ratios observed from compound vagal nerve activity in 
response to GES, we are interested in measuring the vagal response to maneuvers which are known to stimulate the vagus nerve. The implementation of these vagal maneuvers will allow comparison of ABVN stimulation to traditional methods of vagal stimulation.  
 Based on our heathy volunteer study a nd our proposal with NIH, we would like to 
propose some additional features. We would like to study the effect of transcutaneous stimulation of the auricular branch of the vagus nerve (ABVN) in gastroparetic patients with symptomatic nausea and vomiting who have not undergone gastric electrical stimulation device implantation.  
A total of [ADDRESS_1012391] on gastric hormone before, during and after auricular 
stimulation.  
The proposal is to enroll 30 healthy volunteers with no gastric symptoms to undergo transcutaneous stimulation of the auricular branch of the vagus nerve and also undergo 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740616] o f the Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version [ADDRESS_1012392] draw after a period of no stimulation.  
This is based upon the results obtained in our previous IRB approved study where blood 
was drawn in patients who had gastric electrical stimulation device implanted. Blood was 
drawn to study the effects of stimulation on gastric hormones. (Cardiac Vagal Effects of 
Gastric Electrical Stimulation and Vagal Nerve Action Potentials in Vagus nerve in 
Patients with Gastroparesis - IRB [PHONE_15461])
 
 
The next part is also to enroll [ADDRESS_1012393] 
draw after a period of no stimulation. Another part is to enroll 40 gastroparetic subjects to 
undergo vagal maneuver that includes food study using the bipolar (EKG electrodes) . 
 
Another part is to enroll 10 healthy volunteers to undergo vagal maneuver using the Multi Array Electrodes (MEA)  
 An additional [ADDRESS_1012394] no GI symptoms (otherwise healthy) but have undergone Vagal Nerve Stimulation (VNS) Therapy for the treatment of partial or focal seizures  will be recruited for the study.  
  INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN  Healthy human subjects ranging in age between 18 to 80 years and who are able to give informed consent are considered candidates for study.  Pregnant subjects are excluded from study.   The consent may be administered by [CONTACT_740639].  
 A modality of therapy currently being utilized to treat focal or partial seizures that do not 
respond to seizure medications is called as VNS Therapy (Vagus Nerve Stimulation). 
This has been approved by [CONTACT_740640]. Our aim 
is to study the HRV in patients undergoing this therapy as part of their regular mode of 
treatment. The specific aim is to measure the HRV in patients undergoing vagus nerve 
stimulation therapy.  During VNS treatment the stimulator is surgically implanted in the upper chest and 
stimulation electrodes are implanted in the left cervical vagus nerve.  
 
 Technique of transcutaneous auricular vagus nerve stimulation   
Two electrodes  are placed in the auricle of the left ear at loci described by [CONTACT_941] (1) the 
cymba concha and (2) the slope between the antihelix and cavum concha (Figs. A and B).   
 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740616] o f the Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version [ADDRESS_1012395] probability of 
vagal innervation of the human auricle, as has been previously determined by [CONTACT_740641]  (9) Electrodes are passed through the penetration panel with inline low -pass 
radio frequency filtering (80 MHz). Electrical sti mulation to these electrodes is  provided 
by a constant -current stimulator with 100 V compliance ( FE 180 Stimulus Isolator, AD 
Instruments, [LOCATION_011] MA). Stimuli consist of rectangular pulses with 450 µs pulse width, delivered at 30 Hz, and pulse train duration of 0.5 seconds, as 
previously described in studies  of chronic pain 
patients (10).  Stimulation is  
gated, with 0.5- second 
delay, after peak inhalation (i.e., during exhalation) or after peak exhalation (i.e., during inha lation ).
  
 
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_740623]-time 
evaluation of the respi[INVESTIGATOR_50126]. We use a respi[INVESTIGATOR_740624] (Fig. C).  This pneumatic belt i s 
placed around the subject's lower thorax at the level of 
maximum respi[INVESTIGATOR_740625] (TN 1132/ST Respi[INVESTIGATOR_740626], AD Instruments, [LOCATION_011] MA) . The belt is pretensioned slightly. The belt contains a 
capacitive sensing element and custom electronics that respond linearly to changes in length. The transducer is connected to a PowerLab pod port (Power Lab, AD Instruments, [LOCATION_011] MA).  The transducer contains a flexible sensing element bonded to the inside of the fabric belt.    Once electrode placement in the ear is validated, subjects are asked to rate stimulation 
intensity of 0 to 10 (0: no sensation, 10: mild discomfort). Current intensity is set to achieve moderate to strong ( but not painful) sensation ( target score: 4/10), and this 
current intensity i s used on subsequent stimulation runs. For SHAM  baseline study , the 
electrode in the ear remains in place, but the leads are disconnected from the stimulator.   Measurement of cervical vagal nerve compound actions potentials and electrogastrogram (EGG ) 
 The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_740627] (CNAPS) and the cutaneous electrogastrogram (EGG) in patients with gastroparesis who have undergone implantation of a gastr ic electrical stimulation device.  We refer to IRB protocol “Cardiac Vagal 
Effects of Gastric Electrical Stimulation and Vagal Nerve Action Potentials in Vagus 
nerve in Patients with Gastroparesis ” (IRB# [PHONE_15461]).  .
  Briefly ECG electrodes are 
C 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740616] o f the Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version [ADDRESS_1012396] as well as on the neck overlying the right and left vagus nerves.  To measure the cutaneous electrogastrogram (EGG) a set of three ECG electrodes are placed over the upper abdomen in a line parallel to t he 
longitudinal axis of the stomach.  Again, we refer to the protocol itself for further details.   
  ABVN Phase 2 Outcome Measures/Endpoints  
1. To measure the amplitude of vagal nerve compound action potentials in gastroparetic subjects with symptoms of nausea and vomiting with skin electrodes over right and left vagus nerve during ABVN stimulation and also during the vagal maneuvers phase  
2. To measure respi[INVESTIGATOR_740628].  
3. To measure changes in the amplitude of the surface electrogastrogram during ABVN and also during the vagal maneuvers phase. 
4. To measure the Heart rate variability(HRV), vagal nerve compound action potentials and electrogastrogram in subjects undergoing VNS Therapy for focal or partial seizures.  
5. To measure the effect of ABVN stimulation on the gastric hormones in healthy and gastroparetic subjects.  
6. To see the effect on the data if we change the regular ECG electrodes to MEA electrodes in the neck.  
7. To see the effect of COVID 19 on HRV  in healthy volunteers diagnosed with 
COVID- 19 
 
 The study has 4 parts to it; 
Healthy human subjects;  
 Healthy human subjects ranging in age between [ADDRESS_1012397] gastrointestinal motility are excluded from study.   Approximately 30 healthy volunteer s will be recruited for this next phase of the study. 
All previously enrolled healthy volunteers in the earlier phase of the study (IRB# [PHONE_15461])  can also enroll in this phase of the study. The study team may reach out to 
them to see if they would like to receive more information about this new phase of the study. If they are willing,  then information will be provide d to them and if they are 
interested then they will be contact[CONTACT_5365] a screening visit. The team feels that by [CONTACT_740642], they would be able to verify the previous results and thus help in the research.  
If the previously enrolled subjects are not reachable or not interested,  then new healthy 
volunteers will be enrolled.  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740616] o f the Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version 6  
3.17.2021  Page 8  
 Inclusion Criteria  
• Healthy volunteers  with no gastric symptoms  or conditions  (except due to COVID 
19) 
• Aged 18- 80 years  
• Willing to have electrodes placed in the external ear (ABVN arm)  
• Willing to perform vagal activity maneuver (Vagal arm)  
• Willing to have 1 tablespoon (15 ml) of blood drawn at [ADDRESS_1012398] and stomach  
 
 
Exclusion Criteria  
• Unable to provide consent  
• Having gastric motility issues  (not due to COVID 19)  as determined by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_59778] I  
• Taking medications affecting gastric motility  
• Pregnant females  
• Prisoners  
 
 Study Procedures:  
Healthy volunteers who meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria will be enrolled in the study. They will complete a Health History questionnaire that asks in detail about their health history along with any medications that they may be on. If they have been 
diagnosed with COVID 19 then they will be asked to complete another questionnaire about their symptoms. If they meet all the requirements for the study, then they will do 
the following  EAR STIMULATION GROUP:  
This is a onetime visit only that involves baseline and test procedures.  
 
1. Two MRI compatible electrodes will be placed in the auricle of the left ear, fixed by a plastic armature that wraps around the ear. The leads from the electrodes are connected to a stimulator. 
2. A pneumatic belt may be placed around the lower thorax. Pneumatic tubes connect this belt to a pressure transducer that in turn sends signal to a laptop-controlled device that acquires the signals. 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740616] o f the Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version [ADDRESS_1012399] for measurement of the electrocardiogram (ECG)  
5. Three ECG electrodes are placed on the abdomen in a line parallel to the longitudinal axis of the stomach to record the electrogastrogram (EGG).  
 
Electrical stimulation of the electrodes placed in the ear is provided by a current -constant 
stimulator. The stimuli consist of rectangular pulses with 450 µs pulse width, delivered at 30 Hz, and pulse train duration of 0.5 seconds . Stimulation is  gated, with 0.5- second 
delay, after peak inhalation (i.e., during exhalation) or after peak exhalation (i.e., during inhalation ).  
  Baseline procedure:  
 A butterfly catheter is inserted under aseptic conditions into a peripheral vein. Fifteen ml (1 tablespoon) of blood is withdrawn and placed on ice. After this the baseline recording will be started as described below.  
 During the baseline recording the stimulating electrodes are placed in the auricle of the subject but no current is delivered. Cervical neck electrodes are placed over the right and left vagus nerve to record any electrical activity that might occur during the baseline period. Baseline ECG and EGG recordings are also performed during this interval.  
 Test procedure:  
 Stimuli consisting of rectangular pulses with [ADDRESS_1012400].  Current intensity is 
set to achieve moderate to strong (but not painful) sensation, and pulse 
frequency/duration is set following pi[INVESTIGATOR_740629] a subjectively comfortable 
stimulus sensation.  S tarting current is 0.1mA  and the maximum current that can be given 
will not exceed 5.0 mA . This is 4 out of 10 and is designated “100 per cent.” T he current 
amplitude is then increased again by 10 per cent and ABVN is applied again for 60 seconds.  This sequence is repeated until the “100 percent” level  (4/10)  is reached.  Based 
on the previous study we find that the target of 4/[ADDRESS_1012401]. 
Sensation of 10/10 may cor relate with close to 10.0 mA.  The time that may elapse from 
the start to reaching the 100% target is very variable and may range from [ADDRESS_1012402] reaches the subjective 4/[ADDRESS_1012403] effective in producing vagal stimulation (8).   
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740616] o f the Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version 6  
3.17.2021  Page 10  
 Once the target stimulus intensity has been achieved, stimuli are delivered during the expi[INVESTIGATOR_740630] a total of two minutes.  Another 15 ml (1 tablespoon) of blood will be collected [ADDRESS_1012404] will be allowed to keep on resting and 20 minutes after the second blood draw, another 15 ml (1 tablespoon) of blood will be drawn. This is the final draw.  
The catheter will then be withdrawn, and the subject will be allowed to go home  
 ECG and EGG recordings are continued during auricular branch vagal nerve stimulation.  
   VAGAL MANEUVER GROUP:  
 Healthy volunteers will be recruited initially to see the effect of these maneuvers on the vagal activity.  
 A total of 10 healthy volunteers will be recruited. These subjects can be the same subjects 
that enroll in the ear stimulation group of the study or can be entirely new subjects. At the beginning of the study, a baseline recording of 10-  20 minutes will be made 
following which the maneuvers will be conducted. Cervical neck electrodes used in this part of the study will include the multi electrode array (MEA) that are currently being used for a different protocol (IRB [PHONE_15463]). The MEA can be placed on either side of the neck over the area of the vagus nerve to record any electrical activity that might occur during the baseline period. Baseline ECG and EGG recordings are also perf ormed during 
this interval by [CONTACT_740643].  
In a previous protocol (IRB [PHONE_15464]) healthy volunteers have already been recruited using the bipolar ECG electrodes for the vagal nerve recording in the neck, hence a total of [ADDRESS_1012405] will drink it as per 
their capacity.  We will include the following maneuvers:  
 Cough; Each subject will be asked to generate approximately 6 to 8 forceful and sustained coughs for 10 seconds.  
 Cold stimulus to face: We propose to place a washcloth soaked in ice water on each subject’s face for about 10 seconds. This creates a physiological response to a person being submerged in cold water (Diver’s Reflex)  
 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740616] o f the Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version 6  
3.17.2021  Page 11  
 Carotid Massage: This technique is performed with the subject’s neck in an extended position, the head turned away from the side being massaged. Only one side is massaged at a time. Pressure is applied underneath the angle of the jaw in a gentle circular motion for about [ADDRESS_1012406] is monitored throughout.  Gagging: A tongue depressor is briefly inserted into the subject’s mouth for about 10 seconds  touching the back of the throat, which causes the person to reflexively gag. The 
gag reflex stimulates the vagus nerve.  
 Valsalva maneuver: The subject is instructed to bear down as if they were having a bowel movement. The subject is asked to blow through a mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_740631] a device used in clinical spi[INVESTIGATOR_740632] 10mmHg. Alternatively, we  can 
have the subject blow through the barrel of a 10 ml syringe for 10 seconds. This maneuver increases intrathoracic pressure and stimulates the vagus nerve.  
 Eating: Subjects will be asked to drink water or/ and Ensure Original that has [ADDRESS_1012407] on vagal activity during eating. The 
subjects take their time to drink the water or ensure and the time to finish the drink is noted.   All the maneuvers described above will be conducted for duration of 10 seconds each except wherever stated otherwise and the recordings will be made for duration of 5- 10 
minutes after each maneuver. If it is not possible to do all the maneuvers in one visit,  then 
they will be conducted over two visits. Sometimes not all maneuvers will be conducted, 
and this will depend on the discretion of the investigator.  VNS Therapy group:  
 Volunteers who do not have gastrointestinal symptoms and undergoing VNS Therapy as 
part of treatment for focal or partial seizure will be recruited for the study. A total of 15 
subjects will be recruited for the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. This will help us determine if HRV is 
affected by [CONTACT_740644].  
 Volunteers will be recruited from the IU Health Physicians Neurology clinic where the patients are being seen for a routine follow up clinical visit after the VNS placement.  
 
1. Cervical neck electrodes used in this part of the study will include the multi electrode array (MEA) that are currently being used for a different protocol (IRB [PHONE_15463]). The MEA can be placed on either side of the neck over the area of the vagus nerve to record any electrical activity that might occur during the baseline period.  
2. Two ECG electrodes are placed either one on each arm or on the chest for measurement of the electrocardiogram (ECG)  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740616] o f the Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version [ADDRESS_1012408] the electrogastrogram (EGG).  
 A onetime baseline recording will be made for [ADDRESS_1012409] will be discharged from the study. There will be no follow up visit for these subjects in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  Gastroparetic subjects without implanted gastric stimulators;  Gastroparetic subjects ranging in age between 18 to 80 years and who are able to give informed consent are considered candidates for study.  Pregnant subjects are excluded from study.   Approximately 40 gastroparesis subjects will be recruited for this new phase of the study.  
 Inclusion Criteria  
• Gastroparesis subjects  with a confirmed diagnosis  of gastroparesis from a GI 
physician 
• Have a formal diagnosis of gastroparesis or are seeing the GI physician for 
symptoms related to gastroparesis  
• Aged 18- 80 years  
• Willing to have electrodes placed in the external ear (ABVN arm)  
• Willing to perform vagal activity maneuver (Vagal  arm)  
• Willing to have 1 tablespoon (15 ml) of blood drawn at 3 time  points  
 Exclusion Criteria  
• Unable to provide consent  
• Pregnant females  
• Prisoners  
  Study Procedures:  
Gastroparesis subjects who meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria will be enrolled in the study.   VAGAL MANEUVER GROUP:  
 Gastroparetic subjects  will be recruited initially to see the effect of these maneuvers on 
the vagal activity.  
 A total of 40 gastroparetic subjects  will be recruited.  These subjects can be the same 
subjects that enroll in the ear stimulation group of the study or can be entirely new subjects.  
At the beginning of the study, a baseline recording of 10-  20 minutes will be made 
following which the maneuvers will be conducted. Cervical neck electrodes used in this 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740616] o f the Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version [ADDRESS_1012410] will drink it as per their capacity.   We will include the following maneuvers:  
 Cough; Each subject will be asked to generate approximately 6 to 8 forceful and sustained coughs for 10 seconds.  
 Cold stimulus to face: We propose to place a washcloth soaked in ice water on each subject’s face for about 10 seconds. This creates a physiological response to a person being submerged in cold water (Diver’s Reflex)  
 Carotid Massage: This technique is performed with the subject’s neck in an extended position, the head turned away from the side being massaged. Only one side is massaged at a time. Pressure is applied underneath the angle of the jaw in a gentle circular motion for about [ADDRESS_1012411] is monitored throughout. 
 Gagging: A tongue depressor is briefly inserted into the subject’s mouth for about 10 seconds touching the back of the throat, which causes the person to reflexively gag. The gag reflex stimulates the vagus nerve.  
 
Valsalva maneuver: The subject is instructed to bear down as if they were having a bowel 
movement. The subject is asked to blow through a mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_740631] a device used in clinical spi[INVESTIGATOR_740632] 10mmHg. Alternatively, we  can 
have the subject blow through the barrel of a 10 ml syringe for 10 seconds. This maneuver increases intrathoracic pressure and stimulates the vagus nerve.  
 Eating: Subjects will be asked to drink water or/ and Ensure Original that has [ADDRESS_1012412] on vagal activity during eating. The subjects take their time to drink the water or ensure and the time to finish the drink is noted.  All the maneuvers described above will be conducted for duration of 10 seconds each except wherever stated otherwise and the recordings will be made for duration of 5- 10 
minutes after each maneuver. If it is not possible to do all the maneuvers in one visi t, then 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740616] o f the Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version 6  
3.17.2021  Page 14  
 they will be conducted over two or more visits. Sometimes not all maneuvers will be conducted, and this will depend on the discretion of the investigator.  
 EAR STIMULATION GROUP:  
This is a onetime visit only that involves baseline and test procedures.  
 
1. Two MRI compatible electrodes will be placed in the auricle of the left ear, fixed by a plastic armature that wraps around the ear. The leads from the electrodes are connected to a stimulator. 
2. A pneumatic belt may be placed around the lower thorax. Pneumatic tubes connect this belt to a pressure transducer that in turn sends signal to a laptop-controlled device that acquires the signals. 
3. Two ECG electrodes are placed on both sides of the neck overlying the area near the carotid artery where the vagus nerve is superficial. This is to measure the vagal action potentials in the neck.  
4. Two ECG electrodes are placed one on each arm and one on the chest for measurement of the electrocardiogram ( ECG)  
5. Three ECG electrodes are placed on the abdomen in a line parallel to the longitudinal axis of the stomach to record the electrogastrogram (EGG).  
 
Electrical stimulation of the electrodes placed in the ear is provided by a current -constant 
stimulator. The stimuli consist of rectangular pulses with 450 µs pulse width, delivered at 30 Hz, and pulse train duration of 0.5 seconds . Stimulation is  gated, with 0.5- second 
delay, after peak inhalation (i.e., during exhalation) or after peak exhalation (i.e., during inhalation ).  
  Baseline procedure:  
 A butterfly catheter is inserted under aseptic conditions into a peripheral vein. Fifteen ml (1 tablespoon) of blood is withdrawn and placed on ice. After this the baseline recording 
will be started as described below.  
 
During the baseline recording the stimulating electrodes are placed in the auricle of the subject but no current is delivered. Cervical neck electrodes are placed over the right and left vagus nerve to record any electrical activity that might occur during the baseline period. Baseline ECG and EGG recordings are also performed during this interval.  
 Test procedure:  
 Stimuli consisting of rectangular pulses with [ADDRESS_1012413].  Current intensity is 
set to achieve moderate to strong (but not painful) sensation, and pulse frequency/duration is set following pi[INVESTIGATOR_740629] a subjectively comfortable stimulus sensation.  This is 4/10 and is  designated “100 per cent.”  The current amplitude 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740616] o f the Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version 6  
3.17.2021  Page 15  
 is then increased again by 10 per cent and ABVN is applied again for 60 seconds.  This sequence is repeated until the “100 percent” level (4/10) is reached.  These s timuli are 
delivered during expi[INVESTIGATOR_740633] (8).  Once the target stimulus intensity has been achieved, stimuli are delivered during the expi[INVESTIGATOR_740630] a total of two minutes.  Another 15 ml (1 tablespoon) of blood will be collected [ADDRESS_1012414] will be allowed to keep on resting and 20 minutes after the second blood draw, another 15 ml (1 tablespoon) of blood will be drawn. This is the final draw.  
The catheter will then be withdrawn  
 The subject will then undergo stimulation at the “100 percent” designated  level for [ADDRESS_1012415] will be allowed to go 
home  
 ECG and EGG recordings will be continued during auricular branch vagal nerve stimulation.  
 If the blood collection is not possible due to any reasons the subjects will still go ahead with the auricular branch stimulation of 2 minutes and 5 minutes recording made after 
that. 
 Risks:  
 There is no pain associated with this protocol. Prior to the study, subjects are asked at 
what threshold they experience discomfort and subsequent stimuli are delivered below 
the discomfort threshold.  There is a small possibility of slight and temporary discomfort at the site where the electrodes are placed. Potential vaso -vagal reactions to stimulation 
resulting in dizziness or light -headedness will be promptly recognized and treated by a 
study physician or clinically trained  personnel with prompt removal  of the electrodes  or 
other vagal stimulus  and repositioning the subject into a supi[INVESTIGATOR_2547]. In some 
subjects, the experience of electrical stimulation may cause anxiety  in which case the 
electrodes will be removed . Subjects will be required to remain under supervision until 
all symptoms subside. A study physician will be available at all times to discuss the study with subjects should they become concerned.  
  The electrical stimulation procedure is without significant safety concerns. The electrical stimulator, checked by [CONTACT_216509], has a current limiter preventing harmful stimulation levels. Further, during the electrical stimulation, we will be c losely 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740616] o f the Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version [ADDRESS_1012416] feel any discomfort he or she will be advised to let the researcher know and the study will be immediately interrupted /terminated .  
 There may be a risk of transient ischemic attack (TIA) or mini stroke during the carotid massage maneuver.  
 The patient experiences some pain during venipuncture.  An indwelling catheter is used to decrease the discomfort of multiple venipuncture.  The procedure is performed using aseptic technique to minimize the risk of infection.  Pressure and a bandage are a pplied 
over the venipuncture site to minimize the risk of bleeding.  There is no additional risk as part of the recording for VNS Therapy subjects that are research related.  
 Data Safety Monitoring:  
 The study team along with an independent person ([CONTACT_740651], MD) will be responsible for all the data safety and monitoring. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_740634], personnel from Purdue along with [CONTACT_740651], MD will look at the data after the first subject is enrolled. Thereafter they will meet every month for monitoring until the last subject is enrolled. After that they will meet quarterly till it is deemed unnecessary by [CONTACT_3476]. As part of the Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) data quality, subject recruitment, accrual, retention, outcome and adverse event data, assessment of scientific 
reports, results of related studies that may impact subject safety, and procedures designed to protect the privacy of subjects will be evaluated.  Study withdrawal/ Discontinuation:  
The subject can withdraw the consent any time during the study.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_386063] I can 
withdraw the subject if they feel that subject safety may be affected by [CONTACT_740645].  
 Data Analysis  
 The CNAPs are visually analyzed and given a score based on their amplitude.  Mean values for each level of stimulation are then determined.  A comparison between the baseline value (SHAM stimulation) and the amplitude at each level of stimulation is then determined.  The amplitudes of the various nerve fibers at each level of stimulation are also examined to determine if a particular nerve fiber is particularly susceptible to stimulation of the ABVN.  Statistical analysis is performed using analysis of vari ance 
(ANOVA).  
 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740616] o f the Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version 6  
3.17.2021  Page 17  
 The blood samples will be sent as deidentified to Purdue lab for processing and data will 
be analyzed by [CONTACT_740646].  
  REFERENCES  
 
1. Abell, T., Hocking, M., McCallum, R., Koch, K., Abrahamsson, H., LeBlanc, I., Lindberg, G., Konturek, J., Nowak, T.V., Quigley, E., Tougas, G. & Starkebaum, W. (2003). Gastric electrical stimulation for medically refractory gastroparesis. Gastroenterology, 125, 421
-428. 
 
2. Garcia,  RG, Lin a RL,  Jeungchan, L, Kim, J ,  Barbieri, R, Sclocco a, R, Wasan i, 
AJ, Edwards, RR, Rosen a, BR, Hadjikhani a N, Vitaly Napadow .  Modulation of 
brainstem activity and connectivity  by [CONTACT_15206][INVESTIGATOR_696]- gated auricular vagal afferent 
nerve  stimulation in migraine patients .  Pain 158; 1461- 1472, 2017.  
 
3. Kim J, Loggia ML, Cahalan CM, Harris RE, Beissner F, Garcia RG, Kim H,  
Barbieri R, Wasan AD, Edwards RR, Napadow V. The somatosensory link in fibromyalgia: functional connectivity of the primary somatosensory cortex is altered by [CONTACT_740647]/autonomic dysfunction. Arthritis Rheumatol 2015; 67:1395–405.  
4. Kiyokawa J, Yamaguchi K, Okada R, Maehara T, Akita K. Origin, course  and 
distribution of the nerves to the posterosuperior wall of the external  acoustic 
meatus. Anat Sci Int 2014;89:238–45. 
 5. Dietrich S, Smith J, Scherzinger C, Hofmann- Preiss K, Freitag T,  Eisenkolb A, 
Ringler R. A novel transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation leads to brainstem and cerebral activations measured by [CONTACT_165361]. Biomed Tech (Berl) 
2008;53:104–11. 
 
6. Frangos E, Ellrich J, Komisaruk BR. Non- invasive access to the vagus nerve 
central projections via electrical stimulation of the external ear: fMRI evidence in humans. Brain Stimulation 2015;8:624–36. 
 7. Straube A, Ellrich J, Eren O, Blum B, Ruscheweyh R. Treatment of chronic  
migraine with transcutaneous stimulation of the auricular branch of the  vagal 
nerve (auricular t -VNS): a randomized, monocentric clinical trial.  J Headache 
Pain 2015;16:543.  
 8. Sciocco R, Garcia RG, Polimeni JR, Kettner NW,  Isenburk K, Toschi N, Makris 
N, Goldstein J, Wald NN, Narnieri R, Napadow V. The brainstem response to 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_696] -gated auricular vagal afferent nerve stimulation (RAVANS) at 
ultrahigh- field (7T) fMRI and its effect on vagal  autonomic outflow . (Abstract: 
presented at the 2017 Society for Neuroscience Meeting, Washington, DC). 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740616] o f the Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version 6  
3.17.2021  Page 18  
  9 Peuker ET, Filler TJ. The nerve supply of the human auricle. Clin Anat  
2002;15:35–7. 
 10 Napadow V, Edwards RR, Cahalan CM, Mensing G, Greenbaum S, Valovska A, Li A, Kim J, Maeda Y, Park K, Wasan AD. Evoked pain analgesia in chronic pelvic pain patients using respi[INVESTIGATOR_696]- gated auricular  vagal afferent nerve 
stimulation. Pain Med 2012;13:777–89. 
 [ADDRESS_1012417] -wall circumference. Physiol Meas  2007;28:149–
59. 
 [ADDRESS_1012418], Kettner  N, Hui KK. Time -variant fMRI activity in the brainstem and higher 
structures in response to acupuncture. Neuroimage 2009;47:  289–301. 
 
      
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740635] t he Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version 6 
3.17.2021  Page 19  
 Appendix 1: Previously approved protocol: [PHONE_15461] 
 
Cardiac Vagal Effects of Gastric Electrical Stimulation  and Vagal 
Nerve Action Potentials in Vagus nerve  in Patients with Gastroparesis  
  
Appendix 2: Letter of Support  
  Thomas Nowak Professor of Clinical Medicine,  Gastroenterology & Hepatology
 
Indiana University School of Medicine   September 1, [ADDRESS_1012419]. Nowak:  
  This Letter is in full support of our collaborative research study, evaluating the neurophysiology of transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation. We have been conducting similar research, in a safe and reliable manner for more than [ADDRESS_1012420] regards  
 
 
Vitaly Napadow, PhD LAc Director, Center for Integrative Pain Neuroimaging (CiPNI) Associate Professor, Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging  
[LOCATION_005] General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], Harvard Medical School  
[LOCATION_011], MA    

PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740616] o f the Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version 6  
3.17.2021  Page 20  
   
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_740616] o f the Auricular Branch  of the Vagus Nerve o n Cervical 
Vagus Nerve Compound Action P otentials  
 
 
Version 6  
3.17.2021  Page 21  
 Appendix 3: Previously approved protocol for healthy 
volunteers  
 
EFFECT OF ELECTRICAL STIMULATION OF THE AURICULAR 
BRANCH OF THE VAGUS NERVE ON CERVICAL VAGUS NERVE 
COMPOUND ACTION POTENTIALS : [PHONE_15462]   
 
   
Appendix 4:  Previously approved study to use MEA 
electrodes : [PHONE_15463]  
 
High Resolution, Noninvasive Measurement and Functional Classification of Vagal 
Nerve Response Patterns in Relation to Gastroparesis Symptom Management using 
Gastric Electrical Stimulation Therapy  
 
   