 
  Pos4Health Statistical Analysis  Plan   
1. Is stratification/randomization involved? Yes, Randomization  
 
► IF YES, describe the stratification/ randomization  scheme.  
Randomization will be achieved using a random number generator. Equal numbers of 
participants  will be assigned to the two arms. The participants will be blinded to the 
randomization. Because the consent form describes the two arms, it is possible that participants will deduce which treatment arm they are in. The statistician will generate randomiz ation for the participants. The project coordinator will remain blind to the 
randomization until it is time to randomize participants (after study consent and TLFB). At that point, the coordinator will learn which treatment that participant will receive and will provide participants with the instructions relevant to their assigned conditions. 
Co-investigators will have access to the randomization.  
 
► IF YES, who will generate the randomization scheme?  
    X UVa Statistician. Holly Lord,  PhD 
 
2. What are the stat istical considerations for the  protocol?  
Study Design: 2 group (experimental and control) pi[INVESTIGATOR_127692] -treatment 
and post- treatment, with a focus on assessing feasibility and acceptability, along with 
preliminary efficacy.  
1. Endpoints and precision estimates for feasibility: Feasibility will be judged by [CONTACT_127694]. Study Acceptance will be determined 
by [CONTACT_127695]. We will judge this trial feasible if the acceptance rate among eligible patients is equal to or greater than 
56%. This cut -off was chosen so that if we meet this criterion, we can be 95% certain 
that the population proportion of acceptance is at least 50%. We will interview a subs et 
of participants who completed the intervention. Completion rate will be n completed 
follow -up interviews  divided by n baseline interviews . We will judge a larger scale trial 
feasible if our completion rate at the 3M follow -up is 80%. This decision rule was chosen 
so that if it is met, we can be 95% certain that the proportion of patients for whom this is feasible is at least  75%.  
2. Endpoints for Acceptability: We will judge acceptability  by [CONTACT_127696], and by 
[CONTACT_127697]. Participants will rate the Intervention at follow -up. The 
range of items on this scale is from 1 to 7. An item mean of 3.5 would be mid -range. 
Basic descriptive information will be gathered from th e tracking system about whether 
participants logged in, how many times, and for how long. Time spent in each Core will be tracked and summarized. We will judge eHealth Positive acceptable if if the average score on the evaluation was > 5.6, which is 80% of  the highest score (range 1 -7), and if 
75% of participants completed at least half of the Cores and provide [ADDRESS_144028] 4  weeks.  

 
 
3. Endpoints for preliminary efficacy components: PRIMARY: HIV viral suppression rates 
for the experimental vs. control group SECONDARY: adherence (6M average pharmacy 
refill rate), retention in care (6M missed visit proportion), and substance using days per 
[ADDRESS_144029] size. As detailed above, we may consent 100 participants to get 71 fully enrolled and an n of 50 (25 per group) with all  data available for analysis.  
 
4. What is your plan for primary variable analysis? 
Primary research questions and analytic  approach:  
1. Is the intervention trial feasible?  The main reason to conduct this project is to develop 
a feasible intervention to prepare f or a randomized trial. Feasibility standards are based 
on a synthesis of criteria for behavioral research trials.131 Feasibility will be judged by 
[CONTACT_127698]. Study Acceptance will be 
determined by [CONTACT_127695]. We will 
judge this trial feasible if the acceptance rate among eligible patients is equal to or greater than 56%. This cut- off was chosen so that if we  meet this criterion, we can be 
95% certain that the population proportion of acceptance is at least 50%. We will also evaluate factors that influence some eligible candidates to refuse participation (Study Refusal). We will query eligible refusers about t he recruitment process, the informed 
consent process, the study description, how they learned about the study, and other factors, to learn how these might be improved. Some who enroll will not complete the study (Dropout). We will ask dropouts about the ti me commitment, difficulties 
understanding the study, problems with the web program or their device, privacy concerns, or other reasons they discontinued participation. We will interview a subset of participants who completed the intervention to permit comparisons of refusers vs. enrollers and completers vs. dropouts. Completion rate will be n completed follow -up 
interviews  divided by n baseline interviews . We will judge a larger scale trial feasible if 
our completion rate at the 3M follow -up is 80%. This de cision rule was chosen so that if 
it is met, we can be 95% certain that the proportion of patients for whom this is feasible is at least 75%.  
 
2. Is the intervention acceptable?  We will judge acceptability  by [CONTACT_127696], and 
by [CONTACT_127697]. Participants will rate the Intervention at follow -up. The 
range of items on this scale is from 1 to 7. An item mean of 3.5 would be  mid-range.  

 
 
Basic descriptive information will be gat hered from the tracking system about whether 
participants logged in, how many times, and for how long. Time spent in each Core will 
be tracked and summarized. We will judge eHealth Positive acceptable if if the average score on the evaluation was > 5.6, wh ich is 80% of the highest score (range 1 -7), and if 
75% of participants completed at least half of the Cores and provide [ADDRESS_144030] on knowledge and usage of 
copi [INVESTIGATOR_4262]?  Preliminary efficacy. To assess the promise of Pos4Health, we will 
test it in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_127693] [ADDRESS_144031] on secondary outcome variables of adherence (6M aver age pharmacy refill rate), retention in care (6M missed visit proportion), and on 
substance using days per [ADDRESS_144032] methods (means, medians, standard deviations, confidence intervals). Prior to analyses, psychometric analyses will be conducted to assess reliability of the measures and to adjust for abnormal distributions. We will also characterize patterns of missing data. Paired  t- tests 
will compare change over time from baseline to post -treatment follow -up. We 
anticipate the use of nonparametric tests to allow for non- normality. Linear regression 
models will be used to adjust for effects of relevant covariates on participant re sponses 
over time. We will assess the magnitude of associations among the outcome variables using Pearson’s correlation  coefficients.  
 
5. What is your plan for secondary variable analysis? 
Secondary research question and analytic  approach:  
 
How do adherence and engagement in care measures perform as future primary  
outcomes?  Obviously, the ultimate goal for the intervention is to improve adherence 
and engagement in care, although we will not answer this definitively in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251]. At this stage, we will examine the data quality of adherence and engagement in care indicators (Pharmacy Refill Rate, Missed Visit Proportion) to determine which ones are suitable as outcome measures in a future RCT. The purpose is to calculate effect sizes for 
the planned rando mized trial . 
 
6. Have you been working with a statistician in designing this  protocol? YES 
IF YES, what is their name? Holly Lord, PhD  

 
7. Will data from multiple sites be combined during analysis?  NO 
