Study Title 
A Retrospective Study to Understand the Risk Factors/Drivers of Inappropriate” Antimicrobial 
Use and the Performance Evaluation of a Clinical Decision Support Tool that Facilitates 
Prediction of Outbreaks of Inappropriate Antibiotic Use  
 
Objective 1. The first objective of this study is to comprehensively classify and pr edict 
vancomycin never -events.  
Vancomycin is selected as a prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_191285]- spectrum antibiotic that is regularly 
overused and is known to cause downstream harms (e.g., acute kidney injury). We will 
classify the proportion of vancomycin use in which pot ential for harm outweighs the 
potential benefit, herein referred to as “never events”. We will categorize the rate of 
never events as a function of patient, provider, and disease/organism characteristics.  
 
Objective 2. We will develop decision rules and thresholds (e.g. decision support tools ) 
to predict time periods with frequent vancomycin never events based on antimicrobial 
consumption trends.  
 
Objective 2a. Identify the relationship between clusters of high antibiotic use, herein referred to as “outbreaks,” and occurrence of never events. We will use our previously 
published strategies to identify antibiotic outbreaks and correlate to vancomycin never 
event s.  
 
Objective 2b. Compare thresholds for prediction of never events based on Optimal Data 
Analysis (ODA) methodologies with exact statistics versus vancomycin never events.  
 
STATISTICAL METHODS  
For Objective 1, multivariate logit models will be created using never events as the dependent 
variable and the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], provider and patient covariates listed above as the independent variables. Models will be built using forward stepwise procedures (P<0 .2) for model inclusion 
and P<0.[ADDRESS_1265209] eted using 
segmented regressions stratified by [CONTACT_194674] (i.e. Northwestern, Henry Ford Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], 
University of Michigan). Predictive intervals for antibiotic use will be calculated. Antibiotic 
Outbreak’ months will be defined as the antibiotic use level that best predicts the highest 
quartile of vancomycin never events. That is, we will optimize sensitivity and specificity for 
prediction of never events using binary recursive partitioning methods (to identify optimal 
categorical classifications)  we have previously established. We will attempt to combine data 
from all three sites using multilevel mixed- effects models. If this is not possible, we will analyze 
each site individually. Performance (e.g. sensitivity, specificity, etc.) of the prediction for 
antibiotic outbreaks will be compared to the occurrence of vancomycin never events.  
 
Statistical analyses conducted in O2b are theoretically similar but mathematically distinct. The 
methods in O2b address maximum -accuracy calibration, sensitivity, and prospective cross -
generalizability analysis of models identified in O1 and O2a. O2b analyses will use a machine-
learning algorithm that is known as optimal (i.e., maximum -accuracy) discriminant analysis, or 
ODA. To identify and mitigate over -fitting, prospective cross -generalizability of optimized models 
is assessed using one- sample (“leave- one-out”) jackknife analysis.  