Mulligan	Concept	Intervention	for	Pregnancy	Related	Lumbo-
Pelvic	Pain 	
NCT	number:	TBD 	
	
Research	Strategy	
February	 7,	2018 	
Research Strategy  
Significance   
Pregnancy -related pelvic girdle pain (PPGP), whether of the pelvic girdle or the 
lubopelvic junction, is exceptionally prevalent; reportedly, 45 -76% of all pregnant women 
and 25% of postpartum women suffer from PPGP.3-[ADDRESS_1006961] regions compared to national averages; however, a marked decline in the 
provision of pregnancy related care has occur red in Alaska, Idaho, Montana, and 
Wyoming since 1999.1, [ADDRESS_1006962] theorized PPGP to be caused by a widening of 
the pelvis in response to hormonal changes during pregnancy, creating instability in the 
sacroiliac (SI) joints.3, [ADDRESS_1006963] identified gait characteristics and joint relationships differences that 
are unique to patients wit h PPGP ; not found in pregnant women with out PPGP or in 
patients with simple low back pain .3, 8, 10 Positional abnormalities (e.g., subluxation of the 
pubic symphysis) , changes in gait  (e.g., thoracic and lumbar rotation timing and 
amplitude) , and muscle activat ion patterns have be en associated with the syndrome  but 
not found in matched healthy subjects.3, 8,[ADDRESS_1006964] clinical 
intervention trials that close the e vidence- based medicine gap and aim to inform clinical 
practice.  
 Approach  
Twenty pregnant volunteers, ages 20 -45 years, will be recruited for the study. 
Participants will be between their 20th-34th week of gestation, with reported pregnancy -
related lumbope lvic pain. Participants would be excluded for any of the following criteria:  
• orthopaedic or  neurological problems with walking (other than PPGP)  
• prior surgery of the lumbar spi[INVESTIGATOR_050], pelvis, hip, or knee  
• fracture  
• known malignancy  
• active inflammation in the lumbar spi[INVESTIGATOR_321737]  
• ankylosing spondylitis, Scheuermann’s kyphosis, active polyarthritis, or severe 
osteoporosis  
• any pulmonary, cardiac, visual, auditory, or cognitive disorders  
• any other multi/co -morbidities that limit the voluntee rs ability to complete a gait 
and sit -to-stand task 
Volunteers will be recruited from Latah County, Idaho  and surrounding areas by 
[CONTACT_737089]. Pregnant women who express interest in the 
study will be given an informational pac ket explaining the methods, risks, and benefits of 
participation. If the women decide to participate they would sign a consent statement and conduct an initial questionnaire, sent via online link. The survey would be used to 
determine i nclusion and exclusi on criteria,  and group assignment (i.e., intervention 
group, placebo  group). Un- paired t -tests will be conducted to determine whether 
significant differenc es exist between intervention and control groups in age, weight, 
height, as well as gestational week  and number of pregnancies.  Randomly stratifying the 
participants in to groups in this manner minimizes the potential confounding variables .  
Participants will report to the University of Idaho Integrated Sport Medicine and 
Rehabilitative Therapy Clinic for initial patient reported outcome measures collection and 
standardized examination. Primary patient reported outcome measures include the 
Visual Analog Pain Scale, the Pelvic Girdle Questionnaire, the Assessment of 
Disablement Questionnaire , the Patient Specific Function Scale , and the Short Stress 
State Questionnaire. The examination will include  history, palpation, special tests (e.g., 
Poster ior Pelvic Pain Provocation test, Active Straight Le g Raise), and neurological 
screen.  
Each participant will then perform a walking gait and sit -to-stand task as a 
baseline , in the University of Idaho Biomechanics Laboratory . An eight -infrared camera 
optical system (Vicon Motion Systems Ltd., Oxford, [LOCATION_006]) and forceplate (AMTI, 
Watertown, MA, [LOCATION_003]) will be used to collect the kinematic and kinetics data during the 
tasks. In addition, an eight -channel wireless electromyography (EMG) system (Delays, 
Inc., N atick, MA, [LOCATION_003]) will be used to collect muscle activity during the gait and sit- to-
stand tasks, and the active straight leg raise (ASLR) special test. The participants in the 
treatment group will receive a Mulligan Concept evaluation and treatment administ ered 
by a Certified Mulligan Practitioner. The placebo group will undergo only the Mulligan 
Concept evaluation . The same tasks and ASLR will be repeated. Outcome measures 
and physical examination will also be repeated . 
The study will be conducted under a randomized triple blinded placebo trial 
design. Neither the participants, the treating clinician, biomechanist, nor researcher 
collecting outcome measures will know the group designation of the participants. 
Conducting the trial in this manner will ensure the lowest possibility that any observed 
effects of the intervention are due to confounding factors. 
 
Statistical Analysis  
Sample size calculations were conducted to determine the appropriate number of 
participants that must be included. A sample size of [ADDRESS_1006965] differences between groups with 80% power, and an a priori  alpha of 0.05.   
Accounting for a reasonable 5% drop out rate, the final recommended number of 
participants is 36 (18 participants per group).  
Specific Aim #1:  Determine if Mulligan Concept manual therapy produces immediate 
changes in pain and self -reported function in women with PPGP.  
A series of independent samples t -tests will be used to determine if a difference 
exists between the mean scores of the intervention and placebo groups on the VAS, 
PSFS, ADQ, and PGQ.  
Specific Aim #2:  Determine whether treatment with the Mulligan Concept immediately 
restores or alters dysfunctional gait characteristics and pelvic girdle motor control in 
women experiencing P PGP.  
The timing and amplitude of lumbar and thoracic spi[INVESTIGATOR_737087] , as well as 
muscle activity,  will be recorded and compared  using descriptive statistics . Between 
groups analysis will consist of descriptive statistics to compare differences in timing, 
amplitude , and EMG activity  after intervention . 
Specific Aim #3:  Identify intake factors that predict treatment outcome.  
Standard multiple  regression  and step-wise multiple regression will be used to 
predict treatment outcome from different factors of interest (e.g., number of pregnancies, week of gestation, initial ADQ score, etc.).  
 Project Timeline  
Preparation for participant recruitment will begin July [ADDRESS_1006966] timeline will be 
established and implemented.  
  
 
 
Phase  Milestone  Timeline  
Study Start Up  • IRB Approval  
 
• Award Announcement  
• Preparation  
 
• Pre-recruitment planning 
(e.g., creation of media 
material)  • Prior to March 1, 2017  
 
• May 31, 2017  
• July 15 - October 1, 
2017 
• October [ADDRESS_1006967]  • Ready to Recruit  
• Materials completely 
distributed 
• 50% Enrollment Achieved 
• 100% Enrollment Achieved  
• Data Collection  • December  1, 2017  
• January  15, 2018  
 
• February 20, 2018 
 
• March 15, 2018  
 
• Late March, 2018  
Study Close -out • Attendance at Annual 
Meeting  
• Publication within 12 
months of study close  • May, 2018  
• December, [ADDRESS_1006968] will aid in the PI’s professional 
development by [CONTACT_737090].  
Information  gathered from this exploratory trial will greatly inform next steps  in a 
long line of research  and allows the PI [INVESTIGATOR_737088] . For example, if the central hypothesis is 
confirmed, further investigation into the Mulligan Concept as treatment for PPGP in this 
population is warranted. A larger -scale multi -site randomized control trial with large 
sample size  and more diverse sample would be the next log ical step to create more 
robust evidence of the technique. Once the efficacy of the treatment protocol is 
established, exploration of a patient -applied treatment as a home program would be 
developed. If the kinematic, kinetic, pain and dysfunction effects can be well established, 
continued research would not necessarily focus on the biomechanical mechanisms, but 
would be more clinical in nature; a full scale clinical trial, focusing on treatment outcome, 
comorbidity, predictive factors of treatment outcome,  risks, and side effects, etc.  Future 
research will not be equipment heavy, but need funding primarily for participant 
recruitment, clinician training, and researcher salaries. Explorator y/Developmental 
research grants  such as the NIH R21, or multi -site co llaborative grants such as the CTR -
IN Multi -Site Research Project Program, would be an ideal funding mechanism s for the 
next stages of this research line.  