Page 1 of 11  
 
 
Maintenance Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation in Major Depressive Disorder    
 [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
12/17/[ADDRESS_713405] Title:   Maintenance of response to Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) in Major 
Depressive Disorder (MDD) using monthly TMS treatment   
IRB Number:  2013884  
Version Number:  3 
Version Date:  12/17/2019  
Principal Investigator:   [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Muaid Ithman  
Funding Source:   
 
Clinical Trial Phase:  IV 
Clinicaltrials.gov Number:   
Study Drug/Study Device : Magventure/Magvita TMS machine  
 
 
 
 
 
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) has b een established as an effective 
and safe method to treat Major  Depressive Disorder (MDD) .  Large randomized sham 
controlled trials ( 1,4), and over a decade of clinic al use since it was FDA approved  for 
acute treatment of MDD in 2008,  has shown  TMS to be a promising  treatment after 
medications and psychotherapy have failed  to alleviate depressive symptoms.   TMS is 
non-invasive, and uses a small but powerful pulsed magnetic field placed over the dorsa -
lateral -prefrontal -cortex (DLPFC), a part of the brain thought to be associated with 
depression.  In general, treatments are given 5 times for week for 4 -6 weeks. This  
treatment protocol results in an  effectiveness of roughly 2/3 of patients see ing a clinical ly 
significant benefit, while 1/3 of those patients experience a  complete remission of their 
depressive symptoms  (2).  TMS  is also a relatively safe treatment and  has very little if 
any side effects, the most common being a slight headache after the treatmen t (5,6) .   
Given that t reatment resistant MDD is a chronic disease  with no known cure, 
management of symptoms mostly consist s of trialing and failing  medications whose 
positive effects on symptomology are of limited time course .  TMS is no different.  
Patients that respond or remit after a TMS course will most likely see a relapse in their 
depressive symptoms  at some point after their acute TMS treatment course is complete d 
(3,7,8).  The time course of response or remission after acute TMS treatment varies  
between individual s from weeks to years, and  there is no way to predict the length of 
positive outcomes.   Research has shown that close to 40% of patients will see  symptom 
worsenin g, and another 10% will have a relapse  within [ADDRESS_713406]-acute  treatment 
course (3). Interestingly, data and clinical evidence has shown that if a patient responds  to 
TMS and relapses back into a depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865], a  new TMS treatment course will 
provi de the same benefits as the original TMS course  (3).  In other words, if TMS works 
for the patient, it will most likely work again.  Given the relative safety and the fact the 
TMS is equally effective  after a positive acute response, many clinicians and re searchers I. Research Objectives /Background  
Page [ADDRESS_713407]  question ed the current clinical protocol of waiting for a relapse to start treating with 
TMS.  Succinctly, s hould we be using TMS to maintain response?  
 Research  using TMS a s a maintenance therapy  has shown that remission and 
response have been extended out for longer periods after the acute treatment , however 
there has been a multitude of parameters, populations, and treatment protocols used 
which has led to mixed results.   These maintenance proto cols studies include : as needed  
(10), use as a rescue (11),  regular weekly or monthly intervals (10), and clustered 
treatments where multiple treatments are given in the same day  (12).   
More recently, new  acute TMS protocols , called theta -burst have  been FDA 
cleared on some TMS machines for treating depression  (9).  Both the original 10hz 
stimulation approved by [CONTACT_34033] 2008, and the newer theta -burst stimulation are 
excitatory in nature,  but little research has been completed to determine if  newer theta -
burst  protocols  are as effective and safe in maintenance of the response compared to 
acute TMS treatment . Further, no work has been completed on  how they compare to the 
clinical standard [ADDRESS_713408] responded or remitted from their depressive symptoms  from the use of 
clinical TMS treatment, while off their antide pressant medication . A secondary objective 
is to see how the safety and effectiveness of this newer treatment protocol  (theta -burst)  is 
compared to prior treatment protocols  in a maintenance regime , by [CONTACT_545191] -
burst to traditional  10hz TMS trea tment protocols .  An additional tertiary purpose is to 
see if maintenance therapy treatment performed by a certified TMS technician can be 
performed without the need of TMS Attending supervision.  Given the relative safety of 
TMS, that TMS technicians are CPR certified, and highly experienced in understanding 
the safety of TMS, this particular objective would help to show the feasibility and 
possible economic benefit to patient and provider of not needing Attending supervision 
for TMS maintenance treatment.   
 
 
 
 
The device used in this study is a Magventure/MagVita Transcranial Magnetic 
Stimulation device.  It is a  FDA approved for treating Major Depressive Disorder in an acute 
treatment protocol .  The normal acute clinical treatment protocol consists  of 36 treatments 
given over 6 weeks with a 3 week taper  (totaling 9 weeks) .  This study will be looking at a 
mainten ance protocol and treating monthly, so there will be much less treatments 
comparatively.   There is no IDE required for this study since it is a FDA approved device and 
we will use FDA cleared treatment protocols.  M ore specific inclusion criteria are listed in 
the inclusion/ex clusion section of the protocol . 
TMS is an electromagnet that use s a small precise, but powerful magnetic pulse delivered 
to the head corresponding to an area over the brain thought to have some role in the 
depressive symptoms ass ociated with MDD.   This study will use the exact same protocols 
used in the acute  treatment setting, except that treatments will be given monthly not daily 
(see methods section for reference).  
  There are currently [ADDRESS_713409] of a  37 minute treatment, a 20min treatment, and a II. Drugs/Biologics/Devices  
Page [ADDRESS_713410] of a 10Hz stimulation 
for 4 secs with either 27 or 11 sec intertrain break with no stimulation respectively .  The 3 
minute protocol is different than the other two protocols and consists of 600 stimulations per 
treatment.   It’s param eters consist of a 50Hz triplet burst stimulation for 2 seconds  with a 8 
second intertrain break with no stimulation.      
 Dosage (or % of machine output) is determined by [CONTACT_545192].  
 This device will be used in this study because it is the current device used to treat patients 
for acute MDD  in the UMHC Neuromodu lation clinic , and the Neuromodulation clinic is 
where the subjects for the study will be recruited from.  
 This study is open -label with no sham group used as a comparative group.  However, we 
will use a  study arm that does not  use a TMS treatment for mai ntenance and follow them for 
similar time frame as other study TMS treatment arms noting durability/length of response 
measures compared to other study treatment groups.  
 
 
 
Subjects will be recruited from the UMHC Neuromodulation clinic.  All subjects will 
already have completed an acute TMS treatment regime in the clinic.  This study will be 
looking at treating in the maintenance phase only, meaning they must previously  have  
completed the acute clinical protocol (36 treatments).  Subjects will only come from the 
UMHC clinic, and must have responded or remitted from their depressive symptoms due to 
the TMS acute treatment.  No participants will be allowed into the study who we re acutely 
treated outside the UMHC Neuromodulation clinic.  
As patients come close to the end of their acute clinical TMS treatment, they will be 
screened to see if their depressive scores have shown a clinically significant improvement, or 
if their sympto ms have remitted  (we already collect these scores clinically) .  If their clinical 
scores show this inclusion criteria then they will be approached by [CONTACT_545193], letting them know we have a study looking at  the efficacy of 
using TMS treatment to maintain their improvement they have attained in their clinica l 
course of TMS treatment.  
If a potential subject is interested in learning more about the study a copy of the consent 
will be given or sent to them in th e mail  for them to review , and a consent appointment will 
be setup to meet with the study staff.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
When a potential subject is identified and after a copy of the consent is given to the 
potential subject for review, a consent appointment will be setup.  At the appointment an 
approved study team member will go over the privacy practices, HIPAA , and conse nt 
thoroughly, allowing the potential subject to ask questions and stressing that the signing 
of the consent is not a contract only a process, and that they can discontinue the study at III. Recruitment Process  
IV. Consent Process  
Page [ADDRESS_713411].  A baseline visit will 
then be setup , or if time allows a baseline visit commence immediately  following the 
signing of consent . 
 
 
 
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
- Must have recently (within 4 weeks) completed an acute TMS course (full 36 
treatments) at the UMHC Neuromodulation clinic  
- Must have clinically responded to the acute TMS treatment course (≥50% 
improvement according to the clinical depressive scale used - usually the 
PHQ -9)  
- Must be able sign consent  
- Must have a current address and phone number  
- Must have current mental health care provider, either psychiatrist or general 
practioner  who they see for mental health symptom management  
- Must be able to taper off antidepressant medication within 2 months of 
signing consent of study  (treatment group only)  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
- Subject t hat has not completed a full acute treatment course, including taper  
- Subjects that have changed anything that may not make them safe for TMS, 
which are  (all changes will be reviewed by [CONTACT_545194], and will not necessarily 
be excluded possibly depending on se verity) : 
o Any new metal near head  
o Any new medical devices that cannot be removed  
o Any new pregnancies  (verbally confirmed)  
o Seizures that occurred post-acute  TMS treatment  
o Any uncontrolled cardiovascular disease  
o Any new head trauma  
o Any new illness causing injury to brain  
o Any new medications which cannot be altered or lowered that may be 
contraindicated for TMS treatment  
o Any drug or alcohol use deemed by [CONTACT_545195]  
-  Subjects unwilling to sign consent or follow study procedures  
-  Subjects with known extended travel plans which may affect study 
procedures and scheduled TMS treatment  
 
 
 
 V. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
VI. Number of Subjects  
Page [ADDRESS_713412]:  
 
 
 The number of subjects we expect to enroll is based on our current UMHC 
Neuromodulation clinic patient flow.  The average patient clinic flow is [ADDRESS_713413] 
20% of our expected enrolled may drop out of study for varies reasons (moved, loss of interest , 
unexpected reasons) hence the total expected completed bein g 100.  [ADDRESS_713414] responded or remitted from their depressive 
symptoms according to their routine care clinical assessments (PH Q-9, or QIDS ).  There 
is no sham treatment in this study, but we will be using a study arm that does not receive 
TMS treatment in order to compare to an active TMS study a rm.   
 All s ubjects will complete 3 non -treatment visits (consent, baseline, end of s tudy 
visit) and if a subject  is in the treatment arm and additional 60 visits  (over the course of 
year).  Additionally, a subject that is in the treatment arm will completed a PHQ -9, and 
IDS at baseline visit, and the beginning and end of each monthly treatment block.  If a 
subject is in the  non-treatment arm  they will complete 15 total visits consisting of a 
consent, baseline, 12 assessment visits (for PHQ -9 & IDS testing) and an end treatme nt 
visit.   For these individuals, a PHQ -[ADDRESS_713415] signed consen t according to the study doctor’s direction.  
Subjects in the TMS active arm will remain antidepressant medication free for the 
duration of the study. If these subjects deteriorate  during course of the study they will be 
removed from the study and normal c linical care will resume.  They will complete a 
PHQ -9 and QIDS at this time.  Their data will be used in the final analysis of study.  
Deterioration or relapse will be determined by [CONTACT_545196].  
VII. Study Procedures / Design /Treatment Plan  
Page 7 of 11  For subjects in the active TMS treat ment arms, a dosing procedure (Motor 
Threshold)  will need to be per formed by [CONTACT_545197] [INVESTIGATOR_545190], each month immediately before the first treatment of each monthly treatment block.  
The Motor Threshold (MT) is used to det ermine the % TMS machine output or dosage , 
needed to treat.  The procedure consists of the TMS certified operator placing the TMS 
machine treatment coil on the patient’s head, corresponding to an area over the patients 
left Motor Co rtex of his/ her brain. T hen the TMS machine intensity is turned up or down  
and the coil is moved around on patient’s head  to determined how much  energy is need to 
elicit a muscle twitch in the right abductor pollicis brevis muscle (APB).  Then a 
computer algorithm helps determine the correct intensity that should be used for the next 
5 treatments.  An additional computer algorithm uses head measurements of 
circumference , Nasion to Inion, and Tragus to Tragus, to determine where the TMS 
treatment coil will be located to tr eat over the Do rsolateral P refrontal C ortex  (DLPFC) .  
This procedure must  be completed each month prior to the monthly treatment block.   
 If a patient drops out of the study for any reason their data up to that point will be 
retained and used, this will b e discussed with the potential patient during the consent 
process , and described in the consent itself . 
 The last treatment visit when a  patient completes the treatment portion of the 
study or has finished their last m onthly assessment visit if they are no t in an active 
treatment arm, will be an end study visit (this could be the last treatment/assessment visit 
if time allows). At this visit the TMS MD will discuss end of study and possible future 
clinical care that maybe necessary for subject when they swi tch back over to clinical 
realm and are no longer part of the study.  
 
Study procedure plan is below:  
Page [ADDRESS_713416] the TMS treatment visits, but will do the monthly assessment visits : 
 
 

Page [ADDRESS_713417]/ risk is headache, superficial pain und er 
treatment site, dental pain,  eye pain , or facial muscle twi tching .  These seem to well 
tolerated, and can occur during or after treatment.  These can be treated with over -the-counter 
pain medication (Tylenol, Ibuprophen).   
Another r are but serious risk is seizure.  Seizures are very rare and are thought to occur 
about 1in 30,[ADDRESS_713418] already gone through safety screens in order 
to get TMS treatment clinically, but nevertheless, another Transcranial Adult Sa fety Screen 
(TASS ) will be done prior to starting treatment phase of study.  Study staff are trained in 
seizure occurrence during TMS and are also CPR certified.  
The study doctor will determine if patient participation should start or continue  from 
these o r any other subject problems that may occur, s uch as failure of TASS question  
throughout the study.  
If an adverse event , UP, or deviation occur  study staff will fill out a study adverse even t 
form, the AE event log, and will notify the MU IRB if required w ithin [ADDRESS_713419]’s acute response or remission, but it may be a possible 
benefit.  Additionally, this study will help add to the work of clinical and scientific 
community in this area of interest.  This data may also help future patients that have MDD 
and are trying to maintain their response.  
 
 
 
No compensation will be given for this study . 
 
 
 
 
There are no costs associated with this study  either for the research or to participants .  The 
TMS machine is already part of the Neuromodulation Clinic.  
 
 
 
No DSMB is required for this study.  All adverse events will be reported on the 
AE study report form,  the AE log,  and local IRB protocol will dictate wha t needs to be 
submitted to MU IRB.  Because this is a n internal study (no other sites), AEs and UP will  
immediately be known to study doctor.  He will determine if AEs are in the normal range VIII.  Potential Risks /Adverse Events  
IX. Anticipated Benefits  
X. Compensation  
XII. Data Safety Monitoring Plan  XI. Costs  
Page [ADDRESS_713420] udy data 
will be stored for length of time in accordance with UM IRB research data rules.  
 
 
 
 
1. NA 
 
 
 
 
1  O’Reardon, J. P., Solvason, H. B., Janicak , P. G., Sampson, S., Isenberg, K. E., Nahas, Z., ... & 
Demitrack, M. A. (2007). Efficacy and safety of transcranial magnetic stimulation in the acute treatment of 
major depression: a multisite randomized controlled trial.  Biological psychiatry , 62(11), 12 08-1216.  
2  Carpenter, L. L., Janicak, P. G., Aaronson, S. T., Boyadjis, T., Brock, D. G., Cook, I. A., ... & Demitrack, 
M. A. (2012). Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) for major depression: a multisite, naturalistic, 
observational study of acute treatment outcomes in clinical practice.  Depression and anxiety , 29(7), 587 -
596. 
3  Janicak, P. G., Nahas, Z., Lisanby, S. H., Solvason, H. B., Sampson, S. M., McDonald, W. M., ... & 
O’Reardon, J. P. (2010). Durability of clinical benefit with transc ranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) in the 
treatment of pharmacoresistant major depression: assessment of relapse during a 6 -month, multisite, 
open -label study.  Brain stimulation , 3(4), 187 -199. 
4 George, M. S., Lisanby, S. H., Avery, D., McDonald, W. M., Du rkalski, V., Pavlicova, M., ... & 
Holtzheimer, P. E. (2010). Daily left prefrontal transcranial magnetic stimulation therapy for major 
depressive disorder: a sham -controlled randomized trial.  Archives of general psychiatry , 67(5), 507 -516. 
5 Perera , T., George, M. S., Grammer, G., Janicak, P. G., Pascual -Leone, A., & Wirecki, T. S. (2016). 
The clinical TMS society consensus review and treatment recommendations for TMS therapy for major 
depressive disorder.  Brain stimulation , 9(3), 336 -346. 
6 Wasserm ann, E. M. (1998). Risk and safety of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation: report and 
suggested guidelines from the International Workshop on the Safety of Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic 
Stimulation, June 5 –7, 1996.  Electroencephalography and Cl inical Neurophysiology/Evoked Potentials 
Section , 108(1), 1 -16. 
7 Janicak, P. G., Dunner, D. L., Aaronson, S. T., Carpenter, L. L., Boyadjis, T. A., Brock, D. G., ... & 
Demitrack, M. A. (2013). Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) for major depression: a multisite, 
naturalistic, observational study of quality of life outcome measures in clinical practice.  CNS 
spectrums , 18(6), 322 -332. XIV. References /Appendices  XIII.  Multiple Sites  
Page 11 of 11 8 Mantovani, A., Pavlicova, M., Avery, D., Nahas, Z., McDonald, W. M., Wajdik, C. D., ... & Lisanby, S. H. 
(2012). LONG ‐TERM EFFICACY OF REPEATED DAILY PREFRONTAL TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC 
STIMULATION (TMS) IN TREATMNT ‐RESISTANT DEPRESSION.  Depression and anxiety , 29(10), 883 -
890. 
9 Blumberger, D. M., Vila -Rodriguez, F., Thorpe, K. E., Feffer, K., Noda, Y., Giacobbe, P., ... & Downar, J. 
(2018). Effectiveness of theta burst versus high -frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation in 
patients with depression (THREE -D): a randomised non -inferiority trial.  The Lancet , 391([ZIP_CODE]), 1683 -
1692.  
10 Philip, N. S., Dunner, D. L. , Dowd, S. M., Aaronson, S. T., Brock, D. G., Carpenter, L. L., ... & George, 
M. S. (2016). Can medication free, treatment -resistant, depressed patients who initially respond to TMS 
be maintained off medications? A prospective, 12 -month multisite randomize d pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  Brain 
stimulation , 9(2), 251 -257. 
11 Dunner, D. L., Aaronson, S. T., Sackeim, H. A., Janicak, P. G., Carpenter, L. L., Boyadjis, T., ... & 
Lanocha, K. (2014). A multisite, naturalistic, observational study of transcranial magnetic stimulatio n for 
patients with pharmacoresistant major depressive disorder: durability of benefit over a 1 -year follow -up 
period.  The Journal of clinical psychiatry , 75(12), 1394 -1401.  
12 Fitzgerald, P. B., Grace, N., Hoy, K. E., Bailey, M., & Daskalakis, Z. J. (2013). An open label trial of 
clustered maintenance rTMS for patients with refractory depression.  Brain stimulation , 6(3), 292 -297. 
 
 