PROTOCOL TITLE:   Continuous Cerebral Autoregulation Monitoring to Reduce Brain 
Injury from Cardiac Surgery  
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
[INVESTIGATOR_777975], MD  
Department  Anesthesiology  
Telephone Number  [PHONE_16197]  
Email Address  [EMAIL_14835]  
VERSION NUMBER: 3 .0 
VERSION DATE: 08/15 /[ADDRESS_1068442] Summary  
Brain injury during cardiac surgery results primarily from cerebral embolism and/or 
reduced cerebral blood flow (CBF). The latter is of particular concern for the growing 
number of surgical patients who are aged and/or who have cerebral vascular disease. Normally, CBF is physiologically autoregulated (or kept constant) within a range of blood 
pressures allowing for stable cerebral O
[ADDRESS_1068443] 
cerebral vascular disease and in many others due to other conditions. This could lead to 
brain injury since current practices of targeting low mean arterial blood pressure 
empi[INVESTIGATOR_3675] ( usually 50 -70 mmHg) during cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_778015]. The hypothesis of this proposal is that targeting mean arterial pressure during cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_348701] a level above an individual’s lower autoregulatory threshold reduces the risk for brain injury in patients undergoing cardiac surgery compared with the current standard of care of 
empi[INVESTIGATOR_777976].  Monitoring of cerebral autoregulation will be 
performed in real time using software that continuously compares the relation between 
arterial blood pressure and CBF velocity of the middle cerebral artery measured with 
transcranial Doppler and with cerebral oximetry measured with near infrared 
spectroscopy. The primary end- point of the study will be a comprehensive composite 
outcome of clinical stroke, cognitive decline, and/or new ischemic brain lesions detected with diffusion weighted magnetic resonance (MR) imaging.  Autoregulation is mediated by 
[CONTACT_778016] c erebral resistance vessels. A secondary aim of this proposal is to evaluate 
whether near infrared reflectance spectroscopy can be used to trend changes in cerebral 
blood volume and provide a reliable monitor of vascular reactivity (the hemoglobin volume 
index). Assessments for extra -cranial and intra- cranial arterial stenosis will be performed 
using MR angiography to control for this potential confounding variable in the analysis. 
An additional aim of the study will be to assess whether perioperative transc ranial Doppler 
examination of major cerebral arteries can identify patients who are prone to the 
composite neurological end- point. Near infrared oximetry is non- invasive, continuous, 
requires little care- giver intervention and, thus, could be widely used t o individualize 
patient blood pressure management during surgery. The role of p16 in PBTLs will be 
evaluated as a predictor of outcomes after cardiac surgical procedures. Finally, pi[INVESTIGATOR_777977] (frailty and depth of anesthesia) might 
be associated with postoperative delirium. Brain injury from cardiac surgery is an 
important source of operative mortality, prolonged hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], increased health care expenditure, and impaired quality of life. Developi[INVESTIGATOR_777978].  
 
OBJECTIVES:  
The specific aims of this proposal are:  
Aim 1:  To determine whether targeting blood pressure to a level above an individual’s 
lower CBF autoregulatory threshold during CPB (cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_6476]) reduces the 
frequency of the composite end- point of clinical stroke, or a diffusion- weighted MRI brain 
lesion, or postoperative cognitive decline [ADDRESS_1068444] empi[INVESTIGATOR_777976]. Hypothesis:  
Targeting mean arterial pressure during CPB to a level above an individual’s lower 
autoregulator y threshold reduces the risk for brain injury in patients undergoing cardiac 
surgery.  
Aim 1a:  To assess whether extracranial and/or intracranial arterial stenosis (detected by 
[CONTACT_778017]), or other patient characteristics such as age, gender, hypertens ion, 
diabetes, or prior stroke, modify the effect of maintaining blood pressure above an 
individual’s lower CBF autoregulatory threshold on the risk for the above composite 
neurological outcome.  Hypothesis:  Targeting blood pressure during CPB to a level 
above an individual’s lower autoregulatory threshold reduces the risk for brain injury in patients undergoing cardiac surgery who have extra-  and/or intra- cranial arterial stenosis.  
Aim 1b:  To assess whether targeting MAP to a level above an individual’s low er CBF 
autoregulatory threshold during CPB reduces the frequency of cognitive decline [ADDRESS_1068445] blood pressure management.  
Aim 2:  To compare three methods of continuous monitoring of CBF autoregulation 
derived f rom the linear regression correlation between cerebral oximetry O2 saturation 
and blood pressure (oximetry index), near infrared- derived relative total hemoglobin and 
blood pressure (hemoglobin volume index), and transcranial Doppler measured CBF velocity and blood pressure (mean velocity index).  Hypothesis:  Mean velocity index, 
cerebral oximetry index, and hemoglobin volume index provide complimentary data on 
detecting the lower limit of CBF autoregulation.  
 
Aim [ADDRESS_1068446].  
Aim 3:  To evaluate whether perioperative transcranial Doppler measurements of major 
cerebral artery blood flow velocity can identify patients prone to the composite 
neurological end- point.  Hypothesis:  Perioperative transcranial Doppler examination can 
identify patients with cerebral arterial stenosis who are at risk for the composite 
neurological outcome.  
At this point we feel we have enough data to answer this question when the analysis is to 
be performed. Therefore, w e will not be doing the formal TCD study on subjects going 
forward.  
Aim 4:  To assess whether targeting MAP during CPB to a level above an individual’s 
lower CBF autoregulatory threshold during CPB reduces the frequency of postoperative delirium, as assessed with a structured examination, compared with the use of standard 
blood pressure management.  
Aim 5:  To determine whether baseline frailty is independently associated with delirium or 
functional decline after cardiac surgery. Hypothesis:  Baseline frailty a ssessments will 
identify patients at high risk for delirium or functional decline.  
 BACKGROUND:  
A pervasive contemporary view is that cerebral embolism is the dominant cause of brain 
injury during CPB and that cerebral hypoperfusion is a minor precipi[INVESTIGATOR_053].
5,7-12 This view 
has shaped current CPB management practices that include tolerating conditions that 
would be unacceptable in other medical settings. Such conditions include: a) reduced 
brain O 2 delivery (hematocrit often <21%); b) low mean arterial blood pressure, typi[INVESTIGATOR_478987] 50 and 60 mmHg; and c) CBF that is reduced by 40% –50% from 
baseline.9,10,50,51 Understanding the mechanisms of brain injury is important because 
strategies to increas e CBF during CPB (e.g., by [CONTACT_778018]/or PaCO 2) 
might paradoxically worsen injury by [CONTACT_778019].5,[ADDRESS_1068447] synergistically to exacerbate injury from impaired embolic clearance (“washout”).
5,11,21,[ADDRESS_1068448] revealed 
cerebral infarction in 40% –50% of patients before surgery.
14-20,[ADDRESS_1068449] imaging, Moraca et al.22 
found that 75% of 82 patients had abnormal regional cerebral perfusion (defined as >2 
SD below age- matched controls) before CABG surgery, even though patients with prior 
stroke or transient ischemic attack had been excluded from the study.  
Postoperative stroke occurred in 5% of patients and only in those with a preoperative 
regional perfusion defect. Our group has further reported on the high proportion of 
watershed strokes after cardiac surgery (see Effect of Mean Arterial Pressure on CPB 
and Watershed Stroke) and the r elationship of this hypoperfusion- associated injury with 
decreases in mean arterial pressure >10 mmHg from baseline on CPB.54 Importantly, 
preoperative brain imaging is not routine; therefore, patients with cerebral vascular 
disease receive the same empi[INVESTIGATOR_27969] c management during CPB as do patients without this 
disease. Reports showing jugular O 2 desaturation in 17% –23% of patients during CPB 
document that, for some patients, CBF resulting from current practices is inadequate to 
meet cerebral O2 demands during at least portions of surgery.14,55,56 
Cerebral Blood Flow Autoregulation 
During CPB, systemic blood flow is calculated based on body surface area and body 
temperature and is then adjusted, depending on indicators of adequate global tissue 
perfusion (SvO2, pH, etc.). Currently, there are no widely accepted clinical monitoring 
procedures to ensure adequate cerebral perfusion.  Thus, CBF is assumed to be sufficient 
based mostly on older data showing that CBF– arterial pressure autoregulation remains 
intact with CPB flows between 1.6 and 2.4 L/min/m2 (using α -stat pH management).9,10 
Supported by [CONTACT_48040], a mean arterial pressure of 50 mmHg is widely considered to be the minimal acceptable blood pressure during CPB. This practice fails to consider that 
CBF–blood pressure autoregulation has wide individual variation, is altered in many 
common conditions (e.g., hypertension, diabetes, stroke), and is derived using statistical 
methods that have been questioned.
24,25,57 -62 Moreover, rewarming from hypothermia 
could potentially lead to disruption of cerebrovascular reactivity, leading to CBF 
dysregulation.30 Data supporting a mean arterial pressure of 50 mmHg (or lower) during 
CPB are inconsistent and are mostly from older studies that have included few patients 
at high risk for brain injury.10,11,63 Indeed, Gold et al.64 found that combined myocardial 
and neurologic adverse events were less frequent when mean arterial pressure during 
CPB was maintained at between 80 and 100 mmHg, rather than between 50 and 70 
mmHg. These data are corroborated by [CONTACT_778020].65,66 
 
Individualizing blood pressure targets to be above a patient’s lower autoregulatory 
threshold might provide a means to avoid cerebral hypoperfusion during and after CP B. 
Monitoring of cerebral autoregulation with a moving linear regression correlation 
coefficient between cerebral perfusion pressure and middle cerebral artery TCD 
measured blood flow velocity (mean velocity index) has been validated in volunteers and 
in patients with head trauma, carotid artery stenosis, acute ischemic stroke, and 
subarachnoid hemorrhage.31-37, 39, [ADDRESS_1068450] to the intermittent (“snap shot”) measurements provided by [CONTACT_329508] (e.g., PET, inert gas washout). 
This feature allows for assessment of CBF autoregulation in individual patients  rather 
than estimating a patient’s autoregulatory threshold based on summary data obtained 
from a group of patients. This ability is important in surgical patients, as CBF 
autoregulation is dynamic and potentially influenced by [CONTACT_778021], 
including rewarming from hypothermia, volatile anesthetics (dose dependently), and anemia.
30, 68, [ADDRESS_1068451] been 
used as surrogates of CBF for measuring autoregulation.68,71 Clinical monitoring of near -
infrared spectroscopy can be performed with two FDA -approved devices.72,73 The INVOS 
device (Somenetics Corp, Troy, MI) uses light -emitting diodes in two channels to provide 
a continuous -wave spectrometer that measures relative changes in regional O 2 saturation 
of the frontal lobe. The Fore- Sight device (CAS Medical Systems, Branford, CT) uses 
fiberopt ic light in four channels to monitor phase shifts at [ADDRESS_1068452] venous blood, thus indicating the adequacy of regional cerebral O
2 
supply  versus demand. Our group has demonstrated that cerebral oximetry provides a 
clinically acceptable surrogate of CBF for experimental and clinical autoregulation monitoring (see Cerebral Autoregulation Monitoring).
38 Using nearinfrared spectroscopy 
a variable, cerebral oximetry index was generated to describe the moving linear 
correlation between cerebral O 2 saturation and cerebral perfusion pressure. Monitoring 
CBF autoregulation with the cerebral oximetry index has many clinically attractive 
features: it i s noninvasive, its output is continuous and updated every [ADDRESS_1068453] range of clinical settings and locations.  
 Autoregulation is mediated by [CONTACT_778022] (vascular 
reactivity), which consists of dynamic, low -frequency vessel diameter changes in 
response to changes in arterial blood pressure. In most physiologic instances, limits of pressure reactivity are wider than limits of autoregulation.
74 Assessing vascular reactivity 
involves measuring the relationship between blood pressure change and a measure of 
cerebral blood volume.39,40 Low-frequency oscillations in cerebral blood volume are 
attributed to changes in the dynamic collective vascular radius. In health, vascular 
diameter changes to oppose changes in ar terial blood pressure (decreased diameter for 
increased blood pressure). Vascular reactivity is measured clinically using the pressure 
reactive index, which is the moving linear correlation between slow waves of intracranial 
pressure and blood pressure.[ADDRESS_1068454] invasive intracranial pressure 
monitoring but may benefit from precise blood pressure management using this index. 
Our preliminary data ( see Cerebrovascular Reactivity Measured by [CONTACT_494946] -infrared 
Spectroscopy ) suggest that near -infrared reflectance spectroscopy can be used to trend 
changes in cerebral blood volume (relative total hemoglobin in the reflectance arc) and 
provide a reliable monitor of vascular reactivity (the hemoglobin volume index).  
 
Regional brain areas in a vascular territory of a flow -limiting arterial stenosis would likely 
have impaired autoregulation.28,34,77- [ADDRESS_1068455] autoregulation 
could potentially lead to a “steal phenomenon,” whereby [CONTACT_778023]- dependent vascular territories.77-79 Interpretation of the effectiveness of a 
strategy of basing blood pressure management during CPB on CBF autoregulation 
measurement requires knowledge on the extent of cerebral vascular disease.  
Detection of Brain Injury  
Brain injury after cardiac surgery has a range of clinical manifestations, including clinical 
stroke (detected in ~2% –5% of patients) and cognitive decline (reported in 18% –40% of 
patients, depending on statistical criteria and timing of testing).5 Cognitive testing has 
methodologic limitations that lower its sensitivity and specif icity for detecting neurologic 
injury (as opposed to its use for studying the effects of surgery on cognition), including 
difficulty with distinguishing the confounding effects of preexisting cerebral vascular disease.
41-43 Moreover, preexisting brain infarction is associated with cognitive 
impairment, regardless of surgery, thus lowering the likelihood of being able to diagnose further cognitive decrement from new injury or “basement effect.” 
41-[ADDRESS_1068456] individuals returning to near baseline by 3– [ADDRESS_1068457] of interventions aimed at reducing brain injury from cardiac 
surgery on long- term cognition may help assess their overall benefit for patient outcome.  
Advanced MRI techniques such as diffusion -weighted imaging allow for the detection of 
early ischem ic changes in the brain.45-49 Diffusion -weighted imaging is an MRI sequence 
capable of demonstrating changes within minutes of experimental ischemia.47-49 It is 
believed that ischemia- induced energy depletion increases the influx of water from the 
extracel lular to the intracellular space, restricting water motion and resulting in a bright 
signal and low calculated apparent diffusion coefficient.81,82 Although there is wide 
individual variability, the apparent diffusion coefficient signal remains low for 4 days, 
pseudonormalizes at 5– [ADDRESS_1068458] revealed new small lesions after cardiac surgery in 
26%–50% of patients.
19,20,23,83 -85 In our own series, we found DWI lesions after surgery in 
56% of patients. The lesions are broadly distributed in the brain and often have a watershed distribution with/without an embolic signature. Watershed strokes (i.e., lesions 
in end- vascular territories) in the general population are usually secondary to focal 
hypoperfusion, although the mechanism in cardiac surgical patients is not as certain.
[ADDRESS_1068459] a relationship between “silent” MRI 
cerebral infarctions and cognitive decline, [ADDRESS_1068460] been 
sensitive to the functions of the actual injured br ain regions. Regardless, new diffusion-
weighted imaging lesions do represent ischemic brain injury, as they can become brain infarction when re- examined with conventional MRI 1– 2 weeks later.
88 Furthermore, in 
the general population, clinically “silent” infarction detected with brain imaging is increasingly recognized to be associated with cognitive decline, depression, and reduced functional capacity.
89 Combined diffusion -weighted imaging and perfusion- weighted 
imaging (PWI) will enable us to determine whether lesions detected by [CONTACT_778024]. Although diffusion- weighted imaging is 
sensitive for detecting ischemic brain injury, post -cardiac surgery lesions may occur in 
brain areas not involved with higher cognitive function. Thus, combining detection of lesions by [CONTACT_35774]- weighted imaging with clinical neurologic end points (including 
cognitive deficits) will provide a highly sensitive evaluation of perioperative brain injury. 
The findings will be especiall y important for examining mechanisms and/or prevention of 
brain injury related to cardiac surgery.  
Frailty  
Frailty is commonly used to characterize the most vulnerable subset of older adults, with 
decreased physiologic reserve across multiple organ systems .
181 Using data from the 
Cardiovascular Health Study, a frailty phenotype was derived by [CONTACT_143322].188 and 
includes: unintentional weight loss, low grip strength, self -reported exhaustion, gait 
speed, and low physical activity. In community -based cohort studies, frailty has been 
associated with new falls, decreased mobility, disability, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], and death.[ADDRESS_1068461] examined 
important patient -centered outcomes, including delirium and functional status. Delirium 
and functional status -decline are important patient -centered outcomes that are 
hypothesized to occur more in frail vs. non- frail patients after cardiac surgery, given the 
reduced physiologic reserve of frail  patients to recover from stressors. The incidence of 
delirium after cardiac surgery has been estimated to occur in up to 52% of patients (consistent with our data),
 [ADDRESS_1068462] of baseline 
frailty on  change in functional status after cardiac surgery is not known.  
Depth of Anesthesia  
Depth of anesthesia may represent a modifiable target to improve outcomes after surgery 
in frail adults. In both cardiac and non- cardiac surgery, greater depth of anesthes ia (as 
measured by [CONTACT_778025] [BIS], a processed encephalogram) has been 
associated with mortality.184, 185 In current practice, depth of anesthesia as reflected by 
[CONTACT_778026],197 and importantly, older adults may 
experience greater depth of anesthesia at the same drug dose because of increased 
susceptibility to anesthetic agents,198 potentially resulting in relative anesthetic overdose. 
In order to determine whether actively reducing depth of anesthesia could reduce 
postoperative delirium, a collaborator at Johns Hopkins Bayview ([CONTACT_778107]) 
randomized 114 patients undergoing hip fracture repair under spi[INVESTIGATOR_777979]. deep intraoperative sedation and found a 50% reduction in delirium in the light sedation group.
186 In a separate trial of non- cardiac surgery patients undergoing general 
anesthesia, a BIS -guided protocol for depth of anesthesia was reported to reduce 
postoperative delirium from 24.1% to 15.6% (P=0.001).187 However, these results in 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_777980]- cardiac general anesthesia may not be generalizable to patients 
undergoing cardiac surgery, because of different patient populations and perioperative 
insults (e.g. cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_6476]).  
In addition, the range of BIS values during cardiac surgery is unknown. These data 
motivate our current proposal to examine the range of depth of anesthesia (BIS values) 
during cardiac surgery for both frail and non- frail patients. We anticipate that frail patients 
will spend a significant amount of time with BIS values less than cutoffs for general 
anesthesia (BIS 45- 60), and time of BIS<45 will be greater in frail vs. non- frail patients. 
These results would support the future development of a protocol to maintain BIS values 
at higher ranges (45 -60) while reducing total anesthetic dose, particularly in frail patients.  
Preliminary Studies  
The team comprises highly experienced researchers who have performed seminal 
investigations into the frequency, causes, and consequences of neurologic complicat ions 
after cardiac surgery. The group is a multidisciplinary team that encompasses the 
specialties of anesthesiology, neurology, neuroradiology, cardiac surgery, 
neuropsychology, and biostatistics organized to study perioperative neurologic injury with 
the intent of developi[INVESTIGATOR_777981]. The experiences of the team 
members provide evidence of a track record in conducting neurologic outcomes research 
in cardiac surgical patients. The researchers are experienced with all of the propos ed 
measurements.  
Neurologic Outcomes after Cardiac Surgery  
Our neurologic team has been studying the cognitive and neurologic outcomes after both 
conventional and off -pump CABG surgery.41, 90- [ADDRESS_1068463] abnormal cognitive performance even before surgery. 
Our data do not support disproportionate decline among CABG patients compared to 
nonsurgical controls, although both groups performed lower than healthy controls lacking risk factors for cerebrovascular disease. In addition to highlighting the importance of including control groups, our studies also illustrate the importance of the choice of 
statistical criteria for defining postoperative cognitive decline. Some commonly used 
criteria, such as 20% decline on 20% of tests, will result in significantly inflated estimates of postoperative cognitive decline. We have proposed more powerful and appropriate 
analyses using random effects regression models, which can account for practice effects 
and for heterogeneity among subj ects in the levels and trends of their test scores. 
Additionally, we have assembled a multi -disciplinary team to assess delirium in the 
postoperative period using rigorous assessment with the Confusion Assessment Method. We have successfully assessed delir ium in over [ADDRESS_1068464] of Mean Arterial Pressure on CPB and Watershed Stroke 
In a study of 98 patients with clinically detected stroke after cardiac surger y (between  
1998 and 2003), we found, based on diffusion- weighted imaging, 
that 68% had at least unilateral watershed strokes and 48% had 
bilateral watershed strokes (Fig. 1).54 This prevalence of 
watershed stroke suggests that the frequency of infarction due to 
cerebral hypoperfusion is higher than in the general stroke 
population. We sought to determine the role of change in mean 
arterial pressure from baseline during CPB in the development of watershed strokes. Patients with a drop from baseline in mean arterial pressure of ≥[ADDRESS_1068465] was 4.1 (95% CI, 
1.03– 15.90).  
  
Patients with a drop in mean arterial pressure ≥[ADDRESS_1068466] volume (95% CI, 1.1– 10.7). Operative mortality was higher for 
patients with bilateral watershed strokes than for those with other types of cerebral 
infarctions (17% vs. 4%, p=0.04).  
These preliminary data suggest that an important factor in the development of watershed 
strokes is change from baseline in mean arterial pressure during CPB, not the absolute intraoperative mean arterial pressure. As the studied patients represented only those with symptomatic  stroke, it is likely that the frequency of watershed injury might be even 
higher. Regardless, these data support the hypothesis that reduced CBF during CPB is an important contributor to neurologic complications. The data further suggest that low CBF-asso ciated brain injury is related to an individual’s baseline blood pressure. 
Therefore, it is plausible that affected patients might have their autoregulatory threshold shifted to the right, thus exposing them to cerebral hypoperfusion by [CONTACT_778027].  
Cerebral Autoregulation Monitoring 
We have performed preliminary laboratory and clinical investigations of CBF blood 
pressure autoregulation reactivity. In these studies, analog signals from arterial pressure 
and surrogates of CBF measurements are digitally converted, stored in a laptop 
computer, and then processed by [CONTACT_778028]+ software (Cambridge University; Cambridge, 
[LOCATION_006]).31 -37 CBF autoregulation can be monitored with a moving linear regression 
correlation coefficient between cerebral  perfusion pressure and TCDmeasured middle 
cerebral artery (MCA) blood flow velocity (mean velocity index or Mx).25- 33When 
autoregulation is functional, there is no correlation between CBF velocity and MAP, but 
when MAP is outside the autoregulation limits, Mx approaches 1, meaning that flow is Fig [ADDRESS_1068467] exists for measuring CBF to determine 
autoregulation.35 Near infrared spectroscopy -measured regional cerebral oxygen 
saturation (rScO 2) is weighted toward venous blood, thus indic ating the adequacy of O [ADDRESS_1068468] ional (no correlation 
between CBF and MAP). Monitoring CBF autoregulation with COx has many clinically 
attractive features: it is noninvasive, monitoring requires little caregiver intervention, and 
it has sufficient resolution to discriminate the lower aut oregulatory threshold. In a 
laboratory study of 3 - to 8-day-old pi[INVESTIGATOR_1515], we evaluated autoregulatory reactivity by 
[CONTACT_778029] -Doppler –derived red cell flux in the frontoparietal cortex with perfusion 
pressure.38 These studies were used to evaluate whether near -infrared cerebral oximetry 
might serve as surrogate for CBF. If so, it would provide a clinically feasible means for 
measuring CBF autoregulation in real time across a wide array of clinical practices. 
Hypotension was induced by [CONTACT_16131] a balloon catheter in the inferior vena cava. The autoregulatory breakpoint was determined by [CONTACT_778030] (flux) as a function of perfusion 
pressure and intersecting the two best -fit lines with the lowest combined squared error. 
Cerebral oximetry was performe d, and the waveform plotted as a function of perfusion 
pressure, but an autoregulatory plateau was not seen. Two time- domain indices of 
autoregulation were measured during these experiments: the laser -Doppler index 
(velocity index), which correlates laser -Doppler flux with blood pressure, and the oximetry 
index (Fig. 2). Note, when perfusion pressure is <LLA, CBF and perfusion pressure 
become correlated, indicated by [CONTACT_778031] (LDx) and COx (arrows). 
Data combined from multiple experiments in pi[INVESTIGATOR_777982] a cerebral oximetry value 
of ≥0.3 has a sensitivity of 89%, specificity 64%, and likelihood ratio 2.5 for detecting the lower limit of autoregulation.  
 
Our group has experience with TCD monitoring in patients undergoing cardiac surgery.97 
In pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602], TCD monitoring of the right and left middle cerebral arteries was 
performed in patients; the data were combined with arterial signals, digitally converted at 
58 Hz, and stored in a laptop computer for processing by [CONTACT_778032]. In these studies, CBF autoregulation was defined as the relationship 
between CBF velocity and mean arterial pressure (mean velocity index). Of note, mean 
arterial pressure—not cerebral perfusion pressure—is measured because we have found 
that central venous pressure measurements (needed for calculating cerebral perfusion pressure) are not reliable during CPB. The reason is that vacuumassisted venous drainage during CPB collapses the right atrium and vena cava, resulting in highly negative 
central venous pressure measurements. As described above, a correlation between CBF 
velocity and mean arterial pressure (rising velocity and oximetry indices) indicates that 
CBF is pressure dependent, or not autoregulated, and vice versa.  

We initially assessed CBF autoregulation in nearly 
150 patients undergoing cardiac surgery using the 
methods and equipment proposed for this study. 
Data from 60 patients with complete transcranial Doppler and NIRS data were analyzed. There was 
a significan t correlation (r=0.55, p<0.0001) and 
good agreement (bias=0.082±0.18, 95% CI, -0.327 
to 0.43) between COx and Mx for the timeaveraged 
data during CPB. Coherence between slow waves 
(20 s to 2 min) from NIRS and TCD signals was high 
(0.74) suggesting that NIRS can be substituted for TCD for monitoring CBF autoregulation. The mean 
lower autoregulatory  threshold determined by [CONTACT_778033] 
(mean±SD) in our  early data was 61±15 mmHg and 
by [CONTACT_778034], 60±15 mmHg. The range of mean arterial 
blood pressures  at the autoregulatory threshold was 
40–[ADDRESS_1068469] included >450 patients thus far, rScO2 remained >50% in two- thirds 
of patients when MAP was below the LLA, indicating that COx might provide indication of low perfusion pressure earlier than rScO2. An example of Mx and COx monitoring in a patient during CPB is shown in Fig. 3. 
Cerebrovascular Reactivity Measured by [CONTACT_494946] -infrared Spectroscopy  
The prototype index of vascular reactivity is the pressure reactivity index. The 
pressurereactivity index describes cerebral vessel activity by [CONTACT_778035]. The pressure reactivity index analysis assumes that slow waves (Lundberg B waves) of intracranial pressure are caused by 
[CONTACT_778036]. We reasoned that slow changes in the relative total 
hemoglobin (rTHb) measured by [CONTACT_370213] -infrared reflectance spectroscopy 
would also reflect vascular diameter changes (i.e., increases in rTHb results from 
increased vessel diameter and vice versa). We hypothesized that the hemoglobin volume 
index correlates with the pressure reactivity index using the Fore- Sight device, as 
proposed in this submission. The latter monitor is a continuous -wave reflectance 
spectrophotometer that uses [ADDRESS_1068470] is a function of both the hematocrit and the blood volume in the tissue. Oximetric methods Fig 3. Arterial pressure, Mx, and COx values in  
5 mmHg bins, and the percent time at each  
MAP. Increasing Mx and COx with declining 
MAP indicates threshold of autoregulation 
(arrow).  

cancel the effect of changes in blood volume by [CONTACT_778037]. The intensity of light detected at the point of the reflected arc by [CONTACT_778038], (I), is inversely proportional to the concentration (c) of the chromophore being 
measured when the intensity of the light source (Is) is held constant. We were able to use 1/I from a nearly isobestic wavelength (805 nm) of infrared li ght to derive an index of 
autoregulation. Because the relative change in total hemoglobin is a small fraction of the absolute hemoglobin during autoregulation, a logarithmic transformation may not be necessary. Moreover, the phase of the blood volume wavef orm is more important than 
the power when describing vascular reactivity. The hemoglobin volume index was 
continuously recorded as a moving linear correlation between slow waves (20 –300 sec) 
of arterial blood pressure and rTHb. The pressure reactive index was similarly 
continuously recorded. Autoregulation curves were constructed by [CONTACT_778039] 5 mmHg bins according to 
the cerebral perfusion pressure at which they were recorded.  
The lower limit of autoregulation as determined by [CONTACT_201558] -Doppler flow velocity was 
29.4±6.7 mmHg (±SD). Relative total hemoglobin displayed a high degree of 
lowfrequency coherence with ICP. Using all 2242 paired measurements, hemoglobin 
volume index was linearly cor related with pressure reactivity index (Spearman r=0.73). 
The pressure reactivity index and hemoglobin volume index were both accurate 
measures of vascular reactivity, showing higher values below the lower limit of 
autoregulation and lower values above thi s limit. Receiver operating characteristics 
(ROC) of the autoregulation curves derived by [CONTACT_778040]. Areas under the ROC curves were 0.88 for the pressure 
reactivity index (95% CI, 0.82– 0.96) and 0.85 for the hemoglobin volume index (95% CI, 
0.75– 0.94). The demonstrated coherence between the relative total hemoglobin and 
intracranial pressure waveforms at the frequency of sl ow waves (Fig. 4) suggest that slow 
waves of intracranial pressure are the result of blood volume changes. The hemoglobin 
volume index has potential for further development as a noninvasive alternative to the 
pressure reactivity index for patients at risk of neurologic compromise.  
  
Fig 4.  Intracranial pressure and 
relative total hemoglobin (rTHb) 
coherence averaged for 8 
animals. Coherence scores 
between the intracranial 
pressure and relative total 
hemoglobin waveforms are high 
at frequencies correspondin g to 
the observed slow waves of 
intracranial pressure, ≤0.[ADDRESS_1068471] the immense potential clinical utility 
of these noninvasive brain monitors.  
 
Fig 5.  An example of CBF autoregulation monitoring in a 62 year old patient undergoing 
cardiac surgery. In this patient the autoregulatory threshold based on TCD -derived mean 
velocity index (>0.2) was 55 mmHg in both hemispheres. There was a 5 mmHg lag in detection of this threshold based on cerebral oximetry index (>0.3). In contr ast, 
hemoglobin volume index demonstrated changes that correlated with lowering blood pressure [ADDRESS_1068472] found that there is a wide inter -individual range of MAPs at the LLA during CPB 
(40 to 90 mmHg) and that these limits are difficult to predict based on clinical 
information.[ADDRESS_1068473] of care. Moreover, our results show that patients 
experience MAP below the LLA for varying durations of time when MAP targets are 
empi[INVESTIGATOR_777983]. Acute kidney injury (AKI) increases the risk for mortality after 
cardiac surgery.6-8 To assess whether MAP below the LLA has any meaningful 
consequences for patient outcome, we monitored COx in 349 patients during CPB.41 
Based on the RIFLE criteria,8,10,42 AKI developed within 7 days of surgery in 121 (34.7%) 
patients. Excursions of MAP below the LLA (mmHg × min/h of CPB) (relative risk, 1.02; 95% CI, 1.01 to 1.03; p<0.0001) were independently associated with AKI. Each 5 mmHg 
x min/h of MAP below the LLA increased the risk for AKI by 10%. In an analysis of 450 patients, we found that the duration of MAP < LLA was higher in patients (n=83) with major organ m orbidity or mortality (stroke, renal failure requiring dialysis or increase > 2 
mg/dL, mechanical lung ventilation > 48 h, operative mortality, inotrope use > 24 h or new requirement for IABP insertion) than in those without this complication (odds ratio, 2.21; 95% CI, 1.32 to 3.71; p=0.003).43 These data support the premise that individualizing 
MAP during CPB based on physiologic endpoints such as COx monitoring, rather than 
empi[INVESTIGATOR_139512], may provide a means for modifying the risk for AKI and major organ 
morbidity and possibly mortality.  
COx and Neurologic Complications:  Our group has been investigating CBF  
autoregulation for a number of years. Interim analysis has shown a relationship between 
MAP < LLA as detected with COx (i.e., independent of TCD met rics), and neurologic 
dysfunction (ND), defined as postoperative DWI lesions, or clinical stroke, or transient ischemic attack, or clinically detected delirium (Table 1).  
These data are from 176 patients of a planned enrollment of 254 patients. The limit of 
autoregulation was defined as that MAP at which COx increases to >0.3.136 Excursions 
were defined as mmHg × min/h of CPB of MAP below the LLA. MRI was available from 
82 patients. Obtaining MRI after cardiac surgery is not possible in all patients becaus e of 
retained pacemaker wires (i.e., temporary pacing wires left in place rather than having 
them removed postoperatively as is the usual practice), unavailability of research MRI 
scanners, patient’s level of illness, or death. These factors are only known after surgery, 
not during screening. As a result, some enrolled patients later are found not to be eligible 
for MRI scanning. Thus, the primary impetus of this renewal, to continue enrollment until 
an adequate number of patients have been studied with MRI . Regardless, our preliminary 
results show that patients with ND had a larger magnitude and duration of time with MAP < LLA. Delirium was diagnosed based on clinical observations as previously described.
[ADDRESS_1068474] addressed this issue produced conflicting findings, did not use structured assessments for delirium, varied in 
the timing of blood pressure recordings (i.e., every 5 min in some studies), had small numbers of patients, and were associated with other limitations. Based on our findings of a wide inter -individual variability of MAP at the LLA, we believe that examining the 
relationship between hypotension and delirium using a priori blood pressure cutoffs, 
rather than individualized definitions based on autoregulation monitoring, is imprecise. 
We have performed a retrospective analysis of our data obtained from several trials of patients undergoing CPB. Of 496 patients monitored with COx, 10% developed delirium 
based on clinical criteria. In a multivariate logistic regression model, the 
magnitudeduration of MAP < LLA during CPB determined with COx was associated with postoperative clinical delirium (odds ratio, 1.10, 95% CI, 1.10- 1.11, p=0.0203) after 
adjusting for age, 
history of 
hypertension, stroke, 
and duration of CPB. 
We have also obtained preliminary delirium 
data in our current 
randomized trial comparing MAP management with 
autoregulation monitoring to standard of care in patients during CPB. In this latter analysis, Drs. Brown and Neufeld carefully assessed for the presence of delirium using structured instruments as  proposed in this submission (see Delirium Assessment). In that 
preliminary analysis, the frequency of delirium (19 of 37 [51%] patients) tended to be lower in patients who were randomized to have MAP managed during CPB based on real-time autoregulation monitoring than in patients who received standard of care (33% 
vs. 66%, p=0.134). Acknowledging the limitations of the preliminary analysis, our 
early results provide evidence of a relationship between MAP < LLA and ND 
including delirium. Our methods would challenge current standard practice of 
empi[INVESTIGATOR_777984] a 
clinically feasible approach for improving patient outcomes from cardiac surgery.  
HOW PATIENTS WILL BE SCREENED FOR ELIGIBILTY: Authorized research 
personnel will screen for eligible participants during cardiac preoperative visits scheduled 
at the surgeons office. Potential participants will be introduced to the study by [CONTACT_778041].   
INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION CRITERIA:  

Inclusion criteria will be male or female patients, ≥55 years old, undergoing primary or 
re-operative CABG, aortic root replacement and/or valvular surgery that requires CPB 
(but not undergoing circulatory arrest) who are at high risk for neurologi c complications 
(stroke or encephalopathy) as determined by a Johns Hopkins Encephalopathy Risk 
score of >0.05, or Stroke Risk > 0.02.132 This prediction algorithm, devised from data 
analysis by [CONTACT_20685], identifies probability of an adverse neurologic outcome 
based on five patient -related factors: age, prior stroke, diabetes, hypertension, or the 
presence of a carotid bruit. Women of childbearing potential will have a urine pregnancy 
test done prior to surgery to insure that they are not pregnant.  
Patients will be ineligible for this study if they have any of the following exclusion criteria:  
1. Contraindication to MRI imaging (e.g., permanent pacemaker, cerebral arterial 
vascular clips);  
2. AST, ALT and Alkaline phosphatase obtained before surgery which is more than 
twice the upper limit of institutional normal value and which, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_53038], is believed to be related to hepatic dysfunction;  
3. Chronic renal failure requiring renal dialysis. (Subjects with an estimated gl omerular 
filtration rate ≤60 mL/min who do not require dialysis may be included in the study. 
However, these subjects will not receive gadolinium during their MRI/MRA.);  
4. Emergency surgery;  
5. Inability to attend outpatient visits;  
6. Visual impairment or inabili ty to speak and read English; or  
7. Female of child bearing capacity with a positive pregnancy test.  
8. Individual adults less than 54 years old 
9. Prisoners  
 
The patient will be excluded from further study if an adequate temporal window for TCD 
monitoring cannot be identified before surgery.  
STUDY- WIDE NUMBER OF PARTICIPANTS: Initially we are conducting a 5- year study 
that includes a 1- month interval for investigator training and start -up, 56 months for 
enrollment of 280 patients (~5 patients/month), and 3 months for final patient followup testing, data analysis, manuscript preparation, and dissemination of the results (see 
Rapid Dissemination of Clinical Research). The initial study time line is schematically 
summarized in Table 2.  
STUDY TIMELINES:  
 
Table 2. Summ ary of Study Timeline During the Initial Phase of the Project  
We will continue this study for an additional 5- years that will enroll 350 new patients (in 
addition to the 280 patients of the initial study) over a 45- month period (~8 patients/month) 
with th e remaining duration of the proposed funding used for patient follow -up testing, 
data analysis, manuscript preparation, and dissemination of the results. As of June 2016, 
we have enrolled [ADDRESS_1068475] five years and 244 patients in the second five 
year study. We need approximately 150 patients to complete enrollment.  
Patient Randomization  
Patients will be prospectively randomized after anesthesia induction, but before CPB, 
using a computer generated randomization program into one of two single- blinded 
groups:  
1) Blood pressure intervention group (Intervention Group)  in which mean arterial 
pressure during surgery is targeted to be kept above the patient’s lower CBF 
autoregulatory threshold based on continuous monitoring of mean velocity index or cerebral oximetry index (see CBF Autoregulation Measurements) or  
2) Control Group in which mean arterial pressure is maintained during surgery, 
including CPB, using institutional standard of care.  
Blinding:  Clinicians caring for the patients will participate in managing blood pressure in 
the Intervention Group and, thus, cannot be blinded. Individuals making the neurologic assessments and performing data analysis will be blinded to the intraoperative management group, providing effective double blinding.  
Drugs/ Substances/ Devices  
a. The rationale for choosing the drug and dose or for choosing the device to be 
used.The algorithm for the management of mean arterial pressure during cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_778042] A  which reflects the current standard of 
care for the institution. The difference between the two randomized groups is when that intervention will take place. For the Control group, the algorhythm will be followed as per routine standard of care. For the Blood Pressure Intervention Group,  the algorhythm will 
be instituted when the blood pressure is below the lower autoregulatory limits as 
determined by [CONTACT_778043].  

b. Justification and safety information if FDA approved drugs will be administered for 
non-FDA approved indications or if doses or routes of administration or participant 
populations are changed. N/A 
c. Justification and safety information if non- FDA approved drugs without an IND will 
be administered. N/A 
Perioperative Management  
Preoperative Variables:  Preoperative demographics, medical history (including 
euroScore131 calculated based upon the medical history), and medications will be 
recorded. A history of prior stroke or transient ischemic attack will be made by [CONTACT_173261], the result s of prior brain imaging studies, or by [CONTACT_121944]’s 
primary care physician. Preoperative left ventricular function as assessed by [CONTACT_778044], mildly depressed 
(ejection fraction ≥40% but <50 %), moderately depressed (ejection fraction ≥35% but 
<40%), or severely depressed (ejection fraction <35%). The results of carotid artery 
ultrasound imaging studies obtained before surgery will be recorded.  
Anesthesia and Patient Monitoring:  To avoid hypot ension during surgery, patients will not 
be given angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors on the day of surgery. The patients will 
be connected to the NIRS monitor (Invos, Covidien, Boulder, CO) with two self -adhesive 
probes attached to the forehead, according to manufacturer guidelines. Arterial blood 
pressure will be measured via a cannula inserted into the radial or femoral artery placed 
for clinical purposes. Anesthetic drugs will be standardized and will consist of midazolam, propofol, fentanyl, isofl urane, and skeletal muscle relaxants. During CPB, isoflurane will 
be administered via the membrane oxygenator. Sedation after surgery will be started when sternal wires are placed and will consist of propofol. Propofol will be titrated off when the patient  meets institutional standards for tracheal extubation. Postoperative pain 
will be managed per hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2801].  
A deficiency of current clinical practice is that urine output is measured crudely and 
intermittently, and it is not precisely recorded. For t his study, the patient’s urine flow will 
be measured every 1 min with automatic gravimetric sensing device connected to the urinary catheter collection bag (RenAdapter: Urine Flowmeter and Multiparameter 
Monitor). The urine bag will hang on the Renalert device intraoperatively to monitor urine 
output during surgery. At the conclusion of the surgery the device will be removed before 
the patient is transferred to the intensive care unit.  
Assessment of Depth of Anesthesia through BIS monitoring  
We will measure depth of anesthesia during surgery using the Bispectral Index Monitor 
(BIS), which is an FDA- approved device to measure processed electroencephalogram 
signals. Two adhesive pads will be placed on the patient’s forehead during surgery for this monitoring.  
Cardiopulmonary By[CONTACT_6476]:  A 40-μm or smaller filter will be placed in the CPB circuit. Blood 
flow during CPB will be maintained between 2.0 and 2.4 L/min/m2 using nonpulsatile flow.  
Nasopharyngeal temperature will be measured during surgery and the temperature nadir 
recorded. In addition to continuous in- line monitoring, arterial blood gases will be recorded 
30 min after the start of CPB and every 60 min thereafter. The patients will be managed 
using α -stat pH management. Hemoglobin will kept >8.0 g/dL with t ransfusion of packed 
red blood cells. Blood glucose will be measured at the onset of CPB and at least every [ADDRESS_1068476] of care. Rewarming will be at an arterial inflow temperature of ≤37
oC. Nasopharyngeal 
temperature will not exceed 36oC. Surgical field CO 2 insufflation will be performed. 
Cardiotomy suction will be returned to the CPB circuit after being processed with a cell 
saver device for patients undergoing CABG surgery or directly to the CPB c ircuit for open 
chamber procedures, as is our usual practice.  
Perioperative Blood Pressure Monitoring and Recording:  A decrease in arterial blood 
pressure that occurs any time preoperatively could confound analysis of the data. Blood 
pressure will be monit ored using standard operating room and ICU monitors. Transducers 
will be placed level with the right atrium and zeroed to atmospheric pressure before the 
start of anesthesia, before the start of CPB, and after separating from CPB. Blood 
pressure will be recorded continuously during surgery and recorded on a computer interfaced with the operating room hemodynamic monitor (using ICM+ software, see 
Cerebral Autoregulation Monitoring and CBF Autoregulation Measurements). 
Computerized medical record systems will  record arterial pressure every 15 min in the 
ICU. Study personnel will review these medical records daily for the duration of the ICU admission. The number of hypotensive epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841] (mean arterial pressure <70 mmHg) will 
be recorded to adjust for the effect  of this potential confounding variable on the primary 
outcomes. The dose and duration of any vasoconstrictor or vasodilator drugs given during 
surgery and in the ICU will be recorded.  
The patients will be visited on the postoperative ward daily by [CONTACT_40193] s of the surgical 
team to evaluate for adverse events, cardiac arrhythmias, and other events necessitating 
medical intervention, including hypotension or other complications.  
Perioperative Variables:  The patients will receive routine institutional perioper ative care 
that includes continuous arrhythmia monitoring with telemetric ECG after surgery. Postoperative variables, including complications that affect organ systems, will be collected during the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. Patients will undergo 12- lead ECGs before surgery 
and on arrival to the ICU after surgery as well as for the first [ADDRESS_1068477] >0.04 sec and/or >1/[ADDRESS_1068478] myocardial infarction. The data will then be entered into the study 
database.  
Autoregulation Monitoring 
CBF autoregulation will be monitored continuously by [CONTACT_778045]. 
The patient’s forehead will be cleansed with the supplied alcohol sponge and wiped dry. 
Then, two Foresight monitoring electrodes will be calibrated, as specified by [CONTACT_3455], and placed on the patient’s forehead. The electrodes will be attached to a Fore- Sight cerebral oximeter (CasMed, Branford, CTI) specially equipped with an output 
signal for this project. We will perform TCD monitoring (DWL, Compumedics DWL, El Paso, TX) of the right and left middle cerebral arteries using two 2.5- MHz transducers 
fitted on a headband and positioned over the temporal bone windows to obtain 
bilateral continuous measurement of 
baseline velocity. Depth of insonation will be varied between 35 and 52 mm until 
representative spectral middle cerebral 
artery flow is identif ied.  
Arterial pressure from an indwelling 
cannula (started for clinical indication), 
along with TCD signals from the middle 
cerebral arteries and the near -infrared 
spectroscopy signals, will be sampled with 
an analog- to-digital converter using ICM+ 
softwa re at [ADDRESS_1068479] theorem, allowing detection 
of oscillations and transients that occur below 0.05 Hz. A continuous, moving Pearson correlation coefficient will be calculated between mean arterial pressure and TCD CBF 
velocity of the middle cerebral arteries, rendering the variable mean velocity index (Mx). 
Similar methods will be performed to calculate the Pearson correlation coefficient between mean arterial pressure and cerebral oximetry signals, rendering the variable 
cerebral oximetry index, and between mean arterial pressure and relative total 
hemoglobin signals, generating the hemoglobin volume index (see Cerebrovascular Reactivity Measured by [CONTACT_778046]). Consecutive, paired, 10- sec 
averaged values from 300- sec duration will be used for each calculation, incorporating 
30 data points for each index.35,37 Mx and COx values for each patient will be placed into 5 mmHg MAP bins and displayed on the laptop computer ( Figs. 3 and 6). When MAP 
is within the limits of CBF autoregulation, Mx and COx approach zero, but when MAP is Fig 6 . Dysregulated pattern when COx is >0.[ADDRESS_1068480] 
MAP associated with Mx ≥ 0.2 or Cox ≥ 0.3. These values are within the range found to 
be associated with poor outcome after traumatic brain in jury and adverse outcomes after 
cardiac surgery.17,40,151,152 In about 20% of patients, impaired autoregulation is observed 
when Mx and COx are ≥0.3 at all MAPs during CPB (Fig. 6). An attenuated autoregulation plateau is usually observed. Thus, the “optim al” MAP, defined as the MAP with the lowest 
Mx, will be the blood pressure target during CPB, as this point is observed in patients with 
functional and impaired autoregulation. As blood pressure varies during the usual course 
of surgery, including during t he initiation of CPB, no specific interventions are needed to 
establish autoregulation indices. Clinicians will have access to COx data only for patients 
randomized to the Intervention Group.  
The autoregulatory threshold will be defined as the mean arterial pressure at which 
the mean velocity index increases to ≥0.2 or cerebral oximetry index increases ≥0.3.  
Information regarding the mean arterial pressure at which the lower CBF autoregulatory 
threshold is detected will be made available to the anesthesiol ogist, perfusionist, and 
critical care doctors who are caring for the patients in the Intervention Group before and 
after surgery. Physicians and perfusionists will be told specifically that a patient has been 
randomized to the Intervention Group and that his/her mean arterial pressure should be 
kept higher than that value associated with a mean velocity index ≥0.2 or cerebral oximetry index ≥0.3. During surgery, the mean velocity index will be monitored 
continuously by [CONTACT_778047]. These same data will be collected in the Control 
Group but no specific measures for treating blood pressure will be advised.  
At the conclusion of surgery, patient steaming data files will be stored on a portable 
computer in the ICM+ file. The data files will be transferred to a departmental server with 
a password -protected file folder specifically designed for this study. Data on the server is 
backed up daily. The data from each patient will be copi[INVESTIGATOR_777985]. This 
data will include the mean arterial pressure from a range of [ADDRESS_1068481] itutional 
practices and not mean velocity index or cerebral oximetry data. The threshold for treating 
high blood pressure is not specified and will be based on institutional practices. A 
treatment algorithm for treating high blood pressure is provided to ensure consistency in 
treatments between patients. To avoid a precipi[INVESTIGATOR_777986], a 100- μg bolus dose of phenylephrine will be given intravenously 
immediately before drainage of blood from the patient to the CPB reservoir. Initiation of 
CPB will be begun gradually, at no more than 2 L/min, to allow slow equilibration. CPB will be increased by 0.5 L/min increments to the calculated full CPB flow. Phenylephrine 
boluses (50– 100 μg) can be given when mean arterial pressure is below the lower limit, 
until it is stabilized.  
Hypotension for periods other than during CPB will be treated by [CONTACT_778048]. The decision will be dictated by [CONTACT_778049]- diastolic areas with transesophageal echocardiography or 
based on central venous pressure or pulmonary capi[INVESTIGATOR_777987] a 
pulmonary artery catheter is in place and transesophageal echocardiography is not used. 
If cardiac filling i s normal, as described above, and systemic vascular resistance is low, 
hypotension will be treated using the same algorithm as that for treating hypotension on 
CPB. If cardiac preload is adequate but cardiac function is poor (or cardiac index of <2.0 
L/min /m2), epi[INVESTIGATOR_777988]. If cardiac 
function/cardiac index remains depressed, milrinone and dobutamine will be used per 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_270112]. Persistent low cardiac function/cardiac index, including that 
resulting from right ventricular dysfunction, will be treated according to institutional 
treatment guidelines.  
Patients will be evaluated at screening and sometime between postoperative day 5 and  
7 or at hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2345] (whichever occurs first) with the National Institutes of Health 
Stroke Scale (NIHSS). The NIHSS is a standardized, validated neurologic examination 
used in clinical trials to evaluate change in neurologic status.
[ADDRESS_1068482] quantifies 
neurologic deficits in 11 categories using a 42- point scale. This  testing will be performed 
by a trained research nurse. Research personnel will be certified for performing the NIHSS using the American Stroke Association's Online NIH Stroke Scale Training 
Program (http://asa.trainingcampus.net/uas/modules/ trees/windex. aspx). Patients with a 
change from baseline in their NIHSS will be referred for evaluation by a neurologist per 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_777989]. An MRI of the brain will be obtained when 
stroke is likely based on the neurologist’s examinati on. Brain CT imaging will be 
substituted for MRI when MRI is viewed as clinically contraindicated. Central nervous 
system infarction will be defined based on the Expert Consensus Statement of the 
American Heart and Stroke Associations as ischemic injury to  the brain, spi[INVESTIGATOR_1831], or 
retina based on pathological, imaging, or other objective evidence of cerebral, spi[INVESTIGATOR_1831], 
or retinal focal ischemic injury in a defined vascular distribution; or clinical evidence of cerebral, spi[INVESTIGATOR_1831], or retinal focal is chemic injury based on symptoms persisting for 
≥[ADDRESS_1068483] been excluded.
36A stroke will be defined 
as an epi[INVESTIGATOR_777990]. An intracerebral hemorrhage will be defined as a focal collection of blood within the brain 
parenchyma or ventricular system that is not caused by [CONTACT_278066]. A transient ischemic 
attack is defined as focal arterial ischemia with transient symptoms lasting < 24 h without 
evidence of infarction by [CONTACT_342072].  
Delirium Assessment:  Delirium is characterized by [CONTACT_443715]- onset, fluctuating disorder in 
level of consciousness associated with changes in cognition, attention, and perception 
not explained by [CONTACT_094] -existing or evolving dementia.156 Trained examiners can diagnose 
delirium and quantify its severity with structured instruments (Appendix C). Examinations 
are followed by [CONTACT_23353]- by-case adjudication.[ADDRESS_1068484] four postoperative days using the following 
tools:  
a. Confusion Assessment Method (CAM)  is a standardized method that is designed 
to allow trained non- psychiatrists to diagnose delirium. It shows high inter -rater reliability, 
sensitivity (94 –100%), and specificity (90– 95%) when compared to the gold standard of 
psychiatric diagnosis.142 The CAM diagnostic algorithm is based on assessing the four 
cardinal features of delirium: 1) acute onset and f luctuating course, 2) inattention, 3) 
disorganized thinking, and 4) altered level of consciousness.  
b. Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit (CAM -ICU) is a 
validated instrument used to diagnose delirium in critically ill intubated patients i n the ICU, 
including those who are non- verbal due to mechanical ventilation. Inter -rater reliability is 
high (kappa 0.79– 0.95), and it has high sensitivity (95 –100%) and specificity (89– 93%) 
when compared to the gold standard of psychiatric diagnosis. This  test will be used for 
intubated patients in the ICU.  
c. Delirium Rating Scale -Revised -1998 (DRS -R-98) is a 16- item scale that has been 
validated as a measure of delirium severity. Inter -rater reliability is high (interclass 
correlation coefficient = 0.99), and the scale is one of the few that has been validated 
against a dementia group.39 
Trained delirium assessors (authorized research members) will obtain a history of current 
symptoms from the patient, care providers, and family; review medical records; and 
perform a mental status exam and cognitive screens that will include the Mini Mental State Exam (MMSE) and abbreviated digit span.
[ADDRESS_1068485] 24 h. The DRS -R-98, which yields a delirium severity rating, will also be completed. If a 
patient is unable to respond verbally to questions because of intubation and mechanical 
ventilation, the CAM -ICU version will be administered. This instrument has sensitivities of 
76%–80% and a pooled specificity of 96% in the ICU.
157,158 
Neurocognitive Function:  A component of the endpoint of this study is cognitive decline 
after surgery compared with the patient’s baseline. Cognitive testing will be performed 
within two weeks before surgery, 4– [ADDRESS_1068486]. For patients 
who will be admitted the day of surgery, testing will occur either after their preoperative 
visit with their surgeon or by a separate visit specifically for the purposes of the study. For outpatients, testing before surgery will be at NMH.  
 Postoperative cognitive testing will be performed at the patient’s postoperative surgical 
clinic visit, in NMH which usually occurs 4 –[ADDRESS_1068487] the advantage of being standardized. They are also brief and easy to 
administer and score; the total administration time is approximately 35– [ADDRESS_1068488] of verbal learning and memory; Rey Complex Figure Test121, 
an assessment of visual memory; Controll ed Oral Word Association Test,[ADDRESS_1068489] of 
executive functions; Symbol Digits Modalities Test,[ADDRESS_1068490] of psychomotor speed and 
attention control; Trail Making A and B,163 tests of visuomotor speed, attention, and 
executive functions; Grooved Pegboard Test,34,164 a measurement of fine motor dexterity 
and speed; Beck Depression Inventory,105,165 a self -reported scale of depression 
symptom severity; and the State -Trait Anxiety Inventory,162 a measurement of anxiety 
symptoms. The patients are also evaluated with the SF -36 short form of the RAND 
Medical Outcomes Study (MOS) health- related quality of life questionnaire.166 This 
questionnaire is a multi -item scale that measures 8 health- related concepts: physical 
function, social function, physical role, emotional role, mental health, energy, pain, and 
general health perceptions.166,167 The standardized scores for each of the 8 quality -of-life 
domains range from 0 (worst) to 100 (best). The SF- [ADDRESS_1068491] deviation (SD) in two or more tests, or [ADDRESS_1068492] actual postoperative change in cognitive performance.
46 
 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging  
Brain ischemic lesions detected with diffusion- weighted imaging are a component of the 
primary outcome of this study. Brain MRI will be performed between postoperative days 
3 and 14. The imaging sequences will include oblique axial diffusion- weighted images 
from which apparent diffusion coeff icient (ADC) maps will be calculated, 
perfusionweighted images, T2, FLAIR, and 3D spoiled gradient -echo (SPGR; which 
allows 3dimensional reconstruction, comparable to MPRAGE) scans. These data will be acquired on an instrument TBD.
106 Diffusion -weighted tr ace images are obtained using a 
multi -slice, isotropic, single -shot EPI [INVESTIGATOR_79714], with bmax = 1000 s/mm2 and TR/TE = 
10,000/120 msec. Corresponding ADC maps will be used to identify infarcted tissue. For 
perfusion- weighted imaging, single- shot gradient echo EPI [INVESTIGATOR_777991] (TR/TE = 
2000/60 msec) are obtained with a 20 mL Gd- DTPA (Gadolinium) bolus power injected 
at 5 mL/sec at the start of the scan. These scans are used to generate maps of the time-to-peak arrival of contrast across voxels in the region of interest, relative to the 
homologous region of interest in the unaffected hemisphere. Given concerns about the 
potential for nephrogenic systemic fibrosis from gadolinium contrast in subjects with renal failure, the creatinine level of all patients wi ll be measured before the MRI. Gadolinium 
will not be given to individuals with an estimated glomerular filtration rate ≤60 mL/min or to those who need dialysis after surgery (by [CONTACT_8415]).
107 In such patients, only diffusion-
weighted imaging without gadolinium  administration will be performed as needed for 
determining the primary outcome. The FDA Web site states that “there are no reports received of individuals with normal or even moderately impaired renal function developi[INVESTIGATOR_777992]://www.fda.gov/cder/drug/infopage/gcca/qa_200705.htm
. 
 In previous work by [CONTACT_778045], inter -observer point -to-point 
agreement for analysis of the time -to-peak delay in each area for 12 scans was 83% for 
calculating the delay to the nearest 0.1 sec and 100% for calculating the delay within 0.2 sec. We will register each image (first registering the corresponding SPGR scans) to a spatial standard, a digital form of the Montreal Neurological Institute atlas, using local 
registration methods or image warpi[INVESTIGATOR_007], in which each voxel is individually displaced.
[ADDRESS_1068493] and reported in the patient’s 
medical record as part of standard Department of Radiology policy at Northwestern Memorial Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  Any subject who enrolls in this study with a history of retained metal 
in their head and/or eye(s) will have an x -ray of  the head done in order to determine if it 
will be safe to proceed with the MRI. If it is deemed safe for the subject the MRI will be obtained.  
Additionally, stored images will be independently analyzed by [CONTACT_778050] 
(TBD) blinded to patient outcomes. The images will be assessed for nonischemic pathology, the presence and location of prior cerebrovascular disease, new acute 
ischemic lesions, global cerebral edema, and hemorrhages. Acute ischemic lesions will 
be depi[INVESTIGATOR_98864] a hyperintense signa l on the diffusion- weighted images and hypointense 
signal on the ADC map. ADC can be calculated on a pi[INVESTIGATOR_8070] -by-pi[INVESTIGATOR_38149]. Based on the 
location, size, and pattern of distribution, the ischemic infarct will be classified into one of 
four categories: small subcortical infarction (lesion that is <1 cm in diameter located in the 
basal ganglia, thalamus, or brainstem); territorial infarction (lesion located in a vascular 
distribution, usually resulting from large vessel occlusion); watershed infarction (lesion 
located in the border zone between vascular territories); or multiple emboli (multiple 
lesions in one or several different vascular territories). The number of acute lesions detected by [CONTACT_35774]- weighted imaging will be counted, and the total infarct volume will 
be traced and measured volumetrically by a technician using the Image J software.[ADDRESS_1068494] -enhanced MRA (CE MRA), using IV contrast at the time 
of brain MRI. In the event that gadolinium is not administered, MRA of the neck  will be 
carried out with 2D time of flight (TOF) imaging. When gadolinium is administered, neck 
MRA will be 3D TOF of the neck. MRA of the head will be 3D TOF regardless of use of 
gadolinium. Measurements of arterial stenosis on MRA will vary depending on the 
location of the vessel; standard measurements are made by a neuroradiologist, and these 
will be replicated by [CONTACT_54858] (TBD). For extracranial carotid stenosis, the 
technique is that used in the North American Symptomatic Carotid Endar terectomy Trial 
(NASCET) (Fig 7).  
 Intracranial arterial stenosis of the most clinically important major vessels (middle cerebral 
artery, basilar artery, intracranial internal carotid artery) and the extracranial vertebral 
arteries, will be measured based on the methods used in the Warfarin-  Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_777993].111 
 The percent stenosis of a major intracranial artery will be defined as [(1 
(Dstenosis/Dnormal))] x 100, where  
stenosis = the diameter of the artery at the site of the most severe degree of stenosis and 
normal= the diameter of the proximal normal artery.  
 
For the middle cerebral, intracranial vertebral, and basilar arteries, normal will be defined 
as the diameter of the widest part of a normal segment of the proximal part of the artery. 
If this portion of the artery is not normal, then normal will be defined as the diameter of 
widest part of the distal portion of the artery. When the entire intracranial artery has atherosclerotic narrowing, the most distal part of the normal segment of the artery supplying the vessel will be used for determining normal.  
 
Brain imaging might result in the detection of an unexpected condition, such as a brain 
mass, aneurysm, or vascular malformation. In the event of such findings, the pat ient, and 
his/her family and clinical physicians will be notified, and the patient will be referred for 
clinical management.  
 
 
 
  
Frailty Assessments:  
 
We will evaluate frailty based on a validated scoring system
1 that characterizes frailty 
as an age -associated decline in 5 domains: shrinking, weakness, exhaustion, low 
physical activity, and slowed walking speed.  
 
These measurements are described below based on the original paper.  
 Each domain will yield a dichotomous score of 0 or 1. We will classify patients scoring 3 
to 5 as frail, 1 to 2 as intermediately frail (pre -fail), and 0 as nonfrail. We will also measure 
the Instrumental Activities of Daily Living scale as part of the frailty assessment. Research 
staff will undergo frailty screen training to allow consistent measurements of frailty 
domains in the study population. Frailty assessment will be held in clinic during the 
patient’s preoperative and postoperative visits, and again at the time of the 1 year foll ow-
up visit.  
Weight loss : “In the last year, have you lost more than 10 pounds unintentionally (i.e., not 
due to dieting or exercise)?” If yes, then frail for weight loss criterion.  
Exhaustion:  
Using the CES– D Depression Scale, the following question and the accompanying two 
statements are read:  
“How often in the last week did you feel this way?” (a) I felt that everything I did was an 
effort (b) I could not get going.  
The subject will respond to these questions using the following scale:  
0 = rarely or none of the time (1 day);  
1 = some or a little of the time (1– 2 days);  
2 = a moderate amount of the time (3– 4 days); or  
                                            
 

3 = most of the time.  
Subjects answering “2” or “3” to either of these questions are categorized as frail by [CONTACT_778051].  
Physical Activity:  
Based on the short version of the Minnesota Leisure Time Activity questionnaire, asking 
about walking, chores (moderately strenuous), mowing the lawn, raking, gardening, 
hiking, jogging, biking, exercise cycling, dancing, aerobics, bowling, golf, singles tennis, doubles tennis, racquetball, calisthenics, swimming. Kcals per week expended are calculated using standardized algorithm. This variable is stratified by [CONTACT_547]:  
Men:  Those with Kcals of physical activity per week <383 are frail. Women:  
Those with Kcals per week < 270 are frail.  
Walk Time:  Table 3 (below) will be used to stratify Walk Time by [CONTACT_778052] (gender -specific cutoff a medium height).  
 
Grip Strength:  Table 4(below) will be used to stratify Grip Strength by [CONTACT_778053] (BMI) quartiles  
 
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living Scale will be used to provide additional information 
on functional status in the frailty assessment. Seven questions are asked to gauge participant difficulty with using the telephone, walking, preparing meals, managing 
money, shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_007], doing housework, and taking medicines.  
Each study subject will participate in the study for approximately 1 year.  

Consent will be obtained before any study related events occur. Cognitive and quality of 
life testing, medical history, TCD measurements (to determine subject eligibility), National 
Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS), ECG and psychomotor testing and Brief Smell 
Identification Test133will be performed within 1-  [ADDRESS_1068495] randomization will also be done at 
this time.  
Before cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_778054] (after sternotomy and pericardiotomy) the 
patients will undergo epi[INVESTIGATOR_777994]. In many centers epi[INVESTIGATOR_777995].  
The day of surgery during cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_778055]. For individuals in the intervention arm, blood pressure targets during 
cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_778056] (Mx) is <0.2 or the cerebral oximetry index  
(COx) is< 0.3. This information will be communicated to the perfusionist, anesthesiologist 
and surgeon by [CONTACT_20685]. In the control arm, cerebral blood flow 
autoregulation information will be monitored and saved but t he data will not be provided 
to the surgical team.  
After surgery, visits will all be done in the ICU or postoperative unit. The patients will have 
an ECG which is to be done upon the subject’s arrival in the ICU after surgery. This procedure is routine care and only a copy of the ECG will be obtained for the study case 
report form. 
Each patient will be evaluated daily by [CONTACT_778057]. Data will 
be collected from the patient record by a member of the study team. Every patient will 
have an ECG done each day postoperative days [ADDRESS_1068496] of care. An 
MRI will be done at some point between postoperative day three and postoperative day 
14 or at hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2345] (whichever occurs first). In addition, all patients will be evaluated between postoperative days 5 and 7 or at hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2345] (whichever 
occurs first) with the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) And Brief Smell 
Identification Test.  
Cognitive testing and the Brief Smell Identification Test will be repeated at the time the 
patient returns for follow -up with the cardiac surgeon, about 4 to 6 weeks postoperatively.  
Cognitive testing will be repeated at 1 year postoperative.  
Assessment Schedule  
The schemata of study procedures are listed in Table 5.  
 
SAEs/AEs  ---------------------------------------- X------------------------------------------  
Randomization   X           
Mx and C02 monitoring   X X X         
Bispectral Index Monitoring   X X X         
Urine Flow   X X X         
Brain MRI         X1     
MMSE and Abbreviated Digit Span  X            
Delirium assessments       X X X X    
Electrocardiogram  X    X X X X     

 
Clinicians caring for the patients will participate in managing blood pressure in the Blood 
Pressure Intervention Group and, thus, cannot be blinded. Individuals making the 
neurologic assessments and performing data analysis will be blinded to the intraoperative 
management group, providing effective double blinding.  
Participation in this study will not require discontinuation of a subject’s current therapy 
any more than would be required if the subject were to undergo CABG and/or valve 
surgery outside of the study. The Control Group will receive standard care practiced here 
at Northwestern Memorial Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. The Blood Pressure Intervention Group will be receiving investigational care. Blood pressure targets during surgery will be at least those of the standard care group or higher based on the individualized autoregulation measurements.  
Justification for inclusion of a placebo or non- treatment group.  
There will be a Control Group in which mean arterial pressure is maintained during 
surgery, including CPB, using institutional standard of care. This is being done in order to allow direct comparison of the current standard of care with the Blood Pressure Intervention Group.  
Definition of treatment failure or participant removal criteria.  
There is no definition for treatment failure. The subject will be excluded from further study 
if an adequate temporal window for TCD monitoring cannot be identified before surgery.  
Description of what happens to participants receiving therapy when study ends or if a  
participant’s participation in the study ends prematurely.  
If a subject’s participation in the study were to end prematurely then that subject would 
be treated according to current standard of care.  
Study Statistics  
a. Primary outcome variable.  
Aim 1: To determine whether targeting blood pressure to a level above an individual ’s 
lower CBF autoregulatory threshold during CPB reduces the frequency of the composite 
end point of clinical stroke, a diffusion- weighted MRI brain lesion, or postoperative 
cognitive decline [ADDRESS_1068497] 
blood pressure management.  
Aim 1a: To assess whether extracranial and/or intracranial arterial stenosis (detected by 
[CONTACT_778017]), or other patient characteristics such as age, gender, hypertension, diabetes, or prior stroke, modify the effect of maintaining blood pressure above an 

individual’s lower CBF autoregulatory threshold on the risk for the above composite 
neurological outcome.  
Aim 1b: To assess whether targeting MAP to a level above an individual’s lower CBF 
autoregulatory threshold during CPB reduces the frequency of cognitive decline [ADDRESS_1068498] the same risk of the primary 
composite neurologic endpoint of stroke, DWI lesion, or cognitive decline 4 to 6 weeks 
after surgery (i.e., null hypothesis). This will be done using a two- sided test of proportions 
at 5% significance level. We will first calculate and report the relative risk (RR) of 
composit e neurologic outcome by [CONTACT_778058] (i.e., the unadjusted RR). In addition, we will construct an adjusted estimate of RR using a generalized linear model (GLM) with Poisson distribution and robust standard errors.[ADDRESS_1068499] modification by [CONTACT_778059], age, 
gender, hypertension, diabetes, or prior stroke (Aim 1a), we will calculate the unadjusted 
RR stratified by [CONTACT_163669]. We will use a test of homogeneity to compare stratum -
specific estimates of RR.101 Finally, we will use the model developed in Aim 1 to report 
stratum -specific adjusted estimates of RR by [CONTACT_778060]. We will compute the Z- score for the 
cognitive tests to normalize the distribution to the control data. The individual Z- scores 
will be combined into an average score and re- normaliz ed.102 To assess postoperative 
change in cognitive function for up to 1 year (Aim 1b), we will use population- average 
marginal models estimated using generalized estimating equations (GEE) with exchangeable working correlation structure. The model will inc lude assessment time with 
[ADDRESS_1068500] whether 
postoperative trajectory of cognitive function differs by [CONTACT_19313].  
As a secondary analysis, we will develop logistic regression models on the binary 
outcome of the composite neurologic outcome and the time spent below the CBF 
autoregulatory threshold regardless of treatment assignment (i.e., data combined from both groups), while adjusting for other statistically and scientifically important covariates. 
This will allow for the development of a ”dose- response” relationship between blood 
pressure below the CBF autoregulatory threshold and outcome, whereby [CONTACT_778061] e 
the probability of an adverse neurologic event as a function of time spent in suboptimal perioperative conditions. In this analysis, we will consider the time spent below the CBF 
autoregulatory threshold as both an absolute time in minutes and as a percent of the total time on by[CONTACT_6476], thereby [CONTACT_778062]. Note, the lower graph in Figure 6 
(above), depi[INVESTIGATOR_777996] a single patient showing the percent t ime at each blood 
pressure epoch. The program saves the data in a spreadsheet format.  
As an additional set of analyses for the multivariable logistic regression models, we will 
look whether there are interactions (e.g., effect modification) between gender  or extra-  
and intra- cranial arterial stenosis on the composite neurologic outcome. In considering 
patient sex, we are particular interested in whether or not the effectiveness of the 
intervention applies equally to women as well as men. Similarly, we are interested in 
determining whether the association between the intervention and the neurologic end 
point differs in the presence or absence of clinically significant narrowing in the arteries of the neck and head. In considering the modifying effect of carotid arterial stenosis, we will dichotomize this variable with the cut point of <70% versus ≥70% narrowing based 
on the NASCET criteria, using the methods for measurement described in Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging.113 For intracranial arterial stenosis, we wil l dichotomize the 
stenosis as ≥50% or <50%. As a second step, we will also consider three categories of arterial stenosis (<50%, 50% –70%, and >70%), which considers the clinically important 
stenosis definition as defined by [CONTACT_778063]- Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_777997].[ADDRESS_1068501] Wald tests. Finally, we will 
also consider arterial stenosis in the multivariable logistic regression model as a 
continuous variable if the inter -rater reliability is high for this variable. Considering arterial 
stenosis as a continuous variabl e will allow us to consider possible thresholds of risk for 
the neurologic end point as a function of a continuous measure of stenosis. We will look for inflection points in the risk of stenosis on the outcome by [CONTACT_778064] (e.g., 
broken arrow regression) and cubic spline terms in the model. If the inter -rater reliability 
for the continuous measures of stenosis is low, we will consider only the above categories 
of mild, moderate, and severe stenosis in the regression models.  
Aim 2: To compare the accuracy of CBF autoregulation as determined by [CONTACT_778065] O2 saturation 
(cerebral oximetry index) and near -infrared reflectance spectroscopy (hemoglobin volume 
index) with the accuracy of that determined by [CONTACT_689912] -measured CBF velocity (mean 
velocity index).  
We expect that the estimated lower CBF autoregulatory thresholds based on the cerebral 
oximetry index will be similar to those measured with both the mean velocity index and 
the hem oglobin volume index. Nevertheless, to quantify variance, we will first calculate 
the pair -wise differences in each of these estimate threshold levels per patient. 
Graphically, we will quantify these differences using histograms to assess the distribution 
of the discrepancy. In addition, we will create Bland- Altman plots to investigate if these 
differences are related to the absolute values of the threshold estimate. In other words, 
does this difference in estimates using either the hemoglobin value and cer ebral oximetry 
or the mean velocity index and the cerebral oximetry increase (decrease) as one’s autoregulatory threshold increases (decreases)? We will also investigate whether the discrepancies in threshold estimates differ by [CONTACT_778066].  
This hypothesis has already been adequately addressed and will no longer be an aim of 
this study as we move forward.  
Aim 3 : To perform secondary analysis to determine whether an association exists 
between abnormal perioperative TCD findings indicative of intracranial arterial stenosis 
and the risk for the composite neurologic outcom e.  
Under this aim, we will assess whether perioperative TCD findings indicative of arterial 
stenosis of major cerebral vessels ( see Transcranial Doppler Evaluation) are predictive 
of the composite adverse postoperative neurologic outcome. We will test for this possible 
association by [CONTACT_163297] -  in the multivariable logistic regression model described under 
Specific Aim [ADDRESS_1068502] clinically significant narrowing of the intracranial 
arteries, as determined by [CONTACT_778067].  
Aim 4: To assess whether targeting MAP during CPB to a level above an individual’s 
lower CBF autoregulatory threshold during CPB reduces the frequency of postoperative delirium, as assessed with a structured examination, compared with the use of standard 
blood pressure management.  
In Aim [ADDRESS_1068503] undergone the 
more extensive delirium assessments as described in this proposal. This same structure 
assessment for delirium was initiated in year 4 of the prior grant and is consistent with 
other delirium studies performed by [CONTACT_3252]- investigators (R01 AGO33615). We will estimate 
the unadjusted (without any other variable in the model) and adjusted RR of delirium by 
[CONTACT_778068] o study groups. We will adjust for potential confounders using a 
generalized linear regression model with Poisson distribution and robust standard 
errors.119  
Aim 5: To determine whether baseline frailty is independently associated with delirium or 
functional decline after cardiac surgery .  
In Aim [ADDRESS_1068504] the hypothesis that frailty is associated with decreased function after cardiac surgery. The primary outcome will be proportion of patients with >1 IADL decline. 
Secondary outcomes will be change in gait speed and grip strength. Bivariable and 
multivariable linear and logisti c regression analyses will be used. For each of these 
analysis, covariates to include in the model will be selected using a priori evidence, and 
may include age, gender, race, baseline cognitive status, education, medications, and 
type of surgery. We will also consider propensity score analysis to account for important 
confounding.  
Aim 6: To determine whether depth of anesthesia in frail patients is a modifiable risk 
factor for delirium and functional decline after cardiac surgery.  
In Aim 6 , we will compar e cumulative time of BIS<45 in frail vs. non- frail patients using 
bivariable and multivariable linear regression. The cumulative time of BIS<45 will also 
estimate the amount of potential anesthetic overdose in all patients.  
Rapid Dissemination of Clinical Research  
A major objective of this study is to disseminate new information to the medical and lay 
communities. We propose to fulfill this aim by [CONTACT_778069]. Full results of the study will be published as soon as possible, consistent with principles of peer -reviewed 
publication. National meetings of the AHA, American Stroke Association, Society of 
Thoracic Surgeons, and the Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiol ogists are excellent 
venues for presenting clinical study results. We will continue to use MedDium, LLC (Silver 
Springs, MD) for a Web portal that provides the NIH and public with visibility into program 
activities and major scientific discoveries. Finally , the media relations department at 
Northwestern University will be utilized to coordinate press releases of study trial results 
as they become available.  
Secondary outcome variables.  
Included in Primary outcome variables (above).  
Statistical plan includ ing sample size justification and interim data analysis.  
Sample size calculations are based on 
detecting differences in the proportion of patients with an adverse neurologic outcome 
(DWI lesion, stroke, or cognitive decline 4 to 6 weeks after surgery) bet ween the Control 
and Intervention groups. We expect that approximately 45% of subjects in the Control Group will experience an adverse neurologic outcome after surgery based on the 
preliminary data analysis of outcomes of [ADDRESS_1068505] that the 
proportion of the Intervention Group that experiences adverse neurologic outcomes will 
be reduced by 40- 45% (e.g. The frequency of neurologic adverse events will be between 
25% and 27%). This magnitude of reduction in the frequency of the com posite outcome 
is within the range that is considered to be clinically important effect (20% to 45% reduction from control frequency) based on prior trials that have evaluated temperature 
manipulations, pH management, transfusion triggers, and pharmacologi c strategies for 
improving neurologic complications of cardiac surgery
 116-118. Postoperative MRI is not 
always feasible for reasons already discussed. According to our calculations, we will need to obtain MRI data on a total of 122 patients in each study arm (244 patients in total) to 
have 80% power to detect 40% reduction in the composite outcome of stroke, DWI lesion, 
or cognitive decline 4 to 6 weeks after surgery, assuming that 45% of Control Group 
patients experience adverse neurologic events. The Type I error is 5%.  
  
Our current enrollment trajectory suggests that at least [ADDRESS_1068506] enrolled 277 patients to our study ([ADDRESS_1068507] MRI data). On average, 5 to 8 patients are enrolled per month. Thes e projections confirm that the plan for this submission of 
studying 350 additional patients (a total of 630 patients) will ensure completion of the 
study with [ADDRESS_1068508] 0.2 SD difference in combined Z -score for 
cognitive tests normalized to the control group’s data between the Intervention and 
Control groups with 80% power 
47. We assume 2 follow -up points (4 to 6 weeks and 1 
year after surgery) and an average within- patient correlation of 0.7 (observed in our 
preliminary data). The calculations indicate that we will need [ADDRESS_1068509] 0.2 SD difference with 80% power (assuming 5% Type 
I error). The study (first and second funding periods) will recruit a total of [ADDRESS_1068510] the expected 0.2 SD difference in combined cognitive score seven with a 1- year drop- out 
rates high as 27%.Historically, the drop- out rate for cognitive testing at 1 year in similar 
populations has been between 3% and 24% 
47. 
 
For Specific Aim 4, we assessed the level of statistical power to detect clinically 
meaningful differences in proportion of patients with postoperative delirium based on the 
sample size for Aim 1. Our preliminary data indicate a 50% reduction in this outcome 
when a structured instrument for delirium assessment is used (frequency of 33% vs. 66% in Intervention vs. Control Group). This marked decrease was based on n = 37 patients. 
Therefore, in the power assessment for this aim we conservatively assumed 50% 
frequency of delirium in the Control Group. We will expect to see a 40% reduction in 
frequency of this condition in the Intervention Group. Our calculations indicate that having 
a minimum of 122 patients in each group with thorough delirium assessments (not 
performed in all patients in the first cohort) will allow us to detect a 40% decrease in proportion of patients who develop delirium in the Intervention Group with 87% power, assuming a 5% level of statistical significance for the two- sided test. We have instituted 
careful delirium assessments in our current. Postoperative MRI is not always feasible for reasons already discussed. According to our calculations, we will need to obtain MRI data on a total of 122 patients in each study arm (244 patients in total) to have 80% power to 
detect 40% reducti on in the composite outcome of stroke, DWI lesion, or cognitive decline 
4 to 6 weeks after surgery, assuming that 45% of Control Group patients experience 
adverse neurologic events. The Type I error is 5%.  
Our current enrollment trajectory suggests that at  least [ADDRESS_1068511] enrolled 277 patients to our study ([ADDRESS_1068512] MRI data). On average, 5 to 8 patients are enrolled per month. These projections confirm that the plan for this submission of studying 350 additional patients (a total of 630 patients) will ensure 
completion of the study wit h [ADDRESS_1068513] 0.2 SD difference in 
combined Z- score for cognitive tests normalized to the control group’s data between the 
Intervention and Control groups with 80% power.
47 We assume 2 follow -up points (4 to 6 
weeks and 1 year after surgery) and an average within- patient correlation of 0.7 
(observed in our preliminary data). The calculations indicate that we will need [ADDRESS_1068514] 0.2 SD difference with 80% 
power (assuming 5% Type I error). The study (first and second funding periods) will recruit 
a total of [ADDRESS_1068515] the expected 0.2 SD difference in combined cognitive 
scores even with a 1- year drop- out rate as high as 27%. Historically, the drop- out rate for 
cognitive testing at 1 year in similar populations has been between 3% and 24%.[ADDRESS_1068516] clinically 
meaningful differences in proportion of patients with postoperative delirium based on the sample size for Aim 1. Our preliminary data indicate a 50% reduction in this outcome 
when a structured instrument for delirium assessment is used (frequency of 33% vs. 66% 
in Intervention vs. Control Group). This marked decrease was based on n = 37 patients. 
Therefore, in the power assessment for this aim we conservatively assumed 50% frequency of delirium in the Cont rol Group. We will expect to see a 40% reduction in 
frequency of this condition in the Intervention Group. Our calculations indicate that having 
a minimum of 122 patients in each group with thorough delirium assessments (not 
performed in all patients in the first cohort) will allow us to detect a 40% decrease in 
proportion of patients who develop delirium in the Intervention Group with 87% power, 
assuming a 5% level of statistical significance for the two- sided test. We have instituted 
careful delirium assessments in our current protocol. Thus, our sample size projections are conservative estimates, as we will have at least [ADDRESS_1068517] 180 patients in each study treatment arm with 
careful delirium assessments.  
Missing data 
Two sources of missing data are anticipated: missing data on predictors and missing data 
on the primary outcome. The strategy of dealing with missing data on predictors will 
depend on the amount of missing data. If the overall number of observations with missing 
predictors is under 5%, a complete- case analysis will be performed by [CONTACT_59274][INVESTIGATOR_777998]. The pattern of missingness will be examined. If the 
amount of missing data is between 5% and 20%, we will calculate the main results based 
on the complete- case analysis, but we will perform a sensitivity analysis using multiple 
imputation strategy. No attempt will be made to impute variables that have more than 
20% data missing. Missing data on outcomes and the drop- out pattern will be assessed. 
No imputation of the outcome variables will be attempted. In addition to the primary 
analysis with the GEE approach, random -effects models have been shown to be a useful 
strategy in cases of non- equal number of measurements across individuals if missing 
data mechanism can be assumed to be ignorable. Therefore, the primary analysis will be supplemented by [CONTACT_778070] -effects approach. In addition, we will explore random -
effects pattern mixture models to assess the influence of missing data in these analyses.
[ADDRESS_1068518] of high enrollment in industry -spons ored and 
extramurally funded clinical trials in patients undergoing cardiac surgery. The original 
study end point of 280 patients over a 56- month enrollment period required approximately 
5 to be enrolled each month. The study endpoint of 350 patients in the second phase of the study requires enrollment of approximately 8 patients/month, a rate that we feel is attainable based on our success in the first phase of the study. The volume of surgical 
procedures performed at Northwestern Memorial Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (Table 6) will allow for the study 
to be completed in the planned timeframe. Procedures for retention of patients in the study will include visits by [CONTACT_778071][INVESTIGATOR_777999]. The patients will be contact[CONTACT_778072] 
4-to-6–week postoperative visit to confirm their testing session.  
Table 6: Number of Cardiac Procedures at Northwestern Memorial Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_778000]  2014  2015  
Coronary artery by[CONTACT_10956]  177 144 
Mitral valve procedure  134 119 
Aortic valve procedure  286 264 
Multiple procedures  198 186 
Other CV (VAD, ECMO, Heart transplant)  [ADDRESS_1068519] of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_778001].  
Statistical Analysis Plan 
Tabular and graphical methods of data exploration will be used to evaluate variable 
distributions over the perioperative time period. When conducting modeling, we will 
determine the influence of the outliers on model fit. If the influence is high, we will consider 
excluding the outlier/s. We will explore the extent to which CBF a utoregulation changes 
over the perioperative period. Univariate distributions for all study variables will be 
evaluated. We will explore potential confounders as variables strongly predictive of the 
outcomes (a priori and in the data) and differentially di stributed between the study arms. 
Results of these analyses will be used to refine the analyses and guide model building and selection.  
 
The cognitive outcome will be assessed as change from baseline in a composite cognitive Z score 4 to 6 weeks after surg ery.  The Z score will be calculated for 
individual tests at each testing time point with the mean and SD of baseline tests of all patients. Timed tests will be multiplied by ‘ -1’ so that higher scores represent 
better performance. Individual Z scores will  be combined into an average Z -score, 
calculated from the average of the non -missing individual test Z -scores. These will 
then be renormalized using the mean and standard deviation at baseline.  A 
difference between pre-  and post -test > 0.3 is considered cognitive decline.  
Early stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_004]: N/A  
Risks  
a. Medical risks, listing all procedures, their major and minor risks and expected 
frequency.  
Experimental Problems  
Hemodynamic perturbations are frequent preoperatively. Such events could potentially 
confound the results of this study if a patient suffers cerebral ischemia from hypotension 
postoperatively. To adjust for hypotension, patient clinical data will be reviewed daily by 
[CONTACT_3647], and epi[INVESTIGATOR_778002] r ecorded in the 
case report form. Use of vasoconstrictive or inotropic medications will be recorded. One strength of the protocol is that blood pressure will be measured continuously via the IMx+ 
software during surgery rather being recorded by [CONTACT_206091].  
The use of gadolinium in subjects with renal failure has been implicated in the etiology of 
a rare condition called nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF). As we state in Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging, a creatinine level will be measured in all patients before the MRI, 
and gadolinium will not be given to individuals with an estimated glomerular filtration rate of ≤60 mL/min or to those needing dialysis after surgery (by [CONTACT_778073][INVESTIGATOR_778003]).
107 Diffusion -weighted MRI will still be performed as part the 
assessment of our primary end point. MRA will also be obtained of the head and neck; 
the neck MRA will be performed with gadolinium in individuals with adequate renal 
function and without other contraindications for gadolinium, but otherwise will be done 
without gadolinium. No cases have been reported to the FDA of NSF in individuals with normal renal function or with only mild renal insufficiency. Thus, we do not anticipate an increased risk in our study protocol.  
One challenge in this study will be the transport of patients who remain in the 
postoperative ICU to the MRI scanner, particularly those who require continued mechanical lung ventilation and infusion of vasoactive drugs. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_1660] a critical care 
physician will accompany such patients to the scanner, along with the critical care patient transport team of The Northwestern Memorial Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  
AEs will be reviewed by [CONTACT_778074] -monthly meetings and by [CONTACT_778075] t he enrolled patients.  
Patients will be excluded if a TCD trans -temporal window cannot be identified before 
surgery, as the primary intervention is dependent upon detecting the lower CBF 
autoregulatory threshold using this method. Regardless, monitoring wit h TCD in surgical 
patients is challenging for many reasons. Maintaining continuous monitoring is 
particularly difficult during certain portions of the procedures, such as during tracheal 
intubation, central venous line placement, transesophageal echocardiography 
examination, and especially during dissection of the left internal mammary artery, when frequent changes in the patient’s body position and the sternal retractor can lead to 
displacement of the transducers. Intermittent loss of the temporal window d uring surgery 
might lead to bias if blood pressure reductions below the autoregulatory threshold are not 
detected as such. Defining the lower autoregulatory threshold based on mean velocity index or oximetry index should minimize this bias, as the latter w ill be a continuous 
measurement not subject to intermittent loss of signal.  
Many factors can influence a surgical patient’s CBF, including anemia, temperature 
fluctuations, and volatile (but not intravenous) anesthetics.
[ADDRESS_1068520] of volatile anesthetics on CBF autoregulation is dose dependent. In low to moderate doses, as used clinically, the CBF autoregulatory plateau might be slightly attenuated and minimally shifted to the left. These clinical considerations 
emphasize the dynamic nature of CBF autoregulation and the need to monitor this parameter continuously when targeting blood pressure management to remain above the point at whi ch CBF is pressure passive. The conditions of this study will enhance the 
external validity of the findings.  
The monitoring of the CBF autoregulatory threshold by a moving linear regression 
correlation (mean velocity index) requires first ensuring the fidelity of the TCD -derived 
measurements of middle cerebral artery CBF velocity. Intraoperative TCD monitoring will be performed by [CONTACT_778076], 
including in cardiac surgical patients. Our experienc e is that the demarcation of the lower 
CBF autoregulatory threshold via mean velocity index is clearly indicated by [CONTACT_778077], as shown in Figures 3 and 5.  
Undergoing an MRI can lead to anxiety in some patients. The investigative team will tak e 
measures to reassure the patients during the MRI procedure. Image acquisition will be stopped at frequent intervals to query the patients about distress. A “panic button” will 
also be available to the patients to notify radiology and study personnel about distress. 
Some patients may have temporary cardiac pacemaker leads placed after surgery. Coiled pacemaker wires on the surface of the patient could potentially serve as antennae during MRI that might generate heat or induce premature cardiac beats. Howev er, brain MRI will 
be obtained between postoperative days [ADDRESS_1068521] 14 days after the procedure (whatever the patient is more comfortable with), usually after the patient has had the pacemaker wires removed. When necessary, brain MRI can be performed safely 
in patients with retained metallic materials
[ADDRESS_1068522] 
at day 3– 10, and is most visible on T2 images. Edema contributes to the hypoperfused 
region. Patients in whom edema is observed on T2 beyond regions of hypoperfusion on 
perfusion- weighted imaging will be excluded.  
We will obtain only postoperative brain MRI imaging rather than paired pre-  and 
postoperative imaging. The logistics of obtaining preoperative MRI in surgical patients would be a major impediment to recruitment. In some patients, small, clinically undetected 
diffusion- weighted imaging lesions might result from car diac catheterization performed 
before surgery. Such lesions would be mistaken to have occurred during surgery. 
Therefore, a careful neurologic examination using the NIHSS will be performed before 
surgery but after cardiac catheterization to ensure that there are no new major deficits. 
Acute strokes that may have occurred 1– 2 weeks before surgery should no longer appear 
acute at the time of a postoperative DWI MRI (they will no longer be bright on DWI and 
dark on ADC, as occurs with new strokes).  
The signifi cance of new diffusion- weighted imaging lesions to brain regions not involved 
with higher cerebral function might be debated. However, it is increasingly appreciated that the cumulative impact of a small area of injury on cognitive or other neurologic end points might only be manifest after long- term follow -up. Even if the impact of some 
diffusion- weighted imaging lesions is minor, development of strategies to improve 
neurologic outcomes after cardiac surgery should aim to detect all forms of injury using 
sensitive means.  
The use of 2D TOF MRA in the subset of individuals who cannot receive gadolinium will 
limit the resolution of this vascular imaging in this subset; however, we anticipate that we 
should still be able to make global measurements of stenoses.  In addition, MRA may 
suggest stenoses that are not as narrow as they appear, because it measures flow.  
Unfortunately, alternative technologies that might give better vascular imaging (such as 
CT angiography or conventional angiography) expose patients unnecessarily to iodinated 
dye and, in the case of angiography, an invasive procedure.  
Although perfusion- weighted imaging provides an indication of whether a brain area is 
relatively hypoperfused, it cannot necessarily distinguish whether a brain infarct results 
from embolism and/or hypoperfusion. Small emboli in well -perfused areas might be 
transient, but those in areas of hypoperfusion might persist (slow “washout”). In this study, 
we will count the number of TCD -detected microembolic signals to adjust statistically for 
the number of emboli in patients with and without diffusion- weighted imaging lesions. 
Although this study will provide only inferential data on the mechanism of brain injury, the combination of MRI indices and our determination of duration during CPB that mean arterial pressure is below the individual’s CBF autoregulatory threshold, combined with emboli monitoring with TCD, will provide important clinical mechanistic insights.  
Failure to obtain study data after a patient is discharged from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (i.e., at the 4 - 
to 6- week postoperative testing sessions) could confound analysis of the secondary 
cognitive end points of the trial. Multiple reasons might cause patients not to comply with follow- up testing, including death, severe stroke, and discharge to a secondary care 
facility. Postoperative testing is coordinated to occur during the patient’s postoperative 
clinic visit with his/her surgeon.  
Off-pump CABG surgery is performed in <10% of patients at our institution but is not 
performed in patients undergoing combined CABG and valve surgery. Although 
performance of CABG surgery “on- ” versus “off- pump” has not been shown to impact 
neurologic outcomes remarkably based on prospectively randomized trials, it is possible 
that new data may become available during this trial that might support the decision to 
perform more surgeries without CPB. Such a decision could conceivably influence recruitment. However, the number of procedures performed at our hospi[INVESTIGATOR_778004] a sufficient number of patients will be recruited during the planned period of study.  
Providing additional information about functional capacity including performance of 
instrumental ADLs, as well as about ability to drive. This c arries minimal additional 
medical risk to the participant beyond routinely held structured preoperative interview –  
increased anxiety due to extension of regular pre- operative interview time.  
Frailty testing which includes [ADDRESS_1068523] using the dynamometer is associated with minimal 
risks including muscle strain (<1%), discomfort with muscle exertion (~1%), and elevated 
blood pressure as a response to physical exertion (~5%).  
Informed Consent  
Before the start of any study -related procedure, a signed and dated IRB -approved 
informed consent form (ICF) will be obtained and documented in the patient’s medical 
record. The investigator must 1) inform each patient accordingly and allow each patient 
sufficient time to decide whether or not to participate in the study; 2) give patients and relatives the opportunity to inquire about details of the study and to answer any questions 
regarding the study; and 3) ensure that the ICF is approved by  [CONTACT_778078].  
A patient is free to withdraw consent for participation in the study at any time, without 
prejudice to further treatment. Every effort will be made to obtain complete follow -up 
information on subjec ts who discontinue from the study prematurely. The reason(s) for a 
subject’s discontinuation must be clearly documented in the subject’s medical records 
and in the case report form (CRF). A patient’s participation in the study may be 
discontinued at any ti me at the discretion of the PI.  
Data Management Methods  
Patient information relevant to this study will be recorded on case report forms customized 
for this study. Only the PI [INVESTIGATOR_778005]. Completed case 
report forms will be dated and signed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_54720]- PI. Personal patient data will be 
kept confidential. Case report forms or other documents will identify a patient by [CONTACT_778079]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_778006]. To allow compliance with GCP principles, 
each patient will be asked for consent regarding the access to source documents for 
monitoring, audits, and inspections. The agreement, also covering the use of the data for analyses, must be documented in writing, together with the written ICF for study participation. Data will be transferred from the case report form to a study database 
(Redcap). This database will include only the patient study number and will be devoid of 
patient identifying information. All information obtained during the conduct of this study 
will be regarded as confidential.  
Quality Assurance  
Before the start of the s tudy, a training session will be conducted to familiarize team 
members with the protocol and case reporting processes. The protocol and all testing, 
including the cognitive tools, the NIHSS, and the process for reporting AEs, will be 
reviewed in detail.  
Quality control procedures for the cognitive testing include multilayered training of 
examiners, review of practice protocols by a board- certified neuropsychologist, and 
random selection and review of actual patient testing by a board- certified 
neuropsychologist during the study period. An initial training session with detailed 
discussion and demonstration of each test in the battery will be performed led by a 
member of the research team. All examiners will practice administration of the battery with colleagues. Next, all examiners will practice administration of the battery on three 
volunteers at the site. The same procedure will be followed if new examiners are added 
after the study period has begun. During the study period, similar quality control procedures will be in place. Research personnel will be certified for performing the NIHSS using the American Stroke Association's Online NIH Stroke Scale Training Program (http://asa.trainingcampus.net/uas/modules/trees/windex.aspx).  
All members of the team who as sess delirium will undergo rigorous training prior to study 
enrollment. During the course of the study, team members will meet every two weeks to 
discuss the diagnosis and evaluation of individual cases of delirium.  
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan 
At the s tart of the study, a Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) will be appointed 
and will consist of a cardiac surgeon, two neurologist, an anesthesiologist/critical care 
physician, a statistician (Dr. McCarthy), an independent member from an outside institu tion and a member from the NIH all with expertise in the area of neurological 
complications after cardiac surgery. The DSMB members will not be direct participants in the study and they must attest to not having any conflicts of interest with the study or any of its investigators. A team member (TBD) will participate in the DSMB meetings as non-
voting member. The DSMB will be charged with oversight of the study’s safety and 
integrity and assessing the risk versus benefits of continuing the study if such questions 
arise. The DSMB will meet at least bi -annually in person or by [CONTACT_778080], if necessary, based on the progression of the study, including any arising events as communicated by [CONTACT_978]. The DSMB will continue to meet until the compl etion of the 
study.  
 
The DSMB will review patient recruitment and patient follow -up, compliance with the 
protocol including protocol violations, timeliness and completeness of data entry, 
compliance with patient confidentiality and HIPPA regulations, and communications of 
adverse events to the IRB. The DSMB members should immediately review the data in 
order to make any requests for additional information or analysis in a time frame that can allow for such requests to be completed before the scheduled DSMB  meeting. Members 
of the DSMB must maintain confidentiality of the study data until otherwise instructed. An interim analysis of the data looking at safety will be conducted by [CONTACT_778081] 140 subjects are available. If we are given continued funding a meeting of the investigative team will be held to discuss the validity of an additional interim analysis.  
Plan for reporting unanticipated problems or study deviations.  
Adverse Events  
For this study, an adverse event (AE) is any untow ard medical occurrence (e.g., sign, 
symptom, disease, syndrome, intercurrent illness, or abnormal laboratory finding) that 
emerges or worsens relative to baseline during the study periods, regardless of the 
suspected cause. Untoward medical events that occ ur from the time the subject signs the 
ICF to the time of surgery are not considered AEs and should be recorded under medical history. AEs encountered during or after surgery will be recorded on the appropriate AE section of the CRF. All AEs will be evaluated by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_778007], frequency, 
relationship to study, and outcome. The intensity of both serious and nonserious AEs will 
be graded as mild, moderate, or severe. The definitions are as follows: 1) mild, transient event —does not require medical intervention; the normal clinical course for a subject 
undergoing cardiac surgery is not changed; AND/OR the subject experiences discomfort, 
but no disruption of normal daily activity; 2) moderate—event may require medical 
intervention; induces moderate deviation from the normal clinical course for a subject 
undergoing cardiac surgery; AND/OR the subject experiences sufficient discomfort to 
reduce or affect normal daily activity; and 3) severe—event requires significant medical 
intervention and constitutes a marked deviation from the normal clinical course for a subject undergoing cardiac surgery AND/OR the subject is incapacitated and unable to perform normal daily activities.  
An AE should be classified as SERIOUS if: 1) it resulted in death (i.e., the AE  caused or 
led to death); 2) it was life threatening (i.e., the AE placed the subject at immediate risk of death); 3) it required or prolonged inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] (i.e., the AE required at least 
a 24 h inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_57891] a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_137406]); 4) it was disabling (i.e., the AE resulted in a substantial disruption of the patient’s ability to carry out normal life functions); or 5) it did not meet any of the serious criteria listed above but potentiall y jeopardized the patient or required medical or surgical 
intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed above. Adverse events will be reported 
to the IRB, recorded in the study database, and reviewed at the weekly investigators’ meeting. Adverse event s also will be reviewed at the quarterly Data Safety and Monitoring 
Board meeting. Serious AEs will be reported to NIH personnel. As soon as the research team notices that an enrolled patient has died or suffered as an adverse event the 
research team will report it within [ADDRESS_1068524] ordinarily been found. In that case, the study participant’s 
insurance would need to cover the cost of further diagnostics and/or treatment.  
Benefits 
Description of the probable benefits for the participant and for society.  
Brain imaging might result in the detection of an unexpected condition, such as a brain 
mass, aneurysm, or vascular malformation. In the event of such findings, the patient, and 
his/her family and clinical physicians will be notified, and the patient will be referred for 
clinical management.  
Brain injury from cardiac surgery i s an important source of operative mortality, prolonged 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], increased health care expenditure, and impaired quality of life. 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_778008].  
Brain imaging might result in the detection of an unexpected condition, such as a brain 
mass, aneurysm, or vascular malformation. In the event of such findings, the patient, and 
his/her family and clinical physicians will be notified, and the patient will be referred for 
clinical management.  
Payment and Remuneration 
The patients will receive a $100 stipend for participation at the time of their 4- 6 week visit. 
Patients who return for the 1 year follow -up visit will receive an additional $100 stipend. 
Patients will also rece ive a $[ADDRESS_1068525] of parking and meals associated with the postoperative 
visit. 
Costs  
The subjects will not be charged for study procedures including TCD monitoring, blood 
press ure management, MRI/MRA (and x -ray of the head, where indicated), 
neurocognitive testing. In the event something is found on MRI and a referral to a specialist is made, that referral would need to be covered by [CONTACT_423]’s insurance.  
RESOURCES AVAILABLE:  
The research team includes personnel with vast experience in clinical research studies 
and some have been involved with other NIH funded projects and have published 
numerous papers in peer review journals. [CONTACT_778108] is a neurologist with many years of 
experience with clinical trials. [CONTACT_778109] is a neuroradiologist who has participated in a 
several clinical trials. [CONTACT_778110] is a neuropsychiatrist who has participated in clinical 
trials.  Research staff have over 15+ years of clinical research, GCP, and data analysis 
experience.  
PRIOR APPROVALS:  
Department of Anesthesiology Research 
Committee John Hopkins Institutional Review Board  
NUMBER OF LOCAL PARTICIPANTS:  
150 participants  PROCESS TO DOCUMENT CONSENT IN WRITING:  
(Review “SOP: Written Documentation of Consent (HRP -091).” If you will not be following 
HRP- 091, describe whether and how consent of the participant will be documented in 
writing .) 
We will be using documentation of consent checklist.   
DRUGS OR DEVICES:  
A near infrared spectros copy machines (INVOS 5100, Covidien, Inc, Boulder, CO) with 
digital signal output capability, A/D converter for digitizing blood pressure data from OR 
hemodynamic monitors, and a laptop computer all on a mobile cart for acquisition and 
analysis of cerebral  blood flow autoregulation data. The mobile cart will be stored at the 
5th floor or 7th floor of Feinberg pavilion in the anesthesia block room which is locked and 
requires key entry. It will only be used for research purposes.   
 
 
 
 
LITERATURE CITED  
1. Hogue C, Jr., Barzilai B, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_244092], Coombs LP, DeLong ER, Kouchoukos N T, 
Dávila -Román VG: Sex differences in neurologic outcomes and mortality after 
cardiac surgery: A Society of Thoracic Surgery National Database Report Circulation. 2001;103:2133- 2137  

2. Roach G, Kanchuger M, Mora- Mangano C, Newman M, Nussmeier N, Wolman R, 
Aggarwal A, Marschall K, Graham SH, Ley C, Ozanne G, Mangano DT: Adverse 
cerebral outcomes after coronary by[CONTACT_4897]. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1857-
1863  
3. Newman M, Gr ocott H, Mathew J, White W, Landolfo K, Reves J, Laskowitz D, Mark 
D, Blumenthal J: Report of the substudy assessing impact of neurocognitive function 
on quality of life 5 years after cardiac surgery. Stroke 2001;32:2874 -2881  
4. Hogue C, Jr., Murphy S, Schec htman K, Dávila -Román V: Risk factors for early or 
delayed stroke after cardiac surgery. Circulation 1999; 100: 642- 647  
5. Hogue C, Jr., Palin C, Arrowsmith J: Cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_778082]: an evidence- based appraisal of current practices. Anesth 
Analg 2006;103:21- 37  
6. Hogue C, Jr., Hershey T, Dixon D, Fucetola R, Nassief A, Freedland K, Thomas B, 
Schechtman K, Freedland K: The impact of neurocognitive dysfunction on quality of 
life after cardiac surgery for postmenopausal women. A nesth Analg 2008;107:21- 28  
7. Blauth C, Schulenberg W, McCartney A, Taylor K, Loop F: Retinal microvascular 
studies in vivo with fluorescein angiography. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1988;95:668676  
8. Blauth CI, Cosgrove DM, Webb BW, Ratliff NB, Boylan M, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_14646] e MR, Lytle BW, 
Loop FD: Atheroembolism from the ascending aorta. An emerging problem in 
cardiac surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1992;103:1104- 11  
9. Taylor K: The hemodynamics of cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_6476]. Sem Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg 1990;2:300- 312  
10. Schell R, Kern F, Greeley W, Schulman S, Frasco P, Croughwell N, Newman M,  
Reves J: Cerebral blood flow and metabolism during cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_6476]. 
Anesth Analg 1993;76:849- 865  
11. Shaw P, Bates D, Cartlidge N, French J, Heaviside D, Julian D, Shaw D: An analysis of factors predisposing to neurological injury in patients undergoing coronary by[CONTACT_778083] J Med 1989;72:633 -646  
12. Selim M: Perioperative Stroke. N Engl J Med 2007;356:706- 713  
13. Ferguson T, Jr. , Hammill B, Peterson E, DeLong E, Grover F: A decade of change—
risk profiles and outcomes for isolated coronary artery by[CONTACT_778084], 
1990- 1999: a report from the STS National Database Committee and the Duke 
Clinical Research Institute. Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Ann Thorac Surg 
2002;73:480- 489 
14. Goto T, Yoshitake A, Baba T, Shibata Y, Sakata R, Uozumi H: Cerebral ischemic 
disorders and cerebral oxygen balance during cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_4897]:  
preoperative evaluation using magnetic resonance imaging and angiography. Anesth Analg 1997;84:5- 11  
 
15. Toner I, Peden C, Hamid S, Newman S, Taylor K, Smith P: Magnetic resonance imaging and neuropsychological changes after coronary artery by[CONTACT_10956]: 
preliminary findings. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 1994;6:63 -169  
16. Vanninen R, Aikia M, Kononen M, Par tanen K, Tulla H, Hartikainen P, Partanen J, 
Manninen H, Enberg P, Hippelainen M: Subclinical cerebral complications after 
coronary artery by[CONTACT_15806]: prospective analysis with magnetic resonance 
imaging, quantitative electroencephalography, and neuropsychological assessment. 
Arch Neurol 1998;55:618- 627  
17. Sellman M, Hindmarsh T, Ivert T, Semb B: Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain 
before and after open heart operations. Ann Thorac Surg 1992;53:807- 812  
18. Hall RA, Fordyce DJ, Lee ME, Eisenberg B, Lee R F, Holmes JHI, Campbell WG: 
Brain SPECT imaging and neuropsychological testing in coronary artery by[CONTACT_778085]. Ann Thorac Surg 1999;68:2082- 2088  
19. Wityk R, Goldsborough M, Hillis A, Beauchamp N, Barker PB, Borowicz L, Jr., 
McKhann G: Diffusion-  and perf usion- weighted brain magnetic resonance imaging 
in patients with neurologic complications after cardiac surgery. Arch Neurol 
2001;58:571576  
20. Restrepo L, Wityk R, Grega M, Borowicz L, Jr., Barker P, Jacobs M, Beauchamp N, 
Hillis A, McKhann G: Diffusion - and perfusion- weighted magnetic resonance 
imaging of the brain before and after coronary artery by[CONTACT_15806]. Stroke 
2002;33:2909- 2915  
21. Floyd TF, Harris F, McGarvey M, Detre JA: Recurrence of stroke after cardiac 
surgery: Insight into pathogenesis via diff usion- weighted and continuous arterial spin 
labeling perfusion magnetic resonance imaging. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 
2007;21:106- 109  
22. Moraca R, Lin E, Holmes JHI, Fordyce D, Campbell W, Ditkoff M, Hill M, Guyton S, 
Paul D, Hall RA: Impaired baseline regional cerebral perfusion in patients referred for coronary artery by[CONTACT_6476]. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2006;131:540- 546  
23. Stolz E, Gerriets T, Kluge A, Klövekorn W, Kaps M, Bachmann G: Diffusionweighted magnetic resonance imaging and neurobiochemical markers after aortic valve 
replacement. Implications for future neuroprotective trials? Stroke 2004;35:888- 892  
24. Yamamoto M, Meyer J, Sakai F, Yamaguchi F: Aging and cerebral vasodilator 
responses to hypercarbia. Responses in normal aging and in persons with risk facto rs for stroke Arch Neurol 1980;37:489- 496 
25. Davis S, Ackerman R, Correia J, Alpert N, Chang J, Buonanno F, Kelley R, Rosner B, Taveras J: Cerebral blood flow and cerebrovascular CO2 reactivity in stroke- age 
normal controls. Neurology 1983;33:391- 399  
26. Dawson S, Panerai R, Potter J: Serial changes in static and dynamic cerebral 
autoregulation after acute ischaemic stroke. Cerebrovasc Dis 2003;16:69- [ADDRESS_1068526] JD, Czosnyka M: 
Noninvasive evaluation of dynamic cerebrovascular autoregulation using finapres 
plethysmograph and transcranial Doppler. Stroke 2007;38:402- 404  
28. Schoof J, Lubahn W, Baeumer M, Kross R, Wallesch CW, Kozian A, Huth C, 
Goertler M: Impaired cerebral autoregulation distal to carotid stenosis/occlus ion is 
associated with increased risk of stroke at cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary 
by[CONTACT_6476]. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2007;134:690- 696  
29. O'Rourke M, Nork K, Kurth C: Neonatal cerebral oxygen regulation after hypothermic cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_80616]. Crit Care Med 2000;28:157- [ADDRESS_1068527] J, Menon D, Czosnyka M: Cerebrovascular reactivity during 
hypothermia and rewarming. Br J Anaesth 2007;99:237- [ADDRESS_1068528] J, Menon D, Czosnyka M: Assessment of cerebrovascular autoregulation 
in head- injured patients: a validation study. Stroke 2003;34:2404- 2409  
32. Lang EW, Mehdorn HM, Dorsch NW, Czosnyka M: Continuous monitoring of 
cerebrovascular autoregulation: a validation study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2002;72:583- [ADDRESS_1068529] J: Continuous monitoring of cerebrovascular pressure reactivity allows 
determination of optimal cerebral perfusion pressure in patients with traumatic brain 
injury. Crit Care  Med 2002;30:733- [ADDRESS_1068530] M, Roth M, Muller T, Guschlbauer B, Timmer J, Czosnyka M, Hetzel A: 
Effect of carotid endarterectomy or stenting on impairment of dynamic cerebral autoregulation. Stroke 2004;35:1381- [ADDRESS_1068531] JD, Czosnyka M: Pressure 
autoregulation and positron emission tomography -derived cerebral blood flow 
acetazolamide reactivity in patients with carotid artery stenosis. Neurosurg 
2004;55:[ADDRESS_1068532] M, Roth M, Guschlbauer B, Harloff A, Timmer J, Czosnyka M, Hetzel A: 
Dynamic cerebral autoregulation in acute ischemic stroke assessed from 
spontaneous blood pressure fluctuations. Stroke 2005;36:1684- [ADDRESS_1068533] J, Czosnyka M: 
Noninvasive evaluatio n of dynamic cerebrovascular autoregulation using finapres 
plethysmograph and transcranial Doppler. Stroke 2007;38:402- 404  
38. Brady K, Lee JK, Kibler KK, Smielewski P, Czosnyka M, Easley B, Koehler RC, DH 
S: Continuous time- domain analysis of cerebrovascular  autoregulation using 
nearinfrared spectroscopy. Stroke 2007;38:2818- [ADDRESS_1068534] J: Continuous 
assessment of the cerebral vasomotor reactivity in head injury. Neurosurgery 1997;47:11 -17  
40. Ragauskas A, Daubaris G, Petkus V, Ragaisis V, Ursino M: Clinical study of 
continuous non- invasive cerebrovascular autoregulation monitoring in neurosurgical 
ICU. Acta Neurochir 2005;95:367- 370  
41. Selnes O, Grega M, Bailey M, Pham L, Zeger S, Baumgartner W, McKhann G:   
Cognition 6 years after surgical or medical therapy for coronary artery disease. Ann 
Neurol 2008;63:581- 90  
42. Selnes OA, Pham L, Zeger S, McKhann GM: Defining cognitive change after CABG 
surgery: decline versus normal variability. Ann Thorac Surg 2006;82:388- 90.  
43. Mahanna E, Blumenthal J, White W, Croughwell N, Clancy C, Smith L, Newman M:  
Defining neuropsychological dysfunction after coronary artery by[CONTACT_15806]. Ann 
Thorac Surg 1996;61:1342- 1347  
44. Hogue C, Jr. , Hershey T, Dixon D, Fucetola R, Nassief A , Freedland K, Thomas B, 
Schechtman K: Pre- existing cognitive impairment in women prior to cardiac surgery 
and its relation with C -reactive protein concentrations. Anesth Analg 2006;102:1602-
1608  
45. Warach S, Dashe J, Edelman R: Clinical outcome in ischemic stroke predicted by 
[CONTACT_778086]- weighted and perfusion magnetic resonance imaging: a preliminary 
analysis. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1996;16: 53- 59  
46. Tong D, Yenari M, Albers G, O’Brien M, Marks M, Moseley M: Correlation of 
perfusion-  and diffusion- weigh ted MRI with NIHSS score in acute (< 6.5 hours) 
ischemic stroke. Neurology 1998;50:864- 870  
47. Reith W, Hasegawa Y, Latour L, Dardzinski B, Sotak C, Fisher M: Multislice diffusion 
mappi[INVESTIGATOR_48908] 3- D evolution of cerebral ischemia in a rat stroke model. Neurology  
1995;45:172- 177  
48. Mintorovitch J, Moseley M, Chileuitt L, Shimizu H, Cohen Y, Weinstein P: Comparison of diffusion-  and T2 -weighted MRI for the early detection of cerebral 
ischemia and reperfusion in rats. Magn Reson Med 1991;18:39- 50  
49. Moseley M, Cohen Y, Mintorovitch J, Chileuitt L, Shimizu H, Kucharczyk J, 
Wendland M, Weinstein P: Early detection of regional cerebral ischemia in cats: comparison of diffusion-  and T2- weighted MRI and spectroscopy. Magn Reson Med 
1990;14:330- 46 
50. Murkin J, Farrar J, Tweed A, McKenzie F, Guiraudon G: Cerebral autoregulation and 
flow/metabolism coupling during cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_6476]: The influence of PaCO2. 
Anesth Analg 1987;66:825- 832  
51. Habib RH, Zacharias A, Schwann TA, Riordan CJ, Durham SJ, Shah A: Adverse 
effects of low hematocrit during cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_778087]: should current 
practice be changed? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2003;125:1438- 1450  
52. Murkin JM, Adams SJ, Novick RJ,  Quantz M, Bainbridge D, Iglesias I, Cleland A, 
Schaefer B, Irwin B, Fox S: Monitoring brain oxygen saturation during coronary by[CONTACT_4897]: A randomized, prospective study. Anesth Analg 2006;104:51 -58  
53. Caplan L, Hennerici M: Impaired clearance of emboli  (washout) is an important link 
between hypoperfusion, embolism, and ischemic stroke. Arch Neurol 
1998;55:14751482  
54. Gottesman R, Sherman P, Grega M, Yousem D, Borowicz L, Jr. , Selnes O, 
Baumgartner W, McKhann G: Watershed strokes after cardiac surgery: di agnosis, 
etiology, and outcome. Stroke 2006;37:2306- 2311  
55. Croughwell N, Newman M, Blumenthal J, White W, Lewis J, Frasco P, Smith L, 
Thyrum E, Hurwitz B, Leone B: Jugular bulb saturation and cognitive dysfunction after cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_6476]. Ann Thorac Surg 1994;58:1702- 1708  
56. Mutch W, Ryner L, Kozlowski P, Scarth G, Warrian R, Lefevre G, Wong T, Thiessen D, Girling L, Doiron L, McCudden C, Saunders J: Cerebral hypoxia during cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_6476]: A magnetic resonance imaging study. Ann Thorac Surg 1997;64:695- 701  
57. Newman M, Croughwell N, White W, Lowry E, Baldwin B, Clements F, Davis R, Jr., Jones R, Amory D, Reves J: Effect of perfusion pressure on cerebral blood flow during normothermic cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_6476]. Circulation 1996;94 (Suppl II):II -353-
II-357  
58. Mutch W, Sutton I, Teskey J, Chang M, Thomson I: Cerebral pressure- flow 
relationship during cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_778088]. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1994;14:510- 518  
59. Schwartz A, Sandhu A, Kaplan R, Young W, Jonassen A, Adams D, Edwards N, Sistino J, Kwiatkowski P, Michler R: Cerebral blood flow is determined by [CONTACT_778089]. Ann Thorac Surg 1995;60:165- 169  
60. Drummond J: The lower limit of autoregulation: Time to revise our thinking? . 
Anesthesiology 1997;86:1431- 1433  
61. Muhonen M, Sawin P, Loftus C, Heistad D: Pressure- flow relations in canine 
collateral -dependent cerebrum. Stroke 1992;23:988- [ADDRESS_1068535] S, Olsen J, Skinhoj E, Lassen N: Autoregulation of brain circulation in 
severe arterial hypertension. Br Med J 1973;1:507- [ADDRESS_1068536] B, Giesecke N, Jister J, 
Rogers L, Soderberg J, Edelman S: Role of perfusion pressure and flow in major organ dysfunction after cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_6476]. Ann Thorac Surg 1990;50:911- [ADDRESS_1068537] M, Krieger K, Isom O: Improvement of outcomes after coronary artery by[CONTACT_6476]; A randomized trial comparing intraoperative high versus low mean arterial pressure. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1995;110:1302- 1311  
65. Newman M, Kramer D, Croughwell N, Sanderson I, Blumenthal J, White W, Smith L, Towner E, Reves J: Differential age effects of mean arterial pressure and rewarming on cognitive dysfunction after cardiac surgery. Anesth Analg 
1995;81:236- 242  
66. Hartman G, Yao F, Bruefach M, Barbut D, Peterson J, Purcell M, Charlson M, Gold  
J, Thomas S, Szatrowski T: Severity of aortic atheromatous disease diagnosed by 
[CONTACT_778090]: a prospective study. Anesth Analg 1996;83:701- [ADDRESS_1068538] J, Menon D, Czosnyka M: Assessment of cerebrovascular autoregulation 
in head- injured patients: a validation study. Stroke 2003;34:2404- 2409  
68. Panerai R: Assessment of cerebral pressure autoregulation in humans -  a review of 
measurement methods. Physiol Meas 1998;19:305- 338  
69. Patel P, Drummond J: Cerebral physiology and the effects of anesthetics and 
techniques., 6 Edition. Philadelphia, Elsevier, Churchill Livingstone, 2005  
70. van Beek A, Claassen A, Rikk ert M, Jansen R: Cerebral autoregulation: an overview 
of current concepts and methodology with special focus on the elderly. J Cereb 
Blood Flow Metab 2008;28:1071- 1085  
71. Olsen K, Svendsen L, Larson F: Validation of transcranial near -infrared  
spectroscopy for evaluation of cerebral blood flow autoregulation. J Neurosurg 
Anesth 1996;8:280- 285  
72. Tobias J: Cerebral oxygenation monitoring: near -infrared spectroscopy. Expert Rev 
Med Devices 2006;3:235- 243  
73. Taillefer M, Denault A: Cerebral near -infrar ed spectroscopy in adult heart surgery: 
systematic review of its clinical efficacy. Can J Anaesth 2006;62:[ADDRESS_1068539] J: Continuous assessment  of 
cerebral autoregulation: clinical and laboratory experience. Acta Neurochir Suppl 
2003;86:581- [ADDRESS_1068540] J:  
Monitoring and interpretation of intracranial pressure after head injury. Acta 
Neurochir 2006;96:114- 118  
76. Brain Trauma Foundation AAoNS, Congress of Neurological Surgeons, Joint Section on Neurotrauma and Critical Care, AANS/CNS: Guidelines for the management of severe traumatic brain injury. IX. Cerebral perfusion thresholds. J 
Neurotrauma 2007;[ADDRESS_1068541] 1:S59- S64  
77. Vorstrup S, Brun B, Lassen N: Evaluation of the cerebral vasodilatory capacity by [CONTACT_778091] -IC by[CONTACT_778092]. Stroke 1986;17:1291- 1298  
78. Kuwa bara Y, Ichiya Y, Sasaki M, Yoshida T, Masuda K: Time dependency of the 
acetazolamide effect on cerebral hemodynamics in patients with chronic occlusive 
cerebral arteries. Early steal phenomenon demonstrated by [15O]H2O positron 
emission tomography. Stroke 1995;26:1825- 1829  
79. Alexandrov A, Sharma V, Lao A, Tsivgoulis G, Malkoff M, Alexandrov A: Reversed Robin Hood syndrome in acute ischemic stroke patients. Stroke 2007;38:3045- 3048  
80. Newman M, Kirchner J, Phillips -Bute B, Gaver V, Grocott H, Jones R, Mark D, Reves 
J, Blumenthal J: Longitudinal assessment of neurocognitive function after coronary -
artery by[CONTACT_4897]. N Engl J Med 2001;344:395- 402  
81. Hoehn- Berlage M, Norris D, Kohno K, Mies G, Leibfritz D, Hossmann K: Evolution 
of regional changes in apparent di ffusion coefficient during focal ischemia of rat 
brain: the relationship of quantitative diffusion NMR imaging to reduction in cerebral 
blood flow and metabolic disturbances. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1995;5:1002-1011  
82. Warach S, Gaa J, Siewert B, Wielopolsk i P, Edelman R: Acute human stroke studied 
by [CONTACT_778093]- weighted magnetic resonance imaging. Ann 
Neurol 1995;37:231- 241  
83. Djaiani G, Fedorko L, Borger M, Mikulis D, Carroll J, Cheng D, Karkouti K, Beattie 
S, Karski J: Mild to moderat e atheromatous disease of the thoracic aorta and new 
ischemic brain lesions after conventional coronary artery by[CONTACT_10956]. 
Stroke 2004;35:e356- 358  
84. Kohn A: Magnetic resonance imaging registration and quantitation of the brain 
before and after cor onary artery by[CONTACT_10956]. AnnThorac Surg 
2002;73:S3363S3365  
85. Knipp S, Matatko N, Wilhelm H, Schlamann M, Massoudy P, Forsting M, Diener H, 
Jakob H: Evaluation of brain injury after coronary artery by[CONTACT_15806]. A prospective study using neurops ychological assessment and diffusion- weighted 
magnetic resonance imaging. Eur J Cardio- Thorac Surg 2004;25:791- 800 
86. Ringlestein EB, Stogbauer F: Border zone infarcts. [LOCATION_001], Cambridge University 
Press, 2001  
87. Vermeer SE, Prins ND, den Heijer T, Hofman A, Koudstaal PJ, Breteler MM: Silent 
brain infarcts and the risk of dementia and cognitive decline. N Engl J Med 2003;348:1215- 1222.  
88. Bendszus M, Reents W, Franke D, Müllges W, Babin- Ebell J, Koltzenburg M,  
Warmuth -Metz M, Solymosi L: Brain damage after coronary artery by[CONTACT_15806]. 
Arch Neurol 2002;59:1090- 1095  
89. Vermeer SE, Longstreth WJ, Koudstaat P: Silent brain infarcts: a systematic review. 
Lancet Neurol 2007;6:611- 619  
90. Selnes O, Royall R, Grega M, Borowicz J, Jr., Quaskey S, McKhann G: Cognitive 
changes 5 years after coronary artery by[CONTACT_15806]: is there evidence of late decline? Arch Neurol 2001;58:598 -604  
91. Selnes OA, Grega MA, Borowicz LMJ, Royall RM, McKhann GM, B aumgartner WA: 
Cognitive changes with coronary artery disease: a prospective study of coronary artery by[CONTACT_778094]. Ann Thorac Surg 2003;75:1377- 1384.  
92. Selnes O, Grega M, Borowicz L, Jr., Barry S, Zeger S, Baumgartner W, McKhann 
G: Cognitive outcomes three years after coronary artery by[CONTACT_4897]: a 
comparison of on- pump coronary artery by[CONTACT_778095]. Ann Thorac Surg 2005;79:1201- 1219  
93. Hogue C, Jr., Sundt T, III. , Barzilai B, Schecthman K,  Davila -Roman V: Cardiac and 
neurologic complications identify risks for mortality for both men and women undergoing coronary artery by[CONTACT_10956]. Anesthesiology 2001;95:1074-
1078  
94. Hogue C, Jr. , Lillie R, Hershey T, Birge S, Nassief A, Thomas B, Freedland K:  
Gender influence on cognitive function after cardiac operation. Ann Thorac Surg 
2003;76:1119- 1125  
95. Hurn P, Macrae I: Estrogen as a neuroprotectant in stroke. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2000;20:631- 652  
96. Hogue C, Jr, , Freedland K, Hershey T, Fucetola R, Nassief A, Barzilai B, Thomas 
B, Birge S, Dixon D, Schechtman K, Dávila -Román V: Neurocognitive outcomes are 
not improved by 17Beta- estradiol in postmenopausal women undergoing cardiac 
surgery. Stroke 2007;38:2048- [ADDRESS_1068542] J, Bry an R, Hanley D, Oppenheimer S: TCD, MRA and MRI 
in acute cerebral ischemia. Acta Neurol Scand 1999;99:65- 76  
98. McKhann G, Grega M, Borowicz L, Beauchamps M, Selnes O, Baumgartner WR: 
Encephalopathy and stroke after coronary artery by[CONTACT_15806]: incidence,  
consequences, and prediction. Arch Neurol 2002;59:1422- 1448  
99. Sloan M, Alexandrov A, Tegeler C, Spencer M, Caplan L, Feldmann E, Wechsler L,  
Newell D, Gomez C, Babikian V, Lefkowitz D, Goldman R, Armon C, Hsu C, Goodin 
D, Neurology. TaTASotAAo: Assessment : transcranial Doppler ultrasonography: 
report of the Therapeutics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee of the 
American Academy of Neurology. Neurology 2004;62:1468- 1481  
100. McEniery C, Yasmin., Wallace S, Maki -Petaja K, McDonnell B, Sharman J, Retallick 
C, Franklin S, Brown M, Lloyd R, Cockcroft J, Wilkinson I: Increased stroke volume 
and aortic stiffness contribute to isolated systolic hypertension in young adults. Hypertension 2005;46:221- 226  
101. Spencer M, Reid J: Quantitation of carotid stenosis with conti nuous -wave Doppler 
ultrasound. Stroke 1979;10:326- 330  
102. Alexandrov A: The Spencer's curve: clinical implications of a classic hemodynamic 
model. J Neuroimaging 2007;17:6- 10  
103. Gosling R, King D: Arterial assessment by [CONTACT_778096] - shift ultrasound. Proc R Soc Med 
1974;67:447- 449  
104. Ringelstein E, Droste D, Babikian V, Evans D, Grosset D, Kaps M, Markus H,  
Russell D, Siebler M: Consensus on microembolus detection by [CONTACT_689912]. Stroke 
1998;29:725- 729  
105. Goldstein L, Bertels C, Davis J: Interrater reliability of the NIH Stroke  Scale Arch 
Neurol 1989;46:660- 662  
106. Hillis A, Newhart M, Heidler J, Barker P, Herskovits E, Degaonkar M: The roles of 
the “visual word form area” in reading. Neuro Image 2005;24:548 559  
107. U.S. FDA: Information for healthcare professionals: Gadolinium -based contrast 
agents for Magnetic Resonance Imaging scans (marketed as Omniscan, OptiMARK, 
Magnevist, ProHance, and MultiHance), 2006  
108. Davatzikos C: Spatial transformation and registration of brain images using 
elastically deformable models. Comput Vis Image Underst 1997;66:207- 222  
109. Grachev I, Berdichevsky D, Rauch S, Heckers S, Kennedy D, Caviness V, Alpert N: 
A method for assessing the accuracy of intersubject registration of the human brain using anatomic landmarks. Neuroimage 1999;9:250- 268  
110. Rasband WS: ImageJ. U.S. National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, [LOCATION_003], 
http://rsb.Info.Nih.Gov/ij. 2005  
111. Samuels O, Joseph G, Lynn M, Harriet A. Smith H, Chimowitz M: A standardized 
method for measuring intracranial arterial stenosis. Am J Neuror adiol 2000;21:643-
646  
112. Young G, Humphrey P, Nixon T, Smith E: Variability in measurement of extracranial 
internal carotid artery stenosis as displayed by [CONTACT_778097]. Stroke 1996;27:467 -473 
113. Collaborators. NAS CET: Beneficial effect of carotid endarterectomy in symptomatic 
patients with high- grade carotid stenosis. N Engl J Med 1991;325:445- 453  
114. Van Dijk D, Keizer A, Diephuis J, Durand C, Vox L, Hijman R: Neurocognitive 
dysfunction after coronary artery by[CONTACT_6476] s urgery: A systematic review J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg 2000;120:632- 639  
115. Stump D: Selection and clinical significance of neuropsychologic tests. Ann Thorac 
Surg 1995a;59:1340- 1344  
116. Bruggemans E, Van de Vijver F, Huysmans H: Assessment of cognitive deteriorat ion 
in individual patients following cardiac surgery: correcting for measurement error and 
practice effects. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 1997;19:543- 559  
117. Kneebone A, Andrew M, Baker R, Knight J: Neuropsychologic changes after coronary artery by[CONTACT_15806]: U se of reliable change indices. Ann Thorac Surg 
1998;65:1320- 1325  
118. Symes E, Maruff P, Ajani A, Currie J: Issues associated with the identification of 
cognitive changes following coronary artery by[CONTACT_15806]. Aust N Z J of Psych 
2000;34:770- 784  
119. Powell J,  Cripe L, Dodrill C: Assessment of brain impairment with the Rey Auditory -
Verbal Learning Test. Arch Clin Neuropsychol 1991;6:241- 249  
120. Lezak M: Neuropsychological Assessment, 2nd Edition. [LOCATION_001], Oxford University Press, 1983  
121. Min-Sup Shin, Sun- Young Par k, Se -Ran Park, Soon- Ho Seol & Jun Soo Kwon:  
Clinical and empi[INVESTIGATOR_778009] –Osterrieth Complex Figure Test. 
Nature Protocols 1 , - 892 - 899 (2006)  
122. Spreen O, Strauss E: A Compendium of Neuropsychological Tests: Administration, Norms, and C ommentary, 2nd Edition. [LOCATION_001], Oxford University Press 1998  
123. Reitan R, Wolfson D: The Halstead- Reitan Neuropsychological Test Battery. 
Tucson, AZ. , Neuropsychology Press, 1985  
124. Costa L, Vaughan H, Levita E, Farber N: Purdue Pegboard as a predictor of t he 
presence and laterality of cerebral lesions J Consult Psychol 1963;56:295- 297  
125. Reddon J, Gill D, Gauk S, Maerz M: Purdue Pegboard: Test -retest estimates. 
Perceptual and Motor Skills 1988;66:503- [ADDRESS_1068543] C, Mendelsohn M, Mock J, Erbaugh J: An inventory for measuring depression Arch Gen Psychiatry 1961;4:561 -571  
127. Beck A, Beamesderfer A: Assessment of depression: The Depression Inventory. Basel, Switzerland, S. Karger, 1974 
128. Hartnell G, Spence L, Hughes L, Cohen M, Saouaf R, Buff B: Safety of MR imaging 
in patients who have retained metallic material after cardiac surgery. AJNR A J 
Roentgenol 1997;168:1157- 1159   
129. Ware, J.E., Jr., and Sherbourne, C.D. “The MOS 36- Item Short -Form Health Survey 
(SF-36): 1. Conceptual Framework and Item Selection.” Medic al Care, 30: 473483, 
1992.  
130. EuroScore Interactive Calculator: http://www.euroscore.org/calc.html  
131. Guy M. McKhann, Maura A. Grega, Louis M. Borowicz, Jr, William A. Baumgartner 
and Ola A. Selnes: Stroke and Encephalopathy After Cardiac Surgery: An Update. Stroke 2006;37;562- 571.  
132. Brief Smell Identification Test: http://www.sensonics.com/shop/pc/home.asp  
133. Czosnyka M, Brady KM, Reinhard M, Smielewski P, Steiner LA: Monitoring of cerebrovascular autoregulation: Facts, myths, and missing links. Neurocrit Care 
2009; 10: 373- 386  
134. Brady K, Joshi B, Zweifel C, Smielewski P, Czosnyka M, Easley B, Hogue J, C.W.: 
Real time continuous monitoring of cerebral blood flow autoregulation using 
nearinfrared spectroscopy in patients undergoing cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_6476]. Stroke 
2010; 41: 1951- 1956  
135. Lee J, Kibler K, Benni P, Easley R, Czosnyka M, Smielewski P, Koehler R, Shaffner 
D, Brady K: Cerebrovascular reactivity measured by [CONTACT_27227] -infrared spectroscopy. 
Stroke 2009; 40: 1820- 1826  
136. Brady KM, Mytar JO, Kibler KK, Hogue J, C.W., Le e JK, Czosnyka M, Smielewski 
P, Easley RB: Noninvasive autoregulation monitoring with and without intracranial 
pressure in the naive pi[INVESTIGATOR_778010]. Anesth Analg 2010; 111: 191- 5  
137. Ono M, Arnaoutakis GJ, Fine DM, Brady KM, Easley RB, Zheng Y, Brown C, Katz  
NM, Grams ME, Hogue CW: Blood pressure excursions below the cerebral 
autoregulation threshold during cardiac surgery are associated with acute kidney injury. Crit Care Med 2012; (In Press)  
138. Reinhard M, Gerds TA, Grabiak D, Zimmermann PR, Roth M, Guschlbauer  B, 
Timmer J, Czosnyka M, Weiller C, Hetzel A: Cerebral dysautoregulation and the risk of ischemic events in occlusive carotid artery disease. J Neurol 2008; 255: 1182- 9  
139. Lloyd- Jones D, Adams R, Brown T, et al AHASCaSSS: Heart disease and stroke 
statistics—2010 update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2010; 121: e46- e215  
140. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, U.S. Department of Health & Human Services,  
141. Rodes -Cabau J, Dumont E, Boone RH, Larose E, Bagur R, Gurvitch R, Bedard F, 
Doyle D, De Larochelliere R, Jayasuria C, Villeneuve J, Marrero A, Cote M, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_112904] 
P, Webb JG: Cerebral embolism following transcatheter aortic valve implantation: comparison of transfemoral and transapi[INVESTIGATOR_476731]. J Am Coll Cardiol 2011; 
57: 18- 28  
 
142. Brown JR, Cochran RP, MacKenzie TA, Furnary AP, Kunzelman KS, Ross CS,  
Langner CW, Charlesworth DC, Leavitt BJ, Dacey LJ, Helm RE, Braxton JH, Clough 
RA, Dunton RF, O'Connor GT: Long- term survival after cardiac surgery is predicted 
by [CONTACT_10495]. Ann Thorac Surg 2008; 86: 4- 11  
 
143. Karkouti K, Djaiani G, Borger M, Beattie W, Fedorko L, Wijeysundera D, Ivanov J, 
Karski J: Low hematocrit during cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_778098]. Ann Thorac Surg 2005; 80 
1381- 7  
144. Kuitunen A, Vento A, Suojaranta- Ylinen R, Pettilä V: Acute renal failure after cardiac 
surgery: evaluation of the RIFLE classification. Ann Thorac Surg 2006; 81: 542546  
145. Mehta RH, Grab JD, O'Brien SM, Bridges CR, Gammie JS, Haan CK, Ferguson  
TB, Peterson ED: Bedsi de tool for predicting the risk of postoperative dialysis in 
patients undergoing cardiac surgery. Circulation 2006; 114: 2208- 16; quiz 2208  
146. Lassnigg A, Schmid ER, Hiesmayr M, Falk C, Druml W, Bauer P, Schmidlin D: 
Impact of minimal increases in serum creatinine on outcome in patients after 
cardiothoracic surgery: do we have to revise current definitions of acute renal 
failure? Crit Care Med 2008; 36: 1129- 37  
147. Speir AM, Kasirajan V, Barnett SD, Fonner E, Jr.: Additive costs of postoperative 
complications for isolated coronary artery by[CONTACT_778099]. Ann 
Thorac Surg 2009; 88: 40- 5; discussion 45- 6  
148. Tarakji K, Sabik J, III., Bhudia S, Batizy L, Blackstone E: Temporal onset, risk 
factors, and outcomes associated with stroke after coronary artery by[CONTACT_15806]. 
J Am Med Assoc 2011; 305: 381- 390  
149. Inouye SK: Delirium in older persons. N Engl J Med 2006; 354: 1157- 65  
150. Ramlawi B, Otu H, Rudolph J, Mieno S, Kohane I, Can H, Libermann T, Marcantonio 
E, Bianchi C, Selke F: Genomic expression pathw ays associated with brain injury 
after cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_6476]. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2007; 134: 9961005  
151. Franco K, Litaker D, Locala J, Bronson D: The cost of delirium in the surgical patient. 
Psychosomatics 2001; 42: 68- 73  
152. Gottesman RF, Grega MA, Bail ey MM, Pham LD, Zeger SL, Baumgartner WA, 
Selnes OA, McKhann GM: Delirium after coronary artery by[CONTACT_778100]. Ann Neurol 2010; 67: 338- 344  
153. Djaiani G, Fedorko L, Borger M, Green R, Carroll J, Marcon M, Karski J: Continuous -
flow c ell saver reduces cognitive decline in elderly patients after coronary by[CONTACT_13786]. Circulation 2007; 116: 1888- [ADDRESS_1068544] M, Roth M: Effect of carotid endarterectomy or stenting on impairment of 
dynamic cerebral autoregulation. Stroke 2004; 35: 1381- [ADDRESS_1068545] A, Grossi E, Esposito R, Baumann F, Kronzon I, 
Spencer F: Surgical implications of transesophageal echocardiography to grade the atheromatous aortic arch. Ann Thorac Surg 1992; 53: 758- 761  
156. Joshi B, Ono M, Brown C, Brady  K, Easley RB, Yenokyan G, Gottesman RF, Hogue 
CW, Jr.: Predicting the limits of cerebral autoregulation during cardiopulmonary 
by[CONTACT_778101] 2012; 114: 503- 10  
157. Ono M, Arnaoutakis GJ, Fine DM, Brady K, Easley RB, Zheng Y, Brown C, Katz  
NM, Grams ME, Hogue CW: Blood Pressure Excursions Below the Cerebral 
Autoregulation Threshold During Cardiac Surgery are Associated With Acute Kidney 
Injury*. Crit Care Med 2013; 41: 464- 471  
158. Ono M, Brady K, Easley RB, Brown C, Kraut M, Gottesman RF, Hogue CW, Jr.: 
Duration and magnitude of blood pressure below cerebral autoregulation threshold 
during cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_778102]. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2013; Epub Sept 26 2013  
159. Joshi B, Brady K, Lee J, Easley B, Panigrahi R, Smielewski P, Czosnyka M, Hogue 
CW, Jr.: Impaired autoregulation of cerebral blood flow during rewarming from 
hypothermic cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_778103]. 
Anesth Analg 2010; 110: 321- 8  
160. Ono M, Joshi B, Brady K, Ea sley RB, Zheng Y, Brown C, Baumgartner W, Hogue 
CW: Risks for impaired cerebral autoregulation during cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_778104]. Br J Anaesth 2012; Jun 1. [Epub ahead of print]  
161. Lyketsos CG, Steinberg M: Behavioral measures for cognitive disorders,  
Handbook of Psychiatric Measures. Washington, D.C., American Psychiatric 
Association, 2000, pp 393- 416  
162. Williams -Russo P, Sharrock N, Mattis S, Liguori G, Mancuso C, Peterson M, 
Hollen berg J, Ranawat C, Salvati E, Sculco T: Randomized trial of hypotensive 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_778011]. Anesthesiology 1999; 91: 926- 35  
163. Marcantonio E, Goldman L, Orav E, Cook E, Lee T: The association of intraoperative factors with the development of  postoperative delirium. Am J Med 1998; 105: 380- 4 
  
164. Ono M, Brady K, Easley R, Brown C, Kraut M, Gottesman R, Hogue CW: Duration and Magnitude of Blood Pressure Below Cerebral Autoregulation Threshold During 
Cardiopulmonary By[CONTACT_778105]. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2013; (in press)  
165. Sacco RL, Kasner SE, Broderick JP, Caplan LR, Connors JJ, Culebras A, Elkind 
MS, George MG, Hamdan AD, Higashida RT, Hoh BL, Janis LS, Kase CS, 
Kleindorfer DO, Lee JM, Moseley ME , Peterson ED, Turan TN, Valderrama AL, 
Vinters HV, American Heart Association Stroke Council CoCS, Anesthesia, Council on Cardiovascular R, Intervention, Council on C, Stroke N, Council on E, Prevention, 
Council on Peripheral Vascular D, Council on Nutrit ion PA, Metabolism: An updated 
definition of stroke for the 21st century: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke 2013; 44: 
2064- 89 167., 4th edition. Washington, D.C., American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc, 
2000  
  
168. Knipp SC, Matatko N, Schlamann M, Wilhelm H, Thielmann M, Forsting M, Diener 
HC, Jakob H: Small ischemic brain lesions after cardiac valve replacement detected 
by [CONTACT_35774]- weighted magnetic resonance imaging: relation to neurocognitive 
function. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2005; 28: 88- 96  
169. Simon SE, Bergmann MA, Jones RN, Murphy KM, Orav EJ, Marcantonio ER: 
Reliability of a structured assessment for nonclinicians to detect delirium among new admissions to postacute care. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2006; 7: 412- 5  
170. Gusmao- Flores D, Salluh J, Chalhub R, Quarantini L: The Confusion Assessment 
Method for the Intensive Care Unit (CAM -ICU) and Intensive Care Delirium 
Screening Checklist (ICDSC) for the diagnosis of delirium: a systematic review and meta -analysis of clinical studies. Crit Care 2012; 16: R115  
171. Neto AS, Nassar AP, Jr., Cardoso SO, Manetta JA, Pereira VG, Esposito DC, Damasceno MC, Slooter AJ: Delirium screening in critically ill patients: a systematic 
review and meta- analysis. Crit Care Med; 40: 1946- [ADDRESS_1068546] R: Brief visuospatial memory test -revised Odessa:FL, 1997  
173. Wareing TH, Davila- Roman VG, Barzilai B, Murphy SF, Kouchoukos NT: 
Management of the severely atherosclerotic ascending aorta during cardiac 
operations. A strategy for detection and treatment. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1992; 
103: 453- 462 
  
174. Murkin J, Martzke J, Buchan A, Bentley C, Wong C: A randomized study of the 
influence of perfusion technique and pH management strategy in 316 patients 
undergoing coronary artery by [CONTACT_4897]. II. Neurologic and cognitive outcomes. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1995; 110: 349- 362  
175. Nathan H, Wells G, Munson J, Wozny D: Neuroprotective effect of mild hypothermia 
in patients undergoing coronary artery surgery with cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_6476]: a randomized trial. Circulation 2001; 104 I -85-91  
176. Mathew J, Mackensen G, Phillips -Bute B, Grocott H, Glower D, Laskowitz D, 
Blumenthal J, Newman M, Center. NORGNotDH: Randomized, double- blinded, 
placebo controlled study of neuroprotection with lidocaine in cardiac surgery. Stroke 
2009; 40: 880- 887  
177. Zou G: A modified Poisson regression approach to prospective studies with binary 
data. Am J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] 2004; 159: 702- 706 
178. Rothman K, Greenland S: Modern Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. Philadelphia, PA, Lippi[INVESTIGATOR_778012], [ADDRESS_1068547]: Application of random -effects pattern -mixture models for 
missing data in longitudinal studies. Psychol Methods 1997; 2: 64- [ADDRESS_1068548] PJ, et al. Frailty as a Predictor of Surgical 
Outcomes in Older Patients. J Am C oll Surg 2010;210:901– 8.  
181. Walston J, Hadley EC, Ferrucci L, et al. Research Agenda for Frailty in Older Adults: Toward a Better Understanding of Physiology and Etiology: Summary from the American Geriatrics Society/National Institute on Aging Research Conf erence on 
Frailty in Older Adults. J Am Geriatr Soc 2006;54(6):991– 1001.  
 
182. Lee DH, Buth KJ, Martin B -J, Yip AM, Hirsch GM. Frail Patients Are at Increased 
Risk for Mortality and Prolonged Institutional Care After Cardiac Surgery. Circulation 
2010;121(8):973 –8.  
183. Afilalo J, Mottillo S, Eisenberg MJ, et al. Addition of frailty and disability to cardiac 
surgery risk scores identifies elderly patients at high risk of mortality or major 
morbidity. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 2012;5(2):222– 8. 
  
184. Monk TG, Saini V,  Weldon BC, Sigl JC. Anesthetic Management and One- Year 
Mortality After Noncardiac Surgery. Anesth Analg 2005;100:4- 10.  
185. Kertai MD, Pal N, Palanca BJA, et al. Association of perioperative risk factors and 
cumulative duration of low bispectral index with intermediate- term mortality after 
cardiac surgery in the B -Unaware Trial. Anesthesiology 2010;112(5):1116– 27.  
186. Sieber F, Zakriya K, Gottschalk A, et al. Sedation depth during spi[INVESTIGATOR_778013]. Mayo Clin Proc 2010;85:18- 26.  
187. Chan M, Cheng BC, Lee TM, Gin T, Group TC. BIS -guided Anesthesia Decreases 
Postoperative Delirium and Cognitive Decline. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 2013;25:33-
42.  
188. Fried LP, Tangen CM, Walston J, et al. Frailty in older adults: evidence for a 
phenotype. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2001;56(3):M146– 56.  
189. Inouye SKS, van Dyck CHC, Alessi CAC, Balkin SS, Siegal APA, Horwitz RIR. 
Clarifying confusion: the confusion assessment method. A new method for detection of delirium. Ann Intern Med 1990;113(12):941– 8.  
190. Partridge JSL, Harari D, Dhesi JK. Frailty in the older surgical patient: a review. Age Ageing 2012;41(2):142– 7.  
191. Robinson TN, Wallace JI, Wu DS, et al. Accumulated Frailty Characteristics Predict Postoperative Discharge Institutionalization in the Geriatric Patient. J Am Coll Surg 
2011;213(1):37– 42. 
192. Robinson TN, Eiseman B, Wallace JI, et al. Redefining Geriatric Preoperative 
Assessment Using Frailty, Disability and C o-Morbidity. Ann Surg 2009;250:449- 455.  
193. Rudolph JL, Jones RN, Levkoff SE, et al. Derivation and validation of a preoperative 
prediction rule for delirium after cardiac surgery. Circulation 2009;119(2):229– 36.  
194. Rudolph J, Inouye S, Jones R. Delirium: An Independent Predictor of Functional Decline After Cardiac Surgery. J Am Ger Soc 2010;58:643- 649.  
195. Leung JM, Tsai TL, Sands LP. Preoperative Frailty in Older Surgical Patients Is 
Associated with Early Postoperative Delirium. Anesth Analg. 2011;112(5):1199–
201.  
196. Rumsfeld JS, Magid DJ, O'Brien M, et al. Changes in health- related quality of life 
following coronary artery by[CONTACT_10956]. ATS. 2001 Dec. 1;72(6):2026– 32.  
197. Guignard C, Menigaux C, Chauvin M. Reduced isoflurane consumption with bispectral index m onitoring. Acta Anesthesiol Scand; 2001; 45:308- 314.  
198. Monk TG, Weldon BC. Anesthetic Depth Is a Predictor of Mortality: It's Time to Take 
the Next Step. Anesthesiology 2010; 112:1070- 1072.  
199. Rudolph JL, Inouye SK, Jones RN, et al . Delirium: an independent predictor of 
functional decline after cardiac surgery. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2010;58:643- 649.  
200. Mayo NE, Wood- Dauphonee S, Cote R, Gayton D, Carlton J, Buttery J, Tamblyn R. 
There’s no place like home: an evaluation of early supported discharge for stroke. Strok e. 2000;31:1016– 1023.  
201. Ghotkar SV, Grayson AD, Fabri BM, Dihmis WC, Pullan DM. Preoperative 
calculation of risk for prolonged intensive care unit stay following coronary artery by[CONTACT_15806]. J Cardiothorac Surg 2006 May 31;1:14.  
202. Kurki TS, Hakkinen U, L auharanta J, Ramo J, Leijala M. Evaluation of the 
relationship between preoperative risk scores, postoperative and total length of stays and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_778014]. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2001 Dec;20(6):1183- 1187.  
203. Goffaux J, Friesinger  GC, Lambert W, Shroyer LW, Moritz TE, McCarthy M,Jr, et al. 
Biological age--a concept whose time has come: a preliminary study. South Med J 
[ADDRESS_1068549];98(10):985- 993.  
204. Lloyd- Jones D, Adams R, Carnethon M, De Simone G, Ferguson TB, Flegal K, et 
al. Heart dis ease and stroke statistics --2009 update: a report from the American 
Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Circulation 2009 Jan 27;119(3):e21- 181.  
205. Janssen DP, Noyez L, Wouters C, Brouwer RM. Preoperative prediction of 
prolonged stay in the intensive care unit for coronary by[CONTACT_4897]. Eur J 
Cardiothorac Surg 2004 Feb;25(2):203- 207. 
206. Messaoudi N, De Cocker J, Stockman BA, Bossaert LL, Rodrigus IE. Is EuroSCORE useful in the prediction of extended intensive care unit stay after cardiac surgery? 
Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2009 Mar 21  
207. Silvay G, Castillo JG, Chikwe J, Flynn B, Filsoufi F. Cardiac anesthesia and surgery 
in geriatric patients. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2008 Mar;12(1):18- 28.  
208. Kulminski A, Yashin A, Ukraintse va S, Akushevich I, Arbeev K, Land K, et al. 
Accumulation of health disorders as a systemic measure of aging: Findings from the 
NLTCS data. Mech Ageing Dev 2006 Nov;127(11):840- 848.  
209. Anstey KJ, Lord SR, Smith GA. Measuring human functional age: a review of  
empi[INVESTIGATOR_254052]. Exp Aging Res 1996 Jul -Sep;22(3):245- 266.  
210. Mitnitski AB, Graham JE, Mogilner AJ, Rockwood K. Frailty, fitness and late- life 
mortality in relation to chronological and biological age. BMC Geriatr 2002 Feb 27;2:1.  
211. Karasik D, Demissie S,  Cupples LA, Kiel DP. Disentangling the genetic determinants 
of human aging: biological age as an alternative to the use of survival measures. J 
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2005 May;60(5):574- 587.  
212. Warner HR. Current status of efforts to measure and modulate the biological rate of 
aging. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2004 Jul;59(7):692- 696.  
213. Baker GT,3rd, Sprott RL. Biomarkers of aging. Exp Gerontol 1988;23(4- 5):223239.  
214. Kim WY, Sharpless NE. The regulation of INK4/ARF in cancer and aging. Cell [ADDRESS_1068550] 20;127(2):265- 275.  
215. Zindy F, Quelle DE, Roussel MF, Sherr CJ. Expression of the p16INK4a tumor 
suppressor versus other INK4 family members during mouse development and 
aging. Oncogene 1997 Jul 10;15(2):203- 211.  
216. Nielsen GP, Stemmer -Rachamimov AO, Shaw J, Roy JE, Koh J, Louis DN. 
Immunohistochemical survey of p16INK4A expression in normal human adult and infant tissues. Lab Invest 1999 Sep;79(9):1137- 1143.  
217. Signer RA, Monteci no-Rodriguez E, Witte ON, Dorshkind K. Aging and cancer 
resistance in lymphoid progenitors are linked processes conferred by p16Ink4a and Arf. Genes Dev 2008 Nov 15;22(22):3115- 3120.  
218. Krishnamurthy J, Ramsey MR, Ligon KL, Torrice C, Koh A, Bonner -Weir S, e t al. 
p16INK4a induces an age- dependent decline in islet regenerative potential. Nature 
2006 Sep 28;443(7110):453- 457. 
219. Molofsky AV, Slutsky SG, Joseph NM, He S, Pardal R, Krishnamurthy J, et al. 
Increasing p16INK4a expression decreases forebrain progenitor s and neurogenesis 
during ageing. Nature 2006 Sep 28;443(7110):448- 452.  
220. Baker DJ, Perez -Terzic C, Jin F, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_136408] K, Niederlander NJ, Jeganathan K, et al. 
Opposing roles for p16Ink4a and p19Arf in senescence and ageing caused by 
[CONTACT_778106]1 insufficiency. Nat Cell  Biol 2008 Jul;10(7):825- 836.  
221. Krishnamurthy J, Torrice C, Ramsey MR, Kovalev GI, Al -Regaiey K, Su L, et al. 
Ink4a/Arf expression is a biomarker of aging. J Clin Invest 2004 Nov;114(9):1299-
1307.  
 
222. Koppelstaetter C, Schratzberger G, Perco P, Hofer J, Mark W, Ollinger R, et al. 
Markers of cellular senescence in zero hour biopsies predict outcome in renal 
transplantation. Aging Cell 2008 Aug;7(4):491- 497.  
 
223. Liu Y, Sanoff HK, Cho H, Burd CE, Torrice C, Ibrahim JG, et al. Expression of 
p16(INK4a) in peripheral blood T- cells is a biomarker of human aging. Aging Cell 
2009 May 22.  
 
 