 
University at Buffalo  Institutional Review Board ( UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room [ADDRESS_77206]. | Buffalo, NY 142 03 
UB Federalwide Assurance ID#: FWA00008824  
Page 1 of 36 
 10/02 /2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title: Impact of Brain Connectome and Personality on Cognitive Rehabilitation  
in Multiple Sclerosis  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 2 of 36  Complete Research Protocol  (HRP -503) 
 
Table of Contents  
Template Instructions ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  [ADDRESS_77207] the Privacy Interests of Subjects  ................................ ..........  20 
17.0  Data Management and Analysis  ................................ ................................ ............  21 
18.0  Confidentiality  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 22 
A. Confidentiality of Study Data  ................................ ................................ ............  22 
B. Confidentiality of Study Specimens  ................................ ................................ ... 23 
19.0  Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  ..........................  24 
20.0  Withdrawal of Subjects  ................................ ................................ ..........................  25 
21.0  Risks to Subjects  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 26 
22.0  Potential Benefits to Subjects  ................................ ................................ ................  27 
23.0  Compensation for Research -Related Injury  ................................ ...........................  27 
24.0  Economic Burden to Subjects  ................................ ................................ ................  28 
25.0  Compensation for Participation  ................................ ................................ .............  28 
26.0  Consent Process  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 28 
27.0  Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process  ................................ ...............................  33 
28.0  Process to Document Consent  ................................ ................................ ...............  33 
29.0  Multi -Site Research (Multisite/Multicenter Only) ................................ .................  34 
30.0  Banking Data or Specimens for Future Use  ................................ ..........................  35 
31.0  Drugs or Devices ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 35 
32.0  Humanitarian Use Devices  ................................ ................................ ....................  36 
 
  
 Page 3 of 36  Template Instructions  
Sections that do not apply:  
 In several sections, the addition of checkboxes for Not Applicable  have been 
added to the template as responses .   
o If an N/A checkbox is present, select the appropriate justification 
from the list.   
o If an N/A checkbox is not pr esent, or if none of the existing 
checkboxes apply to your study, you must write in your own 
justification.  
 In addition:  
o For r esearch where the only study procedures are records/chart 
review:  Sections 1 9, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25, 31 , and 3 2 do not apply.  
o For e xempt research:  Sections 31 and 32 do not apply.  
 
Studies with multiple participant groups:  
 
 If this study involves multiple participant groups (e.g. parents and children) , 
provide information in applicable section s for each  participant group . Clearly 
label responses when they differ.   For example:  
Response:  N/A  
 
Formatting:  
 Do not remove template instructions or section headings  when they do no t apply 
to your study.  
If you are pasting info rmation from other documents using  the “Merge Formatting ” 
Paste option will maint ain the formatting of the response boxes.  
Amendments:  
 When making modifications or revisions to this and other documents, use  the 
Track Change s function in Microsoft Word . 
 Update the version date or number on Page 3.  
  
 Page 4 of 36  PROTOCOL TITLE:  
Include the full protocol title.  
Response:  Impact of Brain Connectome and Personality on Cognitive 
Rehabilitation in Multiple Sclerosis  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
[INVESTIGATOR_10677]: Ralph H B Benedict PhD 
      Neurology   
      859-3484,      
                  [EMAIL_1388]  
 
 
VERSION : 
Include the version date o r number . 
Response:  Version  1 
 
 
GRANT APPLICABILITY : 
Indicate whether this protocol is funded by a grant (e.g. NIH, foundation grant) .  
For a grant with multiple aims, indicate which aims are covered by [CONTACT_10731].  
NOTE : This question does not apply to studies funded by a sponsor contract.  
Include a copy of the grant proposal with your submission.     
Response:  The study is not funded by a grant or award. The funding will be 
coming from internal funding of [CONTACT_70888] ’s lab and BNAC.  
 
 

 Page 5 of 36  RESEARCH REPOSITORY:  
Indicate where the research files will be kept , including when the study has been 
closed.  The repository should include, at minimum, copi[INVESTIGATOR_28518] (approval , determination letters) as well as signed consent 
documents.  Th is documentation should be maintained for 3 years after the study  
has been closed .   
Response : Files are maintained in locked cabinets at the academic offices of 
Buffalo General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  
Location:  Buffalo General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_70858]:  [ADDRESS_77208], Buffalo, NY  
Department : Neurology  
1.0 Objectives  
1.1 Describe the purpose, speci fic aims, or objectives  of this research . 
Response:   The specific aims of this study are:  
[1a] Determine whether  low Conscientiousness predicts lesser  overall cognitive 
improvement following cognitive rehabilitation in people with MS.   
[1b] Determine whether the impact of Conscientiousness on cognitive 
rehabilitation is moderated by [CONTACT_70865].   
[2] Identify structural and functional brain connectome characteristics which 
predict successful improvement in sub -domains of cognition following 
rehabilitation.  
This study will also serve to supplement the sample of participants for the current  
IRB approved study ((IRB: 603069,  Title: A case -control, 5 -year follow -up study 
of cardiovascular, environmental and genetic risk factors for disease progression 
in patients with multiple sclerosis (CEG -MS study).   
 
1.2 State the hypotheses to be tested , if applicable . 
NOTE:  A hypothesis is a specific, testable prediction about what you expect to 
happen in your study  that correspon ds with your above listed objectives.  
Response:  
[1a] We expect that individuals with low baseline Conscientiousness will 
experience a lower  magnitude of overall cognitive improvement following 
rehabilitation  
[1b] We expect  the impact of Conscientiousness on fidelity of rehabilitation will 
in part be moderated by [CONTACT_70866] 6 of 36  [2a] We expect that individual differences in structural and functional connectome 
disturbances w ill in part explain differences in participant responses to cognitive 
rehabilitation.  
 
2.0 Scientific Endpoints  
 
2.1    Describe  the scientific endpoint (s), the main result or occurrence under 
study.    
 
NOTE:  Scientific endpoints are outcomes defined  before the study begins  to determine 
whether the objectives of the study have been met  and to draw conclusions from the data .  
Include primary and secondary endpoints.   Some example endpoint s are:  reduction  of 
symptoms, improvement  in quality of life , or survival.   Your response should  not be a 
date.    
Response:  Our primary end -point are predictive. Our first primary end -point will 
have been met if baseline measures of personality, as measured by [CONTACT_70867] -Five 
Factor Inventory (NEOFFI), will predict overall cognitive improvement  following 
rehabilitation. Likewise, our second primary end -point will have been met if 
baseline measures of brain connectivity predict specific improvements in 
cognitive sub -domains, following rehabilitation. Cognitive improve ment will be 
measured according to changes from visit 1 to visit 2 for the following 
neuropsychological tests: Symbol Digit Modalities Test (SDMT), [LOCATION_004] 
Verbal Learning Test 2nd Edition  (CVLT) , Brief Visuospatial Learning Test 
Revised  (BVMT -R), MS Ne uropsychological Screening Questionnaire  (MSNQ) , 
Delis -Kaplan Executive Function System (DKEFS)  Sorting Test , Tower of 
London (TOL), Elithorn’s Perceptual Maze Test (EPMT) .   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Day  0 
(Visit 1 ) Day 90  
(Visit 2 ) 
NEO Five Factor Inventory (NEO -FFI) X X 
Symbol Digit Modalities Test  (SDMT)  X X 
[LOCATION_004] Verbal Learning Test Second Edition  (CVLT)  X X 
Brief Visuospatial Memory Test Revised  (BVMT)  X X 
MS Neuropsychological Screening Questionnaire  (MSNQ)  X X 
Delis Kaplan Executive Function System Tower Test (DKEFS -TT) X X 
Delis Kaplan Executive Function System Sorting Test  (DKEFS -ST) X X 
Elithorn’s Perceptual Maze Test (EPMT)  X X 
Multiple Sclerosis Quality of Life (MSQoL)  X X 
Beck Depression Inventory Fast Screen (BDI -FS) X X 
Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS)  X X 
 Page 7 of 36  3.0 Background  
3.1 Provide the scientific or scholarly background, rationale, and significance  
of the research  based on the existing literature an d how it will contribute to  
existing knowledge.  Describe any gaps in current knowledge.   Include  
relevant pr eliminary findings or prior research by [CONTACT_093].   
Response: The personality trait Conscientiousness is a behavioral phenotype 
encompassing the proclivity for achievement striving, organization, and deliberation in 
daily activity . Trait Conscientiousness is operationally measured using the NEO Five 
Factor inventory (NEOFFI), a model of personality widely studied in MS and other 
neurological populations.1  Trait Conscientiousness is normally distributed in humans, 
shows substantial cross -observer agre ement, and has a similar mean and range across 
different cultures .2,3 
Decreased Con scientiousness  relative to healthy controls (HCs) has been observed in 
people with multiple sclerosis (pwMS)4, an autoimmune disease that involves both 
neuroin flammation and neurodegeneration.[ADDRESS_77209] that Conscientiousness predicts 
poor adaptation and unfavorable disease outcomes in neurological disease .  For 
instance, Conscientiousness predicts CD4 count and viral load over 1 -year in HIV 
disease.6  Lower C onscientiousness is associated with increased risk of amnestic mild 
cognitive impairment, and transition to Alzheimer’s dementia over [ADDRESS_77210] less favorable disease course and 
response to intervention in pwMS .  In cross -sectional studies, lower Conscientiousness 
correlates with impaired processing speed, the hallmark of MS associated cognitive 
impairment .12  Low conscientiousness also predicts transition for employment to 
disability, after controlling for the influence of other factors such as cognitive impairment 
and depression.13,14 
The association between low Conscientiousness and poor functional outcomes in pwMS 
may be due to differences in behavior, such as reduced adherence to disease modifying 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014].15  Results from a study in people with Alzheimer’s disease implicates a role of 
executive function, moderating the effect of Conscientiousness of disease outcomes.[ADDRESS_77211].  
 
 
3.2 Include complete citations  or references.  
Response:  
1.  Costa PT, McCrae RR. Professional manual of the revised NEO personality 
inventory and NEO five -factor inventory. Psychol Assess Resour Odessa, FL . 
1992.  
2.  McCrae RR. Trait psychology and culture: exploring intercultural comparisons. J 
Pers. 2001;69(6):81 9-846. 
3.  McCrae RR, Costa PT. Validation of the five -factor model of personality across 
instruments and observers. J Pers Soc Psychol . 1987;52(1):81 -90. 
doi:10.1037/[ADDRESS_77212] RHB, Ph D, Priore RL, et al. Personality Disorder in Mult iple Sclerosis 
Correlates with Cognitive Impairment. 2001:70 -76. 
5.  Hauser SL, Oksenberg JR. The neurobiology of multiple sclerosis: genes, 
inflammation, and neurodegeneration. Neuron . 2006;52(1):61 -76. 
6.  O’Cleirigh C, Ironson G, Weiss A, Costa Jr. PT. Conscientiousness predicts 
disease progression (CD4 number and viral load) in people living with HIV. Heal 
Psychol . 2007;26(4):473 -480. doi:10.1037/0278 -6133.26.4.473.  
7.  Wilson RS, Schneider JA, Arnold SE, Bienias JL, Bennett DA. Conscientiousness 
and th e incidence of Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry . 2007;64(10):1204 -1212.  
8.  Jokela M, Pulkki -Raback L, Elovainio M, Kivimaki M. Personality traits as risk 
factors for stroke and coronary heart disease mortality: pooled a nalysis of three 
cohort studies. J Behav Med . 2014;37(5):[ADDRESS_77213], et al. Personality and risk of diabetes in adults: 
Pooled analysis of 5 cohort studies. Heal Psychol . 2014;33(12):1618 -1621. 
doi:10.1037/hea0000003.  
10.  Vollrath ME, Landolt MA, Gnehm HE, Laimbacher J, Sennhauser FH. Child and 
parental personality are associated with glycaemic control in Type 1 diabetes. 
Diabet Med . 2007;24(9):1028 -1033.  
11.  Fisher L, Hessler D, Masharani U, Strycker L. Research : Ed ucational and 
Psychological Aspects Impact of baseline patient characteristics on interventions 
to reduce diabetes distress : the role of personal conscientiousness and diabetes 
self-efficacy. 2014:739 -746. doi:10.1111/dme.[ZIP_CODE].  
12.  Benedict RHB, Schwart z CE, Duberstein P, et al. Influence of personality on the 
relationship between gray matter volume and neuropsychiatric symptoms in 
multiple sclerosis. Psychosom Med . 2013;75(3):253 -261. 
doi:10.1097/PSY.0b013e31828837cc.  
13.  Strober LB, Christodoulou C, B enedict RHB, et al. Unemployment in multiple 
sclerosis : the contribution of personality and disease. 2012. 
doi:10.1177/1352458511426735.  
14.  Benedict RHB, Wahlig E, Bakshi R, et al. Predicting quality of life in multiple 
sclerosis : accounting for physic al disability , fatigue , cognition , mood disorder , 
personality , and behavior change. 2005;231:29 -34. doi:10.1016/j.jns.2004.12.009.  
15.  Bruce JM, Hancock LM, Arnett P, Lynch S. Treatment adherence in multiple 
sclerosis: Association with emotional stat us, personality, and cognition. J Behav 
Med. 2010;33(3):219 -227. doi:10.1007/s10865 -010-[ADDRESS_77214] 
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living in Alzheimer Disease. Am J Geriatr 
Psychi atry. 2017;24(11):1074 -1083. doi:10.1016/j.jagp.2016.06.014.  
17.  Charvet LE, Yang J, Shaw MT, et al. Cognitive function in multiple sclerosis 
improves with telerehabilitation : Results from a randomized controlled trial. 
 Page 10 of 36  2017:1 -13. 
18.  Studer -luethi B, J aeggi SM, Buschkuehl M, Perrig WJ. Influence of neuroticism 
and conscientiousness on working memory training outcome. Pers Individ Dif . 
2012;53(1):44 -49. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2012.02.012.  
19.  Arnemann KL, Chen AJ -W, Novakovic -Agopi[CONTACT_1629] T, Gratton C, Nomura EM , 
D’Esposito M. Functional brain network modularity predicts response to cognitive 
training after brain injury. Neurology . 2015;84(15):1568 -1574. 
doi:10.1212/WNL.0000000000001476.  
20.  Rubinov M, Sporns O. Complex network measures of brain connectivity: us es and 
interpretations. Neuroimage . 2010;52(3):1059 -1069. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.10.003.  
21.  Takeuchi H, Sekiguchi A, Taki Y, et al. Training of Working Memory Impacts 
Structural Connectivity. 2010;30(9):3297 -3303. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4611 -
09.201 0. 
22.  Chapman BP, Hampson S, Clarkin J. Personality -Informed Interventions for 
Healthy Aging: Conclusions From a National Institute on Aging Workgroup 
Benjamin. 2014;50(5):1426 -1441. doi:10.1037/a0034135.Personality -Informed.  
 
 
4.0 Study Design  
4.1 Describe and explain the study design  (e.g. case-control, cross -sectional, 
ethnographic, experimental, interventional, longitudinal, observational).  
Response: Interventional  
 
5.0 Local Number of Subjects  
5.1 Indicate the total number of subjects t hat will be enrolled or records t hat 
will be reviewed  locally.  
Response: We will recruit [ADDRESS_77215] to screen to reach your 
target sample (i.e. your screen fai lure rate) .  
Response:   
We expect that potential participants to be enrolled through the CEG -MS study 
for suitability for the study. Subjects who agree to participate and pass screening 
requirements will be enrolled in the study.   
 
 Page [ADDRESS_77216] access to? What percentage of those potential subjects 
do you need to recruit?  
Response:  This research will be conducted through the Buffalo Neuroimaging 
Analysis Center (BNAC) group.  We expect to recruit subjects from the CEG -MS 
study database. Based on our targeted population, we believe there is a sufficient 
number of potential participan ts to meet participant target of 50 in adherence to 
the protocol.  
 
6.0 Inclusion  and Exclusion Criteria  
6.1 Describe the criteria that define who will be included  in your final study 
sample.   
NOTE:  This may be done in bullet point fashion . 
Response:   
 
For all subjects:  
- males and females above age  18  
- fluent in English  
- education >9 years  
 
Additional inclusion criteria for MS patients are as follows:  
- Clinically definite MS diagnosis  
- Expanded Disability Status Scale ( EDSS ) ≤ 6.[ADDRESS_77217] be relapse -free and stable from the time of their MRI 
acquired for the CEG -MS study  
- Willing and able to comply with the study procedures for the duration of the 
trial  
 
6.2 Describe the criteria that define who will be excluded  from your final study 
sample.   
NOTE:  This may be done in bullet point fashion.  
Response:   
- history of serious medical or psychiatric illness (other than MS in the patient 
group) that m ay affect cognitive functioning   
- color -blindness  
 Page [ADDRESS_77218] -traumatic or ret rograde amnesia exceeding 5 
min 
- Other pathology related to MRI abnormalities  
 
6.3 Indicate specifically whether you will include any of the following special 
populations  in your study  using the checkboxes below .   
 
NOTE:  Members of special populations may not  be targeted for enrollment  in 
your study unless you indicate this in your inclusion criteria.  
Response:    
☒ Adults unable to consent  
☒ Individuals who are not yet adults (infants, children, teenagers)  
☒ Pregnant women  
☒ Prisoners  
 
6.[ADDRESS_77219] benefit.  
Response: Non-English speaking individuals will not be able to have a 
neuropsychological assessment battery administered as measures are developed in 
English and no translations are available. Thus non -English speaking indi viduals 
will not be involved in the research.  
 Page [ADDRESS_77220] their rights and welfare.    
NOTE: You should refer to the appropr iate checklists, referenced below, to ensure you 
have provided adequate detail regarding safeguards and protections. You do not, 
however, need to provide these checklists to the IRB.  
7.1 For research that involves pregnant women, safeguards include:  
NOTE CHECKLIST: Pregnant Women (HRP -412) 
Response:  
  
☒ N/A:  This research does not involve pregnant women.  
7.2 For research that involves neonates of uncertain viability or non-viable 
neonates , safeguards include:  
NOTE CHECKLIST S: Non-Viable N eonates (HRP -413), or Neonates of Uncertain 
Viability (HRP -414) 
Response:   
 
☒ N/A:   This re search does not involve non-viable neonates o r neonates of  
uncertain viability.  
7.3 For research that involves prisoners , safeguards include:  
NOTE  CHECKLIST: Prisoners (HRP -415) 
Response:   
 
☒ N/A:   This research does not involve prisoners.  
7.[ADDRESS_77221] not attained the legal age for 
consent to treatments or procedures involved in the research (“children”) , 
safeguards include:   
NOTE CHECKLIST: Children (HRP -416) 
Response:   
 
☒ N/A:   This research does not involve persons who have not attained the 
legal age for consent to treatments or procedures (“children”).  
7.5 For research that  involves cognitively impaired adults , safeguards include:  
NOTE CHECK LIST: Cognitively Impaired Adults (HRP -417) 
Response:   
 
☒ N/A:   This research does not involve cognitively impaired adults.  
 Page 14 of 36  7.6 Consider if other specifically targeted p opulations such as students, 
employees of a specific firm , or educationally  or economically 
disadvantaged persons  are vulnerable.   Provide information regarding 
their safeguards and protections, including safeguards to eliminate 
coercion or undue influence.  
Response: N/A 
 
8.0 Eligibility Screening  
8.1 Describe screening procedures  for determining subjects’ eligibility.  
Screening refers to determining if prospective participants meet inclusion and 
exclusion criteria.   
Include all relevant screening documents with your submission (e.g. screeni ng 
protocol, script, questionnai re).  
Response:   
All subjects will be recruited from the CEG -MS study. Subjects will undergo 
eligibility screening conducted  by [CONTACT_70868]-person  script , and screening form to determine whether or 
not they are interested and meet all of the eligibility criteria outlined above.  
 Please see attached.  
 
9.0 Recruitment Methods  
☐ N/A:   This is a records review only, and subjects will not be 
recruited.  NOTE:  If you  select this option, please make sure that 
all records review procedures  and inclusion/exclusion screening 
are adequately described  in other sections.  
9.1 Describe when, where, and how potential subjects will be recruited.   
NOTE:  Recruitment refers to how you  are identifying potential participants and 
introducing them to the study .  Include specific methods you will use (e.g. 
searching charts for specific ICD code numbers, Research Participant Groups, 
posted advertisements, etc.) . 
Response:   
Potential p articipants will be identified from the pre -existing list of study 
participants of  the CEG -MS study  database . Recruitment will be directed towards 
subjects who completed MRI evaluation for the CEG -MS study . These 
individuals will then be further screened b ased on the inclusion and exclusion 
criteria and contact[CONTACT_70869]. If they are interested, the 
remaining screening questions will be asked. If the individual agrees to participate 
in the study, their appointment for testing will be schedul ed based on their 
availability and convenience.  
 

 Page [ADDRESS_77222]  the privacy interests of prosp ective subjects 
during the recruitment process .   
NOTE:  Privacy refers to an individual’s right to control access to him or herself.    
Response:  
Contact [CONTACT_70870] -MS study databases is retained on a secure 
network in Buffalo Neuroimaging Analysis Centre (BNAC).  The network is 
password protected and can only be accessed by [CONTACT_976] [INVESTIGATOR_70859].  
Information is de -identified withi n the contact [CONTACT_70871] a separate de -identifying key file called ‘CEG 
Codes’ will be able to link the potential participant’s name [CONTACT_70887]/her contact 
[CONTACT_3031].  Once a participant has been recruit ed, his/her information will be 
removed from the recruitment contact [CONTACT_70872].  
 
9.3 Identify any  materials that will be used to recruit subjects.  
NOTE:  Examples include scripts for telephone calls, in person announcements / 
presentations, email invitations.  
For advertisements, include the final copy of printed advertisements  with your 
submission . When advertisements are taped for broadcast, attach the final 
audio/video tape.  NOTE:  You may submit the wording of the advertisement prior 
to tapi[INVESTIGATOR_10697] -required revisions,  provided the IRB also 
reviews and approves the final version . 
 Response:  
Please see attached  phone and in -person script . 
 
10.[ADDRESS_77223] is screened and 
determined to be eligible . Provide as much detail as possible.    
NOTE:  Th is should serve as a blueprint for your study and includ e enough detail 
so that another investigator could pi[INVESTIGATOR_10698] .  
For studies that have multiple or complex visits or procedures, consider the 
addition of a schedule of events table in in your response . 
Response :  
The participant will be  asked to make a total of two (2) visits, approximately 90 
days apart. Each visit w ill involve: neuro -performance testing, and self -report 
questionnaires. Each study visit is expected to take approximately [ADDRESS_77224] a close friend or family member to 
complete similar surveys.  A self -addressed envelope containing these 
questionnaires will be provided to take home with them. The participant will need 
to pass it onto a close friend or family member to be completed and mailed back.  
In addition, the participant  will be asked to take part in the 12 week computerized 
cognitive training program. This can be done at home, or anywhere  the participant 
has access to a computer and internet. This cognitive training has been shown to 
improve cognitive performance in people with multiple sclerosis. The training 
involves a variety of interactive exercises which adapt to your abilities. The 
participants will need complete 1 hour of training each day, for 5 days each week.  
At 90 days, the participant will return for the 1 -2 hours’  follow -up visit where 
they will complete the same cognitive testing and questionnaires  which they  had 
completed du ring visit [ADDRESS_77225] at Buffalo General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. All of the procedures 
described above will be performed by a trained member of the research team as 
part of the research study.  
If an individual is ineligible for participation, t heir screening information will be 
discarded (i.e., shredded).  If participants are  deemed eligible (either in person or 
over the phone), they will be scheduled to come in to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_70860].   Written consent will be obtained prior to 
administration of tests.  As part of the consent process, participants will be asked 
for permission to use any data collected as part of the screening process as well.  
 
10.2 Describe what data will be collected.   
NOT E:  For studies with multiple data collection points or long -term follow up, 
consider the addition of  a schedule or table in your response . 
Response:   Demographic/social history, health history (as provided by 
[CONTACT_70873], review of medic al records, etc.), and cognitive test 
data. 
 
10.[ADDRESS_77226] data 
(e.g. questionnaire, interview guide, validated instrument, data collection 
form).   
 
Include copi[INVESTIGATOR_10713].  
Response:  Below is a list of neuropsychological tests that will be included. 
Symbol Digit Modalities Test (SDMT), [LOCATION_004] Verbal Learning Test 2nd 
Edition  (CVLT) , Brief Visuospatial Learning Test Revised  (BVMT -R), Delis -
Kaplan Executive Function System [DKEFS]  Sorting Test , Delis -Kaplan 

 Page 17 of 36  Executive Function System [DKEFS] Tower  Test. Self-report/informant -report 
surveys have been uploaded. Self -report measures include the Beck Depression 
Inventory -Fast Screen (BDI -FS), Multiple Sclerosis Neuropsychological  
Questionnaire (MSNQ), Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS), NEO -FFI personality 
inventory, Multiple Sclerosis Quality of Life  (MSQoL)  and Elithorn’s Perceptual 
Maze Test (EPMT) . Informant -report measu res include the NEO -FFI.  
 
10.[ADDRESS_77227] data about subjects  
(e.g. school records, electronic medical records).  
Response: We will be collecting MRI and EDSS information for subjects from the 
database of IRB no . [ADDRESS_77228] results, such as results of 
investigational diagnostic tests, genetic tests, or incidental findings  will be 
shared with subjects or others (e.g., the subject’s primary care physician) 
and if so, describe how these  will be shared.  
Response:  In case  of any incidental findings, the details will be shared 
with subject’s primary care physician by [CONTACT_70874]. Results will not be shared 
with participants or anyone else. Any incidental finding s for the patients 
will be relayed to the primary neurologist who can make the determination 
regarding whether to share this information with the participant’s primary 
care physician.  
10.6 Indicate  whether  or not  study results will be shared with subjects or ot hers, 
and if so, describe how these  will be shared.  
Response:   Study results will not be shared with subjects.  
 
11.0 Study Timelines  
11.1 Describe t he anticipated duration needed to enroll all study subjects.  
Response:  It is anticipated that enrollment of all study subjects will be completed 
in one to one -and-a-half years.  
 
11.[ADDRESS_77229]’s participation in the study.  
Include length of study visits, and overall study follow -up time.  
Response:   
Patient s will complete two  visits  (Day 1 a nd Day 90). Neuropsychological testing 
will take approximately 1-2 hours  during a single visit .   
 
 Page 18 of 36  11.3 Describe t he estimated duration for the investigators to complete this study 
(i.e. all data is collected and all analyses have been completed).  
Response:  
Com pletion of this study, including primary analyses is expected to be in one to 
two years.   
 
12.0 Setting  
12.1 Describe all facilities/sites where you will be conducting research 
procedures .  Include a description of the security and privacy of the 
facilities (e.g. locked facility, limited access, privacy barriers).   Facility, 
department, and type of room are relevant.  D o not abbreviate facility 
names.   
NOTE:  Examples of acceptable response may be: “A classroom setting in the 
Department of Psychology equipped with  a computer with relevant survey 
administration software,” “The angiogram suite at Buffalo General Medical 
Center, a fully accredited tertiary care institution within [LOCATION_001] State with 
badge access,” or, “Community Center meeting hall.”  
Response:   Screen ing and neuropsychological procedures will be conducted i n a 
private testing room in the Buffalo Neuroimaging Analysis Center  (BNAC ) at the 
Buffalo General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  Database entry and data analysis will also occur at the 
academic offices of Buffalo Neuroi maging Analysis Center  (BNAC ). 
 
12.2 For research conducted outside of UB and its affiliates , describe:  
 Site-specific regulations or customs affecting the research  
 Local scientific and ethical review structure  
NOTE:  This question is referring to UB affiliated research taking place outside 
UB, i.e. research conducted in the community, school -based research, 
international research, etc.   It is not referring to multi -site research.  UB affiliated 
institutions include Kaleida Health, ECMC, and Roswell Park Cancer I nstitute.   
Response:   
 
☒ N/A:   This study is not conducted outside of UB or its affiliates.  
13.[ADDRESS_77230] of the 
research.   
NOTE:   Community -Based Participatory Research (CBPR) is a collaborative 
approach to research that equitably involves all partners in the research process 
and recognizes the unique strengths that each brings.   CBPR begins with a 
 Page 19 of 36  research topic of importance to the community, has the aim of com bining 
knowledge with action and achieving social change to improve health outcomes 
and eliminate health disparities.  
Response:   
 
☒ N/A:   This study does not utilize CBPR.  
13.[ADDRESS_77231].  
Response:   
 
☒ N/A:   This study does not have a community advisory board.  
14.0 Resources and Qualifications  
14.1 Describe the qualifications (e.g., education, training, experience, expertise, 
or certifications) of the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_10715].  When applicable describe their knowledge of the local study sites, 
culture, and society.  Provide enough information to convince the IRB that 
you have qualified staff for the proposed research.   
NOTE:  If you specify a person by n ame, a change to that person will require prior 
approval by [CONTACT_1201].  If you specify a person by [CONTACT_10757] (e.g., coordinator, research 
assistant, co -investigator, or pharmacist), a change to that person will not usually 
require prior approval by [CONTACT_1201], provi ded that the person meets the 
qualifications described to fulfill their roles.  
Response:  Ralph Benedict is a board -certified neuropsychologist.  All members of 
the research team will receive extensive training to administer study procedures in 
this researc h.  They will also undergo required CITI and UBIRB GCP training.  
They will also be closely supervised by [CONTACT_70875].    
 
Describe other resources available to conduct the research .  
14.2 Describe the time  and effort that the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_28534].  
NOTE:  Examples include the percentage of Full Time Equivalents (FTE), hours 
per week.  The question will elicit whether there are appropriate resources to  
conduct the research.  
Response:  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_70861].  In 
addition, members of the research team will be dedicated to conducting the 
project.  
 
 Page 20 of 36  14.3 Describe the availability of medical or psychological resources that su bjects 
might need as a result of anticipated consequences of the human research , if 
applicable . 
NOTE:  One example includes: on -call availability of a counselor or psychologist 
for a study that screens subjects for depression.  
Response:  While there are no anticipated consequences, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_70862].  Any unanticipated medical emergencies or 
incidental findings will be brought to the attention of a neurologist responsible for 
the care of the patient.  
 
14.4 Describe your pro cess to ensure that all persons assisting with the research 
are adequately informed about the protocol, the research procedures, and 
their duties and functions.  
Response:   
As described above, all research staff will undergo extensive training in 
administra tion of neuropsychological tests and they will be closely supervised by 
[CONTACT_70876], [CONTACT_70889].  They will also be required to undergo all 
necessary research training protocols before engaging in research activities with 
participants.    
 
15.0 Other Approvals  
15.1 Describe any approvals that will be obtained prior to commencing the 
research (e.g., school, external site, funding agency, laboratory, radiation 
safety, or biosafety).  
Response:   
 
☒ N/A:   This study does not require any other approvals.  
16.[ADDRESS_77232] subjects’ privacy interests  during the course 
of this research.  
NOTE:  Privacy refers to an individual’s right to control access to him or herself.  
Privacy applies to t he person.  Confidentiality refers to how data collected about 
individuals for the research will be protected by [CONTACT_10758].  
Confidentiality applies to the data.   
Examples of appr opriate responses include: “ participant only meets with a study 
coordinator in a classroom setting where no one can overhear ”, or “the 
participant is reminded that they are free to refuse to answer any questions that 
they do not feel comfortable answering. ”   
 Page 21 of 36  Response:   
Study procedures are performed in private , noise - and temperature -controlled 
rooms and will be conducted in the presence of only one designated, trained 
member of the research team.  Study documents are maintained in a locked staff 
office that is only accessed by [CONTACT_70877].  Participants are reminded 
that they are free to refuse to answer any questions at any time.  When they 
contact [CONTACT_70878].   
 
16.2 Indicate how the research team is permitt ed to access any sources of 
information about the subjects.    
NOTE:  Examples of appropriate responses include:  school permission for review 
of records, consent of the subject, HIPAA waiver.  This question does apply  to 
records reviews . 
Response:   
After the consent process, the participant controls the research team’s access to 
such information because it was directly provide d by [CONTACT_70879]/survey procedure . 
 
17.0 Data Management  and Analysis  
17.1 Describe the data analysis plan, including  any statistical procedures.   This 
section applies to both quantitative and qualitative analysis.  
Response:   
Statistical analyses  will be performed using SPSS 22 .0 (IBM Inc., Armonk, NY, 
[LOCATION_003])  and R 3.4.1  (The R Foundation) . 
[1a] D etermine whether  low Cons cientiousness predicts lesser  overall cognitive 
improvement following cognitive rehabilitation in people with MS.  The question 
of whether Conscientiousness predicts successful intervention will be addressed 
using baseline measures of trait Conscientiousnes s and cognitive performance 
before and after rehabilitation. We will assess  linear relationships between 
baseline trait Conscientiousness and overall magnitude of cognitive improvement 
using linear regression models . Cognitive improvement will be measured 
according to differences in cognitive scores between baseline assessment during 
visit [ADDRESS_77233] scores will be conv erted to normalized z-scores 
and averaged  together .  
1b] Determine whether the impact of Conscientiousness on cognitive 
rehabilitation is moderated by [CONTACT_70865]. In 
order to address the question of whether or not adherence and executive function 
moderate t he impact of Conscientiousness on intervention success, we intend to 
add interaction parameters to the linear regression analysis described for aim 1a. 
 Page [ADDRESS_77234] (executi ve function) and include it in our regression models.  
[2] Identify structural and functional brain connectome characteristics which 
predict successful improvement in sub -domains of cognition following 
rehabilitation.  In order to identify brain connectome characteristics which,  predict 
specific responses to sub -domains of cognition following rehabilitation, we intend 
to employ linear machine /statistical  learning techniques , such as partial least 
squares regression . The correct statistical learning models wi ll be identified at the 
time of analysis in order to pr oduce the most approp riate predictions . Models will 
be selected according to the distribution and dimensionality of our connectome 
variables. Following training of the predictive models, f it of the mod els will be 
assessed  using k -fold cross validation.  
 
17.2 If applicable, p rovide a power analysis.    
NOTE:  This may not apply to certain types of studies, including chart/records 
reviews, survey studies, or observational studies.  This question is asked to elicit 
whether the investigator has an adequate sample size to achieve the study 
objectives  and justify a conclusion.   
Response : Given a 0.[ADDRESS_77235] size observed in a previous study of HCs which 
indicated a relationship between Conscientiousness and successful cognitive 
training20, power analysis indicated 41 participants would be sufficient for an 80% 
chance of avoiding type II error.  
 
17.3 Describe any procedures that will be used for quality control of collected 
data.  
Response:   
All MRI data has already  been reviewed for quality by [CONTACT_70880] -MS study.  
Scoring and data entry will be completed and c hecked by [CONTACT_70881].  
 
18.0 Confidentiality  
 
A. Confidentiality of Study Data  
 
Describe the local procedures for maintenance of confidentiality  of study data 
and any records that will be reviewed for data collection .   
 
18.1 A.  Where and how will all data and records be stored?  Include 
information about:  password protection, encryption, physical controls, 
 Page 23 of 36  authorization of access, and separation of identifiers and data, as applicable.  
Include physical (e.g. paper) and elect ronic files.  
Response:  Neuropsychological testing data and clinical outcome measures 
will be maintained in de -identified participant charts. These charts will be 
stored in a locked cabinet and entered into a password -protected database. 
Appropriate legal g uidelines regarding retention of records will be 
followed. Identifiable data will be destroyed at the earliest possible point. 
The subject will not be identified by [CONTACT_70882], and these 
reports will be used for research purposes only.  Ever y effort will be made 
to keep the subject’s personal medical data confidential. Stored data will 
be accessed only by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or designated research staff. The use of 
stored, de -identified data is undetermined at this time.  
 
18.2 A.  How long will the data be  stored?  
Response:  Data will be stored for the duration of the study and according 
to federal regulations.  
 
18.[ADDRESS_77236] access to the data?  
Response:  The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_70863].  
 
18.4 A.  Who is responsible for receipt or tran smission of the data?  
Response:  The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_70863].  
 
18.5 A.  How will the data be transported?  
Response:  Data will not be transported locally.  
 
B. Confidentiality of Study Specimens  
 
Describe the local procedures for maintenance of confidential ity of study 
specimens .   
 
☒ N/A:   No specimens will be collected or analyzed in this research.    
(Skip to Section 19.0)  
 
18.6 B.  Where and how will all specimens be stored?  Include information 
about:  physical controls, authorization of access, and labeling of specimens, as 
applicable.   
Response:  
 Page 24 of 36   
18.7 B.  How long will the specimens be stored?  
Response:  
 
18.[ADDRESS_77237] access  to the specimens?  
Response:  
 
18.9 B.  Who is responsible for receipt or transmission of the specimens?  
Response:  
 
18.10  B.  How will the specimens be transported?  
Response:  
 
 
19.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety  of 
Subjects  
☐ N/A:   This study is not enrolling subjects , or is limited to records review 
procedures only .  This section does not apply.  
 
NOTE:  Minimal risk studies may be required to monitor subject safety if the research 
procedures include procedures that present unique risks to subjects that require 
monitoring.  Some examples include:  exercising to exertion, or instruments that elicit 
suicidality or substance abuse behavior.  In such cases, N/A is not an acceptable 
response.  
 
19.1 Describe the plan to periodically evaluate t he data collected regarding both 
harms and benefits to determine whether subjects remain safe.  
Response:  Data will be reviewed periodically to confirm the safety of all 
subjects.  
 
19.[ADDRESS_77238] events, 
and efficacy data.  
Response:  All data will be reviewed.  
 
19.3 Describe any safety endpoints.  
Response:  There are no safety endpoints in this study.  There is no active medical 
intervention and the assessments pose no known risk to the subjects.  
 Page 25 of 36   
19.4 Describe h ow the safety information will be collected (e.g., with case report 
forms, at study visits, by [CONTACT_10774]).  
Response:  N/A 
 
19.5 Describe t he frequency of safety data collection . 
Response:  N/A 
 
19.6 Describe w ho will review the safety data.  
Response:  N/A 
 
19.7 Describe t he frequency or periodicity of review of cumulative safety data.  
Response:  N/A 
 
19.8 Describe t he statistical tests for analyzing the safety data to determine 
whether harm is occurring.  
Response:  N/A 
 
19.9 Describe a ny conditions that trigger an immediate suspension of the 
research.  
Response:  N/A 
 
20.0 Withdrawal of Subjects  
☐ N/A:   This study is not enrolling subjects.  This section does not apply.  
 
20.1 Describe anticipated circumstances under which subjects may be withdrawn 
from the research without their consent.  
Response:  Participation in this study is voluntary. Patients are explicitly informed 
that that they may withdraw from the study at any time and for any reason. 
Additionally, if, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_2511] s ite PI [INVESTIGATOR_24565] a subject is no longer able to 
provide informed consent, or if a subject is non -compliant with study visits he/she 
may be withdrawn from the study. For example, if more than three attempts to 
contact [CONTACT_70883] -related pr ocedure are unsuccessful, the 
patient may be withdrawn  
 
20.2 Describe any procedures for orderly termination.    
 Page 26 of 36  NOTE:  Examples may include return of study drug , exit interview with clinician .  
Include whether additional follow up is recommended for safety reas ons for 
physical or emotional health . 
Response:  In the event of early termination/withdrawal from the study, an 
exit interview will be conducted by [CONTACT_978], treating clinician or trained 
members of the research team.  
 
20.3 Describe procedures that will be followed when subjects withdraw from the 
research, including retention of already collected data, and partial 
withdrawal from procedures with continued data collection , as applicable . 
Response:  Participation in thi s study i s voluntary.  Referred patients may 
refuse to participate without penalty and such refusal will not prejudice 
future treatment or benefits at th e Jacobs Neurological Institute (JNI)  or 
Buffalo Neuroimaging Analysis Center ( BNAC ).  Patients will be free to 
discontinue participation in the study at any time without fear of penalty or 
loss of medical care or loss of any benefits to which you may otherwise be 
entitled . If a subject chooses to withdraw from the study, the data collected 
up to the time of withdra wal will continue to be used, but the subject will 
no longer be contact[CONTACT_70884].  
 
21.[ADDRESS_77239] the reasonably foreseeable risks, discomforts, hazards, or 
inconveniences to the subjects related to their participatio n in the research. 
Consider physical, psychological, social, legal, and economic risks.   Include 
a description of the probability, magnitude, duration, and reversibility of the 
risks.  
NOTE:  Breach of confidentiality is always a risk for identifiable subj ect data.  
Response:  The only foreseeable risk is breach of confidentiality, although 
this is unlikely to occur . Since subjects are being asked to perform 
cognitive and manual tasks as part of this study, however, they may 
experience some stress or anxiety or fatigue associated with mental and 
physical exertion. There are no social, legal, or economic risks . 
 
21.2 Describe procedures performed to lessen the probability or magnitude of 
risks, including procedures being performed to monitor subjects for safety.  
Response:  N/A 
 
21.[ADDRESS_77240] risks to the subjects that 
are currently unforeseeable.  
 Page 27 of 36  Response:  Subjects are being asked to perform cognitive and manual tasks 
and some may experience psychological stress/pressure/anxiety or mental 
fatigue with such exertion.  
 
21.[ADDRESS_77241] be or become pregnant.  
Response: N/A 
 
21.5 If applicable, describe risks to others who are not subjects.  
Response:  There are no anticipated risks to others who are not subjects.  
 
22.[ADDRESS_77242] benefit.    
NOTE:  Compensation cannot be stated as a benefit.  
Response:  Participants who successfully adhere to the study protocols are 
expected to experience improved cognitive performance and perceived  cognition.  
 
23.0 Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
☐ N/A:   The research procedures for this study do not present risk of 
research related injury (e.g. survey studies, records review studies).  This 
section does not apply.   
23.1 If the research procedures  carry a risk of research related injury,  
describe  the available compensation to subjects in the event that such injury 
should occur.    
Response:  The University at Buffalo has no program to pay for medical 
care for research -related injury.  No injuries are expected.  
 
23.[ADDRESS_77243] language, if any, relevant to compensation for 
research  related injury.  
NOTE:  If the contract is not yet approved at the time of this submission, submit the 
current version here.  If the contract is later approved wi th different  language regarding 
research related injury , you must modify your response  here and submit an amendment 
to the IRB for review and approval.  
Response:  N/A 
 
 Page 28 of 36  24.0 Economic Burden to Subjects  
24.1 Describe any costs that subjects may be responsible for because of 
participation in the research .   
NOTE:  Some examples include transportation or parking.  
Response:   
The subject is not responsible for any costs of the procedures involved in the 
study.  
 
☐ N/A:   This study is not enrolling subjects , or is limited to records review 
procedures only .  This section does not apply.  
25.[ADDRESS_77244] compensation . 
Response:  Subjects wi ll receive $50 compensation for completion of each study 
visit. Checks will be mailed to subjects.  
 
☐ N/A:   This study is not enrolling subjects , or is limited to records 
review procedures only .  This section does not apply.  
☐ N/A:   There is no compen sation for participation.  This section 
does not apply.  
26.0 Consent Process  
26.1 Indicate whether you will be obtaining consent.   
NOTE:  This does not refer to consent documentation, but  rather  whether you will 
be obtaining permission from subjects to participate in a research study.   
Consent documentation is addressed in Section 27.0.  
☒ Yes (If yes, Provide responses to each question in this Section)  
☐ No (If no, Skip to Section 27.0)  
 
26.[ADDRESS_77245] .  Include steps to 
maximize subjects’ privacy.  
Response: The consent process will take place in a private, temperature 
and noise controlled testing room  in BNAC, Department of Neurology, 
Buffalo General Ho spi[INVESTIGATOR_307] . 
 
26.3 Describe how you will ensure that subjects are provided with a sufficient 
period of time to consider taking part in the research study.   
 Page 29 of 36  NOTE:  It is always a requirement that a prospective subject is given sufficient 
time to have their questions  answered and consider their participation.  See “SOP: 
Informed Consent Process for Research (HRP -090)” Sections 5.5 and 5.6 . 
Response:  Consent will be provided in -person prior to neuropsychological 
assessment at a point where the PI [INVESTIGATOR_70864].   
 
26.[ADDRESS_77246]’s 
willingness to continue participation for the duration of the research study.   
Response: Prior to all study -related procedures participants will reminded that 
participation is voluntary.  
 
26.5 Indicate whether you will be following “SOP: Informed Consent Process for 
Research (HRP -090).” If not, or if there are any exceptions or a dditional 
details to what is covered in the SOP, describe:  
 The role of the individuals listed in the application who are involved in 
the consent process  
 The time that will be devoted to the consent discussion  
 Steps that will be taken to minimize the possib ility of coercion or 
undue influence  
 Steps that will be taken to ensure the subjects’ understanding  
Response:  
 
☒ We have reviewed and will be following “SOP: Informed Consent Process 
for Research (HRP -090).”  
 
Non-English Speaking Subjects  
☒ N/A:  This study will not enroll Non -English speaking subjects.   
(Skip to Section 26.8)  
26.6 Indicate which language(s) other than English are likely to be 
spoken/understood by [CONTACT_70885].  
 
NOTE: The  response to this Section should correspond with your response to 
Section 6.4 of this protocol.  
Response: N/A  
 
 Page 30 of 36  26.7 If subjects who do not speak English will be enrolled, describe the process 
to ensure that the oral and written information provided to those sub jects 
will be in that language.  Indicate the language that will be used by [CONTACT_28582].  
NOTE:  Guidance is provided on “SOP:  Informed Consent Process for Research 
(HRP -090).”  
Response: N/A  
 
 
Cognitively Impaired Adults  
☒ N/A:  This study will not enroll cognitively impaired adults.   
(Skip to Section 26.9)  
26.8   Describe the process to determine whether an individual is capable of 
consent.   
Response:  Individuals are deemed capable when they express an understanding of 
the study obje ctives, procedures, etc. Under standing of the study procedures, 
objectives, etc will be determined if the subject is able to coherently relay relevant 
information when asked by [CONTACT_16133].  
 
 
Adults Unable to Consent  
☒ N/A:  This study will not en roll adults unable to consent.  
(Skip to Section 26.13)  
When a person is not capable of consent due to cognitive impairment, a legally 
authorized representative should be used to provide consent (Sections 26.9 and 
26.10) and, where possible, assent of the individual should also be solicited  
(Sections 26.11 and 26.12 ). 
26.9  Describe how you will identify a Legally Authorized Representative (LAR).  
Indicate that you have reviewed the “SOP: Legally Authorized 
Representatives, Children, and Guardians (HRP -013)” for research in New 
York State.   
NOTE:  Examples of acceptable response includes: verifying the electronic 
medical record to determine if an LAR is recorded.  
Response:  
 
☐ We have reviewed and will be following “SOP: Legally Authorized 
Representatives, Chil dren, and Guardians (HRP -013).”  
 Page [ADDRESS_77247]  a legal 
counsel or authority  review your protocol along with the definition of 
“legally authorized representative” in “ SOP: Legally Authorized 
Representatives, Children, and Guardians (HRP -013). ” 
Response: N/A 
 
26.11  Describe the process for assent of the  adults : 
 Indicate whether a ssent will be obtained from  all, some, or none of the 
subjects.   If some, indicate which adults  will be required to assent and 
which will not.  
Response:  
 
 If assent will not be obtained from some or all subjects, provide an 
explanation of why not.  
Response:  
 
26.12  Describe whether assent of the  adult  subjects will be documented and the 
process to document assent.    
NOTE:  The IRB allows the person obtaining asse nt to document assent on the 
consent document using the “Template Consent Document (HRP -502)” Signature 
[CONTACT_28589].  
Response:  
 
 
Subjects who are not yet Adults ( Infants, Children, and T eenagers)  
☒ N/A:  This study will not enroll subjects who are not yet adults.   
(Skip to Section 27.0)  
26.[ADDRESS_77248] has not attained the legal age for consent to treatments or 
procedures involved in the research  under the applicable law of the 
jurisdiction in which the research  will be conducted (e.g., individuals under 
the age of 18 years) .  For research conducted in NYS, review “ SOP: 
Legally Authorized Representatives, Children, and Guardians (HRP -013)” 
to be aware of which individuals in the state meet the definition of 
“children.”   
 Page 32 of 36  NOTE:  Examples of acceptable responses include: verification via electronic 
medical record, driver’s license or state -issued ID, screening questionnaire.  
Response:  
 
26.[ADDRESS_77249]  a legal counsel or authority  review 
your protocol along the definition of “children” in “ SOP: Legally 
Authorized Representatives, Children, and Guardians (HRP -013). ” 
Response:  
 
26.15  Describe whether parental permission will be obtained from:  
Response:  
☐  One parent even if the other parent is alive, known, competent, reasonably 
available, and shares legal responsibility for the care and custody of the 
child.  
☐ Both parents unless one pare nt is deceased, unknown, incompetent, or not 
reasonably available, or when only one parent has legal responsibility for 
the care and custody of the child.  
☐ Parent permission will not be obtained.  A waiver of parent permission is 
being requested.  
NOTE:  The requirement for parent permission is a protocol -specific determination 
made by [CONTACT_28583].  For guidance, review the 
“CHECKLIST: Children (HRP -416).”   
26.16 Describe whether permission will be obtained from individuals other than 
parents , and if so, who will be allowed to provide permission.  Describe 
your procedure for determin ing an individual ’s authority to consent to the 
child’s general medical care.  
Response:  
 
26.17  Indicate whether assent will be obtained from all, some, or none of the 
children .  If assent will be obtained from some children, indicate which 
children will be required to assent.  
Response:  
 
26.18  When assent of children is obtained , describe how it will be documented.  
 Page 33 of 36  Response:  
 
27.0 Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process  
Consent will not be obtained, required information will not be disclosed, or the 
research involves deception.  
☒ N/A:   A waiver or alteration of consent is not being requested.  
27.1 If the research involves a waiver or alteration of the consent process, please 
review the “CHECKLIST: Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process (HRP -
410)” to ensure that you have provided sufficient information for the IRB to 
make the determinatio n that a waiver or alteration can be granted.   
NOTE:  For records review studies, the first set of criteria on the “CHECKLIST : 
Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process  (HRP -410)” applies.  
Response:  
 
27.2 If the research  involves a waiver of the consent process for planned 
emergency research, please review the “CHECKLIST:  Waiver of Consent 
for Emergency Research  (HRP -419)” to ensure you have provided sufficient 
information for the IRB to make these determinations.   Provide any 
additional infor mation necessary here:  
Response:  
 
28.0 Process to Document Consent  
☐ N/A:   A Waiver of Consent is being requested .   
(Skip to Section 29.0)  
28.1 Indicate  whether you will be following “ SOP: Written Documentation of 
Consent (HRP -091).” If not  or if there are any e xceptions , describe whether 
and how consent of the subject will be  obtained including whether or not it 
will be documented in writing.    
NOTE:  If your research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects 
and involves no procedures for which wri tten documentation of consent is normally 
required outside of the research context, the IRB will generally waive the 
requirement to obtain written documentation of consent.  This is sometimes 
referred to as ‘verbal consent.’  Review “CHECKLIST: Waiver of W ritten 
Documentation of Consent (HRP -411)” to ensure that you have provided sufficient 
information.  
If you will document consent in writing, attach a consent document  with your 
submission .  You may use “TEMPLATE CONSENT DOCUMENT (HRP -
502)”.  If you will obtain consent, but not document consent in writing, attach the 
script of the information to be provided orally or in writing (i.e. consent script or 
Information Sheet).   

 Page 34 of 36  Response:  Consent  form is included in the application packet  
 
☒ We will be following “SOP:  Written Documentation of Consent ” 
(HRP -091). 
29.0 Multi -Site Research (Multisite/Multicenter Only)  
☒ N/A:   This study is not an investigator -initiated multi -site study.  This 
section  does not apply.  
 
29.1 If this is a multi -site study where you are the lead investigator , describe the 
processes to ensure communication among sites, such as:  
 All sites have the most current version of the IRB documents, including 
the protocol, consent document , and HIPAA authorization.  
 All required approvals have been obtained at each site (including 
approval by [CONTACT_779]’s IRB of record).  
 All modifications have been communicated to sites, and approved 
(including approval by [CONTACT_779]’s IRB of record) before the 
modification is implemented.  
 All engaged participating sites will safeguard data as required by 
[CONTACT_28584].  
 All local site investigators conduct the study appropriately.  
 All non -compliance with the study protocol or applicable requirements 
will be reported in accordance with local policy.  
Response:  
 
29.2 Describe the method for communicating to engaged participating sites:  
 Problem s 
 Interim results  
 Study closure  
Response:  
 
29.3 Indicate the total number of subjects that will be enrolled or records that 
will be reviewed  across all sites.  
Response:  
 
29.[ADDRESS_77250], 
and subjects will be recruited by [CONTACT_70886] c ontrol of the local site 
(e.g., call centers, national advertisements) describe those methods.  
Response:  
 Page 35 of 36   
30.0 Banking Data or Specimen s for Future Use  
☐ N/A:   This study is not  banking data or specimens for future use or 
research outside the scope of the present protocol.   This section does not 
apply.  
30.1 If data or specimens will be banked (stored) for future use, that is, use or 
research outside of the scope of the present protocol , describe where the 
data/specimens will be stored, how long they will be stor ed, how the 
data/specimens will be accessed, and who will have access to the 
data/specimens.  
NOTE:  Your response here must be consistent with your response at the “What 
happens if I say yes, I want to be in this research?” Section of the Template 
Consent  Document (HRP -502).  
Response:  The data will be maintained indefinitely.  
 
30.[ADDRESS_77251] the data to be stored or associated with each specimen.  
Response:  Data collected from the research -related procedures described above 
will be stored.  
 
30.3 Describe the procedures to release banked data or specimens for future 
uses, including: the process to request a release, approvals required for 
release, who can obtain data or specimens, and the data to be provided with 
specimens.  
Response: Data will not be released to those out side the clinical treatment 
or research team.  
 
31.0 Drugs or Devices  
☒ N/A:   This study does not involve drugs or devices.  This section does not 
apply.  
31.[ADDRESS_77252] and describe all drugs and 
devices used in the research, the purpose of their use, and their regulatory 
approval status.   
Response:  
 
31.2 Describe your plans to store, handle, and administer those drugs or devices 
so that they will be used only on subjec ts and be used only by [CONTACT_28587].  
Response:  
 Page 36 of 36   
If the drug is investigational (has an IND) or the device has an IDE or a claim 
of abbreviated IDE (non -significant risk device), include the following 
information:  
31.3 Identify the holder of the IND/IDE/Abbreviated IDE.  
Response:  
 
31.4 Explain procedures followed to comply with FDA sponsor requirements for 
the following:   
 
 Applicable to:  
FDA Regulation  IND Studies  IDE studies  Abbreviated 
IDE studies  
21 CFR 11  X X  
21 CFR 54  X X  
21 CFR 210  X   
21 CFR 211  X   
21 CFR 312  X   
21 CFR 812   X X 
21 CFR 820   X  
Response:  
 
32.0 Humanitarian Use Devices  
☒ N/A:   This study does not involve humanitarian use devices.  This does 
not apply.  
32.1 For Humanitarian Use Device  (HUD ) uses provide a description of the 
device, a summary of how you propose to use the device, including a description 
of any screening procedures, the HUD procedure, and any patient follow -up 
visits, tests or procedures.  
Response:  
 
32.2  For HUD uses provide a de scription of how the patient will be informed 
of the potential risks and benefits of the HUD and any procedures associated with 
its use.  
Response:  
 