 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL AND STA TISTICAL PLAN  
 
Mindfulness Mobile App to Reduce Adolescent Substance Use  
(The Qlarity Study)  
 
Grant Number/Protocol ID :  DA043288- 02 
Clinical Trials.gov ID: NCT0402707 [ADDRESS_1135598] Date: 5/1 7/2019  
 
 
  
Page 2 
  
 
 This Phase II SBIR will be conducted in two stages: 1) Product development and usability testing, and 2) 
product evaluation testing. Stage 1 and Stage 2 are outlined below and are expected to take approximately 12 
months each. 
 
Stage 1: Product  development  
The Qlarity  app is proposed to include 12 modules focused on mindfulness techniques for substance use 
cessation, each of which will involve 2 components: a teaching component and a practice component. During 
Phase I, we developed the initial 4 modules of the Qlarity  app in order to examine the feasibility and usability 
of the app, as well as the likeability and satisfaction among our target audience. The initial 4 modules 
developed during Phase I are as follows: 1) Introduction to Mindfulness: Understanding its Application to Substance Use and Cessation, 2) Focusing on Current Mind and Body States: Becoming Aware of Internal 
States and their Connection to Substance Use, 3) Being In the Moment: Observing without Judging, and 4) 
Making Mindful Decisions About S ubstance Use. We propose to use feedback from Phase I to inform the 
development of the full 24-component a; (12 teaching + 12 practice components) that will include the following additional concepts aimed at reducing and eliminating substance use: 5) Under standing and Taking Charge of 
Your Emotions: Using Mindfulness Techniques to Manage Emotional States, 6) Identifying Personal and 
Contextual Triggers for Use, 7) Managing High-Stress Situations: Advanced Mindfulness Skills, 8) Mindful 
Decision-making and R efusal Skills, 9) Establishing a Support System, 10) Effectively Utilizing Existing 
Supports, 11) Planning for the Future: Maintaining Sobriety, and 12) Emergency Planning: Getting Back on 
Track When You Slip-up. 
We will use feedback from the Phase I evaluation of the initial four modules to inform and guide the 
development of the full app. Feedback on usability and attractiveness will be used to modify  the initial  modules  
and to provide consistency  in the development of the modules. Based on this information, we will develop 
prototype versions of each module using Marvel, a design and rapid prototype development tool that yields 
functional mockups for users to interact with before any programming takes place. During an iterative process 
we will refine the mockups, present them to five test users, solicit their feedback, and continue to modify and 
refine the mockups until we arrive at an acceptable design and feature set. We will recruit adolescent test 
users who report current substance use from the community for this iterative process.  
Next, we will finalize and create all the media assets for the app, including text and graphics, images, and 
narration or other audio elements; build all program screens and user controls , and determine scoring 
algorithms and programming logic for knowledge checks and quizzes. We will incorporate a simple user 
registration  component to allow  for tracking of app usage while  also ensuring security  of user-collected data.  
 
Stage 2: Product  evaluation 
We will conduct an evaluation of the Qlarity  app with 380 high-risk adolescents who are involved in the 
juvenile justice system. Feasibility, usability, participant satisfaction, and intervention outcomes of substance 
use will be evaluated in an efficacy trial. Data on: 1) frequency and duration of app use, 2) number of modules  
completed, 3) c hanges in attitudes, emotions and behaviors, and 4) type and frequency of substance use will be 
examined. Participants will be compensated using gift cards to Amazon in the following increments: $20 for each 
of the baseline, 4 week and 3-month assessments, and $50 bonus for  completion off all three asses sments. 
Participants in the focus groups and usability testing will receive a $[ADDRESS_1135599] for their time and effort. 
 
Study Design: Our evaluation of the program will be conducted with 380 adolescents ages 13- 18 who are 
referred from the Oregon Depar tment of Youth Services (DYS) in Lane and Multnomah Counties, Oregon. 
Adolescents will be randomly and equally assigned to one of two conditions: 1) Qlarity , or 2) an active 
comparison condition that is standard treatment through the DYS (i.e., drug court, group therapy, and case 
management). All participants will be instructed to attempt to reduce substance use with a target quit date of 
1 month after program initiation (day 28). Self-reported 7-day and 30-day point prevalence abstinence for all 
substances will be measured [ADDRESS_1135600] 
biochemical verification of self-reported substance use; urinary drug tests will be conducted at the baseline, 
1- and 3-month follow ups and will follow  the same UA drug testing protocol that we have found to be 
successful in our current NIH funded study with adolescents in the juvenile justice system. 
  
Page 3 
  
 Participants: Participants  will include both male and female high risk adolescents recruited from the 
Department of Youth Services (DYS) in Lane and Multnomah Counties, Oregon. We have a long history of 
successful collaborations with the DYS  and have received their support for the current proposal . Inclusion 
criteria will be as follows: 1) ages 13- 18, 2) involvement with the juvenile justice system, 3) documented 
substance use, 4) English-speaking, and 5) living in the community (e.g., biological/adoptive/foster parents).  
 
Focus Groups and Usability Testing: Twenty high-risk adolescents will be recruited to participate as 
test users in the development phase to give us initial reactions to mockup of modules, and a subgroup of 
10 of these participants will be recruited to participate in preliminary usability testing of the modules. 
Feedback from usability testing will be used to inform adaptations  to the app. The prototype app will then 
be evaluated in an efficacy  trial with 380 additional  high-risk adolescents. The primary outcomes of the 
evaluation-testing phase will be changes in adolescent substance use attitudes and behaviors and 
emotion regulation measured at three time points: baseline, [ADDRESS_1135601]- baseline (end of treatment), 
and three months post-baseline. The proposed efficacy trial will evaluate the extent that the Qlarity  app 
influences positive behavior change and will provide power estimates for later larger scale evaluation.  
 
Efficacy Trial: Based on our power calculations , we will recruit [ADDRESS_1135602]-baseline. The participants will be randomly and equally assigned to the Qlarity  condition ( n = 190) or the DC 
standard treatment condition ( n = 190) following adolescent assent and parent consent. Given that 
all youth will be involved in the juvenile justice system, we will assess all services offered and 
accessed by [CONTACT_819708]. 
Based on our prior experience, we expect many of the youth to be under orders to be participating in urine 
screening or other intervention services through DYS. Data from our current and prior studies with this 
population suggest that despi[INVESTIGATOR_819703], 90% of 
youth are involved in ongoing alcohol, tobacco or other drug use (79% alcohol; 68% tobacco; 81% marijuana, 
and 53% other drug; 90% positive for one or more substance) at the time of referral. We will track additional 
services, including mandated urine screens, via official DYS reports and using a services utilization measure at 
each follow -up time point. 
 
Overview of the Proposed Intervention Conditions 
We propose to randomize youth into one of two conditions, outlined below. 
Qlarity. Subjects randomized to Qlarity  will be provided in- person assistance in loading the Qlarity  app 
onto their phone immediately following their baseline interview and assessment. Once the app is loaded onto 
their phone, participants will generate a user name [CONTACT_2383]. The proposed modules will each include a 
teaching and a practice component that uses mindfulness techniques to reduce or avoid substance use.  
Modules will be “unlocked” in ascending order as participants move through the program (i.e., module 2 will be “unlocked” after completion of module 1, etc.).  
Drug Court, Group Therapy and Case Management (DC). The DC youth will receive the usual services 
provided by [CONTACT_819709], which includes involvement in drug 
court, and case management services for the youth and their parents that span the duration of the youth’s 
probation or formal accountability contract. The drug court and case management services are provided by [CONTACT_819710]. The DYS will manage each case and will make all decisions on referrals to 
community resources, including individual therapy, family therapy, mandated urine screens, and/or inpatient or  
outpatient substance use treatment that might occur in addition to the typi[INVESTIGATOR_819704]. None of the usual services that youth in the respective study conditions receive 
will be affected by [CONTACT_47361]. We will track the youths’ and parents’ use of services as part 
of the interviews with a service utilization measure and official DYS reports of urine screens at each 
assessment. With these data, we will examine the type and length of treatment received for youth in both 
conditions, as well as the timing and outcome of urine screens over the course of the study. This services 
utilization measure has been used in previous work
 and has been useful for examining treatment impact. 
  
Page 4 
 Table 1. Measures  Assessments  
Measure  
Adolescent Attitudes Questionnaire 
Alcohol and Drug Use Survey 
(MAST/DAST)  
Qlarity  Usability and Satisfaction 
Cigarette Use  
Demographics  
Emotion Re gulation Scale 
Five Facet Mindfulness 
Urine Drug Screens  
Youth Substance Use Interview 
(Services Utilization)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 Data Collection Procedures 
 
Overview and timeline for the proposed data collection: In the proposed study, a total of at least 380 
youth will be recruited and baseline assessed  for the study. We anticipate  that approximately  10% of these will 
fail to complete the study, resulting in a sample of at least [ADDRESS_1135603] baseline assessments and follow -up 
assessments at treatment completion (1 month), and at [ADDRESS_1135604]-baseline.  
 
Assessments: The baseline assessment primarily measures youth risk factors, as well as past and current 
substance use, and will consist  of an in-person interview  including questionnaires  with the youth.  
The treatment completion (1-month), and 3-month assessments are aimed at assessing short and longer 
term outcomes and will consist of two components: (a) an in -person interview and questionnaires with the youth, 
and (b) usability and satisfaction ratings for the Qlarity  app. Because every participant has unique needs, we 
have standardized guidel ines that allow for minor modifications to our procedures when needed. For example, 
staff will read aloud questionnaires for participants who are nonreaders, and computer -assisted questionnaires 
will be available in hardcopy format. We will travel to participant residences or other locations to conduct the 
interviews as needed.  
 
Measures: The following measures will be used to examine baseline demographic and pre- and post- 
changes in mindfulness skills, emotion regulation, and substance use: 1) Demographics, 2) Alcohol and Drug 
Use Survey, 3) Cigarette Use, 4) Adolescent Attitudes Questionnaire, 5) Emotion Regulation Scale, 6) Five 
Facet Mindfulness  Questionnaire, 7) Youth Substance Use Interview  (including Services  Utilization),  and 
8) Qlarity  usability and satisfaction rating. The Alcohol and Drug Use Survey is a 48-item scale that combines 
the Michigan Alcohol Screening Test (MAST) and the Drug Abuse Screening Test (DAST) and the Self- 
Efficacy for Limiting Substance Use. These scale s are widely used as measures to assess the level and 
frequency of alcohol and drug use, use of mindfulness skills, as well as the ability to limit substance use, and have been shown to have good psychometric  
properties . In addition, urinary drug tests will be 
conducted at the baseline, 1- and 3-month follow 
ups. UA results will be photocopi[INVESTIGATOR_819705], 
and the UA cups will be discarded immediately; no 
identifying information will be recorded on the UA 
cups. We will use the same UA drug testing 
procedure that we have found to be successful in our 
current NIH funded study with adolescents in the 
juvenile justice system. All data will immediately be 
moved to a secure, locked location within 
ORI/Influents Innovations accessible only to the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_27235]. The Services Utilization Survey is an interviewer -administered instrument that collects 
information about a respondent's use of a wide range 
of services such as in- and out-patient medical care 
(hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], clinic, or office based), mental health 
treatment, drug and alcohol abuse treatment, and 
health-related groups (e.g., Narcotics or Alcoholics Anonymous, or physical health groups). For each type of 
service accessed, there are questions regarding frequency, reason for the service (e.g., physical, mental 
health, substance-use related), insurance coverage and out-of-pocket expenses. The Five Facet Mindfulness 
Questionnaire is a 36-item self-reported questionnaire that queries aspects of mindfulness such as non- 
judgment. The Adolescent Attitudes Questionnaire is a measure of attitudes and beliefs regarding drug and alcohol that was adapted from an interview developed to test 12 mediators of drug use in adolescents. For this study, we will use the normativ e beliefs, lifestyle incongruence, beliefs about consequences, and commitment 
scales. The Emotion Regulation Scale is a 36-item self -report questionnaire designed to assess multiple 
aspects of emotion dysregulation. Program navigation and usability will be assessed for all participants and 
will include reports of: 1) ease of use, 2) perceived benefits of using the app, 3) likeability, and  
 
Baseline  
1 Month  
3 Month  
Page 5  
  
4) suggestions for product development and modifications. Participants will provide ratings on 
product satisfaction and usability on a 7-point Likert Scale. Qualitative data gathered from the 
focus groups will be recorded and evaluated with the goal of identifying challenges to using the 
app, product satisfaction, and suggested product modifications. In addition to qualitative data 
gathered during the pi[INVESTIGATOR_819706], login tracking information from the app will be used to 
assess each participant’s: 1) frequency and duration of app use and 2) number of modules 
completed. These data will be used to evaluate treatment engagement and adherence. 
 
Statistical design and power overview : This project will test the efficacy of the Qlarity  app in 
Year 2 with a r andomized trial that nests multiple assessments nested with 380 youth within each 
of two conditions. Half of the participants will receive the Qlarity  app intervention and half will 
maintain business -as-usual. We hypothesize that Qlarity  app will increase youth’s emotional 
regulation, mindfulness and self-efficacy and decrease alcohol, tobacco, and other drug use. 
Within this study design, we will test for main effects, moderation, mediation, and acceptability of 
the Qlarity  app intervention and expect to detect effect sizes  of 0.[ADDRESS_1135605] differences, a high and consistent level of 
app use, and a high degree of youth satisfaction ratings. See Human Subjects Statistical Design and P ower section for complete details.  
 
Feasibility benchmarks:  Program  feasibility  will be demonstrated by [CONTACT_819711]: (a) significant pre-post increases (e.g., Cohen’s d > .35) in emotional 
regulation, mindfulness, and self-efficacy, (b) significantly greater decreases in alcohol, tobacco, 
and other drug use for Qlarity  participants; (c) a high consistent level of app usage (e.g., over 
70% of users used the app at least 12 times over the 12 weeks); and (d) a high degree of youth 
satisfaction and ratings of app acceptability and usability (mean ratings > 4.0 on the 5-point 
scale). Benchmarks are based on meta-analysis quantitative methods that recommend effect 
sizes of at least d >.25 to demonstrate educationally meaningful change; a desire to show at least 
an average of weekly app use by a majority of participants; and a level of participant satisfaction 
that meets or exceeds that of Phase I. 
  
Page 6  
 Data Analysis 
 
Preliminary analyses . Prior to analysis, all variables will be checked for out-of-range values and 
inter- and intra-measure consistency; frequency distributions and plots will be examined for 
unusual data distributions or data points. Any necessary data transformations will be employed. 
Initial analyses will evaluate the baseline equivalence of conditions and examine attrition effects. 
Baseline equivalence will consist of chi -square and grouped t-tests analyses comparing 
intervention condition on demographic characteristics and all baseline measures. Results of the 
baseline equivalency will be a test of the effectiveness of randomization. Any group differences 
will be treated as covariates in subsequent main-effect, moderation, and mediation analyses.  
Attrition analyses will c onsist of chi -square and grouped t-tests comparing proportion of 
participants in each condition who fail to complete follow -up assessments (i.e., drop-outs vs. 
completers); the independent variables will include intervention condition, demographic 
characteristics, and baseline measures. Results of main effects concerning attrition will provide 
information about the external validity of the study, and interaction effects will provide information 
about potential confounding.  
 Main-effects analyses. Tests of the general effectiveness of the Qlarity  app within this three-panel 
(pretest, 1- month, and 3-month follow -up) randomized trial requires an analysis that accounts for 
the dependence of multiple assessments nested within participants that were assigned to conditions. Thus, we will test most of our research hypotheses with random effects growth models 
within the hierarchical and structural equation modeling (SEM) frameworks with individual variability 
in change in study outcomes from pretest to 3-months nested within individuals. Following Singer and Willet when constructing the longitudinal model, we will (a) examine empi[INVESTIGATOR_819707]; (b) 
fit an unconditional means model; (c) fit an unconditional linear growth model; ( d) fit unconditional 
non-linear models; and (e) compare models of longitudinal change from the previous two steps using the Akaike Information Criterion. Individual variability change in the outcomes from baseline 
to the 3-month follow -up assessment will be modeled as a function of intervention condition.  
Intervention condition by [CONTACT_819712]. We will also use logistic regression models 
reporting odds ratios (OR) to test for differential rates of abstinence at the 3-month follow -up 
assessments with intervention condition a two-level predictor. 
 
Moderator effects. Moderating effects of demographics (gender and minority status) and number 
of baseline offenses will be explored by [CONTACT_819713]. The multiplicative interaction term between the participant level 
moderators constitute a three-way cross-level interaction with time in the growth models and 
addresses whether the level of the baseline moderator  impacted the magnitude of intervention 
condition on change in the outcome. All significant cross -level interactions will be probed by 
[CONTACT_819714]-estimated intercepts and slopes of the trajectories of the outcomes at 
conditional levels of the moderator, separately, within the Qlarity  and usual care group (i.e., simple 
trajectories) using methods described by [CONTACT_819715] (Curran, Bauer et al. 2006). 
 
Mediation effects. Growth-curve models implemented in an SEM framework will be used to 
explore whether observe d condition effects on tobacco, alcohol, and drug use are mediated by 
[CONTACT_819716]. Following Preacher et al., models will be constructed by [CONTACT_819717] -
building sequence described above to develop the best longitudinal change model. Then mediator and outcome growth curves will be combined in a single model. We will test whether (a) condition 
predicts change in each mediator, (b) condition predicts chan ge in each outcome, (c) mediator 
change predicts outcome change, and (d) the condition effect on the outcome is significantly weaker when controlling for level or change in the mediator . Significance of indirect effects will be 
tested using bias -correct ed bootstrapped confidence intervals . 
 
Process analyses. A critical element to the program evaluation is the acceptability of the intervention to the target population, which will be assessed via rate of attrition, level of program 
Page 7  
 use, and degree of program satisfaction. Dose-response analyses will be conducted to examine the 
degree to which treatment engagement and retention (e.g., frequency and duration of app use, 
number of modules completed) predict change in the outcome measures at the post-intervention 
and follow -up assessments. Canonical correlation analyses will be used to examine the association 
between the dosage measures and outcome measures within the Qlarity  condition. We will also 
test the hypothesis that those participants who report greater  satisfaction with the intervention will 
have greater improvement in baseline-post scores using residual gain score analyses. Lastly, 
treating participant satisfaction as a process variable, we will examine the correlations between the 
satisfaction ratings  and the amount of treatment engagement/retention.  
 
Missing data. Missing data in outcome measures may result from dropout or item non-response. 
The mixed- growth models described above make use of maximum likelihood estimates and allow 
for use of all available outcome data from all assessments, reducing bias and increasing power . In 
general, maximum likelihood procedures, as well as imputation methods, will be used as they can 
provide unbiased estimates even in instances of substantial attrition. Multiple imputation procedures 
will follow best -practice recommendations. 
Power considerations. The assumptions for the power estimates include a sample size of 380 
participants, Type II error rate of 20% (β = .20) and a 2-tailed alpha = .05. Power estimates for 
multilevel growth models require assumptions that are not easily established in longitudinal studies (e.g., complete data, homogeneous random -effects covariance structures within conditions). Thus 
we rely on the fact that power for multilevel growth models has been shown to surpass that of the 
mixed -model ANCOVA . The proposed growth models, then, will detect smaller differences between 
conditions than the ANCOVA models on which power estimates were based. Allowing for intent-to-
treat analyses that makes use of all available data using missing data techniques described above 
and a pretest covariate r
2= .25, there is sufficient power to detect main effects for condition of 
Cohen’s d = .25 (small effect size) and detect condition by [CONTACT_819718] d = .35 (small to 
medium effect). The smallest subsample expected for decomposition of significant moderating 
effects is approximately 150 minority participants (75 per condition) which will provide sufficient 
power (>.80) to detect condition effects of d = .40 (medium effect). The study is also powered to 
detect small to medium between condition effect size differences (ORs = 2.05 –  2.25) for the logistic 
regression models predicting an estimated 15-20% substance use abstinence rates at follow -up. 
Using mediation effect size guidelines from Kenny  for a model containing a dichotomous 
independent variable and a continuous mediator, effect sizes of .02, .15, and .[ADDRESS_1135606] (r = .20), the proposed sample size 
has sufficient power (>.94) to detect small effect sizes or greater (dr = .04) for tests of mediation. 
Process analyses involving correlation coefficients will have adequate power to detect small to 
medium effects ( r = .20).  
Feasibility benchmarks. Program feasibility will be demonstrated by [CONTACT_819711]: (a) significant pre-post increases (e.g., Cohen’s d > .35) in emotional 
regulation, mindfulness, and self-efficacy, (b) significantly greater decreases in al cohol, tobacco, 
and other drug use for Qlarity  participants; (c) a high consistent level of app usage (e.g., over 70% 
of users used the app at least 12 times over the 12 weeks); and (d) a high degree of youth 
satisfaction and ratings of app acceptability and usability (mean ratings > 4.0 on the 5-point scale). 
Benchmarks are based on meta-analysis quantitative methods that recommend effect sizes of at 
least d >.25 to demonstrate educationally meaningful change; a desire to show at least an average 
of week ly app use by a majority of participants; and a level of participant satisfaction that meets or 
exceeds that of Phase I. 
 