Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_949099], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], ([PHONE_14529] 
Human Subjects Research Protocol Form 06/27/[ADDRESS_949100] a specific “protocol,” such as a grant 
application.  This form must be submitted along with a copy of the complete grant proposal a nd all the information in this form 
must  be consistent with that proposal.   This protocol form, once IRB approved, will be the working protocol for that research.  
When completing this document, do not refer to page numbers within your grant .   If revision s are necessary during the 
course of the research, amendments should refer to this protocol form , not the grant proposal .  En ter responses for all 
sections.  Check N/A if the section does not apply. 
 
 
PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
 
Project: Title (Should match the tit le entered on the face page of any associated grant proposal.)  
 
Role of Magnesium Supplementation in the Treatment of Depression  
  
Principal Investigator:   [INVESTIGATOR_699035], MS, RD  
 
Grant Sponsor:   Grant  Number:   
                                                                                              (For grants routed through UVM, indicate the OSP Proposal ID #  
                                                                                                 located at the top of the OSP Routing F orm) 
 
 
Lay Language Summary:   (Please use non-technical  language that would be  understood by [CONTACT_372974].  The information must include: (1) a brief statement of the problem and related 
theory supp orting the intent of the study, and (2) a brief but specific description of the procedure(s) involving the human 
subjects.  Please do not exceed one single -spaced  8 ½ X 11”  page.)  
 
Depression is a common and disabling disorder. Almost 11%  of adults older than 60 and 1 8.8% of those younger than 60 suffer 
from depress ion (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2010 ). Although both pharmacologic and behavioral therapi[INVESTIGATOR_699036], they have important limitations. Medications can take weeks to have an effect, often hav e 
significant adverse effects, and fail to help many patients at all  (Zarate, Duman et al. 2013 ). Non-pharmacologic approaches 
such as Cognitive Behavioral Therap y are also effective  (Hoifodt, Strom et al. 2011 ), but require highly trained therapi[INVESTIGATOR_699037] s to achieve effectiveness.  
 
As a result of the need for additional treatment options, interest in the role of nutrition in modulating depressive symptoms  has 
grown. Magnesium plays a role in many of the pathways involved in the pathophysiology of depressi on and is found in several 
enzymes, hormones, and neurotransmitters  (Serefko, Szopa et al. 2013 ). Depression and magnesium are both associated with 
systemic inflammation  (Chacko, Sul et al. 2011 , Maes 2011 ). National data indicate a majority of the population has 
magnesium intake below the Recommended Daily Allowance  (Ford and Mokdad 2003 ). 
 
Magnesium supplementation has been linked to  improvement in symptoms of major depression  (Eby [CONTACT_699048] 2006 ), 
premenstrual symptoms  (Walker, De Souza et al. 1998 ), postpartum depression  (Eby [CONTACT_699048] 2006 ) and chronic fatigue 
syndrome  (Cox and Campbell 199 1). Low magnesium status has been associated with increased depressive symptoms in 
several different age groups and ethnic populations  (Barragan -Rodrig uez, Rodriguez -Moran et al. 2008 , Jacka, Overland et al. 
2009 , Jacka, Maes et al. 2012 , Yary, Aazami et  al. 2013 ). Issues in study design have led to inconclusive results and 
skepticism of magnesium’s role in depression. With varying outcomes, different populations and age ranges, and limited 
sample sizes, consensus on the relationship between magnesium i ntake and depression has not been reached.  
 
This study will utilize  the Patient Health Questionnaire 9 (Kroenke, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_72443]. 2001 ) and General Anxiety Disorder 7 Item 
(Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626], Kroenke et al. 2006 ) questionnaires to determine cha nges in depressive symptoms  and anxiety  over a period of 12 
weeks. Magnesium supplements (Alta Health 64mg Mag Chlo ride tablets http://www.altahealthproducts.com/mag.html ) will be 
provided for [ADDRESS_949101], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], ([PHONE_14529] 
Human Subjects Research Protocol Form 06/27/11  2 of 8 Purpose :  The importance of the research and the potential knowledge to be gained should be explained in detail.  Give 
background information .  
The purpose of this study is to test the hypothesis that magnesium supple mentation decreases depressive symptoms. The 
primary outcome measure is the PHQ -[ADDRESS_949102] previously experienced unwanted side effects 
from medications for depression . Although it can lead to hypermagnesemia and diarrhea, magnesium is, in general, a safe 
treatment with few unanticipated side effects. Supplementation with magnesium has shown very quick results. Case studies of 
magnesium supplem entation reported improvements in depression, anxiety, and sleep within one week  (Eby [CONTACT_699048] 2006 , 
Barragan -Rodriguez, Rodriguez -Moran et al. 2008 ). 
References . Include references to prior human or animal research and references that are relevant to the design and conduct 
of the study.  
Barragan-Rodriguez, L., M. Rodriguez -Moran and F . Guerrero -Romero (2008). "Efficacy and safety 
of oral magnesium supplementation in the treatment of depression in the elderly with type 2 diabetes: a 
randomized, equivalent trial." Magnes Res  21(4): 218-223. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (201 0). "Current Depression Among Adults ---United 
States, 2006 and 2008." Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Update  59(38): 1229 -1235. 
Chacko, S. A., J. Sul, Y. Song, X. Li, J. LeBlanc, Y. You, A. Butch and S. Liu (2011). "Magnesium 
supplementation, metabolic and inflammatory markers, and global genomic and proteomic profiling: a 
randomized, double -blind, controlled, crossover trial in overweight individuals." Am J Clin Nutr  
93(2): 463-473. 
Cox, I. M. and M. J. Campbell (1991). "Red blood cell magnesium and chronic  fatigue syndrome." 
Lancet 337(8744): 757.  
Eby, G. A. and K. L. Eby (2006). "Rapid recovery from major depression using magnesium 
treatment." Medical Hypotheses  67(2): 362-370. 
Ford, E. S. and A. H. Mokdad (2003). "Dietary magnesium intake in a national sa mple of US adults." 
J Nutr 133(9): 2879 -2882. 
Hoifodt, R. S., C. Strom, N. Kolstrup, M. Eisemann and K. Waterloo (2011). "Effectiveness of 
cognitive behavioural therapy in primary health care: a review." Fam Pract  28(5): 489-504. 
Jacka, F. N., M. Maes, J. A. Pasco, L. J. Williams and M. Berk (2012). "Nutrient intakes and the 
common mental disorders in women." J Affect Disord  141(1): 79-85. 
Jacka, F. N., S. Overland, R. Stewart, G. S. Tell, I. Bjelland and A. Mykletun (2009). "Association 
between magnesium i ntake and depression and anxiety in community -dwelling adults: the Hordaland 
Health Study." Aust N Z J Psychiatry  43(1): 45-52. 
Kroenke, K., R. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_699038] J. Williams (2001). "The PHQ -9: validity of a brief depression severity 
measure." J Gen Intern Med  16: 606 - 613. 
Littenberg, B. and C. MacLean (2006). "Intra -cluster correlation coefficients in adults with diabetes in 
primary care practices: the Vermont Diabetes Information System field survey." BMC Medical 
Research Methodology  6(1): 20. 
Maes, M. (2011) . "Depression is an inflammatory disease, but cell -mediated immune activation is the 
key component of depression." Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry  35(3): 664-675. 
Morisky, D. E., A. Ang, M. Krousel -Wood and H. J. Ward (2008). "Predictive Validity  of a 
Medication Adherence Measure in an Outpatient Setting." The Journal of Clinical Hypertension  10(5): 
348-354. 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_1946]-Meza, A., A. Serrano -Blanco, M. T. Peñarrubia, E. Blanco and J. M. Haro (2005). "Assessing 
Depression in Primary Care with the PHQ -9: Can It Be Carried Out over the Telephone?" Journal of 
General Internal Medicine  20(8): 738-742. 
Serefko, A., A. Szopa, P. Wlaz, G. Nowak, M. Radziwon -Zaleska, M. Skalski and E. Poleszak 
(2013). "Magnesium in depression." Pharmacol Rep  65(3): 547-554. 
Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626], R. L., K. Kroenke, J. W. Williams and B. Löwe (2006). "A brief measure for assessing 
Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_949103], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], ([PHONE_14529] 
Human Subjects Research Protocol Form 06/27/11  3 of 8 generalized anxiety disorder: The gad -7." Archives of Internal Medicine  166(10): 1092 -1097. 
Walker, A. F., M. C. De Souza, M. F. Vickers, S. Abeyasekera, M. L. Collins and L. A. Trinca 
(1998). "Magnesium supplementation alleviates premenstrual symptoms of fluid retention." J Womens 
Health 7(9): 1157 -1165. 
Yary, T., S. Aazami and K. Soleimannejad (2013). "Dietary intake of magnesium may modulate 
depression." Biol Trace El em Res 151(3): 324-329. 
Zarate, C., R. S. Duman, G. Liu, S. Sartori, J. Quiroz and H. Murck (2013). "New paradigms for 
treatment -resistant depression." Annals of the [LOCATION_001] Academy of Sciences  1292(1): 21-31. 
 
Objectives:   Clearly state the primary and  secondary objective(s) of the study.  
The primary objective is to d etermine whether supplementation with oral magnesium significantly changes PHQ -9 scores.  
Secondary objectives include whether magnesium suppleme ntation changes GAD -7 scores,  to track side effects , and evaluate 
efficacy of supplements from the volunteer’s perspective . 
 
METHODS AND PROCEDURES  
 
Study Design:  Describe the research design, including a description of any new methodology and its advantage over existing 
methodologies.   
We will  conduct a randomized,  crossover study .  
Procedures:   Describe all procedures (sequentially) to which human participants will be subjected. Identify all procedures that 
are considered experimental and/or procedures performed exclusively for research purpo ses. Describe the types, frequency 
and duration of tests, study visits, interviews, questionnaires, etc.   Include required screening procedures performed befor e 
enrollment and while on study. Please provide in table, list or outline format for ease of rev iew. (describe and attach all 
instruments)  
 
Note:  A clinical research protocol may involve interventions that are strictly experimental or it may involve some aspect of 
research (e.g., randomization among standard treatments for collection and analysis of routine clinical data for research 
purposes). It is important for this section to distinguish between interventions that are experimental and/or carried out for  
research purposes versus those procedures that are considered standard therapy. In addition, ro utine procedures performed 
solely for research purposes (e.g., additional diagnostic/follow -up tests) should be identified.  
This study takes place over 12 consecutive weeks. While we will follow the volunteers for the full 12 weeks they will only ta ke 
magnesium supplements for 6 consecutive weeks. They will be randomly assigned to start the supplement at week 1 or week 
7. They will take two Alta Health supplement two times a day for a total of 248 mg elemental magnesium . This amount of 
magnesium is less th an the tolerable upper limit of 350 mg per day.  The supplements will be provided.  Volunteers will be asked 
to maintain their normal diet for the 12 weeks of the study.  
 
What is expected of the volunteers  throughout the study?  
 Complete a baseline interview at home or another location convenient for the volunteer.  
 Take the supplements twice daily for either the first or second 6 weeks of the study period.  
 Complete brief telephone interviews every 2 weeks to include the PHQ -9 and GAD -7 questionnaires.  
 Inform t he PI [INVESTIGATOR_699039].  
 No clinic visits, blood draws, or other invasive data collection are required.  
At the final call the volunteers will be asked to count out the remaining pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353].  
 
Below is a table showing the timeline of the st udy and what will happen each week.  
 
Week  Baseline  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Questionnaire  x             
PHQ -9 x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
GAD -7 x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
phone call    x  x  x  x  x  x 
Supplements 
Provided  x*       x*      
 
* Supplements provided  either at baseline  or week 7.  
 
We will provide written volunteer instructions (attached) with detailed instructions for taking the supplements. The biweekly 
phone call questions will vary depending on randomization (attached as part of the “Volunteer Reco rd”). The last phone call 
Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_949104], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], ([PHONE_14529] 
Human Subjects Research Protocol Form 06/27/[ADDRESS_949105] 32 left over.  In addition we will use the Mod ified Morisky 
Scale to measure adherence (Morisky, Ang et  al. 2008 ). 
 
For research involving survey, questionnaires, etc.:   Describe the setting and the mode of administering the instrument and 
the provisions for maintaining privacy and confidentiality.  Include the duration, intervals of administration, and overall length of 
participation.  (describe and attach all instruments)  
 Not applicable   
The initial PHQ -9 and GAD -7questionnaire s will be done over the phone to determine eligibility. Subsequent questionnaire s will 
be completed over the phone during the biweekly calls.  A validation study has shown similar PHQ -9 results over the phone 
versus in person (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_1946] -Meza, Serrano -Blanco et al. 2005 ). Completed questionnaires will be kept in a locked drawer an d 
entered into a database on a secure network.  The Modified Morisky Scale will be completed over  the phone at the final call. 
Each questionnaire takes about 5 -10 minutes to complete.  
Statistical Considerations : Delineate the precise outcomes to be measured and analyzed. Describe how these results will be 
measured and statistically analyzed. Delineat e methods used to estimate the required number of subjects. Describe power 
calculations if the study involves comparisons.  Perform this analysis on each of the primary and secondary objectives, if 
possible.   
Descriptive statistics will be used to describ e the population. T-tests will determine changes in PHQ -9 and GAD -7 scores while 
on magnesium vs. not. Linear regression will be used to control for confounders and when the supplement was given during the 
study timeline . We will use the intention to treat  analysis.  
 
Microsoft excel will be used to develop a randomization table in blocks of 10. We will transfer the randomization information  to 
an opaque envelope and seal it. Ten slips of paper will be put in 10 envelopes to start (for a total of 100 randomi zation slots). 
Once the envelopes are sealed they will be shuffled and then labeled with numbers 1 -10. The envelopes will be opened in 
numerical order and volunteers will be randomized in accordance to the next available slot on the 10 block randomization in the 
envelope. Additional blocks of 10 will be generated and more envelopes created as needed to account for drop outs.  
Confidentiality Measures and Secure Storage of Data or Tissue :  Describe how the data/tissue will be collected .  Will there 
be identi fiers or will the data /tissue  be coded?  Describe where the dat a/tissue will be stored and how it will be secured.   
Describe who will have access to the data /tissue  or the codes.  If subject data /tissues  with identifiers will be released, specify to 
whom.   Describe what will happen to the data /tissues w hen the research has been completed.  
 Not Applicable  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_699040] a study number to the subject. That subject number will go on the questionnaire s and only the study  number 
will be entered into a  database. Answers to the questionnaires , collected data, and the information on randomization will be 
kept in the database. The database is on a secured UVM Medical Center  database (CTS department). Original copi[INVESTIGATOR_699041] d in a locked drawer in the PIs office  on MCHV Campus of the UVM Medical Center .  
Risks/Benefits:   Describe any potential or known risks.  This includes physical, psychological, social, legal or other risks.  
Estimate the probability that given risk may o ccur, its severity and potential reversibility.  If the study involves a placebo or 
washout period, the risks related to these must be addressed in both the protocol and consent.  Describe the planned 
procedures for protecting against or minimizing potenti al risks and assess their likely effectiveness.  Where appropriate, discuss 
plans for ensuring necessary medical or professional intervention in the event of adverse effects to the subjects.   Discuss the 
potential benefits of the research to the subjects and others.  Discuss why the risks to the subjects are reasonable in relation to 
the anticipated benefits to subjects and others.  Discuss the importance of the knowledge gained or to be gained as a result of 
the proposed research and why the risks are rea sonable in relation to the knowledge that reasonably may result.  If there are 
no benefits state so.  
Potential Risks:  
The dose of magnesium for this study is less than the tolerable upper limit of 350 mg elemental magnesium per day  and 
therefore the risk to volunteers is low , including risk of toxicity . 
 
By [CONTACT_699049] (glomerular filtration rate <60) we will avoid adverse effects secondary to inab ility to 
clear magnesium from the body . Volunteers will be called weekly and ask ed about adverse events. Nausea and diarrhea are 
the most common side effects. Most of the time, nausea and diarrhea will resolve over a few days  and severe side effects can 
be avoided . Volunteers will be instructed to take  only [ADDRESS_949106] stopped making 
urine  they should stop the supplements and seek immediate medical treatment.  
We are excluding people with severe depression (PHQ -9 score >20) but we will  have a suicide action plan in place. Benjamin 
Littenberg, MD w ill be called to speak to the patient in the even t that unanticipated problems arise. Worsening depression , as 
indicated by a 10 point increase in PHQ -9 score or a positive answer to question #9 (“ Thoughts that you would be better off 
dead, or of hurting y ourself in some way ”) will result in instructions to stop the supplements, see their physician immediately 
and/or go to the  local emergency department or call the national suicide hotline for immediate help . 
Participation does involve the potential risks o f a breach of confidentiality and associated privacy of the participants. Such risks 
will be minimized by 1) securing, in a separate location, and limiting access to information with direc t participant identifiers; and 
2) limiting access to information collected to  the research team  
 
Other unanticipated side effects will be recorded and tracked  biweekly . 
Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_949107], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], ([PHONE_14529] 
Human Subjects Research Protocol Form 06/27/11  5 of 8  
Potential Benefits:  
If our hypothesis is correct, there is the potential benefit of improvement in depressive symptoms.   
Therapeutic Alternatives :  List the therapeutic alternatives that are reasonably available that may be of benefit to the potential 
subject and include in the consent form as well.  
 Not Applicable  
Prescription medication s for depression are available. If subjects are currently on medica tion for depression, this study will be 
offered in conjunction with medication since they must still score a 5 or above on the PHQ -9 (but not greater than 19) , 
indicating at least some level of depression even with medi cation. If the potential volunteer  scores >[ADDRESS_949108]  2 months.  
Data Safety and Monitoring:   The specific design of a Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) for a protocol may vary 
extensively depending on the potential risks, size, and complexity of the research study.  For a minimal risk study, a DSMP 
could be as simple as a description of the Principal Investigator’s plan for monitoring the data and performance of safety 
reviews or it could be as complex as the initiation of an external, independent Data Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB). The 
UVM/ UVM MED ICAL CENTER  process for review of adverse events should be included in the DSMP.   
The data will be stored on a secure UVM Medical Center  server, specifically within the S Drive Clinical and Translational 
Science Department sub directory. The data and saf ety monitoring plan will involve routine (i.e., annually ) monitoring b y the 
Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_699042].  Any unauthorized access to 
medical record information or linking of  informat ion to participant direct identifiers shall be reported to the IRB.  
Adverse Event and Unanticipated Problem (UAP) Reporting:  Describe how events and UAPs will be evaluated and 
reported to the IRB.  All protocols should specify that, in the absence of mo re stringent reporting requirements, the guidelines 
established in the Committees on Human Research “ Adverse Event and Unanticipated Problems Reporting Policy ” will be 
followed.  The UVM/ UVM MEDICAL CENTER  process for review of adverse events and UAPs to s ubjects or others should be 
included in the DSMP.   
The guidelines established  in the Committees on Human Research “Adverse Event and Unanticipated Problems Reporting 
Policy” will be followed.  
Withdrawal Procedures:   Define the precise criteria for withd rawing subjects from the study.   Include a description of study 
requirements for when a subject withdraws him or herself from the study (if applicable).  
Subjects can withdraw him or herself at any time  but the data already collected may still be used in analysis.  Because we are 
conducting an intention to treat analysis, all subjects will be included in the final analysis. Volunteers with  worsening 
depression , as indicated by a 10 point increase in PHQ -9 score or a positive answer to question #9 (“ Thoughts  that you would 
be better off dead, or of hurting yourself in some way ”) will stop the supplements and no longer be included in the study.  
Sources of Materials:   Identify sources of research material obtained from individually identifiable human subjects in the form 
of specimens, records or data.  Indicate whether the material or data will be obtained specifically for research purposes or 
whether use will be made of existing specimens, records or data.  
The PHQ -9 and GAD -7 (attached) are both  validated que stionnaire s used regularly in the primary care setting as quick and 
accurate assessments  of current symptoms. These questionnaires are for research purposes only.  
 
DRUG AND DEVICE INFO RMATION   
 
 
Investigators are encouraged to consult the UVM MEDICAL C ENTER  Investigational Pharmacy Drug Service (847 -4863) prior 
to finalizing study drug/substance procedures.  
 
Drug (s)   Not applicable  
Drug name – generic followed by [CONTACT_100099]. Availability – Source and pharmacology; vial or 
product sizes and supplier.  If a placebo will be used, identify its contents and source.  (attach investigational drug brochure)  
Alta Health Magnesium chloride is  an over the counter supplement . Volunteers will receive the original, sealed bottles 
(containin g 100 tablets) of the magnesium that have been purchased for them. Lot numbers and expi[INVESTIGATOR_699043]. We will keep a “Magnesium Accountability Form” (attached) modeled after the NCI 
accountability form  http://ctep.cancer.gov/forms/do cs/oral_agent_accountability.pdf . I have met with IDS and discussed 
storage, dosage, documentation, and accountability.  
Preparation:  Reconstitution instructions; preparation of a sterile product, compounded dosage form; mixing guidelines, 
including flui d and volume required.  Identify who will prepare.  
Magnesium Chloride – two tablet s twice a day with water  for a total of 248 mg elemental magnesium . 
Storage and stability – for both intact and mixed products.   
Before being given to volunteers, i t will be stored in a room with a temperature control (70 degrees Fahrenheit ). Volunteers  will 
be told to store supplements at room temperature in a dry location (see Instructions for Volunteers ). 
Administration – Describe acceptable routes and methods of admini stration  and any associated risks of administration.  
Oral administration  
Toxicity – Accurate but concise listings of major toxicities.  Rare toxicities, which may be severe, should be included by 
[CONTACT_429063].  Also adverse interactions with other  drugs used in the protocol regimen as well as specific foods should 
be noted.  Address significant drug or drug/food interactions in the consent form as well.  List all with above details.  
According to the NIH very large doses of magnesium -containing and  antacids (typi[INVESTIGATOR_699044] 5,000 mg/day 
magnesium) have been associated with magnesium toxicity . We are providing only 5% of this amount and it is less than the 
Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_949109], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], ([PHONE_14529] 
Human Subjects Research Protocol Form 06/27/11  6 of 8 tolerable upper limit of 350 mg per day . http://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Magnesium -HealthProfessional/   
 
People with renal insufficiency are at higher risk for toxicity so we have excluded this group.  
Is it FDA approved:  (include FDA IND Number)  
1.  in th e dosage form specified?  If no, provide justification for proposed use and source of the study drug in that form . 
No. Supplements do not go through the same FDA approval process as drugs. Previous studies in the U.S. have used 
magnesium in other forms (n ot chloride) for clinical trials. Magnesium chloride is better absorbed, which is why we chose 
this form .  The RDA for women >18 years is 360 mg/d and for men >18 years 410 mg/d. Each tablet contains: 62.17mg 
elemental Magnesium Chloride (per the manufactu rer http://www.altahealthproducts.com/mag.html ). The elemental 
magnesium in the dose we are giving ( 4 tablets) is below the upper tolerable limit .  
2.  for the route of administration specified?  If no, provide justification for route and describe the method to accomplish.  
 
3.  for the intended action?  
No, an IND application has been submitted and we are waiting for a response from the FDA.  
 
Device (s)  x Not applicable  
Device name [CONTACT_699054] (attach investigational device brochure)  
 
Is it FDA approved:  (include FDA IDE Number)  
1.  for  indication  specified ? If no, provide justification for proposed use and source of the device.  
 
Risk assessment (no n-significant/significant risk)  - PI [INVESTIGATOR_100053] a device based upon the use of the 
device with human subjects in a research environment.   
 
 
SUBJECT CHARACTERISTICS, IDENTIFICATION AND RECRUITMENT   
 
Subject Selection:   Provide rationale for subject selection in te rms of the scientific objectives and proposed study design.  
We will recruit adults  (age >18 years old) who have a documented Glomerular Filtration  Rate of >[ADDRESS_949110]. Subsequently, o nly people with an in itial PHQ -9 score between 5 and 19  will be invited to 
participate  (mild to moderate depression) . People who are planning to start  or change therap y or medications for depression 
will be asked to contact [CONTACT_699050] 2 months.  
Vulnerable  Populations:   Explain the rationale for involvement of special classes of subjects, if any.  Discuss what procedures 
or practices will be used in the protocol to minimize their susceptibility to undue influences and unnecess ary risk (physical, 
psychological, etc.).   
x Not applicable   
 
Number of Subjects:   What is the anticipated number of subjects to be enrolled at UVM/ UVM MEDICAL CENTER  and in the 
case of a multi -center study , with UVM/ UVM MEDICAL CENTER  as the lead , the total number of subjects for the entire study.  
100  - α=0.05, β=0.844, µ=1.5 (clinically significant change in PHQ -9), and SD=5  (Littenberg and MacLean 2006 ). 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria:   Eligibility and ineligibility criteria should be specific. Describe how eligibility will be determined 
and by [CONTACT_20898].  Changes to the eligibility criteria at a later phase of the research have the potential to invalidate the resea rch. 
Eligibility will be determ ined by [CONTACT_978] (with consultation with Benjamin Littenberg, MD as needed) after the volunteer has 
signed the consent form and allowed access to their medical record.  
Inclusion:  
 All adults at least 18 years of age  
 A Patient Health Questionnaire -9 (PHQ -9) sc ore of greater or equal to 5 but less than 20  
 People who are currently being treated for depression are still eligible to participate but their treatment must be stable 
(no changes in medication dose or brand and/or no changes in therapy regimen for at lea st 2 months).  
 
Exclusion:  
 Active delirium or dementia  
 Medicinal treatment for bipolar disorder, personality disorder or schizophrenia,  
 Glomerular Filtration Rate of less than 60  
 Irritable Bowel Disease  
 Inflammatory Bowel Disease  
 GERD  
 Gastritis  
 Pregnant  as reported by [CONTACT_699051]  
 Myasthenia Gravis  
 Planned elective surgery  
 Currently taking  
o Long Term Antibiotics  
o Fluoroquinolone  
o Trientine  or Penicillamine  
o Long Term Antivirals  
Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_949111], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], ([PHONE_14529] 
Human Subjects Research Protocol Form 06/27/11  7 of 8 o Digoxin  
o Bisphosphonates  
o Eltrombopag  
o Opi[INVESTIGATOR_232000]  
o Calcium Channel Blockers  
o Deferipr one 
o Doxercalciferol  
 Unable or unwilling to stop taking a MVI or magnesium supplement  
 
Due to the complexity of state and federal requirements governing the participation of prisoners in research, prisoners -patients 
shall not be approached for participation .  
Inclusion of Minorities and Women:   Describe  efforts to include minorities and women.  If either minorities or women are 
excluded, include a justification for the exclusion.  
The racial, gender and ethnic characteristics of the individuals approached for participation in this study  shall reflect the 
demographics of the area of the country in which they live . We shall attempt to recruit participants in accordance with these 
demographics. No individuals shall be exc luded from participation based on race,  ethnicit y, or gender .  
 
Inclusion of Children:  Describe efforts to include children.  Inclusion is required unless a clear and compelling rationale shows 
that inclusion is inappropriate with respect to the health of the subjects or that inclusion is inap propriate for the purpose of the 
study.  If children are included, the description of the plan should include a rationale for selecting or excluding a specifi c age 
range of children.  When included, the plan must also describe the expertise of the investig ative team in working with children, 
the appropriateness of the available facilities to accommodate children, and the inclusion of a sufficient number of children  to 
contribute to a meaningful analysis relative to the purpose of the study.  If children are  excluded  then provide appropriate 
justification. Provide target accrual for this population.  
We will exclude anyone under the age of 18. Previous studies using magnesium supplementation have focused on adults. At 
this time, it is not clear what a safe do se of magnesium is for children and what side effects might occur . 
For protocols including the use of an investigational drug, indicate whether women of childbearing potential have been includ ed 
and, if not, include appropriate justification.  
We are excl uding women who are pregnant because magnesium supplementation has not been proven to be safe during 
pregnancy according to the American Academy of Pediatrics.  
If HIV testing is included specifically for research purposes explain how the test results will  be protected against unauthorized 
disclosure.  Include if the subjects are to be informed of the test results.  If yes, include the process and provision for 
counseling.  If no, a rationale for not informing the subjects should be included.   
x Not appli cable  
 
Recruitment :  Describe plans for identifying and recruitment of subjects .  All recruitment materials (flyers, ads, letters, etc) 
need to be IRB approved prior to use.   
Primary care providers will be invited to identify potentially eligible subj ects by [CONTACT_699052]: depression on the problem list , Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR) of >[ADDRESS_949112] or gastritis, and the absence of certain medicati ons ( Long Term Antibiotics , Trientine  or Penicillamine , 
Long Term Antivirals , Digoxin , Bisphosphonates , Eltrombopag , Opi[INVESTIGATOR_232000] , Calcium Channel Blockers , Deferiprone , 
Doxercalciferol ). PCPs will be asked to review the data from their practices themselves. If this is not practicable (as for most 
UVMMG PCPs), Dr. MacLean will identify potentially eligible subjects from the research data set created under protocol 15 -089 
“Health Services Research and Pharmacoepi[INVESTIGATOR_699045]”  and share t he list with the PCP. For 
each potentially eligible patient approved by [CONTACT_21122], the research team will send a letter of invitation on behalf of the PC P on 
the PCPs letterhead (see Patient Recruitment Letter).  The research team will follow -up by [CONTACT_699053]. See 
“Study Intro Call” script attached. If the patient is interested we will request verbal consent to ask initial screening and eligibility 
questions (PHQ -9, GAD -7, medication use, pregnancy status, history of bowel disease) . Once el igibility is determined, we will 
schedule consent and enrollment as appropriate. See “Consent Process” diagram attached.  
 
FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
Expense to Subject:  If the investigation involves the possibility of added expense to the subject (longe r hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], extra 
studies, etc.) indicate in detail how this will be handled. In cases where the FDA has authorized the drug or device company to 
charge the patient for the experimental drug or device, a copy of the authorization letter from the FDA  or sponsor must 
accompany the application. Final approval will not be granted until the IRB receives this documentation.  
There are very limited circumstances under which study participants may be responsible (either directly or via their insuranc e) 
for co vering some study -related expenses. If the study participant or their insurer(s) will be billed for any portion of the research 
study, provide a justification as to why this is appropriate and acceptable. For example, if the  study involves treatment that i s 
documented standard of care and not investigational, state so. In these cases, the protocol and the consent should clearly 
define what is standard of care and what is research.  
There is no expense to the subject.  All supplements will be provided to the subjects.  
Payment for participation:  Describe all plans to pay subjects, either in cash, a gift or gift certificate. Please note that all 
payments must be prorated throughout the life of the study. The IRB will not approve a study where there is only a l ump sum 
payment at the end of the study because this can be considered coercive. The amount of payment must be justified. Clarify if 
subjects will be reimbursed for travel or other expenses.  
Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_949113], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], ([PHONE_14529] 
Human Subjects Research Protocol Form 06/27/[ADDRESS_949114] at collaborating sites or other performance sites 
when UVM/ UVM MEDICAL CENTER  is the lead site, the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_100057] a list of the 
collaborating sites and their Federalwide Assurance numb ers when applicable.  (agreements may be necessary)  
x Not applicable   
 
  
INFORMED CONSENT  
 
Consent Procedures :  Describe the consent procedures to be followed, including the circumstances under which consent will 
be obtained, who will seek it, and the  methods of documenting consent.  
 
Note :  Only those individuals authorized to solicit consent may sign the consent form confirming that the prospective subject was  
provided the necessary information and that any questions asked were answered.  
People who e xpress interest in participating will be given the PHQ -9 and GAD -7 over the phone. If they score between 5 and 19  
on the PHQ -9 they will be invited to participate and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_699046] a meeting to go over the consent form. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_699047]/UVM Medical Center Campus or somewhere convenient for the volunteer  to sign the consent form . 
The Volunteer will be able to take the form home and given as much as they would like to review it and decide whether they 
would like to sign it .  
Information Withheld From Subjects:  Will any information about the research purpose and design be withheld from potenti al 
or participating subjects?  I f so, explain and justify the non -disclosure and describe plans for post -study debriefing .   
x Not applicable   
 
 
 
Consent, Assent, and HIPAA Authorization.   Specify the form (s) that will be used e.g. consent (if multiple forms explain and 
place identifier  on each form), assent form and/or HIPAA authorization (if PHI is included) .  These form(s) m ust a ccompany the 
protocol as an appendix or attachment.   
The consent form and HIPAA Authorization will bot h be signed before randomization .  
 
Attach full grant application, including budget information and/or any contract or draft 
contract associated with this application. 