Transmembrane Electromyography (TM -EMG) for the 
Assessment of Neuromuscular Function in the Oropharynx  
 
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_777580], M.D.  
Co-Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_777581], M.D.  
Subinvestigator : Michael O’Leary , M.D. 
 
Sponsor: Powell Mansfield, Inc.  
Funded by: [CONTACT_777593], Inc.  
 
Version 2 
April 4 , 2019  
 
  
 
 
STUDY SUMMARY  
Study Description:  Transmembrane electromyography (TM -EMG) may be a feasible and 
valid non -invasive EMG technique for detecting neuromuscular (NM) 
impairment. This study will assess whether, in healthy volunteers and 
participant s with known obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and other NM 
diseases involving the oropharynx, the same characteristic motor unit 
potentials obtained on conventional needle EMG (NEMG) can be 
obtained using a TM-EMG  sensor. The purpose of this study is to 
demonstrate whether the  TM-EMG sensor can provide the 
same  diagnostic  accuracy as the concentric needle electrode for the 
diagnosis of NM diseases. Having demonstrated diagnostic similarity of 
TM-EMG to NEMG, the secondary aim of this study is to confirm that 
NM disturbance of oropharyngeal striated muscles  in participant s with 
OSA can be elicited with the TM -EMG sensor . 
 
 
Objectives:  
 Primary Objective : To validate the TM -EMG sensor as a non -invasive 
technique for the assessment of neuromuscular function in the 
oropharynx.  
Secondary Objective: To elicit, using the TM -EMG sensor, 
neuromuscular findings that correlate to OSA in affected participants.  
 
Endpoints:  Primary Endpoint : Proof of diagnostic consistency  using both the TM -
EMG  sensor  and NEMG in neuromuscular disorders affecting  
oropharyngeal muscles.  
Secondary Endpoint: Proof that participant s with known OSA  exhibit 
EMG findings different from healthy  participants and that these  
findings  can be detected  using both the NEMG  and the TM-EMG 
sensor.  
 
 
Study Population:   15 total participants with disorders affecting the function of 
oropharyngeal muscles  
• 10 participants wi th one of the following neur omuscular 
disorders:  
- ALS with the presence of bulbar symptoms  
- muscular dystrophy  with the presence of bulbar 
symptoms  
• 5 participants with severe OSA  
 8 healthy volunteer participants  
 
Phase:  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_777582]/Facilities 
Enrolling 
Participants:  All study recruitment  and screening will occur at the SENTA  Clinic in 
San Diego, CA, [LOCATION_003]; a tertiary referral center which focuses on diseases 
of the head, neck, brain and spi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. All EMG testing procedures will be 
performed in this clinic under the supervision of an expert 
otolaryngologist who will obtain the EMG tracings. In -Laboratory 
polysomnogram (PSG) studies , if required,  will be performed at 
AmeriSleep Diagnostics in San Diego, CA, [LOCATION_003]; a comprehensive and ACHC accredited sleep diagnostic facility.  
 
 
Description of 
Study Intervention:  Medical device for use as novel diagnostic modality.  
Examination of the electromyographic signal from oropharyngeal muscles  obtained  using a n investigational TM -EMG sensor attached to 
a rigid probe and a very fine concent ric needle electrode (Ambu 
Neuroline 25 mm x 30G ). 
 
Study Duration:  Six months  
 
 
Participant 
Duration:  • 60 minutes for in -office screening exam.  
• 60 minutes for  in-office  EMG exam .  
• Healthy participants : One o vernight stay for In-Laboratory 
Polysomnogram ( PSG).  
 
 
  
STUDY BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
Electromyography (EMG) is the electrophysiological examination of muscle used for the 
diagnosis of suspected neuromuscular (NM) disorders such as myopathies, neuropathies, neuronopathies and neuromuscular junction disorders.  
1 Routine needle electromyography 
studies (NEMG) are mainly restricted to skeletal limb muscles, which are easily accessible, and 
are not performed routinely on less accessible muscles, such as striated muscles of the oropharynx. This limits the evaluation of neuromuscular involvement in disorders involving muscles of the oropharynx such as obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and neurogenic 
oropharyngeal dysphagia. Surface  EMG (SEMG) is a non- invasive EMG method that assesses 
muscle function by [CONTACT_777594].  
2,3 
In-laboratory polysomnography (PSG) is considered the go ld standard for diagnosis of OSA.  4 
This study measures numerous sleep metrics including oxygen level, sleep stages, REM patterns, wakefulness, EKG, and leg movements. An apneic event is defined by a 4% drop in the 
level of oxygen associated with a pause in breathing of 10 seconds or longer.  The diagnosis of OSA is determined by [CONTACT_111305]/hypopnea index (AHI) [normal ≤ 5, mild OSA 5 -15, moderate 
15-30 and severe OSA  > 30]. 
5 
A videofluoroscopic swallowing evaluation (VFSE) is currently considered the diagnostic gold standard for accurate assessment of oropharyngeal dysphagia arising from pharyngeal muscle dysfunction due to multiple etiologies including neurologic disorders such as stroke, Parkinson’s 
disease (PD), multiple sclerosis (MS), multi -system atrophy (MSA), and amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS); autoimmune  disorders such as m yasthenia gravis; and myopathies such as 
muscular dystrophy.  Both PSG and VFSE are laborious, costly, and have limited accessibility for 
the diagnosis of muscular disorders of the oropharynx.  
Our body contains more than [ADDRESS_1067967], a greater decline was observed during the early and late sleep onset period, suggesting the loss of this reflex.  
10 
Evidence for motor nerve fiber loss was shown by [CONTACT_777595] (EMG), demonstrating longer duration motor unit potentials (MUP) with larger size index.  
[ADDRESS_1067968]. Such impairment may arise from an underlying neurological disorder 
producing oropharyngeal dysphagia (OPD). Participant s with OPD have difficulty initiating 
swallowing and present  with choking, nasal regurgitation or coughing epi[INVESTIGATOR_777583], 
and drooling due to difficulty managing saliva. In addition, neurogenic OPD may be complicated 
by [CONTACT_6149][INVESTIGATOR_59499], dehydration and malnutrition, increasing the morbidity of the 
unde rlying neurological disorder. Participant s with symptoms of oropharyngeal dysphagia 
undergo a VFSE, which in the case of neurogenic OPD, typi[INVESTIGATOR_777584]/or laryngeal protection.  14  
Electrophysiologic examination of muscles can provide diagnostic information as to the underlying process: myopathy, neuropathy, neuronopathy or neuromuscular junction disorders.  There are currently two primary types of EMG techniques or methods: intramus cular 
or needle EMG (NEMG) and surface EMG (SEMG). NEMG involves the insertion of a needle 
electrode directly into the muscle to be examined and is considered the gold standard for 
assessing the muscle attributes of neuromuscular diseases. NEMG allows the clinician the ability to provide a precise evaluation of key indicators of neuromuscular function such as 
spontaneous activity and motor unit action potential (MUAP) recruitment and morphology. 
These indices are utilized to: 1) differentiate between primar y muscle pathology and muscle 
dysfunction secondary to nerve injury 2) characterize the nature of the pathology by [CONTACT_777596][INVESTIGATOR_777585] 3) assess re -innervation changes indicating  disease chronicity and 4) define the topographical 
distribution of the neuromuscular disorder.  
1 
However, NEMG is invasive and painful. Insertion of the needle damages the pi[INVESTIGATOR_777586]. There is risk of infection, viscus perforation and disease transmission.  
3 These drawbacks are especially evident in areas 
of the body that are sensitive or dangerous places to use a needle such as the mouth/pharynx, 
eyes, ears, GI tract, urinary system, and myocardium. Consequently, NEMG is not used in these 
areas routinely in EMG laboratories. In an awake participant , needle electrode placement into 
oral or pharyngeal muscle s is constrained by [CONTACT_777597], insertion pain, procedure fear, local 
trauma, and bleeding risk. Once inserted, the needle electrode must be optimally positioned to 
record muscle activity. This requires repositioning of the needle in the muscle which f urther 
challenges participant tolerance and compliance.  
SEMG is a non -invasive EMG method that assesses muscle function by [CONTACT_777598]. The main advantages associated with SEMG are that it is a pain -free technique 
which is not associated with the bleeding and infection risks of NEMG. As a result, SEMG can be used to record signals from many sites and motor units at the same time, for prolo nged periods 
of time, and during activity. An additional potential advantage, is a larger recording area, 
making possible the collection of data over a wider region of muscle.
[ADDRESS_1067969] do not function 
properly in participants with OSA. These muscles can also be affected in gastrointestinal conditions such as dysphagia, which may involve dysfunction of pharyngeal muscles.  
Due to the drawbacks and limitations of both NEMG and S EMG, routine clinical EMG 
examination of these types of muscles is not feasible or practical. Therefore, there is a need to 
provide an EMG sensor that can overcome the drawbacks of NEMG and the deficiencies of 
SEMG to provide accurate diagnostic data for t he clinical evaluation of participant s with 
neuromuscular disorders affecting muscles located in body cavities or associated with internal organ systems.  
For that reason, we propose a pi[INVESTIGATOR_777587] a novel 
transmembrane s urface  sensor , and compare signals obtained with the TM- EMG sensor  to 
conventional NEMG signals participants  from healthy volunteers to those with documented 
neurologic pharyngeal muscle dysfunction (ALS and muscular dystrophy ) and to those with 
severe OSA . 
 
STUDY SETTING  
Study recruitment will occur at the SENTA  Clinic in San Diego, CA, [LOCATION_003]; a tertiary referral center 
which focuses on diseases of the head, neck, brain and spi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. All EMG testing procedures will be performed in this clinic under the supervis ion of an expert otolaryngologist who will obtain 
the EMG tracings. In- Laboratory polysomnogram (PSG) studies will be performed at AmeriSleep 
Diagnostics in San Diego, CA, [LOCATION_003]; a comprehensive and ACHC accredited sleep diagnostic facility.  
 
STUDY  DESIGN  
This is a prospective, cohort, pi[INVESTIGATOR_777588] (ALS and muscular dystrophy ) and  to 
those with severe OSA ; assessing diagnostic properties of EMG studies using a  conventional 
needle and TM-EMG  sensor in pharyngeal muscles.  
OBJECTIVES and HYPOTHESIS  
Primary Objective 
To validate the TM -EMG sensor as a non -invasive technique for the assessment of 
neuromuscular function in the upper airway.  
Secondary Objective  
To elicit, using the TM -EMG sensor, neuromuscular findings that correlate to OSA in affected 
participant s. 
Study Hypothesis  
The primary hypothesis is that transmembrane  EMG  (TM-EMG)  examination of muscles located 
within internal body cavities and organ systems such as the oropharynx using  the TM- EMG  
sensor will have similar diagnostic findings to the conventional NEMG  examinations and that 
neurogenic changes will be observed in OSA.  
Eligibility Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria  
• Gender: Male  and or female  
• Age: 18-70 years  
• Must be able pause use of anticoagulation, NSAID and multi -vitamins for appropriate period prior to 
study test. Timeline and safety to be determined by  [CONTACT_22660].  
• A cohort of p articipants  with documented neurological disorders involving upper airway striated 
muscles including ALS and muscular dystroph y with the presence of bulbar symptoms.  
• A cohort of p articipants  diagnosed with moderate to severe OSA on in-lab PSG, including the 
followin g criteria:  
o AHI > 25  made up of primarily of obstructive apneas and hypopneas.  
o Nadir  Sa02 < 85%  
o Untreated  
• A cohort of h ealthy participants that meet the following criteria  
o Normal craniofacial anatomy  
o AHI ≤ 2  
o Epworth scor e ≤ 10 
o Stop- Bang score ≤ 2 
o BMI < 30  
Exclusion Criteria  
• Allergy to topi[INVESTIGATOR_270004].  
• Heavy alcohol use – defined as [ADDRESS_1067970] month.   
• Any type of s moking  with 10 days prior testing. 
• The presence of any underlying medical , surgical or psychiatric disorder that would preclude 
participation in the study  as determined  study principle investigators . 
•  Prior radiation to the oral cavity . 
• Craniofacial anatomical d isorders . 
Interventions  (Diagnostic Procedure ) 
EMG Testing Procedure  
Study participants will be seen by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Mansfield in an outpa tient  otolaryngology clinic in San 
Diego, [LOCATION_004] (SENTA Clinic). Drs. O’Leary and Bril will serve as consulting physicians. All 
participants will be evaluated and selected as study candidates based on inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
Baseline data obtained will include participant demographic information,  a comprehensive 
history including HPI,  medications, past medical history, allergies, family history, social history —
including smoking and alcohol consumption, STOP -Bang, and Epworth sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_50526]. A 
compreh ensive physical examination will be performed. The data will be documented using 
Cerner Ambulatory Electronic Health Record. Once a candidate is selected for the trial, they will be presented with the risks and benefits of this study. This will be discussed with each participant prior to written consent being obtained. Risks include induction of a gag reflex 
and/or feeling of nausea, minor irritation or bleeding at the testing site, mild allergic reactions 
to the topi[INVESTIGATOR_777589] f, infection at the needle insertion site. All 
reactions, if any, are expected to be minor.  
Standard ENT examining room equipment and supplies will be available as part of the study.  
The participant will be positioned in a powered reclining and elevating otolaryngology 
examination chair. The testing physician will stand to the left of the sitting participant, and the participant will be positioned at the appropriate height, head supported in a headrest, to allow the physician to adequately visualize the soft palate anatomy. The physician will use a headlight to illuminate the oral airway. Photographs of the participant and the participant’s soft 
palate/tongue/dentition and oral airway will be taken, and anatomic findings documented. 
Participant’s blood pressure, heart rate, and respi[INVESTIGATOR_777590].  
The skin of the cheek on the zygomatic arch will be prepared and cleaned with an alcohol swab to optimize skin contact [CONTACT_777599]. The investigational TM -EMG probe device is 
hooked up to the EMG system.  
The participant will open his or her mouth adequately to allow for visualization of the soft palate musculature by [CONTACT_099]. For participants in which the palatopharyngeus/ palatoglossus or musculus uv ulae are poorly seen, gentle tongue depression will be used to 
better visualize the anatomy.  
Topi[INVESTIGATOR_2855] 20% Benzocaine will be applied to the mucosal surfaces overlying the muscles to be 
examined using the TM -EMG probe prior to the start of testing. With the  participant’s mouth 
open and in neutral position, the TM- EMG probe is positioned on the mucosal surface 
correlating to the expected midpoint of the palatoglossus by [CONTACT_22888] -investigator. Free run EMG 
recording of the palatoglossus will be obtained. Once an  optimal EMG tracing is obtained the 
probe will be released off the mucosal surface. The same procedure is repeated on the 
contralateral palatoglossus.  
The same protocol will be used to test the genioglossus. The TM- EMG probe is placed on the 
mucosa of the genioglossus until an optimal EMG tracing is obtained. The same procedure is 
repeated on the contralateral genioglossus.  
The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_777591]. The palatoglossus will be examined in the same loc ation using the same TM -EMG probe. Once an 
optimal EMG recording is obtained, the TM- EMG probe will be released off the mucosal surface 
and a very fine concentric needle electrode (Ambu Neuroline 25 mm x 30G) will be placed into 
the palatoglossus using the  procedure as described below. Needle insertion will be done in a 
straight line through the mucosal membrane into the midpoint of the muscle at the desired depth. [ADDRESS_1067971] will not be considered related to the study intervention, unless 
the investigator suspects a potential link.  
Sleep Study  
All healthy study participants selected for the study will be required to complete an overnight 
stay for an in -laboratory Polysomnogram (“PSG”).  
Study Endpoints  
TM-EMG and NEMG  data will be analyzed  offline upon completion of testing by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Vera Bril.  
Analysis will include the presence of spontaneous activity (fibrillation potentials and positive sharp waves), MUP morphology (number phases, duration and amplitude)  and recruitment 
pattern. MUP morphology will be analyzed manually. Each recording will  be labeled as a normal 
or abnormal study. Abnormal studies will  be classified into active or chronic neurogenic 
changes or myopathic changes.  
Secondary Endpoint  
Proof t hat participants with known OSA  exhibit EMG findings different from healthy 
participants  and that these  findings  can be detected using both the needle electrode and the 
transmembrane senso r.  
Analysis results will be compared between  the healthy cohort and the neurologic disorders 
cohort;  and between the healthy cohort and the OSA cohort.  
Sample Size Calculation  
Given that this is a novel EMG testing technique, a formal sample size calculation was not performed. The sample size chosen for this study was based on what would be reasonably 
feasible given constraints in areas such as funding and recruiting. The results from this pi[INVESTIGATOR_777592] a larger, multi- site study adequately powered to show the diagnostic 
usefulness of TM -EMG.  
Statistical Methods  Primary Endpoint  
Proof of diagnostic consistency using both the TM- EMG sensor and NEMG in neuromuscular 
disorders of the oropharyngeal muscles.  
All data will be examined to determine if there are any missing or non -plausible values, and 
these will be removed. Summary statistics will be calculated, including means or medians, 
minimums and maximums, standard deviations, and interquartile ranges.   
The distribution of EMG findings in OSA will be presented as descriptive statistics.  
 
ADVERSE EVENT MONITORING  
Documented above under Interventions.  
 
STUDY DISCONTINUATION  
Participants  will be withdrawn from the study if they withdraw consent  or if the study physician 
determines that there is a safety risk associated with their participation . If a participant exhibits 
intolerance during an individual muscle test, that particular muscle test will be discontinued.  
 
ANCILLARY OR POST- TRIAL CARE  
Following the trial, each participant will return to the clinical care of their original physician. We 
will also assume responsibility for any adverse effects or harms caused by [CONTACT_25234].  
 
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION  
Research Ethics Approval, Protocol Amendments, and Consent  
Participant s who are eligible for study participation will be approached by [CONTACT_683858], to avoid any coercion on the part of the investigators.  Consent will be obtained in 
writing, with the risks and potential benefits of the study clearly explained in basic language in the consent form.   The participant  will be allowed ample time to review the consent form prior 
to signing; and if the participant  wishes to discuss the study with family members prior to going 
forward, they may take the consent form home.  The research assistants will be available to answer any questions about the study; and if the research assistants are unable to answer the ques tion, this will be addressed by [CONTACT_1704].  All participants will be re -assured 
that at any point during the study, they may withdraw consent and end their participation in 
the study.  If consent is withdrawn, all data collected to that point remains as part of the study, 
however, will be de -identified.  
The study will be conducted in accordance with International Conference on Harmonisation Good Clinical Practice (ICH GCP), applicable [LOCATION_002] (US) Code of Federal Regulations 
(CFR). The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_7433], or changes to the protocol 
will take place without prior agreement from the  sponsor  and documented approval from the 
Institutional Review Board (IRB), except where necessary to eliminate an imm ediate hazard(s) 
to the trial participants.  The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all 
participant materials will be submitted to the IRB for review and approval.  Approval of both 
the protocol and the consent form must be obtai ned before any participant is enrolled.  Any 
amendment to the protocol will require review and approval by [CONTACT_3484].  All changes to the consent form will be IRB approved; a determination will be made regardin g whether a new consent needs to be obtained from 
participants who provided consent, using a previously approved consent form.  
Confidentiality, Data Access, and Declaration of Interests  
Participant  confidentiality will be strictly maintained throughout the study.  All study records 
will be de -identified to maximum capability, and all study charts will be kept under lock -and-key 
in a secure office.  The study charts will not contain any protected health information (PHI), and 
each participant  will be identified only according to initials and unique study identifier. 
Following completion of the trial, all data will be kept by [CONTACT_777600] (2)  years, as 
mandated.  Electronic data will be stored on password -protected computers using the SENTA 
Clinic’s secure servers.  Access to trial data will be available to study investigators, research 
assistants, and statisticians; however,  this data will be de -identified to the maximum of the 
investigators’ capabilities.  Finally, each investigator will declare any financial or other conflicts 
of interests prior to study onset, and at completion.  
Dissemination Policy  
Any manuscripts derived from the study will be written by [CONTACT_473], without professio nal writers.  The principal investigators (PI) will be the senior authors.  Other 
investigators who have contributed to the planning and conception; manuscript writing or 
revision; participant recruitment; or data analysis may be named as co -authors on any 
publications.  The results of the study may be presented at national or international scientific 
meetings.  Participant s will be informed about study results through local dissemination.  In 
order to protect Sponsor’s confidential information and intellectual property rights, any 
proposed publication, presentation or other public disclosure of study must be reviewed and 
approved in writing by [CONTACT_777601], such approval not to be unreasonably withheld. Sponsor will respond to requests for publication  or other public 
disclosure within sixty (60) days.  
1. Kimura Y. Electrodiagnosis in diseases of nerve an d muscle: Principles and pracctice. 4 
ed. [LOCATION_001]: Oxford Univeristy Press; 2013.  
2. Saboisky JP, Stashuk DW, Hamilton -Wright A, et al. Neurogenic Changes in the Upper 
Airway of Participant s with Obstructive Sleep Apnea. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2012;185:322 –329.  
3. Meekins GD, So Y, Quan D. American Association of Neuromuscular & Electrodiagnostic 
Medicine evidenced -based review: Use of surface electromyography in the diagnosis and 
study of neuromuscular disorders. Muscle Nerve. 2008;38:1219 –1224.  
4. Blumen M, Bequignon E, Chabolle F. Drug -induced sleep endoscopy: A new gold standard 
for evaluating OSAS? Part II: Results. Eur Ann Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck Dis. 
2017;134:109– 115.  
5. Pépin JL, Bailly S, Tamisier R. Incorporating polysomnography into ob structive sleep 
apnoea phenotypi[INVESTIGATOR_007]: moving towards personalised medicine for OSA. Thorax. BMJ 
Publishing Group Ltd; 2018;73:409– 411.  
6. Saboisky JP, Stashuk DW, Hamilton -Wright A, Trinder J, Nandedkar S, Malhotra A. Effects 
of Aging on Genioglossus Motor Units in Humans. Robin DA, editor. PLoS ONE. 2014;9:e104572– 11.  
7. Kositanurit W, Muntham D, Udomsawaengsup S, Chirakalwasan N. Prevalence and associated factors of obstructive sleep apnea in morbidly obese participants undergoing 
bariatric surgery. Sleep  Breath. Springer International Publishing; 2018;22:251 –256.  
8. Tapia IE, Bandla P, Traylor J, Karamessinis L, Huang J, Marcus CL. Upper airway sensory function in children with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Sleep. 2010;33:968 –972.  
9. Sunnergren O, B roström A, Svanborg E. How should sensory function in the oropharynx 
be tested? Cold thermal testing: a comparison of the methods of levels and limits. Clin Neurophysiol. 2010;121:1886– 1889.  
10. Wijesuriya NS, Gainche L, Jordan AS, et al. Genioglossus reflex responses to negative upper airway pressure are altered in people with tetraplegia and obstructive sleep apnoea. J Physiol (Lond). Wiley/Blackwell (10.1111); Epub [ADDRESS_1067972] of 
obstructive sleep apnoea. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. Springer US; 2015;15:12.  
12. Liu Y, Wang S, Yang H. [Pathologic changes of the genioglossus in participants with obstructive sl eep apnea hypopnea syndrome dominated by [CONTACT_777602]]. 
Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2014;28:1951– 1955.  
13. Patel JA, Ray BJ, Fernandez -Salvador C, Gouveia C, Zaghi S, Camacho M. Neuromuscular 
function of the soft palate a nd uvula in snoring and obstructive sleep apnea: A systematic 
review. Am J Otolaryngol. Epub 2018 Mar 5.  
14. Buchholz DW. Dysphagia associated with neurological disorders. Acta Otorhinolaryngol 
Belg. 1994;48:143– 155.  
15. Friberg D. Heavy snorer's dise ase: a progressive local neuropathy. Acta Otolaryngol. 
1999;119:925933.   
 
16. Friberg D, Gazelius B, Hökfelt T, Nordlander B. Abnormal afferent nerve endings in the soft 
palatal mucosa of sleep apnoics and habitual snorers. Regul Pept. 1997;71:2936.   
 
17. Guilleminault C, Huang Y -S, Kirisoglu C, Chan A. Is obstructive sleep apnea syndrome a 
neurological disorder? A continuous positive airway pressure followup study. Ann Neurol. Wiley 
Subscription Services, Inc., A Wiley Company; 2005;58:880887.   
 
 
18. Ka tz ES, White DP. Genioglossus activity in children with obstructive sleep apnea during 
wakefulness and sleep onset. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. American Thoracic Society; 
2003;168:664670.   
 
19. Friberg D, Ansved T, Borg K, Carlsson -Nordlander B, Larsson H,  Svanborg E. Histological 
indications of a progressive snorers disease in an upper airway muscle. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med. American Thoracic Society[LOCATION_001], NY; 1998;157:586593.   
 
 
20. Saboisky JP, Butler JE, McKenzie DK, et al. Neural drive to human g enioglossus in obstructive 
sleep apnoea. J Physiol (Lond). Blackwell Publishing Ltd; 2007;585:135146.    
21. Woodson BT, Garancis JC, Toohill RJ. Histopathologic changes in snoring and obstructive 
sleep apnea syndrome. Laryngoscope. 1991;101:13181322.   
 
22. Lindman R, Stål PS. Abnormal palatopharyngeal muscle morphology in sleepdisordered 
breathing. J Neurol Sci. 2002;195:1123.   
 
23. Boyd JH, Petrof BJ, Hamid Q, Fraser R, Kimoff RJ. Upper airway muscle inflammation and 
denervation changes in obstructive sleep apnea. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. American Thoracic 
Society; 2004;170:541546.   
 