Version #: 6 
Date Submitted: May 29, 2018  
NCT0308239 1 
1 
 Registry Based , Randomized Controlled T rial comparing Long -Term Results of Heavyweight 
versus Medium W eight Mesh in Ventral Hernia Repair  
  P.I.: Michael J. Rosen, MD FACS  
Director, Cleveland Clinic Comprehensive Hernia Center  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version #: 6 
Date Submitted: May 29, 2018  
NCT0308239 1 
2 
 INTRODUCTION  
 Approximately five million laparotomies are performed annually in the [LOCATION_002] 
with upwards of 25% of these patients developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a ventral hernia postoperatively .[ADDRESS_23226], n early 20% -50% of patients undergoing ventral hernia repair (VHR) will experience a hernia 
recurrence.[ADDRESS_23227] shown that the use of mesh 
during VHR significantly decreases the risk of ventral hernia recurrence, guidelines for the ideal 
prosthetic material remain unknown.  In terms of synthetic mesh, there are proponents that argue the 
value of medium  weight material ( 40-60 g/m2) in order to combat the risk of postoperative deep 
surgical site infection and minimize the risk of a “stiff abdomen ” or chronic pain syndromes.3-5 On 
the other hand, however, proponents of  a heavier weight material ( > 8 0 g/m2) argue that its tensile 
strength leads to a long -term, durable hernia repair with decreased risk of hernia recurrence.3-[ADDRESS_23228] on postoperative pain, w e propose a 
registry -based, randomized clinical trial (RCT)  through the Americas Hernia Society Quality 
Collaborative (AHSQC) . The AHSQC is a multicenter, nationwide quality improvement effort with 
a mission to improve value in hernia care .[ADDRESS_23229] of care practices in use by [CONTACT_14085].  
Version #: 6 
Date Submitted: May 29, 2018  
NCT0308239 1 
3 
 Specific Aim #1:  To determine if the use of a medium weight material leads to a 
decrease in pain intensity  at one year following ventral hernia repair.  
Specific Aim #2:  To determine if there is a difference in ventral hernia recurrence at 
one year following surgery.  
Specific Aim #3: To determine if there is a difference in the rate of deep surgical site 
infection at 30 -days following surgery between the two mesh types.  
Specific Aim #4: To determine if there is a difference in the quality of life between the 
two groups at one year following surgery.  
 
STUDY DESIGN  
This trial will be the first registry -based prospective study p erformed in the hernia disease 
space.  Registry -based  trials use the data available in a pre -existing database to increase the 
efficiency of performing  RCTs.[ADDRESS_23230] and logistical challenges associated with 
operationalizing this type of research.  In our case, the AHSQC will serve as our platform. The 
exposure variables (mesh type)  and outcomes of interest (pain intensity , quality of life, recurrence, 
and deep surgical site infection) for this trial are already captured  within the AHSQC database , 
which will allow for long -term follow -up and data capture with minimal additional effort outside 
that of routine care .7   
There wi ll be a total of four sites participating in this study, including the Cleveland Clinic 
Foundation, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, and Greenville 
Health System. Specific patient inclusion criteria include patients aged 18 years or older, presenting 
for an elective,  single -stage , open, retromuscular reconstruction of a clean (CDC wound class 1) 
midline abdominal wall defect, are able to achieve midline fascial closure, have a hernia defect  
Version #: 6 
Date Submitted: May 29, 2018  
NCT0308239 1 
4 
 width  < [ADDRESS_23231] CDC woun d class 2, 3, or 4, are 
unable to undergo successful retro muscular  mesh placement, are pregnant, or are unable to give 
informed consent.  
Patients will be randomized to heavyweight  (> 75 gm/m2) versus  medium weight ( 40-60 
gm/m2) mesh at the time of operation. Specifically, patients will be randomized precisely at the 
point of mesh placement during the operation.  All currently available polypro pylene  meshes and 
their densities have been confirmed by [CONTACT_24229]:  
AHSQC 
# Frequency 
Used  Mesh Name  [CONTACT_24235] 
(g/m2) Source   
88 1.8 ULTRAPRO Mesh 
(Ethicon Inc.)  PP 28 Ethicon    
118 0.1 VitaMESH Blue 
(Atrium Medical 
Corp.)  PP 
[ADDRESS_23232] Soft Mesh 
(Bard/Davol Inc.)  PP [ADDRESS_23233]    
70 1.9 PROLENE Soft 
Mesh (Ethicon Inc.)  PP 45 Ethicon    
123 1.4 Parietene 
(Covidien)  PP 46 Covidien      
72 0.6 ProLite Ultra Mesh 
(Atrium Medical 
Corp.)  PP 50 
Atrium      
116 4 VitaMESH (Atrium 
Medical Corp.)  PP 50 Atrium      
125 0.2 Freedom Octomesh 
(Insightra Medical)  PP 
55 Insightra Medical 
(http://studiowebgroup.ca/liaison/files/5614/0741/6221/Insightra_ -
_Freedom.pdf)      
69 0.8 PROLENE Mesh  PP 76 Ethicon      
71 0.6 ProLite Mesh 
(Atrium Medical 
Corp.)  PP [ADDRESS_23234] Mesh 
(Bard/Davol  Inc.) PP [ADDRESS_23235]      
Yellow = Lightweight Mesh ; Blue = Medium  Weight M esh; Red = Heavy  Weight Mesh  
Baseline patient demographics will be obtained at initial patient recruitment. Standard 
baseline AHSQC  questionnaires will be completed  following patient recruitment for baseline 
comparison. Operative details will be collected and stored in the AHSQC database . Patient follow -
up visits  will occur at 4 weeks ( + 2 weeks) and  12 months ( + 2 month s) postoperatively . Follow -up 
Version #: 6 
Date Submitted: May 29, 2018  
NCT0308239 1 
5 
 at 4 weeks  (±2 weeks)  and 12 months  (±2 months)  will occur either in person or using Cleveland 
Clinic platform for virtual visits . In the instances where a subject cannot attend to their [ADDRESS_23236] . Pain intensity at differen t time points  will be assessed using the NIH PROMIS Pain 
Intensity 3A scale, which is collected for all patients entered into the AHSQC . Patient quality of life 
and functional mobility will be assessed using the Hernia Quality of Life (HerQLes) , which is also 
collected as standard for all patients entered into the AHSQC . Patients will be required to complete  
these forms at each clinic vis it to allow for monitoring of postoperative  progression and overall 
effect of heavyweight  versus medium weight mesh on patient quality of life . Hernia recurrence will 
be assessed using the Ventral Hernia Recurrence Inventory, a validated quest ionnaire  that can be 
performed either in person or via email or phone correspond ence.8 At the time of the one month and 
one-year follow -up clinic visits, a routine physical examination will be performed on all patients. 
Confirmation of  a recurrent hernia will occur if  the patient report s recurrence of a bulge or hernia at 
the site of previous repair  during the Ventral Hernia Recurrence Inventory question naire. If the 
surgeon’s physical examination does not correlate with the p atient -report hernia recurrence, an 
ultrasound or computed tomography scan will be ordered based on the usual practice of the surgeon. 
At the completion of the study protocol, patients will be informed as to the type of mesh that was 
used during the surgical operati on. An additional question (”Do you feel your mesh?”) will be asked 
to the subjects during the [ADDRESS_23237] and this information will be stored in REDCap.   
 
OUTCOMES TO BE INVESTIGATED  
 Each outcome to be investigated is based on the specific aims of the study and are listed 
below:  
Version #: 6 
Date Submitted: May 29, 2018  
NCT0308239 1 
6 
 Specific Aim #1: To determine if the use of a medium weight  material leads to a 
decrease in pain intensity  at one year following surgery .  This will be assessed with 
the use of the NIH PROMIS  3a Pain Scale . The chang e in scaled sco re one  year after 
operation will be calculated by [CONTACT_24230].  The mean change at one year will be compared for each group 
(heavyweight  mesh and medium weight mesh).  
 
Specific Aim #2 :  To determine if there is a difference in ventral hernia recurrence at 
one year following surgery.  Hernia recurrence will be determined using the Ventral 
Hernia Recurrence Inventory, a validated question naire using patient -reported  
outcomes to determine hernia recurrence after repair.8 
 
Specific Aim #3: To determine if there is a difference in the rate of deep surgical site 
infection at 30 -days following surgery between the two mesh types.  Definitions of 
wound events are per the Centers for Disease Contro l and were agreed upon by [CONTACT_24231]. These wound outcomes will be recorded in the AHSQC 
database at 30 days as follows:  
Deep Incisional SSI  
 A deep incisional SSI must meet the following criteria:  
Infection occurs within 30 days after the operative procedure AND the infection involves deep soft 
tissues (e.g., fascial and muscle layers) of the incision AND patient has at least ONE of the 
following:  
          a. purulent drainage from the deep incisi on but not from the organ/space component of the 
surgical site  
Version #: 6 
Date Submitted: May 29, [ADDRESS_23238] one of the following signs or 
symptoms: fever (>38 °C), or localized pain, or tenderness. A culture -negative finding does not meet 
this criterion.  
          c. an abscess or other evidence of infection involving the deep incision is found on direct 
examination, during invasive procedure,  or by [CONTACT_24232].  
         d. diagnosis of a deep incisional SSI by a surgeon or attending physician.  
 
NOTE:   
a. Classify an infection that involves both superficial and deep incision sites as a deep 
incisional SSI.  
b. Class ify infection that involves superficial incisional, deep incisional, and organ/space sites 
as deep incisional SSI. This is considered a complication of the incision.  
 
Specific Aim #4: To determine if there is a difference in the quality of life between the 
two groups at one year following surgery. Quality of life will be measured using the 
Hernia -Related Quality of Life Surve y (HerQLes).  
 
 
SURGICAL PROCEDURE  
 The surgic al approach to repairing these defects will be standardi zed, as previously 
described. Skin preparation, hair removal, and periop erative  antibiotics will be based on SCIP 
protocol.  The midline fascia will be opened and complete adhesiolysis performed to free up the 
entire abdominal wall. All concomitant procedures will be performed prior to beginning the 
Version #: 6 
Date Submitted: May 29, [ADDRESS_23239].  The mesh will be fixed with mechanical sutures . Drains will be placed above the mesh, 
when utilized, and the timing of removal will be based on the surgeon’s standard practice.  Skin 
must be closed with eith er suture or staples. Fascial closure and management of the wound 
dressings will occur based on the surgeon’s standard practice.   
 
ANTICIPATED TIME FRAME  
Version #: 6 
Date Submitted: May 29, [ADDRESS_23240] enrolled patient. Data analysis and manuscript production will occur within six months 
of completion of data collection.  
 
PATIENT RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS  
 As with any surgical procedure, there are some associated risks  and they will be 
discus sed in a separate surgical consent form. The subjects may experience some pain, bleeding and 
discomfort; however this is with any surgical operation.  Common occurrences following hernia 
repair include seroma or hematoma around the hernia repair, inflammat ion, opening of the wound, 
or infection. Subjects may also experience additional therapi[INVESTIGATOR_24228], including the removal 
of the mesh to treat any of these events.  
 
PATIENT BENEFITS  
There are no direct benefits to subjects for participating in this study.  Subject 
participation will help us better understand the long-term outcomes of heavyweight and 
mediumweight mesh with respect to patient quality of life and hernia recurrence.   
 
COSTS TO THE SUBJECTS  
There are no extra costs to the subjects associated with the research.  Procedures 
related to the  preoperative evaluation and the  hernia surgery are considered standard of care and 
will be the responsibility of the subject and the subje ct’s insurance company.   
 
Version #: 6 
Date Submitted: May 29, [ADDRESS_23241] any patient’s ability to receive care or to undergo ventral hernia repair at the Cleveland 
Clinic Foundation . 
 
PAYMENTS TO THE SUBJECTS  
There are no extra costs to the subjects associated with the research.  
 
PLAN FOR OBTAINING INFORMED CONSENT  
For each subject, written informed consent will be obtained prior to any protocol -
related activities. As part of this procedure, the principal investigator, surgeon co -investigator, or 
one of the approved study coordinators must explain orally and in writing t he nature, duration, and 
purpose of the study in such a manner that the subject is aware of the potential risks, 
inconveniences, or adverse effects that may occur. The subjects will be informed that they may 
withdraw from the study at any time.  Subjects w ill receive all information that is required by 
[CONTACT_17926].  
After a potential study patient is identified, the investigator or the study coordinator 
listed in this protocol as a person who will obtain consent will be responsible for instituting th e 
informed consent process in a face -to-face manner. Before starting any study procedures, the 
investigator will discuss the proposed research study in detail with the potential subject during the 
office visit to discuss treatment options.  The subject wil l be allowed ample time to read and review 
Version #: 6 
Date Submitted: May 29, [ADDRESS_23242] has read and reviewed the informed consent document and has 
agreed to participate, he/she will be asked to sign and date the document. The study member 
obtaining consent will also sign and date the form, and documentation of the informed consent 
process will be included in the research file (i.e., the person who obtained consent, where and when 
consent was obtained, and who was present during the process). A copy of the consent form will be 
given to the subject for their records.  
 
PROVISIONS FOR SUBJECTS FROM VULNERABLE POPULATIONS  
                 The population to be studied includes adults [ADDRESS_23243] the capacity to 
understand and actively consent to th e procedure independently.  Pregnant women will be excluded 
from participating in this study.  
                   Staff and employees at the participating institutions  are considered a part of the 
vulnerable population .  Staff and employees may be eligible  to participate in this study. Since 
Version #: 6 
Date Submitted: May 29, [ADDRESS_23244] will be informed during the consent 
process that his/her p articipation or refusal to  participate  will in no way influence grades, 
employment, or subsequent recommendations.  Every effort will be made to prevent coercion 
during this initial process and throughout study participation.  According to IRB policy, stud ents 
and house staff cannot be asked to participate in research conducted while under the direct 
supervision of the investigator, so those subjects will not be enrolled.  
In those instances where potential participants cannot read the consent form because 
they do not speak English, we will work with the IRB to develop a language -appropriate consent 
form.  In addition, a qualified translator will be present to assist with obtaining the info rmed consent 
of the participant and throughout the duration of the pa tient’s participation in the study.   
In addition, in the unusual situation where a subject cannot read a consent form  due to 
illiteracy or blindness, a member of the research study staff will read and explain the consent form 
to the participant or to the  participant’s legally  authorized  representative.  A witness, who will sign 
and date the consent form, must also be present during this oral presentation.  
 
SUBJECT PRIVACY AND DATA CONFIDENTIALITY  
Anonymity and confidentiality of subjects participating in this study will be 
maintained. The only potential identifiers on any study documents submitted to the sponsor or 
designee will be subject study numbers, dates of birth, and dates of procedures.  Every effort will be 
made to maintain the confidentiality of documents that identify the subject by [CONTACT_2300] (e.g., signed 
informed consent documents, clinic charts), except to the extent necessary to allow monitoring by 
[CONTACT_24233].   
Version #: 6 
Date Submitted: May 29, [ADDRESS_23245] number, will be stored in 
the AHSQC database. Randomization will occur with the use of a customized Research Electronic 
Data Capture (REDCap®) database program. This is in a secure network/firewall protect ed 
electronic database to which only the investigator and the designated members of the study team 
will have access using an individual assigned login and password. Only approved study members 
listed on the IRB protocol will have access to the separately -stored master list.  Only the Principal 
Investigator, Lead Research Coordinators, and Biostatisticians will be granted access to retrieve 
patient data for routine data quality assessments and data analyses. All electronic records pertaining 
to the clinical study will be password -protected, and only approved study members listed on the 
IRB protocol will have password access.  
Any information about the subject will be stored in the AHSQC , a secure  database 
that is used at our institution to track cli nical outcomes in patients who undergo hernia repair . 
 
POWER CALCULATION  
The primary outcome measure of this study is t he change in NIH PROMIS Pain 
Intensity Scale 3a scaled score one  year after operation .  The mean scaled score change at one year 
will be compared for each group ( heavy  weight  mesh versus  medium weight mesh).   Patient 
reported  outcomes within the AHSQC were evaluated for patients undergoing ventral hernia repair 
from July [ADDRESS_23246] 2016. Twenty -three patients met criteria for mediu m weight mesh 
as defined in Table 1  and six patients meeting criteria for heavy  weight  mesh. Scaled score changes 
at one  year after operation are summarized as below:  
 

Version #: 6 
Date Submitted: May 29, [ADDRESS_23247] allowing for unequal variance with equal sample sizes (1:1) 
group allocation of medium weight and heavyweight  mesh, 160 patients per group will achieve a 
target po wer of 80% given an alpha of 0.05.  Assuming a 10% loss to follow up at 1 year, a total of 
352 patients will be recruited for this study (176 patients in each group).  
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
 Categorical variables will be examined using Pearson’s Chi -Square and all continuous 
variables will be exami ned using the non -parametric Wilcoxon signed rank test.  The categorical 
variables will be reported using proportions and continuous variables will be reported using the 
median and the interquartile range.  
 Specific Aim 1: The Wilcoxon signed rank test will b e performed to determine if the 
change from baseline to one-year follow -up is statistically significantly different between the 
medium weight and heavyweight  mesh groups.  
Specific Aim 2 : The proportion of patients in each group reporting a hernia recurrenc e 
will be examined using Pearson’s Chi -Square test to determine if there is a difference between the 
groups.  
Specific Aim 3: The counts of the surgical site infections  will be compared using  
Pearson’s  Chi-Square test to determine if an association exists between either type of mesh and 
frequency of SSI.  
Specific Aim 4: The change in the HerQLes will be examined using the Wilcoxon 
signed rank test to determine if there is a difference in the quality of life after hernia repair for 
patients receiving medium weight vs heavyweight  mesh.  
Version #: 6 
Date Submitted: May 29, [ADDRESS_23248] will 
be comprised of surgeons and statisticians from the Cleveland Clinic Foundation . This group of 
individuals will meet at regular intervals to monitor the safety and progression of this trial.  
 
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE/INNOVATION  
 The use of prosthetic reinforcement during ventral hernia repair is well accepted.   
Both arms evaluated in thi s study represent standard of care for retromuscular ventral hernia repair.  
Nevertheless, previous studies have concluded that the use of heavyweight mesh does not lead to a 
protective benefit with regards to long -term hernia recurrence at the cost of chr onic pain and/or 
impaired quality of life.3 In a recent study by [CONTACT_24234], there was no statistically significant 
difference in chronic pain between the two  types of meshes but there was a significant advantage in 
terms of hernia recurrence for those patients that underwent inguinal hernia repair with heavyweight 
mesh.9 As previous studies looking at the same outcomes in ventral hernia repair are > [ADDRESS_23249], the registry -based trial allows for faster accrual of 
Version #: 6 
Date Submitted: May 29, [ADDRESS_23250] trial of its kind 
in the field of hernia surgery, we hope this trial will help to determine the feasibility and quality of 
registr y-based trials within this field of surgery.   
REFERENCES  
1. Choi JJ, Palaniappa NC, Dallas KB, et al. Use of Mesh During Ventral Hernia Repair in Clean -
Contaminated and Contaminated Cases: Outcomes of 33,832 Cases. Ann Surg . 2012; 255.1: 176 -
180. 
2. Altom LK, Synder CW, Gray SH, et al. Outcomes of Emergent Incisional Hernia Repair. Am 
Surg . 2011; 77: 971 -976. 
3. Schmidbauer S, Ladurner R, Hallfeldt KK, et al. Heavy -Weight versus Low -Weight 
Polypropylene Meshes for Open Sublay Mesh Repair of Incisio nal Hernia. Eur J Med  Res. 2005; 
10: 247 -253. 
4. Conze J, Kingsworth AN, Flament JB, et al. Randomized Clinical Trial Comparing Lightweight 
Composite Mesh with Polyester or Polypropylene Mesh for Incisional Hernia Repair. Br J Surg . 
2005; 92: 1488 -1493.  
5. Ladurner R, Chiapponi C, Linhuber Q, et al. Long -Term  Outcome and Quality of Life after Open 
Incisional Hernia Repair - Light versus Heavy Weight Meshes. BMC Surg . 2011; 11: 25 -30. 
6. Poulose BK, Roll S, Murphy JW, at al. Design and Implementation of the A mericas Hernia 
Society Quality Collaborative (AHCQS): Improving Value in Hernia Care. Hernia. 2016; 20.2: 
177-189. 
Version #: 6 
Date Submitted: May 29, 2018  
NCT0308239 1 
17 
 7. Lauer MS and D’Agostino RB. The Randomized Registry Trial - The Next Disruptive 
Technology in Clinical Research? N Engl J Med . 2013; 369.17: 1579 -1581.  
8. Baucom RB, Ousley J, Feurer ID, et al. Patient -Reported  Outcomes after Incisional Hernia 
Repair - Establishing the Ventral Hernia Recurrence  Inventory. Am J Surg . 2015. doi: 
10.1016/j.amjsurg.2015.06.007 . 
9. Burgmans JPJ, Voorbrood CEH , Simmermacher RKJ, et al. Long -Term Results of Randomized 
Double -Blinded Prospective Trial of a Lightweight (Ultrapro) vs a Heavyweight Mesh (Prolene) in 
Laparoscopic Total Extreperitoneal  Inguinal Hernia Repair (TULP Trial). Ann Surg  . 2016263.5: 
862-866. 