1 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
  
 
 
Title: Oxytocin in Cocaine Dependence 
NCT: 01573273 
Date of Document: 8/1/2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
  
 
Oxytocin in Cocaine Dependence 
SPECIFIC AIMS 
Previous work conducted by [CONTACT_367924]/gender differences in preclinical and clinical 
models of cocaine cue and stress reactivity that may contribute to gender differences in relapse. The proposed 
project will build on this work by [CONTACT_367925]/gender differences. Specifically, 
several studies have indicated that hypothalamic neuropeptides mediate behavioral responding to stress as 
well as play a role in neuroadaptations that occur as a consequence of long- term cocaine use. The 
hypothalamic neuropeptide oxytocin promotes trust, social bonding, and calmness. Given these effects, 
oxytocin may have a therapeutic role in ameliorating the negative affect commonly observed prior to relapse in 
cocaine- dependent indiv iduals. As estrogen appears to enhance oxytocin’s effects, women may have an 
enhanced response to oxytocin. The specific aims of the proposed project are:  
 
Specific Aim 1: Using a human laboratory paradigm, determine the impact of oxytocin on stress -
induced craving in cocaine- dependent women and men.  
Preclinical and clinical investigations have found that the neuropeptide oxytocin exerts anxiolytic effects in 
stress paradigms. However, little is known about the potential anxiolytic effects of oxytocin in c ocaine-
dependent individuals, or if a gender differential in response exists.  
Hypothesis 1a:  Intranasal administration of oxytocin will attenuate drug craving response and stress reactivity 
to a psychosocial stress task in cocaine- dependent individuals compared to placebo administration.   
Hypothesis 1b:  The ameliorative e ffects of oxytocin on drug craving response and stress reactivity will be 
more pronounced in cocaine- dependent women as compared to cocaine- dependent men.  
Exploratory Hypothesis 1c:   The stress and craving reduction induced by [CONTACT_367926].  
Specific Aim 2:  Using a neuroimaging cue paradigm, explore the impact of oxytocin on neural 
correlates and subjective responses of cocaine cue r eactivity in cocaine- dependent men and women.  
Presentation of cocaine- paired cues elicits a stress response in cocaine- dependent individuals. Neuroimaging 
studies indicate substantial overlap in the corticostriatal limbic circuitry responsible for cue and stress -primed 
drug craving. Oxytocin receptors have been localized to these same regions and preclinical studies have 
shown that oxytocin attenuates the acute reinforcing properties of psychostimulants. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_77078], 
little is known about the role of oxytocin in modulating the affective response to cocaine- paired cues and 
associated neural activity in cocaine- dependent men and women and whether there are gender differences in 
this modulation.   
Hypothesis 2a: Intranasal administration of oxytocin will decrease subjective ratings of cue- induced cocaine 
craving in cocaine- dependent men and women compared to placebo administration.  
Hypothesis 2b:  Intranasal administration of oxytocin will decrease functional activity in the anterior cingulate 
cortex , amygdala, striatum, and prefrontal cortex compared to placebo administration.   
Exploratory Hypothesis 2c:  The attenuation of functional activity in the anterior cingulate cortex, amygdala, 
striatum and prefrontal cortex following oxytocin administration will be greater in cocaine- dependent women as 
compared to cocaine- dependent men.  
Exploratory Hypothesis 2d:  Oxytocin will modulate resting -state and task -related functional connectivity 
among sub -networks implicated in reward and motivation (nucleus accum bens, and orbitofrontal cortex), 
3 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 memory and learning (amygdala and hippocampus), and cognitive control (prefrontal cortex and anterior 
cingulate cortex). Oxytocin may increase connectivity between reward/motivation and cognitive control sub -
networks in craving states as an index of top- down regulation.  
In summary, the proposed project will provide important data on the effect of oxytocin on stress and craving in 
cocaine- dependent individuals, explore the neural circuitry involved in response to oxytocin administration, and 
investigate whether sex/gender differences in response exist.  
 
RESEARCH STRATEGY  
A. Significance  
Gender differences in cocaine use disorders. A growing body of literature indicates important gender 
differences in the symptomatology, course , and treatment of addictive disorders, including cocaine 
dependence. Approximately 38% of the 5.3 million individuals in the [LOCATION_002] who reported cocaine use in 
2008 were women (SAMSHA, 2009); despi[INVESTIGATOR_367893], there is evi dence that women may 
actually have an increased vulnerability to the development and deleterious consequences of cocaine 
dependence. W omen meet criteria for drug dependence more quickly and enter treatment programs earlier as 
compared to men (Brecht et al. , 2004; Cotto et al., 2010; Hernandez -Avila et al., 2004; McCance- Katz, 1999; 
Ridenour et al. , 2005; Westermeyer & Boedicker, 2000). Cocaine- dependent women also have greater 
psychiatric, medical, social/family, and employment problems (Brady & Randall, 1999; Elman et al. , 2001; 
Najavits & Lester, 2008; Wong et al. , 2002) and are more likely to attribute relapse to negative emotional states 
and interpersonal conflict than men (Connors et al., 1998; Terry -McElrath et al. , 2009). These findings suggest 
gender  differences in cocaine use and dependence which may have important treatment implications.  
 
Stress and substance use. Multiple theories of addiction postulate that stress plays an important role in 
vulnerability and motivation to use and abuse substances  (Brady & Sinha, 2005; Higgins & Marlatt, 1975; Koob 
& Le Moal, 2001; Russell & Mehrabian, 1975) . Generally, these models suggest that drug use may begin as an 
attempt to modulate tension or distress in some cases. Over time, dependence can develop, and motivation for 
drug use may include treatment of withdrawal symptoms and response to conditioned c ues as well as stress 
relief and mood enhancement. Thus, vulnerability to drug dependence and relapse may be a result of negative 
reinforcement/relief from stress or positive reinforcement/mood enhancement. Consistent with this model, 
clinical studies have shown drug or alcohol consumption to be positively associated with subjective reports of 
stress, lack of support, and avoidance copi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (Cronkite & Moos, 1984; Hall, Havassy, & Wasserman, 1991; 
McMahon, 2001; Pohorecky, 1991) . Data from our previous SCOR work also suggests that cocaine use can be 
related t o stress and negative life events (Waldrop et al., 2007a; Waldrop et al., 2007b).  
 
Stress and craving.  Considerable empi[INVESTIGATOR_367894] a laboratory setting, even in the absence of drug cues 
(Childress et al., 1994; Cooney et al., 1997; McRae- Clark et al., 2011; Sinha et al., 1999) . In cocaine-
dependent individuals, studies show that personalized imagery of stress situations as well as exposure to drug -
related cues produce significant increases in cocaine craving, heart rate, cortisol, and subjective anxiety (Fox 
et al., 2008; Sinha et al., 1999; Sinha et al. , 2000) . Of note, our SCOR data suggests that there may be 
important gender differences in subjective ratings of stress and craving in response to cocaine cues and 
interpersonal stressors. Following presentation of cocaine- related cues, peak subjective ratings of stress and 
craving were correlated in both cocaine- dependent men and women. In response to a social stressor, 
subjective ratings of peak stress and craving were correlated in cocaine- dependent women; however, a 
significant correlation was not pr esent in cocaine- dependent men (Waldrop et al., 2010). These findings 
suggest that stress related to interpersonal triggers is more highly associated with drug craving in women as 
compared to men. Importantly, several studies have found stress/mood -elicite d craving predicted relapse to 
substance use (Cooney et al., 1997; Killen & Fortmann, 1997; Sinha et al., 2006) . We have also recently  
reported that subjective stress and craving response to a pharmacological stressor (corticotrophin releasing 
hormone) predicts relapse to cocaine use (Back et al., 2010). Thus, it appears that provocation of subjective 
4 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 stress not only elicits craving, but  it may also independently predict relapse, supporting the targeting of stress -
activated pathways for relapse medication development (Winhusen & Somoza, 2001) .  
 
Stress and cue reactivity.  Cue-reactivity paradigms are commonly used in systematic investigations o f 
craving (Drummond et al., 1990). The presentation of cocaine- related cues may also induce stress responses. 
Data from the previous funding period demonstrated increased subjective feelings of stress in cocaine-
dependent individuals following cue presentation ( Waldrop et al., 2010). This is congruent with other reports of 
increased anxiety and negative emotion following cocaine- cue exposure (Fox et al., 2008; Sinha et al., 2000). 
Further, cocaine- cue videos produced significantly greater brain activity in cocaine -dependent individuals than 
healthy controls in regions that were activated in response to sad videos. Thus, drug- paired cues may recruit 
brain regions responsible for the processing of negative affective stimuli (Wexler et al., 2001).    
 
Oxytocin and str ess. Oxytocin is a nine amino acid neuropeptide with peripheral endocrine and central neural 
actions that is synthesized in the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus. Peripherally, 
oxytocin elicits physiologic events necessary for copul ation, parturition, and lactation (Ludwig & Leng, 2006) . 
Central release of oxytocin within limbic nuclei has been implicated in “pro- social” behaviors  and may also 
have anxiolytic effects. For example, several preclinical studies have shown that oxytocin increases approach 
behavior in rats (Witt et al., 1992) , and is essential for partner preferences and monogamous pair bonding in 
prairie voles (Williams et al., 1994) . Central administration of oxytocin receptor antagonists prevents pair 
bonding in female prairie voles  without any significant impact on mati ng. In fact, neonatal nurturing promotes 
long-term plasticity within the limbic circuitry, while childhood maltreatment has been associated with low 
urinary oxytocin levels (Francis et al., 2002; Fries et al., 2005) . Intranasal administration of oxytocin attenuates 
anticipatory anxiety, subjective stress, and hypothalamic -pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenal (HPA) axis activation to a 
psychosocial laboratory stress task and increases trust (de Oliveira et al. , 2011; Heinrichs et al., 2003; Kosfeld 
et al., 2005) . In addition, intranasal oxytocin attenuates circulating cortisol levels in men with a history of 
childhood maltreatment (Meinlschmidt & Heim, 2007) . In agreement, neuroimaging studies demonstrate that 
intranasal administration of oxytocin attenuates amygdala activation following stressful and fearful sti muli 
(Baumgartner et al., 2008; Domes et al., 2007; Kirsch et al., 2005) . Taken together, these studies demonstrate 
that oxytocin may play a potential therapeutic role in ameliorating stress and anxiety.  
 
Oxytocin and substance use disorders. Both preclinical and clinical studies suggest that oxytocin may 
attenuate the effects of both acute and long- term drug use. Molecular studies have localized oxytocin receptors 
to the mesolimbic dopamine reward circuit, including the amygdala, nucleus accum bens, and ventral tegmental 
area (VTA) (Vaccari et al., 1998) . Similar to drugs of abuse, oxytocin infusion directly into the VTA promotes 
dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens (Melis et al., 2007). Systemic administration of oxytocin promotes 
conditioned place preference in rodents, indicating that oxytocin is rewarding (Liberzon et al., 1997) . 
Behavioral studies  utilizing animal models of drug reinforcement  demonstrate that oxytocin dose- dependently 
decreases cocaine- induced hyperactivity and stereotypy (Sarnyai et al., 1991; Sarnyai et al., 1992) .  
Interestingly, chronic administration of oxytocin reduces dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens, 
indicating that oxytocin may be involved in the plasticity that occurs within the reward circuit as a function of 
repeated drug use (Kovacs et al., 1998) . In addition, oxytocin inhibits the development of tolerance to repeated 
cocaine administration (Sarnyai et al., 1992) and may also  attenuate self -administration of cocaine (Sarnyai & 
Kovacs, 1994). Oxytocin administration has been shown to block methamphetamine- induced locomotor activity 
and reduce methamphetamine reinstatement (Carson et al., 2010). These preclinical findings implic ate 
oxytocin in the acute effects of stimulants, as well as the long term behavioral consequences of repeated use.  
 Limited clinical research has examined the effects of oxytocin in drug -dependent populations. 
Immunohistochemical analysis of post -mortem br ains from alcoholics indicate a significant reduction in 
oxytocin immunoreactivity in the hypothalamus (Sivukhina et al., 2006) .  Further , mothers using cocaine during 
pregnancy exhibit significantly lower plasma oxytocin levels, as well as greater hostility and depression as 
compared to control mothers (Light et al., 2004) . Based on a positive preclinical s tudy in which increasing 
oxytocin levels were hypothesized to moderate the effects of lithium -attenuated cannabinoid withdrawal in rats 
5 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 (Cui et al., 2001), a trial of lithium on marijuana withdrawal symptoms demonstrated positive outcomes, 
including decreased anxiety, lending support to this hypothesis (Winstock et al., 2009). These clinical findings, 
coupled with preclinical reports, suggest that oxytocin may decrease some symptoms associated with drug 
dependence such as negative affect, withdrawal, and tolerance.  Our group has recently completed a pi[INVESTIGATOR_367895] a social stressor task in marijuana- dependent participants. 
Oxytocin -treated individuals, as compared to placebo, demonstrated a significant trend towards r educed 
craving and cortisol response (see Preliminary Data). The proposed study will be the first controlled 
examination of the effect of oxytocin on stress or cue- induced craving in cocaine- dependent individuals.   
 
Neural correlates of drug craving, sex differences, and potential role of oxytocin. Compulsive drug-
seeking in response to stress and drug cues may be a function of disruption in the circuitry responsible for 
maintaining executive control and response inhibition in response to emotional evocative stimuli (Baler & 
Volkow, 2006) . In support, neuroimaging studies of cocaine- dependent individuals have implicated prefrontal, 
limbic and striatal regions in both cue and stress -primed drug craving. For example, cocaine cues (videos and 
guided imagery) increase activity in limbic regions including the amygdala and anterior cingulate cortex of 
cocaine- dependent individuals but not healthy controls (Childress et al., 1999; Wexler et al., 2001; Garavan et 
al., 2000). Kilts and colleagues found that activity in the ventral striatum of cocaine- dependent men was 
significantly greater during cocaine- cue exposure than during exposure to neutr al cues (Kilts, et al., 2001) . In 
contrast, stress attenuated activity in frontal, limbic/paralimbic regions and increased activity  in the dorsal 
striatum of cocaine- dependent individuals (Sinha et al., 2005) .   
 Significant sexual dimorphism in frontal -limbic -striatal structure, function, and neurochemistry are well 
documented (Cahill, 2006) . Therefore, it is not surprising that there are sex differences in the neural correlates 
of drug craving. For example, stressful imagery produced greater activity in the left anterior and right poster ior 
cingulate, left insula, and inferior medial cortices of cocaine- dependent women as compared to cocaine-
dependent men (Li et al., 2005). On the other hand, cocaine- dependent women exposed to guided imagery of 
cocaine use exhibited significantly less act ivity in the amygdala, insula, orbitofrontal and ventral cingulate 
cortices as compared to cocaine- dependent men (K ilts et al.,  2004).   
 Interestingly, oxytocin receptors appear to be widely distributed within frontal -striatal -limbic regions.  In 
situ hybridization studies have localized oxytocin receptor mRNA in the hypothalamus, rostral regions of the 
frontal cortex, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, anterior cingulate, dorsal striatum, and the amygdala 
(Yoshimura et al., 1996; Yoshimura et al., 1993) . In addition, oxytocin administration attenuates amygdal a 
activity to emotional evocative faces (Domes et al., 2007) . Of note, the reduction in amygdala activity was 
observed in response to both aversive and happy faces, indicating that oxytocin may attenuate reactivity to 
both aversive and appetitive stimuli.  
 
Functional Connectivity in Cocaine Users. Measures of resting state functional connectivity have been 
employed in neuroimaging studies to evaluate the strength of communication within networks encoding 
functions ranging from vision and somatosensory perception to motivation and executive function (Fox & 
Raichle, 2007; Fox et al., 2005) . Recently, measures of resting state functional connectivity have been applied 
to substance- dependent populations. The strength of connectivity within regions in the reward circuit was 
compared between healthy controls and cocaine users. Greater functional connectivi ty was found between the 
ventral striatum and orbitofrontal cortex of the cocaine group compared to healthy controls (Wilcox et al., 
2011) . In contrast, Gu and colleagues found that the strength of connectivity between the ventral tegmental 
area, thalamus/lentiform nucleus/ventral striatum, medial prefrontal cortex, and a mygdala was significantly 
lower in cocaine- dependent individuals as compared to controls (Gu et al., 2010) . Tomasi and colleagues 
found that cocaine abusers exhibited significantly lower connectivity between the midbrain, thalamus, rostral 
cingulate cortex, and cerebellum (Tomasi et al., 2010) . This disparity in findings indicates  the need for 
additional studies assessing functional connectivity in cocaine- dependent individuals. Moreover, the strength of 
functional connectivity during exposure to cocaine cues has not been explored.  
 
6 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 Impact of estrogen and progesterone on reward, cr aving, and response to oxytocin. Estrogen and 
progesterone levels fluctuate throughout the menstrual cycle. Progesterone levels peak seven to twelve days 
after ovulation marking the middle of the luteal phase; estrogen levels dominate throughout the cycle but peak 
six to ten days after the start of the menstrual cycle, marking the mid- follicular phase (Evans et al., 2002) . In 
addition to sex differences in brain structure, function, and neurochemistry, circulating gonadal hormones play 
a critical role in mediating the subjective response to the drug itself, cues, and stress. Preclinical studies have 
localized estrogen and progesterone receptors to brain regions responsible for mediating the physiological and 
behavioral response to stress and cues (Alves et al., 1998; Cushing & Kramer, 2005; Laflamme et al., 1998) . 
Preclinical studies conducted by [CONTACT_367927] (Feltenstein 
& See, 2007; Kippin et al., 2005). In a recent study of treatment -seeking cocaine- dependent women, subjective 
craving following exposure to a laboratory stressor was significantly lower in women with elevated 
progesterone compared t o women with low progesterone (Sinha, et al., 2 007). It has also been demonstrated 
that ovarian hormone levels can impact the response to smoked cocaine with the positive or “rewarding” 
effects of cocaine significantly lower during the luteal phase compared to the follicular phase (Evans et al., 
2002; Sofuoglu et al., 1999) . Taken together, these studies indicate that during the follicular phase when 
estrogen levels are elevated, the positive and rewarding properties of s timulants peak, while increases in 
progesterone during the luteal phase may be decrease craving and/or drug effect.   
 Surprisingly few studies have examined the impact of ovarian hormones on the neural correlates of 
drug craving; however; neuroimaging stu dies of healthy women tested at different phases of their menstrual 
cycle are intriguing. For example, Goldstein and colleagues compared brain activity of healthy women exposed 
to images depi[INVESTIGATOR_367896] f ollicular/mid -cycle phase of their 
menstrual cycle. Activity within the limbic regions was significantly greater during early as compared to late 
follicular phase (Goldstein et al., 2005) . In addition, during the late follicular phase, the magnitude of activity in 
the amygdala was correlated with arousal, a pattern not observed early in the cycle when both progesterone 
and estrogen are low. While these data suggest that estrogen may attenuate limbic reactivity to emotional 
evocative stimuli in healthy subjects, the role of progesterone is unclear since subjects were not tested during 
the luteal phase of their cycle. Dreher and colleagues measured the limbic response to uncertain anticipated 
monetary reward in healthy women during the mid- follicular and mid- luteal phases of their menstrual cycle.  
Anticipation of uncertain rewards produced significantly greater activity in the amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex 
during the follicular phase than the luteal phase of their cycle (Dreher  et al., 2007) , sugges ting that estrogen 
may enhance limbic responding to predictors of reward . 
 Studies have indicated that the ability of oxytocin to modulate social behaviors, such as attachment and 
aggression, is dependent upon gonadal hormone receptors localized the within limbic circuitry. Estrogen 
promotes oxytocin relea se and is required for the synthesis of oxytocin receptors in the amygdala (Lim & 
Young, 2006) . Animal studies have also demonstrated greater oxytocin release in females compared to males 
in response to threat (De Kloet et al., 1986; McCarthy, 1995). In one clinical study, oxytocin or placebo spray 
was administered to couples engaged in a ten- minute conflict discussion of finances, education, or leisure time 
(Ditzen et al., 2009). While oxytocin significantly increased positive behaviors (eye contact [CONTACT_367928] -
disclosure) relative to negative behavior (contempt and defensiveness) compared with the placebo, no 
significant gender differences were found. However, a trend towards an accelerated reduction in salivary 
cortisol levels following the task was observed in the oxytocin- treated women, but not in the men.  As stated 
previously, cocaine- dependent women are more likely to report negative affect and stress prior to relapse as 
compared to men. Combined with the evidence that estrogen enhances the effects of  oxytocin, a more robust 
anxiolytic/anticraving response to oxytocin in drug -dependent women as compared to men might be predicted. 
This hypothesis will be tested in the proposed project.  
Genetic Testing: The role of neuropeptides in mediating the affectiv e and behavioral responses to stress and 
cues is well documented.  However, there is still significant individual variability in the OT system.  For 
example, exogenous OT increases trust and bonding other s have found that OT reduces trust and social 
bonding in individuals with borderline personality disorder (Simeon, et al., 2011: Bartz, et al., 2011).  In addition, 
while one study found that low levels of plasma OT were associated with symptom severity in women with 
7 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 major depression, another study found no correlation (Ozsoy, et al., 2009; P arker, et al., 2010).  Thus, 
understanding how individual variability in the OT system impacts the affective responses to stress particularly 
in cocaine- dependent individuals could have a significant impact on the development of effective treatment 
strateg ies targeted at specific neuropeptide systems.  An emerging literature suggests that genetic 
polymorphisms in neuropeptide receptors play an important role risk and resilience to psychopathology (Brune, 
2012). For example, polymorphic variation in the OT r eceptor gene (rs2254298) has been associated with an 
increased risk for depression and anxiety disorders.  Therefore we plan to examine genes associated with the 
neuropeptide system that regulate the corticolimbic brain activity. Blood will be collected fr om consenting 
participants for genetic testing. Our group has previously collaborated with [CONTACT_367947] at Virginia 
Commonwealth University (VCU), whose research group has been actively investigating genetic variations 
associated with addiction. Br iefly, whole blood will be collected in EDTA containing vacutainers and stored at -
70º at the Institution of Psychiatry Laboratory .  De -identified samples will be shipped on dry ice  to [CONTACT_367948]’s Laboratory at VCU.   The DNA will be extracted and assayed using standardized commercially 
available kits.   
 
Summary. Stress is an important predictor of relapse, and targeting stress -activated pathways may lead to 
therapeutic advancements in the treatment of substance use disorders. Oxytocin has been shown t o promote 
trust, social bonding, and calmness; however, its potential effects have not been explored in cocaine-
dependent individuals. Oxytocin receptors have been localized to brain regions that are activated by [CONTACT_9934]-
paired cues and preclinical studies have shown that oxytocin attenuates the acute and long -term behavioral 
effects of psychostimulants. However,  little is known about the role of oxytocin in mediating the affective 
response to cocaine- paired cues and associated neural activity in cocaine- dependent men and women. This 
project is a direct evolution from our previous SCOR -supported research. Our work has progressed from 
characterizing sex/gender differences in response to social stressors and cocaine cues in cocaine -
dependent men and women, to our on- going work evaluating whether stress potentiates cue- induced 
craving and the impact of hormones on this response. The proposed study will investigate the role of 
oxytocin in the sex/gender differences in stress response and craving in cocaine -dependent 
individuals and preliminarily explore its therapeutic potential.   
 
B. Innovation  
The proposed project will be the first clinical investigation of oxytocin in cocaine -dependent individuals. 
It has been suggested that oxytocin may be useful therapeuticall y in addiction treatment (Carson et al., 2010); 
however, limited clinical research with oxytocin in addicted populations has been conducted. Further, although 
a strong preclinical literature supports the role of ovarian hormones in cocaine craving and relapse, little is 
known about the impact of ovarian hormones on the neural correlates of drug craving. The methodology 
proposed also incorporates novel technologies and analytical techniques. The use of neuroimaging will 
allow identification of the neural cir cuitry involved in oxytocin- mediated affective response to cocaine-
paired cues, and exploration of sex/gender differences in activation.  Inclusion of functional connectivity 
analyses will allow further elucidation of the sub -networks involved in cocaine- related reward and motivation. 
Further, the proposed project is innovative as it is extends an animal model of a potential therapeutic 
intervention (oxytocin) to a human laboratory setting. Therefore, this project will further the ability to 
directly translate findings from an animal model to an ecologically valid test of stress and relapse in cocaine-
dependent humans, and explore the impact of hormonal status on response in this model.  
 
C. Approach  
C.1. Preliminary Studies.  Below, a brief overview of some of the major findings from our previous funding 
periods is provided. Additionally, preliminary data of direct relevance to the proposed project is presented.  
 
8 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 C.1.a. Progress report. In our initial SCOR project, we explored  sex/gender differences in response to a 
social stressor and drug cues in cocaine- dependent individuals. As discussed above, we found gender 
differences in the relationships between subjective ratings of craving across the tasks suggesting that social 
stressors may be more closely associated with relapse for cocaine- dependent women as compared to men 
(Waldrop et al. , 2010). Further, greater dysregulation in the HPA -axis response to corticotropin -releasing 
hormone (CRH) was observed in cocaine- dependent women as compared to cocaine- dependent men or 
healthy men and women (Brady et al. , 2009). S ubjective response to CRH and drug cues in the laboratory 
setting correlated with relapse to cocaine use (Back et al. , 2010). We additionally investigated the impact of 
early life trauma and current life stressors, and how these factors may contribute to stress response, craving, 
and cocaine use (Back et al. , 2008; DeSantis et al. , 2011; Moran- Santa Maria et al. , 2010; Waldrop et al. , 
2007). A complete listing of publicat ions resulting from our previous work can be found in Appendix 4. Taken 
together, our findings suggest that the HPA axis in women may be more sensitive to the toxic effects of 
cocaine or early life trauma as compared to men. Cocaine- dependent women have a greater physiologic and 
subjective response to stress and the magnitude of this response may be related to the potential for relapse. 
This suggests that the stress response is particularly important in understanding sex/gender differences in drug 
dependenc e and other psychiatric disorders and is also an important target in developi[INVESTIGATOR_367897]- dependent women.   
C.1.b. Oxytocin Administration. In a paradigm similar 
to what will be used in the proposed project, we 
administered oxytocin or placebo nasal spray to 16 
marijuana -dependent individuals. As shown in Figure 
1, oxytocin treatment prior to completion of the Trier 
Social Stress Task (TSST) resulted in an attenuated 
cortisol response as compared to placebo (p=0.066). A 
decrease in craving with oxytocin administration 
compared to placebo was also observed (p=0.025). 
These pi[INVESTIGATOR_367898]-
dependent populations. An open- label pi[INVESTIGATOR_367899] -dependent 
participants is ongoing. To date, we have administered 
oxytocin to five cocaine dependent  individuals, and the 
drug has been well -tolerated.  
 
C.1.c. Examination of neural correlates of cocaine craving.  We are currently conducting a neuroimaging 
study (R01DA023188- S2; PI: [INVESTIGATOR_367900]) in which we have examined response to cocaine cues in 39 cocaine-
dependent participants using fMRI. In this sample, the presen tation of cocaine cues, relative to neutral objects, 
was associated with a widespread pattern of 
activation including left occipi[INVESTIGATOR_96067], left 
superior frontal gyrus, right dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate, bilateral 
hippocampus, right  amygdala, posterior cingulate 
cortex, and left orbitofrontal cortex (see Figure 
2). Subjective craving was significantly higher 
following cocaine images blocks ( M = 1.66, SD = 
0.89) versus neutral object blocks (M = 0.58, SD 
= 0.61; p  < 0.001), demonstrat ing our ability to 
elicit craving with our scanning paradigm.  
C.1.d. Functional Connectivity in Cocaine Users.  We recently completed a preliminary study using a graph 
theory -based approach to functional connectivity with the Brain Connectivity Toolbox (BCT; Rubinov & Sporns, 
2011) to examine changes in functional network structure when cocaine- users (n=37) were viewing cocaine-Figure 1. Change in cortisol following oxytocin 
administration and TSST completion.  
 
Figure 2 . SPM map of blood oxygen level dependent 
(BOLD) response to cocaine cues minus neutral objects 
using a voxelwise threshold of z = 3.09 and a corrected 
cluster threshold of p  < 0.05.  
 

9 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
  
related pi[INVESTIGATOR_367901]. Figure [ADDRESS_459919] condition, 4 modules emerged (color coded in Figure 3 ), but in the cocaine 
condition, there was significant reorganization of the modules relative to rest. The blur condition was identical 
to rest whereas the object condition was different from both the rest and cocaine conditions. Notably, in the 
cocaine condition there was greater integration across brain regions as evidenced by [CONTACT_367929] 3 
modules. In addition, the diversity coefficient (which is a measure of functional integration) was great er in the 
cocaine than the rest condition for all regions that changed module membership in the cocaine condition 
(Figure 3 -cocaine; all p’s < .05) except for the right middle occipi[INVESTIGATOR_367902] (region 52). Regions that became 
more integrated with the fronto- parietal module (green) included the insula, posterior cingulate, auditory cortex, 
and dorsal visual regions. We speculate that this reorganization reflects heightened attention to and salience of 
the cocaine stimuli given the characterization of fronto- parietal cortex as a dorsal attention network (Fox et al., 
2006) and insula- cingulate connections 
as part of a salience network (Menon & 
Uddin, 2010). There was also increased 
connectivity/integration of ventral visual 
regions with temporal and ventro -
medial prefrontal regions which may 
reflect strong engagement of memory 
systems related to the cocaine images 
(Childress et al., 1999). Although some 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_367903]- related regions (caudate, 
putamen; blue module) were 
dissoc iated from the other modules in 
the cocaine condition, this also 
occurred when participants were 
viewing objects. The other changes in 
module membership in Figure [ADDRESS_459920] oxytocin receptors (e.g., amygdala, anterior/posterior cingulate, and 
striatum). Finally, Olaf Sporns, a major developer of the BCT, has agreed to be consultant on this project ( see 
Letter of Support). He is currently integrating network -based statistics (Zalesky et al., 2010) into the BCT to 
allow for group comparisons of functional networks.   
 
C.1.e. Summary. As demonstrated by [CONTACT_367930], the research team has experience with stress- induction 
studies (Brady, McRae- Clark, Moran- Santa Maria), cue- reactivity research (Brady, McRae- Clark), 
administration of oxytocin (McRae- Clark), neuroimaging (Brady, Joseph, Moran- Santa Maria), functional 
connectivity analyses (Sporns, Joseph), and recruitment and retention of cocaine- dependent individuals for 
participation in laboratory -based studies (Brady, McRae- Clark). Hence, the study team has the necessary skills 
to ensure the successful completion of the proposed study.  
 
C.2. Research Design and Methods.  In this project, the impact of acute pre- treatment with oxytocin (40 IU) or 
placebo on the subjective and physiologic response to the Trier Social Stress Task (TSST) in men and women 
with cocaine- dependence will be investigated. Additionally, par ticipants will complete two functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI) scans in the presence of cocaine- related cues. Prior to each scan, participants will 
receive either oxytocin (OXY) or placebo (PBO) in a counter -balanced, double- blind fashion. A schematic of 
study procedures is shown below.  
10 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
  
C.2.a. Participants. A total of 152 participants (76 cocaine- dependent women and 76 cocaine -dependent 
men), aged 18 or older, will be recruited over a 51- month period. Additional inclusion criteria include consent to 
random assignment and ability to read and provide informed consent. Exclusion criteria include women who 
are pregnant, nursing, or plan to become pregnant during the course of the study; women who have had a 
complete hysterectomy, are post -menopausal, are receiving hormone replacement or hormonal contraceptive 
therapy, ; having a history of or current major psychiatric or medical disorder; requiring concomitant medication 
that could affect neuroendocrine measu res; and being currently dependent on other substances, with the 
exception of nicotine, alcohol and marijuana. A detailed list of inclusion/exclusion criteria can be found in 
Human Subjects.  
 
C.2.b. Recruitment. Participants will be recruited primarily thr ough media advertisements, as we have had 
good results using this method in previous studies. We are using a similar recruitment strategy for our ongoing 
SCOR protocol . In addition to recruiting through advertisements, our research group also has established 
relationships with clinical programs that screen individuals for research or treatment program participation.  In 
particular primary clinical sources which could be us ed for recruitment include individuals presenting to the 
Charleston Center  for inpatient or outpatient treatment and individuals from the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical 
Center. For patients involved in clinical programs, participation in this protocol will be arranged so as not to 
interfere with treatment participation. Chart review may also be conducted to identify potential subjects , 
although only subjects who have agreed to be contact[CONTACT_367931].  During the previous 
SCOR funding peri od, we consented over 700 cocaine- dependent research participants.   Respondent -Driven 
Sampling” (RDS), will be used to enhance recruitment of the sample (Heckathorn, 1997). The RDS sampling 
methodology is based on recruiting the eligible friends and acquai ntances of each participant so that the 
sample “snowballs”. Each eligible participant who completes an interview will be given coupons to pass on to 
other potential participants. The coupons will have a unique code linked to the person who passes them out.  A 
referral will be instructed to call the site offices for screening and, if eligible, an appointment for further 
evaluation. If a referral completes the screening process and is eligible for the study, the participant who 
referred the person can redeem t he coupon for $20 and 5 fishbowl pi[INVESTIGATOR_103483] . 
C.2.c. Procedures.  
C.2.c.1. Screening/Assessment.  Individuals will be screened for eligibility over the telephone by a trained 
research assistant. Major inclusion/exclusion criteria will be assessed during the telephone interview; if an 
individual seems potentially eligible, (s)he will be invited for an i n-person interview with the research team. 
Prior to any study procedures, the individual will sign an IRB -approved informed consent form. Following 
consent, a battery of standardized assessments will be delivered (described below). At the time of this 
interview, a general medical history and physical exam will be performed to insure that the subject is eligible to 
participate . If a patient is ineligible to participate, (s)he will be given a referral for medical care and/or an 
appropriate treatment program.  
 
a. Screening and Diagnostic Instruments.  Quick Screen: This assessment will quickly determine whether 
an individual meets study inclusion or exclusion criteria. The instrument is designed to assess for substance 
dependence and obvious psychiatric, medical , and logistic exclusions. Mini-International Neuropsychiatric 
Interview (M.I.N.I.):  The M.I.N.I. is a brief structured interview that was designed to assess DSM -IV diagnoses 
using a series of questions in dichotomous format (yes/no). Earlier studies have found that the M.I.N.I. is 
similar in sensitivity, specificity, and inter -rater reliability to other more lengthy diagnostic interviews, such as AssessmentDay 1
•Abstinence assessed
•OXY or PBO
•TSST completed  Day 2
•Abstinence assessed
•OXY or PBO
•fMRI session 1 completedDay 3
•Abstinence assessed
•OXY or PBO
•fMRI session 2 completedFollow -up
11 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 the SCID -I/P (Sheehan & Lecrubier, 2003; Sheehan et al., 1998). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV 
(SCID- I/P): The SCID -P is a structured diagnostic interview that assesses each of the criteria for DSM -IV 
diagnoses. The alcohol and drug use disorder modules will be to thoroughly assess both current and lifetime 
diagnostic status for abuse and dependence. It h as excellent inter -rater and test -retest reliability (First et al., 
2002). Menstrual History Diary:  Participants will be asked to estimate the timing of their cycle for the 90- days 
prior to study entry and to track their cycle during study participation. D aily Hassles Scale:  The Daily Hassles 
Scale consists of a list of [ADDRESS_459921] month. The Daily Hassles 
Scale is positively correlated with adaptational ability and is a good predictor of psychological symptoms 
(Kanner et al., 1981). Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Questionnaire: The modified ACE 
questionnaire assesses childhood maltreatment and exposure to household dysfunction. It has been utilized to 
examine the relationship between adverse childhood experiences and health risk behavior in adulthood (Felitti 
et al., 1998). In addition to providing data to assess the impact of early childhood tr auma on cocaine use, 
utilization of the ACE will allow for potential cross -SCOR collaborations as it also being employed by [CONTACT_367932], Yale and Harvard SCORs.  Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ) :  The CTQ is a [ADDRESS_459922] (sexual abuse, physical abuse, emotional abuse, emotional neglect and physical 
neglect). Subjects answer each question using a 5- point Likert scale ranging from (1) never true to 5 (very 
often true). Severity scores for each domain can range from 5 (no history of abuse/neglect) to 25 (severe 
abuse/neglect). The questionnaire also includes a minimization/denial scale. The reliability and validity of the 
CTQ are excellent (D. P. Bernstein, et al., 1997; D. P. Bernstein, Fink, L.A., 1998) . The Pi[INVESTIGATOR_367904] (Buysse, et al., 1989). The Quick Inventory of 
Depressive Symptoms (Rush,  et al., 2003) will be used to measure depression and a short form anxiety scale 
from the PROMIS© item bank will be used to measure anxiety.  The Life Events Occurrence Scale  
(Maciejewski, , et al.) will be used to inventory adult trauma. A brief survey from the National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey (CDC, 2000) will be used to rate quality of life, and a body map will be used to 
rate areas of pain.  A brief smoking history will also be obtai ned. 
 
b. Substance -Related Instruments.  Form 90: The Form 90 (Miller, 1996) , an ass essment instrument 
commonly used in substance use studies, is similar in concept to the Time Line Follow -back (Sobell & Sobell, 
1992) . This is a calendar -based instrument designed to assess daily substance consumption. Study 
participants will be asked to estimate the amount of substance consumed with the aid of visual cues designed 
to accurately quantify consumption. Cocaine will be recorded in dollar value, as well as quantity, in order to 
standardize for different types of cocaine use (crack, IV, nasal, etc.). Alcohol, nicotine, and other drug use will 
also be tracked. For cocaine use, the data will be summarized in three ways: a) percent of abstinent days (i .e., 
no use), b) amount of use per day, and c) amount used per using day Inventory of Drug- Taking Situations 
(IDTS) (Annis et al., 1997): This instrument measures typi[INVESTIGATOR_367905]’s (1985) eight category taxonomy. T his instrument contains eight subscales mappi[INVESTIGATOR_367906] (unpleasant emotions) and positive 
situations (social situations).  Although initially calculated to assess alcohol use, this scale has been modified 
for use with drug abusers and has demonstrated sensitivity to gender differences (Ross et al., 1994).  
Participants will also be asked to provide a urine sample to be tested for drugs of abuse.  
 
c. Progesterone and Estr ogen Tracking.  We will explore the impact of progesterone and estrogen levels on 
cocaine craving, stress, and oxytocin effects. Because our hypotheses are related to ovarian hormone levels 
rather than menstrual cycle phase, direct measurement of hormone levels at the time of testing is the most 
appropriate measure to address our hypotheses (Becker et al., 2005). As there is significant individual 
variability in progesterone and estrogen levels across the menstrual cycle, we will measure progesterone and 
estrogen at the initial assessment and each of the three study visits. We expect that these four samples will 
provide a profile of hormone levels for each study participant. Since we are interested in having a range of 
hormone levels for comparison, we will t est 50% of participants during the luteal phase when progesterone 
12 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 levels are high, and 50% of participants during the follicular phase when progesterone levels are low. Cocaine-
dependent women have normal 28- day ovulatory cycles (Evans et al., 2002, Evans & Foltin, 2006; Fox et al., 
2008); therefore, we will be able to approximate the menstrual cycle phase by [CONTACT_41680] a menstrual cycle history 
during the initi al assessment and will schedule the study visits accordingly. Direct ovarian hormone 
measurement will  allow us to utilize all participants’ data with absolute progesterone and estrogen levels as 
continuous measures.  
 
 
C.2.c.2. Session Procedures.  
a. Session Preparation.  Participants will be informed that they will be expected to remain abstinent from 
cocaine and other drugs for the three- day period prior to the test sessions in order to minimize the impact of 
recent drug/alcohol use on stress and cue reactivity.  Participants will be asked to come into the office to 
provide a urine sample once during the three days prior to test sessions to encourage abstinence and session 
completion.  Participants will be instructed to arrive at the Addiction Sciences  Division ( ASD) on each test day, 
and to avoid caffeinated beverages on the test day since caffeine can i ntroduce variability to the heart rate 
response. If the individual is nicotine- dependent, (s)he will be provided with nicotine patches throughout their 
clinic stay. Upon arriving at the ASD, the participant will be breathalyzed and will provide a urine sam ple, which 
will be tested for the presence of amphetamines, d- methamphetamine, cocaine, opi [INVESTIGATOR_2438], THC and 
benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651] ; if female, a urine pregnancy test will also be administered. If the pregnancy and urine drug 
tests are negative,  with the possible exc eption of THC,  the session will proceed. In the event a participant tests 
positive, the laboratory visit will be rescheduled.  A blood pressure cuff will be placed on the subject’s arm , and   
baseline subjective measures, physiologic measures (blood pressure and heart rate), and  salivary 
progesterone, estradiol, and cortisol will be collected.   
b. TSST.  On Day 1, participants will be served lunch and be seated in the ASD testing room where t hey will be 
allowed to read or watch television until the TSST testing procedures begin. Forty minutes prior to the TSST , 
participants will be randomly assigned to receive study medication (intranasal oxytocin or placebo; see 
Medication Administration). Tw o more  baseline assessments of subjective, hormonal (cortisol), and physiologic 
measures (blood pressure and heart rate) will be collected, one [ADDRESS_459923] used 
similar doses of oxytocin (Ditzen et al., 2009; Heinrichs et al., 2003; Kubazansky et al., 2009), as well as our 
own previous pi[INVESTIGATOR_20732] (see Preliminary Data). Timing of administration is also based on our pi[INVESTIGATOR_367907] 40 minutes after intranasal administration (Heinr ichs et al., 
2009). Intranasal oxytocin and matching placebo will be compounded by a MUSC Investigational Drug Service . 
Randomization will be done by [CONTACT_218512], who will keep a record of the blind and 
be available should unblinding be required. To achieve balance in sample size with respect to gender, a block 
randomized design with randomly varying block sizes will be used.   
 
2. TSST . The TSST is a standardized psychological stress challenge which has been used extensively in 
research studies. A meta- analysis supports its utility for evoking a HPA axis stress response in a laboratory 
setting (Dickerson & Kemeny, 2004) . It has induced a robust and reliable physiological stress response in 
cocaine, marijuana, and alcohol -dependent individuals in our previous studies (McRae et al., 2006; McRae-
Clark et al., 2011; Waldrop et al., 2010). When the  TSST begin s, The participant will be told that (s)he will give 
a speech and perform an arithmetic task. The topic of the speech will be why (s)he should be hired for a 
particular job (the individual’s “dream job”). The participant will deliver the speech as though speak ing to a 
group of potential employers. The experimenter then tells the participant that (s)he has 5 minutes to prepare 
the speech, and starts the countdown clock (placed in view of the individual). The experimenter leaves the 
room to allow the participant to prepare. After 5 minutes , three individuals unfamiliar to the participant (the 
audience) enter the room and are seated; the individual will be instructed by [CONTACT_367933] 
13 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 and begin his/her prepared speech (without notes). The speech will be delivered for 5 minutes. If the individual 
pauses, (s)he will be instructed to continue. At the end of the speech task, the individual will be instructed to 
serially subtract [ADDRESS_459924] the individual to stop and be seated, and 
the audience leaves the room . Immediately following the task , a salivary sample will be collected to assay 
cortisol and physi ological (blood pressure and heart rate) and subjective measures (CCQ -Brief, Within Session 
Rating Scale, obtained. Measurements will also be obtained 10- (CCQ -Brief, Within Session Rating Scale, 
STAI  cortisol, physiological) , 30-(CCQ -Brief, Within Session  Rating Scale, cortisol, physiological) , and 60-
minute post -task(CCQ -Brief, Within Session Rating Scale, STAI cortisol, physiological) . 
 
3. Assessments.  All baseline and within- session measurements have been previously used by [CONTACT_116189].  Wherever possible, the same assessment instruments will be used in Project IV to foster cross -study 
analysis and comparison (i.e., psychiatric assessment, trauma history).  . Urine Drug Screening: Drug screens 
will be performed using the iCup  DX Drug Screen Cup, an in vitro diagnostic test for the qualitative detection 
of drug or drug metabolite in the urine. The test profile consists of amphetamines,  d -methamphetamine, 
cocaine, opi [INVESTIGATOR_2438], , THC and benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651].  Results will be used to ascertain abstinence pri or to initiation of 
test sessions and to substantiate self -reports. Breathalyzer:  Participants will have their breath sampled for the 
presence of alcohol (Alco- Sensor III, Intoximeters Inc., St. Louis, MO).   Self Report Measures.  Within Session 
Rating Scal e:  A modification of the Within Session Rating Scale (Childress, McLellan, & O'Brien, 1986a) will 
be used to assess craving and mood during the procedure.  This 100 mm visual analogue scale is anchored 
with the adjectival modifiers (“not at all, mildly, mo derately, and extremely”).  The scale includes items 
assessing anxiety, stress, anger, irritability, and depressed mood. State -Trait Inventory (STAI):  The STAI is a 
20-item self -report scale (Spi[INVESTIGATOR_2996], 1983) employing a Likert -scale format with four responses per item (1 -
4). Ten of the STAI items measure feelings of stress and anxiety, while the remaining ten items measure 
feelings of relaxation. The STAI has good psychometric properties. Cocaine Craving Questionnaire- Brief 
(CCQ -Brief) : The CCQ -Brief is a 10 -item scale derived from the Cocaine Craving Questionnaire (Tiffany et al. , 
1993) and demonstrated to be a valid and reliable measurement of current cocaine craving (Sussner et al. , 
2006). Physiological Measures.  Heart rate and blood pressure will be measured using an intermittently 
inflatable cuff as indices of physiological arousal during the test session. Hormonal Measures.  Cortisol:  Cortisol 
will also be measured in unstimulated passive saliva using the Salimetrics expanded range, high sensitivity 
salivary cortisol enzyme immunoassay kit. This kit has a lower sensitivity level of <0.003 µg/dL. The correlation 
between salivary and serum cortisol has been shown to be high (r=0.91, p<0.0001). Cortisol is commonly 
measured as an indication of stress response in human laboratory studies. Progesterone: Progesterone will be 
measured from a salivary sample tested using the Salimetrics salivary progesterone enzyme immunoassay kit.  
The lower limit of sensitivity is 5 pg/ml, and the correlation between serum and saliva is highly significant 
(r=0.80, p<0.0001). Estradiol:  Estradiol will be measured from a salivary sample tested using the Salimetrics 
17β-estradiol enzyme immunoassay kit collected in EDTA -tubes and processed using a chemiluminescent 
immunoassay. The lower limit of sensitivity is 0.1 pg/ml, and correlation with serum is high (r=0.80, p<0.001).    
4. Discharge.  Following the 60 -minute assessment, participants will be given instruction regarding scanning 
appointments on days 2 and 3. A member of the research staff will be available to discuss management of any 
craving urges if craving remains elevated at the end of study procedures.  
 
c. fMRI Sessions.  On Days 2 and 3, participants will be asked to arrive at the ASD . Upon arrival, the 
participant will be breathalyzed and will provide a urine sample, which will be tested for substances and 
pregnancy (if applicable). If the pregnancy and urine drug test s are negative , with the possible exception of 
THC, the session will proceed.  In the event that a participant tests positive, the scanning session will be 
rescheduled. Baseline subjective measures, physiologic measures (blood pressure and heart rate), and 
14 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 salivary progesterone, estradiol, and cortisol will be collected.  Individuals will then be escorted to the Center 
for Advanced Imaging Research (CAIR ; see letter of support ) by [CONTACT_367934].  
 
1. Medication Administration.  At the beginning of the session, participants will be screened for metal using a 
handheld metal detector, and  oxytocin (40IU) or placebo will be intranasally administered 40 minutes prior to 
cue exposure procedures. Although the pharmacokinet ics of intranasal oxytocin are not fully understood 
(MacDonald et al., 2011), given the relatively short half -life of systemically administered oxytocin 
(approximately six minutes), we would not anticipate carry -over effects from repeated once daily dosing. 
Further, the order of administration will counterbalanced to obviate order effect; half of the participants will 
receive oxytocin prior to the first fMRI session and half will receive placebo.  
 
2. Image Acquisition Parameters.  A 3 Tesla Siemens Trio mag netic resonance imaging scanner equipped with 
a 12- channel head coil for whole- brain imaging will be used for data acquisition. Participants’ heads will be 
stabilized using foam padding between the head and the head coil. T2* -weighted gradient echo EPI [INVESTIGATOR_367908]: TR = 2500 ms, TE = 27 ms, flip angle = 77º, 40 axial slices 
(FOV = 224 x 224 mm, thickness = 3.5 mm voxels with 0.5 mm gap, in interleaved order. A high resolution T1 -
weighted MPRAGE anatomical scan (TR =  8.1 ms, TE = 3.7 ms, flip angle = 8°, field of view = 256 mm, 1.0 
mm) covering the entire brain and positioned using a saggital scout image will be acquired for co -registration 
and normalization of functional images. The scanning planes will be oriented parallel to the anterior 
commissure –posterior commissure line.  
 
3. Scanning Procedures.  Prior to entering the scanner, subjective measures, physiologic measures (heart rate 
and blood pressure) and salivary cortisol will be collected. Participants will be given earplugs/headphones to 
protect their hearing and an optical hand pad rating device to allow them to respond to study tasks. Their ability 
to view a nearby [CONTACT_367935] (via a back -projected mirror mounted to their head coil)  and correctly make 
ratings with the hand pad will be assessed prior to scanning. During initial scanner tuning, localizing, and 
structural scanning, participants will be shown relaxation images (i.e., 20 scenic pi[INVESTIGATOR_499], each displayed for 30 
seconds). Next participants will be asked to look at a cross -hair for 6- minutes while resting state connectivity 
data are collected.  Next, the cocaine cue exposure paradigm will be administered. The paradigm to be used 
was adapted from a well -studied alcohol -cue exposure paradigm (George et al. , 2001; Myrick et al. , 2008), and 
is currently being utilized in an ongoing imaging study being conducted by [CONTACT_5051] (R01DA023188-
S1; PI: [INVESTIGATOR_367900]; see Preliminary Data). The paradigm consists of pi[INVESTIGATOR_367909] r elated objects (e.g., 
crack pi[INVESTIGATOR_5836]), neutral objects (e.g., furniture), and visual control images that match the cocaine pi[INVESTIGATOR_367910], but lack object recognition. Stimulus presentation occurs over six 90- second epochs. Each epoch 
contains three 24-second blocks (cocaine images, neutral objects, control images), containing five pi[INVESTIGATOR_367911] 4.[ADDRESS_459925] block (i.e., cross -hair). Blocks, and stimuli within 
blocks, are presented in pseudorandom order. During the task, participants will be asked to rate their stress 
and craving after each block using their hand pad; ratings range from zero (“none”) to four (“severe”). Salivary 
cortisol  and subjective measures  will be collected immediately following the task, and [ADDRESS_459926] had a brief period of monitored 
abstinence durin g testing procedures (3 days prior to testing, 3 days during testing); measurement of relapse 
to cocaine use after early abstinence in a clinical population provides homology and integration with Project III, 
which is assessing similar outcomes in a precli nical model. At each follow -up visit, measures of daily stress will 
be obtained using the 10 -item Perceived Stress Scale (PSS; Cohen et al., 1983), and subjects will be asked to 
15 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 specifically assess possible precipi[INVESTIGATOR_367912].  The PSS has been used 
previously in cocaine dependent adults (Fox et al., 2009; Hyman et al., 2007), and has demonstrated test -
retest reliability. The m enstrual history diary will be updated at each visit. Following study completion, referrals 
to treatmen t programs will be provided to all participants. At the first follow -up visit, blood will be collected from 
consenting participants for genetic testing.  
 
C.2.c.4. Subject Compensation. Participants will receive $25 for completing screening assessments  and 
procedures  ($10 for the history and physical and $15 for the interview/paperwork) , and $25 if they present 
once during the three days prior to testing. Participants will receive $[ADDRESS_459927], $[ADDRESS_459928] scanning session, and $125 fo r the second scanning session.  Patients will receive study session payment 
at the end of Day 3.  Additionally, “fishbowl” contingency management will be used to encourage abstinence 
and study retention (Petry et al., 2001; Petry et al., 2002). P articipants who present to the clinic  and provide a 
clean urine drug screen  will receive chances to draw from a bowl containing 250 chips that are assigned a 
certain value (230 chips denote $1, 1 8 chips denote $10, one chip denotes $50, and one chip denotes $100). 
Participants will be allowed three draws on day one,  five draws on day two,  and seven draws on day three.  We 
have used t his procedure successfully in previous trials requiring similar periods of abstinence in cocaine-
dependent outpatients  (i.e., presenting to the initial laboratory session with a negative UDS and maintaining 
abstinence for three days during study procedures), and have had a completion rate of approximately 80%. 
Participants will also be compensated $20 for completing each follow -up visit ( two visits total). The fishbowl 
method will also be used to encourage attendance at follow -up visits; participants will be allowed nine draws at 
the first follow -up appointment and  13 draws at the  final visit . Participants may be paid in gift cards, cash, or 
money orders.  To facilitate female participation, financial assistance for childcare may be provided if 
necessary.  
 
C.2.c.5. Data Management. The REDCap Study Database Version 4, supported by [CONTACT_367936], will be 
used to capture data directly into an online database (Harris et al., 2009). Auditing will occur quarterly by 
[CONTACT_23992] a random sample of 10% of participant’s original datasheets to the values entered for those 
individuals in all data files. fMRI data are automatically transferred to servers m anaged by [CONTACT_367937]. Task data will 
be stored on CAIR computers which receive daily data backups.  
 
C.2.d. Statistical Methods. The hypotheses associated with Aim [ADDRESS_459929] as compared 
to those receiving matched placebo. A linear mixed effects model containing all serially measured time points 
will be used to assess the effects of oxytocin versus placebo on each dependent variable. Restricted maximum 
likelihood (REML; Patterson and Thompson, 1971) methods will be used to estimate the fixed effects and 
variance components, and bas eline values will be used as covariates in the regression models. To test the 
hypothesis that women will experience greater ameliorative effects of oxytocin on stress and craving response 
following the TSST as compared to males, similar models will examine the differential (interaction) in the 
scores reported between men and women by [CONTACT_1570] (oxytocin vs. placebo).  Additionally, as an 
exploratory analysis, the strength of the effects of oxytocin in women will be assessed with differences in 
estrogen and menstrual cycle phase as independent variables. In a subgroup analysis of women entered into 
the study, linear mixed effects models will be developed to assess the association of estrogen and menstrual 
phase (independently) on the stress and craving r esponse to the TSST. Non- linear associations will also be 
explored using cubic spline models (Marrie et al. , 2009). Within each family of dependent measures, the Type I 
error rate will be controlled using a post -hoc Bonferroni correction.  
 The hypotheses associated with Aim [ADDRESS_459930] -acquisition p reprocessing and statistical analysis 
will be performed using Matlab 7.8 (Mathworks, Sherborn, MA0 with Statistical Parametric Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_55072] 8 
16 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 (SPM 8, The Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London). All volumes within a task run will be 
realign ed to the first volume. After realignment (including adjustment for sampling errors), scans with greater 
than one mm in three axes or one degree in three orientations will be excluded from group analyses. Following 
realignment, images will be stereotactically normalized into a standard space with a resolution of 2x2x2 mm 
voxels using the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) EPI [INVESTIGATOR_176217]8. Subsequently, the data will be 
smoothed with a 8x8x8 mm Gaussian kernel and will be high- pass filtered (cue exposure paradigm cut -off 
period = 288s). Following preprocessing, within- task data from individual participants will be analyzed with a 
fixed -effects general linear model (GLM), with cocaine cue exposure activity modeled as a box -car function 
convolved with t he standard canonical hemodynamic response function. The GLM procedure is repeated for 
each voxel with six movement parameters (3 rotation values in radian and 3 translation values in millimeter) 
included as covariates to control for the influence of head motion on the data. First -level analysis will be 
conducted and contrast maps will be generated. For the cue exposure paradigm, the main contrast of interest 
is the cocaine pi[INVESTIGATOR_367913]. neutral objects contrast. Following first -level analysis, subject -speci fic contrasts will 
be entered into second -level, random -effects analyses. Areas of brain associated with group (oxytocin vs. 
placebo) and sex (women vs. men) differences on these contrasts will be identified using independent samples 
t-tests within a GLM f ramework. The combined group parameter maps will be threshold using a significance 
level of p<0.05, corrected for multiple comparisons.   
 For Exploratory Hypothesis 2d, a graph -theory approach to functional connectivity will be used. The 
BCT (Rubinov & Sporns, 2011) includes metrics specifically designed for functional brain networks, which are 
fully connected with weighted and signed connections. The metrics combine both positive and negative 
weights, but weight the positive connections more heavily. Withi n each of [ADDRESS_459931]. The time series (shifted 
by [CONTACT_367938]) will be segmented into four separate time series, one for each condition (cocaine imag es, blur, 
objects, rest) ( Fair et al., 2007; Just et al., 2004) . Correlation matrices wi ll then be comput ed for each subject 
and each condition and submitted to the BCT. For each subject and each condition, several BCT metrics will 
be computed (see Rubinov & Sporns, 2011 for more details). Network measures include modularity  and 
number of modules . Node- specif ic measures include diversity coefficient , within -module weights , within -
module clustering coefficient , and strength.  We will also compute [ADDRESS_459932] that 
preserve the weight and strength properties of the cocaine network (following Rubinov & Sporns, 2011), since 
that is the network of most interest. The same metrics that are computed for the cocaine, object, blur, and rest 
networks will be computed for the 20 random networks, then averaged to provide a single metric for the 
random network. In addition, a group -average correlation matrix will be computed (Pearson r -values from 
individual participants are Fisher z -transformed prior to averaging) for each of the four conditions and subject 
groups to obtain a modularity partition for the group, which will be visualized using Gephi software (Bastian, 
Heymann, & Jacomy, 2009), as in Figure 4. Network and node- based metrics will be submitted to mixed 
ANOVAs (one ANOVA for each metric and each node in the case of node- based metrics) with gender and 
treatment as between- subjects variables and condition (cocaine, object, blur, rest, random) as the repeated 
factor. Most metrics allow for comparison with the random networks except for strength and weight metrics 
because those are preserved in random networks and will be identical to the cocaine condition.  
 
C.2.e. Power and Sample Size. Aim 1. It is hypothesized that oxytocin will decrease ratings of subjective 
stress and cocaine craving following the TSST relative to placebo. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_367914] (CCQ) following the TSST of Δ=8.24 with a RMSE=11.03 
(d=0.75) (Cohen, 1988) and a stress rating (VAS) difference of Δ=1.07 with a RMSE=2.20 ( d=0.49). As in the 
oxytocin pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], partic ipants will be assessed at four post TSST time points ( m), with an anticipated 
intraclass correlation coefficient of 0.78 for both craving and stress outcomes (ICC=0.78 & 0.79, respectively). 
The design effect, which accounts for the multiple correlated observation within each subject, is estimated to 
be 3.35 (DE=  [1+(4 -1)0.78]) (Donner and Klar, 2000). Assuming independent observations and an effect 
similar to the pi[INVESTIGATOR_367915] (d=0.48), the total effective sample size would be 140 sub jects 
(35 men and 35 women per treatment arm) to provide 80% power with a type I error rate of 0.05. In a clustered 
setting, the sample size is N effective = nm/DE where n is the number of participants required when m replications 
within participants are performed after accounting for the design effect (DE). For the study at hand, the total 
17 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 number of participants required is therefore estimated to be n=118 (=140*3.35/4), which will be rounded to [ADDRESS_459933] to gender. Given an expected retention rate of approximately 80%, we will 
recruit 152 participants to obtain a final sample size of 120. This sample size will provide adequate power 
(80%) to detect the planned stress response, and more than adequate (98%) to detect the planned cravi ng 
response to the TSST. In addition, the sample size of 120 participants will also provide 80% power to detect a 
[ADDRESS_459934] included 
between 6 (Maas et al. , 1998) and 17 (Garavan et al. , 2000) participants per group, and have reliably found 
activation in brain regions associated with cocaine craving (e.g., anterior cingulat e, amygdala). However, 
Mumford & Nichols (2008) simulation study suggested that 23 participants per group may be necessary to 
obtain 80% power for a generic fMRI task design featuring 10, [ADDRESS_459935] 
blocks. As such, our pro posed 60 completer participants per group should provide adequate statistical power.  
 
c.2.f. Design Considerations.  Choice of  experimental groups . Inclusion of control participants was 
considered; however, craving is a main outcome measure of the proposed study, and it would not be expected 
that control participants would have a craving response to either the TSST or cocaine cues. Therefore, it was 
agreed that resources in this project would be best  spent on including sufficient nu mbers of participants with  
cocaine dependence, as a demonstrated reduction in craving with oxytocin in this population may have 
important clinical implications.  Potential modifiers of cerebral blood flow.  Sex differences in hematocrit levels 
and baseline cerebral blood flow may impact the BOLD signal (Kastrup et al., 1997; Levin, et al., 2001) . 
However, the present group comparisons will be based on changes in activation relative to control conditions 
(e.g., cocaine versus object activation differences for oxytocin versus placebo); therefore, even if baseline 
levels of blood flow are different across groups, the present analyses rely on fractional changes in fMRI signal 
relative to control and baseline conditions. Abstinence from cocaine has been shown to alter regional cerebral 
blood flow (Kosten et al., 1998; Volkow et al., 1988) . If any statistical group differences are found, abstinence 
(days since last use) will be included as a covariate in the analysis.  
 
c.2.g. Operational Plan and Research Timetable.  The first three months of the grant period will be used to 
obtain reg ulatory approvals and database cr eation. Fortunately, because we have ongoing trials involving 
cocaine- dependent populations, we have trained pers onnel and an active recruitment network. We also have 
an active IND for use of oxytocin in cocaine- dependent individuals. We anticipate no issues with study 
recruitment beginning by [CONTACT_367939], and for a total of [ADDRESS_459936] will utilize multiple services coordinated through the 
Administrative Core (AC) , such as biostatistical support ( database creation, regular data audits, and statistical 
analyses), physician assistant services, and financial mana gement . The use of shared personnel to perform 
these services across research components allows for significant overall cost -savings.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
1. RISKS TO THE SUBJECTS  
a. Human Subjects Involvement and Characteristics  
Admission into the study is open to men and women and to all racial and ethnic groups, age 18- 65. 152 
participants (76 cocaine- dependent women and 76 cocaine dependent men) will be recruited primarily through 
internet and newspaper advertisements. Inclusio n/exclusion c riteria that apply to all subjects are listed below:  
 
1) General Inclusion / Exclusion Criteria  
 Inclusion Criteria  
1. Subjects must be able to provide informed consent and function at an intellectual level sufficient  to 
allow accurate completion of all assessment instruments.  
2. Subjects must meet DSM -IV criteria for current cocaine dependence (within the past three months). 
While individuals may also meet criteria for abuse of other substances, they must not meet criteria for 
dependence on any other substance (except nicotine) within the last [ADDRESS_459937] HPA function (Adinoff et al., 1991), however to enhance recruitment efforts individuals with 
alcohol dependence or abuse will be included in the study if they  do not require medically supervised 
detoxification.  Also, due to the high comorbidity of cocaine and marijuana dependence, and limited 
evidence that marijuana use affects HPA function, subjects with marijuana dependence will be 
included.  
3. Subjects must consent to remain abstinent from all drugs of abuse (except nicotine) for a three -day 
 period immediately prior to the throughout study procedures.  
4. Subjects must consent to random assignment.  
5. Subjects must consent to participating in study procedures at the ASD  and completion of two fMRI 
scans.  
 
 Exclusion Criteria  
1. Women who are pregnant, nursing or of childbearing potential and not practicing an effective means of 
 birth control (not including hormonal contraceptives).  
2. Women who are currently taking, or have taken in the past month, oral or other types of hormonal 
contraceptives or hormone replacement therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014].  
3. Women with premenstrual dysphoric disorder who are outside of the follicular  phase.  
4. Women who have had a complete hysterectomy or are over [ADDRESS_459938] physiological/subjective responses.    Neurological exclusions include history of stroke, seizure 
disorders, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease, and Alzheimer’s disease.  
6. Subjects with Addison’s disease, Cushing’s disease or other diseases of the adrenal cortex likely to 
affect hormonal/neuroendocrine status.  
7. Subjects with a history of or current psychotic disorder or bipolar affective disorder as these may 
interfere with subjective measurements.  
8. Subjects with current major depressive disorder or post -traumatic stress disorder as these disorders 
are associated with characteristic changes in stress response.  
9. Subjects receiving synthetic glucocorticoid therapy, any exogenous steroid therapy, or treatment with 
other agents that in terfere with hormonal measurements within one month of test session.  
10. Subjects taking any mood stabilizers , antipsychotics, benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651],  opi[INVESTIGATOR_367916].  Subjects taking SSRI’s will be included.  
11. Subjects with any acute illness or fever. Individuals who otherwise meet study criteria will be 
rescheduled for evaluation for participation.  
12. Subjects whose height to weight ratio would preclude them from fitting comfortably in the MRI scanner.  
19 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 13. Subjects who are unwilling or unable to maintain abstinence from alcohol and other drugs of abuse 
(except nicotine) for three days prior to the stress task procedure.  
14. Persons with ferrous metal implants or pacemaker since fMRI will be used.  
15. Subjects who are claustrophobic.  
16. Subjects with significant psychiatric or medical problems that would impair participation or limit ability to 
participate in scan.  
17. Subjects who require maintenance or acute treatment with any psychoactive medication including anti -
seizure medications which could potentially interfere with fMRI.  
18. Subjects meeting DSM -IV criteria for substance dependence (other than nicotine,  cocaine, alcohol or 
marijuana ) within the past [ADDRESS_459939] data will be letter/number coded, and only the investigators w ill have access to the master lists of 
codes. The research material will be obtained specifically for research purposes.  Written research material 
obtained will be stored in the Addiction Sciences  Division, in an office that is locked when not in use. Sal iva 
and urine samples will be stored in the Research Nexus  and the Clinical Neurobiology Laboratory. 
Neuroimaging data will be stored on a secure password protected server maintained by [CONTACT_9373]’s Center for 
Advanced Imaging Research.  
 
c. Potential Risks  
Adver se effects associated with systemic oxytocin use in pregnancy may include seizures, mental 
disturbances, unexpected bleeding or contraction of the uterus. However, several studies have been 
conducted in humans with intranasal doses between [ADDRESS_459940] been reported 
(Bruins, Hijman, & Van Ree, 1992; Fehm -Wolfsdorf, Bachholz, Born, V oigt, & Fehm, 1988; Pi[INVESTIGATOR_26048], Orr, & 
Lasko, 1993) . A recent review by [CONTACT_367940] (2011) also found no adverse outcomes 
associated with oxytocin dosages of 18- [ADDRESS_459941] s will be in the cocaine- free safety of a clinic environment. Since the 
scanner requires subjects to be motionless in an enclosed environment, there is the possibility of a 
claustrophobic reaction or anxiety or discomfort secondary to being stationary for 45-60 minutes per scan. 
Ferrous objects in the body that are undetected could move during scans. This could lead t o tissue damage 
and hemorrhage.  For patients who consent to genetic testing, there is the possibility of complications from 
venipuncture such as mild pain and possible bruising at the needle site.  
2. ADEQUACY OF PROTECTION AGAINSTS RISKS  
 
a. Recruitment and Informed Consent  
Patients will primarily be recruited through the use of advertisements (internet, newspaper).  The study PI, a 
Co-I, or ot her qualified study staff will obtain informed consent. The informed consent form includes a detailed 
description of the study procedures, along with statements regarding participants’ rights to withdraw from the 
procedure at any time without consequences.  The informed consent form will be explained to subjects in easy -
to-understand language, and subjects will be instructed to read the form carefully prior to signing it.  Consent 
will be documented by [CONTACT_367941], accompanied by 
[CONTACT_218510].  
 
20 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 b. Protections Against Risks 
All study participants will be closely monitored for psychiatric and medical stability. Patients in acute distress, 
including those endorsing suicidal ideation, will be seen by [CONTACT_367942]. If the psychiatrist determines that the subject is in immediate danger, arrangements will be made 
for inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_367917]. Subjects who do not pose an 
immediate threat to self or others will be referred for services at the Center for Drug and Alcohol Programs, or 
a community mental health department if appropriate. The instrumentation used for physiological recordings 
meets all safety standards for non- invasive recordings, and participants are located out of reach of any AC -
powered devices in the laboratory.  All sessions will be conducted under the super vision of experienced 
personnel. If crisis intervention is necessary, senior staff will be available to evaluate the subject and provide 
an intervention or referral. If hospi[INVESTIGATOR_89648], the patient will be hospi[INVESTIGATOR_367918]. All subjects will be fully informed 
that they may withdraw from the experiment at any time without penalty. All subject records will be kept in a 
locked filing cabinet, and confident iality of all materials will be maintained.  Offices also will be locked at times 
when not in use. Neuroimaging data are coded and maintained on a password protected server.   
 
To ensure confidentiality, all subject data will be coded by [CONTACT_217183]/or num bers, and only the investigators 
will have access to the master lists of codes.  All patient records will be kept in an office that will be locked at 
times when not in use. The research staff understands the importance of maintaining confidentiality. This 
method of maintaining confidentiality has been used for several years by [CONTACT_367943]. All co -investigators and study personnel have completed (or will complete upon hiring) training in 
Good Research Practic es as mandated by [CONTACT_165469].  
Subjects will be taught about potential side effects of oxytocin, and will be closely followed by [CONTACT_140332], a 
PharmD, and other members of the research team. Pregnancy tests will be performed on the day of oxytocin 
administration.  Oxytocin administration will occur in a fully staffed clinical environment with emergency 
medications (i.e., IM diphenhydramine, alprazolam) and equipment available as needed. Adverse events will 
be monitored throughout the study. If abnormalities in the brain images are found, the subjects will be 
immediately referred to an appropriate clinical care provider. A careful metal screening history will be taken 
from each subject to assess the possibility of metal devices and individuals will be screened with a metal 
detector for the possibility of implanted metal objects since magnetic movement of a metal device or metal 
object could well result in injury or risk to life. Prior exposure to pi[INVESTIGATOR_217167], getting into the 
scanner, and seeing others in t he scanner often reduces psychological discomfort or identifies people for 
whom scanning is not appropriate.  
 
3. POTENTIAL BENEFITS OF THE PROPOSED RESEARCH TO THE SUBJECT AND OTHERS  
Possible risks to study participants include adverse reactions to oxytoc in administration. Benefits include 
detailed assessment of substance use and referral for treatment. While the benefits to the individual patient are 
minimal, the minimal risks are reasonable in relation to the benefits to be gained from the investigation.  An 
investigation of oxytocin’s effects on stress - and cue- induced craving may provide important information that 
can guide treatment for future patients with cocaine dependence.  
 
4. IMPORTANCE OF THE KNOWLEDGE TO BE GAINED 
This study may provide important information that can improve treatment for future patients with cocaine and 
other drug dependence. The minimal risks of the investigation are considered reasonable in relation to the 
expected knowledge to be gained.   
 
21 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 5. DATA AND SAFETY MONITORI NG PLAN  
This section is based on the recommendations in NIDA’s “Guidelines for Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a Data and Safety 
Monitoring Plan” ( www.drugabuse.gov/funding/dsmbsop.html ). A detailed D SMP will be dev eloped and 
approv ed by [CONTACT_313173].  
 
5.[ADDRESS_459942] is 
craving and stress response to the interventions. Inclusion/exclusion criteria are outlined above.  Power 
calculations and sample sizes are in the Dat a Analysis Plan section above.  
 
5.2 Tr ial Management.   
The study will be managed from the Addiction Sciences Division within the Department of Psychiatry and 
Behavioral Sciences at the Medical University of South Carolina.  The target population is described above in 
the inclusion/exclusion c riteria.  
 
5.[ADDRESS_459943] an active IND from the Food and Drug Administration for the use of oxytocin in cocaine-
dependent individuals (IND 109,726).  Potential conflicts of interest will be reported using the upcoming NIH 
rules for disclosure.  Adverse Events (AEs)/Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) occurring during the course of the 
project will be collected, doc umented, and reported in accordance with protocol and IRB reporting 
requirements.  All research staff involved with adverse event reporting will receive general and protocol specific 
AE/SAE training including identification, assessment and evaluation, and documentation and reporting.  A 
research assistant will identify any potential adverse events during the course of the study from participant self -
report and administration of the visit assessments and procedures. The research assistant will provide 
inform ation to a study physician, who will be responsible for AE/SAE assessment and evaluation including a 
determination of seriousness and study relatedness. Any significant actions taken by [CONTACT_367944].   
 
5.6 Def inition of AE and SAE.  
An Adverse Event (AE) is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a study subject administered a 
pharmaceutical product that does not necessarily have a causal relationship with this treatment (ICH GCP).  
Any unwanted change, physically, psychologically or behaviorally, that occurs in a study participant during the 
course of the trial is an adverse event.  A Serious Adverse Event (SAE) is defined as an adverse event that 
has one of the following outcomes:  
• Results in death,  
• Is life-threatening,  
• Requires inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081],  
• Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity,  
• Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect OR  
22 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 • Requires intervention to prevent one of the above outcomes.  
 
5.7 Documentation and Reporting . 
AEs/SAEs are documented and reported as per protocol and IRB requirements.  Research staff will identify 
adverse events and obtain all available information to assess severity, seriousness, study relatedness, 
expectedness, outcome and the need for change or discontinuation in the study intervention.  Adverse events 
are generally documented on AE Logs and AE Case Report Forms (CRFs).  Additional relevant AE information 
if available should be documented in a progress note in t he research record as appropriate to allow monitoring 
and evaluating of the AE.  If the AE meets the definition for serious, appropriate SAE protocol specific reporting 
forms are completed and disseminated to the appropriate persons and within the designat ed timeframes as 
indicated above.  For each AE/SAE recorded, the research staff will follow the AE/SAE until resolution, 
stabilization or until the participant is no longer in the study as stated in the protocol. When a reportable SAE is 
identified, the research staff will notify the MUSC Institutional Review Board (IRB) within [ADDRESS_459944].  
 
If complete information is not available when the initial 24- hour SAE report is disseminated, follow -up 
information will be gathered to enable a complete assessment and outcome of the event.  This information may 
include hospi[INVESTIGATOR_139257], autopsy reports, clinic records, etc.  The research staff will attach copi[INVESTIGATOR_367919] 2 weeks of the initial SAE report.  In addition, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_9042] a signed, dated SAE 
summary report, which will be sent to the NIDA Medical Safety Offi cer within two weeks of the initial SAE 
report.  
 
We will report adverse events to the Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC) Institutional Review Board 
(IRB) online as soon as possible, but no later than [ADDRESS_459945] learns of the 
event.  The MUSC IRB AE reporting requirements are as follows:  All deaths that occur during the study or [ADDRESS_459946] at the next meeting.  
 
5.8 Trial Safety . 
The potential risks and benefits and methods to minimize these risks are outlined above. The research staff will 
report any unexpected AEs or any scores of “severe” on the side- effect symptom rating form or any FDA -
defined serious AEs to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_874] 24 hrs so that the PI [INVESTIGATOR_313117].  All unexpected 
AEs will be monitored while they are active to determine if treatment is needed.  Study procedures will follow 
the FDA’s Good Clinical Practice Guidelines ( www.fda.gov/oc/gcp ). Any outside requests for information or any 
breaches in confidentiality will be reported to Drs. Brady or McRae- Clark. All requests by [CONTACT_3445]’s 
physicians and other medical providers will be referred directly to [CONTACT_335437].  
 
5.9 Trial Efficacy.  
23 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 This is not an intervention trial.  An interim analys is is not planned at the time.  
 
 
5.10 DSM Plan Administration.  
Drs. Brady and McRae- Clark will be responsible for monitoring the study. They will examine (monthly) the 
outcomes database and CAIR server for missing data, unexpected distributions or responses, and outliers.  A 
DSM report will be filed with the IRB and NIDA on a yearly basis, unless greater than expected problems 
occur.  The report will include participant characteristics, retention and disposition of study participants, quality 
assurance issues and reports of AEs, significant/unexpected AEs and serious AEs.  We will report outcomes at 
the end of the trial.  
 
5.[ADDRESS_459947] will be registered at the ClinicalTrials.gov Protocol 
Registration System Information Website prior to study initiation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LITERATURE CITED  
Alves SE, Lopez V, McEwen BS, Weiland NG (1998) Differential colocalization of estrogen receptor beta 
(ERbeta) with oxytocin and vasopressin in the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei of the female rat 
brain: an immunocytochemical study. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95:3281 -3286.  
Annis HM, Tuener NE, Sklar SM (1997) Inventory of Drug -Taking Situations: User's Guide. Toronto, Canada: 
Addiction Research Foundation, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health.  
Back SE, Brady KT, Waldrop AE, Yeatts SD, McRae AL, Spratt E (2008) Early life trauma and sensitivity to 
current life stressors in individuals with and without cocaine dependence. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 
34:389- 396. PMCID: PMC2692094 
Back SE, Hartwell K, DeSantis SM, Saladin M, McRae- Clark AL, Price KL, Moran -Santa Maria MM, Baker NL, 
Spratt E, Kreek MJ, Brady KT (2010) Reactivity to laboratory stress provocation predicts relapse to 
cocaine. Drug Alcohol Depend 106:21 -27. PMCID: PMC2815094  
Baler RD, Volkow ND (2006) Drug addiction: the neurobiology of disrupted self -control. Trends Mol Med 
12:559- 566. 
Bartz, J., et al., Oxytocin can hinder trust and cooperation in borderline personality disorder.  Soc Cogn Affect 
Neurosci, 2011. 6 (5): p. 556- 63. 
24 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 Bastian M, Heymann S, Jacomy M (2009) Gephi: An open source software for exploring and manipulating 
networks. In: International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.  
Baumgartner T, Heinrichs M, Vonlanthen A, Fischbacher U, Fehr E (2008) Oxytocin shapes the neural circuitry 
of trust and trust adaptation in humans. Neuron 58:639- 650. 
Becker JB, Arnold AP, Berkley KJ, Blaustein JD, Eckel LA, Hampson E, Herman JP, Marts S, Sadee W, 
Steiner M, Taylor J, Young E (2005) Strategies and methods for res earch on sex differences in brain 
and behavior. Endocrinology 146:1650 -1673.  
Bernstein, D. P., Ahluvalia, T., Pogge, D., & Handelsman, L. (1997). Validity of the Childhood Trauma 
Questionnaire in an adolescent psychiatric population. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry, 36(3), 340-
348. 
Bernstein, D. P., Fink, L., Handelsman, L., Foote, J., Lovejoy, M., Wenzel, K., et al. (1994). Initial reliability and 
validity of a new retrospective measure of child abuse and neglect. Am J Psychiatry, 151(8), 1132-
1136.  
Bernstein, D. P., Fink, L.A. (1998). Childhood Trauma Questionnaire: A Retrospective Self -Report Manual. San 
Antonio, [LOCATION_007]: The Psychological Corporation.  
Bohus B, de Kloet ER (1981) Adrenal steroids and extinction behavior: antagonism by [CONTACT_367945],  
deoxycorticosterone and dexamethasone of a specific effect of corticosterone. Life Sci 28:433- 440. 
Brady KT, Randall CL (1999) Gender differences in substance use disorders. Psychiatr Clin North Am 22:241-
252. 
Brady KT, McRae AL, Moran- Santa Maria MM, DeS antis SM, Simpson AN, Waldrop AE, Back SE, Kreek MJ 
(2009) Response to CRH infusion in cocaine- dependent individuals. Arch Gen Psychiatry 66:422- 430. 
PMCID: PMC2696287  
Brady KT, Sinha R (2005) Co- occurring mental and substance use disorders: the neurobiological effects of 
chronic stress. Am J Psychiatry 162:1483 -1493.  
Brecht ML, O'Brien A, von Mayrhauser C, Anglin MD (2004) Methamphetamine use behaviors and gender 
differences. Addictive Behaviors 29:89- 106. 
Brune, M., Does the oxytocin receptor (OXTR) polym orphism (rs2254298) confer 'vulnerability' for 
psychopathology or 'differential susceptibility'? Insights from evolution.  BMC Med, 2012. 10: p. 38.Cahill 
L (2006) Why sex matters for neuroscience. Nat Rev Neurosci 7:477- 484. 
Buysse, D.J., Reynolds, C.F., 3rd, Monk, T.H., Berman, S.R., Kupfer, D.J., The Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2272]: 
A new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Res, 1989. 28 : p. 193 -213. 
Carson DS, Cornish JL, Guastella AJ, Hunt GE, McGregor IS (2010) Oxytocin decreases methamphetamine 
self-administration, methamphetamine hyperactivity, and relapse to methamphetamine- seeking 
behaviour in rats. Neuropharmacology 58:38 -43. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2000).  Measuring Healthy Days.  Atlanta, Georgia: CDC.  
Charney, D. S., Deutch, A. Y., Krystal, J. H., Southwick, S. M., & Davis, M. (1993). Psychobiologic 
mechanisms of posttraumatic stress disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 50 (4), 295 -305. 
Childress AR, Ehrman R, McLellan A, MacRae J, Natalie M, O'Brien C (1994) Can induced moods trigger 
drug-related responses in opi[INVESTIGATOR_188562]. J Subst Abuse Treat 11:17- 23. 
Childress AR, McLellan AT, O'Brien CP (1986) Conditioned responses in a methadone population. A 
comparison of laboratory, clinic, and natural settings.  Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment 3:173-
179. 
Childress AR, Mozley PD, McElgin W, Fitzgerald J, Reivich M, O'Brien CP (1999) Limbic activation during cue-
induced cocaine craving. Am J Psychiatry 156:11- 18. 
Chou YC, Luttge WG (1988) Activated type II rec eptors in brain cannot rebind glucocorticoids: relationship to 
progesterone's antiglucocorticoid actions. Brain Res 440:67 -78. 
Cohen J (1988) Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences, 2nd Edition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Earlbaum Associates.  
Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R (1983) A global measure of perceived stress. J Health Soc Behav 
24:386- 396. 
Connors GJ, Maisto SA, Zywiak WH (1998) Male and female alcoholics' attributions regarding the onset and 
termination of relapses and the maintenance of abstinence. Journal of substance abuse 10:27- 42. 
25 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 Cooney NL, Litt MD, Morse PA, Bauer LO, Gaupp L (1997) Alcohol cue reactivity, negative- mood reactivity, 
and relapse in treated alcoholic men. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 106:243- 250. 
Cotto JH, Davis E, Dowling GJ, Elcano JC, Staton AB, Weiss SR (2010) Gender effects on drug use, abuse, 
and dependence: a special analysis of results from the National Survey on Drug Use and Health. Gend 
Med 7:402- 413. 
Cronkite RC, Moos RH (1984) The role of predisposing and moderating factors in the stress -illness 
relationship. J Health Soc Behav 25:372- 393. 
Cui SS, Bowen RC, Gu GB, Hannesson DK, Yu PH, Zhang X (2001) Prevention of cannabinoid withdrawal 
syndrome by [CONTACT_216164]: involvement of oxytocinergic neuronal act ivation. The Journal of neuroscience : 
the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 21:9867 -9876.  
Cushing BS, Kramer KM (2005) Mechanisms underlying epi[INVESTIGATOR_367920]: the role 
of neuropeptides and steroids. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 29:1089- 1105.  
de Kloet ER, Voorhuis DA, Boschma Y, Elands J (1986) Estradiol modulates density of putative 'oxytocin 
receptors' in discrete rat brain regions. Neuroendocrinology 44:415 -421. 
de Oliveira DC, Zuardi AW, Graeff FG, Queiroz RH, Crippa JA (2011) Anxiolytic -like effect of oxytocin in the 
simulated public speaking test. J Psychopharmacol.  
DeSantis SM, Baker NL, Back SE, Spratt E, Ciolino JD, Moran- Santa Maria M, Dipankar B, Brady KT (2011) 
Gender differences in the effect of early life tr auma on hypothalamic -pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenal axis functioning. 
Depress Anxiety 28:383- 392. PMCID: OMC21328636 
Dickerson SS, Kemeny ME (2004) Acute stressors and cortisol responses: a theoretical integration and 
synthesis of laboratory research. Psychol Bull 130: 355-391. 
Ditzen B, Schaer M, Gabriel B, Bodenmann G, Ehlert U, Heinrichs M (2009) Intranasal oxytocin increases 
positive communication and reduces cortisol levels during couple conflict. Biol Psychiatry 65:728- 731. 
Domes G, Heinrichs M, Glascher J, Buchel C, Braus DF, Herpertz SC (2007) Oxytocin attenuates amygdala 
responses to emotional faces regardless of valence. Biol Psychiatry 62:1187- 1190.  
Donner A, Klar N (1988) Design and analysis of cluster randomized trial in health research. London: Arnold.  
Dreher JC, Schmidt PJ, Kohn P, Furman D, Rubinow D, Berman KF (2007) Menstrual cycle phase modulates 
reward- related neural function in women. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104:2465- 2470.  
Drummond DC, Cooper T, Glautier SP (1990) Conditioned learning in alcohol dependence: implications for cue 
exposure treatment. Br J Addict 85:725- 743. 
Elman I, Karlsgodt KH, Gastfriend DR (2001) Gender differences in cocaine craving among non -treatment -
seeking individuals with cocaine dependence. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 27:193- 202. 
Evans SM, Foltin RW (2006) Exogenous progesterone attenuates the subjective effects of smoked cocaine in 
women, but not in men. Neuropsychopharmacology 31:659 -674. 
Evans SM, Haney M, Foltin RW (2002) The effects of smoked cocaine during the follicular and l uteal phases of 
the menstrual cycle in women. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 159:397- 406. 
Fair DA, Schlaggar BL, Cohen AL, Miezin FM, Dosenbach NU, Wenger KK, Fox MD, Snyder AZ, Raichle ME, 
Petersen SE (2007) A method for using blocked and event -related fMRI da ta to study "resting state" 
functional connectivity. Neuroimage 35:396- 405. 
Felitti VJ, Anda RF, Nordenberg D, Williamson DF, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_5543], Edwards V, Koss MP, Marks JS (1998) 
Relationship of childhood abuse and household dysfunction to many of the leading causes of death in 
adults. The Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study. Am J Prev Med 14:245 -258. 
Feltenstein MW, See RE (2007) Plasma progesterone levels and cocaine- seeking in freely cycling female rats 
across the estrous cycle. Drug Alcohol Depend 89:183- 189. 
First MB, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Gibbon M, Williams JBW (2002) Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV-TR Axis I 
Disorders, Research Version, Patient Edition (SCID -I/P). [LOCATION_001]: Biometrics Research, [LOCATION_001] 
State Institute.  
Fox HC, Garcia M, Jr., Kemp K, Mi livojevic V, Kreek MJ, Sinha R (2006) Gender differences in cardiovascular 
and corticoadrenal response to stress and drug cues in cocaine dependent individuals. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl) 185:348- 357. 
26 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 Fox HC, Hong KA, Paliwal P, Morgan PT, Sinha R (2008) Al tered levels of sex and stress steroid hormones 
assessed daily over a 28- day cycle in early abstinent cocaine- dependent females. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl) 195:527- 536. 
Fox HC, Hong KI, Siedlarz K, Sinha R (2008) Enhanced sensitivity to stress and drug/alcohol craving in 
abstinent cocaine- dependent individuals compared to social drinkers. Neuropsychopharmacology : 
official publication of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology 33:796- 805. 
Fox HC, Jackson ED, Sinha R (2009) Elevated cortisol and learning and memory deficits in cocaine dependent 
individuals: relationship to relapse outcomes. Psychoneuroendocrinology 34:1198- 1207.  
Fox MD, Corbetta M, Snyder AZ, Vincent JL, Raichle ME (2006) Spontaneous neuronal activity distinguishes 
human dorsal and ventral attention systems. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:[ZIP_CODE]- [ZIP_CODE].  
Fox MD, Raichle ME (2007) Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity observed with functional magnetic 
resonance imaging. Nat Rev Neurosci 8:700- 711. 
Fox MD, Snyder AZ, Vincent JL, Corbetta M, Van Essen DC, Raichle ME (2005) The human brain is 
intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
102:9673- 9678.  
Francis DD, Diorio J, Plotsky PM, Meaney MJ (2002) Environmental enrichment reverses the effects of 
maternal separation on stress reactivity. J Neurosci 22:7840- 7843.  
Fries AB, Ziegler TE, Kurian JR, Jacoris S, Pollak SD (2005) Early experience in humans is associated with 
changes in neuropeptides critical for regulating social behavior. Proc  Natl Acad Sci U S A 102:[ZIP_CODE]-
[ZIP_CODE].  
Garavan H, Pankiewicz J, Bloom A, Cho JK, Sperry L, Ross TJ, Salmeron BJ, Risinger R, Kelley D, Stein EA 
(2000) Cue -induced cocaine craving: neuroanatomical specificity for drug users and drug stimuli. Am J 
Psychiatry 157:1789- 1798.  
George MS, Anton RF, Bloomer C, Teneback C, Drobes DJ, Lorberbaum JP, Nahas Z, Vincent DJ (2001) 
Activation of prefrontal cortex and anterior thalamus in alcoholic subjects on exposure to alcohol -
specific cues. Archives of general psychiatry  58:345- 352. 
Goldstein JM, Jerram M, Poldrack R, Ahern T, Kennedy DN, Seidman LJ, Makris N (2005) Hormonal cycle 
modulates arousal circuitry in women using functional magnetic resonance imaging. J Neurosci 
25:9309- 9316.  
Gu H, Salmeron BJ, Ross TJ, Geng X, Zhan W, Stein EA, Yang Y (2010) Mesocorticolimbic circuits are 
impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by [CONTACT_91239] -state functional connectivity. Neuroimage 
53:593- 601. 
Hall SM, Havassy BE, Wasserman DA (1991) Effects of commitment to abstinence, positive moods, stress, 
and copi[INVESTIGATOR_367921]. J Consult Clin Psychol 59:526- 532. 
Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG (2009) Research electronic data capture 
(REDCap) --a metadata- driven methodology and workflow proc ess for providing translational research 
informatics support. J Biomed Inform 42:377- 381. 
Heckathorn, D.D. (1997). Respondent -driven sampling: A new approach to the study of hidden populations. 
Social Problems, 44(2), 174- 199.  
Heinrichs M, Baumgartner T, Kirschbaum C, Ehlert U (2003) Social support and oxytocin interact to suppress 
cortisol and subjective responses to psychosocial stress. Biol Psychiatry 54:1389- 1398.  
Heinrichs M, von Dawans B, Domes G (2009) Oxytocin, vasopressin, and human social behavior. Front 
Neuroendocrinol 30:548 -557. 
Hernandez -Avila CA, Rounsaville BJ, Kranzler HR (2004) Opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480]- , cannabis - and alcohol -dependent women 
show more rapid progression to substance abuse treatment. Drug Alcohol Depend 74:265- 272. 
Higgins RL, Marlatt GA (1975) Fear of interpersonal evaluation as a determinant of alcohol consumption in 
male social drinkers. J Abnorm Psychol 84:644- 651. 
Hyman SM, Paliwal P, Sinha R (2007) Childhood maltreatment, perceived stress, and stress -related copi[INVESTIGATOR_367922]. Psychol Addict Behav 21:233- 238. 
Just MA, Cherkassky VL, Keller TA, Minshew NJ (2004) Cortical activation and synchronization during 
sentence comprehension in high -functioning autism: evidence of underconnectivity. Brain 127:1811 -
1821.  
27 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 Kanner AD, Coyne JC, Schaefer C, Lazarus RS (1981) Comparison of two modes of stress measurement: 
daily hassles and uplifts versus major life events. J Behav Med 4:1- 39. 
Kastrup A, Thomas C, Hartmann C, Schabet M (1997) Sex dependency of cereb rovascular CO2 reactivity in 
normal subjects. Stroke 28:2353- 2356.  
Killen J, Fortmann S (1997) Craving is associated with smoking relapse: Findings from three prospective 
studies. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol 5:137 -142. 
Kilts CD, Gross RE, Ely TD, Drexler KP ( 2004) The neural correlates of cue -induced craving in cocaine-
dependent women. Am J Psychiatry 161:233- 241. 
Kilts CD, Schweitzer JB, Quinn CK, Gross RE, Faber TL, Muhammad F, Ely TD, Hoffman JM, Drexler KP 
(2001) Neural activity related to drug craving in cocaine addiction. Arch Gen Psychiatry 58:334- 341. 
Kippin TE, Fuchs RA, Mehta RH, Case JM, Parker MP, Bimonte- Nelson HA, See RE (2005) Potentiation of 
cocaine- primed reinstatement of drug seeking in female rats during estrus. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 
182:245- 252. 
Kirsch P, Esslinger C, Chen Q, Mier D, Lis S, Siddhanti S, Gruppe H, Mattay VS, Gallhofer B, Meyer -
Lindenberg A (2005) Oxytocin modulates neural circuitry for social cognition and fear in humans. J 
Neurosci 25:[ZIP_CODE] -[ZIP_CODE].  
Koob GF, Le Moal M ( 2001) Drug addiction, dysregulation of reward, and allostasis. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 24:97 -129. 
Kosfeld M, Heinrichs M, Zak PJ, Fischbacher U, Fehr E (2005) Oxytocin increases trust in humans. Nature 
435:673- 676. 
Kosten TR, Cheeves C, Palumbo J, Seibyl J P, Price LH, Woods SW (1998) Regional cerebral blood flow 
during acute and chronic abstinence from combined cocaine- alcohol abuse. Drug Alcohol Depend 
50:187- 195. 
Kovacs GL, Sarnyai Z, Szabo G (1998) Oxytocin and addiction: a review. Psychoneuroendocrinology 23:945 -
962. 
Levin JM, Frederick Bde B, Ross MH, Fox JF, von Rosenberg HL, Kaufman MJ, Lange N, Mendelson JH, 
Cohen BM, Renshaw PF (2001) Influence of baseline hematocrit and hemodilution on BOLD fMRI 
activation. Magn Reson Imaging 19:1055 -1062.  
Li CS, K osten TR, Sinha R (2005) Sex differences in brain activation during stress imagery in abstinent 
cocaine users: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Biological psychiatry 57:487- 494. 
Liberzon I, Trujillo KA, Akil H, Young EA (1997) Motivational pr operties of oxytocin in the conditioned place 
preference paradigm. Neuropsychopharmacology 17:353 -359. 
Light KC, Grewen KM, Amico JA, Boccia M, Brownley KA, Johns JM (2004) Deficits in plasma oxytocin 
responses and increased negative affect, stress, and bl ood pressure in mothers with cocaine exposure 
during pregnancy. Addict Behav 29:1541- 1564.  
Lim MM, Young LJ (2006) Neuropeptidergic regulation of affiliative behavior and social bonding in animals. 
Horm Behav 50:506- 517. 
Ludwig M, Leng G (2006) Dendritic peptide release and peptide- dependent behaviours. Nat Rev Neurosci 
7:126- 136. 
Maas LC, Lukas SE, Kaufman MJ, Weiss RD, Daniels SL, Rogers VW, Kukes TJ, Renshaw PF (1998) 
Functional magnetic resonance imaging of human brain activation during cue- induced cocaine craving. 
Am J Psychiatry 155:124 -126. 
Maciejewski, P., Aslan, M., Mazure, C.M., Application of Item Response Theory to the Life Events Occurrence 
Scale (LEOS). Unpublished manuscript.  
Marlatt GA, Gordon RJ (1985) Relapse prevention: Maintenance strateg ies in the treatment of addictive 
behaviors. [LOCATION_001]: Guilford Press.  
Marrie RA, Dawson NV, Garland A (2009) Quantile regression and restricted cubic splines are useful for 
exploring relationships between continuous variables. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] 62:511- 517 e511.  
McCance- Katz EF, Carroll KM, Rounsaville BJ (1999) Gender differences in treatment -seeking cocaine 
abusers --implications for treatment and prognosis. Am J Addict 8:300 -311. 
McCarthy MM (1995) Estrogen modulation of oxytocin and its relation to behavi or. Adv Exp Med Biol 395:235-
245. 
28 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 McMahon RC (2001) Personality, stress, and social support in cocaine relapse prediction. J Subst Abuse Treat 
21:77- 87. 
McRae AL, Saladin ME, Brady KT, Upadhyaya H, Back SE, Timmerman MA (2006) Stress reactivity: biological  
and subjective responses to the cold pressor and Trier Social stressors. Hum Psychopharmacol 
21:377- 385. 
McRae -Clark AL, Carter RE, Price KL, Baker NL, Thomas S, Saladin ME, Giarla K, Nicholas K, Brady KT 
(2011) Stress - and cue- elicited craving and reacti vity in marijuana- dependent individuals. 
Psychopharmacology. In press. PMC Journal - In Process.  
Meinlschmidt G, Heim C (2007) Sensitivity to intranasal oxytocin in adult men with early parental separation. 
Biol Psychiatry 61:1109- 1111.  
Melis MR, Melis T, Cocco C, Succu S, Sanna F, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_367923] G, Boi A, Ferri GL, Argiolas A (2007) Oxytocin injected 
into the ventral tegmental area induces penile erection and increases extracellular dopamine in the 
nucleus accumbens and paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus of male rats. Eur J Neurosci 
26:1026- 1035.  
Menon V, Uddin LQ (2010) Saliency, switching, attention and control: a network model of insula function. Brain 
Struct Funct 214:655- 667. 
Miller WR (1996) Form 90:  Structured assessment interview for drinking related behavior.  Test manual. In: 
Project MATCH Monograph Series, vol. 5  Washington, DC: NIH Publication  No. 96- 4004, National 
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.  
Moran- Santa Maria MM, McRae- Clark AL, Back SE, DeSantis SM, Baker NL, Spratt EG, Sim pson AN, Brady 
KT (2010) Influence of cocaine dependence and early life stress on pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenal axis responses to 
CRH and the Trier social stressor. Psychoneuroendocrinology 35:[ADDRESS_459948] JA, Nichols TE (2008) Power calculation for group fMRI studies accounting for arbitrary design and 
temporal autocorrelation. Neuroimage 39:261 -268. 
Myrick H, Anton RF, Li X, Henderson S, Randall PK, Voronin K (2008) Effect of naltrexone and ondansetron on 
alcohol cue- induced activation of the ventral striatum in alcohol -dependent people. Archives of general 
psychiatry 65:466- 475. 
Najavits LM, Lester KM (2008) Gender differences in cocaine dependence. Drug and alcohol dependence 
97:190- 194. 
Ozsoy, S., E. Esel, and M. Kula, Serum oxytocin levels in patients with depression and the effects of gender 
and antidepressant treatment.  Psychiatry Res, 2009. 169(3): p. 249- 52.Patterson HD, Thompson R 
(1971) Recovery of inter -block information when block sizes are unequal. Biometrika 58:545 -564. 
Parker, K.J., et al., Prelim inary evidence that plasma oxytocin levels are elevated in major depression.  
Psychiatry Res, 2010. 178 (2): p. 359 -62. 
Petry NM, Martin B (2002) Low -cost contingency management for treating cocaine - and opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480]- abusing 
methadone patients. Journal of consulti ng and clinical psychology 70:398- 405. 
Petry NM, Petrakis I, Trevisan L, Wiredu G, Boutros NN, Martin B, Kosten TR (2001) Contingency 
management interventions: from research to practice. Am J Psychiatry 158:694- 702. 
Pohorecky LA (1991) Stress and alcohol i nteraction: an update of human research. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 
15:438- 459. 
Ridenour TA, Maldonado- Molina M, Compton WM, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_96543], Cottler LB (2005) Factors associated with 
the transition from abuse to dependence among substance abusers: implications fo r a measure of 
addictive liability. Drug Alcohol Depend 80:1 -14. 
Ross AA, Filstead WJ, Parrella DP, Rossi JJ (1994) A comparison of high- risk situations for alcohol and other 
drugs. American Journal on Addictions 3:241- 253. 
Rubinov M, Sporns O (2011) Weight -conserving characterization of complex functional brain networks. 
Neuroimage 56:2068- 2079.  
Rush, A. J , Trivedi, M. H., Ibrahim, H. M., Carmody, T. J., Arnow, B., Klein, D. N., Markowitz, J. C., Ninan, P. 
T., Kornstein, S., Manber, R., Thase, M. E., Kocs is, J. H., & Keller, M. B. (2003).The 16- item Quick 
Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology (QIDS) Clinician Rating (QIDS -C) and Self - Report (QIDS -
SR): A psychometric evaluation in patients with chronic major depression.  Biological Psychiatry , 54, 
573-583. 
29 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 Russell JA, Mehrabian A (1975) The mediating role of emotions in alcohol use. J Stud Alcohol 36:1508- 1536.  
SAMSHA (2009) Results from the 2009 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Volume 1. Summary of 
National Findings. (U.S. Department of Health and H uman Services, S. A. a. M. H. S. A., Office of 
Applied Studies, ed).  
Sarnyai Z, Babarczy E, Krivan M, Szabo G, Kovacs GL, Barth T, Telegdy G (1991) Selective attenuation of 
cocaine- induced stereotyped behaviour by [CONTACT_300854]: putative role of basal forebrain target sites. 
Neuropeptides 19:51- 56. 
Sarnyai Z, Biro E, Babarczy E, Vecsernyes M, Laczi F, Szabo G, Krivan M, Kovacs GL, Telegdy G (1992) 
Oxytocin modulates behavioural adaptation to repeated treatment with cocaine in rats. 
Neuropharmacology 31:593- 598. 
Sarnyai Z, Kovacs GL (1994) Role of oxytocin in the neuroadaptation to drugs of abuse. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology 19:85 -117. 
Sarnyai Z, Szabo G, Kovacs GL, Telegdy G (1992) Opposite actions of oxytocin and vasopressin in the 
development of cocaine -induced behavioral sensitization in mice. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 43:491-
494. 
Sheehan DV, Lecrubier Y (2003) Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview. 5.0.0, DSM -IV. 
Sheehan DV, Lecrubier Y, Sheehan KH, Amorim P, Janavs J, Weiller E, Hergueta T, Baker R, Dunbar  GC 
(1998) The Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): the development and validation of a 
structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM -IV and ICD -10. J Clin Psychiatry 59:22 -33;quiz 34-
57. 
Simeon, D., et al., Oxytocin administration attenuates stress reactivity in borderline personality disorder: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_11480].  Psychoneuroendocrinology, 2011. 36 (9): p. 1418- 21. 
Sinha R, Catapano D, O'Malley S (1999) Stress -induced craving and stress response in cocaine dependent 
individ uals. Psychopharmacology 142:343- 351. 
Sinha R, Fox H, Hong KI, Sofuoglu M, Morgan PT, Bergquist KT (2007) Sex steroid hormones, stress 
response, and drug craving in cocaine- dependent women: implications for relapse susceptibility. Exp 
Clin Psychopharmacol 15:445- 452. 
Sinha R, Fuse T, Aubin LR, O'Malley SS (2000) Psychological stress, drug- related cues and cocaine craving. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl) 152:140- 148. 
Sinha R, Garcia M, Paliwal P, Kreek MJ, Rounsaville BJ (2006) Stress -induced cocaine craving and 
hypothalamic -pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenal responses are predictive of cocaine relapse outcomes. Archives of 
general psychiatry 63:324- 331. 
Sinha R, Lacadie C, Skudlarski P, Fulbright RK, Rounsaville BJ, Kosten TR, Wexler BE (2005) Neural activity 
associated with stres s-induced cocaine craving: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl) 183:171- 180. 
Sivukhina EV, Dolzhikov AA, Morozov Iu E, Jirikowski GF, Grinevich V (2006) Effects of chronic alcoholic 
disease on magnocellular and parvocellular hypothalamic neurons in men. Horm Metab Res 38:382-
390. 
Sobell LC, Sobell MB (1992) Timeline follow -back: A technique for assessing self -reported ethanol 
consumption. In: Measuring alcohol consumption: Psychological and biological methods(All en, J. and 
Litten, R. Z., eds), pp 41- 72 Totowa, NJ: Humana Press.  
Sofuoglu M, Dudish- Poulsen S, Nelson D, Pentel PR, Hatsukami DK (1999) Sex and menstrual cycle 
differences in the subjective effects from smoked cocaine in humans. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol 
7:274- 283. 
Spi[INVESTIGATOR_33594] (1983) Manual for the State- Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 
Psychologists Press.  
Sussner BD, Smelson DA, Rodrigues S, Kline A, Losonczy M, Ziedonis D (2006) The validity and reliability of a 
brief measure of cocaine craving. Drug and alcohol dependence 83:233- 237. 
Terry -McElrath YM, O'Malley PM, Johnston LD (2009) Reasons for Drug Use among American Youth by 
[CONTACT_367946], Gender, and Race/Ethnicity: 1976- 2005. J Drug Issues 39:[ADDRESS_459949], Sin gleton E, Haertzen CA, Henningfield JE (1993) The development of a cocaine craving 
questionnaire. Drug Alcohol Depend 34:19 -28. 
30 
 
Version  1 6.0 (Revised 08/01/2016)  
 Tomasi D, Volkow ND, Wang R, Carrillo JH, Maloney T, Alia -Klein N, Woicik PA, Telang F, Goldstein RZ 
(2010) Disrupted functional  connectivity with dopaminergic midbrain in cocaine abusers. PLoS One 
5:e10815.  
U.S. Department of Commerce, Census Bureau. (2008). National Cancer Institute and Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention Co- sponsored Tobacco Use Supplement to the Current Population Sur vey 
(2006- 2007)  
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. National Institutes of Health (NIH). PROMIS© Item Bank 
v.1.0 —Emotional Distress –Anxiety Short Form 1. PROMIS© Item Bank v. 1.0—Emotional Distress –
Depression Short Form 1. PROMIS© I tem Bank v. 1.0 —Sleep Disturbance.  
Vaccari C, Lolait SJ, Ostrowski NL (1998) Comparative distribution of vasopressin V1b and oxytocin receptor 
messenger ribonucleic acids in brain. Endocrinology 139:5015 -5033.  
Volkow ND, Mullani N, Gould KL, Adler S, Kraje wski K (1988) Cerebral blood flow in chronic cocaine users: a 
study with positron emission tomography. Br J Psychiatry 152:641- 648. 
Waldrop AE, Back SE, Brady KT, Upadhyaya HP, McRae AL, Saladin ME (2007) Daily stressor sensitivity, 
abuse effects, and coca ine use in cocaine dependence. Addictive behaviors 32:3015- 3025. PMCID: 
PMC2099298  
Waldrop AE, Back SE, Verduin ML, Brady KT (2007) Triggers for cocaine and alcohol use in the presence and 
absence of posttraumatic stress disorder. Addictive Behaviors 32:634 -639. 
Waldrop AE, Price KL, Desantis SM, Simpson AN, Back SE, McRae AL, Spratt EG, Kreek MJ, Brady KT 
(2010) Community -dwelling cocaine- dependent men and women respond differently to social stressors 
versus cocaine cues. Psychoneuroendocrinology 35:798 -806. PMCID: PMC2875320 
Westermeyer J, Boedicker AE (2000) Course, severity, and treatment of substance abuse among women 
versus men. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 26:523 -535. 
Wexler BE, Gottschalk CH, Fulbright RK, Prohovnik I, Lacadie CM, Rounsaville BJ, Gore JC (2001) Functional 
magnetic resonance imaging of cocaine craving. Am J Psychiatry 158:86- 95. 
Wilcox CE, Teshiba TM, Merideth F, Ling J, Mayer AR (2011) Enhanced cue reactivity and fronto- striatal 
functional connectivity in cocaine use disorders. Drug Alcohol Depend 115:137- 144. 
Williams JR, Insel TR, Harbaugh CR, Carter CS (1994) Oxytocin administered centrally facilitates formation of 
a partner preference in female prairie voles (Microtus ochrogaster). J Neuroendocrinol 6:247- 250. 
Winhusen T, Somoza E (2001 ) The HPA axis in cocaine use: implications for pharmacotherapy. Journal of 
addictive diseases 20:105- 119. 
Winstock AR, Lea T, Copeland J (2009) Lithium carbonate in the management of cannabis withdrawal in 
humans: an open- label study. J Psychopharmacol 23:84- 93. 
Witt DM, Winslow JT, Insel TR (1992) Enhanced social interactions in rats following chronic, centrally infused 
oxytocin. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 43:855- 861. 
Wong CJ, Badger GJ, Sigmon SC, Higgins ST (2002) Examining possible gender differences among cocaine-
dependent outpatients. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol 10:316- 323. 
Yoshimura R, Kimura T, Watanabe D, Kiyama H (1996) Differential expression of oxytocin receptor mRNA in 
the developi[INVESTIGATOR_251780]. Neurosci Res 24:291- 304. 
Yoshimura R, Kiyama H, Kimura T, Araki T, Maeno H, Tanizawa O, Tohyama M (1993) Localization of 
oxytocin receptor messenger ribonucleic acid in the rat brain. Endocrinology 133:1239 -1246.  
Zalesky A, Fornito A, Bullmore ET (2010) Network -based statistic: identifying differences in brain networks. 
Neuroimage 53:1197- 1207.  
 
 