Page  [ADDRESS_505024]  Protocol  #16-H-0129  
IND #: NA 
Note: Supplement,  Nicotinamide  Riboside,  is not subject to  IND regulations as covered  by 
[CONTACT_400649] 1994.  
NHLBI  Protocol : Study  to Evaluate the Effect  of Nicotinamide Riboside  on Immunity  
Short  Title:  Nicotinamide Riboside  on Immunity  
Keywords:  Inflammasome,  Sirt3,  Nicotinamide riboside,  Fasting,  
Principal  Investigator:  
*Michael  N. Sack,  MD, PhD (E)
Cardiovascular  Branch  (CB)  National  Heart,  
Lung,  and Blood  Institute  National  Institutes  of 
Health  
Building  10, Room  5-3150  
Bethesda,  MD [ZIP_CODE]  
Phone:  [PHONE_8309]  
Associate  Investigator  & Research  Coordinator:  
*Rebecca Huffstutler,  CRNP CB, NHLBI  (E) 
Dachelle Johnson PharmD CC Pharmacy  (E) 
Jay H Ch ung, MD, PhD  CB, NHLBI (E)  
Associate  Investigator  & Biostatistics  Investigator:  
Myron  A. Waclawiw,  Ph.D.  DCVS/OBR,  NHLBI  (E) 
*Investigators  authorized  to obtain  informed  consent
Biospecimen  Tracking:  
Shahin  Hassanzadeh,  BS CB, NHLBI  (E) 
Collaborator:  
Julian L. Griffin, Ph.D    Department of Biochemistry, Cambridge 
University, Cambridge, [LOCATION_006]  
Subjects in study  at NIH:  Number  
42 Sex 
M/F Age range  
18-39 years
Multi -center  trial: 
Ionizing  Radiation for Research:  
Off-Site Project:  
DSMB  Involvement:  
Tech  Transfer:  
IND/IDE:  No 
No 
No 
No 
CRADA  
No 
Page  [ADDRESS_505025]  Selection  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 18 
Rationale for the Exclusion of  Children  ................................ ................................ ....................  18 
Rationale for the Exclusio n of Cognitively  Impaired  Subjects  ................................ .................  18 
Risk/Benefit  Assessment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  [ADDRESS_505026]  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  20 
15. Reimbursement  for Travel  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 21 
16. Financial  Compensation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  21 
17. Refer ences  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  21 
APPENDIX A:  NIH INFORMATION SHEET ON STAFF  RESEARCH  PARTICIPATION  
(APRIL 2016 ) ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  [ADDRESS_505027]  of 24-hour fasting  is that it blunts the  activation  of a component  of 
the immune  system,  termed  the Nod-like receptor  family  protein 3 (NLRP3)  Inflammasome.  
This inflammasome,  as a mediator of sterile inflammation,  is associated  with the development  of 
diabetes  and atherosclerosis. At the same time,  we found  that refeeding  after the 24-hour fast 
significantly  increased  NLRP3 protein  levels,  IL-1and TNF  signaling,  and that fasting  blunted  
the NLRP3  inflammasome response,  in association  with the activation  of a fasting  sensing  
protein  called  SIRT3.1 Interestingly,  a recently  discovered  naturally  occurring  form of  vitamin
B3, called  nicotinamide riboside  (NR),  has been found to activate SIRT3.2, [ADDRESS_505028]  of fasting  when administered  to primary  
human  monocytes/macrophages  in culture.  Putting this together,  it would  be interesting  to 
evaluate whether the administration  of NR to human  subjects  would  replicate the fasting  blunting  
effect  on the  NLRP3  inflammasome.  Interestingly,  at the same time,  it has recently  been found,  
in a preclinical  study,  that the  NLRP3  protein  can orchestrate differentiation  of naïve T - cells 
into Th2 cells.  We therefore propose to more  broadly  examine  the effects  of NR administration  
on myeloid  and lymphoid cell biology  in healthy  volunteers.  
2.Background
Atherosclerosis  and type 2 diabetes  are associated  with ‘sterile inflammation’ that  exacerbates  
vascular injury  and insulin resistance.  A mechanism  underpi[INVESTIGATOR_400625] -associated  molecular patterns  
(DAMPs),  which  in turn, activate i ntracellular inflammatory  proteins (the NLRP3  
inflammasome).  Inflammasome activation  increases  the production  and release  of pro- 
inflammatory  cytokines,  including  interleukin -1(IL-1) and IL18.  This emerging  link between  
the immune  system  and metabolic diseases  raises  the question  as to whether caloric restriction  
activated  pathways,  which ameliorate consequences of  metabolic disease,3, 4 may directly
suppress  the NLRP3  inflammasome.  
Emerging  data finds  that mitochondrial  integrity  and function  control  multiple  immunological  
effects  including  effects  on activation  of the NLRP3 inflammasome in monocytes/macrophages,  
on T-cell polarity  and in the activation  of mast  cells.  At the same time data show  that fasting  and 
caloric restriction  improve mitochondrial  integrity,  in part via activation  of sirtuin proteins4 and
that caloric restriction  blunts systemic inflammation.5, 6 Conversely,  overnutrition  is linked  to
activation  of the NLRP3  inflammasome (sterile inflammation) and  TH2 linked diseases  including  
asthma.   Putting  this together,  we reasoned  that fasting,  via maintenance of mitochondrial  
integrity,  would  dampen  the NLRP3  inflammasome compared  to the effects  of refeeding.  This 
hypothesis  was explored  in an initial  NHLBI  protocol (14-H-0103) where we found  that the 
Page  4 of 25 16-H-0129  
Amendment F, May 22, 2018  
Michael N Sack, MD, PhD  NLRP3  inflammasome was lower in the  fasted  compared  to the  refed  state and that Sirtuin  3 
(Sirt3) activation played  a role in the  fasting  effect. Refeeding  itself also  primed inflammatory  
pathways  including  the NLRP3  pathway  and TNF  signaling.  Interestingly,  serum  obtained  from  
the patients  in the  fasted  and refed  states  recapi[INVESTIGATOR_400626] -1 monocytes  and the administration  of a Sirt3  activator (Nicotinamide  Riboside  - 
NR) could  replicate the anti-inflammatory  effect  of fasting  when  administered  to primary  human  
monocytes/macrophages.1 NR is a naturally  occurring  form  of vitamin  B3, and it has been  shown
to be  a Nicotinamide Adenine  Dinucleotide (NAD+) precursor that  boosts cellular NAD+ levels.
NAD+ acts as an activator and  substrate  for sirtuins.
From  our prior study  we concluded  that: (i) fasting  and refeeding  differentially  regulate NLRP3  
inflammasome activation  in humans;  (ii) that  the activation  of Sirt3  by [CONTACT_400650] (iii) that fasting,  refeeding  and the  activation  of 
Sirt3  may play a broader  role in the  modulation  of immune  function.  
To pursue the clinical  potential of  Sirt3  activation  on immune  cell modulation  we propose to 
explore  the administration  of NR to healthy  volunteers  to explore  the effects  on myeloid  and 
lymphoid  cell biology.  
Additional  studies  have been  initiated  or planned  using  NR to study  effects  on mitochondrial  
biology  related  conditions  including  aging  (at the  University  of Colorado  in Boulder – actively  
recruiting) and  in heart  failure  (University  of Washington  in Seattle – protocol in developmental  
stage).  Based  on blood levels of  NAD+ from  a pi[INVESTIGATOR_400627],
the dose of NR chosen  by [CONTACT_400651] 1 gram  daily.  The PI (Sack) has also 
discussed  the experience  to date with  Drs Christopher R. Martens  (UC – Boulder) and  Rong  Tian 
(U. of Washington).  As of May 17, 2016 the  Boulder team  has enrolled  20 subjects  of whom  10 
subjects  had been taking 1 gram  of NR daily  with no evidence of intolerance  or side effects.  The 
Seattle team  has completed a pharmacokinetics  study  ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) on [ADDRESS_505029]  on the  heart  failure study  had been initiated.  We therefore  
propose to use  the 1 gram  daily  dose.  
3.Hypothesis
Nicotinamide riboside,  as a Sirt3  activator,  will mimic  the beneficial  immune  effects  of 
prolonged  fasting  and suppress immune  activation  of refeeding.  
Proposed  Scientific/Clinical  Innovations  and Advances  of the Study  
-Evaluate whether pharmacologic  activation  of Sirt3,  via enhancing  mitochondrial  integrity
will blunt sterile -inflammation  linked  NLRP3  inflammasome activation.
-Expand our  understanding  how NR can modulate  the regulation  of additional innate and
adaptive immune  pathways
Page  5 of 25 16-H-0129  
Amendment F, May 22, 2018  
Michael N Sack, MD, PhD  4.Objectives
1.Explore  whether NR  administration  will blunt NLRP3 activation  in human subjects.
2.Explore  whether NR  will modulate additional  innate (NK cell) and adaptive  (T-cell)
immune  programs.
3.Employ  proteomic  and cytokine array  analysis  to obtain  a broader understanding  of the
NR mediated  effects  on mitochondrial  biology  in modulating  immune  regulation  in
circulating  cells and in the  serum  of study  subjects.
5.Study  Design  and Procedures
The study  design  is a prospective, double -blind  randomized crossover study  with subjects  
serving  as their own  controls.  
Normal  volunteers  will be enrolled  on this 3-5 week  study  that includes  3 visits to the  NIH 
Clinical  Center.  Subjects  may be contact[CONTACT_400652],  text or  email  to verify  study  compound  
compliance,  for AE/safety  assessment  and to remind subjects  to initiate the 24-hour fast  prior to 
Visit  #2 and Visit  #3. Email  communications  will be made through the NIH medical  secure  
email  system  unless  the patient declines  its’ use and requests  standard  unsecure email.  A 
schematic showing  the outline  of the overall  study  is shown  below.  
The variable length  of the washout  and study arms phase is to allow  flexibility  for the 
scheduling  of subject  visits. The prior pharmacokinetic studies  support  that 7 days is more 
than sufficient  to restore  NAD+ levels  to baseline.
The following  actions  will be  undertaken  at the defined  visits:  
Arm  1 
Screening/Visit 1: 
•Subjects  will be screened  for inclusion  or exclusion.
•Baseline screening  laboratories  performed.
•Pregnancy  testing  in women of  childbearing  potential.

Page  6 of 25 16-H-0129  
Amendment F, May 22, 2018  
Michael N Sack, MD, PhD  •Eligible subjects  will be randomized to placebo  (i.e. sugar tablet) or 1 gram  of NR daily.
The study  compound  start date will  be determined  at this visit. Start  date will  be within
one week  of screening  visit.
•Instruct  subject  on study  compound  administration,  reinforce maintenance  of stable diet
and activity  level during the  study  participation  period, and review the time of the
breakfast  on day 6 (+3 days , if needed) , prior  to initiating  the 24-hour fast.
Day [ADDRESS_505030]  study  subjects:  
•to remind  them  which  day to initiate therapy
•to remind  subjects  of the 24-hour ± 2hr  fast
Visit 2 : Day 7 (+ up to 3 days , if needed ) of Arm  1 study  compound  administration  
•Subjects  will arrive at  the Clinical  Center after  a 24-hour fast ± 2 hours  with the
exception  of drinking  water  starting  the morning  of day 6 (+ up to 3 days , if
needed) .
•A pi[INVESTIGATOR_400628].
•Fasting  blood draw  for hepatic  panel, acute  care panel,  insulin, growth hormone,  complete
blood count , serum  immune  cell studies  and to measure NAD  levels.
•Urine collection  for ketones
•Administer day 7 (+ up to 3 days , if needed) Arm 1 placebo/NR  capsules.
•A 500 caloric meal will be eaten.
•Refed  blood -draw for insulin, growth hormone, glucose, serum  immune  cell studies  and to
measure NAD  levels three  hours  ± 30 minutes  after fixed caloric meal  (metabolic  kitchen).
•Subject  educated  about  washout  period.
•New bottles  of study  compound for Arm  [ADDRESS_505031]  study  subjects:  
•to remind  them  which  day to initiate therapy
•to remind  subjects   of the 24-hour ± 2hr  fast
Visit 3: Day 7 (+ up to 3 days , if needed ) of Arm  2 study  compound  administration  
•Subjects  will arrive at  the Clinical  Center after a 24-hour fast ± 2 hours  with the
exception  of drinking  water  starting  the morning  of day 6 of the second study  arm.
•A pi[INVESTIGATOR_400628].
•Fasting  blood draw  for hepatic  function  panel, acute  care panel,  complete blood
Page  7 of 25 16-H-0129  
Amendment F, May 22, 2018  
Michael N Sack, MD, PhD  count , insulin, growth hormone, serum immune  cell studies  and to measure NAD  
levels.  
•Urine collection  for ketones
•Administer day 7 of Arm 2 placebo/NR  capsules.
•A 500 caloric meal will be eaten.
•Refed  blood draw  for insulin, growth hormone, glucose, serum immune  cell studies  and to
measure NAD  levels three hours ±30 minutes  after fixed caloric meal  (metabolic kitchen).
Off Treatment  (Supplement) : 
Subject s will be considered off treatment  (supplement)  after completion of Arm 2 study 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353].  
Follow  up: 
We wi ll follow up the subjects  for [ADDRESS_505032] research team if any symptoms develop 
during this 30 day period.  
 Off Study:  
Subject will be taken off study [ADDRESS_505033] 
doesn’t report any AEs , we will take him/her off study  on day [ADDRESS_505034] off study date upon resolution/returning to the baseline of the AE s.  
Randomization  and dispensing  of study  pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353]:  
The pharmacist  Co-Investigator on the  study  will devise a randomization code in consultation  
with [CONTACT_400676] (Biostatistician).  This code will  be kept confidential and will be 
employed  by [CONTACT_400653][INVESTIGATOR_3353]. For each  arm, subjects would  receive  
sufficient  pi[INVESTIGATOR_132918] 7 days of administration.   If additional pi[INVESTIGATOR_400629], these will be dispensed separately by [CONTACT_1714]. Subjects  will take 
their study  medication  at home  for days 1 through  6 (+ up to 3 days , if needed) .  Day 7 (+ up to 3 
days, if needed) dosing  will be in the clinic.  Subjects  will be instructed  to bring  their study  
medication  bottle  back to the  clinical  center  for day 7 (+ up to 3 days , if needed) dosing  and to not 
take the day 7 (+ up to 3 days , if needed) dose until instructed  to by [CONTACT_2362].   If the subject 
forgets  to bring  the study  bottle  with the day 7 (+ up to 3 day s, if needed)  dose,  the day 7 (+ up to 
3 days , if needed) dose will be  ordered  through  CRIS  from the  pharmacy.  A process  has been 
developed  by [CONTACT_400654].   The day 7 (+ up to 3 days , if needed)  pi[INVESTIGATOR_400630] 24-hour fasting  research  blood draw.  The study  pi[INVESTIGATOR_400631]’s  name,  code  number, prescription  details  (4 tablets  by [CONTACT_400655]) and  will include the arm (1 or 2).   If the study  subject does not bring  in the  pi[INVESTIGATOR_160663],  the subject  will be asked  to confirm  the number  of study  doses  taken over the prior 6 (+ up 
Page  8 of 25 16-H-0129  
Amendment F, May 22, 2018  
Michael N Sack, MD, PhD  to 3 days , if needed)  days and this will be documented  in the  medical  record.  The pi[INVESTIGATOR_400632].  
The code will  be shared  with the statistician  following  the completion  of studies  on [ADDRESS_505035]  deviations  to assess  original  study  assumptions  and continued  
study  feasibility.  
Description  of Study  Population  and Recruitment  
Participants  will be enrolled  at the NIH Clinical  Center.  Subjects  will be recruited  through  a 
LISTSERV email  announcement  and study  procedures  will be performed  in the outpatient  
unit/day  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_400633].   A list of  healthy  volunteers  may also be requested  
from  the NIH Office of Patient Recruitment.  
A total of 42 participants  will be recruited  for this study.  
6.Eligibility  Assessment
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or AI will assess  eligibility.   Screening will be performed  under  this protocol  only.  
Screening  studies  for subject enrollment:  
i. History  and physical  examination.
ii. Screening  and Research  laboratory  tests may include:
oAcute Care  Panel  (Na, K, Cl, CO2,  Creatinine,  Glucose,  and Urea  Nitrogen)
oMineral  Panel  (Phosphorus, Magnesium,  Albumin,  and Calcium)
oHepatic Panel  (Alk Phosphatase,  ALT,  AST,  Total  Bilirubin,  and Direct  Bilirubin)
oCBC  + Differential
oBlood  draw  for immune  cell studies  and NAD levels
oUrine for ketones
oGrowth  hormone  o
Insulin  level
oGlucose
oHCG  (females  of childbearing  potential)
Inclusion  Criteria  
As this is a  pi[INVESTIGATOR_799],  the age-range and  BMI range of subjects  will be restricted  to potentially  
reduce metabolic  variables  associated  with a wide  age- and BMI-range.  
•Males  and females  between  the ages  of 18 and 39
•BMI  between  18.5 and 29.9
•Agrees  to comp ly with study  procedures  and maintain current  level of  physical  activity
and dietary  intake throughout the  study.
•Female subjects of  child -bearing  ability  willing  to commit  to reliable contraception  while
participating  in the  study.
Page  9 of 25 16-H-0129  
Amendment F, May 22, 2018  
Michael N Sack, MD, PhD  Exclusion  Criteria  
•Subjects  with an acute or chronic illness  as per history,  on laboratory  analysis or
requiring  medications  to manage disease.
•Subjects  taking  vitamins  or supplements  or any medications,  except  oral contraceptives,
within  4 weeks  of participation  into this study.
•BMI  <18.5  or >29.9.
•Female subjects who are pregnant  or lactating.
•Subjects  who have donated blood or  participated  in another clinical  trial involving  blood
draws  in the  last 8 weeks.
•Subjects  who use nicotine products  including  chewing  tobacco,  vaporizer,  gum,  cigarette
or patch  form  within  three months.
•Any other  medical   condition  that, in the  opi[INVESTIGATOR_354664],  might  put
the subject  at risk of harm during  the study  or might  adversely  affect  the interpretation  of
the study  data.
7.Procedures
All tests will follow NIH Clinical  Center policies.  Any of the listed  procedures  or laboratory  tests 
performed  within  three  months prior to enrollment  in this protocol  may/may  not be repeated.   
However,  if these procedures  are not repeated,  the prior studies  (within  the last 3 months)  will be 
reviewed  in CRIS  as part of  the protocol.  The purpose  for not repeating  study  procedures  is to 
prevent  unnecessary  inconveniences,  risks or discomforts  for study  participants and the NIH 
Clinical  Center.  
i)Blood Draws:  In addition to the  screening  blood  draw (40  mL),  subjects  will have 4
additional  research  blood  draws  up to 100 mL each, as described  in Section  4.
ii)Urine Analysis: Subjects  will be asked  to provide  up to three urine samples, one for
pregnancy  testing as part of screening  evaluation  and two in the  fasting  state at Visits  2
and 3 as described  in Section 4.
iii)24-Hour  Fasting: Subjects  will be asked  to fast for up to 26 hours  (water intake  will not
be restricted) during  each of the two treatment  arms.
iv)Fixed  Caloric  Meal:  The meal  will be a [ADDRESS_505036] a
choice of two meals.
Meal  Choices  Description  of Meal  
Option  1 •Vegetable omelet
•Toast  with butter and  jelly
•Orange juice
Option  2 - •Oatmeal  with Walnuts, Brown  Sugar and  Dried
Cranberries
•Milk
Page  10 of 25 16-H-0129  
Amendment F, May 22, 2018  
Michael N Sack, MD, PhD  8.Dietary  Supplement
Niagen™  is a commercially -available form  of nicotinamide  riboside (NR).  The nucleoside NR  is 
a single  chemical  moiety  containing  nicotinamide  and ribose.[ADDRESS_505037] as part of  dietary  NAD+ digestion.  Thus,  humans  are 
constantly  exposed to NR from  the diet, albeit  at low levels.  Since 2013, Niagen™  has been sold  
as a dietary  supplement in the  United  States.  Labeling  guidelines  recommend consumers  to limit  
their intake to 2 capsules/day,  which  amounts  to 250 mg/day.  This recommended  level  is the  
equival ent of 3.8 mg/kg  bw/day,  which  is [ADDRESS_505038] on the  
pharmacokinetics  and safety  of orally  administered  NR. However,  ChromaDex  has conducted  a 
recent  randomized,  double -blind,  cross -over,  pharmacokinetic study  (14NBHC,  unpublished  
results) which  demonstrated  that NR was readily  absorbed  and detectable in human  plasma,  
white blood cells,  and urine.  In addition,  NR was well tolerated  and presented no toxicity  
following  a single dose up to 1000 mg  in human  subjects. Moreover,  in an acute toxicology  
study,  rats that were  given a  single oral dose  (5000 mg/kg) of NR did not show  clinical  signs  of 
toxicity  or mortality  (unpublished results).  
Niacin  is a form  of vitamin B38 and has been  used for a long time treat hypercholesterolemia  and
pellagra.  Niacin  administration  can lead to undesirable effects,  such as spontaneous flushing.  
Studies  in animal  models  suggest  that flushing  results from  nicotinic acid -mediated  activation  of 
the G-coupled  receptor,  GPR109A .[ADDRESS_505039]  that NR intake does  not present  any potential risks  and 
should be  well tolerated  in human  subjects.  The dose proposed  for this study  is within  the doses  
tested  in non-clinical  studies  of mice for up to 4  months, and are 300-fold below the daily  dose 
that was given  in rats in a 14-day dose range finder  study.  
Nicotinamide,  an expected metabolite of NR, is a molecule that  is considered  of low toxicity  in 
food by [CONTACT_400656]  
(FDA) and  the European  Food  Safety  Authority  (EFSA).  
Because nicotinamide is a putative metabolite of NR in humans,  understanding  the safety  profile  
of nicotinamide is relevant  when  assessing  the safety  of NR in human  subjects.  
Based  on the  structural  similarities  between  NR and nicotinamide,  and that nicotinamide is a 
downstream  metabolite of NR digestion,  it is assumed  that any unexpected  adverse  effects  of NR 
may be similar to those  associated  with nicotinamide intake.   However,  no significant  adverse  
Page  [ADDRESS_505040] used  doses  up to the  equivalent  of 3000  
mg/day  for up to 3  years  to evaluate the possible  benefits  of nicotinamide administration  to 
patients  with or at risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_400634]  1 diabetes  10, 11. In addition,  doses of  25 and 42 mg/kg  
bw/day  had no effect  on a variety of biochemical  parameters,  such as those  that assessed  liver 
and kidney  function.  
In summary, careful  analysis  of all the non-clinical information  available on NR has not revealed  
any potential serious  toxicity  that would  preclude its use  in healthy  subjects.  
Common  name:  [CONTACT_400675]:  Niagen  
 
Chemical  name:  3-(Aminocarbonyl) -1-β-D-ribofuranosyl -pyridinium  chloride (1:1)  
Dose:  1000mg  daily  for 7-10 days 
 
Route of administration:  oral 
 
Dosing  instructions:  (4) 250mg  study  capsules  daily  after breakfast.  
 
Supply:  Drug  will be supplied by [CONTACT_400657]: W.R. Grace  & Co. [ADDRESS_505041],  Albany,  OR [ZIP_CODE],  
[LOCATION_003]  
Toxicology: None known.  
 
Drug  Interactions:  None known.  
 
Off-label  use: Considering  the clinical  investigation  is designed  to study  the relationship  between  
a dietary  supplement’s  effect  on normal  structure or function  in humans  or to characterize the 
mechanism by [CONTACT_9444]  a dietary  supplement acts to maintain  such structure or function  this study  
would  not need  to be  conducted under an  IND.  Under  the Dietary  Supplement  Health  and 
Education  Act of  1994, a  dietary  supplement is not considered  a drug and is not  subject  to the  
premarket  approval  requirements  for drugs  if the intended  use for which  it is marketed  is only to 
affect  the structure or any function of  the body  (i.e., not intended  to be  used for a therapeutic 
purpose). Similarly,  whether an  IND is needed  for a clinical  investigation  evaluating  a dietary  
supplement is determined  by [CONTACT_400658].  If the clinical  investigation  is 
intended  only to evaluate  the dietary  supplement’s  effect  on the  structure  or function  of the body,  
an IND is not required.  
 
9. Data  and Biospecimen  Management  Plan  
 
Data Management  and Access : 
 
Page  12 of 25 16-H-0129  
Amendment F, May 22, 2018  
Michael N Sack, MD, PhD   Samples  will be de-identified  prior to storage on the  5th floor of building  10 in laboratory  for the 
principal  investigator [INVESTIGATOR_400635].   Samples and data will  
be stored,  using  codes  assigned  by [CONTACT_400659](s).  Research samples  will 
be stored  using  BSI in accordance  with NHLBI  DIR Biospecimen  policy.  Data will  be kept on 
the NHLBI  P:drive,  accessible  through  password -protected  computers.   Only  the members  of the 
research  team will have access  to the  samples  and data.  
Primary  research  data will be  coded  by [CONTACT_400660]  (such  as 
name) with  a code  that will enable the investigator  to readily  ascertain  the identity  of the subject  
through  the use of a code-key, but will not reveal  the identity  of subjects to parties  not authorized  
to have access  to individual  subject  identifiers.  
Biospecimen  Management:  
 
Blood  and urine samples  will be coded  and stored  in conformity  with DIR Policy  (e.g.,  BSI).  
Coded  biospecimens  may be sent to collaborators  outside  of the NIH with  IRB approval  in 
accordance with  applicable NIH and  DIR Policy  for sharing  research  resources,  including  an 
executed  material  transfer  agreement.  
End of study  procedures:  
Data retained  by [CONTACT_400661] a password -protected  database  in conformity  with 
NHLBI  DIR policy  until they  are no longer  of scientific  value.  
Destruction  of research  data collected  on this protocol will be consistent  with NIH policy  and 
upon permission  of the Clinical  Director.  
 
Breach  of Confidentiality:  
 
PIs will report  any breach of  subject  confidentiality  or trial  data to the  clinical  director and  IRB 
per NIH policy,  including  NIH HRPP  SOP 16 - Reporting  Requirements  for Unanticipated  
Problems,  Adverse Events and Protocol  Deviations.  
Data  Sharing  and Future  Use of Data  Data  
Sharing  Plans : 
Research  data may be shared  with qualified  non-collaborator recipi[INVESTIGATOR_400636]  (coded  data) or Office  of 
Human  Subjects  Research  Protections  (OHSRP) approval  (unlinked  data).  In both situations,  a 
data use agreement  between  the sender  and the recipi[INVESTIGATOR_400637]. Future research  use of 
data not defined  in the  research  protocol may occur  only after IRB review  and approval  or a 
determination  from  the NIH OHSRP.  Refusal  of a research  subject participant  to permit  future  use 
of data-will be honored.  
Page  13 of 25 16-H-0129  
Amendment F, May 22, 2018  
Michael N Sack, MD, PhD   Future  Use of Biospecimens:  
 
Following  analyses  of biospecimens  for primary  research  purposes  as described  in the  protocol,  
remaining  samples suitable  for future  research  will be stored  in manner that conforms  with DIR 
policy  (such as BSI) or in a publicly  accessible research  biospecimen  repository  following IRB 
approval.  Biospecimens  may be destroyed  only when permitted  by [CONTACT_400662]. Any future  research  use of biospecimens  not defined  in the  research  
protocol  will occur only after IRB review and  approval,  if the research  holds the  key that 
identifies  research  subjects, or  determination  from  OHSRP  (non-collaborative research).  
Biospecimens  will not be  sent outside  of the NIH for future research  use without  IRB approval  
and an executed  agreement. Refusal  of a research  subject  participant  to allow  for future  use of 
biospecimens  will be honored.  
Loss or  destruction  of samples: Should we become  aware that  a major  breech  in our  plan for 
tracking  and storage  of samples has occurred,  the IRB will be notified.  
 
Collaboration:  
 
Between NHLBI and [CONTACT_400677] L. Griffin, Department of Biochemistry, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 
[LOCATION_006]. This MTA is for the NHLBI to send de -identified blood and serum samples from healthy volunteers 
from this fasting and refeeding study for lipi[INVESTIGATOR_400638] d metabolomic testing.  An MTA will be executed after 
Amendment D approval by [CONTACT_1201]. 
10. Statistical  Considerations  
 
We propose that  NR functions as a fasting  mimetic  and we will  assess  whether after  refeeding  
the NLRP3  inflammasome activation  (IL-1release) is blunted  by [CONTACT_400663].  In 
our prior study,  the mean±SD  value of fasting IL-1β release  was 319±513 pg/ml,  while the mean  
refed  value  was 736±1067 pg/ml  (with  417±613 pg/ml  for the paired refed -fasting  IL-1β release 
differences).  In this placebo -controlled  crossover study,  we would  like to detect  a relative  
reduction  of at least 20%  in refeeding  IL-1β release  (from  736 to 589 pg/ml) with  NR treatment  
compared  to the  paired  responses on placebo.  The crossover design  has the  benefit  of reducing  the 
influence of confounding  covariates  (because  each subject serves  as their own control) and  is 
statistically  efficient,  requiring  fewer subjects than non-crossover designs.  Since estimates  of 
within -subject  variability  for both the  NR and placebo  arms,  between -subject  variability  for the 
NR arm, and between -subject  covariance between  NR and placebo  are not available for this novel  
exploratory  study,  the usual  crossover study  sample size formulas  cannot be  used.  Instead,  we 
calculate sample size using  the paired  Student  t-test. With a  standard  deviation of  276 pg/ml  (45% 
of that observed  for the fasting -refed  differences),  80% power  and an alpha=0.05,  we will need  [ADDRESS_505042] a  20% relative decrease  (absolute decrease of 147 pg/dl  from  736 to  589 pg/dl) 
for the paired  treatment  differences  in IL-1β release with  NR treatment.  We therefore  request  
approval  to enroll up to 35 normal  volunteers  to account  for possible  treatment  non- compliance 
and /or study  dropouts.  
 
There will  be no interim  efficacy  look at the data in this proof -of-concept  study.  However,  when  
[ADDRESS_505043]  for a new larger  enrollment  ceiling  (not to exceed  58 subjects,  accounting  for study  
drop-outs and non-adherers) will  be presented  to the  IRB for consideration.  
 
Of note, the sample size recalculation was performed on October 19th, [ADDRESS_505044] deviation 
of the between treatment fed -fasting differences in IL -1beta levels (S = 177.002 pg/ml) based on 
17/20 evaluable subjects enroll ed into the protocol.   The new calculation was performed for fed -
fasting differences rather than fed differences between treatments (a more conservative approach) 
to allow adjustment for any differences in baseline fasting IL -1beta levels between study per iods. 
With an observed standard deviation of 177 pg/ml, 80% power, and a two -sided alpha=0.05, we 
will need n=[ADDRESS_505045] a 20% relative decrease (absolute decrease of 83 pg/ml from the 
protocol -specified mean level of 417 pg/ml to 333 pg/ml) for  the paired fed -fasting differences 
between treatments in IL -1beta release with NR treatment. As the study continues to be feasible 
(requires the enrollment of fewer than 50 subjects), we request approval to continue enrolling up to 
42 normal volunteers to  account for possible treatment non -compliance and/or study dropouts.  
 
Primary  study outcome:  
The primary  study  outcome  will be the refeeding  IL-1secretion  in response to inflammasome  
stimulation  in the  NR treatment  arm versus  the same  subject’s  response  on the placebo  treatment  
arm using  the nonparametric  Wilcoxon  Signed  Rank test. 
 
Additional  Analyses:  
• NLRP3  inflammasome activation  in PBMC’s  (IL-1in the fasting  state)  
• Isolate PBMC’s  to explore  mitochondrial  functioning  and biochemistry  (oxygen  
consumption  rate in leukocytes)  
• Flow cytometry  to explore  innate and  adaptive cell profiles  (assessment  of cell surface  
markers  to assay  cellular  polarity  and activation)  
• Negative selection  to extract  T-cells to investigate  primary  culture T -cell polarity  (ELISA  
assays  to measure cytokine production  following T-cell activation)  
• Serum  samples  for SomaLogic Proteome  analysis  and Luminex  analysis  of cytokine  
levels  (discovery  proteomics data collection)  
• ELISPOT analysis of  TH1/T H2/T H17 cytokine polarity  following  TCR  crosslinking  
(Alternate  assay  to measure CD4  T-cell polarity)  
 
In this pi[INVESTIGATOR_799],  the parametric paired  Student  t-test and the non-parametric Wilcoxon  Signed  
Rank  test will be used to analyze treatment  differences  in secondary  outcome  measurements.  
 
Page  15 of 25 16-H-0129  
Amendment F, May 22, 2018  
Michael N Sack, MD, PhD   11.Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_400639]   
• Pregnancy and breastfeeding  
• Subjects taking less than 75% of the supplement  
• Any other significant  medical symptoms that may or not be related to the treatment and as 
determined by [CONTACT_400664]  
• Subjects who are found to be pregnant or wish to breastfeed during the study will 
automatically be withdrawn. A pregnancy screening will be done for all female volunteers at 
the first visit and subjects will be excluded from the study if pregnant  
 
 
12. Data  and Safety  Monitoring   
 
Safety  Monitoring  
Accrual  and safety  data will be monitored  by [CONTACT_45822],  Michael  N. Sack,  M.D.  
Ph.D.,  who will provide  oversight  to the  conduct  of this study.  
Accrual  and safety  data will be monitored  and reviewed  annually  by [CONTACT_400665]  (IRB).   Prior to implementation  of this study,  the protocol and the proposed subject  
informed  consent  document will be reviewed  and approved  by [CONTACT_400666]  [ADDRESS_505046] continuing  annual review so long as the 
protocol  is open  to accrual  or follow up of  subjects.  
Adverse Event Reporting  
 
Adverse Event  (AE):  Any untoward  medical  occurrence  in a human  subject, including  any 
abnormal  sign (e.g.,  abnormal  physical  exam or  laboratory  finding),  symptom, or  disease,  
temporally  associated  with the  subject’s  participation  in the  research,  whether or not considered  
related  to the  subject’s  participation  in the  research.  
Abnormal  laboratory values:  A moderate and  severe abnormal  laboratory  value will  be 
considered  an AE if the laboratory  abnormality  is characterized  by [CONTACT_39132]:  
• Results  in discontinuation  from  the study  
• Is associated  with clinical signs  or symptoms  
• Requires  treatment  or any other therapeutic  intervention  
• Is associated  with death  or another serious adverse  event,  including  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]  
• Is judged  by [CONTACT_400667]  
• If any abnormal  laboratory  result  is considered  clinically  significant,  the investigator  
will provide details  about  the action  taken  with respect to the  subject’s  outcome.  
 
Serious  Adverse Event  (SAE) : A serious  adverse  event  that: 
• results  in death;  
• is life-threatening  (places  the subject  at immediate  risk of death from the  event as it 
Page  16 of 25 16-H-0129  
Amendment F, May 22, 2018  
Michael N Sack, MD, PhD   occurred);  
• results  in in-patient  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_40088];  
• results  in a persistent  or significant  incapacity;  
• results  in a congenital  anomaly/birth  defect;  or 
• based  upon appropriate  medical  judgment,  may jeopardize  the subject’s  health and may 
require medical  or surgical  intervention  to prevent  one of the other outcomes listed  in this  
definition.  
 
 
Unanticipated  Problem:  An UP is any  incident,  experience,  or outcome  that meets  all of the 
following  criteria:  
1. unexpected  in terms  of nature,  severity,  or frequency  in relation  to 
a. the research  risks that are described  in the  IRB-approved  research  protocol  and informed  
consent  document;  Investigator’s  Brochure or other  study  documents; and 
b. the characteristics  of the subject  population  being  studied;  and 
2. related  or possibly related  to participation  in the  research;  and 
3. places  subjects  or others  at a greater  risk of harm (including  physical,  psychological,  
economic,  or social harm)  than was previously  known or  recognized.  
 
 
Reporting  of Pregnancy:  
In the event  a subject becomes pregnant  while on study,  this event  will be reported to the  IRB and 
Clinical  Director  as an unanticipated  problem.  Monitoring  of the pregnancy  will continue  until 
conclusion  of the pregnancy.  
 
Unanticipated  Problem  that is not an Adverse Event:  An unanticipated  problem that does not 
fit the definition  of an adverse event, but which  may,  in the  opi[INVESTIGATOR_144457],  involves  
risk to the  subject,  affect  others  in the  research study,  or significantly  impact the  integrity  of 
research  data.  For  example, report  occurrences  of breaches  of confidentiality, accidental  
destruction  of study  records,  or unaccounted -for study  drug.  
Protocol  Deviation  (PD):  Any change,  divergence,  or departure  from  the IRB approved  research  
protocol.  
Non Compliance: The failure to comply  with applicable NIH  HRPP  policies,  IRB requirements,  or 
regulatory  requirements  for the protection  of human research.  Noncompliance may be further  
characterized  as: 
Serious  non-compliance: Non-compliance that:  
a. Increases  risks,  or causes  harm,  to participants.  
b. Decreases  potential  benefits to participants.  
c. Compromises  the integrity  of the NIH HRPP.  
d. Invalidates  the study  data.  
Continuing  non-compliance: Non-compliance that is recurring.  An example  may be a 
pattern  of non-compliance  that suggests  a likelihood  that, absent  an intervention, non - 
Page  17 of 25 16-H-0129  
Amendment F, May 22, 2018  
Michael N Sack, MD, PhD   compliance will  continue. Continuing  noncompliance could  also include  a failure to 
respond  to IRB requests  to resolve previous  allegations  of non-compliance.  
Minor (non -serious) non -compliance: Non-compliance that,  is neither serious nor  
continuing.  
Adverse Event Management  
 
The principal  investigator [INVESTIGATOR_400640],  or designee,  will be responsible for  
assessing  adverse events.  Information  on adverse  events  will be solicited  from subjects  through  
questions  from  study  personnel and/or information  volunteered  by [CONTACT_423]. Adverse  events  will 
be captured  from  the start of  the first pi[INVESTIGATOR_400641]  (day 0) until [ADDRESS_505047] pi[INVESTIGATOR_400641].  
Following  this period,  only serious  adverse events  that are unexpected  and related  to study  pi[INVESTIGATOR_400642].  All AEs, regardless  of severity,  will be recorded,  graded,  assigned  an attribution,  
verified,  and followed  until satisfactory  resolution.  
 
In the event  of any treatment -related  SAEs,  enrollment  will be suspended  until discussed  with the 
IRB and Clinical  Director.  
 
Grading  and Attribution  of Adverse Events  
 
Mild:  Awareness  of sign or  symptom,  but easily  tolerated.  Not expected  to have a 
clinically  significant  effect  on the  patients  overall  health  and well-being.   Not likely  to 
require medical  attention.  
Moderate:  Discomfort  enough  to cause interference with  usual  activity  or affects  
clinical  status.   May require medical  intervention.  
Severe:   Incapacitating  or significantly  affecting  clinical  status.   Likely  requires  medical  
intervention  and/or close  follow -up. 
Attribution  of Adverse Events  
 
Relationship  Attribution  Description  
Unrelated  to 
intervention  Unrelated  The AE is clearly NOT  related to the  intervention  
Unlikely  The AE is doubtfully related  to the  intervention  
Related  to 
intervention  Possibly  The AE may be related  to the  intervention  
Probably  The AE is likely related  to the intervention  
Definitely  The AE is clearly related  to the  intervention  
 
 
NHLBI -IRB and CD reporting  
 
Serious  Events  
Reports  to the  IRB and CD: The PI [INVESTIGATOR_400643],  and Serious  PDs to the  IRB 
and CD as soon as possible  but not more than  [ADDRESS_505048] learns  of the event  
using  the NIH Problem  Report  Form.  
Page  18 of 25 16-H-0129  
Amendment F, May 22, 2018  
Michael N Sack, MD, PhD   Non-serious  Events  
Reports  to the  IRB and CD:  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_400644], and PDs that are not Serious  to the  IRB, not more than  [ADDRESS_505049] learns  of the event.  
Reports  at the  time of continuing  IRB review:   At continuing  review,  the PI [INVESTIGATOR_400645] a summary  of: 
• All UPs 
• All PDs 
• All AEs (except  for those  granted  a waiver of reporting)  
 
 
Waiver  of Reporting: The following  adverse events  will be  listed  in the  consent  and not 
reported  to the  IRB:  
• Vasovagal  symptoms during  blood draws  (expected  frequency  50%).  
• Transient  bruising  at the site of blood draws  (expected  frequency  50%). 
• Hunger,  headache,  fatigue,  or irritability  during fasting  (expected  frequency  50%).  
 
13.  Human  Subjec ts Protections  
Rationale for Subject Selection  
Subjects  of both genders  will be considered  for inclusion in this study.  There will  be no racial,  
ethnic,  or gender discrimination.  Cognitively  impaired  and institutionalized  persons  will not 
participate in this study.   Recruitment,  enrollment  and compensation  of NIH employee subjects  
will be consistent  with NIH Manual  Chapter  2300 -630-3: Leave Policy  for NIH Employees.  
Rationale for the Exclusion  of Children  
 
Subjects  under [ADDRESS_505050]  
benefit  from  participating  in this study.  
Risk/Benefit Assessment  
 
The research  involves  greater  than minimal  risk to subjects,  with no prospect  of direct  benefit,  but 
is likely  to yield  generalizable knowledge (45  CFR  46.102).  
Inclusion  of NIH  Staff  
 
• NIH staff  (employees,  NIH contractors,  special  volunteers,  guest  researchers, and trainees)  
may voluntarily  participate  in this protocol.  
• Recruitment,  enrollment  and compensation  of NIH staff will  be consistent  with the Guidelines  
for the Inclusion  of Staff  in NIH Intramural  Research  Studies  (December 2015)  (Appendix  A of 
SOP 14F) and  NIH Policy  Manual Chapter 2300 -630-3,:”Leave Policy  for NIH Employees  
Participating  in NIH Medical  Research  Studies” (Appendix  B of HRPP  SOP 14F,).  
If the individual  requesting  to participate in the  protocol is a  co-worker,  the consent  from  the NIH 
staff member  (co-worker)  will not be  obtained  by [CONTACT_20782]’s  direct  supervisor but by 
[CONTACT_400668],  and who is also not a  co-
worker.  
• Neither participation  nor refusal  to participate  as a subject  in this protocol  will have an  effect,  
either beneficial  or adverse,  on the  participant’ s employment  or position at NIH.  However,  all 
subjects  will be made aware that  there  are limits to  these protections.  
• The PI,  through the  consenting  staff member will make the “NIH  Information  Sheet  on Staff  
Research  Participation” available to staff members  who are considering  enrolling  in research.  
(SOP  14F, Appendix  C; also in Appendix  A of the protocol)  
Risks  and Discomforts  
 
• Phlebotomy: Standard  precautions  for obtaining  human blood samples  will be taken.  
Transient  discomfort  and minor  bruising  may occur  at the phlebotomy  site.  Vasovagal  
symptoms can occur during  blood drawing.  Blood  samples  will be obtained  by 
[CONTACT_48571]. Blood  samples  will be obtained by a nurse,  physician,  or other skilled  
individual.  A total of 440 mL of blood with be drawn  for this study.  The quantities  of 
blood to be  drawn  for research  purposes will be consistent  with the CC policy  as 
provided in Medical  Administrative Series  (MAS) 95 -9 (revised  05/29/2012):  
a.   Subjects  18 years  of age or older (index  cases  and relatives):  It is estimated  that 
100 mL will be drawn  in one blood draw (but  never  exceeding  10.5 mL/kg  or 550 
ml (whichever is smaller) over any 8-week  period.  
• 24-Hour  Fast:  Subjects  may experience hunger,  headache,  fatigue,  or irritability  
during  fasting.   Subjects  will be instructed  not to take Acetaminophen  (Tylenol®).  
Page  [ADDRESS_505051] 
symptoms  of liver damage  are seen in the  initial  12 to 24 hours  or so after ingestion  
and include nausea  and vomiting.  
• Urine collection: There is no risk associated  with this procedure.  
Nicotinamide  Riboside:  NR is a dietary  supplement  that is currently  available for  
commercial  use with no safety  concerns  noted  to date.  Consecutive doses  of 1000mg  
daily  of NR has not been  reported  in humans  although  there  is currently  an ongoing  
study  at the University  of Colorado  using  [ADDRESS_505052]  used doses  up to the  equivalent  of 3000 mg/day  for up to 3 
years  to evaluate the possible  benefits  of nicotinamide administration  to patients  with 
or at risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_400634] 1 diabetes.10, 11 In addition,  doses  of 25 and 42  mg/kg  
bw/day  had no effect  on a variety  of biochemical parameters,  such as those  that 
assessed  liver and  kidney  function.  
 
Consent Processes  and Documentation  for Research  Subjects  
 
Each  participant  will receive an  oral and written  explanation of  the goals,  procedures,  and risks of 
this study.   The Principal  Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_400646].   Consent  will be obtained  at the NIH Clinical  Center.   The original,  signed  
informed  consent  document will be placed  in the  medical  record,  and the subject  will receive a 
signed  copy  of the informed  consent  document.  
If there is an unexpected  enrollment  of a non-English  speaking  research  participant for which  
there is no translated  extant  IRB approved  consent  document,  the principal  investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or  
those  authorized  to obtain  informed  consent  will use the Short  Form  Oral Consent  Process  as 
described  in MAS  Policy  M77 -2, 45 CFR  46.117 (  b) (2). The summary  that will be used is the  
English  version  of the extant  IRB approved  consent document.  
We request  prospective  IRB approval  of the use of the short  form  for up to a  maximum of  [ADDRESS_505053] that consent  
document  translated  into the given  inherent  language.  
Consent Processes  and Documentation  for NIH Staff  
 
Page  21 of 25 16-H-0129  
Amendment F, May 22, 2018  
Michael N Sack, MD, PhD   If the individual  requesting  to participate in the  protocol is a  co-worker,  the consent  from  the 
employee (co -worker)  will not be  obtained  by [CONTACT_400669]’s  
direct  supervisor but by [CONTACT_400670],  and who is also not a  coworker.  NIH staff will be given  the NIH Information  Sheet  on 
Staff Research  Participation  (See appendix  A) to help them  understand  the possible  consequences  
of participation.  
 
14. Conflict of Interest  
 
None of the members  of the research  team reported a  potential  conflict  of interest.   The National  
Institutes  of Health  reviews  NIH staff researchers  at least yearly  for conflicts of  interest.  The 
following  link contains  details on this process  http://ethics.od.nih.gov/forms/Protocol -Review -  
Guide.pdf . This protocol  has a CRADA with  ChromaDex,  Inc. 
 
15. Reimbursement for Travel  
 
As the study  populations  will be local,  reimbursement  for travel,  food,  and lodging  will not be  
provided.  
 
16. Financial  Compensation  
 
Subjects  will be compensated  for procedures  that are performed  that are of no direct  benefit  to 
the subject,  although  would be  of generalizable benefit  to enhance our understanding  of 
Participants  will be compensated  as described  in the  table below:  
 
Procedures  Inconvenience  
Units  Compensation  
per procedure  Frequency  Total  
Compensation  
Medical  History  and physical  examination  2.5 $25.00  1 $25.00  
Outpatient  Visit  (first  hour)  2 $20.00  3 $60.00  
Outpatient  Visit  (additional  hours  up to 4 
hours)  1 $10.00  8 $80.00  
Screening  Blood  Draw  (if needed)  1 $10.00  1 $10.00  
Research  Blood  Draw  2.5 $25.[ADDRESS_505054] 15 $150.00  2 $300.00  
Urine  Sample  1 $10.00  3 $30.00  
Drug  administration,  General  2 $20.00  14 $280  
  Maximum  Compensation:  $885.[ADDRESS_505055],  Bray  A, Waclawiw MA,  Han 
K, Pelletier M, Sauve AA, Siegel  RM, Sack  MN. Fasting  and refeeding  differentially  
regulate nlrp3  inflammasome activation  in human  subjects.  The Journal  of clinical  
investigation . 2015 Nov 3;125(12):4592 -600. 
2. Canto  C, Houtkooper RH,  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_140486]  E, Youn  DY, Oosterveer MH, Cen Y, Fernandez - 
Marcos  PJ, Yamamoto  H, Andreux  PA, Cettour -Rose P, Gademann  K, Rinsch C,  
Schoonjans  K, Sauve AA, Auwerx  J. The nad(+) precursor  nicotinamide riboside  
enhances  oxidative  metabolism  and protects  against  high-fat diet-induced  obesity.  Cell 
Metab . 2012;15:838 -847 
3. Brown  KD, Maqsood  S, Huang  JY, Pan Y, Harkcom  W, Li W, Sauve A,  Verdin  E, 
Jaffrey  SR. Activation  of sirt3 by [CONTACT_400671](+) precursor  nicotinamide riboside protects  
from  noise -induced  hearing  loss. Cell metabolism . 2014;20:1059 -1068  
Page  23 of 25 16-H-0129  
Amendment F, May 22, 2018  
Michael N Sack, MD, PhD   4. Sack  MN, Finkel  T. Mitochondrial  metabolism,  sirtuins,  and aging.  Cold Spring Harbor  
perspectives  in biology . 2012;4  
5. Fontana  L, Meyer TE,  Klein  S, Holloszy  JO. Long -term calorie restriction  is highly  
effective in reducing  the risk for atherosclerosis  in humans.  Proceedings  of the National  
Academy of Sciences of the United  States  of America . 2004;101:6659 -6663  
6. Fontana  L, Partridge  L. Promoting  health  and longevity  through  diet: From  model  
organisms  to humans.  Cell. 2015;161:106 -118 
7. Chi Y, Sauve AA.  Nicotinamide riboside,  a trace  nutrient  in foods,  is a vitamin  b3 with 
effects  on energy  metabolism and neuroprotection.  Current  opi[INVESTIGATOR_400647] . 2013;16:657 -661 
8. Erdman  JW, MacDonald  I, Zeisel  SH, International  Life Sciences  Institute.  Present  
knowledge in nutrition . Ames,  Iowa:  International  Life Sciences  Institute;  2012.  
9. Benyo  Z, Gille A,  Kero  J, Csiky  M, Suchankova  MC, Nusing  RM, Moers  A, Pfeffer K,  
Offermanns  S. Gpr109a (puma -g/hm74a) mediates  nicotinic acid -induced  flushing.  The 
Journal  of clinical  investigation . 2005;115:3634 -3640  
10. Pozzilli  P, Visalli  N, Signore A,  Baroni  MG, Buzzetti  R, Cavallo  MG, Boccuni  ML, Fava  
D, Gragnoli  C, Andreani  D, et al. Double blind trial of nicotinamide in recent -onset  iddm  
(the imdiab  iii study).  Diabetologia . 1995;38:848 -852 
11. Lampeter EF, Klinghammer A,  Scherbaum  WA, Heinze E,  Haastert  B, Giani G, Kolb  H. 
The deutsche nicotinamide  intervention  study:  An attempt  to prevent  type 1 diabetes.  
Denis  group.  Diabetes . 1998;47:980 -984 
Page  24 of 25 16-H-0129  
Amendment F, May 22, 2018  
Michael N Sack, MD, PhD   APPENDIX A: NIH  INFORMATION SHEET  ON STAFF  RESEARCH  
PARTICIPATION (APRIL  2016)  
 
As an NIH employee,  contractor,  Special  Volunteer,  Guest  Researcher,  or trainee,  you 
may participate in intramural  research  studies  unless it is prohibited  by [CONTACT_400672] (IC),  or if you are excluded  by [CONTACT_400673].  The inclusion  of NIH staff in a particular  protocol  must also be approved  by [CONTACT_5040].  You may be motivated  by [CONTACT_107699],  a commitment  to research  in your own or 
related  fields, or  want  access to clinical  trials  of potential  direct  therapeutic  benefit.  
When deciding,  you should make an  informed  decision about  participation.  This 
information  sheet  offers  some  points to consider for NIH staff who are considering  
research  participation  at NIH.  
 
First,  similar to any  individual who is considering  research  participation,  you should seek 
adequate information  about the  study  purpose,  what is required  of you in terms of  
procedures,  interventions  and time,  and the potential  risks and benefits  of participation.  
For more information,  see the NIH Clinical  Center’s  public  website “Are Clinical Studies  
for You?”  at http://www.cc.nih.gov/participate/studies.shtml . 
 
When  you are thinking  about participation  in a research  study  that is being conducted  
by [CONTACT_107700],  or others with whom  you work closely  in your laboratory,  branch,  or 
unit, you should consider  some  additional  factors:  
 
A. Possible bias:  Are you confident  that you can be unbiased  about  reporting  
answers,  side effects,  or other information  that could influence the study  outcome  
or risk to you?  
 
B. Confidentiality: Has the principal  investigator  (PI) spoken  about  what information  will be 
collected  from  you as part of  the study?  Has the PI [INVESTIGATOR_400648],  and outside,  the study  team?  If applicable,  are you comfortable sharing  your 
medical  history  (including,  for example,  mental  health history  or STDs)  and your social history  
(e.g. substance  use) with  study  investigators  who may be your coworkers,  or with the possibility  
of them  discovering  something  about  your health  during  the study  (e.g. pregnancy  status  or a 
new diagnosis)?  Although  every  effort  will be made  to protect  your information  and keep it 
private and  confidential,  your information  may,  depending  on the  nature  of the protocol,  become  
available in medical  records  or to authorized  users  outside  of the study  team. Discuss  any 
concerns  with the PI.. 
 
C. Pressure : Do you perceive  any pressure  or expectations  from  your supervisor  or colleagues  
regarding  participation?  Could that pressure influence  your decision or  make  it difficult  for you 
to choose whether or not to participate?  Remember that  it is your choice  whether or not to  
participate and  that your decision  to participate or not should not have an  effect,  either  beneficial  
or adverse,  on your position at NIH.  
D. Time and Compensation: Can you take time off from  work to complete the study  
requirements  or participate  solely  during  non-duty hours?  Can you receive  compensation  for 
your participation  in this study?  Will your supervisor  give you permission to participate during  
Page  25 of 25 16-H-0129  
Amendment F, May 22, 2018  
Michael N Sack, MD, PhD   work  hours?  See the NIH Policy  Manual  [ADDRESS_505056] Policy  for NIH Employees  
Participating  in NIH Medical  Research  Studies.  
 
E. Consent Process:  Is the person  obtaining  your consent  for the study your supervisor,  a 
subordinate,  or co-worker?  If so, is there  an independent  person  monitoring  the consent  process?  
If the study  PI [CONTACT_832] a supervisor  and intends  to obtain  consent  from  you, an independent  person  
(e.g.,  through  Bioethics  or the NIMH Human Subjects  Protections  Unit [HSPU],  or others  as 
approved  by [CONTACT_1201])  must monitor  the consent  process.  If the person obtaining  consent from  
you is a co-worker then  an independent  person  (e.g.,  through  Bioethics  or the NIMH HSPU,  or 
others  as approved  by [CONTACT_1201])  may be required  to monitor  the consent  process,  as determined  
by [CONTACT_107701].  
 
If you are thinking  of enrolling  as a subject at the NIH Clinical  Center and  you have  any 
questions  or concerns,  please contact  [CONTACT_400674]  
(OHSRP) at  [PHONE_2465]  and/ or the Patient  Representative if you are thinking  of enrolling  as a 
subject  at the NIH Clinical Center on [ADDRESS_505057]  local  site leadership.  