Page 1 of 19 (V.08/27/2018 )  
 
 
HRP -[ADDRESS_80919] Article(s)  
 
Protocol Title:  
SPY-X: A Study to Assess the Feasibility of Using Real -time Fluorescence Lymphangiography  Alone for Sentinel 
Node Localization in Patients with Melanoma  or Breast Cancer  
 
Principal Investigator:  
[CONTACT_5627]:  Colette Pameijer  
Department:  Surgery  
Telephone:  531-5272  
E-mail Address:  cpameijer@pen nstatehealth.psu.edu  
 
 
Version Date:  
5.27 .2021  
 
 
Clinicaltrials.gov Registration #:  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] . 
 
Important Instructions for Using This Protocol Template:  
1. Add this completed protocol template to your study in CATS IRB ( http://irb.psu.edu ) on the “Basic Information” 
page, item 7.  
2. This template is provided to help investigators prepare a protocol that includes the necessary information needed 
by [CONTACT_20892] a study meets a ll applicable criteria for approval.  
3. Type your protocol responses below  the gray instructional boxes of guidance language.  If the section or item is 
not applicable, indicate not applicable.  
4. For research being conducted at Penn State Hershey or by [CONTACT_74161], delete the 
instructional boxes from the final version of the protocol prior to upload to CATS IRB  (http://irb.psu.edu ).  For all 
other research, do not delete the instructional boxes from the  final version of the protocol.  
5. When making revisions to this protocol as requested by [CONTACT_1201], please follow the instructions outlined in the Study 
Submission Guide available in the Help Center in CATS IRB (http://irb.ps u.edu ) for using track changes.  
 
If you need help…  
University Park and other campuses:  
Office for Research Protections Human Research Protection Program  
The 330 Building, Suite 205  
University Park, PA [ZIP_CODE] -7014  
Phone: 814 -865-1775  
Fax: 814 -863-8699  
Email:  [EMAIL_1492]  College of Medicine and Hershey Medical Center:  
Human Subjects Protection Office  
[ADDRESS_80920], Mail Code A115, [PO_BOX]  
Hershey, PA [ZIP_CODE]  
(Physical Office Location: Academic Support Building Room 1140)  
Phone: 717 -531-5687  
Fax number: 717 -531-3937  
Email:  [EMAIL_779]  
 

Page 2 of 19 (V.08/27/2018 ) Table of Con tents  
1.0 Objectives  
2.0 Background  
3.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
4.0 Recruitment Methods  
5.0 Consent Process and Documentation  
6.0 HIPAA Research Authorization and/or Waiver or Alteration of Authorization  
7.[ADDRESS_80921] Stipend (Compensation) and/or Travel Reimbursements  
15.0  Economic Burden to Subjects  
16.0  Resources Available  
17.0  Other Approvals  
18.0  Multi -Site Research  
19.0  Adverse Event Reporting  
20.0  Study Monitoring, Auditing and Inspecting  
21.0  Future Undetermined Research: Data and Specimen Banking  
22.0  Refe rences  
  
Page 3 of 19 (V.08/27/2018 ) 1.[ADDRESS_80922] cancer. The hypothesis is that sentinel 
nodes can be identified using only indocyanine green (ICG) and fluorescence lymphangiography, without 
the need for technetium99 and a gamma probe.  
 
1.[ADDRESS_80923] cancer. The 
status of the sentinel node provides prognostic information and guides further treatment options in 
these patients. Sentinel node biopsy (SLN) was first devel oped using only a blue dye. Technetium99, a 
radioactive protein, was added later and provides the ability to image the patient and identify relevant 
lymph node basins. This feature is particularly important for trunk melanomas that can drain to multiple 
nodal basins. For the last [ADDRESS_80924] drawbacks.  
 
Technetium 99 (tech99) is a radioactive protein t hat is injected dermally around the melanoma or the 
areola of the breast , usually one day prior to surgery. Lymphoscintigraphy is done [ADDRESS_80925] of identifying sentinel nodes, but it does involve an extra trip to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (patients are 
injected the day prior to surgery), the injection is often the most painful part of the entire treatment 
experience, and the signal can be vague and diffic ult to localize in the operating room. Furthermore, 
there are international concerns about the reliability of the supply of radio -labelled colloid. The reactors 
that currently provide tech99 and other radioactive substances are aging, and shortages of mate rial 
have been threatened in the past.  
 
Blue dye  is injected dermally on the day of surgery, after the patient is anesthetized. This is a visual 
adjunct to the radioactive signal from the tech99. These two methods together have a success rate of 
approximat ely 96% in identifying the sentinel node. Blue dye alone localizes about 50% of sentinel 
nodes, and it  can be problematic for the surgeon in that it stains tissues and is toxic to skin grafts.  
 
Infrared lymphangiography using ICG and real time imaging has  recently been used as an alternative 
method of sentinel node identification. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_74157]99, 
Methylene blue (MB) and ICG.  All subjects in this trial received all [ADDRESS_80926] trial, the next question is whether we can use ICG and fluorescence 
imaging alone, without tech99 and the gamma probe. The SPY Elite and SPY PHI machine s are FDA 
approved for perfusion imaging and are the device s used to identify the sentinel lymph nodes after 
injection of ICG.  
 
Page 4 of 19 (V.08/27/2018 )  
2.[ADDRESS_80927] that ICG can be used alone.  In 
our recently completed SPY trial, 89 subjects were enrolled and received tech99, MB and ICG. The 
tech99 identified a mean of 1.89 sentinel nodes per patient, ICG a mean of 1.87 and MB a mean of 0 .71 
sentinel nodes. The ICG was well tolerated, with no adverse effects noted. A drawback to the ICG is that 
the fluorescent signal is visible through the skin only 47% of the time. If the nodal basin is predictable, 
such as for an extremity melanoma or a breast cancer, we can reasonably proceed with dissection in the 
predicted basin. Truncal melanomas however, do not have predictable drainage and therefore the lack 
of visibility is problematic for using ICG alone.  
 
 
2.[ADDRESS_80928] and shoulder, or the lower extremity between and includi ng the ankle and groin.  
2. Age:  18 years  
3. Sex:  Male or female  
4. Fluent in written and spoken English  
 
3.[ADDRESS_80929].  
Page 5 of 19 (V.08/27/2018 )  
 
3.3.[ADDRESS_80930] cancer and scheduling surgery, 
including the sentinel node biopsy. The surgeon  usually doesn’t see the patient again until the day of 
surgery. Subjects will not be recruited on the day of surgery.  
 
4.3 Recruitment materials  
 
None  
 
4.4 Eligibility/screening of subjects  
 
NA 
 
5.0 Consent Process and Documentation  
 
5.1 Consent Process  
  
5.1.1 Obtaining Informed Consent  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Timing and Location of Consent  
 Consent for the study would be obtained at the end of the clinic visit.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Coercion or Undue Influence during Consent  
Subjects will be counseled that enrollment in the study is completely voluntary, 
and will not change their treatment. They will have a sentinel node biopsy 
whether they participate in the study or not, and the sentinel node is the same 
node whether it is localized with ICG or tech99. Subjects will also be counseled 
that they will still receive the tech99, as a backup plan in case the ICG doesn’t 
work. They can think about the study and consent after the visit, although 
enrollment should occur at least [ADDRESS_80931] information to determine preliminary 
eligibility to participate in the research.  
 
 
Page 6 of 19 (V.08/27/2018 )  
5.2 Consent Documentation  
 
5.2.1 Written Documentation of Consent  
 
The consent process will be documented in writing with the long form of consent documentation:  
• The current IRB approved consent form will be obtained.  
• We will verify that we are using the most current IRB -approved version of the study specific 
consent form and that the consent form is in language understandable to the 
subject/representative.  
• A copy of the consent form will be provided to the subject/representative. Whenever possible the 
consent form will be provided to the subject/representative in advance o f the consent discussion.  
• If the subject/representative cannot read we will obtain an impartial witness to be present during 
the entire consent discussion to attest that the information in the consent form and any other 
information provided was accurately explained to, and apparently understood by, the 
subject/representative, and that consent was freely given.  
 
 
5.2.2 Waiver of Documentation of Consent (Implied consent, Verbal consent, etc.)  
 
NA  
 
5.3 Consent – Other Considerations  
 
5.3.1 Non -English Speaking Subjects  
Non -English speaking subjects will not be enrolled.  
 
5.3.2 Cognitively Impaired Adults  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Capability of Providing Consent  
 
NA 
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Adults Unable To Consent  
 
Cognitively impaired adults will not be enrolled in the study.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Assent of Adults Unable to Consent  
 
NA 
 
5.3.3 Subjects who are not yet adults (infants, children, teenagers)  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Parental Permission  
 
  NA. Melanoma is rare in children, and ICG is not approved for pediatric use.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Assent of subjects who are not yet adults  
 
NA 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 19 (V.08/27/2018 ) 6.0 HIPAA Research Authorization  and/or Waiver or Alteration of Authorization  
 
6.1 Authorization and/or Waiver or Alteration of Authorization for the Uses and Disclosures of PHI  
 
Check all that apply:  
  Not applicable, no identifiable protected health information (PHI) is accessed, used or 
disclosed in this study.  [Mark all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3 as not applicable]  
 
 Authorizat ion will be obtained and documented as part of the consent process.  [If this is the 
only box checked, mark sections 6.2 and 6.3 as not applicable]  
 
 Partial waiver is requested for recruitment purposes only  (Check this box if patients’ medical 
records will be accessed to determine eligibility before consent/authorization has been 
obtained).  [Complet e all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3]  
 
 Full waiver is requested for entire research study (e.g., medical record review studies).  
[Complete all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3]  
 
 Alteration is requested to waive requirement for written documentation of authorization 
(verbal authorization will be obtained).  [Complete all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3]  
 
6.2 Waiver or Alteration of Authorization for the Uses and Disclosures of PHI  
 
6.2.1 Access, use or disclosure of PHI representing no more than a minimal risk to the privacy of the 
individual  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Plan to protect PHI from improper use or disclosure  
 
Information is included in the Research D ata Plan Form.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Plan to destroy identifiers or a justification for retaining identifiers  
 
Study information will be retained until the sponsor notifies the study team that 
the information can be destroyed  and all regulatory and institutional policies are 
met related to data retention.  
 
6.2.[ADDRESS_80932]’s electronic medical record during recruitment 
to determine eligibility and,  in some cases, to confirm information discussed with the subject in 
regards to their medical histor y. 
 
6.2.[ADDRESS_80933] eligibility to ensure that no 
medical conditions that fall into the exclusion criteria are present and would thus preclude 
enrollment.  This waiver will minimize the enrollment of subjects’ who may ultimately fail to 
meet t he study inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
 
 
 
Page 8 of 19 (V.08/27/2018 )  
 
6.[ADDRESS_80934] with the ‘Minimum 
Necessary’ standard (information reasonably necessary to accomplish the objectives of the research) 
per federal regulations.  
 
Access to the information will be limited, to the greatest extent possible, within the research team. All 
disclosures or releases of identifiable information granted under this waiver will be accounted for and 
documented.  
 
7.[ADDRESS_80935]’s viewpoint, the course of events in this study will be no different than usual care and 
sentinel node biopsy.  
 
7.[ADDRESS_80936] a dermal injection of technetium99  (tech99) at the melanoma tumor site prior 
to surgery (either the day before, or morning of surgery) or a subareolar injection if breast 
cancer. The surgeon will not look at the lymphoscintigraphy films, and the radiologist should not 
mark the skin.  
 
7.2.[ADDRESS_80937] is in the operating room and appropriately sedated or anesthetized, he or she 
will receive a dermal injectio n of indocyanine green (ICG) [ADDRESS_80938] cancer. Incision is made in the axilla or groin, and the SPY machine is 
positioned over the lymph node basin. Real -time lymphangiography (SPY) is used to identify 
sentinel nodes. Any fluorescent nodes s hould be resected and are considered sentinel nodes. 
The absolute fluorescence will be quantified for each sentinel node. Absolute fluorescence is 
calculated by [CONTACT_74162].  
 
After the sentinel lymphadenectomy is complete but prior to closing skin, the  excised lymph 
nodes will be examined with the gamma probe (detects tech99 signal) to confirm that they are 
sentinel nodes. If the node does not have a signal with the gamma probe (but is fluorescent) it is 
still considered a sentinel node. The lymph node basin will also be examined with the gamma 
probe, to insure that no sentinel nodes are missed. If a gamma positive sentinel node is 
identified in the lymph node basin, it should be resected and imaged with SPY. If no sentinel 
nodes are able to be identifie d with fluorescent imaging, the gamma probe will be used as per 
usual practice. The surgeon should spend no more than 30 minutes using SPY to identify sentinel 
Page 9 of 19 (V.08/27/2018 ) nodes. If after 30 minutes no sentinel node is found, the gamma probe should be used. The data 
collection form (separately uploaded) should be completed for each case.  
 
7.3 Duration of Participation  
 
Two days (pre -operative and operative procedure visits are associated with the research).  
 
 
7.[ADDRESS_80939] Article(s) (Study Drug(s) and/or Study Device(s))  
 
7.4.1 Descript ion 
 
The SPY Elite machine is FDA approved for perfusion imaging. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_74158] 114602 to perform this research study  using  a dermal injection 
of ICG. The ICG comes as a powder containing 25mg of indocyanine green and sterile water to 
reconstitute the powder for injection. Subjects will receive 2. 25 mg of indocyanine green (ICG) 
in a volume of 0.9 mL.  
 
7.4.2 Treatment Regimen  
 
The patient will receive a  dermal injectio n of indocyanine green (ICG) 0. [ADDRESS_80940] Article  
 
There is no blinding involved in this study.  
 
7.4.6 Receiving, Storage, Dispensing and Return  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Receipt of Test Article  
 
ICG will be transported from the Investigational Drug Services (IDS) pharmacy to 
the OR  pharmacy the day before surgery  or the morning of the surgery 
depending on when the surgery is schedule d at HMC, Vasser Brother’s Medical 
Center, or Emory University School of Medicine . The ICG will come in a 25mg 
vial with 10 mL of Ampule (Solvent). Subj ects will receive 2.25 mg of 
indocyanine green (ICG) in a volume of 0.9 mL.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Storage  
 
The ICG will be stored in the IDS pharmacy  at HMC, Vasser Brother’s Medical 
Center, or Emory University School of Medicine  until the day before surgery  or 
the morning be fore surgery if it is scheduled for the afternoon . A copy of the 
Page 10 of 19 (V.08/27/2018 ) consent form for each patient will be sent to IDS pharmacy at HMC, Vasser 
Brother’s Medical Center, or Emory University School of Medicine prior to 
surgery. ICG should be stored at room tempe rature (between 20 – 25 degree s 
Celsius ).    
 
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Preparation and Dispensing  
 
The ICG will be brought from IDS pharmacy  at HMC, Vasser Brother’s Medical 
Center, or Emory University School of Medicine  to the OR pharmacy the day 
before surgery so it is available  for use  the next day . If the surgery is scheduled 
for the afternoon then IDS pharmacy may bring the ICG over on the morning of 
surgery, not the day before.  The surgeon will prepare the ICG and solvent for 
injection in the operating room prior to the start of the procedure. All aspects of 
the ICG preparation and use will be handled by [CONTACT_11065]. Once reconstituted 
the ICG can be used for up to six hours, making it possible to use in  several 
different cases in one day  if the doses are drawn up in a sterile environment at 
the same time . 
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Return or Destruction of the Test Article  
 
Any remaining ICG will be discarded in the OR  at HMC, Vasser Brother’s Medical 
Center, or Emory University School of Medicine .  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]   Prior and Concomitant Therapy  
 
NA 
 
8.[ADDRESS_80941]  Numbers and Statistical Plan  
 
8.1 Number of Subjects  
 
A total of 40 subjects will be recruited into this study (we estimate we will enroll 20 subjects from Penn  
State Hershey Medical Center  and 20 between Vasser Brother’s Medical Center and Emory University 
School of Medicine. ).  
 
The learning curve for sentinel node biopsy is [ADDRESS_80942] 
cancer . The sample size of 40 subjects is our estimation of an appropriate number of subjects such that 
we can draw conclusions about this technique for sentinel node biopsy, and allows sufficient numbers 
for multiple surgeons to be involved.   
 
8.3 Statistical met hods  
 
The analysis of these results will be descriptive. We will assess the number of nodes per patient that are 
correctly identified with ICG alone, and the number of patients in whom ICG was successfully used 
Page 11 of 19 (V.08/27/2018 ) alone. Multiple surgeons will be involved, so me with more experience than others with this technique. 
We will assess the learning curve by [CONTACT_74163].  
 
9.0 Confidentiality , Privacy  and Data Management  
 
See the attached Research Data Plan form (HRP -598)  
 
10.[ADDRESS_80943] been reported in the literature concerning sentinel node 
biopsy with ICG.  
 
 
10.6 Frequency of review of cumulative data  
 
Data will be reviewed monthly.  
 
10.7 Statistical tests  
 
The number of subjects planned for this study is relatively small, and gi ven the very low complication 
rate seen in the prior study, statistical analysis will not be meaningful.  
Page 12 of 19 (V.08/27/2018 )  
10.[ADDRESS_80944] will trigger a suspension of research.  
 
 
 
 
11.0 Risks  
 
• Loss of confidentiality  
• Adverse reactions to ICG are extremely rare, and none occurred in the prior trial with 87 subjects.   
• Anaphylactic  reactions , urticarial reactions  and headache  have been reported  rarely  in some patients.  
• The risks of sentinel node biopsy are  usual care  as the subjects will undergo the biopsy regardless of 
their participation in the research .  However, t here is the possible risk of longer surgery, with a 
maximum of 30 additional minutes under anesthesia. This added time is of no consequence to  the 
patient and carries an unmeasurable risk. Inaccurate identification of the sentinel node may occur 
equally in patients both on and off this study, therefore the risk in this study is no greater than usual 
care. The false negative rate in identifying s entinel nodes is 8%. Tech99 is used as a backup in this study 
in the event that the sentinel node cannot be identified with ICG.  
 
 
12.[ADDRESS_80945] Stipend (Compensation) and/or Travel Reimbursements  
None  
 
15.0 Economic Burden to  Subjects  
 
15.1 Costs  
 
The sponsor  will provide the ICG directly to HMC, Vasser Brother’s Medical Center, and Emory University 
School of Medicine. Each institution will provide the ICG to the study patients . Subjects will be charged 
for Technetium 99. Subjects  not enrolled in this study would be charged for blue dye, or for ICG if used 
in non -study patients, thus a charge for dye and injection is a usual part of the procedure.  
 
15.2 Compensation for research -related injury  
 
It is the policy of the institution to pro vide neither financial compensation nor free medical treatment 
for research -related injury. In the event of injury resulting from this research, medical treatment is 
Page 13 of 19 (V.08/27/2018 ) available but will be provided at the usual charge. Costs for the treatment of research -related injuries 
will be charged to subjects or their insurance carriers.  
 
16.0 Resources Available  
 
16.1 Facilities and locations  
 
Surgical procedures will be performed at Penn State Hershey Medical Center , Vasser Brother’s Medical 
Center, or Emory University School of Medicine as per usual care.  
 
16.[ADDRESS_80946] will coordinate all commu nications regarding updates to the protocol.   
 
17.0 Other Approvals  
 
17.1 Other Approvals from External Entities  
 
Vasser Brother’s Medical Center IRB and Emory University School of Medicine IRB  
 
17.2 Internal PSU Committee Approvals  
 
Check all that apply:  
  Anatomic Pathology – Hershey only – Research involves the collection of tissues or use of pathologic 
specimens. Upload a copy of HRP-902 - Human Tissue For Research Form on the “Supporting 
Docume nts” page in CATS IRB. This form is available in the CATS IRB Library.  
 
  Animal Care and Use – All campuses – Human research involves animals and humans or the use of 
human tissu es in animals  
 
  Biosafety – All campuses – Research involves biohazardous materials (human biological specimens 
in a PSU research lab, biological toxins, carcinogens, infectious agents, recombinant viruses or DNA or 
gene therapy).  
 
Page 14 of 19 (V.08/27/2018 )   Clinical Laboratories – Hershey only – Collection, processing and/or storage of extra tubes of body 
fluid specimens for research purposes by [CONTACT_40460]; and/or  use of body fluids that had 
been collected for clinical purposes, but are no longer needed for clinical use.  Upload a copy of HRP -901 
- Human Body Fluids for Research Form on the “Supporting Documents” page in CATS IRB. This form is 
available in the CATS IRB Library.  
 
  Clinical Research Center (CRC) Advisory Committee – All campuses  – Research involves the use of  
CRC services in any way.   
 
  Conflict of Interest Review – All campuses – Research has one or more of study team members 
indicated as having a financial interest.  
 
  Radiation Safety – Hershey only – Research involves research -related radiation procedures. All 
research involving radiation procedures (standard of care and/or research -related) must upload a copy 
of HRP -903 - Radiation Review Form on the “Sup porting Documents” page in CATS IRB. This form is 
available in the CATS IRB Library.  
 
  IND/IDE Audit – All campuses – Research in which the PSU researcher holds the IND or IDE or 
intends to hold the IND or IDE.  
 
  Scientific Review – Hershey only – All investigator -writt en research studies requiring review by [CONTACT_40461]. The scientific 
review requirement may be fulfilled by [CONTACT_080]: (1) external peer -review process; (2) 
department/i nstitute scientific review committee; or (3) scientific review by [CONTACT_74164].  NOTE: Review by [CONTACT_74165], records and/or 
tissues. For more information about this requirement see the IRB website at: 
http://www.pennstatehershey.org/web/irb/home/resources/i nvestigator   
 
18.0 Multi -Site Research  
 
18.1 Communication Plans  
 
After approval by [CONTACT_74166]’s Medical Center and Emory University School of Medicine . Written confirmation of approval at 
Vasser Brother’s and Emory will be required prior to enrolling subjects at these locations . All updated 
information regarding the protocols will be communicated to all surgical oncologists by [CONTACT_74167]. Any updates to the consent 
form will result in the HRT sending an updated copy of the form along with a follow up phone call to 
confirm that the newest version of the form will be used with all subsequent patients. New information 
will be communicated via email and receipt will be confirmed by [CONTACT_74168]. All 
pertinent communications will be followed up with a phone call to ensure compliance.  
 
18.[ADDRESS_80947] er to store the collected information. All enrollment, 
consent and data collection forms from Vasser Brother’s and Emory  will be scanned and emailed to the 
Human Research Technologist at Penn State Hershey.  Files will be sen t using the Penn State Hershey 
Secure File Transfer application known as Accellion. This application will allow files to be sent and 
received from Vasser Brother’s and Emory in a secure manner.  The hard copy will be kept in a locked file 
in the clinical trials office at Vasser Brother’s and Emory , until the study has closed and the manuscript 
accepted for publication. Files can then be destroyed. Documents should be scanned and emailed as 
soon as they are completed.  
Page 15 of 19 (V.08/27/2018 )  
18.[ADDRESS_80948] medical occurrence associated with the use of the drug in 
humans, whether or not considered drug related  
Adverse reaction  Any adverse event caused by a drug  
Suspected adverse 
reaction  Any adverse event for which there is a reasonable possibility that the drug 
caused the adverse event.  Suspected adverse reaction implies a lesser degr ee 
of certainty about causality than “adverse reaction”.  
• Reasonable possibility.   For the purpose of IND safety reporting, 
“reasonable possibility” means there is evidence to suggest a causal 
relationship between the drug and the adverse event.  
Serious adverse 
event or Serious 
suspected adverse 
reaction  Serious adverse event or Serious suspected adverse reaction: An adverse event 
or suspected adverse reaction that in the view of either the investigator or 
sponsor, it results in any of the following outco mes: Death, a life -threatening 
adverse event, inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6929], a persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption 
of the ability to conduct normal life functions, or a congenital anomaly/b irth 
defect. Important medical events that may not result in death, be life -
threatening, or require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_708], based 
upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or 
subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the 
outcomes listed in this definition.  
Life-threatening 
adverse event or 
life-threatening 
suspected adverse 
reaction  An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “life -
threatening” if, in the view of either the Investigator (i.e., the study site 
principal investigator) or Sponsor, its occurrence places the patient or research 
subject at immediate risk of death.  It does not include an adverse event or 
suspected adverse reaction that had it occu rred in a more severe form, might 
have caused death.  
Page 16 of 19 (V.08/27/2018 ) Unexpected 
adverse event or 
Unexpected 
suspected adverse 
reaction.   An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “unexpected” if 
it is not listed in the investigator brochure, general i nvestigational plan, clinical 
protocol, or elsewhere in the current IND application; or is not listed at the 
specificity or severity that has been previously observed and/or specified.  
 
 
 
For device studies, incorporate the following definitions into the below responses, as written:  
Unanticipated 
adverse device 
effect  Any serious adverse effect on health or safety or any life -threatening problem 
or death caused by, or associated with, a device, if that effect, problem, or 
death was not previously identifi ed in nature, severity, or degree of incidence 
in the investigational plan or IDE application (including a supplementary plan 
or application), or any other unanticipated serious problem associated with a 
device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfar e of subjects.  
 
19.2 Recording of Adverse Events  
 
All adverse events (serious or non -serious) and abnormal test findings observed or reported to study team 
believed to be associated with the study drug(s) or device(s) will be followed until the event (or its sequelae) or 
the abnormal test finding resolves or stabilizes at a level acceptable to the investigator.  
 
An abnormal test finding will be classified as an adverse event if one or more of the following criteria are met:  
• The test finding is accompanied by c linical symptoms  
• The test finding necessitates additional diagnostic evaluation(s) or medical/surgical intervention; including 
significant additional concomitant drug treatment or other therapy  
NOTE:  Simply repeating a test finding, in the absence of any o f the other listed criteria, does not constitute an 
adverse event.  
• The test finding leads to a change in study drug dosing or discontinuation of subject participation in the clinical 
research study  
The test finding is considered an adverse event by [CONTACT_74169].  
 
19.[ADDRESS_80949] findings to 
determine 1) if the abnormal test finding should be classified as an adverse event; 2) if there is a 
reasonable po ssibility that the adverse event was caused by [CONTACT_5257](s) or device(s); and 3) if the 
adverse event meets the criteria for a serious adverse event.  
 
If the investigator’s final determination of causality is “unknown and of questionable relationship to the 
study drug(s) or device(s)”, the adverse event will be classified as associated with the use of the study 
drug(s) or device(s) for reporting purposes.  If the investigator’s final determination of causality is 
“unknown but not related to the study d rug(s) or device(s)”, this determination and the rationale for the 
determination will be documented in the respective subject’s case history.  
 
19.4 Reporting of Adverse Reactions and Unanticipated Problems to the FDA   
 
19.4.1  Written IND /IDE  Safety Reports  
The Sponsor -Investigator will submit a written IND Safety Report (i.e., completed FDA Form 
3500A) to the responsible new drug review division of the FDA for any observed or volunteered 
adverse event that is determined to be a serious and unexpected, suspected adverse reaction.  
Each IND Safety Report will be prominently labeled, “IND Safety Report”, and a copy will be 
provided to all participating investigators (if applicable) and sub -investigators.  
 
Page 17 of 19 (V.08/27/2018 ) Written IND Safety Reports will be submitted to the FDA as so on as possible and, in no event, 
later than 15 calendar days following the Sponsor -Investigator’s receipt of the respective 
adverse event information and determination that it meets the respective criteria for reporting.  
 
For each written IND Safety Report , the Sponsor -Investigator will identify all previously 
submitted IND Safety Reports that addressed a similar suspected adverse reaction experience 
and will provide an analysis of the significance of newly reported, suspected adverse reaction in 
light of t he previous, similar report(s) or any other relevant information.  
 
Relevant follow -up information to an IND Safety Report will be submitted to the applicable 
review division of the FDA as soon as the information is available and will be identified as such 
(i.e., “Follow -up IND Safety Report”).  
 
If the results of the Sponsor -Investigator’s follow -up investigation show that an adverse event 
that was initially determined to not require a written IND Safety Report does, in fact, meet the 
requirements for report ing; the Sponsor -Investigator will submit a written IND Safety Report as 
soon as possible, but in no event later than 15 calendar days, after the determination was made.  
 
 
19.4.2  Telephoned IND Safety Reports – Fatal or Life -threatening Suspected Adverse Reactions  
 
In addition to the subsequent submission of a written IND Safety Report (i.e., completed FDA 
Form 3500A), the Sponsor -Investigator will notify the responsible review division of the FDA by 
[CONTACT_74170], fatal or lif e-threatening suspected 
adverse reaction.  
 
The telephone or facsimile transmission of applicable IND Safety Reports will be made as soon 
as possible but in no event later than 7 calendar days after the Sponsor -Investigator’s receipt of 
the respective adve rse event information and determination that it meets the respective criteria 
for reporting.  
 
 
19.[ADDRESS_80950] 
(IRB), the investigator will report, to the IRB, any observed or reported harm (adverse event) 
experienced by a subject or other individual, which in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_40454] 
(1) unexpected; and (2) probably related to the research procedures. Harms (adverse events) will be 
submitted to the IRB in accordance with the IRB policies and procedures.  
 
19.6 Unblinding Procedures  
NA 
 
19.7 Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_74159] 18 of 19 (V.08/27/2018 ) 20.[ADDRESS_80951] and the times will be predetermined 
by [CONTACT_74171].  
 
 
20.1.2  Safety Monitoring  
 
The Principal Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_74160] (AE) are correctly entered into the 
AE case report forms by [CONTACT_14676]; be available to answer an y questions that the 
coordinators may have concerning AEs; and will notify the IRB, FDA, sponsor and/or DSMB of all 
applicable AEs as appropriate. All assessments of AEs will be made by a licensed medical 
professional who is an investigator on the research . 
 
 
21.0 Future Undetermined Research: Data and Specimen Banking  
 
21.1 Data and/or specimens being stored  
NA 
 
21.2 Location of storage  
NA 
 
21.3 Duration of storage  
NA 
 
21.4 Access to data and/or specimens  
NA 
 
21.5 Procedures to release data or specimens  
NA 
 
21.6 Process for returning results  
NA 
 
22.0 References  
1. Cloyd JM, Wapnir IL, Read BM, Swetter S, Greco RS. Indocyanine green and fluorescence 
lymphangiography for sentinel lymph node identification in cutaneous melanoma. Journal of surgical 
oncology. Dec 2014;110(7):888 -892. 
2. Fujisawa Y, Nakamura Y, Kawachi Y, Otsuka F. Indocyanine green fluorescence -navigated sentinel 
node biopsy showed higher sensitivity than the radioisotope or blue dye method, which may help to 
reduce false -negative cases in skin cancer. Journal of surgical  oncology. Jul 1 2012;106(1):[ADDRESS_80952] cancer research and treatment. Jun 2010;121(2):373 -378. 
Page 19 of 19 (V.08/27/2018 ) 4. Stoffels I,  Dissemond J, Poppel T, Schadendorf D, Klode J. Intraoperative Fluorescence Imaging for 
Sentinel Lymph Node Detection: Prospective Clinical Trial to Compare the Usefulness of Indocyanine 
Green vs Technetium Tc 99m for Identification of Sentinel Lymph Nodes . JAMA surgery. Jul 
2015;150(7):617 -623. 
5. Ballardini B, Santoro L, Sangalli C, et al. The indocyanine green method is equivalent to the (9)(9)mTc -
labeled radiotracer method for identifying the sentinel node in breast cancer: a concordance and 
validation study. European journal of surgical oncology : the journal of the European Society of 
Surgical Oncology and the British Association of Surgical Oncology. Dec 2013;39(12):1332 -1336.  
 