 
Fasting Versus Fed: Effect of Oral Intake Prior to 
the Glucose Tolerance Test in Pregnancy  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
March 15, [ADDRESS_636223], [LOCATION_004] [ZIP_CODE]  
1. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  
a. Brief Summary 
Gestational diabetes (GDM) complicates approximately 400,000 pregnancies in the 
[LOCATION_002] annually and is associated with significant adverse pregnancy outcomes, 
including increasing the lif etime risk of type 2 diabetes. The American College of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG) recommends that all pregnant women undergo GDM screening between [ADDRESS_636224] that the timing of one's last meal prior to the [ADDRESS_636225] on GDM screening glucose levels. In addition, providers routinely alter the timing o f the 1 -hour GDM screen based on patients' self 
reported oral intake prior to the exam. We plan to conduct a prospective randomized trial comparing a [ADDRESS_636226] Children's Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (LPCH) Stanford outpatient obstetrics clinic. At a new patient intake, a phone conversation is 
completed by [CONTACT_494629]/Gyn department. Potential patients will be identified during this intake phone call. A member of the clinical care team can also ask 
the patient for permission to be contact[CONTACT_70769]. Patient will then be 
approached by [CONTACT_494630] a remote/ electronic 
consenting process. After obtaining informed consent, the patient will be random ized to 
one of two groups: 1. fasting for at least [ADDRESS_636227] (after 24 weeks gestation) as per standard of care. Water intake is 
allowed in the fasting group. During the time of the glucose screening, patients will be 
required to complete a short online/phone survey detailing when their last oral intake was 
and what it consisted of. Women who screen positive with glucose results greater than or equal to 140 mg/dL will then be required to undergo a fasting [ADDRESS_636228] that ranges from 130-140 mg/dL. 
LPCH Obstetrics outpatient clinic typi[INVESTIGATOR_18140] 140 mg/dL as the screen positive cutoff. 
A 140 mg/dL cutoff will be used for women enrolled in the study. A medical chart 
review will be performed for all patients and their neonates after delivery.  
b. Procedure Risks  
The blood draws and glucose testings that are being performed are part of the standard of 
care for any pregnant woman in the screening and diagnosis of gestational diabetes. 
Currently, the recommendation is that the [ADDRESS_636229].  
d. Will it be possible to continue the more (most) appropriate therapy for the 
participant(s) after the conclusion of the study?  
All patients will be treated by [CONTACT_494631]. Clinical providers will determine the type of treatment the 
patient will receive during their pregnancy and postpartum.  
e. Study Endpoint(s)  
The protocol director and investigators who serve as the data and safety monitors will be responsible for addressing whether there are any safety concerns related to the study or if 
there is any need to terminate the study before target enrollments are completed. 
Unanticipated problems or adverse events will be reported to the IRB. The study will end 
after the target enrollment has been completed.
 
3. BACKGROUND  
a. Past Experimental and/or Clinical Findings  
Gestational diabetes (GDM)  is characterized by a state of insulin resistance in the second 
and third trimester, with the prevalence being estimated at up to 9% in the [LOCATION_002] [1,2]. Women with gestational diabetes have a higher risk of large for gestational age 
(LGA) infants,  neonatal hypoglycemia, hyperbilirubinemia, cesarean delivery, shoulder 
dystocia, preeclampsia, and birth trauma [2 –5]. The Hyperglycemia and Adverse 
Pregnancy Outcomes (HAPO) trial further demonstrated a continuous association 
between hyperglycemia and th e risk of adverse maternal and neonatal outcomes [3], and 
treatment of gestational diabetes has been shown to significantly decrease the risk of maternal and neonatal morbidity[6]. Screening for gestational diabetes is routinely 
performed between 24 - 28 we eks gestation in all pregnancies, with early screening being 
utilized for those with risk factors that would lead to a predisposition for GDM or pregestational diabetes [2]. In the [LOCATION_002], the two step approach is commonly 
employed which utilizes a 1-hr 50- g oral glucose tolerance test for screening followed by 
a 100-g 3-hr glucose tolerance test for those who screen positive on the screening test to 
confirm the diagnosis of GDM. Cutoff values for a positive screen range from 130 mg/dL 
– 140 mg/dL and vary by [CONTACT_14189] [2,7,8]. The 1-hour oral glucose tolerance test is 
traditionally obtained without regard to time of day or time of last meal [7,9 –12]. There 
are no societal guidelines regarding appropriate oral intake prior to the test, and there 
appears to be discordant advice given to patients regarding whether or not they should 
fast prior to the test. Moreover, contrary to patients' and providers' intuition, small cohort studies suggest that fasting prior to the GDM screen may actually lead to an increase in 
the [ADDRESS_636230] is administered in the fasting versus the fed state [7,9,13 –16]. 
Coustan et al performed a prospective crossover study in [ADDRESS_636231]. They found that fasting only made a significant difference 
March 15, 2021   Page 4 of 11 in the glucose levels for the known gestational diabetics but not for the presumed normal 
controls [13]. A more recent study by [CONTACT_494632] [ADDRESS_636232] of fasting on 
the GDM screen glucose levels [16]. They found a significant difference in GDM screen 
glucose values following a 6.[ADDRESS_636233], with fasting leading to a higher glucose level 
[16]. However, much of the data regarding the [ADDRESS_636234] higher BMIs than women 40 years ago; therefore determining optimal 
GDM screen strategies in a modern cohort is warranted. Our goal is to use evidence based methodology to determine the effect of a fasting vs fed state prior to the routine 
GDM screen in pregnancy.  
 
1. Casagrande SS, Linder B, Cowie CC. Prevalence of gestational diabetes and 
subsequent Type [ADDRESS_636235]. 2018;141:200-
208. 
2. Gestational Diabetes Mellitus. 2018;131(2):16.  
3. HAPO Study Cooperative Research Group. The Hyperglycemia and Adverse 
Pregnancy Outcome (HAPO) Study. Int J Gynecol Obstet. 2002;78(1):69-77.  
4. McIntyre HD, Metzger BE, Coustan DR, et al. Counterpoint: Establishing Consensus in the Diagnosis of GDM Following the HAPO Study. Curr Diab Rep. 2014;14(6):497.  
5. O'Sullivan JB, Charles D, Mahan CM, Dandrow RV. Gestational diabetes and perinatal mortality rate. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1973;116(7):901- 904.  
6. Landon MB. The NICHD maternal and fetal medicine unit (MFMU) network gestational diabetes mellitus trial: Ca n we use the results as the basis for changing current 
screening approaches? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2010;23(3):210-213.  
7. O'Sullivan JB, Mahan CM, Charles D, Dandrow RV. Screening criteria for high -risk 
gestational diabetic patients. Am J Obstet Gy necol. 1973;116(7):895-900.  
8. Carpenter MW, Coustan DR. Criteria for screening tests for gestational diabetes. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol. 1982;144(7):768- 773.  
9. O'Sullivan JB, Grant ME, Francis JO. Glucose Tolerance Test Standardization Simplified by [CONTACT_494633]. Public Health Rep 1896 -1970. 1965;80(3):220. 
10. Levitt C. Diagnosis and Control: A Review. 1988;34:6.  
11. Teplick FB, Lindenbaum CR, Cohen AW. Cost -effective approach to office screening 
for gestational diabetes. J Perinatol Off J Calif Perinat Assoc. 1990;10(3):301-303.  
12. Summary and Recommendations of the Second International WorkshopConference 
on Gestational Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes. 1985;34(Supplement_2):123- 126.  
13. Coustan DR, Widness JA, Carpenter MW, Rotondo L, Pratt DC, Oh W. Should the fifty- gram, one -hour plasma glucose screening test for gestational diabetes be 
administered in the fasting or fed state? Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1986;154(5):1031-1035. 14. Wang P, Lu M -C, Yu C -W, Yan Y- H. Influence of the Time of Day and Fasting 
Duration on Glucose Level following a 1-Hour, 50-Gram Glucose Challenge Test in Pregnant Women. Siribaddana S, ed. PLoS ONE. 2014;9(11):e112526.  
15. Wang P, Lu M -C, Yu C -W, Wang L-C, Yan Y- H. Influence of Food Intake on the 
Predictive Value of the Gestational Diabetes Mellitus Screening Test: Obstet Gynecol. 
2013;121(4):750-758.  
March 15, [ADDRESS_636236] in the Diagnosis of Gestational Diabetes 
Mellitus. Horm Metab Res. 2018;50(09):671-674.  
  
 
4. PARTICIPANT POPULATION  
a. Planned Enrollment  
We estimate a total sample size of 200 women (100 women in each study arm) is required for this study based on a power calculation at power = 0.8, alpha = 0.05, and a 
20% difference in screen positive rate between the fed versus fasting group. Patients will 
be enrolled at Lucile Packard Children's Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (LPCH) Stanford. No other external 
sites will be involved in the study. All enrolled participants will be pregnant patients as 
this study aims to investigate the effect of oral intake prior to the [ADDRESS_636237] for gestational diabetes.  
b. Age, Gender, and Ethnic Background 
The patient population is pregnant women of childbearing age (more than or equal to 18 years old) including their infants from the current pregnancy. Ethnic background will 
reflect the local and regional population.  
c. Vulnerable Populations 
All participants in this trial will be pregnant women as we are studying gestational diabetes which is a unique disease state that occurs in pregnancy. However, we are 
following standard of care in terms of the timing of the blood draw in pregnancy and also 
in the quantity of the blood draw. Pregnant women identified as eligible for the study will 
be counseled by [CONTACT_494634]. A 
written informed consent form will be obtained from all participants. If at any time 
participants wish to withdraw, they will be allowed to do so. All pregnant women 
obtaining prenatal care at the outpatient obstetrics clinics of LPCH may be eligible for the 
study. Some of these may be homeless women, economically and educationally 
disadvantaged women, employees, and/or students, though specific cohorts will not be 
targeted. Neonates of women enrolled in the study will not have any blood draws or any 
other interventions performed as part of the  study but neonates will have information 
abstracted from their charts to correlate neonatal outcomes with maternal findings. There will be no changes to neonatal care from this study.  
d. Rationale for Exclusion of Certain Populations  
This study will not be o ffered to pregnant minors (age < 18 years old) because we 
anticipate to reach our enrollment goal in the pregnant population that is greater than or 
equal to [ADDRESS_636238] Populations  

March 15, 2021   Page 6 of 11 Laboratory personnel, employees, and students may be recruited if they meet inclusion 
criteria, using the  same informed consent and treatment protocol as other participants. It 
is not possible to estimate the number  of such participants, but they will likely represent a 
small minority of the total subjects recruited. 
 
f. Healthy Volunteers  
Only pregnant women will be included.  
g. Recruitment Details  
Women potentially eligible for the study will be identified by [CONTACT_494635]. A member of the care team will notify 
the potential participant about their eligibility for the research study and will obtain the 
patient's permission before the research team can approach. The medical record review will also determine the inclusion/exclusion criteria for the study. If eligible, the study will 
be discussed and reviewed with the patient. We will also address questions or concerns. If 
the patient is interested, she will be consented and enrolled in the study. A description of 
the study will also be listed on the Maternal Fetal Medicine Research (MFM) Studies 
flyer. This flyer is included in the New OB packet, which is given to every pregnant 
women during their initial OB visit at the LPCH OB Clinic. If the patient is interested, 
she can reach out to our team, and we will discuss th e study and any questions or 
concerns. If still interested, she will be consented and enrolled in the study. Recruitment materials will be submitted to IRB prior to use. The study will be registered on 
ClinicalTrials.gov and the Stanford school of medicine  website  
h. Eligibility Criteria  
i. Inclusion Criteria  
1) Pregnant patients 18 years and older  
2) Planned delivery to occur at LCPH Labor and Delivery unit  
3) Pregnancy being followed by [CONTACT_494636]  
4) Singleton pregnancy 
ii. Exclusion Criteria 
1) Pregestational diabetes  
2) Gestational diabetes diagnosed in the 1st trimester  
3) Diabetes medication use prior to pregnancy  
4) Inability to give informed consent  
5) Chronic steroid use in pregnancy  
6) Less than [ADDRESS_636239] 
7) Prior history of bariatric surgery  
i. Screening Procedures  
Women receiving prenatal care at the LPCH Obstetric clinic will be screened if eligible for the study. Potential participants will be identified by [CONTACT_494637]. If eligible, the 
March 15, [ADDRESS_636240] with what is required in 
the protocol.  
k. Payments to Participants  
Patients participating in the study will receive a token gift of a $[ADDRESS_636241] to demonstrate appreciation for their participation in the study. This level of compensation 
is within the category of token level of appreciation and will not constitute undue pressure on participants to participate in this study.  
l. Costs to Participants 
No additional costs will be charged to the patient.  
m. Planned Duratio n of the Study  
The estimated length of time for the study is approximately 18 months with 15 months of 
enrollment and 3 months of data analysis and summarization of findings.  
 10/2020-12/2021: Patient recruitment and enrollment. We anticipate that all 200 patients 
will be enrolled during this timeline. All patients enrolled will ensure delivery is by [CONTACT_13195] 02/2022.  
02/2022-04/2022: Data analysis  
04/2022-06/2022: Manuscript development and submission  
 
The total time per participant includes: (i) enrollment activities (30 minutes) via remote 
process or at LPCH obstetrics clinic, (ii) active participation to include a universal [ADDRESS_636242] in all pregnancies. Non active participation will include chart 
review of the patient's medical records and the associated neonatal medical records (iii) 
Analysis of data - 3 mont hs. 
5. RISKS 
a. Potential Risks  
i. Commercially available drugs, biologics, reagents or chemicals 
Every pregnant woman (irrespective of participation in the study) undergoes a routine gestational diabetes screen using a [ADDRESS_636243] of the drink includes 
nausea, vomiting, abdominal bloating, and/or headache. Women participating in the study 
March 15, [ADDRESS_636244] a GDM screen using a 50 g glucose drink that is identical to those not 
participating in the study.  
  
 
ii. Procedures 
Every pregnant woman (irrespective of participation in the study) has a blood draw that is a part of the GDM screen. Women participating in the study will also have a blood draw 
as a part of the GDM screen. The risks of a blood draw includes discomfort at the site of 
puncture, possible bruising, redness, and swelling around the site, bleeding at the site, 
feeling lightheadedness when the blood is drawn, and rarely, an infection at the site of the 
blood draw.  
iii. Overall evaluation of risk  
 The protocol is no more than minimal risk (i.e., "not greater than those ordinarily 
 encountered in daily life") AND only involve human subjects a s described below:  
 
• Collection of blood samples by [CONTACT_25877], heel stick, ear stick, or venipuncture 
as follows:  
  a) from healthy, nonpregnant adults who weigh at least 110 pounds. For these  
  subjects, the amounts drawn may not exceed 550 ml in an 8 week period and  
  collection may not occur more frequently than 2 times per week; or  
  b) from other adults and children, considering the age, weight, and health of the  
  subjects, the collection procedure, the amount of blood to be collected, and the  
  frequency with  which it will be collected. For these subjects, the amount drawn  
  may not exceed the lesser of 50 ml or 3 ml per kg in an 8 week period and  
  collection may not occur more frequently than 2 times per week.  
• Research involving materials (data, documents, records, or specimens) that have 
been collected, or will be collected solely for nonresearch purposes (such as medical treatment or diagnosis).  
• Research on individual or group characteristics or behavior  (including, but not 
limited to, research on perception, cognition, motivation, identity, language, communication, cultural beliefs or practices, and social behavior) or research 
employing survey, interview, oral history, focus group, program evaluation, 
human factors evaluation, or quali ty assurance methodologies.  
b. International Research  Risk Procedures  
Not Applicable.  
c. Procedures to Minimize Risk  
Standard safety procedures will be followed to minimize risk associated with blood draw 
including the use of gloves and cleansing of area where venipuncture is to be performed 
with alcohol. In addition, the [ADDRESS_636245]-protected/ encrypted computer in a locked office in the 
administrative offices of the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, or entered into a 
secure server such as RedCap, Encore and Box. Access to the databases will only be 
granted to the research team included under the IRB protocol.  
d. Study Conclusion 
The study will terminate once enrollment goal is achieved. If the patient experiences a rare adverse reaction to a blood draw or from the glucose drink, the obstetrician will be 
notified and will treat the event per usual standard practice (e.g. monitor vital signs, treat 
with ice packs, antibiotics, etc if needed).  
e. Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMC)  
i. Data and/or events subject to review 
For women who are participating in the study, neonatal charts will be reviewed to 
correlate maternal findings with neonatal outcomes. This study poses no risk to 
neonates as they will continue to receive routine care as provided by [CONTACT_494638]. Only 
neonates (0 -28 days of life) of women who consent to participate in this study will be 
included and thus neonates will not be able to give assent. Consent for chart review of the neonates will be obtained from the mother when gives consent for HIPPA 
authorization.  
ii. Person(s) responsible for Data and Safety Mo nitoring  
N/A 
iii. Frequency of DSMB meetings  
N/A 
iv. Specific triggers or stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_004]  
N/A 
v. DSMB Reporting  
N/A 
vi. Will the Protocol Director be the only monitoring entity? (Y/N)  
N/A 
vii. Will a board, committee, or safety monitor be responsible for study monitoring? (Y/N)  
No 
f. Risks to Special Po pulations  

March 15, 2021   Page 10 of 11 Children’s Findings OHRP: 46.[ADDRESS_636246] be made for soliciting the assent of the children and the permission 
of their parents or guardians . For women who are participating in the study, neonatal 
charts will be reviewed to correlate maternal findings with neonatal outcomes. This study poses no risk to neonates as they will continue to receive routine care as 
provided by [CONTACT_494639]. Only neonates (0 -28 days of life) of women who consent to 
participate in this study will be included and thus neonates will not be ab le to give 
assent. Consent for chart review of the neonates will be obtained from the mother 
when gives consent for HIPPA authorization.  
  
Pregnant Women or Fetuses: All of the following conditions are met: 
 
Met  a) Where scientifically appropriate, preclinical studies, including studies on 
 pregnant animals, and clinical studies, including studies on nonpregnant women, 
 have been conducted and provide data assessing potential risks to pregnant 
 women and fetuses;  
Met  b) The risk to the fetus is caused solely by [CONTACT_494640]; or, if there is no 
 such prospect of benefit, the risk to the fetus is not greater than minimal and the 
 purpose of the research is the developm ent of important biomedical knowledge 
 which cannot be obtained by [CONTACT_86416];  
Met  c) Any risk is the least possible for achieving the objectives of the research;  
Met  d) If the research holds out the prospect of direct benefit to the pregnant woman, 
 the prospect of a direct benefit both to the pregnant woman and the fetus, or no 
 prospect of benefit for the woman nor the fetus when risk to the fetus is not 
 greater than minimal and the purpose of the research is the development of 
 important biomedical knowledge that cannot be obtained by [CONTACT_86416] , 
 her consent is obtained in accord with the informed consent provisions of subpart 
 A of this part;  
N/A  e) If the research holds out the prospect of direct benefit solely to the fetus then 
 the consent of the pregnant woman and the father is obtained in accord with the 
 informed consent provisions of subpart A of this part, except that the father's 
 consent need not be obtained if he is unable to consent because of` unavailability 
 , incompetence, or temporary incapacity or the pregnancy resulted from rape or 
 incest.  
Met  f) Each individual providing consent under paragraph (d) or (e) of this section is 
 fully infor med regarding the reasonably foreseeable impact of the research on the 
 fetus or neonate;  
N/A  g) For children as defined in Sec. 46.402(a) who are pregnant, assent and 
 permission are obtained in accord with the provisions of subpart D of this part; 
Met h) No inducements, monetary or otherwise, will be offered to terminate a 
 pregnancy;  
Met  i) Individual engaged in the research will have no part in any decisions as to the 
 timing, method, or procedures used to terminate a pregnancy;  
March 15, 2021   Page 11 of 11 Met  j) Individual engaged in the research will have no part in determining the 
 viability of a neonate.  
6. BENEFITS  
The participants will not benefit directly by [CONTACT_4907], as they would receive 
equally appropriate treatment should they choose not to participate. The knowledge gained in this 
study will be important in establishing the effect of oral intake prior to the routine GDM 
screening test.  
7. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
All participant information  and specimens are handle d in compliance with the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)  and privacy policies of Stanford University, Stanford 
Health Care, and Stanford Children’s Health.  