 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 Protocol T itle: 
 Feasibility and Acceptability of Click’s Ecological momentary assessment (EMA) and text message 
 intervention for STRESS management (FACE STRESS study). 
 Protocol Number:  DL-F ACE-101 
 Amendment Number:  N/A 
 Device:  N/A 
 Study Phase: N/A 
 Sponsor Name: [CONTACT_205916], Inc 
 Legal Register ed Addr ess: 
 [ADDRESS_245558] Floor 
 New Y ork, NY [ZIP_CODE] 
 Manufactur er: Click Therapeutics, Inc 
 Regulatory Agency Identifier Number(s) 
 [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 1 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 Sponsor Signatory: 
 6/30/[ADDRESS_245559] Information will be pr ovided separately . 
 2 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 Protocol Amendment Summary of Changes Table 
 DOCUMENT HISTORY 
 Document  Date 
 Original Protocol  06/25/2020 
 Amendment  N/A 
 3 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 Table of Contents 
 1. Pr otocol Summary  6 
 1.1. Synopsis  6 
 1.2. Schema  8 
 1.3. Schedule of Assessments (SoA)  8 
 2. Intr oduction  10 
 2.1. Study Rationale  10 
 2.2. Background  10 
 2.3. Benefit/Risk Assessment  12 
 3. Objectives and Endpoints  13 
 4. Study Design  14 
 4.1. Overall Design  14 
 4.2. Scientific Rationale for Study Design  14 
 4.2. Justification for Dose  15 
 4.3. End of Study Definition  15 
 5. Study Population  16 
 5.1. Inclusion Criteria  16 
 5.2. Exclusion Criteria  16 
 5.3. Lifestyle Considerations  16 
 5.4. Screen Failures  16 
 5.5. Recruitment  16 
 6. Study Intervention and Concomitant Therapy  17 
 6.1. Study Intervention Administered  17 
 6.2. Preparation/Handling/Storage/Accountability  17 
 6.3. Measures to Minimize Bias: Blinding  18 
 6.4. Study Intervention Compliance  18 
 6.5. Dose Modification  18 
 6.6. Continued Access to Study Intervention after the End of the Study  18 
 6.7. T reatment of Overdose  18 
 6.8. Concomitant Therapy  18 
 7. Discontinuation of Study Intervention and Participant Discontinuation/W ithdrawal  19 
 7.1. Discontinuation of Study  19 
 7.2. Participant Discontinuation/W ithdrawal from the Study  [ADDRESS_245560] to Follow up  19 
 8. Study Assessments and Pr ocedur es  20 
 8.1. Ef ficacy Assessments  20 
 8.2. Safety Assessments  22 
 4 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 8.3. Adverse Events (AEs), Serious Adverse Events (SAEs), and Other Safety Reporting  23 
 8.4. Pharmacokinetics  27 
 8.5. Genetics and/or Pharmacogenomics  27 
 8.6. Biomarkers  27 
 9. Statistical Considerations  28 
 9.1. Statistical Hypotheses  28 
 9.2. Sample Size Determination  28 
 9.3. Analysis Sets  28 
 9.4. Statistical Analyses  28 
 9.5. Interim Analysis  29 
 10. Supporting Documentation and Operational Considerations  30 
 10.1. Appendix 1: Regulatory , Ethical, and Study Oversight Considerations  30 
 10.2. Appendix 2: Clinical Laboratory T ests  33 
 10.3. Appendix 3: AEs and SAEs: Definitions and Procedures for Recording, Evaluating, 
 Follow-up, and Reporting  34 
 10.4. Appendix 4: Contraceptive and Barrier Guidance  38 
 10.5. Appendix 5: AEs, ADEs, SAEs, SADEs, [LOCATION_003]DEs and Device Complaints and 
 Nonconformances: Definitions and Procedures for Recording, Evaluating, Follow-up, and 
 Reporting in Device Studies  39 
 Appendix 6: Abbreviations and Definitions  43 
 5 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 1.  Protocol Summary 
 1.1.  Synopsis 
 Protocol T itle: 
 Feasibility and Acceptability of Click’ s EMA and text message intervention for STRESS 
 management (F ACE STRESS study). 
 Rationale: 
 The purpose of the proposed study is to explore feasibility , acceptability , and initial ef ficacy of 
 an Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) and text message intervention for stress 
 management. 
 Objectives and Outcomes 
 Objectives  Outcomes 
 Primary 
 ●  Feasibility of recruitment including 
 eligibility rates and acceptance rates 
 ●  Feasibility of delivering the 
 intervention via text message 
 ●  Acceptability of the intervention 
 including dropout rates, percentage 
 of completed assessments, 
 adherence, and estimates of 
 satisfaction  The  main outcome  of the F ACE STRESS 
 study is to evaluate  feasibility and 
 acceptability  of an EMA and EMA plus text 
 message intervention. Specifically , we will 
 evaluate: 
 ●  number of interested individuals who 
 contact [CONTACT_205887] 
 ●  the number of eligible individuals 
 after the initial screening 
 ●  time taken to recruit the sample 
 ●  retention rates 
 ●  the number and percentage of 
 participants responding to any EMA 
 text over the 3-week study 
 ●  Satisfaction will be measured using 
 both open-ended questions and 
 likert-scaled questions to examine the 
 6 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 acceptability and utility of the both 
 EMA and intervention texts.  
 Secondary 
 ●  Explore indicators of the EMA and 
 text message intervention ef ficacy 
 ●  The ef fect sizes on reductions in 
 perceived stress and other 
 psychological symptoms will be 
 estimated in the EMA and EMA+ 
 intervention groups at 
 post-intervention, 1, 3 and 6-month 
 time-points.   Secondary outcomes  will measure: 
 ●  Perceived stress and psychological 
 overload 
 ●  symptoms of anxiety and depression 
 ●  symptoms of PTSD 
 ●  positive and negative af fects 
 ●  resilience 
 ●  psychological well-being 
 Overall Design: 
 Brief Summary: 
 The purpose of this study is to evaluate feasibility and acceptability of an EMA compared with 
 an EMA plus text message intervention in participants with higher -than-average perceived stress. 
 Study details include: 
 Study Duration: 7 months 
 Intervention Duration: 3 weeks 
 Number of Participants: 70 
 Up to 120 participants will be screened to achieve 70 enrolled to the study (see Section 9.2). 
 Groups and Duration: 2 gr oups (EMA alone or EMA plus text message intervention); 3 
 weeks 
 Data Monitoring Committee/Data Safety Monitoring Board: N/A 
 7 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 1.2.  Schema 
 N/A 
 1.3.  Schedule of Assessments (SoA) 
 CONFIDENTIAL  [ADDRESS_245561]-Study  3 
 Mos.  6 
 Mos.  E/D  [ADDRESS_245562]  X  X 
 Inclusion and 
 Exclusion 
 Criteria  X 
 Demography  X 
 Informed 
 Consent  X 
 Baseline 
 Assessment  X 
 EMA+Interven 
 -tion  X 
 Post 
 Intervention 
 Assessment  X 
 Follow Up 
 Assessment  X  X  X 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-[ADDRESS_245563]-Study  3 
 Mos.  6 
 Mos.  E/D  1 
 AE/SAE 
 Reporting  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X 
 1.  Early Discontinuation 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 2.  Introduction 
 Click Therapeutics digital therapeutic software applications are integrated with the unique 
 feature of a personalized messaging system. Personalized messages provide the opportunity to 
 tailor the intervention to the specific needs of the individual patient. This study will be pi[INVESTIGATOR_205871]’ s platform a stand-alone text message 
 intervention for stress management. Many patients with psychiatric and medical conditions 
 suffer with chronic stress which exacerbate course and progression of the disease. A stand-alone 
 text message intervention will represent an important feature to add to Click’ s platform across 
 indications to tar get patients with high levels of stress. 
 2.1.  Study Rationale 
 The overarching goal of Face Stress study is to explore feasibility and acceptability and initial 
 efficacy of an EMA and text message intervention for stress management as a digital 
 intervention. As the current pandemic has the potential of causing an increase in mental health 
 problems in people who will be af fected by [CONTACT_205888]-19 for various reasons and in-person 
 counselling and support are not possible, evaluating the feasibility of using a text messaging 
 intervention to manage stress could be the steppi[INVESTIGATOR_205872] a broader 
 population. Based on this premise, our main research questions are: 1) W ill it be feasible to 
 deliver an EMA and text message intervention for the management of stress?; 2) W ill 
 participants find the EMA delivery and SMS content acceptable (satisfactory); 3) Ef ficacy 
 question: will the text message intervention result in improved resilience and/or reduced 
 psychological distress? 
 2.2.  Backgr ound 
 The covid-19 pandemic represents an historic event with the potential to cause enormous 
 psychological distress both because of the fear of the virus and its health implications, and 
 because it requires major life adjustments (i.e. social distancing, isolation, unemployment etc.) 
 which pose further strain on people’ s mental health. A recent review of the available literature 
 reported that in the general population symptoms of distress and self-reported stress (8-28%) are 
 common psychological reactions to the COVID-19 pandemic. A survey including 52,730 
 participants living in the W uhan region in China, found that  35% of the respondents experienced 
 psychological distress. 
 How individuals respond to stressful and traumatic experiences over time have been evaluated in 
 longitudinal studies aiming at identifying stress and resilience trajectories. Evidence supports an 
 adapting response with  most individuals showing patterns  of resilience and gradual recovery (3). 
 However , about 38% of people experiencing traumatic and stressful situations show persistent 
 chronic stress or a delayed stress response. Even though these studies have been helpful in 
 pointing out that most people are indeed resilient, they present several limitations due to the use 
 of  traditional assessment methods. Such measures are  collected infrequently and require 
 participants to recall past events, feelings, and states, increasing the likelihood of bias and 
 [ADDRESS_245564] been developed to address the issues represented by 
 [CONTACT_205889]. Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) involves measuring 
 psychological processes repeatedly in real time as they occur in the natural environment.  EMA 
 encompasses diverse assessment techniques including diaries, behavioral observation, and 
 self-monitoring. EMA presents the advantage of minimizing recall bias, while improving 
 generalizability and ecological validity . It also allows the identification of microprocesses that 
 influence behaviors in real-world contexts. 
 Several contributions reported that during the 2003 SARS epi[INVESTIGATOR_901], individuals who presented 
 high levels of stress continued showing stress symptoms longer after the successful containment 
 of the disease. A survey conducted on the general population, 4 months after resolution of the 
 SARS crisis in T aiwan found that the prevalence of psychiatric morbidity was 1 1.7%. Lee et al. 
 (7) showed that SARS survivors not only had higher stress levels during the outbreak, compared 
 with control subjects (PSS-10 scores = 19.8 and 17.9, respectively; P < 0.01), but this also 
 persisted 1 year later (PSS-10 scores = 19.9 and 17.3, respectively; P < 0.01). At 1 year , about 
 64% of participants scored above the GHQ-12 cut-of f suggesting the presence of psychiatric 
 morbidity (7). Health care workers had stress levels similar to those of non-health care workers, 
 but showed significantly higher stress levels a year later (PSS-10 score = 22.8, compared with 
 PSS-10 score = 18.4; P < 0.05) and had higher depression, anxiety , posttraumatic symptoms, and 
 GHQ-12 scores (7). Likewise, individuals who had been quarantined, or worked in high-risk 
 locations such as SARS wards, or had friends or close relatives who contracted SARS, were [ADDRESS_245565] high PTSD symptoms, than those without these exposures 3 years 
 later. In the light of these findings and the knowledge that about 1/[ADDRESS_245566] been widely used to support healthy behavior change such as 
 smoking cessation, weight loss and health promotion. Evidence shows that text messaging 
 interventions are ef fective in promoting behavior change. For example, a three-arm randomized 
 trial compared self-reported alcohol use three months after emer gency department visits, during 
 which 765 young adults reported hazardous drinking. The number of self-reported binge 
 drinking days decreased from baseline to three months in the real-time feedback group compared 
 to text message drinking assessments without feedback or a control condition. A health 
 text-messaging program including a range of health topi[INVESTIGATOR_205873]. Previous research provided evidence that  text 
 messages intervention including psychoeducation, reminders, and links to informative materials 
 can be ef fective in improving individuals’ mental health  . For example, a text message 
 intervention was found to be ef fective in improving parental competence and parental distress 
 (estimated mean dif ference, -2.39 points; 95% CI, -4.37 to -0.40 points; P = .02) compared to 
 11 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 controls.  Agyapong et al sent supportive text messages twice a day to a sample of 54 patients 
 with depressive symptoms over a 3-month period. During this period, patients in the intervention 
 group had significantly lower scores on the Beck Depression Inventory-II than control groups 
 (8.5, standard deviation [SD] 8.0 vs. 16.7, SD 10.3,  P  =.003).  In Canada, a supportive text 
 message (T ext4Mood) program was recently launched to support mental health during 
 COVID-19. W ithin 1 week of the launch of T ext4Hope, 32,805 subscribers had signed up to the 
 program showing the relevance and timely importance of text messaging intervention. 
 2.3.  Benefit/Risk Assessment 
 Some participants may experience discomfort when completing assessments related to their 
 stress levels and emotional well-being. Although participation in this study may reduce stress 
 and improve emotional well-being, we recognize that individuals experiencing high stress may 
 conversely face the risk of symptomatic worsening. Both text message platforms are two-way . 
 This will allow for review of the evaluation of content and assessment to determine if 
 participants are experiencing a worsening of stress and are in need of further support. 
 12 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 3.  Objectives and Endpoints 
 Objectives  Outcomes 
 Primary 
 ●  Feasibility of recruitment 
 including eligibility rates and acceptance 
 rates 
 ●  Feasibility of delivering the 
 intervention via text message 
 ●  Acceptability of the intervention 
 including dropout rates, percentage of 
 completed assessments, adherence, and 
 estimates of satisfaction  The  main outcome  of the F ACE STRESS 
 study is to evaluate  feasibility and 
 acceptability  of an EMA and EMA plus text 
 message intervention. Specifically , we will 
 evaluate: 
 ●  proportion of individuals who will 
 contact [CONTACT_205890] 
 ●  the number of eligible individuals 
 after the initial screening 
 ●  time taken to recruit the sample 
 ●  retention rates 
 ●  the number and percentage of 
 participants responding to any EMA 
 text over the 3-week study 
 ●  Satisfaction will be measured using 
 both open-ended questions and 
 likert-scaled questions to examine the 
 acceptability and utility of the both 
 EMA and intervention texts.  
 Secondary 
 ●  Explore indicators of the EMA and 
 text message intervention ef ficacy 
 The ef fect sizes on reductions in 
 perceived stress and other 
 psychological symptoms will be 
 estimated in the EMA and 
 EMA+intervention groups at 
 post-intervention, 1, 3 and 6-month 
 time-points.   Secondary outcomes  will measure: 
 ●  Perceived stress and psychological 
 overload 
 ●  symptoms of anxiety and depression 
 ●  symptoms of PTSD 
 ●  positive and negative af fects 
 ●  resilience 
 ●  psychological well-being 
 13 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 4.  Study Design 
 4.1.  Overall Design 
 This study is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_205874]. Eligible 
 participants who complete an informed consent form will be randomized to receive 3 weeks of 
 EMA or 3 weeks of EMA plus the text message intervention for stress management based on a 
 1:1 allocation using random block sizes of 2. 
 Eligible participants will sign the consent form online before moving on to complete their 
 baseline assessment. All participants will receive a copy of their signed consent form and will be 
 provided with the research personnel’ s contact [CONTACT_8972]. Participants who do not complete the 
 baseline survey within 3 days from enrollment will be excluded from the study . Once their 
 baseline is completed, participants will be randomized to receive: 
 ●  Contr ol  : 3 weeks of EMA, consisting of 2  text messages  per day delivered at random 
 times during waking hours to prompt participants to complete the survey 
 ●  Intervention  : 
 o  [ADDRESS_245567] intervention, participants will be contact[CONTACT_205891] a follow up survey . The follow up survey will include the same information collected at 
 baseline with the exclusion of age, race, gender and adverse childhood events. 
 Participants from either group will be informed that they can withdraw from the study at any 
 time without giving a reason  by [CONTACT_19903] ‘ST OP’  to  any of the messages, or by [CONTACT_13172] a 
 member of the research team. No further information will be collected from participants who 
 withdraw from the study . 
 Participants in the control group will be of fered the opportunity to receive the intervention after 
 the 6 months follow-up period. No data will be collected from this intervention. 
 4.2.         Scientific Rationale for Study Design 
 This is a research study designed to explore feasibility and acceptability and initial ef ficacy of an 
 EMA and text message intervention for stress management as a digital intervention. 
 14 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 4.2.  Justification for Dose 
 N/A 
 4.3.  End of Study Definition 
 The end of trial date is defined as the date at which all subjects have completed all activities 
 shown in the Schedule of Assessments, all data has been entered, all data queries have been 
 resolved, and the database has been locked. 
 15 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 5.  Study Population 
 70 participants will be randomized to control (n=35) or intervention group (n=35) 
 5.1.  Inclusion Criteria 
 Participants are eligible to be included in the study only if all of the following criteria apply: 
 1.  Age [ADDRESS_245568] T ime zone 
 3.  Able to read and write in English as demonstrated by [CONTACT_205892] 
 4.  Own an SMS enable smartphone (Android or iPhone OS4) 
 5.  Scoring >5 on the 4-item Perceived Stress Scale (reflecting higher -than-average 
 perceived stress;  15, 16  ) 
 5.2.  Exclusion Criteria 
 Participants are excluded from the study if any of the following criteria apply: 
 1.  Reported cognitive impairment and/or psychiatric disorders of the psychotic spectrum 
 2.  Enrolled in another support study 
 3.  Currently receiving psychotherapy through telehealth 
 4.  PHQ-9 score of 20 or greater . 
 5.3.  Lifestyle Considerations 
 N/A 
 5.4.  Screen Failures 
 Individuals who do not meet the criteria for participation in this study (screen failure) may not be 
 rescreened. 
 5.5.  Recruitment 
 Between [ADDRESS_245569], in order to randomize 70 participants.  Participants  who successfully randomize will 
 receive incremental incentives in the form of gift cards for a total of $145. 
 [ADDRESS_245570]. The development of the text message library followed 
 constructs from The T ransactional Model of Stress and Copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. This theory provides a 
 framework for understanding the process of responding to stress (32  )  . The basic assumption of 
 this model is that an individual makes an appraisal of the impact of a stressful event, which 
 ultimately impacts his or her outcome (emotional well-being, physical well-being, and behavior). 
 Constructs from this theory along with constructs from the Acceptance and Commitment 
 Therapy (33) will be incorporated in the text message intervention for stress management.  
 The text message content will include between 150 and 250 characters and will provide along 
 with the main component of the stress study , motivational reminders, and call to action. Main 
 components of the text message intervention will be: psychoeducation on stress, emotion focused 
 (distraction, breathing relaxation, acceptance of negative emotions, and self-support in dif ficult 
 situations) and problem focused copi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (Problem-solving, time-management, obtaining 
 instrumental social support), 6-step procedure to systematically solve problems, improve 
 psychological flexibility and acceptance of uncertainty , noticing and creating moments of 
 well-being. 
 6.1.1.  Medical Devices 
 N/A 
 6.2.  Preparation/Handling/Storage/Accountability 
 Consent and welcome and intervention text messages will be delivered remotely using a 
 web-based SMS messaging platform. T o send and receive messages, a third-party web-based text 
 messaging platform was used as the Internet gateway . Participants’ cell phone numbers will be 
 registered in the web-based text messaging platform at baseline. EMA and standard surveys will 
 be collected through  SurveyGizmo  , a HIPP A approved  secure survey platform that enables direct 
 texting.  The company is GDPR Compliant; data is stored  securely and encrypted in transit, at 
 rest, and on all backups to reduce the risk of data security breach. In addition, the company 
 leverage  Amazon’ s AWS  security features to further  lock down access to data. 
 Text message send times and delivery status will be recorded. Participants will be informed that 
 this is a one-way message program and not to reply , however record will be kept of any 
 incoming messages from participants. A record of the number of times each participant attempts 
 to contact [CONTACT_205893] (i.e. via phone, email, text message) will 
 also be kept. 
 17 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 Participants who text-back will be sent an automated text message as follows ‘From F ACE 
 stress: This is an automated reply . If this is an emer gency and you are in need of immediate help 
 call 91 1’. In addition, the content of the message will be reviewed by [CONTACT_205894]: 
 ●  No action required (e.g. text is related to content or acknowledgement) 
 ●  Action required on a study-related problem (e.g. participant reporting a technical problem 
 or texting to withdraw from study) 
 ●  Action required on a dif ferent problem (e.g. text indicating high distress; response will be 
 determined on a case-by-case basis and reviewed by [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_205875]) 
 6.3.  Mea sures to Minimize Bias: Blinding 
 N/A 
 6.4.  Study Intervention Compliance 
 Subjects will receive study intervention via text messages. 
 Subjects may remain in the trial, even if they are nonadherent with the digital intervention 
 treatment. 
 A record of the digital intervention administered to each participant will be maintained. 
 Intervention start and stop dates will also be recorded. 
 6.5.  Dose Modification 
 N/A 
 6.6.  Continued Access to Study Intervention after the End of the Study 
 Participants in the control group will be of fered the opportunity to receive the intervention at the 
 end of the study (after 6 months follow up). No data will be collected from this intervention. 
 6.7.  Treatment of Overdose 
 N/A 
 6.8.  Concomitant Therapy 
 N/A 
 18 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 7.  Discontinuation of Study Intervention and Participant 
 Discontinuation/Withdrawal 
 7.1.  Discontinuation of Study 
 If the study intervention is permanently discontinued, any reported AEs/SAEs will be 
 collected at the time of discontinuation. 
 7.2.  Participant Discontinuation/Withdrawal from the Study 
 ●  A participant may withdraw from the study at any time at his/her own request or 
 may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the investigator for safety , behavioral, or 
 compliance reasons. This is expected to be uncommon. 
 ●  If a participant withdraws or is withdrawn from the Study , the sponsor will stop 
 collecting new data from the participant, however , the sponsor may retain and continue to 
 use any data collected before the participant withdraws or is withdrawn from the study . 
 ●  At the time of discontinuation from the study an early discontinuation visit will be 
 conducted, as shown in the SoA. See SoA for data to be collected at the time of study 
 discontinuation and follow-up and for any further evaluations that need to be completed. 
 7.3.  Lost to Follow up 
 A participant will be considered lost to follow-up if he or she repeatedly fails to complete EMA 
 and follow up surveys and is unable to be contact[CONTACT_205895] f. 
 The following actions must be taken if a participant fails to complete 2 consecutive days of EMA 
 survey: 
 ●  The study staf f must attempt to contact [CONTACT_205896]/or should continue in the study . 
 ●  Before a participant is deemed lost to follow up, the investigator or designee must 
 make every ef fort to regain contact [CONTACT_6635] (where possible, 3 telephone calls 
 and, if necessary , an email to the participant’ s last known email address). These contact 
 [CONTACT_13140]’ s study record. 
 ●  Should the participant continue to be unreachable, he/she will be considered to have 
 withdrawn from the study . 
 19 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 8.  Study Assessments and Procedures 
 ●  Study procedures and their timing are summarized in the SoA. Protocol waivers or 
 exemptions are not allowed. 
 ●  Outcomes are self-reported by [CONTACT_205897]. Study staf f 
 will review surveys and assessments for completeness. 
 ●  Immediate safety concerns will be addressed by [CONTACT_079] 
 [INVESTIGATOR_205876] 
 ●  Adherence to the study design requirements, including those specified in the SoA, is 
 essential and required for study conduct. 
 ●  All screening evaluations must be completed and reviewed to confirm that potential 
 participants meet all eligibility criteria. The study coordinator will maintain a 
 screening log to record details of all participants screened and to confirm eligibility 
 or record reasons for screening failure, as applicable. 
 8.1.  Efficacy Assessments 
 Participants will be recruited by [CONTACT_205898]. Screening 
 assessments will occur remotely via  phone  to evaluate eligibility . 
 Planned time points for all ef ficacy assessments are provided in the SoA. 
 ●  Standard assessment.  Participants will be evaluated at baseline, post-intervention and at 
 1, 3 and 6 months follow up. 
 o  Baseline assessment  will include: 
 -  sociodemographic information  (age, race, gender , employment status, 
 annual income, zip code, living situation, health insurance); 
 -  participant’ s expectations of the likely success of the intervention and 
 self-confidence will be asked with the following questions: “How 
 confident are you on the ability of this study to reduce your stress?” “How 
 confident are you in your ability to improve your stress?” “By [CONTACT_205899] , how much improvement in your stress symptoms do you think 
 will occur?” Answers will be on a likert scale from 1 being not at all to 9 
 being very much; 
 -  psychiatric history  (self-reported); 
 -  self-reported information about  general health  (sleep,  drinking habits, 
 smoking status, level of physical activity); 
 -  early life events measured by [CONTACT_205900] e  (ACE-IN) (20). Due to  their sensitive nature, 
 questions about sexual harassment and abuse will be omitted; 
 -  stress will be evaluated using the  Perceived Str ess  Scale (PSS-10)  , a 
 10-item scale of the degree to which situations in one's life are appraised 
 20 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 -  as stressful and an abbreviated version of the Social Readjustment Rating 
 Scale (SRRS) a self-rated questionnaire providing an appraisal of  major 
 stressful life events occurred in the previous year  ; 
 -  copi[INVESTIGATOR_205877];  
 -  symptoms of anxiety and depression measured using respectively the 
 GAD-7  and  PHQ-9  ; 
 -  presence of PTSD using the  Primary Car e PTSD Scr een  for DSM-5 
 (PC-PTSD-5)  , the Primary Care PTSD Screen for DSM-5  (PC-PTSD-5); 
 -  positive and negative af fects assessed using the  Positive  and Negative 
 Affect Schedule (P ANAS)  ; 
 -  uncertainty intolerance will be evaluated using the Intolerance of 
 Uncertainty Scale, brief version; 
 -  resilience evaluated using the  Brief Resilience Scale  ; 
 -  psychological well-being will be assessed by [CONTACT_205901]  . 
 o  Post intervention follow up  will include:  
 -  the  same information collected at baseline  with the  exclusion of age, race, 
 gender and ACE-IN. 
 -  All participants will also receive likert-scaled questions ranked on a scale 
 from 1 (completely disagree) to 5 (completely agree) to examine 
 acceptability of text messages  . Questions will include items that address 
 the acceptability of repeated text messages, what they did with the 
 messages (i.e., saved, shared or deleted), the perceived utility of the text 
 messages and opi[INVESTIGATOR_205878], timing and content 
 suitability of the text messages. 
 -  Participants in the intervention groups will receive open ended questions 
 aimed at evaluating  acceptability of the intervention  and suggestions on 
 how to improve the intervention. Specific questions are: “Which text 
 message did you like the most? And why?”; “Which text message did you 
 like the least? And why?”; “Did any of the text messages lead you to make 
 changes in what you might normally do? If so, which text messages were 
 these, and how did they influence the way you normally act?”; “What did 
 you think about the frequency of the text messages you received?”; “How 
 would you suggest we could improve the content and materials so that the 
 intervention could be more ef fective?”. 
 -  Adverse events will be also recorded. 
 1, 3 and 6 months follow ups  will include the same  information collected at baseline with the 
 exception of age, race, gender ACE-IN and acceptability questions. 
 ●  EMA assessment  . Based on recommendations from the  Science of Behavior Change 
 Research Network and W itchers and colleagues on how to evaluate momentary positive 
 and negative af fects, the following questions will be sent to evaluate momentary 
 responses:  
 21 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 1.  How stressed do you feel right now? 
 2.  Did anything stressful occur since the last survey?  
 a.  If yes, more questions will be asked to understand the timing and nature of the 
 stressor 
 .  How would you describe this stressful event? Please select one of the 
 following items. If more than one event happened, please pi[INVESTIGATOR_205879]: Ar gument/conflict/disagreement, financial event, 
 home-related event, work-related event, health event or accident, event that 
 happened to others, other;  
 i.  When did this happen? 
 2.  How overwhelmed do you feel right now?  
 3.  How helpless do you feel right now? 
 4.  How lonely do you feel right now?  
 5.  How anxious do you feel right now?  
 6.  How guilty do you feel right now?  
 7.  How content do you feel right now?   
 8.  How hopeful do you feel right now?  
 Answers will be on a scale from [ADDRESS_245571] EMA survey of the day  will also include  the following question: 
 1.  How well did you sleep last night?  
 The answer will be rated on a scale 0 to 10, with 0 being not well at all and 10 being 
 extremely well. 
 The  second EMA survey of the day  will include the  following question: 
 2.  Hassles are irritants things that annoy or bother you; they can make you upset or 
 angry . E  xamples of daily hassles could include concerns  about weight, rising 
 prices, home maintenance, too many things to do, misplacing or losing things, and 
 physical appearance, or all of the above. Have you had any hassles today? 
 The answer will be a YES or NO. 
 8.2.  Safety Assessments 
 ●  AEs and SAEs will be collected at each contact [CONTACT_205902], beginning 
 when the consent form is signed, and throughout the participants participation in the 
 study . Safety events will be reported through an electronic reporting system and 
 evaluated by [CONTACT_079] . 
 ●  AEs and SAEs that are collected via the text messaging platform will be recorded and 
 evaluated. Specifically , adverse events will be reported and categorized with respect to 
 22 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 their likely relationship to the intervention (i.e. definitely , possibly , not related). Adverse 
 events that might be reasonably related to SMS text messaging include hand or finger 
 pain, or involvement in an accident as a result of sending or receiving a text relating to 
 the study . 
 ●  Planned time points for all safety assessments are provided in the SoA. 
 8.2.1.  Physical Examinations 
 N/A 
 8.2.2.  Vital Signs 
 N/A 
 8.2.3.  Electr ocardiograms 
 N/A 
 8.2.4.  Clinical Safety Laboratory Assessments 
 N/A 
 8.2.5.  Pregnancy T esting 
 Pregnancy will be self-reported throughout the study . No pregnancy tests will be administered. 
 8.3.  Adverse Events (AEs), Serious Adverse Events (SAEs), and Other 
 Safety Reporting 
 AEs will be reported by [CONTACT_2299]. The investigator and any qualified designees are 
 responsible for detecting, documenting, and recording events that meet the definition of an AE or 
 SAE and remain responsible for following up AEs that are serious, considered related to the 
 study intervention or study procedures, or that caused the participant to discontinue the study 
 (see Section 7). 
 In the unlikely event of an adverse event resulting from participation in this research study , the 
 Click Discovery Lab Standard Operating Procedure will be followed for handling Adverse and 
 Serious Adverse Events. The method of recording, evaluating, and assessing causality of AEs 
 and SAEs and the procedures for completing and transmitting SAE reports are provided in 
 Appendix 3. 
 8.3.1.  Time Period and Fr equency for Collecting AE and SAE Information 
 All AEs and SAEs will be collected from the signing of the informed consent form (ICF) until 
 the 6 months follow-up as specified in the SoA (Section 1.3). 
 23 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 All SAEs will be recorded and reported to the investigator immediately . Under no circumstance 
 should this exceed 24 hours, as indicated in Appendix 3. The investigator will submit any 
 updated SAE data to Designated Click Medical Monitor within 24 hours of it being available. 
 8.3.2.  Method of Detecting AEs and SAEs 
 Care will be taken not to introduce bias when detecting AEs and/or SAEs. Open-ended and 
 non-leading verbal questioning of the participant is the preferred method to inquire about 
 AE occurrences. 
 Baseline and post treatment screening for depression. 
 ●  Onset of major psychiatric disorders requiring referral to a specialist  . We will use the 
 Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) both at baseline and post treatment to screen for 
 depression. The PHQ-[ADDRESS_245572] “more than half 
 the days” in the past two weeks, and 1 of the symptoms is depressed mood or anhedonia. 
 If screening positive for major depression, participants will be suggested to refer to their 
 primary care physician. Specifically , the following protocol will be activated for 
 participants who at baseline score 20 or greater on the PHQ-9 (36) 
 1.  Participants will be withdrawn from the study and the following message 
 will be sent:  
 “Based on most answers most providers would want to talk to you some more 
 about your feelings. Have you ever talked to a provider or health care professional 
 about these feelings?” 
 1.  If Yes  , the following texts will be sent: 
 “Did the person you talked to about these feelings provide you with any 
 suggestions on how to improve your mood? 
 1.  No  
 2.  Yes  
 “Are you under going any treatment for your mood such as seeing a 
 counselor , psychologist, psychiatrist or taking medications?” 
 1.  No 
 2.  Yes  
 If both answers are no  , another text will be sent: 
 “Would it be okay if we let your primary care physician know 
 about your mood?” 
 24 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 1.  Yes ---- PCP will be contact[CONTACT_205903] 
 2.  No 
 If No,  the following text will be sent: 
 “Okay , that’ s fine however we would like to give you some 
 information on other places and resources where you can 
 find someone to talk about your mood if you don’ t want us 
 to contact [CONTACT_4904]” W e will attach information about 
 NYC W ell 
 (  https://www1.nyc.gov/site/doh/health/health-topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]/nyc-w 
 ell.page  ) 
 0.  If No, the following texts will be sent: 
 “We think it may be a good idea to talk to a healthcare professional about 
 these feelings. W ould it be okay if we let your primary care physician 
 know about your mood? 
 1.  Yes ---- PCP will be contact[CONTACT_205903] 
 2.  No 
 If No,  the following text will be sent: 
 “Okay , that’ s fine however we would like to give you some 
 information on other places and resources where you can 
 find someone to talk about your mood if you don’ t want us 
 to contact [CONTACT_4904]” W e will attach information about 
 NYC W ell 
 (  https://www1.nyc.gov/site/doh/health/health-topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]/nyc-w 
 ell.page  ) 
 8.3.3.  Follow-up of AEs and SAEs 
 After the initial AE/SAE report, the investigator is required to proactively follow each participant 
 at subsequent visits/contacts. All SAEs will be followed until resolution, stabilization, the event 
 is otherwise explained, or the participant is lost to follow-up (as defined in Section 7.3). Further 
 information on follow-up procedures is provided in Appendix 3. 
 25 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 8.3.4.  Regulatory Reporting Requir ements for SAEs 
 ●  Prompt notification by [CONTACT_205904] a study intervention under clinical investigation are met. 
 ●  The sponsor has a legal responsibility to notify both the local regulatory authority 
 and other regulatory agencies about the safety of a study intervention under clinical 
 investigation. The sponsor will comply with country-specific regulatory requirements 
 relating to safety reporting to the regulatory authority , Institutional Review Boards 
 (IRB)/Independent Ethics Committees (IEC), and investigators. 
 ●  An investigator who receives an investigator safety report describing an SAE or 
 other specific safety information (e.g., summary or listing of SAEs) from the sponsor will 
 review and file it and will notify the IRB/IEC, if appropriate according to local 
 requirements. 
 8.3.5.  Pregnancy 
 Pregnancy will be self-reported by [CONTACT_423]. Pregnant females will not be excluded from 
 participation  . 
 ●  If a pregnancy is reported, the investigator will record pregnancy information on the 
 appropriate form and submit it to the sponsor within 24 hours of learning of the female 
 participant pregnancy . 
 ●  While pregnancy itself is not considered to be an AE or SAE, any pregnancy 
 complication or elective termination of a pregnancy for medical reasons will be reported as 
 an AE or SAE. 
 ●  Abnormal pregnancy outcomes (e.g., spontaneous abortion, fetal death, stillbirth, 
 congenital anomalies, ectopic pregnancy) are considered SAEs and will be reported as such. 
 ●  Any post-study pregnancy-related SAE considered reasonably related to the study 
 intervention by [CONTACT_55901] 8.3.4. 
 While the investigator is not obligated to actively seek this information in former study 
 participants, he or she may learn of an SAE through spontaneous reporting. 
 ●  Any female participant who becomes pregnant while participating in the study may 
 continue the study intervention. 
 8.3.6.  Disease-Related Events and/or Disease-Related Outcomes Not Qualifying as AEs 
 or SAEs 
 N/A 
 8.3.7.  Events of Special Inter est 
 N/A 
 8.3.8.  Product Quality Complaints and Nonconformances 
 N/A 
 26 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 [IP_ADDRESS].  Time Period for Detecting Device Complaints and Nonconformances 
 N/A 
 [IP_ADDRESS].  Follow-up of Device Complaints and Nonconformances 
 N/A 
 [IP_ADDRESS].  Prompt Reporting of Device Complaints or Nonconformances to Sponsor 
 N/A 
 [IP_ADDRESS].  Regulatory Reporting Requir ements for Device Complaints and 
 Nonconformances 
 N/A 
 8.4.  Pharmacokinetics 
 N/A 
 8.5.  Genetics and/or Pharmacogenomics 
 N/A 
 8.6.  Biomarkers 
 N/A 
 [ADDRESS_245573] 33% of the surveys and a retention rate 
 >= 70%. 
 9.2.  Sample Size Determination 
 Based on an expected small to moderate ef fects size (17) of the text message intervention for 
 stress management, a  sample size of 70 participants  (35 participants per arm) will be suf ficient to 
 establish feasibility for a 80% powered main trial with an 80% upper confidence limit (18). 
 About 120 participants will be screened to achieve up to 70 enrolled to the study . 
 Note  : “Enrolled” means a participant's, or their legally  acceptable representative’ s, agreement to 
 participate in a clinical study following completion of the informed consent process and 
 screening. Potential participants who are screened for the purpose of determining eligibility for 
 the study , but do not participate in the study , are not considered enrolled, unless otherwise 
 specified by [CONTACT_760]. 
 9.3.  Analysis Sets 
 The definition for each participant analysis set should be defined at the participant level. 
 Optionally , to implement the estimand framework, defined analysis data sets may be included 
 here in a separate table that specify the set of data used in the analysis for a given estimand (or 
 family of estimands that dif fer only in endpoint) based on how key intercurrent events will be 
 handled for that estimand. 
 9.4.  Statistical Analyses 
 Primary outcome.    
 ●  Quantitative analysis  . Feasibility of the intervention  will be reported as descriptive statistics, 
 focusing on  number of individuals who contact [CONTACT_205905]; 
 the number of eligible individuals after the initial screening; time taken to recruit the sample; 
 retention rates;  the rate of EMA survey completion.  Acceptability will be measured as means 
 and standard deviations of responses to each item within the satisfaction questionnaire, and 
 the proportion of participants giving favorable responses.  
 ●  Qualitative analysis  . A codebook and coding guidelines  will be developed for analysis of 
 qualitative feedback. T wo researchers will code all transcripts using  NVivo (version 10, QSR 
 International, Inc, Burlington, MA)  and add to the  codebook as needed. Each researcher will 
 then independently identify main themes. Results will be compared and discussed until an 
 agreement will be reached. Representative samples of feedback from open-ended questions 
 will be also used.  
 28 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 Secondary outcomes.    
 ●  Standar d responses.  Sociodemographic responses will  be described by [CONTACT_8477], standard 
 deviation (SD), and range. Mixed-ef fects models for repeated measure (MMRM) will be 
 used to examine change in secondary outcomes, with outcomes examined as change in scores 
 between baseline and follow-up. Models will include ef fects for time, group 
 (control/intervention), group x time interactions and baseline values of the outcome variable 
 (to control regression to the mean) and other potential confounders. Per Protocol analysis will 
 be performed. The per protocol population will include all randomized participants excluding 
 those who had protocol violations. A significance level of 0.05 will be used. All analyses will 
 be performed using  SPSS for W indows  .  
 ●  EMA r esponses.  Variability in momentary responses  will be described by [CONTACT_20908]’ s 
 mean, SD, and range of mean square successive dif ference (34), which is a measure of 
 variability that accounts for the temporal order of responses. Analyses on momentary 
 responses will be conducted using Multilevel Modelling (35) because of the hierarchical 
 structure of the data (level 1 = measurement time, level 2 = measurement day , level 3 = 
 participant) and the aptness for dealing with varying time intervals between assessments and 
 missing data. For depi[INVESTIGATOR_205880] (i.e. changing with time) or unsystematic (i.e. 
 symptom variability) inter - and intraindividual variations in symptom severity and copi[INVESTIGATOR_205881], intraclass correlation coef ficients (ICCs) will be used, while associations of 
 symptomatology , copi[INVESTIGATOR_205882]. 
 9.4.1.  Safety  Analysis 
 All AEs will be coded by [CONTACT_205906] 
 (MedDRA) preferred team. All AEs will be coded by [CONTACT_205907] (MedDRA) preferred term All safety analyses will be made on the 
 Safety Population.All safety analyses will be made on the Safety Population. 
 9.5.  Interim Analysis 
 N/A 
 29 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 10.  Supporting Documentation and Operational Considerations 
 10.1.  Appendix 1: Regulatory, Ethical, and Study Oversight 
 Considerations 
 10.1.1.  Regulatory and Ethical Considerations 
 ●  This study will be conducted in accordance with the protocol and with the following: 
 o  Consensus ethical principles derived from international guidelines including the 
 Declaration of Helsinki and Council for International Or ganizations of Medical 
 Sciences (CIOMS) International Ethical Guidelines 
 o  Applicable ICH Good Clinical Practice (GCP) Guidelines 
 o  Applicable laws and regulations 
 ●  The protocol, protocol amendments, ICF , and other relevant documents (e.g., 
 advertisements) must be submitted to an IRB/IEC by [CONTACT_205908]/IEC before the study is initiated. 
 ●  Any amendments to the protocol will require IRB/IEC approval before 
 implementation of changes made to the study design, except for changes necessary to 
 eliminate an immediate hazard to study participants. 
 ●  Protocols and any substantial amendments to the protocol will require IRB/IEC 
 approval prior to initiation except for changes necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to 
 study participants. 
 ●  The investigator will be responsible for the following: 
 o  Providing written summaries of the status of the study to the IRB/IEC annually or 
 more frequently in accordance with the requirements, policies, and procedures 
 established by [CONTACT_1201]/IEC 
 o  Notifying the IRB/IEC of SAEs or other significant safety findings as required by 
 [CONTACT_1744]/IEC procedures 
 o  Providing oversight of the conduct of the study at the site and adherence to 
 requirements of 21 CFR, ICH guidelines, the IRB/IEC, and all other applicable local 
 regulations. 
 10.1.2.  Informed Consent Pr ocess 
 ●  Patients who meet the eligibility criteria will be asked to sign an online consent 
 form. The consent form will describe the potential risks and benefits of study participation 
 as well as the responsibilities of the participants and the investigators. 
 ●  Participants must be informed that their participation is voluntary . Participants are 
 required to sign a statement of informed consent that meets the requirements of [ADDRESS_245574] 
 (HIPAA) requirements, where applicable, and the IRB/IEC or study center . 
 ●  Participants must be re-consented to the most current version of the ICF(s) during 
 their participation in the study . 
 ●  A copy of the ICF(s) must be provided to the participant. 
 30 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 10.1.3.  Data Pr otection 
 Study participants will be assigned a unique identifying number (ID). This ID, rather than any 
 PII, will be used to label all hard copy and electronic data. Identifiers and study data will be 
 saved in separate files, accessible only to study staf f.  As a result, the bulk of the data will be 
 completely anonymized, including records of screening instruments. 
 However , the consent form and documentation of payment will include both the subject’ s name 
 [CONTACT_175582]. As a result, these documents will be stored separately from other records.  All hard copy 
 records will be stored in locked cabinets to which only the study investigators will have access. 
 All electronic records will be stored on an electronically secure database at Click Therapeutics. 
 This database is password protected. 
 Data from hard copy records will be entered into Excel and/or SPSS by [CONTACT_205909] f. Data analysis 
 will be conducted in SPSS, and/or Excel. Results will never be reviewed in a manner such that 
 individual subjects could be identified. 
 10.1.4.  Patient Privacy 
 Protection of Participant Privacy: Privacy in the context of this study includes confidentiality of 
 data and personal information and in the handling and reporting of data. The investigator will be 
 responsible for ensuring data are stored in a secure area accessible only to study staf f. These 
 provisions will be monitored periodically . Clinical research may be a stressful experience for 
 some patients; therefore, sensitivity in recruitment (i.e., including no coercive strategies) will be 
 a high priority . 
 HIPP A compliance: All projects will obtain an authorization for the Health Insurance Portability 
 and Accountability Act (HIP AA) from the Institutional Review Board (IRB). The authorization 
 is to use or disclose protected health information for research that also includes a research 
 repository , which will be signed by [CONTACT_2299], with a copy kept in the data management 
 system. A copy will also be available to the patient. This authorization will allow the use or 
 sharing of private information including information that is given via written questionnaires from 
 questions regarding demographic and psychological and medical information. 
 Protection of the participant’ s privacy and confidentiality: There is a potential risk to the 
 participant with regards to possible violation of their privacy . We have taken steps to avoid this 
 by [CONTACT_205910] a protected data file. Both the 
 investigator and research coordinator fulfill all requirements of the institution for HIPP A and 
 IRB training. As part of the process involved in obtaining written informed consent, all 
 participants will be reminded that their responses are confidential and that they may refuse to 
 participate in the project or withdraw at any time without explanation, and further , that such 
 action will in no way af fect their future interactions with their health care provider . Prior to 
 inclusion in any data set (internal and external), data will be stripped of all identifying 
 information. 
 31 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 [IP_ADDRESS].  Medical Monitor 
 ●  Participant safety will be continuously monitored by [CONTACT_1689] , which 
 includes safety signal detection at any time during the study . 
 ●  All safety data collected will be summarized and reviewed by [CONTACT_205911]. 
 ●  If at any time during the course of the study , the PI [INVESTIGATOR_205883], either shall have the discretion and responsibility to 
 recommend that the study be terminated. 
 ●  Case unblinding may be performed for above reviews if necessary . 
 10.1.5.  Dissemination of Clinical Study Data 
 N/A 
 10.1.6.  Data Quality Assurance 
 ●  The investigator must permit study-related monitoring, audits, IRB/IEC review , and 
 regulatory agency inspections and provide direct access to source data documents. 
 ●  The sponsor or designee is responsible for the data management of this study 
 including quality checking of the data. 
 10.1.7.  Sour ce Documents 
 Source documents are defined as the electronic survey responses. Electronic survey 
 responses provide evidence for the existence of the participant and substantiate the 
 integrity of the data collected. Source documents for this study will be collected 
 electronically and will be maintained by [CONTACT_456] . 
 10.1.8.  Study and Site Start and Closur e 
 N/A. 
 10.1.9.  Publication Policy 
 N/A 
 32 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 10.2.  Appendix 2: Clinical Laboratory Tests 
 Laboratory tests are not evaluated in this study . 
 33 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 10.3.  Appendix 3: AEs and SAEs: Definitions and Procedures for 
 Recording, Evaluating, Follow-up, and Reporting 
 10.3.1.  Definition of AE 
 AE Definition 
 ●  An AE is any untoward medical occurrence in a clinical study participant, 
 temporally associated with the use of study intervention, whether or not considered 
 related to the study intervention. 
 ●  NOTE: An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including 
 an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease (new or exacerbated) temporally 
 associated with the use of study intervention. 
 Events Meeting the AE Definition 
 ●  Any abnormal laboratory test results (hematology , clinical chemistry , or 
 urinalysis) or other safety assessments (e.g., ECG, radiological scans, vital signs 
 measurements), including those that worsen from baseline, considered clinically 
 significant in the medical and scientific judgment of the investigator (i.e., not related to 
 progression of underlying disease). 
 ●  Exacerbation of a chronic or intermittent pre-existing condition including either 
 an increase in frequency and/or intensity of the condition. 
 ●  New conditions detected or diagnosed after study intervention administration even 
 though it may have been present before the start of the study . 
 ●  Signs, symptoms, or the clinical sequelae of a suspected intervention- intervention 
 interaction. 
 ●  Signs, symptoms, or the clinical sequelae of a suspected overdose of either study 
 intervention or a concomitant medication. Overdose per se will not be reported as an 
 AE/SAE unless it is an intentional overdose taken with possible suicidal/self-harming 
 intent. Such overdoses should be reported regardless of sequelae. 
 ●  The signs, symptoms, and/or clinical sequelae resulting from lack of ef ficacy will 
 be reported as AE or SAE if they fulfill the definition of an AE or SAE. “Lack of 
 efficacy” or “failure of expected pharmacological action” also constitutes an AE or SAE. 
 Events  NOT  Meeting the AE Definition 
 ●  Any clinically significant abnormal laboratory findings or other abnormal safety 
 assessments which are associated with the underlying disease, unless judged by [CONTACT_205912]’ s condition. 
 ●  The disease/disorder being studied or expected progression, signs, or symptoms of 
 the disease/disorder being studied, unless more severe than expected for the participant’ s 
 condition. 
 ●  Medical or sur gical procedure (e.g., endoscopy , appendectomy): the condition that 
 leads to the procedure is the AE. 
 ●  Situations in which an untoward medical occurrence did not occur (social and/or 
 convenience admission to a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]). 
 34 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 ●  Anticipated day-to-day fluctuations of pre-existing disease(s) or condition(s) 
 present or detected at the start of the study that do not worsen. 
 10.3.2.  Definition of SAE 
 An SAE is defined as any serious adverse event that, at any dose: 
 a.  Results in death 
 b.  Is life-thr eatening 
 The term 'life-threatening' in the definition of 'serious' refers to an event in which the 
 participant was at risk of death at the time of the event. It does not refer to an event, which 
 hypothetically might have caused death, if it were more severe. 
 c.  Requir es inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_32957] 
 ●  In general, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_12994] (usually 
 involving at least an overnight stay) at the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_205884]/or treatment that would not have been appropriate in the physician’ s office or 
 outpatient setting. Complications that occur during hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1084]. If a 
 complication prolongs hospi[INVESTIGATOR_9236], the event is 
 serious. When in doubt as to whether “hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]” occurred or was necessary , the AE 
 should be considered serious. 
 ●  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5187] a pre-existing condition that did not 
 worsen from baseline is not considered an AE. 
 d.  Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity 
 ●  The term disability means a substantial disruption of a person’ s ability to conduct 
 normal life functions. 
 ●  This definition is not intended to include experiences of relatively minor medical 
 significance such as uncomplicated headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, influenza, and 
 accidental trauma (e.g., sprained ankle) which may interfere with or prevent everyday life 
 functions but do not constitute a substantial disruption. 
 e.  Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect 
 f.  Other situations: 
 ●  Medical or scientific judgment should be exercised by [CONTACT_205913]. These events should 
 usually be considered serious. 
 o  Examples of such events include invasive or malignant cancers, intensive treatment 
 for aller gic bronchospasm, blood dyscrasias, convulsions or development of 
 intervention dependency or intervention abuse. 
 10.3.3.  Recording and Follow-Up of AE and/or SAE 
 AE and SAE Recording 
 ●  When an AE/SAE occurs, it is the responsibility of the investigator to review all 
 documentation (e.g., hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1088], laboratory reports, and diagnostics reports) 
 related to the event. 
 ●  The investigator will then record all relevant AE/SAE information. 
 35 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 ●  It is  not  acceptable for the investigator to send  photocopi[INVESTIGATOR_10914]’ s 
 medical records in lieu of completion of the required form. 
 ●  There may be instances when copi[INVESTIGATOR_205885]. In this case, all participant identifiers, with the exception of the participant 
 number , will be redacted on the copi[INVESTIGATOR_205886]. 
 ●  The investigator will attempt to establish a diagnosis of the event based on signs, 
 symptoms, and/or other clinical information. Whenever possible, the diagnosis (not the 
 individual signs/symptoms) will be documented as the AE/SAE. 
 Assessment of Intensity 
 The investigator will make an assessment of intensity for each AE and SAE reported during 
 the study and assign it to 1 of the following categories: 
 ●  Mild: An event that is easily tolerated by [CONTACT_2299], causing minimal 
 discomfort and not interfering with everyday activities. 
 ●  Moderate: An event that causes suf ficient discomfort to interfere with normal 
 everyday activities. 
 ●  Severe: An event that prevents normal everyday activities. An AE that is assessed 
 as severe should not be confused with an SAE. Severe is a category utilized for rating the 
 intensity of an event; and both AEs and SAEs can be assessed as severe. 
 An event is defined as ‘serious’ when it meets at least 1 of the predefined outcomes as 
 described in the definition of an SAE, NOT when it is rated as severe. 
 Assessment of Causality 
 ●  The investigator is obligated to assess the relationship between study intervention 
 and each occurrence of each AE/SAE. 
 ●  A “reasonable possibility” of a relationship conveys that there are facts, evidence, 
 and/or ar guments to suggest a causal relationship, rather than a relationship cannot be 
 ruled out. 
 ●  The investigator will use clinical judgment to determine the relationship. 
 ●  Alternative causes, such as underlying disease(s), concomitant therapy , and other 
 risk factors, as well as the temporal relationship of the event to study intervention 
 administration will be considered and investigated. 
 ●  For each AE/SAE, the investigator  must  document in  the medical notes that 
 he/she has reviewed the AE/SAE and has provided an assessment of causality . 
 ●  There may be situations in which an SAE has occurred and the investigator has 
 minimal information to include in the initial report. However , it is very important that the 
 investigator always make an assessment of causality for every event before the initial 
 transmission of the SAE data. 
 ●  The investigator may change his/her opi[INVESTIGATOR_9242]-up 
 information and send an SAE follow-up report with the updated causality assessment. 
 ●  The causality assessment is one of the criteria used when determining regulatory 
 reporting requirements. 
 Follow-up of AEs and SAEs 
 36 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 ●  The investigator is obligated to perform or arrange for the conduct of 
 supplemental measurements and/or evaluations as medically indicated or as requested by 
 [X]  to elucidate the nature and/or causality of the  AE or SAE as fully as possible. This 
 may include additional laboratory tests or investigations, histopathological examinations, 
 or consultation with other health care professionals. 
 ●  New or updated information will be recorded in the originally submitted 
 documents. 
 ●  The investigator will submit any updated SAE data within 24 hours of receipt of 
 the information. 
 10.3.4.  Reporting of SAEs 
 SAE Reporting via an Electr onic Data Collection T ool 
 ●  The primary mechanism for reporting an SAE will be the electronic data 
 collection tool. 
 ●  If the electronic system is unavailable, then the site will use the paper SAE data 
 collection tool (see next section) to report the event within 24 hours. 
 ●  The site will enter the SAE data into the electronic system as soon as it becomes 
 available. 
 ●  After the study is completed at a given site, the electronic data collection tool will 
 be taken of f-line to prevent the entry of new data or changes to existing data. 
 ●  If a site receives a report of a new SAE from a study participant or receives 
 updated data on a previously reported SAE after the electronic data collection tool has 
 been taken of f-line, then the site can report this information on a paper SAE form (see 
 next section) or by [CONTACT_756]. 
 ●  Contacts for SAE reporting can be found in the Study Reference Manual. 
 SAE Reporting via Paper Data Collection T ool 
 ●  Email of the SAE paper data collection tool is the preferred method to transmit 
 this information. 
 ●  In rare circumstances and in the absence of email, notification by [CONTACT_205914] a copy of the SAE data collection tool sent by [CONTACT_205915]. 
 ●  Initial notification via telephone does not replace the need for the investigator to 
 complete and sign the SAE data collection tool within the designated reporting time 
 frames. 
 ●  Contacts for SAE reporting can be found in the Study Reference Manual. 
 37 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 10.4.  Appendix 4: Contraceptive and Barrier Guidance 
 Not applicable. 
 38 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 10.5.  Appendix 5: AEs, ADEs, SAEs, SADEs, [LOCATION_003]DEs and Device 
 Complaints and Nonconformances: Definitions and Procedures for 
 Recording, Evaluating, Follow-up, and Reporting in Device Studies 
 ●  Both the investigator and the sponsor will comply with all local reporting 
 requirements. 
 ●  The detection and documentation procedures described in this protocol apply to all 
 sponsor devices provided for use in the study . See Section 6.1.[ADDRESS_245575] of sponsor 
 devices. 
 10.5.1.  Definition of Device AE and ADE 
 Device AE and ADE Definition 
 ●  An AE is any untoward medical occurrence in a clinical study participant, users, 
 or other persons, temporally associated with the use of study intervention, whether or not 
 considered related to the investigational device. An AE can therefore be any unfavorable 
 and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease 
 (new or exacerbated) temporally associated with the use of an investigational device. This 
 definition includes events related to the investigational device or comparator and events 
 related to the procedures involved. 
 ●  An adverse device ef fect (ADE) is defined as an AE related to the use of an 
 investigational device. This definition includes any AE resulting from insuf ficient or 
 inadequate instructions for use, deployment, implantation, installation, or operation, or 
 any malfunction of the investigational device as well as any event resulting from use error 
 or from intentional misuse of the investigational device. 
 10.5.2.  Definition of Device SAE, SADE and [LOCATION_003]DE 
 A Device SAE is an any serious adverse event that: 
 a.  Led to death 
 b.  Led to serious deterioration in the health of the participant, that either resulted in: 
 ●  A life-threatening illness or injury . The term “life-threatening” in the definition of 
 “serious” refers to an event in which the participant was at risk of death at the time of the 
 event. It does not refer to an event, which hypothetically might have caused death if it 
 were more severe. 
 ●  A permanent impairment of a body structure or a body function. 
 ●  Inpatient or prolonged hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. Planned hospi[INVESTIGATOR_272] a pre-existing 
 condition, or a procedure required by [CONTACT_760], without serious deterioration in health, 
 is not considered an SAE. 
 ●  Medical or sur gical intervention to prevent life-threatening illness or injury or 
 permanent impairment to a body structure or a body function. 
 ●  Chronic disease (MDR 2017/745). 
 c.  Led to fetal distress, fetal death, or a congenital abnormality or birth defect 
 SADE definition 
 ●  A SADE is defined as an adverse device ef fect that has resulted in any of the 
 consequences characteristic of an SAE. 
 39 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 ●  Any device complaint or nonconformance that might have led to an SAE if 
 appropriate action had not been taken, intervention had not occurred, or circumstances 
 had been less fortunate. 
 Unanticipated SADE ([LOCATION_003]DE) definition 
 ●  An [LOCATION_003]DE (also identified as UADE in US Regulations 21 CFR 813.3), is 
 defined as a serious adverse device ef fect that by [CONTACT_5942], incidence, severity , or 
 outcome has not been identified in the current version of the risk analysis report (see 
 Section 2.3). 
 10.5.3.  Recording and Follow-Up of Device AE/SAE/Complaints and Nonconformances 
 Device AE, SAE, and Device Complaint and Nonconformance Recording 
 ●  When an AE/SAE/device complaint or nonconformance occurs, it is the 
 responsibility of the investigator to review all documentation related to the event. 
 ●  The investigator will then record all relevant information in the participant’ s 
 medical records, in accordance with the investigator ’s normal clinical practice and on the 
 appropriate form. 
 ●  It is  not  acceptable for the investigator to send  photocopi[INVESTIGATOR_10914]’ s 
 medical records in lieu of completion of the AE/SAE/complaint and nonconformance 
 form. 
 ●  There may be instances when copi[INVESTIGATOR_205885]. In this case, all participant identifiers, with the exception of the participant 
 number , will be redacted on the copi[INVESTIGATOR_205886]. 
 ●  The investigator will attempt to establish a diagnosis of the event based on signs, 
 symptoms, and/or other clinical information. Whenever possible, the diagnosis (not the 
 individual signs/symptoms) will be documented as the AE/SAE. 
 ●  For device complaints and nonconformances, it is very important that the 
 investigator describes any corrective or remedial actions taken to prevent recurrence of 
 the event. 
 o  A remedial action is any action other than routine maintenance or servicing of a 
 device where such action is necessary to prevent recurrence of a device event. This 
 includes any amendment to the device design to prevent recurrence. 
 Assessment of Intensity 
 The investigator will make an assessment of intensity for each event reported during the study 
 and assign it to one of the following categories: 
 ●  Mild: An event that is easily tolerated by [CONTACT_2299], causing minimal 
 discomfort and not interfering with everyday activities. 
 ●  Moderate: An event that causes suf ficient discomfort and interferes with normal 
 everyday activities. 
 ●  Severe: An event that prevents normal everyday activities. An AE that is assessed 
 as severe should not be confused with an SAE. “Severe” is a category used for rating the 
 intensity of an event; both AEs and SAEs can be assessed as severe. 
 ●  An event is defined as ‘serious’ when it meets at least 1 of the predefined 
 outcomes as described in the definition of an SAE,  not  when it is rated as severe. 
 40 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 Assessment of Causality 
 ●  The investigator is obligated to assess the relationship between study intervention 
 and each occurrence of each event. 
 ●  A “reasonable possibility” of a relationship conveys that there are facts, evidence, 
 and/or ar guments to suggest a causal relationship, rather than a relationship, cannot be 
 ruled out. 
 ●  The investigator will use clinical judgment to determine the relationship. 
 ●  Alternative causes, such as underlying disease(s), concomitant therapy , and other 
 risk factors, as well as the temporal relationship of the event to study intervention 
 administration will be considered and investigated. 
 ●  For each event, the investigator  must  document in  the medical notes that he/she 
 has reviewed the AE/SAE/device complaint or nonconformance and has provided an 
 assessment of causality . 
 ●  There may be situations in which an SAE has occurred and the investigator has 
 minimal information to include in the initial report. However , it is very important that the 
 investigator always make an assessment of causality for every event before the initial 
 transmission of the SAE data. 
 ●  The investigator may change his/her opi[INVESTIGATOR_9242]-up 
 information and send an SAE follow-up report with the updated causality assessment. 
 ●  The causality assessment is one of the criteria used when determining regulatory 
 reporting requirements. 
 Follow-up of Device AE/SAE/Complaint or Nonconformance 
 ●  The investigator is obligated to perform or arrange for the conduct of 
 supplemental measurements and/or evaluations as medically indicated or as requested to 
 elucidate the nature and/or causality of the event as fully as possible. This may include 
 additional laboratory tests or investigations, histopathological examinations, or 
 consultation with other health care professionals. 
 ●  New or updated information will be recorded in the originally completed form. 
 ●  The investigator will submit any updated SAE data within 24 hours of receipt of 
 the information. 
 10.5.4.  Reporting of Device AE/SAE/Complaints or Nonconformances 
 SAE Reporting via an Electr onic Data Collection T ool 
 ●  The primary mechanism for reporting an SAE will be the electronic data 
 collection tool. 
 ●  If the electronic system is unavailable, then the site will use the paper SAE data 
 collection tool (see next table) to report the event within 24 hours. 
 ●  The site will enter the data into the electronic system as soon as it becomes 
 available. 
 ●  After the study is completed at a given site, the electronic data collection tool will 
 be taken of fline to prevent the entry of new data or changes to existing data. 
 ●  If a site receives a report of a new event from a study participant or receives 
 updated data on a previously reported event after the electronic data collection tool has 
 41 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 been taken of f-line, then the site can report this information on a paper SAE form (see 
 next table) or by [CONTACT_756]. 
 ●  Contacts for SAE reporting can be found in the Study Reference Manual. 
 Device AE/SAE/Complaint or Nonconformances Reporting via Paper Data Collection 
 Tool 
 ●  Email transmission of the paper data collection tool is the preferred method to 
 transmit this information. 
 ●  In rare circumstances and in the absence of email, notification by [CONTACT_205914] a copy of the paper data collection tool sent by [CONTACT_205915]. 
 ●  Initial notification via telephone does not replace the need for the investigator to 
 complete and sign the paper data collection tool within the designated reporting time 
 frames. 
 ●  Contacts for reporting can be found in the Study Reference Manual. 
 10.5.5.  Reporting of SADEs 
 SADE Reporting 
 NOTE: There are additional reporting obligations for device nonconformances and complaints 
 that are potentially related to SAEs that must fulfill the legal responsibility to notify 
 appropriate regulatory authorities and other entities about certain safety information 
 relating to devices being used in clinical studies. 
 ●  Any device event that is associated with an SAE must be reported to the sponsor 
 within 24 hours after the investigator determines that the event meets the definition of a 
 device complaint or nonconformance. 
 ●  The sponsor will review all device events and determine and document in writing 
 whether they could have led to an SAE. These device events will be reported to the 
 regulatory authorities and IRBs/IECs as required by [CONTACT_2091]. 
 ●  Contacts for SAE reporting can be found in the Study Reference Manual. 
 42 
 Protocol DL-F ACE-101 v1.0 
 Appendix 6: Abbreviations and Definitions 
 Abbr eviation  Definition 
 ADE  Adverse device ef fects 
 AE  Adverse event 
 CIOMS  Council for International Or ganizations of Medical Sciences 
 CONSOR T  Consolidated Standards of Reporting T rials 
 EMA  Ecological Momentary Assessment 
 GCP  Good Clinical Practice 
 HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
 ICF  Informed consent form 
 ICH  International Council for Harmonisation 
 IEC  Independent Ethics Committees 
 IRB  Institutional Review Boards 
 SADE  Serious adverse device ef fect 
 SAE  Serious adverse events 
 SoA  Schedule of Assessments 
 [LOCATION_003]DE  Unanticipated serious adverse device ef fect 
 43 