Pi[INVESTIGATOR_698392] —April 16, 2019  
 
1 
 I. Background and significance  
A. Historical background  
Every year, over 1.3 million Americans suffer an acute coronary syndrome, or ACS (myocardial 
infarction or unstable angina).[ADDRESS_948394] -ACS patients, approximately 20% will be rehospi[INVESTIGATOR_698393].[ADDRESS_948395] -
ACS health behaviors —especially  increasing physical activity —is associated with substantially lower 
risk of recurre nt events and mortality.3,[ADDRESS_948396] not been able to 
increase their activity to recommended levels .1,3,5  
Positive psychological constructs, such as optimism, are associated with greater adherence to 
evidence -based recommendations for physical activity,6 as well as lower rates of heart disease and 
cardiac mortality.7,8 Exercises that aim to cultivate positive cognitive and emotional experiences, known 
as positive psychology (PP) interventions, utilize short tasks that focus on gratitude (e.g., counting 
blessings), altruism (e.g., p erforming kind acts), use of personal strengths, and related constructs.[ADDRESS_948397] increasingly begun to focus on mobile health  
(“mHealth”)  interventions to deliver text -based messages containing suggestions, support, education, or 
other specific content. These ecological momentary interventions (EMIs) can be tailored to the 
individual  and implemented in real time (i .e., daily life).14 Mobile or  electronic devices can be used to 
provide these interventions in  the dail y lives of individuals. With a w eb-based survey,  Proudfoot15 
showed that 76% of the general population  is interested in using mobile technology for either  
monitoring or s elf-management of health.  Using EMIs has numerous advantages such as the  ability to 
reach la rge populations at lower costs ,16,[ADDRESS_948398] text messages (e.g., promoting 
healthy diet, health screening, and physical activity) led to impr ovement in cardiac risk factors .[ADDRESS_948399] -ACS patients , In addition, prior work has not examined a combination of messages 
that promote both positive psychological constructs and education/s upport around health behavior 
adherence, such as  physical activity  or diet . This may be a promising approach given that a combination 
of psychological and health education interventions may have greater effects on health behavior 
adherence  than either alone .[ADDRESS_948400] experience del ivering health 
education/motivation  interventions in over [ADDRESS_948401] -ACS patients as part of a combined PP/goal -setting 
intervention for physical activity.[ADDRESS_948402] and physical activity —April 16, [ADDRESS_948403] to promote maintenance of 
effects after a more intensive initial intervention, or as a promising stand -alone interven tion.  
 
 C. Rationale for proposed research and bene fits to patients and/or society  
 Given: (a) the relationship betwee n psychological well -being and  health behavior 
adherence /superior cardiac outcomes, (b) the potential for combined PP and educational  interventions to 
improve adherence more than either alone, and (c) the acceptability and impact of health -related text 
messaging on health outcomes in cardiac patients, the use of combined PP -based and health behavior -
related text messages in post -ACS pat ients has the potential to increase physical activity and reduce 
adverse events in a high -risk, high -yield population of patients.  This would have direct benefits to 
patients and would impact public health, given that >[ADDRESS_948404]-ACS patients (mean age ~6022,23) would likely not be used to receiving healthcare 
related interventions remotely, key first steps are  to determine whether post -ACS patients are willing 
and able to receive such text messages, whether they find the messages acceptable, and whether they 
lead to short -term changes in self -reported psychological and behavioral outcomes.  
 
II. Specific Aims  
We will conduct a pi [INVESTIGATOR_698394] -arm project delivering 7  text messages/week containing messages 
related to PP activities (e.g., recalling positive events ), having a heart -healthy diet,  or becomi ng more 
physically active, for  4 weeks among 80 patients with a prior ACS.   
 
Specific Aim 1: To assess the feasibility and acceptability of a pi[INVESTIGATOR_698395] -message -based intervention for 
post-ACS patients  (primary aim) . 
Hypotheses : Over 50% of eligible patients will enroll in the pro ject and  text messages will be 
successfully delivered to over 90% of enrolled p articipants.  In addition, participants ’ mean  ratings of the 
intervention’s burden (<4/10) will suggest that the intervention is well -accepted.  
 
Specific aim 2:  To examine the short -term impact of the intervention on relevant self -reported 
outcomes . 
Hypotheses : Participants will have mean pre -post increases in positive affect,  optimism, determination, 
depression, anxiety,  self-reported physical activity , self-reported dietary adherence,  and self -rated 
health/function .  
 
Specific aim 3:  To understand ACS patients’ experience , via open -ended interviews,  receiving text 
messages in this project regarding the preferred frequency, duration, timing, and content of the text 
messages, along with a ny specific benefits obtained from participation.  
Hypotheses : Though qualitative research does not have formal hypotheses, we expect that participants 
will find that this frequency and duration of messaging was acceptable, and that the positive 
psychologi cal and physical activity -based messages will be ex perienced as equally beneficial.  
 
III. Participant S election  
The convenience sample for this pi[INVESTIGATOR_698396]:  (a) participants 
prospectively enrolled from inpatient cardiac units at MGH admitted for an ACS, and (b) participants in 
prior post -ACS studies performed with our team (specifically the observational Gratitude Research in 
Acute Coronary Events [GRACE] study [ PHS IRB 2012P001191 ], and two linked Positive Emotions in 
Acute Coronary Events [PEACE] studies [ PHS IRB 2013P001961 and 2014P001756 ]).  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_698392] —April 16, 2019  
 
3 
  
A. Inclusion/exclusion  criteria  
 
Inclusion criteria : patients eligible for this pi[INVESTIGATOR_698397]:  
 
1. Prior acute coronary syndrome. To have receive d a diag nosis of ACS, patients must have met  
criteria for acute myocardial infarction (MI) or unstable angina (UA). For MI, potential subjects  must 
have  met established consensus criteria,24 specifically elevation of cardiac biomarkers (card iac troponin 
T) in addition to: (1 ) symptoms of ischemia (e.g., acu te chest  pain), (2 ) ischemic changes on 
electrocardiogram (e.g., ST -segment elevation or ST -depressi on and T -wave inversions), or (3 ) imaging 
evidence of new loss of viable myocardium or new regional wall motion abnormality. For UA, subjects 
met formal sta ndardized criteria used in prior cardiac studies:25,26 (1) crescendo angina, (2) new onset 
(within 1 month) angina with minimal exertion, or (3) angina with minimal exertion or at rest. When 
unclear, diagnoses will be clarified with the primary treatment team and adjudicated by [CONTACT_482705] ([CONTACT_698423] [J.J.])   
 
2. Ability to receive text messages via cellular phone . Participants must have a cellular phone that: (a) 
can receive text messag es, (b) that they use or check ( e.g., checking f or voicemail or email messages) at 
least daily, and (c) that has an unlimited tex t message plan (to prevent the study text messages causing 
them to be charged f or reception of the messages).  
 
Exclusion criteria : patients will be excluded if  they had :  
 
1. A periprocedural ACS (ACS occurring in the setting of another medical procedure)  
2. A medical condition likely to be terminal wit hin the timeframe of the study  
3. An unrelated condit ion limiting physical activity  
4. An inability to communicate in English, or  
5. A cognitive disturbance precluding participation or informed  consent, as identified using a six -item 
cognitive screen designed to assess suitability for research participation.27  
 
Patients with a periprocedural ACS  will be excluded due to concerns that such events may occur in the 
absence of structural heart disease and likely represent a different pathophysiology, course, and 
prognosis than those with 'endogenous' ACS. Those unable to complete physical activity due to an 
unrelated medical condition (e.g., arthritis) w ill be  excluded because the intervention is focused on 
promoting activity and because this would imp ede measurement of one study outcome ( self-reported 
physical act ivity). Furthermore, for all patients, we will only enroll them if they have no 
contraindications to physical activity per their primary cardiology team.  Overall, d etermin ation of 
exclusion criteria will be  made in conjunction with the primary medical team (e.g., regarding comorbid 
or terminal conditions) with consultation and adjudication from  the study team cardiologist ( J.J.) as 
needed.  
 
B. Source of participants and methods of recruitmen t  
Regarding hospi[INVESTIGATOR_9643], r ecruitment and informed  consent procedures for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_698398] (Partners Healthcare System [PHS] IRB 2013P001961, 
2014P001756 ) and involved very similar inclusion/exclusion criteria. Specifically, two cardiac inpatient 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_698392] —April 16, 2019  
 
4 
 units (Ellison 1 0 and 11) will serve as the source of subjects for the study. Potential subjects will be 
those patients who are admitted with a primary diagnosis of ACS. To recruit subjects, study staff will 
review electronic patient censuses with the study team physician  investigators to ensure that the patient 
indeed appears to have been admitted with an ACS and to identify any specific clear contraindications to 
participation (e,g., periprocedural ACS noted in record).  Study staff will then approach treatment 
providers on the care unit to inquire about the accuracy of the ACS diagnosis for such patients. If a 
potentially eligible patient is identified, the study staff member will ask the treatment provider 
(physician, nurse, or nurse practitioner) to  ask the patient  whet her it would be okay for a study staff 
member to inform the patient about an optional study on the unit. If the patient is amenable, a study staff 
member will discuss the study with the patient and assess for inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
Regarding recruit ment of patients who were in our team’s prior studies, we will send them opt -
out letters by [CONTACT_2319] (see letters), signed by [CONTACT_26848].  These letters will explain that 
we are recruiting potential participants for this study.  The letter will describe that if they do not wish to 
receive a call explaining the study, they can call the study team opt -out line to inform the study team.  If 
the team does not receive an opt -out call after 2 weeks, a study coordinator will call the potential 
participant (who will have had an ACS, confirmed using the above criteria, based on their qualification 
for the prior study) and describe the study . The staff member will clarify that this is an optional, separate 
study from the one in which they previously enr olled.  
 
IV. Participant enrollment  
 A. Methods of enrollment/Procedures for obtaining informed  consent  
For hospi[INVESTIGATOR_9643], i f the patient is interested in the study after the discussion as mention ed 
above, a study coordinator or physician will approach the patient to further discuss the study. If the 
patient is willing, the staff member will directly assess for inclusion criteria (especially related to 
cellular phone availability and use) and e xclusion criteria (e.g ., comorbid medical  illnesses/prognosis  
and cognitive deficit s, as assessed by [CONTACT_698409] -item screen). Next, if the patient meets 
study criteria and is interested in the study,  the study staff member will verbally discuss the study in 
detai l and give the patient adequate time to read a written IRB -approved c onsent form and to ask 
questions. To ensure that subjects have the capacity to provid e informed  consent, we will ask potential 
subjects to describe their understanding of the study’s purpose and their role (e.g., that they understand 
the timing of  text messages and study assessments  and their purpose, conf identiality and its limits,  and 
their ability to end participation  in the study at any time for any reason). Patients will be given as long as 
they would like to sign consent (they can complete baseline procedures by [CONTACT_698410]) . Finally, once subjects sign the consent form, the investigat or will perform a focused review 
of the  subject’s medical record (including laboratory data) to again confirm that the patient was admitted 
for ACS, and will consult with the study cardiologist in the event that there is any need for further 
clarification . If there is a question about the patient’s medical prognosis (to assess whether the patient 
has a condition likely to lead to death within 6 months) the study team will consult with th e inpatient 
treatment team ( and the study cardiologist  as needed) . 
For participants from prior studies, i f the patient is potentially interested in the study, the study 
coordinator will assess the patient for inclusion and exclusion criteria, and if the patient is eligible and 
willing to participate, we will mail the patient a consent form (and the coordinator will call the patient to 
ask if there are any questions about the form or the study), and upon receipt of the signed consent form, 
the participant will be enrolled . We will also ask the participant if they are able to “walk a block or two 
on level ground,” to ensure they are able to safely partake in physical activity. If they answer “no,” to 
this question, we will offer to inquire with their medical provider whether physical acti vity (such as 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_698392] —April 16, 2019  
 
5 
 walking) is safe, and when needed in such cases, will obtain a release of information to do so .  
In all cases, o nce patients are confirmed subjects in the study, they wil l complete a series of 
baseline assessm ents (see below ).  
 
B. Treatment assignment  
Participants will be enrolled and complete written informed  consent as described above.  All 
participants will be assigned to the active/expe rimental condition (receiving 7 text messages/week for 2  
weeks) for the purposes of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]/proof -of-concept study.  
 
V. Study procedures  
A. Study visits  
Baseline assessment  and orientation to the intervention . For patients enrolled during 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], w e will  contact [CONTACT_263752] [ADDRESS_948405] -discharge by [CONTACT_698411] . This timing will ensure adequate 
recovery such that participants will be able to complete physical activity  upon beginning the intervention 
(given that the majority of ACS pat ients are able to engage in basic  physical activity such as brisk 
walking within a week of discharge).  For participants from prior studies enrolled via the opt -out letters, 
the study team w ill contact [CONTACT_698412].   
The baseline assessment will consist of gathering of basic demographic information and 
completion of very brief self -report assessments about psychological, health behavior, and overall 
health/functional outcome measures (see below for further detail). Upon completion of this assessment, 
the study coordinator will describe the role of the text messages, specifically describing that participants 
will receive text messages daily for [ADDRESS_948406] —that completing exercises to boost mood and optimism may translate into greater well -being, 
vitality, and energy (and being more active), and that specific reminders and support around becoming 
more active may more directly p romote activity. The coordinator at that contact [CONTACT_698413] a  test 
text message to confirm succ essful transmission of such messages.  
2-Week Check -in. During week [ADDRESS_948407], and to 
reinforce the purpose of the study.  
Follow -up assessment  #1. After completion of the text messaging intervention  (week 4), 
participants will be contact[CONTACT_698414] -report assessments, and to complete 
quantitative (2 questions) and qualitative (15 minute interview)  questions  about the intervention.   
Follow -up assessment #2.  Four  weeks later ( week 8), participants will once more complete the 
self-report assessments (without interview). This will end their study participation.  
 
 B. Drugs to be used  
 No drugs will be administered  
 
 C. Devices to be used  
 No medical devices will be used.  
 
 D. Procedures  
A total of 28 intervention  text me ssages (1/day  for 4 weeks) will be sent to participants  following 
the baseline assessment .  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_698392] —April 16, 2019  
 
6 
 Messages will be addressed to participants by [CONTACT_2300] (if desired) and sent at a time of their 
choosing. Immediately following the delivery of the message, participants will receive a second text 
message asking them  to rate the utility of the message on a scale of 0 to 10  (0=not helpful at all and 
10=very helpful) . A score of 7 or above will be rated “liked” while a score of 6 or below will be rated 
“disliked.” Participants will respond via text message with a rating score, which will be combined with 
prior feedback and then used to select all subsequent messages.  Participants will first receive a set of [ADDRESS_948408] range of attributes to allow sufficient participant 
feedback to clearly identify preferences. Daily adaptation then begins through probabilistic weighting of 
messag es based on prior “liked” attributes. To accomplish this, all messages are annotated for multiple 
attributes, which include content type (e.g., PP), specific content (e.g., optimism), nature (e.g., 
information), and whether the message is explicitly prosoc ial.  
The learning algorithm calculates the proportion “liked” (P) of each message type, using 
messages “liked” and “disliked” of that type and the total number of messages (N) of that attribute with 
feedback. A weighting multiplier (W) specifies the adapt ation rate; a larger W leads to more rapid 
favoring of messages with “liked” attributes; we chose W=1.5 for a moderate rate of evolution. The 
values are combined (B = 1 + [W x P x N]) to produce a modifier (B), which changes the probability of 
selecting fu ture messages of that specific type.  
We wil l deploy the dynamic daily TMI  using a database ( DynamoDB)28 to maintain and execute 
the adaptive algorithm; the database selects messages based on participant response s. Amazon Web 
Services29 allows communication between this database and the secure text -messaging program 
Twilio30, which securely (HIPAA -compliant) delivers messages to participants   
The messages via this server will be sent using the Twilio texting program used by [CONTACT_61604], 
which also uses Amazon Web Services (see Twilio security features at https://s3.amazonaws.com/ahoy -
assets.twilio.com/Whitepapers/Twilio_Whitepaper_Security -Architecture.pdf ). Twilio allows software 
developer s to programmatically make and receive phone calls and send and receive text messages using 
its web service. Our study team has purchased a Twilio account to allow messages to come from an 
anonymous phone number rather than the phone of a study staff membe r.  
We have pi[INVESTIGATOR_698399].   
 
The messages will be signed by [CONTACT_164245][INVESTIGATOR_698400].  Example text messages are listed in Table 1:   
 
Daily messages in adaptive TMI with assignment of specific attributes  
Message  Main category  Subcategory  Education/
Activity  Prosocial  
Perform 3 kind acts today.  PP Altruism  Activity  Yes 
Walking 15 more min/day reduces risk of heart 
disease.  Physical activity  Walking  Education  No 
Miss one TV show this evening and take a walk 
around your block for at least 15 -20 minutes.  Physical activity  Walking; TV  Activity  No 
Eat a pi[INVESTIGATOR_698401].  Diet Fruit Activity  No 
Eating less red meat is associated with lower 
body weight and lower risk of heart disease.  Diet Saturated fat/ 
cholesterol  Education  No 
Table 1. Sample messages and assignment of specific attributes.  
 
 
Participants will be informed  that while study staff do not monitor or respond to text messages regularly, 
participants can opt-out of future messages  by [CONTACT_227734] , “STOP”  or calling the study team at any time.   
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_698392] —April 16, [ADDRESS_948409] basic demographic data (age, gender, race/ethnicity) to 
characterize our population.  Participants will then complete baseline study assessments:  
  At baseline we will also collect the followi ng self -report measures:  
(1) Measures of psychological states : 
• Positive psychological states : Participants will rate their levels of positive  affect, optimism, 
and determination, over t he past week, on a 0 -10 Likert s cale. 
• Negative psychological states : Participants will also rate levels of depression and anxiety, 
over the past week, on 0 -10 scales .  
(2) Measures of health behaviors and function : 
• Self-reported physical activity . Participan ts will complete a two -item assessment for physical 
activity that has been validated and used in thousands of patients in the Kaiser Permanente 
system.[ADDRESS_948410] completion of moderate activity  in number of minutes of 
activity/week. The items are:  
o In the past 4 weeks, how many days/week  did you engage in moderate or greater 
physical activity (like a brisk walk)?'  
o On those days, how many minutes do you engage in activity at this level?'  
These two measures are then multiplied to arrive at the average min/week of moderate or greater 
physi cal activity .  
• Self-reported dietary adherence: Participants will be asked a single item about self -reported 
dietary adherence, adapted from the Medical Outcomes Study Specific Adherence Scale32: 
“In the last month, how often have you followed a low -fat, low -salt, or other diet as 
prescribed by [CONTACT_698415]?”  Choices will include “None of th e time,” “A little of 
the time,” “Some of the time,” “A good bit of the time,” “most of the time,” and “all of the 
time.”  
• Self-reported health : Participants will be asked a single item about self -reported health:  
“In general, how would you rate your health  today” with the possible choices being “very 
good” (1), “good” (2), “moderate” (3), “bad” (4) or “very bad” (5). This scale is a robust 
predictor of mortality and correlates strongly with ot her objective health indicators.33  
Physical function will be assessed with the Duke Activity Status Index (DASI).34 The DASI 
contains 12 items that inquire about activitie s of daily living (e.g., bathing), basic physical activity (e.g., 
walking, climbing stairs), and more strenuous physical function (e.g., vigorous sports) to gauge overall 
functional capacity. It has been extensively used in cardiac patients,35,36 and is reliable, valid, and 
responsive to change. The DASI predicts prognosis in cardiac patients above and beyond the effects of 
biomarkers,37 and is prospectively associated with new cardiac events38 and cardiac mortality.36  
 
Follow -up ass essment  #[ADDRESS_948411] of the quanti tative measures above, in addition to 0-10 overall 
ratings of the intervention’s burden and utility. Finally, they will complete a n open -ended 
(approximately 15 minute) interview:  
 
• Receipt: Did you receive the text m essages?  How many out of the 28 did you receive?  
• Burden/Utility:  Were the texts bothersome or annoying ? Were they helpful?  How?   
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_698392] —April 16, 2019  
 
8 
 • Were some more helpful than others?  Were the texts about happi[INVESTIGATOR_698402]?  
• Impa ct: Did a text ever specifically lead to an action (e.g., activity, a kind act)?   
• Frequency:  Were they not frequent enough?  Too frequent?  Just right?  
• Duration:  How long would such a program be useful?  Would it be useful to have occasional 
reminders?  
• Conten t: Any thoughts about additional content that could be included in the messages?  
 
We will digitally record and transcribe the qualitative interviews to allow analyses for themes.  
 
Follow -up ass essment  #2 
Finally, four weeks later, participants will again repeat by [CONTACT_698416] -report quantitative 
measures.  
 
 
VI. Biostatistical Analysis  
A. Specific data variables to be collected for the study  
 
 
B/C.  Study endpoints and statistical methods  
 
Specific Aim 1: To assess the feasibility and acceptability of a pi[INVESTIGATOR_698395] -message -based intervention for 
post-ACS patients . 
 
We will record: (a) % of elig ible patients who enroll, (b) % of participants who receive text messages, 
(c) % of text messages received, and mean ratings of intervention burden.   
 
Data analysis : We will us e descriptive statistics (e.g.,  proportions, means, standard deviations) to assess 
these outcomes and we will compare them to our hy pothesized outcomes:  Over 50% of eligible patients 
will enroll in the project, text messages will be successfully delivered to ov er 90% of enrolled 
participants, and participants’ mean ratings of the burden of the messages  at 4 weeks  will be <4/10.    
 
Specific aim 2: To examine the short -term impact of the intervention on relevant self -reported outcomes  
 
We will record : pre-post changes  in positive affect, optimism, gratitude, determination, depressi on, 
anxiety, self -rated physical activi ty, self -rated health, and physical function, at both 4 and 8 weeks   
 
Data analysis : We will use desc riptive statistics to calculate  the mean and standard deviation of each 
variable at each timepoint, along with the change in each variable  between baseline and the follow -up Assessment  Screening  Enrollment    4 weeks  8 weeks  
Cognitive screen (six-item screen)  X    
Basic demographic information   X   
Psychological measures (positive/negative)   X X X 
Self-reported activity, health, and function 
(DASI)   X          X       X 
Qualitative interview for feedback    X  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_698392] —April 16, 2019  
 
9 
 timepoint (s). We will also examine the effect size (Cohen’ s d) of the pre -post change in each outcome 
variable  at each timepoint ( 4 and 8 weeks) , calculated by [CONTACT_698417] e variable (av eraged across  timepoints).  We will also p erform exploratory 
paired t tests for each outcome variable to assess for significant (p<.05, two -tailed) change in these 
variables, though this pi[INVESTIGATOR_698403] -post changes. We hypo thesize 
that the text messages will be associated with a small to medium effect size (d=.2 -.5) in these outcomes 
at 4 and 8 weeks .  
 
Specific aim 3:  To understand ACS patients’ experience receiving text messages in this project 
regarding the preferred frequency, duration, timing, and content of the text messages, along with any 
specific benefits obtained from participation.  
 
We will record and transcr ibe responses to the qualitative  interviews, and extract themes relevant to the 
above topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102].  We will not perform quantitative analyses for this a im, but will use the derived theme(s) to 
inform future studies utilizing text messaging in this population.  
 
D.  Power analyses  
As a proof -of-concept/pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], we will not be powered to detect pre -post changes in our main 
outcome variables with N= 80(and estimated 10 -15% dropout based on prior studies).  However, this 
study will provide us very useful information on feasibility/acceptability and some useful preliminary 
data on the potential magnitude of effect of the text messages, along with qualitative feedback from all 
participants on the logistics , burden, and benefits  of such a program . 
 
VII. RISKS  AND DISCOMFORTS  
 
A. Complications of procedures  
Participants may be charged for text messages. We will specifically inqu ire whether participants have a  
text messaging plan on their cellular phone; we will be clear that we are unable to provide any funds to 
cover the costs of text messages and will only enroll those participants who have an unlimited text 
messaging plan on their device to prevent particip ants from being charged. Regarding physical activity, 
the messages recommend walking as the primary physical activity. It is possible that increasing physical 
activity could have adverse health effects, such as pain, fatigue, or exacerbation of chronic phy sical 
symptoms. We will clarify with all participants and when requested, their care providers,  that increasing 
their physical activity by [CONTACT_698418].  
 
B. Drug side effects  
No specific medications are being studied or administered solely for research pur poses in this study.  
 
C. Device complications/malfunctions  
No specific devices are being studied or administered solely for research purposes in this study.  
 
D. Psychosocial risks  
Participants  may experience discomfort at discussing self -rated psychological experiences and 
their health at the initial and follow -up assessments and could experience  the evaluation as intrusive.  
Likewise, though the follow -up assessment s (including interview  at 4 weeks) should be less than [ADDRESS_948412] and physical activity —April 16, 2019  
 
10 
 this during the assessment.   We can break up the assessment into shorter parts (quantitative assessment, 
qualitative interview ) as needed . The text messages (one/day x 4 weeks ) may also be experienced as 
intrusive. We will let patients know at the outset of the interviews that they can ask to stop receiving 
them at any time via text or phone call.  
Participants who do not find the  study to provide a benefit to them may find this upsetting as 
well.  Activities to obtain data through the follow -up assessments may be inconvenient for subjects.  We 
will take all measures to ensure patient comfort and will postpone or end interviews at su bjects’ request. 
We will also ensure that the PI [INVESTIGATOR_698404] (due to 
patient discomfort or to answer specific questions about the study), during in -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_698405]. We have used the b riefest methods necessary to assess emotional states and other outcomes 
to reduce patient discomfort.  
As with any study, there is the risk of a breach of confidentiality; these risks will be minimized 
by [CONTACT_698419], and by [CONTACT_698420]/offices and password -protected databases to store personal information. Only study staff (the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_698406] -up assessments; in some cases this may also include the study  
cardiologist if there is a question of patient safety or accuracy of ACS diagnosis ) will have any access to 
personally identifiable information about subjects, and such access will be limited only to information 
necessary to complete study tasks. We will repeatedly confirm participants’ cellular phone number prior 
to initiating the text messages and will send a generic text message to participants and receive 
confirmation of receipt from them in real time before proceeding with any of the study text messag es. In 
addition, the text messages will only contain participants’ first names  as entered by [CONTACT_476] . Regarding 
follow -up assessments and interviews, the digitally audiotaped recordings of the interviews will be 
identified only with a number (with this number linked to identifying information that is kept in a 
password -protected database), will be kept in a password -protected database , and will be destroyed once 
the time period for keepi[INVESTIGATOR_163612] -related data has passed.  Study staff have been trained in the 
importance of data confidentiality and proper methods of maintaining privacy and confidentiality.  
The main psychosocial safety concern related to patients in thi s study is regarding depression and 
suicidal ideation, since we will be asking about depressive symptoms via a 0 -10 scale.  If patients report 
a depression score of 8 or higher at either of the follow -up assessments, they will be asked a series of 
questions  about suicidal ideation (see suicidal ideation script). If patients (either enrolled or not enrolled 
in the study) express suicidal ideation, the study psychiatrist will perform a specific evaluation regarding 
suicidality and will arrange urgent assessmen t and management as needed (e.g., arranging for a patient 
to be seen immediately for a safety assessment in an emergency department).  These 
protections/responses have been used as part of several of our team’s projects in the past  (e.g., 
2010P001414, 2014P 001756) , and while we expect it to be very unlikely that a participant will have 
active suicidal ideation, we have successfully activated this protocol and arranged for urgent assessment 
for projects in the past.  
 
E. Radiation risks  
 
There will be no radiation exposure in this study.  
 
VI. POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
 
A. Potential Benefits to Participating Individuals  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_698392] —April 16, 2019  
 
11 
     Participating individual s may not benefit from participation in this study.  Participants receiving 
the text messages may experience improvements in their psychological well -being, motivation to be 
active, amount of physical activity , and/or self -rated health. This may be an improvement over no 
prompts to improve mood and activity , as is current standard practice. Furthermore, the serial 
evaluations will allow access  to emergent care if required.  
 
B. Potential Benefits to Society  
 Increasing positive psychological states in cardiac patients may have important public health 
benefits.  Optimism and other positive affective states are prospectively associated with increased 
physical activity  and w ith superior cardiac outcomes.  In addition, communications directly promoting 
physical activity have likewise been linked with greater  activity and improvement in cardiac risk factors. 
Text messaging is being increasingly investigated as a simple, relatively non -intrusive means of 
providing support, education, and health promotion. This study, by [CONTACT_698421] -being and activity promotion, may serve as the first 
step in develo pi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a program in ACS patients.  Enhancing activity in this population could in turn result 
in decreased morbidi ty and mortality . If the text messagi ng program in this and future  studies prove s to 
be feasible, well -accepted, and associated with improvements in physical activity and other key 
outcomes, it may be well be possible to utilize these easily -delivered messages  as part of a clinical care 
packa ge for ACS patients.  Thus participation in this study may result in substantial benefit to future 
patients.  
 
VIII.   MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  
 
A. Independent monitoring of source data  
All source data (e.g., chart review data and subject self -report) will be entered into the REDCap 
database. At intervals throughout the study, the PI ([CONTACT_102974]) will review this data to ensure that it is 
being entered correctly and will perform ‘test do wnloads’ of the data to ensure that it can be captured in 
the statistical package to be used in this study.   
B. Safety monitoring  
 The research team will meet on a weekly basis to review study progress . During these weekly 
meetings, the principal investig ator will review informed  consent documents, study forms, and 
procedures completed that week. The study team will also discuss any procedural difficulties, 
recruitment issues, and adverse events at this meeting (and before if needed). I f there are consiste nt 
issues with the logistics, feasibility, or acceptability of the text messages (e.g., difficulty sending the 
messages, participant complaints about intrusiveness of daily messages), we will r eview our methods 
and alter the study protocol  as needed .  
 
C. Outcomes monitoring  
For this exploratory study, we will not plan to perform interim analyses.  However, given the 
feasibility and acceptability focus of this study, we will review ratings of intervention ease/utility and 
pre-post changes in outcomes after 1 0 and/or [ADDRESS_948413] that there are substantial barriers to acceptability (e.g., reports from participants at follow -
ups/interviews, high rates of dropout, requests to stop text messages), in addition to stron gly considering 
changes in the  protocol as outlined above in Safety Monitoring, above .  
 
 D. Adverse event reporting guidelines  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_698392] —April 16, [ADDRESS_948414] to reporting un anticipated problems, including 
adverse events. Specifically, when a serious or nonserious ad verse event occurs, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_698407]. For all 
unanticipated problems and adverse events dee med related or possibly related to the research, we will 
complete and submit an Other Event repo rt through Insight/eIRB as soon as possible and within 5 
working days / 7 calendar days (as defi ned in the March 2014 Reporting Unanticipated Problems 
Including Adverse Events report) . At Continu ing Review, we will provide a summary of all 
unanticipated problems as per PHRC protocol. Finally, if there are unanticipated problems, especially if 
serious or recurrent, the PI ([CONTACT_102974]) will amend the protocol if it is deemed necessary to protect 
the safety and welfare of the participants.   
 
--------------  
References  
1. Roger VL, Go AS, Lloyd -Jones DM, et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics —2011 update: a report from 
the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2011;123(4):e18 -e209.  
2. Yeo KK, Fam JM, Lim ST, et al. Comparison of clinical characteristics, [ADDRESS_948415] -elevation myocardi al infarction. EuroIntervention. 2012;8:295.  
3. Chow CK, Jolly S, Rao -Melacini P, Fox KA, Anand SS, Yusuf S. Association of diet, exercise, and smoking 
modification with risk of early cardiovascular events after acute coronary syndromes. Circulation. 
2010; 121(6):750 -758.  
4. Gehi AK, Ali S, Na B, Whooley MA. Self -reported medication adherence and cardiovascular events in 
patients with stable coronary heart disease: the heart and soul study. Archives of Internal Medicine. 
2007;167(16):1798 -1803.  
5. Sud A, Kli ne-Rogers EM, Eagle KA, et al. Adherence to medications by [CONTACT_698422]. Annals of Pharmacotherapy. 2005;39(11):1792 -1797.  
6. Steptoe A, Wright C, Kunz -Ebrecht SR, Iliffe S. Dispositional optimism and health behaviour in 
communit y-dwelling older people: associations with healthy ageing. British Journal of Health Psychology. 
2006;11(Pt 1):71 -84. 
7. Rasmussen HN, Scheier MF, Greenhouse JB. Optimism and physical health: a meta -analytic review. 
Annals of Behavioral Medicine. 2009;37:2 39-256.  
8. Tindle HA, Chang YF, Kuller LH, et al. Optimism, cynical hostility, and incident coronary heart disease and 
mortality in the Women's Health Initiative. Circulation. 2009;120(8):656 -662.  
9. Seligman M, Steen T, Park N, Peterson C. Positive psycho logy progress: empi[INVESTIGATOR_49479]. American Psychologist. 2005;60(5):410 -421.  
10. Sin NL, Lyubomirsky S. Enhancing well -being and alleviating depressive symptoms with positive 
psychology interventions: a practice -friendly meta -analysis. Journal of Clinical Psychology. 
2009;65(5):467 -487.  
11. Sin NL, Lyubomirsky S. Enhancing well -being and alleviating depressive symptoms with positive 
psychology interventions: a practice -friendly meta -analysis. J Clin Psychol. 2009;65(5):[ADDRESS_948416] and self -
affirmation to facilitate healthy behaviors in patients with cardiopulmonary diseases. Contemp Clin 
Trials. 2007;28:748 -762.  
13. Huffman JC. Development  of a positive psychology intervention for patients with acute cardiovascular 
disease. Psychosomatic medicine. 2011;6(2):e14.  
14. Mehl R, Conner T. Handbook of research methods for studying daily life. [LOCATION_001]: Guilford Press; 2012.  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_698392] —April 16, 2019  
 
13 
 15. Proudfoot J, Parker G, Hadzi Pavlovic D, Manicavasagar V, Adler E, Whitton A. Community attitudes to 
the appropriation of mobile phones for monitoring and managing depression, anxiety, and stress. 
Journal of medical Internet research. 2010;12(5):e64.  
16. Olff M. Mobile mental health: a challenging research agenda. European journal of psychotraumatology. 
2015;6:[ZIP_CODE].  
17. Price M, Yuen EK, Goetter EM, et al. mHealth: a mechanism to deliver more accessible, more effective 
mental health care. Clinical psycholo gy & psychotherapy. 2014;21(5):[ADDRESS_948417] data for the world bgrablod, 
http://www.itu.int/ en/ITU -D/Statistics/Documents/statistics/2015/ITU_Key_2005 -2015_ICT_data.xls  U. 
19. Versluis A VB, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_75753] P, van der Ploeg MM, Brosschot JF. Changing mental health and positive 
psychological well -being using ecological momentary interventions: a systema tic review and meta -
analysis. J Med Internet Res 2016; 18(6):e152.  
20. Chow CK, Redfern J, Hillis GS, et al. Effect of Lifestyle -Focused Text Messaging on Risk Factor 
Modification in Patients With Coronary Heart Disease: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA. 
2015;314(12):1255 -1263.  
21. Huffman JC, Albanese AM, Campbell KA, Beach SR, Millstein RA, Mastromauro CA, Healy BC, Chung WJ, 
Januzzi JL, Collins LM, Park ER. The Positive Emotions after Acute Coronary Events (PEACE) behavioral 
health intervention: A facto rial design study. Abstract presented at Harvard Psychiatry Day, [LOCATION_011] MA, 
March 11, 2016 (paper under review as of July 2016).  
22. Huffman JC, Mastromauro CA, Sowden GL, Fricchione GL, Healy BC, Januzzi JL. Impact of a depression 
care management program for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_114695]. Circulation: Cardiovascular Quality and 
Outcomes. 2011;4(2):198 -205.  
23. Huffman JC, Mastromauro CA, Beach SR, et al. Collaborative care for depression and anxiety disorders in 
patients with recent cardiac events. JAMA In ternal Medicine. 2014;174(6):[ADDRESS_948418] universal definition of myocardial infarction. Journal of the 
American College of Cardiology. 2012;60(16):[ADDRESS_948419] on restenosis in 
patients with unstable angina pectoris (a SIRIUS substudy). Am J Cardiol. 2007;99(8):1044 -1050.  
26. Huffman JC, Beach SR, Suarez L, et al. Design and baseline data from the Management of Sadness  and 
Anxiety in Cardiology (MOSAIC) randomized controlled trial. Contemporary Clinical Trials. 
2013;36(2):488 -501.  
27. Callahan CM, Unverzagt FW, Hui SL, Perkins AJ, Hendrie HC. Six -item screener to identify cognitive 
impairment among potential subjects fo r clinical research. Medical Care. 2002;40(9):771 -781.  
28. Amazon Web Services.  Amazon DynamoDB Features.  Accessed at: 
https://aws.amazon.com/dynamodb/features/ , September 12, 2018.  
29. Amazon Web  Services. Cloud computing in healthcare.  https://aws.amazon.com/health/ . Accessed 
September 20, 2018.  
30. Twilio. Programmable SMS built for developers.  Accessed at:  https://www.twilio.com/sms , August 21, 
2018.  
31. Sallis R. Developi[INVESTIGATOR_698408]: exercise as the fifth vital sign. British journal 
of sports medicine. 2011;45(6):[ADDRESS_948420], Sherbourne CD. Adherence t o cancer regimens: implications for treating the 
older patient. Oncology (Williston Park, NY). 1992;6([ADDRESS_948421]):50 -57. 
33. Idler EL, Benyamini Y. Self -rated health and mortality: a review of twenty -seven community studies. 
Journal of health and social behav ior. 1997;38(1):21 -37. 
34. Alonso J, Permanyer -Miralda G, Cascant P, Brotons C, Prieto L, Soler -Soler J. Measuring functional status 
of chronic coronary patients. Reliability, validity and responsiveness to clinical change of the reduced 
version of the Duk e Activity Status Index (DASI). European Heart Journal. 1997;18(3):[ADDRESS_948422] and physical activity —April 16, 2019  
 
14 
 35. Ellis JJ, Eagle KA, Kline -Rogers EM, Erickson SR. Perceived work performance of patients who 
experienced an acute coronary syndrome event. Cardiology. 2005;104(3):120 -126.  
36. Grodin JL, Hammadah M, Fan Y, Hazen SL, Tang WH. Prognostic value of estimating functional capacity 
with the use of the Duke Activity Status Index in stable patients with chronic heart failure. Journal of 
cardiac failure. 2015;21(1):44 -50. 
37. Tang WH, Top ol EJ, Fan Y, et al. Prognostic value of estimated functional capacity incremental to cardiac 
biomarkers in stable cardiac patients. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014;3(5):e000960.  
38. Wessel TR, Arant CB, Olson MB, et al. Relationship of physical fitness vs body mas s index with coronary 
artery disease and cardiovascular events in women. Journal of the American Medical Association. 
2004;292(10):1179 -1187.  
 