 
A Novel Neuromonitoring Guided Cognitive 
Intervention for Targeted Enhancement of Working 
Memory 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
October 26, 2021 
 
1. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  
a. Brief Summary 
The purpose of the study is to develop a cognitive training method  
that is short, effective and engaging.  
b. Objectives  
We hope to learn how NIRS -based neurofeedback enhance the e ffectiveness of cognitive 
training.  
c. Rationale for Research in Humans  
The purpose of this study is to examine how human subjects can control  their cognitive 
functions using real -time neurofeedback.  
2. STUDY PROCEDURES  
a. Procedures  
Trained students and staff will screen, consent, enroll, assess, and  monitor  participants 
through every step of the process.  
 
Neuroimaging includes functional MRI, anatomical MRI, and NIRS. Participant’s 
physiological responses including heart rate and breathing rate, may be measured inside 
and/or outside of an MRI scan. This may  require a belt around the chest or abdomen (to 
measure respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516]), a pulse oximeter to be worn on the finger. Wearable or standalone eye-tracking  devices may be used to track participant's eye movement pattern during  the 
training. Particpant's head movement will  be recorded during NIRS  measurements using 
an accelerometer in order to improve the quality of  neurofeedback.  
 VR googles may be used for presenting computerized tasks and/or  training.  
October 26, 2021  Page 2 of 9  
Demographic data will be collected including education level,  ethnici ty, socioeconomic 
status and occupational history. Neuropsychological  testing  includes measures of IQ, 
executive functioning, memory, language  processing  and visual -motor integration. We 
will also include the Tanner staging  assessment - which is a self report scale of physical 
development to assess where the child is in terms of puberty.  Psychiatric assessment will 
also be done to assess for current and  previous emotional and behavioral problems.  
 
Participants will undergo the following procedures:  
 1) Sc reening: Potential subjects will be screened via telephone interview  (see attached 
Screen document) or email questionnaire (see eScreen). The screening will involve only 
questions relevant to this study including  certain demographic information, medical and 
developmental history to estab lish eligibility status.  
 
2) Consent: All eligible participants will undergo informed consent  procedures.  
 3) Neuropsychological Assessment: All participants will be administered a battery of 
standardized neuropsychological tests as stated above.  
 
4) NIRS and MRI measurements: Participants will undergo functional  near- infrared 
spectroscopy (NIRS) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)  measurements. No 
injections or other invasive procedures will be  utilized. NIRS and MRI will be used to 
provide subjects with real -time feedback  about  their brain activity during cognitive 
training as well as to measure the participants' brain activity.  
 5) Intervention: All participants will either undergo cognitive  training  with 
neurofeedback via  NIRS or be waitlisted. Participants will have 50% chance to undergo  
the cognitive training with  neurofeedback; those in the waitlist group have the option to 
receive complimentary cognitive  training with neurofeedback after completion of the 
study.  
b. Procedure Risks  
Neuropsychological assessment is a very low risk procedure and  represents the only 
objective, valid and reliable method for  accurately measuring cognitive function in 
humans.  Neuropsychological  assessment represents the standard of care for diagnosing  
cognitive  impairments in children and adults.  
 Neuroimaging assessments using magnetic resonance imaging scans and NIRS are the 
most accurate and non -invasive, low -risk methods for  determining neurobiological 
function in humans. Near -Infrared Spectroscopy has the additional benefit of not 
requiring the  subject  to endure loud noises or confined space for any period of time.  This 
study will not employ any invasive neuroimaging techniques such as  inject ion of contrast 
agents. MRI scans and NIRS measurements represent the only existing methods for 
obtaining accurate, in  vivo measurements of the human brain.  
c. Use of Deception in the Study  

October 26, 2021  Page 3 of 9 N/A 
d. Use of Audio and Video Recordings  
Video recording will occur. We will archive the data on the CIBSR  server, which is 
housed in the CIBSR facility in the Department of  Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences. 
We will occasionally use images or  footage in scientific presentations, but in such 
instances all identifying information will be eliminated or occluded. In such 
presentations, the recordings will be used to demonstrate the nature  of the task and of our 
study procedure. The recordings will remain on the CIBSR secure server in arch ived 
form. 
e. Alternative Procedures or Courses of Treatment  
N/A 
f. Will it be possible to continue the more (most) appropriate therapy for the 
participant(s) after the conclusion of the study?  
N/A There are no treatments involved.  
g. Study Endpoint(s)  
N/A There are no treatments involved . 
3. BACKGROUND  
a. Past Experimental and/or Clinical Findings  
Cognitive training is an emergent approach for interrogating brain systems and 
mechanisms (such as neuroplasticity) that are associated  with certain cognitive skills and 
the practice of cognitive  skills. Cognitive training promotes several neuroplastic 
mechanisms in the brain and has been shown to improve cognitive functioning in  healthy  
individuals. While the mechanism underlying these plasticity- related  changes in th e 
brain is still unclear, it is speculated that cognitive  training enhances individual’s 
cognitive reserve (i.e. brain’s ability  to perform cognitive tasks) by [CONTACT_445677] a more efficient utilization of brain networks.  
 
The main goal of cognitive training is to boost a specific  cognitive  ability/brain 
mechanism by [CONTACT_18120] a set of cognitive training paradigms that target a specific 
cognitive function. I n order for  the cognitive training to be effective, individuals are 
usually asked  to perform a set of cognitive training paradigms for a long period of  time (1 
to 6 months, 10 to 300 hours). The question that we arise  here is whether we can make a 
more eff icient cognitive training program  that is short and effective. This will be realized 
by [CONTACT_284156] a  training program that assures subjects will use the targeted brain  regions 
during the training.  
b. Findings from Past Animal Experiments 
Other groups have shown that cognitive training enhances brain a ctivity in animals.  
4. DEVICES  USED IN THE STUDY  
October 26, 2021  Page 4 of 9 a. Investigational Devices (Including Commercial Devices Used Off -Label) 
Investigational  Device 1  
Name:  [CONTACT_445681]:  Some of the RF imaging coils, imaging software and other devices used to 
conduct scans at the Lucas Center and CNI (Stanford Center for Cognitive 
and Neurobiological Imaging) are not approved by [CONTACT_1622].  
Significant Risk? (Y/N)  No 
Rationale for Non -Significant Risk  The customized equipment does not currently exist in the market, hence 
our characterization of it as investigational. However, it has been tested 
for safety by [CONTACT_445678].  
Investigational  Device 2  
Name:  W-NIRS  
Description:  An investigational, custom -built NIRS  system that is wearable/portable 
and more  cost-effective than commercially  available NIRS systems. The 
engineering collaborator moved from Stanford to  Vanderbilt and the y 
keep providing with next iterations of the device. Vanderbilt  will not be 
involved in our study and  they will not receive data collected at  Stanford.  
Significant Risk? (Y/N)  No 
Rationale for Non -Significant Risk  There is no known risk associated with functional NIRS.  The LED 
sources used in the system operate under  IEC/ANSI st andards. Theses 
LEDs expose participants to much less light compared with commercially 
available  laser -based NIRS systems.  
 
b. IDE-Exempt Devices  
IND-Exempt Device 1  
Name:  [CONTACT_445682] -4000 (Hitachi)  
Description:  NIRS technology uses specific wavelengths of light, introduced at the 
scalp, to enable the noninvasive measurement of c hanges in the relative 
ratios of deoxygenated hemoglobin (deoxy-Hb) and oxygenated 
hemoglobin (oxy -Hb) in the capi[INVESTIGATOR_445673].   
IND-Exempt Device 2  
Name:  [CONTACT_445683] (NIRx Medical Technologies ) 
Description:  NIRS technology uses specific wavelengths of light, introduced at the 
scalp, to enable the noninvasive measurement of changes in the relative 
ratios of deoxygenated hemoglobin (deoxy-Hb) and oxygenated 
hemoglobin (oxy -Hb) in the capi[INVESTIGATOR_445673].   
IND-Exempt Device 3 
Name:  [CONTACT_445682] 2.0 (SMI)  
Description:  SMI Eye Tracking Glasses 2 Wireless (SMI ETG 2w) are a glasses -type 
eye tracker with full wireless control and live annotations. Instant calibra tionless setup and 4+hrs mobile operation with the SMI ETG 2w 
smart recorder ensure outstanding productivity for mobile eye tracking 
research.   
IND-Exempt Device 4 
Name:  [CONTACT_445684] (HT C) 
Description:  Commercially available VR Goggles and related cameras for presenting 
the computerized exercises/games in an immersive VR environment.   
IND-Exempt Device 5 
Name:  [CONTACT_445685]:  Commercially available VR Goggles and related cameras for presenting 
the computerized exercises/games in an immersive VR environment.   
IND-Exempt Device 6 
Name:  [CONTACT_445686] ( NIRx Medical Technologies ) 
Description:  NIRS technology uses specific wavelengths of light, introduced at the 
scalp, to enable the noninvasive measurement of changes in the relative ratios of deoxygenated hemoglobin (deoxy-Hb) and oxygenated 
hemoglobin (oxy -Hb) in the capi[INVESTIGATOR_445673].   
October 26, 2021  Page 5 of 9  
5. PARTICIPANT POPULATION  
a. Planned Enrollment  
This research study is looking for 160 participants with ADHD.  
b. Age, Gender, and Ethnic Background 
Participants (males and females) ages [ADDRESS_566847] the 
rights of these minors, including  following well -established protocols for parental 
consent and assent.  
d. Rationale for Exclusion of Certain Populations  
N/A 
e. Stanford Populations  
Laboratory personnel and students may be subjects in pi[INVESTIGATOR_445674].  
f. Healthy Volunteers  
Participants will be children with ADHD.  
 
Parents and subjects will be asked to notify research staff immediately if they encounter 
any problems and participation can be discontinued at any time. . 
g. Recruitment Details  
Subjects will be identified using established recruitment measures used at the Center for Interdisciplinary Brain Sciences Research. These procedures include advertising online, 
including on ResearchMatch, or in local newspapers and posting notices in public places. 
These procedures also include email messages to email lists and to potential participants. 
h. Eligibility Criteria  
i. Inclusion Criter ia 
Meeting diagnosti c criteria for ADHD, determined by a BRIEF Working Memory 
score >=65. Age range: 7 years - 11 years.  
ii. Exclusion Criteria  
October 26, 2021  Page 6 of 9 Presence of contraindications for MRI (orthodontia, vascular stents, metallic ear 
tubes, metal implants, pregnancy, etc) for those participating in an MRI scan. History 
of serious medical, neurological or psychiatric illness (except disorders of interest) or 
sensory impairment.  
i. Screening Procedures  
Potential participants will be screened for inclusion and exclusion criteria via an online and/or telephone screen (see attachments). Only information necessary to ascertain 
eligibility will be requested. Because the screening will include q uestions involving 
medical history to determine diagnosis of ADHD, a limited waiver of authorization will be requested in section 15.  
j. Participation in Multiple Protocols  
The screening questionnaire will include a question regarding other study participation. Participants can be enrolled in other studies that do not involve medications or substances 
which would affect the MRI and NIRS measurements or cognitive interventions. Each 
case will be evaluated individually prior to enrollment. 
k. Payments to Participants  
Participants will be provided w ith up to $300 for their participation. If the participant 
does not complete the all study visits, he will be reimbursed $20/hr for the portion of the study that he has completed.  
l. Costs to Participants 
None  
m. Planned Duration of the Study  
The study will require approximately 5 years to complete. Total time per participant: 10 -
15 minutes for screening, 30 minutes for consent, 30-60 minutes for each neuropsychological testing session, 1 hour for  NIRS (or MRI) measurements. Analysis of 
participant data will require approximately [ADDRESS_566848].  
ii. Investigational drugs 
N/A 
October 26, 2021  Page 7 of 9 iii. Commercially available drugs, biologics, reagents or chemicals  
N/A 
iv. Procedures 
Neuropsychological testing 
NIRS measurements  
MRI measurements  
Eye Tracking  
VR-based cognitive assessments and training  
v. Radioisotopes/radiation-producing machines  
N/A 
vi. Physical well-being  
See notes about MRI and NIRS risks above. Otherwise N/A  
vii. Psych ological  well-being 
There is a slight risk that subjects will experience some anxiety, frustration or distress during the neuropsychological testing and/or NIRS/MRI procedures. However, this will 
be minimized by [CONTACT_445679]. Any anxiety or distress will be 
brief and transient and the neuropsychological testing will involve rest breaks to 
minimize discomfort and the NIRS/MRI measurements can be stopped at any time by [CONTACT_2416]. 
viii. Economic well -being  
There is no known risk to subjects' economic well being.  
ix. Social  well-being 
There is no known risk to subjects' social well being.  
x. Overall evaluation of risk  
Low 
b. International Research  Risk Procedures  
N/A 
c. Procedures to Minimize Risk  
The consent form for all participants lists all possible risks of the procedures. Research 
staff administering neuropsychological testing will be trained in clinical assessment 
including how to recognize and deal appropriately with participant distress. Frequent rest 
breaks will be included in the assessment protocol to hel p minimize frustration, fatigue 
and distress.  
 
Research staff are well trained to use protocols and procedures to ensure that the NIRS 
and MRI equipments are used correctly to minimize any risks. Subjects are instructed that 
October 26, 2021  Page 8 of 9 they can alert the operator that they need help or need to ask a question by [CONTACT_445680]/MRI scan.  
 All data handling procedures will follow HIPAA regulations. For each participant, a 
folder is created that contains signed consent forms, screening questionnaires and 
NIRS/MRI logs. This folder serves as a permanent archive of original participant data. 
Extensive precautions are taken to insure the privacy of participants and the 
confidentiality of data. Specifically, participant identity is numerically coded on all pages within data  folders and in the database. All data folders are kept in confidential, lo cked 
files at Stanford University. Only personnel directly associated with the grant have access to these files. Data are entered into the computerized database using only the participant 
ID number, and without any identifying information that would compromise the identity 
and confidentiality of the  participants. Participant background information including 
name, gender, ethnicity, and relevant medical and personal information is kept in a centralized, restricted access location. This data handling system is efficient, guarantees 
confidentiality, and serves research needs expeditiously.  
d. Study Conclusion 
At the discretion of the protocol director, subjects may be taken out of this study due to unanticipated circumstances. Some possible reasons for withdrawing a subject from the 
study include: The subject fails to follow instructions or perform s pecified tasks; The 
investigator decides that continuation could be harmful to the subject; The subject requires treatment not allowed in the study; The study is cancelled; Other administrative 
reasons.    
 
The experiment will terminate when all study procedures have been completed or when 
the participant withdraws from the study.  Any Adverse Event will be immediately 
reported to the Stanford University IRB and the Psychiatry department chair.  
e. Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMC)  
i. Data and/or events subject to review 
- Consent forms  
- AEs, SAEs, S[LOCATION_003]Rs  
- Protocol Deviations  
- Progress toward Study endpoint(s)  
 
All AEs will be reported to DSMB, NIMH, and/or IRB in compliance with NIMH 
Reportable Events Policy Schedule.  
ii. Person(s) responsible for Data and Safety Monitoring 
[CONTACT_445687] (PI) and an independent monitoring committee  
iii. Scope and Composition o f Monitoring Board 
The p roposed data and safety monitoring board consists of senior and junior faculty 
with extensive experience in human subject research and/or clinical practice from 
October 26, [ADDRESS_566849] any stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_445675].  
vi. DSMB Reporting  
To PI [INVESTIGATOR_445676]. Will the Protocol Director be the only monitoring entity? (Y/N)  
No 
viii. Will a board, committee, or safety monitor be responsible for study monitoring? (Y/N)  
Yes 
f. Risks to Special Po pulations  
N/A 
7. BENEFITS  
Participants may benefit indirectly through the information learned in their  cognitive and  
behavioral evaluation as well as cognitive training . We believe this  research will aid in the 
development of an efficient cognitive training method that can be ultimately used for  
boosting/restoring cognitive functions in individuals with impaired executive functioning.  
8. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
All participant information and specimens are handle d in compliance with the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)  and privacy policies of Stanford University, Stanford 
Health Care, and Stanford Children’s Health.  