 June 14, 2017  
STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
Dietary Composition and Energy Expenditure during Weight -Loss Maintenance 
 
 
 
Date  – June 14, 2017   
 
Principal Investigators – David S. Ludwig, MD, PhD –  Cara B. Ebbeling, PhD  
 June 14, [ADDRESS_293749] and Others  .........................................  13 
3.D. Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained .....................................................................................  13 
3.E. Data and Safety Monitoring (DSM) Plan ..........................................................................................   13 
3.F. Trial Registration (ClinicalTrials.gov Requirements)  ........................................................................  [ADDRESS_293750] difficulty maintaining 
weight loss over the long term. One explanation for the poor long- term outcome of weight loss diets relates to 
behavior, in that motivation to adhere to restrictive regimens typi[INVESTIGATOR_241942]. An alternative explanation is that weight loss elicits biological adaptations –  specifically a decline in energy expenditure and 
an increase in hunger – that promote weight regain. We recently examined this question in a cross -over 
feeding study with 21 overweight or obese young adults and found that total energy expenditure (TEE)  during 
weight -loss maintenance was 325 kcal/d greater on a low -carbohydrate diet compared to a conventional low -
fat (high -carbohydrate) diet ( Ebbeling et al. JAMA 2012).  A moderate- carbohydrate diet elicited intermediate 
effects on TEE. We also found potentially important dietary effects on insulin resistance, cortisol ex cretion, and 
other chronic disease risk factors. The purpose of the proposed study is to follow -up our initial findings using a 
parallel design, so that each of three test diet s can be examined for 20 weeks, substantially extending duration 
compared to the 4-week periods in our cross -over study. Following 12±2% weight loss on a standard run -in 
diet, 150 adults  (aged 18 to 65 years)  will be randomly assigned to one of three weight -loss maintenance diets 
controlled for protein content  (20% of energy)  and vary ing widely in dietary carbohydrate- to-fat ratio:  High-
carbohydrate (HI, 60% of energy from carbohydrate, 20% fat), Moderate - carbohydrate (MOD , 40% 
carbohydrate, 40% fat), Low-carbohydrate (LO, 20% carbohydrate, 60% fat). During the weight -loss 
maintenance phase, energy intake will be adjusted to prevent changes in body weight. The primary outcome  
will be change in total energy expenditure ( indirect calorimetry using stable isotopes) through  20 weeks. 
Secondary outcomes wi ll include resting energy expenditure (indirect calorimetry  using respi[INVESTIGATOR_241943]), physical activity (accelerometry), measures of insulin resistance and skeletal muscle work  
efficiency , components of the metabolic syndrome, and hormonal and metabolic measures that might inform 
an understanding of physiological mechanisms. In addition, we will test for effect modification by [CONTACT_241949], including insulin secretion. We also will assess weight change during a 2- week  ad libitum  feeding 
phase, as an objective measure of dietary effects on hunger. The study will be performed in collaboration with 
a local university  and high school , providing a novel and feasible method for feeding subjects in dining halls 
and monitoring  compliance.  
ii 
 June 14, [ADDRESS_293751] deviation of mean ΔTEE under one diet from the other two  ............  11 
 
iii 
 June 14, 2017  
1. SPECIFIC AIMS  
 
We recently examined the effects of dietary composition on energy metabolism in a cross -over f eeding study 
with 21 overweight or obese young adults  and found that t otal energy expenditure (TEE)  during w eight -loss 
maintenance was 3 25 kcal per day greater with a low -carbohydrate diet  compared to a conventional low -fat 
(high -carbohydrate) diet.1 A moderate -carbohydrate diet elicited intermediate effects on TEE.  We also found 
potentially important dietary effects on insulin resistance, leptin sensitivity, cortisol excretion, and cardiovascular disease ( CVD)  risk factors. However, the short duration of each test diet, only [ADDRESS_293752] diet s can be examined for 20 weeks, and a sample size of N=[ADDRESS_293753] 
power.  
 
Specific Aim #1:  To evaluate the effect s of 3 diets varying widely in carbohydrate- to-fat ratio ( high -
carbohydrate, moderate- carbohydrate, low-carbohydrate) on energy expenditure during weight -loss 
maintenance.  
Hypotheses   
1a Total energy expenditure during weight -loss maintenance will differ am ong test diets  through [ADDRESS_293754] diets through 20 
weeks.  
Primary outcome : total energy expenditure (assessed by [CONTACT_241950] e isotopes ). 
Secondary outcomes : resting energy expenditure ( assessed by [CONTACT_241951][INVESTIGATOR_241943]),  physical activity ( assessed by [CONTACT_91152] ). 
Potential effect modification: including insulin secretion (insulin at [ADDRESS_293755] 75- g oral glucose 
load).   
 
Specific Aim #2:  To evaluate the effects of [ADDRESS_293756] diets through 20 
weeks.  
Secondary outcomes : insulin sensitivity  and insulin secretion ( assessed by [CONTACT_241952] -sampled oral glucose 
tolerance test  (OGTT ), urine C-peptide , glycemic control (HgA1c , 1,5 -anhydroglucitol ), lipid profile s (total 
cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol , LDL-cholesterol , non-HDL cholesterol , triglycerides),  lipoprotein particle 
subfraction distribution,  coagulopathy (PAI -1, fibrinogen), inflammatory mediators ( hsCRP, IL-6), blood 
pressure , sleep (assessed by [CONTACT_91152]) . 
 
Specific Aim #3:  To evaluate physiological mechanisms potentially relating dietary carbohydrate- to-fat 
ratio  to metabolism and risk for chronic disease – including CVD, type 2 diabetes, and cancer.   
Hypothes is 
3 Differences among diets i n measures of  skeletal muscle work  efficiency , body composition, insulin 
sensitivity and secretion,  anabolic and catabolic hormones, gut microbiome, and metabolomics profiles 
will provide additional physiological insights into the effects of dietary composition on health outcomes 
during weight -loss maintenance.  
Secondary outcomes : skeletal muscle work  efficiency  (assessed by  [CONTACT_32328]), body composition  
(assessed by a multi -component  model ), insulin sensitivity and secretion,  urine C -peptide,  thyroid functions 
(thyroxine [T4], free T4, rT3, TSH), growth hormone action (IGF -1, IGF binding proteins), reproductive 
hormones (LH, FSH, testosterone [total and free] , estradiol), stress hormones (24 -hour urinary cortisol  and 
catecholamines),  leptin, adiponectin (total, high- molecular weight), ghrelin,  gut microbiome  (saved stool 
samples) , metabolomics profiles (saved serum samples) . 
 
1 
 June 14, 2017  
Specific Aim #4: To evaluate the effects of 3 diets varying widely  in carbohydrate- to-fat ratio on 
voluntary food intake and body weight  during  an ad libitum  feeding  phase.   
Hypothesis  
4 Body weight  will differ among diets during the 2-week ad libitum  feeding phase ( implemented after the 
test phase of weight -loss maintenance) .  
Secondary outcome: body weight.  
 
2. RESEARCH STRATEGY   
2.A. Overview. This RCT will comprise three phases, as shown in Figure 1, using a feeding protocol. The 
purpose of the run-in phase is to obtain baseline measurements and restrict energy  intake to achieve a 12± 2% 
decrease in body weight , and then stabilize body weight . The purpose of the test phase is to compare the 
metabolic effects of high− , moderate −, and low −carbohydrate diets during weight -loss maintena nce (SA#1, 
SA#2) a nd the physiological mechanisms underlying these effects (SA#3) . The purpose of the ad libitum 
feeding phase is to evaluate the effects of these diets on body weight (SA#4) . Food will be prepared in 
kitchens at FSU and Assabet Valley Regional Technical High School (AV) by [CONTACT_241953] . Subjects  (n=150)  will be FSU students , 
faculty , and staff who are regularly on campus  (FSU or AV) , along with members of the greater MetroWest 
community who are able  to come to campus  for meals . We anticipate that many of the enrolled students will  
live in residence halls . We will ask all subjects , regardless of residence status,  to consume meals under 
observation by [CONTACT_241954] . Compliance with this request for campus -based participants will be 
defined as consumption of no fewer than two meals per day (Monday –  Friday) in the dining hall to 
accommodate school, work, and family schedules.  Compliance with this request for community -based 
participants will be defined as consumption of no less  than one meal per  day (Monday –  Friday) in the dining 
hall to accommodate work and family schedules. Other meals and the evening snack will be packaged for 
take-out. The primary outcome is TEE through  20 weeks.  
 
 
2 
 June 14, 2017  
 
2.B. Timeline.  The proposed 4 -year study consists of an initial start -up period; recruitment, preparation, and 
implementation periods for each of 3  cohort s; and  a data management and analysis period ( Table 1). During 
the start -up period, we will develop the diets, establish protocols,  prepare a manual of operations, hire and 
train staff, and begin recruitment. For each cohort, recruitment will occur  during the spring semester prior to 
study participation. We will prepare for the cohort during the summer so that participation can begin in the fall 
semester and continue through the next spring semester. The data management and analysis period will be  
devoted to preparation of data sets and program s for statistical analysis .  
Table 1.  Study timeline.  
 Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun 
Year 1 (2013 -2014)              
Study Start -up             
Recruitment, Cohort 1                n=25         
Year 2 (2014-2015)                          
 Preparation, Cohort 1              
 Implementation, Cohort 1                     
Recruitment, Cohort 2             n=65         
Year 3 (2015-2016)              
Preparation, Cohort 2              
Implementation, Cohort 2                     
Recruitment, Cohort 3         n=60     
Year 4  (2016 -2017)              
Preparation, Cohort [ADDRESS_293757] s Wi-Fi scales (Within gs Inc., Cambridge, MA ). Subjects will weigh themselves 
daily during the study. The scales will be linked to a patient monitoring Website called SetPoint Health (SPH). 
We will use the SPH Website (https://fs2.sphpro.com ) to remote ly monitor subject
 body weight  and to track 
self-reported food intake (amount of provided food consumed) . We  will contact [CONTACT_166085], if 
necessary, to promote compliance.  
2.C. Diets.  Energy content and macronutrient composition of the run- in and test diets are summarized in Table 
2. For all diets, total energy intake will be distributed across meals and snacks throughout the day: 2 2.5% for 
breakfast, 32.5 % for lunch, 32.5%  for dinner,  and 12. 5% for an evening snack. The macronutrient composition 
of every meal will reflect the composition of each respective diet. We will instruct subjects to consume their 
meals at regularly scheduled times and not skip meals. Concerning ad libitum  consumption of non- caloric 
beverages  and artificial sweeteners , we will advise participants to have no more than 3 servings  per day  of 
each of the following items:  beverages containing artificial sweeteners, caffeinated beverages , packets of 
artificial sw eeteners, and gum and mints containing artificial sweeteners . We will ask subjects not to consume 
alcoholic beverages (and exclude heavy consumers and binge drinkers from the study, 2. D). To ensure 
micronutrient adequacy and minimize the influence of micronutrient differences among test diets, we will give 
each subject a daily multi -vitamin and mineral supplement throughout the study.  
[ADDRESS_293758] Phase  
Energy 
Restriction High (HI) 
Carb ohydrate  
Diet Moderate  (MOD ) 
Carb ohydrate  
Diet Low (LO) 
Carb ohydrate  
Diet 
Energy  (% of weight maintenance needs)  60 100 100 100 
Carbohydrate  (% of total energy)  45 60 40 20 
Fat  (% of total energy)  30 20 40 60 
Protein  (% of total energy)  25 20  20 20 
Sodium  (mg) − 3000  3000  3000  
Added Sugar  (% of total carbohydrate)  − 15 15 15 
 (% of total energy)  − 9 6 3 
Saturated Fat  (% of total fat)  − 35 35 35 
 (% of total energy)  − 7 14 21 
Fiber  (g) − [ADDRESS_293759] of REE, estimated using a regression equation,4,5 and a physical activity factor  of 1.5.6 
To avoid overestimation of energy needs, we will use measured body weight adjusted for ideal body weight 
(IBW) as the weight variable (([measured weight – IBW] × 0.25) + IBW) in the regression equation. To estimate 
IBW, we will determine the sex - and height -specific midpoints of weight ranges for medium frames, using 
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company Height -Weight Tables.  Energy intake will be restricted to 60% of 
calculated needs to promote weight loss, without feeding any subject <1200 kcal/d. The goal is to reduce body 
weight to a level that is 12±2% below baseline weight. The amount of food provided will be adjusted, if 
necessary, to achieve the  target weight  loss over [ADDRESS_293760] 
phase. Energy needs for weight stabilization will be estimated based on recent rate of weight loss (energy 
intake during weight loss [kcal/day ] + (rate of weight loss [kg/day ] × 7700 kcal/kg] ). Although the conversion 
factor of 7700 kcal/kg is not appropriate for  calculations of long -term, energy balance,7,8 this calcul ation is 
useful for estimating energy needs over the short term.  Added sugars will contribute no more than 15% of total 
carbohydrate. S aturated fat will comprise approximately 35 % of total fat , with the remainder distributed 
between mono-  and polyunsaturat ed fat . Targets for sodium, added sugar, fat, and fiber will be achieved based 
on daily intakes averaged over one week.  We will use many of the  same foods , in differing amounts, across 
diets and systematically replace foods  when necessary  to achieve the specified macronutrient targets . As 
such, the diets will reflect gradients in amounts of foods rich in carbohydrate and fat.  The quantity of non-
starchy vegetables will be approximately the same across diets.  High-Carbohydrate  Diet. This diet will contain 
60% of total energy from carbohydrate and 20% from fat,  based on contemporary public health 
recommendations9 that emphasize sources of carbohydrate such as whole  grains, vegetables,  fruits, legumes, 
and low-fat dairy products . Moderat e-Carbohydrate Diet. This diet will contain 40% of total energy from 
carbohydrate and 40% from fat . These targets will be achieved by [CONTACT_241955]- carbohydrate , decreasing  fruits , adding foods containing fat (e.g., nuts, seeds, sauces, spreads , 
toppi[INVESTIGATOR_14839] ), decreasing amounts of legumes  when necessary , and including some higher fat dairy products . 
Low-Carbohydrate Diet.  This diet will contain 20% of total energy from carbohydrate and 60% from fat . 
Relative to the moderate -carbohydrate diet, t hese targets will be achieved by [CONTACT_241956] s, removing 
some fruits , adding more foods containing  fat, further decreasing  amounts of legumes , and increasing some 
higher fat dairy products .  
Adjusting Energy Intake  to Achieve Weight Stability.  During the test phase of the study, we will monitor 
body weight using the SetPoint Health Website and adjust energy intake to achieve weight stability, defined as 
weight change of no more than ±2 kg. We will measure weight every day and regress weight (g) on time 
(days). A slope of ≥[ADDRESS_293761] -weight loss anchor weight and the slope of the 
regression line , no more frequently than every 2 weeks.  
4 
 June 14, 2017  
2.D. Subjects. We will recruit adults who meet the criteria outlined in Table 3. These criteria will be assessed 
during visits with potential subjects and in communication with primary care providers .  
Table 3. Inclusion and exclusion c riteria . 
Inclusion criteria  Exclusion c riteria  
• Aged 18 to 65 years  (FSU students, faculty, 
staff, community members ). 
• BMI ≥ 2 5 kg/m2. 
• Weight ≤ 350 lbs (1 59 kg). 
• Medical clearance from a primary care provider.  
• Plans to matriculate as a student at FSU or  work  
on campus throughout the academic year of 
enrollment in the study.  
• Willingness and ability to come to campus throughout the academic year of enrollment in the study.  
• Willingness to eat and drink only the foods and beverages on the study menus  during 
participation, with no food allergies or aversions . 
• Willingness to eat in the dining hall . 
• Willingness to abstain from consuming alcohol 
during participation.  
• Academic and social clearance from the FSU 
Office of Enrollment and Student Development  
(student subjects) or Criminal Offender Record 
Information (CORI) check and Sex Offender 
Registry Information (SORI) check  (community -
based subjects) . • Change in body weight exceeding ±10% during prior year.  
• Recent adherence to a special diet . 
• Recent adherence to a vigorous physical activity regimen (as 
indicated by [CONTACT_103822] a varsity sport) . 
• Chronic use of any medication or dietary supplement that could 
affect study outcomes.  
• Current smoking ([ADDRESS_293762] week).  
• Heavy baseline alcohol consumption (> 10 drinks/week) or history of binge drinking (≥ [ADDRESS_293763] 6 months).  
• Physician diagnosis of a major medical illnes s or eating disorder.  
• Abnormal laboratory screening tests ( hemoglobin A1c , TSH, 
hematocrit <30% , BUN, c reatinine, ALT >200% of normal upper 
limit). 
• Plans for a vacation during the study that would preclude 
adherence to prescribed diet s. 
Additional exclusion  criteria for f emales  
• Irregular menstrual cycles . 
• Any change in birth control medication during the 3 months prior to enrollment.   
• Pregnancy during the 6  months prior to enrollment.  
Lactation during the 3 months prior to enrollment . 
 Rationale for Criteria . Students  (FSU) , faculty, staff, and community members  aged 18 to 65 who are 
regularly on campus  (FSU and AV) , and members of the greater MetroWest community who are willing and 
able to come to campus will be eligible to participate in the study . We specify a BMI inclusion criterion starting 
at 25 kg/m2, which corresponds to the conventional definition of overweight.  We will not enroll anybody who 
weighs more than 350 lbs (1 59 kg), corresponding to the upper limit for some assessment equipment . Rece nt 
and substantial weight change, adherence to a special diet  or vigorous physical activity regimen, use of 
medications or dietary supplements, smoking,  or excessive alcohol consumption will be exclusionary due to 
possible confounding of study outcomes . Abnormal laboratory tests, indicative of unrecognized illness,  also will 
be exclusionary.  We will use a cut -point corresponding to 200% of the normal upper limit for ALT given the 
high prevalence of fatty liver among obese individuals and recognizing that the first line of treatment for fatty 
liver typi[INVESTIGATOR_241944].10 Vacation plans over winter or spring break that involve i nternational travel or that 
do not permit adequate and safe food storage and food preparation are exclusionary given the high likelihood 
of noncompliance for over a week. Additional exclusion criteria for females are specified to diminish 
confounding from unpredictable changes in reproductive hormone cycles .  
Recruitment and Screening.  We will recruit ethnically and racially diverse subjects by [CONTACT_241957], 
newspaper advertisements, and Internet announcements at FSU  and AV  during the spring semester. When an 
individual responds, we will implement a multi -step screening and enrollment process: 1) telephone 
conversation, 2) informational visit, 3) medical clearance from a primary care provider,  4) screening visit , and 
5) informed consent visit . During the telephone conversation, we will provide an overview of t he study and ask 
preliminary screening questions. If the individual is provisionally eligible based on the telephone conversation, 
we will invite him/her to an informational visit during which we will explain the study protocol as outlined in the 
consent f orm and further assess provisional eligibility. If the individual remains provisionally eligible, we will 
request medical clearance in writing from his/her primary care provider (with verbal and written permission from the provisionally eligible subject to make this request ). We will request academic and social clearance in 
writing from the FSU Office of Enrollment and Student Development for all provisionally eligible student 
5 
 June 14, 2017  
subjects . We will obtain permission to do CORI/SORI background checks for provisionally eligible subjects for  
community -based partic ipants , in compliance with University and School District policies. Any potential 
subjects for whom we cannot  obtain medical , academic, or social clearance will be ineligible for the study . At 
the s creening visit, we will obtain a blood sample for analysis of  hemoglobin A1c, TSH, hematocrit, BUN, 
creatinine, ALT.  Subjects will be recruited in three  cohorts at the rate presented in Table 1. 
Retention . We designed the study to promote retention as follows . 1) We will bring research operations to 
the FSU campus where adults spanning a wide age range attend classes or work  during the academic year . 
We also will recruit community -based participants who work or live in metropolitan and residential areas  in 
close proximity to FSU  or AV. 2) The study protocol includes  a run- in phase to promote weight  loss, prior to 
randomization. Individuals who los e weight at the expected rate will have  demonstrated their capacity to 
comply with arguably the most rigorous  phase of our study . 3) We will collaborat e with professional chefs to 
develop a cycle  menu of palatable meals and snacks corresponding to specifications of the run -in and test 
diets ( Table 2). 4) We carefully  consider ed logistical feasibility when selecti ng outcomes and determining 
assessment schedules . 5) The study provides benefits to subjects, including weight loss .  
Compensation . We will offer compensation  for time and any inconvenience imposed by [CONTACT_241958].  All enrolled participants will receive a study stipend totaling $3,280 . 
Resident student participants , who are required to purchase a full meal plan according to FSU policies,  will 
also receive up to $3,[ADDRESS_293764] of the meal plan. Non- resident student s, faculty , staff, 
and community -based participants will receive study meals and snacks  valued at up to $3,220 . Thus, the  
maximum total value of compensation is $6,500 , dispersed at eight specific time points during the study, as 
presented in Table 4. This plan is not considered coercive given the rigors of study participation, but 
encourages  study completion.  
Table 4.  Reimbursement and Compensation Schedule.  
    Resident FSU Students  Non-Resident FSU Students, 
Faculty, Staff , Community 
members  
Week  Phase or Event  Monthly  
Meal Plan *  Monthly 
Stipend *  Additional 
Stipend † Monthly  
Stipend *  Additional  
Stipend † 
  Reimbursement  Compensation  Compensation  
-9 Run-In  $400  $100  $200  $100  $200  
-4 Run-In  $400  $120    $[ADDRESS_293765]  $400  $120  $300  $120  $[ADDRESS_293766]  $400  $130    $[ADDRESS_293767]  $400  $140  $400  $140  $[ADDRESS_293768]  $400  $150    $150    
21 Ad libitum  $400  $170  $400  $170  $400  
  Completion  $420  $550  $500  $550  $500  
* Monthly payments for participating in the intervention. Each payment includes reimbursement  for the meal plan (resident students 
only) and a stipend as compensation for time and effort to adhere to the study diets.  
† Additional stipend as compensation  for time and effort required for measurement of study outcomes at specified time points.  
2.E. Random ization. A blocked randomization design will be employed to ensure close balance among the 
three diet arms at any point in the study. The randomization will be stratified by [CONTACT_241959] (FSU,  AV), sex, 
ethnicity -race (non- Hispanic white, other),  age (18– 39.9 years and 40.0 –65.9 years), and BMI (overweight : 
25.0− 29.9 kg/m2, obese: ≥30.0 kg/m2) to ensure balance at the completion of enrollment within every 
subcategory, regardless of  size. Enrollment logs, one for each stratum, will be prepared with a numerical 
sequence of identifiers. Diet assignment lists, identical to the enrollment logs except for the addition of a 
randomly chosen diet, will be prepared under supervision of the study bio statistician , using specialized 
software developed for that purpose. The diet assignments will be randomly permuted within blocks of 3, 6, 
and 9, and the blocks themselves will be randomly permuted. Each upcoming assignment will thus be 
unpredictable, preventing any deliberate or inadvertent bias on the part of those conducting enrollment. The 
assignment list will be kept in the private custody of a clinical researc h specialist who, confirming adequate 
weight loss during the run- in phase, will relay the diet assignment of each subject to intervention staff.  All staff 
involved in assessing study outcomes  and conducting analyses of biospecimens  will be masked to diet 
assignments.  
[ADDRESS_293769]-Weight  Loss Midpoint  End Feeding Phase  
-14 to -12 weeks  -2 to 0 weeks  8 to 10 weeks  18 to 20 weeks  21 to 22 weeks  
Study Outcomes Corresponding to each SA      
SA#1       
TEE  X X X X  
REE  X X X X  
Physical activity  X X X X  
SA#2       
Insulin s ensitivity  and secretion  (OGTT)  * X X X X  
Urine C -peptide  X X  X  
Glycemic control (HgA1c , 1,5-anhydroglucitol ) X X X X  
Lipid profile s (TC, HDL -C, LDL -C, non -HDL-C, TG) X X X X  
Lipoprotein particle subfraction distribution  X X X X  
Coagulopathy (PAI -1, Fibrinogen)  X X X X  
Inflamma tory mediators  (C-reactive protein, IL -6) X X X X  
      
Blood pressure  X X X X  
Sleep  X X X X  
SA#3       
Skeletal muscle work efficiency (cycle ergometry)  X X  X  
Body composition ( multi -component  model ) * X X  X  
Insulin sensitivity and secretion (OGTT) * X X X X  
Urine C -peptide  X X  X  
Thyroid functions ( T4, Free T4, rT3, TSH)  X X  X  
Growth hormone action (IGF -1, IGF -BPs)  X X  X  
Reproductive hormones (LH, FSH, E2 , total and free 
TST) X X  X  
Stress hormones (urine cortisol, urine 
catecholamines)  X X  X  
Leptin, adiponectin (total, high -molecular weight), 
ghrelin  X X X X  
Gut microbiome  X X  X  
Serum metabolomics profile  X X X X  
SA#[ADDRESS_293770] Modifiers       
Sex X     
Race  X     
Ethnicity  X     
Body weight , BMI  * X X X X  
Body composition ( multi -component  model ) * X X  X  
Insulin sensitivity and secretion (OGTT) * X X X X  
Obesity -related genes  X     
Palatability of Test Diet     X  
Abbreviations . OGTT, oral glucose tolerance test; HgA1c, Hemoglobin A1c; TC, total cholesterol; HDL -C, high -density lipoprotein cholesterol; LDL -C, 
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; non- HDL-C, non- high- density lipoprotein cholesterol; TG, triglycerides; PAI -1, plasminogen activator inhibitor -1; IL-
6, interleukin- 6; T4, thyroxine; rT3, Reverse triiodothyronine; TSH , thyroid stimulating hormone;  LH, luteinizing  hormone; FSH, f ollicle stimulating 
hormone; TST, testosterone; E2, estradiol.  
 
* Variables derived from the OGTT and body composition assessment will be assessed as outcomes and as covariates.  
 
Energy Expenditure (SA #1) . Macronutrient c omposition could affect energy expenditure directly because 
metabolic pathways vary in energetic efficiency or  indirectly through hormonal responses that regulate 
metabolic pathways.11,[ADDRESS_293771]-weight  loss (week 0),  and during intervals ending at weeks [ADDRESS_293772] phase. We will assess 
REE and physical activity at the same time points.   
7 
 June 14, 2017  
Total energy expenditure (with doubly labeled water, DLW) . Following oral administration of the stable 
isotopes of hydrogen (2H) and oxygen- 18 (18O) in the form of 2H218O, the 18O is eliminated from the body as 
both carbon dioxide and water, and the 2H is excreted exclusively as water. The difference between the urinary 
elimination rates of 18O and 2H provides a measure of carbon dioxide production (rCO 2) used to estimate TEE. 
The dose of DLW will be a mixed cocktail containing 0.086 g of 2H2O at 99.98 atom % 2H and 1. 38 g of 10% 
18O per kg body weight. Urine samples will be collected before each dose and at regular intervals over 14 days 
after each dose.  Isotopic enrichment data will be obtained by [CONTACT_134276] -isotope- ratio mass spectrometry,19 converted 
to  atom percent , and used to model rCO 2. TEE will be calculated from rCO 2 using the equation of Ravussin et 
al,20 with the food quotient (FQ) as an estimate of respi[INVESTIGATOR_38952] (RQ).[ADDRESS_293773] . The 
calorimetry system will  be calibrated according to the manufacturer’s specifications  (TrueOne 2400, Parvo 
Medics, Sandy, UT) . Room temperature will be maintained at a constant level , and lighting and noise will be 
minimized to limit variability in measurements. The subject will be awake and reclining . Oxygen consumption 
and carbon dioxide production will be measured for [ADDRESS_293774] 20 minutes.  We will assess REE on two separate mornings.  If the 
two measurements are not within 10%, we will obtain a third measuremen t. We will take the average of the two 
closest measurements as the best estimate of REE . Physical a ctivity . While measures of TEE and REE can be 
used in combination to obtain an estimate of physical activity level,23 this approach does not provide 
information regarding quality of physical activity. Thus, we will assess physical activity with an accelerometer (ASP- BTLE, Actigraph LLC, Pensacola, FL). The device measures and sums the magnitude of accelerations, 
and data are expressed as intensity counts per minute. We will ask each subject to wear the accelerometer on the right hip for 7 days per assessment, except when sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007], bathing, or participating in water activities. Daily 
physical activity will be quantified as total counts and minutes of moderate - to vigorous -intensity physical 
activity, consistent with published methodology.
24 We also will ask participants to complete daily physical 
activity diaries, recording each activity performed during 15 -minute time blocks throughout each day the 
monitor was worn 25. We will use information from the diaries to confirm the times that the physical activity 
monitors were worn during waking hours 26. 
Chronic Disease Risk Factors (SA#2) . The effect of macronutrient composition on conventional CVD risk 
remains a topic of controversy, confounded in part by [CONTACT_17977] -induced differences in body weight. The proposed 
study offers a special opportunity to examine the effects of different macronutrient  diets on novel , as well as 
conventional,  CVD risk facto rs, independent of body weight and taking into account diet -related effects on 
relative adiposity. We will assess chronic disease risk factors following an overnight fast at baseline, post-
weight loss (week 0),  and at weeks [ADDRESS_293775] 75 -gram dose  of dextrose (TrutolTM, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, 
MA). Blood for determination of plasma glucose and serum insulin will be obtained by [CONTACT_241960] −10, −5, 0, 10, 20, 30, 60, 90, and 120 minutes relative to the start time of dextrose consumption. 
The hand and forearm will be placed in a war ming box set at 50 -55°C (~120-130°F) to arterialize venous blood 
samples. Using plasma glucose and serum insulin data, we will calculate indexes of peripheral and hepatic 
insulin sensitivity as described by [CONTACT_241961] -Ghani et al.[ADDRESS_293776] 30 minutes following the 
dose of dextrose will be used to assess insulin secretion. We will measure C -peptide in a 24- hour urine sample 
as an indicator of daily insulin secretion 28. We will assess HbA1c in a fasting blood sample as an integrated 
measure of mean glycemia over approximately three months 29 and 1,5- anhydroglucitol ( 1,5-AG) as marker of 
diet-induced glucose excursions 30. Lipid  profiles, coagulopathy, inflammation, leptin, and adiponectin.  Serum 
total cholesterol, HDL- cholesterol, and triglycerides will be measured using standardized assays. Serum LDL 
cholesterol will be measured using direct enzymatic/spectrophotometric methodology.  Non-HDL-cholesterol 
will be calcul ated as an indicator of atherogenic particle concentration.31,32 Lipoprotein particle subfraction 
distribution will be assessed by [CONTACT_81790] (NMR) spectroscopy (Liposcience Inc., Raleigh, 
NC) to further evaluate metabolic risk. Plasma PAI -1 and fibrinogen will be measured as indicators of 
coagulopathy, and levels of high -sensitivity C- reactive protein and IL -6 will be measured as markers of chronic 
inflammation. Blood pressure.  Consistent with current guidelines,33 we will measure blood pressure by 
[CONTACT_241962] a sphygmomanometer ( System 5, American Diagnostic Corporation,  
Hauppauge, [LOCATION_001] ), 3 times at each assessment visit.  Sleep. We will measure sleep using the same 
accelerometer used to assess physical activity ( ASP- BTLE, Actigraph LLC, Pensacola,  FL). We will ask each 
subject to wear the accelerometer on the non -dominant  wrist for 7 nights per assessment . We will quantify total 
sleep time, sleep onset latency, wake after sleep onset, and sleep efficiency.  We also will ask subjects to 
complete a daily sleep diary.  
8 
 June 14, 2017  
Physiological Mechanisms (SA#3) . We will measure skeletal muscle work efficiency  and other outcomes 
at baseline,  post-weight  loss (week 0) , and week  [ADDRESS_293777] or respond to 
energy balance.  We will assess t hyroid f unctions ( Thyroxine [T4] , free T4, r T3, TSH), growth hormone action 
(IGF-1, IGF -BP3), reproductive hormones (LH, FSH, testosterone, estradiol), stress hormones (24 -hour urinary 
cortisol, 24 -hour urinary catecholamines ), leptin, adiponectin (total, high molecular weight), and ghrelin  using 
standard  procedures.  Body composition.  We will assess body composition using a multi- component  model  with 
measures of total body volume from air displacement plethysmography (ADP, BodPod, Cosmed [LOCATION_003] Inc., 
Concord, CA), total body water by [CONTACT_241963], and bone mineral content by [CONTACT_751] -energy x -ray 
absorptiometry (DXA, Horizon A, Hologic Inc., Bedford, MA) . We will instruct participants to fast for at least [ADDRESS_293778] stool samples to assess 
changes in gut flora previously associated with metabolic changes and obesity in humans  (e.g., relative 
abundance of Firmicutes  and Bacteroidetes species ) following published methods.34-36 This assessment will be 
done only for subjects who “opt  in” to collect stool samples.  Metabolomics profiles. We will save serum 
samples and use liquid chromatography  tandem  mass  spectrometry  for metabolomics profiling. Such a 
platform has proven to be highly informative of pathophysiologic  status, provi ding for ex ample quantitative  
data regarding  disease developmen t before  the appearance  of conventional  disease markers .37-39  
Weight Change (SA#4) . We will allow voluntary food intake during the [ADDRESS_293779] subjects as follows: “Have your meals according to your usual 
schedule. Eat as much or as little of each meal as you like until you are satisfied. If you finish your meal and 
are hungry before the next meal, eat something of your own choosing until you are satisfied. If you do not finish 
your meal, do not eat anything before the next meal. We ask that you eat until satisfied, but avoid overeating to 
the point of feeling too full. Do not drink alcohol during the free feeding phase.” Body weight.  Subjects will 
weigh themselves daily , using Wi -Fi scales  linked to the SetPoint Health Website , through out the ad libitum  
feeding phase  so that we can assess weight change.  
Covariates and Effect Modifiers. Variables that will be included as covariates or effect modifiers in 
statistical analyses are listed in Table 6.  Demographic data.  At baseline, we will collect self -report data with 
regard to sex, race, and ethnicity.  Body weight and composition.  We will measure body weight  at the time of 
each study assessment  using an electronic scale and body composition using a multi -component  model, as 
described above at the time points denoted in Table 6. Insulin sensitivity and secretion. We will conduct an 
OGTT, as described above at the time points denoted in Table 6. Obesity -related genes . The effects of diet on 
study outcomes may be modified by [CONTACT_139447] -related genes. For participants who “opt in,” w e will isolate and 
save buffy coat from blood samples for extracting DNA . Genetic studies may include, but not be limited to, 
candidate gene analysis and whole genome/exome sequencing.  We have particular interest in amylase gene 
copy number 40.  Palatability of Test Diet . We will measure perceived palatability  (tastiness)  of the test diets 
using a 10- cm Visual Analog Scale (VAS).   
2.G. Data Management . We will follow clinical data management best practices. Essential data management 
activities will include design and development of case report forms (CRFs); design, development, and 
maintenance of the data management system; and preparation of datasets.  
Case Report Forms.  We will develop customized CRFs to capture data required to test our hypotheses , 
with particular attention to minimiz ing data entry errors and ensur ing efficient , consistent, and unambiguous 
data abstraction from source documents. The design will include simple introductions for each section, obvious 
skip patterns, and standard coding and formatting conventions. We will write a standard operating procedure 
describing how to complete each CRF ( question -by-question guide). A clinical research s pecialist will complete 
a critical review of all CRFs prior to pre- testing to evaluate the form for programmability. Staff then will pre -test 
CRFs to evaluate the logic, wording, and general construction.  Pre-testing also will include evaluation of overall 
feasibility of the data collection plan and procedures.  The principal investigators and the study biostatistician 
will approve the final set of CRFs prior to database programm ing. 
9 
 June 14, 2017  
Data Management System . We will use the Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) software 
application to collect and manage data. REDCap is designed to comply with HIPAA regulations. The research 
team will work collaboratively with personnel in the C linical Research Center at [LOCATION_011] Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_241945] a study -specific data dictionary for use in implement ing the REDCap system.   The web-based system  
offers an intuitive interface for data  entry, with  real time validation rules (automa ted data type and range 
checks) . Data  entered in REDCap will b e stored in a  password- protected database hosted on a secure, 
firewall -protected server.  Only authorized users will have  access to data in the REDCap system.  All users will 
undergo REDCap training by [CONTACT_241964].  The system is  supported by [CONTACT_241965], with nightly  back -up of data.   
Preparation of Datasets.  Data for primary and secondary outcomes, process measures, and covariates 
will be recorded on CRFs and entered into the REDCap data management system.  The study biostatistician 
will oversee transfer of data to statistical analysis programs.  
 2.H. Statistical Methods . We will follow the a priori  analysis plan described below, with a sample size of 
N=[ADDRESS_293780] power.  
 Analysis Plan.  The primary outcome measure of the trial is total energy expenditure (TEE)  per kg body 
weight , measured at four time points: baseline (pre- weight loss) , week 0 (post -weight loss, pre -randomization),  
week 10 (midway through the test phase), and week 20 ( end of test phase) . The primary  null hypothesis  is that 
the time course of TEE between week 0, week 10, and week 20 will be the same for all  three diets :  high (HI), 
moderate (MOD), or low (LO)  carbohydrate -to-fat ratio. An alternative hypothesis is detailed below.  
The analytic framework for addressing both primary and secondary hypotheses  will be repeated- measures 
analysis  of variance (ANOVA),  with the outcomes of interest as dependent variables and study arm (diet : HI, 
MOD, LO) as a three- level independent variable.  Although c ovariates are theoretically balanced by [CONTACT_241966], we will adjust the ANOVA for a number of baseline and 
time-varying covariates in order to reduce residual variance and improve our power to detect diet differences.  
These include the outcome of interest at baseline (pre- weight loss); change in body weight over the test phase 
(weeks 0– 20); demographic characteristics (sex, race, ethnicity, age); baseline anthropometric measures 
(body -mass index, percentage lean m ass, percentage weight lost pre- randomization); and design variables 
(study site, cohort, enrollment wave).  We will employ an autoregressive covariance structure to account for 
potentially diminishing within- subject correlation over time.  To minimize the influence of extreme values on the 
fitted model, we will employ an outlier -deletion algorithm equivalent to robust regression with iterative 
reweighting.[ADDRESS_293781] who developed a disqualifying medical condition (hypothyroidism, as 
documented by 2 elevated TSH values) post -randomization will be excluded from the primary analysis.  
To test the primary hypothesis , we will construct appropriate contrast s from parameters of the fitted 
repeated -measures model (namely, adjusted mean TEE  at week 10 and week 20 –  adjusted mean TEE 
atweek 0, HI vs. MOD vs. LO), and test their significance with a 2- df F- test and critical p -value 0.05.  If the 
overall null hypot hesis is rejected, pairwise contrasts between study arms will be constructed and compared to 
zero. The principle of closed testing42 dictates that in this special situation of three groups, compared pairwise 
only if the overall null hypothesis is rejected, we may make each pairwise comparison with a critical p- value of 
0.05 and still preserve the Type I error rate for the f amily of four comparisons at 5%.  
In secondary analyses , we will test each covariate for effect modification (covariate × diet interaction) and, 
if significant effects are found, construct separate estimates for the diet effects by [CONTACT_241967] . Additi onal 
secondary analyses will be conducted with insulin- 30 (from baseline OGTT) as a covariate. The use of time-
varying covariates will allow us to test hypotheses of mediation by [CONTACT_17977] -related behavior and other process 
measures, secondary to the primary hy pothesis of intervention efficacy.  We will also perform a “per protocol” 
analysis, excluding any subject whose weight was out of target range at the 20- week time point  (defined as 
weight change of no more than ±2 kg relative to the PWL anchor weight) , or w ho began taking an exclusionary 
medication.  
Secondary outcomes  will be assessed similarly to TEE . Measures with skewed distribution will be log-
transformed for analysis and re- transformed to natural units for reporting, with changes and differences (∆log) 
expressed as ratios (exp(∆log)) or percentages (100% × ( ratio–1)). 
In all analyses , except “per protocol,” we will follow the intention- to-treat principle, ascribing the randomly 
assigned diet to each subject regardless of degree of compliance. To test for  biased dropout, we will compare 
baseline characteristics of completers with those of non -completers, using standard procedures ( Student t, 
Wilcoxon rank-sum, Fisher exact  test). We will use inverse probability weighting to compensate for missing 
[ADDRESS_293782] alternative hypothesis that 
one diet will differ from the other two in mean 20- week change.  
Derived from non-central F distribution assuming 45 
completers per diet arm, 5% Type I error, and standard 
deviation as observed in pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].[ADDRESS_293783]  
Total energy expenditure (TEE)  237 kcal/d  
Resting energy expenditure (REE)  89 kcal/d  
Moderate -vigorous physical activity  8 min/d  
Leptin*  19% 
Urinary cortisol*  31% 
C-reactive protein*  68% 
Peripheral insulin sensitivity index† 0.57 
* Log -transformed for analysis, detectable effect expressed as 
percentage difference.  
† Derived from oral glucose tolerance test:  rate of decline of 
serum glucose between 60 and 120 minutes (mg/dL/hr) 
divided by [CONTACT_5586]-weighted mean serum insulin (μIU/mL) 
between baseline and 120 minutes.  
 data, constructing a logistic model for missingness based on the baseline characteristics that differed between 
completers and non- completers. SAS software (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC) will be used for all computations . 
Sample Size, Power, and Detectable Effects.  For comparability with pi[INVESTIGATOR_202592], our 
sample- size calculation is formulated in terms of changes in TEE uncorrected for body weight between week [ADDRESS_293784] phase compared to week 0 (post-weight loss) , will be the same in all three 
diet arms. To estimate our power to detect deviations from this null hypothesis, we use the power 
characteristics of a sim ple one- factor, three -level ANOVA using covariate -adjusted residual variance estimates 
taken from our pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299]. As a conservative, minimal -impact alternative, pi[INVESTIGATOR_241946] 2, 
we hypothesize that one of the three diets ( high carbohydrate- to-fat ratio, or HI ) will differ from the other two. 
The power of the ANOVA test to reject the null hypothesis increases with the magnitude of difference, as 
detailed in Figure 2 for three illustrative sample sizes. These curves were derived from t he non- central F 
distribution under a range of alternatives from 0 to 400 kcal/d, taking account of the parallel -group design (as 
contrasted with our pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], a 3- arm crossover design)  and assuming a standard deviation of 412 kcal/d for 
ΔTEE among subj ects as observed in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299]. Our proposed sample size, 45 completers per diet 
(allowing for 10% attrition from recruited sample of 50), provides 80% power to detect a difference of 237 
kcal/d, as indicated by [CONTACT_241968]. This is a smaller  effect than was discerned in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], 
where mean ΔTEE under a high -carbohydrate (low -fat) diet  differed from the average under moderate - and 
low-carbohydrate diets  by 263 kcal/d. The smaller sample size, 25 per arm, would provide only 50% power for 
that magnitude of effect, while the larger sample size, [ADDRESS_293785] detectable with 80% power only to 175 kcal/d. We thus believe our design choice to be 
optimal in terms of feasibility and statisti cal power.  
Detectable- effect figures for a variety of secondary outcomes  are tabulated in Table 6. Based on the same 
design, alternative hypothesis, and analytic strategy, each figure represents 0.[ADDRESS_293786] to study design ( 2.A), inclusion and exclusion criteria 
(2.D), recruitment and retention strategies ( 2.D), randomization ( 2.E), dietary intervention ( 2.C), and sample 
size ( 2.H). Key personnel have completed training in the protection of human subjects.  
We will send de- identified urine samples to the Baylor College of Medicine via Federal Express for gas-
isotope- ratio mass spectrometry , as part of the protocol utilizing doubly -labeled water to assess total energy 
 
Figure 2.  Power of one-way ANOVA to detect deviation of 
mean ΔTEE under one diet from the other two (inset).  Each 
curve represents a fixed sample size. Dot indicates 
detectable effect, 237 kcal/d at 80% power, with proposed 
45/arm. Curves based on non- central F distribution, 5% Type 
I error, between-subject standard deviation 412 kcal/d as in 
preliminary data . 
11 
 June 14, 2017  
expenditure ( 2.F). Each sample will contain only a study -specific subject identification (ID) number and 
information regarding the date and time of sample collection to ensure integrity of the data collection process.  
Serum, plasma, and other urine samples collected for assessment of chronic disease risk factors and 
physiological mechanisms will be labeled in the same manner and then triaged to appropriate laboratories or a 
biorepository.  
We will use the Web- based platform of SPH to track subject weight  and food intake . SPH  will require 
access to the following Protected Health In formation (PHI):  study ID number, subject name, telephone number, 
and email address. Subjects will interact with the SPH Web site via computer or through a free smart phone 
application or “ app;” therefore  subject IP addresses and other electronic identifiers may be known and stored.  
A Business Associate Agreement and a Web Site Agreement will be executed between SPH and the Clinical 
Trials Business Office at BCH. A copy of SPH’s HIPAA- compliant IT Data Sec urity Standards  will be filed with 
the Institutional Review Board.  
  
3.A.2. Sources of Materials. Data will be obtained directly from subjects for research purposes only, as described in 2.F. Daily weight and food intake data will be collected from subjects through the SPH Website  or 
smartphone “app .” During the screening process, we will obtain permission from subjects, in writing, to request 
medical clearance from their primary care providers. We will also obtain permission from subjects, in writing, to 
register them with SPH, and to obtain their preference for re ceiving study reminders (email or text message). 
Laboratory testing will be perfor med on blood, stool, and urine samples obtained at the time of the study. SPH 
will be used to collect data on subject weight and food  intake. Data will not be obtained from other sources.  
All data will be held in strict confidence such that only personnel listed i n the protocol on file with the IRB 
will have access to individually identifiable private information about the subjects. A ny publication or report 
resulting from this work will maintain the anonymity of study subjects. A study identification (ID)  assignment log 
will be the only link between subject ID  codes and identifiabl e information. The log will be kept in a password 
protected electronic file, accessible only to study staff for the purposes of enrolling and tracking subjects. 
Tracking information will be stored in a separate database that is not linked to the data manag ement system 
(2.G). All specimens and case report forms will be labeled with study ID codes, without individually identifiable 
private information.  
3.A.3. Potential Risks. The project has been designed to keep risks to the lowest level possible. All subjec ts 
will be fully screened prior to enrollment to rule- out the presence of pre- existing or complicating medical 
conditions. The dietary treatments will satisfy all nutritional requirements, and diets similar to these have been 
consumed for extended periods (i.e., > 1 year) with safety . Our low -carbohydrate diet, with ~60% of energy 
from fat, is similar to the Atkins Diet consumed by [CONTACT_241969], and less 
restrictive than the classic ketogenic diet, with 80% of energy from fat, r ecommended for chronic consumption 
in some clinical settings (e.g., epi[INVESTIGATOR_241947]).  Some inconvenience may be caused by [CONTACT_241970]. Slight pain and small bruises may be 
expected from insertion of intravenous lines for blood draws. The subject may feel lightheaded or nauseated 
with fasting prior to assessment visits and during the oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT).  Total radiation 
exposure from DXA (about 4 millirem per scan) is c onsidered small in comparison to estimated annual 
background radiation dose for the average person living in the [LOCATION_002] (300 millirem).  The SPH Web site 
satisfies HIPAA regulations for data security;  therefore the risk of loss of confidentiality is minimized to the 
fullest -possible extent . 
3.B. Adequacy of Protection Against Risks  
3.B.1. Recruitment and Informed Consent . Recruitment procedures are described in detail above ( 2.D). A 
full explanation of the study  will be provided to each subject by [CONTACT_241971]. W ritten informed consent will be obtained from each subject by [CONTACT_3462] , under the 
supervision of Drs. Ebbeling and Ludwig , who have been appropriately trained in the protection of human 
subjects. Study personnel will provide as much time as needed for each subject to review protocols and ask questions. The consent process will be performed in a private room at Framingham State University (FSU). 
Signed consent forms will be filed in a locked cabinet at BCH, and a copy will be given to the subject for future 
reference.  
3.B.2. Protection Against Risk.  We will take several steps to protect against possible risk. A physician will be 
on call 24- hour per day should any problems arise. A member of the BCH research team will be available to 
assist all subjects with  questions or issues around the use and secur ity of the SPH Website . The OGTT and all 
12 
 June 14, 2017  
blood draws will be performed by a nurse.  Adverse events will be reviewed and action will be taken as 
described below ( 3.E). Abnormal serum electrolytes have rarely occurred on carbohydrate- restricted diets, and 
we will check serum electrolytes (sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, calcium, magnesium and 
phosphate) in any subject assigned to the low-carbohydrate diet who reports potentially -related symptoms 
(e.g., unexplained muscle aches or fatigue).    
3.C.  P otential Benefits of the Proposed Research to the Subject and Others  
Benefits to the subjects include medical assessment that might identify a treatable pre -existing illness and 
substantial weight loss resulting from energy -restriction during the run- in phase. The results of DXA scans and 
blood tests will be sent to the PCP at the end of the study, when all participants have completed all of the study 
measurements.  In addition, the study will demonstrate the effects of different macronutrient  diets on 
metabolism and chronic  disease risk factors, a topic of great significance to society in general. These benefits 
are believed to considerably outweigh the risks and possible inconvenience of participating in this study.  
3.D. Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained 
The study will provide important information regarding the effects of  different macronutrient  diets,  a topic  of 
great potential significance to society in general. We believe that the benefits ( 3.C) and knowledge to be 
gained considerably outweigh t he risks and inconvenience to study subjects.  
3.E.  Data and Safety Monitoring (DSM) Plan  
The dietary interventions are modeled after popular dietary patterns, and the study does not employ 
pharmacological agents or notably invasive procedures. Thus , the DSM Plan will focus on enrollment and 
drop- out rates. However, subjects will be closely monitored by [CONTACT_241972]. Ludwig, in 
close communication with the safety officer ([CONTACT_241974] , see below). Serious adverse events will be promptly 
reported to t he IRB  at BCH . 
The frequency of data review is summarized in the Table 7. The Study Director ([CONTACT_241975])  will be 
responsible for assembling the data and producing summary reports for data review. Reports will be sent to the 
PIs (Drs. Ludwig and Ebbeling) , biostatistician  ([CONTACT_241976]), and safety officer.  
Subject Accrual, Drop -out Rate . Subject accrual rate, with careful attention to inclusion/exclusion criteria , 
will be reviewed monthly during the recruitment phases . This r eview will also assess targeted/planned 
enrollment of ethnic -racial groups to ensure divers ity.  Drop -out rate will be monitored on a monthly basis.  
Data collection . A clinical research specialist  will review all data collection forms on a monthly basis for 
completeness, accuracy, and compliance with standardized protocols. A statement reflecting the results of the 
review will be sent to the IRB as part of the annual continuing review .  
Adverse events.  All serious , unexpected, and study -related adverse events (hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], serious illness 
or disability) will be evaluated by [CONTACT_241973], under the supervision of  [CONTACT_241977],  and the safety 
officer within [ADDRESS_293787]’s 
primary care physician to ensure necessary medical or professional intervention. A case report form will be 
used to monitor adverse events. All events will be reported to the IRB and safety officer as part of the annual  
continuing review.  
 Table  7. Frequency of data review.  
Data type  Frequency of review  
Subject accrual  Monthly during recruitment  
Drop -out rate  Monthly  
Data collection  Quarterly  
Adverse events  Upon occurrence  
 
[ADDRESS_293788].  Agus  will be available as needed for consultation regarding serious and non- serious adverse 
events.  
3.F. Trial Registration (ClinicalTrials.gov Requirements)  
Drs. Ebbeling and Ludwig  will register the proposed study  in ClinicalTrials.gov prior to screening or enrolling 
any subjects.  
3.G. Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
We will enroll both males and females. The distribution of ethnic -racial groups will reflect the diversity of the 
community  at FSU. We will reach out to students, faculty, and staff  using a variety of venues  (2.D). 
14 
 June 14, 2017  
 
4. BIBLIOGRAPHY AND REFERENCES CITED  
 
1. Ebbeling CB, Swain JF, Feldman HA, et al. Effects of dietary composition on energy expenditure during 
weight -loss maintenance. JAMA. 2012;307:2627- 2634. PMID: 22735432.  
2. Institute of Medicine. Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrate, Fiber, Fat, Fatty Acids, 
Cholesterol, Protein, and Amino Acids. Washington (DC): The National Academies Press; 2002.   
3. Halton TL, Hu FB. The effects of high protein diets on thermogenesis, satiety and weight loss: a critical review. J Am Coll Nutr. 2004;23:373 -385. PMID: 15466943.  
4. Mifflin MD, St Jeor ST, Hill LA, Scott BJ, Daugherty SA, Koh YO. A new predictive equation for resting 
energy expenditure in healthy individuals. Am J Clin Nutr. 1990;51:241 -247. PMID: 2305711.  
5. Frankenfield D, Roth -Yousey L, Compher C. Comparison of predictive equations for resting metabolic 
rate in healthy nonobese and obese adults: a systematic review. J Am Diet Assoc. 2005;105:775- 789. 
PMID: 15883556.  
6. Pereira MA, FitzerGerald SJ, Gregg EW, et al. A collection of Physical Activity Questionnaires for health-related research. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1997;29:S1- 205. PMID: 9243481.  
7. Katan MB , Ludwig DS. Extra calories cause weight gain --but how much? JAMA. 2010;303:65- 66. PMID: 
20051571.  
8. Hall KD, Heymsfield SB, Kemnitz JW, Klein S, Schoeller DA, Speakman JR. Energy balance and its 
components: implications for body weight regulation. Am J C lin Nutr. 2012;95:989 -994. PMID: 22434603.  
9. U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2010. 7th Edition, Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, December 2010.  
10. York LW , Puthalapattu S, Wu GY. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and low -carbohydrate diets. Annu Rev 
Nutr. 2009;29:365 -379. PMID: 19575599.  
11. Feinman RD, Fine EJ. Thermodynamics and metabolic advantage of weight loss diets. Metab Syndr 
Relat Disord. 2003;1:209 -219. PMID: 18370664.  
12. Ludwig DS. The glycemic index: physiological mechanisms relating to obesity, diabetes, and 
cardiovascular disease. JAMA. 2002;287:2414- 2423. PMID: 11988062.  
13. Feinman RD, Fine EJ. Nonequilibrium thermodynamics and ener gy efficiency in weight loss diets. Theor 
Biol Med Model. 2007;4:27. PMID: 17663761.  
14. Scribner KB, Pawlak DB, Aubin CM, Majzoub JA, Ludwig DS. Long -term effects of dietary glycemic index 
on adiposity, energy metabolism, and physical activity in mice. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 
2008;295:E1126 -1131. PMID: 18780772.  
15. Baldwin KM, Joanisse DR, Haddad F, et al. Effects of weight loss and leptin on skeletal muscle in human 
subjects. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2011;301:R1259- 1266. PMID: 21917907.  
16. Goldsmith R, Joanisse DR, Gallagher D, et al. Effects of experimental weight perturbation on skeletal 
muscle work efficiency, fuel utilization, and biochemistry in human subjects. Am J Physiol Regul Integr 
Comp Physiol. 2010;298:R79- 88. PMID: 19889869.  
17. Rosenbaum M, Goldsmith R, Bloomfield D, et al. Low -dose leptin reverses skeletal muscle, autonomic, 
and neuroendocrine adaptations to maintenance of reduced weight. J Clin Invest. 2005;115:3579 -3586. 
PMID: 16322796.  
18. Rosenbaum M, Vandenborne K , Goldsmith R, et al. Effects of experimental weight perturbation on 
skeletal muscle work efficiency in human subjects. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 
2003;285:R183- 192. PMID: 12609816.  
19. Wong WW, Lee LS, Klein PD. Deuterium and oxygen- 18 measur ements on microliter samples of urine, 
plasma, saliva, and human milk. Am J Clin Nutr. 1987;45:905 -913. PMID: 3578092.  
20. Ravussin E, Harper IT, Rising R, Bogardus C. Energy expenditure by [CONTACT_88245]: validation in 
lean and obese subjects. Am J Physiol. 1991;261:E402- 409. PMID: 1909495.  
21. Black AE, Prentice AM, Coward WA. Use of food quotients to predict respi[INVESTIGATOR_241948] -
labelled water method of measuring energy expenditure. Hum Nutr Clin Nutr. 1986;40:381- 391. PMID: 
3771290.  
22. Weir JB. New methods for calculating metabolic rate with special reference to protein metabolism. J 
Physiol. 1949;109:1- 9. PMID: 15394301.  
23. Martin CK, Das SK, Lindblad L, et al. Effect of calorie restriction on the free- living physical activity levels 
of nonobese humans: results of three randomized trials. J Appl Physiol. 2011;110:956- 963. PMID: 
21292847.  
15 
 June 14, 2017  
24. Metzger JS, Catellier DJ, Evenson KR, Treuth MS, Rosamond WD, Siega- Riz AM. Patterns of objectively 
measured physical activity in the [LOCATION_002]. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2008;40:630- 638. PMID: 
18317384.  
25. Bouchard C, Tremblay A, Leblanc C, Lortie G, Savard R, Theriault G. A method to assess energy 
expenditure in children and adults. Am J Clin Nutr. 1983;37:461 -467. PMID: 6829488.  
26. Keadle SK, Shiroma EJ, Freedson PS, Lee IM. Impact of accelerometer data processing decisions on the 
sample size, wear time and physical activity level of a large cohort study. BMC Public Health. 
2014;14:1210. PMID: 25421941.  
27. Abdul -Ghani MA, Matsuda M, B alas B, DeFronzo RA. Muscle and liver insulin resistance indexes derived 
from the oral glucose tolerance test. Diabetes Care. 2007;30:89- 94. PMID: 17192339.  
28. Hall KD, Chen KY, Guo J, et al. Energy expenditure and body composition changes after an isocal oric 
ketogenic diet in overweight and obese men. Am J Clin Nutr. 2016;104:324- 333. PMID: 27385608.  
29. American Diabetes Association. Glycemic Targets. Diabetes Care. 2017;40:S48- S56. PMID: 27979893.  
30. Juraschek SP, Miller ER, 3rd, Appel LJ, Christenson RH, Sacks FM, Selvin E. Effects of dietary 
carbohydrate on 1,5- anhydroglucitol in a population without diabetes: results from the OmniCarb trial. 
Diabet Med. 2017. PMID: 28574153.  
31. Miller M, Ginsberg HN, Schaefer EJ. Relative atherogenicity and predicti ve value of non- high-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol for coronary heart disease. Am J Cardiol. 2008;101:1003- 1008. PMID: 18359322.  
32. Di Angelantonio E, Sarwar N, Perry P, et al. Major lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], apolipoproteins, and risk of vascular disease. JAMA. 2009;302: 1993- 2000. PMID: 19903920.  
33. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_65528], Hall JE, Appel LJ, et al. Recommendations for blood pressure measurement in humans 
and experimental animals: Part 1: blood pressure measurement in humans: a statement for professionals 
from the Subcommittee of P rofessional and Public Education of the American Heart Association Council 
on High Blood Pressure Research. Hypertension. 2005;45:142- 161. PMID: 15611362.  
34. Ley RE, Turnbaugh PJ, Klein S, Gordon JI. Microbial ecology: human gut microbes associated with 
obesity. Nature. 2006;444:1022- 1023. PMID: 17183309.  
35. Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Mahowald MA, Magrini V, Mardis ER, Gordon JI. An obesity -associated gut 
microbiome with increased capacity for energy harvest. Nature. 2006;444:1027- 1031. PMID: 17183312.  
36. Ley RE, Backhed F, Turnbaugh P, Lozupone CA, Knight RD, Gordon JI. Obesity alters gut microbial 
ecology. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005;102:[ZIP_CODE]- [ZIP_CODE]. PMID: 16033867.  
37. Christofk HR, Vander Heiden MG, Harris MH, et al. The M2 splice isoform of pyruvate ki nase is important 
for cancer metabolism and tumour growth. Nature. 2008;452:230 -233. PMID: 18337823.  
38. Lewis GD, Wei R, Liu E, et al. Metabolite profiling of blood from individuals undergoing planned myocardial infarction reveals early markers of myocardial injury. J Clin Invest. 2008;118:3503- 3512. 
PMID: 18769631.  
39. Sabatine MS, Liu E, Morrow DA, et al. Metabolomic identification of novel biomarkers of myocardial 
ischemia. Circulation. 2005;112:3868 -3875. PMID: 16344383.  
40. Rukh G, Ericson U, Andersson- Assarsson J, Orho -Melander M, Sonestedt E. Dietary starch intake 
modifies the relation between copy num ber variation in the salivary amylase gene and BMI. Am J Clin 
Nutr. 2017. PMID: 28539377.  
41. Rousseuw PJ, Leroy AM. Robust Regression and Outlier Detection. [LOCATION_001], NY: John Wiley & Sons; 
1987.  
42. Bauer P. Multiple testing in clinical trials. Stat Med.  1991;10:871- 889; discussion 889- 890. PMID: 
1831562.  
 
 
16 