Effect of Banning Menthol Flavored  Cigarettes on Smoking Cessation 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
09/26/2017 
The following is a summary of protocol changes approved by [CONTACT_534663] “ Effect of 
Banning Menthol Flavored Cigarettes on Smoking Cessation”  (#1406M51364) .   
The originally submitted and approved protocol follows this summary.   
 
 
09-18-2014  
1. Modification of the Tobacco Use History  (smoking intake) questionnaire   
Rationale: To get a more thorough understanding of subjects’ current tobacco use  
2. Distribution of transit tokens to subjects that use public transportation to study visits  
Rationale: To increase likelihood of attendance at visits for subjects who rely on public 
transportation 
 
11-25-[ADDRESS_694411] height and weight   
Rationale:  To calculate BMI in order to get a better description of the study population 
 
02-25-2016  
1. Change t o the inclusion criteria regarding  amount of cigarettes smoked per day  by 
[CONTACT_534664] 8 to 5  
Rationale: To keep  consistent with the inclusion criteria now commonly used in smoking 
studies  
 
08-16-2016  
1. Use of an information session  to disseminate study information in a group setting 
Rationale: To better utilize resources for screening potential subjects who are then more 
likely to attend a subsequent visit  
 
11-17-2016  
1. Addition of the Cigarette Evaluation Questionnaire 
Rationale: To collect data  about how smokers  perceive menthol and non- menthol 
cigarettes over time  
 
09-08-2017  
1. Increase in the number of subjects approved for enrollment from 200 to 250 
Rationale: To meet the study  goal of having  at least [ADDRESS_694412] Summary:  
With the passage of the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act, the [LOCATION_002] Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) acquired broad ability to regulate tobacco products.  One of the areas 
over which the FDA gained regulatory authority is the use of flavorants in cigarettes.  Effective 
September [ADDRESS_694413] switching.  The aim of the proposed s tudy is to 
determine the likely effects of a menthol ban on smoking cessation success.  We hypothesize that 
switching to non- menthol cigarettes before a quit attempt (as menthol smokers are likely to do in the 
event of a ban) will improve cessation success , increase motivation and self -efficacy to quit and will 
enhance support for a ban on menthol cigarettes.  In order to pursue this aim, we will enroll [ADDRESS_694414] .  
 
Significance and innovation of the proposed research:  
Background and Significance:
   
a) Introduction:  With the passage of the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act 
(FSPTCA), the [LOCATION_002] Food and Drug Administration (FDA) acquired broad ability to regulate 
tobacco products.  One of the areas over which the FDA gained regulatory authority is use of 
flavorants in cigarettes.  Effective September 2009, the FDA banned cigarettes flavored with fruit or 
candy in response to evidence that such flavoring encourages experimentation by [CONTACT_534665] ( 1).  Menthol was specific ally excluded from this ban as 
the FDA examines the role of menthol in initiation, maintenance and health risks associated with use 
of such products ( 1). 
     As required by [CONTACT_534666], the Tobacco Products Scientific Advisory Committee (TPSAC) in 
March, [ADDRESS_694415] of the use of menthol cigarettes to 
public health and provided the overall recommendation that “Removal of menthol cigarettes from the 
marketplace would benefit public health in the [LOCATION_002]”  (2).  This recommendation was based 
on data suggesting that 1) the availability of menthol cigarettes increases experimentation and regular 
smoking, 2) the availability of menthol cigarettes incr eases the likelihood of addiction and degree of 
addiction in youth smokers and 3) in African Americans the availability of menthol cigarettes results in 
lower likelihood of smoking cessation success.  It was therefore concluded that eliminating menthol 
cigarettes would result in fewer youth initiating smoking and greater success among African 
Americans in successfully quitting smoking.  Based on two models simulating menthol cigarette 
elimination, TPSAC estimated that over 17,000 excess deaths in the US population (and over 4,000 in 
the African American community) would be prevented and over 2.2 million fewer individuals would 
initiate smoking through 2020 if menthol cigarettes were not available ( 2, 3). 
b) Smoking Cessation Success from Menthol vs. Non- Menthol Cigarettes:  The TPSAC report 
reviewed [ADDRESS_694416] of smoking menthol cigarettes 
2 
 
with only two showing a better outcome among menthol smokers (the remaining found no effect).  The 
TPSAC report further narrowed these studies to evaluate those that met more rigorous criteria such 
as comparing cessation rates among racial / ethnic groups (due to possible differences in response to 
menthol), studies that had sufficient s ample sizes, that were broadly representative of a general 
population of smokers and that had appropriate criteria for cessation.  Among the eleven studies meeting the more rigorous criteria, seven found menthol to be associated with a lower level of 
cessa tion particularly among African American smokers.  This led to the conclusion that “there is 
sufficient evidence based on national surveys to show that non -white smokers, particularly African 
American, of menthol cigarettes compared to non -menthol cigarett es experience more difficulty with 
cessation.  The data in whites is mixed.”  The TPSAC report also concluded that menthol cigarette 
smoking leads to less responsiveness to medications ( 2).  Among the studies published after 
submission of the TPSAC report, one found lower quit rates among menthol users in a secondary 
analysis of a trial of naltrexone augmentation of nicotine replacement ( 4), one found that prepartum 
menthol use was associated with significantly lower odds of maintaining postpartum smoking abstinence in white women with near significance ( p=0.08) in African American women ( 5), another 
not showing an overall effect of menthol use on nicotine patch assisted short term smoking cessation rates (6) and a study finding no difference in quit rates between menthol and non- menthol users 
among those calling the Minnesota quit line (7).  The data as a whole therefore suggest that menthol 
cigarettes are detrimental to the smoking cessation attempt in African Americans (i.e. the group most 
likely to smoke menthol cigarettes).  No studies however have attempted to switch menthol smokers 
to non -menthol cigare ttes prior to a smoking cessation attempt so as to potentially improve cessation 
rates.  
c) Preliminary data - Switching menthol smokers to non- menthol cigarettes:  In an open -label study, 
31 African American menthol cigarettes smokers (smoking >  8 cigarett es per day) completed a study 
in which they were asked to abstain from smoking menthol cigarettes for a 4 week period.  Subjects were seen at a screening visit, a baseline visit and 1 week, 2 weeks and 4 weeks after stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_534654].  Subjects were given no specific instructions regarding how to cope with 
the inability to smoke menthol cigarettes (as would be the case if a menthol ban were enacted).  All 
subjects reported switching to non- menthol cigarettes with three subjects making a sm oking cessation 
attempt during the 4 week period.  At the conclusion of the study, subjects were asked to rate on a 10 point scale how difficult it was to quit menthol cigarettes (1=easy; 10=hard) and the extent to which 
they were supportive of banning menthol cigarettes (1=not supportive; 10= very supportive).  Subjects 
indicated that quitting menthol cigarettes was difficult (average score = 7.2); nonetheless motivation to 
quit increased slightly during the period (5.3 at baseline vs. 6.3 at week 4, p=0.03).  Based on a 
preliminary analysis, upon switching to non -menthol cigarettes, participants smoked slightly fewer 
cigarettes over the 4 week period (12.0 cigarettes per day during the week prior to baseline vs. 10.6 during week 4, p=0.14) and had lower ex haled carbon monoxide concentrations relative to baseline 
(16.0 ppm at baseline vs. 13.2 ppm at week 4, p=0.05).  At the conclusion of the study, subjects were 
generally supportive of banning menthol (average score = 7.1).  These data suggest that a simulated 
ban on menthol likely did not result in any greater harm than continued menthol cigarette smoking (i.e. 
smoking did not increase and motivation to quit was not reduced).  Furthermore, after experiencing a 
simulated menthol ban, menthol smokers were supportive of banning menthol cigarettes.  The pi[INVESTIGATOR_534655], as would be the case if switching to non- menthol 
cigarettes resulted in increased subsequent smoking cessation rates.  Such an outcome would be 
consistent with research studies finding that cessation rates are generally higher for African American 
non-menthol smokers relative to African American menthol smokers.    
     There is little additional data regarding the effects of switching menthol smokers to non -menthol 
cigarettes.  In a study by [CONTACT_534667], menthol smokers progressed through three study periods in 
which they smoked usual brand cigarettes for 5 days (peri od 1), followed by [CONTACT_534668] 15 days (period 2), followed by [CONTACT_534669] (period 3, i.e. non- menthol cigarettes) (8).  
Differe nces in several subjective measures were found among periods with significant increases 
3 
 
between period 2 and 3 in a rating of “worse taste”, significant decrease between periods 1 and 3 in a 
rating of “too mild” (i.e. non -menthol cigarettes were less mild) , a significant increase in bad aftertaste 
between periods [ADDRESS_694417] typi[INVESTIGATOR_534656] a few cigarettes of each kind in a laboratory setting rather than having 
smokers switch from menthol to non- menthol cigarettes for a prolonged period of time and are 
therefor e less relevant in determining if switching to non -menthol cigarettes could facilitate cessation 
(for example, references (9-12)). 
     In summary, our preliminary data suggest that if menthol cigarettes are not available, most African 
American menthol smokers would switch to non -menthol ci garettes.  Others have demonstrated that 
African Americans have more difficulty with cessation of menthol cigarettes relative to non- menthol 
cigarettes.  It is currently not known if switching African American menthol smokers to non -menthol 
cigarettes woul d result in higher subsequent smoking cessation rates than would occur if they 
attempted to quit smoking without first switching.  This gap in knowledge is of critical importance since 
demonstrating that switching menthol cigarette smokers to non -menthol c igarettes is a step towards 
successful cessation would strongly strengthen the rationale for banning menthol flavoring in 
cigarettes.  
b) Interest in banning menthol cigarettes:  Menthol cigarettes are used at particularly high rates 
among minority populati ons, adolescents and young adults.  For example although menthol smokers 
account for between 28% and 34% of all US cigarette smokers, over 80% of African American 
smokers and over 40% of adolescents smokers report menthol cigarettes as their usual choice (2).  
Among Hispanics smokers, almost 30% of males and over 40% of females report smoking menthol 
cigarettes  (2).  A ban on menthol would therefore affect many smokers but would have a 
disproportionate effect on African American smokers.   
      There is support among smokers for a menthol ban with rates of those favoring the ban higher in 
African Americans than in Caucasians.  A nationally representative cross -sectional sample contact[CONTACT_534670] 53% of whites and 68% of African Americans supported a ban on menthol cigarettes (13).  Another survey found that overall 20% supported a ban on menthol cigarettes (with 
an additional 52% not expressing a strong opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649]) with the level of support higher among Hispanics 
(36%) and African Americans (29%) ( 14).  As reported previously, our preliminary study found high 
levels of support for banning menthol cigarettes even after finding it difficult to abstain from menthol cigarettes over a four week period. We did not determine support for a smoking ban prior to menthol 
smokers switching to non- menthol cigarettes and it may be that their ability to switch to non- menthol 
cigarettes (despi[INVESTIGATOR_534657]) resulted in great er support for a menthol ban.  The 
proposed study would determine if support for a ban does in fact increase when menthol smokers 
switch to non- menthol cigarettes.   This is important data that needs to be collected in that it may 
suggest that support for a ban on menthol cigarettes would increase after its enactment.   
     Although surveys of menthol smokers suggest that a substantial number would attempt to quit if 
menthol cigarettes were unavailable (2, 14, 15), our preliminary data found that relatively few in fact 
made a cessation attempt (only 3 out of 31 subjects).  However, our study was not recruiting smokers specifically interested in cessation.  It is not known at this time if among those interested in cessation, 
switching to non- menthol cigarettes (as our preliminary data suggests menthol smokers would do in 
the event of a menthol ban) would result in greater cessation success.  Clearly, if smoking cessation success rates were to increase following a menthol ban, the health effect of such a policy would be favorable.  However, since it is not known if this would occur, research i s needed to obtain data on the 
4 
 
consequences of a ban on menthol cigarettes in order to ensure that banning menthol cigarettes 
would not undermine smoking cessation rates.   
Innovation:  Although much research has been conducted on the epi[INVESTIGATOR_534658]. 
non-menthol cigarettes, there is currently little information regarding how  smokers of menthol 
cigarettes would adjust their tobacco use if their preferred cigarettes were no longer available.  It 
seems likely that studies comparing quit rates in those who naturally prefer menthol vs. naturally 
prefer non -menthol cigarettes may underestimate the beneficial effect of menthol smokers first 
switching to non- menthol cigarettes prior to a cessation attempt since they would be switching to a 
non-preferred product and therefore perhaps more likely to quit tobacco use completely.  Obtaini ng 
data determining if this is indeed the case is critical considering that over 25% of all smokers and over 
80% of African American smokers are currently using menthol cigarettes.  Our proposed study in 
which African American menthol cigarettes smokers wi ll switch to non -menthol cigarettes prior to a 
cessation attempt is innovative in that it attempts to approximate what is likely to happen to smoking cessation success rates were the FDA to ban menthol cigarettes.   
 
Specific Aims/Study Objectives:  
In foll ow-up to our previous study demonstrating that when African American menthol smokers were 
asked to abstain from menthol cigarettes, they switched to non- menthol cigarettes, were generally 
supportive of a ban on menthol and experienced an increase in motivation to quit smoking, we are 
proposing a follow up study to determine if switching to non- menthol cigarettes is an effective first step 
to cessation.  We propose to study the following specific aim:  
Determine the impact of a ban on menthol cigarettes on sm oking cessation success rates in African 
American menthol smokers  
We hypothesize that a) switching to non -menthol cigarettes before a quit attempt will improve 
cessation success.  We further hypothesize that switching to non -menthol cigarettes prior to ce ssation 
will b) increase motivation and self -efficacy to quit and c) enhance support for a ban on menthol 
cigarettes.  We anticipate that no greater harm will result from the elimination of menthol cigarettes.   
 
Research Design and Methods:  
Sampling Plan  
Design Overview:  This study will randomize 140 African American menthol cigarette smokers to 
receive either menthol cigarettes (i.e. continue smoking menthol cigarettes) or non -menthol cigarettes 
for a four week period.  At the conclusion of the four week period, participants will attempt to quit 
smoking all cigarettes and will return for follow -up over a [ADDRESS_694418] smoking 
lapse.  
Subjects: In order to be eligible for this study, su bjects must: 1) be African American (based on self -
identification); 2) smoke primarily menthol cigarettes (greater than 80% of cigarettes smoked are 
menthol); 3) be between the ages of 18 and 64 ; 4) Smoke on average, at least 8 cigarettes per day for 
a per iod longer than 1 year and 5) express an interest in quitting smoking (rate themselves >  7 on a 
10 point scale assessing motivation to quit smoking).  Subjects will be excluded if they have: 1)  A 
current unstable medical / psychiatric condition as determined by [CONTACT_6270] -report; 2) Substance abuse 
within six months of beginning the study based on self -report; 3) Regularly use any form of nicotine or 
tobacco other than cigarettes or 4) Are pregnant or breast feeding based on self -report  (subjects will 
[ADDRESS_694419] 
feeding based on self -report).    
     As the risks associated with the study procedures are small, all medical assessm ents are based on 
self-report (except for  a urine pregnancy test at screening).  
     Recruitment will be limited to African American smokers for several reasons.  Menthol cigarette 
use is particularly prevalent in the African American community with 80% of African Americans 
reporting menthol cigarettes as their  usual choice (2).  Additionally, data suggest that greater difficulty 
in cessation of menthol cigarettes (vs. non- menthol cigarettes) may be limited t o African Americans 
(2) and therefore methods to improve cessation rates from menthol cigarettes are particularly relevant 
to this population.   Since our preliminary study suggests that few menthol smokers spontaneously 
attempt to quit when asked to abstain from menthol cigaret tes, we will only enroll those interested in 
smoking cessation.  
     African American menthol smokers will be recruited via the use of flyers and advertisements in 
local newspapers and neighborhood newspapers with a high African American readership or on 
internet resources such as Craigslist.  If additional advertisement becomes necessary, radio or 
television advertisements may be utilized.  Our research team has considerable experience recruiting smokers and we have determined which advertisement strategies are most effective.  
 
Implementation Plan  
Overview:   Each subject will attend a screening visit to determine if they are eligible for the study. If 
subjects are eligible, they will be randomized to either the ‘menthol’ or ‘non- menthol’ group.  Subjects 
will continue smoking in their normal manner for one week after the screening visit to gather 
information on their baseline smoking patterns after which they will attend a baseline visit.  Week 0 
will be considered their quit date, therefore the baseline vis it will be week - 4 (i.e. 4 weeks before their 
target quit date).  Additional visits will be scheduled at week -3, week -2 and week 0 (i.e. 1, 2 and 4 
weeks subsequent to the baseline visit).  Follow up visits will occur at weeks 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 12 and 26.  
The procedures occurring during each of these visits are described below.  
Screening Visit:  All subjects will undergo a screening visit prior to enrollment at which written 
informed consent will be obtained and eligibility will be verified.  Medical and ps ychiatric history will be 
obtained via subject report.  Baseline questionnaires assessing smoking history and nicotine 
dependence will be administered.   Exhaled carbon monoxide (CO) will be measured to confirm that 
they are smokers (CO >  8 ppm) with a Nic Check performed (with a cut -off of >5) for those who state 
that they smoke > 8 cigarettes per day but for whom CO is less than 8 ppm (e.g. they didn’t smoke 
that morning, they are coming from a smoke free work environment, etc.).  Subjects that qualify and are interested in participating will be asked to maintain a smoking diary for the duration of the study 
and will be scheduled for the baseline visit.   
Baseline and Pre- Quit Visits:   Smoking behavior subsequent to the screening visit will be determined 
as will subjects’ level of craving, withdrawal, perceived health risk, motivation and self -efficacy to quit 
smoking and support for a menthol ban.  At the baseline visit subjects will be told their randomization 
and given appropriate product (i.e. menthol or non- menthol cigarettes, based on randomization) at no 
cost to them for a total of 4 weeks.  Subjects will be given a quantity of cigarettes equivalent to 
approximately 120% of their  average daily use based on smoking diaries collected at the baseline visit  
or at pre -quit visits up to a maximum of approximately 1.[ADDRESS_694420] to r ounding.  This 
amount is chosen in case smoking increases as a result of  switching to non-  menthol and to allow for 
flexibility in scheduling subjects for subsequent visits (i.e. if a visit is delayed by [CONTACT_534671], subjects 
will still have product).  Su bjects will be asked to smoke only study product  for the 4 week period 
following the baseline visit.  They will be given no specific instructions regarding using medicinal nicotine (i.e. nicotine patch, gum) or the use of e- cigarettes but will be asked to record any instances 
[ADDRESS_694421] on cigarette cessation, we will also not encou rage their 
use.  In order to approximate what would likely occur were a menthol ban to be enacted, no specific 
instructions will be given to subjects about how to effectively quit but subjects will be encouraged to 
call the Smoking Quitline to obtain support for their cessation attempt.   At each visit, exhaled carbon 
monoxide concentrations will be measured and subjects will complete questionnaires assessing craving and withdrawal symptoms , smoking urges, perceived health risk,  and motivation to quit 
smoki ng.  Subjects will also complete a food diary to assess menthol intake from sources other than 
cigarettes. A questionnaire assessing level of support for a menthol ban will be assessed at baseline, 
the week 0 (i.e. their quit day) visit  and post -quit visit s.  At the baseline visit subjects will set a quit 
date which will be the day of their week 0 visit  (i.e. they are not to smoke after the visit) .  If subjects 
wish to quit smoking  the next day, that will also be allowed.  At each visit, subjects will retur n all 
unused study product.  In order to encourage smokers to bring back all unused product, subject payment will increase by [CONTACT_534672] (i.e. currently 
about $[ADDRESS_694422] brands)  based on how muc h they r eturn.  Since subjects will be provided 
cigarettes during the first month, they will not receive additional compensation (although parking will 
be provided).  Returned cigarettes may be provided to the same subject as part of their subsequent 
supply but will not be used for any other subjects.   
     At all visits, subjects will be asked to provide a urine sample.  The urine will be used to measure 
cotinine concentrations and may in the future also be used to measure other markers related to 
smoking menthol cigarettes (such as other nicotine metabolites, menthol concentrations, tobacco 
toxicants, etc.).  Subject s will also be asked to bring in their smoking diary in which they are to record 
cigarettes smoked as well as any other tobacco or nicoti ne products used (including e -cigarettes) .   
Follow up visits: 
Starting at Week 0 (quit date); subjects will attend follow up visits at weeks 1, 2, 4, 6, 
8, [ADDRESS_694423] smoked at all since their previous visit.  Exhaled carbon monoxide (CO) will be measured with an exhaled CO less than 8 ppm 
and a urine cotinine concentration of less than 50 ng/ml confirming abstinence (
16).  Smoking diaries 
will be used to determine time to lapse ( time from their quit attempt until any smoking occurs) and 
time to relapse ( time from their quit attempt until the first day of seven consecutive days that a 
cigarette is smoked) .   
     Subjects  will be paid $20 for the screening visit, $30 for each of the 7 visits between week 0 and 
week 12 with a $[ADDRESS_694424] complied with study related procedures.  We anticipate that it will be more difficult to  retain subjects through the 6 month 
visit; therefore subjects will receive $60 for that visit.  Since it is imperative that subjects honestly report any smoking during the study (in order to calculate time to lapse), payment during the cessation 
phase wil l not be contingent on successful abstinence.  Subjects that relapse and resume smoking 
during the study will still be eligible to continue in the study .  However, subjects that fail to follow study 
procedures ( e.g. provide urine samples , fill out questionnaires , etc. ) will be removed from the study.  
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan:  
Risks that subjects are exposed to as a result of enrolling in the study are minimal.  Subjects will be 
asked to quit smoking after a [ADDRESS_694425] until an informed consent form has been signed.  Subjects with 
serious or unstable medical conditions (based on self -report) will be excluded from the study since 
their pattern of smoking may be influenced by [CONTACT_534673].    
     To ensure confidentiality, all subjects will be assigned a study identification code to be used on all 
data collection forms except those for  which use of personal identifiers is mandatory (e.g., informed 
consent form).  Forms that link the name [CONTACT_534677] a locked cabinet or office or in an electronic file stored on password protected secure 
computer servers that meet university guidelines  for ensuring confidentiality.  Access to subject 
identifiable information will be limited to those that require this information such as study investigators 
or others who have direct contact [CONTACT_140131] (e.g., study coordinator).  
     At each visit, subjects will be asked if they are experiencing any adverse effects or difficulties with 
the study.  The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_534659] / difficulties that would warrant 
discontinuation from the study.  
Data Analysis 
Time to lapse:   The primary outcome, time to lapse following the week [ADDRESS_694426].  Since drop -outs could be more likely to lapse, we will perform two tests: 
one censoring drop -outs at the time of their last visit, and one considering drop- outs as lapsed at the 
time of their last visit.  Randomization of [ADDRESS_694427] to 
potential confounding factors, and therefore no adjustment for other factors is planned.  The same 
procedure will be used for the secondary outcome of time to relapse.  
Other outcomes:    Several continuous outcomes will be measured at baseline and subsequent time 
points, such as motivation and self -efficacy to quit, support for a menthol ban, severity of craving, 
perceived health risk, urinary cotinine concentrations, and exhaled CO.  We will first calculate the 
change in each subject’s outcome from baseline to the week [ADDRESS_694428] comparison of whether 
cessation of menthol use affects long -term nicotine use and perceptions.  Second, we will use 
analysis of variance (ANOVA) with repeated measurements to further analyze trends over all visits in 
the study period, with group, tim e, and interaction effects.  This would identify more precisely when 
particular changes took place, or if any group differences emerged around the quit attempt but 
diminished by [CONTACT_2054].  Changes in tobacco product use within groups will be 
summarized qualitatively and by [CONTACT_534674].  
Power and Sample Size:   Our primary outcome is time to lapse.  Previous studies have found that 
during a cessation attempt most participants lapse within one week, at a median of 2- 3 days after their 
quit attempt ( 35, 36).  We plan on enrolling 140  subjects randomized 1:1 with an approximately 15% 
post-randomization visit dropout rate, leaving 120  subjects with data on time to lapse.  This gives us 
over 80% power to detect a 1. 7-fold difference using a significance cutoff of 0.05.  We believe that 
such a difference would be a meaningful indicator of smoking success.  The 1. 7 fold difference in time 
to lapse is substantially smaller than is typi[INVESTIGATOR_534660].  For example, an 
analysis by [CONTACT_534675] (J Consult Clin Psychol 2006;74:276 -85) found that the median duration of 
abstinence (i.e. time to lapse) was 6 days for active nicotine patch and 2 days for placebo.  That 
would correspond to a 3 fold difference.  Directly comparable data for other interventions is not 
available, however in a study comparing placebo to five different pharmacotherapy options (i.e. 
bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_2394], nicotine lozenge, patch, bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_2394] + lozenge, patch + lozenge), the time until 50% of 
participants in the placebo group lapsed was approximately 6 days whereas the time for all other 
groups (except for nicotine lozenge) the time until 50% of participants lapsed was over 20 days 
(Japuntich et al. J Consult Clin Psychol 2011;79:34- 42), an over 3- fold difference.   Likewise, we 
[ADDRESS_694429] 80% power to detect an effect  size of 0.6 in continuous secondary outcomes (i.e. a 
difference in group means of 0.6 times the outcome’s standard deviation).  Since it is not clear what 
the smallest difference is that would be important to detect, we believe that this samples size will  be 
able to detect a meaningful difference.     
Data and Record Keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]:  
Data will be managed by [CONTACT_9137](s).  To ensure confidentiality, all subjects will be 
assigned a study identification code to be used on all data collection forms except those for which use 
of personal identifiers is mandatory (e.g., informed consent form).  Forms that link the name [CONTACT_534678] a locked cabinet or office or in an 
electronic file stored on password protected secure computer servers that meet university gguidelines  
for ensuring patient confidentiality.  Access to subject identifiable information will be limited to those 
that require this information such as study investigators or others who have direct contact [CONTACT_534676] (e.g., study coordinator).  
     Data  for this study will be entered into a REDCap database. This database is housed on secure 
servers which are operated by [CONTACT_163673]’s Information 
Systems group (AHC -IS).  Access to the database will be restricted to m embers of the study team by 
[CONTACT_125698]. Specific information regarding the database design and features can be 
found on the Clinical and Translational Science Institutes 
website, http://www.ctsi.umn.edu/research/tools -software/REDCap/  . 
 
 
References  
1. Deyton L, Sharfstein J, Hamburg M. Tobacco product regulation-- a public health approach. 
The New England journal of medicine. 2010;362:1753- 6. 
2. TPSAC. Tobacco Products Scientific Advisory Tobacco.  Menthol Cigarette and Public Health: 
Review of the Scinetific Evidence and Recommendations. 2012. 2012; Available 
from: http://www.fda.gov/AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/TobaccoProductsScientifi
cAdvisoryCommittee/ucm247605.htm . 
3. Levy DT, Pearson JL, Villanti AC, Blackman K, Vallone DM, Niaura RS, Abram s DB. Modeling 
the future effects of a menthol ban on smoking prevalence and smoking -attributable deaths in the 
[LOCATION_002]. American journal of public health. 2011;101:1236 -40. 
4. Rojewski AM, Toll BA, O'Malley SS. Menthol cigarette use predicts treatme nt outcomes of 
weight -concerned smokers. Nicotine Tob Res. 2014;16:115 -9. 
5. Reitzel LR, Nguyen N, Cao Y, Vidrine JI, Daza P, Mullen PD, Velasquez MM, Li Y, Cinciripi[INVESTIGATOR_534661], Cofta -Woerpel L, Wetter DW. Race/ethnicity moderates the effect of prepartum menthol cigarette 
use on postpartum smoking abstinence. Nicotine Tob Res. 2011;13:1305- 10. 
6. Reitzel LR, Li Y, Stewart DW, Cao Y, Wetter DW, Waters AJ, Vidrine JI. Race moderates the 
effect of menthol cigarette use on short -term smoking abstinence. Nicotine Tob Res. 2013;15:883 -9. 
7. D'Silva J, Boyle RG, Lien R, Rode P, Okuyemi KS. Cessation outcomes among treatment -
seeking menthol and nonmenthol smokers. American journal of preventive medicine. 2012;43:S242 -8. 
8. Strasser AA, Ashare RL, Kaufman M, Tang KZ, Mesaros AC, Blair IA. The effect of menthol on 
cigarette smoking behaviors, biomarkers and subjective responses. Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_129859]. 2013;22:382- 9. 
9. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_83643], Moolchan ET, Berlin I, Murty R. Sensory and physiologic effects of menthol 
and non -menthol cigarettes with differing nicotine delivery. Pharmacology, biochemistry, and 
behavior. 2002;71:55- 61. 
10. McCarthy WJ, Caskey NH, Jarvik ME, Gross TM, Rosenblatt MR, Carpenter C. Menthol vs 
nonmenthol cigarettes: effects on smoking behavior. Amer ican journal of public health. 1995;85:67 -
72. 
9 
 
11. Jarvik ME, Tashkin DP, Caskey NH, McCarthy WJ, Rosenblatt MR. Mentholated cigarettes 
decrease puff volume of smoke and increase carbon monoxide absorption. Physiology & behavior. 
1994;56:563 -70. 
12. Nil R, Battig K. Separate effects of cigarette smoke yield and smoke taste on smoking 
behavior. Psychopharmacology. 1989;99:54 -9. 
13. Winickoff JP, McMillen RC, Vallone DM, Pearson JL, Tanski SE, Dempsey JH, Cheryl H, Klein 
JD, David A. US attitudes about banning  menthol in cigarettes: results from a nationally representative 
survey. American journal of public health. 2011;101:1234- 6. 
14. Pearson JL, Abrams DB, Niaura RS, Richardson A, Vallone DM. A ban on menthol cigarettes: 
impact on public opi[INVESTIGATOR_534662]' intention to quit. American journal of public health. 
2012;102:e107 -14. 
15. O'Connor RJ, Bansal -Travers M, Carter LP, Cummings KM. What would menthol smokers do 
if menthol in cigarettes were banned? Behavioral intentions and simulated demand. Addiction 
(Abingdon, England). 2012;107:1330 -8. 
16. SRNT Subcommittee on Biochemical Verification. Biochemical verification of tobacco use and 
cessation. Nicotine Tob Res. 2002;4:149 -59. 
17. Celebucki CC, Wayne GF, Connolly GN, Pankow JF, Chang EI. Characterization of measured 
menthol in 48 U.S. cigarette sub- brands. Nicotine Tob Res. 2005;7:523 -31. 
18. Chen C, Isabelle LM, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_83643], Pankow JF. Levels of mint and wintergreen flavorants: 
smokeless tobacco products vs. confectionery products. Food Chem Toxicol. 2010;48:[ADDRESS_694430]. Mentholated cigarette smoking inhibits nicotine 
metabolism. The Journal of pharmacology and experimental therapeutics. 2004;310:[ADDRESS_694431] on cigarette smoking 
behavior. Nicotine Tob Res. 2004;[ADDRESS_694432] 1:S17- 28. 
21. Benowitz NL, Dains KM, Dempsey D, Havel C, Wilson M, Jacob P, 3rd. Urine menthol as a 
biomarker of mentholated cigarette smoking. Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_1948]. 2010;19: [ADDRESS_694433] LA, Zhang Y, Carmella SG, Jensen JA, Allen SS, 
Shields PG, Murphy SE, Stepanov I, Hecht SS. Reduced nicotine content cigarettes: effects on 
toxicant exposure, dependence and cessation. Addiction (Abingdon, En gland). 2010;105:343- 55. 
23. Ossip -Klein DJ, Bigelow G, Parker SR, Curry S, Hall S, Kirkland S. Classification and 
assessment of smoking behavior. Health Psychol. 1986;[ADDRESS_694434]:3 -11. 
24. Hughes JR, Keely JP, Niaura RS, Ossip- Klein DJ, Richmond RL, Swan GE. Measures of 
abstinence in clinical trials: issues and recommendations. Nicotine Tob Res. 2003;5:13 -25. 
25. Perkins KA, Stitzer M, Lerman C. Medication screening for smoking cessation: a proposal for 
new methodologies. Psychopharmacology. 2006;184:628- 36. 
26. Hatsukami D, McBride C, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_154321] P, Hellerstedt W, Lando H. Effects of nicotine gum on 
prevalence and severity of withdrawal in female cigarette smokers. J Subst Abuse. 1991;3:[ADDRESS_694435] SW, Skoog K, Keenan RM, Fenwick JW. Symptoms of tobacco withdrawal. 
A replication and extension. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1991;48:52- 9. 
28. Hughes JR, Hatsukami D. Signs and symptoms of tobacco withdrawal. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 
1986;43:289 -94. 
29. Hatsukami D, Anton D, Keenan R, Callies A. Smokeless tobacco abstinence effects and 
nicotine gum dose. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1992;106:60 -6. 
30. Hatsukami D, Huber M, Callies A, Skoog K. Physical dependence on nicotine gum: effect of 
duration of use. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1993;111:[ADDRESS_694436] SW, Keenan RM. Physiologic and subjective changes from smokeless 
tobacco withdrawal. Clinical pharmacology and therapeutics. 1987;41:103 -7. 
32. Baer JS, Lichtenstein E. Classification and prediction of smoking relapse epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]: an 
exploration of indivi dual differences. J Consult Clin Psychol. 1988;56:104- 10. 
33. Heatherton TF, Kozlowski LT, Frecker RC, Fagerstrom KO. The Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine 
Dependence: a revision of the Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire. Br J Addict. 1991;86:1119 -27. 
34. Hatsu kami DK, Ebbert JO, Anderson A, Lin H, Le C, Hecht SS. Smokeless tobacco brand 
switching: a means to reduce toxicant exposure? Drug and alcohol dependence. 2007;87:[ADDRESS_694437] week 
of smoking abstinence in PTSD and non -PTSD smokers. Nicotine Tob Res. 2013;15:[ADDRESS_694438] lapses to smoking: within- subjects 
analysis of real -time reports. Journal of consulting and clinic al psychology. 1996;64:366 -79. 
 
11 
 