CM01 Protocol v1 from Oct 5, 2016  
Page 1 of 7  
 CLINICAL PROTOCOL  
 
Study Title:  Cervix monitor for elasticity and length measurements  
Study Protocol Number:   CM01 A 
Clinical Investigator:   Heather van Raalte, MD  
Clinical Site:     Princeton Urogynecology  
Targeted enrollment:   10 patients  
Sponsor:  Advanced Tactile Imaging, Inc. (ATI) ,  
 Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health 
&Human Development  (NIH)  
Project:   Cervix monitor for risk assessment of spontaneous preterm 
delivery   
 
Introduction  
Preterm  birth is a leading global cause of neonatal mortality  despi[INVESTIGATOR_773231].  Almost one million children die each year due to 
complications of preterm birth  and in almost all countries with reliable data, preterm birth rates 
are increasing . Of the 14 million survivors  per year, many face a lifetime of disability, including 
learning disabilities , visual and hearing impairments . 
Preterm birth occurs for a variety of reasons. The majority of preterm births happen 
spontaneously, though some are due to early induction of labor or caesarean birth, typi[INVESTIGATOR_773232] . Common causes of spontaneous preterm 
delivery (SPTD)  include multiple pregnancies, infections , chronic conditions , lifestyle, family 
history,  cervical incompetence; however, often no one cause is identified.  Although SPTD  is 
often a multifactorial event , precocious cervical softening, shortening and dilatation are a 
common denominator.  
The uterine cervix has to provide structural integrity and mechanical resistance to ensure 
normal development of the fetus  as the uterus expands to accommodate the fetus’ growth. 
Preterm delivery is closely related to a premature cervical ripening. The scientific basis for the 
proposed project is that the elastici ty modulus of a cervix is a more sensitive parameter 
characterizing the stage of cervical ripening. The main component of the cervix tissue is 
collagen. Cervical ripening is the result of realignment of collagen, degradation of collagen 
cross- linking due t o proteolytic enzymes. These processes affect the elasticity modulus of the 
cervi cal tissue. Therefore , assessment of cervix by a device measuring cervical elasticity 
(stiffness) and cervical length ( effacement ) appears to be an adequate approach for ident ifying  
pregnant women at high risk of SPTD .  
The primary cervical elasticity assessment currently used in clinical practice is relying on the 
clinician’s evaluation of the cervix as “hard, medium or soft” which is descriptive and subjective. 
Clinicians use  terms such as softening , shortening, funneling, effacing, and dilating to describe 
changes in the cervical conditions  that occur during pregnancy. Collectively, these changes are 
called cervical remodeling and refer to both the tissue’s intrinsic material  property changes and 
its resultant anatomical changes.  These changes definitely require objective and reliable 
quantification.  
CM01 Protocol v1 from Oct 5, [ADDRESS_1061743]-effective device, Cervix Monitor (CM ), 
for detecting cervix conditions leading to 
SPTD and its risk assessment.  The CM will 
be based on measuring of the applied 
pressure to the cervix by a tactile sensor 
array (stress data) and ultrasound 
measurement of cervix length (strain data). 
Tactile a nd ultrasound sensors will be 
allocated on the tip of the disposable 
measuring part of vaginal probe (see Figure 
1). Both stress and strain data will allow 
cervix elasticity and effacement evaluation. 
The discovery of novel biomarkers that could 
reliably identify women who will 
subsequently deliver preterm , may allow for 
timely medical intervention and targeted 
therapeutic treatments aimed at  improving 
maternal and fetal outcomes.  
The objectives of the Phase I research, which covers the proposed protocol, are listed below.   
 
Study Objectives 
The objectives of the Phase I pi[INVESTIGATOR_773233]:  
1. To assess potential risks of CM to pregnant women and fetuses in a study with non- pregnant 
women,   
2. To verify proposed data collection and examination techniques , and  
3. To assess device performance, measurement repeatability and usability.  
 
Study Description  
Study Timeframe   
December 1, 2016 – February 28,  2017.  
Sample Size  
The study will involve [ADDRESS_1061744]. Adult non- pregnant 
pre-menopausal women scheduled for a regular gynecological examination at Princeton 
Urogynecology (Princeto n, NJ) will be considered eligible for enrollment into the study. Each 
patient will first be studied with the existing clinical means and then with the CM. A clinical 
research assistant will maintain a log as to any concerns/complications with the CM.  
Figure  1. Concept of  proposed c ervix monitor.  
It will allow elasticity and length measurements of the 
uterine cervix during gestation to explore and detect 
conditions leading to spontaneous preterm delivery.  Single use 
part Push -to-connect 
coupling  
Control 
button  
Cervix  Vagina  
Sensing tip with tactile 
and ultrasound 
sensors  
 
Region of  
interest   
CM01 Protocol v1 from Oct 5, 2016  
Page 3 of 7  
 Enro llment  
Conditions precluding patients from participation are listed in the study exclusion criteria below. 
In addition, cognitively impaired patients will not be asked to participate. No patients will be 
excluded on the basis of race. Adult women in reproductive age (21-44 years) will be included.    
Inclusion criteria  
1. Adult women age 21 -44 years  
2. Non-pregnant women 
Exclusion criteria  
1. Active cancer of the colon, rectum wall, cervix, vaginal, uterus or bladder  
2. Ongoing or prior radiation therapy for abdominal or pelvic cancer  
3. Recent (less than four months) pelvic surgery   
4. Surgically absent uterus, rectum or bladder  
5. Significant circulatory or cardiac conditions that could cause excessive risk from the 
examination as determined by [CONTACT_515575] 
6. Severe abdom inal or pelvic adhesions preventing access to pertinent anatomy  
7. Known or suspected bleeding disorder  
8. HIV or hepatitis B positive serology  
9. Warty lesions on the vulva 
10. Extensive varicose veins on the vulva  
11. Active skin infection or ulceration within the vagina/vulva (Herpes  infection)  
12. Presence of a vaginal septum  
13. Severe hemorrhoids  
Data Collection    
Cervix tissue elasticity and length measurement data as well as patient age, weight, height and 
parity , patient questionnaire ( CM scan comfort, pain).   
Device   
Cervix Monitor (CM)  
 
Assignments  
Informed Consent Form (ICF) and authorization to release privacy data (HIPAA) Form will be 
obtained from the subject prior to surgery.  Clinical investigator will follow the IRB approved 
informed consent process to answer all  questions and provide explanations during enrollment to 
about the study.  
 
Methods and Procedures  
The examination procedure will comprise the steps of:  
1. Inserting the speculum into the vagina to provide appropriate visualization and access to the 
cervix.  
2. Performing CM measurements at 3, 6, 9, and 12 o’clock specifying the probe tip location on 
cervix on the touch screen display.  
3. Review the measurement results (elasticity and length values) and repeat two 
measurements, one at the location with t he lowest elasticity and one at the location with 
highest value.  
4. Removing the probe and speculum from the vagina.  
CM01 Protocol v1 from Oct 5, 2016  
Page 4 of 7  
 This CM examination procedure will be explored and further optimize d based on the practical 
experience.  
 
Data Analysis  
Measurement repeatability between two measurements will be assessed with a reliability 
parameter, which is also known as an intraclass correlation (ICC), as it equals the correlation 
between any two measurements made on the same subject. The difference between pairs of 
measurements will be plotted against their mean in a Bland- Altman plot. The average difference 
between measurements will be calculated as well as the 95% limits of agreement (LOA).  
 
Study End Points   
Study end points ( measures that will be considered as success ):  
1. The examination using CM is safe, does not cause significant discomfort and is capable of 
production of expected measurement results.  
2. The CM elasticity measurements have intraoperator ICC of 0.90 or above; 95% LOA is within 
±15% . 
3. The CM cervix length m easurements have intraoperator ICC of 0.93 or above; 95%LOA is 
within ±10 %. 
 
Protection of Human Subjects 
Human Subjects Involvement, Characteristics and Design  
Adult non-pregnant women scheduled for a regular gynecological examination at Princeton 
Urogynecology (Princeton, NJ) will be considered eligible for enrollment into the study  with 
Cervix Monitor (CM) . Conditions precluding patients from participation are listed in the study 
exclusion criteria below. This study with non- pregnant women is conducted t o assess potential 
risks to pregnant women and fetuses as required by [CONTACT_625113], Title 45, 
§46.204(a) . This study with non- pregnant women will be conducted before initiation the study 
with pregnant women.   
The highest priority will be gi ven to consideration of examination safety with CM  probe, 
disturbing the cervix tissue during pregnancy and potential risk of premature delivery, infection 
or miscarriage. Clinical study coordinators will maintain a log as to any concerns, complications, 
or suggested improvements in using the CM probe.  After the CM examination a questionnaire 
will be presented to patients to assess their comfort and pain concerns relative to the procedure.  
All clinical investigators will have their CV on file with the loca l IRB and complete training and 
certification in Protecting Human Research Participant. Explanation of how data from the sites  
will be obtained, managed, and protected is presented in Data and Safety Monitoring Plan 
section (see below).  
Source of Material s 
Upon patient’s consent, relevant clinical and demographical data will be collected. Specifically, 
obstetrical history, course of the previous current pregnancy(s), history of prior surgery and a 
connective tissue disorders (i.e. Ehlers -Danlos Syndrome, B enign Joint Hypermobility Disorder, 
etc.), race, age, height, weight, and parity will be documented.  
Prior to taking the CM scan, standard obstetric external and internal vaginal examination will be 
performed by a clinical investigator. Attention to cervix  softness, elasticity and any abnormalities 
CM01 Protocol v1 from Oct 5, 2016  
Page 5 of 7  
 will be made and the results recorded to map the cervix surface. A 4 -point grading system for 
cervix elasticity would be giving soft (0), or moderately soft  (1), or moderately stiff  (2), or stiff (3) 
elasticity  scores to cervix. These subjective measurements would then be correlated with the 
CM data for agreement or discordance.  
The CM examination will be performed as described above in Methods and Procedures section. 
The process is quick, non- invasive and should cause no additional discomfort to the patient as 
compared to a standard pelvic examination. All results will be recorded using an examination 
chart, which will be a part of the Case Report Form (CRF) specifically designed for the study. 
The chart will summ arize all findings by [CONTACT_773238].  
All necessary clinical and demographic data will be derived from existing records and de-
identified. No additional clinical tests will be ordered to support this research. A specific clinical 
study number will be generated for each examination case so the link between the data and the 
patient will be created without revealing patient identity.  
Potential Risks  
Investigators do not expect any additional risks or side effects from the use of CM beyond those 
normally associated with standard manual palpation and transvaginal ultrasound, such as 
extremely rare possibility of physical damage of the vagina, cervix tissue and infection. Other 
risks include software/hardware malfunction, toxicity, allergic reaction, electrical shock and 
breach of confidentiality.  
Recruitment and Informed Consent  
Patients scheduled for vaginal examination will undergo a standard study admission protocol. 
This includes: completion of admini strative and clinical forms, procedure informed consent, and 
a history and physical examination. Prior to enrollment, each patient will be assessed against 
the study inclusion criteria, usually during their initial clinical screening evaluation. Once a 
patient has been found to be acceptable for participation in the study, the consent interview will 
be conducted in private in the pre- procedure facility by [CONTACT_773239]. All informed consents will be reviewed and 
approved by [CONTACT_773240]. Subjects will be informed of the 
potential risks and benefits of the research and of their right to withdraw from the study at any 
time without penalty. A statem ent that the particular CM  examination procedure may involve 
risks to  the subject and to the fetus  which are currently unforeseeable will be included into the 
informed consent as required by [CONTACT_625113]  (CFR)  Title 45, §46.116(b)(1). 
The subject will be free to ask any questions pertaining to the study. Informed consents will be 
signed and dated by [CONTACT_423], investigator and research assistant.  
According to the requirements of CFR Title 45, §46.204 (a), the study with pregnant women will 
follow after assessment of the risks of CM examination procedure with non- pregnant .  
We will comply with all applied requirements of CFR Title 45, Part 46, Protection of Human 
Subjects, in Subpart B – Additional Protections for Pregnant Women, Human Fetuse s and 
Neonates Involved in Research.   
Protection Against Risks  
All investigators performing the CM examination will receive appropriate training in order to 
negate the lack of familiarity with the device. The risk of physical damage to the vagina and 
cervix will be minimized by [CONTACT_773241] a 
speculum. A physical contact [CONTACT_773242] a 
tactual feedback from the CM probe. The risk of cross -contamination and inf ection will be 
CM01 Protocol v1 from Oct 5, 2016  
Page 6 of 7  
 eliminated by [CONTACT_773243] (single use) probe shaft which be sterilized and stored in a 
sterile sheath before the clinical use. It is highly unlikely that the use of the CM probe can 
produce any toxicity since the probe shaft is mad e of certified biocompatible.  
Software and hardware malfunction risks are minimized by [CONTACT_773244]. The devices will go through 
performance bench testing on simulator m odels to verify proper CM functionality.  Standard 
software verification and validation procedures mitigate the risk of incorrect characterization 
being presented to the user during the patient examination. All participating clinical investigators 
will be t rained to recognize inappropriate software and hardware behavior and to react on it.  
Possible risks to the patient caused by [CONTACT_773245], to protective features of electronics and isolated medical -grade 
power supply to electronics and computer. The device will go through a full cycle of EMC and 
electrical safety testing at an independent certified test facility. If ordered by [CONTACT_15686], the 
device will be also tested by [CONTACT_773246][INVESTIGATOR_773234].  
To protect against the risk of breach of confidentiality, patient confidentiality will be maintained 
at all times. The record of patient’s progress while on this study will be kept in locked file 
cabinets to which only limited research staff will have access. The confidentiality of any central 
computer record will be carefully guarded, and no information by [CONTACT_773247]. All information on the case report forms or any information 
communicated from clinics to the company will be de- identified. The psychological risk will be 
minimized by [CONTACT_773248].  
We will complete full Risk Ana lysis for CM, as required by [CONTACT_773249] [ZIP_CODE], according to American National Standard ANSI/AAMI/ISO [ZIP_CODE]: 
Medical Devices –  Application of Risk Management to Medical Devices.   
Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to Human Subjects and Others  
There are no direct benefits to the patients in the study. However, there may be a benefit to 
society, in general, from the knowledge gained in connection with participation in the study.  
Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained  
The proposed clinical studies in the first exploratory stage of the project will allow to assess 
potential risks of C M to pregnant women in studies with non- pregnant women,  to develop and 
test the data collection technique and establish possible lim itations in the C M use , to assess C M 
measurement reproducibility, evaluate the probe ergonomic design and ease of use , and t o 
assess the clinical suitability of the interface software to facilitate the data collection process and 
to get in vivo  test data f or off -line development of analysis routines.  After meeting the basic 
research milestones in the exploratory stage, we plan extensive clinical studies on pregnant 
patients to obtain quantitative data on changes of cervix elasticity for the months of pregnancy, 
on estimating the level of the cervix softening which may qualify the patent for a medical 
treatment and on the range of variability of cervix stiffness which need to be taken into account 
while making decisions on clinical intervention.   
Data and Sa fety Monitoring Plan  
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_773235] (§§ 812.46 and 812.25(e)); ensure that IRB 
approval is obtained (§812.42) and any reviewing IRB  and FDA are promptly informed of 
significant new information about an investigation (§812.150); control distribution and disposition 
of investigational products (§812.43).  
CM01 Protocol v1 from Oct 5, [ADDRESS_1061745] and analyze 
adverse effects, highlight its course and propose means to negate such effects.  
ATI staff will monitor the study by [CONTACT_773250], verifying the consistency of raw CM data, and 
checking clinical protocol complianc e. Communication with clinical investigators will be primarily 
in a form of phone and e- mail. In addition, ATI’s representative will visit all participating clinical 
sites. Establishment Inspection Report (EIR), a detailed record of the inspection and findings, 
will be prepared after the visit. Also, such interactions will result in a clinical database that will be 
set to store all information obtained during the course of the study.  
To protect patient data, confidentiality will be maintained at all times. All records will be identified 
by a study specific code and personal identifiers and linkage to study identification numbers will 
be maintained separately in locked file cabinets to which only designated research staff will 
have access. Each patient will be identified with a unique patient identification number 
(xxxxxxxxxxx) that consists of the patient number (001xxxxxx) and the date (xxx020102) in day -
month -year format. Data for that study are all placed in a study specific patient folder. A file that 
matches patient identifier to a patient name [CONTACT_329245][INVESTIGATOR_773236] a password 
protected computer. No individual subject will be identified by [CONTACT_773251]. Patient’s records, with regard to participation in this study, may b e subject to review by 
[CONTACT_773252][INVESTIGATOR_773237], and patient’s insurance carrier. In addition, the National Institutes of Health and Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) may req uest and will be given access to records of participants 
in this study. This clinical study will be registered in ClinicalTrials.gov as required by [CONTACT_241619] 
110-85, Title VIII and Certification of Compliance under 42 U.S.C. § 282(j).   
Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
Every effort will be made to increase enrollment of the minorities and the study group is 
expended to correspond to the patient population of the clinic as generally representative of the 
overall populations of Mercer County of NJ.  
Minorities will be included in this research project. There is no evidence that minority status may 
affect CM performance. Therefore, there are no inclusion or exclusion criteria based on ethnic 
background, religion, or other division of the population (other than those stated above). 
Racial/ethnic composition of the population is expected to mirror the broad mix of individuals 
within the patient population serviced by [CONTACT_773253] (please see 
Targeted/Planned Enrollment Table).  
The expected racial distribution of the study population at Princeton Urogynecology (Princeton, 
NJ) is 78% White, 15% African American, 0% American Indian/Alaska Native, 7% Asian, and 
0% Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander. Ethnic distribution is: 16% Hispanic or Latino;  
84% - not Hispanic or Latino.  
Men will not be included in the study.  
Inclusion of Children  
Participating gynecology departments serve only adult patients;  therefore our cross section of 
the population will not include individuals under 21 years of age. Additionally, children are not 
likely to benefit from the LTI technology, given no available supporting evidence of incidence of 
pelvic organ prolapse in children.  
 