PROTOCOL  AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
 
 
 
An Interactive Education Program to Reduce High Risk Behavior 
in Adolescents  Phase I ( 1R42HD110333- 01) 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
  
09/27/2022  
 
 
 
Version  1.2  9/27/[ADDRESS_421273]  highlighted  information  in the protocol  relating  to Phase  2 activities  in grey. Such  information  is included  
for reference  but does not pertain  to the current  package  submission.  We are only seeking  approval  for Phase  1 activities  
at this time.  
 
SIGNIFICANCE  
Early  Adolescence  is a Critical  Time  for Sexual  Health  Intervention.  Partnered  sexual  behaviors  often  
begin  in early  adolescence  (ages  12-14 years).  Youth  Risk Behavior  Surveillance  data indicate  that while  only 
3% of adolescents  have  had intercourse  before  age 13, by 10th grade,  over a third have  had sex, highlighting  
the importance  of the early  adolescent  years .[ADDRESS_421274]  pow-
erful implications  for current  and future  health ,3 yet CDC  data indicate  that only 53% of Americans  receive  for-
mal sex education  before  age 18.[ADDRESS_421275]  sex in early  adolescence  continue  to exhibit  greater  sex 
risk (more  sex partners,  substance  use with sex, less condom  use) than their peers  as they age,4-6 suggesting  
a persisten t lifestyle  pattern  with negative  outcomes.  Indeed,  early  sexual  debut  is associated  with more  unin-
tended  pregnancies7Error!  Hyperlink  reference  not valid.  and STIs.[ADDRESS_421276]  sex 
are also less likely  to use contraception  and wait longer  to start doing  so.9 These  effects  extend to other  health  
behavior s; early  adolescent  sex predicts  higher  frequency  of alcohol  use at age [ADDRESS_421277]  when  adolescents  are younger .13 Intervening  during  early  adoles-
cence  is an opportunity  to target  sexual  values,  cognitions,  and feelings  before  they are well established.   
Biological  changes  in early  adolescence  also put youth  at risk via both sexual  development  and emotion  
regulation  (ER). Physical  changes  during  puberty  can elicit sexual  advances,  and hormonal  changes  are linked  
to adolescent  sexual  behavior .14,[ADDRESS_421278]  skills  related  
to self-regulation,  often  leading  to impulsive  decision s. MRI data show  that teens’  frontal  lobes,  which  manage  
executive  functions  such  as impulse  control,  ER, and reasoning,  mature  later than other  brain  areas .16,17 For 
example,  young  adolescents’  performances  on tasks  of emotion  recognition  tend to be poor in early  adoles-
cence,  and this poor performance  has been  linked  to high activa tion of the amygdala  and low activation  of the 
frontal  lobes  when  processing  these  tasks.  Performance  improves  as teens  age, when  their frontal  lobes  be-
come  more  active  in this processing .[ADDRESS_421279]  early  teens’  under-
standing  of their own (and others’)  feelings,  making  it difficult  to recognize  and regulate  emotions  in affect -
laden  situations,  such  as those  involving sex or substance  use (which  has been  shown  to influence  sexual  
risk).19-[ADDRESS_421280]  their lifetime  health  trajectories .  
Emotion  Regulation  (ER) Mitigates  Risky  Behavior . The most  widely  used  and supported  model26 of ER is 
Gross’  process  model ,27 which  conceptualizes  ER as the process  of “shapi[INVESTIGATOR_340388], when  
one has them,  and how one experiences  or expresses  these  emotions .”27 ER uses  multiple  skills,  including  
identifying  affec t in others,  recognizing  one’s  own emotion s, and using  strategies  to manage  one’s  emotional  
response.  Targeted  emotions  are often  negative,  but positive  emotions  can require  regulation  too, as when  cu-
riosity  or attraction  leads  to sex. The process  model  identifies  five families  of ER strategies:  situation  selection,  
situation  modification,  attentional  deployment,  cognitive  change,  and response  modulation.  These  target  emo-
tion management  at various  points  in the emotion  proce ss (e.g.,  attending  to a stimulus,  appraising  a stimulus,  
physical/  cognitive  responses).  
Research  has demonstrated  that when  people  experience  high levels  of negative  emotion,  they act impul-
sively  and prioritize  short -term soothing  to decrease  distress .[ADDRESS_421281] because  adolescents’  ER difficulties  increase  the likelihood  of impulsive  self-
soothing  behaviors,  such  as sex. However,  this work  is hampered  by a preponderance  of associational  studies  
and few developmentally  tailored  interventions  that examine  ER. 
Most sexual risk prevention interventions target knowledge and behavioral skills .35 Without ER skills train-
ing, these approaches are unlikely to influence the ways in which teens  respond to risk situations.  Poor ER 
may short -circuit effective use of knowledge and behavioral skills in risk situations , which  are typi[INVESTIGATOR_340389].  This is particularly important because decision making surrounding risky sexual behavior 
 
Version  1.2  9/27/[ADDRESS_421282] focused on brief face-to-face interventions with parents to encourage sexual 
health communication39,40 or group educational interventions for high risk adolescent subgroups ,19,41 but they 
do not target ER . Similarly, programs targeting social emotional learning (SEL) exist, but these typi[INVESTIGATOR_340390] d in groups, with  a wide range of goals (e.g., organizational skills, personal goal 
setting, compassion, conflict resolution)  that do not explicitly connect to health behaviors . These broad reach-
ing programs serve important but distinct functions to those directly teaching efficacious, evidence -based ER 
skills. Without ER skills training, sexual health education is unlikely to influence the ways in which teens act in 
high-emotion risk situations. Learning facts is not enough; ER training teaches  adolescents  to regulate emo-
tions in ways that allow them to implement other skills (e.g., communication skills, condom use skills) to posi-
tively influence sexual health and outcomes.  
Targeting  ER during  early  adolescence,  when  ER and cognitions  about  sex are developi[INVESTIGATOR_340391]-
cally interacting,  increases  the likelihood  of improving  ER throughout  adolescence  and increasing  healthy  deci-
sion making . While  a few other  group -based  programs  have  been  developed  to specifically  target  ER con-
structs  (rather  than broader  SEL)  among  adolescents42-44, the proposed  program  goes  beyond  existing  ones  by 
[CONTACT_340442] -based  interventions .45 It is 
based  on the only proven  efficacious  program  to target  ER and demonstrate  longitudinal  impac t on sexual  risk 
reduction  among  adolescents  from middle  school  into high school  (Project  TRAC) . Our team  has demonstrated  
that ER skills  can be effectively  taught  at the developmental  level of early  adolescence  and that these  skills  
change  sexual  behavior  over 2.5-year follow -up. We seek  to extend  this work  by [CONTACT_340443],  effective  intervention  and testing  it in a randomized  controlled  trial.  
Preliminary  Studies.  Project  TRAC  (Talking  about  Risk and Adolescent  Choices;  R34 MH07875,  R01 
NR011906)  is an efficacious,  developmentally  tailored  intervention  teaching  ER skills  for early  adolescents  that 
focuses  on strategies  to use in moments  of sexual  decision  making  (e.g.,  peer press ure to have  sex, decisions  
to use a condom ). It contains  3 main  components:  ER training,  sex education,  and the link between  emotions  
and risk behaviors . The program  was developed  using  qualitative  research  with early  adolescents46 and em-
phasizes  emotion  recognition  and labeling,  connecting  emotions  and behavior,  and the use of ER strategies  
(Get Out, Let It Out, and Think  It Out) consistent  with Gross’  process  model.  Sexual  health  information , includ-
ing sexual  development,  safer  sexual  behaviors,  and condoms,  is also included  in the program.  Project  TRAC  
integrates  ER into all topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]  (e.g.,  discomfort  with condoms , managing  emotions  that occur  in sexual  possibility  
situations,  managing  peer pressur e) as the key construct  that is absent  from previous  adolescent  sexual  health  
interventions . In an efficacy  trial (n=420)  of urban  early  adolescents  (ages  12-14), Project  TRAC’s  ER condi-
tion outperformed  a rigorously  matched  health  promotion  (HP) compariso n, which  provided  sexual  and 
general  health  education  without  ER content , in delaying  sexual  initiation  and reducing  sexual  risk.47-49 
The sample  was diverse  in terms  of ethnicity  (38%  Latino),  race (28% Black ), and SES (30%  < $20,000)  and 
balanced  in terms  of gender  (53%  male).  The study  tar-
geted  those  at highest  risk due to mental  health  symp-
toms.  There  were  no significant  differences  between  
the conditions  on baseline  demographics,  sexual  ac-
tivity,  emotional  and behavioral  symptoms,  or attend-
ance  at the 12 after school  sessions  (9.1 vs. 9.0).  
The TRAC  ER condition  was efficacious  in 
slowing  the time to sexual  initiation . Time -to-event  
analyses  show ed that ER participants  were  signifi-
cantly  less likely  to begin  having  vaginal  sex (the pri-
mary  outcome)  over the 1-year follow -up (Adjusted  
Hazard  Ratio  [AHR]=.5 8 [95%  CI: .36 to .94])[ADDRESS_421283]  maintained  to 30 months  (AHR=.6 1 [.42 to 
.89];47 See Figure  1). Further  analyses  indicate  rela-
tively  similar  effects  between  those  with and without  
clinically  significant  mental  health  symptoms  (AHR sub-
clinical= .60 [.31-1.17];  AHR clinical=.65 [.42-.99]47), suggesting  a promising  intervention  that works  for multiple  audi-
ences,  including  those  at higher  risk. 
The intervention  also reduced  sexual  risk behavior.  ER participants  reported  significantly  fewer  con-
domless  vaginal  or anal sex acts (Adjusted  Rate  Ratio  [ARR]=  .36 (.14-.90) and fewer  total vaginal  or anal sex Figure  1.  TRAC  Sexual  Initiation  by [CONTACT_340444]  1.2  9/27/22                                                                               3 
 acts (ARR=.39  [.20-.77]). They  also were  less likely  than HP to endorse  multiple  partners  (Adjusted  Odds  Ratio  
[AOR]=.54  [.30-.99]) or substance  use before  sex (AOR=.42  [.23-.75] during  the 30-month  follow  up.[ADDRESS_421284]  through  80% of the task than those  in HP (OR=  
1.55,  p= .05), suggesting  better  ER skills.  Similarly,  on a validated  task of emotion  recognition49,50 ER partici-
pants  correctly  labeled  more  emotions  based  on facial  expressions  than HP (Rate  Ratio=  1.10,  p<.01) .49 These  
findings  provide  performance -based  evidence  of the efficacy  of TRAC  ER in affecting  emotional  competence  
that correspond  to adolescent  self-reports  of greater  use of ER strategies,  Cohen’s  d= .30 [.25-.34].[ADDRESS_421285]  indicated  that while  they want  to continue  offering  this program,  these  challenges  are prohibitive.  
Indeed,  it is common  for evidence -based  interventions  (EBIs) to encounter  problems  during  broader  dissemi-
nation  due to passive  diffusion  techniques .51-[ADDRESS_421286]  demonstrated  that 
the translation  of traditionally  delivered  EBIs  to technology  1) can be effective ,57-67 2) has high feasibility  and 
acceptability ,68-70 and 3) can achieve  high retention  and adherence .41, 66, 69, 70 Technology  is nearly  ubiquitous  in 
teens’  lives,  and over 90% report  playing  video  games.71 Further,  middle  schoolers’  preferred  device  for learn-
ing at school  is tablets.72 A tablet -based  adaptation  of TRAC  offers  many  advantages  over group -based  train-
ing. Logistically,  a tablet  intervention  reduces  staff and training  in addition  to long-term costs  as tablets  become  
more  accessible.  For learning  uptake,  tablet  adminis tration  provides  all individuals  opportunities  to practice  
skills , whereas  the group  format  often  could  not accommodate  practice  for everyone . It also provides  individu-
alized  feedback  at the participant’s  pace , improving  comprehension , and allows  evaluation  of interaction  with 
the program . Scheduling  barriers  are removed,  so participants  do not miss groups  and thus receive  all content.  
Finally,  some  adolescents  may prefer  sexual  health  content  that is provided  in a less public  setting  than group.  
Findings  for the preliminary  development  of an internet -based  TRAC  (iTRAC ) support  that the ER constructs  
can be taught  through  these  games  and that early  adolescents  liked it. In fact, as expected,  findings  support  
that our tablet -based  intervention  had stronger  effects  on ER constructs  than the group  format.  
iTRAC  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]  (R21  HD089979) . To establish  that the ER skills  training  from TRAC  ER could  be effec-
tively  translated  to a game  format,  the investigative  team  completed  a study  to 1) translat e the ER components  
of TRAC  ER into interactive  web app activities,  2) assess  usability  and acceptability,  and 3) conduct  a small , 
randomized  trial to assess  intervention  feasibility  and the impact  on ER constructs.  Due to the focus  on demon-
strating  feasibility  and preliminary  efficacy  of digital  ER training,  as well as the scope  of funding,  sexual  health  
components  were  not develope d. With the help of two youth  advisory  boards  (YABs;  one male,  one female)  
and input  from an expert  panel  (psychologists  and school  professionals) , TRAC  ER components  (only) were  
adapted  to develop  the foundation  of an internet -based  TRAC  (see Table  1). With guidance  from the YABs  (14 
meetings)  and expert  panel  (3 meetings),  activities  comprising  
four 30- to 45-minute  modules  were  developed  to target  TRAC’s  
core ER constructs.  Using  YAB feedback,  an engaging  space  
theme  was chosen . Users are “cadets”  in a mandatory  training  on 
a planet  in which  the young  aliens  are making  unhealthy  deci-
sions  because  of unmanaged  feelings ; they must  complete  a se-
ries of challenges  to learn  ER skills . After  the translation  phase,  
two round s of acceptability  testing were  conducted  with ten more  
7th graders  to incorporate  their feedback  on program  functionality,  
usability,  and acceptability.  The iTRAC  modules  were  judged  to 
be easy  to use and acceptable,  with average  ratings  of 4.7 (on a 
5-point  scale)  for ease  of use, 4.3 for information  helpfulness , 
and 4.3 for “overall  experience.”  After  establishing  usability  and acceptability,  85 7th graders  (58%  female;  33% 
White)  were  randomized  to iTRAC  or a waitlist  control.  Participants  completed  study  procedures  after school  
under  supervision.  Modules  were  completed  about  1 week  apart.  This format  proved  highly  feasible ; 88% 
(37/42)  of those  randomized  to iTRAC  completed  all 4 modules  (93% completed  at least  3).  
Results  from the final,  3-month  follow -up showed  moderate  to strong  effect  sizes  on ER constructs  (d=.36-
.72), stronger  than  the small  to moderate  effect  sizes  on ER measures  observed  in the original  TRAC  
trial, suggesting  better  efficacy  on ER for the tablet -based  intervention . Specifically,  emotional  compe-
tence  for ER participants  improved  relative  to the control  group  on scales  assessing  belief  in emotions  as mal-
leable  (Implicit  Theories  of Emotion  Scale;  d=.72), emotional  self-efficacy  (Children’s  Self-Efficacy  Question-
naire;  d=.63), emotional  awareness  (Difficulties  in Emotion  Regulation  Scale  (DERS);  d=.59), access  to ER 

 
Version  1.2  9/27/22                                                                               4 
 strategies  (DERS;  d=.36), and use of ER strategies  taught  in TRAC  (Emotion  Regulation  Behaviors  Scale -Re-
vised  (ERBS -R); d=.45). These  data indicate that teaching  TRAC  ER’s constructs  in a technology  format  can 
affect  emotion al awareness  and regulation  in this developmental  period . The proposed  STTR  will improve  
upon  the rigor of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] R21 by [CONTACT_340445]-
tent linking  ER to sexual  health  from the original  program.  It will evaluate  its ability  to influence  self-efficacy  for 
sexual  risk prevention,  a key construct  related  to sexual  risk among  adolescents.  The study  will also collect 
preliminary  data regarding  whether  it delays  sex, which  was not collected  during  the short  pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  The com-
pletion  of iTRAC  to include  sex education  and its content  linking  ER to health  represents  a novel,  efficacious  
strategy  (ER) for promoting  healthy  behaviors  that can reach  a wider audience  than group -based  interventions  
and has substantial  commercia lization  potential  given  societal  interest  in healthy  sexual  development  to avoid  
unintended  pregnancy,  relationship  violence,  and sexually  transmitted  diseases  in adolescence  and beyond .   
History  of successful  collaboration  between  the study  teams.  [CONTACT_340501]  has collaborated  with Klein  
Buendel  on three  previous  federally -funded  projects  involving  the creation  of digital  products  teaching  ER skills  
to adolescents  (2014 -MU-CX-0002,  R21 HD 089979,  R01 HD 097126 ). These  teams  have  established  work  
processes  that have  led to successful  completion  of these  projects  that was built on a foundation  of communi-
cation  of the sophisticated  concepts  of ER and digital  translation  of behavioral  interventions.  Similarly,  the 
Rhode  Island  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]  (RIH)  team  has a 20-year history  of collaboration  with [CONTACT_340502],  previously  at RIH and 
now at the University  of Oregon,  with whom  they continue  to collaborate  (R01  HD 097126;  R01 DA 050603).  
 
INNOVATION  
Integrating  ER Training  in Sexual  Health  Education  for Early  Adolescents : Project  TRAC  innovated  the 
field as the first program  to target  ER in the context  of sexual  risk for early  adolescents,  leading  to positive  sex-
ual health  outcomes . Although  ER is touted  as a promising  approach  for health  interventions  (primarily  from 
work  with preschoolers  or clinical  adults) ,73,74 it has been  rarely  implemented  in sexual  risk prevention,  which  
has typi[INVESTIGATOR_340392] ,45,75 thus weakening  the rigor of previous  prevention  re-
search Error!  Hyperlink  reference  not valid. . Only two other  programs76, [ADDRESS_421287]  used  ER to address  sexual  
risk; both targeted  older  teens  with severe  mental  health  problems  in group  formats . While  a few other  group -
based  programs  have  been  developed  to target  ER constructs  generally  (e.g.,  Learning  to Breathe ,42 Mindful-
ness -based  cognitive  behavioral  therapy78), TRAC  goes  beyond  existing  programs  by [CONTACT_340446] .  
While  we recognize  that digitizing  an efficacious  in-person  intervention  is not innovative  in itself,  creating  a 
marketable  tool that can be used  by [CONTACT_340447]/or other  agencies  and does  not require  staff training  to admin-
ister does  represent  an innovatio n to the field and the commercial  landscape.  Although  there  are a number  of 
programs  designed  to scaffold  Social  Emotional  Learning  (SEL)  within  school  settings,  the vast majority  are 
resource  intensive,  require  trained  facilitators,  and do not integrate  sexual  health  education.  A search  of [ADDRESS_421288]  popular  SEL programs  (most  of which  are focused  on SEL constructs  that emphasize  social  skills  for 
positive  school  climate)  indicates  that about  half (31) distribute  materials  relevant  to early  adolescents . Of 

 
Version  1.2  9/27/22                                                                               5 
 those,  only 12 are primarily  web-based,  and only one (Get Real)  focuses  on sexual  risk behaviors79. Though  
there  are significant  distinctions  that set iTRAC -Sexual  Risk Prevention  (SRP)  apart  from this program,  most  
notable  is iTRAC’s  focus  on teaching  ER skills  and practic ing those  skills  within  the program . Get Real de-
scribes  itself as comprehensive  sexual  education  that includes  elements  of SEL such  as “relational  skill-build-
ing,” but does  not teach  ER skills.  iTRAC  has innovated  the teaching  of ER skills  through  technology  by [CONTACT_340448]-
ing activities  that provide  oppor tunities  to regulate  emotions  through  experiences  that evoke  feelings  (e.g.,  
watching  a sad video  clip, looking  at “gross”  pi[INVESTIGATOR_499],  playing  stressful  video  games  while  receiving  negative  
feedback)  while  coaching  participants  to use the strategies  they have  been  taught.  In this way, teens  develop  
self-efficacy  for emotion  regulation,  which  is key to its use in daily life and is reflected  in the moderate  effect  
sizes  observed  in adolescents’  self-efficacy  for emotion  regulation  (SEQ;  d=.63), beliefs  that they are able to 
change  their emotions  (ITES;  d=.72), and their use of the strategies  taught  (ERBS -R; d=.45). iTRAC -SRP will 
further  enhance  these  opportunities  by [CONTACT_340449] .  
For example,  standard  sexual  health  education  includes  learning  about  reproductive  anatomy  of both 
sexes  with visual  aids for understanding.  This often  elicits  feelings  of discomfort  that can interfere  with engage-
ment  with programs  and, thus,  knowledge  acquisition.  Connecting  the ER strategies  learned  in the program  to 
this content  may enhance  understanding  and improve  application  of this information  to later sexual  health  con-
tent. Other  examples  of connecting  ER to sexual  health  education  include  recognizi ng and regulating  emotions  
evoked  when  learning  how to use a condom  or managing  emotions  during  conversations  with partners  in which  
one is negotiating  sex or condom  use. Explicitly  making  these  connections  for young  adolescents,  before  pat-
terns  of behavio r around  sex are entrenched , can improve  the likelihood  that they will apply  the ER skills  they 
are learning  to sexual  situations.  Sexual  activity  is an emotional  experience  for people,  especially  in the devel-
opmental  period  of adolescence,  and the absence  of emotion  regulation  skill building  in sexual  health  educa-
tion represents  a key opportunity  for innovation.   
 
COMMERCIAL  POTENTIAL  
iTRAC -SRP has strong  commercial  potential,  having  few direct  competitors  in the diverse  landscape  of SEL 
and ER curricula  for middle  school  students  (see Commercialization  Plan).  The vast majority  of existing  pro-
grams  are resource -intensive,  require  trained  facilitators,  and do not integrate  sexual  health  education . Fore-
sight  Science  & Technology,  Inc. will serve  as a Technical  and Business  Assistance  vendor  for this Fast-Track  
application.  Additionally,  we secured  a letter  of interest  from Cranston  Public  School  District  to aid in imple-
mentation  of research  activities  as well as evaluate  the program  for future  adoption  (see Letters  of Support).  
 
RESEARCH  PLAN  
We propose  a Fast-Track  STTR  research  project.  We have  already  developed  the efficacious  iTRAC  interven-
tion to enhance  emotion  regulation  competencies  (based  on the original  efficacious  group  intervention).  This 
was well-received  and resulted  in high uptake,  even  without  the sexual  health  content  (which  is often  of high 
interest  to middle  schoolers).  Thus,  we believe  the potential  feasibility  of iTRAC -SRP (with  its sexual  health  
content)  is high.  We propose  to achieve  Phase  1 milestones  of conducting  focus  groups  with advisory  boards,  
updating  the TRAC  sexual  health  content  using  current  sexual  health  education  standards,  creating  prototypes  
of the iTRAC -SRP intervention  and receiving  approval  from the advisory  boards  and creating  a specifications  
document  that will guide  Phase  2 production.  Milestones  in Phase  2 include  full production  of iTRAC -SRP fol-
lowed  by [CONTACT_340450] 16 students  and a randomized  trial with 120 more . 
Research  Team:  The investigative  team  brings  a wealth  of complementary  experience  to their roles  (see 
Biosketches ). Drs. Houck  and Hadley  developed  TRAC  ER and collaborated  with Klein  Buendel  on the devel-
opment  and pi[INVESTIGATOR_340393] , providing  experience  with the procedures  of the proposed  application.  [CONTACT_340503]  has successfully  recruited  and retained  participants  for several  middle  school -based  projects , including  
the pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]. Each  investigator  brings  necessary  experti se. [CONTACT_340501]  will oversee  the adaptation  and the clinical  
trial with expertise  in ER interventions  and early  adolescence . [CONTACT_340502]  will assist  in the translation  of the re-
maining  content  as well as assist  in the oversight  of the clinical  trial design  and execution . [CONTACT_340504]  will direct  
the statistical  analyses.  [CONTACT_184303]  will contribute  expertise  in the technology  transfer  of interventions . She 
will oversee  the KB development  team  during  the Translation  phase  as well as during  the management  of the 
intervention  during  the RCT.  [CONTACT_340501]  and [CONTACT_184303]  have  collaborated  previously  on an intervention  to 
prevent  adolescent  dating  violence  (R01 HD097126 ) that integrated  emotion  regulation  concepts  into health  
behavior  content.  Thus,  we are uniquely  positioned  to successfully  achieve  the goals  of this program . 
Overview  of Fast-Track  Research:  To fill a need  in the area of sexual  education,  which fails to integrate  
emotion  regulation  skills  training,  the goal of this study  is to complete  adapt ation  of TRAC  to a web app format  
and assess  its efficacy  for improving  self-efficacy  for sexual  risk prevention  behaviors  (e.g.,  sexual  refusal,  
condom  use). Consistent  with the process  of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]  (R21  HD089799),  this will be accomplished  
through  three  stages . In the Translation  Stage  (Phase  1), the remaining  core constructs  of the original  TRAC  
 
Version  1.2  9/27/22                                                                               6 
 sessions  will be adapted  and iteratively  reviewed  by [CONTACT_340451]  (2 adolescent  advisory  
boards , 1 expert  panel  of health  professionals ). In the Acceptability  Testing  Stage  (Phase  2), participants  
(n=16) will provide  feedback  on acceptability  and usability  for the completed  iTRAC  for Sexual  Risk Prevention  
(iTRAC -SRP) , followed  by [CONTACT_340452] . Finally , the RCT Stage  (Phase  2) will individually  randomize  [ADDRESS_421289]  control  group . Teens  will complete  8 tablet -based  modules  after school  in 
small,  monitored  groups.  Adolescent  assessment s (baseline,  post-intervention,  6-month  follow -up) will include  
computer -administered  self-interview s (ACASI)  and computerized  performance  tasks.  Parents  will also com-
plete  ratings  of adolescent  ER. The effect  size of iTRAC -SRP relative  to the waitlist  control  group  will be exam-
ined,  and results  will be published.  See Timeline . 
Settings  and Participants  (for both Phases  1 and 2): Subjects  will be recruited  from four public  schools  in 
Providence  County,  which  is rated  a Level  1 Urban  Influence  Code  by [CONTACT_941] U.S.D .A. Health  and Education  Pro-
fession als Panel  (HEPP)  members  in Phase  1 will also be recruited  through  a Rhode  Island  Department  of 
Health  (RIDOH)  school  nurses  listserv  and the Planned  Parenthood  Federation  of America . Eligibility  criteria  
will include  1) attending  the 7th grade  and 2) being  12-[ADDRESS_421290]  previously  participated  in our studies  and are familiar  with our procedures  
(see Letters ). Racial  and ethnic  minorities  represent  50% of students,  and 45% are from socioeconomically  
disadvantaged  homes . Thus,  these  data will generalize  to large  segment s of the population.  Together,  these  
schools  serve  over [ADDRESS_421291] will enroll  120 participants  (and their parents) , requir-
ing a recruitment  rate of 16%. This is feasible;  our rate of recruitment  in Project  TRAC  was 40% from a sample  
that presented  additional  challenges  (i.e., teens  with mental  health  symptoms) , and the pi[INVESTIGATOR_340394]  86 
students  in 4 months  from fewer  schools  (see Recruitment ). 
 
Overview  of Phase  1: Translation  Stage  (months  1-12): This phase  will complete  the TRAC  adaptation  to a 
web app. The pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]  (R21  HD089 979) effectively  translated  the ER content  of TRAC  (see Table  1) and the 
same  procedures  will be used  to translate  the remaining  content . In month  1, protocols  will be reviewed  and 
approved  by [CONTACT_340453].  In months  1-4, content  will be reviewed  and advisory  boards  will 
participate  in focus  groups  to guide  development  of iTRAC -SRP.  Wireframe  prototypes  will be developed  in 
months  5-8. Advisory  board s will review  prototypes  and provide  approval  of feasibility  and acceptability  in 
months  9-12. Finally,  a specifications  document  will be created  in month  12 to guide  full development  in Phase  
2, if approved  by [CONTACT_340454].  
Phase  1a- Sexual  Risk  Prevention  Content  Development  Updates : The TRAC  content  to be translated  will 
include  sexual  health  information  such  as reproductive  anatomy,  pubertal  development,  STIs, sexual  identity,  
pregnancy,  abstinence,  condom  use and contraception,  accessing  healthcare,  and sexual  behaviors  that con-
fer risk of STIs.  TRAC  content  will be updated  with consideration  of the National  Sex Education  Standards  
(NSES)  published  by [CONTACT_340455] e80, which  emphasize  functional  skills  through  a lens 
that recognizes  the influences  of inclusivity,  intersectionality,  trauma , and social  justice . Other  sources  will be 
consulted  (e.g.,  Gender,  Sexuality  & Inclusive  Sex Education  Tip Sheet81, Vermont  Agency  of Education  Sex-
ual Health  Education  Resource  Guide)82 as well as input  from the HEPP  of middle  school  health  professionals.  
This information  will guide  decisions  related  to adapting  sexual  health  content  for iTRAC -SRP and will ensure  
consistency  with professional  recommendations  for inclusive  sexuality  education . Possible  technology  transla-
tions  include  a digital  anatomy  game  in which  participants  are asked  to label  body  parts  and match  their biolog-
ical functions  and a game  in which  teens  correctly  order  videos  of steps  for condom  use. Similarly,  content  
connecting  emotions  and sexual  behavior  from the TRAC  intervention  remains  to be translated.  Examples  in-
clude  the influence  of sexuality  in the media  on feelings,  attitudes,  and behavior;  emotions’  influences  on deci-
sions  to have  sex and/or  use condoms;  and the influence  of perceived  peer norms  on emotions  and their influ-
ence  on risk behaviors.  Other  content  includes  connecting  these  concepts  with the ER strategies  taught  in the 
intervention.  For example,  an activity  might  include  coach ing participants  to use previously  learned  ER strate-
gies while  watching  a video  in which  a condom  is correctly  placed  on a plastic  penis  model,  which  can be 
dysregulating  to some  and interfere  with learning  in many  settings.  As in the R21 iTRAC  pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268],  game s, puzzles,  
quizzes,  and video  scenarios  used  in the original  TRAC  intervention  to convey  these  concepts  will serve  as the 
starting  point  for translation  ideas  with the advisory  groups  for the current  study.  Per NSES  recommendations,  
inclusive  language  that recognizes  the spectrum  of gender  and sexuality  will be used  throughout.  Further,  we 
will not be including  content  that may be upsetting  for individuals  with a history  of trauma  (e.g.,  descriptions  of 
sexual  violence) , within  this digital  progr am (See  also Trauma -informed  Approach  in Human  Subjects ).  
Deliverable  1: A summary  report  of the recommended  content  based  on review  of sexual  education  stand-
ards,  integrated  with recommendations  from advisory  groups , will be developed.  
Phase  1b- Formative  Research  through  Advisory  Focus  Groups : The iTRAC  program  created  during  the 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] R21 study  was developed  using  principles  consistent  with Designing  for Dissemination  (D4D),  which  
 
Version  1.2  9/27/[ADDRESS_421292]  important  to external  validity.83 
Stakeholders  from the target  population  (early  adolescents)  were  included  as key advisors  in the adaptation  of 
the program  and testing  of delivery  approaches  (after  school).  This proposal  will continue  this approach  and 
form a Health  and Education  Professionals  Panel  (HEPP)  of middle  school  health  professionals  to complement  
two Adolescent  Advisory  Boards  (AABs; 1 male,  1 female,  n=16 ) during  translation.  Research  summaries  will 
also be generated  to communicate  with participating  communities.  Using  these  recommended  D4D processes,  
the research  will be better  positioned  for dissemination  (and commercialization ).  
Content  translation  will be guided  by [CONTACT_340456], who will meet  [ADDRESS_421293]  with brainstorming  transla-
tion of content  and 2 times  to review  the wireframe  prototypes  generated  from that process . AABs  will contrib-
ute ideas  for translation,  provide  feedback  about  appeal,  and attend  to cultural,  developmental,  and gender  
considerations.  The HEPP  will provide  feedback  on the proposed  content  and ensure  contextual  acceptability  
(i.e., schools).  Each  time an AAB or HEPP  meeting  is scheduled,  participants  will be notified  in advance  of the 
time,  data,  and location  to minimize  conflicts.  At least  50% of participants  will need  to indicate  their ability  to 
attend  each  meeting.  Otherwise,  meetings  will be reschedu led for a more  convenient  time.  If municipal,  state,  
or federal  guidelines  prohibit  face to face communication,  or if it is not logistically  feasible  to get the majority  of 
participants  together  in the same  physical  space,  AAB and HEPP  meetings  will be conducted  virtually  using  
secure  video -conferencing  technology.  Research  staff will provide  portable  wireless  internet  and a video -com-
pliant  device  to all participants  who require  them  in order  to fully participate.  As in the R21, the design  develop-
ment  cycles  will begin  with advisory  focus  group  feedback  about  how the existing  activities  convey  the content  
(i.e., what  and how they are learning).  They  will advise  on activity  design  for the remaining  content  (sexual  
health  and content  connecting  this with ER) to ensure  these  are engaging,  appropriate,  and informative.  They  
will also provide  perspective s about  design,  structure,  navigability,  and approach.  Established  protocols , suc-
cessful  in previous  projects,  will be used  and led by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Houck.  Groups  will be recorded,  transcribed,  and ana-
lyzed  for content  and themes,  as in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268].   
Deliverable  2: A report  of the focus  group  data summarizing  and integrating  recommendations  for the de-
velopment  of remaining  modules  will be created.  
Phase  1c- Prototype  Development : Theoretical 
frameworks.  The technology design process will 
use a multi -theoretical framework to guide pro-
duction. Persuasive  System  Design  (PSD)  is a 
well-established  guide  for translating  clinical  aims  
to technolo gy frameworks  for supporting  health -
related  behavior  change.84-86 Along  with PSD,  
User -Centered  Design  (UCD)87, 88 and the ADDIE  
Model,89-91 a user interface  and instructional  de-
sign approach,  will be used.  Design  elements  
such  as space  (colors,  sounds,  visual  space),  
components  (characters,  objects),  and mechan-
ics (actions)  will be determined  for program  fea-
tures  (i.e., activities).   
Iterativ e design process.  The conceptual  and technological  web architecture  will be developed  using  PSD.  
The AABs , HEPP , and investigative  team  will identify  key elements  to be translated.  Using  UCD,  AAB input  will 
be solicited  through  iterative  cycles,  with adjus tments  based  on feedback,92 resulting  in greater  user experi-
ences  and more  effective  results.93, 94 Game design theory and the MDA framework will guide intervention  
“gamification. ” Consistent  with mHealth  research  with teens,95-[ADDRESS_421294]  learning  and bolster  adherence,  “badges”  (visual  reward  icons),  will 
be awarded  intermittently.  Badges  are a highly  effective  tool used  to encourage  user engagement  and build  
game  “loyalty.”100-103 Quizzes  for the modules  will also provide  corrective  normative  feedback.  TRAC  content  
will be integrated  into 8 (approx.  45-minute)  modules  in Phase  2. Though  full programming  will not be com-
pleted  in Phase  1, the formative  research  and iterative  design  process  will guide  plans  for future  development.  
Multimedia  programming  will follow  standard  production  steps.  Investigators  will develop  instructional  and 
behavioral  objectives  based  on focus  group  results,  the previously  validated  intervention,  and existing  web 
platforms.  Interface  design  ideas  will be created  in writing , combined  with scripts,  flowcharts , mock -ups, and 
storyboards  using  Adobe  XD wireframing  tools  in Phase  1. Acceptability  of the prototypes  will be determined  
with a second  round  of advisory  board  meetings  to review  the wireframes  generated  from the ideas  provided  
during  the first round.  A specifications  document , with a full outline  of modules  and activities,  will be created  to 
guide  full development  in Phase  2.  
Deliverables:  Deliverable  3a: Prototype  wireframes  for use in a second  round  of advisory  board  meetings  

 
Version  1.2  9/27/22                                                                               8 
 will be created . Deliverable  3b: A summary  report  of advisory  board  feedback  will be generated  to guide  final 
scripting.  Deliverable  4: Specification  documents  for the digital  modules  to complete  the iTRAC  intervention  for 
sexual  risk prevention  (iTRAC -SRP)  will be created.  
 
Summary  of Phase  I Milestones : 
1. Milestone  1: Review  of Sexual  Education  Standards.  TRAC  sexual  health  content  will be updated  using  
the recommendations  of the health  and education  professional  advisory  board  and by a review  of the National  
Sex Education  Standards80. Deliverable  1: A summary  report  of the recommended  content  based  on review  of 
sexual  education  standards,  integrated  with recommendations  from advisory  groups , will be developed.  
2. Milestone  2: Focus  Groups.  Each  of three  advisory  boards  (female  adolescents,  male  adolescents,  health  
and education  professionals)  will meet  to provide  recommendations  for the adaptation  of the intervention,  in-
cluding  key sexual  health  content  and content  linking  sexual  health  to ER as well as approaches  to translating  
this material  via technology.  Deliverable  2: A report  of the focus  group  data summarizing  and integrating  these  
recommendations  for the development  of remaining  modules  will be created.  
3. Milestone  3: Prototype  wireframes.  Static  screenshots  will be created  to show  the look and feel of the new 
content  (aiming  to match  that of the existing  content),  demonstrate  storyboards  of the proposed  games  and 
activities,  and illustrate  the user interface  via wireframes.  These  will be used  in a second  round  of advisory  
board  meetings  to get feedback.  Deliverable  3: a) Prototypes  of intervention  modules  will be created.  b) A 
summary  report  of advisory  board  feedback  will be generated  to guide  final scripting.   
4. Milestone  4: Specifications  Document.  Scripts  of the remaining  iTRAC  module  content  will be created,  in-
tegrating  the existing  emotion  regulation  content  with the identifi ed sexual  health  skills  and education  content.  
Deliverable  4: Specification  documents  for the digital  modules  to complete  iTRAC -SRP will be created.  
Completing  the Phase  [ADDRESS_421295]  indicating  a high probability  of accomplishing  the Phase  2 goals.  
 
Overview  of Phase  2: Acceptability  Testing  and Randomized  Trial  (months  13-36): This phase  will create  
iTRAC -SRP as a web app from the specifications  document  created  in Phase  1, thus completing  the transla-
tion of the original  group  program  to a mobile  intervention  that can be more  easily  disseminated  and fill a con-
tent gap (emotion  regulation)  in the area of sexual  education . Once  completed,  acceptability  testing  will be 
completed  with early  adolescents  in two rounds  to allow  for modifications  based  on participant  feedback.  Once  
finalized,  a small  RCT will assess  impac t on adolescents’  self-efficacy  for preventing  sexual  risk as well as en-
gagement  in sexual  behaviors . All of these  activities  will follow  procedures  successfully  used  in prior collabora-
tions  between  the research  institution  (RIH)  and technology  partner  (KB). 
Phase  2a- Full Program  Development  (months  13-18): will take place  at the beginning  of Phase  2, using  
content  outlined  in Phase  [ADDRESS_421296]-Track  study,  the sexual  
health  and connecting  ER to risk decisions  content  will be completed  using  the same  successful  procedures  of 
the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]  (including  D4D principles).83 The iTRAC -SRP program  will be produced  for mobile  platforms,  
including  smartphones,  tablets,  and desktop  computers.  It will be alpha  tested  in-house  for stability  and code  
errors,  beta tested  (see below),  and revised  following  KB’s iterative  design  process.  Federal  Section 508 
standards  for accessible  information  technology  will be 
considered  so program  functionality  can be compliant  in 
future  dissemination  trials  and commercialization . Web  
app production  will use a Responsive  Web Design  ap-
proach  that provides  an optimi zed user experience  for 
tablets.  The web app front-end interface  components  will 
be developed  using  HTML5,  CSS and JavaScript.  A Mi-
crosoft  SQL database  will enable  user identification  and 
store  and deliver  tailored  content.  Server -side compo-
nents  will be developed  on the Microsoft  dotNet  platform  
using  the C# programming  language.  Hosting  will occur  
on KB’s state -of-the-art server  farm (see Resources ). 
Click  stream  data will be tracked  and monitored  on the 
backend.  Sensitive  information  is protected  by a hardware  firewall  (Cisco  ASA 5505)  and daily backups  protect  
against  data loss. The program  will be developed  for tablets  for the current  project  but optimized  for use on 
desktop s and smartphones  as well, which  will enhance  commercialization  opportunities.   
The iTRAC  intervention  aims  to enhance  ER skills  to reduce  poor decision  making  that can lead to risk be-
haviors.  Incorporating  the ER content  developed  in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268],  we plan to create  45-minute  digital  modules,  time 
consistent  with computerized  executive  function  training  programs  used  with adolescents  (e.g.,  Cogmed,  
Braingame  Brian)  and typi[INVESTIGATOR_340395].  This length  was acceptable  in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251]. Consistent  with re-
search  on mHealth  strategies  for adolescents,95-99 the design  emphasizes  gaming  as a teaching  strategy . 

 
Version  1.2  9/27/22                                                                               9 
 These  interactive  components  (4-6 per module)  are the centerpi[INVESTIGATOR_340396],  complemented  by 
[CONTACT_340457].  As in the original  TRAC  group  program , each  module  will include  activi-
ties related  to emotions,  sexual  health,  and the link between  the two (the iTRAC  pi[INVESTIGATOR_340397]-
tion content  only) . As with the pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268],  the complete  iTRAC -SRP intervention  will begin  each  module  with teens  
labeling  their feelings  that day (to practice  emotion  recognition  and labeling  skills)  before  moving  on to a brief 
review  of previous  module  content.  The first four modules  will focus  on illustrating  the relationship  between  
emotions  and behaviors  and providing  education  about  emotions,  such  as strategies  for labeling  feelings  in 
others,  identifying  emotional  arousal  in oneself  through  somatic  cues,  labeling  these  feelings,  and recognizing  
their source  (“triggers”).  The last four modules  of the program  will focus  on teaching  developmentally  appropri-
ate strategies  for regulating  emotions  during difficult  situations,  particularly  those  related  to health  risks,  using  
three  primary  groups  of strategies  identified  during  qualitative  work  in the development  stage  of Project  TRAC  
(R34  MH078750)45: 1) getting  away  (physically  or cognitively)  from triggers  for strong  emotions,  2) releasing  
emotional  energy  in healthy  ways  (verbally  or physically),  or 3) changing  cognitions  and appraisals  about  emo-
tional  triggers.  These  strategies,  labeled  “Get Out,”  “Let It Out,”  and “Think  It Out,”  correspond  to four of the 
“families”  of ER processes  in Gross’s  process  model.27 Activities  also emphasize  practice  with the unique  focus  
of the intervention,  managing  emotions  as they occur,  as cued  by [CONTACT_340458].  Much  of this content  exists  through  the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]  (see Table  1), including  games  navigating  a space-
ship through  emotional  triggers,  a virtual  slingshot  target  game  highlighting  places  in the body  where  somatic  
emotional  cues  are experienced,  and activities  exposing  adolescents  to emotional  cues  with coaching  to regu-
late these  emotions.  Emphasis  is also placed  on activities  that encourage  participants  to personalize  this infor-
mation.  This existing  ER training  will be integrated  with the rest of the program  content  (sexual  health  educa-
tion and activities  linking  ER to health  behaviors)  to be developed  with guidance  from the AABs and HEPP . 
This content  will include  strategies  for (and practice  with)  recognizing  and managing  emotions  in sexual  health  
situations,  such  as those  involving  peer pressure,  condom  use, media/pornography  exposure,  or sexual  deci-
sion making,  to enhance  the likelihood  that the ER and sexual  health  education  provided  can be applied  to ex-
periences  that are emotionally  arousing  and lead to risk. 
Deliverable:  A complete  digital  version  of the adapted  TRAC  intervention  for sexual  risk prevention,  
iTRAC -SRP,  will be created.  
Phase  2b- Acceptability  Testing  and Finalizing  Revisions  (months  15-18): A pi[INVESTIGATOR_340398] -SRP will be conducted  to confirm  that the components  perform  as designed.  Assessment  and interven-
tion procedures  to be used  in the RCT will also be tested . Sixteen  7th grade  students  (50% female,  racially  and 
ethnically  diverse ) will be recruited  from the study  schools  in two cohorts  to test iTRAC -SRP and make  iterative  
revisions . These  participants  will be excluded  from the RCT.   
Acceptability  will be assessed  several  ways  for each  module.  First,  teens  will complete  a brief standardized  
questionnaire  (used  in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_16080])  to assess  acceptability  (e.g.,  How much  did you like the program ?) and 
feasibility  (e.g.,  How easy  was it to use?).  Mean  scores  of 3.5 or greater  (on a scale  of 1-poor to 5-excellent),  
will be deemed  acceptable  (the existing  iTRAC  received  scores  over 4). Second,  adolescents  will complete  the 
System  Usability  Scale  (SUS)104. This validated,  10-item scale  provides  a global  view of subjective  usability  for 
programs  such  as web tools.  SUS scores  above  [ADDRESS_421297],  researchers  will ob-
serve  participants  playing  the program  using  screen  sharing  software  (e.g.,  GoToMeeting)  to assess  for confu-
sion with functionality.  In the pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268],  this proved  informative  for identifying  usability  concerns.  Finally,  a brief inter-
view with teens  after each  module  will collect  impres sions  of the primary  messages  conveyed  in each  of the 
developed  activit ies. Interviews  will be reviewed  for consistency  of themes  and content  comprehension  by [CONTACT_6283]. 
Houck  and Hadley;  both have  experience  in qualitative  methods .[ADDRESS_421298]. This process  was successful  in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].   
Deliverable:  A summary  report  of quantitative  and qualitative  data from the Acceptability  testing  question-
naires  and interviews  will accompany  a table  of recommended  changes  that will guide  Klein  Buendel’s  revi-
sions  to the program , leading  to the finalized  iTRAC -SRP program . 
Phase  2c- Randomized  Control  Trial  (months  19-36): Recruitment:  For the RCT,  project  staff will recruit  [ADDRESS_421299]  not experienced  
this. Participants  will be recruited  through  several  methods  consistent  with those  used  to successfully  recruit  in 
the pi[INVESTIGATOR_340399] -based  studies  (see Form  F- Recruitment  and Retention ). 1) Students  
will be introduced  to the program  at school  via small -group  presentations  emphasizing  the content  (sexual  and 
 
Version  1.2  9/27/22                                                                               10 
 emotional  health)  and approach  (gaming),  both of which  are of interest  to this age group.  The introductions  will 
be conducted  by [CONTACT_340459],  who will distribute  flyers  with QR codes  that connect  to a REDCap  link to the 
“consent  to contact ” form,  to avoid  students  having  to remember  to return  the form.  Parents  can also sign and 
return  the forms  to the school . 2) Principals  will introduce  the project  to parents  via school  announcement  
emails  that contain  the REDCap  link to the consent  to contact [CONTACT_982]. 3) Project  staff will recruit  at school  events  
attended  by [CONTACT_3654]  (open  houses,  sporting  events,  etc.).   
Once  permission  to contact  [CONTACT_340460],  trained  staff arrange  a meeting  to describe  the project,  
obtain  parental  consent,  and complete  baseline  parent  measures.  Separate  meetings  for adolescents  are ar-
ranged  to explain  the project  and obtain  assent  (separate  from their parent) . The Translation  and Acceptability  
stages  will also use the classroom  recruitment  procedure s described  above . Parents  and teens  will be com-
pensated  for time and effort  in all stages  of the project.   
Randomization : Participants  will be individually  randomized  to either  iTRAC -SRP or waitlist  control  after 
baseline,  following  consent.  Per recommendations  for achieving  between -group  comparability  in clinical  tri-
als,105 randomization  will be stratified  by [CONTACT_340461]-4 blocks.  
Individual  randomization  avoids  nesting  of conditions  within  schools  by [CONTACT_340462],  
which  is feasible  given  individual  program  completion . We considered  randomization  by [CONTACT_169559],  but a group  
randomized  design  would  require  >30 schools  to achieve  adequate  power.  Minor  concern  exists  that teens  
from different  conditions  may discuss  the intervention ; as in Project TRAC, we will measure this “cross -talk” via 
assessment . Project staff will log participants into the password -protected site to avoid outside access . Acces-
sibility will be an ultimate goal of iTRAC, but use will be monitored during the study to control for dose.  
Intervention  Condition:  iTRAC -SRP will consist  of eight,  approximately  45-minute,  “gamified”  digital  mod-
ules of 4-6 activities  (games,  videos,  etc.).  Teens  will complete  modules  in after-school  supervised  group s. 
Students  will be allowed  to complete  1-2 modules  each  week  (total  intervention  completion  time 4-8 weeks);  
project  staff will be present  at each  school  at least  three  days  per week,  allowing  flexible  scheduling/attend-
ance.  No instruction  is needed  to use the program.  Teens  will come  to a common  area (e.g.,  classroom , li-
brary)  where  they will be provided  a project  tablet  connected  to Wi-Fi. They  will have  an individual  account  for 
the program  (password  controlled  by [CONTACT_340463]),  by [CONTACT_340464]  (thus  allowing  flexible  administration  and breaks,  as needed).  We have  cho-
sen this strategy  for the research  for pragmatic  reasons ; after-school  formats  are common  in schools,  and this 
time,  location,  and format  were  successful  in TRAC  and iTRAC . However,  we recognize  that the program  may 
be administered  differently  (e.g.,  during  class  time, in waiting  rooms , or at home ) once  it is commercialized.  
Content  will use gender - and sexuality -inclusive  language  and avoids  heteronormative  descriptions  of risk. 
All modules  will include  activities  that personalize  main  concepts  (some  were  developed  in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]) . iTRAC’s  
programming  structure  does not permit  the skippi[INVESTIGATOR_340400]  (unless  configured  to allow  it in predetermined  
instances ). Modules  will conclude  with a quiz (with  corrective  feedback)  that must  be passed  before  moving  on.  
Waitlist  Control  Condition : Control  participants  will be assessed  on the same  schedule  as the treatment  
condition  and offered  the intervention  after 6-month  follow -up. This is an appropriate  strategy  given  that ado-
lescents  will still be in the developmental  window  of early  adolescence  at the conclusion  of the follow -up win-
dow, thus the intervention  will still be age appro priate . 
Fidelity:  To preserve  internal  validity,  assurances  for consistent  delivery  will be taken.  1) Research  staff 
complete  comprehensive  training  to assure  proper  administration , and drift will be monitored  through  regular  
team  meetings.  2) The computer ized nature  of iTRAC -SRP will ensure  standardized  delivery  of content.  3) A 
trained  RA will be available  to answer  questions  and problem  solve  at all appointments . 4) Each  module  will 
conclude  with a quiz of key content,  with corrective  information  that re-presents  concepts  relevant  to incorrect  
responses.  Participants  will not be able to advance  to the next module  until successfully  answering  all quiz 
items.  Results  will also be saved  as data to inform  regar ding program  comprehension . 5) The iTRAC  program  
prevents  advancing  through  video  content , to ensure  that teens  do not skip challenging  material.  6) Tracking  
software  will track  time spent  on each  module  and activity  to assess  dose.  Summaries  of these  data (means,  
ranges)  will be reviewed  to understand  usage  patterns  that may also inform  commercialization . 
Intervention  Retention:  Retaining  participants  and ensuring  a maximum  intervention  dose  is critical  to as-
sessing  efficacy.  1) The gaming  approach  to the intervention s will encourage  participants  to return  weekly . Pi-
lot teens  were  easily  engaged ; 88% completed  all modules . 2) The health  content,  especially  that related  to 
sex, is of interest  to this age group.  3) In-program  reinforcers  (e.g.,  “badges ,” virtual  prizes ) mark  progress  and 
encourage  completion,  especially  as they relate  to knowledge  valued  in this developmental  period  (e.g.,  sexual  
anatomy,  STI knowledge).  Badges  were  noted  by [CONTACT_340465][INVESTIGATOR_16080] . 4)  As in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268],  the 
sessions  will be held at a convenient  location  and time (after  school) , with options  to accommodate  special  cir-
cumstances  (e.g.,  library  meetings  during  school  breaks ). 5) Snacks  will be provided.  6) Finally, providing  mul-
tiple chances  to complete  modules  on a flexible  schedule  is an advantage  over traditional  group  formats,  which  
are restricted  to a specific  time and can lead to missed  content  when  participants  miss group.  Mobile  delivery  
 
Version  1.2  9/27/22                                                                               11 
 allow s teens  to receive  100%  of the content  at their own pace,  which  may enhance  intervention  effects.  
Follow -up Retention:  The investigative  team  has previously  demonstrated  strong  retention  capacity  (e.g.,  
Project  TRAC : 86% of adolescents,  77% of parents  throug h 30-months ; iTRAC  pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]:  94% through  3-month s). 
We will facilitate  retention  over the proposed  two-year follow -up using  successful  methods  from our own work  
and the literature .106-111 1) The value  of their participation  will be conveyed  (teen  and parent  compensation;  ed-
ucation  during  consent  regarding  the importance  of follow -ups; problem  solving  barriers).  2) Rapport  will be 
established  (contacts  conducted  by [CONTACT_340466];  follow -ups conducted  at times/locations  conven-
ient to families;  holiday  cards).  3) Participant  relocation  will be monitored  (assessment  of potential  moves  at all 
contacts;  families  complete  locator  forms).  4) Logistic  barriers  will be minimized  (parent  assessments  kept 
brief;  scheduling  to include  evenings/weekends ). See Form  F- Recruitment  and Retention  for details.   
 Assessment  Procedures:  Assessments  for both conditions  will occur  at baseline , post-intervention  (2 
month s) and 6 months  after baseline.  They  will minimize  participant  burden  while  assessing  key constructs  of 
the intervention.  Assessments  will be administered  in a quiet  location  at school ; we expect  the battery  of self-
report  and performance  measures  will take 60-[ADDRESS_421300]  TRAC,  which  was well-tolerated.  Performance  measures  of emotio nal competence  will be 
collected  via laptop  computer . The brief parent  battery  will be collected  via REDCap  and can be administered  
in person,  via email  link, or, if needed,  by [CONTACT_648].  
Measures  
Primary  Outcome:  It is well-established  that sexual  self-efficacy  (SSE)  is correlated  with positive  sexual  
behavior  outcomes  and sexual  well-being  among  a diverse  array  of populations112-115 . As such,  measuring  
self-efficacy  for safer  sexual  activity  as a main  outcome  will indicate  iTRAC -SRP’s efficacy  and ability  to pro-
mote  healthier  sexual  behaviors  with the full sample  (not just those  who are sexually  active) . Adolescents’  per-
ceived  abilities  to engage  in behaviors  that mitigate  sexual  risk will be assessed  by [CONTACT_47584]-Efficacy  for HIV 
Prevention  scale  (12 items)116. This continuously  scaled  measure  includes  items  such  as “If you decide  to have  
sexual  intercourse  with your girlfriend/boyfriend,  how sure are you that you could  talk to your girlfriend/boy-
friend  about  safer  sex?”  The measure  assesses  a range  of behaviors  related  to prevention  of HIV, other  STIs,  
or unintended  pregnancy,  including  refusing  sexual  behaviors,  discussing  sexual  histories  with partners,  buying  
condoms,  taking  free condoms,  carrying  condoms,  and asking  a partner  to use a condom.  Participants  respond  
on a 4-point  scale  (couldn’t  do it, unsure,  sure,  very sure).  This measure  demonstrated  good  reliability  in the 
TRAC  study  with this age group  (α= .90). 
Secondary  Outcomes:  Sexual  Risk Cognitions:  The intervention  is expected  to have  an impact  on other  
cognitive  constructs  related  to sexuality  (e.g.,  knowledge,  attitudes),  as well as behaviors.  The Sexuality  Ques-
tionnaire  for Adolescents  (34 items)  is a multiple  choice  test to assess  sexual  health  knowledge  and has been  
shown  to be sensitive  to intervention  impact.12 The Abstinence  Attitudes  (10 items117) questionnaire  assesses  
agreement  with values  related  to abstinence  (α= .86).  
Sexual  Behaviors:  The Adolescent  Risk Behavior  Assessment  (ARBA)[ADDRESS_421301]  TRAC.  The ARBA  employs  
a skip structure  so that questions  answered  in the negative  are not followed  by [CONTACT_340467].  Ques-
tions  are asked  in behavioral  terms,  without  reference  to sex of partner.  Except  at 2-month  follow -up (which  will 
use an abbreviated  version),  the ARBA  will assess  sexual  behavior  occurrence  and frequency  in the past [ADDRESS_421302]  modified  the ARBA  to include  
behaviors  relevant  to this developmental  period  (e.g.,  genital  fondling)  using  previously  validated  items  from 
the Psychosexual  Development  Interview  (PDI)119. Other  questions  cover  condom  use and number  of partners.  
It is expected  that, as in TRAC,  the ER skills  taught  in iTRAC -SRP will result  in less sexual  behavior  and less 
sexual  risk when  compared  to the waitlist  control  group  over the same  time period.  Occurrence  of vaginal , 
anal, and oral sex, as well as condomless  sex, multiple  partners , and substance  use before  sex, assessed  via 
ARBA,  will be examined.  We recognize  that the study  will be underpowered  to detect  significant  group  differ-
ences  on these  variables,  given  that most  early  adolescents  will not transition  to sex in this 6-month  time frame  
of 7th grade  and that larger  studies  with longer  follow -ups will be needed  to demonstrate  effects  on these  varia-
bles.  Nonetheless,  gathering  preliminary  information  will be useful  for understanding  the impact  of iTRAC -SRP 
and planning  for future  studies .   
Non-sexual  risk behaviors  may also be impacted  by a generalized  effect of ER on health  behavior . Thus , 
we will conduct  brief assessment  of behaviors  that may be more  common  in this developmental  window.   
Youth  Risk Behavior  Surveillance  System1 items  (n=9) will be used  to assess  tobacco /vape  use, violence  (e.g.,  
fighting),  and substance  use behaviors . Further,  acceptability  of the program  will be assessed  at immediate  
posttest  using  the acceptability  questionnaire  used  in stage  2b, to provide  additional  information  for commercial  
 
Version  1.2  9/27/22                                                                               12 
 viability  and marketing  direction . 
Treatment  Mechanisms  (Mediators):  Emotion  regulation  will be measured  via self-report,  performance  
measures,  and parent  observation . Teacher  measures  were  considered;  our experience  in Project  TRAC  was 
that students  changed  teachers  too frequently  for long-term follow -ups and that short -term follow -ups (2 
months)  did not provide  time for the ER skills  learned  for risk situations  to gener alize to non-risk settings,  like 
the classroom48. Self-report:  The Difficulties  in Emotion  Regulation  Scale  (36 items120) uses  six subscale s 
(e.g.,  lack of emotional  awareness,  limited  access  to ER strategies;  all α > .80) to assess  perceptions  of skill in 
ER based  on Linehan’s  theoretical  work .[ADDRESS_421303]  Dysregu lation  Scale  (6 items122) assesses  the frequency  
of difficulties  with ER (α= .72), and is shown  to be related  to adolescent  risk behaviors .122 The Emotion  Regula-
tion Behaviors  Scale- Revised  (9 items123) measures  use of the specific  emotion  regulation  strategies  taught  in 
iTRAC  (α= .73). The emotional  self-efficacy  subscale  of the Self-Efficacy  Questi onnaire  for Children  (8 
items124) assesses  perception  of one’s  ability  to cope  with negative  emotions  (α= .83). It has been  shown  to be 
valid,  reliable,  and related  to risk behaviors  among  adolescents .124 The Implicit  Theories  of Emotions  for Chil-
dren- Self subscale  (6 items)125 is based  on Dwec k and colleagues’  work  on implicit  theories  of intelligence126 
and Tamir’s  adult  measure  of emotion  malleability ._ENREF_146127 It assesses  adolescents’  beliefs  about  the 
controllability  of their emotions  (α=.86). All of these  measures  were  successfully  used  in the iTRAC  study . Per-
formance  measures:  a) Diagnostic  Analysis  of Nonverbal  Accuracy –250 (DANVA2)  is a computer -based  
measure  that asks participants  to identify  the emotion  of facial  expressions  displayed  in photographs.  The 
measure  has shown  one-month  test-retest  reliability  over .[ADDRESS_421304]  TRAC.  b) Be-
havioral  Indicator  of Resiliency  to Distress  (BIRD )128 is a 5-minute  computerized  distress  tolerance  task in 
which  participants  are given  the option  to quit at any time.  It generates  a score  of time spent  persisting  on a 
frustrating  task that provides  negative  feedback  (aversive  noise)  when  users  fail at the task.128-130 Parent  re-
port:  The Adolescent  Self-Regulatory  Inventory  (29 items)131 measur es perceptions  of adolescents’  abilities  to 
regulate  over the short -term and long-term,  separately;  both adolescents  and parents  will complete  it about  the 
adolescent  (α= .75-.90). Parents  will complete  this measure  at baseline  and 6-months , to reduce  burden.  
Treatment  Moderators:  Demographic  information  will be collected,  allowing  for analysis  of demographic  
factors,  including  sex as a biological  variable,  as moderating  influences  of treatment  effects.  Self-Rating  Scale  
for Pubertal  Development  (PDS;  5 items )132 will be used,  as pubertal  status  and sexual  activity  are related . The 
PDS uses  gender -specific  items  to assess  physical  maturation.  It is reliable  (α= .67) and strongly  correlated  
with pediatrician -rated  physical  development .132 The Columbia  Impairment  Scale  (CIS;  13 items )133 provides  a 
global  measure  of functional  impairment  with good  reliability  and validity.131, 133 A score  of > [ADDRESS_421305].29, 134-140 Perceived  Peer  Approval  (3 items )141 measures  perceptions  of peer ap-
proval  of sexual  behaviors  (α= .81). Normative  Beliefs  (5 items )142 assesses  perceptions  of peers’  experience  
with and attitudes  toward  sexual  behaviors  (α= .76). The Neighborhood  Environment  Scale  (6 items )143 as-
sesses  conditions  of an adolescent’s  neighborhood  (α= .83).  
Data  Analysis : A more  detailed  description  of the analytic  plan and justification  for power  calculations  is pre-
sented  in Section  4.[ADDRESS_421306] inter-
vention  with baseline  as a covariate.  All participants  who were  randomized  will be includ ed in all analyses  (i.e., 
intent -to-treat).  The size of the treatment  effect  will be estimated  using  standardized  mean  differences.  The 
same  approach  will be used  to evaluate  sexual  health  knowledge  and emotional  competencies.  Sexual  behav-
iors (number  of sexual  behaviors,  number  of condomless  sex acts)  will each  be aggregated  across  the two- 
and six-month  follow -up assessments  and analyzed  using  generalized  linear  models  with log link functions  and 
negative -binomial  distributions  for behavioral  counts  that are expected  to follow  a zero-altered  count  distribu-
tion. Exploratory  analyses:  Mediation:  Causal  mediation  models  will be used  to test how much  of the treatment  
effect  is accounted  for by [CONTACT_340468].  Causal  mediation  pro-
vides  a general  framework  for evaluating  mediation  in both linear  and nonlinear  models,  including  count  out-
comes1. Moderation:  To better  understand  who is benefiting  most  from the intervention  we will use causal  ran-
dom forests,  a non-parametric  data-mining  procedure2. Although  this principled  exploratory  approach  cannot  
definitively  define  subgroups,  it has better  statistical  properties  than looking  at individual  moderators  and will 
help suggest  subgroups  that differ  in terms  of their response  to the intervention.   
Power  and Sample  Size: This trial was powered  to the primary  and other  continuously  scaled  outcomes  (self-
efficacy,  knowledge,  and emotional  competencies).  With [ADDRESS_421307]  sizes  (standardized  mean  difference  d ≥ .47). The power  analysis  was run using  the R pack-
age simstudy  v0.2.1  and assumed  a two tailed  type-1 error  rate of .05 and a correlation  between  baseline  and 
 
Version  1.2  9/27/22                                                                               13 
 the 6-month  outcome  of r=.6. Effect  sizes  from our previous  work  with TRAC  and iTRAC  showed  effect  sizes  
ranging  from .20 to .70.  
Deliverable:  A summary  report  of the trial data will be created  and submitted  for publication.  
 
Summary  of Phase  2 Milestones :  
1. Milestone  5: Digital  Modules.  Based  on the specifications  document,  Klein  Buendel  will create  the digital  
activities  that will be integrated  with the existing  iTRAC  intervention.  Deliverable  5: A complete  digital  version  
of the adapted  TRAC  intervention  for sexual  risk prevention,  iTRAC -SRP,  will be created.  
2. Milestone  6: Acceptability  Testing.  Acceptability  of iTRAC -SRP will be assessed  by [CONTACT_340469].  Deliverable  6: A summary  report  of quantitative  and qualitative  data from the Acceptability  
testing  questionnaires  and interviews  will accompany  a table  of recommended  changes  that will guide  Klein  
Buendel’s  revis ions to the program , leading  to the finalized  iTRAC -SRP program . 
3. Milestone  7: Efficacy  Data.  A randomized  controlled  trial with assessments  at baseline,  post-intervention  
(2 months ), and 6-months  follow -up will provide  information  regarding  adolescents’  perceived  self-efficacy  for 
sexual  risk prevention  behaviors,  an important  construct  at the intersection  of emotion  regulation  and sexual  
health.  Other  variables  of interest  will include  sexual  health  knowledge,  sexual  behaviors,  and emotion  compe-
tencies.  Further,  acceptability  of the program  will be assessed  at immediate  posttest,  to provide  additional  in-
formation  for commercial  viability.  Deliverable  7: A report  of the trial data will be submitted  for publication.   
 
RECRUITMENT  AND  RETENTION  PLAN  
The approach  for recruitment  will be similar  for both phases  of the project,  with the exception  that, given  the 
small  numbers  of students  needed  for the Translation  and Acceptability  stages  of the project  and adolescent  
enthusiasm  for participation,  suffic ient numbers  of participants  can be recruited  with a few classroom  presenta-
tions  (described  below).   
Adolescent  Recruitment : Several  considerations  for recruitment  have  been  included  in the proposed  plan,  
including  the time needed  to enroll  the target  numb er of participants.  First,  to maximize  the number  of students  
approached,  we will recruit  over [ADDRESS_421308]  been  accounted  for in the recruitment  plan.  
Our team  has successfully  recruited  diverse  families  in previous  projects,  including  the pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251] (33%  White;  
30% endorsed  Latino  ethnicity).  The participating  schools  serve  students  from diverse  racial  and ethnic  back-
grounds  (see Planned  Enrollment  Table ). Our participant  sample  will reflect  current  Cranston  school  de-
mographics;  we expect  at least  50% of the sample  to endorse  racial  or ethnic  minority  identity.   
As noted  in the application,  participants  will be recruited  through  several  methods , all of which  are facilitated  by 
[CONTACT_340470] . All of the methods  described  have  been  used  in our 
intervention  research  laboratory  to successfully  recruit  samples.  First,  project  staff will introduce  students  to the 
study  of iTRAC -SRP via a brief presentation  describing  the program,  arranged  by [CONTACT_340471] e. This presentation  emphasiz es the content  (health  topi[INVESTIGATOR_340401],  such  as sex) 
and approach  (gaming),  both of which  are of interest  to adolescents  in this age group.  The presentations  are 
conducted  in groups  (e.g.,  homerooms) , and project  staff members  distribute  flyers  that depi[INVESTIGATOR_340402]-
ages  of the intervention  with “consent  to contact”  forms  for parents  to sign and return  if interested  in participa-
tion. Homeroo m staff will provide  reminders,  and projec t staff will be present  at schools  on a regular  basis  to 
serve  as reminders  to students  as well. Recruitment  for the Advisory  Boards  and Acceptability  Trial is often  
enhanced  by [CONTACT_65754]’  interest  in providing  their opi[INVESTIGATOR_340403] a product,  lead-
ing to a short  recruitment  period.  Recruitment  for the RCT is staggered  over time,  and anecdotal  evidence  sug-
gests  that positive  word  of mouth  about  the program  (from  those  classes  that receive  the presentation  and thus 
participate  first) enhances  recruitment  during  this phase.   
Our previous  studies  have  also demonstrated  that having  an identified  school  staff member  who serves  as a 
“project  champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394]”  and liaison  to our study  team  is key to successful  recruitment,  thus we will identify  such a 
“champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394]”  at each  school  during  the startup  period  of iTRAC -SRP.  The participating  schools  are familiar  with 
this model;  we will reimburse  schools  for staff time and school  space  used  by [CONTACT_46776],  which  eases  the bur-
den of recruitment  procedures  and enhances  the likelihood  of success.   
 
Version  1.2  9/27/[ADDRESS_421309]  staff recruit  at school  events attended  by [CONTACT_3654]  (open  houses,  awards  nights,  school  plays,  
sporting  events,  etc.).  Again,  having  a presence  at events  where  some  families  have  previously  participated  in 
the project  and spontaneously  refer other  parents  to the project  table  has proven beneficial  to recruitment.  
Recruitment  is also enhanced  by [CONTACT_340472] a core component  of the training  received  
by [CONTACT_340473].  Families  are encouraged  to take time 
to discuss  the project  and to ask questions  at all phases,  including  when  deciding  whether  to schedule  a con-
sent appointment.  Respect  for families’  time is conveyed  by [CONTACT_340474].  Respect  for school  procedures  and personnel  has also fostered  positive,  ongoing  relationships  be-
tween  our research  lab and the local school  districts;  these  supportive  relationships  enha nce collaborative  
problem  solving  around  recruitment  when  issues  arise.  
Health  Education  Professionals  Panel  (HEPP)  Recruitment:  Health  teachers  and other  school  health  pro-
fessionals  (e.g.,  nurses,  counselors)  will be recruited  (n=8)  for the HEPP  to advise  on the adaptation  of the 
TRAC  intervention  during  Phase  1. School  staff directly  involved  in health  of middle  school  students  at each  
participating  school , in addition  to school  health  personnel  who are members  of the Rhode  Island  Department  
of Health  (RIDOH)  school  nurses  listserv  and representatives  of the Planned  Parenthood  Federation  of Amer-
ica, will be invited  to participate  in the panel  meetings  during  Phase  1. Staff will be contact[CONTACT_340475],  a strategy  that 
has been  successful  in our current  research.   
Intervention  Retention:  After  families  are enrolled  in the project,  retention  to completion  of the intervention  
will be critical  to assessing  its efficacy.  The pi[INVESTIGATOR_340404],  with 88% of 
adolescents  randomized  to the intervention  condi tion completing  all 4 sessions  of the intervention.  For the 
group -based  format  of TRAC,  average  attendance  was 75%.   
Several  strategies  will be used  to engage  and retain  participants  in iTRAC -SRP.   
1) iTRAC  was designed  with intervention  retention  in mind  by [CONTACT_340476].   
2) “Badges”  are awarded  for completing  activities  in the program.  Used  in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_340405],  these  badges  
are given  names  that reflect  the construct  of the game  but are also engaging  (e.g.,  “Emotion  Commotion,”  
“Truth  Sleuth”).  They  mark  progress  through  the program,  and a tally of badges  earned  is noted  in the upper  
corner  of the game.  Other  in-progra m reinforcers  will be employed  in the complete  program,  such  as virtual  
prizes  (e.g.,  dressing  up their character  in the game)  that enhance  connection  and individualize  experience  
with the program.   
3) Retention  to the intervention  is enhanced  by [CONTACT_340477] h content  of iTRAC -SRP,  especially  the topi[INVESTIGATOR_340406]-
tionships  and sexual  health . These  topi[INVESTIGATOR_340407],  who anecdotally  complain  that 
information  received  in health  class  regarding  sex and relationships  is inadequate.  In additi on, the program  
teaches  strategies  for managing  emotions  that often  interfere  with relationships  for early  adolescents,  thus cre-
ating  interest  in learning  more  through  continued  participation  in the intervention.   
4) Adolescents  complete  the interventions  in locations  convenient,  familiar,  and comfortable  for them.  As in the 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268],  sessions  will be held immediately  after school  at the school  (e.g.,  library  or classroom;  all schools  have  
procedures  allowing  project  staff to use their facilities  after hours).  This makes  attendance  for students  feasible  
and convenient.  Accommodations  can be made  for students  who have  after school  commitments,  though  
these  are rarely  daily events  at this developmental  stage.  Alternative  locations  can include  the local library  (all 
 
Version  1.2  9/27/[ADDRESS_421310]  rooms  that can be reserved  for privacy  of assessment  or intervention  procedures),  adoles-
cents’  homes  (staff  travel  in pairs  to ensure  safety),  and the research  office.   
5) Providing  families  with flexibility  in timing  of appointment s is maintained  as a priority  by [CONTACT_340459].  Several  
days  each  week  will be offered  for program  completion  right after school.  This flexibility  is an advantage  over 
group -administered  interventions,  which  are restricted  to a specific  time and can lead to missed  content  when  
participants  miss group.  Mobile  formats  allow  participants  to receive  100%  of the content  at their own pace.   
6) Reminders  will be sent via text messages  to parents  (and adolescents  who have  phones  and permission  to 
receive  texts  from research  staff)  regarding  scheduled  appointments  to complete  intervention  sessions.  
7) Snacks  will be provided.  Work  from our previous  trials  has shown  that hunger  can lead adolescents  to leave  
school  at the end of the day; providing  snacks  reinforces  attendance  and focus.   
Follow -up Retention:  Retaining  participants  for follow -ups is critical  to assessing  efficacy.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_340408]-
strated  strong  retention  to study  completion  with challenging  populations  in other  studies  (e.g.,  middle  school-
ers with mental  health  symptoms:  85% at 30-month  follow -up (R01  NR011906);  dyads  of adolescent  boys  and 
their parents:  88% at 9-month  follow -up (2014 -MU-CX-0002).  Similarly,  the pi[INVESTIGATOR_340409]  94% 
of adolescents  for the final assessment  (3-months) . We will facilitate  retention  over the proposed  6-month  fol-
low-up using  successful  procedures  from our own studies  and the literature.   
1) Seventh  graders  attend  8th grade  in the same  middle  schools , which  facilitates  tracking.   
2) Compensation  to families  conveys  respect  for participant  time and effort . Adolescents  will receive  $50 for 
completing  assessment  procedures  at each  time point  (baseline,  post-intervention/2 -month,  and 6-month  fol-
low-up) to convey  the importance  and value  of completing  the project.  Parents  will receive  $30 for each  of their 
assessments  (baseline  and 6-month  follow -up) which  involve  less time than adolescent  assessments.  
3) The informed  consent  process  is an opportunity  to educate  participants  about  the importance  of data collec-
tion to research  studies.  To motivate  collaboration,  families  will be educated  during  the consent  process  as to 
why completing  the intervention  (if randomized  to iTRAC -SRP)  and follow -up assessments  is important  to the 
research  and problem  solve  any anticipated  barriers  to participation.   
4) Each  school  will have  a dedicated  research  assistant  who will assume  primary  responsibility  for recruitment  
and tracking  of participants  at that school.  In this way, participants  have  a primary  project  contact  [CONTACT_340478]-
duct project  activities  with the family  over time to develop  rapport  with families.  This encourages  familiarity  and 
comfort  with the project  and, in turn, retention.   
5) Follow -ups will be conducted  at locations  convenient  to families  (see Intervention  Retention,  item 4). The 
vast majority  of adolescents  prefer  to complete  study  activities  at school.  However,  alternative  locations  can 
include  the local library,  adolescent’s  home,  or the research  office.  All assessment  procedures  can be com-
pleted  in any of these  locations,  due to the portability  of study  devices.  
6) Parent  assessments  will be brief (15-20 minutes)  and follow -ups can be completed  by [CONTACT_324210].  
7) To limit barriers  to families  of diverse  cultural  backgrounds,  all parent  materials  (consents,  questionnaires)  
will be available  in Spanish , and at least  one Spanish -speaking  RA will be a part of the staff.    
8) Other  mailings,  such  as holiday  cards  are sent to enhance  recall  and familiarity  with the project.   
9) Standard  assessment  procedures  include  research  assistants  providing  appointment  reminders  by 
[CONTACT_648]/text  and providing  scheduled  appointments  in writing.  Standard  lab procedure  also includes  inquiring  
about  anticipated  moves  or phone  number  changes,  to avoid  challenges  in reaching  families  for follow -ups. In 
the unusual  circumstance  in which a family  moves  out of the range  in which  a research  assistant  can conduct  
an in-person  assessment,  the questionnaire  portion  of the battery  can be emailed  to adolescents  via REDCap.   
 
Version  1.2  9/27/22                                                                               16 
 10) Families  complete  locator  forms  that provide  contacts  who can help staff locate  the family  if their contact  
[CONTACT_340479].  These  forms  are completed  at each  assessment  point  and include  a check  box and sig-
nature  procedure  for parents  to permit  schools  to provide  updated  contact  [CONTACT_340480]. 
 
 
HUMAN  SUBJECTS  RESEARCH  
This study  is nonexempt  research  involving  human  subjects.  Rhode  Island  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]  (FWA#00001230)  will pro-
vide the oversight  IRB for the study.  Approval  for the project  and for consent  forms  will be obtained  from the 
Rhode  Island  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_153028].    
 
PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 
1. RISKS  TO THE SUBJECTS  
 
a. Human  Subjects  Involvement  and Characteristics  
 
In Phase  1, two Adolescent  Advisory  Boards  (AABs)  composed  of 8 members  each  will be convened  in Rhode  
Island.  A Health  Education  Professionals  Panel  (HEPP)  of [ADDRESS_421311].  One hundred  twenty  adolescents  (ages  12-14) and their par-
ents will be recruited  from public  middle  schools  in Rhode  Island  for the Randomized  Controlled  Trial Phase.   
 
For both phases , Inclusion  criteria : enrolled  at a participating  school,  in the 7th grade,  between  the ages  of 12 
and 14 years , and has a parent/legal  guardian  who speaks  English  or Spanish  to provide  consent . Exclusion  
criteria : unable  to read English  at a 4th grade  level, has a sibling  who has participated  in the project,  or has ob-
servable  cognitive  or developmental  delays  that would  preclude  participation . In the RCT,  eligible  adolescents  
will be randomized  to participation  in a web-based , tablet -delivered  emotion  regulation  intervention  (iTRAC -
SRP)  or a waitlist  control  until the goal of [ADDRESS_421312]:  Hope  Highlands  Middle  School,  Bain Middle  School,  Western  Hills 
Middle  School,  and Park View  Middle  School.  (See  Resources  for more  information  on sites).   
 
Students  will be introduced  via a brief description  of the program  emphasizing  the content  (sexual  and emo-
tional  health)  and approach  (gaming),  both of which  are of interest  to this age group.  The introductions  will be 
conducted  by [CONTACT_340481]  (e.g.,  homerooms) , who will distribute  flyers  with “consent  to contact”  
forms  for parents  to sign and return.  Principals  will introduce  the project  via emails  sent to all parents  with 
school  announcements.  A REDCap  link to the consent  to contact  [CONTACT_340482]-
tronically,  to avoid  students  having  to remember  to return  the form.  Project  staff will also recruit  at school  
events  attended  by [CONTACT_3654]  (open  houses,  sporting  events,  etc.).    
 
Once  permission  to contact  [CONTACT_340483],  school  staff  involvement  ends  (to avoid  per-
ceived  pressure  to participate).  Trained  research  staff  will contact  [CONTACT_340484]-
sent. Participants  will be compensated  for their  time and effort.  Staff  will separately  explain  the project  
to adolescents  and obtain  assent  away  from  their  parent’s  presence.   
 
These  procedures  will be used  for both  Phase  1 and Phase  2. Fewer  homerooms  will need  to be ap-
proached  for the Translation  and Acceptability  stages,  as fewer  participants  are needed.   
 
A Health  Education  Professionals  Panel  of school  personnel  key to student  health  will also be formed  to advise  
on the adaptation  of the intervention  to digital  format.  Identified  from throughout  the school  system , this will in-
clude  individuals  with involvement  in student  health  and risk behaviors  (e.g.,  health  teachers,  administrators,  
school  counselors,  school  nurses ). Once  each  pool of professionals  from Cranston  Public  Schools  is identified , 
individuals  within  each  profession  will be chosen  at random , to ensure  a mix of perspectives  are represented  in 
the HEPP.  They  will be contact[CONTACT_340485]-
tion. Additionally,  members  of the Rhode  Island  Department  of Health  (RIDOH ) school  nurses  listserv , as well 
 
Version  1.2  9/27/[ADDRESS_421313] stage, adolescents and their parents will 
be agreeing to the ad olescent’s participation in an 8 -module tablet -delivered health intervention and completion 
of computerized questionnaires at three points (baseline, 2 -, and 6 -month follow -ups). Similarly, parents will 
provide responses to questionnaires. They will be agr eeing to let their responses, collapsed with those of other 
participants, be used for reporting scientific results.  Adolescents and their parents will be assured that they are 
free to withdraw from the study at any time.  
 
For all phases,  once  permission  to contact  [CONTACT_340483],  trained  research  staff will contact  [INVESTIGATOR_57967]-
ents to introduce  and describe  the program  and what  it involves  for parents  and teens.  At the conclusion  of this 
conversation,  parents  will be asked  whether  they would  be interested  in meeting  to learn  more  about  the pro-
gram.  Research  staff will then arrange  an individual  meeting  at a location  convenient  to them  (e.g.,  the re-
search  office,  the school,  home,  etc.) to describe  the project  in detail,  obtain  parental  consent,  and (for the 
RCT Phase)  complete  measures,  for which  they will be compensated  for their time and effort.  Separate  meet-
ings for adolescents  will be arrang ed (typi[INVESTIGATOR_340410])  to explain  the project  and obtain  assent  away  
from their parent’s  presence.  Adolescents  will be reassured  that they do not have  to participate  in the program  
despi[INVESTIGATOR_340411]’s  consent.  They  will be told that if they do not wish to participate,  the research  staff will not 
disclose  to parents  the reason  that the student  is considered  ineligible,  in order  to protect  their privacy  and 
avoid  coercion  to participate.  These  methods  have  been  successful  in recruiting  and consenting  eligible  ado-
lescents  in our previous  projects . 
 
b. Sources  of Materials  
Participants  in the Translation  Stage  (Phase  1) will provide  feedback  through  discussions  (AAB focus  groups ). 
Study  staff will take notes  on feedback  provided  by [CONTACT_340486].  Data  collected  during  this 
stage  will include  de-identified  written  notes  taken  by [CONTACT_340487].  During  focus  
groups,  discussions  will be audiorecorded .  
 
Participants  in the Acceptability  Testing  Stage  (Phase  2) will complete  brief questionnaires  assessing  accepta-
bility and usability  after each  module  and participate  in interviews  about  their experience  with the digital  mod-
ules (e.g.,  learning  process,  etc.).  These  discussions  will be audiorecorded  as well. They  will also complete  
self-report  questionnaires  and computerized  tasks  to test assessment  procedures  for the RCT.  
 
Participants  in the Randomized  Trial (Phase  2) will complete  audio  computer -assisted  self-interviews  (ACASI)  
on laptops  at baseline,  2-, and 6-months  after baseline.  Adolescents  will complete  several  questionnaires  as-
sessing  demographic  information,  sexual  attitudes  and cognitions,  risk behaviors,  and emotional  functioning.  
Parents  will complete  a locator  form to assist  in retention  and trackin g, as well as measures  of demographic  
information  and their adolescent’s  emotion  regulation.  Teens  will also complete  performance  measures  related  
to emotion  regulation  (Behavioral  Indicator  of Resilience  to Distress;  Diagnostic  Analysis  of Nonverbal  Accu-
racy-2).  
 
c. Potential  Risks  
The risks in this study  are considered  minimal.  During  the Translation  phase,  participation  requires  only attend-
ance  at Advisory  Board  meetings  where  opi[INVESTIGATOR_340412],  though  participants  will be advised  that they 
may decline to answer  any questions  at any time.  During  Acceptability  Testing,  participation  requires  comple-
tion of the web-based  program  across  several  sessions,  and completion  of measures  and interviews  that as-
sess the acceptability  and clarity  of the web-base d program.  Similarly,  during  the RCT,  participation  requires  
completion  of measures  as described  above  and participation  in the finalized  web-based  program.   
 
Some  adolescents  and parents  may feel uncomfortable  with the topi[INVESTIGATOR_340413].  Families  are 
notified  of this content  during  the informed  consent  process.  These  topi[INVESTIGATOR_340414],  in a developmentally  appropriate  way during  all phases  of the project.  Moderators  during  feedback  
 
Version  1.2  9/27/[ADDRESS_421314]  to use of the ACASI  for data collection,  the computer -assisted  format  is expected  to reduce  partic-
ipants’  discomfort  answering  questions  about  sensitive  topi[INVESTIGATOR_340415]-
ment  format  will prevent  others  from becoming  aware  of adolescents’  answers.  However,  it will also be empha-
sized  to participants  that they may skip anxiety -provoking  questions  on any survey  and that they can terminate  
their participation  at any time during  the course  of data collection  or interventions.  If at any point  during  data 
collection  or during  the intervention,  a parent  or adolescent  wishes  to discontinue  participation,  they will be al-
lowed  to withdraw  from the study  without  negative  consequences.   
 
While  not directly  assessed  during  the intervention  or assessment  procedures,  if a subject  discloses  an abu-
sive experience  to project  staff,  parents  will be notified  and the matter  resolved  in accordance  with standard  
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_340416]  (see Protection  Against  Risks ). A similar  protocol  (described  below)  will be followed  
if adolescents  disclose  suicidal  or homicidal  ideation  during  the study.   
 
2. ADEQUACY  OF PROTECTION  AGAINST  RISKS  
 
a. Informed  Consent  and Assent  
Only research  staff at Rhode  Island  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_340417].  Given  that our study involves  children,  
we have  carefully  designed  our consent  and assent  procedures  to meet  HHS  regulatory  requirements  for pa-
rental  permission  and child assent  (45 CFR 46.408 ). Specifically , trained  project  staff will gather  informed  con-
sent/assent  from all participants  in person.  Parents  will provide  informed  consent  for their adolescent  and their 
own participation  in the project.  Adolescents  will provide  assent  for participation.  Staff members  will inform  the 
parent  of the research  study  procedures,  discuss  the inherent  risks,  explain  the rules  of confidentiality  and ob-
tain consent.  Separate  from parents,  staff members  will individually  speak  with each  adolescent  to describe  the 
study  procedures,  review  the inherent  risks,  discuss  the rules  of confidentiality  and obtain  assent.  Research  
staff will be available  to answer  any ques tions  about  the study.  All signed  consent  forms  will be locked  away  
securely  and kept separate  from any study  data (see below ). Participants  will be provided  with copi[INVESTIGATOR_340418]/Assent  Forms.  
 
b. Protection  Against  Risk  
 
As noted  above,  participation  in all phases  of the project  is entirely  voluntary  and participants  are free to with-
draw  from the project  at any time,  without  negative  consequences  to their affiliation  with the referring  school.   
 
Confidentiality . The study  will maintain  confi dentiality  of stored  records  according  to the following  guidelines:   
• All records  will be kept by [CONTACT_340488];   
• RIH will maintain  locked  files of all gathered  data and permit  access  only to authorized  individuals.  (The 
schools  and any associated  staff members  will not have  any access  to these  records.);   
• Completed,  signed  consent  forms  will be stored  in a separate,  locked  cabinet  that holds  no other  study  
information;   
• Data  collected  on laptops  will be downloaded  after each  assessment  onto a flash  drive  as separate  pass-
word -protected  files prior to transfer  to RIH’s  secure  servers ; the flash  drives  will be stored  in a locked  
cabinet  at RIH;  
• Audio  files will be transferred  from recording  equipment  to RIH encrypted  servers  and deleted  from the 
original  source.  Any backup  drives  used  will also be encrypted.  Files  will be deleted  at the conclusion  of 
the study;  
• RIH will maintain  a separate,  secured  digital  file that holds  the list linking  study  identification  numbers  to 
names.  Only the Principal  Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_340419], which  will 
be destroyed  at the completion  of the project;  
• Notes  and transcripts  from focus  groups  will be deidentified  and will be kept in locked  cabinets;   
• Conclusions  and final results  will be presented  for aggregate  data only,  with no disclosure  of specific  
cases;   
 
Version  1.2  9/27/22                                                                               19 
 • Collected  information  will not be released  without  the explicit  consent  of the participant,  according  to the 
Privacy  Act;  
• No personal  identifying  information  will be released  to NIH.   
• All personal  identifying  informati on will be removed  from data prior to sharing  with Klein  Buendel , Inc staff.  
 
Backend user  data during the Acceptability and RCT stages will be collected and stored via internet to Klein 
Buendel’s server farm. KB’s server farm has five Dell PowerEdge serve rs with two 3.[ADDRESS_421315] drives that operate off a 
hardware RAID5 system, connected to a local area network (LAN) running the Windows [ADDRESS_421316]-
ware firewall (SonicWall TZ600) and each server has its own native Windows security software. All KB servers 
are connected via [ADDRESS_421317] the loss of data.  
 
Trauma -Informed Approach . Consistent with SAMHSA’s Trauma -Informed Approach and guidelines published 
by [CONTACT_340489] (Guide to Trauma Informed Sex Education) and the Responsible Sex Education I nstitute, iTRAC -
SRP will be sensitive to the experiences of participants with a history of trauma. These focus on principles fun-
damental to a trauma -informed approach. While some recommendations apply to in -person, group -based edu-
cation programs (collabora tion and mutuality, peer support), many can be incorporated into technology -deliv-
ered platforms.  
 
Safety , both physical and emotional, is the foundation for a trauma -informed approach to sexual health educa-
tion. iTRAC -SRP has advantages in creating a safe  environment that may not exist in some group -based pro-
grams. The content is standardized and avoids shaming language (“you shouldn’t have sex…”). Participants 
may proceed at their own pace, maintaining control throughout the program. In addition, other pa rticipants are 
not present to introduce content that may lead to strong emotions based on their personal experiences. In this 
way, technology -delivered sex education may be a more effective strategy than classroom -based learning 
where some students may hav e undesired responses. Trustworthiness and transparency  will be achieved by 
[CONTACT_340490] (e.g, drawings of sexual anat-
omy). These activities are also used as practice with emotion regulation , as they are emotionally arousing for 
most adolescents regardless of trauma history because of the taboo around sexual health in US culture. Thus, 
coaching will be provided for use of ER skills to manage feelings while learning this important content. The se 
skills are expected to increase the likelihood that participants will recall the information provided and will in-
crease self -efficacy for ER strategy use. Empowerment and choice  are facilitated through the teaching of emo-
tion regulation skills as a way to manage emotions that might otherwise influence decisions in ways that ado-
lescents do not intend. Other strategies for creating empowerment include reaffirming bodily autonomy during 
all sexual health content - that they have many choices over what happen s to their body and when - and allow-
ing participants to skip questions that they prefer not to answer during assessment procedures. Cultural, histor-
ical, and gender issues  will be considered in all elements of the program, to avoid stereotypes and biases. T he 
use of a space theme allows for use of non -human characters that are not easily associated with cultural stere-
otypes. Of particular importance in sex education programs is consideration of heteronormative language that 
may exclude youth who identify as LGBTQ. Inclusive language (e.g., “partner” vs. “boyfriend/girlfriend”) creates 
a safe environment for all participants and reflects sensitivity to the traumas experienced by [CONTACT_340491].    
 
The sexual health co ntent of TRAC has been used in a previous large trial without adverse events. Staff will be 
provided education to improve awareness of how trauma can affect youth, families, and communities to inform 
their day -to-day work with participants. Descriptions of  violence or abuse that might be particularly sensitive for 
those with trauma histories are not a part of the original TRAC program. Adolescents consistently see sexual 
content in media and social media; the content of iTRAC -SRP will be developmentally app ropriate and provide 
a context in which adolescents can interpret the information that they receive in other forums. People with 
trauma histories can lead full lives and develop healthy sexual identities; sexual health education is critical to 
this develop ment. Respectful, affirming programs are key to this process and can be achieved through 
 
Version  1.2  9/27/[ADDRESS_421318]  discloses  an abusive  experience,  suicidal,  or homicidal  thoughts  and/or  behavior  during  any phase  
of the project , a trained  research  staff member  will interview  the subject  immediately  and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_340420]-
tacted.  Next,  the parent  will be notified  and the matter  resolved  in accordance  with standard  medical/psychiat-
ric care as follows.  Abuse  is a reportable  condition.  In the majority  of cases,  a history  of abuse  has already  
been  reported  to the appropriate  authorities.  If not previously  disclosed,  the situation  will be reported  to authori-
ties per state  law and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_340421].  Suicidal  or homicidal  thoughts  or behavior  will be handled  in the 
same  fashion  and the case  will be reviewed  immediately  with one of the investigators . If the participant  is in 
imminent  danger,  the participant  will be taken  by [CONTACT_340492][INVESTIGATOR_340422]-
diate  intensive  psychiatric  evaluation.  Participants  are informed  of the limits  to confidentiality,  including  these  
reportable  conditions,  during  the consent  process.   
c. Vulnerable  Subjects  
Our study  is aimed  at completing  the development  and testing  the efficacy  of a preventive  intervention  de-
signed  for middle  school ers. As such,  this study  necessitates  the involvement  of children.  Importantly , this 
study  presents  no greater  than  minimal  risk to children.  Furthermore,  as noted  above,  we have  made  numer-
ous provisions  for solicitin g the assent  of the children  and the permission  of their parents  or guardians.   
 
3. POTENTIAL  BENEFITS  OF THE PROPOSED  RESEARCH  TO THE SUBJECTS  AND  OTHERS  
We hope  that the emotion  regulation  training  of the iTRAC  intervention  will be successful  in reducing  the rates  
of sexual  onset  and other  health  risks in our subject  population . Waitlist  control  participants  will be provided  the 
opportunity  to complete  iTRAC -SRP after a 6-month  delay.  We believe  that the clear  examination  of these  
questions  outweighs  the previously  mentioned  risks.  Youth  have  an opportunity  to learn  emotion  regulation  
strategies  and consider  safer  sexual  behavior  to avoid  future  risks.  The potential  benefits  to individual  subjects  
outweigh  potential  risks,  particularly  in offering  adolesce nts a chance  to better  understand  the nature  and con-
sequences  of their risk behaviors  and to learn  skills  related  to emotion  regulation . 
 
4. IMPORTANCE  OF THE KNOWLEDGE  TO BE GAINED  
This study  will provide  an important  sex education  tool and elucidate  the role of emotion  regulation  in improving  
sexual  self-efficacy,  a critical  factor  in healthy  sexual  activity  during  development,  and delaying  early sexual  
debut , which  is associated  with significantly  greater  future  sexual  risk, including  more  unwanted  pregn ancies,  
more  sexually  transmitted  infections,  greater  number  of sexual  partners,  greater  frequency  of intercourse,  and 
less condom  use. Even  if an adolescent  or parent  does  not directly  benefit  from the project,  the information  we 
gain may be used  to impro ve the effectiveness  of sexual  health  programs  for other  early  adolescents.  
 
5. HUMAN  SUBJECTS  PROTECTION  EDUCATION  
To meet  mandatory  training  certification  in Human  Subjects  Protection,  the Office  of Research  Administration  
offers  an online  training  progr am through  CITI,  Collaborative  IRB Training  Initiative.  This online  program  offers  
both the initial  certificate  and a three -year re-certification  program  required  by [CONTACT_137377].  Drs. Houck , Hadley,  
and Barker  have  completed  required  training  through  CITI.  
 
Klein  Buendel,  Inc. maintains  compliance  with mandatory  training  through  the NIH Office  of Extramural  Re-
search’s  training  program.  [CONTACT_184303]  and all required  staff members  have  completed  this training.   
 
Collaborating  Sites   
This research  involving  human  subjects  will take place  at both Rhode  Island  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]  (FWA#00001230)  and 
the participating  school  districts.  School  sites will be made  aware  by [CONTACT_340493]-
porting  any issue s related  to risks related  to human  subjects.  Due to their limited  role in the study  (informing  
families  about  the availability  of research  and permitting  use of their facilities  for intervention)  schools  do not 
meet  criteria  for engagement  in research  according  to OHRP  guidance  (dated  October  16, 2008).  Rhode  Is-
land Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_340423].  
Western  Institutional  Review  Board  will provide  oversight  for any study  activities  taking  place  at Klein  Buendel  
(FWA#00003715).   
 
Version  1.2  9/27/22                                                                               21 
  
 
DATA  AND  SAFETY  MONITORING  PLAN  
The nature  of the population  and setting  warrants  the development  of a Data  Safety  and Monitoring  Plan.  The 
current  study  is considered  to present  minimal  risk to participants  given  that subjects  will provide  data via ques-
tionnaires  and performance  measures  as well as participate  in a psychosocial  intervention.  In this plan,  the 
Principal  Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_340424]  (Hadley,  Barker , Berteletti ) will provide  oversight  of all recruit-
ment  and study  procedures.   
 
Specifically,  the Principal  Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_340425]: 
• Monitoring  the safety  of the participants   
It is possible,  though  it has never  happened,  that adolescents  in the schools  may become  aggressive  with 
each  other.  Each  school  has identified  personnel  who are present  during  after school  activities,  and session  
moderators  will have  cell phones  to contac t any necessary  assistance.   
   
• Monitoring  the safety  of the researchers    
It is possible,  though  unlikely,  that the physical  safety  of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_340426],  either  
through  direct  implementation  of the study  (e.g.,  a participant  becomes  agitated  and assaults  a facilitator)  or 
while  in the school  environment  more  generally  (e.g.,  an adolescent  uninvolved  in the study  assaults  a facilita-
tor at the school  for the project).  To help prevent  and/or  respond  to such  occurrence s, school  staff will be on-
site for assistance.  Such  events  are unlikely  to occur,  but in the case  that they do, the event  will be reported  to 
the PI [INVESTIGATOR_340427].  If any project  staff is injured  as a result  of such  an event,  they will seek  
care,  as warranted,  by [CONTACT_340494][INVESTIGATOR_307]’s  Employee  Health  Services.  
 
Home  visits  will be conducted  in pairs,  to ensure  staff safety.  Lab procedures  include  providing  supervisors  
with time and location  of all home  appointments  and texting  a supervisor  prior to entering  the home  as well as 
when  the pair has left. 
 
• Maintaining  the confidentiality  and integrity  of the data 
Data  will be confidentially  maintained  under  the stringent  guidelines  put forth in the aforementioned  Protection  
Against  Risk  (see Hum an Subjects  Protection ). RIH will maintain  locked  files, stored  off-site, and permit  
electronic  access  only to authorized  individuals.  ID numbers  are used  as identifiers  throughout  databases.  The 
collaborating  school s and any associated  staff members  will under  no circumstances  have  any access  to rec-
ords.   
 
• Receiving/eliciting  reports  of adverse  events  from research  assistants  (RAs)  and school  staff   
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_340428] -by-event  basis.  They  will also be elicited  in an open -ended  man-
ner through  regular  contact  [CONTACT_340495] [INVESTIGATOR_340429].  
 
• Reporting  adverse  events  to: 
 
Co-investigators  
School  
The Rhode Island Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_340430] a result  of study  participation  includes  psychological  distress  from 
study  procedures  resulting  in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].  Project  staff will be instructed  to immediately  contact  [CONTACT_340496].  The PIs will immedi-
ately  investigate  the event  and determine  the appropriate  manner  in which  to proceed.  It is the responsibility  of 
the PI [INVESTIGATOR_340431],  provide  commentary,  and provide  oversight  to ensure  that re-
ports  are relayed  to the co-investigators,  Rhode  Island  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_340432], and to the OHRP,  as indicated.  In the 
event  of adverse  events  or unexpected  problems  posing  risks to subjects,  the PI [INVESTIGATOR_340433]-
tocols and/or  request  interim  data analyses.   
 
 
Version  1.2  9/27/22                                                                               22 
 Department  of Health  and Human  Services  (DHHS)  Required  Education  in the Protection  of Human  Re-
search  Participants   
 
To meet  mandatory  training  certification  in Human  Subjects  Protection,  the Office  of Research  Administration  
offers  an online  training  program  through  CITI,  Collaborative  IRB Training  Initiative.  This online  program  offers  
both the initial  certificate  and a three -year re-certification  program  required  by [CONTACT_137377].  Drs. Houck,  Barker , 
Hadle y, and all research  staff in their laboratory  have  completed  required  training.  Klein  Buendel,  Inc. main-
tains  compliance  with mandatory  training  through  the NIH Office  of Extramural  Research’s  training  program.  
[CONTACT_184303]  and all required  staff members  have  completed  this training.   
 
REFERENCES  
1. Kann  L, McManus  T, Harris  WA. Youth  Risk Behavior  Surveillance  - United  States,  2017.  MMWR . 
2018;67:SS -9.  
2. CDC.  Youth  risk behavior  surveillanace -United  States,  2017.  Morbidity  and Mortali ty Weekly  Report . 2017;  
3. National  Research  Council.  Adolescent  health  services:  missing  opportunities.  Washington,  DC: The 
National  Academies  Press;  2009.  
4. Valois  R, Bryant  E, Rivard  J, Hinkle  K. Sexual  risk-taking  behaviors  among  adolescents  with severe  
emotional  disturbance.  J Child  Fam Stud. 1997;21:789 -803.  
5. Capaldi  D, Stoolmiller,  M., Clark,  S., & Owen,  L. Heterosexual  risk behaviors  in at-risk young  men from 
early  adolescence  to young  adulthood:  Prevalence,  prediction,  and association  with STD contraction.  Dev 
Psychol . 2002;38:394 -406.  
6. Sandfort  T, Orr M, Hirsch  J, Sentelli  J. Long -term health  correlates  of timing  of sexual  debut:  Results  from 
a national  U.S. study.  Am Journal  of Public  Health . 2008;98:155 -161.  
7. Magnusson  BM, Masho  SW, Lapane  KL. Adolescent  and sexual  history  factors  influencing  reproductive  
control  among  women  aged  18-44. Sexual  Health . 2011;8(1):95 -101. doi:10.1071/SH100007  
8. Kaestle  C, Halpern  C, Miller  W, Ford C. Young  age at first sexual  intercourse  and sexually  transmitted  
infections  in adolescents  and young  adults.  American  journal  of epi[INVESTIGATOR_623] . 04/15/05  2005;161(8):774 -780. 
doi:10.1093/aje/kwi095  
9. Finer  L, Philbin  J. Trends  in ages  at key reproductive  transitions  in the United  States,  1951 -2010.  Women's  
Health  Issues . May-Jun 2014;24(3):e271 -e279.  doi:10.1016/j.whi.2014.02.[ADDRESS_421319]  M, Poulin  F. Early  sexual  onset  and alcohol  use and misuse  from adolescence  into 
young  adulthood.  Journal  of Adol Health . 2017;61:4.   
11. O'Sullivan  L, & Brooks -Gunn,  J. The timing  of changes  in girls' sexual  cognitions  and behaviors  in early  
adolescence:  A prospective,  cohort  study.  Journal  of Adolescent  Health . 2005;37:211 -219.  
12. Kirby  D. Mathtech  questionnaires:  Sexuality  questionnai res for adolescents.  In: Davis  CM, Yarber  WL, eds. 
Handbook  of Sexuality -Related  Measures . Sage  Publications;  2004:35 -46. 
13. Romer  D, Stanton  B. Feelings  about  risk and the epi[INVESTIGATOR_340434].  
Prevention  science  : the official  journal  of the Society  for Prevention  Research . 2003;4:39 -53.  
14. Udry  J, Billy J, Morris  N, Groff  T, Raj M. Serum  androgen ic hormones  motivate  sexual  behavior  in 
adolescent  boys.  Fertility  and sterility . 1985;43:90 -94.  
15. Udry  J, Talbert,  L., & Morris,  N. . Biosocial  foundations  for adolescent  female  sexuality.  Demography . 
1986;23:217 -228.  
16. Giedd  J. The teen brain:  Insights from neuroimaging.  Journal  of Adolescent  Health . 1986:[ADDRESS_421320]-adolescent  brain  
maturation  in frontal  and striatal  regions.  Nature  neuroscience . 1999;2(10):[ADDRESS_421321]  recognition  in 
children  and adolescents.  Journal  of the American  Academy  of Child  & Adolescent  Psychiatry . 1999;38(2):[ADDRESS_421322]  of including  alcohol  and cannabis  content  in a sexual  risk-
reduction  intervention  on the incidence  of sexually  transmitted  infections  in adolescents.   A cluster  randomized  
clinical  trial. JAMA  pediatrics . 2018;172(4):e175621.   
20. Lowry  R, Dunville  R, Robin  L, Kahn  L. Early  sexual  debut  and associated  risk behaviors  among  sexual  
minority  youth.  American  journal  of preventive  medicine . 2017;52:[ADDRESS_421323] H, DeCoster  J, Sutton  M, Lochman  JE. Risky  sexual  behavior  and substance  use 
among  adolescents:  a meta -analysis.  Children  Youth  Serv Review . 2015;52:74 -88.  
 
Version  1.2  9/27/22                                                                               23 
 22. Hessler  D, Katz L. Associations  between  emotional  competence  and adolescent  risky behavior.  J Adolesc . 
2010;33:241 -46.  
23. Sussman  S, Dent,  C., & Galaif,  E. The correlates  of substance  abuse  and dependence  among  adolescents  
at high risk for drug abuse.  Journal  of Substance  Abuse . 1997;9:241 -255.  
24. Tarter  R. Etiology  of adolescent  substance  abuse:  A developmental  perspective.  American  Journal  of 
Addiction . 2002 ;11:171 -191.  
25. Wills  TA, Walker  C, Mendoza  D, Ainette  MG. Behavioral  and emotional  self-control:  relations  to substance  
use in samples  of middle  and high school  students.  Psychology  of Addictive  Behaviors . 2006;20(3):265.   
26. Webb  T, Miles  E, Sheeran  P. Dealing  with feeling:  A meta -analysis  of the effectiveness  of strategies  
derived  from the process  model  of emotion  regulation.  Psychological  Bulletin . 2012;138:775 -808.  
27. Gross  JJ. Emotion  regulation:  Conceptual  and empi[INVESTIGATOR_340435].  In: Gross  JJ, ed. Handbook  of 
emotion  regulation,  second  edition . Guilford  Press;  2014:3 -20. 
28. Tice D, Bratslavsky,  E., & Baumeister,  R. Emotional  distress  regulation  takes  precedence  over impulse  
control:  If you feel bad, do it! Journal  of personality  and social  psychology . 2001;80:53 -67.  
29. Santelli  J, Kaiser  J, Hirsch  L, Radosh  A, Simkin  L, Middlesteadt  S. Initiation  of sexual  intercourse  among  
middle  school  adolescents:  The influence  of psychosocial  factors.  Journal  of Adolescent  Health . 2004;34:200 -
208.  
30. Brown  L, Barone  V, Fritz G, Cebollero  P, Nassau  J. AIDS  education:  the Rhode  Island  experience.  Health  
Education  & Behavior . 1991;18(2):[ADDRESS_421324]  C, Cotton  A, Cox M. Truancy  and illegal  drug use, and knowledge  of HIV infection  in 932 14-16-
year-old adolescents.  Journal  of Adolescence . 1992;15  
32. Wills  T, Walker  C, Mendoza  D, Ainette  M. Behavioral  and emotional  self-control:  relations  to substance  use 
in samples  of middle  and high school  students.  Psychology  of Addictive  Behaviors . 2006;20:265 -278.  
33. Holmes  C, Brieant  A, King-Casas  B, Sim-Spoon  J. How is religiousness  associated  with adolescent  risk-
taking?  The roles  of emotion  regulation  and executive  functioning.  Journal  of Res Adolescence . 2019;29:334 -
344.  
34. Raffaelli  M, Crockett  L. Sexual risk in adolescence:  The role of self-regulation  and attraction  to risk. 
Developmental  Psychology . 2003;39:1036 -46.  
35. Robin  L, Dittus  P, Whitaker  D, et al. Behavioral  interventions  to reduce  incidence  of HIV, STD,  and 
pregnancy  among  adolescents:  A decade  in review.  Journal  of Adolescent  Health . 2004;34(1):3 -26.  
36. Fiellin  L, Hieftje  K, Pendergrass  T, et al. Video  game  intervention  for sexual  risk reduction  in minority  
adolescents:  randomized  controlled  trial. J Med Internet  Research . 2017;19(9):e3 14.  
37. Haruna  H, Hu X, Chu S, Mellecker  R, Gabriel  G, Ndekao  P. Improving  sexual  health  education  programs  
for adolescent  students  through  game -based  learning  and gamification.  Int J Environmental  Res and Public  
Health . 2018;15(9):2027.   
38. Peskin  MF, Shegog  R, Markham  CM, et al. Efficacy  of It's your game -tech:  a computer  based  sexual  health  
education  program  for middle  school  youth.  J Adolesc  Health . 2015;56(5):515 -521.  
39. Guilamo -Ramos  V, Benzekri  A, Thimm -Kaiser  M, et al. A triadic  intervention  for adolescent  sexual  health:  a 
randomized  clinical  trail. Pediatrics . 2020;145(5):e20192808.  doi:10.1542/peds.[ADDRESS_421325]  of primary  care parent -targeted  interventions  on parent -
adolescent  interventions  on parent -adolescent  communication  about  sexual  behavior  and alcohol  use: a 
randomized  clinical  trail. JAMA  Network  Open . 2019;2(8)  
41. DiClemente  RJ, Wingood  GM, Sales  JM, et al. Efficacy  of a telephone -delivered  sexually  transmitted  
infection/human  immunodeficiency  virus  prevention  maintenance  intervention  for adolescents:  a randomized  
clinical  trial. JAMA  pediatrics . 2014;168(10):938 -946.  
42. Metz  S, Frank  J, Riebel  D, Cantrell  T, Sanders  R, Broderick  P. The effectiveness  of the learning  to 
BREATHE  Program  on adolescent  emotion  regulation.  Res in Human  Dev. 2013;10(3):252 -272.  
43. Burke  C. Mindfullness -based  approaches  with children  and adolescents:  a preliminary  review  of current  
research  in an emergent  field.  J Child  Fam Stud. 2010;19:[ADDRESS_421326]  M. Emotion  regulations  group  skills  training  for 
adolescents  and parents:  a pi[INVESTIGATOR_340436]-on treatment  in a clinical  setting.  Clinical  child psychology  and 
psychiatry . 2020;25:[ADDRESS_421327]  J. New skills  to reduce  sexual  risk behaviors  among  young  adolescents.  Pediatrics . 
2018;141(6)  
 
Version  1.2  9/27/22                                                                               24 
 46. Lansing  A, Guthrie  K, Hadley W, Stewart  A, Peters  A, Houck  C. Qualitative  assessment  of emotion  
regulation  strategies  for prevention  of health  risk behaviors  in early  adolescents.  J Child  Fam Stud. 
2019;28:765 -775.  
47. Houck  C, Barker  D, Hadley  W, Menefee  M, Brown  L. Sexual  risk outcomes  of an emotion  regulation  
intervention  for at-risk early  adolescents.  Pediatrics . 2018;141(6):2017.   
48. Houck  C, Hadley  W, Barker  D, Brown  L, Hancock  E, Almy  B. An emotion  regulation  intervention  to reduce  
risk behaviors  among  at-risk early  adolesc ents.  Prevention  Science . 2016;17(1):[ADDRESS_421328]  of an emotion  regulation  intervention  on early  
adolescent  health  risk behaviors.  Health  Psychology . 2016;35(9):1036.   
50. Nowicki  S, & Carton,  J. The measurement  of emotional  intensity  from facial  expressions:  The DANVA  
FACES  2. Journal  of Social  Psychology . 1993;133:[ADDRESS_421329]  F, Bate P, Kyriakidou  O. Diffusion  of innovations  in service  
organizations:  systematic  review  and recommendations.  Milbank  Quarterly . 2004;82(4):581 -629.  
52. Grimshaw  JM, Shirran  L, Thomas  R, et al. Changing  provider  behavior:  an overview  of systematic  reviews  
of interventions.  Medical  Care . 2001:II2 -II45.  
53. Yuan  CT. Blueprint  for the dissemination  of evidence -based  practices  in health  care. Commonwealth  Fund;  
2010.  
54. Chou  WS, Prestin  A, Lyons  C, Wen K. Web 2.0 for health  promotion:  reviewing  the current  evidence.  
American  journal  of public  health . 2013;103(1):e9 -e18.  
55. Griffiths  F, Lindenmeyer  A, Powell  J, Lowe  P, Thorogood  M. Why are health  care interventions  delivered  
over the internet?  A systematic  review  of the published  literature.  Journal  of medical  Internet  research . 
2006;8(2)  
56. Holt CL, Tagai  EK, Scheirer  MA, et al. Translating  evidence -based  interventions  for implementation:  
Experiences  from Project  HEAL  in African  American  churches.  Implement  Sci. 2014; 9:66.   
57. Lightfoot  M, Comulada  W, Stover  G. Computerized  HIV preventive  intervention  for adolescents:  Indications  
of efficacy.  American  journal  of public  health . 2007;97(6):1027 -1030.   
58. Andersson  G, Cuijpers  P. Internet -based  and other  computerized  psychological  treatments  for adult  
depression:  a meta -analysis.  Cognitive  behaviour  therapy . 2009;38(4):196 -205.  
59. Andrews  G, Cuijpers  P, Craske  MG, McEvoy  P, Titov  N. Computer  therapy  for the anxiety  and depressive  
disorders  is effective,  acceptable  and practical  health  care:  a meta -analysis.  PloS  one. 2010;5(10):e13196.   
60. Arnberg  FK, Linton  SJ, Hultcrantz  M, Heintz  E, Jonsson  U. Internet -delivered  psychological  treatments  for 
mood  and anxiety  disorders:  A systematic  review  of their efficacy,  safety,  and cost-effectiveness.  2014;  
61. Hedman  E, Furmark  T, Carlbring  P, et al. A 5-year follow -up of internet -based  cognitive  behavior  therapy  
for social  anxiety  disorder.  Journal  of medical  Internet  research . 2011;13(2)  
62. Calear  AL, Christensen  H. Review  of internet -based  prevention  and treatment  programs  for anxiety  and 
depression  in children  and adolescents.  Medical  Journal  of Australia . 2010;192(11):S12.   
63. Cuijpers  P, Marks  I, van Straten  A, Cavanagh  K, Gega  L, Andersson  G. Computer  aided  psychotherapy  for 
anxiety  disorders:  A meta  analytic  review.  Cognitive  Behaviour  Therapy . 2009/06/01  2009;38(2):66 -82. 
doi:10.1080/16506070802694776  
64. Hedman  E, Ljótsson  B, Lindefors  N. Cognitive  behavior  therapy  via the Internet:  a systematic  review  of 
applications,  clinical  efficacy  and cost-effectiveness.  2012;  
65. Titov  N, Dear  BF, Schwencke  G, et al. Transdiagnostic  internet  treatment  for anxiety  and depression:  a 
randomised  controlled  trial. Behaviour  Research  and Therapy . 2011;49(8):441 -452.  
66. March  S, Spence  SH, Donovan  CL. The efficacy  of an internet -based  cognitive -behavioral  therapy  
intervention  for child anxiety  disorders.  Journal  of Pediatric  Psychology . 2009;34(5):474 -487.  
67. Clarke  J, Proudfoot  J, Birch  MR, et al. Effects  of mental  health  self-effica cy on outcomes  of a mobile  phone  
and web intervention  for mild-to-moderate  depression,  anxiety  and stress:  secondary  analysis  of a randomised  
controlled  trial. BMC  psychiatry . 2014;14(1):272.   
68. Roberto  AJ, Zimmerman  RS, Carlyle  KE, Abner  EL. A computer -based  approach  to preventing  pregnancy,  
STD,  and HIV in rural adolescents.  Journal  of health  communication . 2007;12(1):53 -76.  
69. Davidson  TM, Yuen  EK, Felton  JW, McCauley  J, Gros  KS, Ruggiero  KJ. Feasibility  assessment  of a brief,  
web-based  behavioral  activation  intervention  for adolescents  with depressed  mood.  The International  Journal  
of Psychiatry  in Medicine . 2014;48(1):69 -82.  
70. Manicavasagar  V, Horswood  D, Burckhardt  R, Lum A, Hadzi -Pavlovic  D, Parker  G. Feasibility  and 
effectiveness  of a web-based  positive  psychology  program  for youth  mental  health:  randomized  controlled  trial. 
Journal  of medical  Internet  research . 2014;16(6 ) 
 
Version  1.2  9/27/22                                                                               25 
 71. Teens,  social  media  & technology  2018.  https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2018/05/31/teens -social -
media -technology -2018/  
72. Student  Mobile  Device  Survey  2015.  https://www.pearsoned.com/wp -content/uploads/2015 -Pearson -
Student -Mobile -Device -Survey -Grades -4-12.pdf . Survey:   
73. Smyth  J, Arigo  D. Recent  evidence  support  emotion -regulation  interventions  for improving  health  in at-risk 
and clinical  populations.  C Opin  Psychiatr . 2009;22:[ADDRESS_421330]  regulation  and prevention  of risky behaviors.  JAMA . 2010;304(5):565 -566. 
doi:10.1001/jama.2010.1058  
75. Jenkins  R. Supplemental  issue  on does  early  intervention  prevent  health -risking  sexual  behaviors  related  
to HIV/AIDS:  Commentary  on effects.  Prev Scien ce. 2014;15:S84 -86. doi:10.1007/s11121 -013-[ADDRESS_421331]  Regulation  (STAR):  human  immunodeficiency  
virus  prevention  in alternative/therapeutic  schools.  J Amer  Acad  Child  Adolesc  Psych . 2011;50(10):[ADDRESS_421332]  management  for HIV 
prevention  with adolescents  in therapeutic  schools:  The immediate  impact  of project  balance.  AIDS  Behav . 
2013;17(8):2773 -2780.  doi:10.1007/s10461 -013-0599-5 
78. Burke  CA. Mindfulness -Based  Approaches  with Children  and Adolescents:  A Preliminary  Review  of 
Current  Research  in an Emergent  Field.  Journal  of Child  and FAmily  Studies . 2010;19:133 -44.  
79. Erkut  S, Grossman,  J.M.,  ,Frye,  A.A.,  Ceder,  I., Charmar aman,  I., Tracy,  A. Can sex education  delay  early  
sexual  debut?  J Early  Adolesc . 2012;33:482 -497. 80. K-12 NSESccas.  Future  of sex education  initiative.  The 
Journal  of school  health . 2020;  
80. Future  of Sex Education  Initiative.  (2020).  National  Sex Education  Standards:  Core  Content  and Skills,  K-12 (Second  Edition).  
81. Cortes,  N., Eisler,  A., & Desiderio,  G. (2016).  Tip sheet:  Gender,  sexuality,  and inclusive  sex education.  
Baltimore:  Healthy  Teen  Network.  
82. Vermont  Agency  of Education  (2018).  Full Spectrum:  Educator’s  Guide  to Implementing  LGBTQ+  Inclusive  
Sex Ed. Barre,  VT: Vermont  Agency  of Education.  
83. Brownson  RC, Jacobs  JA, Tabak  RG, Hoehner  CM, Stamatakis  KA. Designing  for dissemination  among  
public  health  researchers:  findings  from a anational  survey  in the United  States.  American  journal  of public  
health . 2013;103:[ADDRESS_421333]  H, Van Gemert -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_340437]  J. Persuasive  system  design  does  matter:  a 
systematic  review  of adherence  to web-based  interventions.  J Medical  Internet  Res. 2012;14(6)  
85. Oinas -Kukkonen  H, Harjumaa  M. Persuasive  systems  design:  Key issues,  process  model,  and system  
features.  Communications  of the Association  for Information  Systems . 2009;24(1):28.   
86. Oinas -Kukkonen  H, Harjumaa  M. A systematic  framework  for designing  and evaluating  persuasive  
systems.  Persuasive  technology . Springer;  2008:164 -176. 
87. Abras  C, Maloney -Krichmar  D, Preece  J. User -centered  design.  In: Bainbridge  W, editor.  Encyclopedia  of 
Human -Computer  Interaction.  Thousand  Oaks:  Sage  Publications;  2004.  p. 445-456. 
88. Norman  DA, Draper  SW. User  Centered  System  Design:  New Perspectives  on Human -Computer  
Interaction . Lawrence  Erlbaum  Associates  Inc.; 1986.  
89. Peterson  C. Bringing  ADDIE  to life: instructional  design  at its best.  Journal  of Educational  Multimedia  and 
Hypermedia . Jul 2003;12(3):227 -241.  
90. Gustafson  KL, Branch  RM. What  is instructional  design?  In: Reiser  RA, Dempsey  JV, eds. Trends  and 
Issues  in Instructional  Design  and Technology . Merril/Prentice  Hall; 2002.  
91. Molenda  M. In search  of the elusive  ADDIE  model.  Performance  Improvement . Feb 2015;54(2):40 -42.  
92. Mazzara  ML. Application  of theory:  minimalism  and user centered  design . 2001.  [PHONE_7076].  Accessed  
December  20, 2017.  http://www.gotomedia.com/goto/web2expo/workshop/resources/minimialism_ucd.pdf  
93. Pagulayan  RJ, Keeker  K, Wixon  D, Romero  RL, Fuller  T. User -centered  design  in games.  In: Sears  A, 
Jacko  JA, eds. Human -Computer  Interaction  Handbook:  Fundamentals,  Evolving  Technologies  and Emerging  
Applications . Lawrence  Erlbaum  Associaties,  Inc.; 2003:883 -906. 
94. Nicholson  S. A user-centered  theoretical  framework  for meaningful  gamificat ion. 2012:  
95. Cafazzo  JA, Casselman  M, Hamming  N, Katzman  DK, Palmert  MR. Design  of an mHealth  app for the self-
management  of adolescent  type 1 diabetes:  a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  Journal  of medical  Internet  research . 
2012;14(3):e70.   
96. Graafland  M, Dankbaar  M, Mert A, et al. How to systematically  assess  serious  games  applied  to health  
care.  JMIR  serious  games . 2014;2(2)  
97. Kulyk  O, den Daas  C, David  S, van Gemert -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_340437]  L. How Persuasive  are Serious  Games,  Social  Media  
and mHealth  Technologies  for Vulnerable  Young  Adults?  2015;  
 
Version  1.2  9/27/22                                                                               26 
 98. Hieftje  K, Duncan  L, Sawyer  B, Haskell  S, Fiellin  L. A tablet  game  for risk reduction  and HIV prevention  in 
adolescents.  J Mobile  Tech  Med. 2012;1(4S):8 -8.  
99. Shegog  R, Brown  K, Bull S, et al. Serious  games  for sexual  health.  Games  for Health  Journa l. 
2015;4(2):69 -77.  
100. Nah FFH,  Telaprolu  VR, Rallapalli  S, Venkata  PR. Gamification  of education  using  computer  games.  
Human  Interface  and the Management  of Information  Information  and Interaction  for Learning,  Culture,  
Collaboration  and Business . Springer;  2013:99 -107. 
101. 7 things  you should  know  about  BADGES.  https://net.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/ELI7085.pdf .  
102. Easley  D, Ghosh  A. Incentives,  gamification,  and game  theory:  an economic  approach  to badge  design.  
ACM;  2013:359 -376. 
103. Miller  AS, Cafazzo  JA, Seto E. A game  plan:  Gamification  design  principles  in mHealth  applications  for 
chronic  disease  management.  Health  informatics  journal . 2014:1460458214537511.   
104. Bangor  A, Kortum  P, Miller  J. An Empi[INVESTIGATOR_340438].  Int J Hum  
Computer  Interaction  2006;24(6):[ADDRESS_421334] Edition  ed. Springer;  1998.  
106. Armistead  L, Clark,  H., & Barber,  C., Dorsey,  S., Hughley,  J., Favors,  M., & Wyckoff,  S. Participant  
retention  in the Parents  Matter!  program:  Strategies  and outcome.  J Child  Fam Stud. 2004;13:67 -80.  
107. Gwadz  M, Rotheram -Borus  M. Tracking  high-risk adolescents  longitudinally.  AIDS  Educ  Prev. 1992:69 -
82.  
108. Meyers  K, Webb  A, Frantz  J, Randall  M. What  does  it take to retain  substance -abusing  adolescents  in 
research  protocols?  Delineation  of effort  required,  strategies  undertaken,  costs incurred,  and 6-month  post-
treatment  differences  by [CONTACT_340497].  Drug  and Alcohol  Dependence . 2003;69(1):73 -85.  
109. Scott  C. A replicable  model  for achieving  over 90% follow -up rates  in longitudinal  studies  of substance  
abusers.  Drug  and Alcohol Dependence . 2004;24:21 -36.  
110. Smith  E, Gorman -Smith  D, Quinn  W, Rabiner  D, Tolan  P, Winn  D. Community -based  multiple  family  
groups  to prevent  and reduce  violent  and aggressive  behavior:  The GREAT  Families  Program.  American  
journal  of preventive  medi cine. 2004;26:39 -47.  
111. Yancey  A, Ortega  A, Kumanyika  S. Effective  recruitment  and retention  of minority  research  participants.  
Ann Rev Pub Health . 2006;27:1 -28.  
112. Fisher  J, Fisher  W. Changing  AIDS -risk behavior.  Psychol  Bull. 1992;111:455 -474.  
113. Closson  K, Dietrich,  J., Lachowsky,  N., Nkala,  B., Palmer,  A., Cui, Z., Beksinska,  M., Smit,  J., Hogg,  R., 
Gray,  G., Miller,  C., Kaida,  A. Sexual  self-efficacy  and gender:  A review  of condom  use and sexual  negotiation  
among  young  men and women  in sub-saharan Africa.  Journal  of Sex Resesarch . 2018;55:1 -18. 
doi:10.1080/00224499.2017.1421607  
114. Jones  D, Richards,  C. Correlation  between  self-efficacy  in sexual  negotiation  and engagement  in risky 
sexual  behaviors:  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_340439]  a secon dary school  in Grenada,  West  Indies.  Int Public  
Health  Journal . 2016;8(3):397.   
115. Rostosky  SS, Dekhtyar,  O., Cupp,  P.K.,  Anderman,  E.M. Sexual  self-concept  and sexual  self-efficacy  in 
adolescents:  a possible  clue to promoting  sexual  health.  J Sex Res. 2008;45(3):277 -286.  
116. Lawrence  L, Levy  S, Rubinson  L. Self-efficacy  and AIDS  prevention  for pregnant  teens.  J School  
Health . 1990;60:19 -24.  
117. Miller  B, Norton  M, Fan X. Pubertal  development,  parental  communication,  and sexual  values  in 
relation  to adolescent  sexual  behaviors.  Journal  of Early  Adolescence . 1998;18:27 -52.  
118. Donenberg  G, Emerson  E, Bryant  FB, Wilson  H, Weber -Shifrin  E. Understanding  AIDS -risk behavior  
among  adolescents  in psychiatric  care:  Links  to psychopathology  and peer relations hips.  J Am Acad  Child  
Adolesc  Psychiatry . Jun 2001;40(6):642 -53. doi:10.1097/00004583 -200106000 -[ZIP_CODE]  
119. Meyer -Bahlburg  H, Dugan  T, Ehrhardt  A. Psychosexual  development  interview:  Child  version  for sexual  
risk behavior,  female  (PDI-RISK -CF). Unpublished  manuscript.  [LOCATION_001],  NY: Columbia  University;  1998.  
120. Gratz  KL, Roemer  L. Multidimensional  assessment  of emotion  regulation  and dysregulation:  
Development,  factor  structure,  and initial  validation  of the Difficulties  in Emotion  Regulation  Scale.  Journa l of 
Psychopathology  and Behavioral  Assessment . 2004;36:[ADDRESS_421335]  Press;  1993.  
122. Brown  L, Houck  C, Lescano  C, Donenberg  G, Tolou -Shams  M, Mello  J. Affect  regulatio n and HIV risk 
among  youth  in therapeutic  schools.  AIDS  Behav . 2012;doi:10.1007/s10461 -012-0220 -3 
123. Houck  C, Hadley  W, Barker  D, Brown  L, Hancock  E, Almy  B. An emotion  regulation  intervention  to 
reduce  risk behaviors  among  at-risk early  adolescents.  under  review;  
 
Version  1.2  9/27/22                                                                               27 
 124. Valois  RF, Zullig  KJ. Psychometrics  of a brief measure  of emotional  self-efficacy  among  adolescents  
from the United  States.  The Journal  of school  health . 2013;83(10):704 -711.  
125. Michel  B. The association  between  children' s beliefs  about  emotions  and symptoms  of depression.  
Cambridge,  MA: Harvard  University;  2017.  
126. Dweck  C, Chiu Cy, Hong  Y-y. Implicit  theories  and their role in judgements  and reactions:  a world  from 
two perspectives.  Psychological  Inquiry . 1995a;6(4):26 7-285. doi:doi:10.1207/s14327955pli0604_1  
127. Tamir  M, John  O, Silvastava  S, Gross  J. Implicit  theories  of emotion:  Affective  and social  outcomes  
across  a major  life transition.  J Personality  Social  Psychol . 2007;92(4):731 -744. doi:doi:10.1037/0022 -
3514.9 2.4.731  
128. Cummings  JR, Bornovalova  MA, Ojanen  T, Hunt  E, MacPherson  L, Lejuez  C. Time  doesn’t  change  
everything:  The longitudinal  course  of distress  tolerance  and its relationship  with externalizing  and internalizing  
symptoms  during  early  adolescence.  J Abnorm  Child  Psychol . 2013;41(5):735 -748. 
129. Bancroft  J, Janssen  E, Strong  D, Carnes  L, Vukadinovic  Z, Long  J. Sexual  risk-taking  in gay men:   The 
relevance  of sexual  arousability,  mood,  and sensation  seeking.  Arch Sex Behav . 2003;32(6):555 -572.  
130. Schloss  H, Haaga  D. Interrelating  behavioral  measures  of distress  tolerance  with self-reported  
experiential  avoidance.  Journal  of Rational  Emotive  Cognitive  Behavioral  Therapy . 2011;29:53 -63.  
131. Moilanen  K. The adolescent  self-regulatory  inventory:  the development  and validation  of a 
questionnaire  of short -term and long-term self-regulation.  Journal  of youth  and adolescence . 2007;36:835 -848.  
132. Carskadon  M, Acebo  C. A self-administered  rating  scale  for pubertal  development.  J Adolesc  Health . 
1993;14(3) :190-195.  
133. Bird H, Shaffer  D, Fisher  P, et al. The olumbia  impairment  scale  (CIS):  pi[INVESTIGATOR_340440] a measure  of 
global  impairment  for children  and adolescents.  Int J Methods  in Psych  Res. 1993;3:167 -176.  
134. Buhi E, Goodson  P. Predictors  of adoles cent sexual  behavior  and intention:  A theory -guided  systematic  
review.  Journal  of Adolescent  Health . 2007;40:4 -21.  
135. Cubbin  C, Brindis  CD, Jain S, Santelli  J, Braveman  P. Neighborhood  poverty,  aspi[INVESTIGATOR_340441],  and initiation  of sex. Journa l of Adolescent  Health . 2010;47(4):[ADDRESS_421336], Meeus  W. Family  cohesion  and romantic  and 
sexual  initiation:  a three  wave  longitudinal  study.  Journal  of youth  and adolescence . 2012;41(5):583 -592.  
137. Kerr JC, Valois  RF, Siddiqi  A, Vanable  P, Carey  MP. Neighborhood  condition  and geographic  locale  in 
assessing  HIV/STI  risk among  African  American  adolescents.  AIDS  and Behavior . 2014:1 -9.  
138. Markham  CM, Lormand  D, Gloppen  KM, et al. Connectedness  as a predictor  of sexual  and 
reproductive  health  outcomes  for youth.  Journal  of Adolescent  Health . 2010;46(3):S23 -S41.  
139. Secor -Turner  M, McMorris  B, Sieving  R, Bearinger  LH. Life Experiences  of Instability  and Sexual  Risk 
Behaviors  Among  High-Risk Adolescent  Females.  Perspectives  on sexual  and reproductive  health . 
2013;45(2):101 -107.  
140. Hadley  W, Barker  D, Thamotharan  S, Houck  C. Relationship  between  unsupervised  time and 
participation  in an emotion  regulation  intervention  and risk outcomes.  Journal  of devel opmental  and behavioral  
pediatrics  : JDBP . 2017;38(9):714 -722.  
141. Treboux  D, Busch -Rossnagel  N. Social  network  influences  on adolescent  sexual  attitudes  and 
behavior.  J Adolesc  Res. 1990;5:175 -189.  
142. Coyle  K, Kirby  D, Robin  L, Banspach  S, Baumler  E, Glassman  J. All4You!  A randomized  trial of an HIV, 
other  STDS,  and pregnancy  prevention  intervention  for alternative  school  students.  AIDS  Education  and 
Prevention . 2006;18(3):187 -203.  
143. Crum  R, Lillie-Blanton  M, Anthony  J. Neighborhood  environment  and opportunity  to use cocaine  and 
other  drugs  in late childhood  and early  adolescence.  Drug  and Alcohol  Dependence . 1996;43(3):155 -161. 
doi:10.1016/s0376 -8716(96)[ZIP_CODE] -7 
144.  Office  of Disease  Prevention  and Health  Promotion.  Healthy  People  2030 . https://health.gov/healthypeo-
ple/objectives -and-data/data -sources -and-methods/data -sources/national -survey -family -growth -nsfg 
 
 
STATISTICAL  DESIGN  AND POWER  
 
Data  preparation:  Relevant tests  of model  assumptions  will be evaluated with all analyses, and appropriate 
corrections  for problems  in distributions  will be implemented. Because even small  and statistically  non-
significant between condition differences  in baseline characteristics  can adversely  affect treatment effect 
estimates, we will use inverse  probability  of treatment weights  (IPTW) to adjust for potential  imbalance 
between conditions1,2. Covariate balancing propensity  scores3 will be used  to generate the weights  and the 
model  will include demographics  and baseline measures  of primary  outcomes , secondary  outcomes, 
exploratory  outcomes, moderators, and mechanisms. The effectiveness  of the IPTWs  will be evaluated by 
[CONTACT_340498]-to and following 
weighting. We will also examine the positivity  or common  support assumption required for IPTW by [CONTACT_340499]. This assumption is likely  to hold in 
the context of a randomized trial.  
Missing data:  Based on previous  projects, we expect 10% attrition by [CONTACT_2671] 6-month follow -up. We 
will use fully conditional  multiple imputation (a.k.a., multiple imputation using chained  equations  [MICE]4) to 
address  bias introduced  by [CONTACT_340500]. MICE  was selected because it can handle outcomes  with different 
statistical  distributions  (i.e., binomial, Poisson, normal) , it can be applied  to a large number  of variables, and it 
has solid performance in simulation studies4. This approach assumes  data are missing  at random  (MAR).   
Primary  Outcome:   The primary  outcome of the RCT will be Self-efficacy  for Sexual  Risk Prevention at the 6-
month follow -up. All participants  who were  randomized will be included in all analyses  (i.e., intent-to-treat). This 
outcome will be assessed  using an analysis  of covariance with baseline included as a covariate.   
Secondary Outcomes: Secondary  outcomes  include sexual  health knowledge,  abstinence attitudes , sexual  
behaviors , and condomless  sex acts. Sexual  health knowledge will be analyzed like the primary  outcome. 
Sexual  behaviors  will be summed  across  the follow -up assessments. Multiple imputation will be used to 
address  missing  assessments  and the summation will occur  within each imputation to ensure  that missing  
assessment  are appropriately  counted. These data are expected to be zero-altered and will thus be analyzed 
using generalized linear  models  with a negative binomial  distribution and a log link function. Condomless  sex 
acts will be analyzed like sexual  behaviors.   
Mechanisms:  Measures  of mechanisms  include theoretically  important emotional  competencies  (e.g., emotion 
regulation, emotion recognition, distress  tolerance)  that mediate risk as measured by [CONTACT_6270]-report,  performance 
measures, and parent report.  These outcomes  will be assessed at the 2-month and 6-month follow -ups using  
analysis  of covariance like for the primary  outcome.  
Power  and Sample Size: This trial was powered to the continuously  scaled  outcomes  (self-efficacy, 
knowledge, and emotional  competencies). With [ADDRESS_421337] sizes (standardized mean difference d ≥ .47). The power  analysi s was run using the R 
package simstudy  v0.2.1 and assumed a two tailed type-1  error rate of .05 and a correlation between baseline 
and the 6-month outcome of r=.6. Effect sizes from our previous  work  showed effect sizes ranging from .20 to 
.70.   
 
Explorat ory analyses of mediation and treatment  modifiers: Mediation:  Causal  mediation will be used to 
evaluate whether  treatment-related change in self-efficacy  was attributable to change in mechanisms. Causal  
mediation was selected because the framework  can handle mediators  and outcomes  with non-normal  
distributions  such  as a binary  outcome8. Mediation analyses  will be run for each of the hypothesized 
mechanisms. Moderation: To better  understand who is benefiting most  from the intervention we will use causal  
random  forests, a non-parametric  data-mining procedure9. Although this principled exploratory  approach 
cannot definitively  define  subgroups, it has better  statistical  properties  than looking at individual  moderators  
and will help suggest subgroups  that differ  in terms  of their response to the intervention.  Power  was not 
calculated  for these exploratory  analyses.  
 
1. Austin, P. C. The use of propensity score methods with survival or time-to-event outcomes: reporting 
measures of effect similar to those used in randomized experiments. Stat. Med. 33, 1242– 1258 (2014). 
2. Austin, P. C. & Stuart, E. A. Moving towards best practice when using inverse probability of treatment 
weighting (IPTW) using the propensity score to estimate causal treatment effects in observational studies. 
Stat. Med. 34, 3661– 3679 (2015). 
3. Imai, K. & Ratkovic, M. Covariate balancing propensity score. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B Stat. Methodol. 76, 
243– 263 (2014). 
4. Azur, M. J., Stuart, E. A., Frangakis, C. & Leaf, P. J. Multiple imputation by [CONTACT_3006]: what is it and 
how does it work?: Multiple imputation by [CONTACT_3006]. Int. J. Methods Psychiatr. Res. 20, 40– 49 
(2011). 
5. Applied Survival Analysis. in Series in Probability and Statistics  (eds. Hosmer, D. et al.) (Wiley, 2008). 
6. Grambsch, P. M. & Therneau, T. M. Proportional hazards tests and diagnostics based on weighted 
residuals. Biometrika 81, (1994). 
7. Johnson BT, S.-S. L. Interventions to reduc e sexual risk for human immunodeficiency virus in adolescents: 
A meta-analysis of trials, 1985-2008. Arch. Pediatr. Adolesc. Med. 165, 77– 84 (2011). 
8. VanderWeele, T. J. Mediation Analysis: A Practitioner’s Guide. Annu. Rev. Public Health 37, 17– 32 (2016) . 
9. Athey, S., Tibshirani, J. & Wager, S. Generalized random forests. Ann. Stat. 47, 1148– 1178 (2019). 
 