Page 1 of 29 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Using Peer Support to Aid in Prevention and Treatment in Prediabetes (UPSTART ) 
 
Study Protocol  
 
NCT#  03689530  
 
Version Date:  September 20, 2022 ; Approved  by [CONTACT_303744] 27, 2022  
 
Principal Investigators: Michele Heisler and Julie Schmittdiel  
  
Page [ADDRESS_371528] type 2 diabetes mellitus 
(T2DM) , with  projected prevalence by 2050 of 1 in 5  adults .1-3 T2DM results in high mor bidity, mortality, and 
annual costs of  $306 billion .4 The high prevalence  of diabetes is  due in large part to obesity, consumption of 
calorie -dense foods, and sedentary behaviors.3 86 million US adults —1 in 3 —have prediabetes, defined as a 
fasting plasma glucose of 100 -125 mg/dL, 2-hour plasma glucose of 149- 199 mg/dL, or hemoglobin A1c (A1c) 
of 5.7% -6.4%.2,3,5 Annual incidence of T2DM  is 5-10% in adults  with prediabetes compared with  1% per year in 
the general  population.6,7 Yet, only 1 in 13 adults with prediabetes are aware of their  risk,8 and fewer are taking 
steps to avoid diabetes . There is an urgent need to develop and evaluate effective and scal able interventions 
to prevent  or delay the onset of  diabetes, enhance its early detection, and increase uptake of lifestyle and 
pharmacological diabetes prevention interventions . Identifying persons at high risk for developi[INVESTIGATOR_303729] , 
linking them to and supporting their engagement in structured diet and  physical activity  promotion program s 
that reduce incidence of diabetes by 50% could prevent  8.6 million new cases of T2DM  over the next decade.9 
Low-income and Racial/Ethnic Minorities Experience Disproportionate Risk.  The need to prevent T2DM  
is especially pressing for  socioeconomically disadvantaged and for racial and ethnic minority populations . 
T2DM is up to two times as prevalent in US adults with low incomes and education levels compared to higher -
SES adults .10,11 African Americans, Asian Americans, and Latinos are 30- 70% more  likely to  have T2DM  than 
non-Latino whites .[ADDRESS_371529] more risk factors for 
diabetes , including higher rates of overweight, obesity, and being sedentary,  than non- Latino, higher -SES 
whites.13 Asian American and Latinos develop T2DM at lower body mass indices  (BMI) than other racial/ethnic 
groups .14 Among Latino adults , decreasing BMI by 1 unit  is estimated to reduce the incidence of diabetes by 
12%. And, after controlling for age and family history, prevention  of weight gain from normal to overweight BMI 
categories would decrease the incidence of T2DM  by 62% among Mexican Americans.12,15-17  
Structured Lifestyle Interventions Can Prevent or Delay T2DM . Randomized controlled trials ( RCTs ) 
conducted in the US, China, Finland, Japan, and India documented 30 -60% reductions in diabetes incidence in 
high- risk adults .18-21 Several  found an extended “legacy” effect .22-26 In the US Diabetes Prevention Program 
(DPP) , adults  with im paired glucose tolerance who lost 5 -7% of their body weight and achieved 150 minutes of 
moderate physical activity per week reduced their chance of  getting T2DM by 16%  per year (58% over 3 
years).19,27,28 Diabetes incidence was decreased by 16% for every kilogram of weight lost.29 The DPP has been  
successfully adapted into group -based versions30-33 in multiple settings  including YMCA’ s,34-36 churches ,37 and 
community health care centers .38-41 It has also been adapted for delivery  via automated telephone system ,42 
television, DVD, and e- health platform s.43-45 Culturally ta ilored DPP adaptations are effective among African 
American and  Latino adult s,46-49 as are those delivered by [CONTACT_303745].50-52 For 
example, DPP adaptations led by  [CONTACT_29430] ( CHWs ) achieved weight loss of 6-7%.34,40,53-[ADDRESS_371530] 2.5% confer a 
60% r eduction in development of diabetes  at 6 years, with h alf of participants  reverting to normoglycemia.57,58  
Now a Wide Array of Evidence- Based Diabetes Prevention Programs and Increased Coverage. In 2012 , 
the CDC’s  National DPP In itiative  began  to support scaling up community -based DPP programs .59 In 2015, the 
US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommended screening f or abnormal blood glucose in 
overweight and obese  adults aged 40 to 70 and referral to diabetes prevention interventions.60 The Communit y 
Preve ntive Services Task Force  in turn  recommended that  health care systems  and community organizations 
offer such programs .61 In 2016, Medicare joined many private insurers to reimburse  CDC- recognized DPPs 
(including the Omada62 online program ) for the estimated 22 million beneficiaries  with prediabetes .63 If there is  
good uptake by [CONTACT_303746] , federal spending on diabetes treatment  is estimated to  decrease by 
$1.[ADDRESS_371531] decade, with even greater savings over the next decade.63 Both of the health systems for 
our proposed study —Michigan Medicine ( MM) and Kaiser Permanente Northern CA (KPNC) —are now 
themselves offering structured diabetes prevention programs and encouraging referrals to online and the many 
locally available community programs  (see Appendix A) .  
The Problem of Poor Uptake of and Engagement in Diabetes Prevention Program s. Unfortunately,  even 
when referred to programs, rates of uptake/participation (attending at least one session)  and engagement  
(completing a sufficient number of sessions)  of eligible adults are very low.[ADDRESS_371532] knowledge of their elevated but modifiable risk for T2DM and of recommended behaviors and available 
Page 3 of 29 
 programs  as well as  motivation, self -efficacy, and support to  engage in and sustain  behaviors.65-67 Low-income 
and racial and ethnic minorities  in particular  face multiple social and environmental barriers to participation in 
formal programs.68 These include competing demands, time constraints, erratic work schedules , food 
insecurity, poor  access to healthy foods, and  limited opportunities for physical ac tivity. Latino immigrants may 
face additional barriers related to acculturation and language.68-70 Rates of uptake and  engagement  are thus 
disproportionately low. In trials of community -based diabetes prevention programs , participants on average 
attended only 40 to 60% of  diabetes prevention sessions.35,49,71 Yet, active engagement  is critically important. 
One review found that change in weight was similar whether the interventi on was delivered by [CONTACT_303747] s or lay workers ,72 but there was a dose- response association between number of sessions 
attended and amount of weight loss —with  a 1% greater weight loss for every four sessions attended.72 
Rates of uptake of formal programs  are even lower  than rates of engagement. Studies of referral fro m 
primary care to free  community -based lifestyle programs  indicate that uptake may be about  30% for any 
participation and as low as 5% for pa rticipation at a level necessary to  achieve targets .8,45,65,73-[ADDRESS_371533] 
adults are screened for, diagnosed with, and referred to programs for prediabetes by [CONTACT_85338] r primary care 
providers (PCPs). Thus, primary care- based programs to support  patient uptake and engagement in diabetes 
prevention programs  and behaviors could reach large numbers of at -risk individuals and improve their health 
outcomes. To date,  most  initiatives focus  solely on increasing health care provider identification and referral of 
patients to  programs.76,[ADDRESS_371534] primary care -based approaches are 
necessary to link patients to and help them initiate and sustain engagement in health system, comm unity -
based, or  e-health programs and/or  in healthy behaviors that  decrease risk of progression to diabetes . 
B. INNOVATION  
Peer Support is an  Innovative and Effective Approach to Improve Health Behaviors and Outcomes. One 
promising and highly scalable approach to mot ivate and support adults at risk for diabetes would be  to pair  
them with a fellow patient with prediabetes who has completed a diabetes prevention program and is working 
to sustain their  own healthy behaviors. There is a large and growing body of evidence on the feasibility, wide 
acceptability , and effectiveness  of peer support for diabetes self -management and other areas of prevention 
and chronic disease management in diverse settings and populations.78-81 “Peer support” is  “support from a 
person who has experiential knowledge of a specific behavior or stressor and similar characteristics as the 
target population. ”82 In our and others’ prior RCTs  of mutual peer support and of volunteer peer health c oach 
models, peer support  compared to other approaches  including nurse care management  led to improved health 
behaviors —such as diet, exercise, medication adherence—and  clinica l outcomes such as  blood glucose 
control  and weight loss .53,83-89 82.6% of 46 peer support interventions examined in a systematic review found 
significant benefits from peer support compared to a comparison group (52.2%) or from baseline (30.4%).90 
Within diabetes, a 2016 meta -analysis of 17 stu dies demonstrated significant benefits of peer support with an 
average decline in A1c of 0.5%, a clinically meaningful improvement.[ADDRESS_371535] 
more time and are more accessible to patients than health care providers.94 Information and support from 
peers who share a common ethnic  and socio- economic background may be particularly effective among racial 
Page 4 of 29 
 and ethnic minorities and/or  low-income individuals  who face access barriers to health care and less trust in 
health care providers .95,96 Peer support  is intrinsically culturally sensitive and tailored, as there is far less social  
distance between peers than between patients and health care professionals. P eer supporters who t hemselves 
report higher level of distre ss managing a condition89,97 and who are more ‘autonomy -support ive’[ADDRESS_371536], proactive outreach by [CONTACT_303748], text message,  and/or  email outreach  is essential —unsuccessful i nterventions have relied on face -to-
face sessio ns with no outreach to participants.80,103,104 Second, effective initial and booster training and fidelity 
assessments as well as ongoing support of peer coaches are vital.103 In Leahey et al.’s RCT , the peer coaches 
in one arm had been poorly trained and  were  highly  directive (“non -autonomy -supportive”) leading to little 
weight loss among their assigned participants.[ADDRESS_371537] lesson:  the importance 
of participants feeling that they share important characteristics and experi ences with their supporter s. Rather 
than serving as inspi[INVESTIGATOR_303730], peer supporters who have never struggled with the behaviors an 
interventi on is seeking to improve are less effective than supporters who themselves have  also overcome 
challenges.86,97,[ADDRESS_371538] been no 
pragmatic clinical studies in real -life routine practice comparing this strategy with health care provider 
identification and referral alone. In addition to evaluating effectiveness of such an intervention, rigorous 
process eval uations are essential to inform broader dissemination and implementation. Such an evaluation is 
especially timely in our two study health systems  as there is strong stakeholder support for adopting and 
scaling up such a program if found effective. For example, t he University of Michigan Health System ( MM) 
Patient and Family -centered Care (PFCC) Program has established infrastructure and staffing for  a health 
system- wide volunteer peer support program. They have recruit ed, train ed, and supervise  over [ADDRESS_371539] injuri es. They 
are now extending  programs to patients with cystic fibrosis, HIV and for caregivers. PFCC leadership has  
expressed their  commi tment to assume all recruitment, training, and supervisory  functions for this program if 
found effective (see support  letter). Similarly, the Kaiser Permanente Northern [LOCATION_004] (KPNC) leadership for 
prediabetes population care has expressed strong interest in adding this program to their menu of system -wide 
programs to support behavior change if our study demonstrates its effectiveness (see letter of support).  
C. APPROACH 
O
verview. The proposed UPSTART ( Using Peer Support to Aid pRevenTion of Diabetes) intervention seeks to 
address the need to test  in routine primary care  evidence- based approaches to increase uptake, engagement, 
and maintenance of healthy behaviors necessary to decrease progression to diabetes among primary care 
patients with prediabetes, especially  low-income and racial and ethnic minority adults  with prediabetes. Our 
design will be an effectiveness -imple mentation hybrid design type 1: We will test effects of the  intervention on 
outcomes while observing and gathering information on implementation.[ADDRESS_371540]  a parallel, two -
armed, randomized controlled pragmatic clinical trial107 including adults with prediabetes at two primary care 
centers in two different health systems: KPNC and MM . The study primary care centers  serve large numbers of  
low-income and racially and ethni cally diverse patients . The trial will evaluate whether adding a 12 -month 
predominantly telephone -based volunteer peer support program (UPSTART ) to health care provider 
counseling and referral to diabetes prevention programs leads to greater uptake and engagement in formal 
diabet es prevention programs as well as improvements in A1c, weight loss, and waist circumference than 
health care provider counseling and referral  alone (Aim 1). We will also compare differences in reported 
Page 5 of 29 
 physical activity, diet, and enrollment and engagement in diabetes prevention programs;  potential mediators of 
autonomous motivation, behavior -specific self -efficacy, and perceived support; and moderators of health 
literacy , activation,  and reported barriers to participation in diabetes prevention activities (Aim 2 ). To assist in 
both health systems’ efforts to create a menu of program options for patients, we will examine patient 
characteristics associated with participation and engagement in the intervention. To enhance adoption of the 
intervention by [CONTACT_303749], we will 
evaluate costs and use an integrated RE -AIM108 and Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research 
(CFIR)109,110 framework  to evaluate processes  of intervention implementation i n the two primary care settings 
(Aim 3). The study duration will be 5 years, to allow for peer supporter and patient recruitment, completion of 
the 12 -month program, and assessment of outcomes at 6 months and at 12 months.   
We will us e mixed methods —i.e., the collection, analysis, and combining of both quantitative and 
qualitative data —to investigate elements important for implementation and dissemination .111 Specific ally, we 
will use  an “embedded” mixed methods design involving collecting qualitative data during the intervention to 
better understand the mechanisms influencing implementation and outcomes.112 We will gather data on how 
peer supporters, primary care clinic staff, and patients experience the intervention and how the experiences of 
participants together with the  trial’s results suggest we should modify t he intervention. Using this approach, we 
aim to ensure that the intervention has the greatest possible likelihood of adoption in both MM and KPNC 
health systems should we find it has positive effects on processes and outcomes of care.  
Preliminary Studies . The proposed intervention builds on the prior work of Michele Heisler, MD, MPA (MPI)  
and Julie Schmittdiel, PhD (MPI ), as well as that of the multi -disciplinary team of co -investigators Caroline 
Richardson MD, Jeff Kullgren MD, Alyce Adams PhD, Richard Grant MD, Monique Hedderson, PhD, Romain Neugebeauer, PhD, and Laura Damschroder, MA. Dr s. Heisle r and Schmittdiel have led multi-sit e RCTs and 
implementation studies. [CONTACT_74225]’s evaluations  of different peer support models to improve health behaviors 
and outcomes provide  a strong foundation for the proposed intervention. [CONTACT_303770] tdiel’s  research on 
strategies  to improve the  performance of health care systems
 has included studies of natural experiments such 
as the Natural Experiments in Diabetes Translation (NEXT- D) study, which provided pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] d ata for the proposed 
study . Drs. Heisler and  Schmittdiel have a strong track record of collaboration together . For example, they co-
led the five- site cluster randomized pragmatic  trial funded by [CONTACT_303750].113-[ADDRESS_371541]. K ullgren’s RCTs testing 
behavioral economic strat egies to promote weight loss,122,[ADDRESS_371542]. 
Adams’s disparities -focused research. In multiple studies she has identified modifiable determinants of poor 
clinical outcomes among racial and ethnic minority adults with chronic conditions .132-[ADDRESS_371543]. Grant’s prior 
work and current RCTs  testing strategies  to prepare adults with multiple conditions to negotiate priorities with 
their PCPs at clinic visits have informed the proposed intervention’s communication approaches.[ADDRESS_371544]. Schmittdiel’s pragmatic trials and evaluations  of 
health plan experiments to reduce diabetes risk .140,[ADDRESS_371545] guided our statistical approaches.  Finally, our assessment of implementation 
will be guided by [CONTACT_303751]’s extensive prior work and expertise in mixed methods. She was the 
lead developer of t he Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research (CFIR ),109 which has been cited 
by >500 published articles.110 As we propose to do, she used the RE -AIM and CFIR frameworks to evaluate 
the VA D PP120 and the large- scale VA weight management program MOVE!,[ADDRESS_371546]. Heisler’s  prior RCTs  testing different  peer models  to help improve  health behaviors  and 
outcomes . One of her pragmatic  clinical trials  among adults  with poorly  controlled diabetes  in two VA health 
Page 6 of 29 
 systems compared a reciprocal  peer support  model  (P2P) —in which  two participants  were  paired together  
and both gave to and received help from each  other —with  nurse care management  (NCM) .142 In that study , 
PCP participants  had clinically  and statistically  significantly  greater  improvements  in A1c and key patient -
centered  outcomes  after the 6- month  interven tion than those in the NCM  arm. The P2P program  was 
especially  effective  among  participants  with low h ealth literacy,  low social  support,  and high diabetes  
distress .98,143 Based on that trial’s  success, we are now using RE-AIM and CFIR to evaluate the 
implementation of P2P in conjunction with shared  medical  appointments  for adults  with poorly  controlled 
diabetes  in five VA health systems.[ADDRESS_371547]  tested  and refined a plethora  of training and fidelity  assessment  
resources  that will be adapted for our proposed  study . These  include training curricula  and manuals  for initial 
training to peer supporters  in Motivational  Interviewing -based,  autonomy  supportive communication skills148,155 
(see Appendix  A), in-depth peer supporter  fidelity  assessment check  lists (Appendix  B) and procedures , and 
protocols  for monthly  booster sessions . Our experiences  have  reinforced  the critical importance of regular  
support  sessions  to allow exchange,  reinforcement,  and booster  training for volunteer  peer supporters.   
Needs A ssessment  among Latino and African  American Adults with 
Prediabetes . In early  2016, we conducted  interviews  with 20 low-income African  
American and Spanish- speaking Latino adults  with prediabetes  who receive primary  
care from the Ypsilanti Health  Center,  one of the proposed study  sites.  We assessed 
barriers  and facilitators  of participation in structured behavior  change programs  and 
elicited  their preferences  for assistance in finding and engaging in diabetes  
prevention programs  and/or  activities . Interviewees  liked the idea of participating in 
formal  healthy  behavior  programs  that would  help them  ‘get healthy’  and lose 
weight.  Yet, they cited  numerous  barriers  to regular  participation in formal  programs.  
These included time limitations,  limited  availability  due to long hours,  multiple  jobs 
and/or  changing work  schedules , lack of childcare,  and lack of transportation. Interviewees  overwhelmingly  
agreed that additional support  from somebody  they trusted  and who could reach out to them  by [CONTACT_648],  email,  
and/or  text would  be invaluable.  Interviewees  said they would  prefer  that such  additional support  come  from a 
peer rather  than a clinician  or expert.  They  felt it would  be helpful  to have  support  from a peer to help them  eat 
healthier  and exercise more  because  it would  be  ‘moral  support’  that would h elp motivate  them  to know  
someone was checking  in on them  who understood their barriers  and difficulties.  Almost  all preferred receiving  
telephone calls approximately  once  a week  while  they were  trying  to initiate healthier  behaviors.  Most noted 
also appreciating  email  and/or  texts  but not as a substitute  for calls.  Most  said an initial face-to-face meeting 
with their peer supporter  would  be ideal  but beyond that trying  to meet  face-to-face would  be too difficult.  
Characteristics  they would  like the supporter  to have  were  confidence,  ability  to motivate,  and understanding 
of the difficulties  adults  with pre-diabetes  face as they had achieved  something similar  themselves  (lost weight  
or increased physical  activity).  
Recognition  and  Treatment  of Prediabetes  in Primary  Care  Visits.  Despi[INVESTIGATOR_303731], as noted  above, too few at-risk adults  are benefiting from 
these. One barrier  to wider  adoption of lifestyle  interventions  and metfor min may be a lack of strong  evidence-“It’s that I don’t have time, I 
have to work, and I work a 
lot, even on Sundays. This is 
what impedes me from 
joining because I am tired 
and it’s exhausting to get up 
and go to something like 
that. One wants to join but 
they are tired from working 
so much.”   
Page [ADDRESS_371548]. Schmittdiel and colleagues  
examined PCPs’ recognition of and treatment  for prediabetes  from 2006 to 2011.  Within  KPNC < 18% of 
patients  with a blood sugar  level indicating prediabetes  were  re-tested  for FPG or A1c levels  within  six 
months,  and <1% were  prescribed metformin .[ADDRESS_371549] links to KPNC programs . The main health -plan based program to help KPNC members improve 
healthy lifestyles that is linked to the Prediabetes Online Tool is the Motivational -Interviewing (MI) -based 
Telephonic Wellness Coaching Center (WCC ). MI is a highly effective collaborative, person- centered form of 
guiding to elicit and strengthen motivation for  behavioral  change.160,[ADDRESS_371550] shown that curren t levels of engagement among KPNC members with prediabetes  are sub-optimal. In 
2013, her team conducted a randomized encouragement trial that reached out  to prediabetes patients outlining 
the risks of high blood sugar  and encouraging enrollment  in the WCC .165 Patients were randomized to receive 
outreach via letter, interactive voice response (IVR) telephone message, secure email message, or no 
outreach. While email messages were the most effective mode of outreach, only 3% of the patients in this arm 
made and kept a WCC  appointment. Most s trikingly, over the 6 -month period none of the prediabetes patients 
(0%) in the arm who  received no proactive outreach enrolled in the program . This study underscores the need 
for new and innovative strategies, such as the peer -support program outlined in our current proposal.   
The I ntervention  
Conceptual Framework  of Intervention Design. The below figure illustrates the proposed causal pathways 
through which we hypothesize that the peer support intervention will improve health behaviors and outcomes.  
Self-Determination 
Theory (SDT) and 
Social Comparison 
Theory (SCT) provide 
the theoretical 
foundations f or the 
intervention and for 
the Motivational 
Interviewing -based training the peer supporters will receive.166 SDT provides a conceptual framework for 
understanding human behavior across a continuum of motivation and suggests that cultivating autonomy , 
relatedness to others  and competence  (“self -efficacy”) is required for  sustained behavioral change. Higher 
levels of autonomous motivation (i.e. , when people perceive that reasons for a behavior are chosen, emanate 
from oneself and correspond to values and goals that are important to oneself) in contrast to controlled motivation (when people act because they feel pressured or compelled to do so)  are associated with 
engagement in and maintenance of  healthy behaviors .
166-[ADDRESS_371551] that is 
autonomy supportive with the goal of enhancing autonomous moti vation  and self -efficacy  for healthy 
behaviors. Motivational Interviewing (MI) -based approaches are congruent with SDT and  aim to enhance 
autonomous motivation.170 To the extent that peer support facilitates  satisfaction of participants’ needs for 
autonomy, competence, and relatedness, while also providing informational and emotional support,  it may 
provide an effective means  to increase  participants’ uptake, engagement, and maintenance of diabetes 
prevention activities. Findings from Social Comparison Theory  (SCT)  show that lateral comparisons with 

Page 8 of 29 
 “similar” targets (e.g., peers  trained to be autonomy supportive who themselves have prediabetes and struggle 
with similar  problems as their matched participant ) may promote greater motivation and health behavior 
change than upward  comparisons with individuals with whom one does not identify  and/or whose success 
seems unattainable so comparisons with whom  can induce frustration and hinder performance.171-[ADDRESS_371552] constructs of the importance of generating a feeling of “relatedness” with the peer supporter, 
thereby [CONTACT_303752] , trust, mutual reciprocity, and competence/self -efficacy  have been shown to 
be correlated with healthy behaviors among Latino and other low -income and racial/ethnic minority adults.174,[ADDRESS_371553] is  the RE -
AIM framework108 that will be used to assess external validity and prospects for maintenance of UPSTART in 
the two study health centers and for dissemination throughout the two health systems . RE-AIM consists of five 
domains: 1) reach to targeted population; 2) effectiveness; 3) adoption; 4) implementation consistency, costs, 
and adaptations; and 5) maintenance of program benefits .108,[ADDRESS_371554] adoption,  implementation, and/or maintenance.109,177 The CFIR comprises  39 
constructs across 5 domains  culled from published implementation frameworks and models178-180 to 
systemat ically assess contextual factors that may influence program implementation: 1) intervention 
characteristics ; 2) outer setting (e.g., external policies and incentives); 3) inner setting (e.g., leadership 
engagement); 4) individual characteristics; and 5) process  by [CONTACT_74187].109,[ADDRESS_371555] udy Sites. KPNC 
Oakland Medical Cente r 
(OMC): KPNC’s OMC  
provides primary and specialty care to  >210,000 predominantly non- white members : 28% are African-
American, 25% Latino, and 16% Asian.  Approximately 37% of adults  in Oakland are overweight, with higher 
rates among African Americans and Latinos . OMC has on -site lab , pharmacy,  nutrition,  and health education 
services. MM Ypsilanti Health C enter (YHC)  and East Ann Arbor Health and Geriatric Center : YHC provides 
primary care to > 10,000 patients 18 years and older. Approximately 50% are Medicaid enrollees, 40% are 
African-American, 10% are Latino, and 5% are Asian. Over 30% of YHC patients have ICD- 10 codes of 
obesity . Ypsilanti  had a median household income of $32,000 in 2014, compared to the national househol d 
median of $53,000.181 Nearly 60% of  county adult resi dents are overweight or obese.182 YHC has on- site lab, 
pharmacy, nutrition, and health educ ation services including a DPP program.  
Peer Supporter  Selection,  Training, and Fidelity Assessment . If recruited peer supporters participate only 
for 12 months , we will recruit 75  peer supporters. Based on our and others’ prior  interventions ,53,83-85,87-
89,149,150,183 we anticipate that many peer supporters  will choose to participate longer than 12  months  so we will 
need to recruit fewer new supporters . Study participants who complete the initial 6 months of the intervention 
and are interested in becoming peer supporters  will also be active ly recruited—and about  20% of peer 
supporters in  our interventions have been participants who became supporters  after completing the program . 
In our discussions with YHC and OMC  PCPs, most identified 2- [ADDRESS_371556] patients recom mended by [CONTACT_303753] .  Peer supporters may be eligible if 
they meet the following inclusion criteria:  are aged 18 years and older and: 
1. hav e completed a formal diabetes prevention program in the past [ADDRESS_371557] review,  who:  
3. H ad an HbA1c in the prediabetes range (5.7 -6.4 %) in the prior [ADDRESS_371558] recent (in past 12 
months) measurement being either:  less than 5.7% or 0.4% A1c points less than prior A1c ; or  
4. had a BMI score of >=25 or >=[ADDRESS_371559] a 2% decrease in body weight  in the last [ADDRESS_371560] had a diagnosis of a serious psychiatric disorder (bi -polar, 
dementia, schizophrenia,  or personality disorder) in the past 24 months ; substance abuse in the last 12 
months ; prior diagnosis of diabetes or taking a diabetes anti -hyperglycemic medication; any of the following 
concerns that would make it difficult to volunteer as a coach at this time:  too depressed or worried about other 
matters; active cancer treatment; dialysis; other life- threatening illness; or have taken weight loss drugs, 
underwent gastric by[CONTACT_6476], or have participated in a medicated meal plan in the past [ADDRESS_371561] developed effective recruitment, screening, and enrollment procedur es.  
We will hold periodic ~3-4- hour initial  trainings for new peer supporters  over the study period. In 
addition, peer supporters will receive: 1) routine, structured check -ins that will include monthly peer support 
group meetings (teleconference or phone) to allow exchange; 2) b ack-up support: offering peer supporters 
contact [CONTACT_303754]; and 3) continuing education and booster training at the monthly 
group meetings  to enrich their skill sets an d knowledge.  The initial training and booster sessions are adapted 
from peer and CHW trainings we have used successfully in prior interventions.  The initial training will focus on 
key Motivational Interviewing (MI) -based communication s kills and include role- playing activities.  Peer 
supporters  will also practice placing  calls using the I nteractive Voice Response (IVR) -supported telephone 
platform. A focus will be  learning to  help their partners  create action plans and following up on how they  are 
doing on their action plans (which will be the focus of the  at-least  weekly phone calls  during the  intervention’s  
first six months and monthly calls during the final six months). P eer supporters will be asked to reflect on their 
own troubles  initiating and sustaining healthy behaviors and then discuss how they might work with others to 
help them overcome these challenges . They will also review information on evidence- based weight loss and 
physical activity targ ets to reduce risk of diabetes and on all available diabetes prevention programs in which 
patients in  their health system can enroll. Finally, they will become familiar with the printed educational and 
local program curricular  materials participants will receive.  
To assess fidelity , team members trained i n MI will observe a random sample of kickoff sessions and 
IVR-facilitated te lephone calls of each peer supporter, complete a fidelity check list  and provide feedback  to 
peer supporters . The IVR telephone platform peer supporters  will use to contact  [CONTACT_303755] c ontacts  by [CONTACT_303756] -participant dyad  to evaluate intervention 
engagement and dose. We will use these results to refine written training materials to be included in a “Train 
the Trainer” manual for a  translation “toolkit”  at the end of the grant period.  Each supporter  will be as signed 2  
participants  for a 12 -month period, with the option of coaching more if they are interested and participants are 
available . Although their role as volunteers will be emphasized, to cover any expenses they will receive a 
stipend for the initial training and different stipend amounts based on number of contacts  per month 
documented by [CONTACT_303757]. We will assess how participation as coaches affects  their own changes in some of  the study measures.  Thus, peer mentors will undergo informed 
consent and receive incentives to complete same baseline, 6- , and 12- month  surveys as the participants  they 
will be supporting.  
Patient Selection, Recruitment and Randomization . We will use a population- based approach to identify 
potentially eligible patients via KPNC and UM  databases. Eligibility criteria will include : 18 years or older; no 
prior diagnosis of diabetes or use of anti -hyperglycemic drug use; BMI > =25 m2/kg or > =23 if Asian ;
14 and 1 
A1c of 5.7% -6.4%  in the prior [ADDRESS_371562]  had a diagnosis of a seri ous 
psychiatric disorder (bi- polar, dementia, schizophrenia, or personality disorder ) in the past [ADDRESS_371563] any of the following 
concerns that make it unimportant to them to work on decreasing their chances of developi[INVESTIGATOR_303732]:  too depressed or worried about other matters; active cancer treatment; dialysis; other life- threatening 
illness . 
A letter  or email  will be sent to eligible patients  with a follow up call to provide more information about 
the study  and further screen for  eligibility .  
• Pre-COVID:  Eligible and interested patients will be scheduled for an enrollment visit  at the clinic  
to complete in -person informed consent with a staff member, complete  a baseline survey, get 
weighed and have their waist circumference measured, and have blood drawn at the lab for an A1c test.  
• During COVID:  Eligible  and interested pa tients will be scheduled to complete most of the 
informed consent process over the phone followed by [CONTACT_303758] [ADDRESS_371564] copi[INVESTIGATOR_014].  Baseline assessments: survey completed by [CONTACT_49522], 
followed by a short visit at the clinic to get weighed and have blood drawn at the lab for an A1c 
text. The measure of waist circumference was dropped.  
All participants will receive information on available local and online diabetes prevention programs  and other 
local resources for healthy living. Participants will then be randomized to one of two arms.  Randomization will 
be stratif ied by A1c  and Latino ethnicity to allow for sub -analyses. Variable block sizes will preclude prediction 
of trea tment assignments.  Randomization list s will be established separately for each clinic site. After baseline 
assessment and receiving informational resources , participants  will learn their study group assignment.  
Peer Support Arm. Participants randomized to peer suppo rt will be matched with a peer supporter of the 
same gender, race/ethnicity , and approximate age, as possible. Matching on shared characteristics has been 
found to lead to better peer relationships in prior studies . Peer supporters  will receive information on times  their 
partner(s) have indicated they  are best contact[INVESTIGATOR_530].  
• Pre-COVID: The dyads will meet for their kick- off session  in person  at the study site. 
• During COVID:  The dyads will meet for their kick -off session via phone or videoconference  
In the kick -off session, they will get to know one another and review together information on available diabetes 
prevention programs and discuss options that might best meet participants’ needs and preferences. They will 
also review provided educational materials and define together the participants’ behavior change goals  and 
specific  steps to take to meet goals  over the next week (“action plan”).[ADDRESS_371565]  (call or text  exchange)  to each peer partner each week for the  intervention’s  first six 
months and at least once a month during the final six months . In our prior interventions, some dyads spoke 
and/or me t more frequent ly. If the supporter  does not make an initial c ontact  using the study platform  within the 
first [ADDRESS_371566] been facing meeting their action steps, or set a new  or different  action step or goal.  For participants 
enrolled in formal diabetes prevention programs, they will discuss areas covered in that week’s session and 
targeted behaviors/goals for that week. For those participants enrolled in a structured program  yet unable to 
attend program session/s (which we recognize  for many participants may be often), the peer coach w ill help 
them review  covered topi[INVESTIGATOR_303733]. P eer supporters  will be encouraged to use the toll -free IVR exchange system line 
to make contacts . We have used this system in prior peer support interventions,[ADDRESS_371567]  their matched peer participant without exchanging personal telephone numbers. If the 
participant does not want to continue receiving coaching, they can call the study’s toll free number to be 
removed from the system . Research staff will monitor the contacts  via a password- protected Internet web site. 
Through the automatic IVR monitoring system, we will be able to identify when c ontacts  occurred,  who made 
the contact, and how long participants talked. All these process data will be stored in a format accessible for 
statistical analysis as part of our process evaluation. Though often after an initial period in our prior  
interventions, participants and peer coaches have exchanged phone numbers (often by[CONTACT_303759]), peer coaches who complete 3- [ADDRESS_371568] multiple types of data for our mixed methods evaluations. At 
baseline, 6 months, and 12 months, participants will complete survey s, assessments of A1c, and weight  (and 
height at baseline to calculate BMI) . Each s urvey will take < 30 minutes. Participants  will receive $[ADDRESS_371569] semi -structured interviews with purposive samples of 
peer mentors and participants with low, medium, and high engagement . We will operationalize data collection 
of the CFIR as a codebook for qualitative analysis to understand how contextual factors influence RE -AIM 
domains.120  
Variables in our intervention conceptual framework  will be measured according to the table of measures , 
below .   
Measures  
Measure  Timeframe  Instrument  
Primary Outcome Measures  
Change in Glycosylated 
Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c)  6 months  Clinical laboratories at both study health centers  
Change in body weight  6 months  Digital Scale used in clinic  
Secondary Outcome Measures  
Change in Glycosylated 
Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c)  12 months  Clinical laboratories at both study health centers  
Change in body weight  12 months  Digital Scale  
Change in whether participant 
enrolled in a formal program to 
prevent diabetes  12 months  Individu al item on survey: Enrollment in diabetes prevention 
program (Yes/No)  
 
Change in number of sessions 
participant attended in a formal 
program to prevent diabetes  12 months  Individual item on survey:  asks participant to report number 
of sessions attended  
 
Change in frequency participant 
engages in moderate to vigorous 
physical activity  12 months  Individual item on survey:  asks participant number of days in 
week, on average, participant engages in moderate to vigorous physical activity; from the  Godin Leisure Time 
Exercise Questionnaire206,207  
Change in duration participant 
engages in moderate to vigorous physical activity  12 months  Individual item on survey:  asks participant number of 
minutes per week, on average, participant engages in moderate to vigorous physical activity; from the Godin Leisure 
Time Exercise Questionnaire206,207 
Change in diet  
 12 months  Participants will self -report diet using a 10 -item custom 
survey developed by [CONTACT_3476] , adapte d from the eating 
habits items in the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System 
Survey Questionnaire208 
Change in patient activation  
  12 months  The Patient Activation Measure (PAM -13)209 is a 13 -item scale 
that measures participant beliefs, perceived knowledge, and confidence for engaging in behaviors related participant's 
health condition. It has a 0 -100 scale, where a low score 
indicates low activation (disengaged and overwhelmed) and a 
high score indicates high activation (patient considers self 
their own advocate).  
Change in participant's perceived 
confidence in their ability to take 
steps to prevent diabetes  12 months  Williams Perceived Competence Scale210,211  comprises 4 items 
meas uring the participant's perception of their own ability to 
take steps to prevent diabetes  
Change in participant's reasons for 
starting or continuing steps to 
prevent diabetes  12 months  The Treatment Self -Regulation Questionnaire (TSRQ)210,212 
consists of 11 items that measure participants' perceptions of 
how true various reasons to take steps to help prevent 
diabetes may be to the participants  
Change in the participant's level of 
social support related to improving 
their own health behaviors  12 months  Adapted from the Diabetes  Social Support Scale213 and 
consisting of 12 items  that ask the participant to indicate their 
level of agreement with statements regarding accessibility of others who could provide social support in attempts to 
prevent diabetes via healthy lifestyle changes.  
Page 12 of 29 
 Measures  
Measure  Timeframe  Instrument  
The role a participant's peer 
supporter played  in assisting them 
to set and reach their goals  6 months and  
12 months  The Patient Assessment of Chronic Illness Care (PACIC)214 
consists of 5 items that ask the participant to state how often 
their peer supporter engaged in supportive behaviors regarding setting and achieving goals in order to make healthy 
lifestyle changes.  
Participant's perceived autonomy 
support from their peer supporter  6 months and  
12 months  The Health Care Climate Questionnaire (HCCQ, long form)215 
consists of 15 items that ask the participant to rank their agreement with statements that indicate degree of autonomy 
support  
Moderators  
Depression screener  Baseline, 6, and 
12 months  Two item version of the Patient Health Questionnaire ( PHQ -
2)216  
Health Literacy  
 baseline  Single item from the Functional Health Literacy Screener217 
asking respondent to indicate their confidence in filling out 
health forms by [CONTACT_1029].  
Neighborhood characteristics  baseline  8 items from the Measurement Properties of Neighborhood 
Scales 218 that assess local access to food and neighborhood 
characteristics that promote or prevent outdoor physical 
activity  
Social Determinants of health  6 and 12 months  Adapted one item from the PRAPARE tool219 identifying 
unmet needs and the study team developed three items  to 
determine how needs were addressed, needs that the peer supporter helped with, and resources and services they 
learned about from being in the study.  
Mediators  
Healthcare climate (autonomy -
support of health care provider ) Baseline, 6, and 
12 months  The Health Care Climate Questionnaire (HCCQ, short form)215 
consists of 5 items that ask the participant to rank their agreement with statements that indicate degree o f autonomy 
support  
Dyads’ contacts, last 6 mo: method, 
frequency, frequency of texts*  [ADDRESS_371570] data collected will include time spent recruiting, training, and supervising the peer coaches as well as total 
costs of the reimbursements provided to peer coaches throughout the intervention period. Staff will keep logs 
of all time spent in these activities. Finally, we will includ e the time and cos ts of proactively identifying and 
recruiting participants and of providing the teleconferencing system for peers  (although this system is being 
used largely for research purposes and is not usual in actual practice for peer mentoring prog rams.) 
Sample Size . Based on our prior research and data from previous Diabetes Prevention studies, we made 
these assumptions for sample size estimation: (a) two- tailed  test at an alpha level of 0.05; (b) power of .90;  (c) 
a mean difference of 0.16% in change of HbA 1C at 12- month s between groups with a standard deviation of 
0.4%, and (d) a 10% attrition rate. In  addition, we accounted for possible correlations between members of the 
peer-coach dyads (intraclass correlation, or rho) in the intervention group.186,[ADDRESS_371571] site-specific 
effects. With these assumptions, 296 participants are  required (148 in each arm). In addition, over half of our 
target patient population is African American or Latino. A sample size of 128 (64 per group) will give us over 
80% power (alpha = 0.05, two- tail) to detect a mean difference of 0.2% in change of HbA 1C from baseline to 12 
months  between the intervention and control groups for the combined ethnic minority subg roups (mainly Latino 
and African American).21 A recent meta -analysis examining reductions in A1c among racial/ethnic minority 
groups suggests this estimated effect size is conservative .[ADDRESS_371572] clinically significant  difference s in weight and in our other self -reported secondary outcomes.  
Page 13 of 29 
 Analysis Plans. Aim 1:  Compare the effectiveness of the peer support program with enhanced usual 
care in decreasing A1c  and weight . Our past experience in similar patient populations suggests that the 
primary outcome  (change in A1c) will be close to normally distributed. To assess change in mean HbA1c , we 
will use a general linear mixed regression model:  
where i represents the patient, l represents the intervention, j is the pair -group, β l are parameters estimated 
from the data, X il is the value of the lth fixed effect (peer support versus usual care) for the ith patient, b j are 
parameters estimated from the data, Z ij is the value of the jth random effect (pairs) for the ith patient, and ε i is 
the residual error.190 We need to account for the possibility  that members of peer -peer partner pairs, because 
of their interactions with each other, might show a small positive intraclass correlation (ICC), a component of 
the variance attributable to the group. As recommended for group-ra ndomized trials, the mixed model analyses 
will address potentially inflated type I errors that could occur if such clustering were not taken into account .[ADDRESS_371573] for confounding effects of any variables that differed substantially between treatment arms. Both 
unadjusted and adjusted means with 95% confidence intervals  will be reported for both arms. While the 
primary endpoint is the mean difference between baseline and 6 -month A1c , analyses will be conducted to 
determine whether the intervention also affects the difference between baseline and 12- month A1c (i.e., the 
sustainability of any treatment effects) using a repeated- measures mixed model ANCOVA.  We will follow these 
same methods in assessing changes in weight (continuous and % weight loss)  and in waist circumference.  We 
will conduct sensitivity analyses and use standard approaches to account for missing data.192,193 
Aim 2: Identify patient characteristics associated with greater engagement in the peer support 
intervention  and mediators and moderators of effectiveness.  We will use multivariate modeling and path 
analyses.194 Many of these outcomes will be measured using Likert scales. Thus, we will begin these analyses 
by [CONTACT_12780][INVESTIGATOR_303734]. We will then use generalized estim ating 
equations (GEE)  appropriate for modeling ordinal outcomes  with correlated data.[ADDRESS_371574] information helpful in assessing the intervention's reach.  We will model 
independent associations and pathways  linking intervention exposure to outcomes using nested multivariate 
regression. Subsequent nested models will introduce potential mediators, and we will evaluate changes in the magnitude of the relationship between experimental condition and outcomes before and after the covariates 
are introduced. Analyses of potential moderators will use standard approaches to evaluate potential 
interactions between these covariates and patients’ experimental condition.
[ADDRESS_371575] order and higher -
order terms will be minimized. Statistically significant interactions will be interpreted by [CONTACT_303760]. Stata routines facilitate the plotting of these relationships.195  
We will per form a thematic analysis of interview data using QSR NVivo, a qualitative data analysis 
package. Our overall approach to thematic analysis will be what Miller and Crabtree refer to as the “Editing 
Analysis Style,” which contains both deductive and inductive elements .196 Two investigators will independently 
read interview transcript s, break down responses into individual segments that express a single idea or theme 
and label these phrases with appropriate codes. An iterative process will be used to compare results until agreement is reached on the categories and criteria for inclusion.
197 We will examine in more depth factors 
contributing both to successful and unsuccessful peer mentor -partner matches  and outcomes . 
Aim 3: Evaluate program costs and  barriers and facilitators to adoption, implementation, maintenance  
and spread using  an integrated RE -AIM and  CFIR framework.  It is essential to collect and analyze 
information to determine the feasibility  of (in terms of cost, effort, and interest)  and most effective strategies to 
broadly disseminate and implement this intervention. We will examine costs fr om the perspective of the payer  
and create standard costs198-204 to ensure that while the costs reported may be specific to the health plans and 
clinic s studied;  they approximate general charges a patient might  be billed i f these same service s were 
purchased. All costs will be adjust ed to current dollars using medical and pharmaceutical component s of the 
Consumer Price Index. Our  cost analysis will also estimate  the costs of  delivering  the int ervention itself, 
including cos ts associated with training, supporting,  and incentivizing peer coaches, recruitment,  IVR, and 
peer-to-peer communications .[ADDRESS_371576] 0
11    +  + g c
i l il j ij i
ljY X bZ ββ ε
= == +∑∑
Page [ADDRESS_371577] estimates  
but especially highlighting the costs of sustaining UPSTART over the long term.   
The five domains of RE -A IM will be analyzed as follows:  Reach: Calculate the  enrollment rate of 
contact[CONTACT_303761] s of participants to non -participants. Effectiveness.  Aims [ADDRESS_371578] ructured, qualitative interviews with coaches and peers:  
As enrolled participants complete their final, 12- month assessment, they are asked if they would be 
open to being contact[CONTACT_303762].   
 Those who indicate that they are open to being contact[CONTACT_303763] e- mail or 
phone to schedule a one- hour time slot for the phone interview. No more than three attempts will be 
made to connect with each participant.  Up to 65 participants (all consented and enrolled in the 
UPSTART study) will be interviewed; interviews will cease once thematic saturation has been reached.  Staff will first explain the purpose of the interview, its length, the fact that they will be listened to by a note- taker (a study staff member) and audio recorded, and how the participant will 
receive a $[ADDRESS_371579] for participating.  The audio recording is mandatory, so if someone does not want to be recorded, they can’t participate in this phone interview.  St aff will answer any questions, 
and if the participant is willing, the staff person will schedule a one- hour time block for the interview.  
The participant will be given the call -in number and code over the phone, via text, and/or via email, 
according to the participant’s preference.  
   Shortly before the scheduled interview, staff will send the participant a reminder with the call -in 
information.  Once the participant calls in, the interviewer will introduce herself and the note -taker, 
and then explain that  she is going to describe the interview and officially ask for the participant’s 
consent before starting the interview.  Then, she will follow the consent script (uploaded in Section 
10-1.1) to obtain verbal consent.  
 The study staff will document that the consent process took place and whether or not the subject 
verbally agreed to continue participating. If the subject declines participation, the interview will not be conducted , and nothing will be audio recorded. If the participant consents, then she will  begin audio 
recording and start the interview.  When audio recording begins, the system announces this to all on the call.  
 In order to capture responses to the interview questions, a study team member will be on the conference call to take notes during the interview. We will audio record the interview to check that the notes are complete and accurate. We will use a cloud- based conferencing service to conduct these 
interviews and to audio record (for example, Zoom ).  We will only use conferencing services where 
there is a Business Associate Agreement between the service and the University of Michigan, which means it complies with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (also known as HIPAA) regulations.  Also, recordings of the interviews will be encrypted and stored either in the secure conferencing service or on a secure, encrypted server. Once the research team compares the notes taken during the interview to the audio recording, the audio recording will be destroyed.  
 All participants who compete  an interview will receive a $[ADDRESS_371580] of codes.  Once the codebook is established, the study staff will use the agreed- upon codes to code all interview notes.  The study staff will use 
software such as NVivo to facilitate the coding and analysis of qualitative data.  Analyses will be used 
to optimize the intervention for future use and identify key elements contributing to the intervention’s effectiveness.  
 
Protocol for semi -structured, qualitative interviews with key informants 
In the final year of funding, we will conduct interviews with a selection of key informants who work at Michigan Medicine or the University of Michigan with the objective of judging prospects for sustained 
offering of UPSTART as part of usual care, identifying potential barriers to sustaining the program, and determining areas for modification.  
 We plan to conduct [ADDRESS_371581] been identified based on their role 
at MM; they are selected based on their likelihood of sharing information needed to meet our objective in the above paragraph.  In addition, at the end of each interview, we will ask each interviewee if they would recommend others we should interview.  
 We plan to invite: 
• the Medical Directors at the two sites where we offered the program, Ypsilanti Health Center and East Ann Arbor  
• clinicians , social workers, and diabetes educators at these clinics  
• 1- 2 staff or leadership from the Office of the Patient Experience  
• Leadership of Ambulatory Care Operations  
• Leadership of Community  Health Services  
• Leadership the Office of Health Equity and Inclusion  
 The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_303735]; attached to the email will be a 2-page infographic describing the study and a one- page list of topi[INVESTIGATOR_303736] e to cover in the 
interview.  
 No more than three attempts will be made to connect with each potential interviewee.  For those who 
are willing, the staff person will schedule a one- hour time block for the interview.  The participant will 
be given the call -in number and code over the phone, via text, and/or via email, according to the 
individual ’s preference.  
   
Shortly before the scheduled interview, staff will send a reminder with the call -in information.  Once 
the interviewee  calls in, the interviewer will introduce herself and the note- taker, and then explain that 
she is going to describe the interview and officially ask for the participant’s consent before starting the interview.  Then, she will follow the consent script (uploaded in Section 10- 1.1) to obtain verbal 
consent.  
 The study staff will document that the consent process took place and whether or not the subject verbally agreed to continue participating. If the subject declines participation, the interview will not be conducted and nothing will be audio recorded. If the participant consents, then she will begin audio recording and start the interview.  When audio recording begins, the system announces this to all on the call.  
Page [ADDRESS_371582] notes. Differences in implementation and in barriers/facilitators  across the two study sites will also be 
documented. Maintenance. Individual- level maintenance of engagement is captured by [CONTACT_303764] . At the clinic level,  qualitative data will be used to judge pr ospects for sustained 
offering of UPSTART as part of usual care, to identify potential barriers to sustaining the program, and 
determining areas for modification. As part of our process evaluation, we will seek opportunities to streamline 
the intervention through more efficient protocols. Field notes will be kept and analyzed to inform the next 
generation program.  With this aim’s findings, we will develop a t ool k it of all training materials and protocols to 
guide dissemination efforts  and to contribute to the field of implementation science.  
Study Timeline: The timeline contains the study’s activities for all years :
 
Potential Problems and Solutions:  We anticipate four key potential problems. First, our proactive 
ident ification process  requires that patients have had a fasting glucose or A1c within the prior [ADDRESS_371583] progressed to 
levels consistent with diabetes (6.5% or greater). We will facilitate a nurse or PCP appointment with those w ho 
have progressed to diabetes. Those in the improved group will be invited to participate as a Peer Supporter.  In 
both cases, we will give them information about the meaning of their A1c  and provide educational materials 
and information on programs to improve health behaviors and/or for diabetes education. A fourth potential 
problem for this intervention targeting a lower -income, urban population is attrition. In our previous 
interventions with patients at federally qualified health centers, we have faced attrition of up to 20%  over 12 
months. However, in our and our colleagues’ prior work at these two primary care centers , attrition rates have 
not exceeded 10%. Through our years of work with low -income, racial and ethnic minority populations, we 
have developed very effective strategies for recruitment and retention. Moreover, w e will follow sound 
analytical approaches to address  any missing data through intention to treat analyses that will aid in avoiding 
misleading interpretation of the data.  
Expected Outcomes:  The proposed  study  will provide rigorous  evidence on the effectiveness  of peer support  
to enhance  uptake,  engagement,  and maintenance of behaviors  to reduce  risk of progression  to diabetes.  
Findings  from the study  will provide invaluable information on required  staff effort,  costs, and key facilitators  
and barriers  to implementing and sustaining this type of volunteer  patient -led program . At the end of the study, 
along with preparing manuscripts for publication, we will create and disseminate a ‘tool kit’ with all recruitment, 
initial and booster training materials, fidelity assessments, recommended oversight procedures, among other 
materials to facilitate adoption and implementation of the program at other health c enters and systems. We will 
also share the findings with multiple audiences, including research participants, health center and system leaders, policy makers, community leaders, and academic and public audiences. Finally, through the rigor and 
innovativeness of our proposed mixed methods assessment grounded in an integrated RE -AIM and CFIR 
framework , the proposed research will contribute both to translational and implementation science.  
Future Directions:  P
 erhaps the most important goal after the study’s  comple tion is to ensure that the program 
if found effective is fully adopted in both of the study  sites and sustained over the longer term. Additionally, we 
will be positioned for broader dissemination and implementation throughout two large  health systems. To help 
ensure this, in preparing this submission we have met with and secured the support of key stakeholders at 
both study health centers and systems, ensuring that these programs address their key priorities and incorporate  metrics that matter to them in deciding whether to adopt the program. At the end of the study, there 
will be a cadre of trained and experienced peer supporters who can help train and support future peer supporters. Because this program relies on trained patient volunteers, the principal future need is limited staff 
effort to help recruit new peer supporters and provide them training and oversight/support. At MM, these 
functions would be assumed by [CONTACT_303765] -wide peer mentor program  run by [CONTACT_303766]’s 
Patient - and Family -Centered Program  that was  established precisely to develop and oversee peer mentoring 
programs  such as the one we propose to evaluate (see l etter of support). At KPNC, the prediabetes population 
care leadership has also  expressed strong interest in including support for this program among their other 
programs promoting healthy behaviors among KPNC members (see letter of support). One key reason KPNC 
and MM health system and health promotion leaders have strongly endorsed the proposed intervention (see 
letters of support) is that it is a low -cost, patient -led program that can provide flexible and frequent contact [CONTACT_303767]—and is thus an invaluable complement to formal health care.  
 At a broader policy level, through [CONTACT_74225] and [CONTACT_303771]’s leadership roles in their institutions’ 
Centers for D iabetes Translational Research (CDTR) , they will work to inform  local, state,  and national polic y 
makers, such as CDC staff leading efforts to broadly disseminate different versions of the DPP, about key 
lessons gleaned from this study  about how better  to increase uptake of and engagement in diabetes 
prevention activi ties as well as  to maintain achieved gains. Finally , we will build on knowledge gained through 
this study to continue developi[INVESTIGATOR_303737] p atient -centered health care systems.  Well- designed peer 
support models such as the one we propose to evaluate hold promise to help stem the epi[INVESTIGATOR_303738]/ethnicity in diabetes and its complications.  
Lessons from this study  will also fruitfully  inform the design of peer support models for patients who have other 
health conditions and who are working to improve  other  health behaviors.   
 
Bibliography & References Cited  
Page 18 of 29 
  
1. Boyle JP, Thompson TJ, Gregg EW, Barker LE, Williamson DF. Projection of the year 2050 burden of 
diabetes in the US adult population: dynamic modeling of incidence, mortality, and prediabetes 
prevalence. Population health metrics. 2010;8:29. PMCID: PMC2984379.  
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Diabetes Statistics Report, 2014 [Accessed May 23, 2016]. Atlanta, GA2014.  
3. Menke A, Casagrande S, Geiss L, Cowie CC. Prevalence of and Trends in Diabetes Among Adults in 
the [LOCATION_002], 1988- 2012. JAMA. 2015;314(10):1021 -1029.  
4. Herman WH. The economic costs of diabetes: is it time for a new treatment paradigm? Diabetes Care. 2013;36(4):775 -776. PMCID: PMC3609514.  
5. American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in diabetes -2014. Diabetes Care. 2014;[ADDRESS_371584] 1:S14- 80.  
6. Gerstein HC, Santaguida P, Raina P, Morrison KM, Balion C, Hunt D, Yazdi H, Booker L. Annual 
incidence and relative risk of diabetes in people with various categories of dysglycemia: a systematic 
overview and meta -analysis of prospective studies. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2007;78(3):305- 312. 
PMCID: Not Required.  
7. Selvin E, Steffes MW, Gregg E, Brancati FL, Coresh J. Performance of A1C for the classification and 
prediction of diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2011;34(1):84 -89. PMCID: PMC3005486.  
8. Geiss LS, James C, Gregg EW, Albright A, Williamson DF, Cowie CC. Diabetes risk reduction 
behaviors among U.S. adults with prediabetes. American journal of preventive medicine. 
2010;38(4):[ADDRESS_371585] of prevention policies on future diabetes prevalence in the [LOCATION_002]: 2010- 2030. Population health 
metrics. 2013;11(1):18. PMCID: PMC3853008. 
10. Beckles GL, Chou CF, Centers for Disease C, Prevention. Diabetes - [LOCATION_002], 2006 and 2010. 
MMWR supplements. 2013;62(3):99 -104.  
11. Robbins JM, Vaccarino V, Zhang H, Kasl SV. Socioeconomic status and type 2 diabetes in African American and non- Hispanic white women and men: evidence from the Third National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey. Am J Public Health. 2001;91(1):76 -83. PMCID: PMC1446485.  
12. American Diabetes Association. Treatment and Care for African Americans [Accessed May 5, 2016].  
http://www.diabetes.org/living- wit
 h-diabetes/treatment -and-care/high -risk-populations/treatment- african-
americans.html . 
13. Narayan KM, Boyle JP, Thompson TJ, Sorensen SW, Williamson DF. Lifetime risk for diabetes mellitus in the [LOCATION_002]. JAMA. 2003;290(14):1884- 1890. PMCID: Not Required.  
14. Hsu WC, Araneta MRG, Kanaya AM, Chiang JL, Fujimoto W. BMI Cut Points to Identify At -Risk Asian 
Americans for Type 2 Diabetes Screening. Diabetes Care. 2015;38(1):150 -158. PMCID: PMC4392932.  
15. Burke JP, William s K, Narayan KM, Leibson C, Haffner SM, Stern MP. A population perspective on 
diabetes prevention: whom should we target for preventing weight gain? Diabetes Care. 2003;26(7):1999 -2004. PMCID: Not Required.  
16. Mokdad AH, Ford ES, Bowman BA, Dietz WH, Vinicor F, Bales VS, Marks JS. Prevalence of obesity, diabetes, and obesity -related health risk factors, 2001. JAMA. 2003;289(1):76 -79. PMCID: Not 
Required.  
17. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of childhood and adult obesity in the United 
States, 2011 -2012. JAMA. 2014;311(8):806 -814. PMCID: PMC4770258.  
18. Ho LS, Gittelsohn J, Rimal R, Treuth MS, Sharma S, Rosecrans A, Harris SB. An integrated multi -
institutional diabetes prevention program improves knowledge and healthy food acquisition in northwestern Ontario First Nations. Health Educ Behav. 2008;35(4):561 -573.  
19. Knowler WC, Barrett -Connor E, Fowler SE, Hamman RF, Lachin JM, Walker EA, Nathan DM, Diabetes 
Prevention Program Research G. Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with l ifestyle 
intervention or metformin. N Engl J Med. 2002;346(6):393- 403. PMCID: PMC1370926.  
20. Ramachandran A, Snehalatha C, Mary S, Mukesh B, Bhaskar AD, Vijay V, Indian Diabetes Prevention P. The Indian Diabetes Prevention Programme shows that lifestyle modification and metformin prevent 
type 2 diabetes in Asian Indian subjects with impaired glucose tolerance (IDPP -1). Diabetologia. 
2006;49(2):289 -297. PMCID: Not Required.  
Page 19 of 29 
 21. Tuomilehto J, Lindstrom J, Eriksson JG, Valle TT, Hamalainen H, Ilanne- Parikka P, Keinanen-
Kiukaanniemi S, Laakso M, Louheranta A, Rastas M, Salminen V, Uusitupa M. Prevention of type 2 
diabetes mellitus by [CONTACT_258656]. N Engl J 
Med. 2001;344(18):1343 -1350. PMCID: Not Required.  
22. Diabetes Prevention Program Research G, Knowler WC, Fowler SE, Hamman RF, Christophi CA, Hoffman HJ, Brenneman AT, Brown- Friday JO, Goldberg R, Venditti E, Nathan DM. 10- year follow -up 
of diabetes incidence and weight loss in the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study. Lancet. 
2009;374(9702):1677 -1686. PMCID: PMC3135022.  
23. Gong Q, Gregg EW, Wang J, An Y, Zhang P, Yang W, Li H, Li H, Jiang Y, Shuai Y, Zhang B, Zhang J, Gerzoff RB, Roglic G, Hu Y, Li G, Bennett PH. Long- term effects of a randomised trial of a 6 -year 
lifestyle intervention in impaired glucose tolerance on diabetes -related microvascular complications: the 
China Da Qing Diabetes Prevention Outcome Study. Diabetologia. 2011;54(2):300- 307.  
24. Li G, Zhang P, Wang J, Gregg EW, Yang W, Gong Q, Li H, Li H, Jiang Y, An Y, Shuai Y, Zhang B, 
Zhang J, Thompson TJ, Gerzoff RB, Roglic G, Hu Y, Bennett PH. The long- term effect of lifestyle 
interventions to prevent diabetes in the China Da Qing Diabetes Prevention Study: a 20- year follow -up 
study. Lancet. 2008;371(9626):1783 -1789.  
25. Lindstrom J, Ilanne- Parikka P, Peltonen M, Aunola S, Eriksson JG, Hemio K, Hamalainen H, Harkonen 
P, Keinanen- Kiukaanniemi S, Laakso M, Louheranta A, Mannelin M, Paturi M, Sundvall J, Valle TT, 
Uusitupa M, Tuomilehto J, Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study G. Sustained reduction in the incidence 
of type 2 diabetes by [CONTACT_279278]: follow -up of the Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study. Lancet. 
2006;368(9548):1673 -1679. PMCID: Not Required.  
26. Saaristo T, Moilanen L, Korpi -Hyovalti E, Vanhala M, Saltevo J, Niskanen L, Jokelainen J, Peltonen M, 
Oksa H, Tuomilehto J, Uusitupa M, Keinanen- Kiukaanniemi S. Lifestyle intervention for prevention of 
type 2 diabetes in primary health care: one -year follow -up of the Finnish National Diabetes Prevention 
Program (FIN -D2D). Diabetes Care. 2010;33(10):2146- 2151. PMCID: PMC2945150.  
27. Diabetes Prevention Program Research G. Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin. N Engl J Med. 2002;346(6):393- 403. PMCID: Not Required.  
28. Herman WH, Hoerger TJ, Brandle M, Hicks K, Sorensen S, Zhang P, Hamman RF, Ackermann RT, 
Engelgau MM, Ratner RE, Diabetes Prevention Program Research G. The cost -effectivenes s of 
lifestyle modification or metformin in preventing type 2 diabetes in adults with impaired glucose tolerance. Ann Intern Med. 2005;142(5):323 -332. PMCID: PMC2701392.  
29. Hamman RF, Wing RR, Edelstein SL, Lachin JM, Bray GA, Delahanty L, Hoskin M, Krisk a AM, Mayer -
Davis EJ, Pi -Sunyer X, Regensteiner J, Venditti B, Wylie- Rosett J. Effect of weight loss with lifestyle 
intervention on risk of diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2006;29(9):2102 -2107. PMCID: PMC1762038.  
30. Dunkley AJ, Bodicoat DH, Greaves CJ, Russell C, Yates T, Davies MJ, Khunti K. Diabetes prevention in the real world: effectiveness of pragmatic lifestyle interventions for the prevention of type [ADDRESS_371586] of adherence to guideline recommendations: a systematic review and meta -analys is. 
Diabetes Care. 2014;37(4):[ADDRESS_371587] M, Van Dorsten B, Wadden TA, Wagenknecht L, Wesche -Thobaben J, Wing RR, Yanovski SZ. Reduction in weight and cardiovas cular 
disease risk factors in individuals with type 2 diabetes: one- year results of the look AHEAD trial. 
Diabetes Care. 2007;30(6):1374 -1383. PMCID: PMC2665929.  
32. Wadden TA, Neiberg RH, Wing RR, Clark JM, Delahanty LM, Hill JO, Krakoff J, Otto A, Ryan D H, 
Vitolins MZ, the Look ARG. Four -Year Weight Losses in the Look AHEAD Study: Factors Associated 
with Long- Term Success. Obesity (Silver Spring, Md.). 2011;19(10):1987- 1998. PMCID: PMC3183129.  
33. Wadden TA, West DS, Neiberg RH, Wing RR, Ryan DH, Johnson KC, Foreyt JP, Hill JO, Trence DL, Vitolins MZ. One -year weight losses in the Look AHEAD study: factors associated with success. 
Obesity (Silver Spring). 2009;17(4):713 -722. PMCID: PMC2690396.  
34. Ackermann RT, Finch EA, Brizendine E, Zhou H, Marrero DG. Translating the Diabetes Prevention Program into the community. The DEPLOY Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]. American journal of preventive medicine. 
2008;35(4):357 -363. PMCID: PMC2610485.  
Page 20 of 29 
 35. Ackermann RT, Liss DT, Finch EA, Schmidt KK, Hays LM, Marrero DG, Saha C. A Randomized 
Comparative Effectiveness Trial for Preventing Type 2 Diabetes. Am J Public Health. 
2015;105(11):2328 -2334. PMCID: PMC4605179.  
36. Ackermann RT, Marrero DG. Adapting the Diabetes Prevention Program lifestyle intervention for delivery in the community: the YMCA model. Diabetes Educ. 2007;33(1):69, 74 -65, 77- 68. PMCID: Not 
Required.  
37. Boltri JM, Davis -Smith YM, Seale JP, Shellenberger S, Okosun IS, Cornelius ME. Diabetes prevention 
in a faith -based setting: results of translational research. J Public Health Manag Pract. 2008;14(1):29-
32. PMCID: Not Required.  
38. American Diabetes Association. (5) Prevention or delay of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2015;[ADDRESS_371588]:S31- S32.  
39. Amundson HA, Butcher MK, Gohdes D, Hall TO, Harwell TS, Helgerson SD, Vanderwood KK, Montana 
Cardiovascular D, Diabetes Prevention Program W. Translating the diabetes prevention program into 
practice in the general community: findings from the Montana Cardiovascular Disease and Diabetes 
Prevention Program. Diabetes Educ. 2009;35(2):209- 210, 213- 214, 216 -220.  
40. Katula JA, Vitolins MZ, Rosenberger EL, Blackwell CS, Morgan TM, Lawlor MS, Goff DC, Jr. One -year 
results of a community -based translation of the Diabetes Prevention Program: Healthy -Living 
Partnerships to Prevent Diabetes (HELP PD) Project. Diabetes Care. 2011;34(7):1451 -1457. PMCID: 
PMC3120203.  
41. McTigue KM, Conroy MB, Bigi L, Murphy C, McNeil M. Weight loss through living well: translating an 
effective lifestyle intervention into clinical practice. Diabetes Educ. 2009;35(2):199- 204, 208.  
42. Estabrooks PA, Smith -Ray RL. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_28882] a behavioral intervention delivered through interactive voice 
response telephone messages to promote weight loss in a  pre-diabetic population. Patient Educ 
Couns. 2008;72(1):[ADDRESS_371589] T, Coblitz M, Norton KL, Vojta D. A randomized comparative effectiveness trial of using cable television to deliver diabetes prevention programming. Obesity (Silver 
Spring). 2014;22(7):1601 -1607. PMCID: PMC4238734.  
44. Liang X, Wang Q, Yang X, Cao J, Chen J, Mo X, Huang J, Wang L, Gu D. Effect of mobile phone 
intervention for diabetes on glycaemic control: a meta -analysis. Diabet Med. 2011;28(4):[ADDRESS_371590] RS. Diet and physical activity counseling during ambulatory care visits in the [LOCATION_002]. Prev Med. 2004;39(4):815- 822. PMCID: Not Required.  
46. Hawthorne K, Robles Y, Cannings -John R, Edwards AG. Culturally appropriate health education for 
Type 2 diabetes in ethnic minority groups: a systematic and narrative review of randomized controlled trials. Diabet Med. 2010;27(6):613- 623.  
47. O'Brien MJ, Perez A, Alos VA, Whitaker RC, Ciolino JD, Mohr DC, Ackermann RT. The feasibility, 
acceptability, and preliminary effectiveness of a Promotora -Led Diabetes Prevention Program (PL-
DPP) in Latinas: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Diabetes Educ. 2015;41(4):485 -494. PMCID: PMC4617318.  
48. Ruggiero L, Castillo A, Quinn L, Hochwert M. Translation of the diabetes prevention program's lifestyle intervention: role of community health workers. Curr Diab Rep. 2012;12(2):127- 137.  
49. Ruggiero L, Oros S, Choi YK. Community -based translation of the diabetes prevention program's 
lifestyle interven tion in an underserved Latino population. Diabetes Educ. 2011;37(4):564 -572.  
50. Ali MK, Echouffo -Tcheugui J, Williamson DF. How effective were lifestyle interventions in real -world 
settings that were modeled on the Diabetes Prevention Program? Health Aff  (Millwood). 2012;31(1):67 -
75.  
51. Chou C, Burnet DL, Meltzer DO, Huang ES. The effectiveness of diabetes prevention programs in community settings. [LOCATION_001], NY 2015.  
52. Venditti EM, Kramer MK. Necessary components for lifestyle modification interventions to reduce diabetes risk. Curr Diab Rep. 2012;12(2):[ADDRESS_371591] MM. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_303739] a primary care weight loss intervention with peer coaches. Diabetes 
Educ. 2015;41(3):361 -368. PMCID: PMC4511264.  
54. Lynch EB, Liebman R, Ventrelle J, Avery EF, Richardson D. A self -management intervention for African 
Americans with  comorbid diabetes and hypertension: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_2269]. Prev Chronic 
Dis. 2014;11:E90. PMCID: PMC4040140.  
Page [ADDRESS_371592] DS, Bursac Z, Cornell CE, Felix HC, Fausett JK, Krukowski RA, Lensing S, Love SJ, Prewitt TE, 
Beck C. Lay health educators translate a weight- loss intervention in senior centers: a randomized 
controlled trial. American journal of preventive medicine. 2011;41(4):385- 391.  
56. Klein S, Sheard NF, Pi -Sunyer X, Daly A, Wylie -Rosett J, Kulkarni K, Clark NG. Weight management 
through lifestyle modification for the prevention and management of type 2 diabetes: rationale and strategies. A statement of the American Diabetes Association, the North American Association for the Study of Obesity, and the American Society for Clinical Nutrit ion. The American journal of clinical 
nutrition. 2004;80(2):257 -263. PMCID: Not Required.  
57. Balk EM, Earley A, Raman G, Avendano EA, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_105319], Remington PL. Combined Diet and Physical 
Activity Promotion Programs to Prevent Type 2 Diabetes Among Persons at Increased Risk: A 
Systematic Review for the Community Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2015;163(6):437 -451. PMCID: PMC4692590.  
58. Li R, Qu S, Zhang P, Chattopadhyay S, Gregg EW, Albright A, Hopkins D, Pronk NP. Economic Evaluation of Combined Diet and Physical Activity Promotion Programs to Prevent Type 2 Diabetes 
Among Persons at Increased Risk: A Systematic Review for the Community Preventive Services Task 
Force. Ann Intern Med. 2015;163(6):452 -460.  
59. Albright AL, Gregg EW. Preventing type 2 diabetes in communities across the U.S.: the National Diabetes Prevention Program. American journal of preventive medicine. 2013;44([ADDRESS_371593] 4):S346-S3451. PMCID: PMC4539613.  
60. Siu AL, Force USPST. Screening for Abnormal Blood Glucose and Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. Ann Intern Med. 2015;163(11):861- 868.  
61. Pronk NP, Remington PL, Community Preventive Services Task F. Combined Diet and Physical Activity Promotion Programs for Prevention of Diabetes: Community Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. Ann Intern Med. 2015;163(6):465 -468.  
62. Omada Health. Medicare will cover diabetes prevention program for at -risk seniors  [Accessed May 13, 
2016]. 2016; https:// www.omadahealth.com/news/medicare- will
 -cover -diabetes -prevention -program -for-
at-risk-seniors . 
63. Diabetes.org. Estimated Federal Impact of H.R. 962/ S. 452 “The Medicare Diabetes Prevention Act” [Accessed May 23, 2016].  
64. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report - Awareness of 
Prediabetes - [LOCATION_002], 2005- 2010 [Accessed May 23, 2016]. Atlanta, GA2013 . 
65. Okosun IS, Lyn R. Prediabetes awareness, healthcare provider’s advice, and lifestyle changes in American adults. International Journal of Diabetes Mellitus. 2015;3(1):11- 18.  
66. Ruge T, Nystrom L, Lindahl B, Hallmans G, Norberg M, Weinehall L, Rolandsson O. Recruiting high-
risk individuals to a diabetes prevention program: how hard can it be? Diabetes Care. 2007;30(7):e61. 
PMCID: Not Required.  
67. Yang K, Lee YS, Chasens ER. Outcomes of health care providers' recommendations for healthy lifestyle among U.S. adults with prediabetes. Metab Syndr Relat Disord. 2011;9(3):231 -237.  
68. Rosal MC, Borg A, Bodenlos JS, Tellez T, Ockene IS. Awareness of diabetes risk factors and 
prevention strategies among a sample of low -income Latinos with no known diagnosis of diabetes. 
Diabetes Educ. 2011;37(1):47 -55.  
69. Cullen KW, Buzek BB. Knowledge about type 2 diabetes risk and prevention of African -American and 
Hispanic adults and adolescents with family history of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Educ. 2009;35(5):836-
842.  
70. DeNavas -Walt C, Proctor BD, Smith JC. Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in the 
[LOCATION_002]: 2012. 2013.  
71. Ockene IS, Tellez TL, Rosal MC, Reed GW, Mordes J, Merriam PA, Olendzki BC, Handelman G, 
Nicolosi R, Ma Y. Outcomes of a Latino community -based intervention for the prevention of diabetes: 
the Lawrence Latino Diabetes Prevention Project. Am J Public Health. 2012;102(2):336 -342. P MCID: 
PMC3483988.  
72. Jackson L. Translating the Diabetes Prevention Program into practice: a review of community 
interventions. Diabetes Educ. 2009;35(2):309 -320.  
73. Gopalan A, Lorincz IS, Wirtalla C, Marcus SC, Long JA. Awareness of Prediabetes and Engagement in Diabetes Risk -Reducing Behaviors. American journal of preventive medicine. 2015;49(4):[ADDRESS_371594] -effectiveness of exercise 
referral schemes: a systematic review and economic evaluation. Health Technol Assess. 2011;15(44):i -
xii, 1-254. PMCID: PMC4781450.  
75. Waterman MR, Wiecha JM, Manne J, Tringale SM, Costa E, Wiecha JL. Utilization of a free fitness center -based exercise referral program among women with chronic disease risk factors. J Community 
Health. 2014;39(6):1179 -1185.  
76. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. New AMA, CDC Initiative Aims to “Prevent Diabetes STAT” [Accessed May 14, 2016]. 2015; New AMA, CDC Initiative Aims to “Prevent Diabetes STAT”.  
77. Chambers EC, Wylie -Rosett J, Blank AE, Ouziel J, Hollingsworth N, Riley RW, Selwyn PA. Increasing 
Referrals to a YMCA -Based Diabetes Prevention Program: Effects  of Electronic Referral System 
Modification and Provider Education in Federally Qualified Health Centers. Prev Chronic Dis. 
2015;12:E189. PMCID: PMC4651145. 
78. Dale JR, Williams SM, Bowyer V. What is the effect of peer support on diabetes outcomes in adults? A systematic review. Diabet Med. 2012;29(11):1361 -1377.  
79. Fisher EB, Boothroyd RI, Coufal MM, Baumann LC, Mbanya JC, Rotheram -Borus MJ, Sanguanprasit 
B, Tanasugarn C. Peer support for self -management of diabetes improved outcomes in international 
settings. Health Aff (Millwood). 2012;31(1):130- 139. PMCID: PMC4128379.  
80. Fisher EB, Coufal MM, Parada H, Robinette JB, Tang PY, Urlaub DM, Castillo C, Guzman -Corrales 
LM, Hino S, Hunter J, Katz AW, Symes YR, Worley HP, Xu C. Peer support in health care and 
prevention: cultural, organizational, and dissemination issues. Annu Rev Public Health. 2014;35:363-
383.  
81. Pfeiffer PN, Heisler M, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_74182], Rogers MA, Val enstein M. Efficacy of peer support interventions for 
depression: a meta -analysis. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2011;33(1):29- 36. PMCID: PMC3052992.  
82. Heisler M. Overview of Peer Support Models to Improve Diabetes Self -Management and Clinical 
Outcomes. Diabetes Spectrum. 2007;20(4):214 -220. PMCID: Not Required.  
83. Boothroyd RI, Fisher EB. Peers for progress: promoting peer support for health around the world. Fam 
Pract. 2010;[ADDRESS_371595] 1:i62- 68.  
84. Doull M, O'Connor AM, Robinson V, Tugwell P, Wells GA. Peer support strategies for improving health and well -being of individuals with chronic diseases. In: Chochrane Database of Systematic Reviews C, 
ed2007.  
85. Ghorob A, Vivas MM, De Vore D, Ngo V, Bodenheimer T, Chen E, Thom DH. The effectiveness of peer 
health coaching in improving glycemic control among low- income patients with diabetes: protocol for a 
randomized controlled trial. BMC public health. 2011;11:208. PMCID: PMC3082244.  
86. Leahey TM, Wing RR. A randomized controlled pi[INVESTIGATOR_303740]: Professional, peer, and mentor. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2013;21(5):928 -934. 
PMCID: PMC3484232.  
87. Long JA, Jahnle EC, Richardson DM, Loewenstein G, Volpp KG. Peer mentoring and financial incentives to improve glucose control in African American veterans: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 
2012;156(6):416 -424. PMCID: PMC3475415.  
88. Philis -Tsimikas A, Fortmann A, Lleva- Ocana L, Walker C, Gallo LC. Peer -led diabetes education 
programs in high- risk Mexican Americans impro ve glycemic control compared with standard 
approaches: a Project Dulce promotora randomized trial. Diabetes Care. 2011;34(9):1926 -1931. 
PMCID: PMC3161298.  
89. Thom D, Bodenheimer T, Chen E, Hessler D, De Vore D, Ghorob A. Peer health coaching improves 
glycemic in low- income patients with diabetes: a randomized controlled trial. In Press.  
90. Fisher EB, Boothroyd R, Elstad E, Hays L, Henes A, Maslow G. Peer support of complex health behaviors in prevention and disease management: a review.  Peers for Progres s Report;2015.  
91. Zhang X, Yang S, Sun K, Fisher EB, Sun X. How to achieve better effect of peer support among adults with type 2 diabetes: A meta -analysis of randomized clinical trials. Patient Educ Couns. 
2016;99(2):186 -197. PMCID: Journal In Process.  
92. Brownson C, Heisler M. The role of peer support in disease management programs for Diabetes Mellitus. Patient -Centered Care. 2009;2(1):5- 17. PMCID: Not Required.  
Page 23 of 29 
 93. Dennis CL. Peer Support within a health care context: a concept analysis. Internat J Nurs Stud. 
2003;40(3):321 -332. PMCID: Not Required.  
94. Heisler M. Different models to mobilize peer support to improve diabetes self -management and clinical 
outcomes: evidence, logistics, evaluation considerations and needs for future research. Fam Pract. 
2009. PMCID: Not Required.  
95. Armstrong K, McMurphy S, Dean LT, Micco E, Putt M, Halbert CH, Schwartz JS, Sankar P, Pyeritz RE, 
Bernhardt B, Shea JA. Differences in the patterns of health care system distrust between blacks and 
whites. J Gen Intern Med. 2008;23(6):827 -833. PMCID: PMC2517897.  
96. Sokol R, Fisher E. Peer Support for the Hardly Reached: A Systematic Review. Am J Public Health. 2016;106(7):e1 -8.  
97. Moskowitz D, Thom DH, Hessler D, Ghorob A, Bodenheimer T. Peer coaching to improve diabetes self -
management: which patients benefit most? J Gen Intern Med. 2013;28(7):938- 942. PMCID: 
PMC3682027.  
98. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_74182], Resnicow K, Choi H, Heisler M. A diabetes peer support intervention that improved glycemic control: mediators and moderators of intervention effectiveness. Chronic Illn. 2 013;9(4):258 -267. 
PMCID: PMC3830685.  
99. Barg FK, Weiner MG, Joseph S, Pandit K, Turner BJ. Qualitative analysis of peer coaches' experiences 
with counseling African Americans about reducing heart disease risk. J Gen Intern Med. 2011;27(2):167 -172. PMCID: PMC3270244.  
100. Heisler M, Choi H, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_74182], Rosland A, Langa KM, Brown S. Adults with cardiovascular disease who help others: a prospective study of health outcomes. J Behav Med. 2013;36(2):199- 211. PMCID: 
PMC3929385.  
101. Kim ES, Strecher VJ, Ryff CD. Purpose in life and use of preventive health care services. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the [LOCATION_002] of America. 2014;111(46):[ZIP_CODE] -[ZIP_CODE]. 
PMCID: PMC4246300.  
102. Strecher V. On Purpose.  Ann Arbor, MI: Honigman Miller Schwartz and Cohn LLP; 2013.  
103. Fisher EB, Ballesteros J, Bhushan N, Coufal MM, Kowitt SD, McDonough AM, Parada H, Robinette JB, Sokol RL, Tang PY, Urlaub D. Key Features Of Peer Support In Chronic Disease Prevention And Management. Health Aff (Millwood). 2015;34( 9):1523 -1530. PMCID: Journal In Process.  
104. Smith SM, Paul G, Kelly A, Whitford DL, O'Shea E, O'Dowd T. Peer support for patients with type 2 diabetes: Cluster randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2011;342(7795):482. PMCID: PMC3039437.  
105. Shacter HE, Shea  JA, Akhabue E, Sablani N, Long JA. A qualitative evaluation of racial disparities in 
glucose control. Ethn Dis. 2009;19(2):121 -127.  
106. Curran GM, Bauer M, Mittman B, Pyne JM, Stetler C. Effectiveness -implementation hybrid designs: 
combining elements of clinical effectiveness and implementation research to enhance public health impact. Med Care. 2012;50(3):217- 226. PMCID: PMC3731143.  
107. Patsopoulos NA. A pragmatic view on pragmatic trials. Dialogues in clinical neuroscience. 2011;13(2):217 -224. PMCID: PMC3181997.  
108. Glasgow RE, Vogt TM, Boles SM. Evaluating the public health impact of health promotion interventions: 
the RE -AIM framework . Am J Public Health. 1999;89(9):1322 -1327. PMCID: PMC1508772.  
109. Damschroder LJ, Aron DC, Keith RE, Kirsh SR, Alexander JA, Lowery JC. Fostering implementation of health services research findings into practice: a consolidated framework for advancing im plementation 
science. Implement Sci. 2009;4:50. PMCID: PMC2736161. 
110. Fisher ES, Shortell SM, Savitz LA. Implementation science: A potential catalyst for delivery system 
reform. JAMA. 2016;315(4):339- 340.  
111. Creswell J. Research Design: Qualitative, Q uantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches.  Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2003.  
112. Donovan J, Mills N, Smith M, Brindle L, Jacoby A, Peters T, Frankel S, Neal D, Hamdy F. Quality 
improvement report: Improving design and conduct of randomised trials by [CONTACT_303768]: ProtecT (prostate testing for cancer and treatment) study. Commentary: presenting unbiased information to patients can be difficult. BMJ. 2002;325(7367):766- 770. PMCID: Not 
Required.  
Page 24 of 29 
 113. Heisler M, Hofer TP, Klamerus ML, Schmittdiel J, Selby J, Hogan MM, Bosworth HB, Tremblay A, Kerr 
EA. Study protocol: the Adherence and Intensification of Medications (AIM) study --a cluster randomized 
controlled effectiveness study. Trials. 2010;11:95. PMCID: PMC2967508.  
114. Heisler M, Hofer TP, Schmittdiel JA, Selby [CONTACT_9715], Klamerus ML, Bosworth HB, Bermann M, Kerr EA. 
Improving blood pressure control through a clinical pharmacist outreach program in patients with diabetes mellitus in 2 high- performing health systems: the adherence and intensification of medications 
cluster randomized, controlled pragmatic trial. Circulation. 2012;125(23):2863- 2872. PMCID: 
PMC3999872.  
115. Heisler M, Hogan MM, Hofer TP, Schmittdiel JA, Pladevall M, Kerr EA. When more is not better: 
treatment intensification among hypertensive patients with poor medication adherence. Circulation. 
2008;117(22):2884 -2892. PMCID: Not Required.  
116. O'Connor PJ, Schmittdiel JA, Pathak RD, Harris RI, Newton KM, Ohnsorg KA, Heisler M, Sterrett AT, 
Xu S, Dyer WT, Raebel MA, Thomas A, Schroeder EB, Desai JR, Steiner JF. Randomized trial of 
telephone outreach to improve medication adherence and metabolic control in adults with diabetes. 
Diabetes Care. 2014;37(12):3317 -3324. PMCID: PMC4751474.  
117. Munson SA, Krupka E, Richardson C, Resnick P. Effects of Public Commitments and Accountability in a Technology -Supported Physical Activity Intervention. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems; 2015; Seoul, Republic of Korea.  
118. Richardson CR, Buis LR, Janney AW, Goodrich DE, Sen A, Hess ML, Mehari KS, Fortlage LA, Resnick 
PJ, Zikmund- Fisher BJ, Strecher VJ, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_74182]. An online community improves adherence in an 
internet -mediated walking program. Part 1: results of a randomized controlled t rial. J Med Internet Res. 
2010;12(4):e71. PMCID: PMC3056526.  
119. Richardson CR, Mehari KS, McIntyre LG, Janney AW, Fortlage LA, Sen A, Strecher VJ, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_74182]. A 
randomized trial comparing structured and lifestyle goals in an internet -mediated walking program for 
people with type [ADDRESS_371596]. 2007;4:59. PMCID: PMC2212636.  
120. Damschroder LJ, Moin T, Datta SK, Reardon CM, Steinle N, Weinreb J, Billington CJ, Maciejewski ML, 
Yancy WS, Jr., Hughes M, Makki F, Richardson CR. Implementation and evaluation of the VA DPP 
clinical demonstration: protocol for a multi- site non -randomized hybrid effectiveness -implementation 
type III trial. Implement Sci. 2015;10:68. PMCID: PMC4429938.  
121. Moin T, Ertl K, Schneider J, Vasti E, Makki F, Richardson C, Havens K, Damschroder L. Women veterans' experience with a web- based diabetes prevention program: a qualitative study to inform 
future practice. J Med Internet Res. 2015;17(5):e127. PMCID: PMC4468391.  
122. Kullgren JT, Troxel AB, Loewenstein G, Asch DA, Norton LA, Wesby L, Tao Y, Zhu J, Volpp KG. Individual- versus group- based financial incentives for weight loss: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann 
Intern Med. 2013;158(7):505- 514. PMCID: PMC3994977.  
123. Kullgren JT, Troxel AB, Loewenstein G, Norton LA, Gatto D, Tao Y, Zhu J, Schofield HL, Shea JA, 
Asch DA, Pellathy T, Driggers J, Volpp KG. A randomized controlled trial of employer matching of 
employees' monetary contributions to deposit contracts to promote weight loss. American Journal of 
Health Promotion. 2016.  
124. Kullgren JT, Harkins KA, Bellamy SL, Gonzales A, Tao Y, Zhu J, Volpp KG, Asch DA, Heisler M, Karlawish J. A mixed -methods randomized controlled trial of financial incentives and peer network s to 
promote walking among older adults. Health Educ Behav. 2014;41([ADDRESS_371597]):43S -50S. PMCID: 
PMC4382353.  
125. Kullgren JT, Dicks TN, Fu X, Richardson D, Tzanis GL, Tobi M, Marcus SC. Financial incentives for completion of fecal occult blood tests among veterans: a 2 -stage, pragmatic, cluster, randomized, 
controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161([ADDRESS_371598]):S35- 43.  
126. Kullgren J, Knaus M, Jenkins KR, Heisler M. A mixed methods study of initial engagement in behaviors to prevent diabetes among employees with prediabetes. SGIM; 2016; Hollywood, FL.  
127. Brown SD, Partee PN, Feng J, Quesenberry CP, Hedderson MM, Ehrlich SF, Kiernan M, Ferrara A. Outreach to diversify clinical trial participation: A randomized recruitment study. Clin Trials. 2015;12(3):205 -211. PMCID: PMC4424096.  
128. Ehrlich SF, Hedderson MM, Quesenberry CP, Jr., Feng J, Brown SD, Crites Y, Ferrara A. Post -partum 
weight loss and glucose metabolism in women with gestational diabetes: the DEBI Study. Diabet Med. 
2014;31(7):862 -867. PMCID: PMC4065174.  
Page 25 of 29 
 129. Ferrara A, Hedderson MM, Albright CL, Brown SD, Ehrlich SF, Caan BJ, Sternfeld B, Gordon NP, 
Schmittdiel JA, Gunderson EP, Mevi AA, Tsai AL, Ching J, Crites Y, Quesenberry CP, Jr. A pragmatic 
cluster randomized clinical trial of diabetes prevention strategies for women with gestational diabetes: 
design and rationale of the Gestational Diabetes' Effects on Moms (GEM) study. BMC Pregnancy 
Childbirth. 2014;14:21. PMCID: PMC3897959.  
130. Ferrara A, Hedderson MM, Albright CL, Ehrlich SF, Quesenberry CP, Jr., Peng T, Feng J, Ching J, 
Crites Y. A pregnancy and postpartum lifestyle intervention in women with gestational diabetes mellitus 
reduces diabetes risk factors: a feasibility randomized control trial. Diabetes Care. 2011;34(7):1519 -
1525. PMCID: PMC3120183.  
131. Ferrara A, Hedderson MM, Brown SD, Albright CL, Ehrlich SF, Tsai AL, Caan BJ, Sternfeld B, Gordon 
NP, Schmittdiel JA, Gunderson EP, Mevi AA, Herman WH, Ching J, Crites Y, Quesenberry CP, Jr. The Comparative Effectiveness of Diabetes Prevention Strategies to Reduce Postpartum Weight Retention 
in Women With Gestational Diabetes Mellitus: The Gestational Diabetes' Effects on Moms (GEM) Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial. Diabetes Care. 2016;39(1):65- 74. PMCID: PMC4686847.  
132. Adams AS, Bayliss EA, Schmittdiel JA, Altschuler A, Dyer W, Neugebauer R, Jaffe M, Young JD, Kim E, Grant RW. The Diabetes Telephone Study: Design and challenges of a pragmatic cluster 
randomized trial to improve diabetic peripheral neuropathy treatment. Clin Trials. 2016 [e -pub ahead of 
print].  
133. Adams AS, Parker MM, Moffet HH, Jaffe M, Schillinger D, Callaghan B, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_34413] J, Adler NE, Bauer A, Karter AJ. Communication Barriers and the Clinical Recognition of Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy in a 
Diverse Cohort of Adults: The DISTANCE Study. J Health Commun. 2016;21(5):544- 553.  
134. Adams AS, Soumerai SB, Zhang F, Gilden D, Burns M, Huskamp HA, Trinacty C, Alegria M, LeCates RF, Griggs JJ, Ross -Degnan D, Madden JM. Effects of eliminating drug caps on racial differences in 
antidepressant use among dual enrollees with diabetes and depression. Clin Ther. 2015;37(3):597- 609. 
PMCID: PMC4390474.  
135. Adams AS, Madden JM, Zhang F, Soumerai SB, Gilden D, Griggs J, Trinacty CM, Bishop C, Ross -
Degnan D. Changes in use of lipid- lowering medications among black and white dual enrollees with 
diabetes transitioning from Medicaid to Medicare Part D drug coverage. Med Care. 2014;52(8):695 -
703. PMCID: PMC4135389.  
136. Adams AS, Trinacty CM, Zhang F, Kleinman K, Grant RW, Meigs JB, Soumerai SB, Ross -Degnan D. 
Medication adherence and racial differences in A1C control. Diabetes Care. 2008;31(5):916 -921. 
PMCID: PMC25 [ZIP_CODE].  
137. Adams AS, Zhang F, Mah C, Grant RW, Kleinman K, Meigs JB, Ross -Degnan D. Race differences in 
long- term diabetes management in an HMO. Diabetes Care. 2005;28(12):2844- 2849. PMCID: Not 
Required.  
138. Bredfeldt C, Altschuler A, Adams AS, Portz JD,  Bayliss EA. Patient reported outcomes for diabetic 
peripheral neuropathy. J Diabetes Complications. 2015;29(8):1112 -1118.  
139. Grant RW, Uratsu CS, Estacio KR, Altschuler A, Kim E, Fireman B, Adams AS, Schmittdiel JA, Heisler M. Pre -Visit Prioritization for complex patients with diabetes: Randomized trial design and 
implementation within an integrated health care system. Contemp Clin Trials. 2016;47:196 -201. 
PMCID: PMC4818191.  
140. Adams SR, Wiley DM, Fargeix A, George V, Neugebauer RS, Schmittdiel JA. Em ployer -Based 
Screening for Diabetes and Prediabetes in an Integrated Health Care Delivery System: A Natural 
Experiment for Translation in Diabetes (NEXT- D) Study. J Occup Environ Med. 2015;57(11):1147-
1153. PMCID: PMC4636035.  
141. Schmittdiel JA, Brown SD,  Neugebauer R, Adams SR, Adams AS, Wiley D, Ferrara A. Health- plan and 
employer -based wellness programs to reduce diabetes risk: The Kaiser Permanente Northern 
[LOCATION_004] NEXT -D Study. Prev Chronic Dis. 2013;10:E15. PMCID: PMC3562174. 
142. Heisler M, Vijan  S, Makki F, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_74182]. Diabetes control with reciprocal peer support versus nurse care 
management: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2010;153(8):507 -515. PMCID: PMC4117390.  
143. Klamerus ML, Kerr EA, Bosworth HB, Schmittdiel JA, Heisler M. Characteristics of Diabetic Patients associated with Achieving and Maintaining Blood Pressure Targets in the Adherence and Intensification 
of Medications Program. Chronic Illn. 2014;10(1):60- 73. PMCID: PMC4134130.  
Page 26 of 29 
 144. Heisler M. IIR 15 -321 Evaluation of the Implementation of the P2P Program in five VA Health systems. 
VA HSR&D; 03/01/2016- 02/28/2020.  
145. Heisler M, Halasyamani L, Cowen ME, Davis MD, Resnicow K, Strawderman RL, Choi H, Mase R, 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_74182]. Randomized controlled effectiveness trial of reciprocal peer support in heart failure. Circ 
Heart Fail. 2013;6(2):246 -253.  
146. Lockhart E, Foreman J, Mase R, Heisler M. Heart failure patients' experiences of a self -management 
peer support program: a qualitative study. Heart Lung. 2014;43(4):292 -298. PMCID: PMC4082752.  
147. Valenstein M, Pfeiffer PN, Brandfon S, Walters H, Ganoczy D, Kim HM, Cohen JL, Benn- Burton W, 
Carroll E, Henry J, Garcia E, Risk B, Kales HC, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_74182], Heisler M. Augmenting Ongoing Depression Care With a Mutual Peer Support Intervention Versus Self -Help Materials Alone: A Randomized Trial. 
Psychiatr Serv. 2016;67(2):236 -239. PMCID: In Process.  
148. Tang TS, Funnell MM, Gillard M, Nwankwo R, Heisler M. Training peers to provide ongoing diabetes self-management support (DSMS): Results from a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Patient Educ Couns. 2011;85(2):160-
168. PMCID: PMC3783215.  
149. Tang TS, Funnell MM, Gillard M, Nwankwo R, Heisler M. The development of a pi[INVESTIGATOR_303741]: process and content. Diabetes Educ. 2011;37(1):67- 77. PMCID: 
PMC4117387.  
150. Tang TS, Funnell MM, Sinco B, Spencer MS, Heisler M. Peer -Led, Empowerment -Based Approach to 
Self-Management Efforts in Diabetes (PLEASED): A Randomized Controlled Trial in an African 
American Community. Ann Fam Med. 2015;[ADDRESS_371599] 1:S27- 35. PMCID: PMC4648139.  
151. Tang TS, Funnell M, Sinco B, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_171205] G, Palmisano G, Spencer MS, Kieffer EC, Heisler M. Comparative 
effectiveness of peer leaders and community health workers in diabetes self -management support: 
results of a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(6):1525- 1534. PMCID: PMC4030090.  
152. Heisler M, Choi H, Palmisano G, Mase R, Richardson C, Fagerlin A, Montori VM, Spencer M, An LC. Comparison of community health worker -led diabetes medication decision- making support for low-
income Latino and African American adults with diabetes using e- health tools versus print materials: a 
randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161([ADDRESS_371600]):S13 -22. PMCID: PMC4391371.  
153. Henderson VA, Barr KL, An LC, Guajardo C, Newhouse W, Mase R, Heisler M. Communit y-based 
participatory research and user -centered design in a diabetes medication information and decision tool. 
Prog Community Health Partnersh. 2013;7(2):171 -184. PMCID: PMC4117400.  
154. Heisler M. IIR 12 -412 Technologically Enhanced Coaching (TEC): A Program for Improving Diabetes 
Outcomes VA HSR&D; 02/01/2014 -01/31/2018.  
155. Spencer MS, Rosland AM, Kieffer EC, Sinco BR, Valerio M, Palmisano G, Anderson M, Guzman JR, 
Heisler M. Effectiveness of a community health worker intervention among African American and Latino 
adults with type 2 diabetes: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Public Health. 2011;101(12):2253 -2260. 
PMCID: PMC3222418.  
156. Bodenheimer T, Wagner EH, Grumbach K. Improving primary care for patients with chronic illness. Part 
2: The chronic  care model. JAMA. 2002;288(15):1909- 1914. PMCID: Not Required.  
157. Glasgow RE, Orleans CT, Wagner EH. Does the chronic care model serve also as a template for 
improving prevention? Milbank Q. 2001;79(4):579 -612, iv -v. PMCID: PMC2751207.  
158. Wagner EH, Austin BT, VonKorff M. Organizing care for patients with chronic illness. Milbank Q. 1996;74(4):511 -544. PMCID: Not Required.  
159. Schmittdiel JA, Adams SR, Segal J, Griffin MR, Roumie CL, Ohnsorg K, Grant RW, O'Connor PJ. Novel use and utility of integrated electronic health records to assess rates of prediabetes recognition 
and treatment: brief report from an integrated electronic health records pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(2):565 -568. PMCID: PMC3898765.  
160. Heisler M, Resnicow K. Helpi[INVESTIGATOR_303742]: A brief introduction to motivational interviewing in clinical diabetes care. Clinical Diabetes. 2008;26(4):161- 165. PMCID: Not 
Required.  
161. Rollnick S, Miller WR, Butler C. Motivational Interviewing in Health Care. Helpi[INVESTIGATOR_303743].  [LOCATION_001], NY: The Guilford Press; 2008.  
162. Adams SR, Goler NC, Sanna RS, Boccio M, Bellamy DJ, Brown SD, Neugebauer RS, Ferrara A, Wiley DM, Schmittdiel JA. Patient satisfaction and perceived success with a telephonic health coaching 
Page 27 of 29 
 program: the Natural Experiments for Translation in Diabetes (NEXT- D) Study, Northern [LOCATION_004], 
2011. Prev Chronic Dis. 2013;10:E179. PMCID: PMC3816609. 
163. Boccio M, Sanna RS, Adams SR, Goler NC, Brown SD, Neugebauer RS, Ferrara A, Wiley DM, Bellamy 
DJ, Schmittdiel JA. Telephone- Based Coaching: A Comparison of Tobacco Cessation Programs in an 
Integrated Health Care System. Am J Health Promot. 2015 [e -pub ahea d of print].  
164. Schmittdiel JA. The impact of a telephonic wellness coaching program on weight loss: A Natural Experiments in Diabetes (NEXT- D) study. Paper presented at: American Diabetes Association 75th 
Scientific SessionsJune 7, 2015.  
165. Xiao H, A dams SR, Goler N, Sanna RS, Boccio M, Bellamy DJ, Brown SD, Neugebauer RS, Ferrara A, 
Schmittdiel JA. Wellness Coaching for People With Prediabetes: A Randomized Encouragement Trial to Evaluate Outreach Methods at Kaiser Permanente, Northern [LOCATION_004], 2013. Prev Chronic Dis. 
2015;12:E207. PMCID: PMC4674445. 
166. Ryan RM, Deci EL. Self -determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social 
development, and well- being. The American psychologist. 2000;55(1):68 -78. PMCID: Not Required.  
167. Silva MN, Markland D, Minderico CS, Vieira PN, Castro MM, Coutinho SR, Santos TC, Matos MG, Sardinha LB, Teixeira PJ. A randomized controlled trial to evaluate self -determination theory for 
exercise adherence and weight control: rationale and intervention description. BMC public health. 
2008;8:234. PMCID: PMC2483280.  
168. Teixeira PJ, Silva MN, Mata J, Palmeira AL, Markland D. Motivation, self -determination, and long- term 
weight control. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2012;9:22. PMCID: PMC3312817.  
169. William s GC, Grow VM, Freedman ZR, Ryan RM, Deci EL. Motivational predictors of weight loss and 
weight -loss maintenance. J Person Soc Psych. 1996;70(1):115 -126. PMCID: Not Required.  
170. Miller WR, Rollnick S. Motivational Interviewing: Helpi[INVESTIGATOR_68918].  [LOCATION_001], NY: Guilford; 
2012.  
171. Festinger L. A theory of social comparison processes. Human Relations. 1954;7:117. PMCID: Not 
Required.  
172. Lockwood P, Kunda Z. Superstars and me: Predicting the impact of role models on the self. Journal of personality and social psychology. 1997;73(1):91 -103. PMCID: Not Required.  
173. Mueller AS, Pearson J, Muller C, Frank K, Turner A. Sizing Up Peers: Adolescent Girls’ Weight Control 
and Social Comparison in the School Context. Journal of health and social behavior. 2010;51(1):64 -78. 
PMCID: PMC4074007.  
174. King AC, Castro C, Wilcox S, Eyler AA, Sallis JF, Brownson RC. Personal and environmental factors 
associated with physical inactivity among different racial -ethnic groups of U.S. middle- aged and older -
aged women. Healt h Psychol. 2000;19(4):354 -364. PMCID: Not Required.  
175. Marquez DX, McAuley E, Overman N. Psychosocial Correlates and Outcomes of Physical Activity Among Latinos: A Review. Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences. 2004;26(2):195 -229. PMCID: Not 
Required.  
176. Kessler RS, Purcell EP, Glasgow RE, Klesges LM, Benkeser RM, Peek CJ. What does it mean to "employ" the RE -AIM model? Eval Health Prof. 2013;36(1):44 -66.  
177. Damschroder LJ, Lowery JC. Evaluation of a large- scale weight management program using the 
consolidated framework for implementation research (CFIR). Implement Sci. 2013;8:51. PMCID: 
PMC3656778.  
178. Greenhalgh T, Robert G, Macfarlane F, Bate P, Kyriakidou O. Diffusion of innovations in service 
organizations: systematic review and recommendations. Milbank Q. 2004;82(4):581 -629. PMCID: Not 
Required.  
179. Kitson AL, Rycroft -Malone J, Harvey G, McCormack B, Seers K, Titchen A. Evaluating the successful 
implementation of evidence into practice using the PARiHS framework: theoretical and practical 
challenges. Implement Sci. 2008;3:1. PMCID: PMC2235887.  
180. Rogers EM. Diffusion of Innovations.  [LOCATION_001], NY: Simon and Schuster; 2010.  
181. [LOCATION_002] Census Bureau. Quick Facts, Ypsilanti city, Michigan [Accessed May 23, 2016].  http://www .census.gov/quickfacts/table/PST045215/2689140 . 
182. Washtenaw County M. Community Health Assessment: Chronic Disease [Accessed May 23, 2016].  
http://www.ewashtenaw.org/government/departments/public_health/health- pr omotion/hip/cha- chip-
landing- page/cha- chronic -disease . 
Page [ADDRESS_371601] MM, Simmons D, 
Peers for Progress Investigator G. Contributions of Peer Support to Health, Health Care, and 
Prevention: Papers from Peers for Progress. Ann Fam Med. 2015;[ADDRESS_371602] 1:S2- 8. PMCID: 
PMC4648132.  
184. National Institutes of Health | The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention | Deparment of Health 
and Human Services. National Diabetes Education Program. Diabetes Prevention. Bethesda, MD2010.  
185. Bodenheimer T, Handley MA. Goal -setting for behavior change in primary care: an exploration and 
status repor t. Patient Educ Couns. 2009;76(2):174- 180.  
186. Campbell M, Grimshaw J, Steen N. Sample size calculations for cluster randomised trials. Changing 
Professional Practice in Europe Group (EU BIOMED II Concerted Action). J Health Serv Res Policy. 
2000;5(1):12 -16. PMCID: Not Required.  
187. Killip S, Mahfoud Z, Pearce K. What is an intracluster correlation coefficient? Crucial concepts for primary care researchers. Ann Fam Med. 2004;2(3):204 -208. PMCID: PMC1466680.  
188. Cohen J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioural Sciences. 2nd Edition.  Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum; 
1989.  
189. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_140195] J, Armstrong MJ, Butalia S, Donovan LE, Sigal RJ, Vandermeer B, Chordiya P, Dhakal S, Hartling L, Nuspl M, Featherstone R, Dryden DM. Behavioral Programs for Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: A 
Systematic Review and Network Meta- analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2015;163(11):848- 860.  
190. Heagerty PJ, Zeger SL. Marginal regression models for clustered ordinal measurements. J Amer Statist Assoc. 1996;91(435):1024- 1036. PMCID: Not Required.  
191. Roberts C, Roberts SA. Design and analysis of clinical trials with clustering effects due to treatment. Clin Trials. 2005;2(2):152- 162. PMCID: Not Required.  
192. Lavori PW, Dawson R, Shera D. A multiple imputation strategy for clinical trials with truncation of 
patient data. Stat Med. 1995;14(17):1913 -1925. PMCID: Not Required.  
193. Little RJ, Rubin DB. The analysis of social science data with missing values. Sociologic Methods and Research. 1989;18:292- 326. PMCID: Not Required.  
194. MacKinnon DP, Lockwood CM, Hoffman JM, West SG, Sheets V. A comparison of methods to test mediation and other intervening variable effects. Psychol Methods. 2002;7(1):83- 104. PMCID: Not 
Required.  
195. Tomz M, Wittenberg J, King G. CLARIFY: Software for Interpreting and Presenting Statistical Results. Version 2.1. Stanford University, University of Wisconsin, and Harvard University. 2003.  
196. Crabtree B, W. M. Doing Qualitative Research.  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 1999.  
197. Mason J. Qualitative Researc hing.  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2002. 
198. Chu SY, Bachman DJ, Callaghan WM, Whitlock EP, Dietz PM, Berg CJ, O'Keeffe- Rosetti M, Bruce FC, 
Hornbrook MC. Association between obesity during pregnancy and increased use of health care. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(14):1444 -1453. PMCID: Not Required.  
199. Hornbrook MC, Goodman MJ, Fishman PA, Meenan RT, O'Keeffe- Rosetti M, Bachman DJ. Building 
health plan databases to risk adjust outcomes and payments. International journal for quality in health 
care : journal of the International Society for Quality in Health Care / ISQua. 1998;10(6):531 -538. 
PMCID: Not Required.  
200. Meenan RT, Goodman MJ, Fishman PA, Hornbrook MC, O'Keeffe -Rosetti MC, Bachman DJ. Pooling 
multisite administrative data for economic analysi s. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 
2002;2(5):477 -483. PMCID: Not Required.  
201. Meenan RT, Goodman MJ, Fishman PA, Hornbrook MC, O'Keeffe -Rosetti MC, Bachman DJ. Issues in 
pooling administrative data for economic evaluation. Am J Manag Care. 2002;8(1):45 -53. PMCID: Not 
Required.  
202. Meenan RT, Saha S, Chou R, Swarztrauber K, Pyle Krages K, O'Keeffe -Rosetti MC, McDonagh M, 
Chan BK, Hornbrook MC, Helfand M. Cost -effectiveness of echocardiography to identify intracardiac 
thrombus among patients with first stroke or transient ischemic attack. Med Decis Making. 2007;27(2):161 -177. PMCID: Not Required.  
203. Nichols GA, Bell TJ, Pedula KL, O'Keeffe -Rosetti M. Medical care costs among patients with 
established cardiovascular disease. Am J Manag Care. 2010;16(3):e86- e93.  
Page 29 of 29 
 204. O'Keeffe -Rosetti MC, Hornbrook MC, Fishman PA, Ritzwoller DP, Keast EM, Staab J, Lafata JE, 
Salloum R. A standardized relative resource cost model for medical care: application to cancer control 
programs. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr . 2013;2013(46):106 -116. PMCID: PMC3748000.  
205. Duru OK, Ettner SL, Vassar SD, Chodosh J, Vickrey BG. Cost evaluation of a coordinated care management intervention for dementia. Am J Manag Care. 2009;15(8):521- 528. PMCID: PMC2770874.  
206.  G. Godin, R.J. Shephard, A simple method to assess exercise behavior in the  
community, Can. J. Appl. Sport Sci. 10 (3) (Sep 1985) 141– 146. 
207.  R. Shephard, Godin leisure- time exercise questionnaire, Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 29  
(suppl6) (1997) S36– S38. 
208.  (CDC) CfDCaP, Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System Survey Questionnaire,  
(2017).  
209.  J.H. Hibbard, E.R. Mahoney, J. Stockard, et al., Development and testing of a short form of the patient activation measure, Health Serv. Res. 40 (6 Pt 1) (Dec 2005)  
1918–1930.  
210.  G.C. Williams, Z.R. Freedman, E.L. Deci, Supporting autonomy to motivate patients  
with diabetes for glucose control, Diabetes Care 21 (10) (Oct 1998) 1644–1651.  
211.  G.C. Williams, E.L. Deci, Internalization of biopsychosocial values by [CONTACT_303769]: a test of self -determination theory, J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 70 (4) (Apr  
1996) 767–779.  
212.  C.S. Levesque, G.C. Williams, D. Elliot, et al., Validating the theoretical structure  
of the treatment self -regulation questionnaire (TSRQ) across three different health  
behaviors, Health Educ. Res. 22 (5) (Oct 2007) 691– 702. 
213.  Barrera, M., Glasgow, R. E., Mckay , H. G., Boles, S. M., & Feil, E. G. (2002). Do Internet- based support 
interventions change perceptions of social support?: An experimental trial of approaches for supporting diabetes self -management.  American journal of community psychology , 30(5), 637 -654. 
214.  R.E. Glasgow, E.H. Wagner, J. Schaefer, et al., Development and validation of the  
patient assessment of chronic illness care (PACIC), Med. Care 43 (5) (2005)  
436– 444. 
215.  G.C. Williams, H.A. McGregor, D. King, et al., Variation in perceived comp etence,  
glycemic control, and patient satisfaction: relationship to autonomy support from  
physicians, Patient Educ. Couns. 57 (1) (Apr 2005) 39– 45. 
216.   Kroenke K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Williams JB. The Patient Health Questionnaire- 2: Validity of a Two -Item 
Depression Screener. Medical Care. 2003;41:1284- 92. 
217.  Chew, L.D., K.A. Bradley, and E.J. Boyko. Brief questions to identify patients with inadequate health literacy. Fam Med. 2004. 36(8): 588- 94. 
218.  Mujahid, M.S., A.V. Diez Roux, J.D. Morenoff, T. Raghunathan. Assessing the Measurement Properties of Neighborhood Scales: From Psychometrics to Ecometrics. American Journal of Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623] . 2007. 
165(8): [ADDRESS_371603] Fam Med. 2022 Jul- Aug;35(4):668- 679. doi: 10.3122/jabfm.2022.04.200462. PMID: 35896473.  
 
 
  
 