R01 AG061973 -01                                                                      Protocol 
 
 
 
 
Protocol  
 
Date 1/11/22 
 
 
 
Sponsor Name:   [CONTACT_4289]/National Institute on Aging (NIA)  
Sponsor Type:   Federal - NIH  
Sponsor Role:   Funding  
Grant/Contract Number:  R01 AG061973 -01   
Funding Through:   Federal -NIH  
Award Number:   R01 AG061973 -01   
Grant Title:    GamePlan4Care: Web -based Delivery System for REACH II  
 
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
  

IRB Submitted 01/11/22  
 
SPECIFIC AIMS  
Family care of an older adult is a valued tradition of society and has become an essential element of the 
US he althcare system with 83% of long term care provided to older adults coming from family members or other 
unpaid helpers1. As the population of older adults grows, almost doubling in size from 2012 to [ZIP_CODE], so too will 
the expectations placed on American families. This is especially true of families who support community living 
for individual s living with Alzheimer’s  disease and related dementias (ADRD ), which has been defined as “intense 
caregiving” and  is associated with significant daily burdens and an overall threat to the caregiver’s quality of life3. 
A robust body of ADRD  research demonstrates that interventions aimed at supporting and educating caregivers 
can significantly improve the quality of care delivery and improve the well -being and quality of life for both 
caregivers and persons with dementia (PWD)4. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_865405] [ADDRESS_1207228] been found to 
be effective for dementia caregivers in randomized clinical trials (results confirmed in 7 meta -analyses and 17 
systematic reviews), only six have undergone translation efforts resulting in publication5.  The lack of credible 
translation of evidence -based intervention s into widely available community -based services means that the clear 
majority of the current 16.[ADDRESS_1207229].    
This study  is based on a practical approach of applying technology to an existing evidence -based 
intervention, Resources for Enhancing Alzheimer’s Caregiver Health II (REACH II), refined with real -world user 
feedback and rigorously tested with the goal of creating an online family caregiver support sys tem that has the 
potential of both scalability and sustainability. The feasibility of our proposition has been established by [CONTACT_865429] -of-concept system  GamePlan4Care  (GP4C) , demonstrating that modern internet  
technology can be used to aut omate key components of REACH II  delivery . Such automated REACH II 
components  include  active  engag ement of  caregivers in skill -building  to address diverse  challenges in caregiving 
and flexible tailoring of the intervention based on participant needs. There fore, GamePlan4Care  is positioned 
for a Phase 1 study to incorporate  the full breadth of REACH II material  and optimize the user experience  
for efficacy testing in a randomization clinical tri al that engages  BSWH clinics and  community -based 
organizations  (CBOs)  where family caregivers already seek services.  
Two specific staged AIMS are proposed in this study . 
AIM 1 . Advance the current proof -of-concept GP4C into a viable delivery system for the REACH II 
intervention. Further development will include  uploading the full breadth of REACH II education and skill -
building materials,  usability testing and updates  to the user interface/user experience  (UI/UX) , creating a portal 
of delivery tools used by [CONTACT_865430] (DCS; i.e., interventionist), and establishing a comparable  
education -focused online system ( Resources4Care; R4C ) to be used in comparison to the multicomponent, 
skills -training GP4C system. Development activities will be conducted by [CONTACT_865431] & White Health 
(BSWH) Office of Digital Heal th with engagement of community -based organizations, family caregivers , and 
external  advisors, with oversight by [CONTACT_35344]4C research team.  
H1: Within [ADDRESS_1207230], on a wide range of family caregiver outcomes.  Family caregivers will be randomized to one of 
the two conditions  and will complete an assessment b attery at baseline and at the 6 -month follow -up. Primary 
outcome measures will include burden, depression, social support, and caregiver’s health and interaction with 
health care providers. Secondary outcomes will include caregiver stress, positive aspects of caregiving (PAC), 
cognitive change in care -recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]. The CBOs will designate a “GP4C Champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394]” to promote the enrollment of 
[ADDRESS_1207231] computer access and report regular use of the internet.  Use of GP4C & R4C 
and contact [CONTACT_865432].  
H1: Family caregivers randomized to the GP4C condition will report greater  improvement on primary and 
secondary outcomes as compared to family caregivers in the R4C condition.  
GP4C will fill a critical gap in caregiver support services as an evidence -based, internet -enable d system capable 
of providing immediate, tailored education and skills training to caregivers who can  access live support from a 
DCS via phone or web -based video . Compared to existing evidence -base d interventio ns, CBOs will face fewer 
Supplemental File 2: GP4C Study Protocol
  
IRB Submitted 01/11/[ADDRESS_1207232] family caregivers, caregiving is not a short -term obligation. As reported in the 
National Academies’ report  Families Caring for an Aging America6, nearly 70 percent of caregivers in a nationally 
representative survey had provided 2 to 10 years of care, and 15 percent had already provided care for more 
than 10 years by [CONTACT_368246]. This is significant because caregivers are more likely to suffer the 
negative consequences of caregiving the longer they are engaged in it. Caregiving is associated with negative 
psychosocial outcomes such as depression, anxiety, and burden3; social isolation and family conflict7; and 
financial strain due to costs of care8. Some caregivers also experience negative health outcomes such as  poorer 
self-reported h ealth, more chronic conditions/ healthcare utilization, and decreased immune functioning9. The 
data therefore suggests that an average person in their fourth decade of life is expected to eventually spend 5.1 
years (or 10% of their remaining life) caring for an older adult, a situation know n to have negative consequence s 
to one’s health and well -being.  
Dementia caregivers, in particular, are likely to experience these negative outcomes.   In the United 
States, an estimated 5.7 million persons are affected by [CONTACT_7351]’s disease, the most common type of dementia 
and an estimated 16.1 caregivers provide daily care to family members living with Alzheimer’s disease10. 
Compared to non -dementia caregivers, dementia caregivers spend significantly more time providing car e, assist 
with more activities of daily living, face greater impact on work and career, and experience more negative social 
and emotional consequences11.  For dementia caregivers, these compounded negative outcomes are associated 
with increased intensity of caregiving, presence of care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_109685] t problem -behaviors, and lower levels of informal 
support12,13.  
There are proven management techniques that can address t hese unique aspects of dementia caregiving  
and mitigate  negative consequences experience by [CONTACT_116964] . More specifically, interventions that 
actively engage caregivers in skill -building14, utilize a multi -component strategy to address different challenges 
of caregiving15, and allow for flexible tailoring of the intervention based on participant needs16 can positively 
impact family caregiver s. Yet, these services remain  elusive to the vast majority of family caregiver s as caregiving 
services remain  extremely fragmented, poorly adapted to caregiver needs  and preferences , and, in the case of 
technology -based  solutions, underdeveloped .  
Barriers to the provision of caregiver services have been well documented and include the lack of a 
reliable  infrastructure capable of standing up service programs , failure to provide  services in a format and location 
that can be accessed by [CONTACT_865433] a family member living 
with dementia , failure to create a workforce versed in “family -centered care”, and the absence of a typi[INVESTIGATOR_865406] (i.e., commercial health insurance, Medicare)6. While strategies to overcome barriers to the provision 
of caregiver services have been tried, currently evidence -based interventions share a fundamental  restriction – 
the development and testing environment from which the interventions emerged is  not characteristic of real -
world  service delivery and did not include input from the end users (i.e., providers of caregiving services and 
family caregivers) . The failure of current evidence -based intervention to resul t in meaningful community -based 
services lead  the authors of Family caring for an Aging America6 to call for the “ development and testing of 
dissemination and implementation strategies to enable  reach and scaling up of proven programs and integration 
in ex isting systems of care.” P. 180  
INNOVATION  
Application of technology as a strategy towards greater reach and scaling has shown promise in the 
delivery of health care and social services  but has  been underutilized in efforts to support family caregivers. We 
propose modern internet technology  as a feasibility strategy  to scaling currently evidence -based caregiving 
interv entions. More specifically, internet -enabled technology can be part of the solution in efforts to adapt  costly 
and labor -intensive caregive r intervention s into more  scalable and sustainable format s acceptable to today’s 
caregivers.   Innovations demonstrated in this study  is the use  of modern internet  technology in the delivery of an 
existing, well studied , effective approach to improving the quality of life of dementia caregivers, the Resources 
for Enhancin g Alzheimer’s Caregivers Health II (REACH II ) intervention . Development activities will focus on the 
consumer experience and will benefit from access to the latest digital technology in healthcare. Unlike prior 
approaches to using web-based  supports, we will conduct a methodolog ically rigorous randomized clinical  trial 
IRB Submitted 01/11/22  
 
followed  by, if appropriate, dissemination  of an online version of REACH II to CBOs who will face fewer barriers 
to scaling and sustaining an evidence -based intervention . 
As access to the internet is becoming ubiquitous17 even among groups with historically low rates of 
technology adoption ( older adults, less educated, lower income , rural)17,18, technology -based  adaptation  of 
caregiver support ha s emerged  as a potential avenue  to overcom ing barriers of access,  scalability , and 
sustainability .  Caregivers have already demonstrated a collective desire to access  the internet to gather health 
information, track their own health indicators, and seek other s with similar health concerns19. Caregivers believe 
that technology solutions can bring significant benefits to both them and the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]20. Once established, 
technology solutions that make use of automation (which cannot deviate from standardized  protocols 
[implementation fidelity]) can be rapi[INVESTIGATOR_865407]. Therefore, it is through technology 
that the rapi[INVESTIGATOR_865408] a n easily 
implemented,  standardized, and cost-effective format they find acceptable  (and continue using)  to potentially 
reduce the burd en of care  and enable them to stay in the caregiving role longer .   
There are concerns, however, to the quality and utility of information currently being accessed by 
[CONTACT_865434]21. Utilizing content from e vidence -based programs, whose impact on caregiver 
outcomes has been previously verified using rigorous scientific methodology, offer s the s trongest likelihood that 
caregivers will benefit from technology -enabled platforms. Previous r esearch has shown  that adaptations of 
existing evidence -based programs  to internet -based applications is feasible and acceptable for culturally diverse 
groups22. For dementi a caregiver support specifically,  initial work using telecommunications and computer -based 
interventions have demonstrated  the approach  to be a viable mode of intervention delivery23,24. Many studies 
have reported significant improv ements in caregiver outcomes and caregiver satisfaction  and comfortable with 
telehealth25. However, there are concerns about the methodological rigor in the testing of many of the se early 
internet -based caregiver interventions, as many do not use a control condition or assess caregiver compliance 
with the intervention21. 
In order to expand access to evidence -based education and support through technology, Stevens and 
Ory have created a n internet -based delivery system for one of the most respected family caregiver interventions, 
REACH II . While REACH II has been made available in both healthcare systems and community -based 
organizations , it has  failed to achieve the scaling and sustainability needed  to accommodate family caregivers. 
The product cre ated by [CONTACT_865435], called  GamePlan4 Care  (GP4C ), serves as a “proof -of-concept” that 
modern internet technology  can provide family caregivers  with access to the highly efficacious  REACH II 
intervention . The result  of their efforts  is a consumer -friendly  website running on  a scalable technical  architecture  
that foster s skills -acquisition in the home setting . The system  facilitate s high le vels of exposure to effective 
caregiving materials all the while circumventing the need for home visits  which can otherwise limit intervention 
access due to factors related to cost, time constraints, and client preferences . Further efficiencies in intervention 
delivery are  achieved using automating the individuali zation and tailoring process of caregiver  materials,  
automate email outreach to promote caregiver engagement with the system , automate prompts for regular DCS 
outreach, and automate aspects of fidelity monitoring . Online delivery and automation of core REA CH II 
components reduces the human resources need ed for delivering the interventions, promotes standardization 
(fidelity) , and conforms to caregiver preferences by [CONTACT_865436]. Professional support is pro vided by a Dementia Care Specialist who the caregiver may access by [CONTACT_6968], 
phone or web  video (by [CONTACT_85842]). The availability of real -time, interactive engagement with the online 
materials by [CONTACT_865437] -based delivery 
systems. Since GP4C is based on the REACH II materials,  it is culturally appropriate for the three groups 
included in the REACH II trail (Caucasian/White, AA/Black, Hispanic).   
With further development of the existing proof -of-concept , the refined GamePlan4Care system will 
represent a viable product for REACH II delivery, appropriate for  efficacy testing in a randomization clinical trial 
that engages BSWH clinics and community -based organizations (CBOs) where family caregive rs already seek 
services . 
APPROACH  
Relevant  Experi ence with REACH II and Web -based Facilitation of Intervention Delivery   
The GP4C design and research team assembled in this study  is particularly well -positioned to complete 
all proposed aims. In the role of NIH Program Director (1981 -2001), Ory launched the multi -site Resources for 
Enhancing Alzheimer’s Caregiv er Health (REACH I) Initiative15. As an early career investigator, Stevens was 
part of the original REACH I consortium, and emerged as a leading inves tigator of the REACH II project26,27. 
IRB Submitted 01/11/22  
 
Since publication of the REACH II outcomes in 200627, Stevens has implement ed the REACH II intervention 
within a large integrated healthcare system and in multiple community based organizations  (CBOs) , including  
serving as designer and senior evaluator of one 
of the largest implementations of REACH II in the 
US28. Stevens and colleagues have also created 
a training and certification program for REACH II.  
In September 2016, Steven s & Ory 
obtained funding from the [LOCATION_007] Alzheimer’s 
Research and Care Consortium (TARCC), a 
collaborative of seven leading medical research 
institutes across the state focusing on persons 
with dementia, to develop TEXAS CARES, a 
model of memory capable communities in T exas. 
One of three core objectives of TEXAS CARES  
was to explore technology as a n avenue to 
increase family caregivers’ accessibility to the 
evidence -based intervention, REACH II . REACH 
II is a well -known and respected program but is 
rarely available in both urban and rural [LOCATION_007] 
communities. GamePlan4Care (GP4C) resulted 
from this effort as a proof -of-concept  that the 
REACH II intervention was amenabl e for 
adapt ation into an online, interactive platform that 
could maintain the therapeutic materials  and 
techniques while reducing the resource demands 
of delivering the program to family caregivers. 
Stevens and  Ory guided the scientific process of 
maintain ing the integrity  of the REACH II 
intervention according the principles delineated in 
Table 1.  
Consistent with Gitlin and Czaja ’s29 
proposition for adapting evidence based 
interventions, GP4C maintains REACH II’s 
“active ingredients” which include the theory 
guiding the int ervention and tar get population 
while exploring o ther aspects of the intervention 
(dosage, duration, modality, setting, etc.)  
amendable to change . In adapting the REACH II 
intervention to the GP4C platform, an extensive 
review of the original REACH II manu als and 
publications was conducted to identify and 
protect in translation  the immutable aspects of the 
intervention (including its guiding theory, content, 
and essential delivery characteristics) that could not be compromised without significantly risking efficacy of the 
intervention. Conversely, other aspects of the REACH II intervention were judged to be modifiable and include 
limited changes to content (order/sequence of components, formatting), treatment dosage and duration, modality 
(format of interven tion, use of technology), delivery setting, delivery approach (aspects amenable to tailoring, 
criteria for tailoring), and staffing requirements. Through this process, the GP4C team defined and were guided 
by [CONTACT_865438] i nto GP4C (see Table 1). The current  GP4C proof of concept 
abides by  [CONTACT_865439].  
Stevens and Ory contracted with Clairvoyant Network, LLC . for technological assistance to achieve the 
desired internet -based system . The system includes a flexible database and server -side code to allow granular 
information storage and complex data queries. The site was developed using the Microsoft Azure platform which 
meets all technical safeguards for HIPAA compliance concerning prot ected health information . A primary 
development goal to establish a proof -of-concept was to replicate the burden some  process of tailoring the   
 Table 1: Principles Guiding the translation of REACH II 
into online system GP4C  
 The stress -health process model should remain  as the 
theoretical framework for understanding processes by [CONTACT_865440], and 
a multi -component/multi -modal approach for addressing 
specific aspects of the mo del is still warranted.   
 All REACH II educational and skill training tools should be 
made available to family caregivers who access online 
materials via a computer at time and place that is 
possible/convenient to the caregiver.  
 Caregiver exposure to educational and skill building content 
should be tailored to the caregiver’s unique needs and 
caregiving situation using reliable risk assessment tools  
 Tailoring should be based on caregiver’s risk results  and 
presented  in a written plan to guide the car egiver and shape 
the Dementia Care Specialist’s therapeutic interaction  to 
promote fidelity to therapeutic content of REACH II  
 Reassessment of caregiving characteristics  that are  important 
to tailoring of materials should occur  so that the intervention 
continues to be tailored to their needs, and caregivers should 
continue to maintain access to all intervention content as new 
areas of concern arise  
 Automated  features of the web -based system should  be 
integrated with live support from a trained Dementia Care 
Specialist (DCS) to promote  skills development in the REACH 
II core therapeutic areas of problem solving skills/ABC of 
managing dementia behaviors, stress management, mood 
management, pleasant activities  
 Caregiver and DCS should engage in at least t he minimal 
number of therapeutic interactions needed to ensure 
Caregiver has been fully exposed to the therapeutic 
experience  
 Access to other services  and supports  that may be of value to 
the family caregiver should be facilitated by [CONTACT_865441] s ystem supporting the online experience should  also 
track caregiver engagement with the site, all DCS interactions 
with the caregiver, and will alert the DCS to high risks 
experienced by [CONTACT_559274].  
IRB Submitted 01/11/22  
 
REACH II materials based on caregiver reported risks. GP4C achieves this goal using condition -based logic and 
mode rn internet  techno logy to achieve the following  with its users: a) introduce to the system and invite to use a 
secure sign up on an opening page, b ) provide an initial risk assess ment based on RE ACH II RAM, c ) offer 
IMMEDI ATE, tailored recommendations dra wn from REACH II materials that is formatted in to a plan of care to 
address both caregiv er and care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_865409] , d) invite to email a Dementia Care Specialist  (DCS) , e) notif y 
the DCS of the user ’s risk profile and recommendati on identified using cond itional –based logic . In addition to the 
tailored r ecommendation s provided in response  to the caregiver risk assessment, the caregiver has access  to a 
large library of content adapted from REA CH II materials and commonly available online resources .  
Figure 1 presents  a graphic representation of the GP4C system  in its current state of development. As 
illustrated , the GP4C system replicates a core feature of REACH II, assessing caregiver risks and tailoring 
supports to those risks. GP4C builds on this c ore feature by [CONTACT_865442] 
a similar process (i.e., answer risk assessing questions an d get feedback) on each of the target intervention 
areas (e.g., stress management, depression, burden, self -care and healthy behav iors, social support, problem 
behaviors) topic areas. As demonstrated in Figure 1, the caregiver has chosen the topic of stress management, 
which has yielded tailor ed feedback on managing stress and has linked the caregiver to skills training tools within 
the GP4C system.  
 
Achieving proof of concepts means that GP4C has technical viability  and that desired features, functions , 
and benefits have been established and demonstrated.  Thus, t he scope of work delineated in the original TARCC 
contract to establish  a proof -of-concept has been accomplished which was documented in the  final report 
submitted to TARCC. It does not mean that product development has been complete d or that the product is 
market ready. In the case of GP4C, only  a limited a mount of REACH II therapeutic material has been loaded 
into the system , and we have not supplemented written information with video content . Nor have we fully 
achieved integrat ed support from a DCS via emails and live support via telephone/web video. These activities 
will b e the focus of AIM  [ADDRESS_1207233] reviewed the TEXAS 
CARES products created by [INVESTIGATOR_675164] & Ory and have agreed to serve as an Advisory Committee to this study . 
Our CBO partners will be represented  in development activities  by [CONTACT_865443]’s [LOCATION_007] and the 
Directors of each of the AAAs.  
 
AIM 1  – Advance the current proof -of-concept GP4C into a viable delivery system for the REACH II 
intervention.  
GP4C will fully replicate the REACH II intervention  upon completion. We propose development is needed 
to: 1) enhance  usability by [CONTACT_18629], 2) upload the full breadth of education and skill -building materials,  3) 
improve the user interface/user experience  (UI/UX) , and  4) optimize presentation of material so that GP4C 
operates as an engaging, consumer -driven product  suitable for testing in a RCT . Further development is also 
needed to facilitate DCS/Caregiver interaction and tracking of all therapeutic interactions the caregiver has with 
the website and DCS (i.e., DCS portal to guid e and track service delivery).  Lastly, R4C, an on -line education -
based minimal intervention strategy will be created to serve as a comparison condition . Following usability testing 
and a review by [CONTACT_865444]4C Study team will work with UI/UX designers to 
inform updates and refine the user -facing elements based on feedback and usability testing results (i.e. problems 
encountered while performing system tasks). The result will be a comprehensive digital tool to facilitate de livery 
of the REACH II intervention that is consumer informed.  

IRB Submitted 01/11/22  
 
Figure 2 illustrates the sequence 
of events that will occur for completion of 
AIM 1.  The GP4 C Study team will 
capi[INVESTIGATOR_865410], experience, 
and expertise of the BSWH Office of 
Digital Health. The Digital Health 
Development team is comprised of 35 
web, mobile, middl e-tier, and database 
developers with embedded UI/UX 
designers.  The team has considerable 
experience in the development of clinical 
applications that int erface with both 
providers and clients including a top 
medical application in the Apple App 
Store being used by [CONTACT_46431] 600,[ADDRESS_1207234] a review of the code, and make updates to take advantage of opportunities 
to optimize  the code f or improved functionality, better integration with existing BSWH systems, and better 
positi on the system to leverage previously developed software modules to improve GP4C. The UI/UX designers 
will review and begin updating user -facing elements of GP4C base d on industry standards and best practices 
as well as their own experience designing clinical applications. As prototypes become available, they will be 
made accessible to the GP4C study team for internal usability testing.  
Usability  evaluation will occur  concurrently to content enhancement via a method of iterative evaluation  
using concurrent think -aloud technique  (Kushniruk & Patel30). This method characterizes ease in which a user 
can complete a task, by [CONTACT_398445] a user attains  maste ry of system features, and problems a user encounters 
while using the system . The GP4C research team will work with the Digit al Health Development t eam to develop 
a task hierarchy cataloging individual tasks to accomplish within the system and salien t design questions 
appropriate for experimenter prompts. Such tasks will include registering, logging in, answering user 
assessments, and navigating to education and skill -building content.  Participants will be scheduled to test either 
the technical -relate d aspects (user interface and des ign) or content -related aspects (wording/appropriateness of 
questions and feedback, satisfaction with educat ion and skill -building content) of both GP4C  and R4C.  
Participants  will perform system tasks while vocalizing their thoughts, feelings, and satisfaction with the 
system. Research staff may prompt the participant with a question to elicit specific feedback regarding that 
feature . Participants will be engaged in a brief 10 -minute interview regarding their overall impression/opi[INVESTIGATOR_865411] a brief satisfaction survey upon completion of their 
experience with the online system. User tests will be video/audio recorded, transcribe d, and coded for 
occurrences of user problems and aspects of cognitive processes. Audio recordings from usability testing will be 
transcribed and coded using a coding scheme that includes categories for information content, 
comprehensiveness of graphics an d text, problems in navigation, overall system understandability. The 
transcribed audio will also be coded for specific instances of user problems. Resu lts of the usability testing of 
both content and technical  aspects of the system for each participant wi ll be summarized into a report with 
emphasis on type and frequency of problems encountered.  
Data will be reviewed by [CONTACT_865445] 4 participant experiences to identify issues 
that warrant addressing in subsequent design iteration s. Prior to the fourth  and final caregiver testing, the 
external  Advisory Committee will be engaged for review and feedback. Recommendations from the external  
Advisory Committee  will be carefully cons idered by [CONTACT_35344]4C research and Digital Health teams  with 
modification s made before the final round of caregiver testing. Upon completion of the 4 cycle s of UI/UX, Stevens 
and Ory will review all findings from caregiver UI/UX, feedback from the External Advisors and consultation from 

IRB Submitted 01/11/22  
 
the Office of Digital Healt h to judge if GP4C and R4C are sufficiently developed for testing in the proposed 
randomized clinical trial (AIM 2) . In the unlikely event that Stevens and Ory identify significant concerns, 
additional testing and modifications will be requested  from the Office of Digital Health.  
Sixteen  family caregivers will be engaged in user testing of technical -related aspects of the system and 
[ADDRESS_1207235] content -related aspects of the GP4C  system s. Since both GP4C & R4C will run 
from the  same platform, the UI/UX activities proposed will apply to both ensuring  that both are equally user 
friendly. However, GP4C will have more functionality . The 32 p articipants engaged in UI/UX will be selected 
according to participant eligibility criteria d elineated in AIM 2.   To ensure representation of expected users , user 
testing will include at least 2 family caregivers of the three racial/ethnic groups included in REACH II. Moreover, 
equal number of participants will come from the urban and rural counties of the target recruitment area used for 
the RCT (Aim 2 ; Figure 3). Testing will occur in private office space within the three partner CBOs . 
 
AIM 2: Randomized Clinical Trial of GP4C  
GP4C and R4C will be tested as two intervention arms in a randomized clinical trial with [ADDRESS_1207236] of patients  at participating clinics , with a 
diagnosis of dementia established by [CONTACT_183247] (ICD 9/10) or on the problem list will be forwarded to the 
PCPs, practice nurses, or likely partnering physicians to review and obtain permission to contact 
[CONTACT_4676]/car egiver . Additionally, providers can add to the list for patients/caregivers they think would be a good fit 
for the study. Once the revised lists is received from the provider, research staff will follow -up with a phone call 
to confirm eligibility and proceed with enroll ment .  Participants will also be recruited in partnership with various 
community -based organizations such as Alzheimer’s [LOCATION_007] , Area Agency on Aging (AAA) of the Capi[INVESTIGATOR_865412] , 
AAA of Central [LOCATION_007] , and the Greater Dallas Chapter of the A lzheimer’s Association . Additionally, referrals will 
be accepted directly to the study team from  within the Baylor Scott & White System  through a redcap referral 
link.  Eligible participants must be age 18 years or olde r and providing care and /or supervision for a family 
member  for at least the past 6 months  and currently providing an average of 8hrs/wk. of care and/or supervision .  
Family will be s ubjectively determined by  [CONTACT_865446] a broader definition of a” “ family ” member often 
found in minority communities (e.g., a person not related by [CONTACT_865447] “aunt” or 
“grandchild”) . The family member, named as the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841] (CR)  in this proposal , must be diagnose d with 
ADRD  (self-report from the caregiver ac cepted) and is experiencing signs of dementia as verified  by [CONTACT_865448]8 informant interview. AD8 is an  8-question interview  using a yes/no scoring system31. The 
informant  (i.e, family caregiver)  is asked  if there have been changes in areas of cognition and functioning 
including memory, orientation, executive function and interest in activities . A score of [ADDRESS_1207237] not be currently participating in an other  evidence -based caregiver education and support program.  
Enrollment  is limited to English -speaking caregivers. While the Spanish translation of REACH II has been proven 
valid, translation of GP4C/  R4C from English to Spanish is not possible within the limited budget of this study  
  

IRB Submitted 01/11/22  
 
Recruitment and Consenting  
Recruitment through physician referral : 
PCPs will be made aware of the trial through e -mail, fliers, 
and other traditional marketing techniques. In addition, 
project staff will make presentations at meetings of 
participating medical practices . Some physicians or practices 
may opt to pr ovide a “blanket” referral for all their patients with 
dementia and, if so, study team members may reach out 
directly to recruit participants. Alternatively, PCPs may 
choose to review their lists of persons with dementia and 
delete any patients who should not be contact[CONTACT_865449]/or add any patients/caregivers who they think 
would be a good fit.  Providers can also refer through an 
ambulatory referral via EPIC. Referrals will be sent to the 
department of geriatrics, which  will then be funneled into the 
research work  que where research staff will be able to 
outreach.  
Referrals will also be solicited through reports ran through 
data metrics which will help identify patients who have been 
recently discharged from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_17399] l and who have an 
upcoming appointment with their PCP and/or geriatrics .  
Research staff will then send a message via epic to the 
provider for patient’s upcoming appointment as well as 
append appointment note to let provider know about the study 
and sendin g a referral for the study. Additionally, for patients 
who have not been enrolled but their provider agreed for 
research staff to contact, messages will be sent to the 
providers prior to the patient’s upcoming appointment where 
the provider can talk about the study with the 
patient/caregiver and send a referral. Research staff will 
follow -up with a phone call shortly after the visit.  
Recruitment through Community -based organizations : 
[CONTACT_6034] ha s collabor ated with the CBOs for over 10 years 
on multiple research and service programs for family 
caregivers in Central [LOCATION_007]. C ounties served by [CONTACT_865450] 2 along with 
counties  served by [CONTACT_865451]/Councils of 
Government that overlap with the Baylor Scott & White 
Service area (Brazos Valley AAA, AAA of East [LOCATION_007], AAA of 
Ark. Tex, Texoma AAA, and North Central [LOCATION_007] Council of 
Governments) . Alzheimer’s [LOCATION_007] is th e primary Alzheimer’s 
focused not -for-profit in Central [LOCATION_007] and provides service 
to all eligible counties.  Our long-term partnership with the 
named CBOs includes the practice of compensating CBOs 
for research related activities which are typi[INVESTIGATOR_865413] e the 
core mission of the CBO. Thus, the three organizations will be provided stipend s to apply to staff salaries based 
on services each is expected to provide. Stipends will support the staff person charged to be the organization’s  
“Program  Champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394]”.  The Program  Champi[INVESTIGATOR_865414] . Program  Champi[INVESTIGATOR_865415]. Referrals will includ e basic demographic and contact [CONTACT_3031] (See Human 
Subjects for details). GP4C research staff will conduct a formal screening.  Participants will be enrolled  in Months 
13-48 of the study period (See Timeline.)  
Recruitment through existing research studi es: 
Table 2: Recruitment Area
Target Area
Bell Milam
Coryell Mills
Hamilton San Saba
Lampasas
Bastrop Hays
Blanco Lee
Burnet Llano
Caldwell Travils
Fayette Williamson
Brazos Madison
Burleson Robertson
Grimes Washington
Leon Panola
Anderson Rains
Camp Rusk
Cherokee Smith
Gregg Upshur
Harrison Van Zandt
Henderson Wood
Marion
Bowie Lamar
Cass Miller
Delta Morris
Frankling Red River
Hopkins Titus
Cooke Grayson
Fannin
Collin Kaufman
Dallas Navarro
Denton Palo Pi[INVESTIGATOR_865416] 01/11/22  
 
The Dementia Care Study (D -CARE  study, site PI: [INVESTIGATOR_865417] ) funded through the National Institutes o f Health 
(NIH) and Patient Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI ) targets the similar population as the current 
GP4C study. Caregivers  enrolled in D-Care study  have the opportunity to indicate on their consent form if  they 
would like to be contact[CONTACT_94092].  These CGs after complet ing the DCare study  will be 
contact[CONTACT_865452]4C .  
Individual s referred for possible enrollment will be contact[CONTACT_30781] 3  business days of referral  
for the initial screening interview. Part of conf irming eligibility will require the caregiver to demonstrate a functional 
home computer with internet access. While the GP4C systems will be accessible regardless of connection 
speed, GP4C research staff will review key computer/internet characteristic s over the phone  such as use of 
internet browser s, possible system and software updates and conduct an internet speed test. It is expected that 
all homes will have at least 1mb/s download speed.  Those eligible and expressing interest in the project will be 
scheduled for a second phone call for consenting and baseline data collection. During the second phone call, 
participants will review the consent form with study personnel on the phone before providing a digital signature. 
The REDCap survey feature will allow the consent form to be updated in the participant’s record where the 
consen ting staff can add his/her own signature. Participants will then be administered baseline instruments over 
the phone while following along with their PDF copy.  
All data collection systems and services will be based on REDCap , the CTSA -supported data 
management  tool ( http://project -redcap.org ). While REDCap provides many essential features, its main strength 
is its open  architecture and support for user -designed extensions ("plugins" and "hooks"). Many of the services 
described below are highly customi zed REDCap extensions that appear to the user as stand -alone web 
applications. Through these extensions, we can customize the interface of any REDCap -based web tool to match 
the workflow of the study activity .  After confirming eligib ility, study personnel  will administer the informed consent 
procedure, collect intake information, and conduct the baseline assessments over the phone (Aim 2).  
Study Design  
The proposed study  of AIM [ADDRESS_1207238] Manager (Jordan Reese) confirms that all eligibility criteria have been satisfied 
and that a valid signed consent form is in the REDCap system. The project’s co -investigator and biostatistician, 
G. Han, will design and oversee the randomization pro tocol. After randomization, participants will be contact[CONTACT_865453]. 
At six months following randomization, all participants will be contact[CONTACT_865454]. In addition to measures co llected at baseline, the follow -up assessment will include questions  
regarding participant satisfaction with the online systems and other supports.  Assessments will occur over the 
phone  at baseline and [ADDRESS_1207239] staff conducting the 6 -month interview will be blinded to 
caregiver’s condition assignment. Participants will maintain access to the system in which they were assigned 
through the duration of the project.  
 
 GP4C. Participants in the GP4C intervention arm will have access to full system functionality.   This includes the 
ability to answer additional assessment items and receive additional automated, individualized feedback on their 
responses wit h links to site educational and skill-building content.    
Participants  can also access site educational and skill -building content directly by [CONTACT_865455].   Each participant will also be assigned a bachelors or masters  level Dementia Care Special ist (DCS) 
who will facilitate caregiver interactions with the online material and provide skill training via telephone or web -
based video. Study participants in the intervention arm will receive 9 automated emails and 4 phone calls over 
a 6-month period  (See Table 3) .  
Replicating the schedule of in -home contacts used in REACH II , each of nine emails will focus on a major 
topic area covered in the system, encourage the study participant to log into the system to access more 
information related to the topic,  and remind the participant that an interventionist is available for telephonic 
consultation as needed.  Scheduled therapeutic contacts will not be influenced by [CONTACT_865456]4C online materials.   
The goal o f the telephonic core contacts will be to encourage use  of GamePlan4Care to address 
participant educational and skills -training needs and to assist participants with applying knowledge and skills to 
their specific caregiving situation through role -playing and problem -solving.   If the interventionist receives 
IRB Submitted 01/11/22  
 
negative feedback regarding the participant's ability to use the site, they will attempt to troubleshoot the problem 
on the phone or invite the participant to a one -on-one training on system use.   If there is consistent negative 
feedback regarding a specific aspect of the system, these observations will be reported to the project team for 
consideration for possible system updates.   The DCS will discuss the value of support groups on all four of the 
telep hone calls, each time referring the caregiver to a complete list of support groups provided by [CONTACT_7351]’s 
[LOCATION_007], including telephone and web enabled video (i.e., Zoom).  
IRB Submitted 01/11/22  
 
While REACH II provided tailored support 
groups as part of the intervention, our approach 
encourages the use of existing community 
resources reducing future barriers to translation 
of GP4C from a research environment into a 
service environment. (Alzheimer’s [LOCATION_007] will be 
provide d a stipend in Years 2 – 5 to provide 
support groups.)  
R4C. Participants in the R4C comparison will be 
able to access a standard set of educational 
materials. Materials will cover all topi[INVESTIGATOR_865418] -based  comparison condition 
used in the REACH II trial.   We have used the 
REACH II comparison conditions as a guide. 
Educational materials on the fo llowing topi[INVESTIGATOR_865419] : 1) General information on 
Alzheimer’s Disease  and Dementia, 2) General 
information on caregiving, 3) Information on 
caregiving related stress and 4) Home safety.  
R4C will present one page  on each topic and will 
include active links to two additional online 
sources on the same topic.  System functional ity 
will be limited to a welcome screen with direct 
navigation to a subset of the educational content 
by [CONTACT_865457].  Study participants 
assigned to R4C will receive two emails from their 
DCS encouraging the caregiver to review specific 
educatio n materials. Each email will be followed 
by [CONTACT_48437] "check -in" calls (15 -min each) at three 
months and five months after randomization. This 
replicates the REACH II control condition . 
Trea tment Implementation Monitoring  
Treatment fidelity assessments will 
document the degree to which the GP4C and 
R4C was delivered by [CONTACT_865458]34. 
Treatment implementation refers to a class of 
procedures and process me asures that make up 
treatment delivery, receipt, and enactment35,36. 
Treatment implementation procedures promote 
the accurate and consistent delivery of the 
intervention protocol. Process measures  
document the amount and quality of the 
treatment delivered. Treatment implementation 
data will be used to determine if individual 
caregivers meet treatment compliance 
thresholds. Distributions on treatment 
implementation indicators will also be considered  
in exploratory analysis, which will link “dose” of 
treatment to outcomes.  
A number of methods will by [CONTACT_865459]. The 
pre-programmed computerized nature of the intervention will ensure a high level of treatment consistency.  Initial 
and booster training will be conducted with CBO points of contact [CONTACT_865460] 3: Schedule of GP4C Therapeutic Activities  
Timeline  GP4C Intervention Activities  
Week 1 of 
Enrollment  Login & Initial Assessment  
Send login credentials  
Confirm first login  
Completion of user initial assessment  
Drafting of domain feedback by [CONTACT_865461] [ADDRESS_1207240] 1 
Topic: Welcome and Setting Goals  
Week [ADDRESS_1207241] 1  
Introduction to DCS  
Orientation to system and therapeutic 
contacts  
Clarifying needs/setting goals  
Review safety issues  
Action items and next steps  
Week [ADDRESS_1207242]  2 
Topic: Documentation  
Week [ADDRESS_1207243] 3 
Topic: Problem -solving  
Week [ADDRESS_1207244] 2  
Review new issues/recent changes  
Assess progress to goals/troubleshoot 
barriers  
Review social support issues  
Action items and next steps  
Week [ADDRESS_1207245] 4 
Topic: Staying Flexible  
Week [ADDRESS_1207246] 5  
Topic: Midpoint Review  
Week [ADDRESS_1207247] 6 
Topic: Empowerment  
Week [ADDRESS_1207248] 3  
Review new issues/recent changes  
Assess progress to goals/troubleshoot 
barriers  
Review physical/emotional health issues  
Action items and next steps  
Week [ADDRESS_1207249] 7  
Topic: Acknowledging Your Needs  
Week [ADDRESS_1207250] 8 
Topic: Prioritization  
Week [ADDRESS_1207251] 4  
Review new issues/recent changes  
Assess progress to goals/troubleshoot 
barriers  
Review disruptive behavioral issues  
Discuss closing of intervention and ongoing 
needs  
Action items and next steps   
Week [ADDRESS_1207252] 9 
Topic: Wrappi[INVESTIGATOR_865420] 01/11/[ADDRESS_1207253] regular audi ts of DCS  to review documentation and 
ensure the appropriate number, duration, timing, and content of participant interactions.  
Measures and Outcomes  
The primary outcome measures will be those that informed the multi -domain quality of life measure 
utilized in the original REACH II randomized clinical trial. This approach is similar to that used by [CONTACT_865462]37,38. Burden is consi dered the signature [CONTACT_865466] .  
Measures include:  
 Burden: A [ADDRESS_1207254] of perceived burden.  Caregivers rate each item with higher scores indicating 
higher rates of burden.  
 Depression: A [ADDRESS_1207255] week.  Total score is computed  by [CONTACT_865463].  
 Social support: Two subscales of Social Provision Scale (8 items), Reliable Alliance and Guidance will 
be used to assess availability of support  and satisfa ction with support  from others . 
 Self-rated health: A single item of caregiver’s perception on his/her own health is included.   
 Interactions with health care providers: Medical care management and coordination is measured with a 
9-items of NSOC survey for how caregivers manage medical needs for care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_865421].  
 
Additional outcome measures will include those that capture a more diverse aspect of dementi a care than 
capture by [CONTACT_865464]:  
 Caregiver stress : Perceived Stress Scale is a 10 -item  classic stress assessment , designed to help 
measure individual stress levels. Individual scores on the PSS can range from 0  to 40 with higher scores 
indicating higher perceived stress.  
 Positive caregiver:  Positive Aspect of caregiving (PAC) is measured with eleven items of the favorable 
aspects of their caregiving experience46. The items ask about their mental or affective state related to 
their caregiving experience , for example, providing help to care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_183210] ‘mad e me feel more useful’, 
‘made me feel strong and confident’, ‘given more meaning to my life’, ‘enabled me to develop a more 
positive attitude toward life’, and ‘enabled me to learn new skills’.  
 Cognitive change in care -recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]: A 12 -item self -administere d questionnaire (NPI -Q), completed by [CONTACT_865465], that measures the presence and severity of 12 
Neuropsychiatric Symptoms (NPS) in patients with dementia, as well as the caregiver’s distress.  
 Additional process measures will be generated from user logs of the systems to document treatment 
implementation, including  the total duration  of time spent on GamePlan4Care. A program evaluation 
measure , the USE questionnaire , will be provided to caregivers after completion  of the 6 -month battery 
has been administrated. The USE questionnaire  consisting of 30 items on usefulness, ease of use, ease 
of learning, and satisfaction will evaluate participant’s attitude toward GP4C system . 
 
For participants whose care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_865422] 6 months, caregiver burden and cognitive change 
in care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_865423] 6 months  . 
 
Data Analysis  
Caregiver participants will be randomized to the two intervention arms (GP4C and R4C) with the ratio of 
1:1. Primary and secondary outcomes , including the  Zarit’s caregiving burden interview,  will be assessed at 
baseline and 6-month  follow -up. Covariates in the analysis include demographic characteristics of the caregivers. 
IRB Submitted 01/11/22  
 
Common descriptive statistics (mean, standard d eviation, median, interquartile range for continuous variable; 
frequency and percentage for categorical variables) will be calculated for all covariates in each intervention arm 
and the two arms will be compared at baseline. Goals of our statistical analys is will be to evaluate the 
effectiveness of each intervention arm and to compare the two arms. For each intervention arm, the difference 
between [ADDRESS_1207256] significant changes in outcome variables at 6-month  follow -up since the baseline. Medians, 
means, and 95% confidence intervals of the differences will be calculated using both empi[INVESTIGATOR_865424]. The two intervention arms w ill be compared at each follow -up time and for the whole trial 
period. We will compare the two arms at [ADDRESS_1207257] will be used  to check the normality assumption at baseline and follow -up times 
for the two outcome variables. If normal assumption is significantly violated then only nonparametric estimates 
and tests (i.e., median, IQR, empi[INVESTIGATOR_865425], Wilcoxon signed -rank test, and Wilcoxon rank sum 
test) will be reported, and data transformation, such as log and square root transformations, will be considered 
to normalize the outcome variables for further model -based  testing. The two arms will also be compared 
incorp orating observations baseline and the two follow -ups in longitudinal analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) 
models having the follow -up time and adjusting for covariates.  
Given the fact that participants will be randomized into the two arms, the outcome variable s will likely be 
comparable between the two arms at baseline. As a result, the interaction effect between the treatment arm and 
follow -up time (while adjusting for covariates) will be tested in the longitudinal analysis to evaluate the difference 
between t he two intervention arms because a significant interaction indicates the caregiver’s outcome has 
followed significantly different trajectories in the follow -up period depending on the treatment arm. Missing values 
may be possible because 1) some caregivers  may be lost to follow -up, and 2) some caregiving recipi[INVESTIGATOR_865426] -up. Missing patterns will be inspected and multiple imputation methods, including 
regression imputation, propensity score imputation, and MCMC imputation will be considered based on the 
missing mechanism47. All tests will be two -sided and a p -value less than or equal to 0.05 will be reported as 
statistically significant. Statistical Analysis Software (SAS software, version 9.4; SAS Inc., Cary, NC) will be used  
to conduct the proposed analysis.  
 
Sample size considerations  
The primary endpoint  in this power 
analysis  is the  Zarit’s caregiving burden 
score. Assuming 20% attrition rate at the 6 -
month  follow -up, we plan to initially enroll 
totally 240 family caregi vers who  will be 
equally randomized into two will be equally 
randomized into two arms (120 per arm), 
and we expect a minimum of 100 caregivers 
per arm to complete the 6 -month 
assessment.  The sample size of 100 in each 
arm can guarantee 80% power at 
significance level 0.[ADDRESS_1207258] deviation (SD) 
difference between baseline and [ADDRESS_1207259]. (See Table 4).  Nicholas et al.[ADDRESS_1207260] size of 0.33SD of Zarit’s score from the REACH VA intervention (also between baseline and 
6-month follow -up). While GP4C will use a different delivery strategy than used in the REACH II and REACH VA 
trials, core therapeutic materials and techniques  of the intervention are m aintained. Thus , we expect GP4C to 
have a similar impact on caregiver outcomes as observed in prior REACH II trial. Thus , we conclude that enrolling 
120 caregivers per arm (100 available at 6 months) will achieve sufficient statistical power to detect the 
effectiveness of the proposed interventions, even if the GP4C full functionality intervention is slightly less robust 
than the original REACH interventions.   
 
 
 

IRB Submitted 01/11/[ADDRESS_1207261] activities (including community partners, 
interventionists, and caregiver participants) will be used during a final round of iterative design and system 
updates by [CONTACT_865431] & White Office of Digital Health. These updates are judged to be critical as they 
will best position the GP4C for ongoing clinical tria ls, future cultural adaptati ons, and eventual dissemination to 
CBOs.  
Timeline of Study Activities   
 Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  
Aim and Activity  Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 
 Aim 1:  Prepare GP4C for Testing in a RCT                      
 GP4C System Import & Integration w/BSWH IT Systems                      
 Digital Health Team UI/UX Review and Updates                      
 Engage Community Partners for CG Usability Testing                      
 Usability Testing with Dementia Caregivers                      
 External Advisory Committee Review                      
                     
 Aim 2: Randomized Clinical Trial of GP4C                      
 Recruitment Materials Development                      
 Engage Pr ogram Champi[INVESTIGATOR_865427]                      
 Interventionist Training                      
 Participant Recruitment & Screening & Consent                        
 Intervention Delivery                      
 Participant [ADDRESS_1207262] Completion                      
 Data Analysis                      
 Extern al Advisory Committee Review Preliminary Findings                      
 Post study refinements to GP4C system                      
 Final Report Preparation & Dissemination of Findings                      
 
Alternative approaches  
Successful  completion of the two AIM s of this study will advance a proof of concept that the REACH II 
intervention can be made  available online to caregivers and that the burden of intervention delivery can be 
lessened with web technologies that automate many of the tasks that required human resources. This will fill a 
significant gap in the availability of online evidence -based services for caregivers. It will not, however, be the 
only online resource for caregivers. Alzheimer’s Navigator® is a content navigation tool that takes user 
responses to survey questions to direct them outside the site to relevant educational content, mo stly related to 
the planning and provision of care for the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]. GP4C  provide s individual feedback, and link users to 
internal, tailored content for skill -development related to caregiver self -care and dementia care management. 
The intervention i ncludes an integrated live -support element with regular interventionist outreach for coaching 
sessions to facilitate skills acquisition and problem -solving.   
Access to the BSWH Office of Digital Health is a significant and unique asset to this project, allowing us 
to bring GP4C in -house for UI/UX (and hosting). While there are commerci al usability laboratories, using 
resources within the BSWH system provides a more cost -effective  approach and ensure secure hosting during 
the testing phase.  We have allotted one year for this process that we believe is reasonable. The BSWH Digital 
Health Office is committed to having a product within a year . 
Recruitment is often a  challenge in  caregiving studies. Stevens and Ory have a long and strong record 
of completing research trails as expected. Moreover, Stevens has worked closely with the partner CBOs on 
number projects. Establishing a “champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394]” within the organizations wil l demonstrate our mutual commitment to 
project success. While our monthly recruitment goals are reasonable given the target recruitment area, BSWH 
is the largest not for profit h ealthcare provider in [LOCATION_007] , and we can expand recruitment internally if neede d.  
IRB Submitted 01/11/[ADDRESS_1207263] MD. US Prevalence And Predictors Of Informal Caregiving For 
Dementia. Health Aff . 2015;34(10):1637 -1641. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2015.0510.  
2.  Ortman JM, Velkoff V a., Hogan H. An aging nation: The older population in the [LOCATION_002]. Econ Stat 
Adm US Dep Commer . 2014;1964:1 -28. doi:10.1016/j.jaging.2004.02.002.  
3.  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_6051] M, Sörensen S. Differences between caregivers and noncaregivers in psy chological health and 
physical health: A meta -analysis. Psychol Aging . 2003;18(2):250 -267. doi:10.1037/0882 -7974.18.2.250.  
4.  Sörensen S, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_6051] M, Duberstein P, et al. How effective are interventions with caregivers? An updated 
meta -analysis. [Review] [135 refs]. Gerontologist . 2002;42(3):356 -372. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12040138. Accessed November 8, 2012.  
5.  Gitlin LN, Marx K, Stanley IH, Hodgson N. Translating evidence -based dementia caregiving interventions 
into practice: State -of-the-science and next steps. Gerontologist . 2015;55(2):210 -226. 
doi:10.1093/geront/gnu123.  
6.  Schulz R, Eden J, eds. Families Caring for an Aging America . Washington, D.C.: National Academies 
Press; 2016. doi:10.[ZIP_CODE]/[ZIP_CODE].  
7.  Gwyther LP. Social Issues of the Alzheimer’s Patient and Family. Am J Med . 1998;104(4):17S -21S. 
doi:10.1016/S0002 -9343(98)[ADDRESS_1207264] MD, Martorell P, Delavande A, Mullen KJ, Langa KM. Monetary Costs of Dementia in the United 
States. N Engl J Med . 2013;368(14):1326 -1334. doi:10.1056 /NEJMsa1204629.  
9.  Schulz R, Sherwood PR. Physical and Mental Health Effects of Family Caregiving. 2008;44(3):23 -27. 
10.  Alzheimer’s Association. 2018 Alzheimer’S Disease Facts and Figures. Alzheimers Dement . 
2018;14(3):367 -429. doi:10.1016/j.jalz.2018.[ADDRESS_1207265] of Caregiving: A Detailed 
Comparison Between Dementia and Nondementia Caregivers. Gerontologist . 1999;39(2):177 -186. 
doi:10.1093/geront/39.2.177.  
12.  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_6051] M, Sorensen S, Sörensen S. Correlates of physical health of informal caregivers: a meta -
analysis. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci . 2007;62(2):P126 -37. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17379673.  
13.  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_6051] M, Sörensen S. Associations of stressors and uplifts of caregiving with caregiver burden and 
depressive mood: a meta -analysis. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci . 2003;58(2):P112 -28. 
doi:10.1093/geronb/58.2.P112.  
14.  Belle SH, Czaja SJ, Schulz R, e t al. Using a new taxonomy to combine the uncombinable: integrating 
results across diverse interventions. Psychol Aging . 2003;18(3):396 -405. doi:10.1037/0882 -
7974.18.3.396.  
15.  Schulz R, Belle SH, Czaja SJ, et al. Introduction to the special section on Re sources for Enhancing 
Alzheimer’s Caregiver Health (REACH). Psychol Aging . 2003;18(3):357 -360. doi:10.1037/0882 -
7974.18.3.357.  
16.  Richards KC, Enderlin CA, Beck C, McSweeney JC, Jones TC, Roberson PK. Tailored biobehavioral 
interventions: a literature re view and synthesis. Res Theory Nurs Pract . 2007;21(4):271 -285. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18236771.  
17.  Perrin A, Duggan M. Americans’ Internet Access: 2000 -2015 . Washington, D.C.; 2015. 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/06/26/americans -internet -access-2000 -2015/.  
18.  Anderson M, Perrin A. Tech Adoption Climbs among Older Adults . Washington, D.C.; 2017. 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/05/17/technology -use-among -seniors/.  
IRB Submitted 01/11/22  
 
19.  Fox S, Duggan M, Purcell K. Family Caregivers Are Wired for Heatlh . Vol 7.  Washington, D.C.: Pew 
Research Center’s Internet & American Life Project; 2013. http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/06/20/family -
caregivers -are-wired -for-health/.  
20.  E ‑ Connected Family Caregiver : Bringing Caregiving into the 21st Century for Caregiving .; 2011. 
http://www.caregiving.org/data/FINAL_eConnected_Family_Caregiver_Study_Jan 2011.pdf.  
21.  Gaugler JE, Kane RL. Family Caregiving in the New Normal . London: Academic Press; 2015.  
22.  Estrada Y, Molleda L, Murray A, et al. Ehealth familias unidas: Pi [INVESTIGATOR_865428] -based family intervention to reduce drug use and sexual risk behaviors among hispanic 
adolescents. Int J Environ Res Public Health . 2017;14(3):1 -15. doi:10.3390/ijerph14030264.  
23.  Czaja SJ, Rubert MP. Te lecommunications technology as an aid to family caregivers of persons with 
dementia. Psychosom Med . 2002;64(3):469 -476. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12021420.  
24.  Finkel S, Czaja SJ, Schulz R, Martinovich Z, Harris C, Pezzuto D. E -care: a telecommun ications 
technology intervention for family caregivers of dementia patients. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry . 
2007;15(5):443 -448. doi:10.1097/JGP.0b013e3180437d87.  
25.  Chi N -C, Demiris G. A systematic review of telehealth tools and interventions to support family  caregivers. 
J Telemed Telecare . 2015;21(1):37 -44. doi:10.1177/1357633X14562734.  
26.  Burgio L, Stevens A, Guy D, Roth DL, Haley WE. Impact of two psychosocial interventions on white and 
African American family caregivers of individuals with dementia. Gero ntologist . 2003;43(4):568 -579. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12937335.  
27.  Belle SH, Burgio L, Burns R, et al. Enhancing the quality of life of dementia caregivers from different ethnic 
or racial groups: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med . 2006;145(10):727 -738. doi:10.1016/0022 -
2836(89)[ZIP_CODE] -6. 
28.  Stevens A, Cho J, Thorud J, Ory M. Live Well Our Health Initiative Year 6 6 Month Report . Fort Worth, 
TX; 2016.  
29.  Gitlin LN, Czaja SJ. Behavioral Intervention Research: Designing, Evaluating , and Implementing . New 
York, NY: Springer Publishing Co; 2016.  
30.  Kushniruk AW, Patel VL. Cognitive and usability engineering methods for the evaluation of clinical 
information systems. J Biomed Inform . 2004;37(1):56 -76. doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2004.01.003.  
31.  Galvin JE, Roe CM, Powlishta KK, et al. The AD8: a brief informant interview to detect dementia. 
Neurology . 2005;65(4):559 -564. doi:10.1212/01.wnl.[PHONE_3313].[ZIP_CODE].2a.  
32.  U.S. Census Bureau. American FactFinder. https://factfinder.census.gov/. Acces sed April 9, 2018.  
33.  [LOCATION_007] Association of Counties. The County Information Program. http://www.txcip.org/tac/census/. 
Accessed April 9, 2018.  
34.  Moncher FJ, Prinz RJ. Treatment fidelity in outcome studies. Clin Psychol Rev . 1991;11(3):247 -266. 
doi:10. 1016/0272 -7358(91)[ZIP_CODE] -2. 
35.  Burgio L, Lichstein KL, Nichols L, et al. Judging outcomes in psychosocial interventions for dementia 
caregivers: the problem of treatment implementation. Gerontologist . 2001;41(4):481 -489. 
http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/a rticlerender.fcgi?artid=2577189&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstra
ct. 
36.  Lichstein KL, Riedel BW, Grieve R. Fair tests of clinical trials: A treatment implementation model. Adv 
Behav Res Ther . 1994;16(1):1 -29. doi:10.1016/0146 -6402(94)[ADDRESS_1207266] of the REACH II and 
REACH VA Dementia Caregiver Interventions on Healthcare Costs. J Am Geriatr Soc . 2017;65(5):931 -
936. doi:10.1111/jgs.[ZIP_CODE].  
IRB Submitted 01/11/22  
 
38.  Nichols LO, Martindale -Adams J, Burns R, Graney MJ, Zuber J. Translation of a dementia caregiver 
support program in a health care system --REACH VA. Arch Intern Med . 2011;171(4):353 -359. 
doi:10.1001/archinternmed.2010.548.  
39.  Radloff LS. The CES -D Scale. Appl Psychol Meas . 1977;1(3):385 -401. 
doi:10.1177/014662167700100306.  
40.  Irwin M, Artin KH, Oxman MN. Screening for depression in the older adult: criterion validity of the 10 -item 
Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_67905] (CES -D). Arch Intern Med. 159(15):1701 -1704. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10448771.  
41.  Bédard M, Molloy DW, Squire L, Dubois S, Lever JA, O’Donnell M. The Zarit Burden Interview: a new 
short version and screening version. Gerontologist . 2001;41(5):652 -657. 
http://www.n cbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11574710.  
42.  Center for Health Statistics - Division of Health Interview Statistics N. 2016 National Health Interview 
Survey (NHIS) Public Use Data Release Survey Description. 2016;(June). 
ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/Health_Statistics/NC HS/Dataset_Documentation/NHIS/2016/srvydesc.pdf.  
43.  Teri L, Truax P, Logsdon R, Uomoto J, Zarit S, Vitaliano PP. Assessment of behavioral problems in 
dementia: the revised memory and behavior problems checklist. Psychol Aging . 1992;7(4):622 -631. 
http://w ww.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1466831.  
44.  Jennings LA, Reuben DB, Evertson LC, et al. Unmet Needs of Caregivers of Individuals Referred to a 
Dementia Care Program. J Am Geriatr Soc . 2015;63(2):282 -289. doi:10.1111/jgs.[ZIP_CODE].  
45.  Thornton M, Travis SS. Anal ysis of the reliability of the modified caregiver strain index. J Gerontol B 
Psychol Sci Soc Sci . 2003;58(2):S127 -32. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12646602.  
46.  Barber CE, Vega LD. Ethnic Differences in the Experience of Filial Caregiving: A Compari son of Hispanic 
and Non -Hispanic White Caregivers in Colorado. Southwest J Aging . 2004;19:33 -54. 
47.  Schafer JL, Reid N, Keiding N, Louis T, Tong H, Isham V. Analysis of Incomplete Multivariate Data . New 
York: Chapman & Hall/CRC; 1997.  
 
 
 
 
 
 