I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/2023  
 
Page 1 of 21  
Implementing a Skills Training Evidence -Based Treatment for  
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (I -STEP)  
 
 
Protocol Version Number:  H-[ZIP_CODE], Version 1.9  
Protocol Version Date:  8 November 2023   
ClinicalTrials.gov number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Funding Mechanism:   K23MH117221  
Sponsor:   National Institute of Mental Health  
Grant title: An implementation science approach to optimizing evidence -based treatments for 
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) for nonspecialty settings  
 
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_9946] E. Valentine, PhD  
 Phone:  (617) 414 -1989  
 E-mail:  [EMAIL_17206]  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan - pages 19 -20  
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/[ADDRESS_1266126] of Abbreviations  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  3 
2 Protocol Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  3 
3 Background/Rationale & Purpose  ................................ ................................ ............................  [ADDRESS_1266127] Exclusion Criteria  ................................ ................................ ..............................  10 
8 Study Intervention  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  10 
9 Recruitment and Retention Procedures  ................................ ................................ .................  11 
9.1.1  Recruitment Procedures  ................................ ................................ .................  11 
9.1.2  Retention Procedures  ................................ ................................ .....................  12 
10 Screening Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  12 
11 Consent Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  13 
12 Study Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  13 
13 Assessment of Safety and Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP)  ................................ ...........  [ADDRESS_1266128] Keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  ................................ ................................ ........................  18 
14.1  Confidentiality  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  18 
15 Statistical Plan  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  19 
15.1  Study Hypotheses  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  19 
15.2  Sample Size Determination  ................................ ................................ ...........................  19 
15.3  Statistical Methods  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  19 
16 Ethics/Protection of Human Subjects  ................................ ................................ .....................  20 
17 Literature References  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  20 
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/[ADDRESS_1266129] of Abbreviations  
 
PTSD = Posttraumatic stress disorder; STAIR = Skills training in affective and interpersonal 
regulation; EBT = Evidence -based treatment; CPT = Cognitive processing therapy; PE = 
Prolonged exposure; VHA = Veterans health administration; I -STEP = Implementing a skills 
training evidence -based treatment for PTSD; IBH = Integrated behavioral health; RCT = 
Randomized control trial; DSM -5 = Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th 
edition; LEC -5 = Life events checklist for the DSM -5; PCL -5 = PTSD checklist for the DSM -5; RA  = 
Research assistant; CAB = Community advisory board; PI = Principal investigator; CSQ -8 = Client 
satisfaction questionnaire, 8 -item; ISEL -12 = Interpersonal support evaluation list, 12 -item; BSI -
18 = Brief symptom inventory, 18 -item; CFIR = Consolidated framework for implementation 
research; LIM = Level of integration measure; ICS = Implementation climate scale; EBPAS -15 = 
Evidence -based practice attitude scale, 15 -item; ORCA = Organizational readiness to change 
assessment; PCIS = Perceived characteristic s of intervention scale  
 
2 Protocol Summary  
 
Title:  Implementing a Skills Training Evidence -Based Treatment for Posttraumatic Stress 
Disorder (ISTEP)  
Population:  Adult primary care patients with posttraumatic stress disorder 
symptoms, N=60   
Intervention:  Behavioral health interventions, including web -administered and 
clinician administered brief Skills Training in Affective and 
Interpersonal Regulation (STAIR) for PTSD  
Objectives : Hybrid type 1 effective ness -implementation trial  to assess the 
feasibility, acceptability, and preliminary effectiveness of web - 
versus clinician -administered brief STAIR (primary outcome: PTSD 
symptoms, secondary outcome: functioning) while gathering 
information on implementation of both modalities. Findings will 
inform a full stepped -care approach to PTSD treatment that spans 
primary care and specialty care.  
Design /Methodology : 60 patients were randomized, 30 in each condition (webSTAIR v. 
Brief STAIR). Participants completed study survey assessments at 
baseline (0 weeks), 15 weeks (active treatment), and [ADDRESS_1266130] Participation Duration:  9 months  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/2023  
 
Page 4 of 21 3 Background /Rationale  & Purpose  
 
3.1 Background Information  
 
Provide background information, study rationale, and purpose / study objective(s) and/or hypotheses 
for this study. PTSD is a significant public health challenge that disproportionately affects individuals 
receiving care safety net hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600]. The lifetime prevalence of exposure to interpersonal violence among  
patients seen in safety net primary care and behavioral health clinics may be as high as 94%,  with 
current diagnosis of PTSD ranging from 33% to 46%. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_902723], PTSD is vastly under -recognized and under -treated, with only 13% of  individuals with PTSD 
receiving any form of mental health treatment. Of those who do access  treatment, only 57% receive a 
minimally adequate dose of psychotherapy (defined as at least [ADDRESS_1266131]).   
 
Racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic disparities in access to and retention in EBTs for PTSD can also  be 
understood in terms of  system - and client -level factors. At the system -level, low -income  racial and 
ethnic minority individuals are more likely to live in neighborhoods with few mental  health specialists. 
Further, providers in these settings have less access to specialized training in  EBTs for PTSD, thereby 
[CONTACT_902751]. Clients in resource constricted  communities are also more 
likely to access services through non -specialty primary  care setting or community service agencies, and 
less likely to ac cess specialty outpatient mental  health services. These differences may reflect the 
pragmatic response to the low availability of  mental health specialists and  perceptions of lower quality 
of care, as well as consumer  preferences for non -traditional mental health service settings. Preferences 
for informal support  and non -specialty care may also be related to experiences of mental illness stigma 
and negative  experiences with prior mental health treatment (including racial discrimination). The  
unavailability of EBTs for PTSD in usual care and underutilization of outpatient specialty care  have led to 
concerning inequities in quality of care.   
 
Stepped care service delivery models are one approach to making PTSD treatment more  accessible, 
equitable, efficient, and cost -effective. Stepped care approaches usually begin with  interventions that 
are more convenient or acceptable to clients, and, if indicated, progress to  more intensive care. By 
[CONTACT_2163], standard delivery systems often have one mode of  treatment that demands intensive 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_4284]. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_902724] a recently pi[INVESTIGATOR_902725], stepped c are models that include EBTs for  PTSD at Step [ADDRESS_1266132] -line EBTs for PTSD, such as  Cognitive Processing Therapy (CPT) and Prolonged Exposure (PE) 
require specialized and  intensive therapi[INVESTIGATOR_902726] [ADDRESS_1266133]  advocated for the 
development of a  stepped care approach that begins with brief, convenient,  and patient -centered 
interventions for PTSD.  
11.0  
This study will be conducted in compliance with the protocol, applicable regulatory requirements, and 
policies and procedures of the [LOCATION_011] Medical Center and BU Medical Campus Human Research 
Protection Program.  
 
3.2 Rationale  and Purpose  
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/2023  
 
Page 5 of 21  
Skills Training in Affective and Interpersonal Regulation (STAIR) is a safe, evidence -based  intervention for 
PTSD that has been tested in  specialty care and community -based settings, and  has demonstrated 
effectiveness in improving PTSD symptoms. Both synchronous in -person  /telehealth delivery and 
asynchronous web delivery (webSTAIR) have shown similar effect sizes  in PTSD and depression  symptom 
reduction (Bauer et al., in press; Jain et al., 2020).  
 
[ADDRESS_1266134] of care. The intervention will be delivered by [CONTACT_902752][INVESTIGATOR_902727]. Participants who enroll in  the study will be  randomized to either 
in-person/telehealth STAIR or webSTAIR. Those who do not enroll in the  study will still be able to  receive 
STAIR in person or via telehealth as part of usual care.  We hypothesize that offering a low int ensity 
treatment for PTSD (i.e., STAIR) through primary  care will improve access to and engagement in care for 
PTSD among BMC's patient population.  
 
This study will also allow us to compare the feasibility of two modes of treatment delivery (inperson/  
telehealth v. webSTAIR), while  gathering further evidence of the effectiveness of the  intervention in our 
local setting. We hypothesize that both formats will be effective in reducing  mental health symptoms, 
while webSTAIR may have some advantages in regard to uptake and  long -term  sustainability in usual 
care.  
 
4.[ADDRESS_1266135]  data to evaluate 
healthcare utilization. All participants will be given a code that will be used on  all data collection tools. 
The master key that connects participant codes to name, date of birth  (DOB), contact [CONTACT_3031], MRN, 
and scheduled appointment date and time will be kept in a  password protected word file saved on the 
password protected BM C Psychiatry network drive.  The list will only be accessible to [CONTACT_902773] and 
study team staff.  
 
Participants' medical records will be accessed to obtain  information about session scheduling, 
information about ongoing treatment at BMC, and other  healthcare utilization data from 6 months pre -
enrollment to 9 months from baseline. Participants  will be asked to sign  a medical release form in the 
case that they move out of the area during  the study or attend visits at a different hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], so that we 
may obtain medical records from  their new hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]/doctor. In addition, we will obtain the list of EPIC 
enco unters of each enrolled  patient in order to keep track of number of scheduled/attended/no -showed 
appointments. In  total, the following information will be extracted from participant medical records: 
MRN, Name,  DOB, problems lists, and encounter data (date and time of scheduled appointments, and 
date  and time of unscheduled care [i.e., emergency department visits, urgent care visits, [LOCATION_011]  
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/2023  
 
Page 6 of 21 Emergency Services Team (BEST) safety evaluations, records of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]]). Participants  will be 
informed of this extraction during the informed consent process.  
 
4.2.1 Primary Outcome Measure s 
 
Feasibility and Acceptability. We operationalized feasibility as participant retention and provider 
adherence to the protocol. Retention was calculated as the proportion of content for the assigned 
intervention that the participant completed (e.g., number of sessions [Brief STAIR] or nu mber of 
modules [webSTAIR] completed / total number of sessions [5] or modules [10]). We utilized a 
researcher -developed fidelity checklist, adapted from the Brief STAIR fidelity checklist (Cloitre et al., 
2002) to assess adherence to the intervention. Adh erence is reported as percentage of session 
components delivered per protocol. Overall study fidelity was calculated at study completion based on 
adherence scores from a random 20% of Brief STAIR sessions. Fidelity was assessed by [CONTACT_185413]. We 
assessed c lient acceptability (satisfaction) using The Client Satisfaction Questionnaire (CSQ -8, Larsen et 
al., 1979), an eight item self -report measure. Each item is scored on a 4 -point Likert scale from 1 “poor” 
to 4 “excellent” to indicate level of satisfaction w ith services. Higher scores indicate greater satisfaction 
with services.   
 
Preliminary Effectiveness, PTSD Symptoms . We use the PCL -542 to assess PTSD symptoms. The PCL -5 
includes 20 items, which map onto DSM -5 criteria for PTSD. Items are scored on a 5 -point Likert scale to 
indicate symptom severity (0 – not at all to 4 – extremely), with a possible total score of 0 -80. A score ≥ 
33 is c onsidered clinically elevated.  
 
4.2.2 Secondary Outcome Measur es 
 
Social and Emotional Functioning (Secondary outcome): We use the Interpersonal Support Evaluation 
List (ISEL -12)48 to assess social functioning and the Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI -18)[ADDRESS_1266136] including number of visits, 
visit types/departments, no -shows, etc. to characterize healthcare utilization.  
 
5 Study Design  
 
I-STEP is a single site, unmasked, hybrid type 1 effectiveness -implementation36 trial which will assess the 
feasibility, acceptability, and preliminary effectiveness of Brief STAIR and webSTAIR while gathering data 
on implementation. We will randomize 60 patients (30 in each condition). Participants will complete 
study survey assessments at baseline (0 weeks), 15 weeks (active treatment), and [ADDRESS_1266137] -
randomization (follow -up; see Figure 1). To ensure consistency in timing of data collec tion, assessments 
are not linked to condition or amount of content completed.  We hypothesize that: 1) Brief STAIR and 
webSTAIR will be effective in reducing PTSD symptoms (primary effectiveness aim) and mental health 
symptoms (secondary effectiveness aim); 2) Brief STAIR (clinician -administered) will have advantages 
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/2023  
 
Page 7 of 21 over webSTAIR (self -directed) in terms of treatment completion; and 3) webSTAIR will evidence 
advantages over Brief STAIR in regard to scalability and sustainability. Outcomes will be assessed using 
survey data and chart extraction.  
 
Self-report measures that have been shown to have excellent  psychometric properties will be used to 
assess mental health and general well -being for each of  the three study assessments (baseline, 15 week, 
and 9 -month). This will include the LEC -5 and  PCL-5 to assess trauma exposure (historical at the baseline 
study visit and any new traumatic  events at the post -treatment and follow -up assessments) and current 
PTSD symptoms; the  Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale (DERS) to assess emotion regulation; the  
Interpersonal  Support Evaluation List (ISEL -12); the Posttraumatic Cognition Inventory (PTCI -9) to assess  
cognitions associated with PTSD; and the Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI -18) to assess for  general mental 
health issues. Patients will also complete the Coronavirus Stressor Screener, the  Everyday Discrimination 
Scale (EDS), and the Traumatic Symptoms of Discrimination Scale  (TSDS) to understand stress response 
related to Covid -[ADDRESS_1266138] data  on gender, sexual orientation, age, education, marital  
status, ethnicity, and family  income. During the baseline and 15 -week assessments, participants will also 
be asked to  complete the Consumer Experiences of Stigma Questionnaire (CESQ) to assess for perceived  
mental health stigma, the Attitude Toward Seeking Professional Help (ATPHS) to assess attitudes  
towards help -seeking, and the International Trauma Questionnaire (ITQ) to track their own  symptoms. 
During the 15 -week assessment only, participants will be asked to complete the  Client Satisfaction 
Questionnaire (CSQ -8) to assess intervention acceptability. The 15 -week  assessment also includes an 
open text box where participants can provide suggestions and  recommendations for how to improve 
STAIR.  
 
Patients may complete the questionnaires over REDCap, in which case the RA will email the  participant a 
participant -specific link to the REDCap surveys using a secure BMC email address.  This data will be 
collected on REDCap with no identifying patient information but the research  staff at the clinic will hold 
the screen ID for eligible and interested patients to link the screening  form to the patient. Participants 
will be given the option to complete the questionnaires inperson  on paper -and-pencil (dependin g on 
COVID -related clinical and research guidance from  the institution), or to have them administered 
verbally (in -person or by [CONTACT_648]) by [CONTACT_49124]. Regardless of the mode of data collection, study staff will 
be available to answer any  questions that arise. All data will be entered into REDCap.  
 
6 Potential Risks and Benefits  
 
6.1 Risks  
 
Foreseeable risks or discomforts to subjects as a result of their participation in this study include:  a) 
personal discomfort answering questions about trauma and other psychological symptoms,  and b)  
confidentiality risks.  
 
Mitigation of Study Assessment Risks  
 
The risk of discomfort with answering questions about trauma and other psychological symptoms  is 
expected to be short term. To minimize potential discomfort, surveys will be conducted in a  private,  
comfortable setting (or in location of participant’s choosing if engaging in telehealth  STAIR delivery or  
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/2023  
 
Page 8 of 21 webSTAIR). Participants will be assured that their participation is completely  confidential and that  
neither their name [CONTACT_902771]. If the  
participant feels upset or uncomfortable with any question, they will be  free to refuse to answer the 
question without jeopardizing their study status or any regular  clinical treatment received at BMC. They 
will be informed that they may end their study  participation at any time for any reason without negative 
consequences.  
 
Additionally, all staff will  be trained in how to manage distress related to answering questions regarding 
mental health  symptoms, and the study PI [CONTACT_832] a BMC -credentialed and licensed Clinical Psychologist that 
can help study staff manage distressed participants. Participants who express severe distress will be  
referred for evaluation and treatment. If the participant expresses significant distress (but no  suicidal or 
homicidal intent), the PI [INVESTIGATOR_18148] a collaborative plan with the participant in order to  address their 
needs (e.g., brief support, referral, additional phone check ins).  
 
If the participant  expresses suicidal or homicidal intent with a plan, standard protocol to assure safety 
will be  followed (i.e., call the IBH clinical social worker on call, send patient to the emergency  
department, contact [CONTACT_902753]).  Information obtained from participants will indicate if they are at risk of self -
harm. Therefore, we  have a suicide safety protocol in place to mitigate this risk. Using the Red Alert 
function on  REDCap, study staff will be automatically notified when a participant indicates they  are at 
risk for  suicide (>0 on item 12 of the Brief Symptom Inventory -18 [BSI -19], administered at baseline,  15-
week, and 9 -month  assessments). Study staff will notify the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_902728]' 
clinician of the participant's elevated risk for suicide. The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_902729]'s risk and connect them with appropriate resources and follow -up care  (including scheduling 
a visit with their behavioral health providers in integrated care, referral to  other BMC providers, or 
sending participants to the emergency department if necessary). The  treatment follow -up plan will also 
be communicated to the participant's clinician. If for some  reason the participant's safety cannot be 
assessed, the [LOCATION_011] Emergency Services hotline will  be called to evaluate participant safety. In extreme 
situations, 911 may be called to ensure  participant safety.   
 
In the case that suicidality is indicated during the participant's sessions with an IBH clinicians,  the IBH 
clinician will follow the standard safety procedures used in IBH. This process involves  clinician 
assessment of patient safety and negotiating appropriate follow -up care for the patient  (including but 
not limited to: paging the Integrated Behavioral Health team, scheduling a followup  visit, referral to 
outpatient psychiatry, calling the BEST hotline, sending patient to the  emergency department). IBH 
clinicians will report any safety assessments and treatment followup  plans related to patients 
participating in the study to the study team.  The suicidality protocol (Psychiatric Emergencies) is the 
same for all conditions. Specifically, a  person could disclose thoughts of harm to self or others in the 
context of a clinical appointment,  through study measures, or during a study visit or check -in with study 
staff. Participants are not  able to disclose this information during webSTAIR sessions because only the  
user has access to  item -level information. We will inform participants in all conditions to reach out to 
their clinicians,  the study team, call 911, and/or present to the ED if they are having a psychiatric 
emergency.  
 
Mitigation of Confidentiality Risk  
 
Breach of confidentiality is always a concern when participating in a research study. Additionally,  the 
switch to remote data collection due to COVID -[ADDRESS_1266139] practice  that is  
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/[ADDRESS_1266140] to identify them in the data. Physical study  documents with information about p articipants 
will be stored in a locked cabinet within a locked  office at BMC. Electronic data (e.g., session audio -
recordings, webSTAIR data) will be stored on a  secure, private, password -protected BMC network  server 
that can only be accessed by [CONTACT_902754].  
 
The webSTAIR site is protected by  a data security assurance, ensuring that all content is password -
protected, item -level and written  content is not viewable outside of an individual account, and all 
information on the site is  maintained in a confidential and secure. Survey data will be stored on REDCap, 
a HIPAAcompliant,  password -protected, access -restricted electronic database. One list of names and  
Study IDs will be kept on a private, password -protected computer separate from the coded data  and 
accessible only to the study team. Documents with participant information on them (i.e.,  consent form) 
will be kept separate from their other data. Any data transmission will take place  in pooled form and 
participants will be identified only by a Study ID.  Though therapi[INVESTIGATOR_902730], the online program  will only be offered to study participants. Training all site 
staff in using these programs and  ensuring that the system runs smoothly for each participant would 
place a large burden on clinic  staff. Furthermore, the program is encrypted to pr otect the privacy of 
patients and limit access  to the program developers and key study staff. Since site staff cannot support 
the implementation of the online program without the involvement of study staff, the online program  
cannot be offered to all patients and will be limited to study participants.  
 
6.[ADDRESS_1266141] for the DSM -5 (LEC -5) and have elevated  PTSD symptoms as measured by [CONTACT_902755] -5 (PCL -5), defined as reporting  at least moderate severity of at least one question 
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/[ADDRESS_1266142] Exclusion Criteria  
 
Exclusion Criteria: Participants will be excluded from the study if they (a) do not have reasonable  access 
to the technology needed for both conditions (e.g., phone, computer, internet access),  (b) are 
experiencing bereavement (death of someone close) as primary clinical concern, and is , therefore , not a 
good fit for a PTSD -specific treatment; (c) are engaged in concurrent cognitive  behavioral  therapy for  
PTSD (PE, CPT, or EMDR), or (c) are not appropriate for care in IBH (e.g.,  need a higher level of care than 
IBH provides as determined by [INVESTIGATOR_22333]).  
 
[ADDRESS_1266143] 
via telemedicine or in -person based on patient preference and Covid -19 restrictions in the setting. Brief 
STAIR is five sessions and includes all core elements of traditional 10 -session STAIR.33,34,44 Each session 
begins with review of the patients’ most recent PCL -5 score (documented in the medical record by [CONTACT_362803]). Session [ADDRESS_1266144] of trauma on emotions and relationships, 
an introduction to the treatment program s tructure, and a focused breathing exercise. Sessions 2 -4 
focus on emotion regulation skills across the body, thought, and behavior channels (i.e., the cognitive 
behavioral therapy triad).45 These include emotion regulation techniques such as focused breathing and 
emotion surfing to down -regulate symptoms of over -activation (e.g.,, anxiety, hyperarousal) and 
techniques such as behavioral activation and pleasurable activities planning to up -regulate individuals 
when they are in a depressive or dysthymic state. Session 5 focuses on compassion, strategies for  
improving social engagement and sustaining relationships (e.g., conflict resolution), review of treatment 
progress, and a plan to continue use of skills.  
 
Web -administered STAIR  (webSTAIR)   
Participants randomized to webSTAIR complete the program at their own pace. WebSTAIR 
includes the same content as Brief STAIR in ten online modules, which include audio, video, and text 
delivery of psychoeducation and therapy components, with interactive e xercises to assist in skills 
practice.[ADDRESS_1266145] for treatment oversight (in case 
higher -level of care is needed) and for treatment planning purposes. In some cases, webSTAIR 
participants will have access to their study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_902731], i.e., support 
that is not PTSD -specific. This may include regular therapy sessions (which typi[INVESTIGATOR_812] 4 -6 
weeks in usual care), but not Brief STAIR or other trauma -focused therapi[INVESTIGATOR_902732]. The RA pro vides patients with unique login information, technology support, and lightly 
encourages engagement through biweekly reminder phone calls/texts. The principal investigator (PI) 
and RA have access to administrator -level login, which allows them to access be havioral data on 
participant progress (time spent, modules completed). To protect patient privacy, open text fields within 
webSTAIR (e.g., personal written answers to exercises and modules) are not viewable by [CONTACT_464]. 
Patients have access to the progr am for all 9 months of study participation, though progress is only 
reported back to study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_902733] (weeks 0 -15).  
 
 Study Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437]: Training, Fidelity, and Supervision  
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/2023  
 
Page 11 of 21 Study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437] (N=10) are behavioral health specialists in integrated primary care, including 
Master’s -level social workers and doctorate -level psychologists. The PI, a nationally certified trainer in 
Brief STAIR, leads a 4 -hour didactic training availab le to all therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437]. Study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_902734]. Cloitre, Ortigo, & Gupta, and tailored to the local setting by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_902735]. Post -training, the study team sends a follow -up email to determine interest in research 
participation. Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_902736]. To account for therapi[INVESTIGATOR_902737], trainings are ongoing as new hires and trainees join the clinic. During the 
trial, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_902738]. Consultation includes case 
review and discussion of real -time barriers/facilitators to implementation. All Brief STAIR ses sions are 
audio -recorded to allow for fidelity assessment. Fidelity checklists (developed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Cloitre33 and 
adapted for our version of the manual) assess adherence, defined as completion of all session 
components (0 = not implemented, 1 = implemented, N/A = unable to complete), and competency, 
defined as how skillfully each component was delivered from 0 (n ot completed) to 7 (excellent). Average 
adherence and competency scores are calculated for each session. Fidelity monitoring for the purposes 
of training (written feedback on two training cases) will happen in real -time. Overall fidelity will be 
calculated  at study completion based on 20% of Brief STAIR sessions selected at random. Fidelity will be 
assessed by [CONTACT_185413].  
 
[ADDRESS_1266146] will inform study staff that a patient is interested in participating.  Once a patient has been 
introduced or referred to the study team, recruitment/screening will  occur in a private e xam room in 
the primary care clinic or our research center (dependent on  institutional safety policies surrounding 
COVID -19), or over the phone. If study staff or patient is  not immediately available, study staff will reach 
out to the patient over the phone to tell them  more information about the study, complete screening (if 
not assessed by [CONTACT_30223]), and, if  eligible, schedule a time for the patient to complete informed consent 
with study staff prior to  their next appointment in IBH. The Recruitment Scri pt may be used for in -
person  and over the phone recruitment, only in cases where the clinician has gained permission from  
patient for study staff to contact.  If the patient qualifies for the study and completes informed consent, 
screening data will be  retained.  Due to  the unacceptability and burden of conducting full screening 
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/2023  
 
Page 12 of 21 consent, conducting  consent immediately after screening, or destroying screening data after assessing 
eligibility  (justification detailed above), we are requesting a waiver of HIPAA authorization language so  
that we can retain screening data without full screening consent or immediate informed consent.  If the 
patient does not qualify for the study or does not complete informed consent, screening  results will not 
be retained by [CONTACT_5051], with the exception of overall count data.  Written informed con sent, 
completed in person or over REDCap via electronic signature, will be  obtained prior to baseline 
assessment and treatment sessions, and includes notification that the  study team will retain screening 
data if the participant agrees to participate and completes  consent.   
 
For those determined eligible after screening, full written informed consent will be obtained as  soon as 
possible (see justification to retain screening data without full screening consent or  immediate  informed 
consent). Study staff will complete the Informed Consent Form and  subsequent assessments with 
interested patients. Study staff will inform the referring therapi[INVESTIGATOR_902739]’s decision on 
participation in the research components, so that the referring  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_902740] (either within IBH, in outpatient  psychiatry, or in community -based clinics).  
Patients will be informed that they may receive treatment without participating in the research  
component, either within IBH clinic or via referral to outpatient psychiatry or community -based  clinics.  
 
9.1.2 Retention Procedures  
 
Our team will make every attempt to support participant retention , including use of  multiple methods 
for contact[CONTACT_220379]  (phone call, text message, messaging thr ough the medical record, email, 
home address) , send visit reminders,  and provide  incentives for visit attendance).  
 
10 Screening Procedures  
 
Screening will occur in two steps. If a patient screens positive for PTSD on the PC -PTSD -5 and/or  is 
deemed a good fit for PTSD treatment by [CONTACT_192255], the IBH therapi[INVESTIGATOR_902741]. Study staff will conduct screening in  person  in a private 
exam room (dependent on institutional safety policies surrounding COVID -19) or over the phone. Study 
staff will go over the Brief Screening Agreement with the potential  participant before administering  the 
screening questions. If the participant is ineligible or not  interested in participating, the results will be 
immediately destroyed.  If the Brief Screening Agreement is completed and the patient is still interested, 
study staff will  set up a time to obtain written informed consent. The patient will complete the Informed 
Consent  Form and subsequent assessments with study staff via REDCap prior to baseline assessment 
and treatment sessions. Patients may also be offered to complete these measures in person with  study 
staff if hospi[INVESTIGATOR_53756] -[ADDRESS_1266147] provided informed  consent to participate in  the study (we have included  necessary CoC 
language in the informed  consent form).  
 
If the patient qualifies for the study and completes informed consent, screening data will be  retained 
(we have provided justification to request a waiver of HIPAA Authorization language  above; our 
Informed Consent Form and Brief Screening Agreement includes language notifying  the participant that 
we will retain screening data if they are eligible and provide consent). If the  patient does not qualify for 
the study or does not complete informed consent, screening results  will not be retained by [CONTACT_17881], with the exception of overall count data. We will retain  a running list of patient names that have 
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/2023  
 
Page 13 of 21 already been screened that will contain only their  name, date of screen, and outcome (enrolled, 
ineligible, not interested), so that we can create a  recruitment flow chart as well as not inadvertently 
approach the same patient twice regarding  the study. Reasons for ineligibility will be kept in a separate 
list not linked to patient names.  These lists will be kept in a secure private, password -protected drive 
that can only be accessed  by [CONTACT_40221]. After the study is completed and the  
recruit ment flow chart is  created, this list will be destroyed.  
 
11 Consent Procedures  
 
For patients who do not sign an informed consent form, no patient data will be retained. For  patients 
who do sign the informed consent form and agree to participate, study eligibility  screening data  will be 
retained. Participants will be made aware prior to screening and during the  consent process that data 
collected prior to informed consent will be retained and used as study  data.  
 
When study staff complete screening, a Brief Screening Agreement is used before administering  
questionnaires. Language has been added to the Brief Screening Agreement to explicitly state  that 
screening data will be retained if the participant is eligible and completes informed consent.  Written 
informed consent, completed over REDCap via electronic signature (process explained in  17.1), will be 
obtained prior to baseline assessment and treatment sessions, and the informed  consent form also  
includes notificat ion that the study team will retain screening data if the  participant qualifies and 
completes consent.  
 
For those determined eligible after screening, full written informed consent, completed over  REDCap via 
electronic signature (or on pencil and paper), will be obtained by [CONTACT_902756].  The full written informed consent includes HIPAA authorization language to 
allow us to collect  PHI and abstract the medical record, as well as a consent statement to allow for 
colle ction of  evaluation data. The consent also notifies participants that if they agree to participate, we 
will retain their screening data. Patients will be informed that they may receive treatment without  
participating in the research component, either within IBH or via referral to outpatient psychiatry  
or community -based behavioral health clinics. Individuals obtaining consent will be study staff  
who are well trained in obtaining informed consent.  Before the verbal consent, the RA will email the 
participant a participant -specific link to the  consent form in REDCap using a secure BMC email address. 
The informed consent process will be  administered by [CONTACT_21118]. During the consent process, the RA will 
introduce the patient to the  consent form and summarize its content. Participants will be given 
sufficient time to review the  consent and ask any questions necessary in order to aid in their decision to 
participate. The  participant will follow the link, read through the form (which has already been 
summarized by  [CONTACT_21118]) and will electronically sign it in REDCap. Paper copi[INVESTIGATOR_902742] -person informed consent process. After reviewing paper copi[INVESTIGATOR_902743], the  
participant will be provided a REDCap link to sign electronically before proceeding to surveys.  
Participants will be able to keep the printed copy and/or have an electronic copy of the consent  form 
sent to them.  
 
[ADDRESS_1266148] of care in Primary Care is to provide options for screening and treating  
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and related mental health disorders to all patients. Patients  
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/[ADDRESS_1266149] several options for mental health treatment, including treatment with Integrated Behavioral  
Health (IBH) therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437], referral to behavioral health specialists in outpatient psychiatry, or  
referral to community -based behavioral health clinicians. This treatment is not research and  
takes place regardless of participation in the research components. Specifically, all embedded  
IBH therapi[INVESTIGATOR_902744], regardless of a patient's decision to participate in research  
components, as a new standard of care. We will also train additional therapi[INVESTIGATOR_902745]. However, the online, self -paced version of the therapy (webSTAIR) will only be  
provided to research participants for the time being.  
 
Clinic population: IBH provides mental/behavioral health treatment to patients in Primary Care  
who are experiencing a range of mental/behavioral health disorders and symptoms who would  like the 
option of seeing a therapi[INVESTIGATOR_902746]. The Primary  Care team 
includes Primary Care Providers, Nurses and Nurse Practitioners, Community Health  Workers, and IBH 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437]. IBH therapi[INVESTIGATOR_902747], psychologists, and trainees  receiving supervision.  
 
This project will evaluate the intervention for PTSD that is  being used in IBH and use the data to 
iteratively improve the treatment and to explore how  effectively the intervention is working in the 
primary care clinics. We will compare the relative  advantages and disadvantages of the in  -
person/telehealth and web -administered versions of  STAIR to better understand and improve the  
quality of care in IBH.  
 
Eligibility: IBH patients with PTSD treatment needs (based on clinical screening or clinical judgment) may  
be appropriate for STAIR. The IBH clinician will ask patients for their permission  to be contact[CONTACT_902757]. The study RA will then contact [CONTACT_902758], and to complete a study eligibility screener.  Those who are not eligible or choose not to  
enroll in the study components will still receive  standard of care from their IBH therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437], which may  
include in -person or telehealth STAIR.  
 
Inclusion Criteria: To participate in research components, patients must endorse having  experienced an 
event on the Life Events Checklist for the DSM -5 (LEC -5) and have elevated  PTSD symptoms as measured 
by [CONTACT_902759] -5 (PCL -5), defined as reporting  at least moderate severity of at least 
one question [ADDRESS_1266150] be over 18 years of age,  able to engage in therapy in English.  
 
Exclusion Criteria: Participants will be excluded from the study if they (a) do not have reasonable  access 
to the technology needed for both conditions (e.g., phone, computer, internet access),  (b) are  
experiencing bereavement (death of someone close) as primary clinical concern, and is  therefore not a  
good fit for a PTSD -specific treatment; (c) are engaged in concurrent cognitive  behavioral  therapy for 
PTSD (PE, CPT, or EMDR), or (c) are not appropriate for care in IBH (e.g.,  need a higher level of care than 
IBH provides as determined by [INVESTIGATOR_22333]).  With patient permission obtained from IBH therapi[INVESTIGATOR_902748], study staff will reach out to patients to  go over the Brief Screening Agreement before 
administering the study eligibility screening  questions assessing for other inclusion and exclusion 
criteria. If the participant is ineligible or not  interested in participating, the results of the study eligibility 
screener will be immediately  destroyed.  
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/2023  
 
Page 15 of 21  
Adding HIPAA authorization language to our screening process would not be acceptable to our  
participant population, as evidenced by [CONTACT_29091]’ previous experience in conducting full  
screening consent with participants over the ph one and conversations with our c ommunity  determining 
patient eligibility, we would have to repeat the measure with other baseline  assessments, causing undue 
patient burden. Therefore, we are requesting a waiver of  authorization language in order to keep 
screening data of par ticipants who are eligible for and  interested in participating in the study and have 
set up a time to meet with research staff either  in person or over telehealth to conduct the informed 
consent process. Language in the Brief  Screening Agreement informs patients that we will retain their 
screening data if they enroll.  Patients in the webSTAIR condition will provide email addresses to study 
staff. Study staff will  then email a unique login username [CONTACT_902772]. See the webSTAIR Website: https://www.webstair.org/  
 
Evaluation Data Collection: This is a QI project with an evaluation; data is used to iteratively  improve the 
intervention and to explore whether and how the treatment is working. Our  evaluation will include a 
collection of both process measures to understand feasibility,  acceptability, and satisfaction to help us 
make iterative improvements, and outcome measures to  understand whether the treatment is 
improving patient PTSD symptoms, other mental health  symptoms, and overall functioning as expected. 
Our evaluation will also rely on medical record  data to evaluate healthcare utilization. All participants 
will be giv en a code that will be used on  all data collection tools. The master key that connects 
participant codes to name, date of birth  (DOB), contact [CONTACT_3031], MRN, and scheduled appointment 
date and time will be kept in a  password protected word file saved on the password protected BMC 
Psychiatry network drive.  The list will only be accessible to [CONTACT_902773] and study team staff.  
 
Medical Chart Extraction Data: Participants' medical records will be accessed to obtain  information 
about session scheduling, information about ongoing treatment at BMC, and other  healthcare utilization 
data from 6 months pre -enrollment to 9 months from baseline. Participants  will be asked to sign a 
medical release form in the case that they move out of the area during  the study or attend visits at a 
different hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], so that we may obtain medical records from  their new hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]/doctor. In addition, 
we wi ll obtain the list of EPIC encounters of each enrolled  patient in order to keep track of number of 
scheduled/attended/no -showed appointments. In  total, the following information will be extracted from  
participant medical records: MRN, Name,  DOB, problems lists, and encounter data (date and time of 
scheduled appointments, and date  and time of unscheduled care [i.e., emergency department visits, 
urgent care visits, [LOCATION_011]  Emergency Services Team (BEST) safety evaluations, records of  
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]]). Partici pants  will be informed of this extraction during the informed consent process.  
 
Surveys for participants : Self -report measures that have been shown to have excellent  psychometric 
properties will be used to assess mental health and general well -being for each of  the three study 
assessments (baseline, 15 week, and 9 -month). This will include the LEC -5 and  PCL-5 to assess trauma 
exposure (historical at the baseline study visit and any new traumatic  events at the post -treatment and 
follow -up assessments) and current PTSD symptoms; the  Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale (DERS) 
to assess emotion regulation; the Interpersonal  Support Evaluation List (ISEL -12); the Posttraumatic 
Cognition Inventory (PTCI -9) to assess  cognitions associated with PTSD; and the Brief Symptom  
Inventory (BSI -18) to assess for  general mental health issues. Patients will also complete the Coronavirus 
Stressor Screener, the  Everyday Discrimination Scale (EDS), and the Traumatic Symptoms of 
Discrimination Scale  (TSDS) to understand stress response related to Covid -[ADDRESS_1266151] 
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/2023  
 
Page 16 of 21 data  on gender, sexual orientation, age, education, marital status, ethnicity, and family  income. During 
the baseline and 15 -week assessments, participants will also be asked to  complete the Consumer 
Experiences of Stigma Questionnaire (CESQ) to assess for perceived  symptoms. During the 15 -week 
assessment only, participants will be asked to complete the  Client Satisfaction Questionnaire (CSQ -8) to 
assess intervention acceptability. The 15 -week  assessment also includes an open text box where  
participants can  provide suggestions and  recommendations for how to improve STAIR.  
 
Patients may complete the questionnaires over REDCap, in which case the RA will email the  participant a 
participant -specific link to the REDCap surveys using a secure BMC email address.  This data will be 
collected on REDCap with no identifying patient information but the research  staff at the clinic will hold 
the screen ID for eligible and interested patients to link the screening  form to the patient. Participants 
will be given the option to complete the questionnaires inperson  on paper -and-pencil (dependin g on 
COVID -related clinical and research guidance from  the institution), or to have them administered 
verbally (in -person or by [CONTACT_648]) by [CONTACT_49124]. Regardless of the mode of data collection, study staff will 
be available to answer any  questions that arise. All data will be entered into REDCap.  
 
Fidelity to the treatment : 
 
For in -person/telehealth STAIR , patients will be asked to consent to audio -recording of  treatment 
sessions to ensure that fidelity and adherence to the intervention can be evaluated.  Research staff will 
listen to 20% of audio -recorded STAIR sessions and complete a checklist of  expected treatment 
components. Fidelity monitoring will happen in near real -time to assist with  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_73775].  For 
webSTAIR, study staff will monitor treatment progress via information collected  by [CONTACT_902760]. This 
includes behavioral data on module completion, time in each module, total time  in pro gram, and the 
frequency and time spent access each therapy skill. IBH clinicians will also  have access to the webSTAIR  
dashboard so they can monitor their patients’ progression through  the treatment. The dashboard will be 
reviewed in consultation meetings.  
 
Randomization procedure: Participants will be randomized through a randomization software.  Each 
patient will receive a unique study ID at the time of referral to the study that is not  connected to 
identifiable data. Before randomization, the referred patient will complete the  following enrollment 
procedures: (1) each referred patient will complete a clinical intake at with  their IBH therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541], and (for 
those with PTSD treatment needs) give permission for study team to  contact, (2) each referred patient 
will complete an assessment with study staff to determine  eligibility for the study, (3) each referred 
patient will give study staff consent to participate in the  study, and (4) each referred patient will 
complete the baseline assessments.  Once a  participant gives consent to enroll in the study, they will be 
provided with a unique ID  number and this ID number will be connected to their identifiable data 
(access to identifiable  data will be limited). Once all four steps of enrollment (clinical intake, eligibility 
assessment,  consent, and baseline assessment) are completed, the participant will be randomized.  
Study design schedule: This evaluation is designed so that all patients who may benefit  from PTSD 
treatment will be offered STAIR through in -person/telehealth format. Only those who  enroll in the study 
are are randomized to webSTAIR will have access to the webSTAIR format.  Group assignment will 
therefore be randomized for all eligible participants. We also acknowledge  that, because clinic practices 
cannot change overnight, after STAIR is rolled -out, some patients  still may not be provided STAIR, due to 
their treatment preference or their therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]'s preference  not to complete STAIR training. Therefore, 
even therapi[INVESTIGATOR_902749] a different IBH  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541].  
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/[ADDRESS_1266152] participant data for 9 months from baseline. Treatment plans will continue to be  
determined by [CONTACT_902761], the study has no involvement in any decisions regarding  care. This 
means that a participant’s IBH therapi[INVESTIGATOR_902750], offer a different  treatment option, or 
refer to other services at any time in the study and after the study is  completed. At any time, patients 
can also choose to change their treatment plans, for example  from webSTAIR to in -person/telehealth  
STAIR, or to another treatment option in the clinic.  Access to webSTAIR will be discontinued at 9 
months.  
 
13 Assessment of Safety  and Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP)  
 
13.1 Definitions  for Safety Assessment  
 
The following definitions will be used in the assessment of safety:  
 
Adverse Event (AE)  is any untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence in a human subject, including any 
abnormal sign (for example, abnormal physical exam or laboratory finding), symptom, or disease, 
temporally associated with the subject’s participation in the research, whether or not considered 
related to the subject’s participation in the research.  
 
Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  is any adverse event that  
(1) results in death;  
(2) is life -threatening;  
(3) results in inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081];  
(4) results in a persistent or significant disability/incapacity;  
(5) results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect; or  
(6) based upon appropriate medical judgment, may jeopardize the subject's health and may require 
medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes listed in this definition 
(examples of such events include allergic bronchospasm requiring in tensive treatment in the 
emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse).  
 
Life-threatening  means that the event places the subject at immediate risk of death from the event as it 
occurred.  
 
Unanticipated Problem  is defined as an event, experience or outcome that meets all three  of the 
following criteria:  
• is unexpected ; AND  
• is related or possibly related  to participation in the research; AND  
• suggests that the research places subjects or others at a greater risk  of harm (including physical, 
psychological, economic, or social harm) than was previously known or recognized.  
 
Possibly related  means there is a reasonable possibility that the incident, experience, or outcome may 
have been caused by [CONTACT_51408], severity, or frequency of the event is not consistent with either:  
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/2023  
 
Page 18 of 21 • the known or foreseeable risk of adverse events associated with the procedures involved in the 
research that are described in (a) the protocol –related documents, such as the IRB -approved 
research protocol, any applicable investigator brochure, and the curr ent IRB -approved informed 
consent document, and (b) other relevant sources of information, such as product labeling and 
package inserts; or  
• the expected natural progression of any underlying disease, disorder, or condition of the 
subject(s) experiencing the adverse event and the subject’s predisposing risk factor profile for the 
adverse event.  
 
 
13.2 Safety Review  
 
This study is not greater than minimal risk. Unanticipated Problems, Adverse Events, and protocol deviations 
will be reported to the IRB as required by [CONTACT_11222].  
 
13.3 Reporting Plans  
 
  
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_51398]/BU Medical Campus will report Unanticipated Problems, safety 
monitors’ reports, and Adverse Events to the BMC/BU Medical Center IRB in accordance with IRB 
policies:  
 
• Unanticipated Problems occurring at BMC/BU Medical Campus will be reported to the BMC/BU 
Medical Campus IRB within 7 days of the investigator learning of the event.  
• Adverse Events (including Serious Adverse Events) will be reported in summary at the time of 
continuing review, along with a statement that the pattern of adverse events, in total, does not 
suggest that the research places subjects or others at a greater r isk of harm than was previously 
known.  
 
13.[ADDRESS_1266153], the recording will be deleted from the audio -recording device.  WebSTAIR (operated by [CONTACT_902762]'s Health Administration) is protected by a data security  assurance, ensuring that all content is 
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/[ADDRESS_1266154]  access to any study data  collected by [CONTACT_51406] (via 
RedCAP) for purposes of this study. They will not be able to link data  gathered by [CONTACT_902763], 
as only BMC study team will know the link between  webSTAIR usernames and Study ID numbers, and 
only the BM C study team will have access to  data collected during study visits.  webSTAIR is a password -
protected website. For this study, we have been allocated a set of 30  patient -level accounts (with 
unique usernames and passwords) to distribute to study  participants. In addition, the program manager 
has created four administrator -level account (2  for BMC study staff, including PI [INVESTIGATOR_52505]; and 2 for VA 
collaborators). The administrator -level  account allows study staff to see patient engagement  
information such as the  date, time, and  duration of accessing various modules on the website and  
optional self -assessments so patients  can track their progress. The website does not collect item -level 
information (e.g., fillable text  boxes within the modules and worksheets), this information is only 
available to patients via their  unique login.  The webSTAIR website does not communicate with the EMR.  
Because we will contact [CONTACT_902764]’ medical  records,  
we will record their contac t information, their date of birth, and their MRN. One list of  names and  
contact [CONTACT_902765] a private password protected BMC  network drive  
separate from any data collection tools and will only be accessible to the study  team.  All identifiable  
information will be transmitted, stored, analyzed, or otherwise exist only on  HIPAA -compliant electronic 
systems that meet the standards for protection of PHI established by  [CONTACT_902766].  As an extra 
layer of protection, we have a Certificate of Confidentiality because this project is  NIH-funded.  
 
15 Statistical Plan 
 
15.1 Study Hypotheses  
 
Hypothes es:  
A. Brief STAIR will lead to significant change PTSD symptoms between baseline and [ADDRESS_1266155] -implementation of the intervention, I based the power calculation on a  recent but simple method 
proposed by [CONTACT_902767].109 suggesting a sample size of 60 as adequate. True  probability is 
unknown, and therefore the lower bound of the probability will be considered in the context of the  
proposed study. Caution proposed by [CONTACT_902768], where clinical significance is the  
focus.110,111  
 
15.3 Statistical Methods  
 
Analyses were conducted in SPSS version 29. All continuous outcome variables were evaluated for and 
met the assumptions of normality (using both the Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_2152] -Wilk test and the test statistics for skewness 
and kurtosis) and homogeneity of variance (using Lev ene’s test; Hahs -Vaughn & Lomax, 2020). Chi -
square tests and independent samples t -tests were used to examine differences in study variables 
between participants assigned to STAIR and webSTAIR conditions. Paired samples t -tests were used to 
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/[ADDRESS_1266156] differences and pre to follow -up differences; effect sizes were calculated using 
cohen’s d.  Participant retention, measured by [CONTACT_902769], did not meet 
the assumption for normality. To compare differences in engagement between STAIR and webSTAIR, we 
used the Kruskal -Wallis test, a non -parametric test that does not assume distributions between groups 
are similar.   Linear mixed models with repeated measurements nested within patients were used to 
examine changes in study outcomes across time points and between groups. We used the restricted 
maximum likelihood estimator and unstructured covariance matrices for residua ls. We examined fixed 
effects of time, treatment group, and time by [CONTACT_902770]. In 
post hoc analyses, w e used Spearman’s correlations to examine the correlation between engagement 
and baseline trauma symptoms of dis crimination, stigma, and attitudes toward help seeking.   Post hoc 
LMMs examined primary outcomes only (PTSD symptoms, mental health symptoms, and depression 
symptoms) and included two indicators of engagement, percent of assigned intervention completed and 
additional contact [CONTACT_164212] (count of behavioral health enc ounters documented in the electronic medical 
records).    
 
16 Ethics/Protection of Human Subjects  
 
This study is to be conducted according to applicable US federal regulations and institutional policies 
(which are based in federal regulation s, guidance, and ICH Good Clinical Practice guidelines).  
 
This protocol and any amendments will be submitted to the [LOCATION_011] Medical Center and [LOCATION_011] 
University Medical Campus for formal approval of the study conduct. The decision of the IRB concerning 
the conduct of the study will be made in writing to the investigator.  
 
All subjects for this study will be provided a consent form describing this study and providing sufficient 
information for subjects to make an informed decision about thei r participation in this study. The 
consent form will be submitted with the protocol for review and approval by [CONTACT_1201] . The consent of a 
subject, using the IRB -approved consent form, must be obtained before that subject is sub mitted to any 
study procedure. Consent will be documented as required by [CONTACT_1201].   
 
[ADDRESS_1266157] for the DSM -5. 2013; 
Available from: https://www.ptsd.va.gov/professional/assessment/adult -sr/ptsd -checklist.asp   
 
Cohen S, Mermelstein R, Kamarck T, Hoberman HM. Measuring the Functional Components of Social 
Support. In: Sarason IG, Sarason BR, eds. Social Support: Theory, Research and Applications . NATO ASI 
Series. Springer Netherlands; 1985:73 -94. doi:10.1007/978 -94-009-5115 -0_5 
 
Derogatis LR, Fitzpatrick M. The SCL -90-R, the Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI), and the BSI -18. In: The Use 
of Psychological Testing for Treatment Planning and Outcomes Assessment: Instruments for Adults, 
Volume 3, 3rd Ed . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers; 2004:1 -41. 
 
Curran GM, Bauer M, Mittman B, Pyne JM, Stetler C. Effectiveness -implementation Hybrid Designs. Med 
Care . 2012;50(3):217 -226. doi:10.1097/MLR.0b013e3182408812  
 
I-STEP at BMC   Version  1.9 11/08/2023  
 
Page 21 of 21 Cloitre M, Koenen KC, Cohen LR, Han H. Skills training in affective and interpersonal regulation followed 
by [CONTACT_80063]: a phase -based treatment for PTSD related to childhood abuse. J Consult Clin Psychol . 
2002;70(5):1067 -1074. doi:10.1037//0022 -006x.70.5.1067  
Jain S, Ortigo K, Gimeno J, Baldor DA, Weiss BJ, Cloitre M. A Randomized Controlled Trial of Brief Skills 
Training in Affective and Interpersonal Regulation (STAIR) for Veterans in Primary Care. J Trauma Stress . 
2020;33(4):401 -409. doi:10.1002/jts.[ZIP_CODE]  
 
Weiss BJ, Azevedo K, Webb K, Gimeno J, Cloitre M. Telemental Health Delivery of Skills Training in 
Affective and Interpersonal Regulation (STAIR) for Rural Women Veterans Who Have Experienced 
Military Sexual Trauma. J Trauma Stress . 2018;31(4):620 -625. doi:10.1002/jts.[ADDRESS_1266158] Press. Accessed February 15, 2023. 
https://www.guilford.com/books/Cognitive -Therapy -of-Depression/Beck -Rush -Shaw -
Emery/9780898629194  
 
Bauer A, Amspoker AB, Fletcher TL, et al. A Resource Building Virtual Care Programme: improving 
symptoms and social functioning among female and male rural veterans. Eur J Psychotraumatology . 
12(1):1860357. doi:10.1080/20008198.2020.1860357  
 
 
 