 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Official Title of the Study:  
Improving Voluntary Engagement for PTSD Treatment among Service Members  
 
 
 
Date:  
January 30, [ADDRESS_629684] ID:  
Not yet assigned  
  
STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
Objectives  
This study will develop and test a brief motivational enhancement intervention for active duty  
Army and Air Force personnel who are experiencing s ymptoms of PTSD and who are not 
currently in treatment. The intervention is designed to prompt: ( 1) a willingness to participate 
voluntarily in a self -appraisal of PTSD symptoms, (2) increase d perceptions of PTSD treatment 
effectiveness, (3) reduced perceptions of stigma associated with mental healthcare, (4)  
engagement in PTSD treatment or other self -help progr ams, and (5) reductions in PTSD 
symptoms. The proposed s tudy will test the efficacy of this intervention against a comparison  
condition of treatment -as-usual – written referrals to treatment options.  
 
Hypotheses  
H1: Individuals receiving the MET intervention will report mo re PTSD treatment engagement at 
follow -up relative to participants in the comparison condition.  
H2: Individuals receiving the MET intervention will ex perience fewer PTSD symptoms at 
follow -up relative to participants in the comparison condition.  
H3: The effect of the intervention on PTSD sympto ms will be mediated by [CONTACT_489818].  
H4: The impact of the intervention on PTSD treatment enga gement at the 6 -month follow -up 
will be mediated by [CONTACT_489819] o f treatment for PTSD, both of wh ich will be targeted by [CONTACT_489820].  
 
Methods  
Design. In a randomized controlled trial, the exper imental (MET) and control (TAU) 
interventions will be compared. Participants (N = 200) will be randomly assigned to receive the  
MET condition or TAU. Both interventions will be pre ceded by [CONTACT_756] -administered 
screening and baseline assessments. Telephone administered foll ow-up assessments at [ADDRESS_629685] (JBLM). JBLM has a po pulation of active duty personne l 
of approximately 46,496 (LTC Courtemanche, 2014). The demographic characteristics of the  
JBLM sample are expected to mirror demographic charac teristics of Army and Air Force 
personnel in general. Participant selection will  be equitable – inclusion/exclus ion criteria are 
minimal and there are no limitations on age, race, ethnicity or sex included in the study.  
 
Eligibility Criteria. Eligibility for enrollment and random assign ment to the two conditions will 
be based on the f ollowing criteria: 1) current PTSD, 2) not curr ently being treated (counseling 
and/or medication) for PTSD, and 3) currently serving in t he Army or Air Force. Exclusion 
criteria include: 1) non -fluency in English, 2) evidence of psycho sis, 3) pending deplo yment that 
would preclude completion of follow -ups. Callers who do not mee t eligibility criteria, but who 
are concerned about PTSD symptoms, will be provided the opport unity to speak with a counselor 
and to discuss their thoughts and concerns surrounding t heir symptoms. Counselors will provide  
a 15-45 minute Motivational Interviewing (MI) session focused  on their PTSD symptoms, and an 
exploration of options for ongoing support. Referrals to local t reatment agencies and self -help 
options will also be availab le to the ineligible caller.  
 
Relevant Scientific Background  
Posttraumatic Stress (PTS) is associated with serious health  and psychological effects. The 
health and well -being of military personnel, and conseq uently the capacity for optimal 
functioning of m ilitary units, are compromised by [CONTACT_489821]. Rates  of PTS are high among military 
personnel with post -deployment rates ranging from 5 -20% (Hoge et al., 2004). Untreated PTS is 
associated with high rates of suicide, medical services utilization,  relationship impa irment, legal 
difficulties, decreased worker productivity, and decreased military readiness (Hoge et al., 2006;  
Hoge et al., 2007; Kline et al., 2010; Tanielian et al., 2008).  
 
Interventions can lead to long -lasting reductions in PTS sympt om severity. Ther e are multiple 
effective interventions for PTS with a high degree of research evidence supporting their efficacy  
(Bisson & Andrew, 2005; Bradley et al., 2005), including trau ma-focused cognitive behavioral 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] (e.g., Prolonged Exposure, Cognitive Pro cessing Therapy and Eye movement  
Desensitization and Reprocessing) and pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] (e.g., SSRIs) (Forbes et al., 2010;  
VA/DoD, 2004). However, while treatment can be effective, individuals may not seek treatment.  
Drop -out and medication noncompliance  are common. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_489816], the majority of 
military personnel affected by [CONTACT_489822] t (Steenkamp & Litz, 2013). For 
example, less than 10% received the recommended exposure t o PTSD treatment by [CONTACT_142008] [ADDRESS_629686] year of PTSD 
diagnosis (Seal et al., 2010). For medications, on aver age, approximately 30% of those 
prescribed medications for PTSD also drop out (Ravindran & Stein, 2009).  
 
Military per sonnel encounter more real and perceived barriers t o seeking treatment than people 
in the general community, such as stigma, fear of a diagnosis app earing on one’s service record, 
the perception that diagnosis would reflect negatively on  one’s unit, work i nterference, 
geographical distance, and the belief that treatment is ineffective (Gould et al., 2007).  
 
A brief, telephone -delivered motivational enhancement interven tion (MET) called a “check -up,” 
has shown promise in promoting self -initiated behavior cha nge as well as voluntary treatment 
entry, enhanced retention, and more successful outcomes for soldiers with substance use 
disorders (Walker et al., 2017). Why MET for PTS? Effica cious options for treatment are 
available for PTS and the military has invest ed considerable resources into scaling up access to 
care. However, rates of self -referral and retention are low among active duty military. Given the 
availability of effective treatments contrasted with the low rates of military personnel who 
present and c omplete treatment, figuring out how to connect  individuals with PTSD symptoms 
into treatment and then helpi[INVESTIGATOR_489817] a high pr iority. Adapting the “check -up” 
for application with military personnel experiencing PTS symp toms is warranted fo r three key 
reasons: (1) it has the potential of overcoming barriers to trea tment seeking, i.e., stigma and 
apprehension of a negative impact on one’s military career; (2) it has the potential of attracting 
voluntary participation; and (3) protocols for di sseminating this low -cost intervention for  use 
with deployed military can readily be developed and evaluated.  
 
Summary. Adapting the “check -up” variant of motiv ational enhancement therapy for 
application with military personnel is warranted for three key r easons: (1) permitting anonymous 
participation through a telephone delivered intervention has the potential of overcoming a major 
barrier to treatment -seeking among those who are concerned abo ut their behavior, i.e., stigma 
and apprehension that being iden tified as having PTSD will negatively impac t one’s military 
career and providing information about efficacy; (2) the nature of the check -up intervention as an 
opportunity to take stock of one’s PTSD experiences without bei ng pressured to change, and the 
use of an empathic counseling style in its delivery, have the po tential of attracting voluntary 
participation among individuals who would otherwise be deter red by [CONTACT_489823]; and (3) if  the c heck -up is efficacious in 
voluntarily recruiting untreated service personnel wi th PTSD and promoting treatment 
engagement, support group participation, or self -initiated  behavior change, protocols for 
disseminating this low cost and brief intervention for use with d eployed military can readily be 
developed and evaluated.  
 
  
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
The primary data assessed at baseline and follow -up points vi a interviews and questionnaires 
will be entered into SPSS for Windows data entry (DE) files. Out -of-range values and skip rules 
will be built into DE files to facilitate data entry. All data will be d ouble entered into the DE files 
by [CONTACT_489824].  
 
Following data cleaning, initial analyses will focus on assessing  the psych ometric properties of 
the assessments and constructing scale scores where approp riate. Univariate and bivariate 
descriptive analyses will be performed to examine distribution s of and correlations among key 
study variables. In the event that variables show non-normal dis tributions (which could lead to 
violation of regression model assumptions), we will consider using generalized forms of models  
(e.g., Poisson or negative binomial count regression) o r transformation of the outcome 
variable(s) of interest.  
 
Hypotheses [ADDRESS_629687] repeated 
measures from baseline to 6 months follow -up yielding up  to 800 observation s. Given the 
nesting of observations within individuals, we will run linear mi xed (also known as hierarchical 
linear or multilevel) models (Diggle, Heagerty, Liang, & Zeger, 2002) to test study hypotheses.  
Measures of PTSD symptoms (CAPS) and treatment eng agement (TAQ) will be analyzed as 
outcomes in separate models. Fixed effects will include indicator variables for time (1 -week,  
3-months, 6 -months) with baseline as the reference, intervention  condition, and the interaction 
between time point and condition . The following represents the basic model:  
 
Level 1: Yti = π0 + π1(Time1wk)i + π2(Time3m)i + π3(Time6m)i  
Level 2: π0 = β00 + β01(Treat) + r00i  
π1 = β10 + β11(Treat) + r10i  
π2 = β20 + β21(Treat) + r20i  
π3 = β30 + β31(Treat) + r30i  
 
where Yti represents the continuous outcome for individual i at time t; Time1wk , Time3m , and  
Time6m are the indicator variables for study time points where baseline is the reference; Treat 
represents the variable for intervention condition; and r00i through r30i represent random subject  
specific deviations from the corresponding overall intercept or slope. Of particular interest are  
the coefficients β11, β21, and β31, which describe the cross -level interactions between 
intervention condition and time. For analyses of  PTSD symptom score as th e outcome, we expect 
that these interaction terms will be negative and statistically significan t suggesting that PTSD 
symptoms are lower at follow -up visits among those randomized to t he MET intervention 
compared to those in the co ntrol group. We will consider inclusion of additional covariates su ch 
as gender, social support, and trauma severity to improve precision of estimates. We will also 
explore modeling time as a continuous measure to assess treatment d ifferences on slopes ove r 
time. Similar mixed effects models will be used to test effects of the int ervention on 
stigma/barriers to treatment (PSBCPP) and treatment expectancies (CEQ) as wel l as secondary 
outcomes such as anxiety and depression symptoms.  
 
For analyse s involving m ultiple outcomes, w e will guard ag ainst Type I error by [CONTACT_489825] (e.g., usin g global tests that test for an 
overall difference across outcomes while accounting for their inter -correlation or Benja mini- 
Hochberg corrections for the false discovery rate) where appropriate.  
 
For hypothesis 3, we will test whether the effect of the interv ention on PTSD symptoms will be 
mediated by [CONTACT_489826]. For hypothesis 4, we w ill test whether effects of the 
intervention on treatment engagement are mediated through stigma and treatment expectancies.  
We will evaluate the effect of the intervention on change in th e outcome (e.g., PTSD symptoms) 
both before and after controlling fo r the putative mediator(s) (e. g., treatment engagement) using 
the method described by [CONTACT_337301] (1999; 2001).  Reduction in the percentage of 
variance accounted for by [CONTACT_489827](s) will inform 
the de gree to which the effect is mediated.  
 
Missing Data and Attrition  
Based on retention rates in our ongoing clinical trial, we expect n o more than 20% attrition by 6 - 
month follow -up in this proposed study. Linear mixed models pr ovide unbiased estimates in t he 
presence of missing data as long as it can be considered ignorable (Atkins, 2005). Missing  data 
are ignorable if they are either missing completely at random  or related to variables in the 
analysis, including earlier time points of the outcome (Graham, 2009 ). Little efficiency is lost in 
linear mixed models with 10% -20% missing data. As a safe -guard against the possibility of 
nonignorable missing data, we will use pattern -mixture models for non-ignorable missing data 
that directly assess sensitivity of f indings to the presence of missing data (Atkins, 2005).  
 
Sample Size and Power  
This study was powered to detect differences in PTSD sy mptoms between the intervention 
condition and control group over time. We used a simulation -based approach to estimate pow er 
for this study (Gelman & Hill, 2007). Using R statistical software, 1,000 datasets were gen erated 
based on the linear mixed model equation provided in the Ana lysis Plan. Estimates for model 
parameters for standardized PTSD scores (e.g., baseline interce pt, slopes for time, distribution of 
random effects) were guided by [CONTACT_489828]. We also 
specified missingness of 13% and 19% at [ADDRESS_629688] >.[ADDRESS_629689] based on data collected in our current ongoing trial.  