Effect of Medical Marijuana on Neurocognition and Escalation of Use
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Date: 1/28/2022
PARTNERS HUMAN RESEARCH COMMITTEE  DETAILED PROTOCOL: Effect of Medical Marijuana on Neurocognition and Escalation of Use Protocol #: 2015P001600 Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_309993], Ph.D. Co-Investigator: A. Eden Evins, MD   Summary of Changes Made and Rationale  The IRB protocol, attached, was written for a pi[INVESTIGATOR_309994], and was updated when we received the R01. All measures, outcome definitions, and sample size calculations were up to date in clinicaltrials.gov ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]). The statistical analysis section was amended before any data were analyzed except for the propensity score analysis for missing data, explained below. No changes were changed after looking at the data, except for the propensity score analysis.   Method of randomization:  In Year 1 of the study, we realized that many participants, who were interested in obtaining an MMC never obtained one because of barriers such as expense or needing to go outside the usual healthcare system. We therefore changed our randomization from 1:1 to 2:1 MMC:WLC early in the trial in order to have enough participants in the MMC arm.  Outcomes and outcome definitions:  Outcome measures and definitions were updated on 07/19/2017 in clinicaltrials.gov ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]), but were not explicated stated in the IRB protocol.  Primary Outcome Measures: - Cannabis Use Disorder Symptoms (Time Frame: Baseline to 12 Weeks)  o The DSM-[ADDRESS_380359] will evaluate symptoms of CUD (number of symptoms). - Changes in Symptoms of Depression and Anxiety (Time Frame: Baseline to 12 Weeks) o For those with depression and anxiety symptoms, the Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_309995]. - Changes in Pain (Time Frame: Baseline to 12 Weeks) o For those with pain, the Brief Pain Inventory Severity Scale (BPI-S) will be used to assess levels of pain. - Changes in Sleep (Time Frame: Baseline to 12 Weeks) o For those with insomnia, the Athens Insomnia Scale will be used to assess symptoms.  Secondary Outcome Measures  o General Medical/Psychiatric Health (Time Frame: Baseline to 12 Weeks) The Short Form-12 Health Survey (SF-12) will be used to assess self-report of emotional and physical functioning. - Cognitive Testing (Time Frame: Baseline to 12 Weeks) o Verbal learning/memory, attention, working memory, and complex decision-making will be assessed. - Brain-based Measures (Time Frame: Baseline to 1 Year) 
o Changes in resting state functional connectivity and task-associated activation in brain regions involved in reward, inhibitory control, and working memory will be assessed.  The IRB protocol includes exploratory outcomes that were not presented in this manuscript, but will be included in future publications.  Statistical Analysis: The IRB protocol did not include the final statistical plan. When we brought [CONTACT_310022], an experienced clinical trial statistician, on this project in Year [ADDRESS_380360]. Potter, who had access to the data, implemented the analyses.   Propensity score analysis for missing data: We could not ensure that participants in the MMC condition obtained an MMJ card, and we could not give participants a MMJ card because of state and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_309996], a stated limitation of the study. Thus, we conducted a post hoc sensitivity analysis to verify the positive findings of the primary analysis in the final stages of the analysis when we realized that there was a problem with differential drop-out between the randomization and the baseline visit in the MMC and WLC groups.   Sample size calculation: This was not included in the trial protocol but calculated for the R01 grant submission in 2016.  We aimed to recruit [ADDRESS_380361] benefits and risks of MMCs. To identify a difference in development of CUD symptoms in the MMC vs WLC groups, assuming that the mean number of symptoms for MMC would be .4 (corresponding to 20% of subjects developi[INVESTIGATOR_309997]) versus .1 in WLC (corresponding to 5% of subjects developi[INVESTIGATOR_309997]), at a two-sided 0.05 significance level, power was 85%. To identify a difference in symptoms of pain, insomnia, depression, and anxiety, assuming a clinically significant effect would be a 30% reduction in presenting medical symptom with MMC while WLC subjects were expected to have a minimal change, assumed to be a 5% reduction, at a two-sided 0.[ADDRESS_380362] sizes in the literature, power was 84% (pain), 90% (insomnia), and 84% (depression and anxiety), with sample sizes of approximately 1/3 (33 in each group) in the pain, insomnia, and anxiety/depression subgroups.    
 1 PARTNERS HUMAN RESEARCH COMMITTEE   DETAILED PROTOCOL: Effect of Medical Marijuana on Neurocognition and Escalation of Use Protocol #: 2015P001600 Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_309993], Ph.D.  Co-Investigator: A. Eden Evins, MD  Version Date: 04/15/[ADDRESS_380363] that 52% of [ADDRESS_380364] ever tried cannabis2, and 23.4% of high school students reporting use one or more times per month3. Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the psychoactive compound in cannabis, binds to endogenous cannabinoid CB1 receptors located in brain regions such as the hippocampus, amygdala, basal ganglia, prefrontal cortex, substantia nigra and globus pallidus 4,5, making frontal-limbic neurocircuitry particularly susceptible to cannabis-related effects in the brain6. There is now a well-established relationship between regular cannabis use and a range of potentially adverse outcomes, including effects of learning and cognition (see 7,8 for review), effects on brain structure and function (see 9 for review), and potential impacts on mental health (10). Furthermore, regular cannabis use can lead to the development of cannabis abuse or dependence [11,12], particularly among daily users, where it is estimated that between 25-50% of users will develop a substance use disorder (13). A recent study found that younger age of onset of regular and maximum daily use were correlated with lower achievement scores and worse neurocognitive functioning14. At the time of this submission, [ADDRESS_380365] legalized marijuana for medical use. Virtually nothing is known about the effects of marijuana on those who choose to use marijuana for medical, and not recreational, purposes. Healthcare providers will be increasingly confronted with patients who are interested in using medical marijuana (MM) to treat various disorders, and few evidence-based studies exist to offer guidance regarding side effect profiles for these patients. Basic behavior regarding use of MM, including whether patients substitute MM for traditional medicines, resulting in reductions in use of opi[INVESTIGATOR_309998], is not known. Little is known about tolerability, amounts, duration of use, or whether patients reach a stable and regular dose of MM. As extensive research has shown that marijuana can affect memory, attention, decision-making, and even IQ, it is important to study whether or not those who use MM experience neurocognitive harms. Data is also lacking on whether those who use MM daily for chronic conditions also develop similar rates of addiction to those who use marijuana daily for recreational purposes.  It is important to study, in a rigorous and well-controlled manner, (1) basic behavior of MM patients, including general patterns of MM use, tolerability, dose (e.g. stable vs escalation of use), perception of benefit for presenting medical condition, and change in maintenance medication use (e.g. reduction/discontinuation in opi[INVESTIGATOR_15834]), (2) progression to addiction and escalation of use, including an experience loss of control over intake of marijuana or other substances, development of tolerance, marijuana caving, and experience of reinforcing effects (e.g. euphoria or ‘high’), and withdrawal among those who choose to stop using marijuana, and (3) side effect profiles of medical marijuana on neurocognition, including memory, attention, and executive function, as well as possible effects on neural structure and function.   II. SPECIFIC AIMS Aim 1: To observe behavior of MM patients in first months of use, including potential progression to addiction. We will examine, using rigorous real time daily dosing/purchase diaries, temporal patterns of MM use and change over time (e.g. stable vs escalation of use), tolerability, perception of benefit for presenting medical condition using EMA techniques, and change in 
 2 dose/frequency, type of maintenance medication use (e.g. reduction/discontinuation in opi[INVESTIGATOR_15834]) also with real time, daily diaries. We will also examine whether or not MM patients experience loss of control over intake of marijuana or other substances. We will use measures such as development of tolerance, escalation of use, marijuana caving, and assess experience of reinforcing effects (e.g. euphoria or ‘high’), and withdrawal among those who choose to stop using marijuana.   Any changes throughout [ADDRESS_380366] control group.  Aim 2: To assess neurocognitive and psychiatric effects of MM. We expect that neurocognitive outcomes, such as working memory, attention, executive function, anhedonia, amotivation, and decision-making, (when not acutely intoxicated) may be worsened with MM use. Outcomes may be worse in those who use more frequently/heavily (as measured by [CONTACT_310011]).  Aim 3: In a subset of patients, assess how MM effects neurocircuitry of prefrontal function. We will use functional MRI tasks to assess working memory, inhibitory control, sustained attention, and risk/reward task performance and brain activation patterns. We expect that individuals who use MM may experience changes from baseline in neurocircuitry involved in memory, attention, inhibitory control and reward.   Aim 4: To assess how medical marijuana patients compare to healthy controls in structural and functional brain imaging measures. We will use functional MRI tasks to assess memory, inhibitory control, sustained attention, and risk/reward task performance and brain activation patterns. We expect that individuals who use MM to show alterations in task-related brain activity.  III. PARTICIPANT SELECTION  Medical Marijuana Participants Inclusion Criteria: 1. Men and women aged 18-65 years, inclusive;  2. Competent and willing to provide written informed consent;  3. Desire to use medical marijuana for self-reported pain, sleep, or affective (mood and/or anxiety including PTSD) symptoms. 4. Not in possession of a medical marijuana card, but expressing intent to get one. 5. Able to communicate in English language.   Exclusion Criteria: 1. Current daily marijuana use (prior to enrollment) 2. Current substance use disorders (e.g. cocaine, opi[INVESTIGATOR_2573], stimulant). Light to moderate alcohol use is permitted (defined as 16 or less on the AUDIT), and nicotine dependence is permitted because of the high co-use of nicotine and marijuana. Participants cannot meet current SCID criteria for a use disorder on any illicit substance.  3. Pregnant (verified by a urine test). 4. Diagnosis of acute coronary syndrome, coronary thrombosis, myocardial infarction, cardiomyopathies and arrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation, thrombophilia such as Factor V Leiden, Prothrombin [ZIP_CODE], antithrombin deficiency, Antiphospholipid syndrome. 5. History of deep vein thrombosis (DVT), pulmonary embolism, stroke.  6. In the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], not able to safely participate in this study because of any medical or psychological issues (e.g. psychosis) that might compromise their safety. 
 3 Healthy Control Participants Inclusion Criteria: 1. Men and women aged 18-65 years, inclusive 2. Competent and willing to provide written informed consent 3. Able to communicate in English language 4. No contraindications for fMRI (see MRI safety screening form).  Exclusion Criteria: 1. Current or past history of major medical illness by [CONTACT_6270]-report 2. History of diabetes, cardiovascular disease, HIV, Hepatitis C, migraines, head injury or prolonged unconsciousness (> 24 hours) 3. Current use of drugs/medications, such as analgesics 4. Current use of illicit drugs, verified with urine drug screen 5. Pregnancy, verified with urine screen 6. Meets DSM-5 criteria for psychological disorders (current) 7. Reports using marijuana in the past 3 months 8. Reports using marijuana approximately > 50 times in their lifetime 9. In the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], not able to safely participate in this study.  Healthy Control Participants and Medical Marijuana Participants to Undergo MRI Scanning Additional Inclusion Criteria for MRI studies (applicable for only the subset who will undergo neuroimaging) 1. Randomized to active MM group or scanned as healthy control participants.  Additional Exclusion criteria for MRI studies (applicable for only the subset who will undergo neuroimaging) 1. Known claustrophobia 2. Presence of electrically, magnetically, or mechanically activated implants (such as cardiac pacemakers) or intracerebral vascular clips 3. History of working with metal (e.g. shavings or fragments could be lodged in scalp or eye) 4. Pregnancy (if the subject cannot rule out the possibility of pregnancy, a pregnancy test will be conducted prior to the study) 5. In the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], not able to safely participate in this study.    IV. RECRUITMENT METHODS Participants will be recruited by [CONTACT_310012], web and bulletin board announcements posted within the local site network community. We will place a Partners HRC approved research study advertisement on relevant websites and in relevant print publications, as well as on the MBTA and on radio advertisements. We will also recruit from local clinics.  In accordance with NIH guidelines, efforts will be made to attain a mix of study participants, in terms of gender and racial/ethnic representation that is reflective of the population of the greater metropolitan area where the recruitment is taking place.  For example, for the metropolitan [LOCATION_011] area we will attempt to recruit; 63% white, 26% African American and 11% other races. We anticipate that half of our participants will be male and half female and that we will have representation from Asian American, African American and Hispanic minority groups in our final cohort that is representative of that reported in census data for Greater [LOCATION_011].   
 4 V. STUDY PROCEDURES Healthy Control Participants Screening: Participants who have expressed interest in participating in the study will undergo a brief  phone screen to assess eligibility. We plan to phone screen about 100 participants. If they are eligible according to the phone screen, they will be scheduled for an in-person study visit. At this visit, a consent form will be reviewed with the study doctor. If participants are determined eligible at the end of this visit, they will then be scheduled for the MRI scan.   Study Design: Visit I: Healthy Control Screen  Visit I of this study will take place outside of the scanner only. Participants will be recruited and scheduled for a behavioral session. In this session, we will test participants on a computer in order to optimize the parameters of the task.    Visit II.  Healthy Control Imaging Procedure  In Visit II, participants who have met all inclusion criteria and none of the exclusion criteria will be scheduled for an MRI scan.  Each scan session will last up to two hours during which structural and/or functional images will be collected.   Participants will be positioned in the scanner and outfitted with audio and visual presentation and response indicator equipment. Visual images and auditory stimuli will be presented using MRI compatible presentation software and hardware. Participant responses are monitored using MRI-compatible keypads, and reaction times may be recorded for subsequent analysis of timing and accuracy of task performance.    Visit I Visit II Measure Instrument Screen MRI Scan General Medical/Psychiatric Health      Medical History/ CON MEDS  x   Drug Screen/pregnancy  x x  Psychiatric Interview MINI 7 x   Suicidality and Health Risk Taking   (N/A for scores < 9 on MINI Suicidality) CHRT x   Provider Expectations for  Recovery Scale PERS x  Substance Use     Frequency of substance use TLFB (MJ, EtOH, tobacco, other drugs) x   Harmful drinking  AUDIT x  Cognitive Testing       Intelligence / reading WTAR x  MRI Scan       MPRAGE Structural  x    Resting state  Functional connectivity  x    Task-based (i.e. working     memory, inhibitory control) Task-based fMRI  x  MRI Protocol: The purpose of the MRI portion of the study is to compare the brains of individuals with no serious medical conditions, current psychological conditions, or drug use to those enrolled in the medical marijuana study. All of these participants will undergo a 3T MRI scanning. Each scan session will last up to two hours during which structural and functional data will be collected. 
 5 Participants will be positioned in the scanner and outfitted with audio and visual presentation and response indicator equipment. Visual images and auditory stimuli will be presented using MRI compatible presentation software and hardware. Participant responses are monitored using MRI-compatible keypads, and reaction times may be recorded for subsequent analysis of timing and accuracy of task performance. Participants may undergo the scans noted below:  1.   Structural MRI For the structural imaging sessions T1 -weighted sequences may be acquired. Multiple anatomical imaging sequences may be run to assess specific image quality measures. The same anatomical scans will be repeated varying a limited range of pulse sequence parameters to assess their effect on the image contrast, image artifacts and signal to noise ratio. Parameters that will be varied may include the repetition time of the MR acquisition (TR), the echo time of the acquisition (TE), and the presence of pre-acquisition inversion pulses. The above parameters will also be evaluated in pulse sequences which acquire parameters used in the reconstruction of the MR images. The software and hardware interlocks put in place by [CONTACT_310013]'s non-significant risk criteria.   2.  Functional Magnetic Resonance (fMRI) The scanner is outfitted with audio and visual presentation and response indicator equipment. All tasks are programmed using presentation software that is synchronized with the video synch pulse of the computer running the task.  The presentation software also collects the behavioral response information. The experimental paradigms will assess activation in brain regions underlying memory, attention, inhibitory control, and risk/reward. Participants may earn points for correct answers, and those points may be converted to monetary values. The experimental paradigm will take approximately [ADDRESS_380367] about one hour.  Drug Testing: At both study visits, participants will provide a urine sample, which will be used to qualitatively screen for cannabis use as well as other substances of abuse. An alcohol reading may also be taken if there is any concern about a participant being intoxicated.  Medical Marijuana Participants Screening: Participants who have expressed interest in participating in the study will undergo a brief phone screen to assess eligibility. We plan to phone screen about 2000 participants. If they are eligible according to the phone screen, they will be scheduled for an in-person (or teleconference) study visit. At this visit, a consent form will be reviewed with the study staff. Participants who give permission to receive text messages from the study staff will receive appointment reminders via text two days before upcoming appointments. In addition, subjects will be instructed on how to use our phone app for tracking their medical marijuana use, they will fill out some questionnaires and also do a urine drug and if applicable, a pregnancy test.  Also at this visit, participants will be randomized to either the active study group or the waitlist control group. We plan to randomize 200 participants to each group.   Study Design: The active study group will be asked to call the study staff once they receive their MM cards. A staff member will follow up via phone with participants who do not contact [CONTACT_310014]. Staff will contact [CONTACT_310015]. If after six weeks, a participant still has not made any progress on the application for a 
 [ADDRESS_380368] (i.e., made an appointment with a doctor who recommends medical marijuana), the participant will be discontinued from the study and a three-month follow-up visit will be scheduled.   When participants in the active study group receive their medical marijuana card, they will be scheduled for a baseline assessment in which they will undergo cognitive testing, interviews, questionnaires, and possibly an MRI scan (see Measures below). In contrast, participants in the waitlist control group will be scheduled for the baseline visit approximately 3-[ADDRESS_380369]. If participants are in the active study group, we will ask that they not use MM on the day of testing (though they can use it after testing on that day). These visits will take approximately [ADDRESS_380370] completed Visit 5 (Three Months). During those 3 months, they will be assessed at the same time points as those in the active MM group (see study schema). After the 3-month waitlist period, the waitlist control group will have the option to start using MM. If this group fails to adhere to the waitlist control, they will be kept in the study and will be asked to complete the same assessment schedule as those initially assigned to the active study group. All participants will be assessed after 1 year.      Visit 1 Visit 2 Visit 3 Visit 4 Visit 5 Visit 6 Visit 7 Measure Instrument Screen Baseline Two Weeks One Month Three Months Six Months One Year General Medical/Psychiatric Health Medical History/ CON MEDS  x x x x x x x Quantitative cannabinoids   x x x x x x Drug Screen/pregnancy  x x x x x x x Psychiatric Interview MINI 7 + Past SUD and AUD x      x Suicidality and Health Risk Taking CHRT x x x x x x x Emotional and physical   Functioning SF-12  x x x x x x ADHD symptoms  ASRS  x     x Impulsivity  BIS-11  x   x x x Executive function BRIEF  x   x x x Risk perceptions and behavior  DOSPERT  x   x   Family history of Addiction  KSADS  x       Provider Expectations for  Recovery Scale PERS x       Substance Use Frequency of substance use TLFB (MJ, EtOH, tobacco, other drugs) x x x x x x x 
monthly check in phone calls 
2-yr follow-up call 
 [ADDRESS_380371] x x x x x x x MJ craving  MCQ-SF  x x x x x x Marijuana Motives MMM     x   Marijuana Withdrawal (if stop) CWS  x x  x x x MJ use severity CUDIT  x x x x x x Harmful drinking  AUDIT x    x x x Alcohol consumption urge  URGE  x x x x x x Expectancy of MMJ effects  MMEEQ x x  x x x x Reflection of MMJ effects (qualitative)        x x Symptoms Pain level BPI x x x x x x x Pain Catastrophizing Scale PCS x x x x x x x Perceived Stress Scale PSS x x x x x x x Clinician’s Severity Scale CGI  x x x x x x Insomnia  AIS x x x x x x x Anxiety Scale  HADS x x x x x x x Delusions and Psychosis  PDI  x  x x x x Difficulties due to health  conditions WHODAS x x   x x x Post-traumatic stress symptoms PCL x      x COVID-[ADDRESS_380372] of epi[INVESTIGATOR_901]/pandemic on various areas of life EPII x       Changes in substance use since COVID-19 pandemic Covid19-CSU x       Cognitive Testing Verbal learning/memory,  attention, working memory,  and complex decision-making  CANTAB  x  x x x x Intelligence / reading WTAR x       MRI Scan MPRAGE Structural  x     x Resting state  Functional connectivity  x     x Task-based (i.e. working memory, inhibitory control) Task-based fMRI  x     x  Drug Testing: At all study visits, participants will provide a urine sample, which will be used to qualitatively screen for cannabis use as well as other substances of abuse. For participants who provide written consent for sample shipment, urine samples will be shipped to quantitatively screen for amount of THC metabolites in urine. Samples will only be shipped for participants who report recent marijuana use and/or qualitatively screen positive for THC. An alcohol reading may also be taken if there is any concern about a participant being intoxicated.   Urine Collection During Remote Data Collection: While we must conduct remote study visits, participants will be asked to consent to shippi[INVESTIGATOR_309999]. Participants who do not consent to remote urine collection will not be penalized and will not receive materials for shippi[INVESTIGATOR_310000]. Participants who consent 
 [ADDRESS_380373] the packaged sample at the location where their mail is pi[INVESTIGATOR_310001]. Because there is no staff at our MGH offices, study staff will schedule a UPS pi[INVESTIGATOR_310002]’s home to the home of our Center Director, [CONTACT_310023], MD, who will be available to transport urine samples to the -[ADDRESS_380374]. Evins be unable to perform it due to illness or redeployment.  Online Dosing Diaries: All participants will be asked to keep a daily log of (1) marijuana use, and (2) ratings of pain, sleep quality, mood, and general health. They will be asked to send in data once per day during the first three months of study participation (from Visit 1 to Visit 5). We will collect this data using Secure Survey, a web application designed to collect data from a modern user group on their mobile, tablet, or desktop devices.   MRI Protocol (Optional): The purpose of the MRI portion of the study is to investigate possible changes in the brain from those who obtain MM cards. Therefore, only patients randomized the active MM group will be given the option to undergo a 3T MRI scanning. Participants will undergo MRI scanning at baseline and at 1 year after initiation of MM. In addition, a small group (n = 25) of non-MJ-using controls, matched on demographics, will also be scanned at baseline and after [ADDRESS_380375] up to two hours during which structural and functional data will be collected. Participants will be positioned in the scanner and outfitted with audio and visual presentation and response indicator equipment. Visual images and auditory stimuli will be presented using MRI compatible presentation software and hardware. Participant responses are monitored using MRI-compatible keypads, and reaction times may be recorded for subsequent analysis of timing and accuracy of task performance.  Participants may undergo the scans noted below:  1.   Structural MRI For the structural imaging sessions T1 -weighted sequences may be acquired. Multiple anatomical imaging sequences may be run to assess specific image quality measures. The same anatomical scans will be repeated varying a limited range of pulse sequence parameters to assess their effect on the image contrast, image artifacts and signal to noise ratio. Parameters that will be varied may include the repetition time of the MR acquisition (TR), the echo time of the acquisition (TE), and the presence of pre-acquisition inversion pulses.  The above parameters will also be evaluated in pulse sequences, which acquire parameters used in the reconstruction of the MR images. The software and hardware interlocks put in place by [CONTACT_310016]'s non-significant risk criteria.   2.  Functional Magnetic Resonance (fMRI) The scanner is outfitted with audio and visual presentation and response indicator equipment. All tasks are programmed using presentation software that is synchronized with the video 
 9 synch pulse of the computer running the task.  The presentation software also collects the behavioral response information. The experimental paradigms will assess activation in brain regions underlying memory, attention, inhibitory control, and risk/reward. Participants may earn points for correct answers, and those points may be converted to monetary values. The experimental paradigm will take approximately [ADDRESS_380376] about one hour.   V. REMUNERATION Healthy Control Participants Participants in the healthy control group will be paid for the completion of each study visit. Each study visit is compensated in the amount of $50. If participants undergo the screening visit but are not eligible, they will be paid $[ADDRESS_380377] visit only. There are opportunities to receive additional money in the MRI scanner ($1- $50) based on scan task performance. All participants who drive to visits will also be given parking vouchers for each visit. This level of compensation is deemed appropriate given the time commitment. All payments will be made via check following each study visit.   Medical Marijuana Participants Participants in the medical marijuana study will be paid after the completion of each study visit, and weekly for submitting their dosing diaries. Participants will be compensated $20 on the day of the screen and $60 for each study visit. Participants will be paid an additional $40 after completing their six month visit and an additional $60 after completing their twelve month visit. Participants will be paid $[ADDRESS_380378] AEs, medication changes, TLFB, and symptom severity (measured by [CONTACT_20763]-12). Participants will be paid an additional $5 for completing the EPII and $5 for completing the Covid19-CSU.  If participants undergo the screening visit but are not eligible, they will be paid $[ADDRESS_380379] visit only. They will be paid $[ADDRESS_380380] three months of the study, for a maximum total of $260 for completing all dosing diaries. Additionally, they may be paid for pre-baseline daily diary entries for a maximum of five weeks ($20 per week, $100 total). They will be paid $50 for each scan if they agree to undergo scanning procedures. For each scan participants may also receive additional money ($1-100) based on scan task performance. All participants who drive to visits will also be given parking vouchers for each visit. All payments will be made via check at the end of the study.   Please see table below for payment schedule. Visit # Active Study Group Waitlist Control Group 1 Screening $20 Screening $20 2 Baseline $60 Baseline $60 3 2 weeks $60 2 weeks $60 4 1 month $60 1 month $60 5 3 months $60 3 months $60  Dosing Diaries (13 weeks x $20/week) $260 Dosing Diaries (13 weeks x $20/week) $260 6 6 months $100 6 months $100 
 10  Monthly phone calls 2, 4, 7-11 months (7 x $10 each) $70 Monthly phone calls 2, 4, 7-11 months (7 x $10 each) $70  Covid19 Questionnaires $10 Covid19 Questionnaires $10 12 12 months $120 12 months $120 Total  $820 Total $820 Scan (Optional) Baseline $50    12 months $50   Total  $[ADDRESS_380381] of a brief discussion of the research study, confirming a potential participant’s understanding of the basic study procedures, interest in participation and whether he/she meets eligibility criteria and includes asking for current medications, gender, age, history of claustrophobia, pregnancy status, history of psychiatric conditions including substance use disorders. Screening takes place over the phone in response to a potential participant inquiry (see attached screening telephone script).  Those not eligible for the experiment based on the phone screen will be informed that they do not qualify for entry into this particular study.  An initial cohort of up to [ADDRESS_380382] access to data on individuals that is stripped of all unique identifiers according to HIPAA guidelines.    Biostatistical Analysis Data variables collected for study Standardized questionnaires, assessing drug use, personality characteristics, and anxiety will be collected. Cognitive data will be collected using standardized computer programs such as the CANTAB. MRI data will also be collected.  Data will be collected and managed using REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) tools (Harris 2009) hosted with Partners HealthCare. REDCap data collection projects rely on a thorough study-specific data dictionary defined in an iterative self-documenting process by [CONTACT_310017], Enterprise Research Infrastructure & Services (ERIS) group. The REDCap Survey is a powerful tool for building and managing online surveys. The research team can create and design surveys in a web browser and engage potential respondents using a variety of notification methods. Participants will complete a number of REDCap Surveys using a tablet provided to them at study visits. This platform allows access to specific surveys and participants are required to initial at the completion of each. Study staff members will initial to indicate who completed each item. Both REDCap and REDCap Survey systems provide secure, HIPAA compliant, web-based applications that are flexible enough to be used for a variety of types of research, provide an intuitive interface for users to enter data and have real time validation rules (with automated data type and range checks) at the time of entry. Online dosing diaries will be collected using Secure Survey, a web application designed to collect data from a modern user group on their mobile, tablet, or desktop devices. This platform secures not only the data transmission, but also the storage using industry standard security techniques.   Analytic Plan  Power/Sample Size. Aim 1 seeks to address the development of CUD (dependent on the number of symptoms reported) in the MM compared with the WLC group. To assess this, we will use the DSM-[ADDRESS_380383] (Cohen’s d=.3) with 90% power using a t test with alpha at .05.  Data Analysis Plan: In general, 3 analytic approaches will be employed, corresponding to three types of comparisons and data:     (a) Numeric Data Assessed at Baseline, [ADDRESS_380384]-level numeric covariates (i.e. THC metabolite levels) and categorical factors (e.g. disease category) crossed with condition and possibly interacting with time will be included in the analysis. Covariates such as baseline MJ use, primary disorder for which MM is sought, age, and gender will be of interest.  The term of primary interest will be the interaction of condition x time as a test of the hypothesis that assignment to the MM condition will be associated with an increased rate of CUD. A limited amount of backward elimination of nonsignificant ancillary terms will be employed to increase power for effects of more interest (e.g. non-significant terms can be dropped from the models).  An additional, analogous repeated-measure ANCOVA, restricted to the MM group, will include the third 
 12 assessment at 6 months. The Greenhouse-Geisser adjustment for correlated error will be employed for significance tests with more than one degree of freedom. For all models, residuals will be checked graphically for adherence to assumptions of normality and homoscedasticity, and data transformations applied if needed.           (b) Daily Numeric Data Collected via Dosing Diaries in the First 3 Months.  Daily-recorded numeric measures such as dose and frequency of use of MJ, of analgesic, anxiolytic, and/or antidepressant medications, and ratings of pain, sleep, mood, and anxiety will be analyzed as dependent variables in separate analyses. Preliminary exploratory graphical analyses will be conducted using longitudinal “spaghetti plots” in order to check any need for curvilinear models, explore any clusters of trajectories, and address distribution problems such as floors/ceilings, non-normality, outliers, etc.  Analysis methods employed will be mixed fixed and random effects longitudinal models. Fixed terms will be Condition (MM vs. WLC groups) and various relevant crossed factors and numeric covariates.  Correlated random terms will be subjects’ intercepts and linear rate of change of their trajectories on the dependent variable across days (curvilinear terms will be included if warranted). In order to test the predictive relation of some of the time-varying variables (e.g., frequency of MJ use) on others (e.g., pain recordings or use of analgesic, anxiolytic, and/or antidepressant medications), the former will be included as additional time-varying predictors in models otherwise analogous to those above.  Exploratory structural equation models (SEM) and cross correlations of time series will be examined for evidence of underlying causal dynamics.  Cross-lagged partial correlations can be used to test direction of effects.     (c) Imaging Data. Imaging data will be analyzed using standard analysis platforms for longitudinal analysis (e.g. FSL and SPM). We will use a linear mixed-effects model approach, with a univariate two-stage specification. The advantage of this method is that it offers flexibility in handling unbalanced repeated measurements with missing data, which is one of the biggest challenges to longitudinal fMRI datasets. At the subject-level, a unique trajectory for each individual is defined for each region or voxel being considered, meaning that activation measurements are condensed into summary statistics for each scan. At the second, population-level, individuals are considered as arising from a population of all such individuals, each with a unique intercept and slope, and a linear mixed-effects model is fit. With this modeling approach, it is reasonable to deduce that the within-individual variances are the fluctuations around the individual-specific trajectory, and the among-individual variances can be described as differences of parameters characterizing these trajectories. As one way to conduct this model using brain-imaging data, statistical measures of brain activity responses serve as the dependent variable and one linear mixed-effect model is then fit for each ROI or voxel. Repeatability of fMRI can be directly addressed via certain parameters of this model.   Risks and Discomforts  Psychosocial risks Risks: There are no legal risks to the participants associated this study, because medical marijuana is legal in [LOCATION_005].  There is a small social risk associated with participation in this study, as some people may be embarrassed if others found out that they are using medical marijuana. Minimization: All data will be completely deidentified and anonymized. Please see ‘confidentiality and loss of privacy’ below.  The Co-Investigators on this project include a psychiatrist ([CONTACT_310023]) and a clinically-trained clinical psychologist ([CONTACT_310024]).  If there are any concerns about a subject who is actively suicidal and in need of clinical attention, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_310003] (co-investigators Eden Evins and Randi Schuster) to determine appropriate steps. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_310004]-investigators will assess the needs of the subject and offer the subject either prompt treatment or medical referral, whichever is appropriate 
 13 for the situation. There is a licensed clinician on site 40 hours per week, and other MGH resources can be used as necessary.  Confidentiality and Loss of Privacy Risks: The risk of loss of privacy is judged to be minimal. Online dosing diaries will be collected using Secure Survey, which secures not only the data transmission, but also the storage using industry standard security techniques.  Minimization: Confidentiality will be maintained by [CONTACT_310018][INVESTIGATOR_310005]. Subject information will be accessible only to research staff. Information about study participants will not leave our institution in any form that would identify individual subjects.  Secure Survey implements multiple layers of security using industry standard techniques:  • SSL Certificates from Trusted Certificate Authorities encrypts all traffic between the user’s device and the server • All database data is encrypted using 256-bit encryption ensuring no data is at risk should the servers be breached • Browser tokens further secure the flow between pages and help prevent XSS attacks  fMRI Risks Risks: fMRI is a minimal risk procedure. Although fMRI scanning itself is painless, subjects may experience discomfort. Some may become claustrophobic inside the magnet. Subjects may also be bothered by [CONTACT_310019][INVESTIGATOR_310006], and/or experience peripheral stimulation, manifested as a gentle tap or sensation of mild electric shock.  Because of the high magnetic field of the fMRI scanner, individuals with pacemakers, cosmetics, or certain metallic implants in their bodies must be excluded. Each potential subject must identify these and other possible contraindications prior to fMRI scanning.  Because the scanner attracts certain metals, precautions must be taken to remove metallic objects from the MRI room.  Minimization: Since some subjects may be uncomfortable in the MRI, all subjects will be able to converse with the experimenter via a microphone and speaker system, and will be able to communicate an immediate need to come out or stop the scan via a “panic squeezeball”. All efforts will be made to make the subjects as comfortable as possible while in the scanner. A member of the study staff will explain the procedure thoroughly to the subjects prior to scanning, allowing for maximal understanding and comfort. The MRI can be stopped at any time at the subjects’ request. In addition, the scanners are equipped with an emergency button that the subject can press if necessary. A qualified M.D. will always be on site or reachable by [CONTACT_310020]. If there are any concerns about a subject in need of clinical attention, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_310003] (co-investigator: A. Eden Evins, MD) to determine appropriate steps.   Potential subjects will be carefully screened before recruitment with respect to their medical history. This includes: history of head trauma, surgical aneurysm clips, cardiac pacemaker or any other type of implants, metal rods or plates. They will be queried about their previous surgeries, hearing aid, intrauterine devices, dentures and pregnancy. Individuals with any one of these contraindications will not be recruited for the study.   If there are any concerns about a subject in need of clinical attention, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_310003] (co-investigator Eden Evins, MD) to determine appropriate steps. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_310004]-investigators will assess the needs of the subject and offer the subject either prompt treatment or medical referral, whichever is 
 [ADDRESS_380385] will fill a critical gap in the addiction literature, at a critical time when cannabis is being legalized for ‘medical’ use with little known about effects of MM on target symptoms, addictions, neurocognition or brain structure and function.   MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE All participants will have contact [CONTACT_76074] [INVESTIGATOR_310007].  [CONTACT_310025] is responsible for the overall management of the study and will maintain regular communication with all of the study staff.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_310008].  In the event of any significant adverse event, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_166395]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_310009], which will also be included in the Continuing Review reports to the IRB.  Serious adverse events are not expected as a result of the study procedures.  Should one occur, it will be reported by [CONTACT_310021] [INVESTIGATOR_310010] (version dated: March 13, 2007).  All adverse events (if not serious) will be reported in writing to the Partner’s Human Research Committee.  All information regarding experimental subjects will be kept in the offices of the Principal Investigator.  All data will be identified by a unique code number.        References  1. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Results from the 2013 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Summary of National Findings, NSDUH Series H-48, HHS Publication No. (SMA) 14-4863. Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration; 2014:31. 2. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Results from the 2013 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Summary of National Findings, NSDUH Series H-48, HHS Publication No. (SMA) 14-4863. Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration; 2014:25. 3. Kann LK, S.; Shanklin, S. L.; Flint, K.H.; Hawkins, J.; Harris, W.A.; Lowry, R.; O'Malley Olsen, E.; McManus, T.; Chyen, D.; Whittle, L.; Taylor, E.; Demissie, Z.; Brener, N.; Thornton, J.; Moore, J.; Zaza, S. Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance - [LOCATION_002], 2013. Rockville, MD: ICF International; Westat; 2014:20. 
 15 4. Mackie K. Distribution of cannabinoid receptors in the central and peripheral nervous system. Handbook of experimental pharmacology. 2005(168):299-325. 5. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_1934] D. The molecular logic of endocannabinoid signalling. Nature reviews. Neuroscience. 2003;4(11):873-884. 6. Martin-Santos R, Fagundo AB, Crippa JA, et al. Neuroimaging in cannabis use: a systematic review of the literature. Psychological medicine. 2010;40(3):383-398. 7. Solowij N, Battisti R. The chronic effects of cannabis on memory in humans: a review. Current drug abuse reviews. 2008;1(1):81-98. 8. Solowij N, Stephens R, Roffman RA, Babor T. Does marijuana use cause long-term cognitive deficits? Jama. 2002;287(20):2653-2654; author reply 2654. 9. Lorenzetti V, Solowij N, Fornito A, Lubman DI, Yucel M. The association between regular cannabis exposure and alterations of human brain morphology: an updated review of the literature. Curr Pharm Des. 2014;20(13):2138-2167. 10. Hall W, Degenhardt L. Adverse health effects of non-medical cannabis use. Lancet. 2009;374(9698):1383-1391. 11. Anthony JC. Cannabis dependence: Its Nature, Consequences and Treatment. Cambridge, [LOCATION_006]: Cambridge University Press; 2006. 12. Lopez-Quintero C, Perez de los Cobos J, Hasin DS, et al. Probability and predictors of transition from first use to dependence on nicotine, alcohol, cannabis, and cocaine: results of the National Epi[INVESTIGATOR_7446] (NESARC). Drug and alcohol dependence. 2011;115(1-2):120-130. 13. DrugFacts: Marijuana. 2010; http://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/marijuana. 14. Hooper SR, Woolley D, De Bellis MD. Intellectual, neurocognitive, and academic achievement in abstinent adolescents with cannabis use disorder. Psychopharmacology. 2014;231(8):1467-1477. 15. Ware J, Jr., Kosinski M, Keller SD. A 12-Item Short-Form Health Survey: construction of scales and preliminary tests of reliability and validity. Med Care. 1996;34(3):220-233. 16. Kessler RC, Adler L, Ames M, et al. The World Health Organization Adult ADHD Self-Report Scale (ASRS): a short screening scale for use in the general population. Psychological medicine. 2005;35(2):245-256. 17. Patton JH, Stanford MS, Barratt ES. Factor structure of the Barratt impulsiveness scale. Journal of clinical psychology. 1995;51(6):768-774. 18. Weber EU, Blais, A., & Betz N.E. A Domain-specific Risk-attitude Scale: Measuring Risk Perceptions and Risk Behaviors. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making. 2002;15:263–290. 19. The Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test (ASSIST): development, reliability and feasibility. Addiction. 2002;97(9):1183-1194. 20. Sobell MB, Sobell LC, Klajner F, Pavan D, Basian E. The reliability of a timeline method for assessing normal drinker college students' recent drinking history: utility for alcohol research. Addictive behaviors. 1986;11(2):149-161. 21. Bohn MJ, Krahn DD, Staehler BA. Development and initial validation of a measure of drinking urges in abstinent alcoholics. Alcoholism, clinical and experimental research. 1995;19(3):600-606. 22. Adamson SJ, Sellman JD. A prototype screening instrument for cannabis use disorder: the Cannabis Use Disorders Identification Test (CUDIT) in an alcohol-dependent clinical sample. Drug and alcohol review. 2003;22(3):309-315. 
 [ADDRESS_380386] (AUDIT): WHO Collaborative Project on Early Detection of Persons with Harmful Alcohol Consumption--II. Addiction. 1993;88(6):791-804. 24. Schafer J, Brown SA. Marijuana and cocaine effect expectancies and drug use patterns. Journal of consulting and clinical psychology. 1991;59(4):558-565. 25. Farrar JT, Young JP, Jr., LaMoreaux L, Werth JL, Poole RM. Clinical importance of changes in chronic pain intensity measured on an 11-point numerical pain rating scale. Pain. 2001;94(2):149-158. 26. Soldatos CR, Dikeos DG, Paparrigopoulos TJ. Athens Insomnia Scale: validation of an instrument based on ICD-10 criteria. J Psychosom Res. 2000;48(6):555-560. 27. Watson D, Weber K, Assenheimer JS, Clark LA, Strauss ME, McCormick RA. Testing a tripartite model: I. Evaluating the convergent and discriminant validity of anxiety and depression symptom scales. Journal of abnormal psychology. 1995;104(1):3-14. 28. Treadway MT, Buckholtz JW, Schwartzman AN, Lambert WE, Zald DH. Worth the 'EEfRT'? The effort expenditure for rewards task as an objective measure of motivation and anhedonia. PloS one. 2009;4(8):e6598. 29. Faul F, Erdfelder E, Lang AG, Buchner A. G*Power 3: a flexible statistical power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. Behavior research methods. 2007;39(2):175-191.   