Cover  Page  
O+icial Title: Brain  Networks  of Turning  Performance with  Aging  and Stroke 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
Document  Date:  10/13/2022  
IRB Version Date:  3/9/2004 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_68756]:10/13/2022  
IRB study  number:  IRB202200959   Protocol  
 
1. Project  Title 
Brain  Networks  of Turning Performance with Aging and Stroke  
 
2. Investigator(s):  
Clayton  W. Swanson,  PhD 
David J. Clark, ScD 
Dorian Rose, PhD  
Damon Lamb,  PhD 
 
3. Abstract:  
 
The objective of this study is to examine the neural control of turning while walking, which is 
often impaired for older adults and people who have had a stroke. Leveraging the 
infrastructure of [CONTACT_809703]’s IRB approved ongoing Merit Review study cal led the 
CONTROL  Study  (IRB201803010 - Cerebral  networks of locomotor  learning  and retention 
in older adults) this study adds one additional (optional) assessment visit to measure 
brain function using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) which is a form of non- 
invasive brain stimulation. The CONTROL Study collects multiple forms of turning 
performance data in older adults; however, the it does not perform or collect transcranial 
magnetic  stimulation  (TMS)  data to assess excitatory  and inhibitory  neurophysiological  function 
in motor networks of the brain.  
 
Recent  work  demonstrates  significant  associations  between  brain  excitatory/inhibitory  function 
and turning performance in older adults, although these results remain largely preliminary.  
Therefore, the objective of this proposal is to further elucidate associations between 
neurophysiological function (measured with TMS) and measures of turning performance. Specific  Aim [ADDRESS_1119727] the hypothesis  that greater  cortical  inhibitory  function will be associated 
with faster turn speed and shorter turn duration for 360˚, 180˚, and 90˚ turns. Specific Aim [ADDRESS_1119728] the hypothesis that greater cortical inhibitory function will be associated with greater segmental turning strategies (i.e., head leads in the turn followed by [CONTACT_809698], trunk, etc.) of 
the axial skeleton.  Specific  Aim [ADDRESS_1119729] the hypothesis  that participants  with greater  baseline 
cortical inhibition  will demonstrate larger  360 ̊, 180 ,̊ and 90˚ turning performance gains.  This 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_809688]  [ADDRESS_1119730]-stroke which 
will provide preliminary data for a future grant submission, proposing a larger scale clinical trial 
of turning rehabilitation for mobility compromised adults.  
 
4. Background:  
Gait and balance impairments during straight ahead walking are well documented in older adults and post -stroke survivors, but rarely is turning factored into either the assessment or 
intervention. Nearly all tasks performed throughout the day require some amount of turning. In fact, people over the age of 65 execute between 300- 1500 turns per day. Even with the 
abundance of turning in daily life, there remains a relative paucity of research targeted to understanding age and stroke related turning deficits, or the potential for achieving turning improvements following an intervention. Recent research has documented significant 
differences  in 360 ̊ and 180 ̊ turning performance  between neurotypi[INVESTIGATOR_809689], 
such that older adults were found to turn more slowly and to have a reduced peak velocity.  
Moreover,  our recent  research as shown that compared to conventionally  measured straight  
IRB Version Date:  3/9/2004 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_68756]:10/13/2022  
IRB study  number:  IRB202200959   ahead walking variables (i.e., walking speed), performance on the 360  ̊ turn test provides 
excellent ability to discern between neurotypi[INVESTIGATOR_809690]- age and older adults. This finding 
indicates that turning ability may be more sensitive to lower limb motor control differences 
between these  populations.  Similarly,  stroke  related research demonstrates  increases  in the 
duration and number of steps needed to complete 360 ̊  turns.  
We propose to use transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), which is a non- invasive brain 
stimulation technique to measure motor cortex neurophysiology during a single study visit . 
Specifically, we are interested in three measures associated with inhibitory activity respectively 
termed the cortical silent period (cSP), short interval intracortical inhibition (SICI), and long 
interval intracortical inhibition (LICI). These measures represent inhibitory activity, specifically 
gamma -aminobutyric acid (GABA) which is the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain. 
Although there are certain unique features  for each of these  measures.  Specifically,  the cSP is a 
single pulse TMS measure which assesses GABA -B corticospi[INVESTIGATOR_809691] (rather 
than corticospi[INVESTIGATOR_1304]) levels of inhibitory activity. Moreover, the two paired pulse TMS measures 
assess different GABAergic subtypes. Specifically, SICI measures GABA -A activity while LICI 
measures GABA -B activity. Notably, my prior research is the first to demonstrate associations 
between the cSP and turning performance for older adults, such that those older adults with greater levels of inhibition (i.e., longer silent periods) demonstrate better turning performance 
(i.e., shorter turn duration). Although the precise mechanism linking cortical inhibition to turning 
performance remains unclear, there is emerging evidence that motor cortex inhibition predicts 
performance on tests of motor response -inhibition (i.e., the termination or prevention of 
movement). In the context of turning (e.g., 90˚, 180˚, and 360  ̊ turns), response- inhibition may 
help facilitate transitioning away from “automatic” straight ahead walking allowing for 
neuromuscular control to initiate a change in direction. This concept has been demonstrated for 
other complex walking tasks, such as obstacle avoidance or sudden step length adjustments. 
Together, these results indicate that cortical inhibition likely plays an important role in gait related performance. However, no research has assessed all three inhibitory measures and their associations to turning performance. Moreover, no studies have assessed whether 
baseline levels  of motor  cortex  inhibitory  activity  are predictive  of turning  performance  gains  or 
tDCS induced neuroplastic alterations. 
5. Specific  Aims:  
 
The specific aims are developed around the premise of incorporating turning data 
collected from  the CONTROL  Study  and incorporating  those data with the unique TMS 
data collected from this study.  
Specific  Aim 1: Determine the extent  to which  cortical  inhibition  is associated  with 90˚, 
180˚, and 360˚ turn duration and velocity in older adults.  
Hypothesis  1: G
 reater  levels  of cortical inhibitory  activity  will be associated  with shorter  turn 
duration and faster peak turn velocity for 90˚, 180˚, and 360˚ turns.  
Specific  Ai m 2: Determine the extent  to which  cortical  inhibition  is associated with 
segmental turning strategies in older adults.  
Hypothesis  2: G reater  levels  of cortical inhibitory  activity  will be associated  with greater  degrees 
of segmental specific turning strategies for 90˚, 180˚, and 360˚ turns.  
Specific  Ai m 3: Determine the extent  to which  cortical  inhibition  is predictive of turning 
performance changes post -interven tion.  
IRB Version Date:  3/9/2004 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_68756]:10/13/2022  
IRB study  number:  IRB202200959   Hypothesis  3: Participants  with greater  cortical inhibitory  activity  at baseline will demonstrate 
larger improvements on the 360 ̊  and 180  ̊ turn tests.  
 
6. R
esearch Plan:  
Study  O verview  
This study  will recruit  zero participants.  
• Please refer to Table  1 outlines  what  measures  will be shared from the CONTROL  Study 
and which measures are unique to the current study.  
Table  1: Shared and Unique methods  and metrics  between the CONTROL  Study  and this study.  
 
 
Participant  Screening 
Recruitment will coincide with the CONTROL Study. Specifically, participants will be screened 
by [CONTACT_809699]. This includes participants between the ages of 65 – 95 years for the older adult participants and 65 – [ADDRESS_1119731] 
contraindications to non- invasive brain stimulation (i.e., TMS). This would include having metal 
in the head, a pacemaker, a wound on the scalp, or a history of seizures. Additionally, medications  affecting  the central  nervous  system including,  but not limited  to, benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], 
anti-cholinergic medication and GABAergic medication will be exclusionary as they could 
influence the results of TMS.  
 
Informed Consent  and Onsite Screening Visit 
Participants will undergo informed consent for the CONTROL Study and at that time will be invited  to undergo an additional  informed consent  for this study. Prior  to the participant  signing 
the additional consent form research staff will explain the TMS study protocol to participants. For participants who wish not to participate in the TMS visit they may continue with the 
CONTROL Study protocol.  
At the discretion  of the Principal  Investigator,  any individual  may be deemed  ineligible  for further 
participation in this study if there are concerns about the individual’s capability to perform study 
procedures or if it may be unsafe for the volunteer to participate in the study.  
 
Transcranial  Magnetic Stimulation  (TMS)  Visit 
Various  assessments  of muscle strength,  neural  control,  and health and independence will be 
made during the TMS assessment visit. These assessments include:  
Maximal  For ce Assessment  
Participants  will perform  a series  of maximal  voluntary  contractions  (MVCs)  to determine  the 
maximal tibialis anterior strength output for each leg. On separate trials, participants will be 
encouraged to produce as much force during a dorsiflexion as possible with each tibialis  

IRB Version Date:  3/9/2004 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_68756]:10/13/2022  
IRB study  number:  IRB202200959   anterior  muscle.  Once force  output  for subsequent  trials  is within  10% the largest  force 
producing trial will be recorded and used during the cSP TMS trials. 
 
Electromyography  (E MG) 
EMG electrodes will be placed on each tibialis anterior muscle which will be used to measure 
muscle activity  during the TMS  trials.  Please see the section  Transcranial  Magnetic  Stimulation 
below for more information.  
Transcranial  Magnet ic Stimulation  (TMS)  
Prior to starting TMS, participants will first complete a 
TMS safety screening questionnaire. The answers to 
this safety screening will be reviewed and approved 
by [CONTACT_809700]/or the PI. Like 
figure 1 but on the tibialis anterior muscles rather than the vastus medialis  oblique’s  participants  will have two 
surface EMG electrodes placed on each muscle belly and one on a boney landmark (e.g., patella).  
Participants will be seated in the TMS chair. Then research staff will measure the part icipants head to 
locate the center. This is completed by [CONTACT_809701].  Once the center  of the 
head is determined we will measure laterally 1 cm on 
both cortical hemispheres this point will denote the starting spot for stimulation. After locating the general location, the research staff will work to 
identify a more precise location for stimulation by [CONTACT_809702] a consistent 
muscle response. Once an initial muscle response is observed stimulation intensity will be determined to consistently generate an appropriate muscle response and amplitude. This procedure will be conducted on both cortical hemispheres.  
Following  the determination of location and intensity  for stimulation the tibialis  anterior  muscles, 
the 6 TMS trials will be performed at random. Each of these trials will be roughly three minutes in length and will include collection of the cortical silent period, short interval intracortical 
inhibition, and long interval intracortical inhibition for each hemisphere independently.  
 
Questionnaires  
We will administer  two questionnaires  aimed at assessing self-reported measures  of health and 
independence when performing activities of daily living. Both are short, simple, paper -based 
questionnaires. Specific examples include:  
• Short Form -36 – is a set of 36 questions aimed at assessing self -reported measures of 
health.  
• Katz Index  of Independence – is a set of questions  aimed at assessing one’s  level of 
independence when performing activities of daily living.  
 
Possible  Discomforts and Risks:  
There is a risk that participants  may find the questionnaires  uncomfortable or embarrassing  if they 
feel uncomfortable with their answers.  In an attempt  to alleviate these feelings  participants  may 
skip any question that they do not wish to respond do. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Example of TMS 
participant set up 
IRB Version Date:  3/9/2004 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_68756]:10/13/2022  
IRB study  number:  IRB202200959   Falls.  While  we do not anticipate a fall occurring there  is the potential  that a participant  could fall 
while  getting into or out of the Biodex  seat (Figure  1). To mitigate  this risk the Biodex  seat rotates 
and lowers.  Additionally,  study  staff will be present  to help participants  safely  navigate  their body 
position into the seat.  Once  seated,  participants  will be securely  harnessed in (similar  to a seatbelt 
in a vehicle).  
Headache.  Although  rare, the most  common  side effect from TMS  brain stimulation  is headache. 
However,  individuals  should not, participate if they have a history  of migraine or other  types  of 
severe or frequent  headaches.  It is also possible that participants  may experience some neck 
stiffness  or neck  pain.  This is believed to be due to the straight  posture of the head and neck  we 
will require during the experiment. 
TMS  is a safe,  non-invasive brain stimulation  technique that can be used for both diagnostic  and 
therapeutic  procedures.  The single  and paired  pulse TMS  techniques  that will be performed  in this 
study  have been used extensively  in thousands  of research studies  and on tens of thousands  of 
subjects  in the United  States  and around the world.  Single  and paired  pulse TMS  techniques  are 
considered very safe when  accepted guidelines  are followed,  and no long- term risks have been 
reported involving  the use of single  and paired  pulse TMS.  For most  people,  the stimulation is not 
painful,  but occasionally  slight  discomfort  or headache can occur. The headaches  go away  quickly 
with nonprescription medication.  TMS  produces  a clicking  sound when a current  is passed 
through the stimulation  coil. During  repetitive TMS  stimulation  this click can result  in ringing in the 
ear and temporary  shifts  in your ability  to determine the pi[INVESTIGATOR_809692].  Hearing damage is possible,  and one subject  suffered permanent  hearing 
damage when hearing protection fell out, although  this was done using repetitive  TMS  (rTMS).  
This s tudy  does  NOT  include rTMS  and only single  and paired  pulse  TMS  will be employed  in this 
study.  Animal  and human  studies  have  shown that earplugs  or headphones  can effectively 
prevent  the risk of hearing disturbance due to TMS.  Therefore,  participants  will be fitted  with 
earplugs  during TMS.  If individuals  find the procedure too uncomfortable,  they may discontinue at 
any time.  
TMS  can interfere  with implanted medical  devices  and will not be done in people who have 
pacemakers,  implanted  pumps,  or stimulators,  such  as cochlear  implants  or in people who have 
metal  objects  inside  the eye or skull (dental  work  such  as fillings  and similar procedures  do not 
pose a risk and are acceptable).  If participants  have  an implanted  device  or metal  object  that is 
not safe for TMS, they will not be allowed to participate.  
In general,  the risks associated with TMS  are very minimal,  but research  has shown that there  is a 
very small  risk of seizures  if repetitive TMS  (rTMS) is done with very intense,  high frequency 
stimulation  or with trains  of stimulation  separated by a second  or less. Such  intensity,  frequency, 
and repetition rate will n ot be used  in this study  as the study  does  NOT  include rTMS  and only 
single  and paired  pulse TMS  methods  will be employed.  Finally, there  is no medical  risk 
associated  with the surface EMG  recordings  of the muscle responses  to TMS.  
 
8. P
ossible  Benefits:  
There is no direct  benefit  to the participant.  
9. Conflict  of Interest:  
None.  
 
10. Statistical analysis and sample size calculations 
IRB Version Date:  3/9/2004 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_68756]:10/13/2022  
IRB study  number:  IRB202200959   For each aim, the objective of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_809693] a future grant submission 
which  will incorporate  a clinical trial for turning  specific  rehabilitation.  The proposed sample  size 
of [ADDRESS_1119732] size. The proposed sample of 10 stroke participants will allow 
for the assessment of feasibility.  
 
Data  and Safety Monitoring Plan 
Adverse Event  Reporting 
Adverse events  will be reported  according to the guidelines  of the University  of [LOCATION_012] 
Institutional Review.  
Reporting wit hin 5 days  of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_809694]:  
• S erious  
• Unexpected  
• Related or the Relationship is “more  likely  than not” 
Adverse events  will be added to the cumulative  event  table and reported  at continuing review 
when they meet either of the following criteria:  
• Serious  (but expected)  and related or the relationship is “more  likely  than not”. 
• Unexpected  (but not serious)  and related  or the relationship is “more  likely  than not”. 
A serious adverse event is any  adverse event that results in any of the following outcomes: 
• death,  
• a life-threatening adverse event,  
• inpatient  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_809695],  
• a persistent  or significant  disability/incapacity,  
• or a congenital  anomaly/birth defect.  
Important medical events that may not result in death, be life- threatening, or require 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3767] a serious  adverse event  when  the event  may jeopardize the 
patient or subject and/or may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in the definition above.  
An unexpected adverse event is any adverse event that is not consistent with the current 
investigator  brochure,  protocol,  consent  form,  or is not part of the normal  disease progression. 
In addition, known adverse events may occur more frequently than expected.  If so, then this 
meets the definition of “unexpected” and must be reported to the IRB.  
Protection Against  Risk 
Staff t
raining: All personnel  will be thoroughly  trained in the study  procedures  by [CONTACT_9532] [INVESTIGATOR_809696].  
Health monitoring and medical response: Vol unteers at risk of health problems due to recent 
history  of medical  conditions  (e.g.,  serious  cardiac  or pulmonary  conditions)  will be excluded,  as 
noted above in the inclusion/exclusion criteria. Any adverse events will be recorded and 
monitored as required by [CONTACT_102772]. In the event of a 
medical emergency at the VA Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (our study site) we will call the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_809697]:  3/9/2004 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_68756]:10/13/2022  
IRB study  number:  IRB202200959   response  line, 6-9-1-1 and alert them  to a code blue (medical  emergenc y). Subjects  will be able 
to terminate a study session at their request at any time without prejudice. Minimization of risk 
during neurorehabilitation and assessments  will be accomplished by [CONTACT_49126],  with 
prescribed criteria for termination of the testing session.  Vital signs will be monitored before, 
during and after assessment.  Contraindications for participation will include resting heart rate  
>100 bpm or <50 bpm, resting systolic blood pressure >180 mmHg or <100 mm Hg or resting 
diastolic blood pressure >[ADDRESS_1119733], the patient’s primary physician will be called and patient referred for evaluation. If the patient complains of angina at rest, loss of consciousness occurs, or cardiac arrest, emergency medical services through 911 will be called immediately.  Portable defibrillators are available.  
Confidentiality :
  Data will be used only in aggregate and no identifying characteristics of 
individuals will be published or presented. Confidentiality of data will be maintained by [CONTACT_102773]. Safeguards will be 
established to ensure the security and privacy of participants’ study records. Appropriate 
measures will be taken to prevent unauthorized use of study information. Data other than 
demographic information will not use names as an identifier. The research ID number will be 
used. The research records will be kept in a locked room in the study site. The files matching participants' names and demographic information with research ID numbers will be kept in a 
locked file that uses a different key from that of all other files. Only trained and certified study 
personnel will have access to these files, and they will be asked to sign a document that they 
agree to maintain the confidentiality of the information.  Electronic records will be stored on 
password protected network server maintained by [CONTACT_102774].  In compliance with the Health  Insurance Portability  and Accountability  Act (HIPAA) 
and the Standards  for Privacy of Individually  Identifiable Health  Information  of the Department  of 
Health and Human Services, we access personal health information and medical records only after receiving signed informed consent. 
TMS Safety : 
 Our protocol uses stimulation parameters that are considered standard practice for 
single - and paired - pulse TMS. These parameters have been used safely in thousands of prior 
research studies. The most common side effect of TMS is a headache. To minimize risks 
associated  with TMS,  participants  will complete  a pre-TMS  screening  form and will be monitored 
throughout the stimulation session. Additionally, participants will be asked to report any 
discomforts. If stimulation is or becomes uncomfortable, the stimulation levels will be decreased 
to a comfortable level or will be stopped.  
Questionnaire administration: Questionnaire data are collected in secure spaces where the 
interview  cannot  be overheard.  Participants  will be informed  that they are not required  to answer 
questions that they do not wish to answer.  