[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Study ID : LVM-MD-11 
 
 
 
Title: A Double-blind, Placebo- and Active-Controlled Evaluation of the Safety and Efficacy of 
Levomilnacipran ER in Adolescent Patients With Major Depressive Disorder  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan Amendment 2 Date : [ADDRESS_458492] Research Institute, Inc.  
Harborside Financial Center, Plaza V  
Jersey City, NJ [ZIP_CODE] 
LVM-MD-11 
A Double -blind, Placebo - and Active -Controlled Evaluation of the Safety and 
Efficacy of Levomilnacipran ER in Adolescent Patients with Major D epressive  
Disorder  
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
Original SAP Date: 06 Mar 2015 
Amendment #1:       16 July 2015 
Amendment #2:       [ADDRESS_458493] Research Institute, Inc., an affiliate of Actavis, 
Inc., and may not—in full or part—be passed on, reproduced, published, distributed, or submitted to any regulatory authority without the express written permission of Forest Research, Inc. 
[ADDRESS_458494] FOR 
ADVERSE EVENTS  ........................................................................................................  35 
16.8 MISSING DAT E INFORMATION FOR ADVERSE EVENTS  .....................................  35 
16.9 MISSING DATE INFORMATION FOR PRIOR OR CONCOMITANT MEDICATIONS  ...............................................................................................................  36
 
16.9.1  Incomplete Start Da te .........................................................................................  36 
16.9.2  Incomplete Stop Date  .........................................................................................  37 
  
17.0 CHANGES TO ANALYSES SPECIFIED IN PROTOCOL  .......................................................... 40 
18.0 REFERENCES  ...............................................................................................................................  41 
19.0 APPENDICES  ................................................................................................................................ 42 
APPENDIX I  PATTERN- MIXTURE MODEL DETAILS  ...................................................... 42 
      
 
APPENDIX III     SAP AMENDMENT #[ADDRESS_458495] aspartate aminotransferase  
ANCOVA  analysis of covariance  
BP blood pressure  
CDRS-R Children’s Depression Rating Scale- Revised 
CGI-I Clinical Global Impression - Improvement  
CGI-S Clinical Global Impression - Severity 
  
DSM-IV-TR Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fourth Edition, Text 
Revision  
ECG electrocardiogram, electrocardiographic 
eCRF electronic case report form  
ET early termination  
GLMM generalized linear mixed model 
IP investigational product  
ITT intent to treat  
LAR legally authorized representative 
LOCF last observation carried forward  
MDD major depressive disorder 
MAR missing at random  
MedDRA  Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities  
MMRM mixed-effects model for repeated measures  
MNAR missing not at random 

5 
 NEAE newly emergent adverse event  
NFD non-future dependence  
OC observed cases  
PCS potentially clinically significant 
PID patient identification  
PK pharmacokinetic  
QTc QT interval corrected for heart rate  
QTcB QT interval corrected for heart rate using the Bazett formula  
QTcF QT interval corrected for heart rate using the Fridericia formula  
SAE serious adverse event  
SAP statistical analysis plan  
SI Le Système International d’Unités  (International System of Units)  
TBL total bilirubin  
TEAE treatment -emergent adverse event  
ULN upper limit of normal laboratory reference range  
6 
 4.0 INTRODUCTION  
This statistical analysis plan (SAP) provides a more technical and detailed elaboration of 
the statistical analyses of the efficacy and safety data as outlined and/or specified in the protocol of study LVM- MD-11. Specifications of tables, figures, and data listings are 
contained in a separate document. The statistical analysis for pharmacokinetic parameters 
will be specified in a separate document. 
Study LVM- MD-[ADDRESS_458496] been diagnosed with major depressive disorder (MDD) using Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision (DSM- IV-TR) 
diagnostic criteria. This study includes 4 treatment groups: placebo, levomilnacipran 40 mg/day, levomilnacipran 80 mg/day, and fluoxetine 20 mg/day. A total of 544 patients (136 per treatment group ) are planned to be randomi zed. 
The length of this study will be [ADDRESS_458497] provide assent to participation and their legally authorized representative (LAR) and caregiver must provide written informed consent prior to the conduct of any study- specific procedures. At the end of Visit 2 (Baseline), 
patients meeting eligibility criteria will be randomized in 1:1:1:1 ratio to treatment groups 
of placebo, levomilnacipran 40 mg, levomilnacipran 80 mg, and fluoxetine 20 mg , 
respectively. Patients randomized to  the levomilnacipran 40 mg/day group will receive 
10 mg/day for Days 1 to 2 (2 days), 20 mg/day for Days 3 to 7 (5 days), and 40 mg/d ay 
for Weeks 2 through Week 8; patients randomized to the levomilnacipran 80 mg/day group will receive 10 mg/day for Days 1 to 2 (2 days), 20 mg/day for Days 3 to 4 (2 days), 40 mg/day for Days 5 to 7, and 80 mg/day for Weeks 2 through Week 8; 
Patients ran domized to fluoxetine 20 mg/day group will receive 10 mg/day for Week 1, 
and 20 mg/day for Weeks 2 through 8. ( Table 4–1). 
7 
 

8 
 

9 
 

10 
 

11 
 5.0 OBJECTIVES 
The objective of this study is to evaluate the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of 
levomilnacipran relative to placebo in adolescent outpatients (12 - 17 years) with MDD. 
In addition, the study is designed to obtain pharmacokinetic (PK) data to guide the dose 
selection for future levomilnacipran  pediatric studies.  
[ADDRESS_458498].  
6.4 INTENT- TO-TREAT POPULATION  
The Intent- to-Treat (ITT) Population will consist of all patients in the Safety Population 
who had the baseline and at least 1 postbaseline assessment of the CDRS -R total score.  
13 
 7.0 PATIENT DISPOSITION 
The number of patients in 3 of the study populations (Randomized, Safety, and ITT) will 
be summarized by [CONTACT_143494]; the Screened Population will be summarized overall only by [CONTACT_91294]. 
Screen-failure patients (i.e., patients screened but not randomized) and the associated 
reasons for failure to randomize will be tabulated overall for the Screened Population. 
The number and percentage of patients who complete the double- blind treatment period 
and of patients who prematurely discontinue during the same period will be presented for 
each treatment group and pooled across treatment groups for the Safety Population. The number and percentage of patients who enter the double-blind down-taper period and of patients who complete the double-blind down-taper period will be presented for each treatment group and pooled across treatment groups for the Safety Population. 
The reasons for premature discontinuation from the double- blind treatment period as 
recorded on the disposition pages of the electronic case report forms (eCRF) will be 
summarized  (number and percentage) by [CONTACT_143496]. 
Percentage of premature discontinuations will be provided for overall and for each 
discontinuation reason. All patients who prematurely discontinue during the double-blind 
treatment period will be listed by [CONTACT_366842]. 
14 
 8.0 DEMOGRAPHICS AND OTHER BASELINE 
CHARACTERISTICS  
Demographic parameters (age, sex, race, and ethnicity) and other baseline characteristics 
(weight, height, body mass index) will be summarized descriptively by [CONTACT_366843], respectively. Baseline efficacy variables will be summarized by [CONTACT_357894].  
Continuous variables will be summarized by [CONTACT_242310], SD, median, minimum, and maximum values. Categorical variables will be summarized by [CONTACT_366844].  
Medical and surgical history/physical findings will be classified by [CONTACT_223264], version 16.[ADDRESS_458499] during the double-blind 
treatment period, inclusive. Descriptive statistics (number of patients, mean, SD, median, minimum, and maximum) will be presented by [CONTACT_1570]. The number and percentage of patients will be presented for specific int ervals of exposure by [CONTACT_6490]. 
Patient-years, defined as total exposure to double-blind investigational product in years 
(excluding the double-blind down- taper period), will b e summarized by [CONTACT_366845]. In addition, weekly and overall mean daily dose of investigational product during the 
double-blind treatment period will be summarized by  [CONTACT_82184]. 
9.[ADDRESS_458500]. All s tatistical tests will be 2 -sided hypothesis tests 
performed at the 5% level of significance for main effects. All confidence intervals will 
be 2-sided 95% confidence intervals, unless stated otherwise.  
For efficacy analyses in which study center is a facto r, a small center will be defined as a 
center with fewer than [ADDRESS_458501] 2 ITT patients within the center. Pooling will be done using the following algorithm: 
Based on the number of ITT patients, small centers will be ordered from the largest to the 
smallest, and centers of the same size will be ordered from the largest center code to the smallest center code. The pooling process starts with the largest small center from the top, which will be pooled with the smallest from the bottom until a non-small pseudo center is formed. The process will be repeated using the small centers left out after the first pass. If any centers are left out at the end of the process, they will be pooled with the 
smallest pseudo center. If there is more than [ADDRESS_458502] center code will be selected.  
These pseudo -centers will be used for all efficacy analyses when the model is adjusted 
for study center.  
By-visit analyses based on the mixed- effects model for repeated measures (MMRM) 
using the observed case (OC) approach will be performed for all continuous efficacy parameters with multiple post-baseline measurements.  
In addition, by- visit analyses using the last -observation- carried-forward (LOCF) 
approach will be presented for all efficacy parameters. For the LOCF approach, only the postbaseline total score of a parameter will be imputed; individual item scores will not be carried forward to derive the total score. Baseline total score will be carried forward only for the intermittent missing scores immediately after baseline. If all the postbaseline values are missing, the baseline value will not  be carried forward.  
[ADDRESS_458503] -Roger approximation ( Kenward 
and Roger, 1997) will be used to estimate denominator degrees of freedom. This analysis will only use the observed cases of postb aseline scores without imputation of missing 
values. To control the overall type I error rate for the multiple comparisons across the 
primary and the secondary hypotheses, the mat ched parallel gatekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_124502] 
(Chen et al.,2005) will be applied. Detai ls are provided in Section 10.2. 
Graphical display of treatment difference vs. placebo (mean difference ± SE) in primary 
efficacy parameter will be provided by [CONTACT_91294].  
In addition, two sensitivity analyses, LOCF and pattern-mixture model approaches, will be performed on the primary efficacy parameter.  
The LOCF approach is based on an analysis-of-covariance (ANCOVA) model including treatment group and pooled study center as factors and baseline CDRS -R total score as a 
covariate. The pattern-mixture mo del approach is based on the non-future dependent 
missing value restrictions ( Kenward et al., 2003 ) and is performed to assess the 
robustness of the primary MMRM results to the possible violation of th e missing -at-
random assumption. The details of this sen sitivity analysis are as follows:  
The pattern for the pattern -mixture model will be defined by [CONTACT_102]’s last visit with 
an observed value. The observed CDRS- R total score at a v isit is assumed to have a 
linear relationship with the patient’s prior mea surements. The missing values will be 
imputed under the assumption that the distribution of the missing observations differs from that of the observed only by a shift parameter value Δ. The dataset with all missing 
values imputed will be analyzed using an ANCOVA model with treatment group and pooled study center as factors and baseline CDRS -R total score as a covariate for 
between–treatment group comparisons at Week 8. The imputation of m issing values and 
the analysis will be performed multiple times and th e inference of this sensitivity analysis 
will be based on the combined estimates using t he standard multiple imputation 
technique. The range of values for the shift  parameter Δ is selected as 0 to 6 based on 
experience with historical data.  Technical  details of the proposed pattern -mixture model 
approach (eg, the models for the pattern -specific identifiable densities and the 
unidentified conditional distributions, the shift parameter Δ, and the multiple imputation 
algorithm) are provided in Appendix I to this SAP.  
18 
 Since the investigator of Site 054  didn’t conduct the study in accordance with signed 
statement, one more sensitivity analysis excluding all data from Site 054 will be 
performed on the primary efficacy parameter. The same MMRM would be applied on all 
OC of change from baseline to Week 8 in CDRS- R total score except all values of Site 
054.  
10.2 SECONDARY EFFICACY PARAMETER  
The secondary efficacy parameter is the change from baseline to Week 8 in CGI- S score, 
which will be analyzed using the MMRM approach similar to the one used for the 
primary efficacy parameter. A sensitivity analysis will a lso be performed using the LOCF 
approach as described in Section 10.1. 
To control the overall type I error rate for multiple comparisons across the primary and 
the secondary efficacy parameters and multiple doses, t he matched parallel gatekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_223117] ( Chen et al., 2005) will be implemented. The  primary hypotheses family,  F1, 
consists of [ADDRESS_458504] the 
corresponding hypotheses family F 2 = {H21, H22}. Family F [ADDRESS_458505]  will be 
performed to derive the local p -values for the intersection hypotheses. Assignment of 
weight for all 2
4 - 1 = 15 inte rsection hypotheses i s shown in Table 10.2–1. 
Table 10.2–1. Weights for Intersection Tests in the Matched Parallel Gatekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_366841] 
H11 H12 H21 H22 
H11∩H12∩H21∩H22 0.5 0.5 0 0 
H11∩H12∩H21 0.5 0.5 0 0 
H11∩H12∩H22 0.5 0.5 0 0 
H11∩H12 0.5 0.5 0 0 
H11∩H21∩H22 0.5 0 0 0.5 
H11∩H21 1 0 0 0 
H11∩H22 0.5 0 0 0.5 
H11 1 0 0 0 
H12∩H21∩H22 0 0.5 0.5 0 
19 
 H12∩H21 0 0.5 0.5 0 
H12∩H22 0 1 0 0 
H12 0 1 0 0 
H21∩H22 0 0 0.5 0.5 
H21 0 0 1 0 
H22 0 0 0 1 
 
The adjusted p- values for the four elementary hypotheses will be calculated from the 
local p-values based on the closed testing principle. Statistical significance is determined 
by [CONTACT_366846] p- values to α = 0.05. The multiplicity method controls the 
family-wise type I error rate since the Simes inequality holds for multivariate normal 
distributions with nonnegative correlations ( Sarkar, 2008). The large sample size of this 
study ensur es asymptotic normality while nonnegative correlations are well-known 
among different active versus placebo comparisons and are expected to exist across different time points and between the CDRS -R and CGI -S endpoints based on historical 
data. 

20 
 11.1 ADVERSE 
EVENTS  
Adverse events will be coded by [CONTACT_366847], version 16.1 or newer. 

21 
 An AE (classified by [CONTACT_11702]) that occurs during th e double-blind treatment period 
or during the double-blind down- taper period will be considered a treatment -emergent 
adverse event (TEAE) if it was not present befor e the date of the first dose of 
double-blind investigational product, or was present before the date of the first dose of 
double-blind investigational product and increased in severity during the double- blind 
treatment period or during the double-blind down- taper period, respectively. If more than  
[ADDRESS_458506] in the study will not be counted as a TEAE but will 
be included in the listings.  
An AE occurring during the double-blind down- taper period will be considered a newly  
emergent AE (NEAE) if it is not present before the start of the double-blind down- taper 
period or was present before the start of the double-blind down-taper period but increased in severity during the double-blind down- taper period. The NEAEs during the 
double-blind down-taper period will be summarized by [CONTACT_366848] s ystem, preferred term, and 
treatment group for all patients who enter the double -blind down- taper period.  
The number and percentage of patients reporting TEAEs in each treatment group will be tabulated by [CONTACT_366849] c ategorized by [CONTACT_366850], for both the double- blind treatment 
period and the double-blind down-taper period, separately. If more than [ADDRESS_458507] will be summarized by [CONTACT_366851]-blind down-taper period. Common TEAE during the double-blind treatment period is defined in 2 ways: ≥ 1% of patients in any treatment group and ≥ 2% of patients in any treatment group. The incidence of common TEAEs will be summarized separately by [CONTACT_2940], and treatment gro up and will be sorted by [CONTACT_366852] (first levomilnacipran 80  mg/day, then 
levomilnacipran 40 mg/day). 
A serious adverse event (SAE) that occurred between the date of the first dose of 
double-blind investig ational product and [ADDRESS_458508] will be summarized by [CONTACT_366853] g roup. 
Listings will be presented for patients with SAEs, patients with AEs leading to  
discontinuation, and patients who died (if any) for the Screened Population. All patients with SAEs, including those reported during the screening period or more than [ADDRESS_458509] will be included in these listings. 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 

24 
 

25 
 

26 
 

27 
 

28 
 12.0 HEALTH OUTCOMES A NALYSES  
Not applicable.  
29 
 13.0 BLINDED INTERIM ANALYSIS  
A blinded interim analysis will be conducted when approximately 75% of randomized 
patients have either completed the study or discontinued from the study. The blinded 
interim analysis is to obtain an estimate of the pooled standard deviation of the change from baseline to Week [ADDRESS_458510] deviation specified in Determination 
of Sample Size ( Section 14.0), the sample size may be increased to ensure an adequate 
power. However, due to the difficulties in recr uiting pediatric patients with MDD, the 
total number of patients of the study will be capped at 800 ( 200 per treatment group ). 
Detailed specification of the blinded interim analysis will be provided in the  blinded 
interim analysis plan, a separate document . 
30 
 14.0 DETERMINATION OF SAM PLE SIZE  
Original sample size calculation: t he effect size (treatment group difference relative to 
pooled standard deviation) of 0.[ADDRESS_458511] deviation of 11.1 for the 
primary efficacy parameter, change from baseline to Week 8 in CDRS -R total score. 
Adjusting for multiple comparisons of two levomilnacipran groups with placebo across 
the primary and secondary endpoints by [CONTACT_226412] e matched parallel gatekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_223117], a sample size of 660 patients ( 165 per treatment group) will provide 85% 
power for the primary analysis ( levomilnacipran vs. placebo ) and for assay sensitivity 
analysis (fluoxetine vs. placebo)  based on an MMRM model using simulation method 
(Lu, 2012). The simulation assumed a correlation of 0.7 between the repeated measures, 
and a dropout rate of 17%, based on historical data in pediatric patients. 
Sample size recalculation based on discussion with FDA:  following the discussion 
with FDA, the study will be deemed as successful if statistical significance is achieved in 
at least one of two levomilnacipran doses (40 mg/day and 80 mg/day) versus placebo based on the primary efficacy endpoint. Therefore, resultant sample size is 520 patients  
(130 per treatment group) as required by 85% power based upon statistical significance in 
at least one of the two dose levels with the same effect size assumption.  
Sample size recalculation  based on interim analysis : following a blinded interim 
analysis, the sample size has been re- estimated. The MMRM model to estimate the 
pooled variance for change from baseline in CDRS-R total score at Week 8 includes pooled study site and week as factors and baseline CDRS -R total score and baseline 
value-by- week interaction as covariates, where week is included as a class variable. A 
total of 421 patients were included in the ITT analysis. Of these 421 patients, 347 
(82.4%) patients have observed data at Week 8, so the estimated drop- out rate at Week 8 
is 17.6%. Based on the MMRM model, the variance estimate for the change from baseline in CDRS -R total score at Week [ADDRESS_458512] size of 0.35, a common dropout rate of 17.6%, and a correlation of 0.7 between the repeated measures, 
an estimated total sample size of 544 patients (136 per treatment group) will b e needed to 
maintain the 85% power to detect the treatment difference of [ADDRESS_458513] one 
levomilnacipran group versus placebo and for fluoxetine versus placebo. 
31 
 15.0 STATISTICAL SOFTWARE  
Statistical analyses will be p erformed using  
 

32 
 16.0 DATA HANDLING CONVENTIONS  

33 
  
 
 
 
 
 
16.2 DERIV
ED EFFICACY VARIABLES  
The efficacy variables are derived as follows:  
• CDRS-R responders are defined as patients with a ≥ 40% reduction from baseline in 
CDRS-R total score. The value is 1 for CDRS-R responders and 0 otherwise 
• CDRS-R remitters are defined as patients with CDRS-R ≤ 28. The value is 1 for 
CDRS-R remitters  and 0 otherwise   
The total score at a particular visit will be calculated using (sum of nonmissing 
items) × (total number of items) / (number of nonmissing items) only if the number of 
missing items is ≤ 2 for the CDRS -R score. 
If a patient misses a postbaseline visit or if his/her postbaseline visit is outside of the visit 
time window, a record for the scheduled visit will be imputed using the last observed nonmissing value immediately before the missing value. If the missing value occurs at Week 1, the baseline value will be ca rried forward for Week 1, provided that at least 
[ADDRESS_458514] weight (kg) and height (cm) for sex and age, one needs to compare them to standard reference values for the same sex and age group, which are available in the [LOCATION_002] Growth Charts and can be downloaded from: 
http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/percentile_data_files.htm 

34 
 The z-score is calculated as below  
SLM XzL1 ) / (−= , if L ≠ 0 and 
SM Xz) / ln(= , if 0=L, 
where X is the physical measurement (eg weight and height) and L, M and S are the 
values from the appropriate table corresponding to the age in months (or length/stature) and sex (1  = male; 2  = female).  X must be in metric measurements (kilograms or meters). 
This is called LMS method (Cole TJ, 1990), and parameters L, M, and S are the Box-Cox transformation power, median, and standard deviation, respectively, in the reference data, which again are provided in the reference data tables.  
16.[ADDRESS_458515], an intensity of severe will be assigned. The imputed values for severity assessment will be used for the incidence summary; the values will be sh own as 
missing in the data listings.  
16.[ADDRESS_458516], a causality of 
yes will be assigned. The imputed values for causal relationship to double- blind treatment 
will be used for the incidence summary; the values will be shown as missing in the data listings. 
16.8 MISSING DATE INFORMATION FOR ADVERSE EVENTS  
The following imputation rules only apply to cases in which the start date for AEs is incomplete (i.e., partly missing).  
Missing month and day  
• If the year of the incomplete start date is the same as the year of the first dose of double-blind investigational product, the month and day of the first dose of double-blind investigational product will be assigned to the missing fields  
• If the year of the incomplete start date is before the year of the first dose of double-blind investigational p roduct, December 31  will be assigned to the missing 
fields 
• If the year of the incomplete start date is after the year of the first dose of 
double-blind investigational product, January 1 will be assigned to the missing fields  
Missing month only  
• If only the  month is missing, the day will be treated as missing and both the month 
and the day will be replaced according to the above procedure 
36 
 Missing day only  
• If the month and year of the incomplete start date are the same as the month and year 
of the first dose of double-blind investigational product, the day of the first dose of 
double-blind investigational product will be assigned to the missing day 
• If either the year of the incomplete start date is before the year of the date of the first 
dose of double-blind investigational product or if both years are the same but the 
month of the incomplete start date is before the month of the date of the first dose of double-blind investigational product, the last day of the month will be assigned to the missing day 
• If either the year of the incomplete start date is after the year of the date of the first dose of double- blind investigational product or if both years are the same but the 
month of the incomplete start date is after the month of the date of the first dose of double-blind investigational product, the first day of the month will be assigned to the missing day 
If the stop date is complete and the imputed start date as above is after the stop date, the start date will be imputed by [CONTACT_366854]. 
If the start date is completely missing and the stop date is complete, the following 
algorithm will be used to impute the start date:  
• If the stop date is after the date of the first dose of double -blind investigational 
product, the date of the first dose of double- blind investigational product will be 
assigned to the missing start date 
• If the stop date is before the date of the first dose of double- blind investigational 
product, the stop date will be assigned to the missing start date 
16.9 MISSING DATE INFORMATION FOR PRIOR OR CONCOMITANT MEDICATIONS  
For prior or concomitant medications, including rescue medications, incomplete (i.e., partly missing) start dates and/or stop dates will be imputed. When the start date and the stop date are both incomplete for a patient, the start da te will be imputed first.  
16.9.1 Incomplete Start Date  
The following rules will be applied to impute the missing numeric fields for an incomplete prior or concomitant medication start date. If the stop date is complete (or 
imputed) and the imputed start date is after the stop date, the start date will be imputed using the stop date. 
37 
 Missing month and day  
• If the year of the incomplete start date is the same as the year of the first dose of 
double-blind investigational product, the month and day of the first dose of double-blind investigational product will be assigned to the missing fields  
• If the year of the incomplete start date is before the year of the first dose of 
double-blind investigational product, December 31  will be assigned to the missing 
fields 
• If the year of the incomplete start date is after the year of the first dose of 
double-blind investigational product, January 1 will be assigned to the missing fields  
Missing month only  
• If only the month is missing, the day will be treated as missing and both the month and the day will be replaced according to the above procedure 
Missing day only  
• If the month and year of the incomplete start date are the same as the month and year of the first dose of double-blind investigational product, the day of the first dose of double-blind investigational product will be assigned to the missing day 
• If either the year of the incomplete start date is before the year of the date of the first 
dose of double- blind investigational product or if both years are the same but the 
month of the incomplete start date is before the month of the date of the first dose of 
double-blind investigational product, the last day of the month will be assigned to the missing day 
• If either the year of the incomplete start date is after the year of the date of the first dose of double- blind investigational product or if both years are the same but the 
month of the incomplete start date is after the month of the date of the first dose of double-blind investigational product, the first day of the month will be assigned to the 
missing day 
16.9.[ADDRESS_458517] visit date in the imputations described below. If the imputed stop date is before the start date (imputed or non-imputed start date), the imputed stop date will be equal to the start date.  
38 
 Missing month and day  
• If the year of the incomplete stop date is the same as the year of the last dose of 
double-blind investigational product, the month and day of the last dose of 
double-blind investigational product in the study will be assigned to the missing fields  
• If the year of the incomplete stop date is before the year of the last dose of 
double-blind investigational product, December 31  will be assigned to the 
missing fields 
• If the year of the incomplete stop date is after the year of the last dose of double -blind 
investigational product, January 1 will be assigned to the missing fields  
Missing month only  
• If only the month is missing, the day will be treated as missing and both the month and the day will be replaced according to the above procedure 
Missing day only  
• If the month  and year of the incomplete stop date are the same as the month and year 
of the last dose of double-blind investigational product, the day of the last dose of double-blind investigational product will be assigned to the missing day 
• If either the year of th e incomplete stop date is before the year of the date of the last 
dose of double- blind investigational product or if both years are the same but the 
month of the incomplete stop date is before the month of the date of the last dose of double-blind investig ational product, the last day of the month will be assigned to the 
missing day 
• If either the year of the incomplete stop date is after the year of the date of the last dose of double-blind investigational product or if both years are the same but the month of the incomplete stop date is after the month of the date of the last dose of double-blind investigational product, the first day of the month will be assigned to the missing day 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

39 
 

40 
 17.0 CHANGES TO ANALYSES SPECIFIED IN PROTOCO L 
The major change to the analyses specified in the Protocol Amendment #3 , dated 25 
March 2019, is as follows:  
• Delete the Fisher exact test  to compare the percentage of premature discontinua tion of 
levomilnacipran with placebo (specified in Section 9.7.2 of the protocol amendment 
#3) to reflect the current sponsor standards .  
• Delete the comparability analysis with placebo for continuous variables and 
categorical variables (specified in Sectio n 9.7.3 of the protocol amendment #3) to 
reflect the current sponsor standards .  
41 
 18.0 REFERENCES  
Chen X, Luo X, Capi[INVESTIGATOR_108210], T. The application of enhanced parallel gatekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_4262]. 
Statistics in Medicine , 2005;24:1385-1397. 
Cole TJ. The LMS method for constructing normalized growth standards. Eur J Clin 
Nutr., 44: 45-60, 1990. 
Kenward MG, Roger JH. Small sample inference for fixed effects from restricted maximum likelihood. Biometrics, 1997;53:983-997. 
Lu K. Sample size calculations with multiplicity adjustment for longitudinal clinical trials  
with missing data. Stat Med 2012;31:19-28. Sarkar SK. On the Simes inequality and its generalization. IMS Collections, Beyond 
Parametrics in Interdisciplinary Research: Festschrift in Honor of [CONTACT_210298] K. Sen, 2008; 1: 231-242. 
[ADDRESS_458518] et al. (2003), 
provides a feasible solution to accommodate certain missing not at random (MNAR) mechanism. The methodology relies on constructing unidentifiable conditional densities using identifiable densities and borrows techniques from standard multiple imputation.  
1. Non-Future Dependent M issing Assumption 
Assume there are T designed visits in a longitudinal study and let 
) ,..., 2 , 1 (T i yi=  
represent patient’s measurement at Visit i. When the missing mechanism is monotone, 
the pattern of missing  data can be defined by [CONTACT_366855] (L) actually 
observed from the patient. Let ) | ,..., (t L y y fj i= denote the conditional density of y i ,... 
yj, given that the last observed measurement  is at Visit t. Then the overall density 
function for Pattern t can be written as 
f (y1,..., yT | L = t) = f (y 1,..., yt | L = t) f (y t+1 | y1 ,..., yt, L = t) 
(1)  × T 
 f (ys | y1 ,..., ys-1, L = t) Π 
s = t+2 
Note on the right hand side of (1) the first factor is clearly identifiable from the observed data, while the second and the beyond are not, due to lack of available data. The second 
factor 
) , ,..., | (1 1 t L y y y ft t =+  could be identifiable ba sed on an assumed relationship 
between ) , ,..., | (1 1 t L y y y ft t =+  and f (y t+1 | y1,...yt, L ≥ t + 1). The third and beyond 
factors ) , ,..., | (1 1 t L y y y fs s =−(with all s ≥ t + 2) could be identifiable with the help of 
non-future dependent missing assumption. 
For longitudinal data with dropouts, non-future dependent (NFD) missing mechanism 
(Kenward et al., 2003) assumes that the unidentifiable conditional distributions of sy 
(s ≥ t + 2), given earlier measurements, in Pattern t, is equal to the  corresponding 
distribution in patterns L ≥ s – 1:   
f (ys | y1,..., ys-1, L = t) = f (y s | y1,..., ys-1, L ≥ s – 1)  (2) 
43 
 The right hand side of (2) can further be partitioned into  
f (ys | y1,..., ys-1, L ≥ s – 1) =  T 
ωs-1, j · f (ys | y1,..., ys-1, L = j) (3) Σ 
j = s-1 
Where mixture probabilities ωs-1,j are: 
 ωs-1,j =  αj f (y1,...,ys-1 | L = j) , and α j represents the fraction of  
(4) T 
αt f (y1,...,ys-1 | L = t)  Σ  
t = s-1 
patients from Pattern j. 
Each factor of the unidentifiable conditional distribution ofsy (s ≥ t + 2) on the right side 
of (1) can be expressed using the following: 
- ) 1 , ,..., | (1 1 − =−s L y y y fs s , the unidentifiable conditional distribution of the 
first missing in pattern 1−s,  
- ) , ,..., | (1 1 j L y y y fs s =−, the identifiable conditional distributions ofsygiven1 1,...,−sy y 
of pattern j (j ≥ s), and 
- αj, the fraction of patients from pattern j (j ≥ s - 1).  
So under NFD, all the unidentifiable conditional distribution on the right side of (1)  can 
be estimated and missing value could be therefore imputed based on the assumption for 
unidentifiable conditional distribution of the first missing.  
We re-formulate the partition in (3), for s ≥ t +2, as the following: 
 f (ys | y1,..., ys-1, L = t) = δs-1 f (ys | y1,..., ys-1, L = s – 1) (5) 
+ (1 – δs-1) f (ys | y1,..., ys-1, L ≥ s)     
for s ≥ t +2 with 1 , 1 1 − − −=s s sω δ. 
44 
 Therefore, under monotone missing and NFD assumption, the unidentifiable conditional 
densities for Visit s in Pattern t (s ≥ t +2) can be expressed as a mixture distribution of 
) 1 , ,..., | (1 1 − =−s L y y y fs s - the unidentifiable conditional distribution of the first missing 
measurement ys in Pattern 1−s, and f (y s | y1,...,ys-1, L ≥ s) - the identifiable conditional 
distribution of y s from all the patterns with observed data at Visit s or beyond: 
f (ys | y1,..., ys-1, L ≥ s) = T 
 λs-1,j f (ys | y1,..., ys-1, L = j) (6) Σ 
j = s 
where the mixture probability  
λs - 1, j = ωs-1,j /(1 – ωs - 1, s - 1) =  
αj f (y1,...,ys-1 | L = j) for j ≥ s, where α j is the fraction of  
(7) T 
αt f (y1,...,ys-1 | L = t) Σ  
t = s   
patients from Pattern j. 
The conditional densities for the first missing are selected as:  
f (ys | y1,..., ys-1, L = s – 1) = f (y s – Δ | y1,..., ys-1, L ≥ s) for s = 2, ..., T,  (8) 
Note that the two distributions only differ by a shift (Δ) parameter. When Δ = 0, the 
missing value ys in Pattern s-1 is imputed based on the distribution of all observed data up 
to Visit s, as a result, leading to missing at random (MAR) missingness. When Δ ≠ 0, ( 8) 
will introduce a scenario of MNAR. The similar idea was also presented in the recent publication “The Prevention and Treatment of Missing Data in Clinical Trials” by [CONTACT_366856]. The selection of the plausible values for the shift parameter (Δ) is discussed in Section 3. 
Note that per recommendation in Wang and Daniels (2011), only the observed data 
within pattern is assumed to be multivariate normal. The observed data distribution can 
be expressed in terms of the marginal distribution of baseline measurement and the conditional distributions of postbaseline measurements given earlier measurements. Assuming that these distributions are normal, the linear re gression of each observation on 
prior observations will yield least- squares estimates of model parameters that can be 
utilized for independent posterior draws of model parameters for observed data. Multiple imputation approach will be used to estimate the overall mean at the final time point.  
45 
 2. Imputation Procedure  
All the missing data will be imputed to create complete datasets, then statistical analysis 
can be performed using appropriate techniques such as ANCOVA. The imputation can accommodate MNAR missing  data mechanisms, based on the theory discussed in the 
previous section.  
The model parameters for each dropout pattern, i.e., the mean, variance and proportions 
of observations in each pattern, are drawn from their posterior distributions prior to the 
imputation of missing data for a single imputation.  
The details of imputation within a pattern, say Pattern t, are as the following: 
Step 1. Impute the first missing value y
t+1 for each patient in Pattern t (t = 1,..., T – 1) :  
a. Compute estimates of mixture probabilities λs-1,j in (7) with s = t+1 given the 
posterior draw of proportions of observations in each pattern and the posterior draw of regression parameters for the observed data.  
b. Draw a random integer from { s,...,T} to index a component distribution on the right 
hand side of (6), using mixture probabilities obtained in a). Draw 
*
1+ty from the 
identified component normal distribution. Impute the missing yt+1 as *
1 1~
+ +=t ty y + Δ. 
Step 2. Impute the rest of the missing values of y t+2, yt+3, ..., yT for patients in Pattern t:  
Starting with imputation for yt+2, first, similar to Step 1, draw *
2+ty from the normal 
mixture (6) based on the observed y 1,...,yt and the already imputed 1~
+ty for the patient. 
Then the missing y t+2 is imputed as *
2 2~
+ +=t ty y + Δ with probability δ t+1 and as 
*
2 2~
+ +=t ty y with probability 1 – δt+1, where the mixture probability δt+1 = ωt+1,t+1 is 
obtained from (4) given the posterior draw of proportions of observations in each pattern and the posterior draw of regression parameters for the observed data. 
Missing values of y
t+3 through y T can be imputed similarly as yt+2.  
To summarize, the imputations of yt+1 through y T is done recursively within each Pattern t 
(for all t = 1,...,T – 1) to create a complete dataset af ter imputation is done for all patterns 
with missing values.  
[ADDRESS_458519] multiple imputation theory (Rubin, 1987, p. 114), and m = [ADDRESS_458520] 96% of relative efficiency as compared with using an large number of imputations (SAS/STAT User’s Guide, p. 3796).  
3. Determination of the Shift Parameter Values  
The common shift parameter Δ is the difference between the mea n of y
t+1 among those 
who drop out at Visit t and those who remain beyond Visit t (1 ≤ t ≤ T – 1). The exact 
value of Δ is unknown and can’t be estimated from data because of missingness. The magnitude of Δ depends on the medical aspects of the trial. Using relevant historical data, one may select Δ as a proportion of the sample standard deviation or a proportion of observed treatment efficacy.  
References:  
Kenward MG, Molenberghs G, Thijs H. Pattern- mixure models with proper time 
dependence. Biometrika, 2003;90:53-71. 
Rubin DB. Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys. J. Wiley & Sons, [LOCATION_001]; 1987. 
SAS Institute Inc. SAS/STAT 9.2 User’s Guide, Second Edition. Cary, NC: SAS Institute 
Inc; 2009. 
Wang C, Daniels MJ. A note on MAR, identifying rest rictions, model comparison, and 
sensitivity analysis in pattern mixture models with and wi thout covariates for incomplete 
data. Biometrics, 2011; 67(3):810-818. 
47 
 

48 
 

49 
 APPENDIX III     SAP AMENDMENT #2 SUMMARY  
Title: A Double-blind, Placebo- and Active -Controlled Evaluation of the Safety and 
Efficacy of Levomilnacipran ER in Adolescent Patients with Major D epressive Disorder  
Study LVM- MD-11 SAP Amendment #2 
Date of Amendment #2: 3 October 2019 
Amendment Summary  
This summary in cludes changes made to SAP LVM- MD-11 Amendment #1 (16 July 
2015). Minor editorial and document formatting revisions have not been summarized. The 
following is a summary of the major changes that were made to each section of the SAP, and a brief rational fo r these changes.  
Section Major Revision  Rationale  
Section 7.[ADDRESS_458521] current sponsor 
standards.  
 
Section 10.1  Add a sensitivity analysis  on primary 
efficacy parameter to exclude the data from Site 054.   Investigator of Site 054 
didn’t conduct in 
accordance with signed statement. Operational concerns to add this 
sensitivity analysis.  
  
 
  
 
Section 14.[ADDRESS_458522] the discussion 
with FDA and blinded 
interim analysis.  
 
