 
Protocol Summary  (ERICA)   IRB_00073554  
Page 1 of 12   IRB Approval 1/10/2022  
  
RAPID EC – RCT Assessing Pregnancy with Intrauterine 
Devices for Emergency Contraception 
 
 
Protocol Summary 
 
 
 
IRB Approval 
Date of 
Current 
Version: 1/10/2022 
University of 
Utah IRB #: IRB_00073554 
Sponsor: NIH NATIONAL INST CHILD HLTH & HUMAN DEV 
  
Principal 
Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_524168]-
Investigators: Site Name [CONTACT_524182]. The document is created 
from study information approved by [CONTACT_32629] B on the date listed above.  Any alteration to the original content of this 
document may not be considered to repres ent the study as approved by [CONTACT_1201].  
  
 
Protocol Summary  (ERICA)   IRB_00073554  
Page 2 of 12   IRB Approval 1/10/2022  
 Background and Introduction 
 
In order to reduce our nation’s pe rsistently elevated rate of unplanned pregnancy we must seek 
every opportunity to provide women who desire  contraception with the most effective 
methods. The vast majority of the 3.[ADDRESS_679925] efficacious method of EC 
(pregnancy rates of 0.1%)[ 1] and offers continued highly eff ective contraception for over a 
decade.  While its use is supported by a Cochrane Review,[ADDRESS_679926] 
shown a strong preference for the LNG IUD as it minimizes or eliminates menstrual bleeding 
and discomfort.[ 2, 3]. The Contraceptive CHOICE project [ADDRESS_679927]  47% of participan ts selected the LNG IUD and 9% the copper 
IUD.  We are unaware if offering women th e option to receive e ither IUD method will 
increase uptake of highly eff ective methods by [CONTACT_524173]. 
Offering women presenting for EC the option of the LNG or copper IUD may increase the 
initiation of highly effective methods of c ontraception among a population at high risk of 
unintended pregnancy. Leaders in  the field of EC, acknowledgi ng the lack of effect of 
increasing availability to EC pi[INVESTIGATOR_524169], have called for 
procedures that streamline the delivery of hi ghly effective methods of contraception when 
women present for EC.16 
Our research team working in conjunction with  our clinical partners  at Planned Parenthood 
Association of Utah (PPAU) have conducted se veral studies evaluating use of the IUD in 
women presenting for EC. The cumulative findings of  our research to date show that EC users 
are willing to have the copper IUD placed[ 4, 5] and those that obtain it have lower pregnancy 
rates than those choos ing oral LNG for EC.[ 6]  Our recent study assessing the LNG IUD with 
oral LNG for EC users has shown no pregnancie s with 110 women using this approach.  In 
addition, 90% of participants agr eed to being randomized to eith er type of IUD. The potential 
to further reduce unintended pr egnancy in a high risk population by [CONTACT_524174] a randomized controlled trial of the copper and LNG IUDs for EC 
users. 
Study Design: 
 
Protocol Summary  (ERICA)   IRB_00073554  
Page 3 of 12   IRB Approval 1/10/2022  
 Non-inferiority randomized controlled trial.  If re cruitment is not adequate  with this design and 
potential participants report  concern about randomization as  a reason for non-participation 
then a patient-preference cohort (PPC) will be of fered to interested and qualified individuals. 
All women presenting to participating clinics when study participation is offered will be 
presented with a study informati on sheet (discussed below) wh ich includes an assessment of 
interest in the study.  If we find that we are not able to meet recruitment goals (e.g. <[ADDRESS_679928] 6 months) a nd the reason for non-partic ipation is assessed to 
be lack of willingness to be ra ndomized to the study interventi ons, then we will add an option 
for a PPC.  Should the PPC be introduced then pa rticipants who are inte rested in the study and 
eligible for participation but not willing to be  randomized will be offered participation 
through the PPC which has a separate consent fo rm.  While 90% of EC users enrolled in a 
current study where they can choose their IUD t ype stated they would be be willing to be 
randomized to either type of IUD, some indi viduals may be reluctant to agree to random 
assignment.  This potentially impacts result  generalizability. In or der to evaluate the 
magnitude and direction of non-pa rticipation bias we will offer eligible women presenting for 
EC who desire an IUD but are not willing to undergo randomization participation in a patient-
preference cohort (PPC).   Part icipants in the PPC may choose the IUD they desire.  Based on 
our survey of current participants in an EC  Trial offering women the copper IUD or the LNG 
IUD and oral LNG we expect that the significant majority of potential participants in this trial 
will agree to randomization. The PPC will allow us  to ascertain selection bias due to RCT non-
participation.  We will evaluate participant demo graphics and clinical characteristics.  This 
strategy has been successfully used the OPUS tr ial, an RCT assessing a mid-urethral sling or 
sham incisions at the time of pe lvic organ prolapse repair.[7] 
 
 
 
Purpose and Objectives 
 
In this prospective observati onal study, all women presenting for Emergency Contraception 
(EC) at Planned Parenthood Asso ciation of Utah (PPAU) clinic s will be counseled using a 
standardized script; those intere sted in an IUD, who meet st udy qualifications and agree to 
participate, will be randomi zed to either the hormonal IUD (LNG 52mg IUD commonly 
known as Mirena ® or Lilleta ®) or the copper IUD (Paragard ®). Participants will be followed 
for one year.  If enrollment goals are not achie ved due to a lack of willingness among potential 
participants to be randomized then we will initiat e a PPC (patient preference cohort).  In that 
case, participants who are interested in the st udy and eligible for part icipation but not willing 
to be randomized will be offered participation in a PPC.   This study has three specific objectives. 
  Objective 1:   Determine the efficacy of the levonorgestrel IUD and copper T380 IUD for 
emergency contraception as assessed by [CONTACT_486192] e pregnancy tests 1 month  after EC use. 
Hypothesis : The LNG IUD is non-inferior to the copper T380 IUD for EC based on a 1% non-
inferiority limit. 
 
Protocol Summary  (ERICA)   IRB_00073554  
Page 4 of 12   IRB Approval 1/10/2022  
 Objective 2:  Compare the one-year unintended pregna ncy rates from women initiating the 
levonorgestrel IUD vs. copper T380 IUD for EC. 
Hypothesis : At one-year the LNG IUD users will have  lower pregnancy rates compared to 
copper IUD users. 
Objective 3:   Assess the one-year continuation, satisfa ction, pain, and bleed ing patterns of a 
LNG20 IUD to a copper T380 IUC as a method of  EC and the mechanisms of continuation. 
Hypothesis : The LNG IUD will have superior rates of continuation and non-inferior 
satisfaction (what about pain a nd bleeding patterns) compared to  the copper IUD as a method 
of EC and the mechanisms of continuation. 
 
 
 
Study Population 
 
Age of Participants: Women ages 18-35  
 
Sample Size: 
At Utah: 706   
All Centers: Up to 850 
 
Inclusion Criteria: 
Eligible participants must be: 
  1. Between 18-35 years old   2. In need of EC (had unprotected intercourse within 120 hours – 5 days)   3. Desire to prevent pregnancy for 1 year   4. Fluent in English and/or Spanish   5. Have a regular menstrual cycle (21-35 days)   6. Know their last menstrual period (+/-3 days)   7. Be willing to comply with the study requirements   8. Participants current preferred phone numbe r must be functioning at the time of study 
entry and will be tested  prior to enrollment 
 
 
Exclusion Criteria: 
1. Current pregnancy 
  
 
Protocol Summary  (ERICA)   IRB_00073554  
Page 5 of 12   IRB Approval 1/10/[ADDRESS_679929] an IUD or contracep tive implant (Nexplanon) in place 
  6. Vaginal bleeding of unknown etiology   7. Known Gonorrhea or Chlamydia infection in th e last 30 days (unles s successfully treated 
at least 7 days pr ior to study entry) 
  8. Allergy to copper or Wilson's disease 
9. Known abnormalities of the uterus that distort the uterine cavity 10. Use of oral emergency contraception within [ADDRESS_679930]-market surveillance. This study evaluates both of 
these medications for off label us e as emergency contraceptives.  
 
If enrollment goals are not being met (for ex ample, <[ADDRESS_679931] 6 months 
or less than 10 participants per site at any ti me in the study when staff are available to 
enroll participants) and lack of willingness to be randomized is a stated barrier to 
participation, then we will introduce a PPC whereby [CONTACT_524175] a patient- preference cohort (PPC). 
 
 
Study Procedures 
 
Recruitment/Participant Identification Process: 
Women who present for emerge ncy contraception at Planne d Parenthood clinics will be 
provided with an information sheet describing the two IUD options offered in this study.  This 
will be provided to them by a member of the PPAU clinical staff.  The information sheet also asks if they are interested in participating in a study where they  would be randomized to one of 
the two IUDs offered in this study.  They are al so asked for age, ethnicity, site, and reason for 
declining participation.  They are asked to mark  Yes or No before giving the information sheet 
back to the clinical staff member.  No identifi able information is collected on these participant 
 
Protocol Summary  (ERICA)   IRB_00073554  
Page 6 of 12   IRB Approval 1/10/2022  
 information sheets and unless a woman agrees to screening for the study, she is not listed in a 
screening log.  
Those women who mark yes are then approached  either by [CONTACT_524176].  
Note:  Women who are under age [ADDRESS_679932] udy information sheet.   After 
a member of the research team reviews the in itial eligibility criteria, these under age 18 
women would be considered scr een failures and would not be offered participation in the 
study.  
Should the PPC be initiated, then potential partic ipants interested in the study but who decline 
randomization will be offered participation in the PPC. 
 
 
Informed Consent: 
Description of location(s) where consent will be obtained:  
Consent will be obtained in a private examination room at the clinic where the patient is 
receiving care.  
 
Description of the consent process(es), including the timing of consent:  
Due to the nature of this study, it may not be possi ble for patients to retu rn at a later time to 
enroll in the study. Participants  will have all questions answer ed prior to enrollment. The 
research staff are experienced in interviewing and working with this population. They will be 
certain to take the time needed to ensure that the patient understands the study and is 
consenting willingly. If the woman continues to  have questions, she will be offered the 
opportunity to discuss the study in  further detail with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_524170].  
 
Procedures: 
Women who meet inclusion/exclusion criter ia will be offered participation in the 
randomization arm of the study.  For those who agree, they will be randomized to either the copper IUD or the LNG IUD and the study procedur es below will apply. All participants in the 
RCT will be informed to use a backup method of contraception (e.g. condoms) or sexual 
abstinence for the next [ADDRESS_679933] future pregnancy risk 
immediately.  
Should enrollment not meet expectations as prev iously described, then for those patients who 
meet all inclusion/exclusion cr iteria and wish to participate in the study, but do not agree to 
random assignment, we will offer them participa tion in a PPC.  Participants in the PPC may 
 
Protocol Summary  (ERICA)   IRB_00073554  
Page 7 of 12   IRB Approval 1/10/2022  
 choose the IUD they desire.  Once the participant decides wh ich IUD they prefer, the study 
procedures below will apply.  
Enrollment (Initial Clinic Visit)  
 Consent process 
 Urine pregnancy test (Completed at  the Planned Parenthood Clinic Lab) 
 Assignment to either rand omized arm or PPC arm 
 IUD Insertion 
 Data collection 
 Diary instructions 
 Gonorrhea/Chlamydia testing, if recomme nded per PPAU STI screening protocols 
1 Month Follow-Up  
 The [ADDRESS_679934] results and text 
the results pi[INVESTIGATOR_520735] a dedicated Planned Parenth ood clinic cell phone (number 
will be provided at the time of enroll ment).  This at-home testing will be 
confirmed at the in-clinic appointment as a proof-of-concept to establish this as 
a norm for future studies with the goal  of reducing participant burden.    
 The following information will also be obt ained either at the 1 month follow-up 
appointment or by [CONTACT_648], text, or email link to  an online data colle ction instrument for 
those participants not able to return to clinic for the 1 month follow-up.   
o Bleeding history 
o Sexual activity 
o Data collection including evaluation of satisfaction of method chosen, current 
use of contraception and review for potential adverse events 
 If urine pregnancy test is positive, the following will occur:   
o Ultrasound and/or serum quantitative hCG pr egnancy test as necessary to date 
the pregnancy (this will be completed at the Planned Parenthood Clinic Lab) 
o Removal of IUD 
o Follow-up throughout remainder of pregnancy 
o Pregnancy options counseling and appropr iate referral for pr egnancy care based 
on desire to continue or terminate the pregnancy. 
3, 6, and 9 months after enrollment 
 Telephone, text, email links to online survey or completion with a research assistant by 
[CONTACT_756], text, or email (bas ed on participant preference) 
 Review for potential adverse events 
 
Protocol Summary  (ERICA)   IRB_00073554  
Page 8 of 12   IRB Approval 1/10/2022  
  Review of bleeding experience, questionnair e review including: unplanned pregnancy, 
abortion, sexual activity, IUD complications , contraception related side effects, 
participant clinic visits , use of condoms, employment status, income, school 
attendance and satisfaction with contraception method 
 12 months after enroll ment (return visit) 
 Urine pregnancy test (Completed at  the Planned Parenthood Clinic Lab). 
 IUD  string check. 
 Review for potential adverse events. 
 Review of bleeding experience, questionna ire review including unplanned pregnancy, 
abortion, sexual activity, IUD complications , contraception related side effects, 
participant clinic visits , use of condoms, employment status, income, school 
attendance, and satisfaction with contraception method. 
 If participant cannot come to the clinic for their for 12-month visit, they will be 
contact[CONTACT_426] a research assistant for revi ew of follow-up information (bullet point #4 
above) which can be completed via telephone, text, or email links to an online survey 
(based on participant preference).  The study te am will also provide participants with a 
urine pregnancy test they can take at home (if unable to come into the clinic for this 
final visit) and ask that participants send the results of the home-urine pregnancy test to 
the study team via email, phone or text.   
**Note:  We have provided specifics about the questionnaires/surveys that will be asked of 
participants under each of the study procedure secti ons.  It is our understanding that we are not 
required to submit full versions of the survey s to the IRB, as long as we have provided 
thorough descriptions of what will be asked of participants.  
PI [INVESTIGATOR_524171], as follows: 
I will provide annual reports of my compliance w ith this management plan to the Conflict of 
Interest Office for review. 
I will disclose my financial confli ct(s) of interest to the editors  of all publications (journals, 
books, etc.) when submitting manuscripts or other reports of the results of this research. 
I will disclose my financial confli ct(s) of interest in all public presentations of this research. 
The University of Utah will disclose my financia l conflict(s) of interest  on a publicly available 
web site. The publicly available disclosures wi ll include my name, the name [CONTACT_524183](ies), the nature of the financial interest (s) and the dollar ranges or  value of the financial 
interest(s) as available. 
I will disclose my financial conflict(s) of interest in writing to all members of the research team .
Members of the research team will be informed  that if they have any concerns about my 
conflict(s) of interest, they can discuss those w ith the Individual Conflict of Interest Committee.
I will disclose my financial conflict(s) of interest  in writing to all subordinates working on this 
project. Subordinates will be informed that if  they have any concerns about my financial 
 
Protocol Summary  (ERICA)   IRB_00073554  
Page 9 of 12   IRB Approval 1/10/[ADDRESS_679935](s) of interest, they can discuss those with the department chair or the Individual 
Conflict of Interest Committee. 
My evaluation of University subordinates will not be based, in whole or in part, on their 
participation (or refusal to participate) in non-Un iversity activities  involving any business entity 
in which I have significant financial interest(s) as defined by [CONTACT_524177]. Th e participation of subordinates in non-University activities 
involving such business entities wi ll not be expected or required. 
I will disclose my financial conflict(s) of inte rest in writing to all students working on this 
project. Students will be informed that if they have any concerns about my financial conflict(s) 
of interest, they can discuss those with their department chair, the ch air of their graduate 
committee or the Individual Conflict of Interest Committee. 
My evaluation of University students will not  be based, in whole or in part, on their 
participation (or refusal to participate) in non-Un iversity activities  involving any business entity 
in which I have significant financial interest (s) as defined by [CONTACT_2374]'s Individual 
Financial Conflict of Interest Po licy. The participati on of students in non -University activities 
involving such business entities wi ll not be expected or required. 
Publication of student, subordina te, or other investigator's wo rk on the project will not be 
delayed beyond the standard Univ ersity agreement for review of intellectual property issues. 
I will promptly disclose any and all new intellectu al property arising from this research to the 
University of Utah Technology & Venture Commercialization. 
I will identify a non-conflicted peer subject to the approval of the Individual Conflict of Interest 
Committee to review the research and results prior to publication. 
I will disclose my financial conflict(s) of interest  to all potential research participants in the 
informed consent documents. 
A member of the research team who does not have any conflicts of interest related to this 
research or an appropriate third party will inform potential research participants of my financial 
conflict(s) of interest during the informed consent process. 
I will recuse myself from participation in the process of obtaining informed consent from all 
potential research participants  for this study. Informed consen t for all potential research 
participants will be obtained by a member of the research team who does not have any conflicts 
of interest related to this research or by [CONTACT_524178]. 
  
 
 
Procedures performed for research purposes only:   
Randomization, for those participating in that arm of the study, is distinct from the u s
clinical care that is provided at participat ing clinics. In addition, the use of a LNG IUD 
alone for EC is unique to the study and is not currently offered at the clinics.  
 
 
 
Statistical Methods, Data An alysis and Interpretation 
 
 
Protocol Summary  (ERICA)   IRB_00073554  
Page 10 of 12   IRB Approval 1/10/2022  
 Sample Size and Randomization:   There are two arms to the study.  The main study is a 
randomized controlled trial with non-inferiority design and particip ants will be assigned 1:1 to 
either the copper T380 IUD or the LNG20 IUD for EC. The non-inferiority margin is 2.5% 
and we assume a pregnancy rate of 0.1% for copper IUD EC users and a 1% EC pregnancy 
rate for LNG IUD users.   This estimate, based on our current COLIEC study (IRB# [ZIP_CODE]) is 
conservative, falling within the 95% confidence interval (CI) of 0%- 5.2% of the pregnancy 
rate of LNG20 IUD plus oral LNG for EC users. To achieve 80% power to detect a two-
sided 95% CI around the EC pregnancy inci dence, a percent difference that does not 
cross the 2.5% noninferiorty margin, will re quire 335 participants per study arm (total 
of 670). We will recruit an additional 5%, 36 participants, (total of 706) to accommodate 
for potential early loss to follow up.  Five percent is a conserva tive estimate based on our 
prior successful IUD EC studies. Even with obt aining multiple points of contact [CONTACT_524179]  a difficult population to maintain contact [CONTACT_4490]. 
In our prior EC studies at [ADDRESS_679936] with 12 of 218 ( 5.5%) IUD users in our 
copper T IUD vs. oral LNG study and 8 of 176 (4.5%) in the COLIEC study. The use of the 2.5% noninferiority margin is with in confidence interval s of previous litera ture for pregnancies 
among oral LNG users, which is one of the c linical standards of car e (1.7%; 95% CI 0.8%-
2.6%) (76) and the continued protection against fu ture unintended pregnancy explored in aim 2 
makes this clinically acceptabl e. In addition, women who current ly present for EC and decline 
a copper IUD are left with a choice of oral EC, wh ich also falls within th is confidence interval. 
While approaching the higher lim it of the oral LNG per cycle pregnancy rate from the 
aforementioned study, it is well below per cycl e pregnancy events in some subpopulations 
using oral LNG, which can result in pregnanc y events of 5.8% for women with higher BMIs 
(>30BMI) and 7.3% in women who have additiona l unprotected sexual intercourse(28).  The 
LNG20 IUD is not affected by [CONTACT_524180]. 
The maximum number of participan ts in the entire study is 706.  
If recruitment is not adequate with this design and potential pa rticipants report concern about 
randomization as a reason for non-participation th en a patient-preference cohort (PPC) will be 
offered to interested a nd qualified individuals.  
All women presenting to participating clinics when study participation is offered will be 
presented with a study information sheet, which includes an assessment of interest in the 
study.  If we find that we are not able to meet recruitment goals (e.g. <[ADDRESS_679937] 6 months) and the reason for non-partic ipation is assessed to be lack of willingness 
to be randomized to the study interventions, then we will add an option for a PPC.  Should the PPC be introduced then part icipants who are interested in the study and eligible for 
participation but not willing to be randomized  will be offered participation through the 
PPC. While 90% of EC us ers enrolled in a current study wher e they can choose their IUD type 
stated they would be willing to be randomized to either type of  IUD, some individuals may be 
reluctant to agree to random assignment.  This  potentially impacts result generalizability. In 
order to evaluate the magnitude and direction of  non-participation bias we will offer eligible 
women presenting for EC who desire an I UD but are not willing to undergo randomization 
participation in a patient-pref erence cohort (PPC).   Particip ants in the PPC may choose the 
 
Protocol Summary  (ERICA)   IRB_00073554  
Page 11 of 12   IRB Approval 1/10/[ADDRESS_679938] non-
participation.  
Outcomes  
Primary Outcome:  Emergency contraception fail ures in both arms as assessed by [CONTACT_524181] (HCG >25 IU) 4 weeks after having the IUD inserted. 
Secondary Outcomes:  
one-year unintended pregnancy rates Assess the one-year continuation, satisfaction, pa in, and bleeding patterns  of a LNG20 IUD to 
a copper T380 IUC as a method of EC 
 Pregnancy rates in the first year after presenting for EC 
 Timing of IUD insertion relative to time in the menstrual cycle (pre-ovulatory, 
ovulatory, post-ovulatory) 
 Unplanned pregnancy rates in the fi rst year after presenting for EC 
 Effect of IUD choice on vaginal bleedi ng assessed monthly by [CONTACT_25715][INVESTIGATOR_524172] 
 Infections 
 IUD continuation, expulsions, and removals through the first year after presenting for 
EC 
 Satisfaction with EC method and contraception chosen 
 Sexual satisfaction at baseline and through the first year after presenting for EC 
 Frequency of unprotected interc ourse since presenting for EC 
 Use of contraception in the year following presentation for EC 
 New diagnosis of any STI 
 IUD related complications 
 Abortion 
 Contraception related side effects 
 Use of a barrier method for prevention of sexually transm itted infections  
Data Analyses :  
The primary objective will be tested by [CONTACT_105]-inferior ity design to test the hypothesis that the 
LNG IUD is no worse than the copper IUD w ith a noninferiority margin of 2.5%. Using 
Blackwelder’s approach for equivalence testing,[ 8] comparing those who become pregnant 
during the menstrual cycle in which their st udy IUD was inserted. Noninferiority will be 
established if the lower bound of a two-sided 95% CI does not  cross the noni nferiority bound. 
Analysis will be by [CONTACT_118067]. 
For objective #2, comparison of one-year uninten ded pregnancy rates fr om women initiating 
the levonorgestrel IUD vs. copper T380 IUD for EC, will be assessed by [CONTACT_5263]-Meier 
estimates. This same approach will be utilized  to construct estimates of the proportion of 
patients who continue with their se lected IUD for 1 year (continuation 
 
Protocol Summary  (ERICA)   IRB_00073554  
Page 12 of 12   IRB Approval 1/10/2022  
 proportion).  Continuous variable s will be assessed by t-tests a nd discrete variables by [CONTACT_177610]-
square testing as appropriate. 
All data will be analyzed usi ng Stata statistical software (Col lege Station, [LOCATION_007]).  Standard 
quality control methods will be employed including use of an independent data safety monitor. 
 
 