Improving  Informed Consent  for Palliative  Chemotherapy: 
RCT  of Usual IC versus Investigati onal IC 
Dana -Farber  IRB Protocol  # 15-[ADDRESS_1226112] udy PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_877394], MD, MPH  
[EMAIL_15023]  
[PHONE_16430]
Participating Sites under DF/HCC  IRB:  
Lead Site & Coordinating Center  
Dana -Farber  at Longwood  
Co-I Site  Lead:  Andrea  Enzinger,  MD 
[EMAIL_16695]  
[PHONE_15304]
(Sites permanently closed to accrual)  
Dana -Farber  at South  Shore 
Site PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877395] , MD  
  Meredith_Faggen @dfci.harvard.edu  
[PHONE_18185]
Dana -Farber  at Milford  
Site PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877396]_Constantine @dfci.harvard.edu  
[PHONE_18186]
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center  
Site PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877397]  
[EMAIL_14292]  
617-667-2100Participating Sites not under DF/HCC IRB : 
(Sites Permanently Closed to Accrual)  
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill  
Site PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877398], MD, MPH  
[EMAIL_16696]  
[PHONE_15869]
Virginia Commonwealth University  
Site PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877399], MD, FACP  
[EMAIL_16697]  
[PHONE_18187]
University of [LOCATION_004] at San Francisco  
Site PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877400], MD  
[EMAIL_16698]  
[PHONE_18188]
Central Research Assistant at Dana -Farber:  
Christine Cronin  
Christine [EMAIL_16699] .edu 
Phone: 617 -632-3784  
Fax: [ADDRESS_1226113], D -1068  
[LOCATION_011], MA [ZIP_CODE]  
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  2  
 
Within  2  
weeks of 
baseline 
assessment  
Time from  
baseline to 
change is 
variable   
 
 
SECTION 1:  Protocol  Schema 
 
Patient  presenting  for new treatment  decision OR Patien ts on active chemo  
 
Oncolo gy 
consult ation. 
Review chemo 
options.  Patient  receiving 
ongoing 1st‐line 
chemo  
 
Appr oach pt & 
conse nt for 
study  Appr oach pt & 
conse nt for 
study  
 
Baseline 
Assessment 
Prior to st arting 
chemo  Baseline 
Assessment 
Prior to st arting 
chemo  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Change in status 
(e.g., progression). 
Discusses 2nd‐line 
chemo options 
with oncologi st. 

Randomization  Randomization  
   No change in status  during 
the study per iod. Pt not 
randomized.  Pt excluded 
from subse quent 
assessments.  
Standard 
chemo 
educational 
materials  Intervention: 
multimedia 
chemo 
educational 
tool Standard 
chemo 
educational 
materials  Intervention: 
multimedia 
chemo 
educational 
tool 
   
Treatment 
Decision/ 
Starts  chemo  Treatment 
Decision/ 
Starts  chemo  
 0‐4 wks   0‐4 wks  
 
 
 
2‐[ADDRESS_1226114]‐decision  
Assessment   
 
 
2‐[ADDRESS_1226115]‐decision  
Assessment  
 
Ongoing 
chemo  Ongoing 
chemo  
 
Follo w‐up 
Assessment  Follo w‐up 
Assessment  
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  3  
  
 
 
SECTION 2: BODY OF  PRO TOCOL  
 
 
Contents  
 
1.[ADDRESS_1226116] ENTRY      8 
5.0 STUDY D ESIGN AND  METHODS     10 
5.1 Design/Study  Type  
5.2 Selection  of Instru ments 
5.3 Description  of Intervention  
5.4 Data  Colle ction 
5.5 Description  of Study  Process  
5.6 Adverse Reaction  and Their  Manage ment 
5.7 Privacy  and Confidentiality  
6.0 STATISTI CAL ANALYSIS      27 
7.0 REFERENCES        29 
8.0 APPENDICIES A -X      31 
 
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  4  
  
1.0 INTRODUCTION  
 
1.1 Overview  
 
Patients  are routinely  asked  to sign an infor med consent  docu ment prior  to starting  chemotherapy, 
indicating  they understand  the risks  and benefits  of treatment.1 Although  this could  be a strategic 
moment to equip  patients  with infor mation  they need  to make truly  infor med medical  decisions, 
many  patients  and caregivers  note that these  conversations  are less useful  than they could  be.1 The 
infor med consent  proce ss and its associated  documents suffer sever al limitations:  1) risks are 
emphasized  over benefits;  2) educational  materials  focus on individual  drugs instead  of regi mens; 3) 
information  is presented  in written  instead  of alternative  written/audiov isual format; and 4) the 
patient perspective is lacking.  
 
Our research  team, consisting  of oncologists,  nurses, and  cancer  patients  has worked together  to 
create  a suite  of info rmed consent  tools  which  better  convey  the risks and  benefits  of common 
palliative  chemotherapy  options  for advanced GI cancer . Each  informed consent  tool consists  of a 
video  and written  booklet,  and improves  upon existing  resources  in several  ways: 1) balanced  
discussion  of benefits  as well as risks, 2) focus on regi mens rather  than drugs, 3) use of  
both written  and video  format, and 4) inclusion  of the  patient  persp ective  (e.g. video  clips  of patients 
descri bing their experience).  
 
The overarching  objective  of this  project  is to conduct  a rando mized clinical  trial to demonstrate  if 
the informed consent  toolkit the study  team  has developed  improves  the quality  of info rmed consent 
for palliati ve chemotherapy.  If effective,  the tools will be amenable  to broad  disse mination  via 
patient  accessible  cancer  educat ion websites  and oncology  clinics.  
 
1.[ADDRESS_1226117]  practice  for 
oncologists  to obtain  infor med consent  (IC) from  patients  prior  to initiating  chemotherapy,  whereby 
[CONTACT_1962]’  attest  they understand  core information  and agree  to treatment.1,2 The goal of IC is  to equip 
patients  with the knowledge  to make an infor med decision,  including  the purpose of treat ment (e.g. 
cure versus palliate),  bene fits & risks, effects  on prognosis &  quality  of life  (QOL), and 
alternatives .1,2 
 
The informed consent  (IC) process for palli ative chemotherapy  is failing  to achieve  its purpose. 
Research  indicates  many patients  lack the minimal understanding  required  for infor med decision - 
making,  particularly  about the purpose and  likely  magnitude  of benefits  from  palliative 
chemotherapy.3-[ADDRESS_1226118] patients  indicate a preference  for detai led infor mation  about  their 
illness and an active role in their treatment decisions ,6-8 many harbor  inaccurate  and overly 
optimistic conceptio ns about  potential benefits  of palliative  chemotherapy .4,5,9,10 For exa mple, they 
may think  that treatment will cure their illness or extend  their lives  by [CONTACT_153230],  whereas several 
months  is far more typi[INVESTIGATOR_2855].  We recently  reported  from  the CANCORS9 survey of 1193 cancer  
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  5  
 patients  receiving  palliative  chemotherapy  that 81% of colorectal  cancer  and 69% of lung  cancer 
patients  erroneously  believed  that chemotherapy  might be curative.  [ADDRESS_1226119],  they call into question  the 
validity  and integrity  of the  current IC process. Second,  inaccurate  understanding  of these  issues 
impacts  patients’  end-of-life (EOL) medical  care in troubling  ways.  Overly  optimistic expect ations 
of ch emotherapy  drive  the use of lat e-line, minimally-effecti ve chemotherapy ,1,2 and overopti mistic 
prognostic  expectations  are known to  promote intensive  and burdenso me care near EOL.3 Patients  
with metastatic  colorectal  cancer (mCRC)  have  a median  survival  of [ADDRESS_1226120]  doctor -patient  communication.  Because 
patients  look to oncologists  for hope ,3 physicians  may consciously  or subconsciously  magnify  the 
benefits  and suppress negative  infor mation  about  prognosis and  the limitations  of palliative 
chemotherapy.1-3 Oncologists  seek to establish therapeutic  alliance with their patients,  to convey 
hope,  and to be well regarded  by [CONTACT_877413].  This may lead them  to avoid  explicitly  discussing 
prognosis or survival  benefits  associated  with chemotherapy,  or to downplay  potentially  distressing 
infor mation.  For exa mple: an analysis  of audio - recorded  oncologic  consult ations  found that  only 
30% of visits  included  any discussion  of the  likelihood  or magnitude  of benefit  associated  with 
chemotherapy.[ADDRESS_1226121] optimistic 
scenarios  and/or  misinterpret  the benefits of treatment.1,2 
 
Chemotherapy  infor med consent  (IC) docu ments do little to correct  these  misconceptions.  Instead  of 
providing  balanced  infor mation  about  the risks a nd reasonably  expected  benefits  of palliative 
chemotherapy,  consent  docu ments have  beco me myopi[INVESTIGATOR_877402],  resembling 
legalistic  laundry  lists of every  possible  toxicity .[ADDRESS_1226122]  litigation.1 Other 
docu ments accompanying  IC, such as che motherapy  infor mation  sheets,  are similarly  flawed  by [CONTACT_877414],  risk emphas is, and focus on individual  drugs.  As a result,  these  docu ments do 
little to educate  patients  about  the “big pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103]”  of ch emother apy, and do not  communicate  clear 
infor mation  about  risks/benefits/alternatives.  Despi[INVESTIGATOR_877403],  infor mation  about  prognosis and  the magnitude  of benefit  from  specific  regimens is 
challenging  to obtain.2 Answers to  questions  such as, “what  does this  all mean  for my futur e?” are 
exceedin gly difficult  to come by, which  impedes  patie nt-centered  decisi on-making.  
 
The optimal time to initiate  frank  conversations  about  progn osis and  the likely  benefits  of palliati ve 
chemotherapy  is at the outset  of treat ment.1,[ADDRESS_1226123] is difficult because oncologi sts are usually 
unaware  of their  patients’  misconceptions.  Moreover,  research  suggests that  early  communication 
and understanding  of prognostic  and EOL  issues may best support patients  ability  to come to terms 
with their illness  and make plans  for ca re over the trajectory  of their  disease .2,3 Evidence  suggests 
that providing  patie nts with tangible supple mentary  infor mation about their illness and treatment,4,5 
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  6  
 and encouraging  questions,6 can improve  patients’  understanding  of these  topi[INVESTIGATOR_877404]. Because  informed  consent  (IC) docu ments and chemotherapy  information  sheets  are often 
distributed  to patients,  these  tangible  resources  represe nt an attractive  target  for intervention ,1,[ADDRESS_1226124]  that oncologists 
should  (or want) to be absolved  of the  responsibility  for conveying  difficult  infor mation.  However, 
access  to high quality  patient -centered  education al materials  may reinforce  difficult  information 
conveyed  during oncology office  visits,  or fill  in gaps that may have  been  omitted.  
 
Advanced GI cancer  represe nts an ideal model for augmenting  chemotherapy infor med consent  
(IC) tools.  CRC  is a major cause  of morbidity/ mortality,  representing  the third - leading  cause of 
cancer  related  mortality  among men and women in the US, with  50,310 people expected  to die of 
CRC  in the US this  year.1 The majority  of mCRC  patients  undergo  palliative che motherapy;  
however,  even  with optimal treatment median  surviv al is less t han two years.[ADDRESS_1226125] the efficacy  of multimedia IC tools,  which  if 
effective  could  be broadly  applied to other  cancer  types.  
 
Intervention  develop ment: Our r esearch  team  has worked through  a stakeholder -driven  process to 
develop  a suite of multi-media infor med consent  (IC) to ols to support in formed decision -making 
regarding  palliative  chemotherapy  for advanced GI cancer.  The suite  includes  five tools explaining : 
FOLFOX with or without  bevacizu mab and FOLFIRI with  or without  bevacizu mab for mCRC as 
well as FOLFIRINOX, Gemcitabine, and Gemcitabine + nab -paclitaxel for advanced pancreatic 
cancer , which  are recommended  in national  guidelines  and represent  the most common  
chemotherapy regi mens used to  treat these cancers .2,3  Each  informed consent  tool is comprised  of a 
video  and a companion  booklet,  both of which  are suited  for review  in clinic  and to be taken  home 
for patients  and caregivers  to review  further.  Each  tool reviews  core infor mation  important  for an 
infor med decision,  including  the purpose of treat ment, its potential  benefits,  side effects,  and 
alternatives.  The tools  also review  logistics  of treat ment administration  and contain  optional 
infor mation  about  prognosis.  
 
Under Dana -Farber/Harvard  Cancer  Center  IRB protocol  #14-130, our intervention  was evaluated  by 
a panel  of [ADDRESS_1226126] majority  
(98%) of whom  agreed  that it would be  useful  to patients  and promote infor med decision -making. 
All advocates  agreed  that inclu ding patient  voices  was a  key strength,  and only 1 thought  the tools 
would be  too upsetting  to patients.  The intervent ion was also  evaluated  & highly  rated  by 25 expert 
GI oncologists  representing 8 practices,  all of whom reported  that if they had access to these 
infor med consent  (IC) tools  they would use them  usually  or always.  Booklets  and videos  were 
revised  according  to patient  advocate  and oncol ogist feedback.  Under Dana -Farber/ Harvard  Cancer 
Center  IRB protocol  #14-318, in -depth interviews  were  then conducted  with metastatic  colorectal 
cancer  patients  actively  receiving  palliative  chemotherapy.  Patients  reviewed  the intervention  in 
detail  and provided  feedback  and suggestion  for improvement. Most suggestions  were  relatively 
minor (e.g. clarifying  phrasing,  re-filming a small section  of film  to improve  eye-contact  [CONTACT_877415]).  No adverse  events  occurred  during  the in-depth  interviews.  Thematic satur ation was 
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  7  
 reached  after 5 in-depth interviews.  The IC tools  were  then revised  according  feedback  from  the in- 
depth  interviews  to create  our final  intervention.  
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  
 
Objective 1: Deter mine if the multi-media infor med conse nt (IC) to ols improve  patients’  under standing  of 
benefits  and risks of palliative  chemotherapy  as co mpared  to the standard  IC process.  
Hypothesis: The multi-media  IC to ols will decrea se the likeli hood that patients  overesti mate the curative 
potential  of palliative  chemotherapy  as compared  to the usual  IC process.  
Hypothesis: The multi-media  IC tools will increase the likelihood that patients will have an accurate 
understandin g of the risks of chemotherapy as compared to the usual  IC process.  
 
Objective 2: Deter mine if the multi-media infor med consent (IC) to ols enhance  patients’  progn ostic 
understanding,  increase  advance  care planning,  and facilitate  patient -physician  conversations  about  end-of- 
life care preferences.  
Hypothesis:  Patie nts randomized to the intervention  will have more realistic expectations of their 
prognosi s as compared to patient s randomized to the usual IC process.  
Hypothesis: Patie nts randomized to interve ntion will be more likely to have design ated a healthcare  proxy 
and more  likely  to have  a DNR  order  as compared  to patients  randomized to the usual  IC process 
Hypothesis: Patie nts randomized to the intervention  will be more likely  to discuss  their end-of-life care 
preferences  with their healthcare  proxy, and  with their oncologist  as co mpared to patients  rando mized to 
the usual  IC process.  
 
3.[ADDRESS_1226127] ION 
Eligi bility Criteria  
Inclu sion criteria:  
 Diagnosis  of metastatic  colorectal  cancer  OR locally advanced pancreatic cancer OR metastatic 
pancreatic cancer  AND  
o Is making  a decision  regarding  treatment with 1st or 2nd line palliative chemotherapy . OR 
o Is receiving  1st line palliative  chemotherapy,  and is therefore  likely  to make a future  decision 
about  2nd line chemotherapy  (either  for cancer  progression or toxicity).  This cohort  of 
patie nts will be eligible for study  enrollment and baseline  assessment, but will not be subject 
to rando mization  until the time of their  next treatment decisi on. 
 Treating  oncologist  has recommended  consideration  of one or more  of the regimens for which  we 
have  developed  infor med consent  (IC) toolkits  (FOLFOX, FOLFOX +  bevacizu mab, FOLFIRI,  
FOLFIRI +  bevacizu mab, FOLFIRINOX, Gemcitabine, or Gemcitabine + nab -paclitaxel ). 
o Patients  who are  also considering  treatment on a clinical trial are eligible, inclu ding those 
conside ring treatment on a clinical trial of FOLFOX (+/ -bev) + investig ational  agent, or 
FOLFIRI (+/ -bev) + investigational agent  
 Age ≥ 21 
 English  proficient  
Exclusion  criteria:  
 Patie nts with oligo metastatic  disea se to the lung and/or  liver who a re being  treated  with a 
definitive plan for curative  surgi cal resection  are not eligible.  
 Significant delirium/dementia as judged by  [CONTACT_877416], caregivers of eligible patients will also be eligible to participate in the caregivers assessments.  
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  8  
  
How caregiver participants will be defined, identified, and recruited:   In order to identify the appropriate 
caregiver, the research assistant will ask the consented patient who s/he would identify as his/her primary 
caregiver, if any.  If the caregiver is physically present with the patient at the time the RA obta ins the 
patient’s consent, the RA will provide the caregiver the study letter, explain the study, answer any questions, 
and ask if the caregiver would like to participate.  If the caregiver verbally agrees, the RA will administer the 
caregiver survey (avai lable on paper, electronically, or orally per caregiver preference).  If the caregiver is 
not physically present, the RA will send the patient home with the caregiver study letter and follow up with a 
phone call.  When speaking to the caregiver on the phon e, the RA will be sure that the caregiver has had time 
to read and consider the study letter.  If the caregiver does not have the study letter, the RA will offer to email 
or postal mail a duplicate.  Because the caregiver is not always physically present at  clinic visits, we are 
requesting waiver of documentation of consent for caregivers.  This will allow the RA the flexibility 
needed to verbally consent caregivers in person and over the phone since caregivers will not always be 
present in clinic.  
 
4.[ADDRESS_1226128]  recruitment:  The research assistant will identify potentially  eligible participants  by 
[CONTACT_877417],  as well  as by [CONTACT_877418].  We are requesting  a HIPAA waiver  of authorization  so that  the research  assistant  may look in the 
Electronic  Health  Record to determine eligibility  before approaching  potentially eligible participants. 
 
1)  For patients  presenting  to oncology  clinic  for an  initial  consultation /new treatment decision 
regarding  first or second -line chemotherapy  for the ir metastatic  colorectal  cancer , locally 
advanced pancreatic cancer, and metastatic pancreatic cancer : the research assi stant will 
identify potentially  eligible patients by [CONTACT_877419]. The  research 
assistant will notify the provider  of the patients’  potential  eligibility  prior to this initial  
consultation.  Immediately  after the consultation,  the resea rch assistant  will contact  [CONTACT_877420]’  eligibility,  and to ask per mission  to approach  the patient  for 
participatio n. Study  research  assistants will keep track  of the  number of potentially  eligible 
patients,  the number of physician  refusals,  and the reason  for those  refusals.  
2)  For patients  receiving  ongoing  first-line chemotherapy:  The study  research  assistant  will identify 
potentially  eligible participants  by [CONTACT_877421],  and accepting 
physician  referrals.  For potentially  eligible patients,  the research  assistant will contact  [CONTACT_877422] n. Study  research  assistants will keep a log of the  number of potentially  eligible 
patients,  the number of physici an or nurse practitioner  refusals,  and the reason  for those refusa ls. 
 
Procedure for research informed consent: The research assistant will approach  the eligible participant 
either  in-person  in the clinic,  or over  the phone  and introduce  the study,  answer  any questions,  and offer  the 
potential  participant  time to think  it over. If/When the potential participant decides to particip ate, the 
research  assistant  will obtain  signed  informed conse nt for participation  in the research  study.  The signed 
infor med consent  docu ment will be returned  to the study  research  assistant  either  in-person,  via postal  mail, 
or via  email. If the potential participant decides NOT  to participate,  the study team  will not contact [CONTACT_877423].  The study  research  assistant  will keep  a log of the  number of patient  refusals,  and the reason 
for those  refusals.   The caregiver will also be invited to participate; they will be given a study letter that 
contains the elements of informed consent.   
 
Procedure for regi stration: After the partici pant signs writt en informed consent  to particip ate in research, 
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August [ADDRESS_1226129] er the participa nt and his/her caregiver using  
REDCap  managed by [CONTACT_877424]. 
 
Procedure for randomization (see schema on page 2): 
1.   For patients  making  a chemotherapy  treatment decision  at the time of study  enroll ment: After  study 
consent  and the baseline  assess ment, the study  team  will then rando mize the patient  to either  the Usual 
IC A rm or the  Investigational  IC Arm of the  study  using  REDCap’s 1:[ADDRESS_1226130]-line or 2nd-line chemotherapy.  
2.   For patients  NOT making  a new chemotherapy  treatment decision  at the time of study  enroll ment (e.g., 
they are receiving  ongoing  treatment with first-line palliative  chemotherapy),  rando mization  will occur  at 
the point  at which  the patient  is faced  with a new che motherapy  treatment  decision  (e.g.,  for cancer 
progres sion, or treatment-related  toxicit y). Resea rch assistants will contact [CONTACT_877425]/or restaging  visits  to remind them of their patient’s particip ation on 
the study,  and to request  that the oncologi st contact  [CONTACT_877426] a new 
treatment decision  is being  made. When  the patient’s  oncologist confir ms that the patient  is faced  with a 
new che motherapy  treatment decisi on, the study  team  will then rando mize the patie nt to either  the Usual 
IC A rm or the  Investigational  IC Arm of the  study  using  REDCap’s 1:[ADDRESS_1226131]-line or 2nd-line chemotherapy.  Patients  who do  not make a new treat ment decision  
during  the timeframe of this  study will not be randomized,  and will not complete  future  study 
assess ments. 
 
Participa nts will be randomized 1:[ADDRESS_1226132] line palliative chemotherapy  or 2nd line palliative 
chemotherapy.  
 
The name [CONTACT_877454]: Christine  Cronin,  [EMAIL_15594] , [PHONE_17135].  
 
When  registering  subjects, the study team  will ask for the  following  infor mation  (see Appendix  B): 
 Name, telephone  number, and email address of  research  assistant  enrolling the participant  
 Date  subject  signed  infor med consent  
 Subject  and caregiver ’s phone  numbers, emails, and postal  mail addresses  (reason  for collecting  
these:  so central research  assistant  at Dana-Farber  can administer  follow -up assessments)  
 Subject  and caregiver ’s ranks of preference  regarding  contact  [INVESTIGATOR_12183]  
 Subject  and caregiver ’s gender s 
 Subject  and caregiver’s  initials  
 Subject  and caregiver’s  ages 
 Subject  ID nu mber 
 Primary oncologist  
 Confi rmation  of eligibility  
 Stratificati on or cla ssification  factors (1st versus 2nd line palliative  chemotherapy)  
 
Procedure for asses sment contact [CONTACT_820349]: It is acceptable  to administer  each assess ment aloud 
(via phone  or in-person),  via email (REDCap  weblink),  via iPad (REDCap),  or via  hard copy  (in-person  or 
postal  mail). The baseline  assess ment will be administe red immediately  after the participant  signs infor med 
consent ; the baseline caregiver assessment will be administered immediately after the caregiver receives the 
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August [ADDRESS_1226133]-informed 
consent.  One follow -up is defined  as: an in-person  approach  OR a phone  call with an accompanying  email. 
If the  participant  is non- responsi ve after [ADDRESS_1226134] -chemo  start.  During  this 4 
week  period,  the study  research  assistant  will follow -up with the partici pant up to  3 times. One follow -up is 
defined  as: an in-person  approach  OR a phone  call with an accompanying  email. If the  participant  is non- 
responsi ve after [ADDRESS_1226135]-chemo start.  During this  1 month period,  the 
study  research  assistant will follow -up with the participa nt and caregiver up to 3 times each. One follow -up is 
defined  as: an in-person  approach  OR a  phone  call with an accompanying  email. If the  participa nt is non-
responsive  after [ADDRESS_1226136]  the participa nt about the follow-up asses sment again.  
 
 
5.0 STUDY D ESIGN AND METHODS  
 
5.1 Design/Study  Type  
 
Non-treatment intervention,  rando mized clinical  trial of up to  350 participants  [244 patient 
participants plus up to 106 of their caregivers as caregiver participants] (social  behavioral rese arch). 
 
5.2 Selection  of Instru ments 
 
Questionnaire -based  instru ments will be administered  1) in person by a  trained research  assistant  at 
the time of a routinely  scheduled  visit,  2) by e -survey,  3) by [CONTACT_648],  , or 4) by [CONTACT_877427]. Mode of 
collection  will be recorded. REDCap  (Resea rch Elect ronic Data Captu re) will be used to collect  and 
store  all participa nt information  and survey answers.  REDCap  is a secure,  web-based,  HIPAA - 
compliant  application  hosted  by [CONTACT_877428],  Enterprise  Research 
Infrastructure  & iServices  (ERIS) group, designed  to support data  capture  for research  studies, 
providin g: 1) an intuitive  interface  for validated  data entry; 2) audit  trails  for tracking  data 
manipulation  and export  procedures;  3) auto mated export  procedures  for sea mless data downloads to 
common  statistical  packages;  and 4) procedures  for importing  data from  external  sources.  
 
Regardless  of whether  a participant  is rando mized to receive  Usual IC materials  or the  Interventional  
IC material s, each participant  will be asked  complete three  assessments:  
 
Instrument  1: Baseline  Assessment (See Appendix C)  
The baseline  assess ment will assess socio -demographics, information/communication  preferenc es, 
decision control  preferences, and illness understanding.  Patients  will complete  this assessment after 
consenting  for the  study,  but before  rando mization.  The baseline  assessment  takes  approxi mately  5 
minutes  to complete.  
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  11  
  
Instrument 2: Post -Decision Assessment (See Appendix E and App endix F) 
Within 0-4 weeks of the  participa nt’s treatment decision, the partici pant will be asked  to complete  a 
post-decision  survey  assessing  core understanding  required  for infor med consent  (IC) (risks,  benefits, 
alternative s), understan ding of illne ss (diagno sis, curability),  decisional confli ct, satisfaction  with the 
IC materials,  satisfaction  with communication,  and anxiety.  The post-decision  assess ment takes 
approxi mately  20 minutes  to complete.  
 
Instrument 3: Follo w-up Assessment (See Appendix G and Appendix I) 
Within 2-3 months  of the  partici pant’s  treatment decision, the participa nt will be asked  to complete  a 
follow -up survey assessing changes  in treatment and illness  understanding,  decisional  regret, 
communication  satisfaction,  care satisfaction  & anxiety.  The post-decision  assess ment takes 
approxi mately  20 minutes  to complete.  
 
NOTE:  Participants  will be asked  questions  about prognosis  regardless  of whether  or not they skip 
the life expectancy  sections  in the booklet  and video.  
 
Immediately following completion of the follow up assessment: Using methods similar to those 
described by [CONTACT_101286]11, the interviewer will show each participant his/her responses to the 2 
questions about prognosis **. Next, the interviewer will read the following standardized prompt: 
“Please take a moment to look at your responses. I notice that your answers to these two questions are 
[different/the sam e]. Can you tell me a little bit about this?”  
 
The research assistant will then ask permission to audio -record the patient’s answers. If the 
participant is willing to answer the question but declines audio -recording, notes will be taken during 
and after th e interview. The RA will use standard cognitive interviewing techniques, such as reflexive 
listening, “think alouds” and standard probes (“can you tell me what you mean by [INVESTIGATOR_24565]?”) as 
necessary.  
 
**Copy -pasted for reference - these are the 2 questions about  prognosis:  
Q: Based on what you have learned or been told, what is your understanding about how long the 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_877405]?  
A: 1, More than 10 years | 2, More than 5, but less than 10 years | 3, More than 3, but less than 5 
years | 4, More than 2, but less than 3 years | 5, More than 1, but less than 2 years | 6, Less than 1 
year 
Q: Every person is different and every situation is unique. If you had to make a guess - based on what 
you have learned about your cance r, your cancer treatment, and what you know about yourself - how 
long do you think that you have to live?  
A: 1, More than 10 years | 2, More than 5, but less than 10 years | 3, More than 3, but less than 5 
years | 4, More than 2, but less than 3 years | 5,  More than 1, but less than 2 years | 6, Less than [ADDRESS_1226137] Abstraction ( see Appendix K): Research assistants  will perform medical  record 
abstraction.  These  medical  record  abstractio ns will be designed to assess rele vant information  about 
their clinical  condition  (e.g. stage  at diagnosis,  date of recurrence,  perfor mance status,  comorbid 
conditions),  treatment decision,  and treatment experience. Information  will be entered  into a study 
specific  structured  medical  record  abstraction  tool (Appendix  K). See  below  for specific  infor mation 
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  12  
 to be abstracted:  
 date of diagnosis;  stage  at diagnosis;  prior  adjuvant  or palliative  chemotherapy;  date of 
metastatic  recurrence  (if relevant);  comorbid  medical  conditions;  perfor mance status; 
treatment decision  made (e.g.,  what  chemotherapy  regimen, clinical  trial, no che motherapy); 
changes  in treatment (e.g. dose reductions,  change  in chemotherapy);  results  of resta ging 
scans (disease  progression, stable  disease,  or response);  changes  in treatment; medical  record 
docu mentation  of advance  care planning;  and vital status  at study  completion.  
 
NOTE: Each  site has the option to  conduct  the medical  record  review  for their  site’s  participants  
using the unique study  ID # and  enter  the infor mation into REDCap  using  the participants’  unique  
study  ID #. Medical  records  from  participating  sites will not be released  to Dana -Farber unless the 
participant signs the medical record release form (Appendix X) . 
 
In so me cases,  a participant  will consent  to participate  in this study and begin  this study  while  at a 
participating  site, but then continue/transfer  care at a non-participat ing site. In these  instances,  the 
participa nt will be asked to sign an option al, voluntary  Global Medical Record  Release Form  (see 
Appendix  X) so that  the central  research  assistant at Dana -Farber  can access  the participant’s  medical 
records  in order  to complete  the study  Medical  Record  Abstraction  (Appendix  K). 
 
Each  caregiver will  be asked  complete two assessments:  
 
Instrument  1: Caregiver Baseline  Assessment (See Appendix D) 
The baseline  assess ment will assess socio -demographics, information/communication preferences,  
and illness understanding.  The baseline  assessment  takes  approxi mately  5 minutes  to complete.  
 
Instrument 2: Caregiver Follo w-up Assessment (See Appendix H and Appendix J ) 
Within 2-3 months  of the  partici pant’s  treatment decision, the participa nt will be asked  to complete  a 
follow -up survey assessing changes  in treatment and illness  understanding,  decisional  regret, 
communication  satisfaction,  care satisfaction  & anxiety.  The post-decision  assess ment takes 
approxi mately  20 minutes  to complete.  
 
CAREGIVER : Immediately following completion of the caregiver follow up assessment, the 
interviewer will read the following standardized prompt:   
 
How do you think the person for whom you care would answer this question? Could you tell me a 
little bit about why you answered in this way?  
Q: Based on what you have learned or been told, what is your understanding about how long th e 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_877405]?  
A: 1, More than 10 years | 2, More than 5, but less than 10 years | 3, More than 3, but less than 5 
years | 4, More than 2, but less than 3 years | 5, More than 1, but less than 2 years | 6, Les s than 1 
year 
 
How do you think the person for whom you care would answer this question? Could you tell me a 
little bit about why you answered in this way?   
Q: Every person is different and every situation is unique. If you had to make a guess - based on what 
you have learned about your cancer, your cancer treatment, and what you know about yourself - how 
long do you think that you have to live?  
A: 1, More than 10 years | 2, More than 5, but less than 10 years | 3, More than 3, but less than 5 
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  13  
 years | 4, M ore than 2, but less than 3 years | 5, More than 1, but less than 2 years | 6, Less than [ADDRESS_1226138] the caregiver’s answers. If the participant 
is willing to answer the question but declines audio -recording, notes will be taken during and after 
the interview. The RA will use standard cognitive interviewing techniques, such as reflexive 
listening, “think alouds” and standard probes (“can you tell me what you mean by [INVESTIGATOR_24565]?”) as 
necessary.  
 
NOTE:  Caregive rs will be asked  questions  about prognosis regardless  of whether  or not they skip 
the life expectancy  sections  in the booklet  and video.  
 
5.3 Description  of Intervention  
 
Interventi on Overvie w: The intervention  consists  of 5 sets of che motherapy  infor med consent  (IC) 
tools.  Each  tool consists  of a video  and a complementary  booklet  which  explain  a common 
chemotherapy  option  for mCRC , locally advanced pancreatic cancer, or metastatic pancreatic 
cancer . This suite  of tools reviews  the following  treatment option s: 
 IC Tool  1: FOLFOX &  FOLFOX +  bevacizu mab are revie wed together  in one IC tool, 
comprised  of a video  and complementary  booklet  
 IC Tool  2: FOLIRI  & FOLFIRI +  bevacizu mab are reviewed  together  in one IC tool:  
comprised  of a video  and complementary  booklet.  
 IC Tool  3: FOLFIRINOX is reviewed in one IC tool:  
comprised  of a video  and complementary  booklet.  
 IC Tool  4: Gemcitabine + nab -paclitaxel is reviewed  in one IC tool:  
comprised  of a video  and complementary  booklet.  
 IC Tool  5: Gemcitabine is  reviewed  in one IC tool:  
comprised  of a video  and complementary  booklet.  
 
  FOLFOX &  FOLFOX + bevacizu mab booklet  – see Appendix  N 
  FOLFOX &  FOLFOX + bevacizu mab video  website  – see Appendix  O 
  FOLIRI &  FOLFIRI +  bevacizu mab booklet  – see Appendix  P 
  FOLIRI &  FOLFIRI +  bevacizu mab video  website  – see Appendix  Q 
  FOLIRI NOX  booklet  – see Appendix  R 
  FOLIRI NOX  video  website  – see Appendix  S 
  Gemcitabine + nab -paclitaxel booklet  – see Appendix  T 
  Gemcitabine + nab -paclitaxel video  website  – see Appendix  U 
  Gemcitabine  booklet  – see Appendix  V 
  Gemcitabine video  website  – see Appendix  W 
 
Description  of info rmed consent (IC) videos  
Each  video  is approxi mately  [ADDRESS_1226139]. “B -
roll” visually  illustrates potentially  confusing  aspects  of the chemotherapy  regimen (for exa mple: a 
chemotherapy  home infusion  pump). Candid  patient  interviews are interspersed throughout  the 
video  to present  patients’  experience,  with particular  attention  to quality  of life and  copi[INVESTIGATOR_007].  
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  14  
 Infor mation  about  life expectancy  is included  as an  optional  link, allowing patients/caregivers  a 
choice  about  whether  or not to hear this information.  Patients  and provide rs in the video  are diver se 
with respe ct to age, gender,  and ethnicity.  Videos will  be acces sible via a password -protected  
website  suitable for viewing  on tablet  or co mputer.  
 
The structure  & content  of the videos  are outlined  below.  
 Basics : The drugs used as part of each regimen, their route of administration, schedule, logistics of 
administration. A nurse demonstrates a 5FU infusion pump.  
 Risks : Toxicities reviewed, with greatest attention to the most common toxicities, followed by [CONTACT_877429]. Side effects specific to bevacizumab highlighted.  
 Benefits : State that chemo alone cannot cure mCRC, locally advanced pancreatic cancer, or 
metastatic pancreatic cancer , and review the palliative intent of chemotherapy.  
 Alternatives : Mention other chemotherapy regimens, clinical trials, &  palliative/supportive care.  
 
Description  of informed consent (IC) booklets  
Booklets are regimen -specific IC documents, which serve as a regimen -specific educational tool  and 
an acceptable documentation of IC. Content of the written IC tool adheres to regulatory requirements 
of IC with attention to patients’ informat ion preferences. The tools are written at an  8th grade reading 
level, use generic drug names, and communicate risk clearly.  
 Basics : The drugs used as part of each regimen is outlined, along with their route of administration.  
 Benefits : Includes the purpose  of treatment (palliative, prevent symptoms, not cure).  
 Impact on prognosis : Patients have the option of reviewing a section that describes typi[INVESTIGATOR_877406]-
expectancy of mCRC with and without chemotherapy. This section is closed by a seal,  and 
preceded by a w arning to allow them to make a conscious choice of whether or not to be  exposed 
to this information.  
 Risks : Most common toxicities listed in order of frequency (and approximate rates). Rare 
complications listed, but de -emphasized to avoid the feel of a  “laundry list.”  
 Alternatives : Clinical trials, palliative /supportive care, & other chemotherapy regimens.  
 FAQ’s : Identified by [CONTACT_877430]:  Patients randomized to the Usual IC A rm will undergo  the standard  institutional  practice of 
informed consent  for che motherapy.  At Dana -Farber, this will include  receipt and signat ure of the 
standard  institutional  consent form for che motherapy. The oncologist  may also choose  to give the 
patient  the institutionally  approved  chemotherapy  infor mation  sheets  according  to their  preference  (this 
is not a required practice  at Dana -Farber).  
 
Parti cipati ng sites should follow  their o wn ins titutional practices for usual informed consent.  
 
Patie nts randomized to Interve ntional IC Arm  will be given regimen speci fic written  and video 
Infor med Consent  tools  developed  by [CONTACT_877424]. The treating  oncologist  will identify  which 
chemotherapy  regimen(s)  are being  considered,  in order  to select the appropriate informed consent (IC) 
tool(s)  to give the patient.  The patient  may be given  more than one IC tool  if relevant;  for exa mple: if 
they are deciding  between  FOLFOX and  FOLFI RI, they  could  be given  both IC tools. Patie nts 
randomized to the intervention  arm may receive  the intervention  in addition  to OR in place  of the 
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August [ADDRESS_1226140] instit utionally  approved  chemotherapy  information  sheets (both  are acceptable);  this is at the 
discretion  of the treating  site or the treating  physician.  Patients  rando mized to  the Interventional  IC 
Arm will undergo  infor med consent  for che motherapy.  This will include receipt  of the  investigational  
IC tool  for che motherapy  in addition  to OR in place  of the stand ard instit utionally  approved 
chemotherapy  teaching sheet.   
 
At the  beginning of the study period,  the video  and booklet  infor med consent  tools  will be shared with  
medical  oncologists  and nurse practitioners  at a GI oncology  staff meeting.  The purpose of this 
orientation  is to help facilitate  any subsequent  conversations  about  the study infor med consent  (IC) 
tools  that might occur  between  providers  and patients  rando mized to the intervention.  
 
Timing of interve ntion: Patients  rando mized to the experi mental arm of the study  will be exposed  to 
the intervention  as soon as possible  following  the oncology  visit discussing  treatment 
recom mendations  (see protocol  schema on page  1) and  prior to their actual  chemotherapy  decision and  
treatment initiation. In sel ect cases in which  it is not possible  to administer  the interve ntion prior to  
their initiation  of chemotherapy  (e.g. such as  a patient  who opts  to start a new chemotherapy regi men 
on the  same day as their  treatment discu ssion), it  will be allowed to administer  the intervention  within  
[ADDRESS_1226141]  relevant  to them. 
 
Administr ation of interv ention : A research  assistant  or the  treating  physician/nurse  practitioner 
(depending  upon the  preference  of the physician/nurse  practitioner)  will give the patient  the relevant 
infor med consent  (IC) booklet(s)  along  with printed  infor mation  containing  the URL address and 
password to  the relevant IC video( s). The research assistant will offer to meet the patient in the clinic  
in order  to orient  them  to the booklet  and to allow  them  to watch  the video  on a study  iPad.  If 
the patient  prefers  not to review the study  materials  in clinic  (e.g. due to inconvenience  of 
scheduling),  the study  materials  will be mailed  to the patient s’ home, and the research  assistant 
will follow -up by [CONTACT_877431].  Patients will be 
encoura ged to  review the booklet(s)/video( s) as many times as they wish, and  will be encouraged  
to discu ss any questions  with their oncologist.  
 
5.[ADDRESS_1226142]  asses sments  x   
Health  Literacy and numeracyb Stagliano12 (2013 ), Lipkus13 (2001)  x  
QOL c FACT -G14  
Optimismd Life Orientation  Test-Revised15   
Distresse Emotional  wellbeing  component  of FACT -G14   
Communicat ion & decis ion 
prefer encesf Control  Preferences Scale17    
Preferred  infor mation  for chemother apy decision  (for study)  x   
Prognostic  communication  preferences,  Meropol16  x   
Illness  understanding Developed  for study  x   
Use of IC booklet and video  Video  use monitored  via password protected  website,  booklet use 
monitore d by [CONTACT_154700]   x
Quality of Informed Consentg 
Core  Understan ding 
Chemotherapy  risks  Modified  from Leighl et al18   
Chemotherapy benefits Adapte d from CANCOR S9 (primary outcome)    x
Decision  Making  
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  16  
 Adequate information Develop ed for study    
Decisional  involve ment Modified  Contr ol Preferences  Scale17    
Decisional  conflict  Modified  SURE  assessment27    
Satisfactionh 
MD-patient  relati onship  Revised  Human Connection  Scale19    x 
With study  IC tools/  stand ard IC Developed  for study   
With  decision  Brehaut  decisional  regret  scale20   
Doctor -patie nt communicationi    
Patient -centered  communication  Aurora and Mazor21    x
Prognostic  communication  Developed  for study    x
Prognostic  Understandin gj Adapted  from CANCORS9    x
Advance  Care  Planning  Chart  abstraction  (DNR)  and patient  report  (healthcare  proxy)    x
Patient  Participant Assessment  
x    Caregiver Participant Assessment  
 
Clinical  characte ristics: Date of diagnosis  (or metastatic  recurrence),  location  of metastases,  
prior adjuvant  chemotherapy,  and ECOG  performance status  via chart  review.  
 
aSocio -demographics:  Age, race/ethnicity,  marital  status,  educati on, insurance  status,  
preferred language,  religious  affiliation  via chart  review;  and a one-item measure of religious  
copi[INVESTIGATOR_877407]. 
 
bHealth  Literacy & Numeracy : Parti cipants  will complete  a valid ated 1-item screening  measure  for 
health  literacy developed  by [CONTACT_877432],12 and a validated  1-item screening  measure  to assess 
numeracy.13 
 
cQOL:  QOL  will be assessed  by [CONTACT_877433] - 
General  (FACT -G)14, a 27-item scale  assessing physi cal wellbeing,  social/f amily wellbeing, 
functional  wellbeing,  emotional  wellbeing,  and functional  wellbeing.  
 
dOpti mism: The validated  7-item Life Orientation  Test-Revise d15 will assess trait optimism at baseline.  
 
 
eDistres s: will be measured  using  the emotional  wellbeing  subscale  of the FACT -G QOL survey14. 
 
fCommunication  & decision -maki ng preferences:  
Prognostic  communication  preference s: 5 items from  an instru ment developed  by [CONTACT_877434]16 et al will 
assess  patients’  preferences  regarding  prognostic  communication  (e.g. “I want to hear detailed 
statistics,”  “I want  the doctor  to speak  to me in a positive  manner”)  via participant  questionnaire. 
Responses:  “strong ly agree,”  to “strongly  disagree”  on a 5-point  scale.  
 
Preferred  infor mation  for che motherapy  decision : 7 items developed  for the  study  will assess the 
amount of info rmation  patie nts want  about  each of the following  topi[INVESTIGATOR_877408]:  potential side effects, other treatment options,  potential  impact on quality  of life, 
likelihood  of cancer  control,  likelihood  of cure,  impact  on length  of life. Response options  are on a 
5-point  Likert scale  ranging  from  no infor mation to as much information  as possible.  
 
Preferred  involv ement in care decisions:  The Control  Preferences  Scale17 is a validated 2-item 
measure  of preferences  for decision involvement (active, active -shared, collaborative, passive 
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  17  
 shared, or passive) via participant questionnaire.  
 
gQuality  of Informed  Consent:  
Understanding  of ch emotherapy  benefits:  The first primary outco me is a valid ated item from 
CANCOR S.9 Patien ts are asked:  “After  talking with your doctors about chemotherapy, how likely did 
you think it was that chemo would cure your cancer?” Responses (“very likely,” “somewhat  likely,” 
“a little likely,” “not at all likely,” “don’t know”) will be dichotomized to accurate (“not at all 
likely”) and inaccurate (all others). The pre -specified time -point for assessing the primary outcome is 
at the follow -up assessment, although pati ents will also be asked  this question  at baseline  and the 
post-decision  survey. Si milar to CanCORS9, patients  will also be asked  how likely they  think  it is that 
chemotherapy  will “help you with  proble ms or sy mptoms you are  having because  of your cancer,”  
“contr ol the growth of your cancer,”  and “help  you live  longer.” These additional  items are included  
in the post-decision survey al one. 
 
To assess understanding of treatment goal , patients are asked at the post -decision survey, “according to 
your doctor, what is the goal of the chemotherapy?” with the ability to choose any/all of the following 
response options: cure, control cancer growth, alleviate symptoms, prolong life, or other. Selecting either 
control cancer growth, and/or alleviate symptoms, and/or prolong life are defined as accurate 
understanding; “to cure” was inaccurate.  
 
Understanding  of ch emotherapy  risks : Modified items from Leighl  et al18 will assess  patients’ 
understanding  of the potential  risks (e.g.  side effec ts) of their chemotherapy  choice  via participant 
question naire. Thes e items include understandin g of key risks (e.g., FOLFOX+/ -bevacizu mab (e.g. 
fatigue, nausea/vomiting and neuropathy), and FOLFIRI+/ -bevac izumab (e.g. fatigue, 
nausea/vomiting, diarrhea, hair loss)). The accuracy of patients’ understanding of chemotherapy 
risks will be score d based upon the chemotherap y regimen they opted to receive , as described 
below:  
 
 Patients initiating FOLFOX or FOLFOX bev will be considered to have an accurate 
understanding of risks if they respond that they are somewhat/very likely to experience 
neuropathy and nausea and a little/not very likely to experience hair loss  
We will create similar algorithms for all of the other chemotherapy regimens based upon well -
established toxicity profiles.  
  
Adequate  information  for infor med consent  (IC):  Patie nts will be asked  whether  they received  the a mount 
of info rmation  they desired  regarding  the following  topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]:  potential side effects,  manage ment of side  
effects,  potenti al impact on QOL, other  treatment options,  likelihood  of cancer  contr ol, likelihood  of cure,  
and potential  impact on length  of life,  using  a 5-point  Likert  scale  from  too far 
little information  to far too much infor mation.  
 
Decision al Conflict & Decision al Contro l: Decisio nal conflict (representing  potential  conflict  and 
satisfaction about a medical decision) will be assessed using a modified 6 -item version of the SURE27 
assessment, which measures whether patients feel sure about what matters to them, understand their 
treatment options,  understand the risks/benefits of those options, and feel supported in their decision.   
 
Achievement of decisional control preferences  (i.e. achievement of preferred role in treatment decision -
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  18  
 making) will be assessed using the  modified  Control  Preferences  Scale (decisional  involvement is 
compared  with stated  preferences).13 
 
Decisional  regret:  Brehaut’s  validated  5-item scale will measure  decision regret  (scale  0-100).20 
 
hPatient  Satisfa ction 
Satis faction  with informed  consent  (IC) materials : Patients  will rate their satisfaction with the IC 
docu ments (standard  IC docu ment and teaching sheets  for patients  randomized to UIC,  or study  IC 
docu ments).  Patie nts randomized to investi gational IC will also complete  an assess ment of the 
acceptability  of the multimedia IC tool. Patie nts will self-report wheth er or not  they read  the booklet  
or watched the video , and how many times  they reviewed  it. 
 
Satis faction  with patient -MD relatio nship will be assessed by [ADDRESS_1226143] -decision survey (e.g. “I 
got clear, understandable information about the treatments we were considering,” “I got consistent 
information from all my doctors and nurses; everyone was on the same page;” “My doctors and nurses 
helped me cope with the uncertainty or unknowns about  my treatment decisions;” “I got a clear 
recommendation about what treatment approach would be best for me;” “I was encouraged to ask 
questions about my treatment choices;” “I felt my doctor understood what was important to me, and 
considered that in recommending a treatment”), with response options with [ADDRESS_1226144] satisfied.  
 
 
iCommuni cation  
Patient -Centered  Communication:  the Patient Assessment of Cancer Communication Experiences developed  by 
[CONTACT_877435] a21 will assess patient s’ perceptions of patient -centered  communication  at the time of 1) 
cancer  treatment decision -making,  and 2) che motherapy tre atment. At the  post-decision  asses sment, 9 
items  will assess patie nt-centered  communication regar ding treatment decision -making.  At the  follow-up 
asses sment, 11 different  items will assess patie nt-centered  communication  while on active  chemotherapy  
treatment. 
 
Prognostic  communication:   At the  follow-up assessment, patients  will be surveyed  regarding prognostic  
conversations  they may have had with their oncologist,  including  whether  their oncologist has discussed 
their life expectancy  and who brought  up the  conversation.  
 
jPrognostic  Understanding, care preferences and advance care planning:  Patie nts will be asked 
about  their understanding  of the  typi[INVESTIGATOR_877409]’  with their type of cancer.  Using a 
single  item adapted  from  CanCORS9, patie nts will be asked  to estimate their own life  expectancy .[ADDRESS_1226145] discu ssed with their  physician  
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  19  
 their preferences  for care  should they become more seriously  ill, or terminally  
ill. Chart abstraction will determine whether  the patie nt has completed  a DNR order.  
 
Participa nts will be asked  questions  about  prognosis regardless  of whether  or not they skip the life 
expectancy  sections  in the booklet  and video.  
 
 
 
5.5 Description  of Study  Process  
 
1.   IDENTI FY PART ICIPANTS:  The research  assistant  will identify potentially  eligible 
participants  by [CONTACT_877436],  as well  as by 
[CONTACT_877437].  We are requesting  a HIPAA waiver  of auth orization  so that  the 
research  assistant  may look in the Electronic  Health  Record  to deter mine eligibility  before 
approac hing potentially  eligible participants.  
 
2.   CONSENT  PART ICIPANTS:  The research assistant  will approach  the eligible participant 
either  in-person  or over  the phone  and introduce  the study,  answer  any questions,  and offer  the 
potential  participant  time to think  it over. If/When the potential participant decides to 
participate,  the research  assistant will obtain signed informed consent  for particip ation in the 
research  study. If the  potential  participant  decides NOT to  participate,  the study  team  will not 
contact  [CONTACT_877438].   The caregiver will also be invited to participate; they will be given a 
study letter that contains the elements of informed consent.  
 
3. ADMINIS TER BASELINE A SSESSMENT:  If the participant  consents , the research  
assistant  will administer  the baseline  assessment. For patients who are unable to complete the 
baseline assessment immediately following study consent (for example, if they are too fatigued  
or emotionally overwhelmed after their oncology consultation) the protocol will allow for 
participants to be randomized (see 4.0) and then complete the baseline survey (within two 
weeks of randomization).  Question naire-based  instruments will be administe red 1) in person by 
a trained  research  assistant  at the time of a routi nely scheduled  visit,  2) by e-survey,  3) by 
[CONTACT_648],  4) or by [CONTACT_877427]. Mode of  colle ction will be recorded.  The baseline  assessment takes 
approxi mately  5 minutes  to complete.  
 
4.   RANDOMIZE  PART ICIPANTS:  The research  assistant will contact  [CONTACT_877439] -Farber  to randomize the participant:  
 
A.  For patients  making  a chemotherapy  treatment decision  at the time of study  enroll ment: After 
study  consent  and the baseline  assess ment, the study  team  will then rando mize the patient  to 
either  the Usual IC Arm  or the  Investigational  IC A rm of the  study.  
 
B.  For patients  NOT making  a new chemotherapy  treatment decision  at the time of study 
enroll ment (e.g. they are receiving  ongoing  treatment with first-line palliative  
chemotherapy),  randomization  will occur  at the point  at which  the patie nt is faced  with a new 
chemotherapy  treatment decision (e.g. for cancer  progres sion, or unacce ptable  treatment- 
related  toxicity).  After  the patient’s  oncologi st confirms that the patient  is faced  with a new 
chemotherapy  treatment decision, the study  team  will then rando mize the patie nt to either  the 
Usual IC Arm or the  Investigational  IC A rm of the study.  
 
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  20  
 Participa nts will be randomized 1:[ADDRESS_1226146] line palliati ve 
chemotherapy  or 2nd line palliative  chemotherapy.  
 
5.   ADMINISTER INTERVENTION:  For patients  rando mized to the intervention,  the research 
assistant or the patient’s  oncologi st or primary nurse practiti oner (depending  upon oncologist 
preferenc e) will give the participa nt the relevant  interve ntional informed consent  (IC) materials.  
 
The treating oncologi st will identify which  chemotherapy  regimen(s)  are being  considered,  in 
order  to select  the appropriate  IC tool(s)  to give the patient.  Although  we anticipate  that most 
oncologi sts will recommend  a single treatment option and will request  that patie nts be given  a 
single  IC video  and companion  booklet,  patients  may be given  both IC tools  if the oncologist  has 
recom mended  consideration  of either  FOLFOX (+/-bevacizu mab), FOLFIRI(+/ -bevacizu mab), 
FOLFIRINOX, Gemcitabine + nab -paclitaxel, or Gemcitabine . 
 
The patie nt will be given the investigation al IC tools  after  discussing  his or her  treatment 
options  with the oncologist,  baseline  assess ment and rando mization.  Patients  will be given  the 
intervention  IC materials as soon as possible  after discussing  treatment recommendations  with 
their oncologist  but prior to their actual  treatment decision  and initiation.  In select  cases  in 
which  it is not possible  to administer  the intervention  prior  to the initiation  of ch emotherapy  (e.g. 
such as a  patient  who opts  to start a new chemotherapy  regimen  on the  same day as their 
treatment discussio n), it will be allowed to administer the intervention  within  [ADDRESS_1226147]  relevant  to them. 
 
Research  assistants (or the oncologi st, or NP if  they choose  to distribute  the interventi on) will 
give participants  rando mized to the intervention  a hard copy  of the relevant  investigational  IC 
booklet(s),  and will show the participant  the investigational IC video  on a pre-loaded  study  iPad. 
Patients  will be offered  a private  area to review  the video  (such as consultation  room, or in 
private  during  their chemotherapy  infusion).  Caregiv ers will be allowed  to join in the viewing,  if 
the patient  prefers.  If the patient  wishes to  watch  the video  during  their chemotherapy  infusion 
but no private  room  is available  (e.g. they are receiving  treatment  in a semi-private  infusion  area), 
they will use headphones  so as not  to expose other  patients to the interve ntion. All participa nts 
will be given the URL address and  password to take with them so that  they will be able to access 
the video at any time, and will be given a copy  of the booklet  to take home. The website  will 
have  capability of tracking  the frequency  with which  the video  is viewed.  
 
In rare  cases when ad ministering  the intervention  in person is  not possi ble, the research  assistant 
will send the  participa nt the IC booklet  (which  will also contain  the web a ddress  and password 
for the  IC video)  via postal  mail or electronic  mail. The study  research  assistant will call the 
patie nt within one week  to answer a ny questions  about  how to  access  the video.  
 
In cases  in which  the study  resea rch assistant  gives  the participa nt the investigational  IC booklet 
and video,  research  assistants  will make it clear  that their sole purpose is  to orient  the patient  to 
the booklet/video  and answer  questi ons regar ding how to  access  the video website  and/or use the 
study  iPad to watch  the video.  If the  participant  asks the  study  research  assistant  any question 
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August [ADDRESS_1226148] -DECISION ASSESSMENT  within  0-4 weeks by [CONTACT_877440]-Farber after the day on which  the participa nt made their treatment decision  and 
initiated  their new chemotherapy  treatment.  Questi onnair e- based  instruments will be 
administe red 1) in person by a trained research assistant at the time of a routinely  scheduled  visit,  
2) by e -survey,  3) by [CONTACT_648],  4) or by [CONTACT_877427]. Mode of collection will  be recorded. The post-
decision assess ment takes approxi mately  20 minutes  to complete.  
 
 
7. ADMINIS TER FOL LOW-UP ASSESSM ENT within  2-3 months  by [CONTACT_877441]-Farber  after the day on which  the participa nt made their treatment decision  and 
initiated  their new che motherapy  regimen.  Questionnaire - based  instruments will be administe red 
to the participant and his/her caregiver 1) in person by a trained research assistant at the time of a 
routinely  scheduled  visit,  2) by e -survey,  3) by [CONTACT_648],  4) or by [CONTACT_877427]. Mode of collection 
will be recorded. The follow -up assessment takes  approxi mately  20 minutes  to complete.    
 
PATIENT: Immediately following completion of the follow up assessment: Using methods 
similar to those described by [CONTACT_101286]11, the interviewer will show each participant his/her 
responses to the 2 questions about prognosis **. Next, the interviewer will read the following 
standardized prompt: “Please take a moment to look at your responses. I notice that your answers 
to these two questions are [different/the same]. Can you tell me a little bit about this?”  
 
The research assistant will then ask permission to audio -record the patient’s answers. If the 
participant is willing to answer the question but declines audio -recording, notes will be taken 
during and after the interview. The RA will use standard cognitive interviewing techniques, such 
as reflexive listening, “t hink alouds” and standard probes (“can you tell me what you mean by 
[INVESTIGATOR_24565]?”) as necessary.  
 
**Copy -pasted for reference - these are the 2 questions about prognosis:  
Q: Based on what you have learned or been told, what is your understanding about how long the 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_877405]?  
A: 1, More than 10 years | 2, More than 5, but less than 10 years | 3, More than 3, but less than 5 
years | 4, More than 2, but less than 3 years | 5, More than 1, but less than 2 years | 6, L ess than 1 
year 
Q: Every person is different and every situation is unique. If you had to make a guess - based on 
what you have learned about your cancer, your cancer treatment, and what you know about 
yourself - how long do you think that you have to live ? 
A: 1, More than 10 years | 2, More than 5, but less than 10 years | 3, More than 3, but less than 5 
years | 4, More than 2, but less than 3 years | 5, More than 1, but less than 2 years | 6, Less than 
1 year  
 
CAREGIVER : Immediately following completion o f the caregiver follow up assessment, the 
interviewer will read the following standardized prompt:   
 
How do you think the person for whom you care would answer this question? Could you tell me a 
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August [ADDRESS_1226149]?  
Q: Based on wh at you have learned or been told, what is your understanding about how long the 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_877405]?  
A: 1, More than 10 years | 2, More than 5, but less than 10 years | 3, More than 3, but less than 5 
years | 4, More than 2, but less than 3 years | 5, More than 1, but less than 2 years | 6, Less than 
1 year  
 
How do you think the person for whom you care would answer this question? Could you tell me a 
little bit about why you answered in this way?   
Q: Every person is di fferent and every situation is unique. If you had to make a guess - based on 
what you have learned about your cancer, your cancer treatment, and what you know about 
yourself - how long do you think that you have to live?  
A: 1, More than 10 years | 2, More than 5, but less than 10 years | 3, More than 3, but less than 5 
years | 4, More than 2, but less than 3 years | 5, More than 1, but less than 2 years | 6, Less than 
[ADDRESS_1226150] the caregiver’s answers. If the 
participant is willing to answer the question but declines audio -recording, notes will be taken 
during and after the interview. The RA will use standard cognitive interviewing techniques, 
such as reflexive listening, “think alouds” and stan dard probes (“can you tell me what you 
mean by [INVESTIGATOR_24565]?”) as necessary.  
 
Once  the participant  completes the follow-up assessment, the research  assistant  will inform  the 
participa nt that his/her study  partici pation  is now complete  and will remunerate  him/her with a 
$[ADDRESS_1226151] (this applies to patient and caregiver participant s). 
 
 
 
In order to ensure that all interviews are being done correctly, all research  assistants will undergo 
training in qualitative and cognitive interviewing from the SSMC (survey and stats methodology 
core). The study team investigators ([CONTACT_736822] and [CONTACT_633480]) and a clinical social worker 
(Jane Bausch) will also conduct one -on-one training w ith all involved research assistants. This 
training will include a structural overview of the clinical teams involved with the care of GCC 
patients, and how to contact [CONTACT_877442] a timely manner.  Research assistants will be 
trained in how to  recognize participant distress, assess its severity, and respond in an appropriate 
and compassionate manner. This training will include role plays modeling both mild, moderate and 
severe distress, with debriefing and feedback.  The research assistant(s) w ill not implement this 
qualitative question until training in adverse reaction management has occurred.  
The research assistant’s first 3 -5 cognitive interviews will be observed by a study investigator ([CONTACT_877455]), who will offer post -interview debriefin g and critiques.   When RA has shown 
proficiency, RA would then conduct the qualitative interviews independently. A is the most 
appropriate person to conduct these interviews because patients/caregivers are already bringing up 
these issues exact within thei r interactions with her during the surveys.  
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  23  
 The s tudy team will also ensure that all interviews are being done correctly by [CONTACT_877443] ([CONTACT_736822]) listen to a sample of interview audio recordings (2 randomly 
selected recordings p er month for each research assistant conducting interviews). Weekly team 
meetings will also be held so that the study investigator and research assistants have an opportunity 
to discuss any questions or concerns arising during the previous week’s interview  process.  During 
these team meetings, potential interview situations will be discussed and mock interviews may be 
conducted. In addition, study team investigators and researchers conducting the interviews will be 
in regular communication to ensure that in terviews are being conducted on -time and in the 
appropriate way.  
 
 
 
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  24  
  
 
 
5.6 Adverse Reaction  and Their  Manage ment 
 
Reporting  adverse  or unanticipated  events:  Investigators do not anticipate  needing  to remove a 
subject  from  the study  for any  adverse events.  Subjects  may decline  to participate  or withdraw  their 
consent,  as per  standard  policies  and procedure s. If a circu mstance  arose  where  the investi gators 
were  concerned  about  a subject’s  safety as a result of the  study,  the subje ct would be  removed  from 
the study.  The proposed research  will comply with the regulations  set forth  in CFR P art 46, 
Protection  of Hu man Subjects.  All staff involved  in the proposed protocol  have  been  educated 
regarding  HIPAA regulations  and fully  understand  their responsibility  to safeguard  the personal 
health  infor mation  of every  participant  involved  in the research.  
 
Anticip ated reactions: Adverse reactions are expected to be minimal. A possible  adverse  reaction  as a 
result  of participating  in this study  is psycholo gical distress as a  result  of viewing  the infor med 
consent  (IC) video  and booklet,  which  discuss the  fact that chemotherapy  does not  cure metastatic 
colorectal  cancer.  The IC booklet  also includes  an optional  section  that discusses typi[INVESTIGATOR_877410].  This optional  section  is sealed,  and is preceded  by a 
cautionary  sign with explanation  that normalizes  patients’  decision  of whether  or not  to review  it. The  
video  similarly  includes  an optional  web-link to a segment discussing  life expectancy.  This optional  
video  web-link is also preceded  by a cautionary  explanation  that normalizes  patients’ decision  of 
whether  or not  to view  this segment. Participants  may also find some survey ite ms regarding  their 
prognostic  understan ding to be distressing;  however  we have  worded these  items care fully and with 
the input of patient  stakeholders  to ensure  their sensitivity  and acceptability  to patie nts. 
 
Reaction  manage ment: As explained  above,  our interve ntion is designed  to minimize patient  distress 
by [CONTACT_877444].  Further more, 
patients  will not be eligible  for this  study  until after they have  received  an initial  chemotherapy 
recom mendation  from  their oncologist,  a convers ation which  would have  covered  the fact that 
chemotherapy  is not intended  to cure metastatic  colorectal  cancer  and may also have  included 
conversation  about  prognosis. As mentioned  above,  sensitive  aspects  of the  survey were carefully 
worded with  the input of patie nt stakeholders  to minimize potential  for distress. Participants  will be 
reminded  that they may skip portions  of the  questionnaires  that they find disco mforting.  
 
For any  patient  who exhibits  severe  distress as result  of the  study  procedures,  the study  research 
assistant  will notify  the patients’  oncologist  and social  worker for appropriate  response, including 
possible  mental  health  referral  if necessary.  Further more, participants  will be reminded  that 
participation  is voluntary  and can be stopped  at any time for any  reason.  
 
The qualitative interviews, specifically, will include questions about prognosis. These questions are 
sensitive and may precipi[INVESTIGATOR_877411]. We propose the following plan 
should the patient exhibit mild, moderate, or severe distress during the interview.   
 Mild distress: The research assistant will pause the interview, and ask the patient if they would 
prefer to skip the interview question or end the survey all together.  The patient will be 
reminded that answering the qualitative question is entirely volunt ary, and study participation 
is voluntary and can be ended at any time.  At the end of the interview, or should the 
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August [ADDRESS_1226152] a member of 
that patient’s care team (nurse, social wo rker, primary nurse practitioner, or physician) to 
inform them of the event, or to speak with the patient in person (if the interview is taking place 
in clinic) or by [CONTACT_648].  
 Moderate or severe distress: the research assistant will stop the interview, and i mmediately 
notify the patients’ treating physician or nurse practitioner by [CONTACT_877445].  
They will also page the social worker on call for the DFCI GCC.  
 
For any  caregiver  who exhibits  severe  distress as result  of the  study  procedures,  the study  research 
assistant  will notify  the study PI, [CONTACT_877456].  [CONTACT_633480] will personally facilitate obtaining 
the appropriate support for the caregiver in distress , including possible  mental  health  referral for the 
caregiver  if necessary.  Further more, caregivers will  be reminded  that participation  is voluntary  and 
can be stopped  at any time for any  reason.  
 
All sites should  notify  the Overall  PI, Deborah  Schrag,  MD, MPH, at  [EMAIL_15020]  
or [ADDRESS_1226153]. Schrag  will notify  the patie nt’s primary 
oncologist  and the Dana -Farber  IRB, as appropriate.  In concert  with the primary oncologist,  [CONTACT_877457]  will ensure  the patient received  appropriate  follow -up care.  
 
5.7 Privacy  and Confidentiality  
 
Privacy Protections:  
Participa nts will be recruited and consented  in-person in the clinic  or via  phone.  The research 
assistant obtaining  informed consent  will ensure that these  conversations  occur  in private or semi- 
private settings  where  others  cann ot overhe ar. If the participant signs c onsent,  they will be given 
standard  institutional  Informed Consent  materials which  they can review silently (as these  are paper 
docu ments)  or the  investigational  IC materials  (booklet  and video)  which  they can review  in private 
(if a private room  is availabl e) or in semi-private  (in this case, we will  ask the  participant to watch 
the video  using  earphones  to protect  the patient 's privacy).  
 
Participa nts will be asked  to complete  [ADDRESS_1226154]  the participant’s  answers,  or the  participant  may 
complete  the questionnaire  silently  using  a study-provided  iPad.  If these  are done  via phone,  the 
research  assistant  may read the questions  aloud  to the participant  and record  the participant’s 
answers; the  research  assistant  will conduct  the phone  questionnai re from  a private  location.  In 
some instances,  the central  research  assistant at Dana -Farber  may email the REDCap  questionnaire 
link to a participa nt; the partici pant will open  the link, enter the survey using their unique study  ID 
number, complete  and submit the question naire online. The question naire will not request  PHI and 
will be administered online  using  REDCap,  a HIPAA-compliant,  Partners'-managed  electro nic data 
capture platform.  
 
Participa nt question naire responses will be recorded in a de-identified  fashion using  unique study  ID 
numbers.  The only key linking  these unique  study ID numbers to the participant 's identity will be 
maintained  by [CONTACT_877446] a password -protected  spreadsheet  saved in a secure 
network  folder.  Hard -copy  signed  informed consent  docu ments will be kept in the research assistant 's 
locked  drawer.  At Dana -Farber,  this is located  at their Dana -Farber  desk (Dana  Bldg,  10th floor).  Any 
hard-copy  study docu ments will be kept in a study file in the research  assistant 's locked drawer  
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  26  
 separately  from  the signed  informed consent  docu ments. 
 
Once  the study is complete,  the data collected will be aggregated  and analyzed.  All disse mination  of 
results  be aggregated  and de-identified.  
 
Confidenti ality Pr otections:  
The following  infor mation  will be collected  from or about  study partici pants using  unique  study  ID 
numbers (the only key linking  these unique  study ID numbers to the participant 's identity will be 
maintained  by [CONTACT_877447] a password -protected  spreadsheet  saved in a secure 
network  folder).  
 
Medic al record Abstra ction: Baseline abstraction  will collect date of diagnosis  and stage at 
diagnosis,  prior  cancer  surgeries,  prior  adjuvant  or palliative  chemotherapy  and dates  of 
administration,  date of metastatic  recurrence  (if relevant),  comorbid  medical  conditions, 
perfor mance status.  Post-decision  abstraction  will collect  treatment decision  made (e.g. what  
chemotherapy  regimen, clinical  trial, no che motherapy).  Follow -up abstraction  will collect  changes  
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  27  
  
in treatment (e.g. dose reductions,  change  in chemotherapy),  ER visits  or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602],  results  of 
resta ging scans (di sease progression, stable  disease,  or respons e), and medical  record  docu mentation 
of advance  care planning.  
 
Questionnaire  Administratio n: The baseline  assessment will assess socio -demographics, 
information/communication preferences, decision control preferences, and illness understanding. 
Post-decision survey will assess  core understan ding required  for info rmed consent  (IC) (risks, 
benefits,  alternatives ), understan ding of illness  (diagnosis,  curability),  decisional  conflict, 
satisfaction  with the IC materia ls, satisfaction  with communication, and anxiety.  Follow -up survey 
will assess changes  in treatment and illness  understanding,  decisio nal regret,  communication 
satisfaction,  care satisfaction  & anxiety.  
 
The raw data  will only be shared  with the study  team  at Dana -Farber  Cancer Institute.  Once  the 
study  is complete,  the data colle cted will be aggregated  and analyzed. All disse mination  of results 
be aggregated  and completely  de-identified.  
 
Data  collected  from  this study  will be retained  for [ADDRESS_1226155] -copy  study materials  will be kept in the research assistant's locked  drawer.  At Dana -Farber, 
this is located  at their Dana-Farber  desk (Dana  Bldg,  10th floor).  Electronic  data will be kept in 
password -protected  spreadsheets  saved in a secure  network  folder  accessible  only to study  team 
members  and maintained  by [CONTACT_375085] -Farber  IS.  Data  will be captured  using  REDCap,  a HIPAA - 
compliant,  Partners '-managed  electronic  data capture  platform.  
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August [ADDRESS_1226156] hypotheses  that the study interve ntion---infor med consent  (IC) video/wri tten tools d eveloped 
with patie nt and clinician input—can improve  patient -centered  decision  making  for subjects  contemplati ng 
palliative  chemotherapy  for advanced GI cancer . 
 
Objective 1: Deter mine if the multi-media infor med conse nt (IC) to ols improve  patients’  under standing  of 
benefits  and risks of palliative  chemotherapy  as co mpared  to the standard  IC process.  
Hypothesis: The multi-media  IC to ols will decrea se the likeli hood that patients  overesti mate the curative 
potential  of palliative  chemotherapy  as compared  to the usual  IC process.  (primary study outcome)  
Hypothesis:  The multi -media IC tools will increase the likelihood that patients understand the goal of    
treatment as compared to the usual IC process .  
Hypothesis: The multi-media  IC tools will increase the likelihood that patients will have an accurate 
understandin g of the risks of chemotherapy as compared to the usual  IC process.  
 
Objective 2:  Determine if the multi -media informed consent (IC) tool s decrease decisional conflict23, increase 
the likelihood patients achieve their preferred role in decision -making23, and increase satisfaction with the 
chemotherapy IC process as compare d with the st andard IC process22. 
Hypothesis:  The multi -media IC tools will decrease decisional conflict as compared to the usual IC process  
Hypothesis:  The multi -media IC tools will increase the likelihood that patients achieve their preferred role in 
treatment decisi on-making as compared to the usual IC process  
Hypothesis:  The multi -media IC tools will increase satisfaction with the chemotherapy IC process as 
compared to the usual IC process  
 
 
Objective 3: Deter mine if the multi-media infor med consent (IC) to ols enhance  patients’  progn ostic 
understanding,  increase  advance  care planning,  and facilitate  patient -physician  conversations  about  end-of- 
life care preferences.  
Hypothesis:  Patie nts randomized to the intervention  will have more realistic expectations of their 
prognosi s as compared to patient s randomized to the usual IC process.  
Hypothesis: Patie nts randomized to interve ntion will be more likely to have design ated a healthcare  proxy 
and more  likely  to have  a DNR  order  as compared  to patients  randomized to the usual  IC process 
Hypothesis: Patie nts randomized to the intervention  will be more likely  to discuss  their end-of-life care 
preferences  with their healthcare  proxy, and  with their oncologist  as co mpared to patients  rando mized to 
the usual  IC process.  
We will adhere  to standard reporti ng principles delineated by [CONTACT_877448].  Primary reports  will reflect  the as rando mized,  “intenti on to treat” 
principle,  however,  we will also describe  results accor ding to actual exposure to the study  interve ntions  
(based on patients’ self -report of whether they reviewed the standard -of-care, or investigational 
chemotherapy informed consent materials) ..Fisher’s  exact test will test the difference  betwe en the study  
arms in the first primary outco me (the proportion  of patients  at follow -up assess ment who fail  to 
understand  that chemotherapy  is “not at all likely”  to cure their cancer,  as assessed by [CONTACT_877449] S9). We will also test the influence of the intervention  on secondary outcomes  (e.g. 
understanding  of the goal of palliative chemotherapy , chemotherapy  risks,  decisional conflict, 
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  29  
 achievement of preferred role in decision -making, satisfaction with chemotherapy IC process, prognostic 
understanding,  advance  care planning,  discussion  of end -of-life care preferences,  satisfaction with MD 
communication,  satisfac tion with infor med consent  (IC) docu ments, decisional  regret,  emotional  
distress) using  Fisher’s exact  or chi -square  tests for dicho tomous outco mes, and t-tests or Wilcoxon  
tests for linear  outco mes. For missing data for primary or secondary outcomes, we will employ 
multiple imputation under a missing at random assumption24.  
 
Subset  analyses will explore the effect of the intervention  on 1) patie nts making  a decision about  1st line 
treatment, 2) patients  making  a decision  about  2nd line treatment, 3) patients with colorectal cancer, and 
4) patients with pancreatic cancer.  
 
Because  the effects  of our interve ntion may be moderated  by [CONTACT_877450]  (e.g. age, 
race/ethnicity,  health  literacy and numeracy,  communication  preferences,  decisional  contr ol preferenc es), 
we plan  to conduct  exploratory  analyses  investigating  whether  these  factors  moderate  the effect of the 
intervention  of outco mes including 1) accurate understan ding of chemotherapy  benefits,  2) satisfaction with  
communication  and the IC tools,  3) decisional  involve ment, or 4) emotional  distress.  For example: we 
hypothesize  that the IC tool may lead to decreased  distress  among patients  who prefer  a detail -oriented 
prognostic  communication  style,  whereas  it may lead to increased  distress among patients  who prefer  a 
vague  and support -focused  prognostic  communication  style.  We would  also hypothesize  that the effects  of 
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August [ADDRESS_1226157] these 
hypotheses  using  multivariable logistic or linear  regres sion analyses  (depending  upon the depe ndent 
varia ble), including  interaction  terms for colline ar factors,  and controlling  for potential  confounding 
factors  (e.g. age, race/et hnicity, marital  status).  
 
Power:  In the CANCORS9 study,  80% of mCRC patients  on 1st line chemotherapy  thought  that chemotherapy 
could  poten tially cure their disease  (median  of [ADDRESS_1226158]-diagnosis).  Based  on previous  series  and 
projections  about  our patient  mix, we anticipate  that 60% of patients  will have  inaccurate  expectations  about 
the benefits  of ch emotherapy.  If the  intervention  strategy  is able to better align  expectations  with likely 
outco mes by [CONTACT_877451]  (33%) we will  deem  the interve ntion as having  major impact.  If this  benchmark  33% 
reduction  is not achieved  but the intervention  exposed  subjects  nonetheless  have  expectations  that are more 
accur ate, we will view  the interventi on as beneficial  but lacki ng major impact.  Assu ming a baseli ne 60% 
rate of inaccurate  expectations  about  the benefits  of ch emotherapy,  with a total of [ADDRESS_1226159]  
80% power to  detect  a 33% decrease  (20% absol ute decrease)  in inacc urate expectations  among patients 
exposed  to the intervention  with a one-sided  type I error  of 2.5%.  
 
Open -ended comments in the patient and caregiver follow -up surveys regarding prognostic understanding 
will be transcribed verbatim with removal of  all potential identifying information (e.g. names). The 
transcribed responses will then be analyzed using standard qualitative techniques.  Borrowing from principles 
of grounded theory25,26 ,comments will be reviewed by [CONTACT_877452] a set 
of themes emerges. Themes will be compared and revised in an iterative process with input from the lead 
study investigators as necessary to resolve differences. A coding manu al will be developed using the final 
coding schema.  Using this coding framework, each participant’s response will be analyzed line -by [CONTACT_877453]. Coders will be blinded to the participants’ randomization group, although if the 
particip ant mentions the intervention within their response, this will not be stricken from the transcripts.  
 
 
 
7.0 REFERENCES  
 
1. QOPI  [INVESTIGATOR_877412].  2013;  
http://qopi.asco.org/Documents/QCPstandards_Round8_01_15_2013.pdf. Accessed March 7, 2013.  
2. Cassileth  BR, Zupkis  RV, Sutton‐Smith  K, March V. Informed  consent  ‐‐ why  are its goals  imperfectly  realiz ed? N 
Engl  J Med.  Apr 17 1980; 302(16):896‐ 900. 
3. Peppercorn  JM, Smith  TJ, Helft  PR, et al. American  society  of clinical oncology  statement:  toward  individualized  
care  for patients  with  advanced  cancer. J Clin Oncol.  Feb 20 2011; 29(6):755‐760.  
4. Blackwell  AC, Boothman  RC. Documenting  Informed  Consent  for Chemot herapy. Journal  of Oncology  Practice.  
2007;3(4):1 94‐195.  
5. Annas  GJ. Informed  consent,  cancer,  and truth in prognosis.  N En gl J Med.  Jan 20 1994;330(3):22 3‐225.  
6. Faden  R, Beauchamp  T. A History  and Theory of Informed  Consent.  New  York:  Oxford University  Press;  1986.  
7. Jenk ins V, Solis‐Trapala  I, Langridge  C, Catt S, Talbot  DC, Fallowfield  LJ. What oncologists  believe they said and 
what  patients believe  they  heard:  an analysis  of phase  I trial  discussions.  J Clin Oncol.  Jan 1 2011;29(1):61‐ 68. 
8. Temel  JS, Greer JA, Adma ne S, et al. Longitud inal perceptions  of prognosis  and goal s of therapy  in patients with 
metastat ic non‐small‐ce ll lung cancer: results  of a randomiz ed stud y of early  palliative  care. J Clin Oncol.  Jun 10 
2011;29(17):2319‐2326.  
9. Weeks  JC, Catalano  PJ, Cronin  A, et al. Patients'  expectations  about  effects  of chemotherapy  for advanced 
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August [ADDRESS_1226160] 25 2012;367(17):1616‐1625.  
10. Cassileth  BR, Zupkis  RV, Sutton‐Smith  K, March V. Information  and participation  prefer ences  among  canc er 
patie nts. Ann Intern  Med.  Jun 1980;92( 6):832‐836.  
11.  White DB, Ernecoff N, Buddadhumaruk P, Hong S, Weissfeld L, Curtis JR, Luce JM, Lo B. Prevalence of and 
Factors Related to Discordance About Prognosis Between Physicians and Surrogate Decision Makers of 
Critically Ill Patients. J Amer Med Assoc. May 17 201 6;315(19):[ADDRESS_1226161] vital sign scores.  Journal of the 
American  Boar d of Family  Medicine : JABFM.  Sep‐Oct 2013;26(5): 558‐565.  
13.  Lipkus  IM, Samsa  G, Rimer BK. General performance  on a numeracy  scale  among  highly educated samples.  Med  
Decis  Making. Jan‐Feb 2001;21(1):37‐4 4. 
14.  Cella  DF, Tulsky DS, Gray  G, et al. The Functional Assessment  of Cancer  Therapy  scale:  devel opme nt and 
validation  of the general  measure.  J Clin Oncol.  Mar 1993;11(3):570‐579.  
15.  Sche ier MF, Carver  CS, Bridges  MW. Distinguishing  optimism  from  neuroticism  (and  trait anxiety,  self‐mastery, 
and self‐est eem):  a reevaluation  of the Life Orientation Test.  Journal  of personality  and social psycholog y. Dec 
1994;67(6): 1063‐1078.  
16.  Mer opol NJ, Egleston  BL, Buzaglo  JS, et al. Cancer  patient  prefe rences  for quality and length  of life. Cancer.  Dec 
15 2008;113(12):3459‐3466.  
   17. Legare  F, Kearing S, Clay K, et al. Are you SURE?: Assessing  patient decisional  conflict  with  a 4‐item  screening test.    
Can Fam Physician.  Aug 2010;56(8):e308‐314.  
   18.   Leighl  NB, Shepherd  HL, Butow PN, et al. Supporti ng treatm ent decision  mak ing in advanced  cancer:  a randomiz ed 
trial of a decision aid for patients  with  advanced  colorectal  cancer  considering  chemotherap y. J Clin Oncol.  May  20 
2011;29(15):2077‐2084.  
   19. Mack  JW, Block  SD, Nilsson  M, et al. Measuring  therapeut ic alliance  between oncologists  and patients  with 
advanced  cancer: the Huma n Connecti on Scale. Cancer.  Jul 15 2009;115(14):3 302‐3311.  
 20.  Brehaut  JC, O'Connor  AM, Woo d TJ, et al. Validation  of a decision  regret  scale.  Med Decis  Making.  Jul‐Aug 
2003;23(4): 281‐292.  
 21. Maz or K AN.  Patient‐Centered  Communication  Scale.  2014.  
 22.  Mazor, K. M., Street, R. L., Sue, V. M., Williams, A. E., Rabin, B. A., & Arora, N. K. (2016). Assessing Patients’ 
Experiences with Communication Across the Cancer Care Continuum.  Patient Education and Counseling , 99(8), 
1343 –1348. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.pec.2016.03.[ADDRESS_1226162] 
cance r. Jama.  May  14 1997;277(18):14 85‐1492.  
24.   Collins LM, Schafer JL, Kam CM. A comparison of inclusive and restrictive strategies in modern missing data 
procedures. Psychol Methods. 2001;6(4):330 -351.  
25.  Charmaz K. Constructing grounded theory: a practical guide through qualitative analysis.  Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage Publications; 2006.  
26.  Corbin JM, Strauss AL. Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developi[INVESTIGATOR_48545] . 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2008.  
27.  Hagerty  RG, Butow  PN, Ellis PA, et al. Cancer  patie nt prefer ences  for comm unication  of prognosis  in the metastat ic 
setting. J Clin Oncol.  May  1 2004;22(9):1 721‐1730.
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  32  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
28. Jenk ins V, Fallowfield  L, Saul J. Information needs of patients  with cancer: results  from  a large  study  in [LOCATION_006] cancer 
cent res. Br J Cancer.  Jan 5 2001;84(1):48‐51.  
29. Lennes  IT, Temel JS, Hoedt  C, Meilleur A, Lamont  EB. Predictors  of newly  diagnosed cancer patient s' 
understa nding of the goals  of their care  at initiation  of chemotherapy.  Cancer.  Sep 25 2012.  
30. Mer opol NJ, Weinfurt  KP, Burnett  CB, et al. Perceptions  of patie nts and physic ians regarding  phase  I cancer 
clinical trials:  implic ations  for physicia n‐patie nt commun ication.  J Clin Oncol.  Jul 1 2003;21(13):2589‐2596.  
31. Weeks  JC, Cook EF, O'Day  SJ, et al. Relationship  between  cancer patie nts' predictions  of prognosis  and their 
treatm ent preferences.  Jama . Jun 3 1998;279(21): 1709‐1714.  
32. Meyerhar dt JA, Li L, Sanoff  HK, Carpenter  Wt, Schrag D. Effectiveness  of bevacizumab  with  first‐line  comb ination 
chem othera py for Medicare patients with stage  IV colorectal  canc er. J Clin Oncol . Feb 20 2012;30(6):608‐6 15. 
33. Meyerhar dt JA, Mayer  RJ. System ic therapy  for colorectal  cancer. N Engl J Med. Feb 3 2005; 352(5):476‐[ADDRESS_1226163] ic disclosure.  J Clin Oncol.  Dec 10 
2007;25(35):5636‐5642.  
35. Audrey  S, Abel  J, Blazeby  [CONTACT_54963], Falk S, Campbell  R. Wha t oncologists  tell patients about  survi val benef its of 
palliative  chemotherapy  and implications for informed  cons ent: qualitative  study. Bmj.  2008;337:a752.  
36. Lamont  EB, Christakis  NA. Prognostic  disclosure  to patients  with cancer near  the end of life. Ann Intern Med.  Jun 
19 2001;134(12):1096‐1105.  
37. Fallowfield  L, Ford  S, Lewis  S. No news  is not  good  news: informat ion preferences  of patients with  cancer. 
Psychooncol ogy. Oct 1995;4(3):197‐202.  
38. Gatt ellari M, Butow  PN, Tattersall  MH,  Dunn  SM, MacLeod CA. Misunderstand ing in cancer  patie nts: why shoot 
the messenger?  Ann Oncol.  Jan 1999;10(1):39‐46.  
39. Gatt ellari M, Voigt  KJ, Butow  PN, Tattersall MH.  When  the treatment  goal  is not  cure:  are cancer  patients 
equi pped to make  inform ed decisions?  J Clin Oncol.  Jan 15 2002;20(2):503‐5 13. 
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  33  
  
40. Horng  S, Emanuel  EJ, Wilfond  B, Rackoff  J, Martz K, Grady C. Descriptions  of benefi ts and risks  in consent  forms 
for phase  1 oncology  trials. N Engl  J Med. Dec 26 2002;347(26):2 134‐2140.  
41. Arora  NK, Hess e BW, Rimer BK, Viswanath  K, Clayman  ML, Croyle  RT. Frustrated  and confused: the Americ an 
publ ic rates  its cancer‐related  inform ation‐seeking  experience s. J Gen Intern Med.  Mar 2008;2 3(3):223‐228.  
42. Mack  JW, Cronin  A, Keating  NL, et al. Associations  Between  End‐of‐Life  Discussion  Characteristics  and Care  
Received  Near Death:  A Prospective  Cohort  Study.  J Clin  Oncol.  Dec 10 2012; 30(35):4387‐ 4395.  
43. Mack  JW, Cronin  A, Taback  N, et al. End‐of‐life  care  discussions  among  patients  with  advanced  cancer: a cohort 
study.  Ann Intern Med.  Feb 7 2012;15 6(3):204‐210.  
44. Wright  AA, Zhang  B, Ray A, et al. Associations  between end‐of‐life  discussions,  patie nt men tal health,  medical 
care  near  death, and caregiver bereav ement  adjustment.  Jama.  Oct 8 2008; 300(14):1665 ‐1673.  
45. Bruera  E, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_89999]  E, Calder  K, Neuma nn CM, Hanson  J. The additi on of an audiocassette  recording  of a 
consultation  to written  recommend ations  for patients with  advanced  cancer:  A randomiz ed, controlled  trial. 
Cancer.  Dec 1 1999;86(11):2420‐2425.  
46. Clayton  JM, Butow PN, Tattersall  MH,  et al. Random ized controlled  trial of a prompt  list to help advanced  cancer 
patie nts and their  caregivers  to ask questions about  prognosis  and end‐ of‐life  care. J Clin Oncol. Feb 20 
2007;25(6): 715‐723.  
47.  
48. Society  AC. 2012;  Cancer  Facts & Figur es 2012.  Available  at: 
www.cancer.org/research/cancerfactsfigures/cancerfactsfigures/cancer ‐facts‐figures‐2012. Accessed December  
12, 2012.  
49. Colon  Cancer.  Version  3.2013. NCCN  Clinical  Practice  Guidelines  in Oncology.  2013. www.nccn.org.  
50. Abrams  TA, Meyer  G, Moloney  J, Mey erhardt  JA, Schrag D, Fuchs CS. Patterns  of chemothe rapy use in a U.S .‐ 
wide  population‐based  cohort of patients with  metastatic  colorect al cancer. J Clin Oncol.  2012  2012;30(suppl;  
abstr  3537).  
.  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
Title:  Improving Informed Consen t for Palliative Chemotherapy: RCT of Usua l IC versu s Investigationa l IC 
Overall  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_877401],  Dana‐Farber  Cancer  Institute  
Dana‐Farber protocol  version  no./ date: v17 / August 30 , 2017  
Page  34  
  
 
8.0 APPENDICIES A -X 
 
Study forms and assessments:  
Appendix  A:    Checklist  for Partici pating  Sites  
Appendix  B:  Registration  Form  
Appendix  C:  Patient Baseline  Assess ment 
Appendix D:   Caregiver Baseline Assessment  
Appendix  E:  Patient Post -decision  Assess ment – Usual IC A rm  
Appendix F:  Patient Post -decision Assessment – Investigational IC Arm  
Appendix G:  Patient Follow -up Assessment – Usual IC Arm  
Appendix H:  Caregiver Follow -up Assessment – Usual IC Arm  
Appendix I:     Patient Follow -up Assessment – Investigational  IC Arm  
Appendix  J:  Caregiver Follow -up Assess ment – Investigational  IC Arm  
Appendix  K:    Medical  Record  Abstraction  Form  
 
Appendix  L:  Phone script  for app roaching  potential  participants  via phone  
Appendix  M:  Phone script  for assessment  administration  
 
Investig ational IC Arm:  
Appendix N:   FOLFOX+/ -bevacizumab booklet  
Appendix O:  FOLFOX+/ -bevacizumab video website  
Appendix P:   FOLFIRI+/ -bevacizumab booklet  
Appendix Q:    FOLFIRI+/ -bevacizumab video website  
Appendix R:   FOLFIRINOX booklet  
Appendix S:   FOLFIRINOX video website  
Appendix T:   Gemcitabine + nab -paclitaxel booklet  
Appendix U:   Gemcitabine + nab -paclitaxel video website  
Appendix V:   Gemcitabine booklet  
Appendix W:   Gemcitabine video website  
 
Appendix X:  Global Medical Record Release Form  
 
Appendix Y:   Study Letter for Caregiver Participants  