 
Tolvaptan Treatment to Reverse Worsening Outpatient Heart Failure:  
Possible Role of Copeptin i n Identifying Responders  
(TROUPER)  
 
 
 
NCT number  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date  03/07/2022  
 
 1 
 
Study Protocol  
 
 
 
 
Tolvaptan Treatment to Reverse Worsening Outpatient Heart Failure: 
Possible Role of Copeptin In Identifying Responders  
(TROUPER)  
 
 
 
Kirkwood F. Adams, Jr., MD 
Principal Investigator 
 
[CONTACT_15957]-Investigators, Amanda Lee, BA, Jana Glotzer, ANP, ACNP, Todd Schwartz, DrPH on 
behalf of the UNITE -HF investigative team at UNC-CH and the UNITE -HF Site Network 
 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill  
 
 
 
   
Version: 12.1 
 
Version Date: 3-7-2022 
 
 
 
 2 
 
1.  Protocol Synopsis 
Title:  Tolvaptan Treatment to  Reverse Worsening Outpatient Heart Failure: 
Possible Role of Copeptin In Identifying Responders  
Indication: Heart Failure  
 
Location:  Approximately 4 -6 clinical centers in U.S.  
 
Rationale:  Patients with worsening heart failure presenting in the outpati ent setting 
represent a unique opportunity for novel approaches to decongestion that 
may more rapi[INVESTIGATOR_879083].  In these patients with less severe congestion , 
combining the vasopressin  antagonist tolvaptan with loop diuretic may 
represent a more effective strategy for decongestion.  In addition, profiling copeptin may help identify patients in this unique population who are more  
likely to respond to tolvaptan.   
Hypothesis:  This study is designed to test two related hypotheses 1) that the addition of 
oral tolvaptan to loop diuretic therapy will produce better decongestion than 
augmentation of loop diuretic therapy in patients presenting with worsening 
heart failure in the outpatient set ting 2) that  prespecified  post hoc 
stratification on baseline copeptin level will be a predictor of the degree of 
superiority of oral tolvaptan plus loop diuretic compared to augmentation of 
loop diuretic.   
Study Design:  This study will be a randomized, double blind, positive control, multi -center 
clinical trial enrolling patients who present in the outpatient setting with signs 
and symptoms consistent with worsening congestive heart failure.  The 
sample size for t he study is [ADDRESS_1228223] of follow -up by 
[CONTACT_879113] .   
Primary 
Objectives:  The primary objectives  of this study are to compare the effects of oral 
tolvaptan plus augmented  loop diuretic versus augmented loop diuretic on 
short t erm changes in body weight and indices of congestion in patients 
presenting with worsening congestive heart failure in the outpatient setting 
with and without  prespecified  post hoc stratification based on baseline 
copeptin level.   
 
 3 
	
Tolvaptan Treatment to Reverse Worsening Outpatient Heart Failure  
STUDY FLOW CHART  
 
SCREENING  
Patients presenting with worsening heart failure in the outpatient setting will be considered for the 
study .  Patients who meet study inclusion and exclusion criteria will be consen ted and enter the study.  
RANDOMIZATION  
Patients will be randomi zed in a 1:1 fashion to Augmentation of current daily dose of oral loop diuretic + 
30 mg of oral Tolvaptan daily OR Augmentation of current daily dose of oral loop diuretic  + placebo for 
tolvaptan.  The last day of s tudy drug administration will be Day 8 of the study.    
BASELINE  VISIT  
• History and physical examination, vital signs, and review of current cardiovascular medications  
• Serum pregnancy test  
• Assessment of degree of congestion present  
• Blood sampling  for routine clinical labs and copeptin determination  
• Blood sampling for optional biobank for future study of biomarkers, DNA and RNA  
• Urine sample for future analysis  
Patients without baseline hyponatremia (serum sodium <135 mEq/L)  will be o bserved for [ADDRESS_1228224] repeat 
determination of serum sodium 6 hours  after their dose of study drug.  Patients with overcorrection 
of serum sodium (increase in serum sodium of > 6 mEq/L from baseline) will be receive D5W and 
have serum sodium monitored for a minimum of 24 hours  (details in study protocol ).  Hyponatremic 
patients without overcorrection of serum sodium will complete observation at 8 hours.   
FOLLOW -UP VISITS 
Day 3 Visit, Day 8 Visit  
• History and physical examination, vital signs, current cardiovascular medications  
• Blood sampling  for routine clinical labs and  copeptin determination  
• Blood sampling for  optional biobank for future study of biomarkers, DNA and RNA  
• Urine sample for future analysis  
• Changes in cardiovascular medications  
• Assessment of degree of congestion present  
• Assessment for occurrence of events r elated the morbidity index  
• Assessment for adverse events  
Day 30 Telephone Follow -up  
• Days of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_879084]  
• Days of ED visit and reason for ED visit  
• Days of clinic visits and reasons for clinic visits  
 4 
• Changes in cardiovascular  medications  
• Assessment for adverse events  
2.  Background and Rationale 
Problem and Target Population.  Worsening heart failure due to f luid overload remains a 
vexing problem in congestive heart failure  (CHF) despi[INVESTIGATOR_879085]-based 
medications dictated by [CONTACT_879114].  Acute decompensated heart failure is 
one manifestation of this  general syndrome of worsening heart failure that has attracted 
increasing attention .   Acute decompensated heart failure is on the se vere end of the 
spectrum of the worsening heart failure syndrome and has emerged as a major public 
health problem associated with frequent hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5478] a poor prognosis post 
discharge.  However, patients presenting with worsening heart failure in the outpatient 
setting are also an important part of the overall decompensated heart failure syndrome .   
We are proposing that these patients comprise a novel clinical subset that has not been 
well investigated to date.  Often patients  presenting to the outpatient clinic with 
decompensated heart failure have less congestion and fluid overload  than patients with 
acute heart failure who require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].  Patients in this less ill group can often be 
managed as outpatients but they are at risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_879086] .  As efforts to reduce hospi[INVESTIGATOR_879087], the aim will be to i dentify interventions that  more effectively relieve fluid 
overload and allow outpatient management without  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].  
 The pathophysiology of the process that leads to congestio n in out patient s who present 
with worsening heart failure is not fully delineated.   However, congestion caused by [CONTACT_879115].  It is also well recognized these patients decompensate  despi[INVESTIGATOR_879088].   Current treatment typi[INVESTIGATOR_879089], less commonly, the addition of non-
loop diuretics.   However, this approach is  often  ineffective; hospi[INVESTIGATOR_879090]  a poor response characterized by [CONTACT_879116] a slow 
recovery to euvolemia.  Despi[INVESTIGATOR_879091], there has been 
little clinical investigation of potential therapeutic strategies to improve care in this important 
clinical subset.  
Tolvaptan Therapy.  Vasopressin antagonis ts are a potential adjunct  to current strategies 
for the treatment of worsening heart failure seen in the outpatient setting.  Tolvaptan, a 
selective oral V2 vasopressin receptor antagonist, has been well studied in acute and 
 [ADDRESS_1228225] to reset  
the patient’s volume status to euvolemia and thereby [CONTACT_879117][INVESTIGATOR_059].  If this concept is correct, the addition of tolvaptan may be 
short-term and yet still effective.    
Copeptin Guided Therapy.  In addition  to testing the possible novel role of tolvaptan as 
effective therapy in outpatient s with worsening heart failure, this trial is also designed to 
investigate the potential role of the biomarker, copeptin, to guide patient selection for 
tolvaptan therapy.  Copeptin or c-terminal pre-provasopressin is tight ly coupled to 
vasopressin secretion.  So this biomarker provides a reliable estimate of the extent of 
vasopressin activation in patients presenting with worsening heart failure.  Greater 
activation of vasopressin could result in more water retention and promote expansion of  
intravascular volume; leading to more advanced congestion than that promoted by [CONTACT_879118].  Given that the major mechanism of action of tolvaptan appears to be 
inhibition of vasopressin, it is possible that this drug may be more pharmaco logically active 
in patients where greater vasopressin activation is present.   
 In the current study design, assessment of the association of copeptin with the 
therapeutic response to tolvaptan will be done post hoc.  Samples for analysis of copeptin 
will be obtained throughout the study but assays will not be performed until after the study 
is completed.  The proposed principal analysis of the predictive role of copeptin for 
tolvaptan response will be based on post hoc stratification of the study populati on by 
[CONTACT_879119].  The current plan is to base this post hoc stratification on the 
results of a recently completed pi[INVESTIGATOR_879092] -treatment copeptin level 
with the effect of tolvaptan on change in body weight in patients  with chronic stable heart 
failure due to reduced ejection fraction.   
 Results from this pi[INVESTIGATOR_879093].  A total of 20 outp atients with chronic stable symptomatic 
heart failure and history reduced left ventr icular ejection fraction (≤40) were enrolled in the 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  Patients were selected for later enrollment by [CONTACT_879120] 
 6 
lower quartile copeptin levels determined during an outpatient screening period (n=10 
each).  Patients received a single dose of 30 mg of tolvaptan and body weight, fluid intake 
and urine output were monitored in a clinical research unit for 24 hours.  For analysis, 
patients  were divided into two groups using a prespecified cut point based on their baseline 
copeptin level determined during their study hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] (≥10 versus <10 pmol/L).   
Results comparing key study variables based on this prespecified cut point approach are 
shown in Table 1.  These findings  demonstrate that change in body weight, reflecting the 
net aquaretic response to tolvaptan, was greater in the subgroup of patients with baseline 
copeptin levels ≥ 10 pmol/L.   
 
Table 1.  Changes in body weight and fluid status after tolvaptan by [CONTACT_879121] ≥ 10 
pmol/L  Copeptin < 10 
pmol/L *P 
value 
N 20 10 10  
Baselin e Copeptin (pmol/L)  13.1 ± 9.7 20.5 ± 8.7 5.7 ± 1.9 <0.001  
Change in Body Weight (Kg)  -0.8 ± 1.1 -1.3 ± 1.0 -0.4 ± 1.0 0.035 
Net Output (mL)  1360 ± 1881 2091 ± 1662 630 ± 1876 0.089 
Total Output (mL) 6141 ± 2072 6498 ± 2328 5784 ± 1835 0.853 
Total Inpu t (mL)  4780 ± 1664 4406 ± 1398 5154 ± 1893 0.393 
Values are mean ± SD. *P Values are for comparison of copeptin groups by [CONTACT_879122].   
 
One potential implication of these pi[INVESTIGATOR_879094].  Patient s with low vasopressin activation can be hypothesized to have less 
water retention and so that water overload may play less of a pathophysiological role  than 
sodium retention in these patients .  In contrast, if the patient’s heart failure is associated 
with an elevation in vasopressin , there may be a greater role for water overload and 
therefore a better clinical response to tolvaptan therapy.   
Assessment of Other Potential Markers. The study will collect serial blood samples to allow future investigation of other potential 
biomarkers and Omic markers (including DNA and RNA) that may inform understanding of 
the decompensated heart failure state and heart failure p atient response to tolvaptan 
therapy.   
 [ADDRESS_1228226] questioned the role of objective 
assessments of congestion like change in body weight, the work of Pang et al. shown below (Figure 1) suggests reconsideration of this measurement as a useful surrogate 
marker.  These investigators report data from the EVEREST trial that shows a very strong 
link between the degree of acute weight loss and the magnitude  of dyspnea relief reported 
by [CONTACT_11581] t after 24 hours of inpatient therapy.  These findings strongly support using 
change in body weight as the  primary efficacy endpoint for the current study. 
 
Figure 1.  Pang et al. Change in Weight versus Change in Patient Reported Dyspnea 
 
	
 
Visual Analog Scales (VAS) for Patient Assessment.  Additionally, it is necessary to 
consider other approaches to assess fluid status that are more clinically oriented.  There continues to be substantial controversy surrounding the accuracy of a number of clinical 
assessments to document improvement in worsening heart failure.  Both the nature of the 
 [ADDRESS_1228227] 
worsening congestion while a decision to reduce loop dose during Visit 2 would indicate 
improvement in volume status and less congestion.  Therefore, assessments of change in 
loop diuretic dosing at Visit 2 are designated as key secondary endpoint s in this trial.  
Three assessments of change in loop diuretic will be made during analysis  of study results: 
1) change from baseline to 48 hours in loop diuretic dose (with loop diuretic dosing standardized on milligrams (mg) of furosemide equivalent ), 2) whether loop diuretic dose 
was changed at 48 hours using a dichotomous approach and 3) changes in loop diuretic 
which account for whether loop diuretic was decreased, increased or unchanged .  Details 
 [ADDRESS_1228228] a substantial amount of information on various  indices of heart failure status in this 
unique clinical population.  Data remain limited on the clinical characteristics and clinical 
course of patients with outpatient worsening of h eart failure.  The study will use a novel 
version of the 10-point VAS scale for patient reported congestion based on the patient’s self report of their perception of the extent of fluid overload present.  The study investigator also will complete a VAS congestion scale based on their perception.  Finally, repor ted 
changes in fluid status will also be assessed by [CONTACT_879123].  A substantial amount of information was collected on a variety of signs and symptoms of heart failure status including detailed  
assessment of congestion and physical limitation  during the follow-up period.  Future 
analyses of th ese data will help to better understand the clinical pi[INVESTIGATOR_879095].   
Clinical Outcomes.  Assessment of the effect of study treatments on occurrence of worsening heart failure as reflected by [CONTACT_879124], increases in diuretic treatment and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_879096].  The small sample size of this 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_879097].  However, information on these adverse clinical outcomes will be collected as part of 
the protocol.  Modifications to Original Study Statistical Analysis Plan.  A number of modifications 
were made to the original statistical analysis plan for the study.  Secondary efficacy 
endpoints were revised to reflect 1) knowledge gained since the desi gn of the study 
concerning the assessment of worsening heart failure , 2) the results of analyses of blinded, 
aggregate study data related to clinical metrics of worsening heart failure collected in the 
trial and 3) refinement of the analysis of the primary endpoint related to baseline copeptin 
and clarification of the analysis of the association of change in body weight with baseline 
copeptin in the two randomized arms of the study.  In addition, to reduce the effect of 
multiple testing, a limited number of  secondary endpoints were specified.  These finalized 
secondary outcomes were ordered according to their clinical importance.  Blinded review of 
adverse outcomes revealed that events related to worsening heart failure were uncommon during the treatment period.  Thus the tertiary endpoint, clinical composite of morbidity, was 
 [ADDRESS_1228229] two related hypotheses 1) that the additi on of 
oral tolvaptan to augmented loop diuretic therapy will produce better decongesti on than 
augmentation of loop  diuretic therapy alone in patients presenting with worsening heart 
failure in the outpatient setting and 2) that prespecified post hoc stratification based on 
baseline copeptin level will be a predictor of the degree of superiority of oral tolvaptan plus augmented loop diuretic compared to augmentation of loop diuretic  alone.   
Objectives.  This study is designed to address the following objectives:  
The objectives of this study will be  to compare the effects of oral tolvaptan plus augmented 
loop diuretic versus augmented loop diuretic on 1) short term changes in body weight with 
and without stratification for baseline copeptin and 2) indices of congestion in patients  
presenting with worsening congestive heart failure in t he outpatient setting with and without 
prespecified post hoc stratification based on baseline copeptin level.    
 4.  Study Overview and Patient Cohort  
This study will be a randomized, double blind, po sitive control, multi -center clinical trial 
enrolling patients who present in the outpatient setting with  signs and symptoms consistent 
with worsening congestive heart failure.  The sample size for the study is [ADDRESS_1228230] of observation during outpatient visits  or 
telephone follow -up to assess response to randomized therapy.  Patients will receive study 
medication through Day 8 of the study.   
 11 
 
4.1  Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria Inclusion Criteria  
• ≥ 18 years of age 
• Presenting to clinic with worsening heart failure due congestion (fluid overload)  
o Patient reported worsening fluid overload based on perception of edema and/or weight gain  
With at least one of the following symptoms o Worsening dyspnea on exertion or fatigue 
o Worsening orthopnea or PND 
o Perception of abdominal and/or lower extremity edema  
o Early satiety and/or decreased appetite  
And at least one of the following signs  
o Lower extremity edema 
o Ascites 
o Elevated JVD 
o Pulmonary rales 
• Daily oral dose of  loop diuretic 
• Prior history of heart failure with this diagnosis for at least 1 month with preserved or 
reduced left ventricular ejection fraction 
• Signed informed consent  
Exclusion Criteria  
• Patients with symptomatic hyponatremia will be excluded from the study. 
• Patients with severe hyponatremia, defined as serum sodium < 125 mEq/L at 
the time of screening, will be excluded regardless of whether they are symptomatic or not.   
• Patients with the following predisposing factors for osmotic demyelinating 
syndrome ( ODS ), assessed by [CONTACT_879125], will be excluded: 
chronic alcoholism at the time of study, severe liver disease, marked malnutrition, and risk for chronic hypoxia.  
• Patients currently undergoing renal replacement therapy  
• Planned hospi[INVESTIGATOR_135136] 
• History of primary significant liver disease or acute hepatic failure, as defined by [CONTACT_093] 
 12 
• Hemodynamically significant arrhythmias  
• ACS or acute myocardial infarction within 4 weeks prior to study entry 
• Active myocarditis 
• Hypertrophic obstructive, restrictive, or constrictive cardiomyopathy 
• Severe stenotic valvular disease amendable to surgical treatment  
• Complex congenital heart disease  
• Constrictive pericarditis 
• Clinical evidence of digoxin toxicity 
• History of adverse reaction or clinical contraindication to tolvaptan 
o Concomitant use of strong CYP3A4 inhibitors  
o Inability of patient to sense and/or respond to thirst  
o History of hypersensitivity to tolvaptan 
o Patient is anuric 
• Enrollment or planned enrollment in anothe r randomized clinical t rial during the 
study period 
• Pregnant or breast -feeding  
• Inability to comply with planned study procedures  
5.  Study Design 
5.1  Overview  
Patients will be randomized in a 1:1 fashion to one of two treatment arms: 
• Augmentation of current  daily dose of oral loop diuretic + 30 mg of oral Tolvaptan 
daily 
• Augmentation of  current daily dose of oral loop diuretic + placebo of oral Tolvaptan 
daily 
The study oral treatment regimen will begin on the day of randomization and continue for a 
total of [ADDRESS_1228231] treatment  following the stratified (by [CONTACT_3725]) block design . 
5.4  Treatment Arms 
Patients will be randomized in a 1:1 fashion to one of two types of treatment:  
• Augmentation of current dose of loop diuretic + 30 mg of oral tolvaptan daily 
  Or 
• Augmentation of current dose of loop diuretic  + placebo for tolvaptan 
Doses of loop diuretics will be standardized to mg equivalents of furosemide based on 40  
mg of furosemide for each 1 mg of bumex and 2 mg of furosemide for each 1 mg of  
torsemide.  Augmentation of current dose of loop diuretic will be defined as doubling the 
current dose of oral loop diuretic if the total daily dose of loop diuretic is ≤ 120 mg 
furosemide equivalents.  If the total current oral dose of loop diuretic is > 120 mg then the augmented dose of will be 50% of the current oral dose of loop diuretic + the current oral dose of loop diuretic in furosemide mg equ ivalents.   
5.5  Patient Safety 
5.5.1  General Considerations.   
Investigators should follow the randomized treatment strategy for the 8 days of 
treatment.  However, as always, the patient’s safety, as assessed by [CONTACT_879126], will take priority over treatment assignment and management based on adherence to the study protocol.  Patients who are experiencing inadequate treatment response in terms of relief of congestion may have unscheduled visits as required.  They may be treated with more aggressive measures 
including additional  diuretic and may be hospi[INVESTIGATOR_879098].  Patients will also be evaluated for excessive decongestion and volume 
 [ADDRESS_1228232] additional 
laboratory assessment and follow-up visits as needed.  Patients may continue to be 
seen for face to face visits after their Day 8 study visit  based on investigator judgment 
of volume status and clinical course.   
 The study drug (Tolvaptan or placebo) will be stopped prior to the 8 days of 
planned therapy as per the study protocol or if the study investigator believes in their 
judgment that the rate of rise of serum sodium is inappropriately rapid or if serum 
sodium increases to >145 mEq/L in the setting of volume depletion.  
5.5.[ADDRESS_1228233] this 
degree of reduction in serum sodium at baseline.  Hyponatremia will be defined as a 
serum sodium < 135 mEq/L as measured at the baseline/randomization visit (Visit 1). 
Hyponatremic patients will be more closely monitored during the baseline visit for 
possible overcorrection of serum sodium as described below  
Patients with No Hyponatremia.   At Visit 1, patients without hyponatremia will be observed for the occurrence of any adverse events for 8 hours in a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_879099] 
(Figure 2).  Patients free of adverse events and clinically stable from a volume 
standpoint will leave the facility and return for follow-up as outlined below.   
 15 
Baseline Visit Safety Assessment 
Dose Study Drug 
No 
DC Home Not Hyponatremic  
Baseline  Serum Na ≥ 135 mEq 
Review Clinical Status at 6 hours 
Observe for total of 8 hours 
Any Clinical Concerns?  
Yes 
Triggers [ADDRESS_1228234] initial study drug administration (Figure 3).  Patients with an increase in serum 
sodium > 6 mEq/L at 6 hours will require additional monit oring of serum sodium for 24 
hours, they will also receive D5W as outlined in detail in Section 6.2 .  Patients with an 
increase in serum sodium > 6 mEq/L will not receive additional doses of study 
medication but will otherwise complete the study as planned.    
 16 
Baseline Visit Safety Assessment 
Dose Study Drug 
No 
 
Clinical Status OK 
Then DC Home Hyponatremic 
Serum Na < 135 mEq 
Blood Draw at 6 Hours 
Serum Na Increased ≥ 6 mEq over Baseline Value?  
Yes 
 
ConInued ObservaIon and Rx for 
Sodium OvercorrecIon 
Figure [ADDRESS_1228235] follow-up at 48 hours (Visit 2) with clinical assessment of 
volume status including evaluation for volume depletion.  All patients will have follow -
up determination of serum sodium, other electrolytes and renal function at this visit to 
complement their clinical evaluation and to address the possibility of overcorrection of 
serum sodium.   
 All patients will return for a final follow -up visit at 8 days (Visit 3).  At this visit all 
patients will have clinical assessment of volume status including evaluation for volume 
depletion.  All patients will also have d etermination of serum sodium, other electrolytes 
and renal function at this visit to complement their clinical evaluation.   
   6.  Study M ethodology  - See Appendix A  
6.1 Screening and Enrollment 6.1.1   Study Screening 
 17 
Outpatients seen at the participating centers with signs and symptoms consistent with 
worsening chronic heart failure will be  screened by [CONTACT_879127].  Patients found to meet eligibility criteria will be approached 
regarding the study and consented f or enrollment if they agree to participate.  Patients 
are expected to be enrolled and randomized within 24 hours of informed consent . 
6.1.2   Study Enrollment and Estimated Enrollment Period 
The sample size for the study is 40 patients.  The projected timeline for enrollment is 
approximately 12 months. 
6.2  Baseline Procedures 
6.2.1 Randomization 
All study subjects will be randomized in a 1:1 fashion to one of the two treatment 
groups.  
6.2.2  Baseline Assessments 
At the time of randomization, all study subj ects will undergo:  
• History and physical examination focused on signs and symptoms of congestion 
• Assessment of the degree of congestion and dyspnea present 
• Vital signs (including blood pressure and body weight)  
• Documentation  of current cardiovascular medications  
• Measurement of Creatinine, BUN, electrolytes, and serum osmolarity 
• Serum pregnancy test for women of child bearing potential  
6.2.3  Baseline Blood Sampling 
• Blood samples will be  obtained prior to the patient receiving study drug/placebo 
• A blood sample (20 mL) will be collected for assay of  routine clinical labs and 
copeptin determination 
• An optional blood sample (30 mL) will be collected for potential future biomarker 
and Omic analysis (including DNA and RNA)  
• A urine sample (5 mL) will be collected for later measurement of biomarkers, 
electrolytes and osmolarity and other analytes 
6.2.4   Follow -up Observation at Baseline Visit 
All patients will initiate study drug tolvaptan/placebo in a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885].   
6.2.5   Observation at Baseline Visit - Patients without Hyponatremia 
o Patients who are not hyponatremic at baseline will be monitored for 8 hours for 
adverse effects and changes in vital signs suggestive of potential volume 
 18 
depletion (orthostatic decline in blood pressure and increases in heart rate) a nd 
intake and output.  Review of these findings will aid in identification of patients 
who may be more likely to have overcorrection of serum sodium due to ex cess 
aquaresis and inadequate per oral  intake.  Any patient without hyponatremia at 
baseline who is clinically suspected to have overcorrection of serum sodium will have repeat determination of serum electrolytes and renal function at [ADDRESS_1228236] initial dose of tolvaptan/placebo .  Results of these labs will be reviewed prior 
to their discharge from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885].  Any patient subsequently found to have an increase in serum sodium > 6 mEq/L will be manage d as indicated 
below for patients with baseline hyponatremia  and a similar increase in serum 
sodium.   
6.2.[ADDRESS_1228237] a rise in serum sodium of > 6 mEq/L at the 6 hour time point will receive 
treatment with intravenous D5W.  Intravenous D5W will administered at the rate of 3 mL/kg per hour (210 mL for a 70 kilogram patient) which is expected to reduce serum sodium from 1 to 2 mEq/L per hour.   
o Patients with this degree of early increase in serum sodium will have repeat 
serum sodium and other electrolytes plus BUN and Creatinine d etermined at [ADDRESS_1228238] their initial dose of study drug and the serum 
sodium is < 8 mEq/L above their baseline value.  
o Patients with this degree of early increase in serum sodium will be observed 
for a minimum of [ADDRESS_1228239] repeat determination of serum sodium and other electrolytes plus BUN and Creatinine 20 hours after their initial dose of study medication and these 
values will be reviewed prior to their discharge from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885].  If their 
serum sodium remains < 12 mEq/L above baseline at the [ADDRESS_1228240] a 20 hour 
serum sodium that is ≥ 12 mEq/L from their baseline, they  will receive additional 
D5W as above with repeat determinations of serum sodium until their value is < 
 19 
12 mEq/L above their baseline.  At that time if they are clinically stable then they 
will be discharged from the hos pi[INVESTIGATOR_6885].   
o Patients found to be hyponatremic will also be monitored for development of 
symptoms during the study related to reduced serum sodium.  As a precaution, patients with symptomatic hyponatremia are excluded from the study,  Patients 
with hea rt failure who present with hyponatremia are very commonly 
asymptomatic and the condition is chronic and does require therapy to reverse 
the hyponatremia per se.  Patients with heart failure and chronic hyponatremia 
rarely become symptomatic.  Patients enr olled in the study with asymptomatic 
hyponatremia will be cautioned to monitor for changes in mental status, nausea, and lethargy between their baseline visit and follow-up visits.  Patients will be 
instructed to contact [CONTACT_879128] e symptoms develop and 
they will be seen for follow-up evaluation as needed . 
6.2.7  Follow -up of Patients with Overcorrection of Sodium 
Once discharged, any patient with overcorrection of sodium will be followed in the study as planned except they will not be treated further with study 
medication.  They will be treated with augmented loop diuretic and other diuretics 
as appropriate.  They will return for study visit 2 (Day 3) where they will have 
repeat determination of serum electrolytes, including seru m sodium, as well as 
BUN and Creatinine.  In the unlikely event that they are found to have serum sodium > 18 mEq/L at this visit, they will be considered for per oral hydration or administration of additional intravenous D5W at the discretion of the clinical  
investigator.  They will be seen at Day [ADDRESS_1228241] study drug administration 
Patients will return on study Day 3 at 48 hours after initial administration of study drug.  This follow-up evaluation is  expected to occur within ± 2 hours of initial study drug 
administration on Day 1 . 
All patients will undergo the following assessments at this time point : 
• Directed history and physical examination, focused on signs and symptoms of 
congestion 
• Assessment of the degree of congestion and dyspnea present 
 20 
• Vital signs (including blood pressure and body weight)  
• A blood sample (20 mL) will be collected for assay of routine clinical labs and 
copeptin determination 
• An optional blood sample (30 mL) will also be collected for potential future 
biomarker and Omic analysis (including RNA) 
• A urine sample (5 mL) will be collected for later meas urement of biomarkers, 
electrolytes and osmolarity and other analytes  
• Changes in cardiovascular medications  
• Assessment for occurrence of heart failure events 
• Assessment for adverse events 
6.3.[ADDRESS_1228242] face-to-face visit in the study.  This 
follow-up evaluation is  expected to occur within ± 2 hours of initial study drug 
administration on Day 1 . 
• Directed history and physical examination, focused on signs and symptoms of 
congestion 
• Assessment of the degree of congestion and dyspnea present 
• Vital signs (including blood pressure and body weight)  
• A blood sample (20 mL) will be collected for assay of routine clinical labs and 
copeptin determination 
• An optional blood sample (30 mL) will also be collected for potential future 
biomarker and O mic analysis (including RNA) 
• A urine sample (5 mL) will be collected for later measurement of biomarkers, 
electrolytes and osmolarity and other analytes  
• Changes in cardiovascular medications  
• Assessment for occurrence of heart failure events 
• Assessment for adverse events 
6.3.[ADDRESS_1228243] (Day 30) 
All study patients will be contact[CONTACT_879129] 30 (+/ - 2 days).  
• Review of heart failure symptoms 
• Review of changes in cardiovascular medication  
• To determine vital status and occurrence of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_210364] . 
 21 
Completion of this 30 day telephone follow -up will end the patient’s participation in the 
study.   
6.3.4    Core Lab Blood Sample Processing 
At each study visit, in addition to sending a blood  sample to the local site laboratory, 
plasma, serum, and whole blood samples  and a urine sample will be processed and 
shipped to the UNITE -HF Biomarker and Genomics Core laboratory at UNC .  These 
samples will undergo additional processing as needed and will be stored long-term 
according the Manual of Operations that will be developed for the study .  Whole blood 
will be processed at the core lab to isolate DNA and RNA which will be stored appropriately for potential long -term analysis.  The blood biomarker copeptin will be 
measured to assess the association with the therapeutic response to tolvaptan after 
the completion of study enrollment and patient follow -up.  The remainder of the 
samples will be used by [CONTACT_879130] 
(plus genetic and Omic markers) in the biology and pathophysiology of heart failure  
and the  response to heart failure medications including tolvaptan .  
 7.  Study Endpoints 
7.1  Primary Endpoint 
The primary endpoint for the study will be change  in body weight between patients 
randomized to tolvaptan versus placebo from baseline to 48 hours with and without stratification for baseline copeptin level . 
7.2  Secondary Endpoints – Congestion Indices and Body Weight. 
7.2.1  Change in the patient repor ted visual analog scale for dyspnea  from baseline to 
48 hours. 
7.2.2   Change in loop diuretic dose (mg furosemide) at [ADDRESS_1228244]  that may warrant future analyses include investigation of 
interrelationships between clinical characteristics and change in the pattern of 
worsening heart failure during treatment in the study patients.  
 
8.  Statistical Analysis  of Study Endpoints  
8.1  General Aspects of the Study Analysis 
8.1.1  Intention to Treat.  The primary analysis will be done on an intention -to-treat 
basis, with patients analyzed as being in the treatment group to which they were 
randomized.   
8.1.2  Missing Data.  No imputation will be  made for missing study data points.   
8.2   Primary Endpoint.   
8.2.1  Priority  Analysis of Primary Endpoint 
The two components of the Primary Endpoint will be ordered by [CONTACT_879131].  The priority analysis of the primary study endpoint will be  change in body weight between 
treatment groups at 48 hours without stratification for baseline copeptin.   
8.2.2  Second Analysis of the Primary Endpoint  
The second analysis of the primary study endpoint will be change in body weight between treatment groups at 48 hours with stratification for baseline copeptin.  This 
approach will stratify study patients into subgroups based on their baseline copept in 
level.  Change in body weight will be compared between tolvaptan and placebo 
stratified according to baseline copeptin levels into low and high groups, in a similar 
manner to that described above for the primary analysis of the primary endpoint.  A 
single prespecified cut point for baseline copeptin will define low and high copeptin in 
the randomized subgroups. Originally, this cut point was defined as < 10 pmol/L  based 
on the previous pi[INVESTIGATOR_879100].  However, recent 
studies in patients with volume overload, suggest that few patients in the current 
protocol would have values < 10 pmol/L.  Therefore, the prespecified cut point will be 
determined based on blinded analysis of the baseline copeptin levels in the current 
study.  This cut point will be determined taking into consideration the distribution of 
copeptin levels present in the study population at baseline.   Additional cut points may 
be proposed based on the unrestricted correlation analysis of the changes in body 
 23 
weight related to baseline copeptin in the randomized subgroups as  described below 
([IP_ADDRESS] ).  The copeptin guided hypothesis predicts that patients with elevated 
baseline copeptin who are treated with tolvaptan will have a significantly greater 
weight loss than placebo treated patients.    
 
Table 2.  Analysis of Treatment Effect by [CONTACT_879132]  
+ Augmented 
current loop Augmented  
current loop Change in  
Body Weight 
 
Baseline 
Copeptin Level  Low Low Weight change will be 
similar in 2 treatment groups 
High High Weight change will be > in 
Tolvaptan + Augmented 
current loop 
 
8.3   Secondary Endpoints: Ordered by [CONTACT_879133].   
8.3.[ADDRESS_1228245] priority secondary 
endpoint w ill be based on changes in loop diuretic dosing in the study patients at Visit 
2.  Doses of loop diuretic will be  converted as necessary to milligram (mg) equivalents 
of furosemide dose by [CONTACT_632896]: 1 mg of bumetanide = 40 mg of furosemide and 1 mg of torsemide = [ADDRESS_1228246] will be  the dose of loop diuretic at the  end of Visit 2 minus the dose at the start of Visit 
2 (expressed as mg equivalents of furosemide).    
8.3.3  Categorical Assessment of Loop Diuretic Use at Visit 2 – Loop Diuretic 
Adjustment.  Clinical experience strongly suggests that changes in dosing of loop 
diuretics during the trial would be a strong indicator of changes in congestion status.  
Specifically, a decision to increase loop diuretic dose during Visit [ADDRESS_1228247] of the analysis plan (still in the blinded 
period of the study), the investigators assumed that the pattern of changes in loop dose use would be similar to that of patients with acute heart failure where increases 
in doses of loop diuretic are typi[INVESTIGATOR_2855].  Thus, the initial analysis for loop dose adjustment  
was based on increases in loop dose at Visit 2 or the addition of metolazone.  
However, when blinded aggregate study results were reviewed, the opposite pattern 
was found.  The aggregate blinded data revealed that loop doses on the whole 
decreased rather than increased at Visit 2  and no additional diuretics were added .  
These observations led to a final  analytical approach, where dichotomous response 
was characterized as favorable when loop doses were decreased and unfavorable 
when loop doses stayed the same or were increased.  
8.3.4  Change in Loop Diuretic Score at Visit 2.  A final  response analysis based on 
changes in diuretic use at Visit 2, change in loop diuretic score, will be  developed.  
This scoring system account s for increases, decreases, and no change in loop diuretic 
dose to capture the overall pattern of loop diuretic use at 48 hours.  This change in 
loop diuretic score endpoint will be  calculated as follows: patients having an increase 
in loop diuretic dose at Visit 2 will be  given a score of 2, patients with no change a 
score of 0, and patients with a decrease in loop dose at Visit 2 w ill be given a score of 
-1.  Increases in loop diuretic dose will be  given a higher weighting to account for their 
reflection of treatment failure.  Scores for diuretic change w ill be compared between 
the two treatment groups as described below.   
8.3.5  Change  in Body Weight Visit 1 to Visit 3.  This secondary endpoint will be  
change in body weight change from Visit 1 to Visit 3 by [CONTACT_1570].   
8.5  Statistical Analysis of Study Results 
8.5.1  General Statistics.  Descriptive statistics will be  generated for a 
comprehensive set of study variables to determine measures of central tendency and dispersion, as well as to characterize the nature of their distributions and whether outliers existed in the data.  Continuous values w ill be reported as mean ± standard 
deviation and categorical values as f requencies and percentages.  
8.5.[ADDRESS_1228248]; a two-sided significance level of .[ADDRESS_1228249] ing of 
secondary endpoints with no adjustment for multiple comparisons.  
[IP_ADDRESS]  Changes in VAS Scale.  Changes in the VAS dyspnea scale will be  
analyzed via point estimates and corresponding standard deviati ons.  Supportive 
between -treatment group comparisons will be  conducted via the Wilcoxon rank -sum 
test.  [IP_ADDRESS]  Change in Loop Dose .  For this continuous variable (dose of loop diuretic in 
furosemide mg equivalents)  between -group comparisons will be  assessed via t-test.     
[IP_ADDRESS]  Loop Diuretic Adjustment.  The  Fisher’s exact test will be  used to assess 
between -group comparisons for  this dichotomous variable.  
[IP_ADDRESS]  Change in Loop Diuretic Score.  For this ordinal variable between -group 
comparisons will be assessed via t-test.   [IP_ADDRESS]   Change  in body weight from Visit 1 to Visit 3 . This endpoint will be  
analyzed in a similar fashion as the change in body weight from Visit 1 to Visit 2. 
8.5.4  Analysis of Exploratory Endpoints.   
[IP_ADDRESS]  Change in Body  Weight with Baseline Copeptin by [CONTACT_879134].  This endpoint will be evaluated using Spearman Correlation analysis.  The 
correlation coefficient between copeptin concentration at baseline and the change in 
body weight from baseline to 48 hours in  the study patients within each of the two 
randomized arms (tolvaptan or placebo) will be determined.  The two -sided 95% 
confidence interval will also be constructed.  The Spearman correlation approach will 
be used as it is rank-based and does not make dis tributional assumptions.    
 26 
[IP_ADDRESS].  Other Exploratory  Endpoints.  Planned between-group comparisons of 
continuous variables (copeptin, serum creatinine, and serum sodium) will be 
assessed via the Wilcoxon rank -sum test or t-test as appropriate.   
 
9.  Sample Size and Rationale 
9.[ADDRESS_1228250] a sample size of 40 patients , equally allocated to the two study 
treatment groups.   9.2  Power Calculation.  The study power calculation was based on the primary analysis of the primary endpoint:  change in body wei ght from baseline to 48 hours between  the 
randomized study groups.  Using experience in the preceding pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] (8), a sample size 
of [ADDRESS_1228251] 79% power to detect a difference of 1 kilogram in change  in body 
weight between  the study treatment groups (augmented loop diuretic + tolvaptan versus 
augmented loop diuretic  alone) at the two -sided .[ADDRESS_1228252] and polyuria and these may lead to discontinuation.  However reduction in renal function and blood pressure or elevation of potassium are not associated with drug use; a major finding since most evidence based therapy for heart failure can produce significant renal dysfunction, unwanted hypotension 
and elevation of potassium that can have serious consequences.   
Safety in Heart Failure.  Oral tolvaptan was previously studied in the acute heart failure 
population in the EVEREST study, in which acute and chronic t olvaptan administration was 
not associated with any evidence of harm over a median follow -up of  10 months (compared 
to 8 days in the current study).  The EVEREST study provides extensive experience with 
the safety of tolvaptan in heart failure.  In this trial, 4133 patients with acute decompensated heart failure were  randomized to either placebo or t olvaptan.  T he overall 
 27 
rate of in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_879101] 5%, and was similar bet ween Tolvaptan and placebo. 
Therefore it is not anticipated that study participation will be associated with increased ri sks 
beyond that of standard therapy for decompensated heart failure.   
 Recurrent volume overload, driven by [CONTACT_879135], remains a major 
clinical problem in heart failure despi[INVESTIGATOR_879102].  All too often patients fail to be congestion free despi[INVESTIGATOR_879103].  Therefore potential benefits to study participants 
include the possibility of improvements in clinical congestion and associated symptoms (if 
Tolvap tan proves to be efficacious).  
Risk of Overcorrection of Serum Sodium.  Although the target patient population of this 
study is decompensated heart failure rather than hyponatremia, it must be acknowledged 
that there is the real potential for overlap of t hese two conditions in a given patient.  This 
possibility means that there is one risk that is unique to tolvaptan versus other medications for heart failure that must be addressed: overcorrection of serum sodium.  Overcorrection 
of serum sodium is related to the primary mechanism of action of tolvaptan which leads to 
greater water excretion by [CONTACT_879136].  In the great majority of patients with heart failure, the increase in serum sodium following administration of tolvaptan is appropriate.  However, rarely patients may experience an 
overcorrection of serum sodium.  Overcorrection has been most commonly defined as an 
increase in serum sodium from baseline of > 12 mEq/Liter in a 24 hour period after tolvaptan admi nistration.   
The risk of overcorrection of serum sodium is strongly associated with the degree of 
reduction in serum sodium present prior to therapy.  Overcorrection is generally only a 
potential issue when patients with hyponatremia are treated with tolv aptan.  The widely 
accepted definition of hyponatremia is presence of a reduction in serum sodium to < 135 mEq/L.  Hyponatremia can be further characterized as mild (serum sodium from 130 to 134 
mEq/L) or marked (serum sodium < 130 mEq/L).  A serum sodium of less than 125 mEq/L 
has also been defined as sufficiently reduced to warrant tolvaptan therapy as treatment 
regardless of the presence or absence of symptoms.  Although it remains uncommon, overcorrection of serum sodium is most likely to occur in cases  where serum sodium is < 
125 mEq/L.   Since hyponatremia is uncommon in acute or chronic heart failure, overcorrection of serum sodium has not been reported as an issue in these studies.  Review of the experience in 
 [ADDRESS_1228253] trial helps provide a clinic al context concerning the potential risk of 
overcorrection of serum sodium specifically in patients with heart failure.  Despi[INVESTIGATOR_879104] 
a targeted patient population of acute decompensated heart failure, hyponatremia was 
uncommon in the patients enrolled  in this trial.  A total of 4133 patients were studied, 
randomized to tolvaptan and randomized to placebo with an initial dose of 30 mg of 
tolvaptan daily.  The incidence of hyponatremia at baseline was 11.5% overall (475 patients) and as expected, was similar in groups receiving tolvaptan and placebo.   
 Experience in the SALT trials, which used the definition above for hyponatremia (serum 
sodium < 135 mEq/L) as an inclusion criteria and did include patients with heart failure, can help define the risk of overcorrection of serum sodium in patients with heart failure and 
hyponatremia.  A total of 448 patients were randomized in the SALT studies with 225 
patients treated with tolvaptan and 223 patients with placebo.  The initial dose of tolvaptan 
in these trials was 15 mg daily but could be titrated to 60 mg daily depending upon therapeutic response.  In these trials only 5 patients on active therapy (2.2%) experienced a rise in serum sodium of > 12 mEq/L during any 24 hour period of treatment.  
Osmotic Demyelination Syndrome (ODS).  Although an increase in serum sodium can be lifesaving in acute symptomatic hyponatremia, overcorrection of serum sodium may rarely result in severe neurological dysfunction referred to as ODS.  This syndrome is the general term for central pontine and extrapontine myelinolysis.  Clinically ODS is 
characterized by [CONTACT_879137], dysphagia, behavioral disturbance, and muscle weakness  
which may not resolve and the condition may be fatal .  A number of predisposing factors for 
ODS following overcorrection of serum sodium have been identified: chronic alcoholism, 
severe liver disease, marked malnutrition and hypoxia.  Review of clinical reports of ODS 
suggest that while the threshold for observing this syndrome may be 8 to 12 mEq/L 
increase of serum sodium, most cases have occurred in the setting of significantly larger increases in serum sodium, often in excess of 20 mEq/L.   
While there is no question that overcorrection of serum sodium by [CONTACT_879138] > 12 mEq/L of serum sodium may rarely occur with tolvaptan therapy, the 
frequency with which ODS occurs in association with tolvaptan therapy remains disputed.  None of the 5 patients in the SALT trials who has an increase in serum sodium of > 12 mEq/L experienced ODS (nor did any other patient in the SALT trials).  No cases of ODS 
have been reported in patients treated with tolvaptan in randomized clinical trials including 
approximately 2,[ADDRESS_1228254] found that the develo pment of ODS may be low in the setting of overcorrection.   
Implications for the Present Study.  Given the study sample size of 40 patients and the 
planned exclusion of patients with serum sodium < 125 mEq/L, ap proximately 3 to 4 
patients could be expected to be enrolled with hyponatremia.  The low rate of 
overcorrection observed in the SALT Trials  suggests, that even in the setting of 
hyponatremia, the risk of a single study patients experiencing overcorrection of sodium in 
response to tolvaptan would be low.   
Minimizing Risk of Overcorrection of Sodium.  Although the risk of overcorrection of 
serum sodium is low in patients with heart failure, it is appropriate to take steps to reduce 
the risk of this potential ly very serious and rarely fatal complication.  
During Screening 
1- Patients with symptomatic hyponatremia will be excluded from the study.  
2- Patients with severe hyponatremia, defined as serum sodium < 125 mEq/L at the time of screening, will be excluded regardless of whether they are symptomatic or 
not.   
3- Patients with the following predisposing factors for ODS, assessed by [CONTACT_879139], will be excluded: chronic alcoholism at the time of study, severe liver disease, marked malnutrition, and risk for chronic hypoxia.  
Randomization - Initial Dose of Study Drug 
4. All patients will initiate study drug tolvaptan/placebo in a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885].   
5. Patients who are not hyponatremic at baseline will be monitored for 8 hours for adverse effects and changes in vital signs suggestive of potential volume depletion 
(orthostatic decline in blood pressure and increases in heart rate) and intake and 
output.  Review of these findings will aid in identification of patients who may be more likely to have overcorrection of serum sodium due to excess aquaresis and inadequate per oral intake.  Any patient without hyponatremia at baseline who is 
clinically suspected to have overcorrection of serum sodium will have repeat 
determination of serum electrolytes and renal function at [ADDRESS_1228255] initial dose of 
 30 
tolvaptan/placebo and these labs will be reviewed prior to their discharge from the 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885].  Any patient subsequently found to have an increase in serum sodium > 6 mEq/L will be managed as indi cated in points [ADDRESS_1228256] a rise in serum sodium o f > 6 mEq/L at the 6 
hour time point will receive treatment with intravenous D5W designed to limit further 
increases in serum sodium.  Intravenous D5W will administered at the rate of 3 
mL/kg per hour (210 mL for a 70 kilogram patient) which is expected to  reduce 
serum sodium from 1 to 2 mEq/L per hour.  
7. Patients with this degree of early increase in serum sodium will have repeat serum 
sodium and other electrolytes plus BUN and Creatinine determined at [ADDRESS_1228257] their initial dose of study drug and the serum sodium is < 8 
mEq/L above their baseline values.  
8. Patients with this degree of early increase in serum sodium will be observed for a minimum of  [ADDRESS_1228258] 
repeat determination of serum sodium and other electrolytes plus BUN and Creatinine 20 hours after their initial dose of study medication and these values will 
be reviewed prior t o their discharge from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885].  If their serum sodium 
remains < 12 mEq/L above baseline at the [ADDRESS_1228259] a 2 0 hour serum sodium that is > 12 mEq/L from their 
baseline will receive additional D5W as above with repeat determinations of serum sodium until their value is < 12 mEq/L above their baseline.  At that time if they are clinically stable then they will be discharged from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885].   
9. Once discharged hyponatremia patients with overcorrection of sodium will be 
followed in the study but not treated further with study medication.  They will return 
for a study visit Day [ADDRESS_1228260] serum sodium > 18 mEq/L above their baseline 
value at this visit, they will be considered for per oral hydration or administration of 
additional intravenous D5W at the discretion of the clinical investigator.   
 [ADDRESS_1228261] overcorrection (a rise in serum sodium of > 6 mEq/L at t he 
6 hour time point ) will still continue to be followed in the study and treated with 
augmented loop diuretic and other medical approaches as needed.  They will be 
seen at Day [ADDRESS_1228262] the study investigators should these symptoms develop and they will be seen for follow -
up evaluation as needed.  
Hepatic Toxicity.  The FDA proposed label changed for tolvaptan in 2013.  These changes 
concerning tolvaptan  use indicated that the drug should not be used for longer than 30 
days and should not be used in patients with underlying liver disease.  These changes 
were made after 3 cases of suspected liver injury with Tolvaptan were identified in the TEMPO study. TEMPO studied a significantly higher tolvaptan dose (60 mg per day and titrated up to 120 mg per day) and a longer duration of treatment (36 months) than in the 
planned study (30 mg for 8 doses – with 8 days of exposure).  The patient population in 
TEMPO (Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease)  is different than the one 
proposed for this study. The liver abnormalities occurred after at least 3 months of treatment and all 3 patients improved following discontinuation of treatment.  The study 
protocol for this trial will exclude patients with known underlying liver disease to  be 
consistent with the revised FDA labeling.  
 10.2  Serious Adverse Events  
10.2.1  Definitions  
A “Serious Adverse Event” (SAE) is any adverse event that:  •  Results in death  
•  Is life-threatening  
 32 
•  Requires inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5183] o f hospi[INVESTIGATOR_879105].  
•  Results in permanent impairment of a body function or permanent damage to a body 
structure  
•  Requires medical or surgical intervention to preclude permanent impa irment of a 
body function or permanent damage to a body structure  
Additionally, important medical events that may not result in death, be life -threatening, 
or require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_879106].  Example of such medical events include: allergic bronchospasm requiring 
intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions 
that do not result in in-patient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or the development of drug dependency or 
drug abuse.  Medical and scientific judgment must be exercised when classifying events as serious.  10.2.[ADDRESS_1228263] SAEs, the clinical 
diagnosis rather than the laboratory term will be used by [CONTACT_9673] (e.g., anemia versus low hemoglobin value).  
10.2.3  Assessment of Severity  
The determination of adverse event severity rests on medi cal judgment of a medically-
qualified investigator. The severity of SAEs will be graded using the following definitions:  
Mild: awareness of sign, symptom, or event, but easily tolerated;  
Moderate:  discomfort enough to cause interference with usual activi ty and may 
warrant intervention;  
Severe:  incapacitating with inability to do usual activities or significantly affects 
clinical status, and warrants intervention.  
10.[ADDRESS_1228264] assess the r elationship of any AE to the use of 
study drug, based on available information, using the following guidelines:  
 [ADDRESS_1228265] been 
caused by [CONTACT_5257]. The temporal relationship o f the adverse event to study drug 
administration makes a causal relationship possible, and other drugs, therapeutic 
interventions or underlying conditions do not provide sufficient explanation for the observed 
event.  
Not Possibly Related- It is unlikely that  the event was caused by [CONTACT_5257]. The 
temporal relationship of the adverse event to the study drug administration makes causal 
relationship unlikely and other drugs, therapeutic interventions or underlying conditions 
provide a more likely explanat ion for the event. 
Expectedness - The expectedness of an adverse event or suspected adverse reaction 
shall be determined according to the package insert for U.S. marketed  furosemide and 
tolvaptan.  Any AE that is not identified in nature, severity, or spe cificity in the current U.S. 
package insert is considered unexpected. Events described in the U.S. package  insert as 
occurring with a class of drugs or as anticipated from the pharmacological properties of the drug, but not specifically mentioned as occur ring with the particular drug under investigation 
are considered unexpected.  
10.4  Recording and Reporting  
Recording.   All serious adverse events occurring from randomization through the 30 day 
follow -up period will be  collected.  The Site Investigator is responsible for monitoring the 
safety of patients enrolled int o the study at the study sites.  The following adverse events 
are anticipated, disease related -events in patients with decompensated heart failure 
however they should still be reported on the Serious Adverse Event form of the CRF (some 
may require reporting as study endpoints):  
• Atrial fibrillation 
• Ventricular tachycardia 
• Myocardial infarction 
• Acute coronary syndrome 
• Acute renal failure 
• Worsening heart failure 
• Death  
All serious adverse events must  be recorded in the Serious Adverse Event Record of the 
patient’s CRF.  All serious adverse events should be monitored until stabilization or resolution.   
 34 
Reporting to Local IRB.  Investigators are also responsible for promptly reporting adverse 
events (serious and non serious) to their reviewing IRB in accordance with local 
requirements.  
Reporting to Study Coordinating Center.  Sites will report all adverse events and serious 
adverse events, as well as unexpected evens, to the coordinating center at UNC.   All the 
adverse events (serious and non serious) and unexpected events from all sites will be formally reviewed in aggregate by [CONTACT_879140].   The UNC coordinating 
center will report all unanticipated problems and serious adverse events to  the study 
sponsor for review.   Sites will be updated concerning the status of the study based on this 
review as appropriate.   Consideration will be given to modification of the study protocol and 
the study ICF as appropriate based on this review.   
10.[ADDRESS_1228266] (IRB) for approval.  
11.[ADDRESS_1228267] the purpose of the study, the study interventions and evaluations, and 
the potential risks and benefits of participation explained to them and their questi ons 
answered.  If they consent to participation in this study, they will review and sign the 
informed consent form (ICF).  11.[ADDRESS_1228268] clinical research methods and procedures. These procedures are designed to 
ensure adherence to Good Clinical Practice, as described in the following documents:  
1. ICH Harmonized Tripartite Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice 1996.  
2. US 21 Code of Federal Regulations dealing with clinical studies (including parts 50 and 56 concerning informed consent and IRB regulations).  
 35 
3. Declaration of Helsinki, concerning medical research in humans (Recommendations 
Guiding Physicians in Biomedical Research Involving Human Subjects, Helsinki 
1964, amended Tokyo 1975, Venice 1983, Hong Kong 1989, Somerset West 1996).  
The investigator agrees, when signing the protocol, to adhere to the instructions and procedures described in it and thereby [CONTACT_879141].  
12.  Study Administration 
12.[ADDRESS_1228269].  
12.2  Description of the TROUPER Study Cordinating Center The UNITE -HF Coordinating Center (CC) housed at the University of North Carolina 
Chapel Hill will serve as the CC for the study.  The UNITE -HF CC will function as the study 
operational center and will be responsible for coordina ting all aspects of the study.  The 
UNITE -HF CC will provide project management, development and preparation of study -
related documents, and site management and education related to the execution of the trial.  The UNITE -HF CC will conduct initial start -up activities which will primarily involve 
development of the study protocol and in site identification.  The UNITE -HF CC will be 
responsible for site contracting and monitoring the site IRB approval process.  During the study, the UNITE-HF CC will be responsible for ongoing site education and retention, quality c ontrol of site conduct of the study, and site reimbursement.   
The UNITE -HF CC will conduct the data management for the trial.  Data related activities 
will include development of study specific CRFs  and instructions; establishing data 
management methods; creating and maintaining the substudy database; and ensuring all data queries are addressed.   
The UNITE -HF CC will also be responsible for  analysis of the study data and take a 
leadership role in development of presentations and publications related to the results of the substudy as describe in section 12.[ADDRESS_1228270] in dissemination of trial results.  
   13.  References 
1.  Gheorghiade M, Gattis WA, O’Connor CM, Adams KF, Jr., Elkayam U, Barbagelata 
A, Ghali JK, Benza RL, McGrew FA, Klapholz M, Ouyang J, Orlandi C. Effects of 
tolvaptan, a vasopressin antagonist, in patients hospi[INVESTIGATOR_879107]: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2004;291:[ADDRESS_1228271], in Patients Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_879108]: The EVEREST Clinical Status Trials. JAMA. 2007;297(12):[ADDRESS_1228272] trials. Eur Heart J. Jun 27 2009;30:2233-2240.  
 4.  Konstam MA, Gheorghiade M, Burnett JC, Jr., et al. Effects of Oral Tolvaptan in 
Patients Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_879109]: The E VEREST Outcome Trial. 
JAMA. 2007;297(12):1319-1331.  
 
5.  Morgenthaler NG, Struck J, Jochberger S, Dünser MW. Copeptin: clinical use of a 
new biomarker. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2008;19:[ADDRESS_1228273]-Crain M. 
Changes in plasma copeptin, the c -terminal portion of arginine vasopressin during 
water deprivation and excess in healthy subjects. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007;92:3973 -8. 
 7.  Morgenthaler NG, Struck J, Alonso C, Bergmann A. Assay for the measurement of 
copeptin, a stable peptide derived from the precursor of vasopressin. Clin Chem 2006;52:112 -9. 
 
 37 
8. Verbalis JG, Goldsmith SR, Greenberg A, Korzelius C, Schrier RW, Sterns RH, 
Thompson CJ.  Diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment of hypo natremia: expert panel 
recommendations.  Am J Med. 2013;126 (Suppl 1):S1 -42. 
 
9. Greenberg A, Verbalis JG, Amin AN, Burst VR, Chiodo Iii JA, Chiong JR, Dasta JF, 
Friend KE, Hauptman PJ, Peri A, Sigal SH.  Current treatment practice and 
outcomes. Report of the hyponatremia registry.  Kidney Int 2015;88:167 -77. 
 10.   Felker GM, Lee KL, Bull DA, et al. Diuretic strategies in patients with acute  
decompensated heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2011 Mar 3;364(9):797 -805.  
 
11. Adams KF Jr, Glotzer J, Lee A, Schwartz, TA, Lin TE, Patterson JH.  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_879110].  J Am Coll Cardio (Abst) 2015;65(10 -S):A917.   
 
12.   Teerlink JR, Cotter G, Davison BA, et al.  Serelaxin,  recombinant human relaxin-2, 
for treatment of acute heart failure (RELAX-AHF): a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2013 Jan 5;381(9860):29 -39. 
 13.   Konstam MA, Kiernan M, Chandler A, Dhingra R, Mody FV, Eisen H, Haught WH, 
Wagoner L, Gupta D, Patten R, Gordon P, Korr K, Fileccia R, Pressler SJ, Gregory 
D, Wedge P, Dowling D, Romeling M, Konstam JM, Massaro JM, Udelson JE; 
SECRET of CHF Investigators, Coordinators, and Committee Members.  Short -Term 
Effects of Tolvaptan in Patients With Acute Heart Failure and Volume Overload. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:1409 -1419.  
 14.   Felker GM, Mentz RJ, Cole R, Adams KF, Egnaczyk GF, Fiuzat M, Patel CB, Echols 
M, Khouri MG, Tauras JM, Gupta D, Monds P, Roberts R, O'Connor CM.  Efficacy 
and Safety of Tolvaptan in Patients Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_879111].  J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2017;69:1399-1406.  
 
 38 
Appendix A:  Schedule of Study  Assessments  
Assessment or Procedure  Screen  Baseline  8 to 24 † 
hours  Day [ADDRESS_1228274] as 
applicable   X     
Screening electrolytes, renal and 
liver function tests  X   
    
Directed History and Physical 
Examination   X  X X  
Vital signs   X X X X  
Body Weight   X  
X X  
Current Cardiovascular Meds   X  
X X X 
Blood sampling for Serum 
Creatinine , BUN, electrolytes, 
serum osmolarity and copeptin  X X* X X  
Blood Sampling – for Other 
biomarkers and O mics   X  
X X  
Blood Sampling – Whole blood   X  
   
Urine Sampling   X  
X X  
Adverse Events Assessment     
X X X X 
Assessment of Congestion  and 
Dyspnea   X  
X X  
Changes in Cardiovascular Meds     
X X X X 
 
Morbidity Assessment   
  
  
  
X  
X  
X 
*  Blood samp ling will be dependent up baseline hyponatremia or change during observation . † It is possible that 
a rare patient may have to remain under observation for more than 24 hours before their serum sodium is < 12 
mEq/L based on determinations from serial blood  samples.    	
 
	39 
	
	
APPENDIX B 
	
Baseline Visit (Day 1) 
 
VISUAL ANALOG SCALE: PATIENT CONGESTION  
 
VISIT  1 (Day 1) and Date:      __ __ /  __ __ __  /  __  __  __ __ 
      D  D     M  M  M     Y    Y   Y    Y  
 
 
To be completed by [CONTACT_4676].  “Please draw a horizontal line on the scale to show how you think your 
fluid or congestion is right now. The number “0” equals the worst your fluid or congestion has ever felt 
and the number “1 0” equals the best you r fluid or congestion has  ever felt.”  
 
	
 [ADDRESS_1228275] your fluid or congestion has ever felt  
 
 
	40 
 
	
	
APPEN DIX C 
 
Baseline Visit (Day 1) 
 
VISUAL ANALOG SCALE: PATIENT DYSPNEA  
 
VISIT  1 (Day 1) and Date:      __ __ /  __ __ __  /  __  __  __ __ 
      D   D     M  M  M     Y    Y   Y   Y  
 
To be completed by [CONTACT_4676].  “Please draw a horizontal line on the scale to show how you think your 
breathing is right now. The number “0” equals the worst your breathing has ever felt and  
the number “1 0” equals the best you have ever felt.”  
	
	
 [ADDRESS_1228276] your breathing has ever felt  
  
 
	41 
 
 
APPEN DIX D 
 
Baseline Visit (Day 1) 
	
VISUAL ANALOG SCALE: INVESTIGATOR CONGESTION  
 
VISIT  1 (Day 1) and Date:      __ __ /  __ __ __  /  __  __  __ __ 
      D   D     M  M  M     Y    Y   Y   Y  
 
 
To be completed by [CONTACT_10670] .  To indicate your opi[INVESTIGATOR_879112], use the 
scale below which indicates t he best possible state for the patient is a  10, and the worse state is 0.  
Please draw a line on the scale to show how you think the patient is now.  
	
	
 [ADDRESS_1228277] state patient could be in regarding fluid or congestion  
 
	42 
	
	
 
 
APPENDI X E 
 
Visit 2 (Day 3) versus Baseline Visit 
 
LIKERT SCALE: PATIENT CONGESTION  
 
VISIT  2 (Day 3) and Date:      __ __ /  __ __ __  /  __  __  __ __ 
      D   D     M  M  M     Y    Y   Y   Y  
	
		
Patient will be  presented  with the following question: 
	
“We would like to measu re how you how your congestion is right now. Please circle the  
number next to the desc ription that best indicates how you  best your congestion  is right 
now, compared to when you first started the study 48 hours ago“ 
	
	
	
3 = Markedly better 
		
	
2 = Moderately better 
		
	
1 = Minimally better 
		
	
0 = No change 
		
	
-1 = Minimally worse 
		
	
-2 = Moderately worse 
		
	
-3 = Markedly worse 
 
  
 
	43 
 
 
APPENDI X F 
 
Visit 3 (Day 3) versus Past Month 
 
LIKERT SCALE: PATIENT CONGESTION  
 
VISIT  2 (Day 3) and Date:      __ __ /  __ __ __  /  __  __  __ __ 
      D   D     M  M  M     Y    Y   Y   Y  
	
		
Patient will be  presented  with the following question: 
	
“We would like to measu re how you how your congestion is right now. Please circle the  
number next to the desc ription that best indicates how you best your congestion  is right 
now, compared to your best compensated state in the past month “ 
	
	
	
3 = Markedly better 
	
	
	
2 = Moderately better 
		
	
1 = Minimally better 
		
	
0 = No change 
		
	
-1 = Minimally worse 
		
	
-2 = Moderately worse 
		
	
-3 = Markedly worse 
 
  
 
	44 
 
APPENDI X G 
 
Visit 2 (Day 3) versus Baseline 
 
LIKERT SCALE: INVESTIGATOR CONGESTION  
 
VISIT  2 (Day 3) and Date:      __ __ /  __ __ __  /  __  __  __ __ 
      D   D     M  M  M     Y    Y   Y   Y  
	
	
	
Investigator is presented  with the following question: 
	
“We would like you to measure the degree of congestion in the patient . Please circle the  
number next to the desc ription that best indicates how your assessment of the patient’s 
degree of congestion right now, compared to when they first started the study 48 hours 
ago.“ 
	
	
	
3 = Markedly better 
	
	
	
2 = Moderately better 
		
	
1 = Minimally better 
		
	
0 = No change 
		
	
-1 = Minimally worse 
		
	
-2 = Moderately worse 
		
	
-3 = Markedly worse 
 
  
 
	45 
 
 
APPENDI X H 
 
Visit 2 (Day 3) versus Baseline Visit 
 
LIKERT SCALE: PATIENT DYSPNEA  
	
 
VISIT  2 (Day 3) and Date:         __ __ /  __ __ __  /  __  __  __ __ 
       D   D     M  M  M     Y    Y   Y   Y  
	
Patient will be  presented  with the following question: 
	
“We would like to measu re how you how your breathing is  right now. Please circle 
the nu mber next to the description that best indicates how you are feeling right now, 
compared to when you first started the study 48 hours ago “ 
	
	
	
3 = Markedly better 
	
	
	
2 = Moderately better 
		
	
1 = Minimally better 
		
	
0 = No change 
		
	
-1 = Minimally worse 
		
	
-2 = Moderately worse 
		
	
-3 = Markedly worse 
 
  
  
 
	46 
 
APPENDI X I 
 
Visit 2 (Day 3) versus Past Month 
 
LIKERT SCALE: PATIENT DYSPNEA  
	
 
VISIT  2 (Day 3) and Date:         __ __ /  __ __ __  /  __  __  __ __ 
       D   D     M  M  M     Y    Y   Y   Y  
	
		
Patient will be  presented  with the following question: 
	
“We would like to measu re how your breathing is  right now. Please circle the nu mber 
next to the description that best indicates how you feel about your breathing right 
now, compared to your best compensated state in the past month  “ 
	
	
	
3 = Markedly better 
		
	
2 = Moderately better 
		
	
1 = Minimally better 
		
	
0 = No change 
	
	
	
-1 = Minimally worse 
	
	
	
-2 = Moderately worse 
	
	
	
-3 = Markedly worse 
 
 
 