 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HALT -AD Protocol and Analysis Plan  
 
HALT -AD Pv1.4 10Mar2023  
 
"Healthy Actions and Lifestyles to Avoid Dementia or Hispanos y el ALTo a la Demencia 
Program" (HALT -AD) 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
[ADDRESS_927318] FELDMAN, MDCM, FRCP(C) 
PROFESSOR, DEPARTMENT OF NEUROSCIENCES  
DIRECTOR, ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE COOPERATIVE STUDY (ADCS) 
DEAN, ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE AND NEURODEGENERATIVE  RESEARCH  
[ADDRESS_927319] La Jolla, [LOCATION_004] [ZIP_CODE] -0949 TEL: (858) 246 -1347 FAX: (858) 246 -1414  

  
 
Protocol Title:  A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_684466] y el ALTo a la Demencia program (HALT -AD) 
Protocol Acronym:  HALT -AD 
Sponsor:  UC San Diego  Health  
Protocol Version:  1.4 10MAR 2023  
Co-Principal Investigators:  Howard Feldman, MDCM, FRCP(C)  
Director, Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study 
Professor, Department of Neurosciences  
Dean, Alzheimer’s Disease and Neurodegenerative Research 
University of [LOCATION_004], San Diego  
[ADDRESS_927320] be in formed that the information is 
privileged or confidential and may not be further disclosed by [CONTACT_476]. These restrictions on 
disclosure will apply equally to all future information supplied to you, which is indicated as 
privileged or confidential.  

 
HALT -AD Study Protocol  Confidential  
Page  2 of 52 
 
 
SIGNATORE PAGE  
 
(SIGNATURES ON FILE AT ADCS)  
 
 
 
 
 
Howard Feldman, MDCM , FRCP(C)  
Directo r, Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study 
Profe ssor, Departme nt of Neu rosci e nces 
Dean , Alzhe i mer ' s and Neurodegenerative Research 
Univers i ty of Cali fornia , San Diego  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sarah Banks, PhD , ABPP -CN 
Associate [CONTACT_79175] nts of Neuro lo gy and Psychiatry 
University of Californ ia, San Diego  ft M Z-.2, 20 i 3 
D ate (MMDDDYYY)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
04/03/2023  
 
 
Date (MMDDDYYY)  

Confidential  
Page 3 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
 
Protocol Synopsis  
 
Title  A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_684467] y  el ALTo a la Demencia program (HALT -AD) 
Background 
& Rationale  Alzheimer’ disease and dementia are common, and feared. Recent scientific 
advances have underscored the significant population attributable risk of 
modifiable risk factors including those whose modification particularly when 
combined could delay or prevent  dementia. However, there is an important 
gap in having this opportunity translated by [CONTACT_684495]. The preventive message does not fit  the medical 
model well and the opportunity is not reaching the public or engaging it 
through public health programs that can intervene to bridge the gap. Healthy 
Actions and Lifestyles to Avoid Dementia or Hispanos y el ALTo a la 
Demencia program (HALT - AD) is a novel bilingual educational program 
that will focus on reducing risk factors with the ultimate goal of preventing 
dementia. It will be centered around a web -based interactive virtual online 
platform that will be developed to be dynamic, engaging, a nd interactive.  
HALT -AD will be complemented by [CONTACT_684496].  
Prior to launching the full  HALT -AD program, it is essential that we conduct 
a preliminary pi[INVESTIGATOR_684468]’s first prototype including: 
the usability of - and engagement with - the online platform, users’ 
acceptability of the learning content and facilitated suppor t discussion 
groups. As well, effectiveness of the program in changing knowledge, self - 
efficacy, and dementia -related lifestyle risk measures will be assessed.  
This initial four -months pi[INVESTIGATOR_684469] (such as:  introduction to dementia and risk factors, sleep, diet, and 
social connectivity). The information generated from this study will help 
inform the development of the second program’s prototype, expected to 
benefit from the initial pi[INVESTIGATOR_684470] -friendly, effective and 
accessible to our target audience.  
Study Design  This pi[INVESTIGATOR_102191] a longitudinal study of an inception cohort exposed 
to the HALT AD online educational program for a four month study. It will 
utilize pre - and post - intervention collection of quantitative and qualitative 
data to evaluate the progr am’s first prototype.  
Target 
Population  • Cognitively normal midlife and older -adult participants will be 
eligible to participate in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_684471]; Ages 50 -85 
Confidential  
Page 4 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
 
 • Montreal Cognitive Assessment -Telephone/Blind version (T -MoCA) 
Score >18/22  
• Sufficient proficiency in English or Spanish to undergo clinical 
assessment and participate in an online educational program.  
• Technical abilit y to participate in an online educational program (i.e. 
computer/tablet and internet access; ability to send and receive 
emails)  
• Sufficient vision and hearing to participate in online educational 
program (judgement of site investigator)  
Number of 
Participants  A total of 20 participants will be enrolled at UCSD  
• 10 participants will complete the English version of  HALT -AD 
• 10 participants will complete the Spanish version of HALT -AD 
We are aiming to recruit 50% women and to enroll a diverse  participant  
sample across varied age ranges within both language groups.  
Study 
Duration  Estimated duration of the entire pi[INVESTIGATOR_684472] 4 
months (including participant enrollment, pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], focus groups and 
completion of data collection)  
• Individual HALT -AD participation: 3 Months participation in online 
HALT -AD program  
Study Goal 
and Aims  Overall Goal: To conduct a preliminary pi[INVESTIGATOR_684473] -AD. 
Aims:  
1. To evaluate engagement with - the online  platform  
2. To evaluate preliminary evidence on the effectiveness of the program 
in changing  
a) knowledge,  
b) self-efficacy, and  
c) dementia -related lifestyle risk factors.  
3. To determine users’ acceptability of the program content  
4. To determine users’ acceptability and satisfaction with the facilitated 
support discussion groups  
5. To evaluate the usability of the online platform  
Outcome 
Measures  Primary Outcome Measures:  
1. Users’ engagement with - the HALT -AD online platform as measured 
by: 
• The total amount of time (in minutes) spent per user on all 
courses combined  
Confidential  
Page 5 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
 
 • The percentage of participants who completed all courses  
Secondary Outcome Measures:  
1. Preliminary evidence on the effectiveness of the program in changing 
knowledge, self -efficacy, and dementia -related lifestyle risk fa ctors 
will be evaluated by:  
• Change from baseline in knowledge on the HALT -AD 
knowledge assessment survey at 4 months  
• Change from baseline in self -efficacy on the New General 
Self-Efficacy Scale at 4  months  
• Change from baseline in lifestyle risk on the HALT -AD 
Lifestyle Risk Assessment Survey at 4 months  
Exploratory Outcome Measures:  
1. Users’ acceptability of the HALT -AD program content will be 
determined by:  
• HALT -AD Course Acceptability  Survey  
• Focus group discussion  
2. Users’ acceptability and satisfaction with the facilitated support 
discussion groups will be determined by:  
• Facilitated support discussion group Acceptability Survey  
• Focus group discussion  
3. The usability of the online platform will be evaluated  by: 
• HALT -AD User Experience  Survey  
• Net Promotor Score Survey  
Statistical 
Plan  Descriptive statistics will be used for quantative data. Change scores will be 
computed where applicable. Change = (4 months score - baseline score).  
Continuous data will be presented with mean, standard deviations, median, 
minimum and maximum and 95% confidence intervals. Categorical data will 
be presented as proportions and percentages. Changes in continuous outcome 
measures between baseline and post -intervention will be analyzed by 
[CONTACT_134706] t -test. 
Qualitative data generated from focus groups, logs, and open -ended survey 
questions will be thematically analyzed using inductive qualitative coding.  
Sample Size and Power  
Given that this pi[INVESTIGATOR_684474] -AD program, we did not power to detect an  
Confidential  
Page [ADDRESS_927321] OF ABBREVIATIONS:   9 
1.0 INTRODUCTION   10 
1.1 BACKGROUND   10 
1.2 RATIONALE   10 
2.0 STUDY  DESIGN   11 
3.0 STUDY GOAL AND  AIMS   11 
3.1 OVERALL  GOAL   11 
3.2 AIMS  11 
4.0 OUTCOME  MEASURES  12 
5.0 ETHICS AND  REGULATORY  CONSIDERATIONS  12 
5.1 ELECTRONIC  INFORMED  CONSENT  12 
5.2 POTENTIAL RISKS AND BENEFITS ASSOCIATED WITH  THIS  STUDY  13 
5.2.1 Potential  Risks  13 
5.2.2 Potential  Benefits  13 
6.0 PARTICIPANT  SELECTION  13 
6.1 INCLUSION  CRITERIA  13 
6.2 EXCLUSION  CRITERIA  14 
7.0 STUDY  PROCEDURES  14 
7.1 STUDY  VISITS  14 
7.1.1 Remote  Study  Visits  14 
7.1.2 Pre-Screening Telephone Questionnaire (within a month prior  to baseline)  15 
7.1.3 Telephone Screening (within a month prior  to baseline)  15 
7.1.4 Baseline/ HALT -AD Program Launch (+/ - 30 days)  15 
7.1.5  Month 4/ End of  HALT -AD Program  [ADDRESS_927322]-Pi[INVESTIGATOR_684475]  16 
7.2 HALT -AD PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION  17 
7.2.1 Overview  17 
7.2.2 Program  Registration  18 
7.2.3 Program  Elements  18 
7.3 MONTHLY FACILITATED  DISCUSSION  GROUP  19 
7.4 HALT -AD ACTIVITY  DATA  19 
7.5 COMPENSATION  20 
8.0 STUDY  PROCEDURE  DESCRIPTIONS  20 
8.1 SOCIODEMOGRAPHICS  20 
8.2 MEDICAL /SURGICAL /FAMILY  HISTORY  20 
8.3 HEIGHT /WEIGHT /BMI  20 
8.4 HEARING AND  VISION  ASSESSMENT  20 
9.0 STUDY -SPECIFIC  INSTRUMENTS  20 
9.1 COGNITIVE  MEASURES  20 
9.1.1 Montreal Cognitive Assessment -Telephone/Blind  Version  (T-MoCA)  20 
Confidential  
Page 8 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
9.2 QUESTIONNAIRES  21 
9.2.1 Knowledge  Assessment  Survey  21 
9.2.2 The New General  Self-Efficacy  Scale  21 
9.2.3 Lifestyle  Risk Assessment  21 
9.2.4 HALT -AD User  Experience  Survey  21 
9.2.5 Net Promoter Score  (NPS)  Survey 21 
9.2.6 HALT -AD Course  Acceptability  Survey  21 
9.2.7 HALT -AD Facilitated discussion group  Acceptability  Survey  21 
10.0  EARLY  DISCONTINUATION  PROCEDURES  22 
11.0 ADVERSE  EVENTS  22 
11.1 EVALUATION AND REPORTING OF  ADVERSE  EVENTS  22 
11.2 ASSESSMENT OF  ADVERSE  EVENTS  23 
12.0 STATISTICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  24 
12.1 ANALYSIS  PLAN  24 
12.2 SAMPLE SIZE AND  POWER  24 
13.0 RECORDING AND COLLECTION  OF DATA  24 
13.1 CASE  REPORT  FORM  24 
13.1.1  HALT -AD Website  Server  27 
13.1.3  REDCap  Surveys  28 
13.1.4  Focus Groups Recordings  and Transcription  28 
13.2 STUDY FILES AND PARTICIPANT  SOURCE  DOCUMENTS  28 
13.3 RATER  TRAINING  28 
13.4 INCIDENTAL  FINDINGS  28 
14.0  PUBLICATIONS POLICY AND SHARING  OF DATA  28 
15.0 REFERENCES  30 
16.0 APPENDICES  31 
APPENDIX 1: S CHEDULE  OF EVENTS  31 
16.1 APPENDIX 2:  SURVEY  INSTRUMENTS  32 
16.1.1  Knowledge  Assessment  Survey  32 
16.1.2  New General  Self-Efficacy  Scale  33 
16.1.1   HALT -AD User  Experience  Survey  33 
16.1.1  Net Promoter Score  (NPS)  Survey  34 
16.1.2  HALT -AD Course  Acceptability  Survey  34 
16.1.3  HALT -AD Facilitated discussion group  Acceptability  Survey  36 
16.1.4  HALT -AD Lifestyle  Risk Assessment  36 
16.2 APPENDIX 3:  SCREENING  QUESTIONS  37 
16.2.1  PRE-SCREENING  TELEPHONE  INTERVIEW  37 
16.2.2  HEARING  AND  VISION  40 
16.3 APPENDIX 4:  BASELINE  ASSESSMENTS  [ADDRESS_927323] OF  ABBREVIATIONS:   
AD Alzheimer’s  Disease  
ADRD  AD and related dementias  
AE Adverse event  
BMI  Body Mass  Index  
CMS  Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 
CRF  Case Report Form  
HALT -AD Healthy Actions and Lifestyles to Avoid Dementia 
ICF Informed Consent Form  
NGSE  New General  Self-Efficacy  
NPS Net Promoter Score Survey  
T-MoCA  Montreal Cognitive Assessment -Telephone/Blind Version 
UEQ  User Experience Questionnaire  
ICMJE  International Committee of Medication Journal Editors  
Confidential  
Page 10 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
1.0 INTRODUCTION  
 
1.1 Background  
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the single most feared disease associated with aging [1, 2], having a 
devastating social and economic impact on patients, families, and the community [3]. With its 
aging demographic, the growth of affected Americans is exponenti al with one person diagnosed 
every [ADDRESS_927324] of AD to the US economy is over $260 
million [4]. Over 84,[ADDRESS_927325] AD in San Diego county alone [5], and 690,000 across 
[LOCATION_004]. There is a 35% increase proj ected within approximately the next decade [3].  
Coinciding with these general trends for America’s aging population, there are currently just 
over [ADDRESS_927326] 20 million by 2060 [6], with 3.6 million having AD [7]. Currently, close to half (45%) of 
all older Hispanic Americans are living in two states, [LOCATION_004] and [LOCATION_007]. Given that this 
population is disproportionately affected by [CONTACT_684497] [8], the development of culturally informed preventive 
interventions that target modifiable risk factors to reduce dementia risk in Hispanics is 
paramount.  
Progress in finding effective pharmaceutical treat ments to modify or definitively treat AD and 
related dementias (ADRD) has been extremely disappointing [9]. Recent research underscores a 
population attributable risk of 28.2% associated with a range of modifiable risk factors across the 
lifespan [10], and  encouraging results from studies combining multiple risk factors as a focus of 
their intervention [11]. In turn, efforts to successfully modify lifestyle and other health factors 
(e.g., vascular health, physical activity, diet, sleep etc.) addressing pers onalized risk could have 
an enormous long -term benefit in delaying or preventing dementia. While the medical sector and 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) are constantly innovating individual service 
delivery [12], insufficient attention has been given to systematically translating biomedical 
research on lifestyle changes to reduce dementia risk through information at the population level 
that can promote effective behavioral change. Indeed, this approach is our best current 
opportunity for de mentia risk reduction.  
1.2 Rationale  
Healthy Actions and Lifestyles to Avoid Dementia or Hispanos y el ALTo a la Demencia 
program (HALT - AD) is a novel bilingual educational program that will focus on reducing risk 
factors with the ultimate goal of preventing dementia. It will be centered around a web -based 
interactive virtual online platform that will be developed to be dynamic, engaging, and 
interactive. Through interactive courses, the educational content of HALT -AD will provide 
guidance on modifiable lifest yle risk factors and the identification of treatable medical conditions 
including cerebrovascular health, sleep, sensory loss, social isolation, mood, diet, and physical 
activity.  
Participants in HALT -AD will be provided with personalized risk profiles, wi ll be encouraged to 
learn about their risk factors and how they can effectively modify them, and will be provided 
with feedback on their progress. They will participate in facilitated support discussion groups,  
Confidential  
Page [ADDRESS_927327] a preliminary pi[INVESTIGATOR_684476]’s first prototype. At t he end of the 3 -month pi[INVESTIGATOR_29426], 
evaluations will include: the usability of - and engagement with - the online platform and users’ 
acceptability of the learning content and facilitated support discussion groups. As well as, 
evaluating preliminary evidenc e on the effectiveness of the program in changing knowledge, 
self-efficacy, and dementia -related lifestyle risk factors. The program will also be evaluated on 
metrics such as being user friendly, engaging, supportive and communicative, with the potential 
for scalability to state - and national -levels.  
This initial four -months pi[INVESTIGATOR_684477] (introduction 
to dementia and lifestyle risk factors, sleep and diet). It may also include a fourth educational 
course on so cial connectivity and lonliness. Completion of this initial pi[INVESTIGATOR_684478] a 
round of improvements informed by [CONTACT_684498], on usability, as well as feedback 
from participants and citizen advisors. This will allow for an iterative pro cess to build the 
program to its full content, with feedback to optimize the user experience and ensure the 
accessibility of the content. The information generated from this study will help inform the 
development of the second program’s prototype, expected  to benefit from the initial pi[INVESTIGATOR_684479] -friendly, effective and accessible to our target audience.  
 
2.[ADDRESS_927328] - intervention 
collection of quantitative and qu alitative data to evaluate the program’s first prototype.  
 
3.[ADDRESS_927329] prototype of HALT -AD. 
3.2 Aims  
1. To evaluate engagement with - the online  platform  
 
2. To evaluate preliminary evidence on the effectiveness of the program in changing 
knowledge, self -efficacy, and dementia -related lifestyle risk factors  
3. To determine users’ acceptability of the program content  
4. To determine users’ acceptability and satisfaction with the facilitated support discussion 
groups  
Confidential  
Page 12 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
5. To evaluate the usability of the online platform  
 
4.0 OUTCOME MEASURES  
 
4.1 Primary Outcomes  
4.1.1 Users’ engagement with - the HALT -AD online platform as measured  by: 
• the total amount of time (in minutes) spent per user on all courses  combined  
• the percentage of participants who completed all  courses  
4.2 Secondary Outcomes  
4.2.1 Preliminary evidence on the effectiveness of the program in changing knowledge, self- 
efficacy, and dementia -related lifestyle risk factors will be evaluated by:  
• Change from baseline in knowledge on the HALT -AD knowledge assessm ent 
survey at 4 months  
• Change from baseline in self -efficacy on the New General Self -Efficacy Scale 
(NGSE) at 4 months  
• Change from baseline in lifestyle risk on the HALT -AD Lifestyle Risk 
Assessment Survey at 4 months  
4.3 Exploratory Outcomes  
4.3.1 Users’ acceptability of the HALT -AD program content will be determined  by: 
• HALT -AD Course Acceptability  Survey  
• Focus group discussion  
4.3.2 Users’ acceptability and satisfaction with the facilitated support discussion groups will 
be determined by:  
• Facilitated Di scussion Group Acceptability Survey  
• Focus group discussion  
4.3.3 The usability of the online platform will be evaluated  by: 
• HALT -AD User Experience  Survey  
• Net Promotor Score Survey  
 
5.0 ETHICS AND REGULATORY  CONSIDERATIONS  
5.1 Electronic Informed Consent  
For the purposes of this study, the consent process will be completed remotely. A telephone 
call with the participant and a study coordinator will be scheduled in order to facilitate the 
informed consent discussion and to address any questions from the par ticipant.  
Confidential  
Page 13 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
The electronic Informed Consent Form (ICF) will be maintained in REDCap. Participants will 
review the consent information and electronically sign the ICF directly within REDCap. The 
REDCap e -Consent Framework provides standard ized tools to obtain consent and store consent 
documentation with a certification screen and a storage function which automatically generates 
a ‘hard -copy’ PDF of the signed form. Participants will be able to download and keep a copy of 
the ICF for their r ecords. The completed PDFs will be securely stored in REDCap’s File 
Repository and will only be accessible to the program manager, study coordinators and Co - 
Principle Investigators (co -PIs). These files will be kept separate from other study data 
maintain ed in REDCap, which will be de -identified and coded by [CONTACT_684499] (see 
Figure 2 (page 23) for a description of how study will be entered and stored in REDCap)  
It will be made clear to each potential participant that informed consent may be withdra wn at 
any time without needing to give a reason and that such withdrawal will not compromise the 
relationship between the participant and the Investigator nor the participant’s future treatment.  
The ICF will be provided in a language fully comprehensible t o the prospective participants 
and ample opportunity must be given to inquire about the details of the study.  
5.2 Potential Risks and Benefits Associated with this  Study  
5.2.1 Potential Risks  
Risks associated with study participation are minimal and may include fatigue and/or frustration 
associated with cognitive screening at baseline and participating in an online educational 
program. Questionnaires on mood and lifestyle risk may increase nega tive affect. In order to 
mitigate these risks, participants will be reminded they can skip questions or take breaks. If a 
participant mentions negative emotions, the study coordinator will alert Dr.Sarah Banks, co -PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_684480], who will att empt to contact [CONTACT_78772] [ADDRESS_927330], literacy, and engagement in lifestyle interventions for 
brain  health  and dementia  prevention  through  dissemination  of HALT -AD to the broader  public.  
 
6.0 PARTICIPANT SELECTION  
 
A total of 20 participants will be enrolled at UCSD with 50% (n=10) completing the English 
version of HALT -AD and 50% (n=10) completing the Spanish version. We are aiming to recruit  
Confidential  
Page 14 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
50% women and to enroll a diverse participant sample across varied age ranges within both 
language groups.  
6.[ADDRESS_927331] meet all of the following inclusion criteria to be eligible for enrollment:  
1. Signed informed consent must be obtained and documented (from the  participant).  
2. Sufficient proficiency in English or Spanish to undergo clinical assessment and 
participate in an online educational program.  
3. Ages 50 -85 
4. Montreal Cognitive Assessment -Teleph one/Blind Version (T -MoCA) score >18/22  
5. Technical ability to participate in an online educational program (i.e. ability to operate a 
computer/tablet and gain internet access; ability to send and receive emails)  
6. Sufficient vision and hearing to participate in online educational program (judgement of 
site investigator)  
7. Ability to sit comfortably for a period of at least [ADDRESS_927332] the technical ability to participate in an online educational 
program. Technical ability is defined as ability to operate a computer/tablet and  gain 
internet access; ability to send and receive emails)  
5. Total Score on the T -MoCA <[ADDRESS_927333] an advanced degree (e.g. Master’s, MD, PhD) in an area related to 
brain health will not be eligible to participate.  
 
7.0 STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
7.1 Study Visits  
The schedule of study visits and procedures to be performed at each visit are outlined below 
and summarized in the Schedule of Events table (Appendix 1). A detailed description of 
study procedures is located in Section 8.0. and a detailed description of st udy instruments is 
located in Section 9.0  
 
7.1.1 Remote Study Visits  
Confidential  
Page 15 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
Pre-screening and screening visits will be conducted remotely over telephone. Participants will 
need access to a computer or mobile device in order to participate in HALT -AD and complete 
baseline and follow -up surveys on REDCap.  
 
7.1.2 Pre-Screening Telephone Qu estionnaire (within a month prior to  baseline)  
Interested participants will be invited to complete a brief pre -screening questionnaire over 
telephone with a study team member to ascertain potential elegibility for the study. Participants 
will be asked to p rovide verbal assent prior to completing the questionnaire. Questions will 
include age, education, language fluency and access to technology needed to participate in the 
study. Total time to complete the pre -screening questionnaire is approximately 5 -10 mi nutes.  
 
7.1.3 Telephone Screening (within a month prior to  baseline)  
Following the pre -screening procedures described above, potentially eligible participants will be 
invited to complete the electronic informed consent process (see section 5.1). Once participant s 
have electronically signed the ICF, the following procedures will be conducted remotely via 
telephone during the screening period (Estimated Time to Complete: up to 1 hour). Screening 
procedures may be completed over multiple days as long as all procedur es are completed within 
30 days prior to baseline. Procedures and instruments will be adapted for remote administration 
(see section 8.0 Study Procedure Descriptions and section 9.0 Study -Specific Instruments).  
The following procedures will be conducted du ring the screening period (Estimated Time: 1.0 - 
1.5 hours):  
• Review of inclusion/exclusion criteria  
• T-MoCA  
• Hearing and Vision assessment  
• Evaluation and confirmation of eligibility  
Following completion of the screening assessments above, the co -PIs will be responsible for 
confirming participant eligibility to be enrolled in the study.  
 
7.1.4 Baseline/ HALT -AD Program Launch (+/ - 30 days)  
Participants who are confirmed to be eligible to par ticipate and enrolled in the study, will then 
complete the following baseline assessments. These may be completed on the same day as the 
screening visit, as long as they are conducted following the screening assessments and 
confirmation of eligibility (tot al estimated time approximately 30 min):  
• Documentation of demographics, medical history (including past medical procedures and 
family history), medications  
• Self-Report Height,  Weight  
• Body Mass Index (BMI) calculation (based on self -report current height an d weight)  
• Knowledge Assessment Survey  
Confidential  
Page 16 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
Following completion of the above baseline assessments, participants will be enrolled in the 
HALT -AD online program and will be provided with instructions for logging into and beginning 
their participation in the program (see section 7.2 for a complete des cription of HALT -AD).  
Participants will also complete the following baseline assessments directly within the online 
HALT -AD program (total estimated time approximately 30 min -1.0 hour):  
• New General Self -Efficacy Scale  (NGSE)  
• Lifestyle Risk Assessment  
• Goal setting  
Throughout  the participants’  participation  in the 3-Month  HALT -AD program,  a study  coordinator 
will maintain contact [CONTACT_684500] -in with participants, 
provide reminders about upcoming HALT -AD program elements and be available to answer any 
questions that may arise. E -mails will be sent from a secur e UCSD health e -mail account.  
 
7.1.5  Month 4/ End of HALT -AD Program  
Following completion of the 3 -Month HALT -AD program, participants will complete the 
following assessments remotely via the REDcap survey tool (total estimated time approximately  
1.0 hour):  
• HALT -AD User Experience  Survey  
• Net Promoter Score Survey  
• HALT -AD Course Acceptability  Survey  
• Facilitated Discussion Group Acceptability Survey  
• Knowledge Assessment Survey  
Participants will also complete the following end of study assessments directly withi n the online 
HALT -AD program (total estimated time approximately 30 min -1.0 hour):  
• New General Self -Efficacy Scale  (NGSE)  
• Lifestyle Risk Assessment  
• Review of Goals  
 
7.1.[ADDRESS_927334]-Pi[INVESTIGATOR_684481] 3 -month HALT -AD program, participants m ay be invited to 
participate in an end of study remote focus group(s) to further evaluate user -experience and 
satisfaction with HALT -AD. This will allow the study team to address in more detail the 
components that have been surveyed in the questionnaires o n usability and acceptability: (e.g. 
level of difficulty and interest in the content, strengths and weaknesses, confidence in the 
content, applicability and impact in everyday life, clarifications, quality of design, animation and 
visual effects, effort ne eded, motivation for behavioral change). Participant feedback and 
responses will be used to make any necessary changes to the web -based HALT -AD program 
prior to launch of the full program. Total time to participate in the focus group is approximately 
2 hou rs (1 hour to discuss web -based platform and 1 hour to discuss facilitated discussion 
groups).  
Confidential  
Page [ADDRESS_927335] participants 
to engage in different evidence -based content, to lea rn and become motivated to change their 
personalized profile of modifiable risk factors. It will include up to date information and 
evidence for lifestyle risk factor modification that can be addressed to promote brain health and 
reduce dementia risk. HALT -AD will include learning courses that will be aligned with those 
modifiable risk factors with significant population attributable risk of dementia.  
HALT -AD is a bilingual bicultural program with options to participate in English or Spanish. 
The program is  developed as a collaborative effort by [CONTACT_684501]’s content areas, along with significant input from older -adult Citizen 
Advisors and Promotores (community health workers), ensuring cultural relevance and a ssisting 
in feedback within its iterative development.  
For this initial pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], HALT -AD will focus on up to four initial learning courses:  
• Introductory Course  
• Diet 
• Sleep or Physical Activity  
• Social Connectivity and Loneliness  
Once the full program is developed, additional learning courses will include, vascular factors 
(hypertension, diabetes, obesity and cerebrovascular health), physical activity (exercise), mood 
(depression and stress), mindfulness, sensory (vision and hearing) and cognitive training . Topic 
matters will also include advice on how to navigate the healthcare system as well as courses 
myths and popular misconceptions regarding brain health, and how risk profiles may differ in 
men and women.  
Confidential  
Page [ADDRESS_927336]. Their 
registration will include demographic and lifestyle questions.  
 
7.2.3 Program Elements  
Participants will be provided access to HALT -AD where they will participate for approx imately 
1-2 hours a month for 3 months, from home, with their own devices and at their own time.  
Information within the courses will contain scientific evidence, explanation of principles and 
mechanisms that underlie positive effects, specific recommendati ons (e.g. a healthy recipe to 
make at home), suggestions to improve behavior in everyday life and typi[INVESTIGATOR_684482]. Participants will also be able to revisit course material as often as they would 
like. Additional program elemen ts will also include interactive activities, quizzes and a resource 
library.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Personalized Profiles  
Participants will be asked to complete a brief online lifestyle risk assessment at the beginning 
and end of their participation in the program. Questions wi ll be related to the content in the 
program courses (e.g. sleep, diet, and mindfulness/compassion). A personalized profile will be 
developed for each participant based on their responses to the lifestyle risk assessment. A visual  

Confidential  
Page 19 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
aide (e.g. sliding scale) will be used on the program dashboard to show the participant their risk 
level in each lifestyle domain.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Goal Setting  
Participants will also be asked to set goals based on their risk profile and to re -visit and update 
their goals  at the end of the 3 month program.  
 
7.3 Facilitated discussion group  
Participants will also participate in moderated remote discussion groups that will focus on 
learning and promotion of behavioral change. Discussion groups will occur approximately every 
3 we eks and will be moderated by a social worker (ASW or LCSW) called HALT Helper 
Sessions will be filled on a rolling basis, with a variety of meeting times available to 
accommodate other commitments such as caregiving. Before each discussion group, the HALT 
Helper will review what the group is (and is not) and it will be made clear to participants that this 
is not group therapy but rather a facilitated discussion to focus on content that is being addressed 
in HALT -AD and to promote healthy lifestyle changes. Participants will also be reminded of the 
importance to maintain confidentiality during the group sessions and the limits to 
privacy/confidentiality due to the group setting at the beginning of each session.  
 
7.4 HALT -AD Activity  Data  
The following data will b e automatically collected through the HALT -AD program in order to 
evaluate user activity and engagement with the program:  
 
Program Level Reporting  
Course Started %  How many users started the course  
Course Complete %  How many users completed the course  
Course Passed %  How many users passed the course  
Minutes per learner  Average time spent per learner on a 
module  
Average Score  Average Score per learner in a course  
Participant Level Reporting  
Course Started %  How many courses were started by [CONTACT_684502] %  How many courses were completed by  
[CONTACT_684503] %  How many courses were passed by [CONTACT_684504]. All study data from HALT -AD 
will be de -identified and linked to the unique Participant ID prior to being included in the study 
database.  
Confidential  
Page 20 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
7.5 Compensation  
Participants will be co mpensated $[ADDRESS_927337] the amount of compensation provided.  
 8.0 STU DY PROCEDURE  DESCRIPTIONS   
8.1 Sociodemographics  
Sociodemographic data (sex, age, handedness, languages, marital/partner status, living 
circumstances, education, employment history) will be captured.  
 
8.2 Medical/Surgical/Family History  
Relevant medical and surgical history will be captured as well as relevant medical history of 
first-degree relatives. A list of current medications will also be documented.  
 
8.3 Height/Weight/BMI  
Participants will be asked to self -report current height and wei ght during the baseline visit. 
Responses will be used to calculate BMI using the NIH BMI Metric Calculator 
(https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/educational/lose_wt/BMI/bmi -m.htm). 
 
 
8.[ADDRESS_927338] relatively sufficient vision (with corrective 
lenses or other aid s) so that they can identify symbols, stimuli and text presented on a computer 
screen in front of them. Participants must also have sufficient hearing (corrected with hearing 
aids or other voice amplification devices) to be able to follow spoken instructio ns and 
information that is presented only verbally.  
 
9.0 STUDY -SPECIFIC INSTRUMENTS  
 
9.1 Cognitive Measures  
9.1.1 Montreal Cognitive Assessment -Telephone/Blind Version (T -MoCA)  
The T -MoCA is a [ADDRESS_927339] that has been validated for remote administration by 
[CONTACT_684505] a global assessment of cognition, covering domains of memory, 
language, attention and executive functioning [13]. The T -MoCA has been modified from  the 
original MoCA to remove items requiring paper and pencil administration and visual stimuli. 
The total possible score is 22 with a cutoff score of greater or equal to 18 to indicate normal 
cognitive functioning.  
Confidential  
Page 21 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
9.2 Questionnaires  
9.2.1 Knowledge Assessment Survey  
Brief questionnaire that will be developed as the HALT -AD program content is finalized to 
assess general knowledge of dementia including risk factors, brain health and prevention. 
Participants’ knowledge will be assessed pre and post part icipation in HALT -AD. 
 
9.2.2 The New General Self -Efficacy  Scale  
Self-Efficacy is a concept that refers to one’s global confidence in their ability to cope with 
demanding or novel situations. The New General Self -Efficacy scale is an 8 -item 5 -point likert 
scale (strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree (5)) which measure one’s perceived competence in 
dealing with a range of stressful or challenging situations [14]. The scale will be completed 
online within HALT -AD. 
 
9.2.3 Lifestyle Risk Assessment  
Questionnaire to be de veloped by [CONTACT_684506] -AD Pi[INVESTIGATOR_684483] (e.g. Sleep, Diet, Physical Activity, Mindfulness/Compassion). Risk scores for each 
domain will be calculated.  
 
9.2.4 HALT -AD User Experience Survey  
Questionnaire adapated for HALT -AD based on questions from the User Experience 
Questionnaire (UEQ) available at https://ueqtryitout.ueq -research.org/ . Participants will be asked 
to decide as spontaneously as possible which conflicting terms (e.g. annoying vs. enjoyable) 
better describes the HALT -AD program . 
 
9.2.5 Net Promoter Score (NPS) Survey  
The Net Promoter Score (NPS) Survey is a metric used in customer experience programs to 
measure the loyalty of customers to a product ( What is Net Promoter Score? (Upda ted 2020) |  
Qualtrics AU ). NPS scores are measured with a single question survey “How likely is it that you 
would recommend [Organisation X/Product Y/Service Z] to a friend or colleague?” and reported 
with a number from -100 to +100, a higher score is desi rable.  
 
9.2.6 HALT -AD Course Acceptability Survey  
Questionnaire developed by [CONTACT_684507] -AD team to evaluate overall acceptability and 
satisfaction with the course content for the HALT -AD program. There are a total of 15 items 
including both multiple choice and ope n-ended questions (see Appendix 2).  
 
9.2.7 HALT -AD Facilitated discussion group Acceptability Survey  
Questionnaire to be developed in collaboration with the group facilitator. Questions will assess 
overall satisfaction and utility of the the monthly facilitated discussion groups.  
Confidential  
Page 22 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
 10.0 EARLY DISCONTINUATION  PROCEDURES   
Participants are free to withdraw from study participation at any time, for any reason, and 
without prejudice.  
Study Discontinuation for an individual participant may occur in the following circumstances:  
1. Withdrawal of informed consent by [CONTACT_2299].  
2. Adverse event or other significant medical condition which, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_684], render it neces sary to remove the individual from study  participation.  
3. Any other occurrence that, in the Investigator’s opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649], makes continued participation 
contrary to the participant’s best interests.  
If co-PIs discover sufficient reasonable cause for the premature t ermination of the study, the 
terminating party will provide written notification to the participant documenting the reason for 
study termination.  
 
 11.0 ADVERSE  EVENTS   
 
An adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical occurrence in a participant that occurs from the 
time of the baseline visit and up to 30 days after study participation has ended. For the purposes 
of reporting on the this study, an AE is defined as any unfavourable or unintended sign, 
symptom, or disease associated with study participation that is both non -serious and either 
temporally or causally related to study procedures. Pre -existing conditions, which increase in 
frequency or severity or worsen in nature during, or as a consequence of, a study procedure, 
may also be considered an AE if it meets the definition of being both non-serious and related 
to a study  procedure.  Adverse  events  that occur  prior  to the baseline  visit will be documented  as 
medical  history.  
An AE does not include:  
• Medical or surgical procedures (e.g., surgery, endoscopy, tooth extraction, transfusion). 
The condition that leads to the procedure is the  AE. 
• Situations   where   an   untoward   medical   occurrence  has   not  occurred (e.g., 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_63805], social and/or convenience  admissions).  
• Worsening of symptoms associated with an associated co -morbid condition and not 
related to a study  procedure.  
11.1 Evaluation and Reporting of Adverse Events  
All AEs (i.e., a new event  or an exacerbation of a pre -existing condition) that occur from the 
baseline visit to the end of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_684484]. Adverse events that occur prior to the baseline visit  
will be documented as medical history. The Investigator will follow all AEs until the AE  
Confidential  
Page 23 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
resolves, or until the Investigator determines the event is chronic or clinically stable. If an 
AE remains unresolved at the conclusion of the study, t he Investigator will make a clinical 
assessment to determine whether continued follow -up of the AE is warranted.  
11.2 Assessment of Adverse Events  
All AEs will be promptly documented on the Adverse Event CRF and assessed by [CONTACT_3786]. Details of the even t will include the dates of onset and resolution, severity, 
relationship to study procedures, seriousness, whether the event caused the participant to 
withdraw from the study, and outcome.  
Severity: Severity will be graded and recorded according to the tab le below.  
 
 
Severity  Definition  
Mild  Awareness of event but easily tolerated  
Moderate  Discomfort enough to cause interference with usual activity  
Severe  Inability to carry out usual activity, incapacitating, requires 
medical intervention  
 
Relationship: The relationship of the AE to study procedures will be determined by [CONTACT_3786], and assessed using the following definitions:  
 
 
 
Relatedness  Description  
 
Not Related  There  is no evidence  of a causal  relationship  and a causal 
relationship cannot  be reasonably attributed to the study  
procedures. The event is clearly due to extraneous causes.  
 
Unlikely Related  A poor temporal  relationship  exists  between  the event  onset  and 
study procedures. The event could easily be explained by [CONTACT_2416]’s  clinical  state,  intercurrent  illness,  or concomitant  
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014].  
 
 
Possibly Related  A relationship  cannot  be ruled  out with certainty  and the event 
may be related. There is some evidence to suggest a causal 
relationship but the influence of other factors may have 
contributed to the event, such as the  participant’s clinical  
condition or concomitant treatment.  
 
Probably Related  The event is likely related to study participation. There is 
evidence to suggest a causal relationship, such as reasonable 
temporal sequence from procedure. The influence of other  
factors is unlikely.  
 
Definitely Related  The event is clearly related to study participation. There is clear 
evidence to suggest a causal relationship. The influence of other 
factors can be ruled out.  
Confidential  
Page 24 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
These criteria, in addition to good clinical judgment, should be used as a guide for 
determining the causal assessment.  
 
 12.0 STATISTICAL  CONSIDERATIONS   
12.1 Analysis Plan  
Descriptive statistics will be provided for each timepoint on HALT -AD measures and chan ge 
scores will be computed where applicable. Change = (4 months score - baseline score).  
Continuous data will be presented with mean, standard deviations, median, minimum and 
maximum and 95% confidence intervals. Categorical data will be presented as propo rtions and 
percentages. We will examine the proportion of participants reaching a defined threshold on 
usability measures. Changes in continuous outcome measures between baseline and post - 
intervention will be analyzed by [CONTACT_134706] t -test. 
Furthermore, the continuous measures collected directly from the program will be analyzed to 
evaluate program use during the 3 -month period. User engagement as measured by [CONTACT_684508] (in minutes) spent on all courses combined and the percentage of 
participants who completed all courses, overall and by [CONTACT_654], gender and educational level will be 
tracked.  
The post -pi[INVESTIGATOR_287327]/focus groups will collect more detailed feedback on the experience 
with the program and these will be guided b y the results obtained on the usability and 
functionality questionnaires. Qualitative analyses (content analysis) will be used for responses to 
open -ended questions (e.g. suggestions for improvements of the web platform) obtained during 
focus groups. Answe rs to open -ended questions will be first transcribed verbatim in Word, then 
the text will be imported into MAXQDA. Thematic analysis will be conducted in MAXQDA to 
identify common themes arising from the focus group discussions. Themes will be defined and 
described in a Table format. Saturation will be reached and analysis will be considered complete 
when no new themes are identified.  
12.[ADDRESS_927340] size over time. The sample size for 
the pi[INVESTIGATOR_684485].  
 
 13.0 RECORDING AND COLLECTION OF  DATA   
13.1 Case Report Form  
The co -PIs and study  team will be trained on elecontric case report form (eCRF) completion. The 
investigator is responsible for all entries in the eCRF for completeness, accuracy and clarity. The 
investigator or designee should complete the eCRF as soon as possible after the information is  
Confidential  
Page [ADDRESS_927341] 
protected UCSD Health File server (see Figure 2 and Figure 3 below for descriptions of the data 
flow in REDCap and UCSD Health File Server)  . All study files will only be accessible to study 
co-PIs and team members.  
The program manager for this study will be responsible for storing all participant identifying 
information (name, contact, e -mail address) and to maintain the master file that links the 
participant to their unique Participant ID on a secure password -protec ted UCSD Health File 
server. This master file will be kept separate from all other de -identified study data generated in 
this study.  
Confidential  
Page 26 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
Figure 2. REDCap Data Flow  
Baseline 
Assessments  
• Study Coordinator conducts 
following assessments over 
telephone with  participant:  
➢ Sociodemographics  
➢ Vision and  Hearing  
➢ Medical  History  
➢ T-MoCA  
• Study Coordinator enters 
participant responses 
directly into e -CRF coded in 
REDCap  
• E-mail link sent to complete 
survey directly in  REDCap:  
➢ Knowledge  Assessment  
• Data is identified by [CONTACT_684509] 
• Data is securely stored and 
saved in  REDCap  End-of-Study 
Assessments  
 E-mail link sent to 
participants to complete 
the following surveys 
directly in  REDCap:  
➢ HALT -AD User 
Experience  Survey  
➢ Net Promoter Scor e 
Survey  
➢ HALT -AD Course 
Acceptability  Survey  
➢ Facilitated 
Discussion Group 
Acceptability  Survey  
➢ Knowledge 
Assessment  
 Data is identified by 
[CONTACT_684510] [ADDRESS_927342] -protected UCSD Health File Server (see Figure 2 for a 
description of the data flow for the HALT -AD program)  
HALT -AD Study 
Assessments  
• Assessments 
conducted directly in 
HALT -AD program 
will be provided  in 
.csv file format to be 
saved to study files 
on UCSD Health File 
Server  
• Assessments 
include:  
➢ New General Self- 
Efficacy  Scale  
➢ Lifestyle Risk 
Assessment  
• .csv data will be de - 
identified and linked 
to unique Participant 
ID only 
Confidential  
Page 28 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
13.1.3  REDCap Surveys  
Data and questionnaires that are not collected directly within the online HALT -AD website, will 
be securely collected and stored in REDCap. All study data from REDCap will be de -identified 
and coded by [CONTACT_684511] (see Figure 1 for a descrip tion of the study data that will 
be stored within REDCap).  
13.1.4  Focus Groups Recordings and Transcription  
Audio -Recordings from the focus group(s) will be transcribed. All identifiable information will 
be removed from the transcriptions and names will be replac ed by [CONTACT_684512].  
Audio -recordings will be permanently deleted once transcription is complete. The de -identified 
transcriptions will be stored with other study data on a secure password -protected UCSD Health 
file server (see Figure 2 UCSD Healt h File Server Data Flow).  
13.[ADDRESS_927343] of  the study   
to be fully documented and the study data to be subsequently verified. These documents 
include Investigators’ Study Files, original participant source documents generated at the 
study  site, or completed source document worksheets. The term “original” means the first 
recording of the  data.  
The co -PIs will ensure theinvestigator files are maintained, including essential documents such 
as the study protocol and its amendments, informed co nsents, staff curriculum vitae, 
correspondence, and other appropriate documents.  
13.3 Rater Training  
Study staff will be trained on the assessments and study specific cognitive, functional and 
behavioral measures that are described in Sections 8.0 and 9.0. study database.  
13.4 Incidental Findings  
In the event that an incidental finding is identified as being m edically significant, the program 
manager will link the participant code to the participant identity and the finding will be passed on 
to the co -PIs within 24 hours. The co -PIs will be responsible for determining the significance of 
the finding, arranging appropriate follow -up and informing the primary care physician (if 
provided).  
 
 14.[ADDRESS_927344] the academic contribution of individuals to the d esign and 
implementation of the trial, analysis of the data and preparation of the manuscript. All funding 
partners will be acknowledged. All publications that arise from the use of study data will give 
acknowledgement, attribution, or co -authorship as app ropriate in accordance with the 
International Committee of Medication Journal Editors (ICMJE) standards.  
Confidential  
Page 30 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
 15.0 REFERENCES   
 
1. Metlife Foundation. What America Thinks - Metlife Foundation Alzheimer’s Survey. 
Available at:  https:// www.metlife.com/content/dam/microsites/about/corporate - 
profile/alzheimers -2011.pdf . 2011.  
2. Ostergren,  J.E., et al., The Influence  of Psychosocial  and Cognitive  Factors  on Perce ived 
Threat of Alzheimer's Disease. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen, 2017. 32(5): p. 289 - 
299. 
3. Association, A.s., Alzheimer’s Disease Facts and Figures 2020 . 2020, Alzheimer’s 
Dement.  
4. Hurd, M.D., et al., Monetary costs of dementia in the [LOCATION_002]. N Engl J Med,  2013.  
368(14): p. 1326 -34. 
5. Agency, C.o.S.D.H.a.H.S., The Alzheimer's Project Clinical Rountable. Alzheimer’s 
disease and related dementias in San Diego county. . 2018.  
6. Living, A.f.C., Profile of Older Americans . 2019.  
7. Network, U.E.R.R.I.o.A.L.s., Latinos and Alzheimer’s Disease: New Numbers Behind the 
Crisis . 2016.  
8. Velasco -Mondragon, E., et al., Hispanic health in the [LOCATION_003]: a scopi[INVESTIGATOR_684486]. Public Health Rev, 2016. 37: p. 31. 
9. Cummings, J., et al., Alzheimer's disease drug development pi[INVESTIGATOR_19189]: 2018. Alzheimers 
Dement (N Y), 2018. 4: p. 195-214. 
10. Livingston,  G., et al., Dementia  prevention,  intervention,  and care.  Lancet,  2017.  
390([ZIP_CODE]): p. 2673 -2734.  
11. Kivipelto, M., et al., The Finnish Geriatric Int ervention Study to Prevent Cognitive 
Impairment and Disability (FINGER): study design and progress. Alzheimers Dement, 
2013. 9(6): p.  657-65. 
12. Cummings, J., C. Reiber, and P. Kumar, The price of progress: Funding and financing 
Alzheimer's disease drug development. Alzheimers Dement (N Y), 2018. 4: p. 330-343. 
13. Pendlebury,  S.T.,  et al., Telephone  assessment  of cognition  after transient  ischemic  attack 
and stroke: modified telephone interview of cognitive status and telephone Montr eal 
Cognitive Assessment versus face -to-face Montreal Cognitive Assessment and 
neuropsychological battery. Stroke, 2013. 44(1): p.  227-229. 
14. Chen,  G., S.M. Gully,  and D. Eden,  Validation  of a new general  self-efficacy  scale.  
Organizational research methods, 2001. 4(1): p. 62 -83. 
 
Confidential  
HALT -AD Study  Protocol  Page 31 of  52 
 
 
 16.0 APPENDICES   
APPENDIX 1: Schedule of Events  
 
UCSD HALT -AD PI[INVESTIGATOR_684487] 1  MONTH 2  MONTH 3  MONTH 4  
Remote Study Procedures (on Zoom or REDCap)  
ELECTRONIC INFORMED CONSENT (E - 
CONSENT)  X      
INCLUSION/EXCLUSION CRITERIA EVALUATED  X      
SOCIODEMOGRAPHICS   X     
MEDICAL/SURGICAL/FAMILY HISTORY   X     
WEIGHT, HEIGHT (participant estimates) and BMI   X     
HEARING AND VISION ASSESSMENT  X      
MONTREAL COGNITIVE ASSESSMENT (MoCA)  X      
HALT -AD USER EXPERIENCE SURVEY       X 
NET PROMOTER SCORE SURVEY       X 
HALT -AD COURSE ACCEPTABILITY SURVEY       X 
KNOWLEDGE ASSESSMENT SURVEY   X    X 
FACILITATED DISCUSSION GROUP  
ACCEPTABILITY SURVEY       X 
FOCUS GROUPS       X 
HALT -AD Online Assessments   
NEW GENERAL SELF -EFFICACY SCALE (NGSE)   X    X 
LIFESTYLE RISK ASSESSMENT (Diet, Sleep,  
Mindfulness)   X    X 
GOAL SETTING AND REVIEW   X    X 
FACILITATED DISCUSSION GROUPS1   X* X* X*  
1 *Facilitated Discussion Groups will occur approximately every three weeks in between Months 1 -3. They will occur prior to the start of each new content module.  
Confidential  
Page 32 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
16.1 APPENDIX 2: Survey  Instruments  
16.1.[ADDRESS_927345] a higher risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_586829]’s  Disease.  
 
4. Being physically inactive and being obese are two examples of factors that can increase 
our chances of developi[INVESTIGATOR_6237]’s  Disease.  
5. Hanna may avoid dementia by [CONTACT_684513], eating a healthier diet, and being more physically  active.  
6. There are many reasons why older adults may feel lonely. Reasons include losing family 
members, f acing difficulties in moving around, and well as feeling empty and  sad. 
7. Everyone experiences loneliness the same way. It is not personal, and it does not differ 
across  people.  
8. People that are lonely have an increase in abnormal proteins in their brain. The 
accumulation of abnormal proteins in the brain occurs during the development of 
Alzheimer’s  Disease.  
9. If you are feeling lonely, there is nothing you can do to overcome your  loneliness.  
10. Sometimes, when we are very lonely, making personal initiatives such as joining a 
volunteering social group does not always work. That’s totally  OK. 
11. An average adult should be getting [ADDRESS_927346] brain function, since it is only a few 
hours less than the recommended  amount.  
12. When we haven’t sleep for [ADDRESS_927347] tasks very  well. 
8. Even when things are tough, I can perform quite  well. 
 
 
16.1.1 HALT -AD User Experience Survey  
Decide as spontaneously as possible which of the following conflicting terms better describes the 
HALT -AD web platform (website). There is no "right" or "wrong" answer. Only your personal 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_684488]!  
 
annoying  O O O O O O O  enjoyable  
not understandable  O O O O O O O  understandable  
creative  O O O O O O O  dull 
easy to learn  O O O O O O O  difficult to learn  
valuable  O O O O O O O  inferior  
boring  O O O O O O O  exciting  
not interesting  O O O O O O O  interesting  
Confidential  
Page [ADDRESS_927348] O O O O O O O  slow  
inventive  O O O O O O O  conventional  
obstructive  O O O O O O O  supportive  
good  O O O O O O O  bad 
complicated  O O O O O O O  easy 
unlikable  O O O O O O O  pleasing  
usual  O O O O O O O  leading edge  
unpleasant  O O O O O O O  pleasant  
secure  O O O O O O O  not secure  
motivating  O O O O O O O  demotivating  
meets expectations  O O O O O O O  does not meet expectations  
inefficient  O O O O O O O  efficient  
clear  O O O O O O O  confusing  
impractical  O O O O O O O  practical  
organized  O O O O O O O  cluttered  
attractive  O O O O O O O  unattractive  
friendly  O O O O O O O  unfriendly  
conservative  O O O O O O O  innovative  
 
 
16.1.1  Net Promoter Score (NPS) Survey  
“How likely is it that you would recommend HALT -AD to a friend or colleague?”  
 
16.1.2  HALT -AD Course Acceptability Survey  
 
1) Overall, was it easy to understand the information presented in the courses?  
  Not at all easy    Slightly easy    Moderately easy    Very easy (skip to question 3)  
  Extremely easy (skip to question 3)  
2) What changes can we make for information to become more understandable?  
 
 
3) Rate the overall amount of information presented in the courses:  
  Too little    About right    Too much  
4) Generally, was the information presented in the courses  boring?  
Confidential  
Page 35 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
 
  Not at all boring (skip to question 6)    Slightly boring    Moderately boring    Very boring    Extremely boring  
5) What changes can we make for information to become less boring?  
 
 
6) Generally, was the information presented to you in the courses  helpful ? 
  Not at all helpful    Slightly helpful    Moderately helpful    Very helpful    Extremely helpful  
7) Generally, did you find the activities in the courses to be interesting ? 
  Not at all interesting    Slightly interesting    Moderately interesting    Very interesting (skip to question 9)    Extremely interesting (skip to question 9)  
8) How can we change the activities to make them more interesting?  
 
9) Generally, did you find the activities in the courses to be helpful ? 
  Not at all helpful (skip to question 11)    Slightly helpful (skip to question 11)    Moderately helpful (skip to question 11)    Very helpful    Extremely helpful  
10) In what ways were the activities helpful? (skip to question  12) 
 
 
11) How can we change the activities to  make them more helpful?  
 
 
12) Generally, were the quiz questions clear ? 
Confidential  
Page 36 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
  Not at all clear    Slightly  clear    Moderately clear    Very clear    Extremely clear  
13) Overall, was the information in the courses new to you?  
   Not at all new    Slightly new    Moderately new    Very new    Extremely new  
14) Overall, did you find the information in the courses to be  uplifting ? 
  not at all uplifting    Slightly uplifting    Moderately uplifting    Very uplifting  
  extremely uplifting  
15) How likely are you to recommend these courses to a family member, friend or  colleague?  
  extremely unlikely    Unlikely    Likely    Extremely likely  
 
16.1.3  HALT -AD Facilitated discussion group Acceptability Survey  
Questionnaire to be developed in collaboration with the gr oup facilitator. Questions will assess 
overall satisfaction and utility of the the monthly facilitated discussion groups.  
 
16.1.4  HALT -AD Lifestyle Risk Assessment  
Questionnaire developed by [CONTACT_684506] -AD Pi[INVESTIGATOR_684483] (e.g. Sleep, Diet, Physical Activity, Mindfulness/Compassion). Risk scores for each 
domain will be calculated.  
Confidential  
Page 37 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
16.2 APPENDIX 3: Screening  Questions  
 
16.2.[ADDRESS_927349] in the Healthy Actions and Lifestyles to Avoid Dementia or Hispanos 
y el ALTo a la Demencia program (HALT - AD) study. My name [CONTACT_832] [ name ], and I am [ role/title ] at 
the [site name ]. Are you able to understand me well in English, or should I give you the 
following information in  Spanish?  
Is this a good time to talk? (If Yes, proceed with verbal consent language below. If No, confirm 
with participant when would be a good time to call  back)  
 
The HALT -AD study is designed to determine if a new online educational program and 
discussion groups, available in English and in Spanish, can help midlife and older adults learn 
how to prevent dementia through lifestyle changes. Before we offer th e HALT -AD program to a 
large group, we are conducting an initial pi[INVESTIGATOR_684489]. Your participation in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_684490].  
 
In order to see if you are eligible to participate in this study, I would like to ask you some 
questions about your background. This is completely voluntary and you can stop at any time. If 
you give me your verbal permission, I will write down  your responses and enter them into the 
study data base. This will allow us to see what recruitment methods work well and to potentially 
make changes in the future. No information that can identify you will be included in the study 
database. Your contact i nformation will be securely stored at the study site and will be kept 
separate from your responses to this questionnaire. If you are not eligible for this study, we will 
delete your contact [CONTACT_684514] -contact  [CONTACT_684515] a future study 
(see section B below for optional permission to re -contact [CONTACT_684516]) . 
Now, would you like to see if you are eligible to participate? q Yes q No 
Do you give me your permission  to continue  with the questions  and permission  to also write  the 
responses down?q Yes q No 
[YES, continue below Section A; NO, continue below Section B ] 
Section A:  
1. First, can you please tell me how you heard about this study ( select all that  apply )? 
☐ Flyer  
☐ Social  Media  
☐ Word of mouth (please  specify):  
☐ Family  member  
☐ Friend  
☐ Neighbor  
☐ Other (please  specify):     
☐ Other (please  specify):     
Confidential  
Page 38 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
2. What is your  age?     
3. Have  you been  diagnosed  with dementia  or Alzheimer's  disease?  q Yes q No 
4. Do you have  access  to a computer  or tablet  that connects  to the internet?  q Yes q No 
5. Do you understand  the basic  functions  of the computer  or tablet  and can you navigate  to 
different  web pages  on the internet?  q Yes q No 
6. Do you have  the ability  to send  and receive  emails?  q Yes q No 
7. Do you have  an advanced  educational  degree  in an area related  to brain  health?  q Yes q 
No 
8. What is your primary  language?     
9. Participants are able to complete the online educational program in either English or Spanish. 
In which language would you prefer to  participate?     
10. a) On a scale  from [ADDRESS_927350]  your level of proficiency  in speaking  [language 
participant indic ates on Question  7]: 
• None  (0) 
• Very low  (1) 
• Low (2) 
• Fair (3) 
• Slightly less than adequate  (4) 
• Adequate  (5) 
• Slightly more than adequate  (6) 
• Good  (7) 
• Very good  (8) 
• Excellent  (9) 
• Perfect  (10) 
 
b) On a scale  from [ADDRESS_927351]  your level of proficiency  in understanding  spoken 
language in [ language participant indicates on Question  7]: 
• None  (0) 
• Very low  (1) 
• Low (2) 
• Fair (3) 
• Slightly less than adequate  (4) 
• Adequate  (5) 
• Slightly more than adequate  (6) 
• Good  (7) 
• Very good  (8) 
• Excellent  (9) 
• Perfect  (10) 
*≥ 7 out of 10 is considered proficient  
If potential participant does not pass this pre -screen or target recruitment per language, gender, 
or age group is currently full, proceed to B below.  
Confidential  
Page 39 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
 
If potential participant does pass this pre -scree n, proceed with providing information on next 
steps: inviting potential participant to receive electronic informed consent form for their review 
and scheduling a telephone call to discuss the ICF and answer any questions they may have.  
 
Section B:  
If poten tial participant does not meet eligibility criteria [say]  
Unfortunately, you are not eligible for this specific study.  
Would  you be willing  to be contact[CONTACT_684517][INVESTIGATOR_684491] a future study? q Yes q No 
If participant cannot be enrolled because recruitment in target group (language, gender, age 
range) is full [say]  
Unfortunately, recruitment in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_684492] [specify reason i.e. 
language group, gender, age range] is currently full.  
Would  you be willing  to be contact[CONTACT_684518] a future  study?  q Yes q No 
Thank  you so much  for your time today.  We appreciate  you. 
Confidential  
Page 40 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
16.2.2  HEARING AND  VISION  
 
Hearing  
1. How would you describe your hearing (with a hearing aid if you use  one)?  
£Excellent  
£Very good  
£Good  
£Fair 
£Poor  
2. Do you have sufficient hearing (corrected with hearing aids or other voice amplification 
devices) to be able to follow spoken instructions and information that is presented only 
verbally?  
£Yes 
£No 
£Don’t know  
3. Do you find it difficult to follow a conversati on if there is background noise, such as TV, 
radio or children playing, even if using a hearing aid or assistive device as  usual?  
£Yes 
£No 
£Don’t know  
4. Do you use a hearing  aid or specialized  equipment,  or services  for persons  who are deaf or 
hard of hearing, for example, a volume control telephone or TV  decoder?  
£Yes 
£No 
£Don’t know  
5. If YES , Which of the following equipment do you use to hear better? (check all that  apply)  
£Hearing aid  
£Computer to communicate (e.g., email or chat services)  
£Volume control telephone  
£TTY or TTD  
£Message relay service  
£Other phone -related devices (e.g., flashers)  
£Closed caption TV or decoder  
£Amplifiers (e.g., FM, acoustic, infrared)  
£Visual or vibrating alarm  
£Cochlear implant  
Confidential  
Page 41 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
£Another aid (pl ease  specify):     
 
 
 
 
 
Vision  6. If your hearing loss began before middle age, is it likely to have been   Present from early childhood   Due to noise exposure at work   Due to a disease or medical condition?  
1. How would you characterize your eyesight (using glasses or corrective lens if you use 
them)?   Excellent   Very  Good   Good, Fair   Poor   Non-existent (non -existent = blind)  
2. Do you have  relatively  sufficient  vision  (with  corrective  lenses  or other  aides)  so that 
you can identify symbols, stimuli and text presented on a computer screen in front  of 
you?  
 Yes  No  Don’t know  
3. Do you wear glasses?   Yes 
 
 No  Near (Reading)   Distance  
 Don’t know  
4. Besides glasses or contact [CONTACT_13276], do you use any aids or specialized equipment for 
persons who are blind or visually impaired, for example, magnifiers or Braille reading 
materials?   Yes  No  Don’t know  
5. If YES, Which of the following aids do you use? (Plea se choose all that apply)   Magnifiers   Braille reading materials   Larger print reading materials   Talking books   Recording equipment or portable note -takers   Closed circuit devices (e.g., CCTVs)  
Confidential  
Page 42 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
 A computer with Braille, large print, or speech  access   A white cane   A guide dog  
Another aid (please specify):    
Confidential  
Page 43 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
16.3 APPENDIX 4: Baseline  Assessments  
 
16.3.1  SOCIODEMOGRAPHIC  INFORMATION  
 
BIRTH; SEX; GENDER IDENTITY  
 
1. What is your date  of birth?   /    
MM YYYY  
2. People  living  in the United  States  come  from many  different  cultural  and racial 
backgrounds. Which racial category do you identify with? (Choose all that 
apply):  
☐ American Indian or  Alaskan  
☐ Native  Asian  
☐ Native Hawaiian or other Pacific  Islander  
☐ Black or African  American  
☐ White  
☐ Latin  American  
☐ More than one  race 
☐ Unknown or prefer not to  answer  
3. Which ethnic category do you identify  with?  
☐ Hispanic or  Latino  
☐ Not Hispanic or  Latino  
☐ Unknown or prefer not to  answer  
4. What sex was originally listed on your birth  certificate?  
☐ Female  
☐ Male  
5. Do you think of yourself  as: 
☐ Female  
☐ Male  
☐ Transgender woman/trans woman/male -to-female  (MTF)  
☐ Transgender man/trans man/female -to-male  (FTM)  
☐ Genderqueer/gender nonconforming neither exclusively male nor  female  
☐ Additional gender category (or other; please  specify):     
☐ Decline to  answer  
 
HANDEDNESS  
 
1. What is your hand preference? (Hand used predominantly, not  necessarily  
Confidential  
Page 44 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
hand you write with exclusively)  
☐ Left 
☐ Right  
☐ Ambidextrous  
MARITAL / PARTNER STATUS  
 
1. What  is your current  marital/partner  status?  (Choose  the one that describes  you now)  
☐ Single  
☐ Married  
☐ Domestic  partnership  
☐ Separated  
☐ Divorced  
☐ Widowed  
CURRENT LIVING CIRCUMSTANCES  
 
1. Please describe your living  environment:  
☐ House  or apartment/condominium  that you own 
☐ Apartment/condominium  or house  that you rent 
☐ Retirement home (autonomous  living)  
☐ Residence for semi -autonomous  individuals  
☐ Nursing home or long -term care (assisted  living)  
☐ Other, please  specify:     
 
2. Please describe your living  environment:  
☐ Urban  
☐ Suburban  
☐ Rural  
3. With whom do you live? (Please check all that  apply)  
☐ I live alone  
☐ Spouse/significant  other  
☐ Children/grandchildren  
☐ Other members of the  family  
☐ Friend(s)  
☐ Other  (specify):     
 
EDUCATION  
 
2. What  is the highest  grade  or level of school  you completed  or the highest 
degree obtained? (Choose  one) 
Confidential  
Page 45 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
☐ Never attended  school  
☐ Some primary/grade school; specify number of years  completed:     
☐ Completed primary/grade  school  
☐ Some high school; specify number of years  completed:     
☐ Completed high school. Graduated? YES £ NO £ 
☐ GED  
☐ Apprenticeship; specify number of years  completed:     
☐ Technical school or community college; specify number of years  completed:  
   Graduated? YES £ NO £ 
☐ Some university; specify number of years  completed:     
☐ Undergraduate degree at university; please specify degree/specialty (e.g. B.A., 
B.Sc., B.Eng., LL.B., B.Ed.,  etc.):     
☐ Some graduate (post -undergraduate) school; specify number of  years  
completed:     
☐ Graduate degree at university; please specify degree/specialty (e.g., M.A., 
M.Sc., Ph.D., LL.M., other graduate  degree):     
EMPLOYMENT HISTORY  
 
1. What is your current employment status? (Choose  one) 
☐ Paid employment  
☐ Retired  
☐ Voluntary/unpaid  work  
☐ Unemployed  
Confidential  
Page [ADDRESS_927352] Medical History  
1. History of type II diabetes?  
   Yes 
   No 
   Unknown  
2. Currently being treated for type II diabetes?  
   Yes 
   No 
   Unknown  
3. Currently being treated for high blood pressure?  
   Yes 
   No 
   Unknown  
4. Past head trauma?  
   Yes 
   No 
   Unknown  
 
4a. If Yes, what was the date of the most recent head trauma?  
 
 
MM/DD/YYYY  
5. Is there a history of strokes?  
   Yes 
   No 
   Unknown  
 
5a. If there is a history of strokes, when did the last stroke occur?  
 
 
MM/DD/YYYY  
6.Have you experienced any epi[INVESTIGATOR_684493]?  
   Yes 
   No 
 
6a. If Yes, when was the lasttime you fainted or had a blackout?  
 
Confidential  
Page 47 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
 
7 History of any type of seizure?  
   Yes 
   No 
   Unknown/Uncertain  
 
7a. If Yes, when was the last known seizure?  
 
 
MM/DD/YYYY  
 
8. History of epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] (recurrent seizures)?  
   Yes 
   No 
   Unknown  
 
8a. If Yes, when was the last epi[INVESTIGATOR_684494]?  
 
 
MM/DD/YYYY  
9. History of malignant  cancers?  
   Yes 
   No 
   Unknown  
 
9a. If Yes, in remission?  
   Yes 
   No 
   Unknown  
 
9b. If Yes, what was the date of remission?  
 
 
MM/DD/YYYY  
 
 
10. Current diagnosis of a mental health or behavioral  disorder?  
   Yes 
   No 
   Unknown  
 
10a. If Yes, please  specify:     
 
10b. If Yes, are medications currently being taken to treat this disorder?  
   Yes 
   No 
Confidential  
Page 48 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
 
   Unknown  
11. Drug or alcohol dependency or a history of drug or alcohol abuse?  
   Yes 
   No 
   Unknown  
12. Currently have a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea?  
   Yes 
   No 
   Unknown  
 
12a. If yes, who made the diagnosis:  
   Primary care  physician  
   Neurologist  
   Psychiatrist  
   Sleep  Center  
  Other  
 
12b. If Yes, please indicate one of the following in regards to participant treatment?  
   Yes, treatment prescribed and  compliant  
   Yes, treatment prescribed and not fully  compliant  
   No 
   Unknown  
 
13. Please indicate all the surgical procedures that you have undergone, as well as your age and 
whether a general anesthetic was administered.  
 Type of surgery  Age General anesthetic?   
   Yes No Unknown  
 £ Cataract surgery         
 Heart surgery:         
 £ Coronary by[CONTACT_4897]         
 £ Pacemaker surgery         
 £ Coronary stent insertion         
 £ Angioplasty         
 £ Bariatric surgery         
 £ Gastrectomy         
 £ Bowel surgery (e.g. for adhesions, cancer, resection)         
Confidential  
Page 49 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
 
 ☐ Urology  surgery  (e.g. bladder,  kidney)          
 ☐ Hip replacement         
 ☐ Knee  replacement         
 ☐ Other(s):          
 
 
Family History  
14. Please indicate which of your blood relatives have/had a history of any of the following 
conditions.  
  
Condition  Family 
history   
Relative(s) affected  Age of Onset 
(if known)  Number of 
relatives affected  
Yes No 1st ° 2nd ° 
  A. Neurological disorders  
 Memory problems without a  
diagnosis of dementia  ££     
 Alzheimer's dementia  ££     
 Frontotemporal dementia  ££     
 Other dementia (specify):  ££     
 Parkinson's disease  ££     
 Epi[INVESTIGATOR_63798]  ££     
 Stroke  ££     
 Multiple sclerosis  ££     
 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis  
(ALS)  ££     
  B. Mental health disorders  
 Depression  ££     
 Bipolar disorder  ££     
 Other mood disorder  ££     
 Anxiety disorder  ££     
 Schizophrenia  ££     
 Suicide or suicide attempt  ££     
  C. Other disorders  
 Diabetes mellitus  ££     
 Cancer  ££     
 Heart disease  ££     
 Hypertension  ££     
Confidential  
Page 50 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
 
 Other:  ££     
 
Confidential  
Page 51 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 
 
16.3.3  CURRENT  MEDICATIONS  
 
Instructions: The participant should have on hand all their current medications and supplements  (herbal, 
vitamins) or a list of current medications from the pharmacy (plus an accounting of supplemen ts if not 
prescribed by a physician). With this information, fill out the table below. Be sure to include injected 
medications/supplements.  
 
Medication Name  [CONTACT_684519]  
(YYYY)  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
(Interviewer Note: If more space is needed than provided on this page, print more 
pages and paginate accordingly.) Total number of current medications (incl. 
supplements and vitamins)  
Confidential  
Page 52 of 52 HALT -AD Study Protocol   
 