6/16/2015   
  
Comparison of Two 
Techniques of 
Combination Therapy  for 
Treatment of O bstructive 
Sleep A pnea  (OSA)  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
      
      
RESEARCH SUBJECT INFORMATION AND CONSENT FORM  
 
 
TITLE:  COMPARISON  OF TWO  TECHNIQUES 
COMBINATION THERAPY FOR  OSA  
 
PROTOCOL  NO.:  
 
 
SPONSOR: 
INVESTIGATOR:  
 
 
 
STUDY -RELATED 
PHONE NUMBER(S):  Sponsor  
WIRB® Protocol #  
 
J. Michael Adame, D.D.S., PA  
 
J. Michael Adame , D.D.S. 
206 W.  Mahl  
Edinburg, [LOCATION_007],  [ZIP_CODE] 
United  States  
 
 
J. Michael Adame , D.D.S. 
Phone Number: (956) 383 -4400  
 
 
SUMMARY  
 
The purpose of this consent form is to help decide if you would like to participate in the research study . 
 
• You are being asked  to be in a research  study  to compare  two types  of therapi[INVESTIGATOR_619674].  
• You were  selected as  a possible  participant  because  you meet  the requirements  for this study  which 
are: 
a. eighteen (18) years old or  older  
b. Baseline Apnea -Hypopnea Index (AHI) of greater or equal to  [ADDRESS_823949] Pressure  (CPAP)  
d. Partial response to Oral Appliance Therapy  (OAT)  
e. AHI greater or equal to  [ADDRESS_823950] before agreeing to be in the study. You 
should not join this research study until all of your questions are answered.  
 
Things to know before deciding to take part in a research study : 
 
• The main goal of a research study is to learn things to help patients in the  future.  
• The decision  to join or not join the research  study  will not cause  you to lose any medical  benefits.  If 
you decide not to take part in this study , your doctor will continue to treat you.  
• Your  medical  records may become  part of the research  record.  If that happens,  your  medical  records 
may be looked  at and/or  copi[INVESTIGATOR_619675].  
PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  
 
The frequency of Sleep -Disordered Breathing (SDB) in adults has been increasing. It is a common disorder, 
which usually requires lifelong care. SDB is associated as a s econdary disease to many others including 
cardiovascular  diseases,  strokes,  metabolic  disorders  and impaired  memory  function.  Due to the wide  range  and 
serious implications of untreated SDB, there is high motivation to treat it. Unfortunately, the gold standard of 
treating Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA) Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) therapy results in 
around a 50% observance rate and a pop ular alternative (oral appliance therapy) results in around a 50% sub- 
therapeutic  rate, which  leaves  many  patients  untreated  or not treated  well enough.  An advantage  of combination 
therapy  is that it can reduce  the frequently  high CPAP  pressures,  which  lead to intolerance  and also improve  the 
effectiveness of oral appliance therapy thus providing an adherent and effective option. To date however, there 
is only one cited  study  using  a single  type of combination  therapy option  in a very limited  number  of patients  
(10) over a very short  period  (3 days).  As a result,  this study  may provide  health  care practitioners  with valuable 
information, which may increase the opportunity for patients to improve their health outcomes and overall 
wellness.  
 
PROCEDURES  
 
• You will be randomly  assigned  to one therapy  or the other  and you are to use the therapy  for one month.  
 
• After  one month,  you are switched  to the other  therapy  and you are to use it for one month.  You will 
use the therapy only while  sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007].  
 
• You will be expected  to fill out forms  before  you start therapy  which  ask if you had prior  difficulty  or 
side effects with CPAP or oral appliance  therapy.  
 
• During  the study,  you will also be expected  to fill out forms  which  ask if you used  the therapy  each 
night.  
 
• You will be expected to return to the office for a follow up after one week of using each therapy or 
unless you  feel a need  to return  sooner  to the office  to ask questions  or have  something  checked  or fixed.  
 
• At the end of each month you will be asked to fill out the same form asking about difficulty or side 
effects with CPAP or oral appliance therapy.  Also at the end of each month, you will be expected to 
take home a pulse oximeter for an overnight  study.  
 
• You will also be asked to bring in your CPAP at the end of each  month.  
 
• Your  height  will be measured  and you  will also be weighed  before,  after  one month,  and at the end of 
the study.  
 
• You remain anonymous - Your identity will not be  disclosed.  
RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS  
 
Discomforts  may be experienced  and are those  usually  associated  with the use of CPAP  and/or  oral appliance 
therapy.  
 
These can include:  
• pressure  and/or  inflammation  and/or  infection  of the nasal  cavity,  
• CPAP  mask  pressure  and/or  straps  holding  CPAP  mask  pressure,  
• mask leaks causing  discomfort,  
• feelings of  claustrophobia  
• oral appliance discomfort including pressure to the teeth, gums, or jaw  joint  
 
BENEFITS  
 
Benefits of participation:  
• include  a likelihood  that you will be able to use your  CPAP  with the oral appliance  which  will in tum 
manage your sleep  apnea  
• Managing sleep apnea successfully or in an improved manner has been shown to lower high blood 
pressure,  decrease  the chance  for stroke,  reduce  blood  sugar  levels  in diabetics  and lower  the risk of 
death.  
• The results of this study may help people in the  future.  
 
COSTS  
 
You have already paid for the oral appliance therapy. No further charges are expected during the duration of 
this research.  
 
AUTHORIZATION TO USE AND DISCLOSE INF ORMATION FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES  
 
What information may be used and given to others?  
The study doctor will get your personal and medical information. For example:  
 
• Past and present medical  records  
• Research  records  
• Records about your study  visits  
 
Who may use and give out information about you? 
The study doctor and the study staff.  
 
Who might get this information?  
The sponsor of this research. "Sponsor" means any persons or companies that are : 
 
• working  for or with J. Michael  Adame,  D.D.S,  PA, Adame  Dental  Sleep  Medicine,  PLLC  or Pulmonary 
& Sleep Center of the Valley  
Your information may be given to:  
• The U.S. Food and Drug Administration  (FDA),  
• Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS)  agencies,  
• Governmental agencies in other  countries,  
• Governmental agencies to whom certain diseases (reportable diseases) must be reported,  and 
• Western Institutional Review Board®  (WIRB®).  
 
Why will this information be used and/or given to others?  
• to do the  research,  
• to study the results,  and 
• to see if the research was done  right.  
If the results of this study are made public, information that identifies you will not be used. 
What if I decide not to give permission to use and give out my health information?  
Then you will not be able to be in this research study.  
 
May I review or copy my information? 
Yes, but only after the research is over.  
 
May I withdraw or revoke (cancel) my permission? 
Yes, but this permission will not stop automatically.  
 
You may withdraw or take away your permission to use and disclose your health information at any time. You 
do this by [CONTACT_130919]. If you withdraw your permission, you will not be able to 
stay in this study.  
 
When you withdra w your permission, no new health information identifying you will be gathered after that 
date. Information that has already been gathered may still be used and given to others.  
 
Is my health information protected after it has been given to others?  
There is  a risk that your information will be given to others without your permission.  
 
Confidentiality  
Information from this study will be given to the sponsor. "Sponsor" includes any persons or companies that are 
contracted by [CONTACT_619679] r esearch information during and after the study.  
 
The information will also be given to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). It may be given to 
governmental agencies in other countries where the study device may be considered for approval. Medical 
records which identify you and the consent form signed by [CONTACT_288246]/or copi[INVESTIGATOR_565360]:  
 
• the sponsor  
and may be looked at and/or copi[INVESTIGATOR_288179]:  
 
• the FDA,  
• Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS)  agencies,  
• governmental agencies in other countries,  and 
• Western Institutional Review Board®  (WIRB®).  
 
Absolute  confidentiality  cannot be  guaranteed  because  of the need  to give information  to these  parties.  The 
results of this research study may be presented at meetings or in publications. Your identity will not be 
disclosed in those  presentations.  
 
VOLUNTARY PARTICIPATION AND WITHDRAWAL  
Your  participation  in this study  is voluntary.  You may decide  not to participate  or you may leave  the study  at 
any time.  
 
Your participation in this study may be stopped at any time by [CONTACT_619680] , including:  
 
• if it is in your best  interest  
• if you do not consent  to continue  in the study  after  being  told of changes  in the research  that may affect 
you 
 
QUESTIONS  
Contact J. Michael Adame, D.D.S. at (956) 383 -4400 for any of the following reasons:  
 
• if you have any questions about your participation in this  study,  
• if you have questions, concerns or complaints about the  research.  
 
If you have questions about your rights as a research subject or if you have questions, concerns or complaints 
about the research, you may contact:  
 
[CONTACT_244734]® (WIRB®) 
[ADDRESS_823951] SE Suite 120  
Puyallup, Washington [ZIP_CODE] -2115  
Telephone: 1 -[PHONE_6597] or 360 -252-2500  
E-mail: [EMAIL_6164]  
 
WIRB is a group of people who independently review research.  
 
WIRB will not be able to answer some study -specific quest ions, such as questions about appointment times. 
However, you may contact [CONTACT_619681].  
 
Do not sign this consent form unless you have had a chance to ask quest ions and have gotten satisfactory 
answers.  
If you agree to be in this study, you will receive a signed and dated copy of this consent form for your records.  
 
A description  of this clinical  trial will be available  on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov,  as required by  U.S. Law. 
This Web  site will not include  information  that can identify  you. At most,  the Web  site will include  a summary 
of the results. You can search this Web site at any  time.  
 
CONSENT  
I have read this consent form (or it has been read to me). All my questions about the study and my part in it 
have been answered. I freely consent to be in this research study.  
 
I authorize the release of my medical and research records for the purpose of this study . 
By [CONTACT_50841] , I have not given up any of my legal rights.  
 
 
Subject Name (printed)  
 
 
Signature  [CONTACT_619689] (printed)  
 
 
 
 
Signature  [CONTACT_619690]. 06/15/2015  
COMPARISON OF TWO TECHNIQUES OF COMBINATION THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF OSA  
2  
  
 
 
"Comparison of Two Techniques of Combination Therapy for Treatment of OSA 11
 
 
Purpose of the study and background  
 
• Purpose of the  study  
To compare two techniques of combination therapy for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and 
determine if clinical data obtained before, during and after suggests that either or both 
techniques  improve  tolerance  to CPAP  and/or  are statistically  more  efficacious  than CPAP  or 
oral appliance therapy  alone.  
 
• Background  
The prevalence of sleep -disordered breathing {SOB) in adults has been increasing. It is a 
common  disorder,  which  usually  requires  lifelong  care.  A recent  study  has shown  that in the 
last [ADDRESS_823952]  been  seen  in 30-70 year olds for both genders  (1). 
 
One of the likely leading causative factors for the increase in SOB is obesity. The ongoing 
obesity epi[INVESTIGATOR_619676] (off -spring epi[INVESTIGATOR_7509]) and the increase in 
SOB is one of them. (1) The increase in body mass index (BMI) can caus e an increase in fat 
deposition and decrease in neuromuscular control of the airway, which can increase the 
collapsibility of the airway. (2)  
 
SOB  is associated  with much  co-morbidity  including  cardiovascular  diseases,  strokes,  metabolic 
disorders and impa ired neurocognitive function. {3 -5) Due to the wide range and serious 
implications of untreated SOB, there is high motivation to treat it. The American Academy of 
Sleep Medicine (AASM) recommendations for treatment of OSA include: weight loss, 
behavioral  therapy,  oral appliance  therapy,  positive  airway  pressure  (PAP)  therapy  and surgical 
intervention.  (6) There  also continues  to be emerging  and investigational  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_619677].  
 
PAP may be delivered  in continuous  positive  airway  pressure  {CPAP),  bi-level  positive  airway 
pressure  (BPAP)  or auto titrating  positive  airway  pressure  (APAP)  modes.  The gold standard 
for treatment  of OSA  is CPAP;  however,  it has been  shown  that APAP  can be better  tolerated 
and used  a greater  number  of hours  than CPAP  in long term randomized  study  (7, 8). CPAP 
improves systemic hypertension, and it has been demonstrated that successful CPAP 
treatment prolongs survival (9). In addition, improvements in glucose metabolism have also 
been  shown  with CPAP  therapy  {22).  While  PAP therapy  continues  to be  the first line therapy  
offered (10), adherence issues are well established. (11) A recent study following patients from 2 -
6 years, showed an adherence rate of 54.8% with an average use of 4.02 hours/night. (12).  
Adherence issues therefore may result in less favorable effectiveness than required. (13)  
COMPARISON OF TWO TECHNIQUES OF COMBINATION THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF OSA  
3  
  
 
 
An alternative option for the treatment of SOB is oral appliance therapy (OAT). The AASM and 
the American Academy of Dental Sleep Medicine (AADSM) have provided management 
guidelines for the utilization of oral appliance therapy ( 14, 15). Although not as efficacious as 
CPAP, OAT is indicated for use in patients with mild to moderate OSA who prefer OAT to CPAP, 
or who do not respond to CPAP, are not candidates for CPAP, or who fail CPAP or behavioral 
measures such as weight loss or sleep position change. (15) OAT has also demonstrated 
cardiovascular benefits by [CONTACT_619682] (16, 19).  OAT has 
also been shown to have a good adherence rates as determined by [CONTACT_619683]. One 
example of this is a  study by [CONTACT_619684] 'index  of agreement'  of 0.[ADDRESS_823953]'s log sheets. In the study, the mean hours of 
wear was 6.8 hours.  (17) 
 
While the benefits and good adherence of OAT are recognized, the efficacy of OAT remains 
less than optimal (partial response). Using a definition of decreasing Apnea -Hypopnea Index 
(AHi) to less than or equal to 10, it has been shown that the percent succe ss rates for OAT 
was: Mild OSA -81%, Moderate OSA -60% and Severe OSA -25%. The mean success rate of OAT 
was 52% (18).  
 
It would seem prudent that the simultaneous use of both CPAP  and OAT (combination 
therapy) may be beneficial to consider. One pi[INVESTIGATOR_619678] (as compared to original PAP titration study) and improve 
effectiveness of OAT (20). Another study was able to show that OAT could be a short -term 
alternative to CPAP (21). The study demonstrated  that an oral appliance could be as 
successful, or near successful as CPAP, and as being a convenient option for travel  purposes.  
 
There are two primary ways to use combination therapy. One way uses the oral appliance as 
an anchor for a customizable nasal mask interface (CNMI) while another way uses the 
patient's preferred CPAP mask separate from the oral appliance. This study will prospectively 
and randomly assign patients to one of the two combination therapy options and they will use 
each one for two mon ths. Clinical data obtained during the study will be at one month and at 
the end of two months and will include: AHi, CPAP pressure, and mask leakage, Nadir, T90, 
hours of usage and ESS.  
 
Sources:  
1) Peppard, Paul E., Am J Epdemiol, 2013 May 1, 177 (9),  1006 -1014  
 
2) Schwarz  AR, Patil SP, Proc Am Thoracic  Soc, 2008  Feb 15; 5(2):185 -92 
COMPARISON OF TWO TECHNIQUES OF COMBINATION THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF OSA  
4  
  
 
3)  Marshall, NS, Sleep Apnea as an independent risk factor for all -cause mortality: 
The Busselton Health Study, Sleep 2008 Aug; 31  (8):179 -85. 
 
4)  Drager LF; OSA: A cardio metabolic risk in obesity and the metabolic syndrome, 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013 Aug 13; 62(3):  569-76. 
 
5)  Yount T, Sleep Disordered Breathing and mortality: eighteen year follow up of the 
Wisconsin Sleep Cohort. Sleep, 2008; 31:  1071 -78. 
 
6)  Epstein, U, Clinical guideline for the evaluation, management  and long -term care 
of obstructive sleep apnea in adults, J Clin Sleep Medicine, 2009 Jun 15; 5(3):  263-76 
 
7)  Sullivan CE, Reversal of obstructive sleep apnea by [CONTACT_619685] e 
applied through the nares. Lancet  1981;1:862 -5 
 
8)  Hudgel DW, A long -term randomized, cross -over comparison of auto -titrating and 
standard nasal continuous airway pressure. Sleep.2000 Aug 1;  23(5):645 -8. 
 
9)  Robinson GV, Obstructive Sleep Apnea/hypopnea syndrome and hypertension. 
Thorax  2004;59:1089 -94 
 
10) Gay, P, Evaluation of positive airway pressure treatment for sleep related 
breathing disorders in adults; Sleep, 2006 Mar, 29 (3),  381-401. 
 
11) Reeves -Hoche  MK, Nasal  CPAP:  An objective  evaluation  of patient  compliance. 
American  Journal  of Respi[INVESTIGATOR_696]  & Critical  Care  Medicine.  1994;149:149 -54 
 
12) Wang  Q, Analysis  of long-term compliance  to CPAP  patients  with OSA,  and 2016 
Aug 9;  96(30):2380 -4. 
 
13) Grote L, Therapy with CPAP: incomplete elimination of sleep related breathing 
disorder. Eur Respir J 2000;  16:921 -7. 
 
14) Kannan Ramar, MBBS, MD, Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Treatment of 
Obstructive  Sleep  Apnea  and Snoring  with Oral Appliance  Therapy:  An Update  for 2015  
 
15) Kushida CA, Practice parameters for the treatment of snoring and Obstructive 
Sleep Apnea with oral appliances: an update for 2005. Sleep. 2006; 29:  240-3. 
COMPARISON OF TWO TECHNIQUES OF COMBINATION THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF OSA  
5  
  
 
16) Gotsopoulos  H, Oral Appliance  therapy  reduces  blood  pressure  in OSA:  a 
randomized, controlled trial. Sleep  2004;27:934 -41 
 
17) Lowe AA, Treatment, airway and compliance effects of a titratable oral 
appliance. Sleep. 2000 Jun 15; [ADDRESS_823954]  4:S172 -8. 
 
18) Ferguson et al (2006) Sleep  29:244 -62. 
 
19) Anandam  A, Cardiovascular  mortality  in OSA  treated  with CPAP  or OAT:  an 
observational study. Respi[INVESTIGATOR_16921] 2013  Nov;18(8):1184 -90 
 
20) EI-Solh AA, Combined oral appliance and PAP therapy for OSA: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  Sleep 
Breath. 2011 May;  15(2):203 -8. 
 
21) Almeida FR, Mandibular advancement spline as a short -term alternative 
treatment in patients with OSA already effectively treated with CPAP. J Clin Sleep 
Med.2013 Apr 15;  9(4):319 -24. 
 
22) Rasche,  K, Obstructive  sleep  apnea  and type 2 diabetes,  Eur J Med Res. 2 010; 
lS(Suppl 2):  152-156. 
 
Criteria for Subject Selection  
 
• Number  of subjects:  50-100 
 
• Gender  of Subjects:  Male and female with attempt of equal  participation  
 
• Age of Subjects:  18 and  older  
 
• Racial  and Ethnic  Origin:  Distribution  will mirror  that of normal  patient  base  of the clinics 
which is primarily  Hispanic.  
 
• Inclusion  Criteria:  
 
 
 
 
• Exclusion  Criteria:  Diagnosis of OSA with AHi greater than or equal to 5, CPAP 
intolerance due to CPAP pressure too high, mask fit/leak, Oral 
Appliance  Therapy  partial  responders  of AHi at or above  5, patients 
demonstrated successful adherence to oral appliance  therapy.  
 
Daily use of alcohol, CNS depressants and narcotics, pregnancy and 
prisoners  
COMPARISON OF TWO TECHNIQUES OF COMBINATION THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF OSA  
6  
  
 
• Vulnerable  Subjects:  Ethnic minorities and economically  disadvantaged  
 
Methods and Procedures  
 
At least fifty patients who were intolerant to CPAP and had a partial response to OAT (AHi 
greater than or equal to 5 will be recruited randomly and prospectively into one of two  gr oups  
(at least 25 each in each group). The group options were: 1} Combination therapy with CNMI 
and 2) Combination therapy with patient's preferred CPAP  mask.  
 
These CPAP intolerant patients underwent a PAP titration during an overnight PSG or were 
assigned an autoPAP and had accumulated at least one month of data. Intolerance to CPAP 
was defined as patients who reported to their sleep physician that they were in tolerant due to 
CPAP pressure, mask fit/leak issues. They were also asked to fill out a CPAP intolerance 
questionnaire to document the reason for the intolerance.  
 
Patients who were determined to be partial responders to OAT were determined to have met 
an adherence and titration protocol. Adherence was defined as using the oral appliance for at 
least 4 hours per night for 70% of the nights in the [ADDRESS_823955] or in -lab PSG, the AHi was greater than or equal to 5 (verification sleep 
test).  
 
Patients  who were  assigned  the option  of using  their previously  preferred  CPAP  mask,  they 
underwent  one CPAP  care session  and then the two month  time period  would  begin.  
 
If patients were assigned the CNMI option, they were allowed one week for follow 
up/adjustments  of the customized  mask,  they also underwent  one CPAP  care session  and then 
the two month time period would  begin.  
► Data  Analysis  and Data  Monitoring  - Data  will be analyzed  quantitatively  using, 
but not limited to, the Kolmogorov -Smirnov test, Student's t test or the Wilcoxon 
rank- sum test, and SPSS 12.0 for Windows {Chicago, IL, [LOCATION_003]).  
Demographic: Ask patients for age and gender  
Physiologic: Weight Scale - Weight+ Ruler - Height= Body mass index (BMI) 
Pulse Oximeter: Nadir (low 02 saturation), Time percen t below 90 {T90) 
Polysomnography {PSG): Apnea -Hypopnea Index (AHi), CPAP pressure, leakage 
CPAP Airview or Data Card: AHi, CPAP pressure, leakage  
Home Sleep Study (HST): AHi, Nadir, and T90  
COMPARISON OF TWO TECHNIQUES OF COMBINATION THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF OSA  
7  
  
 
 
 
► Data  Monitoring  - At time of start of study  at Adame  Dental  Sleep  Medicine,  PLLC  or 
at J. Michael Adame, DDS, P.A. Obtain from  patient: 
 
1) CPAP intolerance  questionnaire  
2) Compliance questionnaire with oral  appliance  
3) Obtain CPAP data from PAP titration or autoPAP: CPAP pressure,  Leakage, Apnea- 
Hypopnea Index (AHi), Nadir, Time percent below 90 (T90), hours of  usage  
4) Home Sleep Test (HST): AHi, Nadir,  T90 
5) AutoPAP: AHi, mask  leakage  
6) Gather patient demographics: age, gender,  BMI 
 
At one (1) Month  
1) CPAP intolerance  questionnaire  
2) Compliance questionnaire with Oral  Appliance  
3) Gather CPAP data from "Airview" or Data card: CPAP pressure, leakage,  AHi, 
4) Gather oxygen saturation data from Pulse Oximeter: Nadir and  T90 
5) Optional verification (PSG or  HST)  
 
After 2nd Month  
1) CPAP intolerance  questionnaire  
2) Compliance questionnaire with Oral  Appliance  
3) Gather CPAP data from "Airview" or Data card: CPAP pressure, leakage,  AHi, 
4) Gather oxygen saturation data from Pulse Oximeter: Nadir and  T90 
5) Optional verification (PSG or  HST)  
 
• Data  Storage  and Confidentiality - Data  will be safeguarded  by [CONTACT_619686]. Depending on relevant data, it will be stored in a 
password  protected  computer  with encrypted  files in the sleep  lab at the Pulmonary  & Sleep 
Center  of the Valley  to which  sub-investigator,  Tony  Abreu  may access.  At J. Michael  Adame, 
D.D.S., PA and Adame Dental Sleep Medicine, PLLC facilities data will be on a password 
protected computer with encrypted files to which Dr. J. Michael Adame and research 
coordinator Amy Carrizales may  access.  
 
• Transition  from Research  Participation  - subjects  are patients of  record  of the clinics.  
 
Risk/Benefit Assessment  
 
• Risk Category - Low, minimal  risk 
COMPARISON OF TWO TECHNIQUES OF COMBINATION THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF OSA  
8  
  
 
 
• Potential  Risk - pressure  and/or  inflammation  and/or  infection  of the nasal  cavity,  CPAP 
mask  pressure  and/or  straps  holding  CPAP  mask  pressure,  mask  leaks  causing  discomfort, 
tubing  restriction  of movement  and feelings  of claustrophobia.  Oral appliance  discomfort 
including pressure to the teeth, gums, or jaw  joint.  
 
• Protection against Risks - patients will be thoroughly educated on proper CPAP and Oral 
Appliance use and maintenance. Patients  will be given follow -up  appointments  within one 
week of init ial delivery to troubleshoot and issues and/or  side effects.  Patients  will be told to 
call or come into the clinic if they have any concerns before their scheduled visit. Scheduled 
follow -up visits will include attention to  side effects  or issues to  ensure  they are addressed. 
Any side effect and/or issue is expected to be temporary and if intervention is necessary, a full 
resolution is  expected.  
 
• Potential Benefits to the Subjects - The use of the CPAP with the oral appliance has the 
possibility of a ssisting subjects with managing their sleep apnea. Successfully managing or 
improving  issues  with sleep  apnea  has been  shown  to lower  high blood  pressure,  decrease  the 
chance for stroke, reduce blood sugar levels in diabetics, and lower the risk of death. 
Additionally,  results  from this study  may assist  other  individuals  with sleep  apnea  in the future.  
 
Subject Identification, Recruitment and Consent/Assent  
 
• Method of Subject Identification and Recruitment - Patients of record of Pulmonary and 
Sleep  Center  of the Valley,  J. Michael  Adame,  D.D.S,  PA and Adame  Dental  Sleep  Medicine, 
PLLC  who meet  inclusion/exclusion  criteria  will be asked  to participate  in the study.  Research 
coordinator will read WIRB approved script to recruit  patient.  
 
• Process of Consent - Dr. J. Michael Adame and/or Amy Carrizales will personally read the 
consent form in the potential subjects' language of choice (i.e. Spanish or  English).  
• Give the person providing informed consent as much time as they need to make a 
decision.  
• If the person  providing  informed  consent  needs  more  time than is allowed  by [CONTACT_619687], not enroll the prospective  subject.  
• Evaluate whether the person providing informed consent is experiencing  time pressure 
to make a decision, and if so, do not enroll the prospective subject, even if the person 
providing informed consent agrees to be in the  research.  
• Ensure  there  is no threa t of harm  or adverse  consequences  to the prospective  subject 
for a decision to not take part in the  research.  
• Stop  the informed  consent  process  once  the person  providing  consent  indicates  that he 
or she does not want to take part in the  research.  
COMPARISON OF TWO TECHNIQUES OF COMBINATION THERAPY FOR TREATMENT OF OSA  
9  
  
• Evaluate whether the person providing informed consent is being coerced or unduly 
influenced by [CONTACT_619688], and if so, not enroll the prospective 
subject, even if the person providing informed consent agrees to be in the  research.  
• Communicate  in the preferred  language  of the person  providing  informed  consent.  
• Adapt  the presentation  of the information  to the subject's  capacities  in terms  of 
intelligence, rationality, maturity and  language.  
• Invite and answer questions from the person providing informed consent. Evaluate 
whether  the person  providing  informed  consent  understands  the information  provided, 
and not enroll a prospective subject who does not understand, even if that person 
providing  informed consent agrees to be in the  research.  
• Ensure that no information is provided to the prospective subject or the person 
providing informed consent that is made to waive or appear to waive any of the 
prospective  subject's  legal  rights,  or releases  or appears  to release  the investigator,  the 
sponsor, the institution or its agents from liability for  negligence.  
• Communicate to the person providing informed consent all the information in the 
consent document or script approved by [CONTACT_36985]. 
• Invite and answer questions from the person providing informed  consent  
 
• Consent Forms - WIRB approved consent  form.  
 
• Documentation of Consent - Dr. J. Michael Adame will ensure a valid consent is obtained 
and documented for all participants. Signed consents will be obtained on hard copy (paper) 
and kept at J. Michael  Adame,  D.D.S.,  PA and/or  Adame  Dental  Sleep  Medicine,  PLLC  facilities 
on a password prot ected computer with encrypted files to which Dr. J. Michael Adame and 
Amy Carrizales  may access.  A copy  of signed  consents  will be given  to each  participant.  
 
• Costs to the Subject: Routine costs associated with CPAP therapy. Financial assistance can 
be granted on a case -by-case basis as normal to daily operations of the  clinics.  
 
• Payment for Participation:  none  