Title of Study:   Implementation  of EIT-4-BPSD  in Nursing  Homes  1R01NR015982 -01A1  
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
Study  Date  of Funding:  08/23/[ADDRESS_718656]  effective  management  strategy  for BPSD ,20 and the 
persistent  failure  to provide  quality  person -centered  care to residents .35,36  This work  is in line with the National  
Quality  Strategy  that aims  to ensure  that each  person  and family  are engaged  as partners  in care that supports  
their well-being,  needs  and goals.37 Our work  to improv e care to patients  with dementia  is also congruent  with 
the 2015  Update  to the National  Plan to Address  Alzheimer's  Disease38 and the recommendations  of the NIH-
convened  Alzheimer's  Disease  Research  Summit  2015:  Path to Treatment  and Prevention .[ADDRESS_718657]  been  conceptualized  as expressions  of un-met needs  and frustrated  goals45-
48 and are exhibited  by [CONTACT_8622] 90% of residents  with dementia.2,49 BPSD  contribute  to poor quality  of life, more  
rapid  cognitive  and physical  decline50 and put residents  at risk for inappropriate  use of antipsychotics  as well 
as other  psychotropic  medica tions  (antidepressants,  anxiolytics,  sedative/hypnotics)[ADDRESS_718658] line of treatment  for BPSD .52 Unfortunately  the up-take of behavioral  
approaches  is low. Between  2004  and 2011  fewer  than 2% of nursing  homes  implemented  these  
approaches .15  In 2011  approximately  25% of residents  residing  in nursing  homes  were  receiving  antipsychotics  
and 88% of these  individuals  had dementia.53  Since  then there  has been  a 22% decrease  in use of 
antipsychotics  to a national  prevalence  of 19% of residents  receiving  psychotropic  medications  in 2015.37  In 
September  2014 , the National  Partnership  set new goals  of an additional  25% reduction  in antipsyc hotic  use 
by [CONTACT_5638] 2015,  and 30% reduction  by 2016.[ADDRESS_718659] an implementa tion strategy  for addressing  BPSD  in nursing  homes , which  has been  
identified  as a research  priorit y. 55-58 
 
            Implementation Challenges of Care Approaches.  To date , the major emphasis  in research has been on the 
development of new knowledge . There has been limited focus on dissemination or implementation of findings  
into real world settings .34,59 There is a  gap between the percentage of individuals who could benefit from 
evidence based interventions and those who actually are exposed to these interventions.60-62  In particular , little 
has been done to optimally i mplement evidence -based interventions in nursing homes.62  Identified challenges 
and barrie rs include:  lack of belief in the utility and feasibility of the care approach; limited motivation and 
training of staff; insufficient support from administration; inadequate staffing levels; competing workload 
concerns; staff turnover; costs of the inter vention; and lack of fit between the intervention and the philosophy of 
care.26,28,63-[ADDRESS_718660]  shown  that the effectiveness  of evidence -
based  practices  can be improved  when  delivered  under  conditions  of an implementation  framework.60,62 Some  
implementation  models  can be complex  and time consuming  for practitioners .70 This is especially  true for 
resource -stressed  nursing  facility  environment s.71,72 This pragmatic  trial will use the Evidence  Integration  
Triangle  (EIT)30 which  is a parsimonious,  community -engaged  participatory  framework.  EIT is a readily  applied  
framework  that brings  evidence  (available  in the nursinghometoolkit.com)  and facility  stakeholders  together . 
Active  engagement  empowers  key stakeholders  to integrate  evidence  into practice.73 Figure  1 illustrates  the 
simple  three -pronged  framework  and the interactions  among  the components  of EIT: (1) Participatory  
Implementation  Process  which  is done  via monthly  meetings , weekly  emails  and phone  interactions  between  
stakeholders  and a clinical  expert  (Research  Nurse  Facilitator ) as they develop  facility  goals and work  toward s 
achieving  those  goals ; (2) Implement ation  of the 4 steps  delineated  in EIT-4-BPSD , with implementat ion led by 
a facility  designated  cham pi[INVESTIGATOR_549015];  and (3) Practical  
Progress  Measures  which  are evaluated  via ongoing  assessments  of progress  made  towards  goal 
achievement  and implementation  based  on monitoring  of facility  and resident  data (e.g.,  environment  
assessment;  resident  care plans;  falls data) . EIT allows  for differences  between  facilities  and encourages  
tailoring  of the implementation  process.  Participatory  approach es such  as EIT have  been  shown  to increase  
the adoption  of innovations  by [CONTACT_182857]  a rapid  learning  environment  and may speed  translation  of evidence  
into practice .74,75 EIT has been  shown  to facilitate  implementation  of interventions  in community  based  primary  
care practices  and in cancer  outpatient  facilities.31,60 Our team  used  this approach  previously  to successfully  
implement  Function  Focused  Care  (FFC)  in long term care facilities.22,23,76  
 
EIT-4-BPSD  involves  the merg ing of EIT with evidence  housed  in our Nursing  Home  Toolkit  (described  below)  
and an established  4-step approach  for implementing  evidence  into real world  setting s.  EIT-4-BPSD  is 
implemented  by [CONTACT_549041][INVESTIGATOR_549016] a Research  Nurse  Facilitator8,29,63,77-79 who has 
expertise  working  with BPSD  and implementing  behavioral  interventions  in the nursi ng home  environment .   
Figure  1 The Implementation  of EIT-4-BPSD )   
Additional  theoretical  support  for the EIT-4-BPSD  
comes  from a Social  Ecological  Model79 and Social  
Cognitive  Theory.80,81 The Social  Ecological  Model79 
explain s the dynamic  interactions  between  people  
and their environment  and the factors  that account  for 
successful  goal attainment . We help the Stakeholder  
team  and Internal  Facility  Champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394]  (referred  to as 
Champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394])  understand  and use the factors  in the 
model .  These  include:  intrapersonal  factors  (e.g.,  
age, years  of experience,  gender);  interpersonal  
factors  (e.g.,  staff to staff and staff to resident  
interactions);  environmental  challenges  (e.g.,  
resources  to help address  BPSD);  and policy  issues  
(e.g.,  polici es around  inclusion  of nursing  assistants  
in resident  care conferences) .  These  factors  are 
used  to identify  barriers  and ways  to overcome  
barriers  and to help staff change  from a task focused  
care approach  to a person -centered  approach.  In addition,  use of social  cognitive  theory80,81 provides  the 
Champi[INVESTIGATOR_549017]:  1. 
enactive  mastery  experience  such  as engaging  them  in successful  performance  of person -centered  behavioral  
approaches;  2. verbal  encouragement  to provide  behavioral  approaches  to BPSD;  3. vicarious  experience  or 
sharing  how others  provide  successful  behavioral  approaches;  and 4. elimination  of fear and frustration  
associated  with implementing  behavioral  approac hes. Progress  in implementation  is monitored  at monthly  
stakeholder  meetings  using  all available  outcome  data (pragmatic  measures  and intervention  resources  such  
as environment  assessments,  falls data,  evaluation  of care plans ). As shown  in Table  2, adjust ments  and 
corrections  are made  at these  meetings  by [CONTACT_549042] , evidence  of use 
of behavioral  approaches,  or challenges  as identified  by [CONTACT_549043][INVESTIGATOR_549018] .   
 
As noted,  implementation  of EIT-4-BPSD  (Figure  1 and Table  2 below)  will be done  under  the guidance  of a 
Research  Nurse  Facilitator .22,23,[ADDRESS_718661]  that the facility  
identify  a Champi[INVESTIGATOR_549019].  The four steps  include:  1. Assessment  of the environment  and policies , 
which  are used  to guide  stakeholders  in the eliminat ion of barriers  and to help optimiz e implementation.  2. Staff 
education , based  on gaps in staff knowledge  of BPSD  and behavioral  interventions ; 3. Establishment  of 
person -centered  care plans , which  are developed  by [CONTACT_549044][INVESTIGATOR_2394] ; and finally  4. Mentoring  and motivating  of staff to integrate  behavioral  approaches  as they 
provide  care.  Mentoring  and motivating  is done  by [CONTACT_549043][INVESTIGATOR_2394] , supported  by [CONTACT_549045] , using  techniques  from social  cognitive  theory  (e.g.,  verbal encouragement ).23 
Resources  for all four steps  are contained  in our Nursing  Home  Toolkit  (nursinghometoolkit.com ).22,23,76  
 
Nursing  Home  Toolkit . All members  of our investigative  team  worked  with CMS  to produce  the Nursing  Home  
Toolkit .17,18,21 The Nursing  Home  Toolkit  is an ONLINE  repository  of resources  that includes  five areas:  
Introduction  to the philosophy  of person -centered  care;  System  integration  processes;  Education  and 
leadership  programs  for responding  to BPSD;  Tools for assessment  of BPSD;  and Pragmatic  behavioral  
approaches  for BPSD.  We engaged  experts  and end-users  in the development  of the Toolkit  (59 staff) .19 
Usability  testing  of the website  was completed  with 61 staff from nursing  homes  in Maryland,  [LOCATION_005]  
and Pennsylvania:  3 administrators,  10 registered  nurses  (RNs), 3 therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437],  10 licensed  practical  nurses  
(LPNs ), 19 certified  nursing  assistants  (CNAs ), 5 social work ers and 11 others . On a Likert  scale  of 1 (very  
unsatisfied)  to 7 (very  satisfied)  participants  found  the website  to be logical  in organization  (5.6 ± 1.7), to have  
appropriate  content  (6.0 ±1.8) , and likely  to be used  (5.5±1.7).   In their written  comments,  the participants  were  
less enthusiastic  about  how easy  it was to use the website.   Participants  reported  that they needed  more  
guidance  for implementation . These  findings  support  our plan to provide  facilities  with a step approach  for 
implementati on, and to use the Nursing  Home  Toolkit  as a resource  library . 
 
By [CONTACT_549046], our 4-step approach  and the material  in the Nursing  Home  Toolkit  to develop  the EIT-4-BPSD  
intervention , we address  the major  challenges  to implementation .  These  include : insufficient  support  from 
administration;  lack of fit between  the intervention  and the facility;  beliefs  about  the utility  and feasibility  of 
behavioral  approaches;  motivation  of staff;  and lack of staff training . EIT-4-BPSD  also addresses  facility  
concern s about staffing  levels,  competing  workloads  and costs. Implementation  of EIT-4-BPSD  will be 
modeled  after the work  we did to implement  function  focused  care in assisted  living  facilities.23,29,[ADDRESS_718662]  rigorous  and inclusive  review  to date14 found  strong  evidence  for 
reduction  of BPSD  by [CONTACT_549047] -centered  
communication  skills  during  resident  interactions.  Further,  a recent  meta -analysis  of 23 randomized  clinical  
trials  (RCTs ) found  small  to moderate  effect  sizes  for behavioral  approaches  that address  BPSD .[ADDRESS_718663]  residents  at risk for BPSD  and poor quality  of life.86 
Staff relate  to residents  who are impaired  as “others”,  different , and outside  of accepted  social  norms .87 Our 
behavioral  approach  to BPSD  focuses  on the individual  as a person  and uses  strategies  to optimize  function  
and address  unmet  needs . Our team  has extensive  experience  individualizing  care and using information  
about  residents  to prevent  and manage  BPSD  and optimiz e their function  and physical  activity .8,9,29,63,77,88-90  In 
this work  we demonstrated  that engaging  cognitively  impaired  residents  in activities  of daily living  increased  
function , reduced  falls and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_549020],  and decreased  resistance  (e.g.,  turning  away,  pushing,  or hitting)  
during  care.  Further,  our team  demonstrated  that individually  tailored  activities  that incorporated  residents’  
preferences  and function al ability  improved  positive  affect  and behavioral  engagement  to a greater  extent  than  
non-tailored  activities .10,12 We deliver ed these  activities  using  existing  nursing  facility  staff.   
 
Finally,  the use of relationship -oriented  behavioral  strategies  (such  as consistent  assignment)  and teamwork  
among  staff have  been  identified  as critical  drivers  of quality  care.91,92 Good  communication  skills  are 
foundational  to the implementation  of these  strategies  and all behavioral  approaches.19  Also important  is our 
work  on the development  of person -centered  quality  indicato rs that supports  the critical  need  to sustain  the 
gains  made  via these  behavioral  interventions  over time.93  
 
In the implementation  of EIT-4-BPSD  we will build  on our prior work  and that of others.  We will train staff to 
reduce  BPSD,  address  unmet  resident  needs,  optimize  function  and physical  activity , promote  quality  of life 
and reduce  adverse  events . Specifically,  we will work  with facilities  to establish  appropriate  environments  and 
policies,  use individualized  approaches  based on resident  preferences , use person -centered  communication  
skills  and optimiz e function  during  care interactions . Further  we will emphasize  teamwork , ongoing  quality  
improvement,  and use of motivational  techniques  to engage  residents  in appropriate  activities .  
 
B. Innovation  
The proposed  study  offers  the following  innovations : 
 
1. To our knowledge,  there have  been  no systematic  attempts  to facilitate  implementation  of best practices  for 
BPSD  in nursing  homes  using  EIT. Our approach  addresses  several  gaps  identified  in a recent  systematic  
review  of 54 implementation  studies  on behavioral  approa ches  for dementia  care.94  Specificall y, we use:  (a) 
all 5 RE-AIM criteria  for evaluation ; (b) a flexible  approach  for implementation;  (c) theoretically  based  behavior  
change  techniqu es; (d) direct  observ ation  of staff behavior  change;  (e) monitoring  of outcomes  to [ADDRESS_718664] initial  implementation  of EIT-4-BPSD ; and (f) we examine  maintenance  in EIT-4-BPSD  facilities  at [ADDRESS_718665] implementation  (which  is [ADDRESS_718666] intervention  activities).    
 
2. One size does  not fit all with regard  to successful  implementation  of interventions .[ADDRESS_718667] completion  of the 
intervention  ([ADDRESS_718668] implementation) . We will use qualitative  methods  to understand  challenges  and 
facilitators  associated  with implementation  of EIT-4-BPSD  and evaluate  the cost of implementation  to guide  
future  work . 
 
C. Approach  
Preliminary  Research:  Our interdisciplinary  team  is uniquely  poised  to conduct  this implementation  study . We 
have  longstanding  scientific  expertise  in BPSD,  function,  behavior  change,  and implementation  of evidence  
based  approaches  in nursing  homes . We also have  real-world  experience  in long-term care practice , staff 
education  and nursing  facility  regulation.  This study  is the next logical  step in our programs  of research.   
  
Behavioral  Approaches  for BPSD.   Kolanowski  has tested  the efficacy  of individualized  activities  for BPSD  in 
nursing  homes97-104 and is currently  testing  the efficacy  of individualized  cognitive  activities  for delirium  in these  
facilities .103  Individualized  activities  are designed  to address  interests  and preferenc es of resident s and 
decreas e agitation  and apathy  and improv e mood .10,11,102 Activities  that addressed  the resident's  interests  and 
functi onal ability  improved  positive  affect  to a greater  extent  than either  function  or interest s alone .10 As 
repeatedly  noted  by [CONTACT_2296],  optimizing  physical  function  is central  to individualized  care approaches  that 
decrease  BPSD  and improve  mood  and wellbeing .8,12,63 To help facilitate  this individualized  approach,  Van 
Haitsma  has expertise  in the development  of pragmatic  measures  for assessing  resident  daily care 
preferences  and quality  improvement  metrics  design ed to assess  preference  congruence  care over time. 
Assessments  of resident  preferences  and congruence  will be implemented  in this trial.105,106  Van Haitsma  and 
team  also conducted  a randomized  controlled  trial using  nursing  facility  staff as interventionists  and found  that 
staff-led tailored  activities  to treat BPSD  improved  quality  of life of residents .12,107-110 Van Haitsma  has also 
developed  educational  programs  for behavioral  health  concerns  of nursing  facility  residents .111-114.  
 
Use of Function  Focused  Care  (FFC)  to Optimize  Function  and Physical  Activity  and Address  BPSD.  Resnick  
and Galik  have  extensive  experience  optimizing  function  and physical  activity  and decreasing  resistance  to 
care using  FFC approach es in residents  with cognitive  impairment.8,9,29,63,77,88-[ADDRESS_718669]  consistently  
demonstrated  that FFC approaches  improve  residents’  physical  activity  and function  and decrease  falls and 
transfers  to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_549021] .8,23  In addition,  engaging  cognitively  impaired  residents  in 
functional  activities  (i.e., activities  of daily living ) increased  their cooperation  and decreased  their resistance  
(e.g.,  turning  away,  pushing,  or hitting)  during  care interactions.   
 
Expertise  in Changing  Care  Behaviors  among  Nurses.  Resnick , Galik  and Van Haitsma  have  consistently  been  
able to change  how nurses  approach  care to residents .8,29,63,78,79,113-115 Their  innovative  and successful  
approach es are theoretically  based  using  a Social  Ecological  Model  and Social Cognitive  Theory.8,29,63,78,79   
 
Expertise  in Dissemination  and Implementation  Research.  The team  has expertise  in disseminating  and 
implementing  health  promotion  and Function  Focused  Care  interventions  into senior  housing  and long term 
care facilities .22,23,29, 63,77-79,116-119 (see biosketches).   For example,  the team  tested  a dissemination  and 
implementation  approach  to implement  Function  Focused  Care  into [ADDRESS_718670] .22,23,63  These  projects  included  a recruitment  plan using  
outre ach to all facilities  in Maryland .  The investigators  engage d 80% of the Champi[INVESTIGATOR_5458],  change d 
environments , policies  and philosophies  of care to encourage  physical  activity  and decrease d the percentage  
of residents  transferred  to acute  care facilities  for non-fall related  events.  At the completion  of these  projects  
the team  developed  a website  (functionfocusedcare.org)  which  is included  in the Nursing  Home  Toolkit .   
 
Real World  Experienc e and Pi[INVESTIGATOR_549022]-4-BPSD : Our team  has expertise  with regard  to clinical  work  
(Resnick,  Galik , Van Haitsma ), administration  (Boltz)  and regulations  (Bonner), and implementation  of releva nt 
innovative  approaches  to care (all investigators)  in nursing  home s.  In addition,  we have  expertise  in the 
education  of minorities  and nursing  assistants (Harden,  Resnick,  Van Haitsma,  Galik,  Boltz)  and using  
qualitative  methods  (Penrod,  Resnick ,Van Haitsma ) (see biosketches).  We have  pi[INVESTIGATOR_549023]-4-BPSD  
in two facilities  (one in Maryland  and one in Pennsylvania)  for feasibility  and demonstrated  that sites are willing  
to identify  a Champi[INVESTIGATOR_549024],  engage  in monthly  face-to-face meetings  (100% participation  of 
stakeholders)  and weekly  email  interactions  (100%  participation) . We implement ed all components  of the 
intervention,  recruit ed residents  (recruitment  rate of 50%) and complete d measures  without  being  burdensome  
to residents  or staff.    Building  on our extensive  preliminary  work  we will test EIT-4-BPSD  in 50 nursing  homes  
in Maryland  and Pennsylvania . 
  
Methods  
Design:  To achieve  our Aims  we will use a Hybrid  III pragmatic  cluster  randomized  clinical  trial32 for two 
reasons:  (a) implementation  of EIT-4-BPSD  requires  a facility -wide approach ; and (b) we need  to prevent  
treatment  contamination  that might  occur  if we randomized  within  sites. Fifty nursing  homes  will be randomized  
to treatment  (EIT-4-BPSD)  or Education -Only Control  (EO)  using  permuted -block  randomization.  Assignment  
will be concealed  until after the facility  consents  to participat e. Outcomes  at the resident  and facility  level will 
be evaluated.   Resident  outcomes  will be obtained  at baseline,  [ADDRESS_718671] implementation . 
   
Sample  Size: Sample  size calculation  was based  on the hypotheses  associated  with the Effectiveness  
component  of RE-AIM and our prior research .8,10,12,22,23,29,[ADDRESS_718672]  sizes  of 0.9 for environmental  and policy  changes .22,76,120 With the proposed  sample  size 
of 50 facilities,  the statistical  power  for these  two measures  will be adequate  (>.90  for both outcomes  based  on 
our analysis  plan). For resident  level outcomes,  person -centered  approaches  resulted  in a small  intervention  
effect  (Cohen’s  d=0.19)  to maintain  or improv e BPSD,  function,  wellbeing  or experiencing  adverse  
events.8,10,12,22,23,29,77 Given  a two-tailed  alpha  of 0.05,  an estimated  intra-class  correlation  coefficient  (ICC)  
between  clusters  (facilities)  of 0.02,  a correlation  coefficient  between  repeated  measures  (baseline,  4 and 12 
months)  of 0.6, and assuming  even  dispersion  of means,  a total sample  of 500 residents will provide  sufficient  
power  (> .80) to detect  the small  effect  size for group  differences .121 Our prior research  showed  a 20% rate of 
attrition  over 12 months .8,77 Therefore,  we anticipate  that a total of 625 residents  from 50 nursing  homes  will be 
sufficient  to demonstrate  outcomes.  To achieve  this sample  we will recruit  12-13 residents  in each  facilit y.  
  
Setting : Nursing  homes  will be invited  and eligible  to participate  if they: (a) agree  to actively  partner  with the 
research  team  to change  practice ; (b) have  at least  100 beds;  (c) identify  a RN, LPN or CNA  to be the 
Champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394] ; and (d) are able to access  email  and websites  via a phone,  tablet  or computer . Recruitment  of 
facilities  will be done  by [CONTACT_549048]. 
We will also post invitations  on relevant  websites  (see letters  of support).   This approach  has been  used  
successfully  in our prior work .[ADDRESS_718673] of interested  facilities  in the event  that some  volunteer  
faciliti es decide  not to participate  (their  data will be included  in terms  of Reach).     
 
Resident  Participants : We will keep  our resident  enrollment  criter ia to a minimum  to increase  external  validity.  
Residents  will be eligible  to participate  if they: (a) are living in a participating  nursing  home;  (b) are 55 years  of 
age or older;  (c) have  a history  within  the past month  of exhibi ting at least  one BPSD ; (d) have  cognitive  
impairment  as determined  by a score  of 0-12 on the Brief Interview  of Mental  Status  (BIMS) ;122 (e) are not 
enrolled  in Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6125] ; and (f) are not in the nursing facility  for short -stay rehabilitation  care.  We will obtain  a list 
of all eligible  residents  from a designated  staff member  and randomly  approach  each  resident  until 12-13 
residents  per facility  are recruited  by [CONTACT_549049]  (RAs)  (N= 625 residents).  This sampling  approach  is 
used  to assure  variability  and equal  participation  from each  nursing  facility  in the study.   Based  on our prior 
research  and recent  data from the most  recent  Nursing  Home  Compendium123 we conservatively  anticipate  
that 25% to 30% of residents  will be eligible.123,124  We are confident  we will be able to recruit  12-13 residents  
per facility .8,77,125 See the Human  Subjects  section  for details  of the consenting  and recruitment  process.   
 
The Implementation  of EIT-4-BPSD : [CONTACT_549062]  will train the Research  Nurse  Facilitators  on how to best work  
within  each  intervention  facility  so that implementation  is culturally  sensitive  to the diversity  within  each  site. To 
guide  assessment  of residents  and the development  of staff training  materials  she will use seven  key elements  
from the literature126-128: communication,  space,  social  orientation,  time,  environmental  control,  biologic al 
variations  and trust.  This training  helps  to ensure  a participatory  implementation  approach  as delineated  in the 
EIT30. Facilities  voluntarily  participate  and identify  a Champi[INVESTIGATOR_549025].  We will 
recommend  the following  stakeholders  as part of the implementation  process:  a nurse  in a leadership  position  
(e.g., director  of nursing);  a unit nurse;  a nursing  assistant ; a family  member;  an activity  staff;  a social  worker;  
and a resident.  As per facility  preference,  other  team  members  can also be included.  All EIT-4-BPSD  related  
activities  will be done  during  scheduled  working  hours  for the facility  employed  stakeholders.  EIT-4-BPSD  is 
implemented  by [CONTACT_549050][INVESTIGATOR_549026] 4-step 
approach.  EIT-4-BPSD  involves  a combined  face-to-face and an internet  enhanced  approach  that includes  
ongoing,  iterative,  and active  participation  of all Stakeholders.  The Research  Nurse Facilitator  will arrange  the 
first face-to-face meeting  with the Champi[INVESTIGATOR_549027].  This meeting  introduce s the 
Stakeholder  Team to the participatory  process  and their responsibilities , and will provide  training  on the 
knowledge  and skills  they will need  for implementation.  It will be scheduled  for 4 hours  (Table 1); Appendi ces 
A, B, C and the Nursing  Home  Toolkit  contain  the training  materials .  
 
Table  1: Content  for First  EIT-4-BPSD  Meeting  With  the Stakeholder  Team   
Introduction  and 
Overview  of EIT-4-
BPSD  (8am -10am/ 
or preferred  time) a. Welcome  and overview  of project ; b. Roles  and responsibilities  of research  and stakeholder  teams;  c. 
Background  support  for EIT-4-BPSD:  1. Review  of current  care practices/philosophies  of care and evaluation  of 
readiness  to implement  change  in philosophy;  2. Task  versus resident  focused  care;  3. BPSD  and interventions  
to prevent  or decrease  BPSD;  d. Participatory  Implementation/Brainstorming  Activity (Appendix  A & B) and 
identification  of barriers /solutions  to implementation ; e. Development  of facility -specific  goals  relevant  to BPSD.  
Implementation  of 
Steps  1 and 2 in the 
4-step process  
(break;  10:15am -
11am)  (Appendices  
B and C) a. Training  to complete  Step 1: Completing  Environment  and Policy Assessm ents:  Use of assessments  and 
examples  of environment  interventions  and policies  to facilitate  use of behavioral  approaches  for BPSD;  b. 
Training  to complete  Step 2: Education  of staff. Review  educational  materials  developed  by [CONTACT_827]  
(Appendix  C) and establish  the facility  plan for staff training ; c. Prior  to staff training,  Taylor  Harden,  will review  
educational  material  and make  sure it is culturally  relevant  for staff within  the facility  using  7 factors  from multiple  
sources  (see description  above )126,127; d. the research  team  will help assure  that the education  meets  state  and 
federal  based  requirem ents for education  of nursing  facility  staff  (e.g.,  content  and length  of  session) .  
Implementation  of 
Steps  3 and 4 in the 
4-step process  
(11am -11:45noon)  
(Appendix  B) 
 a. Training  to complete  Step 3: Establishing  person -centered  care plans  for BPSD:  1. Teach  use of the Describe,  
Investigate,  Create  and Evaluate  (DICE)  approach , the Physical  Capability  Assessment , and the Resident  
Assessment  of Preferences.  b. Training  to complete  Step 4: Mentoring  and motivating  staff:  1. Review  self-
efficacy  based  techniques  (e.g., verbal  encouragement ); 2. Training  of Champi[INVESTIGATOR_549028]  (done  at 0-2, 
4-6 and 10-12 months) ; use of contests  to motivate  staff to adhere  to person -centered  care plans  for BPSD.   
Summary  of 
Training  Day 
(11:45am -12:00  a. Summary  of training  and findings  from Brainstorming  session , review  of challenges/drivers  and established  
facility  goals;  b.  Discussion  of ways  the stakeholder  team  will achieve  goals;  c. Opportunity  for questions;  d. 
Review  of next steps  and timeline  of project;  e. Homework  given  to Champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394] s to complet e the Environment  and 
noon)  Policy  Assessments  which  will be reviewed  at the next monthly  meeting.   
 
Following  this initial  face-to-face training,  each  EIT-4-BPSD  facility  will be visited  monthly  for a total of 12 
months by a Research  Nurse  Facilitator  who works  with the Champi[INVESTIGATOR_549029]-4-BPSD  (Table  2). This will be accomplished  using  the 4-step process  delineated  above.   During  monthly  
meetings  (approximately  1-2 hours  each)  the Research  Nurse  Facilitator  will explore  challenges,  celebrate  
successes  and give feedback  to the Stakeholder  Team based  on available  pragmatic  measures  (changes  
made  in the environment,  policies , care planning ) and will work  with the Champi[INVESTIGATOR_549030]-4-BPSD  (e.g.,  help with education,  care plan development) . Monthly  
interactions  will intentionally  allow  the Stakeholder  team to make  revisions  to the implementation  process  so 
that EIT-4-BPSD  is standardized  yet individualized  for each facility.  We will keep  minutes  of these  meetings  to 
describe  the implementation  process  in each  facility.  This cyclic  feedback  pattern  of review  of progress  and 
challenges  will help guide  staff intervention  activities  to best respond  to contextual  change s in the facility  over 
time.  In addition  to the monthly  visits , weekly  emails  will be sent to all Stakeholder  Team members  within  the 
cohort  to provide  BPSD  Tidbits.  The Tidbits  (examples  provided  in Appendix  D) will include  updates  about  
person -centered  behavioral  approaches  for BPSD  and will share  individual  facility  successes.  To motivate  
stakeholder  teams  across  the cohort , contests  will be held (e.g.,  winning  example  for overcoming  a challenging  
bathing  interaction  with a resident  with BPSD)  and winners  announced  in the weekly  emails.   In addition,  we 
will use a pragmatic  coaching  model  which  has successfully  improv ed up-take of innovation  in long term care 
facilities .129 This model  involves  having  Champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394] s sign up for weekly  office  hours  with the Research  Nurse  
Facilitator  for individualized  phone  coaching  session s.  Sessions  will be up to 30 minutes  and will be made  at 
times  convenient  for the Champi[INVESTIGATOR_549031].   To motivate  and retain  the Champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394] s we will 
provide  them  with a 50 dollar  gift certificate  to buy activit y supplies/resources  to enga ge residents  with BPSD  
(e.g., games  or music ), and provide  conference  registration  for each  champi[INVESTIGATOR_549032]  (see support  letters) .     
 
Table  2:  Research  Nurse  Facilitator  Monthly  Stakeholder  Team  Meetings  to Implement  EIT-4-BPSD *  
Activities  for Monthly  Meetings  With Stakeholder  Team                           EIT-4-BPSD  Intervention  Month  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Initial  4 hour Training  of Internal  Champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394]/ Stakeholder  
Team  (see Table  1) X            
Review  of environment  and policy  assessment s8,22,23   X           
Plan and implement  education  of nurses  and families  as 
relevant  to the facility  goals ; plan for new staff education   X           
Review  Care  Plans  of consented  residents  to assure  that 
person -centered  approaches  to BPSD  are established    X X X X X X X X X X 
Review  of practical  measures  and data collected  as part 
of the intervention  (e.g.,  evaluation  of care plans;  
observations  of staff during  care interactions);  Ongoing  
review  of challenges/ solutions  identified  by [CONTACT_549051][INVESTIGATOR_2394]/  
stakeholders ; review  of motivational  techniques  to assure  
implementation  of person -centered  approaches    X X X X X X X X X X X 
*During  the monthly  meeting  the Research  Nurse  Facilitator  will meet  with the full Stakeholder  Team  and will work  on the units  with the 
Champi[INVESTIGATOR_549033] 4 steps  in EIT-4-BPSD  (e.g.,  evaluation  and care planning for residents;  motivating  the staff).  
Education  Only (EO)  Control  Intervention:    
All nursing  homes  are mandated  to provide  a minimum  of [ADDRESS_718674]  include  dementia  management  training.  Total  hours  devoted  to this topic  are not specified.   
Facilities  randomized  to EO will be provided  with staff education  using  our developed  PowerPoint  
presentation s in 30 minute  sessions  as is currently  done in usual  practice  (Appendix  C slides  1-35).  We will 
provide  the education  in the preferred  format  (e.g.,  face-to-face; webinar ) and will work  with the facility  to 
record  the necessary  documentation  to assure  that the education  meets  state  and federal  regulations.   
 
Procedure  for Assessing  Outcomes : Facility -level and resident -level outcomes  will be obtained  by [CONTACT_549052] (RAs) who are blind  to facility  condition  (treatment  versus control).  To maintain  blind ing, 
these  RAs will not be provided  with information  about  randomization  or details  of the different  interventions  and 
we will keep  all meetings  of evaluation  and intervention  teams  separate.  Inter-rater reliability  will be done  on 
10% of our outcome  measures.  Blinded  RAs will obtain  all resident  descriptive  and outcome  data and 
descriptive  facility  data at baseline,  4 and 12 months  from the following  sources:  desig nated  administrative  
staff for facility  relevant  date (e.g.,  staffing);  resident  medical  chart;  and observations  by [CONTACT_549053]  (approximately  10 minutes  of staff 
time) . The Research  Nurse  Facil itator will obtain  setting  RE-AIM outcomes  at baseline,12  and 24 months  in 
intervention  sites only as delineated  in Appendix  E.  
 
Measures  are in Appendix  F. Overview  of each  measure,  measurement  level,  source  of data, and timing  
of data collection  are in Appendix  E 
 
Facility  Descriptive  Data  
The following  data will be obtained  at baseline  to describe  facilities  and consider  confounders:  state;  size; profit  
or non-profit  ownership  status;  urban  or rural;  Nursing  Home  Compare  reported  descriptives  (11 outcomes  
such  as percentage  of residents  with pain) ; staffing  ratio and mix [at baseline,  4, 12 months:   number  of 
nursing  assistants ; nurses  (registered;  licensed  practical  nurses ), and activity  staff /number  of residents ].   
 
Resident  Descriptives   
Resident  descriptive  information:   age, race,  gender,  education,  and marital  status  at baseline;  psychotropic s  
(antipsychotics,  antidepressants,  sedative/hypnotics , anxiolytics ) obtained  at baseline,  4 and 12 months.    
 
Cognitive  status  will be measured  at baseline  using  the Brief Interview  of Mental  Status  (BIMS).122 The BIMS  
includes  3-item recall  and orientation  questions  with scores  ranging  from 0 to 15.  Prior  use has provided  
evidence  of reliability  and validity.132-134  
 
Health  Status : The Cumulative  Illness  Rating  Scale  (CIRS)135,136  was designed  for use with frail nursing  facility  
residents .  CIRS  will be obtained  at baseline . It contains  ratings  of both illness  severity  and comorbidity.  
Resident s are evaluated  based  on 13 organs  or systems  and a psychiatric/behavioral  rating.  CIRSs ratings  
correlate d with medication  use and predict ed mortality,  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_549034].135,136 
 
Facility  and Staff  RE-AIM Measures   
 
The Environment  Assessment  (Effectiven ess; Adoption;  Maintenance) : includes  [ADDRESS_718675]  care of 
residents  with BPSD  (e.g., outdoor  spaces  are available ).  Items  are scored  as present  or not present  and 
summed.  There was prior evidence  of inter-rater reliability  and validity  based  on hypothesis  testing .8 22,23,137 
 
Policy  Assessment  (Effectiven ess; Adoption;  Maintenance):   includes  [ADDRESS_718676]  policies  that support  
behavioral  approaches  for BPSD  (e.g., policies  on use of restraints ).  Items  are scored  as present  or not 
present  and summed . There was prior evidence  of inter-rater reliability  and validity .[ADDRESS_718677]  for Evide nce of Person  Centered  Approaches  for BPSD  (Effectiveness ; Adoption;  
Maintenance)  is used  to evaluate  care plans for approaches  that address  common  BPSD  (apathy,  agitation,  
inappropriate /disruptive  vocalizations,  aggression,  wandering,  repetitive  behaviors,  resistance  to care,  and 
sexually  inappropriate  behaviors) . 
   
Knowledge  of Behavioral  Interventions  For BPSD  Test (Implementation ; Receipt)  is a 10-item multiple  choice  
test that evaluate s staff knowledge.   Evidence  of test-retest  reliability  was supported  with correlations  of .92 
and validity  with significant  associations  between  knowledge  and use of behavioral  interventions  for BPSD.138   
 
Use of Behavioral  Interventions  for BPSD  (Implementation ; Enactment)  is a reliable  and valid 8-item 
observation  measure  that assesses  if nursing  assistants  implement  appropriate  interventions  to prevent  or 
manage  BPSD  when  interacting  with a resident  during  routine  care.138   
 
Resident  RE-AIM Measures   
 
Behavioral  Symptoms  (Effectiveness ): Depressive  symptoms  will be measured  using  the Cornell  Scale  for 
Depression  in Dementia  (CSDD)139,140.  CSDD  is a 19 item survey  that assesses  depressive  symptoms  in 
individuals  with dementia.  There  is evidence  of reliability  and validity  of the CSDD .139-141 Aggressive  and/or  
resisti ve behaviors  during  care activities  will be measured  using  the Resistiveness  to Care  Scale ,142  a reliable  
and valid 13 item Likert  scale  that assess es residents’  behaviors  during  activities  of daily living.  Agitated  
behaviors  will be measured  using  the Cohen -Mansfield  Agitation  Inventory  (CMAI) ,143,144 a survey  of disturbing  
behaviors  commonly  found  in residents  with dementia.  The 14 item version  CMAI  uses  a 5-point  Likert  scale  to 
rate the frequency  of behavioral  symptoms.144,145 Prior  use supported  evidence  of reliability  and validity.144,145 
 
Function  (Effectiveness) : The Barthel  Index  (BI)146 is a 10 item measure  of performance  of activities  of daily 
living  with evidence  of internal  consistency,  inter-rater reliability  and validity.146 147 Items  are weighted  to 
account  for the amount  of assistance  required.  A total score  of 100 indicates  complete  independence.   
 
Quality  of Life:  will be measured  using  the Quality  of Life-AD (QoL -AD)148 scale .  The QoL-AD is a 13 item 
reliable  and valid instrument  designed  to rate the resident's quality of life from the staff perspective. Examples 
of items include physical  condition,  mood,  relationships  and participat ion in meaningful  activities.  Ratings are 
obtained on a 4 point scale (1= poor  to 4=excellent)  and total scores  range  from 13-52.148 
 
Adverse  Events  (Effectiveness) : will be based  on data obtained  from medical  record s and designated  
individual s within  the facilit ies (e.g.,  quality  assurance  nurse).  Adverse  events  will include  falls and transfers  to 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_549035].  Baseline  will include  the four months  prior to 
treatment  implementation;  4 month  will include  those  between  baseline  and 4 months;  and [ADDRESS_718678] implementation  of the intervention.   Restraint  use will be based  
on the reliable  Minimum  Data  Base  3.0 definition  of assessment  for use of restraints.149-151     
Data  Analysis :  
Aim 1:  To implement  and test the implementation  of EIT-4-BPSD.   
Research  question : Do facilities  exposed  to EIT-4-BPSD  demonstrate  evidence  of implementation  at 12 
months  evaluated  by [CONTACT_549054],  Effectiveness,  Adoption,  Implementation,  and Maintenance  (RE-AIM)  Criteria ?33  
 
Reach : To facilities :  Descriptive  statistics  will describe  total number  of eligible  facilities  across  both states  at 
the time of recruitment  and the percentage  of eligible  facilities  volunteering  to participate  by [CONTACT_549055].   
In addition , we will compare  facilities  (by [CONTACT_549055])  willing  to participate  versus  those  that were  not with 
regard  to facility  charac teristics  (e.g.,  size, profit  status ). We will also compar e facilities  expressing  a 
willingness  to participate  versus  those  that do not using  publically  available  Nursing  Home  Compare  data.152 
To staff:  We will evaluate  reach  to staff in terms  of percentage  of staff exposed  to education  (# exposed/total  
number  of staff)  in EIT-4-BPSD  and EO facilities.  To residents :  Using  the Care  Plan Checklist  for Evidence  of 
Person -Centered  Approaches  for BPSD  we will evaluate  the percentage  of all residents  (using  de-identified  
care plans) living  in EIT-4-BPSD  facilities  that have  at least  1 person -centered  approach  for BPSD.       
  
Effectiveness:    
Effectiveness  will be based  on testing  the following  hypotheses.    
 
H1: Resident  level: Residents  in EIT-4-BPSD  facilities  will experience  less BPSD,  maintain  or improve  function , 
have  reduced  use of psychotropic  medications,  experience  fewer  adverse  events  and have  improved  quality  of 
life compared  to residents  in EO facilities.   
H2: Facility -level:  EIT-4-BPSD  facilities  will demonstrate  improvements  in Environment  and Policy  
assessments  that support  behavioral  approaches  for BPSD,  and will have  a greater  percentage  of residents  
with behavioral  approaches  addressed  in care plans  at 12 months  when  compared  to EO facilities . 
 
Descriptive  statistics  including  measures  of central  tendency,  dispersion  and appropriate  visualization  
approaches  (e.g.,  box plots  and spaghetti  plots)  will be performed  on each  outcome  variable  for residents  and 
facilities.   This will be done  to ascertain  distributional  characteristics  and ensure  that the assumptions  (e.g.,  
normal ity) associated  with the planned  statistical  procedures  are met. When  necessary,  transformations  will be 
performed.  All analyses  will be done  using  an intent -to-treat philosophy.   Baseline  characteristics  (both  resident  
level and facility  level)  will be compared  between  intervention  and control  groups  and the relevant  variables  
(e.g.,  age) that differ  by [CONTACT_374941].  In particular  we will utilize  
constructs  known  to correlate  with BPSD  including  gender,  pain, health  status  and cognitive  and functional  
impairment.   Linear  mixed  models  (LMMs)153 for longitudinal  data (baseline,  4 and 12 months)  will be used  to 
assess  the intervention  effect  on continuous  outcomes  (i.e., function,  behavioral  symptoms,  and quality  of life) 
accounting  for clustering  of residents  that may occur  within  the same  facility  and correlations  between  repeated  
measurements  of each  resident.   Mixed -effect  Poisson  regression  [i.e., Generalized  Linear  Mixed  Model  
(GLMM)]  will be conducted  to asse ss the effect  of the intervention  on count  outcomes  (i.e., number  of adverse  
events  including  number  of falls, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_549036] , restraint  use). The fixed  effects  
included  in the models  will be treatment  group  (EIT-4-BPSD  versus  EO), time (baseline,  4 and 12 months),  
group -by-time interaction  term and the aforementioned  relevant  covariates  (e.g.,  age).  Random  effects  will 
include  facilities  and residents.   
 
The hypothesis  will be tested  by [CONTACT_374942].  Similar  LMMs  will 
be used  to compare  changes  in facility  level measures  (i.e., environments,  policies)  from baseline  to [ADDRESS_718679]-analysis  diagnostic  measures  (e.g.,  residuals)  will be explored  to assess  
model  fit.  All tests  will use a 5% significance  level.   The use of LMM  will provide  flexibility  with regard  to 
assumptions  related  to the covarian ce structure  of the residuals  and the presence  of missing  data for the 
repeated  measures.154 Missing  data.  In prior research  we had 20% rate of attrition  at the resident  level and 
10% of facilities.22,23 If there  is significant  dropout,  we will identify  baseline  characteristics  that differ  between  
persons  or facilities  that drop out. Maximum  likelihood  methods  will be used  for primary  analyses,  which  
address  non-informative  dropout  (missing  at random  [MAR]).  If "informative"  dropout  appears  possible,  we will 
consider  sensitivity  analyses  that involve  adding  these  relevant  baseline  covariates  to make  the MAR  
assumption  more  plausible.155 Qualitative  data will be collected  to inform  effective ness  outcomes .   
 
Adoption : Staff Adoption : Descriptive  statistics  will be done  to evaluate  the number  of Internal  Champi[INVESTIGATOR_549037]-to-face training  and monthly meetings  among  the 25 
facilities  randomized  to EIT-4-BPSD.  We will also consider  improvement  in scores  on the Use of Behavioral  
Interventions  for BPSD  measure  at each  testing  time point  as evidence  of adoption  among  staff.   Facility  
Adoption : Facility  adoption  will be based  on changes  in environments,  policies,  and care plans of residents  at [ADDRESS_718680]  1 item changed  in each  
assessment  area.  Further  we will describe  differences  among  EIT-4-BPSD  facilities  that demonstrate  adoption  
(based  on changes  in environments,  policies  and care plans) early  (the first 4 months)  versus  late adopters  
(between  5-12 months)  versus  those  that are non-adopters  (no change  by 12 months).   Predictors  such  as 
facility  characteristics  will be compared  across  the three  potential  times  of adoption  (early,  late, nonadopters).  
 
Implementation:   Delivery/Dosage : We will describe  the number  of treatment  facilities  that are exposed  to the 
first EIT-4-BPSD  training  session  and the number  of EO facilities  and staff exposed  to education  session.  In 
addition,  we will measure  evidence  of delivery  for each  step of the EIT-4-BPSD  intervention .  Step 1: Percent  
of environmental  and policy  assessments  completed.  Step 2: Percentage  of staff exposed  to education.  Step 3: 
Percentage  of residents  with evidence  of person -centered  approaches  to BPSD  in care plans.  Step 4: 
Description  of mentoring  and motivating  activities  (e.g.,  participation  in contests);  number  of observatio ns of 
staff-resident  interactions  (Use  of Behavioral  Approaches  for BPSD  measure)  at 0-2, 4-6, and 10-12 months ; 
number  of telephone  conferences  requested.  Receipt :  Descriptive  statistics  of staff Knowledge  of Behavioral  
Interventions  for BPSD  Test with mean  scores  of 80% or greater  providing  evidence  of receipt.  We will also 
compare  differences  in mean  scores  of percentage  correct  on the Knowledge  of Behavioral  Interventions  for 
BPSD  Test between  EIT-4-BPSD  facilities  and EO facilities.  Enactment:   Descriptive  statistics  reflecting  the 
percentage  of care interactions  in which  person -centered  approaches  for BPSD  in EIT-4-BPSD  facilities  are 
provided  based  on the Use of Behavioral  Approaches  for BPSD  measure . This is done  as part of Step 4 within  
EIT-4-BPSD  at baseline  (0-2 months),  4-[ADDRESS_718681] implementation  of EIT-4-BPSD.   This will 
provide  evidence  that the staff enacted  person  centered  behavioral  approaches  to address  BPSD.      
 
Maintenance:  Long  term Attrition : We will track  facilities  that withdraw  from the study  within  12 months  (as well 
as reasons  for attrition) . We will compare  EIT-4-BPSD  facilit ies with EO facilit ies to determine  if there  is a 
differential  rate of attrition.   Maintenance  of environment  and policy  changes  and inclusion  of person -centered  
approaches  for BPSD  in care plans will be examined  at [ADDRESS_718682] implementation  of EIT-4-BPSD .   
Evidence  of maintenance  will be based  on maintaining  or improving  Environment  and Policy  assessments  and 
percentage  of residents  with evidence  of person -centered  approaches  for management  or prevention  of BPSD  
in their care plans.  LMMs  will be used  to compare  changes  in facility  level measures  from baseline  to 24 
months  with facility  included  as random  effects.   Time  will be included  and recorded  accordingly.   Comparison  
of outcomes  at 12 and 24 months  will be examined  to determine  maintenance  over that time period.   
 
Primary  Aim 2: Evaluation  of the Feasibility,  Utility  and Cost  in EIT-4-BPSD  Facilities    
Using  descriptive  and qualitative  data from focus  groups  (held  following  the intervention)  we will evaluate  use 
of the EIT strategy  and our participatory  implementation  process  with the stakeholder  team and addition al 
facility  staff.  We will determine  the cost of the implementation  process  using  an activity -based  costing  method .  
 
Aim 2: To evaluate  the use of EIT and our participatory  implementation  process.   
 
Findings  will be descriptive  and considered  at the individual  facility  level and across  all treatment  facilities .  
Data  will include  a summary  of information  obtained  during  the intervention  including : (1) ideas  generated  from 
the Brainstorming  sessions156; (2) themes  identified  in the Affinity  Diagrams;  and (3) "drivers"  identified  to 
overcome  challenges  to implementing  person -centered  behavioral  approaches  to BPSD  via implementation  of 
the EIT-4-BPSD  (Interrelationship  Diagraphs).  We will quantify  similarities  across  facilities  to note the most  
common  themes  and drivers  identified  and establish  best practices.  We will also have  facilitie s evaluate  their 
goal achievement  at 12 months  (Appendix  B).  
Focu s groups  will be conducted  at the end of the intervention  activities  in order  to better  understand  the 
implementation  process157.  The stakeholder  team  and additional  facility  staff (e.g.,  nursing,  administrative,  
activities,  therapy,  and social  work)  will be invited  to participate  in a [ADDRESS_718683] year.  Stakeholders/staff  will be excluded  from the study  if they are less than 21 years  of 
age.  Demographic  information  will be obtained  from participants  to describe  the group  composition .  (See 
Human  Subjects  section  for recruitment  /consent processes.)  
Drs. Resnick, Galik , Kolanowski,  and Van Haitsma  will moderate  the focus  groups  through  a carefully  
designed  series  of questions  that engage  the group  and then progress  toward  the most  substantive  areas  of 
inquiry159,160. All moderators  are experienced  in leading  focus  group s with staff in long term care facilities.  Key 
elements  of the inquiry  address  the RE-AIM framework (see Appendix  G, Focus  Group  Interview  Guide).  Data  
collection  will end when  saturation  of findings  has been  achieved  (i.e., when  no new barriers,  facilitators  or 
other  insights  are gleaned  from incoming  data)  or all [ADDRESS_718684]  documents.  Verified  “clean’  transcripts  (confirmed  for accuracy  of transcription  and 
purged  of identifiers)  will be shared  on a secure,  password  protected  data management  site. Within - and 
across -group  analy ses will be completed  using  techniques  of conventional  content  analysis161. This analytic  
approach  produces  a taxonomy  of responses  to targeted  questions  in the discussion  guide  (e.g.,  facilitators,  
barriers)  as well as rich description  of the process  of implementation  and resultant  outcomes.   
Analytic  sessions  will begin  after two focus  groups  have  been  transcribed/verified.  The full team  will meet 
to share  preliminary  coding  insights  and develop  a standardized  codebook.   Drs. Resnick,  Galik,  Kolanowski  
and Van Haitsma  will code  the full transcript  individually  and inter-rater reliability  will be evaluated.  The 
codebook  will be refined  and iterati ve double -coding/team  meetings  will proceed  until a satisfactory  level of 
agreement  is achieved  (Kappa  Coefficient  > 0.8).  As data collection/coding  proceeds,  the four investigators  
will meet  via conference  call at least  bi-weekly.  In the event  that cons ensus  cannot  be reached  at any time 
during  the analysis  process,  the four investigators  will be led in adjudication  by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Penrod.  Findings  will be 
shared  with stakeholder  teams  and consultants  to confirm/refine  insights  and integrate  their knowledge  of the 
environment  and intervention  related  activities.  The qualitative  findings  will not be transformed  for integration  in 
quantitative  analyses,  but we will use descriptive  statistics  to summarize  patterns  in the categorical  findings  in 
the taxonomy.   The final stage  of analysis  involves  examining  the qualitative  findings  for “fit” with the 
quantitative  findings.  Variations  in qualitative  findings  may be related  to contextual  features  or implementation  
processes  at a given  facility . This approach  permits  integration  of qualitative  findings  with other  sources  of 
formative  evaluation  data to understand  EIT-4-BPSD  implementation  and outcomes .  
Four quality  criteria  for establishing  the trustworthiness  of the qualitative  data will be addressed162:  (1) 
Credibility  (i.e., confidence  in the ‘truth’  of the findings)  is enhanced  by [CONTACT_50783]’s  methodological  expe rtise 
and familiarity  with the facilitie s; rigorous  analytic  approaches;  the use of a detailed  audit  trail; triangulation  
through  use of multiple  facilities ; and iterative  question ing; (2) Transferability  (i.e., applicability  of findings  to 
other  contexts)  will be established  through  rich description  of the facilities  and consideration  of the similarity  
with other  facilities  in these  states  and nationally;  (3) Dependability  (i.e., application  of methods  that can be 
replicated)  will be based  on our detailed  methodological  approach,  coding  dictionaries  and audit  trail; (4) 
Confirmability  (i.e., the extent  to which  the findings  represent  the voice  of participants)  will be enhanced  
through  the use of our consultants  both of whom  have  extensive  knowledge  of the long term care environment  
and by [CONTACT_549056]  (in written  or verbal  format) . 
In addition  to obtaining  qualitative  findings,  we will determine  the costs  of the implementation  process  
(Appendix  H) with regard  to the services  of the Research  Nurse  Facilitator,  the amount  of time the internal  
champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394] /stakeholder  team  spend s in training  and working  with the Research  Nurse  Facilitator,  the amount  of 
time for staff education  and time spent  by [CONTACT_549057][INVESTIGATOR_549033] 4 steps  of EIT-4-BPSD.   An 
activity -based  costing  method  will be used  which  includes:  (1) gathering  resources  used  in the implementation  
process  such  as personnel,  supplies  and other  expenses;  (2) establishing  the amounts  used  of these 
resources;  (3) multiplying  the amounts  of resources  used  by [CONTACT_549058];  (4) tracking  the time spent  by [CONTACT_549059]-4-
BPSD  and multiplying  this by [CONTACT_549060];  and (5) summing  costs  
across  all components  of the implementation  process  to determine  the total cost of implementatio n. Study  
timeline  is described  in Table  3.   
Table  3: Study  Timeline    
Table  3:  Time  Line (Treatment  and Control  facilities  will be run simultaneously).  Cohorts  will be run in groups  of 16-20 facilities  with a total of three  
cohorts  run over the 5 year study  period.   The two Research  Nurse  Facilitators  will be working  with a total of 8-10 EIT-4-BPSD  facilities  per cohort  
group  such  that each  will be responsible  for 4-5 EIT-4-BPSD  facilities  during  the cohort  period.      
Study  Months  Activities   
STUDY  ACTIVITIES:  Recruitment  of Facilities /Randomization  (16-20 facilities /cohort  with a total of 50 facilities - 25 from each  state )  
Month  1-4 Initial  
Planning/Set  Up IRB/Staff  training;  facility  recruitment;  Cohort  1 Coordination  with facilities;  EIT-4-BPSD  planning  for training  and identification  of 
Internal  Champi[INVESTIGATOR_5458];  listserv  of Internal  Champi[INVESTIGATOR_549038].   EO planning  for in-service . 
Month  5-17 
Cohort  1 
Intervention  EIT-4-BPSD  Intervention:  4-5 from Maryland;  4-5 from Pennsylva nia; Implementation  of Steps  of EIT-4-BPSD ; Recruitment  of 12-
[ADDRESS_718685] data. 
EO Intervention : 4-5 from Maryland;  4-5 from Pennsylvania;  Coordinat e and provide  the educational  intervention;  Recruitment  of 
12-13 residents  per facility  and complet e assessments  of resident  and facilities .  
Month  18-20 
Cohort  2 Set Up Cohort  2-Coordination  with facilities;  planning  for face-to-face training;  and identification  of Internal  Champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394].   
Month  21-33 
Intervention  EIT-4-BPSD  Intervention:  Same  process  as for Cohort  1; 18 and 24-month  maintenance  data collection  for Cohort  1 (month s 23 
and 29) 
EO Intervention:   Same  process  as for Cohort  1 
Month  34-36 
Cohort  3 Set Up Cohort  3-Coordination  with the Facilities;  planning  for face-to-face training  and identification  of Internal  Champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394].   
Month  37-49 
Intervention  EIT-4-BPSD  Intervention:  Same  process  as for Cohorts  1 and 2; 18 and 24 month  maintenance  data collection  for Cohort  2 
(month s 39 and 45) 
EO  Intervention:   Same  process  as for Cohorts  1 and 2 
Month  50-60  18 month  maintenance  data collection  for Cohort  3 (month  55); Completion  of data entry , analysis  and manuscript  development ;  
Strengths  and Limitations:  We included  facilities  from two states  and residents  who have  evidence  of BPSD.  
Thus  findings  cannot  be generalized  to all residents  and all nursing  homes.  Due to the limitation  on recruitment  
numbers  this study  does  not provide  a true reflection  of reach , but provides  data to inform  future  dissemination  
research.  We recognize  that all facilities  are different  with unique  challenges . We use the EIT to allow  flexibility  
in implementation  and have  included  known  factors  that may influence  study  outcomes  such  as size and 
staffing.  There  may be other factors  we have  not considered.  To overcome  this limitation  we will adjust  for 
clustering  and resident  characteristics.  Potential  challenges  include  participation  of facilities,  engagement  of 
Internal  Champi[INVESTIGATOR_549039] s, staff turnover,  and loss to follow  up of residents.  We anticipate  these  
challenges  and are prepared  to retrain  staff if there  is turnover  and will over sample  to address  loss to follow  
up. We have  a highly  qualified  and experienced  team  with members  who have  successfully  engage d 
administration  and staff in the planning,  development,  training  and implementation  of similar  care related  
interventions.  Despi[INVESTIGATOR_549040],  EIT-4-BPSD  has the potential  to make  a significant  impact  on practice  in our 
nation's  15,633  nursing  homes  by [CONTACT_549061] -centered  behavioral  
approaches  for BPSD , the ultimate  goal of the National  Partnership.  