Title: A Biomarker Stress Test f or Detection of Early Osteoarth ritis 
NCT: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Document Date: 10/2/2019  
Study Protocol: 
General Study Plan:  Subjects will be assigned a variable-stiffness shoe to wear fo r [ADDRESS_1094290] (serum co llection before and after a 30-minute 
walking activity) at the baseline visit to determine the immedi ate effects of the shoes on joint 
mechanics and will return at [ADDRESS_1094291]. 
  
Intervention: The intervention shoe is a normal-appearing commercially availa ble athletic shoe 
with a specially designed sole. The lateral aspect of the sole is made of a stiffer material than the 
medial aspect of the sole (lateral sole 1.4 times stiffer than medial sole). Previous studies have 
revealed that a shoe of this kind can reduce medial compartment  loading. Patients will be asked to 
use the shoe during their ac tive portion of the day and provide  a report of daily usage.  
 
Collection of Serum Samples (OA Stress Test): Subjects will be asked to limit their physical 
activity for 36 hours prior to tes ting. Tests will begin betwee n 8:00 and 9:00 am, and subjects will 
be required to limit their activity between the time they wake up and the beginning of study 
activities. Blood samples (5mL o r 1 teaspoon) will be obtained by [CONTACT_793625], immediately after, 0.5, 1.5, 3.5, and 5.[ADDRESS_1094292]’s forearm 
will be used so that only one venipuncture will be required for  all blood samples. Blood specimens 
will be centrifuged to separate serum, aliquoted, and frozen to  -80oC within 1 hour of collection. 
 
Gait Analysis:  Each subject will be tested bilaterally in their own personal walking shoe, a 
constant-stiffness control shoe, and the variable-stiffness int ervention shoe, to determine the 
immediate and long-term (6 month)  effects of the variable-stiff ness shoes on joint mechanics. 
Subjects will be instructed to perform three walking trials at a comfortable speed (normal), slower 
than normal, and faster than normal. A 10-camera optoelectronic  system for 3d motion analysis 
(Qualisys Medical AB; Gothenburg,  Sweden) will be used to colle ct marker data. Ground reaction 
force data will be collected using a multi-component force plat e placed in the center of the 
walkway (Bertec Corporation; Col umbus, OH). All data will be co llected at a frequency of 120 
Hz.   The point cluster technique (PCT) marker protocol will be used  for gait analysis to measure 
the movements of the underlying femur and tibia. The intersegme ntal forces and moments at the 
knee will be calculated through an inverse dynamics approach. A  link model of the segments of 
interest will be used, assuming the inertial properties for eac h rigid segment to be lumped at its 
center of mass, symmetry of the segment along the main inertia axis, and negligible angular 
velocity and acceleration along the longitudinal axis. The peak  external knee adduction moment 
will be calculated as the maximum moment during stance phase. A verage moment values for each 
speed and subject combination will be calculated. Moments will be normalized to bodyweight and 
height (%Bw*Ht) to allow for comparison between subjects. Pain will be quantified at baseline 
and at the time of the 6 month follow-up by [CONTACT_793626] 
(WOMAC) pain scores.
 
 
Statistical Analysis Plan: 
Changes from baseline in peak knee adduction moment and in resp onse of serum levels of 
biomarkers to a mechanical s timulus in an early knee OA populat ion will be tested  after [ADDRESS_1094293] for significant 
differences in the biomarker levels and knee adduction moment b etween baseline and 6 months. 
Data will be checked for normality, and a paired Student’s T-Te st will be used for normally 
distributed data, or a non-parametric alternative such as the p aired-sample Wilcoxon Signed Rank 
Test will be used if normality checks show that the data is not  normally distributed. Analysis of 
covariance (or non-parametric alternative) may be used to test the influence of potential covariates 
such as pain, age, gender, and BMI. 
 