 
 Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
 
PACT to Improve Health Care in People with Serious Mental Illness (SMI-PACT) 
 
ClinicalTrials.gov: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Funder: Department of Veterans Affairs HSR& D Quality Enhancement Research Initiative 
ID: SDP 12-177 PI: [INVESTIGATOR_140316] S. Young, MD MSHS; Department of Veterans  Affairs, VISN-22 MIRECC 
 
Version: May 31, [ADDRESS_159472]  substantially worse health outcom es than people without mental 
illness.  Several factors contribute to  this.  At the patient level, psychiat ric symptoms, cognitive disabilities, and 
decreased motivation impair patients ’ ability to self-manage medical illness and navigate the healthcare 
system. At the provider level, clinicians often have limite d experience, discomfort, and a lack of familiarity with 
evidence-based practices for this population.  At the organizational level, systems often lack protocols for care 
management, shared treatment arrangements, and effective partnerships between primary care (PC) and mental health (MH) staff.
 
The Department of Veterans Affair s (VA) has undertaken major initia tives to improve primary care, in 
terms of both efficiency and patient-centeredness, via the Patient Aligned Care Team (PACT) model, and in 
terms of its capacity to handle mental health issues , via Primary Care-Mental Heal th Integration (PC-MHI).  
Primary care in VA has undergone significant transforma tion under the PACT model, which is derived from the 
Patient Centered Medical Home (PCMH) concept.  Implem entation of PACT is continuing, and active efforts 
are ongoing to augment and refine the model.  In addi tion, since 2008, the PC-MHI  initiative has addressed 
Veterans’ mental health conditions by 1) co-locating me ntal health clinicians in primary care, and 2) making 
care management services available in  primary care for common psychiatric disorders. PC-MHI has focused on 
patients with depression and anxiety, with a goal of managing these patients within primary care, and 
providing specialty mental health care for patients who need it most, i.e., those with serious mental illness. 
The next step is to transform the he alth care of Veterans with serious mental illness (SMI), a population 
that dies many years prematurely, mo stly due to medical illnesses.  To address these medical issues, primary 
care clinicians have, in some VAs, be en co-located within specialty mental  health.  However, this co-location 
has not been implemented widely, and researchers have foun d that it has inconsistent effects on care processes 
and outcomes. Treatment processes, in  particular, need to be improved to address these patients’ multiple 
needs.  Medical care management models do this by [CONTACT_140329].  The research evid ence for medical care management is strong in that it improves medical 
treatment and outcomes, and can reduce treatment costs in people with SMI.  There is also growing evidence 
supporting the efficacy of the collaborative care model (a cornerstone of PACT) to improve treatment for people with SMI. PACT and collaborative care both include care coordination, team-based care, patient-
centered care, an emphasis on access, and use of clinical data to proactively manage po pulations.  It is likely 
that PACT can be tailored to people with SMI by a pplying the evidence on medical care management and 
collaborative care.  Our group has ex perience implementing and evaluating  care management and collaborative 
care in people with SMI,
 and the current project capi[INVESTIGATOR_140317]. 
Using existing evidence, we adapt PACT to meet th e needs of individuals with SMI (“SMI-PACT”), and 
to implement and evaluate this adapted model in a site-level controlled trial.  This will be a hallmark study for 
the Mental Health QUERI, and will be supported by [CONTACT_140330]’s SMI Health Workgroup.  This project 
addresses Goal 1 of Mental Health QUERI for FY12-FY15 to “support and enhance implementation of evidence-based practices, as well as promising and emerging clinic al practices that address hi gh priority system needs, 
for Veterans with mental health conditions, includin g SMI Health.”  This QUERI Step 4, Phase 1-2 trial 
involves researchers, policy makers, and staff at sites in VISN22.  Our specific aims are: 
1. Using applicable evidence, adapt the PACT model to the needs of patients with SMI, and partner with 
one VA healthcare center to implement SMI-PACT. 
2. In a site-level controlled tr ial, evaluate the effect, relative  to usual care, of SMI-PACT on: 
a.  provision of appropriate preventive and medical treatments; b.  patient health-related quality of life, and satisfaction with care; and 
c.  medical and mental health treatment utilization. 
3. Using mixed methods, conduct a fo rmative evaluation of usual care and SMI-PACT implementation to  
 strengthen the intervention, and to: 
a.  assess acceptability of the SMI-PACT model, an d barriers and facilitators to its implementation;  
b.  investigate the relationships between organizational context, intervention factors, and patient and 
 provider outcomes; and 
c.  identify factors related to successful patient outcomes. 
 
Design Overview  
This is a site-level, controlled tr ial conducted at three VA healthca re centers. VISN22 has expressed 
strong support for the project, along with the capa city and commitment to be involved in an early 
 
 implementation study. VISN22 has an organizational st ructure that includes a Mental Health Product Line 
manager who oversees mental health services across th e VISN and who will serve as a change agent.  In 
VISN22, the VA Greater Los Angeles He althcare System (GLA VA) will serve as the intervention site and the 
San Diego VA and Las Vegas VA will continue with care as  usual and serve as control sites.  All facilities in 
VISN22 have adopted the PC-MHI model and have implem ented PACT, and both GLA VA and LB VA currently 
have primary care available in their mental health clinics.  These structural features serve to support SMI-
PACT.  At the intervention site, one full-time primary care  physician will lead a teamlet that will be adapted for 
the SMI population.  The control sites will continue with care as usual. 
We will recruit patients with SMI fr om the specialty mental health prac tices at both sites.  All enrolled 
patients will complete a survey at baseline, 7 months (mid-study), and 15 months (final) conducted in-person 
by a trained Research Assessor (RA).  The RA will en ter the data via online su rvey software during the 
interview.  A subset of patients at the intervention site will also complete a 20-minute qualitative interview 
following the 15-month survey.  Clinic ians and administrators will be recr uited from specialty mental health 
and PACT at both sites.  All enrolled providers will complete a 20-minute survey and 20-minute qualitative 
interview at baseline, [ADDRESS_159473] affed by [CONTACT_140331], 
one registered nurse care manager, one licensed or vocational nurse, and one clerical associate.  Inter-
professional team members (who work across several teamlets) include representatives from pharmacy, 
dietetics, and rehabilitation.  The team let will also have representation fr om a psychiatrist.  Psychiatrists are 
discipline-specific team members.  This  linkage to specialty mental health is essential. The liaison role for the 
psychiatrist ensures that there are PC-MH linkages to address the interrelationship between patients’ physical 
and mental illnesses.  At the control sites, patients wi ll continue to receive care as usual, meaning PC-MHI and 
PACT.  
 
Sample   Patient subjects:  We will enroll a random sample  of patients who have diagnoses of schizophrenia, 
schizoaffective disorder, bipolar disord er, recurrent major depres sion with psychosis, or severe chronic post-
traumatic stress disorder (160 interven tion, 160 control).  Patients will not be excluded based on comorbid 
mental or medical diagnoses.  However, there is a su bset of individuals at mental health clinics who are 
psychiatrically stable and advanced enough in their re covery that they do not re quire enhanced supports to 
make effective use of PC.  This will be assessed at baseline by [CONTACT_6904]’s clinician, using the Milestones of Recovery Scale (MORS) scale.  This sc ale rates an individual’s ability to self-manage their care.  Patients who 
rate at “early recovery” or “advanced recovery” on th is scale will remain with standard PACT, and are not 
eligible for SMI-PACT. 
 Staff subjects: At each site this will include: members of PACT, members of SMI-PACT (intervention 
site) or mental health integration (control site), prov iders from the mental health clinic, administrators who 
oversee the mental health clinic (e.g.,  psychiatry, psychology, nursing, soci al work, clerks), and administrators 
who oversee primary care.  
Settings 
Outpatient Mental Health Clinics:  The sites offer comprehensive mental health services to patients.  
The clinics are multidisciplinary in na ture, staffed by [CONTACT_140332], psycho logists, nurses, social workers, and 
psychiatric technicians.  Severity of  psychiatric illness covers the full  spectrum ranging from adjustment 
disorders to severe psychoses and mood disorders.  A full range of both short- and long-term treatment 
services is available: individual, group, and family therapy, psychi atric consultation and evaluation, 
psychological assessment, medication management, social work assessment, and case management. 
Primary Care:  The sites each have PACT establ ished in primary care (e .g., teamlet formation, 
communication SOP in place, daily hu ddles) with PC-MHI.  As well, both sites have PC co-located in their 
outpatient mental health clinics. 
 
 
 Recruitment  
Immediately following funding, we will form an “I mplementation Team” at the intervention site and 
begin to have monthly in-person meetings.  The Im plementation Team will be  comprised of (a) PC 
administrators, MH administrators, and systems redesign experts who have been invo lved in improving clinic 
performance in the recent past and have influence to he lp with the reorganization necessary to form and tailor 
the SMI-PACT teamlets, and (b) the study PI [INVESTIGATOR_140318].  Many of these individuals who have been 
involved in improving clinic performance have already been identified and have been involved in the revision of this proposed project so that it meets the needs, capacity, and plans al ready established for the intervention 
site. The model and project implementation plan has be en discussed with the primary care, PACT, and mental 
health leads; the systems rede sign lead; the mental health reorganizati on workgroup; and the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_140319]. 
We have collaborated on design of th e model, and worked together to consider where it would be located; 
under what service it would fall; how patients would be  recruited, assigned, and followed; and how the PACT 
components would be met.  The Implementation Team, and particularly the primary care / PACT lead, has 
begun to identify providers who might have interest the joining a SMI-PACT teamlet.  Interested providers and 
clerks will join the Implementation Team meetings in  Year 1 to further their knowledge about the model, 
including roles and functions; answer questions; and to  include them in the ongoing discussions of how to 
tailor and implement the four change  components, described below.  Ulti mately, the Implementation Team will 
name [CONTACT_140355] d on provider interest and expertise, and clinic resources. The control 
site PI [INVESTIGATOR_140320]. 
 We will draw a random sample of patients using a visit-based sampling method that has previously 
worked well in this population.  A partial HIPAA waiver wi ll be obtained to allow a panel list to be generated for 
each clinic.  At both sites, patients are eligible during their first visit duri ng the 6-month sampling period.  As of 
that visit, patients have a random determination of in clusion or not, based on proportion expected to be 
required at that site.  If the patient is selected for inclus ion, then the patient will be asked if they would like to 
participate in the research project, and participate in the informed consent process.  The consent process will 
include use of a brief consent quiz to ensure pote ntial participants fully understand the study.  
 Intervention Condition:  SMI-PACT Care Model 
 Consistent with the PCMH model and the VA’s PACT  adaptation, SMI-PACT creates a system of care 
that maximizes the delivery of preventative and evidence -based medical care for Vete rans served in specialty 
mental health.  The PCMH design principles are best  summarized in the Group Health PCMH study described 
by [CONTACT_140333]. Although that description was of PCMH implementation for traditional primary care, 
many of the change components transl ate logically to SMI-PACT and will be the basis for this study.  The 
implementation process will be guided by [CONTACT_140334]: planning, engaging, executing, and 
reflecting and evaluating. 
 Planning:  In the planning period, the behavior and tasks for implementing  SMI-PACT are developed 
and the quality of the model is assessed and reviewed.  The project has already started by [CONTACT_140335], VISN, and medical center levels.  The VISN22 MIRECC has close ties to the VISN 
leadership and medical center primary care and mental  health leadership.  These regional collaborative 
learning sessions are three-day knowledge-based activi ties, held approximately every [ADDRESS_159474] implementation. 
Also during the planning period, the intervention site’s Implementation Team will begin meeting in-
person to discuss the components of SMI-PACT and to begin tailoring the model to their site.  Specifically, 
while the three pi[INVESTIGATOR_140321] (a ccess, care management and coordination, and practice 
redesign) are established, strategic pl anning will shape the implementation of the change components based on 
local structures, priorities, and patient needs.  Minutes will be taken during the Implementation Team meetings and will be reviewed and approved the Team. During this period, the staff at both sites will be enrolled and the Evaluation Lead will conduct a site visit at each site to complete a diagnostic analysis.  This 
analysis will include a web-based survey and interviews with staff regarding baseli ne knowledge, attitudes, 
beliefs and practice patterns (see Formative Evaluati on below).  At the intervention site, there will be 
additional questions regarding facilitators and barriers to SMI-PACT implementation.  The information gained 
from the diagnostic analysis will be promptly analyzed, summarized, and conveyed to the Implementation 
 
 Team to inform strategic planning and tailoring of the model. 
 The Implementation Team will work specifically on how to implement four overarching change 
components:  Structural Changes, Point-of-Care Cha nges, Patient Outreach Changes, and Management 
Changes; and they will strategize as to how to address patient-, provider-, and organizational-level barriers and 
facilitators.  Probable modifications to PACT to acco mmodate the needs of the SMI population are as follows: 
 Structural Changes:  1) A teamlet will be formed with a suggested compositio n of one FTE primary care 
provider (physician or nurse practitioner), one FTE registered nurse care manager, one FTE vocational nurse, and one FTE clerical associate.  Inter-professional te am members (who work across  several teamlets) include 
representation from clinical pharmacy, dietetics, and reha bilitation.  Each teamlet will include liaison from the 
three psychiatrists who are providing specialty mental heal th care to the patients.  2) Each teamlet member will 
function to his/her highest capability.  3) Teamlet members will be located, wh en possible, in the same clinic to 
facilitate communication and coordination.  4) Teamle t size will be smaller (n=500), in line with the VHA 
Handbook 1101.[ADDRESS_159475] visit length from 20 to 30 minutes.  This ex tra time is needed to allow for increased discussion of 
complex medical comorbidities.  5) A ca ll system will be implemented to direct calls for patients in SMI-PACT 
to the team’s clerical associate who will be the first poin t of contact.  6) Time will  be dedicated for “desktop 
medicine” to respond to calls, contact [CONTACT_140336], and respond to secure messaging (VA secure email 
is being deployed nationally for pati ents).  7) Clerical associates will  schedule routine services based on 
algorithms for appropriate care usin g Clinical Dashboard software (e.g ., mammograms, colorectal cancer 
screens, influenza vaccinations).  Point-of-Care Changes:  1) The registered nurse will be the medical care manager for the panel of patients and will be the “communication s hub.”  This provider will be in cl ose communication with the clerical 
associate (who receives all calls) and will facilitate coordi nation within the team.  2)  Patients will be active 
collaborators in their treatment plan, which will be jointly “owned” by [CONTACT_140337].  3) If 
there is a conflict between the patien t’s psychiatric illnesses and treatments  and the patient’s medical illnesses 
and treatments (e.g., weight gain from antipsychotic medications), the PACT provider will work with the 
psychiatrist to resolve the co nflict.  4) Patients will be encouraged to use secure email to contact [CONTACT_50783], book 
appointments, and change appointments.  5) Patients wi ll be encouraged to use phone or secure email as 
alternative or to complement in-per son visits with goal of 1/3 phone,  1/3 email, 1/3 in-person visits. 
 Patient Outreach Changes:  1) Scripted messages wi ll be delivered to each patient on the panel to 
describe the new care model, clinicians on their team, their role in supporting this change, and potential care 
improvements. 2) Patients who are assigned a new PC cl inician as part of this reorganization will receive a 
welcoming call within one month of  the new assignment to encourage a strong clinician-patient working 
relationship.
50  3) Teamlets will routinely review Chronic Dise ase Panel reports from the Clinical Dashboard to 
track and address any deficiencies.  Teamlet staff will contact [CONTACT_140338] (e.g., outstanding 
retinal exam, elevated LDL-C).  4) Patients will be enco uraged to join “group visi ts” comprised of individuals 
with similar medical concerns.  5) There will be outrea ch to pharmacists for consultation on patients who are 
not well-controlled on their medication s.  6) Lab tests will be systematical ly reviewed and results reported to 
patients either via secure email from the clerical a ssociate (normal results) or via phone from the nurse 
(abnormal results).  Management Changes:  1) Time will be dedicated to a daily “huddle” for the teamlet to discuss 
outstanding issues, problem solve, plan , and divide up responsibilities.  2) The Clinical Dashboard will be 
available to all teamlet members incl uding the clerk.  3) A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) will be 
established between the SMI-PACT teamlet and other PACT  teams regarding assignment of patients based on 
their psychiatric diagnosis and functioning.  4) Sa me day and walk-in appointments will be available. 
 Engaging:  During the period of engagement, the project begins to attract and involve appropriate 
individuals in the implementation and use of the interv ention through social marketing, education, modeling, 
and training.  In addition to teamlet members, we will invite PACT experts and clinicians to several 
Implementation Team meetings to serve as SMI-PACT opin ion leaders, redesign models, and expert resources.  
These meetings will continue to focus on th e adaption and implementation of the model.  
Once the teamlet is finalized and strategic planning  regarding implementation is completed, the Study 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_140322]-PACT  model, protocols to be 
implemented, and a discussion of barri ers and facilitators.  We will use re levant training materials from PACT, 
which have been shared with us by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Davies who lea ds the PACT collaborative learning sessions nationally.  
The care manager for the intervention site will be trained in treatment guidelines for the prevention and 
 
 medical care targets of the intervention. We will send the SMI-PACT registered nurse care manager and 
primary care provider to a PACT collaborative learning session during the engaging period.  At this learning 
session, these two attendees will work to understand ho w to integrate access to spec ialty care and discipline-
specific providers in Medical Center PACT sites of care (1 of the 5 learning objectives of these sessions).  Since the staff will have worked for a period on planning for their site, they will be  able to focus more specifically on 
methods related to tailoring PACT for specialty populations. 
In addition to the training during this period, st udy staff will also meet wi th the SMI-PACT teamlet, 
PACT leadership, and the systems analyst who manages the Clinical Dashboard for the site.  At this time we 
will also finalize the MOU between SMI-PACT and PACT , regarding patient referrals between the groups.  
Communication routines within the SMI-PACT team let itself, and between the teamlet and its inter-
professional (clinical pharma cy, dietetics, and rehabilita tion) and multidisciplinary pa rtners (e.g., psychiatrist) 
will be established, practiced, adjusted, and routinized.  Throughout this period, the Evaluation Lead will take 
ethnographic field notes as part of the formative evaluation. 
Throughout the engaging period and the remaining implementation stages, the Implementation Team 
will work to foster a supportive organizational cult ure for the SMI-PACT team and address environmental 
constraints to model implementation.  The Implementation  Team will develop marketing handouts for patients 
regarding the new care model, contact [CONTACT_3031], an d some “tips” including na mes and contact [CONTACT_140339], encouragement to use phone/email,  and availability of same-day appointments.  Team 
members will be educated regarding the im portance of this activity, their role  in the project, and tools they can 
use to motivate providers and facilitate implementa tion. SMI-PACT opi[INVESTIGATOR_140323]. 
 Executing:  In this period, the intervention is implemented. During this period, the Implementation 
Team will focus on barriers and facilitators to implementa tion, with an eye to sustainability.  Teamlet providers 
will be encouraged to take advantage of local PACT learning collaboratives to support implementation and 
change efforts.  The registered nurse care manager will oversee day-to-day SMI-PACT teamlet implementation activities to ensure that care is coor dinated, continuous, and appropriate.  In  order to do this, he/she will rely 
on Chronic Disease Panel reports from the Clinical Dash board to monitor progress towards the prevention and 
medical care targets.  The care manager will use supportive strategies and reminders to encourage teamlet clinicians and teamlet clerks to address access delays,  outstanding preventive and medical care issues, and 
teamlet processes (e.g., cost tracking, team huddles, and minutes for any meetings).  The SMI-PACT care 
manager will report any barriers to implementation that occur between Im plementation Team meetings.  The 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_140324]-solving and use of qu ality improvement techniques, but ultimately the 
Implementation Team will guide implementation of the model and be responsible for addressing barriers.  
Throughout implementation, periodic and targeted feedback to the Implementation Team will be provided and continued tailoring of the model will oc cur accordingly.  The Team will make use of available financial incentive 
and performance rewards for clinics and providers to motivate implementation. 
 Reflecting and Evaluating: Damschroder and colleagues  explain that in this final stage quantitative and 
qualitative feedback about the progress and quality of implementation is pr ovided. In the proposed 
demonstration trial, we will undertake an iterative process of reflecting and engaging, whereby [CONTACT_140340].  This feedback will be based in part on mid-implementation data 
collected from patients (survey) and providers (survey and interviews). 
 
Usual Care Condition 
The comparison condition will consis t of treatment as usual. The contro l sites will continue with use of 
PC-MHI and PACT.  
 Data Collection, Variables, and Measures 
Aim [ADDRESS_159476], which draws 
from the Regional Data Warehouse, plus chart reviews at baseline and mid-study.  At the end of the 
intervention, data on utili zation history is required fo r both intervention and control sites, and this will be 
obtained using chart review and the VA Informatics an d Computing Infrastructure (VINCI).  SAS Programmers 
from the HSR&D Center of Excellence for the Study of  HealthCare Provider Behavior, including the data 
 
 analyst on this project, have been working with the VINCI group since September [ADDRESS_159477]’s needs, data will be obtained from  the VA Decision Support System (DSS) and Corporate 
Data Warehouse (CDW).  Table [ADDRESS_159478]  common chronic illnesses.  It has be en used in several community studies 
with patients with SMI. 
 Severity of comorbid medical illness .  For each patient we will calculate their Charlson Age-
 
Comorbidity index score.  Each patien t’s index score is the total of the pa tient’s comorbid conditions weighted 
plus age.  A higher score indicates a more severe comorb id condition.  For example,  diabetes is weighted a 1 
while moderate to severe liver disease is given a 3. Age is added as 0 for anyone 40 years old or younger, and 
each decade over 40 adds 1 point to the index score. 
Patient Ability and Engagement in Care .  The Milestones of Recovery Scale (MORS)  assesses the 
extent of a patient’s mental health recovery and has g ood test-retest reliability an d strong validity. A MORS 
score ranges from 1 (extreme risk) to  8 (advanced recovery) and is based on three underlying dimensions: 1) 
patient’s level of risk, 2) patient’s stre ngth of engagement with healthcare se rvices (but not quantity of service), 
and 3) the patient’s level of skills and supports.  Scor es on the MORS are responsive to change over time, 
reflecting the recovery process. At baseline, all patien ts will be assessed by [CONTACT_102]’s clinician using the 
MORS.  Those patients who have a baseline MORS score of [ADDRESS_159479]. 
 The patient survey will also include the measures described below in Table 5. 
 
Aim 2a Measures 
 Prevention composite score : We will calculate composite scores for preventive services based on the 
Office of Quality and Performance Technical Manual. Ob esity screen data will be drawn from VINCI.  The 
remaining measures that compose the prevention score will  be gathered via chart review at baseline, mid-study 
and follow-up.  We will construct a chart abstraction in strument for use with CPRS abstractions, test it for 
reliability and validity, and train RAs to a high level of reliability.  The instrument will be developed and 
administered using the we b-based survey system. 
 
Table 4.  Measurement of Outcomes for Impact Evaluation (Aim 2)
Dependent Variable Measures Source of Data 
Aim 2a:  Provision of appropriate prev entive and medical treatment services 
Composite Prevention • Pneumococcal immunization age 65 and older, ever received
• Influenza vaccination 50-64 years of age 
• Influenza vaccination 65+ years of age 
• % of women age 50-[ADDRESS_159480] cancer 
• % of women age 21-[ADDRESS_159481] 
three years • % of patients receiving appropriate colorectal cancer screening 
• % of patients screened for obesity  Data Warehouses; VINCI; 
Chart Reviews 
 
 Composite Diabetes Mellitus  • LDL-C < 100 mg/Dl
• HbA1c Annual 
• HbA1c >9 or not done (poor control) in past year 
• Retinal Exam, timely by [CONTACT_4623] 
• LDL Measured 
• BP < 140/90 
• Nephropathy screening test or  evidence of nephropathy  Data Warehouses; VINCI
Composite Cardiovascular • Hy pertension and BP < 140/90
• LDL-C Measured 
• LDL-C < 100 mg/Dl   Data Warehouses; VINCI
Aim 2b:  Patient mental and physical quality of life, and satisfaction with care 
Health Related Quality of Life SF-12V mental an d physical component summa ry scores Patient surve y
Satisfaction with Care CSQ-8 Patient surve y
Aim 2c:  Healthcare utilization and costs 
Healthcare Utilization • SURF 
• Pharmacy and lab data Patient survey; VINCI
Healthcare Costs • Treatment utilization
• Physical Resources 
• VA unit costs 
• Non-VA unit costs • SURF; Time Logs; VINCI
• VA accounting records 
• DSS-NDE; Salary tables 
• Appropriate pricing 
schedule (e.g., Medicare fee 
schedule) 
 
 Diabetes Mellitus and Cardiovascular composite scores :  We will calculate composite scores for 
diabetes and cardiovascular disease based on the Office of Quality an d Performance Technical Manual. The 
data that compose the composite calcul ations will be drawn from VINCI. 
 Composite calculations :  All composite scores are as follows:  for the numerator, each of the clinical 
indicators that contribute to a composite is scored as  1 or 0 (pass or fail, respectively).  The composite 
numerator is the sum of scores for al l measures that contribute to the composite.  The denominator is a count 
of all the measures that contribute to  the composite.  Composite scores of the quality of preventive and chronic 
care have been shown to be reliable and va lid and useful as a comprehensive assessment. 
 
Aim 2b Measures 
 Health-related functioning : The Veterans version of the widely us ed SF-12 will be used to assess self-
perceptions of general health functioning across multiple  dimensions (including gene ral, physical, and mental 
health functioning). The SF-12V has good internal consiste ncy, stability, and concurrent validity in outpatients 
with SMI. 
 Satisfaction with Care : The Client Satisfaction Questionnaire (C SQ-8) is a brief, eight-item self-report 
questionnaire used to measure patient satisfaction with  services. The questionnaire has been widely used in 
research and service settings and demonstrates high in ternal consistency as well as consumer acceptability. 
 
Aim 2c Measures 
 Healthcare Utilization :  The Service Use and Resources Form (S URF) will be completed by [CONTACT_140341]. SURF has been successfully used  to assess costs and servic e utilization in numerous 
multi-site studies with patients with SMI, includin g CATIE. For the present study, we will use the SURF 
questionnaire to collect information on inpatient and outp atient services utilization for psychiatric and medical 
issues, including type of facility and type of provider co ntact, for visits both inside and outside VA settings.  
Additional data on services utiliz ation, lab tests, and pharmacy records will come from the VA Decision 
Support System National Database Extracts (DSS NDEs ), administrative database s that include information 
for all healthcare use within the VA healthcare system.  We will also comp are DSS records of outpatient events 
and inpatient admissions to data from the SURF, and in tegrate information from both sources when there are 
obvious omissions in data from the SURF.  Healthcare Costs :  Using microcosting methods that are a ppropriate for the VA context, we will 
document the cost of the SMI-PACT intervention in additi on to the costs of all othe r health care utilized by 
[CONTACT_140342], and will similarly document all health care costs for patients assigned to 
 
 usual care.  We will document both the direct cost of the SMI-PACT intervention as well as the overall 
incremental resource costs (i.e., the ad ditional costs) of SMI-PACT relative to usual care (the alternative 
minimal intervention) over a [ADDRESS_159482].  Some of these implementation costs might 
be offset by a reduction of expenditures on redundant services and by [CONTACT_140343].  
 Intervention Costs :  The total direct cost of SMI-PACT will be  estimated by [CONTACT_140344] (i.e., prices) of each type of resource 
and then summing all over a ll resource categories.  Enumerated resource s will include labor costs as well as all 
intervention-related diagnost ic (i.e., lab) tests, office and other me dical supplies, equipment depreciation, and 
all overhead expenses.  Transportation, phone calls, and other ancillary services needed in order to deliver the 
SMI-PACT intervention will be included in cost estimate s. We will estimate the costs of these resources using 
standard methods for approximating of opportunity costs, including salaries plus frin ge benefit costs for labor, 
depreciation plus rental cost methods for estimating the cost of capi[INVESTIGATOR_140325], time-discounting for 
adjustment of future costs to reflect present value, and imputed overhead expenses.  Average cost per patient 
will be estimated by [CONTACT_140345]. 
   Tracking resource use : Resources used in SMI-PACT will be rela tively easy to track, as they will be 
comprised mostly by [CONTACT_140346].  
Each provider on the SMI-PACT team and the SMI-PACT cl erk will keep a written record (i.e., a time log) of 
time spent in service of a patient (e.g., in clinical en counters and in completing paperwork/CPRS notes), and 
will also record the mode of contact (telephone or in -person), patient involvement (with or without patient), 
and other persons contact[CONTACT_140347].  Ti me spent in training sessions and in daily huddles will 
be tracked on a time log maintained by [CONTACT_140348].  Sa lary estimates plus fringe benefits expenses will be 
obtained from programs and used in estimating personnel costs.  Study interventions also will require use of 
physical resources—handouts, office space and office su pplies, expenses tracked using study receipts and VA 
accounting records.  Lab tests record ed for dates when the patient had an SMI-PACT encounter will also be 
included in the direct costs of the intervention, as such tests are conceptually integral to the delivery of PACT 
services.  Lab tests and their costs are recorded in DSS NDEs. 
Other Healthcare Costs :  For each patient,  we will include in our overall cost estimate costs for other 
inpatient, outpatient, emergency department, pharmace utical and labs utilizatio n during the [ADDRESS_159483] amount (or price) that is representative given the type of service provided, the duration of the service, 
and the provider type.  Prices will be obtained from VA  administrative sources unless a service is not available 
within the VA healthcare system.  Costs of non-VA services will be  derived from an appropriate pricing 
schedule, such as the Medicare fee schedule.  For pres cription medication costs and lab tests, we will use 
Decision Support System (DSS) cost es timates. DSS estimates are based on VA acquisition costs and workload.  
Prescription medication costs are adju sted for the pharmacy dispensation costs.  We will check pharmacy and 
lab cost data for outliers, which can o ccur due to key entry errors or unusual fluctuations in acquisition prices.  
Usual Care Costs : We will assess the costs of usual care over  the [ADDRESS_159484] be thoroughly 
characterized in order to establish the magnitude an d dimensions of the chan ges that occur with the 
introduction of a new care model (e.g., SMI-PACT).  In this evaluation, usual care will be assessed at baseline, 
mid-, and post-implementation via quantitative meas urement of the presence of Chronic Care Model 
components (described above), and qualitative assessment of structures and existing delivery models of care, as well as knowledge of and attitudes toward the medical home model (and the specific PACT model). 
 
 Subsequently, implementation processes and patient- and provider-level factors will be evaluated in numerous 
ways.  Table 5 summarizes the measurement plan for the formative evaluation. 
 
Table 5.  Mixed Methods  Ev aluation Measures (Aim 3)
Domain of Inquiry Measures Source 
Usual care versus SMI-
PACT (organizational 
contexts)  Assessment of Chronic Illness Care (ACIC) 
 Patient Assessment of Chronic Illness Care (PACIC) 
 Semi-structured qualitative interview at 3 time-points 
(baseline, mid-study, final follow-up)  Providers 
 Patients 
 Providers 
SMI-PACT 
implementation  Rogers Adoption Questionnaire 
 Degree of implementation of model components  Providers 
 Providers 
Acceptabilit y  Semi-structured qualitative interview at 3 time-points 
 Semi-structured qualitative interview at follow-up  Providers 
 Patients 
Barriers and facilitators 
to implementation  Ethnographic field notes (throughout implementation) 
 Implementation Team meeting notes 
 Observational logs 
 Semi-structured qualitative interview at 3 time-points  Evaluation Lead 
 Research Assistant 
 Providers 
 Providers 
Provider outcome  Maslach Burnout Inventory  Providers 
Patient factors  Behavior and Symptom Identification Scale (BASIS) 
 Ambulatory Care Experiences Survey (ACES) 
 Interpersonal Support Ev aluation List (ISEL) 
 Medication Possession Ratio (MPR)  Patients 
 Patients 
 Patients 
 VINCI 
 
Aim [ADDRESS_159485] 
 The 28-item Assessment of Chronic Illness Care (ACI C) assesses strengths and weaknesses in care for 
chronic illness, specifically community linkages, self -management support, decision support, delivery system 
design, information systems, and organization of care.  Scores range from 0-11 with categories defined as 
follows: 0–2 (little or no support for ch ronic illness care); 3–5 (basic or in termediate support for chronic illness 
care); 6–8 (advanced support); and 9–11 (optimal, or co mprehensive, integrated ca re for chronic illness). 
Subscale scores for the six areas are derived by [CONTACT_140349] s in that subsection and 
dividing by [CONTACT_140350]. In the original study, teams were encouraged (but not 
required) to complete the ACIC toge ther.  However, in this study we will ask providers to complete it 
individually and results will be shar ed with the Implementation Team to  confirm and discuss findings, with 
particular attention to components th at appear to need strengthening. 
 The 20-item Patient Assessment of Chronic Illness Care (PACIC)  assesses the extent to which patients 
with chronic illness receive care that aligns with the Chronic Care Model, i.e., care that is patient-centered, 
proactive, planned and includes colla borative goal setting, problem-solv ing, and follow-up support. In the 
original study, the PACIC demonstrated moderate test-r etest reliability (r = 0.58  during the course of 3 
months) and was correlated moderately, as predicted (r = 0.32-0.60, median = 0.50, P < 0.001) to measures of 
primary care and patient activation.  In a subsequent study of over 4000 patients with chronic conditions, 
PACIC scores were positively associated (odds ratios rang ing from 1.20 to 2.36) with  measures of use of self-
management resources, self-management behaviors such as regular exercise, patient rating of their health care, 
and quality of life. 
 
SMI-PACT Implementation 
 The 20-item Rogers’ Adoption Questionnaire assesses three factors that potentially affect rate of 
adoption: complexity, relative advantage, and observab ility.  Each scale has g ood internal consistency 
(Cronbach Alpha =.83, .88, .77 respectively). 
 Degree of implementation of SMI-PACT model components will be rated as to the degree of 
implementation (structural changes, point-of-care ch anges, patient outreach changes, and management 
changes).  Ratings will be made on a 4-point scale (n ot at all implemen ted, partially implemented, mostly 
implemented, fully implemented).  This rating scale is consistent with that used in the ACIC, described above. 
 
 
 Provider Outcome 
 The Maslach Burnout Inventory (MBI ) is a standard tool used to measure aspects of workplace stress 
and has three subscales:  emotional exhaustion, depers onalization, and personal accomplishments.  The MBI 
has been used in several studies of the PCMH.  In the Group Health demonstration, provider burnout was 
reduced at 12 months and continued to  decrease at two years, particularly  as gauged by [CONTACT_140351]. 
 
Patient Factors 
The Behavior and Symptom Identification Scale – Re vised (BASIS-R) will be administered at all three 
time-points.  It measures psychopathology, and provid es covariates for analyses.  We will use the following 
scales: psychosis (4 items), depression/daily functionin g (6 items), interpersonal functioning (5 items), and 
alcohol/drug use (4 items). The BASIS-R is widely us ed, and research supports its reliability and validity. 
 The Ambulatory Care Experiences Survey (ACE S; Short Form) is a brief patient-completed 
questionnaire that evaluates patients' experiences with a specific physician and that physician's practice.  The 
ACES uses the Institute of Medicine definition of primary care as its underlying conceptual model for 
measurement, but was designed to eval uate any sustained clinician-patient re lationship, irrespec tive of clinical 
specialty.  It is sensitive to chan ges in patients’ experiences of care over time and demonstrates excellent 
psychometric properties. As a result, it has become a national standard for measuring patients' experiences 
with individual clinicians and their practices.  A short- form version of ACES is available and has been widely 
used since 2003.  The Short Form will be used to collect data on 5 domains:  access,  quality of doctor-patient 
interactions, shared decision-making,  coordination of care, and helpfuln ess of physician office staff.  
 The Interpersonal Support Evaluation List (ISEL) is a widely used 30-item instrument that assesses 
perceptions of social support, includ ing: belonging, appraisal help, tang ible support, and self-esteem support. 
The ISEL has been subjected to extensive reliability and validity testing and has shown to be internally 
consistent and valid with the general populati on as well as with people with SMI.  
 A Medication Possession Ratio (MPR) will be calcul ated from [ADDRESS_159486], and anticipated barriers and facilitators to 
implementation.  The mid-study and final follow-up will interviews will assess: (1) usual care versus SMI-
PACT; (2) barriers and facilitators to implementation  of SMI-PACT (intervention staff); (3) provider 
perceptions of acceptability of SMI-PA CT (intervention staff).  Members of the Management Team will also be 
interviewed periodically to capture thei r perceptions of intervention characteristics, outer setting, inner setting, 
and process (i.e., key CFIR constructs).   Semi-structured interviews will al so be conducted with a subsample of 
patients at final follow-up to assess perceptions of  acceptability of and satisfaction with SMI-PACT. 
 Ethnographic field notes will be taken by [CONTACT_140352].  Th e care manager on the SMI-
PACT teamlet will be trained to record a more moderate version of field notes in the form of observational logs, 
and will record noteworthy occurrences and events rela ted to barriers and facilitators to implementation.  
Notes and minutes will be recorded  for all demonstration-related meet ings (including trainings) and 
conference calls. In addition, substantive emai ls and other communications regarding SMI-PACT 
implementation will be archived and analyzed. 
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN 
 Formative Evaluation 
Investigators from 9 different previous PCMH evaluations convened and offered suggestions for future 
PCMH studies: 1) look critically at models being implemented and identify aspects requiring modification;  2) 
embed qualitative and quantitative data collection to de tail the implementation process;  3) capture details 
concerning how PCMH components interact with one anot her over time;  4) understand and describe how and 
why physician and staff roles do or do not evolve;  5) id entify the effectiveness of individual PCMH components 
 
 and how they are used;  6) capture how primary care practi ces interface with other enti ties such as specialists, 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600], and referral services; and  7) measure resource s required for initiating and sustaining innovations. 
Our mixed methods evaluation wi ll follow these suggestions. 
In the Planning stage, pertaining to suggestion #1, we will conduct a careful diagnostic analysis of 
treatment as usual at both intervention and control si tes. This baseline analysis will incorporate:  1) 
quantitative measurement of (a) chronic care mode l implementation using the ACIC, (b) degree of 
implementation of PACT model compon ents, (c) adoption factors using Ro gers’ Adoption Questionnaire, and 
(d) provider burnout using the MBI; and, 2) qualitativ e assessment via semi-structured interviews and site 
visits.  As Nutting and colleagues noted in the PCMH Nati onal Demonstration Project, it is critical to assess 
which components of the model are in place at baseline  in order to define what changed as a result of 
implementation of an alternative care model. In addition, providers at the intervention site will be asked about 
their expectations of the SMI-PACT intervention.  Patients  will complete a baseline as sessment of the extent to 
which they receive chronic illness care (using the PACIC), and wi ll provide information regarding their 
symptoms (using the BASIS-R), their experiences of care (using the ACES), and their social support networks 
(using the ISEL).  These measures are included in the patient survey described above.  For each patient we will 
calculate their MPR to assess medication adherence.  These measures of patient factors enables analyses of 
patient-level covariates that may help to determine which patients are best served by [CONTACT_140353]-PACT versus PACT. 
In the Engaging and Executing stages, assessment of degree of implementation will continue on a 
quarterly basis, and observational logs  and data collection of documents (m inutes, notes, emails, etc.) will be 
ongoing.  Particular attention will be paid in the Enga ging stage to suggestion #[ADDRESS_159487] to measuring 
resources required for initiating innova tions.  In the Executing stage, we will focus on suggestions #1, 3, 4, and 
5.  Assessment of how different model components intera ct, physician and staff role changes, and effectiveness 
of individual components will be accomplished via mi d-implementation semi-structured interviews at the 
intervention sites, along with the quarterly ratings.  Fu rthermore, usual care at th e control site will be re-
investigated mid-implementation in or der to capture any global changes in PACT implementation or co-located 
primary care at the site (e.g., changes that migh t be relevant to PACT for special populations). 
We consider the Reflecting & Evaluating stage to occur, for the most part, concurrent to the other [ADDRESS_159488] (NDP) approach. In the summat ive evaluation at final follow-up, reflecting and 
evaluating will include re-measurement of CCM im plementation (ACIC and PACIC), adoption (Rogers 
Adoption Questionnaire), burnout, and patient factors (BASIS-R, ACES, ISEL), along with interviews with 
providers and other key stakeholders.  In addition, a subs ample of patients (n=30) from the intervention site 
will complete a brief interview regard ing their experiences in SMI-PACT.  This interview will be designed to 
assess acceptability of and satisfaction with care delivery under SMI-PACT.  We feel that  it is important to have 
a qualitative assessment of satisfaction (along with the CSQ described above) due to the finding in the NDP 
that patient ratings of satisfaction did not increase , and in some domains decreased slightly. Qualitative 
investigation of patient satisfaction may yield insight into non-measured aspects of their experiences and will 
be triangulated with the quan titative data from the CSQ. 
 
Data Analysis Plan  In this section we describe our analytic methods fo r key hypotheses derived from our specific aims.  We 
first present the outcome analyses (A im 2), and then the mixed method s evaluation analyses (Aim 3). 
 Aim 2.   In a site-level controlled trial, evaluate the effect, relative to usual care, of SMI-PACT on: 
a.  provision of appropriate preventive and medical treatments; 
b.  patient health-related quality of life, and satisfaction with care; and 
c.  medical and mental health treatment utilization 
 
 The main data analytic strategy for the site-level controlled trial will be a generalized linear mixed 
model (GLMM).  The advantage of the GLMM is that it allows us to capi[INVESTIGATOR_140326], and that it prov ides a unified framework that will allow us to integrate 
person level time varying and time invariant covariates  if necessary.  Additionally, the GLMM is robust to 
 
 missing data under Rubin’s “missing at random” assumpti ons and will allow us to include cases with missing 
test occasions while maintaining unbiased parameter estimates. 
 The main outcome is service utilization and will be modeled as a within subject design, the baseline 
measurement as a person level covariate, and PACT partic ipation as a between subject variable.  To model this 
dichotomous outcome variable, we will use the logistic link function in the GLMM to model each participant’s 
likelihood of service utilization.  We hypothesize that at the 15-month follow-up, the treatment group will show 
significantly higher likelihood of serv ice utilization than the control group. 
 The outcomes measured by [CONTACT_94259], Pa tient Satisfaction, and health functioning composite 
scales will be modeled using the same strategy, but will use the canonical link function to appropriately model 
the continuous nature of these variables. 
 To complement these analyses we also plan to do a range of exploratory analyses.  We will explore if 
patient demographics are associated with the efficacy of  PACT by [CONTACT_140354].  
 Aim 3. Using mixed methods, conduct a formative evaluation of usual care and SMI-PACT implementation to  
strengthen the intervention, and to: 
a.  assess acceptability of the SMI-PACT model, an d barriers and facilitators  to its implementation; 
b.  investigate the relationships between organization al context, intervention factors, and patient and 
provider outcomes; and 
c.  identify patient factors related to successful patient outcomes. 
  To assess implementation of the care model, we will collect both qu antitative and qualitative data.  
Qualitative methods enable the researcher to gain a th orough understanding of the context and interpretation 
of variables.  Qualitative methods are strongly re commended for evaluation of PCMH demonstrations.  
 All semi-structured interviews will be digitally reco rded and sent to Keystrokes, a medical transcription 
company, via a secure website for verbatim transcriptio n. We have used Keystrokes in two previous studies, 
with great success.  Transcripts will be reviewed and edit ed for accuracy by [CONTACT_6283]. Hamilton and Cohen.  Analysis 
of the qualitative data will be conducted using ATLAS.ti, a qualitative data analysis software program that 
allows for fluid “interaction” of data  across types and sources.  Initially, a top-level codebook will be developed 
for the baseline interviews based on the semi-structured interview guide. Using a cons tant comparison analytic 
approach, this codebook will be elaborated upon based on  emergent themes, and it will be adjusted as each 
round of interviews is reviewed.  Inte rviews will be compared within each clinic, across clinics, and over time.  
Additional sources of qualitative data (i.e. meeting minutes, fiel d notes, and archival information) will also be 
included in the data set and will be coded separately and in relation to the inte rview data.  These multiple 
approaches and groupi[INVESTIGATOR_140327], which has the capacity to group 
data in multiple ways and which al lows the qualitative researchers ma ximum flexibility in negotiating a 
complex narrative dataset.  In the pre-implementation transcri pts, we will identify commonly shared knowledge, attitudes, and 
beliefs related to PACT structures, processes, and effectiveness and the potential for SMI-PACT’s effectiveness. 
We will synthesize this inform ation with survey data to create baseline summaries of care as usual, and to tailor 
our marketing and implementation strate gies for use at the intervention site.  In mid-study interview data from 
the intervention site, we will identify factors facilitati ng and impeding implementation of the care model, and 
strengths and weaknesses of the model as implemented.  In conjunction with mid-implementation survey data, 
we will assess the extent to which components of the model are being implemented, and which components are 
efficient and easy to incorporate into routine care.  We  will explore whether partic ular components appear to 
be of limited value in improving care  and examine clinic and provider char acteristics associated with varying 
levels of care model implementation and effectiveness.  In mid-implementation interview data from the control 
site, we will explore changes in PACT implementation an d co-location of primary ca re, i.e., changes in usual 
care. In patient interview data collected at final follow- up, we will examine which ch aracteristics of care were 
most (and least) salient for patients, and then look for degree of convergence between patients’ and providers’ perspectives on core elements of care within the SMI- PACT model.  In addition to identifying themes and 
patterns qualitatively, we will examin e statistical associations between care model components and important 
process and outcome variables such as treatment appr opriateness and improvement in patient outcomes.  
Tables generated in ATLAS.ti can be ex ported into SPSS in order to facilita te the integration of qualitative and 
quantitative data. 
 
 The quantitative measures that assess implementation (i.e., from the formative evaluation) of the care 
model consist of three general types:  1) those that will primarily be used to inform the tailoring of the care 
model implementation (ACIC, PACIC);  2) those that will describe the level of, and factors that impact, 
implementation of the care model (Rogers’s Adoption Questionnaire, quarterly ratings of degree of 
implementation); and  3) provider and patient factors that may relate to implementation (MBI) and outcomes 
(BASIS, ACES, ISEL, MPR), respectively .  For the first category, we will compi[INVESTIGATOR_140328].  We will also use the second category of these measures descriptively, correlating them with the change scores of the outcome variables (treatment appropriateness, patient outcomes, and service utilization). Although  correlations do not allow for 
determination of causality, they will allow us to assess  the relationship between improvement in outcomes and 
1) greater implementation of multiple SMI-PACT mode l components; and 2) less perceived complexity and 
greater relative advantage and observability of the care model (Rogers Adoption Questionnaire). 
 
 