Page 1 Stand Alone Protocol Title: Development and Pi[INVESTIGATOR_194791]2Quit App 
MPIs: Drs. Schnall and Huang 
Version: 9.18.20 23 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Page 2  SPECIFIC  AIMS  
Of the approximately  one million  persons  living  with HIV (PLWH)  in the United  States  (U.S.),  it is estimated  that 
between  40-70% smoke  cigarettes1, 2, at least three  times  the prevalence  observed  in the general  U.S. adult  population  
(14%)3. Consequently,  PLWH  experience  substantial  tobacco -related  morbidityand mortality.  For PLWH,  apart  from  
achieving  and maintaining  a suppressed  viral load,  tobacco  cessation  is the most important  health  behavior  they can 
undertake  to maximize  both quality  of life and life expectancy4. Indeed,  PLWH  who quit smoking  upon  entering  HIV 
care gain greater  than [ADDRESS_231271],  there  is ‘very  low’ quality  evidence  that they were  effective  in the short‐term  and ‘moderate’  quality  evidence  
indicating  similar  outcomes  to controls  in the long-term7. 
Given  the few randomized  controlled  trials  (RCTs)  examining  smoking  cessation  interventions  for PLWH  and 
the major  methodological  limitations  of many  of these  studies  (e.g.,  lack of randomization,  comparison  conditions,  
treatment  fidelity  assessments,  abstinence  verification  tests),  it is critical  to develop  evidence -based  tobacco  cessation  
interventions  to address  the complex  and unique  needs  of PLWH  (e.g.,  risk factors,  treatment  needs).  Tailored  cessation  
interventions  for PLWH  need to focus on  the factors  specific  to PLWH  which  are associated  to date with poor success  
with tobacco  cessation  efforts.  For example,  neurocognitive  deficits  are common  among  PLWH  and are associated  with 
poor quit rates and relapse,  supporting  the need for unique  interventions  for PLWH8. Additionally,  specific  factors  such 
as self-efficacy  and decisional  balance  have been shown  to decrease  the likelihood  of relapse9. 
In recent  years,  use of mobile  healt h (mHealth)  technologies  for tobacco  cessation  has gained  popularity,  such as 
Text2Quit10 and the National  Cancer  Institute’s  (NCI’s)  SmokeFree  Text11. While  these  programs  have demonstrated  
positive  effects  in some  populations12-15, their functionality  is limited  because  text messaging  is unable  to automatically  
capture  instances  when  assistance  resisting  cravings  is needed  or when  relapses  occur.  To address  this need,  our study  
team  proposes  to capi[INVESTIGATOR_194792] a just-in-time 
cessation  intervention  for smokers.  Our Sense2Quit  App builds  on the extant  evidence  that text messaging  can be an 
effective  tool for improving  smoking  cessation  in the general  population.  However,  text messaging  as a stand -alone  
intervention  has limited  efficacy  for PLWH  who smoke16. To address  this limitation,  our team  proposes  to develop  and 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_194793]2Quit  App which  specifically  addresses  challenges  to tobacco  cessation  for PLWH:  slips,  relapses,  and 
difficulties  associated  with neurocognitive  deficits8 and supports  both self-efficacy  and decisional  balance9. Sense2Quit  is 
a multi -component  intervention  that links  a smartphone  app to a smartwatch  to provide  real-time quit reminders  to curtail  
relapses  and avoid  potential  triggers.  The artificial  intelligence  algorithm  (validated  by [CONTACT_194833]  
[MPI]  Huang)  interprets  time-series  wearable  sensor  data to detect  smoking  gestures  and motions  – a technology  with 
more  than 98% accuracy  in differentiating  “lighting  up” from  other  similar  motions17. Sense2Quit  leverages  low-cost 
smartwatches  to detect  when  smoking  activity  occurs  so that an intervention  message  can be sent in real time to the 
participant  via a linked  smartphone  app to help prevent  the slip (a puff or two) from  becoming  a full-fledged  relapse.  
This real-time feedback  is critical  especially  in the first few weeks  of a quit attempt.  Additionally, Global  Positioning  
System  (GPS)  data can help participants  deal with geographical  triggers  (e.g.,  coffee  shops,  smoking  relatives,  friends’  
homes,  etc.).  Reminders  to take nicotine  replacement  when  around  geographic  triggers  will be sent to participants  instead  
of suggesting  complete  avoidance  (e.g.,  ‘You  are now in a trigger  area. Pleas e take a moment  to have a nicotine  
replacement/substitute.’)  Finally,  Sense2Quit  provides  information  on how well they are progressing  through  their quit 
plan as well as motivational  tools  (i.e., badges).  Our MPI [INVESTIGATOR_194794]  (mobile  health,  health  disparities,  tobacco  cessation  intervention,  software  engineering,  human  computer  
interaction,  and health  behavior  change  interventions  with PLWH)  to develop  and pi[INVESTIGATOR_194795].  Participants  will be recruited  from  clinics  and community -based  organizations  in New 
York  City (NYC).  The specific  aims of the study  are to: 
AIM  1: Explore  and identify,  using  qualitative  methods,  acceptable  and appropriate  app content  and features  of 
the Sense2Quit  App to support  smoking  cessation  and relapse  prevention  in PLWH  who smoke.  We will conduct  
focus  groups,  design  sessions,  and usability  assessments  with HIV-positive  daily  smokers,  former  smokers,  and usability  
experts. This feedback  will guide  tailoring  of the app to this population  of smokers.  
AIM  2: Conduct  a pi[INVESTIGATOR_194796],  acceptability,  and preliminary  
efficacy  of the Sense2Quit  App. We will randomize  [ADDRESS_231272]  smoking  cessation  counseling,  and nicotine  replacement  therapy  (active  condition)  versus  
Page [ADDRESS_231273]  smoking  cessation  counseling  plus referral  to NYC  Quitline  (control)  in order  to examine  group  differences  in 
rate of quit attempts,  7-day point  prevalence  abstinence,  and sustained  abstinence.  
 
AIM  3: Employ  the RE-AIM  framework  to assess  the potential  scale -up of the Sense2Quit  App. 
IMPACT: Given  the high rates of tobacco  use among  PLWH,  the Sense2Quit  App has considerable  potential  for 
reducing  morbidity  and mortality  among  PLWH  who smoke.  
AIM 4:  Testing with Confounding Gestures . To improve the accuracy of smartwatch smoking detection within 
the current version of the app, we will perform additional testing on the smartwatch with participants who will 
complete a set of hand gestures to distinguish them from smoking gestures.  
 
STUDY  TIMELINE  
We will implement  a 2-year timeline  to accomplish  study  specific  aims.  The details  of the study activities,  including  
development  of the Sense2Quit  App and the detailed  timeline  for the clinical  trial, are listed  in Table  1. 
 
Table  1. 
Timing  Enrollment  Milestones  
(Year/Month)  Target   
“Just  
in 
Time”   • Protocol  & manual  of procedures  finalized  Institutional  
• Review  Board  (IRB)  approvals  
1-3  • Recruitment:  Pre-screen  potential  participants,  contact  [CONTACT_194834],  advertisements/brochures  in local clinics,  provider  meetings,  
presentations  to community  groups  about  study  
 
4-6  • Aim 1 – Focus Group  Sessions  
• Coding  of qualitative  data begins  
 
7-8  • Aim 1 – Design  Sessions  
• Code  and analyze  qualitative  data 
 
9-10  • Aim 1 – Usability  Testing  
• Complete qualitativeanalyses 
• Disseminate  findings  from  Aim 1 through  presentations  and publications  
11  • Prepare/submit  Year 1 progress  report  & IRB continuing  review  
 
12  
Begins  • Pi[INVESTIGATOR_194797]  
• Prepare/meet  with safety  officer  for every  6-month  review  (after  first patient  enrolled)  
13-15 20 • Enrollment  continues  
 
16-18 40 • Revisit  enrollment  progress  and recruiting  strategies;  readdress  as needed  
• Enrollment,  study  visits  continue  
 
19-21 60 • Prepare/submit  IRB continuing  review  to complete  data analyses  
• Aim 3 – Follow -Up Interviews  
 
 
 
22-24  • Last participant  completes  all study  procedures  
• Data cleaned,  code transcripts  for Aim 3, data analyses  for Aim 1, begin  Aim 
2, 3 and 4 submit  manuscript  Dissemination  of results  
• Study  completed,  results  disseminated  to the research  and participant  community  
• Submit  R01 study  to test the intervention  in fully-powered  efficacy  trial. 
Page 4  SIGNIFICANCE  
 
Cigarette  smoking  is highly  prevalent  among  PLWH.  The 
prevalence  of smoking  in the general  U.S. population  has 
gradually  declined  to 14% in 2017  – the lowest  rate ever 
recorded3. However,  this has not been true for PLWH  who 
have disproportionately  high smoking  rates (40-70%)1, 2. In 
our studies  across  more  than 550 PLWH  in NYC,  47.1%  of 
our participants  are cigarette  smokers  (see Table  1), 
highlighting  the need for interventions  to improve  tobacco  
cessation  in this group.  Tobacco  use causes  morbidity  and 
mortality  in PLWH,  and tobacco -related  harm  is 
substantially  higher  in PLWH  than smokers  in the general  
population.  
High  
rates of smoking  have grave  health  implications  for PLWH,  placing  them  at increased  risk for bacterial  pneumonias18, 
acute  bronchitis  and tuberculosis19-26, early  development  of emphysema27-32, and lung and cervical  cancers  at a younger  
age than the general  population33-38. These  disparities  are partly  due to a higher  prevalence  of tobacco  use in PLWH than 
the general  population  and partly  attributable  to exacerbated  co-morbidities  such as cardiovascular  disease,  lung cancer,  
and diabetes  in PLWH  who smoke  compared  to non-HIV-positive  smokers39-41. 
Smoking  cessation  efforts  have largely  been aimed  at the general  population.  Consequently,  it is not clear whether  
they are suitable  or effective  for cohorts  with population -specific  concerns  and clinical  issues  such as PLWH1, 21, 32, 42. 
Further,  three  specific  factors  have been identified  as contributing  to poor quit rates and relapse  in PLWH.  First,  
 
 
or 
perception  of the pros versus  cons of smoking43, and self-efficacy  through  the provision  of success  experiences  can do 
more  to support  long-term tobacco  cessation  in PLWH  than motivational  interviewing.  Building  on these  three  factors  
which  contribute  to slips,  relapses,  and poor quit rates in PLWH,  our study  will develop  and test an mHealth  intervention,  
the Sense2Quit  App, which  specifically  targets  these  factors  by [CONTACT_194835]-in-time feedback  through a sensor   
detection  system,  reminders,  and information  about  the benefits  of tobacco  cessation  to improve  decisional  balance44. 
Importantly,  mHealth  is a feasible  platform  for delivering  this intervention  since  there  is extremely  high mobile  phone  
penetration  in the U.S.45, especially  among  racial/ethnic  minority  groups46. mHealth  technology  can be used for achieving  
health  equity  in vulnerable  groups  because  it is a widely  available  and relatively  inexpensive  tool for health  behavior  
change47 and can be adapted  to meet the needs  of its end-users48-51. Our work  has shown  that even  the lowest  income  
and most  health  disparate  persons  own and use smartphones  (Table  1)52. Therefore,  our mHealth  intervention,  the 
Sense2Quit  App, is timely,  relevant,  scalable,  and likely  to improve  health  outcomes  in our health  disparate  study  
population  – PLWH  who smoke.  Even  when  successful,  however,  there  are barriers  to widespread  adoption  and 
successful  scale -up of tobacco  interventions53, 54. Therefore,  we will use implem entation  science  in Aim 3 to understand  
and address  the well-documented  gap between  ‘research’  and ‘practice’55. To accelerate  and improve  the translation  of 
research  into widespread,  routine  practice,  implementation  will be actively  considered  and evaluat ed during  the 
translational  process56. Thus,  this study  will overcome  the limitations  of incremental,  stepwise  progressions  of research  
(i.e., efficacy  to implementation),  reducing  the length  of the traditional  research  pi[INVESTIGATOR_194798] -up efforts  of the Sense2Quit  App for tobacco  cessation  in PLWH.  
 
INNOVATION  
 
1) The Sense2Quit  App uses a validated  sensor to detect  participants’  smoking  behaviors  in real-time.  The algorithm  for 
detecting  the smok ing arm movement  can be used to interpret  data from  a smartwatch17. Testing with confounding 
gestures will be completed as part of aim 4 to improve this algorithm.  
2) We will combine  biometric  data with behavioral  interventions  specific  to smoking  behavior,  an advancement  and 
innovation  not previously  tested  in PLWH.  
3) The Sense2Quit  App is a multicomponent  intervention  addressing  each slip and craving,  having  the potential  to 
empower smokers  to succeed  without  relapse.  Table  1. Sample  of Smokers  among  Studies  of PLWH  (PI: [INVESTIGATOR_194799])  
(Funding)  Period    Owner  
Gender  Supplement  
(R01NR015737 -02S1)  Apr. 2017  – 
Mar. 2018  100 44% 94% 
Wise  App 
(R01HS025071)  Oct. 2017  – 
Aug.  2020 172 60% 100%  
VIP-HANA  
(R01NR015737)  Nov.  2017  – 
Oct. 2018  105 47% 100%  
mVIP  
(R21HS023963)  Sept.  2016  – 
Feb. 2017  80 23% 100%  
InternationalHIV  
Network  Dec. 2015  – 
Sept.  2016  101 49 % 92% 
Total   558 47%   
 
neurocognitive  deficits  are common  among  PLWH  and are a unique  barrier  to their smoking  cessation,  increasing  the 
likelihood  of relapse8. Mediators  to tobacco  cessation  through  nicotine  replacement  therapy such as self-efficacy  and 
decisional  balance  have been more  effective  than motivational  interviewing  in PLWH.  Therefore,  
decisional  decisional  balance , 
 
Page 5  
4) The ability  for a mobile  app to deliver  content  that would  otherwise  require  staff and clinician  time and resources,  as 
well as burden  participants,  is an innovative  approach  to the delivery  of a tobacco  cessation  intervention.  
 
INVESTIGATORS  
 
The investigative  team  has previously  worked  together . Formative  focus  groups  were  conducted  with African  American  
PLWH  in NYC,  and findings  were  disseminated  by [CONTACT_194836]. Schnall  and Huang57. Further,  Drs. Schnall  and Cioe (Co- 
Investigator)  have been long-time colleagues  as Editorial  Board  members  of the Journal  of the Association  of Nurses  in 
AIDS  Care  (JANAC) ; additionally,  they work  closely  on a small  committee  to determine  the JANAC  Article  of the Year.  
 
Case  Western  Reserve  University  (CWRU).  [CONTACT_194878] -Chun  Huang,  PhD,  will commit  his effort  in the research activities  
in the CWRU  site and will be responsible  for designing  and optimizing  Sense2Quit  sensors,  app interfaces,  and advanced  
data analytics  methodology  to improve  performance  and user-friendly  operation  of mobile  and wearable  devices.  Our 
sponsor ed GRA  will focus  on the aims including  wearable  system  interfacing,  App integration,  algorithm  development  
under the supervision  of [CONTACT_194879]  and also help in research  dissemination  by [CONTACT_194837]-reviewed  journal s, and present  at premier  conferences.  [CONTACT_194879]  has an over six-years  of dedicated  
research  on wearable  sensors  and mobile  sensing  technologies  development  with 20+ conference  and journal  
publications.  He led a well-established  research  team  in terms  of solid theoretical,  technological,  experimental,  and 
societal  foundations  to contribute  to this project.  
 
Brown  University.  Patricia  A. Cioe,  PhD,  will serve  as Co-Investigator  and will be responsible  for assisting  the Principal  
Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_194800],  data collection,  and use of instruments  for measurement  of 
smoking  cessation  outcomes  throughout  the course  of the study  period.  [CONTACT_194880] will assist  with interpretation  of the 
study  results  and will contribute  to publicati ons and dissemination  of data. 
 
APPROACH  
 
Theoretical  Framework  for Developi[INVESTIGATOR_194801].  This study  is guided  by [CONTACT_194838]  (ISR)  Framework  (Figure  1) that will inform  the design  of the Sense2Quit  App. The ISR framework has 
Figure  1. ISR  Framework  for developi[INVESTIGATOR_194802]2Quit  App      been used to design  two mobile  apps for ongoing  studies  
(R01HS025071,  U01MD011279),  and has been cited 
over [ADDRESS_231274]  such as an 
mHealth  app: 1) the Rigor  Cycle  - to evaluate  and 
update  the knowledge  base;  2) the Relevance  Cycle  - to 
understand  the environment  of the end-user by 
[CONTACT_194839]  a series  of focus  
group  interactions  with stakeholders  (PLWH  current  
and 
 
former  smokers);  and 3) the Design  Cycle  in which  artifacts  Figure  2. (a) Visual  reminders,  (b) Motivational  messages  will be 
produced  and evaluated59. The cycles  do not need to be 
conducted  linearly,  and it may be preferable  to conduct  them  
in an iterative  process.  
 
Overview : 
A research  study  involving  a mobile  technology  intervention  
for persons  living  with HIV (PLWH).  The research  activities  
will take place  in [LOCATION_001]  City, and data collection  will 
take place  at Columbia  University.  Participants  will be 
recruited  online  and offline  through  social  networking  
websites  and apps and through  local  community -based  
Page [ADDRESS_231275] the Sense2Quit  App for smokers  living  with HIV.  
 
Participants  in the intervention  arm will receive  Nicotine  replacement  therapy  (NRT).  Participants  will be provided  with 
an 8- week  supply  of combination  NRT  that they will begin  after the baseline  visit. The quit date will be the date of their 
baseline  visit. Participants  will be offered  all 3 forms  of NRT  (patch,  lozenge,  gum)  and will be allowed  to choose  2 
forms  (combination:  patch/lozenge  or patch/gum)  to use. 
 
Participants  who smoke  10 or more  cigarettes  per day will receive  the following  dosage  for their NRT  patch:  one 21 
milligram  patch  per day for 4 weeks;  one 14 milligram  patch  per day for 2 weeks;  and one 7 milligram  patch  per day for 2 
weeks.  Participants  who smoke  less than 10 cigarettes  per day will receive  the following  dosage:  one [ADDRESS_231276]  clinical  treatment,  
and participants  will receive  additional  instructions  on usage  of the patch. Participants  will be told the risks of using  
the patch,  which  include  skin irritation,  itching,  dizziness,  headache,  rapid  heartbeat,  and nausea.  Participants  will 
also be advised  that they can curb additional  cravings  with their choice  of Nicotine  gum or lozenge  available  for purchase  
over-the-counter.  
 
Setting.  The study  will be conducted  at Columbia  University  which  provides  HIV care for a diverse  group  of more  than 
2,000  PLWH.  A recruitment  plan,  which  outlines  how participants  will be recruited  through the clinic  and community - 
based  organizations,  is outlined  below.  
 
Participants.  
Inclusion  criteria : For Aim 1, (1) PLWH;  (2) ≥ 18 years  of age; (3) current  or former  smoker  (where  smoking  is defined  
as ≥[ADDRESS_231277] smoker  is defined  as having  at one point  smoked  a minimum  of >[ADDRESS_231278] 30 days)  and (4) underst and and read English;  Aims  2 and 3 follow the same  
inclusion  criteria  with the added  criteria  that (1) PLWH  will be confirmed  through  medical  records  or pi[INVESTIGATOR_194803];  (2) onlycurrent smokers  are eligible  (where  smoking  is defined  as ≥ [ADDRESS_231279] 30 days);  
(3) own an Android smartphone (if they do not have a phone compatible with the app, they will be provided with one to 
use during the study) ; (4) not pregnant or breastfeeding(due to contraindications for Nicotine Replacement Therapy 
[NRT]); (5) permanent contact [CONTACT_3031];(6) interested in quitting smokingwithin 30 days; and (7) blows ≥ 
5  CO intoa breath   analyzer  at baseline.  For Aim 4) participants will be PWH who smoke cigarettes  and will either be  1) 
enrolled participants at their 12 -week follow -up visit; 2) participants who are initially eligible for the study after 
completing the  screener but do not qualify based on eCO levels; or 3) participants who already finished Aim 2 (and 3, if 
applicable).   
Exclusion  criteria . For Aim 1, participants  will be excluded  if they do not meet  the defined  inclusion  criteria.  For Aims  2 
and 3, the exclusioncriteria will be (1) use tobacco products other than cigarettes (i.e., cigars, pi[INVESTIGATOR_194804], chew, snuff); 
(2) planning  to move  within  6 months  of enrollment;  (3) alcohol  dependence  measured  through  the AUDIT -C60; (4) 
positive history  of a medical  condition  that precludes  nicotine  patch  use; (5) current use  of NRT  or other  smoking  
cessation  medications  (e.g.,  Chantix  or Zyban);  (6) current  enrollment  in another  smoking  cessation  program;  and (7) 
household  member  is also participating  in the Sense2Quit  study  (due to study  contamination) . For Aim 4, participants will be 
excluded if they fail to meet the inclusion criteria.  
Inclusion  of Individuals    
Across  the Lifespan : Our study  will not include  children.  All participants  in this study  will be 18 years  or older.  Given  the 
current  age breakdown  of the epi[INVESTIGATOR_194805]  2.5%  or less of new diagnoses  of HIV infection  occurring  in 
those  who are under  18 years  of age, children  (under  18 years  of age) are not a major  epi[INVESTIGATOR_194806]. Further,  given  that most children  18 years  of age are newly  diagnosed  (within  the past 1-2 years)  with the infection  
and there  could  be many  psychological  implications  of a new HIV diagnosis,  tobacco  cessation  is a secondary  concern  
to sustaining  these children  and participation  in this study  may divert  their focus  from  their need to focus  on 
starting  HIV treatment.  
There  is no upper -age limit for participation  in this study.  Based  on our past studies  with persons  living  with HIV,  we 
anticipate  that ~5% of our study  sample  will be over 65 years  of age. 
Inclusion  of women:  
The aims of this proposal  are geared  towards  improving  tobacco  cessation  in persons  living  with HIV (PLWH)  who 
smoke.  We will enroll  at least 40% women  in this study  to ensure  that we can compare  differences  in the intervention  
effect  between  men and women.  Our study  team  has extensive  experience  recruiting  and enrolling  PLWH  into study  
trials.  More specifically,  [CONTACT_194881]  has experience  and success  recruiting  women  living  with HIV into her studies  
Page 7  (R01NR015737,  R21HS023963,  R01HS025071).  
We will purposefullyenroll a minimum  of 40% females  and stop enrollment  of males  at 60% of the sample  to force  
female  enrollment.  We will also track  refusals,  reasons,  and demographic  characteristics  of those  refusing  to participate  
and examine  those  data as part of our ongoing  data safety  and monitoring  activities.  
Inclusion  of Minorities  
[CONTACT_194881]  has extensive  experience  recruiting  PLWH  of diverse  racial  and ethnic  backgrounds  in her prior 
investi gations. It  is planned  for this investigation  that at least 75% of the enrolled  participants  will be of diverse  racial  and 
ethnic  backgrounds,  largely  from  Latino  and Black/African  American  backgrounds.  In our past work  in [LOCATION_001]  City 
(NYC),  nearly  90% of our study  participants  are Black,  Latino,  or Black  and Latino.  
Several  strategies  will be employed  at both study  sites to maximize  the potential  of enrolling  many  racial  and ethnic  
minorities  in the study.  The strategies  that will be employed  are: 
1. Partne r with PLWH  of diverse  racial  and ethnic  backgrounds  at HIV clinics  and community  organizations  to 
identify  successful  strategies  to promote  engagement  of diverse  populations  of PLWH.  [CONTACT_194881]  has an ongoing  
relationship  with community -based  organizatio ns throughout  NYC  and has worked  closely  with these  community -
based  organizations  (e.g.,  Gay Men’s Health  Crisis, Alliance  for Positive  Change,  LGBT  Center,  Iris House,  Callen  
Lorde)  during  her past and ongoing  studies  to recruit  study  samples  and has consistently  met her recruitment  goals  
across  all studies  per project  timelines.  
2. Host tables  with information  about  our study  at health  fairs in diverse  neighborhoods  and at churches,  
community  organizations,  and wellness  events.  
3. Present  an overview  of the study at invited  patient -centered  presentations  at HIV community  organizations  in 
areas  that are comprised  of participants  of diverse  racial  and ethnic  backgrounds.  
4. In addition  to posting  study  flyers,  we will use previously  successful  online  recruitment  meth ods such as 
online  postings  and social  media.  Specifically,  we will post our study  ads on Craigslist,  a free online  classified  
service  that is one of the most popular  websites  in the United  States.  It has been used successfully  in online  work,  
including  our own current  National  Institutes  of Health - and Agency  for Healthcare  Research  and Quality -funded  
HIV self-management  studies  (U01PS003715,  R01NR015737,  R21HS023963,  R01HS025071,  R01MH118151;  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_194799])  which  have all been completed  per project  timeline s. 
5. Recruitment through  clinics  and community -based  organizations.  One of our primary  clinic  sites is the 
Comprehensive  Health  Program  of [LOCATION_001] -Presby[CONTACT_194840]/Columbia  (NYP -CHP).  The NYP -CHP is a Ryan  
White  funded,  bilingual,  patient -centered  clinic  that emphasizes  sexual  health,  hepatitis  management,  and HIV 
care. It primarily  serves  Upper  Manhattan  and the South  Bronx  where  residents  are disproportionately  affected  by 
[CONTACT_10840].  NYP -CHP’s  large  multidisciplinary  team  provides  HIV care to a population  of more  than 2,300  children,  
adolescents,  and adults  through  more  than 16,000 visits  per year.  NYP -CHP clients  are 58% male,  40% female,  
and 2% male  to female  transgender.  
 
 
RECRUITMENT  AND  RETENTION  PLAN  
 
Study  Settings . 
This study  will be conducted  at the Columbia  University  School  of Nursing  in collaboration  with the Comprehensive  Health  
Program  of [LOCATION_001] -Presby[CONTACT_194840]/Columbia  (NYP -CHP).  The NYP -CHP is a Ryan  White  funded,  bilingual,  patient -
centered  clinic  that emphasizes  sexual  health,  hepatitis  management,  and HIV care. It primarily  serves  Upper  Manhattan  and 
the South  Bronx  where  residents  are disproportionately  affected  by [CONTACT_10840].  NYP -CHP’s  large  multidisciplinary  team  provides  
HIV care to a population  of more  than 2,300  children,  adolescents,  and adults  throug h more  than 16,000  visits  per year.  
NYP -CHP  clients  are 40% female.  In addition  to the clinic,  [CONTACT_194881] has  an ongoing  relationship  with community -based  
organizations  throughout  [LOCATION_001]  City (NYC)  and has worked  closely  with these  community -based  organ izations  (e.g.,  
Gay Men’s  Health  Crisis,  Alliance  for Positive  Change,  LGBT  Center,  Iris House,  Callen  Lorde)  during  her past and 
ongoing  studies  to recruit  her study  sample  and has consistently  met her recruitment  goals  across  all studies  per project  
timelines.  Recruitment  for participation  in the study  will occur  following  approval  by [CONTACT_194841]. 
 
Recruitment  Challenges.  
If recruitment  for this study  proves  difficult,  in addition  to posting  study  flyers,  online  recruitment  methods  will be used such 
as online  postings,  Recruitme  and social  media  which  the study  team  has used successfully  in the past. Specifically,  study  
flyers   will be posted  on Craigslist  (a free online  classified  service  that is one of the most popular  websites  in the United  
States)   and POZ.com  which  have been used successfully  in online  work,  including  the study  team’s  current  National  
Institutes  of  Health  and Agency  for Healthcare  Research  and Quality -funded  HIV self-management  studies  (U01PS003715,   
Page 8  R01NR015737,  R21HS023963,  R01HS0 [ZIP_CODE];  PI: [INVESTIGATOR_194799])  that have all been completed  per project  timeline.  Craigslist   is 
widely  used in NYC.  Each  Craigslist  has a Volunteers  section.  The research  assistant  will post numerous  ads per week.   
This will be repeated  each week  to reach  and recrui t a diverse  sample.  
Facebook  and Instagram.  The study  team  had great  success  in recruiting  diverse  samples  from  social  networking  sites,  
like Facebook  and Instagram,  where  psychographic  targeting  (in-depth  publicly  available  consumer  data such as interests , 
occupation,  and city) is used,  as well as boosting  posts  and asking  colleagues  to post campaigns  to their pages.  
 
Retention  Plan  
Our study  team  has developed  several  successful  strategies  for retaining  study  participants  during  our study  period.  
Strategi es used successfully  in our previous  studies  include  confirming  contact  [CONTACT_194842].  In addition,  a token  of 
appreciation  will be provided  for comp letion  of all study  questionnaires. Importantly,  our team  has a strong  track  record  
of retention  of study  participants  across  past trials.  Notably  these  participants  are typi[INVESTIGATOR_194807]  (e.g.,  low income,  unstabl e housing,  co-morbid  psychiatric  conditions,  illicit  substance  use). We have 
conservatively  estimated  an 80% retention  rate at the follow -up assessment  for each study  arm based  on our past work  
with this study  population.  Specifically,  our R21HS023963 study had a 5% attrition  rate at 12 weeks,  and our current  
R01NR015737  has an attrition  rate of 12% at 3 months  and 14% at [ADDRESS_231280]  with staff members  during  each of their visits  and phone  calls,  thus 
providing  the opportunity  for frequent  assessments  of engagement with the mobile  Health  app and to discuss  other  study  
related  concerns.  Information  that is to be recorded  by [CONTACT_3038] (e.g.,  assessments)  is reviewed  by [CONTACT_114377]  
(and clarified,  if necessary).  Participants  will be provided  opportunities  to communicate,  either verbally  or in writing,  
any concerns  they have regarding  participation  in the study.  During  the intervention,  an unexpected  absence  from  
scheduled  assessment  appointments  generates  a phone  call to the participant.  If contact  [CONTACT_194843],  a certified  letter  is sent. Failure  to receive  a reply  to the certified  
letter  would  result  in the participant  being  designated  as having  dropped  from  the study.  
 
The retention  plan harnesses  the previously  used retention  strategies including  phone  calls,  texts,  emails,  and/or  letters  to 
participant  to remind  themabout their upcoming  appointment;  providing  bus or parking  validation/vouchers  for study  
visits;  and hiring  professional  staff with whom  many  of the participants  will have a long-standing  and trusting 
relationship. Additionally,  each of our sites will provide  compensation  (amount  determined  by [CONTACT_3725]-specific  norms  and in 
collaboration  with the local Community  Advisory  Boards)  for the additional  time to complete  the study -specific  research  
procedures.  
 
STUDY  PROCEDURES  
 
 
 
be extended  through  machine  learning  to interpret  data from 
a smartwatch  to detect  smoking  hand  gestures  and motions  
and differentiate  themfrom  other  common  daily  activities  
(e.g.,  drinking  from  a cup, answering  the phone,  etc.)17 and  
 
Intervention:  The Sense2Quit  App 
Sense2Quit  is a multi -component  intervention  that links a 
smartphone  app to a smartwatch  and addresses  tobacco  
cessation  challenges  for PLWH,  namely  providing  real-time 
quit reminders  to curtail  the urge to smoke  and avoid  
potential  relapses  (validated  by [CONTACT_79086] [INVESTIGATOR_194808]).  Sense2Quit  will 
Figure  3. Smartwatch  screenshots,  (a) daily  progress  summary,  
(b) detecting  smoking  motions,  (c) motivational  messages  to show  
(c) motivational messages  to show  how long the user has 
maintained  the quit plan 

 aid with PLWH -specific  daily  activities  such as taking  medicines  and tracking  hygiene  habits.  Our pi[INVESTIGATOR_194809],  
Moto360,  Misfit Vapor  2, and Skagen  Falster  2 (unpublished).  Sense2Quit  leverages  smartwatch  data (Figure  3) and 
detects  when  smoking  activity  occurs  so that a message  can be sent in real time to the participant  via a linked  smartphone  
app to help prevent  the slip (a puff or two) from  becoming  a full-fledged  relapse.  This real-time feedback  is critical  
especially  in the first few weeks  of a quit attempt.  The base algorithm  for the Sense2Quit  App has been validated  and 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_169354],  but the user interface  of the App,  PLW H-specific  daily  activities,  the alerts,  and the just-in-time intervention  
message  delivery  service  have not been developed  or tailored  for PLWH.  This will be achieved  through  Aim 1 described  
below  with methods  summarized  in Table  2. 
 
Informed  Consent  
The study  team  under  the direction  of the MPIs  will determine  eligibility  for inclusion,  explain  the purpose  of the study,  
answer  any questions,  and obtain  written  consent  from  the participants.  Informed  consent  will be obtained  for each of the 
study  component s in Aims  1 and 2, and 4 . Interested  volunteers  who agree  to participate  will sign an electronic  consent  
form.  Potential  risks and strategies  for managing  risks will be carefully  explained  as part of informed  consent  procedures.  
The study  team  will use RED Cap’s  E-Consent  Framework  to electronically  collect  and store consent  documents.  
REDCap  uses survey  features  to consent  research  participants  and forms  can be completed  via computer,  mobile  phone  or 
tablet.  CUMC - approved  REDCap  is secure  with restricted  access  that ensure  confidentiality  of a participant’s  identity,  
study  participation  and personal  information.  Additionally,  REDCap  is easy to navigate,  and information  will be on one 
scroll -able page.  
There  is functionality  within  the system  and to stop and continue  at a later time.  REDCap  also allows  for generation  of a 
copy  of the informed  consent  form  signed  by [CONTACT_107087],  which  can be downloaded  at any time.  In REDCap,  all 
versions  of the IRB-approved  e-Consent  Form  and all signed  e-Consent  Forms can be accessed  and retrieved  easily.  
 
AIM  1. Explore  and identify,  using  qualitative  methods,  acceptable  and appropriate  app content  and features  of 
the Sense2Quit  App for smoking  cessation  and relapse  prevention  in PLWH  who smoke.  
 
 
Table  2. Overview  of Aim 1 Research  Design  and Methods  
 Cycle  I: Cycle  II: Design  Cycle:  Cycle  III: Design  Cycle:  Evaluate   Relevance  Cycle  Develop/Build   
Sample  • 40 PLWH  who 
smoke  or are 
former  smokers  • 10 PLWH  who smoke  • 5 experts  in human  computer  interaction  
for heuris tic evaluation  
• Usability  Testing:  20 PLWH  who 
smoke  or are former  smokers  
Instruments  • Focus  Group  
Guide  • Interview  guide  
• Preliminary  designs  of mobile  
apps • Usability  Testing  Survey  
• Heuristic  Evaluation  Survey  
• Health -ITUES61, 62 
Procedures  • Four focus  group  
sessions  
(N=40)  Session  1: 
1. Review  content,  features,  & 
functions  from  focus  group  
sessions  & literature  review  
2. Discussion  based  on structured  
questions  
3. Brainstorm  functional  
requirements  
Session  2: 
1. Reviewpotential app designs 
& confirm/revise  them  
2. Sketch  user interface  • Heuristic  evaluation  
• Usability  testing  
Analysis  Thematic  analysis  Descriptive  analysis  Descriptive  analysis  
 
The Relevance  Cycle:  
Procedures.  We will conduct  focus  groups  with 40 intended  e-users  (see inclusion  criteria).  Prior  to the start of the focus  
group  session,  we will collect  demographic  information.  Focus  groups will be 60-[ADDRESS_231281]  staff as note-takers.  
 
Sample  focus  group  questions  for PLWH  who smoke  are: 
1) What  are the barriers  to quitting  smoking?  
2) What  messages  would  motivate  you to not light up your cigarette?  
3) What  information  would  you like to see included  in an app? 
4) What  messages  would  deter you if were about  to start smoking  a cigarette?  
5) How  frequently  do you want  to receive  reminders  about  your quit plan?  
6) How  frequently  do you want  alerts  about  your accomplishments?  
7) What  are your triggers?  And what  is the best time for you to receive  an alert about  the trigger?  
 
The team  will adhere  to qualitative  research  processes  to ensure  the credibility,  confirmability,  and transferability  of the 
data from  these  analyses.  To support the  data credibility,  we will conduct  peer debriefing  and triangulate  findings.  We 
will also use member  checks,  i.e., sharing  of initial  data interpretations  with participants  to ensure  accurate  
interpretations.  Triangulation  of findings,  along  with reflexivity,  will enhance  confirmability  of the interpretations.  
Compensation : Eligible  participants  will be able to receive  $[ADDRESS_231282] level are the primary  analytic  foci coded  as headings.  Specific  aspects  or dimensions   
of the headings  are assigned  core codes.  Specific  aspects  or dimensions  of the core codes  are assigned  sub-codes.  We will 
use Nvivo ™ (QSR  International,  Victoria,  Australia)  software  program  for qualitative  analysis.  The following  seven  steps  
will be used to develop  the coding  scheme:  
• Step 1: Identify  the principal  issues  discussed  by [CONTACT_4317];  
• Step 2: Construct definitions of the primaryanalytic themes; 
• Step 3: Develop  and apply  core codes  and sub-codes  to the initial  set of data; 
• Step 4: Develop  a provisional  coding  scheme;  
• Step 5: Test and refine  the provisional  coding  scheme;  
• Step 6: Reconcile  coding  differences  and construct  an updated  and final coding  scheme;  
• Step 7: Apply  the coding  scheme  to the full data set and assess  inter-coder  reliability.  After  all transcripts  have 
been coded,  we will extract  and examine  the content  of text segments  linked  to core codes  and sub-codes  relevant  
to understanding  barriers  and facilitators  to the use of the App and its content.  
 
The Design  Cycle:  Develop/Build  Phase:  In this phase,  focus  is on creation  of a highly  usable  artifact  (mHealth  app).  
To achieve  this, we will incorporate  findings  from  the earlier  parts of our study,  including  a list of content,  features,  and 
functions  from  the focus  groups.  We will conduct  two design  sessions.  
 
Design  Session  I: We will recruit  10 PLWH  who smoke to participate,  and each will be expected  to attend  two sessions.  
Sample:  Focus  group  methodology  will be used as it permits  participants  to use their own words  to answer  open-ended  
questions  and react  to each other’s  responses67. This interaction  should  elicit  the most useful  information.  
Procedur es. The goal of the first design  session  will be to identify  optimal  features  for the Sense2Quit  App. Each  session  
will be audio  recorded  and is anticipated  to last 60-[ADDRESS_231283] work  with PLWH.  
Compensation : Eligible  participants  will be able to receive  $35 for participating  in design  session I. 
 
Design  Session  II: 
Procedures:  The goal is to gain information  about  the user interface  to inform  the development  of prototypes.  We will 
audio  record  the session,  which  is anticipated  to last 60-[ADDRESS_231284] design  session  as 
categories  along  with pi[INVESTIGATOR_194810].  Participants  will be asked  to identify  the components  to include  
under  each topic  area and will be reminded  that each category  would  be a screen  on the App.  They  will also be asked  to 
describe  the organization  of the content  and features  and the desired  “look”  of the user interface  they would  want  to see in 
an app. After  participants  share  ideas,  we will follow  up with questions  to stimulate  discussion  about  the existing  apps and 
the need for refined  content,  features,  and interface  design.  We will ensure  that the App is usable  and will ask 
questions such  as, “Are  the alerts  useful  to you?”  
Compensation : Eligible  participants  will be able to receive  $35 for participating  in design  session  II. 
Data Analysis  of the data collected  in the design  sessions  will be the same  as the procedures  described  for data analysis  of 
the Relevance  Cycle  data. 
 
The Design  Cycle:  Evaluate:  The goal of this phase  is to improve  the App design  and increase  the likelihood  of 
technology  acceptance68. We will evaluate  the user interface  and system  functions  of the prototype  and assess  whether  
they are consistent  with the end-user’s  needs.  We will conduct  two types  of usability  assessments:  1) heuristic  evaluation  
of the prototype  using  informaticians  with experience  in interface  design  and/or  human -computer  interacti on, and 2) end- 
user usability  testing  with PLWH.  We will use an iterative  process  in which  one heuristic  evaluator  and four end-users  
will evaluate  the Sense2Quit  App for PLWH  and then changes  will be made  based  on recommendations.  Five versions  of 
the app will be created,  each building  on an earlier  version.  
 
Heuristic  Evaluation.  
Participants.  Five experienced  informaticians  will participate  as usability  experts,  based  on the number  recommended  by 
[CONTACT_194844]69. Each  expert  will have training  in human -comput er interaction,  hold at least a master’s  degree,  and have 
published  in the field of informatics.  
Procedures. Usability  experts  will be provided  with a description  of the full functionality  of the prototype  App.  Each  
human -computer  interface  expert  will test the prototype  user interface  with use case scenarios  for approximately  45-[ADDRESS_231285]  the research  staff member  which  tabs or buttons  
they should  click  on to perform  specific  tasks on  the app. They  will be asked a series  of interview  questions  regarding  the 
app’s  usefulness  and appropriateness  for people  living  with HIV who want to quit smoking.  The process  will be audio  and 
video  recorded  using  Zoom.  Recording  the users’  interactions  and vocalizations  provides  additional  feedback  to 
highlight  problems  that would  not be identified  with static  screenshots70. Experts  will evalu ate the App using  a think - 
aloud  protocol  as they perform  the assigned  use case scenarios,  and then complete a Heuristic  Evaluation  Survey  to 
evaluate  the extent  to which  the user interface  violates  a set of usability  heuristics.  They  will indicate  specifi c areas  of 
usability  problems  and rate the severity  of each problem73, 74. 
Compensation : Usability  experts  will be able to receive  $150  for participating  in the 2-2.5 hour heuristic  evaluation  
session.  
Data Analysis.  Mean  severity  scores  will be calculated  for each heuristic  principle.  Evaluators’  comments  about  usability  
problems on the evaluation  form  and the recordings  will be used to refine  the prototype  App.  
 
Usability  Testing  with End-Users  (PLWH).  
Participants.  We will recruit  [ADDRESS_231286] not participated  in the earlier  
phases  of the study  activities  to evaluate  the prototype  user interface  screens.  Eligibility  criteria  will be the same  as 
described  above  for Aim 1. We will use similar  recruitment  methods  as those  used for the other  study  aims.  
Procedures . Participants  will be assigned   tasks  to perform  on all screens of the app and their use of the App will be 
recorded  using  an audio  recording  device.  After  the usability  evaluation,  participants  will rate the prototype’s  usability  
using  the Health  Information  Technology  (IT) Usability  Evaluation  Scale  (Health -ITUES)61, 62. This tool differs  from 
traditional  scales  as it is designed  to support  customization  at the item level  to match  the specific  task/expect ation  and 
health  IT system  while  retaining  standardization  at the construct  level;  it has been validated  for mHealth  technology  
evaluation63. Compensation : Eligible  participants  will be able to receive  $40 for participating  in the 2-hour usability  
testing  evaluation.  Data Analysis.  Analysis  will be based  on recordings  of user sessions,  transcriptions,  notes,  and the 
user survey.  The team  will search  for critical  incidents  characterized  by [CONTACT_194845],  silence,  and repetitive  actions.  We 
will review  these  using  the recordings  and summarize  incidents  and written  comments. Descriptive  statistics  of the 
Health -ITUES  will be calculated.  
 
AIM  2: Conduct  a pi[INVESTIGATOR_194811],  acceptability,  and preliminary  efficacy  
 of the Sense 2Quit  App. 
 
Purpose:  The purpose  of this aim is to conduct  a pi[INVESTIGATOR_194812] y of the Sense2Quit  App 
for improving  tobacco  cessation  in PLWH  who smoke.  
Study  Design:  The study  will be conducted  with 60 PLWH  who smoke  and will be randomized  to two arms.  Participants  will 
be randomly  assigned  to receive  the Sense2Quit  App (active)  or a control  condition  (standard  smoking  cessation  counseling  
session).  Participants  will also receive  a survey  at baseline,  4, and [ADDRESS_231287]-baseline.  
Sample  Size and Power:  The goal of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_194813].  To conduct  a hypothesis  test for the comparison  of cessation  rates between  the two intervention  arms  
will require  a minimum  199 people  in each arm (total  sample=398)  for at least 80% power.  This calculation  was based  on a 
2-sided  test with the type I error  of 0.05,  and assuming  a 20% cessation  rate in the Sense2Quit  App group  (intervention)  and a 
10% cessation  rate in the control  arm. The 10% difference  would  be equivalent  to a medium  effect  size (Cohen’s  d=0.45). In 
this pi[INVESTIGATOR_799],  we propose  a total sample  of 60 (30 per group)  of whom  we expect  there  to be 20% attrition.  Therefore,  this 
study  is not powered  to detect  a significant  difference  between  study  arms.  Instead,  for the sample  size (30 per group),  this 
study  will have at least 80% probability  that the standard  error of the cession  rate estimates  ≤7%,  We assume  that the 
expected  cessation  rates range  from  10% to 20%,  and therefore  the sample  size is sufficient  to provide  a power  estimation  for 
a larger  trial with acceptable  reliability.  
Recruitment  and Retention:  Strategies  for recruitment  and retention  are described  in the Recruitment  and Retention  attachment.  
We will enroll  60 PLWH  who smoke  tobacco.  Inclusion/exclusion  criteria  are described  above.  
Screening:  Potential  study  participants  will provide  verbal  informed  consent  by [CONTACT_194846]  a phone  screening  process  that assesses  eligibility.  If eligible,  participants  will attend  a 
baseline  session  described  below.  
Procedures:  Eligible  participants  will attend  a baseline  visit at Columbia  University  School  of Nursing.  On the day of their 
baseline   appointment,  study  participants  will meet a study  staff member  who is trained  by a nurse.  The study  staff member  
will  run  the baseline  appointment.  Upon  arrival,  participants  will be asked  to blow  into a breath  analyzer  to complete  
assessment  of  their study  eligibility.  Breath  samples  will be analyzed  for exhaled  carbon  monoxide  (CO)  levels  (in ppm)  using  
a  breathalyzer  (Micro+TM  basic  Smokerlyzer®). After  providing  written  consent,  participants  will complete  a baseline  
questionnaire  (See Table 3). They  will be asked  complete  a timeline  to follow   back to track  their cigarette  use for the 
previous  [ADDRESS_231288] for Nicotine  Dependence.  Survey  instruments  will be collected  through  
Qualtrics  at baseline,  and 4 week s, and 12 weeks  after baseline.  
Following  completion  of baseline  study  instruments,  participants  will be randomized  (1:1)  to the App arm or the control  arm, 
stratified  by [CONTACT_194847].  Participants  in both arms will undergo  a smoking  cessation  counseling  session.  Notes  from  
the counseling  session  will be recorded  on RedCap.  Participants  will receive  an informational  packet  during  the counseling  
session  which  will consist  of: 1) an appointment  reminder  sheet,  nicotine  patch  information,  nicotine  gum information, nicotine 
lozenge information and smoking substitutionideas (Intervention) or 2) a reminder sheet, NYS Quitline information, and 
smokingsubstitution ideas (control). Participants in the control arm will be referred to the [LOCATION_001] State Smoker ’s Quitline.  
Throughthe Quitline,  participants  in the control  arm can receive  NRT  if desiredand receive  additional  smokingcessation 
counseling. A studystaff member willfollow up to see how manyparticipants called, textedand/or visited the Quitlinewebpage. 
Participants in the interventionarm (App arm) will be provided with combination NRT. Participants will be given  an 8-week  
supply  of combination  NRT  and will be instructed  to begin  using  their NRT  supply  directly  after their baseline  visit. 
Participants  will be offered  all 3 forms  of NRT  (patch,  lozenge, gum)  and will be allowed  to choose  2 forms  (combination:  
patch/lozenge  or patch/gum)  to use. Also for those  in the intervention  arm, study  staff will provide  participants  with a Fossil  
Gen5E  or TicWatch smartwatch  and initiate  the Sense2Quit  App on the participant’s  smartphone. If a participant’s 
smartphone is not compatible with the Sense2Quit app, they will be provided with a smartphone to be used during the [ADDRESS_231289]  smoking  data, such as when  the user smokes  (time  of day, day of week,  
before/after  eating,  after waking  up/before  going  to sleep,  before driving  to/from  work,  while  driving),  where  the user 
smokes,  and who is nearby.  The Sense2Quit  App will provide  real-time feedback  to participants,  providing  them  with tips 
and messages  to urge them  to quit smoking  when  they lift their hand  up for a smoke.  The Sense2Quit  App will be paired  
with the smartwatch  so that smoking  will be detected  by [CONTACT_194848].  The Sense2Quit  
App will reliably  predict  cravings, target  users  with notifications  to prevent  individuals  from  smoking,  refine  notifications  for 
each user, and display  their change  in smoking  behavior  in a smoking  graph and money  spent  in a cash spent  graph.  Users  
will also be able to see their quit plan with their assigned  quit date which  will be baseline  or another  set date within  a short  
period  after baseline  (i.e. within  a week  of completing  the baseline  visit),  along with smoking  trends,  supporting  tips, videos  
and games.  The study  staff member  will show  the participant  how to use the app, and will also help them  set up a reminder  
to take their daily  HIV medication  and use NRT  at their baseline  appointment.  Partici pants  will wear  the smartwatch  and 
 use the app for the duration  of the study  period.  Two days after baseline, a study  team  member will reach  out to the 
intervention  arm study  participant  to see if they have any questions  or issues  with the Sense2Quit  App and/or  watch.  The 
study  coordinator  will be able to access  smoking  behaviors  and subject  information  through  the online  dashboard.  The 
study  coordinator will also reach  out to participants  in both arms  once a week  through  phone  call to check -in about  their 
quitting  process.  At 4 and 12 weeks  after baseline,  participants  in both study  arms  will attend  a follow -up visit at the study  
site.  Participants  will report  a 7-day point  prevalence  abstinence  of smoking  cigarettes76 and provide  a breath  sample  using    
Micro+TM  basic Smokerlyzer®. They  will also be given  a follow -up survey  with questions  asked  at baseline  and process   
questions  dictated  by [CONTACT_194849]2Quit    (see Table  3). We will   
use skip logic  features  in our study  surveys  to identify  subjects  who select  certain  responses  indicating  depression,  substance  
abuse,  and/or  alcohol  abuse  and referral  information  will be presented  at the end of the survey. Referral  information  will 
include  contact  [CONTACT_194850]  (CHP)  at [LOCATION_001] - Presby[CONTACT_194840]/Columbia  University  
Irving  Medical  Center,  which  offers  comprehensive  care and services  for people  living  with HIV.  Participants  completing  
the survey(s)  on-site will be asked  if they want to be escorted  by [CONTACT_194851].  
 
Table  3. Study  Measures  
Construct  Measures  
Demographics  Gender,  age, education,  income,  employment,  health  insurance,  
housing,  time since  diagnosis  with HIV,  health  literacy  (measured  
by S-TOFHLA),75 and co-morbid  conditions  Tobacco  Use History  Age ofinitiation, current  smoking,  dailysmoking,  e-cigarette  use, 
types  of products  used,  historyof quit attempts,  prior  use of 
quitline/telephonecounselingservices  
Tobacco  Cessation  CO lung/blood  concentration,  7-daypoint prevalence  abstinence  – 
Timeline  follow -back 76, 77 (confirmed  with saliva  cotinine);  number  
ofquit  attempts;  days of continuous  abstinence  
Illicit  Substanceand Alcohol  Use NIDAASSIST78, 79, AUDIT -C60 
Predictors  of Tobacco  Cessation  FagerstromTestfor  Cigarette  Dependence,80 Readiness  to quit81 
Cravings  and Withdrawal  MinnesotaWithdrawalScale82 
Psychosocial  Factors  Depression:  CESDscore83; Anxiety:  STAI  score84, Social  support85 
Marker of HIV/AIDSimmune status CD4,  viral load (chart  review),  Case  Adhere nce Index  (self-report)86 
Follow  Up Visit  Only  
Pharmacotherapy  Use Nicotinereplacementtherapy   Adherence  
Intervention Quality  Health -ITUES63;Post -SystemStudyUsability   (PSSUQ)   87, 
Intervention  ratings  
Operationalization  of Outcome  Measures:  
The primary outcome for determining preliminary efficacy will be biochemically(saliva cotinine) validated 7-day point 
prevalence  abstinence.  
Subjective  Data  (e.g.,  health  status,  quality  of life) and system  use will be obtained  from subjects  for the specific  resear ch 
purposes  of this study.  Follow -up visits  will be completed  on-site at the study  location.  
Carbon  Monoxide  Monitoring.  We will be using  a carbon  monoxide  detector  to biochemically  verify  tobacco  use. Medical  
Records.  We will be reviewing  patient  records  to assess  participants’  CD4 and viral loads.  For participants  who are not  
patients  at CUIMC,  they will be asked  to bring  in their most recent  CD4/viral  load laboratory  data from  their last visit to their 
healthcare  provider.  
Compensation : Eligible  partici pants  will be able to receive  $40 for completing  baseline  study  procedures,  $50 at the 4-week  
follow -up study  visit,  and $60 at the 12-week  follow -up study  visit.  
Data Analysis : This is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_194814],  acceptability,  and efficacy.  Descriptive  statistics  will be   
used for all analyses.  The rate of quit attempts  will be calculated  as the proportion  of smokers  who attempt  to quit (i.e., no 
smoking  during  a 24 hours  period);  7-day point  prevalence  abstinence  will be calculated  as the proportion  of smokers  who   are 
biochemically  verified  (saliva  cotinine)  7-day abstinence  at a given  time point;  and sustained  abstinence  will be  calculated  as 
proportion  of days of no smoking  starting  on the quit date among  those  who attempt  to quit. We will provide   point  estimates  
and corresponding  confidence  intervals  of these  measures  for each arm. Because  of our small  sample   sizes,   we will obtain  
Clopper -Pearson  exact  confidence  intervals  based  on the binomial  distribution.  Given  the small  sample  size,  the purpose  of the 
arms  is to monitor  for unexpected,  gross  differences  between  the two groups. To determine  acceptability,    we will ask 
participants  in both arms  how useful  each of the intervention  components  were  (1 =Not at all useful   to 7 = Extremely  useful ) 
and whether  they would  recommend  the program  to a friend  (1 = Definitely  would  not recommend   to 7 = Definitely  would  
recommend ). For the intervention  to be deemed  acceptable,  the mean  level  for each of these   measures  would  have to be five or 
 higher.  The efficacy  of the intervention  will be based  on saliva - confirmed  7-day point  
prevalence  abstinence  at the final study  visit.  Lost-to-follow -up participants  will be included  as smokers.  
NOT -OD-15-102: Consideration  of Sex as a Biologic al Variable : In accordance  with NIH guidance,  we will include  sex  
as a biological  variable  in the study  design  (enroll  equal  numbers  of males  and females),  analyses,  and reporting.  We 
will report  all primary  and secondary  outcomes  separately  by [CONTACT_194852].  
 
AIM  3: Employ  the RE-AIM  framework  to assess  the potential  scale -up of the Sense2Quit  App. 
 
In addition  to testing  the Efficacy  of the Sense2Quit  App, we will concurrently  measure  the four remaining  RE-AIM  
dimensions88 as follows:  
Reach  –1) percent  and demographic  and clinical  
characteristics  of those  who joined  the study  
based  on current  national  statistics  of PLWH,  
and 2) percent  and demographic  and clinical 
characteristics  of those  randomized  to the 
intervention  who used  the app compared  to 
those  who did not. 
Adoption  – We will recruit  study  participants  
from  the intervention  arm (N=30)  to assess  
acceptability  and perceived  usefulness  of the 
Sense2Quit  App (see Table  4). Interviews  will 
be collected  until saturation  is reached,  but we 
estimate  up to 30 participants.  
Implementation  and Maintenance  will be evaluated  through  interview  data gathered  from  intervention  arm 
participants  (N=30)  (Table  4). Finall y, we will meet  with other  key stakeholders  (N=10)  (e.g.,  health  care payers,  
city health  officials)  to determine  what  they may need to implement the Sense2Quit  App and their willingness  to 
partner  and cost-share;  implementation  strategies  will also be developed  with them.  
Compensation : Participants  will be able to receive  $30 for completing  an interview  session.  
In-depth  Interview  Data Analysis:  We will use the same  analytic  plan as described  in Aim 1 for analyzing  the 
qualitative  data. 
Paradata  Data Analy sis: At the individual  level,  we will understand  participants’  use of the App over time through  the 
collection  of paradata89 which  is “free”  in that it does not require  any additional  effort  from  the user90. To explore  
barriers  and facilitators  to widespre ad implementation  of Sense2Quit  App, we will  collect  data during  intervention,  
implementation,  and after the trial has ended.  The primary  paradata  to be collected  are page accessed,  time stamp,  and 
device  type.  From  these  data, we will derive  the following  use of data for each session:  duration  on each page,  page 
progression  through  the application,  time from  login  to result,  and total time from  login  to logout.  We will analyze  the 
data at the individual -level (i.e., user-level),  application -level,  page-level, and session -level and assess  how these  differ   
by [CONTACT_194853],  technology  use, and outcome measures.  Additionally,  we will measure  the amount  in 
by[CONTACT_194854].  Importantly,  longitudinal  analysis  will determine  if the user experience  changes  with 
repeated  use. The paradata  collected  from  each page will be analyzed  to generate  a “heatmap”  of user-interaction  (i.e., 
the distribution  of activity  for each link/button)  that will inform  user duration  on each page of the App and user 
interaction  with App content,  contact  [CONTACT_1787],  and the help page.  We will explore  usability  issues  with consideration  for 
how many  times  users  accessed  help and what  page of the App referred  themto the help,  implying  the need for 
clarification.  We will analyze  differences  in aggregated  data by [CONTACT_194855]  (e.g.,  age) to better  understand  
engagement  with the intervention  and potential  facilitators  and barriers  to App use. 
Plan for Future  Fully  Powered  RCT  of Sense2Quit . At the end of Year 2, we will write  an R01,  which  will include  a 
full- scale  trial of the final Sense2Quit  App with the same  sample. Importantly,  process  evaluation  interviews  will 
allow  us to refine  the intervention  in preparation  for the RCT.  We will also assess  the interven tion’s  sustainability,  
and with key stakeholders,  develop  specific  strategies  to scale  up the intervention  to reach  more  PLWH  who smoke  
within  additional  community -based  and clinical  settings.  
 
AIM 4: Testing with Confounding Gestures  
We recognized confounding ef fects as a range of gestures and actions that mimic the motion associated with smoking. 
To enhance the accuracy of smoking detection, the capability to discern these confounding effects is essential. For 
example, a typi[INVESTIGATOR_194815] a puff, subsequently shifting 
Describe  your general  perceptions  of the Sense2Quit  App and its usefulness  
for helpi[INVESTIGATOR_194816].  
How  helpful  was the Sense2Quit  App for improving  your tobacco  cessation?  
What  would  you change  or improve  about  the Sense2Quit  App? 
How  did the Sense2Quit  App help you gain information  about  your tobacco  
cessation?  
How  comfortable  were you in using  the Sense2Quit  App in social  settings?  
Probe:  where  and when  did you use it mostly?  
How  often did you  use the Sense2Quit  App in a typi[INVESTIGATOR_51653]?  Would  you 
recommend  it to a friend?  
Did you stop using  the App altogether  at some  point?  (If yes) Why?  
Describe  the usefulness  of the reminders  to overcome your triggers.  
Table  4. Follow -up Sample  Interview  Guide  
 the hand to a resting position, and then returning it to the mouth for another puff. This particular sequence of actions is 
not exclusive to smoking, and parallels can be drawn with othe r activities that we investigate, such as drinking and 
answering a phone call. To improve precision and accuracy of smartwatch smoking detection, for Aim [ADDRESS_231290] studies [93-96], will help us improve the current algorithm for smoking detection 
associated with the Sense2Quit app.   
  
Recruitment and Consent:   
Aim [ADDRESS_231291] of 1) enrolled 
participants at their 12 -week follow -up visit; 2) participants who are initially eligible for the study after completing the 
screener but do not qualify based on eCO levels; or 3) participants w ho already finished Aim 2 (and 3, if applicable).   
  
All participants will sign informed consent prior to participating in Aim 4 procedures.    
  
Procedures:   
 Participants who have not yet participated in Aim 2 will complete the baseline survey prior to pa rticipating in Aim 4 
procedures.  All Aim 4 participants will complete the required hand gestures (See table below) as well as smoking gestures 
for a total of approximately 30 minutes. Study staff will 1) connect the watch with the smartphone; 2) have parti cipant 
wear the watch on their smoking hand; 3) open the smartphone to start data collection by [CONTACT_194856]; 4) repeat each activity listed above in three 
postures (sitting on a char, standing, walking around) for a duration of 5 seconds; and 5) stop data collection by [CONTACT_194857] 5 seconds of the activity being performed. Participants will also complete the optional actions with 
the opportunity to  omit some of them.   
  
  Action   Required?   
1  Drinking a beverage without a straw   Yes  
2  Drinking beverages with a straw   Yes  
3  Eating a meal with a spoon or fork   Yes  
4  Eating a snack with a hand   Yes  
5  Talking with a hand gesture   Yes  
6  Using a phone (making a phone call)   Yes  
7  Adjusting glasses   Yes  
8  Arm cross   No  
9  Brushing teeth   No  
10  Gym activity (e.g. lifting, Zumba)   No  
11  Scratching face   No  
12  Applying lipstick   No  
13  Coughing   No  
14  Yawning    No  
15  Whistling   No  
16  Eating a lollipop   No  
17  Playing harmonica   No  
19  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_194817]  
20   Wipi[INVESTIGATOR_194818]  
21  Massaging somewhere on the head   No  
22  Waving    No  
  
 Compensation:    
 Participants will receive  $[ADDRESS_231292] following the completion of the Aim 4 activities.  
 
 
LIMITATIONS  AND  ALTERNATIVES  
 
 1) An important  limitation  is that we are relying  on self-report  of NRT  use among  study  participants,  and while  we 
will track  our administration  of NRT to study  participants,  we are limited  in our ability  to validate  whether  
participants  have used the NRT.  
2) We carefully  considered  our control  condition  and although  referring  control  arm participants  to the NYC  quitline,  
which  will therefore  give them  access  to an NRT  supply  may underestimate  the effect  of the Sense2Quit  App,  we 
believe  that it is imperative  to offer NRT/access  to NRT  to both arms since  this is standard  of care for persons  who 
are trying  to quit smoking.  
3) While  leveraging  accessible  mHealth  technologies  is a strength,  our study  team  acknowledges  the target  population  
may not have access  to smartwatches  outside  of the research  study.  Nonetheless,  if efficacious,  the cost of the 
smartwatch  is half of the cost of purchasing  cigarettes  for 1 month  in NYC,  estimated  at $320/month91 and even more  
minimal  in comparison  to the annual  cost ($170  billion)  for direct  medical  care for persons  who smoke  in the US92. 
 
POTENTIAL  RISKS  AND  ADEQUATE  PROTECTIONS  
The investigators  will follow  all required  policies  related  to the protection  of human  subjects. All investigators  have 
fulfilled  Human  Subjects  Protection  and Health  Insurance  Portability  and Accountability  Act (HIPAA)  training  
requirements  (including  CITI  basic  and refresher  courses,  Good  Clinical  Practice s, and conflicts  of interest)  and are up to 
date with these  certifications.  All prospective  participants  will be fully informed  of the intent  of the study,  expectations  of 
participants,  and risk to participants  prior to enrollment  using  an IRB-approved  informed  consent  form.  
 
Potential  Risks  
 
There  is no more  than a minimal  risk associated  with any of the study  activities.  The study  activities meet the general  
definition  found  in Subpart  A (46.102)  that the probability  and magnitude  of harm  or discomfort  anticipated  in the 
research  are not greater  in and of themselves  than those  ordinarily  encountered  in daily  life or during  the performance  of 
routine  physical  or psychological  examinations  or tests.  
 
The risks of participating  in this study  are few. Potentia l risks consist  of discomfort  with interview  questions  and potential  
breaches  of confidentiality.  It is possible  that certain  questions  on the questionnaires  (e.g.,  drug use) may make  
participants  feel uncomfortable,  but the subject  is free to decline  to answer  any questions.  Participation  in research  can 
involve  loss of privacy.  All study  data including  App data will be maintained  on CUIMC  servers  that are completely  
secure  and HIPAA  compliant.  All signed  consent  forms and payment  receipts  used in this study will be kept in locked  
files which  only the investigators  can access.  We will also apply  for a Federal  Certificate  of Confidentiality,  which  will 
protect  against  attempts  by [CONTACT_194858]. 
Nicotine  Repla cement  Therapy.  Participants  will be told the risks of using  NRT,  which  include  skin irritation  (patch),  
itching  (patch),  dizziness,  headache,  rapid  heartbeat,  and nausea.  
FDA  Regulatory  Pathway.  The CUIMC  IRB will make  the final determination  if this App is subject  to FDA  regulation.  
Nonetheless,  the Sense2Quit  App is not subject  to FDA  regulation  within  the category  of Software  as a Medical  Device  
because  this device  does not function  as a medical  device  (meaning  such software  functions  do not meet the definition  of a 
device  under  section  201(h)  of the Federal  Food,  Drug,  and Cosmetic  Act),  and therefore  the FDA  does not regulate  it as a 
device.  Since  the software  function  does not meet  the definition  of a device,  even  though  it is deployed  on a mobile  
platform,  the FDA  oversight  would  not be applicable.  This is consistent  with the FDA's  existing  oversight  approach  that 
considers  functionality  of the software  rather  than platform,  and the FDA  will apply  its regulatory  oversight  to only those  
software  functi ons that are medical  devices  and whose  functionality  could  pose a risk to a patient's  safety  if the device  were  
to not function  as intended.  
 
Adequacy  of Protections  Against  Risks  
 
Confidentiality  and Privacy.  Risks  will be minimized  by [CONTACT_194859],  when  
possible,  and by [CONTACT_194860] a private  setting.  Reminder  text messages  
will make  no mention  of HIV. All  data will be collected  using  unique  patient  identific ation  codes.  All laboratory  specimens,  
evaluation  forms,  reports,  and other  records  will be identified  by a coded number  to maintain  participant  
confidentiality.  All records  will be stored  in a locked  file cabinet.  Study  data from  all sites will be collect ed and managed  
using  Research  Electronic  Data Capture  (REDCap).  REDCap  is a secure  web application  designed  to support  data capture  
for research  studies,  providing  user-friendly  web-based  case report  forms,  real-time data entry  validation  (e.g.,  for data types 
and range  checks),  audit  trails,  and a de-identified  data export  mechanism  to common  statistical  packages  (e.g.,  SPSS,  
SAS,  Stata,  R/S-Plus).  REDCap  data collection  projects  rely on a thorough,  study -specific  data dictionary  defined  in an 
iterative  self-documenting  process by [CONTACT_194861].  This iterative  development  and testing  process  
 results  in a well-planned  data collection  strategy  for individual  studies.  REDCap  also includes  a powerful  tool for building  
and managing  online  surveys. The research  team  can create  and design  surveys  in a web browser  and engage  potential  
respondents using  a variety  of notification  methods.  REDCap  is flexible  enough  to be used for a variety  of types  of research  
and provides  an intuitive  user interface  for database  and survey  design  and data entry.  Lastly,  clinical  information  will not 
be released  without  written  permission  of the participant,  except  as necessary  for monitoring  by [CONTACT_194862]  (NIH).  
 
Plan for Privacy  and Data Security  of the Sense2Quit  App. Beginning  with the development  process  and throughout  the 
research  project,  we will follow  the privacy  and security  principles  set forth  at healthhit.gov.  Our team  is familiar  with the 
importance  of the privacy  and security of personal  health  information  to engender  individual  trust in the use of health  IT 
applications.  We have expertise  and experience  in this domain  as we have developed  a number  of health  IT systems  funded  
through  NIH and the Agency  for Healthcare  Research and Quality  for PLWH  whose  personal  health  information  is usually  
held to higher  security  standards  than traditional  patients  as HIV has historically  been a stigmatized  disease.  
 
The App will be stored  on a secure  HIPAA  compliant  server.  
 
Further,  CUIMC has an Information  Security  Office  (ISO)  that facilitates  all aspects  of information  security  risk 
management  at CUIMC,  with a particular  focus  on threat  management  and HIPAA  compliance.  This includes  
administration  and enforcement  of information  securi ty policies  on campus.  ISO also provides  guidance  to CUIMC  Schools  
and Departments  regarding  any information  security  concerns  they may have.  The ISO collaborates  with the entire  CUIMC  
community  to protect  the confidentiality,  integrity,  and availability  of our critical  information  and computer  resources.  The 
ISO strives  to implement  secure  computing  infrastructure  and practices  with sensitivity  to CUIMC's  educational  and 
research  environment.  Columbia University  has an  information  security  charter  which  is the foundation  of all the work  
carried  out by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Schnall  and her research  team.  In specific,  the Multiple  Principal  Investigator  (MPI)  team  will work  with 
the CUIMC  ISO to protect  the confidentiality, integrity,  and availability  of participants’  data. 
Confidentiality  means  that information  is only accessible  to authorized  users.  Integrity  means  safeguarding  the accuracy  
and completeness  of data and processing  methods.  Availability  means  ensuring  that authorized  users,  such as research  
participants,  have access  to data and associated  information  resources  when  required.  
 
To protect  the integrity  of participants’  data, the Project  Coordinator  will assign  an ID number  to all participants.  The 
participant  ID number  will be used to identify  data collected.  Since the study  has repeated  follow -up visits,  we will 
maintain  a list of participants  which  link identifying  information  to study  ID numbers.  Only  a limited  number  of staff 
members  will have access  to this list, which  will be kept in locked  files and in a password -protected  computer  file. De- 
identified  data will be accessible  by [CONTACT_194863],  unless  study  
personnel  needs  access  to individually  identifiable  information  to perform  their duties.  Access  to individ ually  
identifiable  private  information  about  human  subjects  will be limited  to research  team  members  who collect  and manage  
the data, the project  coordinator,  and the MPIs.  
 
All research  personnel  will complete  extensive  training  before  they are granted  access  to this identifying  information.  Study  
personnel  will complete  Human  Subjects  Protection  Training  which  complies  with federal  guidelines  delineated  in 45 CFR 
Part 46. Personnel  will also sign confidentiality  statements  that specify  that if the partic ipants’  confidentiality  is breached  
unintentionally  that personnel  will follow  the procedures  for reporting  this breach  to the MPIs.  The confidentiality  statement  
also indicates  that unintentional  or deliberate  violations  of participants’  confidentiality  may result  in demotion  or 
termination  depending  upon  the severity  of the event.  Personnel  will also participate  in training  with the Investigators  
and/or  Project  Coordinator  regarding  data safety,  confidentiality  of participants,  limits  of confidentiality,  and proper  
administration  of the study  protocol.  
 
We will store all personally  identifiable  data on secure,  HIPPA  compliant  servers.  All electronic  forms  containing  personally  
identifiable  information,  including  participant  locator  forms  (i.e., containing  contact  [CONTACT_3031]),  will be maintained  in a 
password -protected  computer  files.  Data that are entered  into computer  files will be de-identified  and maintained  on a 
subdirectory  of an institutional  server  with password -protected  access.  The MPIs  will revie w all requests,  current  and future,  
to use the data, and any data files that are provided  to other  individuals  will be de-identified.  Data files will contain  code 
numbers  in order  to make  reference  to particular  cases  across  multiple  assessment waves.  
 
We will maintain  a Federal  Certificate  of Confidentiality  throughout  the life of the research  project.  We will inform  study  
participants  of the above  procedures  and the limits  of confidentiality  during  the consent  process  prior to data collection.  
 Specificall y, we will warn  participants  that state law mandates  reporting  of abuse  and/or  neglect  of children,  and that threat  
of harm  to self or others  requires  intervention  by [CONTACT_183840].  We will inform  participants  that criminal  behavior  (i.e., 
drug use) is not reported  to authorities,  and that the security  of this information  is protected  by [CONTACT_194864].  
 
Plan for Privacy  and Security  Protections  in the Development  and Implementation  of the Sense2Quit  App System.  
Beginning  with the development  process  and throughout  the research  project, we will follow  the privacy  and security  
principles  set forth at healthhit.gov.  Our team  is familiar  with the importance  of the privacy  and security  of personal  health  
information  to engender  indiv idual  trust in the use of health  information  technology  applications.  We have expertise  and 
experience  in this domain  as we have developed  a number  of health  information  technology  systems  for persons  from  
high-risk populations,  including  PLWH,  whose  perso nal health  information  is usually  held to higher  security  standards  
than traditional  patients.  We will be housing  the App on a secure  server  hosted  by [CONTACT_194865].  All servers  
have HIPAA  compliant  security.  Data will be encrypted  and stored  securel y on the Amazon  Web  Services servers.  Prior  
to consent,  study  participants  will be informed  as to what  data the Sense2Quit  App will collect  (including  location/GPA  
information).  Study  staff will explain  to study  participants  that data will be encrypted  and stored  securely  on the Amazon  
Web  Services  servers.  As a starting  point  for ensuring  privacy  and security,  all smartphones  will be password –protected.  
In addition,  there  will be an additional  password  for the Sense2Quit App so that only study  subjects  will be able to open  
the app and/or  view  their personal  health  information.  
 
Procedures  for Monitoring  Adverse  Events.  Should  any physical  or psychological  manifestation  be exhibited  at any time 
during  the study,  [CONTACT_194881]  will consult  with her Co-Investiga tors regarding  clinical  situations  as they arise.  If an urgent  
clinical  situation  should  arise,  [CONTACT_194881]  or a designee  will access  an urgent  appointment  at the Columbia  University  
School  of Nursing  Nurse  Practitioners  Primary  Care Clinic  or the emergenc y department  at CUIMC.  [CONTACT_194881]  will 
complete  an adverse  event  form  and report  it to the CUIMC  IRB. If there  are any serious  adverse  events,  they will be 
reported  within  48-[ADDRESS_231293] sustained  tobacco  cessation.  More  broadly,  the 
knowledge  gained  will contribute  to the body  of knowledge  regarding  the use of health  information  technology  for 
improving  the lives of persons  with chronic  illnesses.  Possible  risks (i.e., discomfort  answering  questions,  potential  
confidentiality  breaches)  are outweighed  by [CONTACT_194866] a health  dispa rate group  
of PLWH.  
 
Importance  of the Knowledge  to be Gained  
 
The knowledge  gained  from  this research  will enable  the scientific  community,  clinicians,  and PLWH  to improve  tobacco  
cessation.  The Sense2Quit  App is a scalable,  low-cost intervention  which  does not require  provider  resources.  Findings  
from  our study  will provide  timely  and important  information  on the use of mobile  technology  for the delivery  of an 
evidence -based  tobacco  cessation  intervention  for PLWH.  
 
DATA  SAFETY  AND  MONITORING  PLAN  
Data  Management  and Data  Quality.  Columbia  University  will be responsible  for computerized  survey  programming,  
data capture,  management,  and analysis.  All study  information  will be identified  through  the Participant  Identification  
Number  (PID)  on all forms  and computerized  files.  Data files will be exported  from  the Qualtrics  program  and imported  
into the SPSS  statistics  software  database  for storage.  Computer  data files never  have any identifying  information  and are 
encrypted  prior to transfer  between  study  sites. 
Data entered  into the SPSS  database  will not include  any identifying  information.  Only  authorized  users  with a login  name  
[CONTACT_194876],  and only those  with administrative  privileges  will be able to 
 access  data. The study  research  assistant  will use a login  name  [CONTACT_194877] a participant,  but they will have no ability  to access  the saved  data. The database,  data structure,  and data 
quality  will be routinely  reviewed  by [CONTACT_194867]  (PI), [CONTACT_194881].  [CONTACT_194881]  will work  closely  to 
plan analyses  for various  purposes,  including  for hypothesis  testing  and manuscript  development  and reports.  Data quality  
will be examined  before  statistical  analyses  are conducted,  including  examination  of missing  data, assessment  of 
distributional  assumptions,  and identification  of outliers.  In addition  to data quality,  the comparability  between   
intervention  and control  groups  will be carefully  examin ed, including  baseline  balance  and differential  attritions  at all 
waves  of follow -up. While  differences  are not expected  from  the randomized  design,  it is prudent  to plan for this 
contingency  so that sufficient  follow -up data and appropriate  statistical  methods  can be used for intent -to-treat analyses.  
The psychometric  properties  of instruments  will also be examined,  as will the patterns  of missing  data. 
 
Training  on human  subjects  and data safety  and monitoring.  All staff will participate  in the National  Institutes  of 
Health  (NIH)  required  trainings  for the conduct  of studies  that involve  human  subjects,  and any future  study  staff will do 
so upon  hiring.  Training  for all staff includes  (but is not limited  to) Human  Subjects,  Informed  Consent,  Good  Clinical  
Practice,  Quality  Management,  Confidentiality,  and Reporting  of Adverse  Events.  If any study  staff discovers  any 
untreated  condition  (e.g.,  onset  of physical  or mental  health  condition),  they will refer participants  to appropriate  treatment  
immediately.  
 
Data Safety  and Monitoring  Committee.  This study  will also have a data safety  monitoring  committee  (DSMC)  which  
will meet  yearly  via Zoom . The DSMC  will consist  of individuals  who are not otherwise  associated  with the study.  The 
DSMC  will meet  at least yearly to review  study  progress,  adequacy  of randomization,  and, at their discretion,  adverse  
events  or differential  outcomes.  For randomization,  we will tabulate  the number  of individuals  who have been randomly  
assigned  to each condition  at each of the DSMC  meetings.  Before  the DSMC  meeting,  relevant  information  will be 
tabulated  to report  to the DSMC,  and after the meeting,  staff of the management  core will collect  minutes  and distribute  to 
the board  for sign-off. The final report  will be submitted  to the Institutional  Review  Board  (IRB)  on an annual  basis.  
 
Procedures  for Monitoring  Adverse  Events.  Per guidance  provided  by [CONTACT_194868],  an adverse  event  (AE)  is any unfavorable  and unintended  diagnosis,  symptom,  sign (includ ing an abnormal  
laboratory  finding),  syndrome,  or disease  which  either  occurs  during  the study,  having  been absent  at baseline,  or, if 
present  at baseline,  appears  to worsen.  A serious  adverse  event  (SAE)  is defined  as an untoward  medical  occurrence  that: 
1) results  in death,  2) is life threatening,  3) requires  (or prolongs)  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059],  4) causes  persistent  or significant  
disability/incapacity,  5) results  in congenital  anomalies  or birth defects,  or 6) is another  condition  which  in the judgment  of 
the investigators  represents  significant  hazards.  
 
Possible  AEs that are anticipated  include  the need to violate  the confidentiality  of the participants.  All study  personnel  will 
be trained  regarding  the limits  of confidentiality.  The training  will include  reviewing  possible  scenarios  and knowledge  of 
key questions  to assess  risk. We will train staff to err on the side of caution  and to contact  [CONTACT_194869].  
Coordinators  will be available  on site or via phone  after hours  should  staff need consult  regarding  an emergency.  In this 
situation,  we will train all staff to immediately  contact  [CONTACT_194870],  and under  the guidance  and direction  of clinical  
supervisors,  study  staff will be trained  when  to either  contact  [CONTACT_194871].  
 
Possible  AEs that are unanticipated  will be brought  to the attention  of the Coordinators  and reported  immediately  to both 
site IRBs.  All study  staff will be trained to recognize  and report  AEs and SAEs.  Possible  AEs will immediately  (within  24 
hours)  be brought  to the attention  of the Lead  at each site by [CONTACT_194872].  The Site Lead  will report  
the AEs and SAEs  to the IRB in writing  as soon as possible,  but within  7 calendar  days for death  or life-threatening  events 
and within  15 calendar  days for all other  AEs or SAEs.  The IRBs  will determine  whether  it is appropriate  to stop the study  
protocol  temporarily  or will provide  suggestions/modifications  to the study  procedures  as necessary.  Possible  
modifications  includ e adding  these  possible  adverse  events  to the consent  form  and re-consenting  all study  participants.  
The PIs will be responsible  for monitoring  participant  safety  on a monthly  basis  at regularly  scheduled  research  meetings.  
They  will keep a written  log of all events  and ensure  that the IRB is contact[CONTACT_194873].  They  will also keep a log of 
the outcome  of IRB decisions  regarding  AEs and apprise  the research  team  of any changes  that need to occur  because  of 
IRB decisions  
 STATISTICAL  DESIGN  AND  POWER  
 
Sample Size and Power.  The goal of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_194819].  To conduct  a hypothesis  test for the comparison  of cessation  rates between  the two 
intervention  arms , it requires  a minimal  sample  size of 199 per group  (total  398) for at least 80% power.  This calculation  
was based  on a 2-sided  test with the type I error  of 0.05,  and assuming  a 20% cessation  rate in the Sense2Quit  App group  
(intervention)  and a 10% cessation  rate in the control  arm. The 10% difference  would  be equivalent  to a medium  effect  
size (Cohen’s  d=0.45).  In this pi[INVESTIGATOR_799],  we propose  a total sample  of 60 (30 per group).  Therefore,  this study  is not 
powered  to detect  a significant  difference  between  arms.  Instead,  we estimated  the minimal  sample  size for the estimation  
of cessation  rates in each arm with acceptable  reliability.  For the sample  size (30 per group),  this study  will have at least 
80% probability  that the standard  error of the cessati on rate estimates  ≤7%,  assuming  expected  cessation  rates ranging  
from  10% to 20%.  Therefore,  the sample  size is sufficient  to provide  estimation  with acceptable  reliability.  
 
Statistical  Design  and Data  Analysis : This is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_194814],  acceptability,  and preliminary  
efficacy.  Descriptive  statistics  will be used for all analyses.  The rate of quit attempts  will be calculated  as the proportion  of 
smokers  who attempt  to quit (i.e., no smoking  during  a 24-hour period);  7-day point prevalence  abstinence  will be 
calculated  as the proportion  of smokers  who are biochemically  verified  7-day abstinence  at a given  time point;  and 
sustained  abstinence  will be calculated  as proportion  of days of no smoking  starting  on the quit date among  those  who 
attempt  to quit. We will provide  point  estimates  and corresponding  confidence  intervals  of these  measures  for each arm. 
Because  of small  sample  sizes,  we will obtain  Clopper -Pearson  exact  confidence  intervals  based  on the binomial  
distribution.  Given the small  sample  size, the purpose  of the arms is simply  to monitor  for unexpected,  gross  differences  
between  the two groups.  To determine  acceptability,  we will ask participants  in both arms  how useful  each of the 
intervention  components  were  (1 = Not at all useful  to 7 = Extremely  useful ) and whether  they would  recommend  the 
program  to a friend  (1 = Definitely  would  not recommend  to 7 = Definitely  would  recommend ). For the  intervention  to be 
deemed  acceptable,  the mean  level for each of these  measure s would  have to be [ADDRESS_231294]  and reach  of tobacco  cessation  
for all smokers  but specifically  for persons  living  with HIV (PLWH)  who smoke.  Per the RFA,  this study  was designed  
for dissemination  (e.g.,  feasibilit y/acceptability  of the intervention  for PLWH)  and suitable  for the intended  context.  
Therefore,  a multi -faceted  dissemination  plan targeting  various  stakeholders  is proposed.  We will disseminate  our 
findings  to technology -oriented  and clinical  management - oriented  audiences.  For technology  audiences,  we will provide  
enough  detail  to enable  the Sense2Quit  App to be constructed  and used within  an appropriate  context.  
We propose  the following  dissemination  strategies:  
1. Members  of the research  teamwill present  the results  of this study  in several  different  venues  targeting  different  
audiences,  including  conferences  such as the American  Public  Health  Association  and Society  for Behavioral  
Medicine.  
2. We will seek out appropriate  organizations  that are influential  in HIV and tobacco  cessation  public  health  practice  
(e.g.,  International  AIDS  Society,  Society  for Research  on Nicotine  and Tobacco).  We will provide  these  
organizations  with an executive  summary,  press  releases,  and/or  published  papers  and present  study  findings  at local 
community -based  organizations.  
3. We plan to publish  our results  in appropriate  high-impact,  peer-reviewed  academic  journals  such as the American  
Journal  of Public  Health , AIDS  and Behavior , and Nicotine  and Tobacco  Research . 
4. We will work  with our local  community -based  organizations  (e.g.,  Alliance  for Positive  Change,  Gay Men’s  Health  
Crisis,  LGBT  Center)  to disseminate  our study  findings  to the community.  
 
All informed  consent  documents  for this clinical  trial will include  a specific  statement  relating  to posting  of clinical  trial 
information  at ClinicalTrials.gov.  We will register  this study  with ClinicalTrials.gov.  Finally,  the recipi[INVESTIGATOR_194820]  
(Columbia  University)  has an internal  policy  in place  to ensure  that clinical  trials  registrat ion and results  reporting  occur  in 
compliance  with policy  requirements.  Specifically,  the Human  Research  Protection  Office  and Institutional  Review  Boards  
have policies  to ensure  that clinical  trials  registration  reporting  occurs  in compliance  with policy  requirements.  
Specifically,  the Human  Research  Protections  Office  and Institutional  Review  Boards  have policies  to ensure  that clinical  
trials  registration  reporting  occurs  in compliance  with policy  requirements.  
 Presentations  at national  scientific  meeti ngs. It is expected  that we will present  our findings  at HIV,  tobacco -cessation,  
behavioral  health,  informatics,  and engineering  related  scientific  meetings.  We will also disseminate  the findings  through  
relevant  newsletters  and websites  of related  interes t groups.  
 
We will also make  de-identified  data from  our study  available.  Researchers  interested  in replicating  our methods  and study  
findings  will have full access  to the study  protocol,  analytic  methods,  and codebook  of qualitative  data analysis.  We will 
deliver  versions  of our protocol  with our first 12-month  progress  report.  We will deliver  our final protocol,  codebook  
documents,  and instructions  regarding  how other  researchers  can access  our study  documents  to the NIH within  [ADDRESS_231295]  are made  as widely  
and freely  available  as possible  while  safeguarding  the privacy  of participants  and protecting  confidential  and proprietary  
information.  
 
REFERENCES  
1. Shuter  J, Bernstein  SL. Cigarette  Smoking  is an Independent  Predictor  of Nonadherence  in HIV-infec ted 
Individuals  Receiving  Highly  Active  Antiretroviral  Therapy.  Nicotine  & Tobacco  Research.  2008;10(4):731 -6. 
doi: 10.1080/14622200801908190.  
2. Tesoriero  JM, Gieryic  SM, Carrascal  A, Lavigne  HE. Smoking  Among  HIV Positive  [LOCATION_001]ers:  Prevalence,  
Frequency,  and Opportunities  for Cessation.  AIDS  and Behavior.  2010;14(4):824 -35. doi: 10.1007/s10461 - 
[ADDRESS_231296]  Ever Recorded:  14% 
in 2017  2018  [cited  2018  December  23]. Availab le from:  
https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2018/p1108cigarette -smoking -adults.html.  
4. Vidrine  DJ, Fletcher  FE, Buchberg  MK, Li Y, Arduino  RC, Gritz  ER. The influenc e of HIV disease  events/stages  
on smoking  attitudes  and behaviors:  project  STATE  (Study  of Tobacco  Attitudes  and Teachable  Events).  BMC  
Public  Health.  2014;14(1):149.  doi: 10.1186/1471 -2458 -14-149; PMCID:  PMC3929124.  
5. Mdodo  R, Frazier  EL, Dube  SR, et al. Cigarette  smoking  prevalence  among  adults  with hiv compared  with the 
general  adult  population  in the united  states:  Cross -sectional  surveys.  Annals  of Internal  Medicine.  
2015;162(5):335 -44. doi: 10.7326/M14 -0954.  
6. Reddy  KP, Parker  RA, Losina  E, Baggett  TP, Paltiel AD, Rigotti  NA, Weinstein  MC, Freedberg  KA, Walensky  
RP. Impact  of Cigarette  Smoking  and Smoking  Cessation  on Life Expectancy  Among  People  With  HIV:  A 
USBased  Modeling  Study.  The Journal  of Infectious  Diseases.  2016;214(11):1672 -81. doi: 
10.1093/infd is/jiw430;  PMCID:  PMC5144729.  
7. Pool ERM,  Dogar O, Lindsay  RP, Weatherburn  P, Siddiqi  K. Interventions  for tobacco  use cessation  in people  
living  with HIV and AIDS. Cochrane  Database  of Systematic  Reviews.  2016(6).  doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD011120.pub2.  PubMed  PMID:  CD011120.  
8. Harrison  JD, Dochney  JA, Blazekovic  S, Leone  F, Metzger D, Frank  I, Gross  R, Hole A, Mounzer  K, Siegel  S, 
Schnoll RA,  Ashare  RL. The nature  and consequences  of cognitive  deficits  among  tobacco  smokers  with HIV:  a 
comparison  to tobacco  smok ers without  HIV.  Journal  of NeuroVirology.  2017;23(4):550 -7. doi: 
10.1007/s13365017 -0526 -z; PMCID:  PMC5623102.  
9. Stanton  CA, Lloyd -Richardson  EE, Papandonatos  GD, de Dios MA, Niaura  R. Mediators  of the relationship  
between  nicotine  replacement  therapy  and smoking  abstinence  among  people  living  with HIV/AIDS.  AIDS  Educ  
Prev.  2009;21([ADDRESS_231297]):65 -80. doi: 10.1521/aeap.2009.21.3_supp.65.  PubMed  PMID:  19537955;  PMCID:  
 PMC3566232.  
10. Abroms  LC, Boal AL, Simmens  SJ, Mendel  JA, Windsor  RA. A randomized  trial of Text2Qu it: a text messaging  
program  for smoking  cessation.  American  journal  of preventive medicine. 2014;47(3):242 -50; PMCID:  
PMC4545234.  
11. Businelle  MS. The potential  of mHealth  for tobacco  dependence  treatment:  domestic  and international  examples  
from  NCI’s  Smoke free. gov initiative.  Nicotine  & tobacco  research.  2014;16(7):1033 -. 
12. Lupton  D. Quantifying  the body:  monitoring  and measuring  health  in the age of mHealth  technologies.  Critical  
public  health.  2013;23(4):393 -403. 
13. Dobkin  BH, Dorsch  A. The promise  of mHealth : daily  activity  monitoring  and outcome  assessments  by [CONTACT_194874].  Neurorehabilitation  and neural  repair.  2011;25(9):788 -98; PMCID:  PMC4098920.  
14. Leon  N, Schneider  H, Daviaud  E. Applyinga framework  for assessing  the health  systemchallenges to scaling  up 
mHealth  in South  Africa.  BMC  medical  informatics  and decision  making.  2012;12(1):123;  PMCID:  
PMC3534437.  
15. Xu B, Xu L, Cai H, Jiang  L, Luo Y, Gu Y. The design  of an m-Health  monitoring  systembased on a cloud  
computing  platform.  Enterprise  Information  Syste ms. 2017;11(1):17 -36. 
16. Shuter  J, Kim RS, An LC, Abroms  LC. Feasibility  of a Smartphone -Based  Tobacco  Treatment  for HIV-Infected  
Smokers.  Nicotine & Tobacco  Research.  2018:nty208 -nty. doi: 10.1093/ntr/nty208;  PMCID:  PMC7297101.  
17. Chen  T, Zhang  X, Jiang  H, Asae ikheybari  G, Goel  N, Hooper  MW,  Huang  M-C. Are you smoking?  Automatic  
alert system  helpi[INVESTIGATOR_194821].  Smart  Health.  2018;9 -10:158 -69. doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smhl.2018.07.008.  
18. Lifson  AR, Neuhaus  J, Arribas  JR, van den Berg-Wolf M, Labriola  AM, Read  TRH,  Group  ISS. Smoking -related  
health  risks among  persons  with HIV in the Strategies  for Management  of Antiretroviral  Therapy  clinical  trial. 
American  journal  of public  health.  2010;100(10):1896 -903. Epub  2010/08/19.  doi: 10.2105/AJ PH.2009.188664.  
PubMed  PMID:  20724677;  PMCID:  PMC2936972.  
19. Burns  DN, Hillman  D, Neaton  JD, Sherer  R, Mitchell  T, Capps  L, Vallier  WG,  Thurnherr  MD. Cigarette  
smoking,  bacterial  pneumonia,  and other  clinical  outcomes  in HIV-1 infection.  JAIDS  Journal  of Acqu ired 
Immune  Deficiency  Syndromes.  1996;13(4):[ADDRESS_231298]  P-M, Lundgren  JD, Miro  JM, Palfreeman  A, Rodriguez -Barradas  MC, Wolff  
MJ, Easterbrook  PJ, Clezy  K. Pneumonia  in HIV-infected  persons:  increased  risk with cigarette  smoking  and 
treatment  interruption.  American  journal  of respi[INVESTIGATOR_194822].  2008;178(6):630 -6; PMCID : 
PMC2542436.  
22. Hajjeh  RA, Group  CAS,  Conn  LA, Group  CAS,  Stephens  DS, Group  CAS,  Baughman  W, Group  CAS,  Hamill  R, 
Group  CAS.  Cryptococcosis:  population -based  multistate  active  surveillance  and risk factors  in human  
immunodeficiency  virus —infected  persons.  The Journal  of infectious  diseases.  1999;179(2):449 -54. 
23. Marrie  TJ, editor.  Pneumococcal  pneumonia:  epi[INVESTIGATOR_194823].  Seminars  in respi[INVESTIGATOR_194824];  1999.  
24. Miguez -Burbano  MJ, Ashkin  D, Rodriguez  A, Duncan  R, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_194825]  A, Quintero  N, Flores M, Shor-Posner  G. 
Increased  risk of Pneumocystis  carinii  and community -acquired  pneumonia  with tobacco  use in HIV disease.  
International  Journal  of Infectious  Diseases.  2005;9(4):208 -17. 
25. Nuorti  JP, Butler  JC, Gelling  L, Kool  JL, Reingold  AL, Vugia  DJ. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_194826],  [LOCATION_004].  Annals  of Internal  Medicine.  
2000;132(3):182 -90. 
26. Tumbarello  M, Tacconelli  E, Ardito  F, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_194827]  T, Cauda  R, Ortona  L. Bacterial  pneumonia  in HIV-infec ted 
patients:  analysis  of risk factors  and prognostic  indicators.  Journal  of acquired  immune  deficiency  syndromes  and 
human  retrovirology:  official  publication  of the International  Retrovirology  Association. 1998;18(1):[ADDRESS_231299].  2006;130(5):1326 -33. 
28. Diaz PT, King  MA, Pacht  ER, Wewers  MD, Gadek  JE, Nagaraja  HN, Drake  J, Clanton  TL. Increased  
suscep tibility to pulmonaryemphysema among HIV-seropositive smokers. Annals of internal medicine. 
2000;132(5):[ADDRESS_231300].  2000;117(5):2 85S-S. 
30. Diaz PT, King  MA, Pacht  ER, Wewers  MD, Gadek  JE, Neal D, Nagaraja  HN, Drake  J, Clanton  TL. The 
 pathophysiology  of pulmonary  diffusion  impairment  in human  immunodeficiency  virus  infection.  American  
journal  of respi[INVESTIGATOR_194822].  1999;160(1):[ADDRESS_231301].  2003;123(6):1977 -82. 
32. Petrache  I, Diab  K, Knox  K, Twigg  H, Stephens  R, Flores  S, Tuder  R. HIV associated  pulmon ary emphysema:  a 
review  of the literature  and inquiry  into its mechanism.  Thorax.  2008;63(5):463 -9. 
33. Engels  E, Brock  M, Gillisonm  M, Hooker  C, Moore  R, editors.  Elevated  lung cancer  incidence  in an urban  cohort  
of HIV-infected  individuals.  12th Conference  on Retroviruses  and opportunistic  Infections;  2005.  
34. Kirk GD, Merlo  C, O'driscoll  P, Mehta  SH, Galai  N, Vlahov  D, Samet  J, Engels  EA. HIV infection  is associated  
with an increased  risk for lung cancer,  independent  of smoking.  Clinical  Infectious  Diseases.  2007;45(1):103 -10; 
PMCID:  PMC4078722.  
35. Phelps  RM, Smith  DK, Heilig  CM, Gardner  LI, Carpenter  CC, Klein  RS, Jamieson  DJ, Vlahov  D, Schuman  P, 
Holmberg  SD. Cancer  incidence  in women  with or at risk for HIV.  International  journal  of cancer.  
2001;94(5):753 -7. 
36. Reynolds  NR. Cigarette  smoking  and HIV:  more  evidence  for action.  AIDS  Education  and Prevention.  
2009;21(3_supplement):106 -21; PMCID:  PMC3248054.  
37. Tirelli  U, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_28947]  M, Sandri  S, Serraino  D, Gobitti  C, Fasan  M, Sinicco  A, Garavelli  P, Ridolfo  A, Vaccher  E. The 
Italian  Cooperative  Group  on AIDS  and Tumors.  Lung  carcinoma  in 36 patients  with human  immunodeficiency  
virus  infection.  Cancer.  2000;88(3):563 -9. 
38. Vyzula  R, Remick  SC. Lung  cancer  in patients  with HIV-infection.  Lung  cancer.  1996;15(3):325 -39. 
39. Calvo -Sánchez  M, Perelló  R, Pérez  I, Mateo  MG, Junyent  M, Laguno  M, Blanco  JL, Martínez -Rebollar  M, 
Sánchez  M, Mallolas  J, Gatell  JM, Domingo  P, Martínez  E. Differences  between  HIV-infected  and uninfected  
adults  in the contributions  of smoking,  diabetes  and hypertensio n to acute  coronary  syndrome:  two parallel  case– 
control  studies.  HIV Medicine.  2012;14(1):40 -8. doi: 10.1111/j.[ADDRESS_231302].  2013;1 43(2):305 -14. doi: 10.1378/chest.12 -1699.  PubMed  PMID:  23381313;  PMCID:  PMC3619638  
41. Sigel  K, Wisnivesky  J, Gordon  K, Dubrow  R, Justice  A, Brown  ST, Goulet  J, Butt AA, Crystal  S, Rimland  D. 
HIV as an independent  risk factor  for incident  lung cancer. AIDS.  2012;26(8):1017;  PMCID:  PMC3580210  
42. Treating  tobacco  use and dependence:  2008  update  U.S. Public  Health  Service  Clinical  Practice  Guideline  
executive  summary.  Respi[INVESTIGATOR_194828]. 2008;53(9):1217 -22. Epub  2008/09/24.  PubMed  PMID:  18807274.  
43. Carlson  LE, Taenzer  P, Koopmans  J, Casebeer  A. Predictive  value  of aspects  of the Transtheoretical  Model  on 
smoking  cessation  in a community -based,  large -group  cognitive  behavioral  program.  Addictive  behaviors.  
2003;28(4):[ADDRESS_231303]  MR. Ecological  mom entary  assessment.  Annu  Rev Clin Psychol.  2008;4:1 -32. 
45. CTIA -The Wireless  Association.  Wirless  Quick  Facts  2014  [cited  2015  February  13]. Available  from: 
http://www.ctia.org/your -wireless -life/how -wireless -works/wireless -quick -facts.  
46. Pew Research  Center.  Mobile  Technology  Fact Sheet  2014  [cited  2015  February  24]. Available  from : 
http://www.pewinternet.org/fact -sheets/mobile -technology -fact-sheet /. 
47. Cole-Lewis  H, Kershaw  T. Text Messa gingas a Tool for Behavior Change  in Disease  Prevention  and 
Management.  Epi[INVESTIGATOR_194829].  2010;32(1):56 -69. doi: 10.1093/epi[INVESTIGATOR_19275]/mxq004.  
48. Schnall  R, Carballo -Dieguez  A, Larson  E. Can the HIV Home  Test Promote  Acces s to Care?  Lessons  Learned  
from  the In-home  Pregnancy  Test.  AIDS  Behav.  2014.  doi: 10.1007/s10461 -014-0798 -8. PubMed  PMID:  
24849622;  PMCID:  PMC4431629.  
49. Ostergren  JE, Rosser  BRS,  Horvath  KJ. Reasons  for non-use of condoms  among  men who have sex with men:  a 
comparison  of receptive  and insertive  role in sex and online  and offline  meeting  venue.  Culture,  Health  & 
Sexuality.  2010;13(2):123 -40. doi: 10.1080/13691058.2010.520168;  PMCID:  PMC3010288.  
50. Winetrobe  H, Rice E, Bauermeister  J, Petering  R, Holloway  IW. Asso ciations  of unprotected  anal intercourse  
with Grindr -met partners  among  Grindr -using  young  men who have sex with men in Los Angeles.  AIDS  Care.  
2014;26(10):1303 -8. doi: 10.1080/09540121.2014.911811.  
51. Hightow -Weidman  L, Muessig  K, Bauermeister  J, Zhang  C, LeGrand  S. Youth,  Technology,  and HIV:  Recent  
Advances  and Future  Directions.  Curr HIV/AIDS  Rep. 2015;12(4):500 -15. doi: 10.1007/s11904 -015-0280 -x; 
PMCID:  PMC4643403.  
52. Schnall  R, Cho H, Mangone  A, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_188889]  A, Jia H. Mobile  Health  Technology  for Improving  Sympto m 
Management  in Low Income  Persons  Livingwith HIV.  AIDS  and behavior.  2018;22(10):3373 -83. doi: 
10.1007/s10461 -017-2014 -0. PubMed  PMID:  29299790.  
 53. Himelhoch  S, Riddle  J, Goldman  HH. Barriers  to implementing  evidence -based  smoking  cessation  practices  in 
nine community  mental  health  sites.  Psychiatric  Services.  2014;65(1):75 -80. 
54. Monson  AL. Barriers  to tobacco  cessation  counseling  and effectiveness  of training.  American  Dental  Hygienists'  
Association.  2004;78(3):5 -. 
55. Brownson  RC, Colditz  GA, Proctor  EK. Dissemi nation  and Implementation  Research  in Health:  Translating  
Science  to Practice  (2nd Edition).  [LOCATION_001]: Oxford  University  Press;  2018.  
56. Naar  S, Czajkowski  S, Spring  B. Innovative  study  designs  and methods  for optimizing  and implementing  
behavioral  interventi ons to improve  health.  Health  Psychol.  2018;37(12):1081 -91. Epub  2018/10/12.  doi: 
10.1037/hea0000657.  PubMed  PMID:  30307270.  
57. Schnall  R, Carcamo  J, Porras  T, Huang  M-C, Webb  Hooper  M. Use of the Phase -Based  Model  of Smoking  
Treatment  to Guide  Intervention  Development  for Persons  Living  with HIV Who  Self-Identify  as African  
American  Tobacco  Smokers.  International  journal  of environmental  research  and public  health.  
2019;16(10):1703;  PMCID:  PMC6571600.  
58. Schnall  R, Rojas  M, Bakken  S, Brown  W, Carballo -Dieguez  A, Carry  M, Gelaude  D, Mosley  JP, Travers  J. A 
user-centered  model  for designing  consumer  mobile  health  (mHealth)  applications  (apps).  J Biomed  Inform.  
2016;60:243 -51. Epub  2016/02/24.  doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2016.02.002.  PubMed  PMID:  26903153;  PMCID:  
PMC4837063.  
59. Hevner  AR. A three  cycle  view of design  science  research.  . Scandinavian  Journal  of Information  Systems.  
2007;19(2).  
60. Bush  K, Kivlahan  DR, McDonell  MB, Fihn SD, Bradley  KA. The AUDIT  alcohol  consumption  questions  
(AUDIT -C): an effective  brief screening  test for problem  drinking.  Archives  of internal  medicine.  
1998;158(16):1789 -95. 
61. Yen PY, Wantland  D, Bakken  S. Development  of a Customizable  Health  IT Usability  Evaluation  Scale.  AMIA  
Annual  Symposium  proceedings  / AMIA  Symposium  AMIA  Symposium.  2010;2010:917 -21. PubMed  PMID:  
21347112;  PMCID:  3041285.  
62. Davis  F. Perceived  usefulness,  perceived  ease of use, and user acceptance  of information  technology.  MIS 
Quarterly.  1989;13(3):319 -40. 
63. Schnall  R, Cho H, Liu J. Health  Information  Technology  Usability  Evaluation  Scale (Health -ITUES)  for 
Usability  Assessment  of Mobile  Health  Technology:  Validation  Study.  JMIR  Mhealth  Uhealth.  2018;6(1):e4.  doi: 
10.2196/mhealth.8851; PMCID:  PMC5775483.  
64. Cho H, Yen PY, Dowding  D, Merrill  JA, Schnall  R. A multi -level usability  evaluation  of mobile  health  
applications:  A case study.  J Biomed  Inform.  2018;86:79 -89. Epub  2018/08/27.  doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2018.08.012.  
PubMed  PMID:  30145317;  PMCID:  PMC6448568.  
65. Schnall  R, Bakken  S, Rojas  M, Travers  J, Carballo -Dieguez  A. mHealth  Technology  as a Persuasive  Tool for 
Treatment,  Care and Management  of Persons  Living  with HIV.  AIDS  Behav.  2015;19. doi: doi: 
10.1007/s10461014 -0984 -8.; PMCID:  PMC4497931.  
66. Schnall  R, Gordon  P, Camhi  E, Bakken  S. Perceptions  of factors  influencing  use of an electronic  record  for case 
management  of persons  living  with HIV.  AIDS  Care.  2011;23(3):357 -65. Epub  2011/02/25.  doi: 
10.1080/09540121.2010.507745.  PubMed  PMID:  21347899;  PMCID:  PMC3129034.  
67. Kitzinger  J. Qualitative  research.  Introducingfocus groups.  BMJ.  1995;311(7000):299 -302. doi: 
10.1136/bmj.311.7000.299.  PubMed  PMID:  7633241;  PMCID:  PMC2550365.  
68. Sheehan  B, Lee Y, Rodriguez  M, Tiase  V, Schnall  R. A comparison  of usability  factors  of four mobile  devices  for 
accessing  healthcare  information  by [CONTACT_65754].  Appl  Clin Inform.  2012;3(4):356 -66. doi: 10.4338/ACI -201206 - 
RA-0021.  PubMed  PMID:  23227134;  PMCID:  PMC3517216.  
69. Nielsen  J, Molich  R. Heuristic  evaluation  of user interfaces.  Proceedings  of the SIGCHI  Conference  on Human  
Factors  in Computing  Systems;  Seattle,  Washington,  [LOCATION_003]. [ZIP_CODE]:  ACM;  1990.  p. 249-56. 
70. Hyun  S, Johnson  SB, Stetson  PD, Bakken  S. Development  and evaluation  of nursing  user interface  screens  using  
multiple  methods.  Journal  of biomedical  informatics.  2009;42(6):1004 -12. Epub  2009/05/19.  doi: 
10.1016/j.jbi.2009.0 5.005.  PubMed  PMID:  19460464;  PMCID:  PMC2803697.  
71. Nielsen  J. 10 Usability  Heuristics  for User Interface  Design:  Neilson  Norman  Group;  1994  [updated  2005;  cited  
2019].  
72. Bright  TJ, Bakken  S, Johnson  SB. Heuristic  evaluation  of eNote:  an electronic  notes  system . AMIA  Annual  
Symposium  proceedings  AMIA  Symposium.  2006;2006:864 -. PubMed  PMID:  17238484;  PMCID:  
PMC1839434.  
73. Dix A, Finlay  J, Abowd  G, Beale  R. Human -computer  interaction.  3 ed. England:  Pearson  Education  Limited;  
 2005.  
74. Bertini  E, Gabrielli  S, Kimani  S. Appropriatingand assessing  heuristics  for mobile  computing2006.  119-26 p. 
75. Aguirre  AC, Ebrahim  N, Shea  JA. Performance  of the English  and Spanish  S-TOFHLA  among  publicly  insured  
Medicaid  and Medicare  patients.  Patient  education  and counseling.  2005;56(3):33 2-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.pec.2004.03.007.  PubMed  PMID:  15721976.  
76. Brown  RA, Burgess  ES, Sales  SD, Whiteley  JA, Evans  DM, Miller  IW. Reliability  and validity  of a smoking  
timeline  follow -back interview.  Psychology  of Addictive  Behaviors. 1998;12(2):101.  
77. Sobell  LC, Sobell  MB. Timeline  follow -back.  Measuring  alcohol  consumption:  Springer;  1992.  p. 41-72. 
78. Ghitza  UE, Gore‐Langton  RE, Lindblad  R, Shide  D, Subramaniam  G, Tai B. Common  data elements  for 
substance  use disorders  in electronic  health  records:  the NIDA  Clini cal Trials  Network  experience.  Addiction.  
2013;108(1):3 -8. 
79. Bogenschutz  MP, Donovan  DM, Adinoff  B, Crandall  C, Forcehimes  AA, Lindblad  R, Mandler  RN, Oden  NL, 
Perl HI, Walker  R. Design  of NIDA  CTN  Protocol  0047:  screening,  motivational  assessment,  referral,  and 
treatment  in emergency  departments  (SMART -ED). The American  journal  of drug  and alcohol  abuse.  
2011;37(5):417 -25; PMCID:  PMC3168577.  
80. Fagerstrom  K-O, Schneider  NGJJobm.  Measuring  nicotine  dependence:  a review  of the Fagerstrom  Tolerance  
Questionnaire19 89;12(2):159 -82. 
81. Biener  L, Abrams  DB. The Contemplation  Ladder:  Validation  of a measure  of readiness  to consider  smoking  
cessation.  Health  Psychol.  1991;10(5):360 -5. doi: 10.1037/0278 -6133.10.5.360.  
82. Hughes  JR, Hatsukami  DJAogp.  Signs  and symptoms  of tobacc o withdrawal1986;43(3):289 -94. 
83. Radloff  LS. The CES-D scale:  A self-report  depression  scale  for research  in the general  population.  Applied  
psychological  measurement.  1977;1(3):385 -401. 
84. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_194830], Gorsuch  RL, Lushene  RE. Manual  for the state-trait anxiety inventory1970.  
85. Zimet  GD, Dahlem  NW,  Zimet  SG, Farley  GK. The multidimensional  scale  of perceived  social  support.  Journal  
of personality  assessment.  1988;52(1):30 -41. 
86. Mannheimer  S, Mukherjee  R, Hirschhorn  L, Dougherty  J, Celano  S, Ciccarone  D, Graham  K, Mantell  J, Mundy  
L, Eldred  LJAc.  The CASE  adherence  index:  A novel  method  for measuring  adherence  to antiretroviral  
therapy2006;18(7):853 -61. 
87. Lewis  JR. Psychometric  Evaluation  of the PSSUQ  Using  Data from  Five Years  of Usability  Studies.  International  
Journal of Human –Computer  Interaction.  2002;14(3 -4):463 -88. doi: 10.1080/10447318.2002.9669130.  
88. Kessler  RS, Purcell  EP, Glasgow  RE, Klesges  LM, Benkeser RM, Peek  CJ. What  Does  It Mean  to “Employ”  the 
RE-AIM Model?  Evaluation  & the Health  Professions.  2012;36( 1):44 -66. doi: 10.1177/0163278712446066.  
89. Bauermeister  JA, Golinkoff  JM, Muessig  KE, Horvath  KJ, Hightow -Weidman  LB. Addressing  engagement  in 
technology -based  behavioural  HIV interventions  through  paradata  metrics.  Current  opi[INVESTIGATOR_194831].  
2017;12(5 ):442 -6. doi: 10.1097/COH.0000000000000396.  PubMed  PMID:  28617711;  PMCID:  PMC5637536.  
90. Kreuter  F. Improving  surveys  with paradata:  Analytic  uses of process  information:  John Wiley  & Sons;  2013.  
91. Linton  A. How  Much  Money  Does  Smoking  Cost You?  : Very  Well  Mind; 2020.  Available  from:  
https://www.verywellmind.com/how -much -money -does-smoking -cost-you-4143324#citation -4. 
92. Prevention  CfDCa.  Economic  Trends  in Tobacco  2020.  Available  from:  
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/economics/econ_facts/index.htm#sales.  
93. Cole, C.A., et al., Detecting Smoking Events Using Accelerometer Data Collected Via Smartwatch Technology: 
Validation Study.  JMIR Mhealth Uhealth, 2017. 5(12): p. e 189.  
94. 2. Cole, C.A., et al., Quantification of Smoking Characteristics Using Smartwatch Technology: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_194832].  JMIR Form Res, 2021. 5(2): p. e20464.   
95. Maramis, C., et al. Objective Smoking: Towards Smoking Detection Using Sma rtwatch Sensors . in Precision 
Medicine Powered by [CONTACT_194875] . 2018. Singapore: Springer Singapore.   
96. Shoaib, M., et al. A hierarchical lazy smoking detection algorithm using smartwatch sensors . in 2016 IEEE 
18th International Conference on e -Health Networking, Applications and Services (Healthcom) . 2016.   
 