Document Coversheet  
 
 Study Title: Re-entry XR -NTX for Rural Individuals With Opi[INVESTIGATOR_806033]/Site:  University of Kentucky  
Document (Approval/Update) Date:  11/7/2022  (Protocol); 12/1/2021 (ICF)  
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
IRB Number  [ZIP_CODE]  
Coversheet created:  2/23/2023  
 
 
PROTOCOL TYPE  (VERSION 4)0 unresolved
comment(s)
Which IRB
Medical NonMedical
Protocol Process Type
Exemption
Expedited
Full(Must be risk level 1)
 
IMPORTANT NOTE: You will not be able to change your selections for "Which IRB" and "Protocol Process Type" after
saving this section. If you select the wrong IRB or Protocol Process Type, you may need to create a new application.  
See below for guidance on these options, or refer to ORI's " Getting Started " page. Please contact [CONTACT_41888]
(ORI) at [PHONE_728] with any questions prior to saving your selections.
 
*Which IRB*
The Medical IRB  reviews research from the Colleges of:
Dentistry
Health Sciences
Medicine
Nursing
Pharmacy and Health Sciences
and Public Health.
 
The Nonmedical IRB  reviews research from the Colleges of:
Agriculture
Arts and Sciences
Business and Economics
Communication and Information
Design; Education
Fine Arts
Law
and Social Work
Note:  Studies that involve administration of drugs, testing safety or effectiveness of medical devices, or invasive medical procedures
must be reviewed by [CONTACT_41889]. 
*Which Protocol Process Type*  
Under federal regulations, the IRB can process an application to conduct research involving human subjects in one of three ways: 
by [CONTACT_41890].
by [CONTACT_41891];
The investigator makes the preliminary determination of the type of review for which a study is eligible. Please refer to ORI's " Getting
Started " page for more information about which activities are eligible for each type of review.
 
The revised Common Rule expanded exemption certification category 4 for certain secondary research with
identifiable information or biospecimens. The regulations no longer require the information or biospecimens to be
existing.  For more information see the Exemption Categories Tool .
Section 1 Page 1 of 2IRB Approval
11/7/2022
IRB # [ZIP_CODE]
IRB6
 
Section 1 Page 2 of 243830
EXPEDITED CERTIFICATION0 unresolved
comment(s)
To Be Completed Only If Protocol is to Receive Expedited Review
Applicability
A. Research activities that (1) present no more than *minimal risk to human subjects, and (2) involve only procedures listed in one or
more of the following categories, may be reviewed by [CONTACT_86411] [ADDRESS_1112659] apply regardless of the age of subjects, except as noted.
C. The expedited review procedure may not be used where identification of the subjects and/or their responses would reasonably
place them at risk of criminal or civil liability or be damaging to the subjects’ financial standing, employability, insurability, reputation,
or be stigmatizing, unless reasonable and appropriate protections will be implemented so that risks related to invasion of privacy and
breach of confidentiality are no greater than minimal.
D. The expedited review procedure may not be used for classified research involving human subjects.
E. IRBs are reminded that the standard requirements for informed consent (or its waiver, alteration, or exception) apply regardless of
the type of review—expedited or convened—utilized by [CONTACT_1201].
*“Minimal risk” means that the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research are not greater in
and of themselves from those ordinarily encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological
examination or tests. 45 CFR 46.102(i)
Check the appropriate categories that apply to your research project:
 Study was originally approved by [CONTACT_86412] a convened meeting.
1) Clinical studies of drugs and medical devices only when condition (a) or (b) is met.
A. Research on drugs for which an investigational new drug application is not required. (Note: Research on marketed drugs
that significantly increases the risks or decreases the acceptability of the risks associated with the use of the product is
not eligible for expedited review.)
B. Research on medical devices for which (i) an investigational device exemption application is not required *; or (ii) the
medical device is cleared/approved for marketing and the medical device is being used in accordance with its
cleared/approved labeling.**
* Study must meet one of the IDE Exempt categories listed on the Device Form Attachment. 
** An approved Device used in research according to its approved labeling is considered Exempt from IDE requirements. 
NOTE: Select Category 1 for compassionate use medical device applications or individual patient expanded access
investigational drug applications for which FDA has waived the requirement for full review.
2) Collection of blood samples by [CONTACT_25877], heel stick, ear stick, or venipuncture as follows:
A. From healthy, nonpregnant adults who weigh at least 110 pounds. For these subjects, the amounts drawn may not
exceed 550 ml in an 8 week period and collection may not occur more frequently than 2 times per week; or
B. From other adults and children* considering the age, weight, and health of the subjects, the collection procedure, the
amount of blood to be collected, and the frequency with which it will be collected. For these subjects, the amount drawn
may not exceed the lesser of 50 ml or 3 ml per kg in an 8 week period and collection may not occur more frequently than
2 times per week.
NOTE: Intravenous (IV), Port, Central, or any other lines are NOT eligible under this category even if the research involves
“minimal risk”.
*In Kentucky, “child/children” refers to all individuals less than 18 years of age unless the individual(s) is/are legally
emancipated. (See Informed Consent SOP  for discussion of “Emancipated Individuals” under Kentucky state law.)
Individuals less than 18 years of age who are not emancipated meet the federal definition for “child” (e.g., DHHS, FDA, and
U.S. Department of Education). Children are defined in the HHS regulations as “persons who have not attained the legal age
for consent to treatments or procedures involved in the research, under the applicable law of the jurisdiction in which the
research will be conducted.” If conducting research outside the state of Kentucky, you are responsible for complying with
applicable state law.
3) Prospective collection of biological specimens for research purposes by [CONTACT_25878]. Examples:
Section 2 Page 1 of 243830
A. Hair and nail clippi[INVESTIGATOR_59787] a nondisfiguring manner;
B. Deciduous teeth at time of exfoliation or if routine patient care indicates a need for extraction;
C. Permanent teeth if routine patient care indicates a need for extraction;
D. Excreta and external secretions (including sweat);
E. Uncannulated saliva collected either in an unstimulated fashion or stimulated by [CONTACT_86413]
a dilute citric solution to the tongue;
F. placenta removed at delivery;
G. Amniotic fluid obtained at the time of rupture of the membrane prior to or during labor;
H. Supra- and subgingival dental plaque and calculus, provided the collection procedure is not more invasive than routine
prophylactic scaling of the teeth and the process is accomplished in accordance with accepted prophylactic techniques;
I. Mucosal and skin cells collected by [CONTACT_59846][INVESTIGATOR_59788], skin swab, or mouth washings;
J. Sputum collected after saline mist nebulization.
4) Collection of data through noninvasive procedures (not involving general anesthesia or sedation) routinely employed in
clinical practice, excluding procedures involving x-rays or microwaves. Where medical devices are employed, they must be
cleared/approved for marketing. (Studies intended to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the medical device are not
generally eligible for expedited review, including studies of cleared medical devices for new indications.) Examples:
A. Physical sensors that are applied either to the surface of the body or at a distance and do not involve input of significant
amounts of energy into the subject or an invasion of the subject’s privacy;
B. Weighing or testing sensory acuity;
C. Magnetic resonance imaging;
D. electrocardiography, electroencephalography, thermography, detection of naturally occurring radioactivity,
electroretinography, ultrasound, diagnostic infrared imaging, doppler blood flow, and echocardiography;
E. moderate exercise, muscular strength testing, body composition assessment, and flexibility testing where appropriate
given the age, weight, and health of the individual.
5) Research involving materials (data, documents, records, or specimens) that have been or will be collected solely for non-
research purposes (such as medical treatment or diagnosis) as well as research involving existing information or specimens that
were previously collected for research purposes, provided they were not collected for the currently proposed research. (Note:
Some research in this category may qualify for Exempt review. This listing refers only to research that is not exempt.) 
(Note: If submission includes materials previously collected for either non-research or research purposes in a protocol for which
IRB approval expi[INVESTIGATOR_5697], you may check Category 5. However, a separate category must also be selected for prospective collection
of data/specimens obtained solely for research purposes)
6) Collection of data from voice, video, digital, or image recordings made for research purposes.
7) Research on individual or group characteristics or behavior (including, but not limited to, research on perception, cognition,
motivation, identity, language, communication, cultural beliefs or practices, and social behavior) or research employing survey,
interview, oral history, focus group, program evaluation, human factors evaluation, or quality assurance methodologies. (Note:
Some research in this category may be exempt from the HHS regulations for the protection of human subjects. This listing refers
only to research that is not exempt.)
Section 2 Page 2 of 243830
CONTINUATION REVIEW/FINAL REVIEW0 unresolved
comment(s)
In accordance with federal regulations and/or local policies, the IRB conducts periodic review of all currently approved
projects. If you need your IRB approval to continue and you do not complete and submit the required materials in a timely
manner, IRB approval will expi[INVESTIGATOR_219201].
If you have any questions, please contact [CONTACT_41916] [PHONE_728].
To initiate your continuation review (CR)/annual administrative review (AAR), or properly close your study,
complete this section and update/correct all other sections of your IRB application as applicable. 
***IMPORTANT*** Before leaving this page to update other sections of your application, be sure to SAVE this
section first.
1. Status of the Research
Check the statement(s) that best describe(s) the current status of your research: 
No subjects have enrolled to date.
Recruitment and/or enrollment of new subjects or review of records/specimens continue.
Study is closed to enrollment, but subjects still receive research-related interventions (e.g., treatment, blood draws).
Study enrollment is permanently closed; subjects have completed all research-related interventions; and the study remains active
only for long-term follow-up of subjects (see Tool Tip above for info on long-term follow-up of subjects).*
Research has progressed to the point that it involves 1) Data analysis, including analysis of identifiable private information or
identifiable biospecimens; and/or 2) Accessing follow-up clinical data from procedures that subjects would undergo as part of clinical
care.*
The remaining research activities are limited only to data analysis. There is access to records or specimens either directly or
through codes or links to the data.*
The remaining research activities are limited only to data analysis. There is no subject/record/specimen identifying codes or links to
the data; the researcher or research team cannot readily ascertain the subject's identity.*
All study activities are complete. IRB approval can be inactivated.
*Possibility that review will move from Full to Expedited.
2. If subjects have been enrolled within the last year, and the IRB approved a consent/assent form for your
study, attach one copy of the entire signed consent/assent form/HIPAA form  for the last TWO subjects enrolled.
Attachments
Attach Type File Name
[CONTACT_240316]_EntireConsent Screening Consent PD.pdf
CR_EntireConsent Trial Consent PD.pdf
CR_EntireConsent Screening Consent AS.pdf
CR_EntireConsent Trial Consent AS.pdf
3. Informed Consent
If the study is open to subject enrollment, please go to the Informed Consent section of the E-IRB Application and verify
attachment(s) include:
One clean copy in PDF (without the IRB Approval stamp) of the currently approved consent/assent document(s), or,
If requesting changes to the consent/assent document(s), submit one copy with the changes highlighted (and designate Document
Type as "Highlighted"), and one clean copy in PDF (without the changes highlighted).
If the study is open to subject enrollment and the IRB has waived the requirement to document informed consent, please go
to the Informed Consent section of the E-IRB Application and verify attachment(s) include:
One clean copy in PDF of the currently approved document used for the informed consent process (e.g., cover letter, phone
script), or,
If requesting changes to the consent/assent document(s), submit one copy with the changes highlighted (and designate Document
Type as "Highlighted"), and one clean copy in PDF (without the changes highlighted).
Section [ADDRESS_1112660] enrollment, please go to the Informed Consent section of the E-IRB Application and remove
Informed Consent Documents designated to get an IRB approval stamp to avoid having them appear valid for enrollment.
4. Unanticipated Problems Involving Risk to Subjects or Others/Adverse Events Summary & Assessment
Did any problems/adverse events occur during the last 12 months?
Yes No
In the space below, provide a written summary of both unanticipated problems* and available information regarding adverse events
since the last review (e.g., initial review or annual/continuing review). The amount of detail provided in such a summary will vary
depending on the type of research being conducted; in many cases, such a summary could be a brief statement that there have been
no unanticipated problems and that adverse events have occurred at the expected frequency and level of severity as documented in the
research protocol, the informed consent document, and investigator’s brochure (if applicable). The summary must include the PI’s
assessment whether the problems/adverse events warrant changes to the protocol, consent process, or risk/benefit ratio.
Note: It is the IRB's expectation that all unanticipated problems involving risk to subjects or others or related deaths requiring prompt
reporting are submitted in the appropriate time frame (See Policy [ PDF]). Your response to this Annual/Continuing Review is
considered assurance that all prompt reportable problems/adverse events have been submitted for IRB review.
*For multisite studies, the written summary should describe external events determined to be unanticipated problems involving risk to
subjects or others.
5. Subject Info To-Date
Our records for the previously approved IRB application indicate the  IRB approved estimate  of subjects to be enrolled (or
records/specimens reviewed) is:
84
Enter the number of enrolled subjects (or records/specimens reviewed) that have not been previously reported  to the IRB
9
Our records for the previously approved IRB application indicate the previous total # of subjects enrolled (or records/specimens
reviewed) since activation of the study is:
23
The new total number of subjects enrolled (or records/specimens reviewed) since activation of the study: 
[ADDRESS_1112661] Info section for the IRB approved estimate of subjects to be enrolled (or records/specimens reviewed).
If this new total exceeds your approved estimate of subjects to be enrolled (or records/specimens reviewed), please update the
number in the field for Number of Human Subjects in the Project Info section.
6. Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)/Plan (DSMP)
If your study is monitored by a DSMB or under a DSMP, attach all documentation (i.e. summary report; meeting minutes) representing
Data and Safety Monitoring activities that have not been previously reported to the IRB.
Attachments
7. Since the most recent IRB Initial/Continuation Review Approval:
Have there been any participant complaints  regarding the research?
Yes No
If yes, in the field below, provide a summary describing the complaints.
Section [ADDRESS_1112662] of the research? If a participant does not meet the screening criteria for a study even if they signed a screening
consent it is NOT considered a withdrawal.
Yes No
If yes, in the field below, provide a detailed explanation to the withdrawal(s) including if participants were lost to contact.
Has any new and relevant literature  been published since the last IRB review, especially literature relating to risks associated with
the research?
Yes No
If yes, attach a copy of the literature as well as a brief summary of the literature including, if pertinent, the impact of the findings on the
protection of human subjects.
Attachments
Have there been any  interim findings?
Yes No
If yes, attach a copy of Interim Findings .
Attachments
Have subjects experienced any benefits?
Yes No
If yes, in the field below, provide a description of benefits subjects have experienced.
Have there been any  inspections/audits/quality improvement reviews  of your research protocol resulting in the need for
corrective action in order to protect the safety and welfare of subjects?
Yes No
If yes, please attach documentation evidencing the outcome(s) and any corrective action(s) taken as a result.
Attachments
Was an FDA 483 issued as a result of any inspections/audits?
Yes No
If yes, submit documentation using attachment button above.
8. Risk Level:
Our records for the previously approved IRB application show your research is:
Risk
Level:2
Has something during the course of your research changed the level of risk?
Yes No
If yes, go to the Risk Level section, mark the appropriate risk level, and in the field below, describe why the risk level has changed:
Risk level has been revised to 1. The remaining research activities are limited to data analysis.
9. Funding/Support:
Our records for the previously approved  IRB application indicate your research is being submitted to, supported by, or conducted in
cooperation with the following external or internal agency(ies) or funding program(s):
Grant application pending
Section 3 Page 3 of 943830
(HHS) Dept. of Health & Human Services
(NIH) National Institutes of Health
(CDC) Centers for Disease Control & Prevention
(HRSA) Health Resources and Services Administration
(SAMHSA) Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(DoJ) Department of Justice or Bureau of Prisons
(DoE) Department of Energy
(EPA) Environmental Protection Agency
Federal Agencies Other Than Those Listed Here
Industry (Other than Pharmaceutical Companies)
Internal Grant Program w/ proposal
Internal Grant Program w/o proposal
National Science Foundation
Other Institutions of Higher Education
Pharmaceutical Company
Private Foundation/Association
U.S. Department of Education
State
Other:
Please update the Funding/Support section of your IRB application  if needed, including the following attachments if they contain
changes not previously reported to the IRB:
A current copy of your protocol if you are conducting industry/pharmaceutical research;
A current  Investigator Brochure (submit a copy with all changes underlined).
A new or revised grant application for this project.
Did your project receive extramural funding?
Yes No
If yes, please review and correct if necessary, the OSPA Account # information under the Funding/Support section  of your IRB
application.
If the project is externally funded, has the sponsor offered any of the research team enrollment incentives or other personal benefit
bonuses? (e.g., cash/check, travel reimbursements, gift checks, etc.)
Yes No N/A
Note: It is University of Kentucky policy that personal benefit bonuses are not allowed. If these conditions change during the course of
the study, please notify the IRB.
10. Project Information
Our records for the previously approved IRB application indicate your estimated project end date is:
03/31/[ADDRESS_1112663] (if
applicable):
Last Name [CONTACT_806127] [ADDRESS_1112664] Kathy
Levi Mary
Calvert Joseph
Tillson Martha
Anderson Brittany
Williams Summer
Flores Katrin
Stamper Roscoe
Napi[INVESTIGATOR_806034] E-IRB application,
being sure that each individual listed has completed or is up-to-date on the mandatory human research protection training [see the
policy on Mandatory Human Subject Protection Training FAQs  (required every three years)].
Section 3 Page 5 of 943830
12. Progress of the Research
To meet federal requirements the IRB is relying on your RESEARCH DESCRIPTION as a protocol summary and
their expectation is that it is up-to-date.  If the currently approved protocol (or research description) in your E-IRB
application is outdated, please make applicable changes, and describe in the field below any substantive changes and
explain why they are essential. If none, insert "N/A" in the text field below. If you are closing your study, you may use the
space below to summarize the final status of the research.
N/A
Note: No changes in the research procedures should have occurred without previous IRB review. Approval from the IRB must
be obtained before implementing any changes.
Provide a brief summary  of any modifications that affect subject safety and/or welfare  approved by [CONTACT_219220] (If none, insert "N/A" in the text field below.):
N/A
Attach one copy of the most recent progress report sent to the FDA, if available. All PI-sponsored IND/IDE studies are
required to submit a copy of the FDA progress report.
Attachments
13. Confidentiality/Security
Review your Research Description section and update the Confidentiality portion, if necessary, to describe measures for security of
electronic and physical research records (e.g., informed consent document(s), HIPAA Authorization forms, sensitive or private data).
14. Subject Demographics
Our records for the previously approved IRB application indicate the following categories of subjects and controls are
included in your research:
Children (individuals under age 18)
Wards of the State (Children)
Emancipated Minors
Students
College of Medicine Students
[LOCATION_006] Medical Center Residents or
House Officers
Impaired Consent Capacity Adults
Pregnant Women/Neonates/Fetal
Material
Prisoners
Non-English Speaking
International Citizens
Normal Volunteers
Military Personnel and/or DoD
Civilian Employees
Patients
Appalachian Population
Please review the Subject Demographics section of your IRB application for accuracy, and note the following:
If during the course of your research 1) any prisoners have been enrolled, OR 2) subjects have been enrolled that became involuntarily
confined/detained in a penal institution that have not been previously reported to the IRB, go to Subject Demographic section in your E-
IRB application and mark “prisoners” in the categories of subjects to be included in the study, if it is not already marked.
Note: If either [ADDRESS_1112665] received funding from the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), a
Certification Letter should have been submitted to the Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP); prisoners and individuals who
Section [ADDRESS_1112666] become involuntarily confined/detained in a penal institution cannot continue participation in the research until OHRP issues
approval. If the Certification has not been submitted, contact [CONTACT_41888].
Based on the  total # of subjects  who have enrolled, complete the subject demographic section below:
     Participant Demographics
Cisgender Man 
 Cisgender Woman 
 TGNB/TGE 
 Unknown/Not Reported
American
Indian/Alaskan
Native
Asian
Black or
African
American
Latinx
Native
Hawaiian or
Other Pacific
Islander
White
American
Arab/Middle
Eastern/North
African
Indigenous
People
Around the
World
More than
One Race
Unknown or
Not Reported
                                                                                                   
If unknown, please explain why:
Aim 1: Ten (n=10) individuals have completed qualitative interviews and provided demographics. Aim 2: Demographics are
collected at baseline (n=9), thus are unknown for participants who do not complete baseline (n=13).
15. Research Sites
Our records for the previously approved IRB application indicate that you are conducting research at the following sites:
[LOCATION_006] Sites
[LOCATION_006] Classroom(s)/Lab(s)
[LOCATION_006] Clinics in Lexington
[LOCATION_006] Clinics outside of Lexington
[LOCATION_006] Healthcare Good Samaritan Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_41877]/Education Institutions  Schools/Education
Institutions
Fayette Co. School Systems *
Other State/Regional School Systems
Institutions of Higher Education (other than [LOCATION_006])[ADDRESS_1112667]
Cardinal Hill Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_219205]’s Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_219206]. Centers
Correctional Facilities
Home Health Agencies
International Sites
Other:
Kentucky River Regional Jail
The Little Flower Clinic-an FWA for Little Flower has been obtained due to NIH funding requirements, and the IAA
to reflect that agreement is attached to the application.
If the above listed sites are not accurate, go to the Research Sites section of the E-IRB application to update the facilities at which
research procedures have been or will be conducted.
If you are adding a new off-site facility, you may also need to update your E-IRB application Research Description,
Research Sites, Informed Consent, and other affected sections as well as any documents which will list the off-site facility.
Documents needing updating may include, but not limited to:
Consent forms (attachment under Informed Consent section)
Brochures (attachment under Additional Info section)
Advertisements (attachment under Research Description section) ;
Letter of support (attachment under Research Sites section)).
Please revise applicable sections and attachments as necessary.
16. Disclosure of Significant Financial Interest
Disclosure of Significant Financial Interest:
Our records for the previously approved IRB application indicate that you, your investigators, and/or key personnel (KP) have a
significant financial interest (SFI)  related to your/their responsibilities at the University of Kentucky (that requires disclosure per the
[LOCATION_006] administrative regulation 7:2) : 
Yes No
If you need to update your records, please go to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_219207]/or Details for individuals listed in the Study
Personnel section to change your response to the applicable question(s).
17. Supplementals
To ensure the IRB has the most accurate information for your protocol you are expected to re-visit the E-IRB application sections and
make corrections or updates as needed. At a minimum you are being asked to review the following sections for accuracy:
STUDY DRUG INFORMATION—Please review for accuracy.
STUDY DEVICE INFORMATION—Please review for accuracy.
RESEARCH ATTRIBUTES—Please review for accuracy.
OTHER REVIEW COMMITTEES -- Please review for accuracy.
Section [ADDRESS_1112668] INFORMATION0 unresolved
comment(s)
Title of Project: (Use the exact title listed in the grant/contract application, if applicable). 
If your research investigates any aspect of COVID-19, please include "COVID19" at the beginning of your Project Title and Short Title 
Re-entry XR-NTX for rural individuals with opi[INVESTIGATOR_806035] a few key words to easily identify your study - this text will be displayed in the Dashboard listing for your study.
Re-entry XR-NTX
Anticipated Ending Date of Research Project: 
Maximum number of human subjects (or records/specimens to be reviewed) 
84
After approval, will the study be open to enrollment of new subjects or new data/specimen collection? 
 Yes No3/31/[ADDRESS_1112669] INFORMATION0 unresolved
comment(s)
Principal Investigator (PI) role for E-IRB access
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_41857] E-IRB application:
1. Read; 
2. write/edit;
3. receive communications; and 
4. submit to the IRB (IR, CR, MR, Other Review*).
If research is being submitted to or supported by [CONTACT_41892], a private foundation or a
pharmaceutical/manufacturing company, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_41858]. 
Please fill in any blank fields with the appropriate contact [CONTACT_3031] (gray shaded fields are not editable). Required fields left blank will
be highlighted in pi[INVESTIGATOR_41859] "Save".
To change home and work addresses, go to my[LOCATION_006]  and update using the Employee Self Service (ESS) portal. If name [CONTACT_41928],
the individual with the name [CONTACT_41929] a 'Name [CONTACT_41930]'  to the Human Resources Benefits Office for entering
into SAP. The new name [CONTACT_41931]'s Link Blue ID in SAP before the change is reflected in E-IRB.
Contact [CONTACT_41893].
The Principal Investigator's (PI) contact [CONTACT_41894].
If you are not the Principal Investigator, do NOT add yourself as study personnel.
To change the PI [INVESTIGATOR_41860]:
click "Change Principal Investigator";
search for the PI's name [CONTACT_41932];
click "Select" by [CONTACT_41895], then "Save Contact [CONTACT_7171]".
You will automatically be added as study personnel with editing permissions to continue editing the application.
Change  Principal Investigator:
[INVESTIGATOR_41861]:ChristaRoom# &
Bldg:[ADDRESS_1112670] Name:[CONTACT_806128]# : 
[ZIP_CODE]
Middle NameM.
Department: Dept Code:7H150
 PI’s
Employee/Student
ID#:00008256Rank: 
Assoicate Professor
 PI's Telephone #:859-312-8245Degree:PhD, MSW
PI's e-mail
address:[EMAIL_15338]'s FAX
Number:
PI [CONTACT_832] R.N. Yes No HSP Trained: Yes
HSP Trained
Date:5/26/2021
RCR Trained: Yes
Do you, the PI, have a significant financial interest  related to your responsibilities at the University of Kentucky (that requires
disclosure per the [LOCATION_006] administrative regulation 7:2 )?
Yes NoBehavioral Science - 7H150
 
Section 5 Page 1 of 243830
Section 5 Page 2 of 243830
RISK LEVEL0 unresolved
comment(s)
Indicate which of the categories listed below accurately describes this protocol
(Risk Level 1) Not greater than minimal risk
(Risk Level 2) Greater than minimal risk, but presenting the prospect of direct benefit to individual subjects
(Risk Level 3) Greater than minimal risk, no prospect of direct benefit to individual subjects, but likely to yield generalizable
knowledge about the subject's disorder or condition.
(Risk Level 4) Research not otherwise approvable which presents an opportunity to understand, prevent, or alleviate a serious
problem affecting the health or welfare of subjects.
*“Minimal risk” means that the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research are not greater in and of
themselves from those ordinarily encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological
examination or tests.
***For Expedited and Exempt Applications, the research activities must be Risk Level 1 (no more than minimal risk to
human subjects).***
Refer to [LOCATION_006]'s guidance document  on assessing the research risk for additional information.
Section [ADDRESS_1112671] DEMOGRAPHICS 0 unresolved comment(s)
Age level of human subjects: (i.e., 6 mths.; 2yrs., etc..)18to99
Study Population:
Describe the characteristics of the subject population, including age range, gender, ethnic background and health status. Identify the criteria for inclusion and
exclusion. 
Provide the following information:
A description of the subject selection criteria and rationale for selection in terms of the scientific objectives and proposed study design;
A compelling rationale for proposed exclusion of any sex/gender or racial/ethnic group;
Justification for the inclusion of vulnerable groups such as children, prisoners, adults with impaired consent capacity, or others who may be vulnerable to
coercion or undue influence.
Please consider these resources: 
NIH Diversity Policy  
FDA Diversity Guidance  
Gender disparities faced by [CONTACT_806093]-risk population. Research indicates that
women drug users, in general, are more likely to have injecting intimate partners, and with fewer economic resources to buy drugs, they are more likely to
engage in sex exchange to obtain drugs. So, women will be prioritized in this trial. Studies of rural drug users are challenging because recruitment of this high-
risk population can be limited by [CONTACT_806094], travel distances to study sites, and the general protective nature of rural social
networks (Friedman, 2003). This study will utilize local rural jails as venues for screening and recruitment of high-risk drug users, followed by [CONTACT_806095]-release. For Aim 1, the study population will include stakeholders (n=10) who are community health/behavioral health
providers and community supervision officers. Aim 1 will also include participants (n=20) in focus groups who mirror the pi[INVESTIGATOR_806036]/exclusion criteria.
The second set of interviews will include key stakeholders who work in community supervision and health care providers (n=15) and individuals who have used
opi[INVESTIGATOR_806037] (n=15). For Aim 2, the pi[INVESTIGATOR_806038], KY (n=60). Based on pre-screening and medical evaluation, inclusion and exclusion criteria
is described below, and summarized in the attached Research Strategy:
Inclusion Criteria 
• Meets criteria for opi[INVESTIGATOR_2427] 
• Anticipated release date within 30 days 
• Opi[INVESTIGATOR_39895] 
• Not currently in methadone or buprenorphine trial 
• No serious medical or psychiatric condition 
• Willingness to enroll in the trial 
• Currently has or is willing to obtain Medicaid or other health insurance coverage
Exclusion Criteria 
• Positive study pregnancy test 
• Abnormal liver function tests (5X upper limits of normal) 
• Chronic pain conditions that require opi[INVESTIGATOR_218947] 
• Untreated medical or psychiatric disorder 
• Suicidal ideation 
• BMI > 40 Medical evaluation
Attachments
Indicate the targeted/planned enrollment of the following members of minority groups and their subpopulations. Possible demographic
sources: Census Regional Analyst Edition , Kentucky Race/Ethnic Table , Kentucky Population Data . 
(Please note: The IRB will expect this information to be reported at Continuation Review time for Pre-2019 FDA-regulated
Expedited review and Full review applications):
Participant Demographics
Cisgender Man 
 Cisgender Woman 
 TGNB/TGE 
 Unknown/Not Reported
American
Indian/Alaskan
Native:
Asian:
Black/African
American:
Latinx:
Native
Hawaiian/Pacific
Islander:
White:
American
Arab/Middle
Eastern/North
African:2
32 50
Section 7 Page 1 of 343830
Indigenous
People Around
the World:
More than One
Race:
Unknown or Not
Reported:
 
 If unknown, please
explain why:
Indicate the categories of subjects and controls to be included in the study. You may be required to complete additional forms depending on
the subject categories which apply to your research. If the study does not involve direct intervention or direct interaction with subjects, (e.g.,
record-review research, outcomes registries), do not check populations which the research does not specifically target. For example: a large
record review of a diverse population may incidentally include a prisoner or an international citizen, but you should not check those categories
if the focus of the study has nothing to do with that status.
Check All That Apply (at least one item must be selected)
Children (individuals under age
18)
Wards of the State (Children)
Emancipated Minors
Students
College of Medicine Students
[LOCATION_006] Medical Center Residents or
House Officers
Impaired Consent Capacity
Adults
Pregnant Women/Neonates/Fetal
Material
Prisoners
Non-English Speaking (translated
long or short form)
International Citizens
Normal Volunteers
Military Personnel and/or DoD
Civilian Employees
Patients
Appalachian PopulationADDITIONAL INFORMATION:
Please visit the IRB Survival Handbook  for
more information on:
Children/Emancipated Minors
Students as Subjects
Prisoners
Impaired Consent Capacity Adults
Economically or Educationally
Disadvantaged Persons
Other Resources:
[LOCATION_006]MC Residents or House Officers
[see requirement of GME ]
Non-English Speaking  [see also the
E-IRB Research Description section
on this same topic]
International Citizens  [DoD SOP  may
apply]
Military Personnel and/or DoD Civilian
Employees
Section 7 Page 2 of 343830
Traumatic brain injury or acquired brain
injury
Severe depressive disorders or Bipolar
disorders
Schizophrenia or other mental disorders
that
involve serious cognitive disturbances
Stroke
Developmental disabilities
Degenerative dementias
CNS cancers and other cancers with
possible CNS involvement
Late stage Parkinson’s DiseaseLate stage persistent substance
dependence
Ischemic heart disease
HIV/AIDS
COPD
Renal insufficiency
Diabetes
Autoimmune or inflammatory disorders
Chronic non-malignant pain disorders
Drug effects
Other acute medical crisesAssessment of the potential recruitment of subjects with impaired consent capacity (or likelihood):
Check this box if your study does NOT involve direct intervention or direct interaction with subjects (e.g., record-review research, secondary
data analysis). If there is no direct intervention/interaction you will not need to answer the impaired consent capacity questions.
Does this study focus on adult subjects with any conditions that present a high likelihood  of impaired consent capacity or fluctuations  in
consent capacity? (see examples below)
Yes No
If Yes and you are not filing for exemption certification, go to "Form T" , complete the form, and attach it using the button below.
Examples of such conditions include:
Attachments
Section 7 Page 3 of 343830
PRISONERS0 unresolved
comment(s)
SECTION 1. 
For studies involving prisoners  or people at risk of becoming involuntarily detained during the research (e.g., subjects with substance
abuse history), respond to the following items. For information on restrictions and regulatory requirements, see ORI's Research
Involving Prisoners web page . 
For research involving prisoners, the definition of minimal risk refers to the probability and magnitude of physical  or psychological
harm that is normally encountered in the daily lives, or in the routine medical, dental or psychological examination of healthy persons. 
Select the category below that best represents your research and explain why your research meets the criteria.
Prisoner Categories
Category 1: My research involves the study of possible causes, effects, processes of incarceration, and of criminal
behavior.  (Processes of incarceration can be interpreted broadly to include substance abuse research, half-way houses,
counseling techniques, criminal behavior, etc.)
Category 2: My research involves the study of prisons as institutional structures, or of prisoners as incarcerated
persons.  (This category is usually used fairly narrowly – i.e., looking at prisoner diet, conditions of prison, etc.)
Category 3: My research involves the study of conditions particularly affecting prisoners as a class.  (This category
is rarely used – e.g., vaccine trials, research on hepatitis, social and psychological problems such as alcoholism, drug addiction,
sexual assaults. Minimal risk studies should not go under this category.)
Category 4: My research involves the study of practices, both innovative and accepted, which have the intent and
reasonable probability of improving the health or well-being of the subject.  (Rare for research involving placebo or control
groups to fall in this category because of the difficulty in justifying improvement of the health or well-being of the subject being
given placebo or in a control group.) Note: Contact [CONTACT_41916] ([PHONE_729] for more information.
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_806039] [See also SECTION 3 below]
Explain the research practices that will be used in this study and how they are intended to improve the health and well-being
of the participants:
This study will identify, screen, assess, and
provide treatment for high-risk rural individuals
with OUD. Study participants will have equal
opportunity to be screened for high-risk opi[INVESTIGATOR_806040]. Participants will
have the opportunity to participate in a thorough
medical evaluation including urinalysis,
pregnancy testing, LFT, and HIV and HCV pre-
test counseling and testing with results
provided during the baseline. Based on the
research for XR-NTX, it is expected that study
participants will benefit from receiving the
medication and addiction services to decrease
illicit drug use and reduce risk for relapse and
overdose during the high-risk period of
community re-entry.
SECTION 2. 
When an IRB is reviewing a protocol in which a prisoner will be a subject, the IRB must find and document justification that six additional
conditions are met. Describe in the space provided how each condition applies to your research. 
NOTE: If your study only  involves epi[INVESTIGATOR_20851], you may insert "N/A" in each of the text boxes in this section (Section 2).
Your response to Section 3 will determine appropriateness for "N/A" answers here.
Condition 1. Advantages acquired through participation in the research, when compared to the prisoners’ current situation, are not so
Section 8 Page 1 of 543830
great that they impair their ability to weigh risks. 
Describe the possible advantages that can be expected for prisoner participants:
This study has a few advantages for
participants. First, study participants will have
equal opportunity to be screened for high-risk
opi[INVESTIGATOR_806041]. Second,
participants will have the opportunity to
participate in a thorough medical evaluation
including urinalysis, pregnancy testing, LFT, and
HIV and HCV pre-test counseling and testing
with results provided during the baseline. Third,
based on the research for XR-NTX, it is
expected that study participants will benefit
from receiving the medication and addiction
services to decrease illicit drug use and reduce
risk for relapse and overdose during the high-
risk period of community re-entry. Fourth, there
will be significant potential benefits to science
because the study will provide important
information about the feasibility, acceptability,
and short term outcomes associated with an
effective, life-saving medication for opi[INVESTIGATOR_806042]-risk individuals in rural
areas who otherwise face enormous challenges
to accessing treatment. Finally, the project will
generate important information related to the
feasibility of XR-NTX treatment for rural drug
users, providing the formative work needed to
advance access to treatment through criminal
justice venues which can be tailored to high-risk
and underserved populations.
Condition 2. Risks are the same as those that would be accepted by [CONTACT_105]-prisoners. 
Describe the possible risks that can be expected for prisoner participants and justify that they are the same as for non-
prisoners:
The procedures to be used by [CONTACT_806096]-
entry XR-NTX studies. The potential risks in this
study are mainly related to use of the study
medication, which is the same for prisoners and
non-prisoners. The potential risks will be
discussed with participants during recruitment,
screening, and the informed consent process
to assist them in making a voluntary decision as
to whether they wish to participate in the study
protocol. These risks are explained further in
the Research Description and Informed
Consent forms.
In addition to possible risks associated with the
medications, other potential psychological risks
are primarily related to being asked questions in
the interview that they do not feel comfortable
asking. It is possible, that a participant may
experience anxiety, emotional distress, or other
negative reactions due to the content of the
interview questions, HIV/HCV testing
procedures, and/or treatment participation.
Based on our experiences working with this
population, such occurrences are rare.
Condition 3. Procedures for selection are fair to all prisoners and are immune from intervention by [CONTACT_806097]; control
subjects must be randomly selected. 
a) Describe how prisoners will be selected for participation:
Section 8 Page 2 of 543830
Randomly selected inidividuals will be
screened to assess recent high-risk opi[INVESTIGATOR_2441].
Face-to-face screening (estimated 10 minutes)
will be conducted by [CONTACT_23164].
The session will include informed consent and
an emphasis on the voluntary nature of
participation. Consenting participants will be
administered the NIDA-modified ASSIST
(NIDA, 2009) to measure high risk opi[INVESTIGATOR_2441],
including injection, prior to entering jail.
Participants will be asked about their interest
and willingness to engage in XR-NTX
treatment, as well as their probation/parole
status following release. Participants who
screen positive for high-risk opi[INVESTIGATOR_806043] 11 will then see the study nurse for a
medical evaluation to determine study eligibility.
Study eligibility includes: 1) not currently
pregnant, or have a positive pregnancy test
during the study medical screening; 2) opi[INVESTIGATOR_806044]; 3) not
currently enrolled in a methadone or
buprenorphine medication trial; 4) no serious
medical or psychiatric condition; 5) normal liver
function test; 6) no chronic pain conditions; 7)
no evidence of suicidal ideation, 8) body mass
index less than 40; and 9) planning to be
released from jail within 3 months.
b) Describe what measures will be taken to prevent intervention by [CONTACT_806098]:
Consistent with our current R01 (IRB protocol
#12-0372), while jail staff may monitor
participant entry and exit into the visitation room
for the screening, medical evaluation, and
interview process, no jail staff will be present
for any study related procedures.
Section 8 Page 3 of 543830
Condition 4. Parole boards cannot take into consideration a prisoner’s participation in research. Informed consent must state
participation will not impact parole. 
Describe what measures are in place to ensure parole boards are not influenced by [CONTACT_806099]’ participation in research
and how prisoners will be told their participation (or refusal or withdrawal from) will not impact parole:
Based on our current study, we anticipate that
most of our participants will be on probation
rather than parole. However, confidentiality
issues will be stressed during informed consent
and will include the description of a federal
Certificate of Confidentiality. Participants will
also be assured that their screening results,
HIV/HCV test results, study participation, and
study data will not be made available to any
representative of the jail or criminal justice
system. Jail officials and administrators will not
be informed of participants who participate in
the screening, eligibility data, or refusals in
order to protect participant confidentiality.
Consent form language reflects this emphasis
on participant confidentiality.
Condition 5. For studies that require follow-up, provisions are made including consideration for the length of individual sentences;
informed consent must reflect provisions for follow-up. 
Describe what provisions have been made for follow-up and how this information will be relayed to the prisoner
participants:
Follow-up data will be collected with all study
participants three months post-release from jail
through (1) Medical Management Assessment
(MMA), and (2) the 3-month post-release
interview. For study participants in both
conditions, data will be collected at each
monthly visit with the study nurse through the
MMA. The MMA will include an assessment of
compliance with the medication, potential side
effects, and symptoms associated with
cravings in the previous [ADDRESS_1112672] been made to present information about the study in a language understandable to the
prisoner population:
All questions in the required assessments are
constructed to be understandable by [CONTACT_806100] 6th grade education or less. Additionally,
data is collected via a face-to-face interview by
[CONTACT_806101], thus there will be an
individual present to help provide
clarification/prompts for any questions not
understood by [CONTACT_2299].
Section 8 Page 4 of 543830
SECTION 3. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_806045]:  
Effective June 20, 2003, DHHS adopted policy that allows waiver of the requirement for documenting applicability of a category (as
found in Section 1 of this form) for certain epi[INVESTIGATOR_806046]. This waiver applies to epi[INVESTIGATOR_806047]-subjects.
Check this box if your research meets all three criteria listed below, then provide justification in the space provided.
1. I request a waiver for meeting the category conditions under Section 1 of this form.
2. My research involves epi[INVESTIGATOR_806048]/incidence of a disease by [CONTACT_806102], or to study potential risk factor associations for a disease; and
3. Prisoners are not the sole focus of my research.
Justify how the research presents no more than minimal risk and no more than inconvenience to the subjects:
SECTION 4. Prisoners are not the targeted population 
Only complete if applicable:  
Although prisoners may not be the target population for your research, a subject could become a prisoner during the course of the
study (particularly if studying a subject population at high-risk of incarceration). 
Note:  If you did not receive IRB approval for involvement of prisoners, and a subject becomes a prisoner during the study, all
research activities involving the now-incarcerated participant must cease  until IRB approval has been issued for their
continuation in the research. If you need IRB approval for a prisoner subject to continue participation in your research, select and
complete the applicable category from Section 1, complete section [ADDRESS_1112673] identifiable
private information during the participant’s incarceration:
SECTION 5. Kentucky (KY) Department of Corrections (DoC) Approval
Review the following conditions and determine whether any apply to your study: 
active recruitment of participants from a correctional facility (prison, jail, or community corrections institution);
active recruitment of individuals under community supervision from a state probation and parole office.
If any of the above conditions apply to your research, refer to the Kentucky Department of Corrections Policy and Procedures,
Management Information and Research (Chapter 5)  for information about submitting a proposal for DoC approval of research including
the DoC approved Research Consent and Research Agreement (5.1.G.1).
If your research involves a certificate of confidentiality or the Department of Corrections is directly involved in the study as a sponsor (or
otherwise), contact [CONTACT_806103], Legal Counsel, at [EMAIL_15339] , or [PHONE_16814], for additional information.
Section 8 Page 5 of 543830
INFORMED CONSENT/ASSENT PROCESS/WAIVER0 unresolved
comment(s)
For creating your informed consent attachment(s), please download the most up-to-date version listed in "All Templates" under the
APPLICATION LINKS menu on the left, and edit to match your research project.
Additional Resources:
Informed Consent/Assent Website
Waiver of Consent vs. Waiver of Signatures
Sample Repository/Registry/Bank Consent Template
Consent/Assent Tips:
If you have multiple consent documents, be sure to upload each individually (not all in a combined file).
If another site is serving as the IRB for the project, attach the form as a “Reliance Consent Form” so the document will not receive
a [LOCATION_006] IRB approval stamp; the reviewing IRB will need to stamp the consent forms.
Changes to consent documents (e.g., informed consent form, assent form, cover letter, etc...) should be reflected in a 'tracked
changes' version and uploaded separately with the Document Type "Highlighted Changes".
It is very important that only the documents you wish to have approved by [CONTACT_41896]; DELETE OUTDATED FILES --
previously approved  versions will still be available in Protocol History.
Attachments that are assigned a Document Type to which an IRB approval stamp applies will be considered the version(s) to be
used for enrolling subjects once IRB approval has been issued. 
Document Types that do NOT get an IRB approval stamp are:
"Highlighted Changes",
"Phone Script", and
"Reliance Consent Form",
"Sponsor's Sample Consent Form".
How to Get the Section Check Mark
1. You must:
a) provide a response in the text box below describing how investigators will obtain consent/assent, and 
b) check the box for at least one of the consent items and/or check mark one of the waivers
2. If applicable attach each corresponding document(s) as a PDF .
3. If you no longer need a consent document approved (e.g., closed to enrollment), or, the consent document submitted does not
need a stamp for enrolling subjects (e.g., umbrella study, or sub-study), only select "Stamped Consent Doc(s) Not Needed".
4. After making your selection(s) be sure to scroll to the bottom of this section and SAVE your work!
Check All That Apply
Informed Consent Form (and/or Parental Permission Form and/or translated short form)
Assent Form
Cover Letter (for survey/questionnaire research)
Phone Script
Informed Consent/HIPAA Combined Form
Debriefing and/or Permission to Use Data Form
Reliance Consent Form
Sponsor's sample consent form for Dept. of Health and Human Services (DHHS)-approved protocol
Stamped Consent Doc(s) Not Needed
Attachments
Informed Consent Process:
Using active voice, describe how investigators will obtain consent/assent. Include:
the circumstances under which consent will be sought and obtained
Section 9 Page 1 of 543830
the timing of the consent process (including any waiting period between providing information and obtaining consent)
who will seek consent
how you will minimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence
the method used for documenting consent
if applicable, who is authorized to provide permission or consent on behalf of the subject
if applicable, specific instruments or techniques to assess and confirm potential subjects’ understanding of the information
Note: all individuals authorized to obtain informed consent should be designated as such in the E-IRB "Study Personnel" section of
this application.
Special considerations may include:
Obtaining consent/assent for special populations such as children, prisoners, or people with impaired decisional capacity
Research Involving Emancipated Individuals  
If you plan to enroll some or all prospective subjects as emancipated, consult with [LOCATION_006] legal counsel prior to submitting this
application to the IRB . Include research legal counsel’s recommendations in the "Additional Information" section as a separate
document.
Research Involving Non-English Speaking Subjects  
For information on inclusion of non-English speaking subjects, or subjects from a foreign culture, see IRB Application Instructions
for Recruiting Non-English Speaking Participants or Participants from a Foreign Culture.
Research Repositories  
If the purpose of this submission is to establish a research repository describe the informed consent process. For guidance
regarding consent issues, process approaches, and sample language see the Sample Repository/Registry/Bank Consent
Template .
Aim 1: Potential participants will be read the interview script and will be asked to verbally consent to completing the interview. A waiver
of documented informed consent has been requested, because the consent document would be the only link between the research
activities and the participant (Option 1) and the main risk would be related to a breach of confidentiality. Participants will be offered the
opportunity to sign a stamped consent form if they would prefer.
Aim 2: Potential participants who are interested in the study will be asked to participate in the screening session at the jail with the [LOCATION_006]
research coordinator (See Research Procedures). Potential participants will be provided with informed consent prior to the screening
session. As part of the informed consent process, potential participants will be assured that: (a) Neither participation nor refusal to
participate in a protocol will affect their legal parole status (if applicable); (b) No individual or identifiable data collected as part of a
study protocol will be made available to any criminal justice authority including jail, parole, or community mandated treatment; and (c)
If potential participants do NOT wish to participate, their parole or other legal status will not be affected. Potential participants who
choose NOT to participate in the study protocol will not be identified in their records, and non-participation will NOT become a matter
of official record in any file. For the focus groups, the consent procedure will only cover the focus group. Focus groups will be audio
recorded unless anyone objects. For the pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251], informed consent procedures will cover participation in the screening session,
medical evaluation, HIV/HCV testing procedures, baseline interview, medication trial, and follow-up interviews so that participants are
fully aware of all possible study procedures and possible risks before making a decision about entering the study. A medication guide
for Vivitrol will also be given to each participant. Due to the sensitive nature of some of the questions asked in the interviews,
confidentiality issues will be stressed during informed consent which will include a description of a federal Certificate of
Confidentiality which provides an additional layer of human subject protection. Participants will also be assured that their screening
results, study participation, and study data will not be made available to any representative of the criminal justice system. The
research coordinator will keep detailed records on the number of interested participants who participate in the screening session and
the number of refusals. Screening data will be examined as part of the implementation phase to examine characteristics of
participants who enter the study compared to those who are not eligible. Because of the short time frame between baseline and
follow-up interview (3 months), consent procedures will not be repeated since no new procedures will be introduced. 
The Kentucky Department of Corrections (DOC) requires us to provide the DOC with the study title and participant name [CONTACT_806129], including inmates, parolees, or individuals likely to be incarcerated by [CONTACT_806104].
**Due to COVID-19 restrictions, we are requesting a waiver of documented informed consent (described in detail in the Informed
Consent page) for the Screening consent only. Research staff will still review the Screening consent in detail with potential
participants over the phone and there will be a section added to the IRB-approved Screening consent document for staff to verify that
they reviewed the consent with the participant, answered any questions, that the participant agreed to participate in the study, and the
participant's name. The research activities covered in the Screening consent present no more than minimal risk to participant. If the
participant qualifies to continue with the study after screening, the research assistant conducting the screening will review the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_806049]. When the Little Flower Clinic staff meet with the participant to conduct the Medical
Evaluation session they will first review the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_806050]. The Pi[INVESTIGATOR_806051]-[ADDRESS_1112674] for Waiver of Informed Consent Process
If you are requesting IRB approval to waive the requirement for the informed consent process, or to alter some or all of the
elements of informed consent, complete, Section 1 and Section 2 below.
Note: The IRB does not approve waiver or alteration of the consent process for greater than minimal risk research, except
for planned emergency/acute care research as provided under FDA regulations. Contact [CONTACT_41897] ([PHONE_728]).
SECTION 1.
Check the appropriate item:
I am requesting a waiver of the requirement for the informed consent process.
I am requesting an alteration of the informed consent process.
If you checked the box for this item, describe which elements of consent will be altered and/or omitted, and justify the
alteration.
SECTION 2.
Explain how each condition applies to your research.
a) The research involves no more than minimal risk to the subject.
b) The rights and welfare of subjects will not be adversely affected.
c) The research could not practicably be carried out without the requested waiver or alteration.
d) Whenever possible, the subjects or legally authorized representatives will be provided with additional pertinent
information after they have participated in the study.
Section [ADDRESS_1112675] fit into one of three regulatory options :
1. The only record linking the participant and the research would be the consent document, and the principal risk would be
potential harm resulting from a breach of confidentiality (e.g., a study that involves participants who use illegal drugs).
2. The research presents no more than minimal risk to the participant and involves no procedures for which written consent
is normally required outside of the research context (e.g., a cover letter on a survey, or a phone script).
3. The participant (or legally authorized representative) is a member of a distinct cultural group or community in which
signing forms is not the norm, the research presents no more than minimal risk to the subject, and there is an appropriate
alternative mechanism for documenting that informed consent was obtained.
Select the option below that best fits your study. 
If the IRB approves a waiver of signatures, participants must still be provided oral or written information about the study.
To ensure you include required elements in your consent document, use the Cover Letter Template  as a guide. There is
an English  and a Spanish  version.
 
Option 1
Describe how your study meets these criteria:
a) The only record linking the participant and the research would be the consent document:
b) The principal risk would be potential harm resulting from a breach of confidentiality (i.e., a study that involves
subjects who use illegal drugs).
Under this option, each participant (or legally authorized representative) must be asked whether (s)he wants to sign a
consent document; if the participant agrees to sign a consent document, only an IRB approved version should be
used.
Option 2
Describe how your study meets these criteria:
a) The research presents no more than minimal risk to the participant:
Aim 1: The only link between the participant and
the research would be the signed consent
document (Option 1).
Aim 2: There is no more than minimal risk to
participants in the procedures covered in the
Screening consent.
b) Involves no procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research context (i.e. a cover
letter on a survey, or a phone script):
Aim 1: We are requesting a waiver of
documented informed consent for the
qualitative interview script. The research
procedures only involve asking participants
questions and they are free to skip any
questions. Participants are being asked
questions about illegal activities and the
principle risk of the research is associated with
a breach of confidentiality. The interview will not
involve collecting any names or other identifiers
(Option 1). Participants will be given the option
to sign a stamped consent document if they
would prefer.
Aim 2: We also request a waiver of
documented informed consent only for the
Screening consent for study participants who
Section 9 Page 4 of 543830
are unable to be met with in person to sign a
consent form. Given the Kentucky governor's
recent declaration of a state of emergency, we
have advised our data coordinators to take
extra precautions when collecting data from
participants. Should either jail be placed on
lockdown or [LOCATION_006] staff deem it unsafe to do face-
to- face interviews with eligible participants, we
request that those who are unable to complete
a face-to-face screening interview be granted a
waiver of documented consent, and their
screening interview will be completed over the
telephone. Research staff will review the
Screening consent form in detail with the
participant and answer any questions they may
have. Verbal consent will be requested.
Whenever possible, face-to-face interviews and
documented informed consent will be
preferred. No interviews will be administered
without written or verbal consent.
A waiver of documented informed consent is
not being requested for the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_806052].
Option 3
Describe how your study meets these criteria:
a) The subject (or legally authorized representative) is a member of a distinct cultural group or community in which
signing forms is not the norm.
b) The research presents no more than minimal risk to the subject.
c) There is an appropriate alternative mechanism for documenting that informed consent was obtained.
Section 9 Page 5 of 543830
STUDY PERSONNEL 0 unresolved comment(s)
Do you have study personnel who will be assisting with the research?
After selecting 'Yes' or 'No' you must click the 'Save Study Personnel Information' button.  
Yes No
Manage Study Personnel
Identify other study personnel assisting in research project:
The individual listed as PI [INVESTIGATOR_41862] 'PI [INVESTIGATOR_41863]' section should NOT be added to this section.
If the research is required for a University of Kentucky academic program, the faculty advisor is also considered study personnel and should be listed below.
***Residents and students who are PI’s are encouraged to designate the faculty advisor or at least one other individual as a contact [CONTACT_41898] (DP).***
Role: DP = Editor (individual can view, navigate, and edit the application for any review phase (IR, CR/FR, MR) or 'Other Review", and submit Other Reviews on
behalf of the PI.)
Role: SP = Reader (individual can view and navigate through the currently approved application only.)
To add an individual via the below feature:
Search for personnel;
Click "select" by [CONTACT_41899];
For each person, specify responsibility in the project, whether authorized to obtain informed consent, AND denote who should receive E-IRB notifications (contact
[CONTACT_41900]).
NOTE: Study personnel must complete human subject protection (HSP) and Responsible Conduct of Research (RCR) training before implementing any
research procedures. For information about training requirements for study personnel, visit [LOCATION_006]’s HSP FAQ page , the RCR Getting Started  page, or
contact [CONTACT_41901] [PHONE_728]. If you have documentation of current HSP training other than that acquired through [LOCATION_006] CITI, you may submit it to ORI
([EMAIL_806] ) for credit.
Study personnel assisting in research project: 
Last
NameFirst
NameResponsibility In
ProjectRoleA
CContact [CONTACT_41902] (HSP) (HSP)Date (RCR) Removed?Last
UpdatedSFI
Anderson Brittany Data Collection SP Y N  P Y 07/14/2021 Y N 06/28/2019 N
Bush HeatherData
Analysis/ProcessingSP N N  P Y 06/07/2022 Y N 11/10/2021 N
Calvert JosephData
Analysis/ProcessingSP N N  P Y 03/24/2020 Y N 03/27/2020 N
Dickson MeganData
Analysis/ProcessingSP N N  P Y 03/23/2022 Y N 07/14/[ADDRESS_1112676]
Assistance/SupportSP Y N  P Y 05/22/2022 Y N 02/05/[ADDRESS_1112677] Kathy Data Collection SP Y N  P Y 08/29/2022 Y N 02/13/[ADDRESS_1112678]
Assistance/SupportSP N N  N Y 03/03/3000  N 07/17/[ADDRESS_1112679]
Assistance/SupportSP N N  N Y 03/03/3000  N 07/17/2019 N
Knudsen Hannah Co-Investigator SP Y N  P Y 08/06/2020 Y N 02/13/2018 N
Levi MaryData
Analysis/ProcessingSP N N  P Y 12/16/2020 Y N 05/03/2022 N
Lofwall Michelle Co-Investigator SP Y N  P Y 08/04/2020 Y N 02/13/2018 N
Oser Carrie Co-Investigator SP Y N  P Y 12/08/2021 Y N 02/13/2018 N
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_806053]/ProcessingDP Y Y  P Y 02/16/2021 Y N 07/17/[ADDRESS_1112680]
Assistance/SupportSP N N  N Y 03/03/3000  N 10/17/2019 N
Seaver RobertData
Analysis/ProcessingSP N N  P Y 02/16/2021 Y N 02/13/[ADDRESS_1112681]
Assistance/SupportSP N N  P Y 03/25/2020 Y N 03/27/2020 N
Tillson MarthaData
Analysis/ProcessingSP N N  P Y 05/03/2021 Y N 07/14/2021 N
Walsh Sharon Co-Investigator SP Y N  P Y 01/18/2022 Y N 02/13/2018 N
Webster JohnData
Analysis/ProcessingSP N N  P Y 11/24/2020 Y N 08/19/2021 N
Winston Erin Study Coordinator DP Y N  P Y 04/12/2021 Y N 01/06/2020 N
Acree TiannaData
Analysis/ProcessingSP N N  P Y 11/17/2020 Y Y 04/11/2022 N
Bailey Egan Data Collection SP N N  P Y 06/14/2021 Y Y 04/11/[ADDRESS_1112682] Degree StatusFlag (HSP) (HSP)Date (RCR) Removed?Last
UpdatedSFI
Engle Sarah Data Collection SP Y N  P Y 01/09/2020 Y Y 04/11/[ADDRESS_1112683]
Assistance/SupportSP Y N  N Y 03/03/3000  Y 04/11/[ADDRESS_1112684]
Assistance/SupportSP Y N  P N 01/29/2019  Y 12/14/[ADDRESS_1112685]
Assistance/SupportSP Y N  N Y 03/03/3000  Y 04/11/[ADDRESS_1112686]
Assistance/SupportSP Y N  N Y 03/03/3000  Y 10/13/[ADDRESS_1112687]
Assistance/SupportSP Y N  N Y 03/03/3000  Y 10/13/[ADDRESS_1112688]
Assistance/SupportSP N N  N Y 03/03/3000  Y 10/13/[ADDRESS_1112689]
Assistance/SupportSP Y N  N Y 03/03/3000  Y 04/11/[ADDRESS_1112690]
Assistance/SupportSP Y N  N Y 03/03/3000  Y 04/11/[ADDRESS_1112691]
Assistance/SupportSP Y N  N Y 03/03/3000  Y 10/13/2022 N
Stamper Roscoe Data Collection SP N N  P N 10/03/2018  Y 12/14/2020 N
Wells Shelly Data Collection SP N N  N Y 03/03/3000  Y 12/14/[ADDRESS_1112692]
Assistance/SupportSP N N  N Y 03/03/3000  Y 04/11/[ADDRESS_1112693]
Assistance/SupportSP Y N  N Y 03/03/3000  Y 04/11/[ADDRESS_1112694]
Assistance/SupportSP Y N  N Y 03/03/3000  Y 04/11/[ADDRESS_1112695]
Assistance/SupportSP Y N  S N 02/12/2019 Y Y 04/11/2022 N
Section 10 Page 2 of 243830
RESEARCH DESCRIPTION0 unresolved
comment(s)
You may attach a sponsor’s protocol pages in the “Additional Information” section and refer to them where necessary in
the Research Description. However, each prompt that applies to your study should contain at least a summary paragraph.
**!!!PLEASE READ!!!** Known Issue: The below text boxes do not allow symbols, web addresses, or special characters
(characters on a standard keyboard should be ok). If something is entered that the text boxes don't allow, user will lose
unsaved information.
Workaround(s):
Save your work often to avoid losing data.
Use one of the attachment buttons in this section, or under the Additional Information section to include the
information with your application. During the document upload process, you will be able to provide a brief description
of the attachment.
Background
Include a brief review of existing literature in the area of your research. You should identify gaps in knowledge that should be
addressed and explain how your research will address those gaps or contribute to existing knowledge in this area. For interventional
research, search PubMed and ClinicalTrials.gov for duplicative ongoing and completed trials with same condition and intervention(s).
The overall aim of this R34 grant is to examine the feasibility, acceptability, and short-term outcomes associated with an innovative
service delivery model to increase adherence to extended-release naltrexone (XR-NTX) during the transition from jail to the
community for rural individuals with opi[INVESTIGATOR_2427] (OUD). This study responds to a NIH high-priority area to increase access to
evidence-based treatment due to the increasing rates of OUD and related high-risk injection drug practices among individuals in rural
Appalachia (Staton-Tindall et al., 2015). The Appalachian region is characterized by [CONTACT_806105], disability, and
impaired quality of life in the nation, attributed in large part to increasing rates of prescription opi[INVESTIGATOR_2427]. Kentucky ranks 3rd
in the country for drug-related deaths (AHR, 2016), and the state ranks among the highest in the country for drug-related disease
transmission (particularly Hepatitis C [HCV]). Kentucky had the highest rate of new HCV infections in the nation between 2008-2015
(KY Dept. for Public Health, 2017), with rates nearly seven times the national average (Zibbell, 2015). The majority of HCV cases has
been linked to prescription opi[INVESTIGATOR_806054] -- high-risk behaviors that also significantly increase the vulnerability of
drug users in this region for new HIV infections. 
Research indicates that women drug users are more likely to have injecting intimate partners, engage in sex exchange to obtain
drugs, and have a faster trajectory from use to dependence than men (Hernandez-Avila et al., 2004; Fraizyngier et al., 2007;
Greenfeld et al., 2010; Prithwish et al., 2007). These issues are even more pronounced in rural Appalachia where poverty and
limitations in health care access have been exacerbated by [CONTACT_46248][INVESTIGATOR_15817]. Rural women drug users recruited from jails (not
providing XR-NXT) in a recent behavioral intervention trial were shown to have extensive opi[INVESTIGATOR_806055], with most women meeting criteria for opi[INVESTIGATOR_2427] (Staton et al., in press). Coupling the severity of substance use with
the fact that rural, Appalachian women suffer from some of the most significant health disparities in the country (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2014), research is urgently needed to advance access to OUD treatment with this high-risk,
vulnerable, and underserved population. Thus, while men will be included in this trial, women will be oversampled and prioritized for
treatment entry.
Extended-release naltrexone (XR-NTX) is an effective, life-saving treatment for OUD (e.g., Syed & Keating, 2013), but it is largely
underutilized in the criminal justice system despi[INVESTIGATOR_175257]. A limited number of randomized clinical trials (RCTs) have shown
that pre-release XR-NTX has been associated with reductions in community opi[INVESTIGATOR_806056] (Gordon
et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2015). These RCTs have primarily included men, have been situated in prisons, and have focused on re-entry
to urban communities (Chandler et al., 2016). Research is limited on service delivery models to increase post-release acceptance
and adherence to XR-NTX, which is critically needed in rural areas where services are limited. This application proposes to leverage
real-world, accessible locations as service delivery models to increase access to evidence-based XR-NTX treatment.
Objectives
List your research objectives. Please include a summary of intended research objectives in the box below.
Specific Aim 1: Adapt the standard XR-NTX protocol for use in a community P&P office for rural individuals with OUD. Adaptation of
standardized clinical procedures (ASAM, 2015) will include screening, medical evaluation, injection administration/dosing, safety
procedures, and client education materials for delivery in a real-world, non-clinical setting. This aim will be guided by [CONTACT_549718]-
based ADAPT-ITT framework and involve key stakeholders (n=10) and rural individuals with OUD(n=20). A second set of qualitative
interviews will be conducted with key stakeholders (n=15) and rural individuals with who have used opi[INVESTIGATOR_806057] (n=15) to better understand study trends related to medications for opi[INVESTIGATOR_2427] (MOUD), as well as
factors which may affect the feasibility and acceptability of a larger trial (the overall goal of this R34 pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251]). 
Specific Aim 2: Conduct a small scale pi[INVESTIGATOR_806058], acceptability, and short-term outcomes of the adapted protocol on
Section 11 Page 1 of 1143830
XR-NTX adherence and relapse to opi[INVESTIGATOR_2441]. Rural justice-involved individuals on community supervision with OUD will be invited to
initiate XR-NTX and continue injections for up to three months in the community.
Study Design
Describe and explain the study design (e.g., observational, secondary analysis, single/double blind, parallel, crossover, deception,
etc.).
Clinical Research : Indicate whether subjects will be randomized and whether subjects will receive any placebo.
Community-Based Participatory Research : If you are conducting community-based participatory research (CBPR) , describe
strategies for involvement of community members in the design and implementation of the study, and dissemination of results
from the study.
Qualitative research : Indicate ranges where flexibility is needed, if a fixed interview transcript is not available, describe interview
topi[INVESTIGATOR_41866].
Research Repositories : If the purpose of this submission is to establish a Research Repository (bank, registry) and the material
you plan to collect is already available from a commercial supplier, clinical lab, or established IRB approved research repository,
provide scientific justification for establishing an additional repository collecting duplicate material. Describe the repository design
and operating procedures. For relevant information to include, see the [LOCATION_006] Research Biospecimen Bank Guidance  or the [LOCATION_006]
Research Registry Guidance .
During this 36-month R34 developmental trial, we propose to examine the feasibility, acceptability, and short-term outcomes
associated with an innovative XR-NTX re-entry delivery model to increase adherence during the transition from jail to the community
for rural individuals with opi[INVESTIGATOR_2427] (OUD). The study will be accomplished through two specific aims: (1) Adapt XR-NTX
services for rural individuals with OUD in the community supervision (P&P) office. This aim focuses on adapting standard clinical
procedures (ASAM, 2015) including screening, assessment, injection administration/dosing, safety procedures, and client education
materials for a real-world, non-clinical setting (community P&P office) using the evidence-based ADAPT-ITT framework. (2) Conduct
a small scale pi[INVESTIGATOR_806058], acceptability, and short-term outcomes of the adapted protocol on XR-NTX adherence and
relapse to opi[INVESTIGATOR_2441]. Rural justice-involved individuals on community supervision with OUD will be invited to initiate XR-NTX and
continue injections for up to three months in the community at the Little Flower Clinic in Hazard, KY.
Attachments
Subject Recruitment Methods & Advertising
Describe how the study team will identify and recruit subjects. Please consider the following items and provide additional information
as needed so that the IRB can follow each step of the recruitment process.
How will the study team identify potential participants?
Who will first contact [CONTACT_41907], and how?
Will you use advertisements? If so, how will you distribute those?
How and where will the research team meet with potential participants?
If applicable, describe proposed outreach programs for recruiting women, minorities, or disparate populations.
How you will minimize undue influence in recruitment?
Attach copi[INVESTIGATOR_41868] (emails, verbal scripts, flyers, posts, messages, etc.).
For additional information on recruiting and advertising:
IRB Application Instructions - Advertisements
PI [INVESTIGATOR_806059] 1 (focus groups) will include phone calls to health and behavioral health care providers and to community
supervision officers in District 11 (see recruitment script). Stakeholder who agree to participate in the focus groups (n=10) will be
invited to the one-time group which will be scheduled at a convenient community location (Center for Excellence in Rural Health in
Hazard, KY). Focus groups will be audio recorded unless anyone objects. The second set of qualitative interviews (n=15) will be
recruited in the same manner, individuals who agree to participate will be invited to complete a group or one-on-one interview which
will be scheduled at a convenient community location, over secure video conferencing (i.e., Zoom), or over the phone. Interviews will
be audio recorded unless anyone objects.
Recruitment for Aim 1 (focus groups) with incarcerated participants (n=20) will mirror the pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251]. Consistent with approaches used
in our current R01 trial (Staton-Tindall et al., 2015b), participant recruitment in the jail will occur once a month based on a randomized
schedule involving days of the week and times of the day. On each monthly recruitment day, a targeted number of offenders serving
time in the jail will be randomly sampled from the daily census sheet. All individuals residing in the jail on the day of screening will
have an equal opportunity of being selected, including minorities, as long as they are at least 18 years of age and not previously
screened for the study. Based on our previous work, and the demography of the overall jail population in rural Appalachia, it is
expected that participants will be about 32 years old on average, and 95% will be white (Staton et al., 2017). Focus groups will be
audio recorded unless anyone objects. The second set of interviews (n=15) will be recruited by [CONTACT_806106][INVESTIGATOR_4251], distributing flyers to those who are on community
supervision through the P&P office, distributing flyers at Kentucky River Regional Jail, and distributing flyers in the community (PR
stamped and clean flyer attached in the "Advertising" section below). Individuals who agree to participate will be invited to complete a
Section 11 Page 2 of 1143830
group or one-on-one interview which will be scheduled at a convenient community location, over secure video conferencing (i.e.,
Zoom), or over the phone. Interviews will be audio recorded unless anyone objects.
Aim 2: Randomly selected participants will be initially screened to assess recent high-risk opi[INVESTIGATOR_2441]. Face-to-face screening
(estimated 10 minutes) will be conducted by [CONTACT_23164]. The session will include informed consent and an emphasis on
the voluntary nature of participation. Consenting participants will be administered the NIDA-modified ASSIST (NIDA, 2009) to
measure high risk opi[INVESTIGATOR_2441], including injection, prior to entering jail. The ASSIST was developed by [CONTACT_38375]
(WHO, 2002) for use in primary health care settings, and modified by [CONTACT_133312] (2009) to separate categories of prescription opi[INVESTIGATOR_806060]. Participants in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_806061]-NTX treatment,
as well as their probation/parole status following release. See additional screening details in "research procedures" below.
**During COVID-19 restrictions, individuals on community supervision who are at high risk for relapse or overdose (as determined by
[CONTACT_806107]/or P&P officer) will be referred to the study for eligibility screening. Once COVID-[ADDRESS_1112696] information for the
study team, will be prepared for mailing by [CONTACT_806108] P&P (letter is attached in "research procedures" below). P&P will
distribute sealed letters to individuals on supervision in Perry County. Flyers (attached in the "Advertising" section) will be distributed
to the Perry Co P&P office, KRRJ, and our research office to recruit individuals who may be eligible for Aim 2.
Flyers will be used to recruit individuals to complete interviews for Aim 1 (Flyer interview 2021).
Flyers will be hung at the Perry Co P&P office, at KRRJ, and in our research office to recruit individuals for Aim 2 (Flyer in jail 2021
and Flyer 2021).
Attachments
Section [ADDRESS_1112697]?
What will study participants be expected to do?
How long will the study last?
Outline the schedule and timing of study procedures.
Provide visit-by-visit listing of all procedures that will take place.
Identify all procedures that will be carried out with each group of participants.
Describe deception and debrief procedures if deception is involved.
Differentiate between procedures that involve standard/routine clinical care and those that will be performed specifically for this
research project. List medications that are explicitly forbidden or permitted during study participation.
All research procedures for Phase 1 (focus groups for intervention development) and Phase 2 (small RCT) including screening,
medical evaluation, HIV/HCV testing, baseline interviews, primary measures, and follow-up interviews are discussed in the attached
Research Strategy. Also, attached is a medication guide for Vivitrol that will be given to participants. Research procedures to
understand study trends related to medications for opi[INVESTIGATOR_2427] (MOUD), as well as factors which may affect the feasibility and
acceptability of a larger trial are attached in the Qualitative Interview file.
Follow-up interviews will be conducted in person or over the phone. When [LOCATION_006] staff conduct a phone interview they will be in a private
location and will encourage the participant to do the same to protect confidentiality.
**During COVID-19 restrictions, we propose several temporary changes to the research procedures, which are outlined in the
attached table. Face-to-face procedures will be conducted unless [LOCATION_006] research staff are unable to physically meet with the participant
due to reasons beyond [LOCATION_006] research staff control (e.g., COVID-19 restrictions). Procedures that cannot be shifted to virtual
procedures will be conducted by [CONTACT_806109]. As soon as the jail opens to in person
visitors, we will resume normal IRB-approved protocol procedures. A COVID screener (attached) will be used to assess participants
for COVID symptoms prior to in person sessions.
Attachments
Attach Type File Name
[CONTACT_806130] 2.1b Form_Brief Initial Screening_changes marked.pdf
ResearchProcedures 2.1d Form_Screening Assessment_changes marked.pdf
ResearchProcedures Vivitrol Protocol Revisions Summary Table 10 1 21 Changes Marked.pdf
ResearchProcedures XR-NTX Qualitative Interview_ 6 24 21.docx
ResearchProcedures Letter to P&P_revised_v2.pdf
ResearchProcedures Letter to P&P_revised_v2_marked.pdf
ResearchProcedures COVID Screener.pdf
ResearchProcedures Research Proc 1 3 20 marked.pdf
ResearchProcedures Research Proc 1 3 20.pdf
ResearchProcedures Recruitment and Screening_Full Protocol_6 7 19.pdf
ResearchProcedures Vivitrol info handout.pdf
Data Collection & Research Materials
In this section, please provide the following:
Describe all sources or methods for obtaining research materials about or from living individuals (such as specimens, records,
surveys, interviews, participant observation, etc.), and explain why this information is needed to conduct the study.
For each source or method described, please list or attach all data to be collected (such as genetic information, interview scripts,
survey tools, data collection forms for existing data, etc.).
If you will conduct a record or chart review, list the beginning and end dates of the records you will view.
Data collection for this study will include qualitative data collected from focus groups (audio recorded unless anyone objects) during
Phase 1, and Phase [ADDRESS_1112698] data including screening, medical evaluation, interview at baseline, and in person or over the phone
follow-up interview (all described in the attached Research Strategy). A DRAFT data collection instrument is included as an
attachment. 
Aim 1 qualitative interview questions to understand study trends related to medications for opi[INVESTIGATOR_2427] (MOUD), as well as
factors which may affect the feasibility and acceptability of a larger trial are attached under the Research Procedures section as the
Qualitative Interview.
Attachments
Section 11 Page 4 of 1143830
Resources
Describe the availability of the resources and adequacy of the facilities that you will use to perform the research. Such resources may
include:
Staffing and personnel, in terms of availability, number, expertise, and experience;
Computer or other technological resources, mobile or otherwise, required or created during the conduct of the research;
Psychological, social, or medical services, including equipment needed to protect subjects, medical monitoring, ancillary care, or
counseling or social support services that may be required because of research participation;
Resources for communication with subjects, such as language translation/interpretation services.
The proposed study will use the approach established by [CONTACT_806110] R01 (IRB #12-0372) in the Kentucky River Regional Jail. The
target jail study site has a daily average census of approximately 165 women, and a yearly census of 370 women. Based on our
current trial, 80% are anticipated to meet the substance use criteria for the study during the proposed recruitment period (n=296).
Based on our previous work with the population, we anticipate 65% of women who are randomly selected for the study will enroll in
the protocol. The jails provides medical services and will be available to respond to referrals for HIV/HCV testing procedures if
needed. However, because many of the participants in the study are expected to be re-entering the community, HIV/HCV referrals will
also be made to local health departments and community based services as well. 
Additional available resources for this project include a Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_806062]
(R21-AA017937; R01-11030397), as well as a research staff who work on the current R01 trial with experience with substance users
in jails. Co-Investigator [CONTACT_130907] is a board-certified psychiatrist and addiction physician in the University of Kentucky Department of
Behavioral Science and the Center on Drug and Alcohol Research. [CONTACT_130907] has a rich history of conducting medication-assisted
treatment including a pi[INVESTIGATOR_443562] P.I. for a 36-site Phase III randomized double-dummy double-blind outpatient clinical trial
evaluating the efficacy and safety of subcutaneous buprenorphine weekly and monthly injections among adults with moderate –
severe opi[INVESTIGATOR_2427]. [CONTACT_130907] will oversee all clinical operations including training for the study nurse. She will lead the
development of the adapted medication protocol developed during phase one of the study and monitor medication delivery during
the RCT open-label trial in phase 2.
Administration of the XR-NTX injections will be carried out under subcontract with The Little Flower Clinic in Hazard, KY. The clinic is
designated by [CONTACT_806111] a Rural Health Clinic and is a Federally Qualified Health Center. The clinic is a KY DOC
contracted site to administer XR-NTX (Vivitrol®) injections and wrap around services, including behavioral therapy, to those released
from prison and seeking to obtain help with their addiction in the Hazard/Perry County area. In addition to a team of Nurse
Practitioners who will deliver the XR-NTX injections, the clinic has a full-time therapi[INVESTIGATOR_806063] (LCSW) and a dually licensed
Psychiatric Nurse Practitioner. For this project, the Little Flower Clinic will serve as the service provider for XR-NTX, re-entry
behavioral therapy, and on-going XR-NTX injections in the treatment-as-usual condition.
Potential Risks & Benefits
Risks
Describe any potential risks – including physical, psychological, social, legal, ability to re-identify subjects, or other risks. Assess
the seriousness and likelihood of each risk.
Which risks may affect a subject’s willingness to participate in the study?
Describe likely adverse effects of drugs, biologics, devices or procedures participants may encounter while in the study.
Qualitative research  - describe ethical issues that could arise while conducting research in the field and strategies you may use
to handle those situations.
Describe any steps to mitigate these risks.
Benefits
Describe potential direct benefits to study participants – including diagnostic or therapeutic, physical, psychological or emotional,
learning benefits. This cannot include incentives or payments.
State if there are no direct benefits.
Describe potential benefits to society and/or general knowledge to be gained.
Describe why potential benefits are reasonable in relation to potential risks. If applicable, justify why risks to vulnerable subjects are
reasonable to potential benefits.
The procedures to be used by [CONTACT_806112]-entry XR-NTX studies (Lee et al., 2016; Gordon et al., 2017). The potential risks will be discussed with participants during
recruitment, screening, and the informed consent process to assist them in making a voluntary decision as to whether they wish to
participate in the study protocol. The primary risks associated with participation in this research are those related to oral naltrexone
(12.5 mg) and Vivitrol® administration. Naltrexone is an opi[INVESTIGATOR_806064], if any, opi[INVESTIGATOR_806065]. VIVITROL®
(naltrexone for extended-release injectable suspension) is a microsphere formulation of naltrexone for suspension and is
administered by [CONTACT_80626]. It is designed as a once-monthly medication for the treatment of opi[INVESTIGATOR_2561], as well
as the prevention of relapse to opi[INVESTIGATOR_676872].
Potential side-effects of Vivitrol® and oral naltrexone (12.5 mg) will be fully explained to participants during informed consent and will
Section 11 Page 5 of 1143830
include the FDA approved package insert for the medication (http://www.alkermes.com/products/vivitrol). The most common side
effects of both oral naltrexone and Vivitrol® include nausea, tiredness, headache, dizziness, vomiting, decreased appetite, painful
joints, and muscle cramps. In addition, common side effects may also include cold symptoms, trouble sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007], and toothache.
Possible side effects also include risk of opi[INVESTIGATOR_806066]-blocking effects of the medication. Specifically for Vivitrol®, it is also possible that
participants may experience injection site reactions, including intense pain, swelling, lumps, blisters, open wound, or a dark scab.
Naltrexone may also be associated with increasing the risk for liver damage or hepatitis. While the medical evaluation for this protocol
will include a liver function test, participants will also be monitored closely through the trial for symptoms of liver problems including
stomach area pain lasting more than a few days, yellowing of the whites of the eyes, dark urine, and tiredness. Other possible side
effects include depressed mood, allergic pneumonia, and serious allergic reactions. The risk of serious adverse effects is low,
especially using our screening procedures to exclude those that need inpatient detoxification or with LFTs five times the upper limit of
normal. The study protocol that is developed for Aim 1 will also include additional study procedures, medical staff coverage, and
other strategies for handling any potential adverse events. 
In addition to possible risks associated with the medications, other potential psychological risks are primarily related to being asked
questions in the interview that they do not feel comfortable asking. It is possible, that a participant may experience anxiety, emotional
distress, or other negative reactions due to the content of the interview questions, HIV/HCV testing procedures, and/or treatment
participation. Based on our experiences working with this population, such occurrences are rare. Participants will be assured that they
do not need to answer anything they do not feel comfortable answering and that they can withdraw at any time with referrals to the
local Little Flower Clinic for any medical concerns. These risks will be discussed with each potential study participant during the
informed consent process, as well as safeguards in place to provide study protections. If the participant’s anxiety reaches a
significant concern for the participant, she/he will be removed from the study and provided with a referral for mental health and
substance abuse treatment in the community.
The proposed study has potential benefits. First, study participants will have equal opportunity to be screened for high-risk opi[INVESTIGATOR_806067]. Second, participants will have the opportunity to participate in a thorough medical evaluation including
urinalysis, pregnancy testing, LFT, and HIV and HCV pre-test counseling and testing with results provided during the baseline. Some
previous research in by [CONTACT_806113]/or laboratory findings were detected that resulted in treatment of these problems. Third, based on
the empi[INVESTIGATOR_806068]-NTX, it is expected that study participants will benefit from receiving the medication and addiction
services to decrease illicit drug use and reduce risk for relapse and overdose during the high-risk period of community re-entry.
Fourth, there will be significant potential benefits to science because the study will provide important information about the feasibility,
acceptability, and short term outcomes associated with an effective, life-saving medication for opi[INVESTIGATOR_806069]-risk
women in rural areas who otherwise face enormous challenges to accessing treatment. Finally, the project will generate important
information related to the feasibility of XR-NTX treatment for rural drug users, providing the formative work needed to advance
access to treatment through criminal justice venues which can be tailored to high-risk and underserved populations.
Available Alternative Opportunities/Treatments
Describe alternative treatments or opportunities that might be available to those who choose not to participate in the study, and which
offer the subject equal or greater advantages. If applicable, this should include a discussion of the current standard of care
treatment(s).
There are no alternatives to participation in this evaluation project except not participating.
Back to Top
Records, Privacy, and Confidentiality
Specify where the data and/or specimens will be stored and how the researcher will ensure the privacy and confidentiality of both.
Specify who will have access to the data/specimens and why they need access.
Describe how data will be managed after the study is complete:
If data/specimens will be maintained, specify whether identifiers will be removed from the maintained information/material.
If identifiers will not be removed, provide justification for retaining them and describe how you will protect confidentiality.
If the data/specimens will be destroyed, verify that this will not violate retention policies  and will adhere to applicable facility
requirements.
If this study will use de-identified data from another source, describe what measures will be taken to ensure that subject identifiers are
not given to the investigator.
If applicable, describe procedures for sharing data/specimens with collaborators not affiliated with [LOCATION_006].
For additional considerations: 
Return of Research Results or Incidental Research Findings  
HIPAA policies  
FERPA policies  
Procedures for Transfer agreements  
Information regarding multi-site studies  
Section 11 Page 6 of 1143830
NIH Genomic Data Sharing (GDS) Policy  
Digital Data
Self-reported behavioral data and medical information will be collected at screening, medical evaluation, baseline, and [ADDRESS_1112699]-
release from jail for follow-up interviews, along with HIV/HCV Orasure tests. The study interviewer will attend an intensive week-long
training that covers topi[INVESTIGATOR_806070]-based data collection. For
example, training will be conducted on the importance of ensuring that all materials brought in to the jail are also taken out of the jail by
[CONTACT_236410] (e.g., pens, study materials, etc). A variety of behavioral data including demographic characteristics, past drug use,
injection drug use, health and mental health problems, and service utilization will be collected through self-reports using Computer
Assisted Personal Interviewing. administration with a portable computer (DELL notebook). During the CAPI [INVESTIGATOR_806071],
the trained interviewer will read the instructions, questions, and response categories from a laptop and directly enter the participant’s
response. The CAPI [INVESTIGATOR_806072] (QDS™) from Nova Research
(http://www.novaresearch.com). Data with the participant ID and all other identifying information (consent form, locator sheet, payment
forms) will be stored separately. Consent forms, locator sheets, and payment forms will be managed on site. Security of the data will
be maintained through regular computer server backups and CD Rom back-ups secured in fire-safe locked boxes. No data will be
provided to jail officials or any other criminal justice official.
Every effort will be made in the protection of human participants and issues relating to participant confidentiality. Because this study
will involve individuals who are incarcerated, this study’s human participants’ protocol will comply fully with the special protections
pertaining to behavioral research involving prisoners as participants. A Certificate of Confidentiality will be obtained from the National
Institute on Drug Abuse which, under federal statute PL [ADDRESS_1112700] matching identifiers to specific participants will be maintained in a locked file in
the PI’s office. Research data will be reported in aggregate form only. Computer files will be retained and all electronic data will be
password protected, stored on secure [LOCATION_006]-maintained servers, and accessible only be the researchers on this study. In addition, no
DOC personnel (including jail staff or personnel, probation/parole officers, etc) will be asked about participants information for
locating and tracking for follow-up. The consent form includes a statement about access to state-maintained records including the
KOMS system (Kentucky Offender Management System) which is standard for offender protocols at [LOCATION_006] CDAR. Information on
participants in the study should be available from those systems and through self-reported locator information. While every effort will
be made to keep study information confidential, one arm of the study will be receiving on-going injections in the P&P office.
Participants will reminded that no study information will be shared with their officers, but it may be possible for the officer to see them
visiting with the study nurse.
All volunteer information and data are confidential and never released to anyone outside of the project purview without the volunteer’s
written authorization. The identity of participants is never revealed in research reports. All intake documentation that contains PHI is
handled separately from the actual data collected during the study. For instance, written records with PHI will be stored in a separate,
locked area from all other de-identified data and codes linking the two will be kept under lock and key. Electronic data with PHI (e.g.,
blood and urine test results) will stored in the password protected medical database that has limited to only the study nurse, [CONTACT_806141], and [CONTACT_806142]. Incidental materials containing subject identifiers will be shredded. Identification and access of identified
data/specimens will be available only to study investigators when it is detrimental to subject safety or the conduct of the research
protocol. 
Medical risks to study participants will be minimized by [CONTACT_806114], standardized injection procedures, ongoing
regular check-in calls with the study nurse, and 24-hour 7 day per week medical on-call medical. Precipi[INVESTIGATOR_806073]® dosing during incarceration following opi[INVESTIGATOR_806074]. The use of the
12.5 mg oral naltrexone challenge and 2 hour wait period will ensure there is no precipi[INVESTIGATOR_2613] (as evidence by [CONTACT_806115]) prior to the injection, as well as ensuring that the injection is only given to those participants without any opi[INVESTIGATOR_806075]. Ensuring no precipi[INVESTIGATOR_806076] (Gordon et al., 2015; Lee et
al., 2017), and [CONTACT_130907]’s has clinical experience inducting patients in this manner. Thus, it is unlikely that there will be precipi[INVESTIGATOR_806077]-NTX induction among subjects using full agonist opi[INVESTIGATOR_806078]. Additionally, LFTs are evaluated as part of
the medical evaluation. The proposed dosing of Vivitrol® is within the therapeutic dose range indicated by [CONTACT_1622]-approved drug
label. Vivitrol® will be stored and dispensed through the Little Flower Clinic by [CONTACT_806116]. For on-going dosing in the community, if a participant presents to either community site (The Little Flower Clinic or the
P&P office) for injections and appears intoxicated, the study nurse will assess the person based on the safety protocol established
during Aim 1, and consistent with the protocol for The Little Flower Clinic. In most cases, the injection will be held and a safe ride
home will be arranged with a next day (if after 5pm) or same-day medical evaluation (if prior to 5pm) at the Little Flower Clinic to
determine the need for any further course of action. Treatment response will be monitored on a regular basis by [CONTACT_74309], and
counseling and medical staff at the Little Flower Clinic will work closely with participants to help them address ongoing illicit drug use
and relapse, which are inherent aspects of opi[INVESTIGATOR_2561]. 
Participants will also work closely with staff at the Little Flower Clinic to obtain birth control during the course of the study due to the
potential consequences of unintended pregnancy among women maintaining XR-NTX (Heil et al., 2016). Any participant becomes
pregnant during the study will be removed from the study and referred to substance abuse program that regularly treats pregnant
women with OUD. Alternatively, if the woman desires detoxification, she will be referred to the detox program within [ADDRESS_1112701]. All participants, regardless of completing or not completing the study, are offered
assistance with finding ongoing treatment in the community (such as The Little Flower Clinic) in order to further decrease the risk of
relapse and ongoing illicit drug use. 
A Certificate of Confidentiality has been obtained from the National Institute on Drug Abuse which, under federal statute PL 94-255,
prohibits all data collected during the course of a study protocol from being used in any legal or criminal proceedings. In addition,
participants will be verbally informed and given a copy of the signed informed consent, which describes the study purpose and the
Section [ADDRESS_1112702] be retained for a minimum of 6 years after study closure. Do
you confirm that you will retain all IRB-related records for a minimum of 6 years after study closure?
Yes No
Back to Top
Payment
Describe the incentives (monetary or other) being offered to subjects for their participation. If monetary compensation is offered,
indicate the amount and describe the terms and schedule of payment. Please review this guidance  for more information on payments
to subjects, including restrictions and expectations.
Aim 1: Participants will receive $25 or a [LOCATION_006] promotional item for completing the interview. 
Aim 2: Participants will receive $25 for taking part in the screening, $25 research interviews for study at baseline and at follow-up (3-
months post release). And, if participants complete all data collection activities, they can earn an additional $25. Participants will have
the opportunity to earn up to $[ADDRESS_1112703] of services and/or tests that will not be paid for by [CONTACT_23638]/or the study (e.g., MRI, HIV). Keep in mind that a
subject will not know what is “standard” – and thus not covered by [CONTACT_456]/study – unless you tell them.
There is no cost to participants in the study.
Data and Safety Monitoring
The IRB requires review and approval of data and safety monitoring plans for greater than minimal risk research or NIH-funded/FDA-
regulated clinical investigations.
If you are conducting greater than minimal risk research, or your clinical investigation is NIH-funded, describe your Data and
Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP). Click here for additional guidance on developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a Data and Safety Monitoring Plan .
If this is a non-sponsored investigator-initiated protocol considered greater than minimal risk research, and if you are planning on
using a Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) as part of your DSMP, click here for additional guidance  for information to
include with your IRB application.
The study Data Safety and Monitoring Plan is included as an attachment.
Future Use and Sharing of Research Data
If the results of this study will be used by [CONTACT_41915], please
address the following:
list the biological specimens and/or information that will be kept
briefly describe the types, categories and/or purposes of the future research
describe any risks of the additional use
describe privacy/confidentiality protections that will be put into place
describe the period of time specimens/information may be used
describe procedures for sharing specimens/information with secondary researchers
describe the process for, and limitations to, withdrawal of specimens/data
Data will not be used for other studies or shared.
Are you recruiting or expect to enroll Non-English Speaking Subjects or Subjects from a Foreign Culture ? (does not include
short form use for incidentally encountered non-English subjects)
Yes No
Section 11 Page 8 of 1143830
Non-English Speaking Subjects or Subjects from a Foreign Culture
Recruitment and Consent:
Describe how information about the study will be communicated to potential subjects appropriate for their culture, and if
necessary, how new information about the research may be relayed to subjects during the study. 
When recruiting Non-English-speaking subjects, provide a consent document in the subject’s primary language. After
saving this section, attach both the English and translated consent documents in the “Informed Consent" section.
Cultural and Language Consultants:
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_41871].
This person should be familiar with the culture of the subject population and/or be able to verify that translated
documents are the equivalent of the English version of documents submitted.
The consultant should not be involved with the study or have any interest in its IRB approval.
Please include the name, address, telephone number, and email of the person who agrees to be the cultural
consultant for your study.
ORI staff will facilitate the review process with your consultant. Please do not ask them to review your protocol
separately.
For more details, see the IRB Application Instructions on Research Involving Non-English Speaking Subjects or Subjects
from a Foreign Culture.
Local Requirements:
If you will conduct research at an international location, identify and describe:
relevant local regulations
data privacy regulations
applicable laws
ethics review requirements for human subject protection
Please provide links or sources where possible. If the project has been or will be reviewed by a local ethics review board,
attach a copy in the “Additional Information/Materials” section. You may also consult the current edition of the International
Compi[INVESTIGATOR_222733] 11 Page 9 of 1143830
Does your study involve HIV/AIDS research and/or screening for other reportable diseases (e.g., Hepatitis C, etc…) ?
Yes No
HIV/AIDS Research
If you have questions about what constitutes a reportable disease and/or condition in the state of Kentucky, see ORI’s
summary sheet: “Reporting Requirements for Diseases and Conditions in Kentucky" [ PDF].
HIV/AIDS Research:  There are additional IRB requirements for designing and implementing the research and for
obtaining informed consent. Describe additional safeguards to minimize risk to subjects in the space provided below.
For additional information, visit the online IRB Survival Handbook  to download a copy of the "Medical IRB's requirements
for Protection of Human Subjects in Research Involving HIV Testing" [D65.0000] [ PDF], and visit the Office for Human
Research Protections web site  for statements on AIDS research, or contact [CONTACT_41916] 859-257-
9428.
HIV/HCV testing procedures are covered under Research Procedures. Testing procedures will be using FDA and CDC
approved for ORAQUICK Advance® HIV and HCV Rapid Testing. Testing of subjects will be conducted on a voluntary basis
at all interview contacts. As such, none of the subjects will be coerced in any way to submit to testing. They will also be
asked to consent for release of any positive HIV screen to the state Department for Public Health in Frankfort knowing that a
HIV care coordinator may be contact[CONTACT_806117]-up. In addition: (a) HIV/HCV test results collected at the
initial assessment points will be used for research purposes only and will not be made available to correctional or treatment
program authorities; (b) all HIV/HCV testing will include pre- and post-test counseling following Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC) protocols; (c) subjects testing positive for HIV/HCV infection will be given referral information as to
the appropriate community resources for counseling and treatment, and assisted in contact[CONTACT_806118].
PI-Sponsored FDA-Regulated Research
Is this an investigator-initiated study that:                                                                                                                                                 
          Back to Top
1) involves testing a Nonsignificant Risk (NSR) Device, or
2) is being conducted under an investigator-held Investigational New Drug (IND) or Investigational Device Exemption (IDE)?
Yes No
PI-Sponsored FDA-Regulated Research
If the answer above is yes, then the investigator assumes the regulatory responsibilities of both the investigator and sponsor.
The Office of Research Integrity provides a summary list of sponsor IND regulatory requirements for drug trials [PDF ], IDE
regulatory requirements for SR device trials [ PDF], and abbreviated regulatory requirements for NSR device trials [ PDF]. For
detailed descriptions see FDA Responsibilities for Device Study Sponsors  or FDA Responsibilities for IND Drug Study
Sponsor-Investigators .
Describe the experience/knowledge/training (if any) of the investigator serving as a sponsor (e.g., previously held an
IND/IDE); and
Indicate if any sponsor obligations have been transferred to a commercial sponsor, contract research organization (CRO),
contract monitor, or other entity (provide details or attach FDA 1571).
IRB policy requires mandatory training for all investigators who are also FDA-regulated sponsors (see Sponsor-Investigator
FAQs ). A sponsor-investigator must complete the applicable Office of Research Integrity web based training, (drug or
device) before final IRB approval is granted.
Has the sponsor-investigator completed the mandatory PI-sponsor training prior to this submission?
Yes No
If the sponsor-investigator has completed equivalent sponsor-investigator training, submit documentation of the content for
the IRB’s consideration.
Attachments
Section 11 Page 10 of 1143830
Section 11 Page 11 of 1143830
HIPAA0 unresolved
comment(s)
Is HIPAA applicable? Yes No
(Visit ORI's Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) web page  to determine if your research falls under the HIPAA
Privacy Regulation.)
If yes, check below all that apply and attach the applicable document(s): 
HIPAA De-identification Certification Form
HIPAA Waiver of Authorization
Attachments
Section 12 Page 1 of 143830
STUDY DRUG INFORMATION0 unresolved
comment(s)
The term drug may include:
FDA approved drugs,
unapproved use of approved drugs,
investigational drugs or biologics,
other compounds or products intended to affect structure or function of the body, and/or
complementary and alternative medicine products  such as dietary supplements, substances generally recognized as safe (GRAS)
when used to diagnose, cure mitigate, treat or prevent disease, or clinical studies of e-cigarettes  examining a potential therapeutic
purpose.
Does this protocol involve a drug including an FDA approved drug; unapproved use of an FDA approved drug; and/or an
investigational drug?
Yes No
If yes, complete the questions below. Additional study drug guidance .
LIST EACH DRUG INVOLVED IN STUDY IN THE SPACE BELOW
Drug Name:
[CONTACT_806131] (Vivitrol)
Note: Inpatient studies are required by [CONTACT_23189][INVESTIGATOR_41873] (IDS) pharmacies
(Oncology or Non-Oncology) . Use of IDS is highly recommended, but optional for outpatient studies. Outpatient
studies not using IDS services are subject to periodic inspection by [CONTACT_429859]. 
Indicate where study drug(s) will be housed and managed:
Investigational Drug Service (IDS) [LOCATION_006] Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_41874]:
[LOCATION_006] Center on Drug and Alcohol Research
Little Flower Clinic (Hazard, KY)
Is the study being conducted under a valid Investigational New Drug (IND) application?
Yes No
If Yes, list IND #(s) and complete the following:
IND Submitted/Held by:
[CONTACT_2728]: Held By:
[CONTACT_10670]: Held By:
[CONTACT_41918]: Held By:
[CONTACT_41919]’s Expanded Access Program (e.g., Treatment
IND) or if this is an Individual Patient Expanded Access IND ( FDA Form 3926 ).
FDA's Expanded Access Program Information for Individual Patient Expanded Access INDs , and
attach the following:
FDA Form 3926 ;
FDA expanded access approval or correspondence;
Confirmation of agreement from manufacturer or entity authorized to provide access to the
product.
For guidance and reporting requirements at the conclusion of treatment see the Expanded Access
Section 13 Page 1 of 243830
SOP .
Complete and attach the required Study Drug Form  pi[INVESTIGATOR_41875] "Study Drug Form" for the
document type. Any applicable drug documentation (e.g., Investigator Brochure; approved
labeling; publication; FDA correspondence, etc.) should be attached using "Other Drug
Documentation" for the document type.
Attachments
Attach Type File Name
[CONTACT_806132]_final.pdf
Study Drug Form FDA approved label_oral naltrexone.pdf
Study Drug Form FDA approved label_depot naltrexone.pdf
Section 13 Page 2 of 243830
STUDY DEVICE INFORMATION0 unresolved
comment(s)
A DEVICE may be a:
component, part, accessory;
assay, reagent, or in-vitro diagnostic device;
software, digital health, or mobile medical app;
other instrument if intended to affect the structure or function of the body, diagnose, cure, mitigate, treat or prevent disease; or
a homemade device developed by [CONTACT_41920]-commercial entity and not approved for marketing by [CONTACT_8415].
For additional information, helpful resources, and definitions, see ORI's Use of Any Device Being Tested in Research web page .
Does this protocol involve testing (collecting safety or efficacy data) of a medical device including an FDA approved device,
unapproved use of an approved device, humanitarian use device, and/or an investigational device?
Yes No
[Note: If a marketed device(s) is only being used to elicit or measure a physiologic response or clinical outcome, AND, NO data will
be collected on or about the device itself, you may answer “no” above, save and exit this section, (Examples: a chemo drug study
uses an MRI to measure tumor growth but does NOT assess how effective the MRI is at making the measurement; an exercise study
uses a heart monitor to measure athletic performance but no safety or efficacy information will be collected about the device itself, nor
will the data collected be used for comparative purposes against any other similar device).]
If you answered yes above, please complete the following questions.
LIST EACH DEVICE BEING TESTED IN STUDY IN THE SPACE BELOW
Device Name:
[CONTACT_86440] a valid Investigational Device Exemption (IDE),
Humanitarian Device Exemption (HDE) or Compassionate Use?
Yes No
If Yes, complete the following: 
IDE or HDE #(s)
IDE/HDE Submitted/Held by:
[CONTACT_2728]: Held By:
[CONTACT_10670]: Held By:
[CONTACT_41918]: Held By:
 [CONTACT_41921] a Treatment IDE or Compassionate Use under the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) Expanded Access program.
For Individual or Small Group Expanded Access, see FDA's Early Expanded Access Program
Information , and attach the following:
FDA expanded access approval or sponsor’s authorization;
An independent assessment from an uninvolved physician, if available;
Confirmation of agreement from manufacturer or entity authorized to provide access to the
product.
For guidance and reporting requirements at the conclusion of treatment see the Medical Device SOP .
Section 14 Page 1 of 243830
Does the intended use of any research device being tested (not clinically observed) in this study meet the regulatory definition  of
Significant Risk (SR) device?
Yes. Device(s) as used in this study presents a potential for serious risk to the health, safety, or welfare of a subject and (1) is
intended as an implant; or (2) is used in supporting or sustaining human life; or (3) is of substantial importance in diagnosing,
curing, mitigating or treating disease, or otherwise prevents impairment of human health; or (4) otherwise presents a potential
for serious risk to the health, safety, or welfare of a subject.
No. All devices, as used in this study do not present a potential for serious risk to the health, safety, or welfare of
subjects/participants.
Complete and attach the required Study Device Form , pi[INVESTIGATOR_41876] "Study Device Form" for the document type. Any applicable device documentation
(e.g., Manufacturer information; patient information packet; approved labeling; FDA correspondence, etc.) should be attached using "Other Device
Documentation" for the document type.
Attachments
Section 14 Page 2 of 243830
RESEARCH SITES0 unresolved
comment(s)
To complete this section, ensure the responses are accurate then click "SAVE".
A) Check all the applicable sites listed below at which the research will be conducted. If none apply, you do not need to check any
boxes.
[LOCATION_006] Sites
[LOCATION_006] Classroom(s)/Lab(s)
[LOCATION_006] Clinics in Lexington
[LOCATION_006] Clinics outside of Lexington
[LOCATION_006] Healthcare Good Samaritan Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_41877]/Education Institutions
Fayette Co. School Systems *
Other State/Regional School Systems
Institutions of Higher Education (other than [LOCATION_006])
*Fayette Co. School systems, as well as other non-[LOCATION_006]
sites, have additional requirements that must be
addressed. See ORI's IRB Application Instructions -
Off-site Research  web page for details.
Other Medical Facilities
Bluegrass Regional Mental Health Retardation Board
Cardinal Hill Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_41878]’s Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_41879]. Centers
Correctional Facilities
Home Health Agencies
International Sites
Research activities conducted at performance sites that are not owned or operated by [CONTACT_41922], at sites
that are geographically separate from [LOCATION_006], or at sites that do not fall under the [LOCATION_006] IRB’s authority, are subject to special
procedures for coordination of research review. Additional information is required (see IRB Application Instructions - Off-
Site Research  web page), including:
A letter of support and local context is required from non-[LOCATION_006] sites. See Letters of Support and Local Context  on the
IRB Application Instructions - Off-Site Research  web page for more information.
Supportive documentation, including letters of support, can be attached below.
NOTE: If the non-[LOCATION_006] sites or non-[LOCATION_006] personnel are engaged in the research, there are additional federal and
university requirements which need to be completed for their participation. For instance, the other site(s) may need
to complete their own IRB review, or a cooperative review arrangement may need to be established with non-[LOCATION_006]
Section 15 Page 1 of 243830
sites.
Questions about the participation of non-[LOCATION_006] sites/personnel should be discussed with the ORI staff at (859) 257-
9428.
List all other non-[LOCATION_006] owned/operated locations where the research will be conducted:
Kentucky River Regional Jail
The Little Flower Clinic-an FWA for Little
Flower has been obtained due to NIH
funding requirements, and the IAA to reflect
that agreement is attached to the
application.
Describe the role of any non-[LOCATION_006] site(s) or non-[LOCATION_006] personnel who will be participating in your research.
Attachments
Attach Type File Name
-IRB Approval (non-[LOCATION_006]) Fully executed IAA for Staton [ZIP_CODE] between [LOCATION_006] and Little Flower Clinic.pdf
-Letter of Support & Local Context PerryCoLOS.pdf
-Letter of Support & Local Context LittleFlowerClinic_letter.pdf
B) Is this a multi-site study for which you are the lead investigator or [LOCATION_006] is the lead site ?Yes No
If YES, describe the plan for the management of reporting unanticipated problems, noncompliance, and submission of protocol
modifications and interim results from the non-[LOCATION_006] sites:
C) If your research involves collaboration with any sites and/or personnel outside the University of Kentucky, then it is considered
multisite research and IRB reliance issues will need to be addressed. This may include national multi-center trials as well local studies
involving sites/personnel external to [LOCATION_006]. If you would like to request that the University of Kentucky IRB ([LOCATION_006] IRB) serve as the lead
IRB for your study, or if you would like the [LOCATION_006] IRB to defer review to another IRB, please contact [CONTACT_941] [EMAIL_807] .
Section 15 Page 2 of 243830
RESEARCH ATTRIBUTES0 unresolved
comment(s)
Indicate the items below that apply to your research. Depending on the items applicable to your research, you may be required to
complete additional forms or meet additional requirements. Contact [CONTACT_41923] ([PHONE_728]) if you have questions about additional
requirements.
Not applicable
Check All That Apply
Academic Degree/Required Research
Alcohol/Drug/Substance Abuse Research
Biological Specimen Bank Creation (for sharing)
Cancer Research
CCTS-Center for Clinical & Translational Science
Certificate of Confidentiality
Clinical Research
Clinical Trial - Phase 1
Clinical Trial
Collection of Biological Specimens for internal banking and use
(not sharing)
Community-Based Participatory Research
Deception
Educational/Student Records (e.g., GPA, test scores)
Emergency Use (Single Patient)
Gene Transfer
Genetic Research
GWAS (Genome-Wide Association Study) or NIH Genomic Data
Sharing (GDS)
Human Cells, Tissues, and Cellular and Tissue Based Products
Individual Expanded Access or Compassionate Use
International Research
Planned Emergency Research Involving Exception from
Informed Consent
Recombinant DNA
Registry or data repository creation
Stem Cell Research
Suicide Ideation or Behavior Research
Survey Research
Transplants
Use, storage and disposal of radioactive material and radiation
producing devices
Vaccine TrialsFor additional requirements and information:
Cancer Research (MCC PRMC)
Certificate of Confidentiality  (look up
"Confidentiality/Privacy...")
CCTS (Center for Clinical and Translational
Science)
Clinical Research  (look up "What is the definition
of....)
Clinical Trial
Collection of Biological Specimens for Banking
(look up "Specimen/Tissue Collection...")
Collection of Biological Specimens  (look up
"Specimen/Tissue Collection...")
Community-Based Participatory Research  (look
up "Community-Engaged...")
Data & Safety Monitoring Board  (DSMB)
*For Medical IRB: Service Request Form  for
CCTS DSMB
Data & Safety Monitoring Plan
Deception*
*For deception research, also go to the E-IRB
Application Informed Consent section,
checkmark and complete "Request for Waiver
of Informed Consent Process"
Emergency Use (Single Patient) [attach
Emergency Use Checklist]  (PDF)
Genetic Research  (look up "Specimen/Tissue
Collection...")
Gene Transfer
HIV/AIDS Research (look up "Reportable
Diseases/Conditions")
Screening for Reportable Diseases [E2.0000]
(PDF)
International Research  (look up "International &
Non-English Speaking")
NIH Genomic Data Sharing (GDS) Policy  (PDF)
Planned Emergency Research Involving Waiver
of Informed Consent*
*For Planned Emergency Research Involving
Waiver of Informed Consent, also go to the E-
IRB Application Informed Consent section,
checkmark and complete "Request for Waiver
of Informed Consent Process"
Use, storage and disposal of radioactive material
and radiation producing devices
Section 16 Page 1 of 243830
Section 16 Page 2 of 243830
FUNDING/SUPPORT0 unresolved
comment(s)
If the research is being submitted to, supported by, or conducted in cooperation with an external or internal agency or funding program,
indicate below all the categories that apply. 
Not applicable
Check All That Apply
Grant application pending
(HHS) Dept. of Health & Human Services
(NIH) National Institutes of Health
(CDC) Centers for Disease Control &
Prevention
(HRSA) Health Resources and Services
Administration
(SAMHSA) Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration
(DoJ) Department of Justice or Bureau of
Prisons
(DoE) Department of Energy
(EPA) Environmental Protection Agency
Federal Agencies Other Than Those Listed
Here
Industry (Other than Pharmaceutical
Companies)
Internal Grant Program w/ proposal
Internal Grant Program w/o proposal
National Science Foundation
Other Institutions of Higher Education
Pharmaceutical Company
Private Foundation/Association
U.S. Department of Education
StateClick applicable listing(s) for additional requirements and information:
(HHS) Dept. of Health & Human Services
(NIH) National Institutes of Health
(CDC) Centers for Disease Control & Prevention
(HRSA) Health Resources & Services Administration
(SAMHSA) Substance Abuse & Mental Health Services
Administration
Industry (Other than Pharmaceutical Companies) [ IRB Fee Info ]
National Science Foundation
(DoEd) U.S. Department of Education
(DoJ) Department of Justice or Bureau of Prisons 
(DoE) Department of Energy Summary and Department of Energy
Identifiable Information Compliance Checklist
(EPA) Environmental Protection Agency
Other:
Specify the funding source and/or cooperating organization(s) (e.g., National Cancer Institute, Ford Foundation, Eli Lilly
& Company, South Western Oncology Group, Bureau of Prisons, etc.):
 National Institute on Drug Abuse
Add Related Grants
If applicable, please search for and select the OSPA Account number or Electronic Internal Approval Form (eIAF) #
(notif #) associated with this IRB application using the "Add Related Grants" button. 
If required by [CONTACT_38389], upload your grant using the "Grant/Contract Attachments" button.
Add Related Grants
Grant/Contract Attachments
Attach Type File Name
[CONTACT_806133]_Christa_3200002279_PADR1.pdf
Section 17 Page 1 of 243830
The research involves use of Department of Defense (DoD) funding, military personnel, DoD facilities, or other DoD resources.
(See DoD SOP  and DoD Summary  for details)
Yes No
Using the “attachments” button (below), attach applicable materials addressing the specific processes described in
the DoD SOP.
DOD SOP Attachments
Additional Certification: (If your project is federally funded, your funding agency may request an Assurance/ Certification/Declaration
of Exemption form.) Check the following if needed:
Protection of Human Subjects Assurance/Certification/Declaration of Exemption (Formerly Optional Form – 310)
Assurance/Certification Attachments
Section 17 Page 2 of 243830
OTHER REVIEW COMMITTEES0 unresolved
comment(s)
If you check any of the below committees, additional materials may be required with your application submission.
Does your research fall under the purview of any of the other review committees listed below? [ If yes, check all that apply and attach
applicable materials using the attachment button at the bottom of your screen. ]
Yes No
Institutional Biosafety Committee
Radiation Safety Committee
Radioactive Drug Research Committee
Markey Cancer Center (MCC) Protocol Review
and Monitoring Committee (PRMC)
Graduate Medical Education Committee (GME)
Office of Medical Education (OME)Additional Information
Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC)  - Attach required IBC
materials
Radiation Safety Committee (RSC)  - For applicability, see
instructions and attach form
Radioactive Drug Research Committee (RDRC)
Markey Cancer Center (MCC) Protocol Review and Monitoring
Committee (PRMC)**  - Attach MCC PRMC materials, if any, per
instructions.
Office of Medical Education (OME)
Graduate Medical Education Committee (GME)
Attachments 
** If your study involves cancer research, be sure to select "Cancer Research" in the "Research Attributes"
section.  ORI will send your research protocol to the Markey Cancer Center (MCC) Protocol Review and Monitoring
Committee (PRMC). The MCC PRMC  is responsible for determining whether the study meets the National Cancer Institute
(NCI) definition of a clinical trial and for issuing documentation to you (the investigator) which confirms either that PRMC
approval has been obtained or that PRMC review is not required. Your IRB application will be processed and reviewed
independently from the PRMC review.
Section 18 Page 1 of 143830
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION/MATERIALS0 unresolved
comment(s)
Do you want specific information inserted into your approval letter? Yes No
Approval Letter Details:
If you wish to have specific language included in your approval letter (e.g., serial #, internal tracking identifier, etc…), type that
language in the box below exactly as it should appear in the letter. The text you enter will automatically appear at the top of all
approval letters, identical to how you typed it, until you update it. Don't include instructions or questions to ORI staff as those will
appear in your approval letter. If these details need to be changed for any reason, you are responsible for updating the
content of this field.
Continuation 2022
Additional Materials:
If you have other materials you would like to include for the IRB's consideration, check all that apply and attach the corresponding
documents using the Attachments button below.
Detailed protocol
Dept. of Health & Human Services (DHHS) approved protocol (such as NIH sponsored Cooperative Group Clinical Trial)
Other Documents
Protocol/Other Attachments
Attach Type File Name
[CONTACT_806134]_101018_114859.pdf
Other Vivitrol info handout.pdf
Other FWA.pdf
Other Fully executed IAA for Staton [ZIP_CODE] between [LOCATION_006] and Little Flower Clinic.pdf
Other Little Flower Clinic Indivdual Invesigator Agreement Forms and Training Documentation.pdf
Protocol Little Flower Clinic Staff Individual Investigator Forms and Training Documentation.pdf
NOTE: Instructions for Dept. of Health & Human Services (DHHS)-approved protocol ]
If you have password protected documents, that feature should be disabled prior to uploading to ensure access
for IRB review.
To view the materials currently attached to your application, click “All Attachments” on the left menu bar.
Section 19 Page 1 of 143830
SIGNATURES (ASSURANCES)0 unresolved
comment(s)
All IRB applications require additional assurances by a Department Chairperson or equivalent (DA), and when applicable, a Faculty
Advisor or equivalent (FA). This signifies the acceptance of certain responsibilities and that the science is meritorious and deserving of
conduct in humans. The person assigned as DA should not  also be listed in the Study Personnel section, and the individual assigned
as FA should  be listed in the Study Personnel section.
For a list of responsibilities reflected by [CONTACT_41924], refer to "What does the Department Chairperson’s
Assurance Statement on the IRB application mean? " 
Required Signatures:
First
NameLast
NameRole DepartmentDate
Signed 
Carl LeukefeldDepartment
AuthorizationBehavioral
Science02/15/2018
11:04 AMView/Sign
Christa StatonPrincipal
Investigator[INVESTIGATOR_806079]02/14/2018
03:27 PMView/Sign
Department Authorization
 This is to certify that I have reviewed this research protocol and that I attest to the scientific validity and importance of
this study; to the qualifications of the investigator(s) to conduct the project and their time available for the project; that
facilities, equipment, and personnel are adequate to conduct the research; and that continued guidance will be provided
as appropriate. When the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_41882] a sponsor function, the investigator has been notified of the
additional regulatory requirements of the sponsor and by [CONTACT_41926] [INVESTIGATOR_41883], confirms
he/she can comply with them.
*If the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_41884], the Vice Chairperson or equivalent should complete
the "Department Authorization".
**IF APPLICABLE FOR RELIANCE: I attest that the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_41885], according to the information provided in the E-IRB application. The attached Reliance
Assurance Statement, signed by [CONTACT_458], confirms that he/she can comply with both sets of IRB
requirements.
Principal Investigator’s Assurance Statement
I understand the University of Kentucky's policies concerning research involving human subjects and I agree:
1. To comply with all IRB policies, decisions, conditions, and requirements;
2. To accept responsibility for the scientific and ethical conduct of this research study;
3. To obtain prior approval from the Institutional Review Board before amending or altering the research protocol or
implementing changes in the approved consent/assent form;
4. To report to the IRB in accord with IRB/IBC policy, any adverse event(s) and/or unanticipated problem(s) involving risks to
subjects;
5. To complete, on request by [CONTACT_41925], the Continuation/Final Review Forms;
6. To notify the Office of Sponsored Projects Administration (OSPA) and/or the IRB (when applicable) of the development of
any financial interest not already disclosed;
7. Each individual listed as study personnel in this application has received the mandatory human research protections
education (e.g., CITI);
8. Each individual listed as study personnel in this application possesses the necessary experience for conducting research
activities in the role described for this research study.
9. To recognize and accept additional regulatory responsibilities if serving as both a sponsor and investigator for FDA
regulated research.
Section [ADDRESS_1112704] that:
I have appropriate facilities and resources for conducting the study;
I am aware of and take full responsibility for the accuracy of all materials submitted to the IRB for review;
If applying for an exemption, I also certify that the only involvement of human subjects in this research study will be in the
categories specified in the Protocol Type: Exemption Categories section.
If applying for an Abbreviated Application (AA) to rely on an external IRB, I understand that certain items above (1, 3, 4, 7-8)
may not apply, or may be altered due to external institutional/IRB policies. I document my agreement with the Principal
Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_41881].
*You will be able to "sign" your assurance after you have sent your application for signatures (use Submission section). Please notify the
personnel required for signing your IRB application after sending for signatures. Once all signatures have been recorded, you will need
to return to this section to submit your application to ORI. 
Section 20 Page 2 of 243830
SUBMISSION INFORMATION0 unresolved
comment(s)
*** If this Continuation Review entails a change in the scope of your activities to include COVID-19 related research, please
insert “COVID19” at the start of your Project and Short Titles.***
Each Section/Subsection in the menu on the left must have a checkmark beside it (except this Submission section) indicating the
Section/Subsection has been completed. Otherwise your submission for IRB review and approval cannot be sent to the Office of
Research Integrity/IRB.
If applicable, remember to update the Approval Letter Details text box under the Additional Information section
If your materials require review at a convened IRB meeting which you will be asked to attend, it will be scheduled on the next available
agenda and you will receive a message to notify you of the date.
If you are making a change to an attachment, you need to delete the attachment, upload a highlighted version that contains the changes
(use Document Type of "Highlighted Changes"), and a version that contains the changes without any highlights (use the appropriate
Document Type for the item(s)). Do not delete approved attachments that are still in use.
Principal Investigator’s Assurance Statement
I understand the University of Kentucky’s policies concerning research involving human subjects, and I attest to:
1. Having reviewed all the investigational data from this study, including a compi[INVESTIGATOR_219216].
2. Having reviewed, if applicable, information from the sponsor including updated investigator brochures and data and safety
monitoring board reports.
I also attest that I have reviewed pertinent materials concerning the research and concluded either:
A. The human subject risk/benefit relationship is NOT altered, and that it is not necessary to modify the protocol or the informed
consent process,
OR,
B. The human subject risk/benefit relationship has been altered, and have previously submitted or am including with this
continuation review submission, a modification of the research protocol and informed consent process.
By [CONTACT_38379], I am providing assurances for the applicable items listed above.  
Your protocol has been submitted.
Section 21 Page 1 of 143830
 
Page 1 of 6 
 Combined Consent and Authorization to Participate in a Research Study 
 
KEY INFORMATION FOR MEDICATIONS FOR RURAL INDIVIDUALS WITH OUD 
PI[INVESTIGATOR_806080] 
11/9/21  
   
You are being invited to take part in a research study about injectable naltrexone (Vivitrol®) for opi[INVESTIGATOR_2427] (OUD) 
treatment among rural individuals who tr ansition from jail to the community.  
WHAT IS THE PURPOSE, PROCEDURES, AND DURATION OF THIS STUDY? There are two purposes for this research. First, we hope to desig n a medication (injectable naltrexone) protocol to reduce 
the risk for relapse to opi[INVESTIGATOR_806081]-entry. Second, we want to see if individuals who 
are transitioning from jail to the community or on community supe rvision will use injectable naltrexone and if it is helpful to  
them. Your commitment to this research  will be participation in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_806082] (Vivitrol ®), a 
FDA-approved medication for opi[INVESTIGATOR_806083] e with OUD, is offered to rural individuals with opi[INVESTIGATOR_806084].   
WHAT ARE REASONS YOU MIGHT CHOOSE TO VOLUNTEER FOR THIS STUDY? There are a few reasons you might volunteer for this study. First, study participants will have equal opportunity to be 
screened for high-risk opi[INVESTIGATOR_806085]. Second, partici pants will have the opportunity to participate in a thorough 
medical evaluation including urinalysis, pregnancy testing, liver function test. Thir d, based on the research for injectable 
naltrexone, it is expected that  study participants will benefit from receivin g the medication and addiction counseling and 
case management services to decrease illicit drug use and reduce risk for relapse and opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480]-involved overdose. Fourth, 
there will be significant potential benefits to  science because the study will provide important information about the feasibil ity, 
acceptability, and short-term outcomes associated with an effective, life-saving medication for opi[INVESTIGATOR_806086]-risk individuals in rural areas who otherwise face enormous challenges to accessing treatm ent. Finally, the project will 
generate important information related to the feasibility of in jectable naltrexone treatment for rural individuals with OUD, 
providing the needed work needed to advance access to treatment through criminal justice venues which can be tailored to 
high-risk and underserved populations. 
 
WHAT ARE REASONS YOU MIGHT CHOOSE NOT TO VOLUNTEER FOR THIS STUDY?  
You should not participate in this study if  you are not currently at least [ADDRESS_1112705] chronic pain conditions that require 
prescription opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438], or untreated medical and/or psychiatric conditions. You should not participate if you do not have or are 
unwilling to obtain Medicaid or other health insurance. If you choose not to participate in this study, you may choose to find 
other medical providers to treat you if  you have opi[INVESTIGATOR_806087].  
DO YOU HAVE TO TAKE PART IN THE STUDY? 
If you decide to take part in the study, it should be because y ou really want to volunteer. You will not lose any benefits or 
rights you would normally have if you choose not to volunteer. You can stop at any time during the study and still keep the 
benefits and rights you had before volunteering. If you do not want to take part in this st udy, it won’t affect your status wit h 
any criminal justice agency, treatment, parole, or other agency.  If you are currently on probation or parole, the researchers 
will not disclose any information about you or your participation in the study to the parole board or to a parole officer to influence their decisions without your  specific written authorization. 
 
WHAT ELSE DO YOU NEED TO KNOW? 
If you are under the supervision of the Kent ucky Department of Corrections (DOC), (including prisoners, parolees, awaiting 
sentencing for felony convictions), then note that: The DOC requires researchers to provi de the DOC with the name [CONTACT_806135]. By [CONTACT_806119], you are allowi ng the researcher to provide 
your name [CONTACT_806136]. The information will be sent to the DOC's Di rector of the Office  of Research and 
Legislative Services in Frankfort. The rese archer will not share any of your resear ch data or confidential information with 
the DOC. The DOC may ask you to sign a separate consent form that verifies that you are vo lunteering for a study that is 
not a part of the DOC. If you do not want to sign the DOC consent form, you should not choose to participate in this study, 
and if you chose not to sign the DOC consent we  would have to withdraw you from this study.  
WHAT IF YOU HAVE QUESTIONS , SUGGESTIONS OR CONCERNS? 
The person in charge of this study is Mi chele Staton, Ph.D. of the University of Kentucky, Department of  Behavioral Science. 
If you have questions, suggestions, or concerns regarding this  study or you want to withdraw from the study, her contact 
[CONTACT_86422] [PHONE_16815]. If you have any questions, suggestions  or concerns about your rights as a volunteer in this 
research, contact [CONTACT_197023] ([LOCATION_006]) Office of Research In tegrity (ORI) between the business hours of 
8am and 5pm EST, Monday-Friday at [PHONE_728] or toll free at [PHONE_730].
IRB Approval
12/1/2021
IRB # [ZIP_CODE]
IRB6
 
Page 2 of 6 
 DETAILED CONSENT 
 
ARE THERE REASONS WHY YOU WOULD NOT QUALIFY FOR THIS STUDY?  
 
You will not qualify for this study if you meet any of the followi ng criteria: 1) you are cu rrently pregna nt, or have 
a positive pregnancy test during the study medical screening; 2) you do not have a opi[INVESTIGATOR_806088]; 3) if you are currently in treatment with methadone or buprenorphine; 4) if you have a serious medical 
or psychiatric condition or abnormal laboratory results that would make it unsafe for you to participate; 5) 
require opi[INVESTIGATOR_806089]; 6) if you want to hurt yourself or end your life or 7) if you have a 
body mass index greater than 40. You will also not quality for this study if 8) you are not planning to be released 
from jail within 3 months and 9) you are not planning to live the Hazard/Perry County area. You will not qualify for the study if 10) you do not have or are unwilling to obtain Medicaid or other health insurance. 
 WHERE IS THE STUDY GOING TO TAKE PLACE AND HOW LONG WILL IT LAST? 
 
Because you have participated in the initial screening, y ou can now be referred for t he study medical evaluation 
with the study nurse from the Little Flower Clinic. The medi cal evaluation will take place at the Little Flower Clinic 
in Hazard and it will take approximately 1 hour. If you are medically eligible for the study, you will be asked to 
complete an interview with a research assistant which will be done in the jail (if you are incarcerated), over the 
phone, video conference call, or face-to-face at a location that is convenient for you. It will take about [ADDRESS_1112706] that is convenient for you, and it will also take about 1-2 hours. The total amount of time you will be asked to volunteer fo r data collection and medication visit sessions for this 
study is 10-12 hours over the next 3 months. The foll owing table shows visits and time commitments: 
 
Visit Description Time commitment 
Initial screening session  Completion of surveys to determine eligibility  [ADDRESS_1112707] Up to 3 hours 
2nd injection in community after release 
([ADDRESS_1112708] injection) Visit with nurse to get injectable naltrexone injection, visit with therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541], and visit with case manager at the Little 
Flower Clinic in Hazard Up to [ADDRESS_1112709] injection in community after release (30 days after 2
nd injection) Visit with nurse to get injectable naltrexone injection, visit with therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541], and visit with case manager at the Little 
Flower Clinic in Hazard Up to 2 hours 
4th injection in community after release 
([ADDRESS_1112710] injection) Visit with nurse to get injectable naltrexone injection, visit with therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541], and visit with case manager at the Little 
Flower Clinic in Hazard Up to 2 hours 
Follow-up study data collection intervie
w in 3 months Interview with [LOCATION_006] research assistant 1-2 hours 
 
WHAT WILL YOU BE ASKED TO DO?  
If you screen eligible to participate in the study, you will be asked to participate in a medical evaluation at the Little 
Flower Clinic in Hazard. As part of the medical evaluation, you will be asked a number of questions pertaining to 
your medical history. The nurse will also check your vital signs and collect a blood sample to help evaluate your basic body functioning (like your liver and kidney functioning, blood sugar, el ectrolyte and fluid balance) to help 
ensure that you are healthy enough to enter the trial. If you do not currently hav e Medicaid or other health insurance 
coverage, case managers at the Little Flower Clinic  can assist with the process to get you enrolled. 
 
If you meet all of the study eligibility cr iteria, you will be asked to complete a face-to-face, phone, or video conference 
call interview with a [LOCATION_006] research assi stant about your history of substance use, sexual activity, mental health, 
criminal justice involvement, need for treatment, and fee lings/attitudes about treatment. After completion of the [ADDRESS_1112711] injectable 
naltrexone dose (380 mg) will be administered via injection into a buttock right under your beltline. You will be given 
a card with the contact [CONTACT_181883] r the study nurse, as well as our study  physician ([CONTACT_806143]) and [CONTACT_806144] (study Principal Investigat or) if you have any issues with the injectable naltrexone dose.  
 You will be eligible for a monthly injection at the Little Flow er Clinic ([ADDRESS_1112712], KY) every [ADDRESS_1112713] ing on the days of the co mmunity injections and 
these samples may be observed by a member of the research te am. All samples will be ob served by a trained, 
same-sex staff member, meaning only female staff will obs erve samples provided by [CONTACT_806120]. 
 Both groups will be asked to take part in the baseline inte rview and 3-month follow-up interview with a [LOCATION_006] research 
assistant. Questions in the follow-up inte rview will be very similar to the ea rlier interview regarding drug use and 
related issues. However, it will also as k about any personal changes in  the services that you re ceive, as well as to 
provide a urine sample for a drug screen (if the interview is completed in person). In order to stay in touch with you 
for follow-up, you will also be asked to give locator informat ion during your initial interview. This includes the names, 
addresses, and phone numbers of indivi duals who would be most likely to know how to reach you. You are also 
asked to let the research team access information in st ate-maintained records (DOC KOMS files, behavioral health 
service records) including admission/ discharge/termination dates of treat ment services, number and kind of 
services received, discharges, diagnosis/other relevant clin ical information, court dates and actions, results of urine 
screens, time incarcerated, and other criminal activity in the study. The research team may also use other internet 
searches and social media sites like Facebook to try to find you for the follow-up. Please note that if you are in a 
residential treatment program or a jail facility at the time of your 3-month follow-up, the research team will attempt 
to contact [CONTACT_806121]-up.  
WHAT ARE THE POSSIBLE RI SKS AND DISCOMFORTS? 
 
The primary risks associated with participation in this rese arch are those related to oral naltrexone tablet (12.5 mg) 
and injectable naltrexone injection administration. You will be provided with a copy of the FDA medication guide for 
injectable naltrexone which explains all possible side effects. Naltrexone is an opi[INVESTIGATOR_806090], if any, 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_806065]. In other words, you will not get “high” as a result of taking this medication. While the risk of 
serious adverse effects is low, especi ally using our screening procedures, we want to make you aware that there 
are some possible side effects of using naltrexone. The most common side effects  of both medications include 
nausea, tiredness, headache, dizziness, vomiting, decreased appetite, painful joints, and muscle cramps. In 
addition, common side effects may also include cold symptoms, trouble sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007], and toothache. Possible side effects also include risk of opi[INVESTIGATOR_806091]. Therefore, use of inject able naltrexone may require a different pain management strategy in an 
emergency situation or if surg ery is required. Specifically, for inject able nal trexo ne, it is also p
 ossible that you may 
experience injection site reactions, incl uding intense pain, swelling, lumps, blisters, open wound, or a dark scab. An 
injection site reaction could be severe and require medica l intervention. Naltrexone may also be associated with 
increasing the risk for liver damage or hepatitis. While the m edical evaluation for this pr otocol will include a liver 
function test to rule out any liver co mplications, you will also be monitored cl osely through the trial for symptoms of 
liver problems including stomach area pain lasting more th an a few days, yellowing of the whites of the eyes, dark 
urine, and tiredness. Other possible side effects include depressed mood (which may be associated with suicidal 
thoughts), allergic pneumonia, and serious allergic reactions.   
 
In addition to possible risks associated with the medications , other potential psychological risks are primarily related 
to being asked questions in the intervie w that you do not feel comfortable a sking. It is possible, that you might 
experience anxiety, emotional distress, or other negative reactions due to the content of the interview questions, 
HIV/HCV testing procedures, and/or trea tment participation. Based on our experi ences working with this population, 
such occurrences are rare. Please know that you do not need to answer anything y ou do not feel comfortable [ADDRESS_1112714]. 
 
WILL YOU BENEFIT FROM TAKING PART IN THIS STUDY?  
 There is no guarantee that you will get any benefit from taking part in this  study. However, some people have 
experienced success with injectable naltrexone in reducing the risk for relapse to opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438].  
 
WHAT WILL IT COST YOU TO PARTICIPATE? 
 
There is no cost to you for participating in the study. If t here are other costs to you for any health conditions, you 
and/or your insurance company, Medicare, or Medicaid w ill be responsible for the costs of all care and treatment 
that you would normally receive. These are co sts that are considered medically necessa ry and will be part of the 
care you receive even if you do not take part in this study.  
WHO WILL SEE THE INFORMATION THAT YOU GIVE? 
 We will make every effort to keep private all research reco rds that identify you to the ex tent allowed by [CONTACT_2371]. Your 
information will be combined with information from other people taking part in the st udy. When we write about the 
study to share it with other researc hers, we will write about the combined in formation we have gathered on everyone 
in the study. You will not be personally i dentified in these papers or reports. We may publish the results of this 
study; however, we will keep your name [CONTACT_111040].  
 We will make every effort to prevent anyone who is not  on the research team from knowing that you gave us 
information, or what that in formation is. All research data will be kept in locked file cabinets in the office of the 
Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_806092]. Your research records with 
us will not include your name – we assign only a number to your file. All research data will be identified by [CONTACT_806122]. Some of your information including demographics, substance use and medical history, screening and lab results, medication monitoring, and clinical notes will be shared between the research team at the University of 
Kentucky and the Little Flower Clinic in order to provi de the best care possible during this medication trial. Any 
clinical files with the Little Flower Clinic that contain your name [CONTACT_806137]. 
Computer files will be retained and all electronic data w ill be password protected, stor ed on secure [LOCATION_006]-maintained 
servers, and accessible only to t he researchers on this study.  
 This research is covered by a Certific ate of Confidentiality from the National Institutes of Health. The researchers 
with this Certificate may not disclose or use information, documents, or biospecimens that may identify you in any federal, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, legisl ative, or other action, suit, or proceeding, or be used as 
evidence, for example, if there is a court subpoena, unless  you have consented for this use. Information, documents, 
or biospecimens protected by [CONTACT_806123], if there is a federal, state, or local law that requires disclosure (such as to report child abuse or communicable diseases but not for federal, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other 
proceedings, see below); if you have cons ented to the disclosure, including for your medical treatment; or if it is 
used for other scientific research, as allowed by [CONTACT_92452].  
 
The Certificate cannot be used to refuse a request for in formation from personnel of t he [LOCATION_002] federal or 
state government agency sponsoring t he project that is needed for auditing or program evaluation by [CONTACT_806124] r information that must be disclosed in order to meet the 
requirements of the federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA). You should understand  that a Certificate of 
Confidentiality does not prevent you from vo luntarily releasing information about y ourself or your involvement in this 
research. If you want your research information released to  an insurer, medical care provider, or any other person 
not connected with the research, you must provide consent to allo w the re se
 archers to release it. 
 Officials from the National Institutes of Health (National Institute on Dr ug Abuse, which funds this study) and the 
University of Kentucky may look at or  copy pertinent portions of records that  identify you. In addition, if you test 
positive for HIV or HCV and release your test result, t hat information will also be shared with the Kentucky 
Department of Public Health. However, it is the policy of  these agencies and these investigators that every attempt 
will be made to resist demands to release information that identifies you. When results of  this study are published, 
your name [CONTACT_55203].   [ZIP_CODE]
 
Page 5 of 6 
  
CAN YOU CHOOSE TO WITHDRAW  FROM THE STUDY EARLY?  
 
If you decide to take part in the study  you still have the right to decide at any  time that you no  longer want to 
continue. You will not be treated differently if you decide to st op taking part in the study. If you decide to stop the 
injectable naltrexone treatment, we would still like to do a 3-month follow-up interview. The individuals conducting the study may need to withdraw you from the study. This may occur if you have an unexpected reaction to the study 
medication, if you are not able to follow the directions they gi ve you, if they find that y our being in the study is of 
more risk than benefit to you, or if  the agency funding the study decides to stop the study early for a variety of 
reasons. If you become pregnant during t he course of the 3-month study trial, you will not be able to continue on 
study medication, but you are still invit ed to continue with the research study visits. the research team will provide 
you with a referral to treatment specifically for pr egnant women. Should you withdraw or be withdrawn, data 
collected up to that point will be kept.  ARE YOU PARTICIPATING, OR CAN YOU PARTICIPAT E, IN ANOTHER RESEARCH STUDY AT THE SAME 
TIME AS PARTICIPATING IN THIS ONE?  You cannot take part in this study if you are enrolled in any other study involving the delivery of medication for opi[INVESTIGATOR_46212] (such as methadone or buprenorphine) or another investigational medication or device. It is important to let the investigator/your doctor kn ow if you are in another research st udy. You should also discuss with the 
investigator before you agree to participate in anothe r research study while you are enrolled in this study. 
 WHAT HAPPENS IF YOU GET HURT OR SICK DURING THE STUDY?  
If you believe you are hurt or if you get sick because of something that is due to the study, you should call Michele 
Staton, PhD, ([PHONE_16815]) or the st udy physician Jenny Mullins, DO (606-4 87-9505) immediately. You may also 
call the study nurse, Allyson Williams, at the Little Flower Clinic at ([PHONE_16816]). Study staff will determine what 
type of treatment, if any, that is best for you at that time. It is important for you to understand that the University of 
Kentucky does not have funds set aside to  pay for the cost of any care or tr eatment that might be necessary because 
you get hurt or sick while taking part  in this study. Therefore, these cost s will be your responsibility. Also, the 
University of Kentucky will not pay for any wages you may lose if  you are harmed by [CONTACT_15365].  
 
WILL YOU RECEIVE ANY REWARDS FOR TAKING PART IN THIS STUDY?  
 
You will receive $25 for taking part in the research intervie ws for this study at baseli ne, $25 at follow-up (3-months 
post release), and a $25 completion bonus for all data collection activities. With the additional $[ADDRESS_1112715] the opportunity to earn up to $100 over the next 3 months. If you earn $[ADDRESS_1112716] YOUR DECISION 
TO PARTICIPATE? 
 You will be informed if the investigator s learn new information that could c hange your mind about  staying in the 
study. You may be asked to sign a new informed consent form  if the information is provided to you after you have 
joined the study.   
WILL YOU BE GIVEN INDIVIDUAL RESULTS FROM THE RESEARCH TESTS?  
 
Michele Staton, Principal Investigator, will contact [CONTACT_806125]/your fa mily’s health. (Incidental findings are unforeseen findings 
discovered during the course of the research that may affect you or your family’s health). 
 
WHAT ELSE DO YOU NEED TO KNOW?  
If you volunteer to take part in this study, you will be one of about 60 individuals to do so  through the University of 
Kentucky. The National Institute on Drug Abuse is providing financial suppo rt and/or material for this study. 
Alkermes is providing the injectable naltrexone for this study. [ZIP_CODE]
 
Page 6 of 6 
 A description of this clinic al trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov . This Web site will not include 
information that can identify you. At most, the Web site will include a summary of the results. You can search this 
Web site at any time. 
 
If you are under the supervision of the Kentucky Department of Corrections (D OC), (including prisoners, parolees, 
awaiting sentencing for felony convictions), then note that: The DOC requires researchers to provide the DOC 
with the name [CONTACT_806138]. By [CONTACT_806126], you are allowing 
the researcher to provide your name [CONTACT_806139] e to the DOC. The information will be sent to the DOC's 
Director of the Office of Research and Legislative Services  in Frankfort. The researcher will not share any of your 
research data or confidential information with the DOC.  The DOC may ask you to sign a separate consent form 
that verifies that you are volunteering for a study that is not a part of the DOC. If you do not want to sign the DOC 
consent form, you should not choose to participate in this  study, and if you chose not to sign the DOC consent we 
would have to withdraw you from this study.  
 
FUTURE USE OF YOUR PROTECTED HEA LTH INFORMATION OR SPECIMEN(S): 
 Your information or samples collected for this study wi ll NOT be used or shared for future research studies, even 
if we remove the identifiable information like y our name, medical record number, or date of birth.  
 
  
INFORMED CONSENT SIGNATURE [CONTACT_806140] a participant or are authorized to act on behalf of the participant. This consent includes the 
following: 
 Key Information Page 
 Detailed Consent  
 You will receive a copy of this consent form after it has been signed. 
  
___________________________________________           _____________________ 
Signature [CONTACT_111042]  
 
    
___________________________________________    
Printed name [CONTACT_111043]   
  
________________________________________________________________     ___________ 
Printed name [CONTACT_4007] [authorized] person obtaining informed consent             Date  
 
________________________________________________________________            ___________ Printed name [CONTACT_4007] [authorized] person who reviewed the cons ent over the phone (if applicable)        Date [ZIP_CODE]