 
Palliative care to improve quality of life in CHF and COPD_Protocol_v_ 05.08.[ADDRESS_49629]  
CAMPUS BOX F -490    TELEPHONE:  303 -724-1055   
Fax:  303 -724-0990  
 
Protocol #:    15-[ADDRESS_49630] Title:    Palliative care to improve quality of life in CHF and COPD  
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_47137], MD, MPH  
Version Date:    05.08.2018  
I. Hypotheses and Specific Aims :   
 
We will conduct a two site randomized clinical trial  (VA Eastern Colorado Health Care System [ VA ECHCS] 
and VA Puget Sound [ PSVAHCS ]) to determ ine whether an intervention to improve symptoms and to help 
Veterans adjust to living with Chronic Heart Failure ( CHF), Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease ( COPD ) 
and Interstitial Lung Disease (ILD)  improves quality of life. The intervention will also he lp Veterans 
communicate preferences for treatment with their providers. The intervention involves routine clinical care and 
no experimental drugs or devices.  The results will be directly relevant to Veterans who suffer with these 
illnesses and their famil ies, as well as to providers, leaders in VA Central Office, and other researchers. 
Furthermore, this study will generate information that supports the broader dissemination and implementation 
of the intervention and informs the development of future pallia tive care and team -based interventions in the 
VA.  Specific aims include:  
 
Aim 1 : Determine the effect of the intervention on (a) quality of life as a primary outcome, and (b) 
depression, symptom burden, advance care planning communication and documentatio n, disease -  
specific health status, emergency department visits, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], and mortality as secondary 
outcomes.  
Aim 2 : Examine the implementation of the intervention.  
Aim 2a : Assess the degree, barriers, and facilitators of implementation of various intervention  
components.  Identify which intervention  components and processes are most critical from the 
perspectives of patients, intervention team members, and primary care pro viders whose 
patients received the intervention.  
Aim 2b . Evaluate the resources (e.g., personnel time and other costs) associated with the 
intervention , and estimate the resources needed for implementation and maintenance of the 
intervention  in other VA se ttings.  
The brief study title is Advancing Symptom Alleviation with Palliative Treatment (ADAPT) and will 
be used with participants as it provides a simple acronym.  
 
 
II. Background and Significance :  
 
Among Veterans, CHF and COPD are top causes of poor quality of life, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], mortality, and health 
care costs.  While not as common, ILD also leads to poor quality of life , has few effective treatments, and has a 
poor prognosis.   While palliative  care is effective in advanced cancer, it has not been adequately studied in 
CHF, ILD, or  COPD.  Commonalities in CHF , ILD,  and COPD make them priorities for a palliative care 
intervention to improve quality of life in both populations.  CHF and COPD commo nly co -occur: there is a 20% 
chance a patient with COPD will have CHF, and a 30% chance a patient with heart failure will have COPD.1  
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_47138] -specific treatments CHF, ILD, and COPD , Veterans with these  illness es still suffer from the 
burdens of persistent, diverse symptoms and depression that reduce quality of life.  These burdens are 
remarkably similar in CHF , ILD, and COPD  despi[INVESTIGATOR_47139].   
 
Palliative care need #1: Poor quality of life in CHF , ILD and COPD is due to  similar  persistent, diverse 
symptoms and depression.  This is illustrated in the study conceptual model ( Figure 1 ), which is based on 
 
Palliative care to improve quality of life in CHF and COPD_Protocol_v_ 05.08.2018  integrating elements of Lenz’ unpleasant symptom theory2 into an adaptation of the Wilson and Cleary model 
of health related quality of life.3  As illustrated in the conceptual m odel, i n CHF , ILD,  and COPD, t he symptom 
experience and depression  exert major  influence s on health -related qua lity of life.  
1. Symptom experience: p ersistent, diverse s ymptoms .  Patients who have CHF , ILD or COPD are 
burdened by [CONTACT_47173] -related  symptoms of breathlessness  (44-85%)  and fatigue (66-85%) as 
well as pain (38-58%)  and other non-disease related symp toms that  reduce quality of life and persist 
over time .4-11  In CHF, a  mean of 15 physical and emotional symptoms are experienced concurrently.12  
Diverse symptoms  reduce quality of life  in patients with CHF ,12 ILD,10, 13 COPD.7 
 
2. Depression .  Depression  in CHF , ILD and COPD  is a key determinant of the experience of 
symptom s12, 14 -16 and quality of life.14, 17, 18   Between 20 -30% of patients  with CHF ,[ADDRESS_49631] dep ressive disorders.   Between 50 -60% have clinically significant depressive symptoms.19, [ADDRESS_49632] effective  approach  
for both.24   
 
Diverse symptoms and 
depression are not only major 
contributors to quality of life in 
Veterans, but they are also 
associated with numerous other 
adverse outcomes ( Figure 1 ).  In 
both HF and COPD , symptom 
severity and depression 
independently predict health 
care utilization (e.g., emergency department visits and  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602] ) and mortality19, 25 -29 and contribute 
substantially to  high care costs.30   
 
Palliative care need #2: Few Veterans with CHF , ILD or COPD engage in a dvance care planning .  Advance 
care planning is the process of c onsidering and communicating healthcare values and goals.31  An advance 
directive is a legal document describing preferences for future care and appointing a s urrogate to make health 
care decisions in the event of incapacity.  While the benefits of completing an advance  directive are 
controversial,32, 33 recent studies demonstrate advance care planning can  reduce health care costs;  increase 
the likelihood of dying at home and receiving  care aligned  with one’s wishes ; decrease rates of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47140];  and increase rates of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47141] .34, [ADDRESS_49633] not 
simultaneously addressed diverse symptoms and depression ( Figure 1 ).  In COPD , intensive pulmonary 
rehabilitation  improve s quality of life, but ha s limited reach as most veterans cannot access or receive 
pulmonary rehabilitation .   
 
Prior palliative care interventions  to improve quality of life in CHF, ILD,  or COPD  are sparse, have mixed 
results, and did not use high quality randomized study designs.44-[ADDRESS_49634] promising study, 
common symptoms including depression and pain did not improve  because providers ofte n did not  follow the 
palliative care consult recommendations.44  By [CONTACT_2329] a collaborative care model that integrates palliative care 
into primary care, our intervention will address this barrier.   
 
By [CONTACT_47174] -spec ific care with the addition of palliative and psychosocial care to address 
diverse symptoms and depression  simultaneously , we hypothesize the proposed intervention will succee d in 
improving quality of life.  In addition , the intervention will implement an advance care planning intervention that 
successfully improved advance care planning communication in COPD (see Preliminary Studies).  Because 
both CHF , ILD and COPD have common barriers to advance care planning,47-[ADDRESS_49635] in primary care, and 
both primary care providers  (PCPs)  and specialists believe palliative care should be provided through 
primary care.53  The intervention integrates palli ative care into primary care through  (1) a nurse  who 
provides palliative care and collaborates  with the Veteran’s PCP, and (2) once a palliative care plan is 
approved by [CONTACT_21122], palliative care orders are written for the PCP to review and sign  
2. Specialist, consultative model of palliative care cannot be  scaled -up to CHF and COPD .  Given the 
difficulty assessing when end of life is near and talking to patients about palliative care, as well as 
concerns about professional control, providers avoid referring patients for palliative care.[ADDRESS_49636].  
3. Prior palliative care interventions are not structured and thus are difficult to replicate or disseminate .  
The proposed palliative care intervention is structured and operationalized in a treatmen t manual which 
will facilitate replication and dissemination.  
 
Study innovation  and rationale for Aim 2 : within the context of an effectiveness trial, examine  
implementation issues  
Blending the efficacy and effectiveness stages of intervention testing can (1) reduce the time delay between 
the discovery of health care innovations and their implementation;55 (2) produce additional knowledge for 
researchers ; and (3) increase the operations and policy relevance of clinical research .[ADDRESS_49637] 
emphasized the importance of understanding challenges to implementation early in intervention  studies.57  In 
the context of an effectiveness trial, VA QUERI has recommended  blending by [CONTACT_47175] a clinical 
intervention whil e simultaneously observing and gathering information on implementation.  QUERI has termed 
this a “hybrid effectiveness -implementation” (type 1) study design.56 
 
 
Palliative care to improve quality of life in CHF and COPD_Protocol_v_ 05.08.2018  The proposed study is innovative in that it is a “pragmatic” or “practical” (i.e. , “effectiveness”) clinical trial58 that 
uses a type 1 hybrid design to  generate information on implementation of team -based and palliative care 
interventions.  It is an effectiveness trial because ( 1) population -based sampling is used to identify a “real 
world”  population of veterans ; (2) the intervention “dose” is allowed to vary with Veteran needs as would occur 
in the clinical setting; and ( 3) the analysis includes all patients regardless  of compliance with the intervention 
and missing data.  As a type [ADDRESS_49638] ion of  data on valuable intervention content 
and processes from the perspectives of patients, intervention team members, and PCPs whose patients 
recei ved the intervention ( Aim 2a ).  This data will yield information about barriers and facilitators of intervention 
delivery  that will be important to plan  subsequent  implementation if the int ervention is successful.  I f the 
intervention is not successful, th is aim will inform subsequent implementation of other  team -based , palliative 
care, or specialty/primary care  interventions . 
 
The operational partners contributing to this study recommended we determine the personnel time and other 
costs to implement and ma intain the intervention ( Aim 2b ).  This information, combined with an understanding 
of whether the intervention improves quality of life or advance care planning o utcomes, wa s most important to 
them  in considering intervention implementation and disseminat ion. 
 
Research staff at VA ECHCS will assist PSVAHCS  in some aspects of recruitment , follow -up data collection  
and the process evaluation.  The Intervention SW and RN at each site will interact with participants at both 
sites.  
 
III. Preliminary Studies:   
Preliminary studies demonstrate study and intervention feasibility and likelihood of success :   
1) The Principal Investigator (PI, Bekelman) developed and conducted initial pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] -testing of  the CASA 
palliative symptom management compone nt, which includes evaluations and treatments for fatigue, 
breathlessness, and pain,  as Director of  outpatient C HF palliative care programs at the University of Colorado 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]  (published sample of  patients)59 and th e Denver VAMC.    
2) The psychosocial care  component of the intervention was developed by [CONTACT_47176] , PhD (see letter of 
support)  through  grants from the  NIMH (R34MH73566)  and the American Heart Association (AHA 
0555699Z).60  In a randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_47142] (n=37), the mean Beck Depression Inventory -II 
(BDI-II, scale range 0 -63) scores for the intervention patients improved  from 21.1  to 11.8, while those in the 
usual care remai ned approximately the same, 17.8 to 16.2 (mixed effects model, treatment assignment by [CONTACT_26072] F=5.45, p=0.009).   Defining treatment response as a 50% or greater decline in BDI -II score, 9/19 
(47%) responded in the intervention group as compared with 1/18 (5.5%) in the usual care group.   
3) In a single arm pi[INVESTIGATOR_14737] 15 patients with adv anced stage (GOLD III/IV) COPD, depression  (Patient 
Health Questionnaire -9), anxiety  (Generalized Anxiety Disorder -7), and overall quality of life  (St. George 
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_6015])  improved with CASA  over three months (effect sizes of 0.64, 0.54, and 0.22 
respectively ).  The nurse was able to continue the intervention after the study concluded, and 10 patients 
(67%) elected to continue the inte rvention.   
4) In a single arm pi[INVESTIGATOR_14737] 17 patients with CHF (15 Veterans at the Denver VAMC) , 16 completed the 
study, and symptom distress, depression, anxiety, and qu ality of life improved with CASA  over three months  
(using the same measure s as in the  proposed IIR study, effect sizes  of 0.64, 0.12, 0.57, and 0.27 
respectively ).61  This study was funded by [CONTACT_47177] 11 -239 (PI: [INVESTIGATOR_47143]).   As planned in the 
intervention protocol, t he CASA intervention team met  weekly,  and the nurse and social worker  each  provided 
a mean of  6 phone visits per patient.  
5) In a RCT of 376 Veterans  with COPD  conducted by [CONTACT_15957] -I David Au  (VA HSR&D IIR 02 -292), advance care 
planning communication increased from 11% to 30% using the patient -completed preference form.62   
6) For the propo sed study, c ollaborating with the VA Office of Analytics and Business Intelligence, we  
electronically  identified the number of potentially eligible patients with CHF and COPD.   There were a total of 
10,860 Veterans with CHF or COPD ( Denver VAMC , n=5301; Se attle VAMC, n=5550).  Of these, we identified 
5,951 who were at high risk of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_9017] (see Table 1, Eligibility).  
7) Drs. Bekelman (PI) and Au (Co-I) have expertise conducting multi -site behavioral and health delivery 
clinical trials.  
 
 
Palliative care to improve quality of life in CHF and COPD_Protocol_v_ 05.08.2018  IV. Re search  Methods  
 
A. Outcome Measure(s):   
 
Aim 1 : The measures were chosen to reflect domains of the conceptual model (Figure 1)  as follows 
(instrument abbreviations defined below):   
• Antecedents : Demographics; CHF factors (e.g., left ventricular ejection fraction); COPD factors (e.g., 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_038])  
• Symptom Experience : GSDS (symptom distress) , Symptom assessments  
• Depression : PHQ  
• Health -Related Quality of Life : FACT -G (primary outcome measure),  QUAL -E, KCCQ -12, CCQ , K-BILD  
• Health Care Utilization : Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]  
• Advance care planning communication, documentation : patient -reported advance care planning 
communication, advance directive documentatio n in Electronic medical record review  
1. FACT -G (primary outcome):  The Function Assessment of Chronic Ill ness Therapy -General is a widely used, 
valid, reliable (alpha range, 0.88 -0.92), and responsive 27 item self -report measure of health -related quality of 
life that includes domains of physical, social/family, emotional, and functional well -being.35, [ADDRESS_49639] -G correlations with disease severity.64 
2. QUAL -E: The Quality of Life at the End of Life is a valid and reliable self -report measure of several domains, 
each scored separately, of quality of life in advanced illness.67   
3. GSDS :  The General Symptom Distress Scale is a single item measure of overall symptom distress that is 
reliable and valid68  and a sks, “In general, how distressing are all of your symptoms to you?” It is rated on 0 
(“not at all distressing”) to 10 (“extremely distressing”) on a numeric rating scale.   
4. PHQ -8: The Patient Health Questionnaire -8 is an 8-item valid and reliable instru ment that provides a 
continuous measure  of depressive symptoms and is sensitive and specific for a diagnosis of major depressive 
disorder .69 
5. GAD -7:  The Generalized Anxiety Disorder -7 is an 7-item valid and reliable screening instrument for four 
common anxiety disorders in primary care (post -traumatic stress disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, panic 
disorder, and social anxiety disord er.79,80 It provides a continuous measure of anxiety symptoms.  
6. PEG: The PEG is a reliable and valid 3 -item scale of pain intensity and interference.70 Patients rate the 
pain’s intensity and interferences with their enjoyment of life and general activity on a numeric rating scale 
ranging from 0 (“no pain” or “ does not interfere”) to 10 (“pain as bad as you can imagine” or “completely 
interferes”).  
7. PROMIS Fatigue : The Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) Fatigue 
Scale is a  4-item scale that measures fatigue impact and fatigue exp erience.[ADDRESS_49640] experienced and how much fatigue has bothered them on a 5 -point Likert -type scale ranging from 0 
(“not at all”) to 5 (“ver y much”).  
8. ISI: The Insomnia Severity Index is a 7 item reliable and valid instrument to quantify perceived insomnia 
severity.72   
9. Constipation and Numbness/Tingling : These symptoms will each be assessed by [CONTACT_47178] a 6 point Likert -type scale 
from no symptom to very bothersome.  
10. KCCQ -12:  The K ansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire  is a 12-item self -administered validated 
questionnaire (admin istration  time 5 -10 minutes) that measures CHF-specific health status.73  it is a shortened 
version of t he KCCQ  23 item measure  which is reliable , sensitive to clinical change, and predicts 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47144].74, 75  Additionally, we will ask two questions assessing how bothersome symptoms 
are. It will be administered to Veterans with CHF . 
11. CCQ :  The Clinical COPD Questionnaire is a self -administered 10 -item measure of COPD symptoms, 
functioning, and emotional well -being.  It is well -validated, reliable, and responsive.76, 77  It will be administered 
to Veterans with COPD.  
 
Palliative care to improve quality of life in CHF and COPD_Protocol_v_ 05.08.2018  12. K-BILD :  The King’s Brief Interstitial Lung Disease is a 15 -item self -completed health status measure for 
ILD. It is validated and can be used to  assess ILD from the patient’s perspective.  It will be administered to 
Veterans with ILD78.  
12. Demographics/Study Form :  Age, gender, race and ethnicity, education level, and clinical variables will be 
determined at the enrollment visit from the electronic medi cal record and patient self -report.  For example, 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_47145] (COPD), NYHA classification  (CHF) , etiology of CHF or COPD , most recent ejection fraction  
(CHF), and BNP or NT -pro BNP (CHF) will be documented.  Medical history (including comorbidities) , current 
medications, number of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47146]. Patients’ current care, including palliative care, mental health, cardiology, pulmonology, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47147] [ADDRESS_49641]  at baseline  and 6 months : advance directive discussion; scanned 
advance directive (either a living will or durable power of attorney for hea lth care); or medical orders for life -
sustaining treatment.  
14. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]/emergency room visits , mortality  and risk of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5478]/or death :  The following 
events will be assessed  during the study period  through  VA and non -VA facility  medical record review to 
supplement pa tient report: hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] (with cause) and mortality.  We will also review medical records for 
intensive care use and end of life care patterns. We will also assess risk of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5478]/or death for 
partici pants during the study.  Vital status will also be ascertained  via the VA Vital Status File  and the  National 
Death Index.   
15.Telephone Interview for Cognitive Status (TICS) : The Telephone Interview for Cognitive Status is an [ADDRESS_49642] of cognitive status. The TICS takes approximately 4 minutes to administer and 
assesses memory and other cognitive functions. The TICS was originally developed to discriminate between 
cognitive normals and deme ntia patients79 and has demonstrated good sensitivity and specificity when 
discriminating between normals and individuals with mild cognitive impairment.80 The TICS will be used as a 
covariate in the analyses.  
16.  Satisfaction surveys : Satisfaction with health care and the study will be assessed.  Questions were 
adapted from the CANHELP Questionnaire.81 
  
 
Aim 2a : We will conduct a mixed method (i.e., combination of quantitative and qualitative) evaluation to assess 
intervention implementation.   
Intervention database:  The intervention database will be used to track intervention content and processes.   
Brief patie nt interviews:  After the [ADDRESS_49643] interviews with  Veterans  
randomized to  the intervention arm  to ask for their feedback on  the intervention.   
Intervention  Close Out Summary:  The intervention team  will complete an Inter vention Team Intervention Close 
Out Summary on each Veteran once they complete the intervention.  
Focused Group Discussion with Intervention Team:   We will conduct structured  group discussion s with 
intervention team members at the completion of the project intervention period to debrief about how the 
intervention  was implement ed.   
Surveys of PCPs:   We will administer a brief survey to all PCPs who have patients who have completed the  
intervention.  
 
Aim 2b : We will evaluate t he resources and costs to implement and maintain the intervention.  Data for the 
costs to implement  (i.e., start -up costs) and the cost to maintain  the intervention will be collected separately.  At 
a minimum, the costs to implement will include personnel t raining, database development; the costs to 
maintain will include identification of eligible Veterans and personnel time to provide the intervention (e.g., 
patient visits/phone calls; team meetings; communication/coordination with PCPs).  
 
Palliative care to improve quality of life in CHF and COPD_Protocol_v_ 05.08.2018   
B. Description of Po pulation to be Enrolled:   
Settings    
The study will be conducted at the VA Eastern Colorado  Health Care System ( VA ECHCS)  and Puget Sound 
VA Health Care  (PSVAHCS ) systems.  Each health care system  includes a tertiary care medical center and 
seven community -based outpatient clinics (CBOCs).   
 
Study population:  
 
Aim 1:  A total of 400 adult subjects will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to one of 2 treatment arms: 1) enhanced 
usual care or 2) team -based  palliative care intervention plus usual care. A component of the study intervention 
involves speaking to study subjects’ informal (family) caregivers.  The eligibility crite ria (Table 1 ) aim to enroll  
Veterans  with a diagnosis of  CHF, ILD,  or COPD who are  at risk of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47148], have po or quality 
of life , and are able to participate in the intervention.  
 
Patients  with CHF , ILD,  or COPD in both the PSVAHCS  and VA ECHCS  will be identified electronically  by [CONTACT_47179] s of diagnostic codes .82, 83  The Care Assessment Need Table 1.  Eligibility Criteria   
Inclusion Criteria  Definition  
• CHF:  Diagnosis of CHF in 2 years 
prior to enrollment  • Inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47149] ≥ 2 outpatient visits*  
• COPD:  Diagnosis of COPD  in 2 years 
prior to enrollment  • Inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47149] ≥ 2 outpatient visits* 
• ILD: Diagnosis of ILD in 2 years prior 
to enrollment  • Inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47149] ≥ 2 outpatient pulmonary visits  ** 
• Among those with CHF or COPD, 
high risk for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_9017]  • Care Assessment Need score ≥ 80  
• Poor quality of life  • FACT -G score ≤ 70  
• Symptomatic  • Bothered by [CONTACT_47180] : pain, fatigue, 
depression, shortness of breath , trouble sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  
• Primary care or other provider who is 
willing to facilitate intervention medical 
recommendations  • PCP listed in  Electronic medical record review  or self-report  
• Able to read  and understand English  
• Consistent access to  and able to use  
a standard telephone  • Self-report  
• Self-report  
  
Exclusion Criteria   
• Previous diagnosis of dementia  • Inpatient or outpatient diagnostic code† 
• Active substance abuse  • Electronic medical record review  for substance abuse in the previous 6 
months  
• Comorbid metastatic cancer  • Electronic medical record review  
• Diagnosis of obesity hypoventilation 
syndrome  
• Nursing home resident  • Inpatient or outpatient diagnostic code (ICD9 278.03, ICD10 E66.2) or 
(BMI >=45 and diagnostic codes for COPD)  
• Electronic medical record review   or self -report  
• Heart or lung transplant or LVAD  
• Participation in the intervention arm of 
the CASA trial, COMIRB 11-0969  • Electronic medical record review   or self -report  
• Electronic medical record review  
• Enrolled in palliative care, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47150]  
• Prisoner  
• Pregnant  • Electronic medical record review  or self -report  
 
• Electronic medical record  
• Electronic medical record or self -report  
* ICD-9 code definitions for CHF (428.XX) validated in Go et al82; ICD -9 code definitions for COPD ( 491.XX, 492.XX, 
493.2, 496.XX)  validated in Au et al83  and the corresponding ICD -10 codes  
**ICD -9 code definitions for ILD : 515, 516.30, 516.31, 516.32, 516.34, 516.37  and the corresponding ICD -10 codes  
† ICD-9 codes for dementia (290 .0-290.43, 291.2. 046.1, 294.0, 294.1x, 294.2x, 294.8, 331.0, 331.1x, 331.2, 331.6, 
331.7, 331.82, 331.89, 331.9) from Taylor et al84 and Bharmal et al85  and the c orresponding ICD -10 codes   
 
Palliative care to improve quality of life in CHF and COPD_Protocol_v_ 05.08.2018  (CAN) score will be used to define a population at increased risk for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47151].[ADDRESS_49644] the CAN score on all potential subjects with a diagnosis of CHF, COPD, or ILD 
as defined in Table 1.  A CAN score of ≥ 80 for those with CHF or COPD was chosen in consultation with the 
VA Central Offices  of Primary Care and Palliative C are.  Preliminary studies identified 5,951 Veterans total at 
both sites with CHF or COPD and a CAN score of ≥ 80.  The CAN score may not be as valid for the small 
number of patients with ILD, thus we will not use it as an el igibility criterion.  
 
To enroll a sample with poor quality of life  who is appropriate for the intervention, potential participants will 
need to report a Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy -General ( FACT -G) score ≤ [ADDRESS_49645] -G is a widely -used, valid, reliable quality of 
life measure that is the primary outcome in this study.  It measures physical, social/family, emotional, and 
functional well -being.  A score of ≤ 70 identifies poor quality of life as validated by [CONTACT_47181].87   
 
Given the intervention delivery model whose purpose is to integrate palliative care into chron ic care, a provider 
(ideally the PCP) must be willing to work with the intervention team. In prior studies , 61,[ADDRESS_49646] problems with 
active substance abuse, defined as a  substance abuse documented in EMR in the previous 6 months  
(cannabis will be allowed) are unlikely to participate in the regular follow up phone calls or respond to the 
intervention and will be excluded. Subjects with comorbid metastatic cancer are excluded because this study 
focuses on CHF , ILD, and COPD rather th an cancer palliative care. Those with a diagnosis of obesity 
hypoventilation syndrome, or those at high risk for obesity hypoventilation syndrome (BMI >= 45 and  diagnostic 
codes for COPD ), are excluded as we do not think this intervention will be helpful t o them.  Those with a heart 
or lung transplant or left ventricular assist device (LVAD) will be excluded because they already receive 
substantial psychosocial care and resources. Those receiving palliative care, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47152] -based primary 
care will be excluded as they are likely to be receiving services similar to what is provided in the intervention.  
We will exclude those who participated in the intervention arm of the CASA trial (COMIRB #11 -0969) as they 
have received some components of th e interventi on in this trial.  Finally, nursing home residents will be 
excluded since this study is focused on outpatient care. Competence for study participation will be evaluated 
by [CONTACT_42148]’ ability to explain to study personnel the goals of the study , requirements of study 
participation, and potential risks and benefits.  
 
Patient interviews : After the outcome measureme nt at [ADDRESS_49647]  interviews with Veterans 
randomized to  the intervention arm to ask their opi[INVESTIGATOR_47153] . We will 
interview a subset of  patients completing the intervention every 6 months in order to account for potential 
differences over time (e.g., intervention provider experience).   
 
Intervention personnel : All intervention  personnel will be invited to participate.  
 
Primary care providers whose patients have received the intervention : Providers who have patients who have 
completed the intervention will be invited to complete a  brief survey.    
 
 
C. Study Design and Research Methods.    
Timeline  
 Table 2. Timeline  Year 
Activity  1 2 3 4 
Study start -up x        
Patient recruitment   x x x x    
Outcomes measurement , 
implementation data collection   x x x x x x  
Analysis and write -up        x 
 
Palliative care to improve quality of life in CHF and COPD_Protocol_v_ 05.08.2018  The proposed study will be completed within a 4 year timeline (Table 
2).  Collection and analysis of medical record information will 
continue for up to ten years after a patient’s active study participation 
concludes .   
The table illustrates timing for com pletion of the main study tasks 
using [ADDRESS_49648] budgeted for completing recruitment over 
25 months.  
 
 
Recruitment Targets and Tracking  
 
Aim 1:  
The estimated flow of patients and  overall  accrual goals are 
displayed in Figure 2 .  We will aim to randomize 8 patients per month 
at each site (16 total)  over a 19 month period.  This will yield one 
intervention patient per week per site on average.  If enrollment is 
slower than anticipate d, we w ill still be able to complete the study on 
time if 6 Veterans per month are randomized at each site over a 25 
month period.   
 
Aim 2a:  
 
Patient interviews : We anticipate at most [ADDRESS_49649] already 
participated in the intervention and would be likely to offer feedback.   
 
Intervention personnel : We expect all intervention team members to 
participate as they are invested in the intervention and would be likely 
to want to provide feedback.  
 
Primary care providers whose patients have received the 
intervention : We expect approximately 100 providers w ill participate.  
 
Recruitment Process  
Aim 1:   
1. We are requesting a  HIPAA waiver to allow us to screen administrative databases and review medical 
records of Veterans seen at each study site to identify Veterans  who may be appropriate for the study. 
Data sou rces for screening include CDW Production, CDW Raw, CAN Score, PACT Implementation 
Index, Real SSN, Scrambled SSN, CAPRI, and VSSC web reporting.  
2.  Administrative data will be pulled according to the inclusion/exclusion criteria outlined in section “Study 
population.”  We will also use  a research database of veterans who consented to be contact[CONTACT_47182] (COMIRB # 11-0969 ) and meet eligibility requirements.  
Providers within the VA system can also choose to tell potential study participants about the study and 
provide them with a flyer for the patient to write in patient contact [CONTACT_47183].  
3. Study staff  will review medical records to confirm eligibility criteria .   
4. Veterans who meet initial eligibility screening will be mailed a letter that describes the study and gives 
them the opportunity to ca ll the recruitment team if they are interested or decline by [CONTACT_47184] a postage 
paid letter  and envelope .  The letter will also say that the Veteran will be contact[CONTACT_47185].  Veterans ca n also opt out during the 
phone call.    
5. Interested Veterans will be asked to verbally consent to further phone screening to verify eligibility  (see 
included script) .   
Initial Eligibility Screening  
CHF , ILD,  or COPD; CAN ≥ [ADDRESS_49650] reviews per month  
Contact[CONTACT_47186]  
90 per month  
Enrolled  
12-16 per month  
Baseline assessment  
Randomization  
Usual Care  
N=6-8/month  
Intervention  
N=6-8/month  
Palliative Symptom 
Management  
Psychosocial Care  
Advance care 
planning  
Outcomes Assessment  
4 , 6 and 12  month follow -up 
Figure 2. Study Population Flow  
 
Contact[CONTACT_47187]  
70 per month  
 
Palliative care to improve quality of life in CHF and COPD_Protocol_v_ 05.08.2018  6. Patients who are eligible after screening will be asked to provide informed consent (study and 
evaluation interview) and to complete HIPAA B forms. Informed consent will be conducted in -person, 
whenever possible.  If geographic distance prohibits an in -person visit, the patient will be mailed the 
consent forms and a member of the study team w ill contact [CONTACT_47188] .  If amenable, the patient will sign the consent form and return it to the study 
team.  Patients will be offered a $10 incentive for participation, provided at the baseline , 4m and 12 
month  visits  and $15 at the 6 month visit . Participants may decline payment.   
 
Patients will be assigned a study identifier, a number unrelated to any personal identifying information.   
Data will be kept on a secured server (see Protocol Application for details).  No surveys will be labeled 
with the subject’s name [CONTACT_1290]. The surveys will be coded with the patient’s study 
identification number.  
 
VA providers may refer their patients to the study.  
 
The research coordinator, research assistant, study social worker and the study nurse may contact [CONTACT_47189].   
 
Prior to the start of the study, all re search staff will be trained and will practice the screening and consent 
process.  The training will include the process of fully explaining the study and consent procedures, 
explaining the possible risks and inconveniences, answering patient questions and  assessment of the 
patient’s understanding of the study and consent process.  
  
Randomization  - Aim 1:  
Randomization will occur at the patient level with 1:[ADDRESS_49651] a clinically significant 
change on the primary outcome, quality of life.  We plan to enroll 
400 Veterans and anticipate 5% will die and 15 -20% will have 
missing outcome data because they did not complete surveys or 
dropped out.  Thus approximately [ADDRESS_49652] 85% 
power to detect a moderate effect size of 0.4 (two -sided test, 
alpha=0.05).  The minimal clinically important difference on the FACT -G is [ADDRESS_49653] 
deviation of 15, a Cohen’s d effect size of  0.[ADDRESS_49654] size assumptions.  
 
 
Aim 2a:  
Patient interviews : Patients will consent to participant in interviews when they provide informed consent for Aim 
1.   
 
Intervention personnel : All intervention personnel will be asked to participate in the focused group discussion.   
Recruitment and consent: Those who agree  will be asked to provide verbal consent to the following at the 
beginning of all focus group:  
• Full disclosure that the session will be digitally recorded and detailed notes taken;  
• Statement that responses will be kept confidential and names will not be li nked with responses in the 
summary;  
• An opportunity for them to excuse themselves   
 Table 3.  Sample sizes per study arm 
for different assumptions  
 Power  
Effect size  80% 85% 90% 
0.[ADDRESS_49655] received the intervention : Providers will be invited to complete the 
survey via email , phone or in -person .  By [CONTACT_47190], they will provide consent for this portion of 
the study.  We will request a waiver 
of written consent for providers who 
complete the survey because the 
surveys are minimal risk, and it is 
impractical to obtain written consent 
from busy health care  providers.  
 
Description of the Intervention  
Overview :  The  intervention is 
Vetera n-centered, multidisciplinary, addresses palliative and psychosocial issues, and integrates with  PCP 
care (Table 4).  A nurse  (Registered Nurse, RN)  and a social worker (Mas ter’s level, e.g., MSW) will be the 
primary intervention personnel . The nurse and social worker  will meet weekly for approximately 60 minutes  
with a collaborat ive care team (“Team”) including a representative  PCP and palliative care specialist .  Each site 
(VA ECHCS , PSVAHCS ) will have a T eam.  The Team  will provide caseload supervision and write notes and  
orders for patient’s clinical providers to sign.  
Team c ollaborative care  model :  The Team will provide  symptom -based care by [CONTACT_47191], ILD, and/or COPD disease -specific  care plan s37, 38 based on the intervention team  
interviews/ evaluations  of patients  and medical record review.  Study staff  will record the Team’s 
recommendations in a progress note in the Veteran’s electronic medical record .  The psychosocial care and 
other non -pharmacological  recommendations (e.g., pacing ) will be implemented immediately  by [CONTACT_47192] .  Orders for medications or tests will be written for patient’s clinical providers  to review & sign 
at their discretion.   This integration into ongoing primary care both informs patient’s clinical providers of the 
intervention care plan and provides an extra level of s afety for patients  by [CONTACT_47193] .  The team  will have phone access to a cardiologist and pulmonologist for specialist  support 
and will re -review patients if their symptoms are not improving as assessed by [CONTACT_47194]. 
Visits :  The intervention team  will make  an initial in -person , phone  or VA telehealth equipment  visit with 
patients a nd informal caregivers.  At the initial  visit, a history and examination will be conducted and the patient 
will be offered the option o f choosing  which  initial symptom (fatigue, breathlessness, pain , depression , trouble 
sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007] ) on which to focus.  With participants’ permission, these visits may be audiorecorded.  If an informal 
(family)  caregiver is present, s/he will be invited to participate in the discussion.  Follow -up visits will be by 
[CONTACT_47195]-person to accommodate patient preferences , and the number and duration will be tr acked.  The 
nurse will provide approximately  6 visits (2/ month) to check on symptoms  and provide education , and the 
social worker will provide  approximately  6 visits (2/month) to complete  the psychosocial intervention.  This will 
be allowed to vary dependent on patient and staffing needs . In the unexpected situa tion that study nurse or 
social worker  are unavailable to contact [CONTACT_4317] , study physicians will contact [CONTACT_47196] . 
 
Algorithm -guided s ymptom management :  The  nurse will assess patients’ symptoms and , based on the 
symptom algorithms,  discuss an initial management plan with the collaborative care team.  Algorithms for 
breathlessness, fatigue, and pain have been previously developed and studied. An algorithm for trouble 
sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_47154]. To facilitate pa tient commitment and activation, we will suggest patients 
choose one of the symptoms to work on initially , although they will have the option of choosing other symptoms 
in subsequent visits (e.g., constipation).  In our previous studies, the overwhelming majority seek help for 
fatigue, breathlessness, pain  or depression,52, 61 which will be addressed by [CONTACT_47197] .  The nurse is 
responsible for following up on medical orders, disease and health care system navigation  education , advance 
care planning discussions, assessing changes in patients’ symptoms and progress on behavioral changes 
(e.g., increased physic al activity), and communicating with patients’ PCPs.  The social worker will assist the 
nurse as needed for this part of the intervention.  
Structured p sychosocial care:  The social worker will conduct a psychosocial assessment,89 and provide  6 
phone -based counseling  sessions.  This counseling  was specifically developed and tested in patients with CHF 
or COPD  to improve depression60 (see Preliminary Studies).  The purpose is to help veterans adjust to living Table 4. Intervention Overview  
Intervention Component  Personnel  
Algorithm -guided symptom management: 
breathlessness, fatigue, pain , trouble sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_47155] (RN)  
Structured psychosocial care, targeting 
depression and adjustment to illness; advance 
care planning  Social Worker  
Team collaborative care model: 30 -60 minute 
weekly team meetings  RN, LCSW, palliative and 
primary care providers  
 
Palliative care to improve quality of life in CHF and COPD_Protocol_v_ 05.08.2018  with CHF, ILD,  or COPD  and to activate/empower them to discuss issues related to their illness with their care 
providers. The counseling will be supplemented with antidepressant medica tion if the T eam agrees providing 
antidepressant medication  is an appropriate, evidenced -based  recommendation.   The social worker will also 
follow up on the patient -completed advance care planning pre ference form to help  patients clarify health care 
goals and complete written advance directive s.  The nurse will assist the social worker as needed fo r this part 
of the intervention.  
 
Advance Care Planning:  The intervention team  will meet with the patient one time to discuss care goals.  Using 
a structured guideline,90 participants under standing of their illness will be assess ed.  Questions about what is 
important, goals, concerns and fears will be asked.  If a care giver is present, s/he will be invited to participate 
in the discussion.  The discussion will be documented in the medical rec ord. 
 
 
Control Group (treatment as usual plus information from baseline surveys  and self -care materials ) 
Patients in the control group will continue to receive care at the discretion of their providers, which may include 
referral s to and ongoing care from cardiology , pulmonary, palliative care, or mental health.  They will also have 
the same amount of interaction with research assistants  as the interven tion patients, completing questionnaires 
and participating  in study visits at the sa me frequency.  Patients’ providers will be given  the results of all  
baseline depression surveys  if screen positive for depression .  For example, patients in the usual care arm 
who have significant depressive symptoms will be notified of this and their prov iders will also be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530].  
Referring providers will then assume responsibility for depression care at their discretion, with no constraints 
on treatment or referrals.  Therefore, the usual care patients may benefit from self-care materials or the 
feedb ack of screening instruments to their referring providers.  This sets a high but appropriate standard by 
[CONTACT_47198] .  We considered a control group that included time with a 
nurse or social worker to match the inte rvention patients’ time (“attention control”).  However, this is not 
feasible as the intervention “dose” of nursing and social work care varies according to patient needs and 
symptoms.  It would not be possible to match the “dose” of provider time in both groups.  
 
 
D.   Description, Risks and Justification of Procedures and Data Collection Tools:  
 
Aim 1 :  Study personnel will administer measures four times: enrollment (baseline), 4  months , 6 months  and 
12 months  (Table 5). The baseline and [ADDRESS_49656]  45 minute s, will be obtained during an in -person visit, by [CONTACT_47199].  We will allow patients to complete 4  month  and 12 month  measures by [CONTACT_47200] a n incentive for completing each of the 4 study visits  ($10 at baseline, 
$10 at 4 months, $15 at 6 months, $10 at 12 months) .  Patient reported survey data is necessary to achieve 
study aims as the primary outcome is quality of life which is patient perceived .  Demographic data and 
information fro m medical record review is necessary to determine secondary outcomes.  We have 
implemented the following protections:  
 
Table 5 .  Study Visits and 
Assessments  Baseline  Month  4  Month 6  Month 12  
Demographics/study form  X    
FACT -G (primary outcome)  X X X X 
PHQ -8, GAD -7 X X X  
KCCQ -12, CCQ, K -BILD  X X X  
QUAL -E,Symptom Assessment, GSDS  X  X  
Advance care planning communication ,  
assess for advance directive 
documentation  X  X  
Medications  X  X  
Heath care utilization, vital status, risk 
of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]/death    X X 
Use of other medical services  X  X  
 
Palliative care to improve quality of life in CHF and COPD_Protocol_v_ 05.08.[ADDRESS_49657] loss of confidentiality, all research materials will be inaccessible to anyone other than the 
investigators and research staff. All source documents will be identified by [CONTACT_47201] (ID) number, and 
the key to that ID will be kept in a locked file cabinet in a locked office of the site PI, study coordinator, or 
resea rch assistant. All personally identifiable information also will be kept separately from data forms and in a 
locked file cabinet. No results will be entered into our data collection system or reported in a personally 
identifiable manner.   Any non -VA health care records will be faxed to a fax machine in a restricted access room.   
 
We will use the Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) system for electronic entry of deidentified 
outcome data. All tracking system data will be password -protected with several  levels of protection. The first 
will allow access to the operating system of the computer. The second will allow access to the basic menus of 
the integrated system; within certain menu options, such as database browsing, a third password will be 
required.  All user interaction with the web -based system, from transmission of access passwords to sensitive 
patient data, is done via [ADDRESS_49658] a private room. For example, we wil l use a family conference room on the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47156].  
 Satisfaction  X  X  
Table 6.  Intervention implementation (Aim 2a) objectives, data collectio n, and analytic frameworks  
Objective  Data Source  Sample Size  Analytic Framework  
Assess intervention 
component 
implementation  Intervention database  150 Quantitative : descriptive statistics by [CONTACT_47202] “dose” and 
content of the delivered intervention  
 
 
Identify critical 
intervention 
components and 
processes  and 
facilitators/barriers to 
intervention 
implementation  Brief patient interviews  100 Qualitative  analysis of data using the 
following CFIR*  Domains , Constructs , 
allowing for emergence of new codes/ideas  
Intervention Characteristics  
Relative advantage, complexity, cost, 
design quality and packaging  
Characteristics of Individuals  
Knowledge & beliefs ab out Intervention  
Outer Setting  
Patients’ Needs and Resources  
Inner Setting  
Implementation climate, relative priority, 
readiness for implementation  Intervention  close out 
summary  [ADDRESS_49659] received 
the intervention  150 
*CFIR, Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research  
 
Palliative care to improve quality of life in CHF and COPD_Protocol_v_ 05.08.2018  Staff Training, Supervision and Quality Assurance.   
The intervention manual and protocol, procedures for medical or psychological emergencies, procedures for 
protec tion of human subjects, and HIPAA requirements will be reviewed in detail in a pre -study meeting. The 
importance of adherence to intervention protocol will be stressed. The social workers will be trained in the 
intervention and how to provide psychosocial care. This will include training to review the theory underlying the 
counseling, a review of the treatment manual and patient materials, and role -playing to show the appropriate 
application of the counseling.  Study training will also include  training for the study nurse who is conducting the 
palliative symptom management algorithms and coordinating the collaborative care team. This training will 
review the symptom management algorithms and procedures for unanticipated events (e.g., a subject 
complains of c hest pain while on the pho ne). Day -to-day supervision and study fidelity and quality assurance 
will be maintained by  [CONTACT_7676] . 
 
Data management/Data quality  
To ensure data integrity, the study protocol manual will include a section on data collection with descriptions of 
each data element or measure and instructions for its accurate collection or acceptable source.  Several 
strategies will be used to avoid mis sing data and dropout, such as follow -up phone calls and letters.  The study 
will use VA research servers for building and managing online databases.   
 
Monitoring plan  
Monitoring will focus on recruitment, baseline comparability of treatment groups, proto col adherence, 
completeness of data, accrual of primary endpoint data, safety,  and follow -up rates .  This monitoring  will 
provide the basis for reporting to a Data Safety and Monitoring Board and quarterly review by [CONTACT_47203].   
 
In the event  we discover a serious medical or psychological problem in the usual care group, a referral will be 
made to appropriate medical and/or psychological professionals. Participants will be encouraged to access 
resources provided by [CONTACT_47204] a s well as community resources.  
 
Study Procedures for Positive Depression Screening:  
The outcome measures administered to all subjects include a screen for depression (a score of greater than 1 0 
on the PHQ -869). Because the intervention focuses on depression, these issues will be addressed in 
intervention subjects as part of the intervention. Subjects in the usual care group who score above the 
screening cutoff for moderate depression will be advised of this and  given resources for depression care, 
including advice to discuss these results with a health care professional. In addition, the results will be 
forwarded to their health care professional.  
 
Aim 2a:  To understand why particular intervention components and  processes were most critical from the 
perspectives of patients, intervention team members, and PCPs, we used the Consolidated Framework for 
Implementation Research (CFIR) to guide data collection  (Table 6).  CFIR, which is well -established in VA, 
was chos en as it provides a useful framework for considering contextual facilitators and barriers to intervention 
implementation.[ADDRESS_49660] the areas that were 
important to patients, intervention team members, and providers in the CASA pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].61  The following data 
sources will be used for Aim 2a:  
Intervention database:   The following data will be collected: (1) team meeting duration, number of patients 
discussed and time spent  per patient, medical orders (e.g., tests, medications) written and completed; (2) 
nurse and social worker visit duration, number, and content (using a brief checklist) for each patient.  
Brief patient interviews : After the outcome measurement at [ADDRESS_49661] brief in -person  or 
telephone  interviews with Veterans randomized to  the intervention arm. Interviews will be conducted to elicit 
patient views about different parts of the intervention (e.g., nurse vs. social worker); how to improve the content 
and value of the intervention; communication and coordination; and to what extent they continue to su stain 
their use of the intervention after the study. We will continue to interview as staff time permits  or until no new 
information emerges from continuing interviews, a principle known in qualitative research as “saturation.”92  We 
will interview a subset of  patients completing the intervention every 6 months in order to account for potential 
 
Palliative care to improve quality of life in CHF and COPD_Protocol_v_ 05.08.2018  differences over time (e.g., intervention provider experience).   We will seek variability in the sample we 
interview (e.g., by [CONTACT_47205] -G score at 6 months or participant ratings of helpfulness). 
Interviews will be audio -recorded using a secure recording mechanism o r an audio recording device. Detailed 
notes will be taken during the interviews.  Interviews will be transcribed verbatim by [CONTACT_47206] a member of the study team .  All interviews will be de -identified and all PHI/PII will be re moved 
before transcribed.   
 
Intervention  Close Out Summary :  This 1 -page summary form will capture information from intervention 
providers on what worked well and not so well with components of the intervention, what was missing, and 
whether the patient en gaged in and followed up with behavioral changes.   
 
Focused Group Discussion with Intervention Team :  The goal of this discussion  is to elicit intervention team 
views about what work ed well; what parts of the intervention  might  be streamlined, dropped or enhanced; and 
their views about patient , family caregiver , and PCP  receptivity and responsiveness.  A qualitative researcher  
will lead these focused group discussions which will be recorded  and transcribed   
Surveys of PCPs : Using a combination of rating sc ales and a few open -ended questions, the goal of these 
surveys is to efficiently identify strong positive or negative opi[INVESTIGATOR_47157],  integration of the intervention  into work flow, and the perceived impact  of the 
intervention  on quality of care.  We will also ask for their insights into ways to sustain and spread the 
intervention  to other urban and rural VA sites .  The questions were selected to explore specific CFIR 
constructs of im portance.  Providers will complete the survey via  phone , in-person , or via e -mail.     
 
Aim 2b : In addition to the above data collected for Aim 2a that are associated with the intervention content and 
processes, we will also use methods and instruments desc ribed in Ritzwoller et al 200993 to evaluate the 
resources and costs to implement and maintain the intervention.  These resources and costs will be measured 
from the perspective of each VA health care system site.  The rationale for this perspective is that each health 
care system ( ECHCS  and PSVAHCS ) has budgetary and administrative authority over implementing programs 
such  as the proposed intervention.   Resource s associated with the program will be classified as labor (e.g., 
nurse intervention time) or non -labor (e.g., supplies, printing of patient materials) and recorded using Excel 
spreadsheets.  Costs for research (e.g., grant administration, IRB approvals, in formed consent, analysis) will 
not be included.  
 
E.   Potential Scientific Problems:   
 
1.  Recruitment problems .  The recruitment goals are modest, reasonable for each site, and were planned 
based on the investigators experience with similar prior trials.   If necessary, resources can be diverted to 
increase efforts at one of the recruitment sites.  We can also add recruitment of inpatients at the sites’ VAMCs 
using the same enrollment criteria and conduct a sensitivity analysis to determine if outcomes are  different for 
those recruited in this setting.  
2.  Limits of administrative data for the diagnosis of CH F, ILD,  or COPD .  While the administrative codes used 
to identify patients with CHF or COPD have been validated, they are not perfect and some Veterans will be 
enrolled who do not have these illnesses.  However, all enrolled Veterans will be appropriate for the 
intervention because they will (1) be at high risk of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_9017], (2) have poor quality of life, and 
(3) be symptomatic.  The team will recommend appropriate evaluation and management for all Veterans.  For 
example, this may include a spi[INVESTIGATOR_47158].  
3.  Palliative care elements such as spi[INVESTIGATOR_47159].   The palliative care specialist is 
on the team to bring all aspects of palliative care to patient care.   In addition, social workers have basic 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_47160].  If spi[INVESTIGATOR_47161], for  example, the team c an enlist 
assistance  from a chaplain or the Veteran’s religious community .   
 
Palliative care to improve quality of life in CHF and COPD_Protocol_v_ 05.08.[ADDRESS_49662] pallia tive care team (physician, nurse, social worker, chaplain) all provide direct patient care, the 
intervention was designed to use much less personnel time.  Most of the intervention is delivered by [CONTACT_648].  
We will track the personnel time and other costs as sociated with the intervention (Aim 2b).   
 
 
 
F.   Data Analysis Plan:   
 
Aim [ADDRESS_49663] graphical methods, 
including histograms and boxplots, will be used to examine overall distributions and identify potential  outliers , 
which  will be c onfirmed prior to inclusion  in analysis. Internal consistency of multi -item scales will be examined  
using Cronbach’s alpha , and whenever possible, items and scales will be compared to existing findings on 
their psychometric properties  to ensure appropriate performance.   Data transform ations will be considered, 
such as log transformations for highly skewed data, to meet model assumptions . Each measure  will be 
summarized using standard descriptive statistics , including mean s and standard deviation s, median s, and 
range s for continuous mea sures and proportions for categorical measures .  Baseline characteristics will be 
compared between groups using  appropriate  tests , such as Chi-square and t -tests.   
 
Primary/Secondary Analyses.  Data from all participants will be included regardless of leve l of participation 
using an intent -to-treat approach .  The primary outcome measure, FACT -G, will be analyzed as a continuous 
variable, while the secondary outcomes will be either continuous (disease -specific health status, depression, 
symptom burden, emerg ency department visits, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]) or binary (advance care planning 
communication and documentation; mortality).   Due to the short follow -up period, time -to-event analyses will 
not be used.  Analyses of the repeated measures, including primary and s econdary endpoints, will be 
performed with SAS 9.4 using maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) for incomplete data using linear mixed 
models for continuous outcomes and generalized linear mixed models with a logit link for binary endpoints . 
This approach has  several advantages: 1) all available data on eligible subjects can be included in the analysis 
even when there are missing data at follow -up, 2) MLE estimates the correlation between related measures 
and adjusts test statistics appropriately, 3) time -varying covariates can be incorporated into the model , if 
desired , and 4) the assumptions about missing data are relaxed from missing completely at random to missing 
at random.[ADDRESS_49664] -G (r>0.5), we will include the baseline FACT -G as a 
precision variable in the mixed model.[ADDRESS_49665] and its confidence interval within  each of the disease groups (CHF, ILD, COPD) using 
disease -specific health status measures (KCCQ,  K-BILD,  CCQ) at the [ADDRESS_49666] within illness subgroups (CHF, ILD, and COPD) on the primary  
outcome, and within subgroups of illness, including CHF (preserved vs. reduced ejection fraction) and COPD 
(defined by [CONTACT_15209][INVESTIGATOR_47162]).   Missing data will be reviewed to identify potential patterns and examined 
to assess how these patterns impact our results.  Specifically, we will examine  plots of group means over time 
stratified by [CONTACT_47207].  
When data are missing at random, unbiased results can still be obta ined from the likelihood method used in 
the analysis.  To account for the possibility of data missing not at random, sensitivity analyses will be 
performed using pattern mixture models96 and results will be presented to assess the impact of missing data 
on the reported conclusions .  Among those who were hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47163], we will examine for di fferences in 
 
Palliative care to improve quality of life in CHF and COPD_Protocol_v_ 05.08.[ADDRESS_49667] on 
longer term health care utilization (e.g., hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], intensive care utilization).   
 
Aim 2 a Data Analysis  
The quantitati ve data on intervention component implementation will be examined using descriptive statistics.  
For example, for team meetings, the number and type of medical orders written and completed will be 
summarized.  For social worker visits, the median, range, i nterquartile range, and types of modules completed 
will be displayed.  This type of analysis was completed for the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]61 and will show what components of 
the intervention were actually done.  It will characterize the true “dose” and content of the intervention that was 
provided.  This will contribute information about what may have led to intervention success  or failure.  
 
The data on intervention components and processes will be analyzed u sing a combination of inductive and 
deductive methods .  We will create an evolving set of codes linked to units of text ( fragments, sentences or 
paragraphs ) using the Atlas.ti software package .  A qualitative analyst and the research assistant will serve as 
primary coders for qualitative data, and PI [INVESTIGATOR_47164].  We will 
follow a systematic process to enhance coder agreement i n assigning codes and a peer debriefing process 
that requires regular meetings with a qualitative analyst , the PI , and the research assistant to review and refine 
codes, code definitions and conceptual boundaries for our analysis.97  The iterative analysis will begin by [CONTACT_47208] a -priori codes based on the CFIR model (Table 6 ), supplemented by [CONTACT_47209] .  Codes will be refined  and new codes added as new 
insights emerge.  Through systematic coding we will quickly develop working themes and hypotheses  about 
critical intervention component s and processes  that will be examined (and inform any minor changes in data 
collection interview  guides /survey).  These themes will also describe facilitators and barriers to intervention 
implementation.  We will both audio -record  and take detailed notes d uring all data analysis meetings in order to 
document proposed codes and code revisions, proposed themes and their descriptions, and other decisions 
made during these working meetings .   
 
We will use several recommended strategies to enhance the validity o r credibility of qualitative findings:92 (1) 
structured interv iew guides administered by [CONTACT_10070] -trained interviewers, (2) coding templates and detailed 
descriptions of codes, coding decisions and analysis strategies to document al l phases of the data analysis 
(audit trail); and (3) team approaches (at least two analysts) to develop coding templates and independently 
code subsets of transcripts/notes to determine their agreement and application of codes and code definitions.  
 
In ad dition to analyzing and summarizing quantitative  (implementation tracking database and provider surveys)  
and qualitative (patient interviews and intervention team focus groups) findings  separately, we will also merge  
findings to draw overarching lessons learned from multiple methods used.  In this process, findings will be 
summarized in a table placing qualitative themes side by [CONTACT_47210].  M erging these findings will provide “ triangulation ”:  findings from each data 
source will be used  to validate and confirm findings from the other data sources .  With the combination of 
qualitative and quantitative data, we expect to provide a more complete expl anation of why certain intervention 
components and processes are more critical than others, as well as facilitators and barriers to the 
implementation of the intervention . 
 
Aim 2b Data Analysis  
We will first calculate  the resources (personnel hours or FTE,  and other  costs ) to implement and maintain the 
intervention  during the study .  Personnel costs associated with the program will be calculated based on actual 
VA nurse (and other staff) wage and benefit rates.  Total intervention costs and costs per interv ention 
participant  at each site  will be calculated.  Actual salaries and benef its will be used when calculating  personnel 
costs.  Second, we will estimate the resources and costs to implement and maintain  the program in a variety of 
VA settings.   
 
Several  sensitivity analyses  will estimate the range of intervention costs using alternative assumptions for 
costs  that may vary in different implementation contexts.  Three sensitivity analyses are planned: (1) variable 
labor costs with more or less e xperienced nurses or physicians; (2) variable efficiency of the nurse and social 
 
Palliative care to improve quality of life in CHF and COPD_Protocol_v_ 05.08.2018  worker in part -time vs. full -time intervention roles; this will be done using actual data that reflect the range of 
time spent per patient early in the study vs. later in the study; (3) variable patient case mix  using the range of 
time spent per patient.  In exploratory analyses, we will estimate which patient -level predictors (e.g., cardiac 
ejection fraction, spi[INVESTIGATOR_038], quality of life) are associated with time spent per patient (outcom e) using linear 
regression models.  
 
G. Summarize Knowledge to be Gained  
The proposed study is significant because it aims to improve quality of life and provision of care according to 
Veterans’ goals and preferences in common, burdensome illnesses. The study is innovative because it (1) 
tests the effectiveness of palliative care in CHF , ILD,  and COPD, leading causes of death among Veterans; (2) 
combines palliative and disease -specific care for symptoms with psychosocial treatment for depre ssion to 
improve quality of life; and (3) leverages the skills of affiliate health providers (nurses, social workers) to 
provide basic palliative care, with physician supervision; and (4) uses an hybrid effectiveness/implementation 
design to increase the r elevance to operations leaders and future research. The research team has expertise 
in behavioral and health care delivery clinical trials, CHF , ILD and COPD, and implementation science.  
 
H. References:  
References  
 
 1.  Rutten FH, Cra mer MJ, Lammers JW, Grobbee DE, Hoes AW. Heart failure and chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease: An ignored combination? Eur J Heart Fail 2006;8(7):706 -711. 
 2.  Lenz ER, Pugh LC, Milligan RA, Gift A, Suppe F. The middle -range theory of unpleasant symptom s: an 
update. ANS Adv Nurs Sci 1997;19(3):14 -27. 
 3.  Wilson IB, Cleary PD. Linking clinical variables with health -related quality of life. A conceptual model of 
patient outcomes. JAMA 1995;273(1):59 -65. 
 4.  Blinderman CD, Homel P, Billings JA, Portenoy R K, Tennstedt SL. Symptom distress and quality of life 
in patients with advanced congestive heart failure. J Pain Symptom Manage 2008;35(6):594 -603. 
 5.  Walke LM, Gallo WT, Tinetti ME, Fried TR. The burden of symptoms among community -dwelling older 
persons  with advanced chronic disease. Arch Intern Med 2004;164(21):2321 -2324.  
 6.  Janssen DJ, Franssen FM, Wouters EF, Schols JM, Spruit MA. Impaired health status and care 
dependency in patients with advanced COPD or chronic heart failure. Qual Life Res 2011;2 0(10):1679 -
1688.  
 7.  Blinderman CD, Homel P, Billings JA, Tennstedt S, Portenoy RK. Symptom distress and quality of life 
in patients with advanced chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. J Pain Symptom Manage 
2009;38(1):115 -123. 
 8.  Bentsen SB, Rustoen T,  Miaskowski C. Prevalence and characteristics of pain in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease compared to the Norwegian general population. J Pain 2011;12(5):[ADDRESS_49668] ructive pulmonary disease. Heart 
Lung 2011;40(3):e90 -101. 
 10.  Swigris JJ, Kuschner WG, Jacobs SS, Wilson SR, Gould MK. Health -related quality of life in patients 
with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: a systematic review. Thorax 2005;60(7):588 -594. 
 11.  Vries JD, Kessels BLJ, Drent M. Quality of life of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis patients. Eur Respir J 
2001;17(5):[ADDRESS_49669] Fail  2007;13(8):643 -648. 
 13.  Vries JD, Kessels BLJ, Drent M. Quality of life of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis patients. Eur Respir J 
2001;17(5):[ADDRESS_49670] scores. Eur Respir J 2014;43(3):[ADDRESS_49671] 
2011;139(3) :609-616. 
 
Palliative care to improve quality of life in CHF and COPD_Protocol_v_ 05.08.2018   16.  Holland AE, Fiore JF, Jr., Bell EC et al. Dyspnoea and comorbidity contribute to anxiety and depression 
in interstitial lung disease. Respi[INVESTIGATOR_16921] 2014;19(8):[ADDRESS_49672] 2007;24(3):[ADDRESS_49673] MM, Gazzana MB, Barreto SS. Predictors of physical and mental health -related 
quality of life in patients wit h interstitial lung disease: a multifactorial analysis. J Bras Pneumol 
2010;36(5):562 -570. 
 19.  Rutledge T, Reis VA, Linke SE, Greenberg BH, Mills PJ. Depression in heart failure a meta -analytic 
review of prevalence, intervention effects, and associations  with clinical outcomes. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2006;48(8):[ADDRESS_49674] 2005;127(4):1205 -1211.  
 21.  Ng TP, Niti M, Fones C, Yap KB, Tan WC. Co -morbid association of depression and COPD: a 
population -based study. Respir Med 2009;103(6):895 -901. 
 22.  Lacasse Y, Rousseau L, Maltais F. Prevalence of depressive symptoms and depression in patients with 
severe oxygen -dependent chroni c obstructive pulmonary disease. J Cardiopulm Rehabil 2001;21(2):80 -
86. 
 23.  Cully JA, Phillips LL, Kunik ME, Stanley MA, Deswal A. Predicting quality of life in veterans with heart 
failure: the role of disease severity, depression, and comorbid anxiety. Behav Med 2010;36(2):70 -76. 
 24.  Kroenke K, Bair MJ, Damush TM et al. Optimized antidepressant therapy and pain self -management in 
primary care patients with depression and musculoskeletal pain: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 
2009;301(20):[ADDRESS_49675] event -free survival in patients 
with heart failure. J Cardiovasc Nurs 2010;25(4):284 -291. 
 26.  Park SK, Larson JL. Symptom cluster, healthcare use and mortality in patients with sever e chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease. J Clin Nurs 2014.  
 27.  Atlantis E, Fahey P, Cochrane B, Smith S. Bidirectional associations between clinically relevant 
depression or anxiety and COPD: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Chest 2013;144(3):766 -777. 
 28.  Sherwood A, Blumenthal JA, Trivedi R et al. Relationship of depression to death or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47165]. Arch Intern Med 2007;167(4):[ADDRESS_49676] 2002;122(2):429 -436. 
 30.  Sullivan M, Simon G, Spertus J, Russo J. Depression -related costs in heart failure care. Arch Intern 
Med 2002;162(16):1860 -1866.  
 31.  Kolar ik RC, Arnold RM, Fischer GS, Tulsky JA. Objectives for advance care planning. J Palliat Med 
2002;5(5):[ADDRESS_49677]. Effects of offering advance 
directives on medical treatments and costs. Ann  Intern Med 1992;117(7):599 -606. 
 33.  Silveira MJ, Kim SY, Langa KM. Advance directives and outcomes of surrogate decision making before 
death. N Engl J Med 2010;362(13):1211 -1218.  
 34.  Wright AA, Zhang B, Ray A et al. Associations between end -of-life di scussions, patient mental health, 
medical care near death, and caregiver bereavement adjustment. JAMA 2008;300(14):1665 -1673.  
 35.  Temel JS, Greer JA, Muzikansky A et al. Early Palliative Care for Patients with Metastatic Non -Small -
Cell Lung Cancer. New England Journal of Medicine 2010;363(8):[ADDRESS_49678] of advance care planning on end of life 
care in elderly patients: randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2010;340:c1345.  
 37.  Yancy CW,  Jessup M, Bozkurt B et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: 
a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on 
practice guidelines. Circulation 2013;128(16):e240 -e327.  
 38.  Stand ards for the Diagnosis and Management of Patients with COPD [Internet]. Version 1.2.   2004. [LOCATION_001], 
American Thoracic Society. 4 -11-2014.  
Ref Type: Online Source  
 39.  Allen LA, Stevenson LW, Grady KL et al. Decision making in advanced heart failure: a scientific 
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2012;125(15):1928 -1952.  
 
Palliative care to improve quality of life in CHF and COPD_Protocol_v_ 05.08.2018   40.  Lanken PN, Terry PB, Delisser HM et al. An official American Thoracic Society clinical policy statement: 
palliative care for patients with respi[INVESTIGATOR_47166]. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2008;177(8):912 -927. 
 41.  Brown CE, Engelberg RA, Nielsen EL, Curtis JR. Palliative Care for Patients Dying in the Intensive 
Care Unit with Chronic Lung Disease Compared with Metastatic Cancer. Ann Am Thorac Soc 
2016;13(5):684 -689. 
 42.  Barclay S, Momen N, Case -Upton S, Kuhn I, Smith E. End -of-life care conversations with heart failure 
patients: a systematic literature review and narrative synthesis. Br J Gen Pract 2011;61(582):e49 -e62. 
 43.  Bajwah S,  Koffman J, Higginson IJ et al. 'I wish I knew more ...' the end -of-life planning and information 
needs for end -stage fibrotic interstitial lung disease: views of patients, carers and health professionals. 
BMJ Support Palliat Care 2013;3(1):84 -90. 
 44.  Rabow MW, Dibble SL, Pantilat SZ, McPhee SJ. The comprehensive care team: a controlled trial of 
outpatient palliative medicine consultation. Arch Intern Med 2004;164(1):83 -91. 
 45.  Aiken LS, Butner J, Lockhart CA, Volk -Craft BE, Hamilton G, Williams FG. Out come evaluation of a 
randomized trial of the PhoenixCare intervention: program of case management and coordinated care 
for the seriously chronically ill. J Palliat Med 2006;9(1):111 -126. 
 46.  Paes P. A pi[INVESTIGATOR_47167] a palliative care clinic in improving the quality of life 
for patients with severe heart failure. Palliat Med 2005;19(6):[ADDRESS_49679] 2011;139(5):[ADDRESS_49680] 2005;127(6):2188 -2196.  
 49.  Kavalieratos D,  Mitchell EM, Carey TS et al. "Not the 'grim reaper service'": an assessment of provider 
knowledge, attitudes, and perceptions regarding palliative care referral barriers in heart failure. J Am 
Heart Assoc 2014;3(1):e000544.  
 50.  Green E, Gardiner C, Gott  M, Ingleton C. Exploring the extent of communication surrounding transitions 
to palliative care in heart failure: the perspectives of health care professionals. J Palliat Care 
2011;27(2):107 -116. 
 51.  Boyd KJ, Worth A, Kendall M et al. Making sure servic es deliver for people with advanced heart failure: 
a longitudinal qualitative study of patients, family carers, and health professionals. Palliat Med 
2009;23(8):[ADDRESS_49681], Retrum JH et al. Giving voice to patients' and family ca regivers' needs in 
chronic heart failure: implications for palliative care programs. J Palliat Med 2011;14(12):1317 -1324.  
 53.  Hanratty B, Hibbert F, Mair F et al. Doctors' Perceptions of Palliative Care for Heart Failure: Focus 
Group Study. BMJ 2002;325: 581-585. 
 54.  Lupu D. Estimate of current hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47168]. J Pain 
Symptom Manage 2010;40(6):899 -911. 
 55.  Glasgow RE, Lichtenstein E, Marcus AC. Why don't we see more translation of health promotion 
research t o practice? Rethinking the efficacy -to-effectiveness transition. Am J Public Health 
2003;93(8):1261 -1267.  
 56.  Curran GM, Bauer M, Mittman B, Pyne JM, Stetler C. Effectiveness -implementation hybrid designs: 
combining elements of clinical effectiveness and  implementation research to enhance public health 
impact. Med Care 2012;50(3):[ADDRESS_49682] RA, Bates ER. Beyond the randomized clinical trial: the role of effectiveness 
studies in evaluating cardiovascular therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. Circulation 20 08;118(12):1294 -1303.  
 58.  Tunis SR, Stryer DB, Clancy CM. Practical clinical trials: increasing the value of clinical research for 
decision making in clinical and health policy. JAMA 2003;290(12):[ADDRESS_49683], Allen LA, Shakar S, Kutner JS, Matlock DD. Outpatient palliative care for 
chronic heart failure: a case series. J Palliat Med 2011;14(7):815 -821. 
 60.  Turvey CL, Klein DM. Remission from depression comorbid with chronic illness and physical 
impairment. Am J Psychiatry 200 8;165(5):[ADDRESS_49684] et al. Feasibility and acceptability of a collaborative care 
intervention to improve symptoms and quality of life in chronic heart failure: mixed methods pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251]. J 
Palliat Med 2014;17(2):[ADDRESS_49685] 2012;141(3):726 -735. 
 63.  Cella DF, Tulsky DS, Gray G et al. The Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy scale:  development 
and validation of the general measure. J Clin Oncol 1993;11(3):570 -579. 
 64.  Steinhauser KE, Arnold RM, Olsen MK et al. Comparing three life -limiting diseases: does diagnosis 
matter or is sick, sick? J Pain Symptom Manage 2011;42(3):331 -341. 
 65.  Zimmermann C, Swami N, Krzyzanowska M et al. Early palliative care for patients with advanced 
cancer: a cluster -randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2014;383(9930):[ADDRESS_49686] K, Cashy J, Webster K, Cella D. General population an d cancer patient norms for the 
Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy -General (FACT -G). Eval Health Prof 2005;28(2):192 -211. 
 67.  Steinhauser KE, Clipp EC, Bosworth HB et al. Measuring quality of life at the end of life: validation of 
the QUAL -E. Palliat  Support Care 2004;2(1):3 -14. 
 68.  Badger TA, Segrin C, Meek P. Development and validation of an instrument for rapi[INVESTIGATOR_47169]: the general symptom distress scale. J Pain Symptom Manage 2011;41(3):[ADDRESS_49687] 2009;114(1 -3):163 -173. 
 70.  Krebs EE, Lorenz KA, Bair MJ et al. Development and initial validation of the PEG, a three -item scale 
assessing pain intensity and interference. J Gen Intern Med 2009;24(6):733 -738. 
 71.  Garcia SF, Cella D, Clauser SB et al. Standardizing patient -reported outcomes assessment in cancer 
clinical trials: a patient -reported outcomes measurement information sy stem initiative. J Clin Oncol 
2007;25(32):5106 -5112.  
 72.  Bastien CH, Vallieres A, Morin CM. Validation of the Insomnia Severity Index as an outcome measure 
for insomnia research. Sleep Med 2001;2(4):297 -307. 
 73.  Spertus JA, Jones PG. Development and Validation of a Short Version of the Kansas City 
Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 2015;8(5):[ADDRESS_49688] MW et al. Monitoring clinical changes in patients with heart failure: a 
comp arison of methods. Am Heart J 2005;150(4):707 -715. 
 75.  Heidenreich PA, Spertus JA, Jones PG et al. Health status identifies heart failure outpatients at risk for 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_30059]. J Am Coll Cardiol 2006;47(4):752 -756. 
 76.  van der Molen T, Wille mse BW, Schokker S, ten Hacken NH, Postma DS, Juniper EF. Development, 
validity and responsiveness of the Clinical COPD Questionnaire. Health Qual Life Outcomes 2003;1:13.  
 77.  Reda AA, Kotz D, Kocks JW, Wesseling G, van Schayck CP. Reliability and validi ty of the clinical 
COPD questionniare and chronic respi[INVESTIGATOR_47170]. Respir Med 2010;104(11):1675 -1682.  
 78.  Patel AS, Siegert RJ, Brignall K et al. The development and validation of the King's Brief Interstitial 
Lung Disease (K -BILD) health status questionnaire. Thorax 2012;67(9):804 -810. 
 79.  Brandt J, Spencer M, Folstein M. Validity of the telephone interview for cognitive status (TICS) and 
modified TICS (TICSm) for mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and dementia screening. Neuropsychiatry 
Neuropsychol Behav Neurol 1988;1(2):111 -117. 
 80.  Seo EH, Lee DY, Kim SG et al. Validity of the telephone interview for cognitive status (TICS) and 
modified TICS (TICSm) for mild cognitive imparment (MCI) and dementia screening. Arch Gerontol 
Geriatr 2011;5 2(1):e26 -e30. 
 81.  Heyland DK, Cook DJ, Rocker GM et al. The development and validation of a novel questionnaire to 
measure patient and family satisfaction with end -of-life care: the Canadian Health Care Evaluation 
Project (CANHELP) Questionnaire. Palliat  Med 2010;24(7):682 -695. 
 82.  Go AS, Yang J, Ackerson LM et al. Hemoglobin level, chronic kidney disease, and the risks of death 
and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47171]: the Anemia in Chronic Heart Failure: Outcomes 
and Resource Utilizati on (ANCHOR) Study. Circulation 2006;113(23):2713 -2723.  
 83.  Cooke CR, Joo MJ, Anderson SM et al. The validity of using ICD -9 codes and pharmacy records to 
identify patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. BMC Health Serv Res 2011;11:37.  
 84.  Taylor DH, Jr., Fillenbaum GG, Ezell ME. The accuracy of medicare claims data in identifying 
Alzheimer's disease. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] 2002;55(9):[ADDRESS_49689] 2007;21(2):[ADDRESS_49690] C et al. Predicting risk of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47172]. Med Care 2013;51(4):368 -373. 
 87.  Pearman T, Yanez B, Peipert J, Wortman K, Beaumont J, Cella D. Ambulatory cancer and US general 
population reference values and cutoff scores for the functional assessment of cancer  therapy. Cancer 
2014;120(18):2902 -2909.  
 88.  Cella D, Eton DT, Lai JS, Peterman AH, Merkel DE. Combining anchor and distribution -based methods 
to derive minimal clinically important differences on the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy 
(FACT) anemia  and fatigue scales. J Pain Symptom Manage 2002;24(6):547 -561. 
 89.  National Association of Social Workers. NASW Standards for Palliative & End of Life Care. 
Washington, DC: NASW Press, 2004  
 90.  Bernacki RE, Block SD. Communication about serious illness  care goals: a review and synthesis of 
best practices. JAMA Intern Med 2014;174(12):1994 -2003.  
 91.  Damschroder LJ, Aron DC, Keith RE, Kirsh SR, Alexander JA, Lowery JC. Fostering implementation of 
health services research findings into practice: a consol idated framework for advancing implementation 
science. Implement Sci 2009;4:50.  
 92.  Frankel R. Standards of qualitative research. In: Crabtree BF, Miller WL, editors. Doing qualitative 
research, 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications; 1999.  
 93.  Ritzw oller DP, Sukhanova A, Gaglio B, Glasgow RE. Costing behavioral interventions: a practical guide 
to enhance translation. Ann Behav Med 2009;37(2):218 -227. 
 94.  Little RJ. Methods for handling missing values in clinical trials. J Rheumatol 1999;26(8):1654 -1656.  
 95.  Assmann SF, Pocock SJ, Enos LE, Kasten LE. Subgroup analysis and other (mis)uses of baseline data 
in clinical trials. Lancet 2000;355(9209):1064 -1069.  
 96.  Little RJ, Wang Y. Pattern -mixture models for multivariate incomplete data with covaria tes. Biometrics 
1996;52(1):[ADDRESS_49691] G, MacQueen KM. Handbook for team -based qualitative research. Lanham, MD: Altamira Press; 
2008.  
 
 