Title:  A Phase 2a Study of NAD+ Precursor Supplementation in Friedreich’s Ataxia    
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
Document Date:  May 6, 20 22 
 
    
   
   vii
PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS 
Study Title A Phase 2a Study of NAD+ Precursor Supplementation in 
Friedreich’s Ataxia  
Funder Friedreich’s Ataxia Rese arch Alliance (FARA) 
Clinical Phase Open Label, Safety and Tolerability 
Study Rationale Frataxin supports the function of the mitochondrial electron 
transport chain (ETC) because it fa cilitates the formation of iron-
sulfur clusters, which are essent ial to multiple ETC components. 
Cardiac muscle has a high energy requirement, and the role of 
impaired mitochondrial oxidative ph osphorylation capacity in the 
pathogenesis of FA-related cardiom yopathy is a focus of ongoing 
investigations. In animal models, there is evidence for disruption of 
the physiologic coupling between mitochondria and sarcomeres in cardiomyocytes, as well as iron accumulation and mitochondrial proliferation.
16 Similar phenomena may be  observable in skeletal 
muscle in humans.3,17 
 We hypothesize that MIB-626 thera py will be feasible, well-
tolerated, and may increase ca rdiac mitochondrial bioenergetic 
capacity, as reflected by [CONTACT_689369] (PCr) to ATP ratio 
measured via cardiac 
31Phosphorus magnetic resonance 
spectroscop y (31P- MRS). 
Study Objective(s) Primary   
 To test the safety and tolerability of short-term  MIB-626 therapy 
in adults with FA wit hout overt heart failure. 
Secondary 
 To use cardiac 31P-MRS to measure the within-participant 
change in PCr/ATP- γ ratio before and afte r treatment with MIB-
626. 
 To assess the within-participant change in skeletal muscle post-exercise CrCEST recovery (a n index of skeletal muscle 
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation capacity) and the within-participant change skeletal muscle NAD
+ via 1H-MRS 
before and after treat ment with MIB-626.  
 To assess within-participant change s in grip strength (via hand 
grip dynamometry) before and after treatment with MIB-626. 
 To measure the concentration of NAD+ (and associated 
metabolites) in whole blood befo re and after treatment with 
MIB-626.  
 To assess within-participant ch ange in the FARS-ADL, before 
and after treatment with MIB-626. 
 To assess within-participant chan ge in overall well- being, 
    
   
   viii
assessed via CGI scales (CGI-S and CGI-C), before and after 
treatment with MIB-626. 
Test Article(s) 
 MIB-626 two (2) [ADDRESS_935144] Population key criteria for 
Inclusion and Exclusion: Inclusion Criteria 
1. Molecular diagnosis of Fr iedreich’s Ataxia (FA). 
2. Males and females, ages 18y to < 65y. 
Exclusion Criteria 
1. Known sensitivity to nicotinamide-containing compounds. 
2. Concurrent use of vitamin B3 supplements and/or any 
medications likely to increas e risk of MIB-626 toxicity. 
3. HGbA1c > 8.5% and/or DM requiring insulin or insulin 
secretagogue. 
4. Kidney disease (eGFR < 60 ml/min/1.73 m2) using serum 
creatinine and MDRD equation. The eGFR levels will be calculated using the MDRD (Modified Diet in Renal Disease study) equation, which is the equation used by [CONTACT_689370]. 
5. Liver disease (AST/ALT > 3x ULN) 
6. Severe co-existing cardiac diseas e as manifest by a reduced 
LV ejection fraction to < 40%, moderate or greater valve 
disease, presence of a congenital heart defect, and/or evidence of pulmonary hypert ension on an echocardiogram 
or cardiac MRI within 12 months of screening. 
7. History of clinically significant arrhythmias (atrial fibrillation, atrial flut ter, or ventricular tachycardia) or an 
increased potential for arrhythm ias on the screening ECG as 
evidenced by:  
 Prolonged QTc (>480 ms for females or >460 msec for 
males) 
 Any rhythm other than sinus on the baseline ECG, excluding sinus arrhythmia. 
 Multiple PACs (>2) or PVCs on the baseline ECG 
8. Prior history of heart failure. 
9. Any contraindication to MRI, including spi[INVESTIGATOR_689366] (related 
to unknown safety considerations for cardiac 
31P-MRS). 
    
   
   ix
10. Use of any investigational agent within 4 weeks of 
enrollment. 
11. Females: Pregnant/lactating or planning to become pregnant 
during their participation. 
12. Any medical condition that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_1070], will interfere with the safe completion of the 
study. 
Number Of Subjects  
 N =10 screened at CHOP with an aim to enroll and obtain complete 
data for 6 participants. 
 
2 Sites: The Children's Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_689367] d at The Children's Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_689368] e University of Pennsylvania. 
Study Duration Each individual’s participati on will last up to 15 weeks.   
 
Study Phases 
Screening Study Treatment Follow-Up   Participants will undergo a telephone screening to assess eligibility 
and then, within 90 days, comple te an in-person screening to 
confirm eligibility. Participants with confirmed eligibility will be 
included and begin 14 (+/- 2) days of test article (MIB-626).  Participants will complete a follow -up visit at the conclusion of 14 
(+/- 2) days of MIB-626.  
Efficacy Evaluations PCr/ATP- γ ratio via cardiac 31P-MRS 
Skeletal muscle CrCEST and NAD+ (1H-MRS) 
NAD+ analysis of metabolites in whole blood 
Grip strength (hand grip dynamometry)  
FARS-ADL scale Clinician/participant clinical gl obal impression (CGI) scales (CGI-
S, CGI-C)  
Safety Evaluations Safety will be monitored thr ough the collection of laboratory 
assessments at baseline and follow-up.  Participants will also be 
monitored using a standardized assessment of symptoms (see attachment).    We will use the Common Terminolo gy Criteria for Adverse Events 
(CTCAE, version 5.0, U.S. Depar tment of Health and Human 
Services) to grade adverse events.   Individuals who experience a new Grade 3 or higher AE will be 
required to stop stud
y participation.  
    
   
   x
Statistical And Analytic 
Plan We will focus primarily on safety and tolerability. We will note the 
number of participants who complete the protocol, monitor adherence, and systematically coll ected adverse events. We will also 
use paired t-tests and/or Wilcoxon si gned rank tests to assess 
within-participant changes in cardiac and skeletal muscle bioenergetics, NAD
+ metabolites, grip strength, FARS-ADL, and 
clinician/participant reported overall clinical status.   To estimate statistical power, we  used data from a previous study 
comparing cardiac 
31P-MRS assessments of ti ssue bioenergetics in 
individuals with FA as compar ed to control participants.1 With an 
expected initial mean of  adjusted PCr/ATP ratio in individuals with 
FA of 1.42 (SD 0.52) 1, and assuming a conservative short-term 
(i.e., over 14 (+/- 2) da ys) within-subj ect correlation of at least 0.6 
between repeated measures, a sa mple of 6 individuals has 80% 
power to detect an improvement  in PCr/ATP to 2.09 (normal = 
2.20). This initial experience will generate estimates regarding the 
distribution of the candidate mech anistic/efficacy outcomes in FA 
and treatment responses, and may pr ovide a basis for longer Phase 
2/[ADDRESS_935145] and medical monitor. 