	
	
Official	Title: 	 Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788681]	
(CLOCS)	
NCT	number :	 [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 	
Document	Type: 		Study	Protocol	and	Statistical	Analysis	Plan 	
Date	of	the	
Document: 	1/15/16	
	
	
V 01.15.2016 page 1 of 42   
Study Title: Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788682] (CLOCS) 
 Funding Source (Sponsor): National Institute on Drug Abuse 
 Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_271791] I. Green, M.D.     
 
Attachments:  
 Attachment A:  Nonsignificant Risk Devices 
 Attachment B:  Placebo 
 Attachment C:  Genetic Research 
 Attachment D:  Employees and Students 
 Attachment E:  Illiterate Participants 
 Attachment F:  Research Involving Children 
Attachment G:  Research Involving Individuals With Impaired Decision-Making Capacity 
 (formerly referred to as incompetent) 
 Attachment H:  Request for Wa iver of Participant Consent  
 Attachment I:  Request for Waiver of Participant Signed Consent Form 
 Attachment J:  Drugs or Biologics 
 Attachment L:  International Research 
 Attachment M:  Pregnant Wo men, Fetuses and Neonates 
 
1. Abstract.    
 
Cannabis use disorder (CUD), which is up to ten times more common in patients with 
schizophrenia (SCZ) than in the general population, worsens the course of this severe psychiatric disorder. Since SCZ occurs in 1% of the population, the co-occurrence of CUD in 
13% to 42% of people with this disorder presents society with an important public health 
problem. Unfortunately, most antipsychotics available for treatment of patients with SCZ do not appear to limit their cannabis use. Moreover, the one antipsychotic that preliminary data suggest may well limit cannabis use in these patients, clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050] (CLOZ), is not used for this 
purpose; it is reserved for patients whose psychosis is treatment resistant. The overarching 
idea behind this proposal, however, is that CLOZ's use is being unreasonably restricted and should be made more widely available for patients with SCZ who have a co-occurring CUD but whose psychosis is not necessarily treatment resistant. This notion is supported by [CONTACT_788758], as well as our neurobiological 
model of the basis of cannabis use in patients with SCZ that provides a pharmacologic 
rationale for this effect of CLOZ. Even given all the arguments favoring the potential benefits of CLOZ in patients with SCZ and CUD, however, its side effect profile will likely limit its use until a fully powered study demonstrates its ability to decrease cannabis use in patients with SCZ. 
This proposal aims to launch such a study. If, as we hypothesize, this study confirms and 
extends our previous preliminary data of the effects of CLOZ in patients with SCZ and CUD, it will provide a strong impetus to expand the use of CLOZ in this population. In the proposed 
V 01.15.2016 page 2 of 42 study, 132 patients who are comorbid for both SCZ and CUD wi ll be randomized to a 12-week 
treatment course with either CLOZ or risperidone (RISP). The primary specific aim of this 
proposal is: (1) To test the hypothesis that patients treated with CLOZ will have decreased 
cannabis use as compared to patients treated  with RISP. Subsidiary aims will further elucidate 
the effects of CLOZ in this population: (2) a) To determine whether patients treated with CLOZ 
will have improvements in (i) psychiatric symptoms; (ii) quality of life; and (iii) neuropsychological functions as compared to those taking RISP; and b) to explore whether 
patients taking CLOZ will show improved reward responsiveness as compared to those taking 
RISP; and (3) To explore whether those patients with the val/val genotype at the COMT Val158Met locus are more likely to decrease cannabis use during CLOZ treatment than are those without the val/val COMT genotype. Should this study indicate that CLOZ will lessen 
cannabis use in patients with SCZ more than RISP, it will provide evidence needed to begin to 
shift clinical practice toward its use in these patients. Given the increased morbidity associated with CUD in patients with SCZ, doing so could dramatically improve the clinical outcome of these individuals. Lastly, CLOZ's use in this study may also reflec t its potential to serve as a 
prototype of the next generation of medications for treatment of SCZ and co -occurring CUD. 
 
2. Objectives & Hypotheses:   
 
The primary specific aim of this proposal is:  
 
(1) To test the hypothesis that patients treated with clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050] (CLOZ) will have decreased 
cannabis use (intensity and frequency of use) as compared to patients treated with risperidone 
(RISP). 
 Subsidiary aims will further elucidate the effects of CLOZ in this population:  
(2) (a) To determine whether patients treated with CLOZ will show improved (i) psychiatric 
symptoms; (ii) quality of life; and (iii) neuropsychological function, as compared to those taking 
RISP; and (b) to explore whether patients taking CLOZ will show improved reward responsiveness as compared to those taking RISP.  
 
(3) To explore whether those patients with the val/val genotype at the COMT Val158Met locus 
are more likely to decrease cannabis use during CLOZ treatment than are those without the val/val  genotype.   
 
 
V 01.15.2016 page 3 of 42 3.  Introduction:   
 
Note: This introduction is an abridged version of the grant proposal submitted to NIDA.  
Reviewers desiring a more detailed background for this study are referred to pages [ADDRESS_1085820] can be found in Appendix I. 
Cannabis use disorder in schizophrenia (SCZ) is an important public health issue:  SCZ is a 
severe psychiatric disorder occurring in 1% of the population worldwide.  M ost surveys of 
substance use disorders (SUDs) in patients with SCZ have reported lifetime prevalen ce of 
drug/alcohol use disorder in this population ranging from 10 to 60%17-[ADDRESS_1085821] 
comprehensive of these studies, the large -scale NIMH Epi[INVESTIGATOR_249710] (ECA) 
community-based co-morbidity survey, provided clear evidence that patien ts with SCZ are 
much more vulnerable to SUDs than are people in the general population.22  In the ECA study, 
47% of patients with SCZ were noted to have serious problems with substance use during their 
lifetime compared to 16% of the general population.  Cannabis is a very common  co -occurring 
substance use disorder in patients with SCZ21-25 with lifetime rates ranging from 13 to 42%,26-32  
a three to ten-fold increase over the lifetime prevalence of 4% in the general population.[ADDRESS_1085822] levels of use, and with much greater likelihood of substance abuse than dependence in this population.
33  Nonetheless, co-occurring SUD in patients with SCZ is associated with 
relapse,34-36 non-compliance with treatment,37 poorer overall response to typi[INVESTIGATOR_788683],38 more rehospi[INVESTIGATOR_602],35, 39 and an increased risk for violence.14, 22, 40 Cannabis 
use disorder (CUD) in particular has been associated with clinical exacerbations, non -
compliance with treatment, poor global functioning, and increased relapse and 
rehospi[INVESTIGATOR_14285].27, 29, 41- 45  Clearly, CUD adds greatly to the financial costs and emotional 
toll that SCZ places on patient s, families and the entire mental health system. e.g., 53, 54    
Given the clear negative effects of cannabis use in patients with SCZ, the frequent use and 
abuse of cannabis in these pa tients is puzzling – why would they use a drug that worsens the 
symptoms and course of their underlying disease?  One common explanation for the use of 
cannabis/other substances in patients with SCZ invokes the "self -medication" hypothesis,84, 85 
which suggests that use of drugs, despi[INVESTIGATOR_788684] n egative effects, "corrects" an underlying 
"deficit", potentially involving negative symptoms,55, [ADDRESS_1085823] that cannabis and 
other substances may lessen negative symptoms in some patients and also decrease 
medication-induced side effects, the "reason" for use of substances in these patients may not be merely an attempt at "self medication"  of such negative symptoms or medication indu ced 
side effects.   
We have proposed an alternative formulation of this self -medication hypothesis,
[ADDRESS_1085824] that many brain areas that are 
dysfunctional in SCZ are part of the DA-mediated "brain reward circuit".e.g., 92  While cannabis's 
neuropharmacological actions are complex, and may involve many other neural sy stems, 
including  norepi[INVESTIGATOR_788685],e.g., 93, 94 it appears that cannabis, like alco hol, 
cocaine and other drugs of abuse (including nicotine), produces its reinforcing effects on animal behavior via midbrain DA neurons projecting into the prefrontal cortex and limbic system.
94-99  In patients with SCZ, cannabis and other substance use may decrease negative 
symptoms via increase in DA activity in the prefrontal cortex (PFC),e.g., 97, 98, 99, [ADDRESS_1085825] system by [CONTACT_788759] -
based "signal detection" of these DA -rich systems.103, 104 Thus, while the abuse of cannabis 
and other substances may decrease negative symptoms in patients with SCZ, the "basis" of the use of these substances may be related to the difficulty that these patients have in 
experiencing "normal" levels of reward from the environment and to the ability of cannabis and 
other substances of abuse to ameliorate this "reward system" deficit.
5, 92, 105, 106  In this sense, 
use of cannabis is based on the need for patients to “self -medicate” this deficit.   
For most of the past six decades, the treatment of psychotic disorders has involved the use of the standard or typi[INVESTIGATOR_67128] (i.e., neuroleptic) drugs.  However, for "dual diagnosis" psychotic patients who are comorbid for SUDs, it appears that the typi[INVESTIGATOR_788686].  Although the drugs are effective for the underlying p sychosis, the side 
effects they produce (the feeling of being "snowed", and the extrapyramidal system effects) 
may lead to the further use of cannabis or other substances in an attempt to override (or "self -
medicate") such side effects produced by [CONTACT_788760].
42, 55 Thus, while there may be an 
increased rate of CUD/SUD in patients with SCZ whether treated or not, the typi[INVESTIGATOR_788687].  
By [CONTACT_22242], a number of reports, including several from the PI's group, suggest that the newer 
V 01.15.2016 page 5 of 42
atypi[INVESTIGATOR_788688].  In the early 1990s, we described two patients with SCZ who had used alcohol extensively to make them "feel more outgoing", and who dramatically decreased their 
alcohol use after beginning treatment with CLOZ.
56  Other groups also reported evidence that 
substance use may decrease during CLOZ treatment.57-61 
Subsequent studies by [CONTACT_788761] 
"dual diagnosis" patients. The first study,62 a naturalistic, clinical services survey, followed 151 
patients who were comorbid for SUD and SCZ or schizoaffective disorder for 3 years.  In our 
analysis of data from this prospective study, we noted that the patients taking CLOZ had 
higher rates of remission of cannabis abuse (6/9 = 67%) compared to those treated with a 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_751557] (12/37 = 32%).  Similarly, remission of alcohol abuse was higher in patients taking CLOZ (15/19 = 79%) compared to those treated with typi[INVESTIGATOR_30265] (29/86 = 34%; 
Bonferroni corrected p=.003).  In a continuing assessment of those patients whose abuse 
remitted, only 8% of those treated with CLOZ relapsed to abuse in the following 6 months vs. 
40% of those treated with other antipsychotics (p=.003).
63 
These findings were further confirmed by [CONTACT_788762] a separate site, indicating that between 54% and 72% achieved abstinence from cannabis and alcohol during treatment with CLOZ. 
64, 65  A report presented by [CONTACT_788763].66 
provided further support for our data (an abstinent rate for all substances of 73% in patients 
who took CLOZ for 12 weeks), as did another report by [CONTACT_43265].67   
Under support from NIDA, we recently completed a randomized “stay or switch” 12-week trial 
of CLOZ vs. continued atypi[INVESTIGATOR_788689] 35 patients with SCZ and co-occurring CUD.  During the study, the patients were not provided extra "dual diagnosis" psychosocial treatment 
(i.e. beyond clinical care for this 
population.)  Data regarding intensity of 
cannabis use over the course of the study are indicated in Figure 1.  The primary finding from this study
1 is:  using 
longitudinal random effects models, we 
determined that the intensity of cannabis smoking between the two groups (those randomized to CLOZ and those staying on 
their original antipsychotic) was 
systematically different (effect size ~ .6; p<.09), such that, as compared to those staying on 
V 01.15.2016 page 6 of 42 their original antipsychotic, those treated with CLOZ used less cannabis during the 12 -week 
study (with CLOZ, heavy users [> 10 joints/week] had a decrease in cannabis use, and most 
other users [< 10 joints/week] approached abstinence).  
    Many inves tigators are currently assessing whether other atypi[INVESTIGATOR_788690]-occurring SUDs in patients with SCZ .  Unfortunately, available data 
are somewhat mixed and not overly promising.65  Although Smelson et al.68, 69 reported that 
risperidone (RISP) reduced craving scores and relapse to cocaine use (as compared to typi[INVESTIGATOR_91874]) in patients with SCZ and co -occurring cocaine abuse, our  retrospective survey 
of patients with SCZ and co-occurring alcohol or cannabis abuse did not demonstrate an 
important effect of RISP (on alcohol and/or cannabis use) compared to CLOZ.[ADDRESS_1085826] in limiting substance abuse in these patients,
71, 72 including one from the PI’s group,[ADDRESS_1085827] been three open label (small N) reports indicating that aripi[INVESTIGATOR_4253], a partial dopamine agonist, may also have some ability to decrease substance use in co-occurring 
patients.
79-[ADDRESS_1085828] some value in patients with SCZ and co -occurring SUD, CLOZ 
remains the only one where there is consistent evidence of a substantive decrease in cannabis 
and other substance use.  
Our neurobiological formulation also suggests that CLOZ’s unique p harmacological profile may 
help explain its unusual clinical profile in patients with SCZ and co -occurring cannabis (and 
other substance) use disorder.  We have proposed, based on animal studies, that CLOZ’s 
unusual clinical effects may relate to its varied pharmacologic actions, including those on 
dopaminergic and, particularly, noradrenergic systems.  Work of a number of groups has suggested that some of CLOZ's clinical effects may result from release of DA in the PFC,
e.g., 
107-[ADDRESS_1085829], may contribute to its 
antipsychotic potential.e.g., 89, 90 However, CLOZ's unusual actions on noradrenergic neurons 
may be of paramount importance in understanding its clinical effects.5, [ADDRESS_1085830] proposed that CLOZ’s activation of the norepi[INVESTIGATOR_238] (NE) system (including its antagonistic effects at the NE α
2 receptor and its ability to release NE)e.g., 111-120 may potentiate 
functioning of (and ameliorate dysfunction in) the DA -mediated "reward system" through 
V 01.15.2016 page 7 of 42 increase of signal detection in DA subcortical neurons.5  Within our proposed study (in Aim 
2b), we will begin to explore, through study of reward responsiveness,e.g., [ADDRESS_1085831] on alcohol/substance use of other antipsychotics may indicate that these antipsychotics are less likely than CLOZ to ameliorate a reward system deficit.  We are assessing, under funding from NI AAA and industry, the action 
of antipsychotic medications in alcohol -preferring rodents with an eye toward creation of a 
CLOZ -like agent that could decrease alcohol and other substance use in patients with SCZ.  
Our animal studies have provided considerabl e support for our neurobiologic formulation of the 
action of CLOZ. They have suggested that increasing the DA D
2 receptor potency of CLOZ (by 
[CONTACT_788764]) will diminish the ability of CLOZ to suppress alcohol 
drinking; and adding the NE reuptake inhibitor desipramine (DMI) to RISP will allow RISP, 
which does not decrease alcohol drinking when given alone, to suppress alcohol drinking.  
Given our formulation of the mechanism of action of CLOZ in patients with SCZ and CUD or 
other SUD, we are interested in beginning to investigate whether patients with the val/val genotype at the COMT (catechol-o-methyl transferase) Val158Met locus are more likely to decrease cannabis use with CLOZ than are those with (particularly) the met/met genotype a nd 
(possibly) the val/met genotype.  We base our hypothesis about this on the action of COMT, which breaks down DA (and NE) particularly in the frontal cortex (given the relative lack of DA reuptake capacity in this brain region).
124, 125  The val/val genotype subjects (25 – 30% of the 
population) would have a “high output” form of COMT, thus increasing the metabolism of DA in 
their PFC (where DA-ergic activity is deficient in patients with SCZ).[ADDRESS_1085832] that those individuals whose cannabis use 
occurs in the presence of the COMT val/val genotype would be more likely to respond to CLOZ 
(with a decrease in cannabis use, and potentia lly a decrease in symptoms) than will individuals 
who have the met/met (and possibly the val/met) COMT genotype.     
The preliminary data from our group and others, including our recent NIDA – funded pi[INVESTIGATOR_788691]. other atypi[INVESTIGATOR_788692], suggest that CLOZ, despi[INVESTIGATOR_788693]-effect burden, should be considered as a routine treatment option f or patients with SCZ 
and CUD, even for those patients who are not classically “treatment resistant” (i.e., regarding 
their psychosis).  With CLOZ, however, increasing use is an uphill battle – given its potential 
V 01.15.2016 page 8 of 42 side effects (e.g., rare seizures, and very rare agranulocytosis or myocarditis, as well as weight  
gain, and glucose and lipid increases),82, 83 requiring regular blood monitoring, and the 
resulting “medicalization” of treatment, which may be uncomfortable for psychiatrists worki ng in 
mental health centers.  With CLOZ, the evidence in favor of its use needs to be very solid 
before its use will become routine for treatment of co -occurring CUD.  As noted by [CONTACT_788765],[ADDRESS_1085833] limitations.  It 
is the special nature of this drug that indicates to us that the field needs a well -powered trial of 
CLOZ vs. another (preferably atypic al) antipsychotic that will provide the base for change in 
practice.  We are proposing such a trial.  
In addition, we will explore whether the val/val COMT genotype may identify those subjects 
with SCZ most likely to respond to CLOZ with a decrease in canna bis use.  Given the side 
effects of CLOZ, it will be important to be able to exclude from CLOZ treatment any patient in whom CLOZ is not likely to be effective. 
 
4.  Design, procedures, materials and methods:   
 
This a longitudinal, randomized, double -blind [ADDRESS_1085834] the medication regimen and proposed change reviewed by [CONTACT_788766] (MAG), consisting of all study physicians that serve in an advisory capacity on the study and patient care, and led by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Brunette, to ensure that medication decisions are made in a similar fashion across all sites.    
V 01.15.2016 page 9 of 42 The procedure for considering and making such a medication change as deemed appropriate 
will be as follows:  
        o Assess whether a change in or elimination of the agent is likely to worsen the clinical 
condition of the patient.  If the MAG determines the risk to be too great, then the person may not enter the study.        o If there is no reason to assume that elimination of the exclusionary medication or use of 
an alternate medication would worsen the patient's condition and the patient wants to be in the 
study, he/she will be consented to the study at that time (if not already consented), and the 
change in medication will be made in consultation with the person's regular physician.  
       o The MAG will determine the length of time the person must be off of the exclusionary 
medication before beginning the study and set an interval at which the study doctor is t o meet 
with the person to supervise his or her medication change.   Participants will be paid for their time and travel up to $25 per visit for these additional visits.  
 At the end of the period set by [CONTACT_788767], if the patient appears to be likely to contin ue to meet 
study entry criteria, he or she will continue the screening visit.  If not, the person will continue to be transitioned back to the regular treating physician.  
 At baseline, subjects will be randomly assigned to one of 2 groups of approximately 66 
subjects: taking (blinded) RISP or CLOZ.    The blinded CLOZ will be titrated on a 
recommended standard schedule, supervised by a study physician (or other prescriber) w ho 
can make the necessary adjustments to account for symptom control and tolerability.  The titration is recommended to begin at 12.5 mg and then increase while the open -label base 
antipsychotic is tapered with a recommended goal of decreasing the base ant ipsychotic by 
25% each week.  If clinically tolerated, the target dose of CLOZ is 400 mg/day.  The blinded RISP will also be titrated with a target dose of 4 mg/day, while the open label base antipsychotic is tapered in a similar fashion.  Participants, tr eatment providers and study staff 
will be blinded to study condition by [CONTACT_788768].   
 After the initial [ADDRESS_1085835] to increase or lower the dose 
of blinded medication to achieve optimal response or to accommodate side effects.  Study physicians may change doses to address symptom control or tolerability at any time.  The principle to be followed is that CLOZ and RISP should be maintained at an optimal dose for psychiatric symptoms.  To keep RISP in the dosage range thought to be "atypi[INVESTIGATOR_2855]" and to 
V 01.15.2016 page 10 of 42 minimize the seizure potential of CLOZ, we will employ a maximum dose of 6 mg of RISP and 
550 mg of CLOZ per day  – doses likely to be sufficient for most patients.  Compliance with study medication will be monitored by [CONTACT_788769][INVESTIGATOR_788694] -pack or 
planner, conducting pi[INVESTIGATOR_10685], and paying participants $[ADDRESS_1085836] decided on the following g uidelines:  (1) Where clinically 
appropriate, patients will be taking only RISP or CLOZ  during the course of the study; (2) 
enrolled patients will have concurrent psychotropic medications reduced prior to randomization unless (a) the "MAG" indicates the medication is necessary for their treatment and should not 
be removed; and (b) the concurrent medication is neither specifically prohibited in the study 
nor contraindicated in combination with CLOZ or RISP.  Wherever possible, concurrent medications will be held stable during the trial. Prospective participants requiring benz otropi[INVESTIGATOR_788695] (or other similar side -effect medications) will be allowed into the study following 
approval by [CONTACT_788767].  Sedative-hypnotics will be severely restricted (allowed only on an 
occasional basis, approved by [CONTACT_788770]).  The principle to be followed is that concurrent agents may only be used for non -substance-related 
psychiatric disorders.  We believe that this plan will allow us to  achieve our specific aims while 
providing good clinical care.  
 Participants will be followed for [ADDRESS_1085837] baseline with weekly study visits.  If participants cannot tolerate their assigned study medication after randomization, it will be stopped, tho ugh 
the participant may continue to be followed on another treatment (ideally their pre -study 
antipsychotic medication) for the remaining weeks of the study.  
 At the end of an individual's participation (whether as scheduled or earlier if the person leaves  
the study early), he or she will be asked to have a final study visit.  The research physician will work with the participant and his or her treatment team to determine the best course of treatment following the study.  If the decision is for the particip ant to remain on the same 
antipsychotic as during the study, then the patient and his or her treatment team will be 
V 01.15.2016 page 11 of 42 unblinded to study condition but the research team will remain blinded.  If the participant opts 
to stop the study medication and the clinic al team will be responsible for the transition to 
another medication, the study team will provide for four additional blood draws after clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788696].  They will unblind the participant's treatment provider to the individual's study 
treatment condition so that the treatment provider can supervise the cross titration of the antipsychotic medications.   
 
Occasionally, after a patient completes the study, a pi[INVESTIGATOR_788697].  For this 
reason, participants will be asked as part of the consent process if they are willing to be contact[CONTACT_723244].  
 While our study teams strive to have all participants complete all asse ssments, this is a 
population that struggles with the impact of two debilitating disorders.  Symptoms of psychosis, including avolition, apathy and cognitive disturbances, commonly lead to behavior that can be 
inconsistent and result in poor appointment at tendance and variable tolerance of assessment 
batteries.  Substance use disorders can similarly contribute to persons having complex lives 
that can be unpredictable and lead to a variety of difficulties with participation in research activities.  Additionally, problems related to symptoms of schizophrenia and substance 
dependence can cause a number of challenges to carrying out the protocol with a given 
participant, including: missed appointments, visits outside of the window, inability to complete all study assessments, not taking medication correctly, and not returning medication containers and extra pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353].  Such events will not be considered protocol deviations unless they impact a 
participant's safety or the scientific validity of the study.  
 
Pharmacy Problem: In February 2014, the pharmacy providing the medications for this study ceased doing business.  The study team intends to arrange services with a new pharmacy, but 
this may take weeks or months.  During this time, participants will be randomized to open label 
treatment with either risperidone or clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050].  The only other change in the protocol during 
this time is that after the baseline visit participants randomized to risperidone, will not need the weekly clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788698].  A new consent form is being created for this period of 
time.  Any participants consented using the existing consent form with be reconsented.   Once arrangements are made with a new pharmacy, participants who were randomized to open label study medication will remain on  open label medication.  New individuals entering the 
study after a new pharmacy begins to provide services will be consented using the currently 
V 01.15.2016 page 12 of 42 approved consent describing the use of double -blind study medication and double -blind 
randomization will re-commence.  We will notify the CPHS when this occurs.  
 
Transition Back to Double-Blind: As the various study sites receive all necessary approvals to 
transition back into the double-blind design, screening will continue and some patients who screen positive may not be randomized immediately so that they can be randomized when the 
double-blind design is operating again. This delay may be as short as a few days or as long as 
a few weeks, and may potentially involve one or more extra study visits and pos sibly one more 
blood test for blood cell count.   
 
Tapi[INVESTIGATOR_007]:  We hope to audio or video record research interviews for training and reliability 
purposes. Recording will be done on digital equipment when possible, and on traditional analog equipment when necessary. We  plan to transfer digital recordings either directly from 
the digital recorder to the supervisor's computer or through email as password -protected 
attachments. When transmitting analog recordings, research interviewers will either hand -carry 
the tapes back to the supervisor or mail the tapes via registered  mail  
 
5.  Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria:   
 
Inclusion Criteria: 
1.  Ages 18-55   
2. Meets the DSM-IV TR criteria for diagnoses of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder and 
a cannabis use disorder (abuse or dependence) based on the Structured Interview for the 
DSM-IV TR [SCID].  
3. Has used cannabis on 8 or more days over the 28 days prior to randomization (assessed by [CONTACT_376997] [TLFB]  interview)  
4. Stable outpatients as determined by [CONTACT_788767] ( e.g. no psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_788699] 4 weeks)  
5. Stable on antipsychotic medication as determined by [CONTACT_788767] (i.e. no substantial change in dose/type of antipsychotic in the past 4 weeks.)  
6. Treated with an antipsychotic drug other than CLOZ  at the time of study entry and willing to 
be treated with either CLOZ or RISP  
7. Is willing and able to provide informed consent  
V 01.15.2016 page 13 of 42   
Exclusion Criteria 
1. Current diagnosis of a substance use disorder other than a CUD o r an Alcohol Use 
Disorder.  Caffeine and nicotine (tobacco smoking) use will be allowed, but monitored. Note: 
Persons using synthetic cannabinoids will be allowed in the study assuming they also have a CUD. 
2. Is currently pregnant, trying to become pregnant or nursing 
3. Has a history of a seizure disorder  
4. Is currently treated with CLOZ or RISP 5. Contraindication to treatment with RISP or CLOZ   
6. Treatment with two or more antipsychotics, unless the MAG determines that one of the 
antipsychotics is prescribed at a dose that is less than therapeutic for psychosis (e.g. low doses of quetiapi[INVESTIGATOR_788700].)  
7. Receives treatment with a psychotropic agents proposed to curtail substance use (e.g., 
disulfiram, naltrexone, acamprosate, topi[INVESTIGATOR_052], valproate,  levetiracetam, varenicline or 
bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_2394]) as determined by [CONTACT_788767].  
8. Is at risk of suicide (as determined by [CONTACT_788767].) 
9. Has a medical condition that would increase risk of study participation.  
10. Is deemed inappropriate for the study by [CONTACT_788771] (e.g. due to other medical 
conditions, medication, psychiatric concerns or other circumstances that could cause safety concerns or impair the person’s ability to participate in or benefit from the study.  
 
6.  Statistical Methods and Review Statement:   
 
The primary outcome measures (Aim 1) will be intensity (number of joints) and frequency 
(days of use) of cannabis use  (per week) during follow-up.  We will also assess global 
severity of use monthly.  Secondary auxiliary measures (Aim 2) will include symptoms: the 
BPRS score (total, positive and negative subscales), the SANS (negative symptoms), and the 
CGI total score; quality of life: QLS (composite, interpersonal relations and instrumental role 
subscales), QLI (satisfaction score); neuropsychological functioning:  five subcomponents 
from the MATRICS battery:  attention/vigilance (CPT IP); verbal learning and memory (Le tter 
V 01.15.2016 page 14 of 42 Number Span, Hopkins learning and memory trials); nonverbal learning and memory (Spatial 
Span and BVMT learning and memory trials); reasoning and problem solving (NAB Mazes); 
and speed of processing (Trail Making A, Category Fluency, Symbol -Coding); and reward 
responsiveness : delta response bias (delta RB) on the Probabilistic Reward Task.  The 
measures for Aim 3 will include:  val/val, val/met and met/met COMT genotypes.  
 
        Aim 1: For both explanatory and intent -to-treat comparisons, we will first graphically 
describe treatment differences over time and check for unusual data and patterns.  For the 
LRE models, polynomial time trends (e.g., slopes) will be used to fit the population mean 
response curve for the RISP (control) group. Group-by-time i nteractions will be modeled as a 
function of time to fit between-group effects. Subject-specific parameters will be estimated to 
model individual subject deviations from the group mean.  For efficiency, baseline measures of 
intensity of cannabis use and clinical symptoms will be included in the model as covariates; 
history of treatment resistance and indicators of the COMT genotype subgroup will be included 
to control for possible imbalances between groups.  While not a specific aim, secondary 
analyses of SUD will assess the effects of CLOZ vs. RISP on nicotine and other substance 
use, using baseline measures as controls.   
       Aim 2:  The analyses for this aim will be carried out as for Aim 1, but using the auxiliary 
measures described above. Nicotine de pendence at baseline will serve as a control for RR 
comparisons. 
       Aim 3:  The analyses for this aim will be explanatory, using LRE models that include 
measures of cannabis use and clinical symptoms as baseline covariates.  Subjects in the 
CLOZ group will be stratified into three subgroups according to their COMT genotype (val/val, 
val/met, met/met).  Separate models for each subgroup will also be used to explore 
differences, as there is likely to be insufficient power for (subgroup x time) interaction s.  
Differences in use over time will be qualitatively assessed using categorical response (50% 
decrease, based on predicted values from LRE models).   
 
Sample Size: The sample size for this study was chosen to provide statistical power for an 
effect size (ES) for Aim 1 as small as 0.45, based on results from our preliminary “stay or 
switch” study for assessing the effects of CLOZ vs. other antipsychotics on cannabis use.  That 
study provided an ES of 0.6, but to be conservative (given uncertainty in estima ted effect sizes 
from small pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299]), we power this study for a smaller ES.  For our primary explanatory 
analyses, assuming 30% of the 132 subjects fail to complete the study on assigned 
medication, the detectable ES (two-sided tests, alpha = .05, power = .80) for primary analyses 
V 01.15.[ADDRESS_1085838] correlation (r = .2) and .[ADDRESS_1085839] correlation 
(r =.5). 
 
7.  Data and Safety Monitoring:  
 
The Dartmouth Department of Psychiatry has created a Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) 
to independently oversee clinical trials and other studies. The DSMB for this study will be 
composed of at least three people and will include (at minimum) a clinician  knowledgeable 
about SCZ and co-occurring substance use disorders, and a biostatistician who will be 
independent of the study group. The group will follow the NIH policy for data and safety 
monitoring and guidelines as published on http://www.nimh.nih.gov/ research-
funding/grants/nimh-policy-on-data-and-safety-monitoring-in-extramural-investigator-initiated -
clinical-trials.shtml.  Study data regarding subject enrollment, characteristics, symptoms, 
substance use, adverse events and serious adverse events will  be submitted to the DSMB for 
review and analysis quarterly. The DSMB will review study data quarterly to oversee the safety 
of study participants and conduct of the study. It will advise the PI (and the Departmental 
Research Committee) on continuation of the study and provide reports to the IRB regarding 
recruitment of appropriate subjects and presence of adverse effects.   
 
8. Instruments:  
 
Please refer to Appendix II: Schedule of Events for the specific timing of assessments.   
Diagnosis:  Patients will be assessed at recruitment with the Structured Clinical Interview for 
DSM-IV (SCID).176 Information gathered from all sources (e.g., charts, clinicians, patients).   
Cannabis and other substance use: Cannabis/other substance use (including nicotine) will 
be assessed primarily by [CONTACT_273050] -report using the Timeline Followback (TLFB) method,139, 
181 enhanced by [CONTACT_788772], as well as 
data from collateral informants, urinary and breath measures.   
  Participants’ urine will be tested weekly for the presence of cannabis and other 
substances. We will also test for alcohol (using a breathalyzer).  At three points in the study,  
we will obtain a urinary cotinine level.  Urine screen tests that are positive for cannabis use will 
be quantified using liq. chromatography/mass spectrometry  (LC/MS/MS).  In addition, a urine 
specimen sample each month will be sent for testing of synthetic cannabinoids. The 
Fagerström Test for Nicotine Dependence will be used to assess smoking status.  
V 01.15.2016 page 16 of 42     Psychiatric symptoms:  Level of psychiatric symptoms will be assessed with the modified 
Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS),190 the Clinical Global Inventory (CGI),191 and the 
Schedule for the Assessment of Negative Symptoms (SANS). 192  Suicidality will be assessed 
with the  Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS).9 Extrapyramidal system effects 
will be assessed with the Simpson -Angus Scale (S-A),194 the Abnormal Involuntary Movements 
Scale (AIMS),195 and the Barnes Akathisia Scale (BAS).196   
 Quality of life (QOL):  Quality of life measures can provide a broad assessment  of the 
status of patients, including those with substance use disorders.174, 197 We will use items from 
the Quality of Life scale (QLS) scale199 and the "subject ive section" from the Quality of Life 
interview (QLI)200 for the proposed study.   
 Neuropsychological (NP) functions:  In this study, to complement the quality of life 
functional measures, and because cannabis use produces cognitive effects201 we will utilize a 
small battery of NP tests to assess the effects of the two treatments on aspects of NP function 
that have been shown to be impaired in patients with both schizophrenia and CUD (i.e., 
attention/vigilance, verbal and visual short - and long -term memory, and executive functions).  
This will include components from the  Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence,204 and an 
abbreviated online cognitive assessment ("Integneuro"), a 20 minute assessment that, 
includes brief visual memory span, attention switching, processing speed.  There is also an 
additional brief functional capacity assessment using virtual rea lity (another 10 -20 minutes).  
 Reward responsiveness (RR):   In an exploratory aim, in order to obtain empi[INVESTIGATOR_788701], we will assess reward responsiveness using the compu terized Probabilistic Reward Task
4. This task 
measures the extent to which a participant biases their responding toward a more rewarded versus less rewarded stimulus, consistent with the view that frequency of responding is increased toward reinforcers.
208 Relevant for the proposed research, impaired RR in this task 
has been associated with increased levels of nicotine dependence209 and affective flattening in 
patients with schizophrenia.210   
   CLOZ/RISP blood levels:  We will draw blood samples to measure CLOZ/RISP levels, and 
to explore for possible effects of the CLOZ/RISP level on cannabis use.    
    DNA collection and COMT Val158Met genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_007]:  A venous blood sample (5 ml) will be 
drawn and sent to Dartmouth for DNA extraction and genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_007].  (Note: An extra tube of blood will be drawn [with permission] and frozen for possible subsequent genetic testing.)    
 Treatment and service utilization:  We will monitor treatment for drug/alcohol abuse and 
psychosis with a modified version of the Treatment Services Review (TSR).
221   
V 01.15.2016 page 17 of 42   Other assessments:  Other assessments that will be done and are mentioned elsewhere 
in this Study Plan include: a medical history and physical at screening; an EKG at screening 
and as clinically appropriate; laboratory testing, including CBC with diff (to obtain blood cell 
counts) and glucose, cholesterol and triglyceride levels, renal and hepatic function tests; 
monitoring of vital signs (including weight); monitoring medication compliance via pi[INVESTIGATOR_10685]; reviewing current medications and adverse events; pregnancy tests;  m onitoring for signs of 
withdrawal from alcohol and cannabis; and assessing for possible cardiac side effects.  EKGs and blood cardiac enzymes will be taken as appropriate clinically.   
Note: In order to assure a high degree of reliability in the rating for  this study, some of the 
assessments may be conducted via secure video conference using centralized  raters. 
 
9.  Risks and Benefits:   
 
Potential risks and benefits for participants:    
(1) Medications:  
 (a) Safety of CLOZ: Risks of CLOZ include agranulocytosis – occurs in approximately 0.37% 
of patients, if a weekly blood count monitoring system is in place (as will be done in this study 
– see below).  All subjects in this study will participate in this weekly blood count monitoring 
system. The study will follow the FDA package insert for monitoring for neutropenia and 
treatment recommendations.  If the package insert recommends interrupting or discontinuing 
treatment with clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050], this will be done  in consultation with the patient and his/her clinical 
psychiatrist, another antipsychotic will be started and the patient’s care will be transition from 
the study to the clinical team.  Patients and staff will be specifically instructed to recognize and 
report any evidence of leukopenia or granulocytopenia such as fever, malaise, sore throat, etc.  
We limit our population under study to patients between ages 18 and 55 primarily because of 
the slightly increased risk of agranulocytosis in children and the elderly, and to avoid the  
confounding effects of age for our neuropsychological measures.  (Most patients meeting our 
inclusion criteria, however, will be within this age range).   
The second major risk is the development of seizures. In patients who had no seizure history 
seizures occurred in 0.9% of people at doses less than 600 mg/day, and 1.5% at doses 
greater than 600 mg/day.  Higher rates have been reported in patients with medical 
comorbidities and history of head injuries.  For this reason we will carefully exclude patients  
with unstable medical conditions and history of previous seizures and we will utilize a target 
dose of CLOZ of 400 mg/day.  We will exclude patients with a history of a seizure disorder, 
and carefully assess for prodromal signs of seizures, including myoc lonus, in patients within 
V 01.15.2016 page 18 of 42 the study.  Should a seizure occur, the medication trial will be terminated and the patient will 
be treated as appropriate clinically.  The doses of CLOZ chosen (target of 400 mg/day, with an 
upper limit of 550 mg/day) will lower the rate of seizures.  
CLOZ is associated with a minimally increased risk of myocarditis early in treatment (between 
0.015% and 0.188%). Although this is a very rare effect of CLOZ, patients will be carefully 
assessed at each visit for signs indicative of myocarditis (e.g., chest congestion, syncope, 
heart failure, etc.).  EKGs will be taken as appropriate clinically.   
 CLOZ can also cause cardiometabolic side effects such as weight gain, increased glucose 
levels (with increased rate of diabetes), as well as increased levels of triglycerides and 
cholesterol. Potential cardiometabolic side effects will be carefully monitored.  Patients will be 
weighed at each visit, vital signs will be taken and patients will be provided brief advice for 
exercise and nutrition.  Patients will be tested for glucose, triglycerides and cholesterol at 
screening, [ADDRESS_1085840] elevations in triglycerides or cholesterol will be 
managed clinically.  Patients with clinically significant elevations in glucose will  be switched 
back to pre-study medication or another medication mutually agreed upon by [CONTACT_7357], the patient, and the patient’s clinical physician.  
Lastly, CLOZ can also cause hypotension, tachycardia, fever, sedation and sialorrhea. Study 
physicians will ask participants about side effects each week and will instruct them to call the 
study team at any time between study visits should adverse events occur.  Management of 
side effects will be discussed with participants.  Any moderate to severe s ide effect will trigger 
the study physician to consider taking measures to minimize the side effect burden.  Lowering 
the dose of study medication or discontinuing the study medication will be considered and 
discussed with the MAG and with the participant.    
 (b) Safety of RISP: Neurologic side effects associated with the short term use of RISP include, 
in order of frequency:  rigidity and stiffness (30%), restlessness (20%), tardive dyskinesia 
(<3%), and, rarely, neuroleptic malignant syndrome (<1%) -- although the rates of these 
neurologic side effects are lower than with standard (typi[INVESTIGATOR_2855]) antipsychotic drugs. We will 
monitor patients for these effects weekly.  In our previous studies of these patients, the rates of 
neurologic effects have been quite low.   If a participant experiences significant side effects, 
dose adjustment will be attempted or an anticholinergic medication (or propranolol) will be 
added.   
V 01.15.[ADDRESS_1085841] discharge and menstrual difficulties.    Participants will be monitored for 
these potential side effects weekly.  
RISP may also cause cardiometabolic side effects (although at rates significantly lower than 
CLOZ), including weight gain, incr eased glucose and diabetes, and increased triglycerides and 
cholesterol. All participants will also be monitored for cardiometabolic side effects as described 
above. 
Other side effects of RISP may include anxiety, stomach upset, and rhinitis. Study physici ans 
will ask patients about side effects weekly and address them by [CONTACT_788773].  If medication side effects are problematic, the medication 
may be discontinued.  
(2) Relapse of psychosis:   Although patient s will be under treatment for their psychosis during 
the study, and both RISP and CLOZ are very effective antipsychotics, patients who switch 
antipsychotic medication may not do as well on either RISP or CLOZ as on their previous 
antipsychotic medication.  Patients who experience an exacerbation are vulnerable to a 
number of dangerous behaviors, including self -harm or harm toward others. Symptoms will be 
assessed weekly.  Interviewers will consult with the study psychiatrist if there is any evidence 
of exac erbation of psychosis or dangerous behavior.  Research staff will be on call at all times 
and available for after hours consultation if needed.  If, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_614620], further 
intervention is needed, the team will coordinate with the partic ipant’s clinical treatment team to 
ensure that the participant gets appropriate care, including emergency care and/or 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].  In addition, if necessary, study medication will be terminated and the patient 
placed on the most appropriate medication  for clinical management.  
(3) Confidentiality:  This research involves monitoring and treatment of patients who may use a 
variety of illegal substances in addition to cannabis.  Participants may engage in other illegal 
activities. Maintaining confidentiality is an area of utmost importance for this pop ulation. See 
Section 27 for details on how the study team will maintain participant’s confidentiality.  
(4) Research assessments (cannabis/substance use measures, symptom and side effect 
measures, breath and urine testing) :  Answering the questions asked by [CONTACT_788774], boredom, embarrassment, anxiety or fatigue.  It is also possible, but 
not likely, that the patients may experience an increase in their underlying symptoms due to 
the process of research assessments. Participant s will be advised that they can take a break, 
refuse to answer question(s), or end the interview if they become uncomfortable in any way.  
V 01.15.[ADDRESS_1085842] (on -call) to provide consultation if a patient 
becomes more symptomatic during a study procedure.  In addition, each study site provides 
emergency services that can be accessed at any time if the study psychiatrist is unavailable.  
Additionally, either our co-investigator, [CONTACT_788783], or her coverage, [CONTACT_788784], both of 
whom are experienced psychiatrists, will be available via pager for emergency consultation.  
(5) Cannabis (or alcohol) withdrawal :  Although participants will be using cannabis (and 
possibly some alcohol as well) mostly in a moderate fashion, heavy cannabis users who 
drastically reduce or discontinue use during the study may experience withdrawal symptoms.  
Such symptoms, although not medically dangerous, may consist of mood disturbance such as 
anxiety or irritability, sleep disturbance, loss of appe tite, diarrhea, tremors, and night sweats.  
While alcohol withdrawal can be more of a serious issue, given the exclusion of patients with 
alcohol dependence, we do not expect to see alcohol withdrawal symptoms.  (In our previous 
studies of patients with SCZ and CUD [as well as alcohol use disorder], we have not seen 
withdrawal symptoms in our patients.) Patients will be educated about cannabis (and alcohol) 
withdrawal with a fact sheet that includes a brief list of copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262].  Participants will be 
monitored with weekly vital signs and questions to assess withdrawal symptoms (following 
symptoms with the Cannabis Withdrawal Scale172 [CWS] and the Clinical Institute Withdrawal 
Assessment for Alcohol Scale [CIWA]171).  If patients experience severe cannabis or alcohol 
withdrawal symptoms, research staff will link the patient with clinical support from their 
treatment team or other resources as necessary for appropriate medical treatment.  
 (6) Suicidality:  Suicidality is increased in patients with SCZ, especially those with substance 
use disorders. Since CLOZ is known to limit suicidality more than other antipsychotic 
medications, patients on CLOZ may be less likely than those on RISP to have suicidality.  
Nonetheles s, all patients will be monitored with the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -
SSRS) weekly.  Interviewers will consult immediately with the study psychiatrist if the C -SSRS 
indicates any evidence of suicidal ideation or suicide attempts.  Should the  patient be deemed 
to be at risk, the study team will ensure appropriate emergency care, and if necessary, 
termination from study medication, use of a different medication, and/or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].  
(7) Genetic testing:  The major risks of genetic testing are related to maintaining confidentiality 
of results. The confidentiality of genetic data will be closely guarded.  The DNA samples will be 
securely stored in a locked freezer, and labeled with study number and date of sample.  
Participants will be assigned  a study code number used to cross -link participant data sets.  No 
identifying data will be contained in these data sets.  Study records will be maintained in a 
locked file cabinet with controlled access.  Following the Dartmouth guidelines for protection of 
V 01.15.[ADDRESS_1085843] any clinical relevance and would potentially be 
confusing to participants.  
(8) Venipuncture: There is risk of discomfort and a slight risk of infection due to venipunctures. 
Standard high quality clinical practice will be used to draw blood in order to avoid discomfort 
and infection.  
(9) Risk to pregnant or nursing women:  Since the risk of these medications to developin g 
fetuses and pregnant women is unknown, we will exclude women who are pregnant, nursing, 
or who wish to become pregnant from study participation.  Female participants will be tested 
for pregnancy at screening, [ADDRESS_1085844] procedures described below.  A participant’s clinical status 
will be monitored throughout the protocol and care will be coordinated with  each person’s 
clinical treatment team.  Patients may discontinue a study procedure at any time if they are 
uncomfortable or the study procedures appear to be causing exacerbation of illness.   
 Potential Benefits:  Participants may not benefit from participation in the study.  Participants 
with SCZ and CUD may benefit from the treatment with CLOZ by [CONTACT_297586] a reduction in 
cannabis use.  All study participants will be monitored closely, which may be beneficial to 
them. 
Risk/Benefit Analysis:  Although the study medications have multiple potential risks, they 
are both effective treatments for psychosis.  All study patients will have diagnoses of 
schizophrenia and will already be taking an antipsychotic medication for it.  Thus, they are 
already being exposed to potential medication side effects.  Since there are preliminary 
data suggesting that clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788702], those who receive CLOZ may benefit from the effect of the drug, although the 
V 01.15.[ADDRESS_1085845] access to the following:  the 
opportunity to have a comprehensive assessment done, to meet with a doctor weekly for 
13-14 weeks (usual community mental health care involves doctor v isits once in 3 months), 
and to have an accurate longitudinal assessment of symptoms and substance use with 
standardized measures to understand whether medication and treatment are helpi[INVESTIGATOR_788703] 
(standard care doesn’t involve the multiple standardized mea sures used in this study).   At 
the end of the study, the client will have experienced a comprehensive assessment of 
symptoms and function, and of the response of symptoms, function, and substance use to 
medication.  These assessments are more comprehensiv e than would have been possible 
without involvement in the study protocol.  
Study participants will be carefully informed of all potential risks and will not participate if they 
have concerns about these risks.  We will monitor study participants carefully and will address 
all side effects immediately as they occur.  The other potential risks of study participation are 
minimal.   We will use our standard procedures to maintain the highest level of confidentiality 
and to minimize all potential risks related t o the study.  Overall we believe the potential benefits 
outweigh the risks.  
 
10. Adequacy of Resources to Protect Subjects: 
 
Describe availability of psychological, social, or medical services, which include counseling or 
social support services, that may be required as a consequence of research participation.  
 All study participants will be engaged in treatment and have access  to their usual case 
manager and psychiatrist as well as psychological and medical services available in their 
communities. The medications being prescribed in this study have been FDA -approved and 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_788704]. While in the study, p articipants will be monitored very 
closely.  If need for increased assessment or treatment arises, the study doctor will access any and all services needed, including inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].      
 
Describe psychological, social, or medical monitoring, an cillary care, equipment needed to 
V 01.15.[ADDRESS_1085846] participants (e.g. close proximity to resuscitation equipment or a plan for monitoring of 
emotional state during study procedures).  
 
Investigators and site personnel, trained and experienced at conducting assessments in 
persons with schizophrenia, will assess for deteriorating mental status and/or suicidal ideation.  
Participants will meet with a study physician at each visit and have routine monitoring of psychiatric symptoms.  As described above staff have a number of means of addressing psychiatric symptoms.  Staff will also monitor participants through schedule weekly 
assessments for changes in vital signs, withdrawal from alcohol, and medication side effects.  
Changes in status will be referred to the treating study physician for follow-up.  Each site will have access to medical care in the unlikely event that a participant should develop severe side effects. 
 
Describe other resources needed for the protection of subjects in the conduct of this research (e.g. language translation services). None 
 
11. Pregnant Women:
Are pregnant women eligible for enrollment into this study?   Yes    No 
 
Although women of childbearing capacity, pregnant women, and nursing women who have 
SCZ and co-occurring CUD can benefit from treatment with RISP and CLOZ, the risks for 
pregnant or nursing mothers, and for fetuses and nursing babies are not clear.  Thus, pregnant 
and nursing mothers will not be included in the study.  Women with childbearing capacity will be required to use birth control and pregnancy tests will be conducted at baseline, week 6, and week 12 (cost covered by [CONTACT_1758]).  
 
 
12. Fetuses and Neonates:   
Are fetuses and neonates participants in the research?    
 Yes    No  
 
 
13. Women of Child-Bearing Capability  
Are women of child-bearing capability eligible for enrollment into this study?   
 Yes    No 
 
Although women of childbearing capacity who have SCZ and co-occurring CUD can benefit 
from treatment with RISP and CLOZ, the risks for pregnant or nursing mothers, and for fetuses and nursing babies are not clear.  Women with childbearing capacity will be required to use 
V 01.15.2016 page 24 of 42birth control and pregnancy tests will be conducted at baseline, week 6, and week 12 (cost 
covered by [CONTACT_1758]).       
 
14.  Individuals With Impaired Decision-Making Capacity:   
Will participants potentially lacking capacity to provide informed consent be eligible to enroll in 
this study?   Yes    No 
 
Is it likely study participants may lose their capacity to provide informed consent during the 
conduct of the study?  Yes    No 
 
If yes to a or b, respond to  Research Involving Individuals with Impaired Decision-Making 
Capacity:  Attachment G    
  
15.  Recruitment:    
 
Individuals who are interested in learning about the study will be invited to meet with the study 
coordinator to review the consent and their possible eligibility.  They will be given information about the protocol as well as the opportunity to ask questions.  Because these individuals are 
often coming in for a special appointment to meet with study staff, they will be compensated 
with a $25 voucher for attending this session.   
 
16.  Consent Process:    
 
Our group has a procedure for the consent of participants into medication studies. It allows for 
only physicians and ARNPs to consent participants to be in studies.  Other staff may present a 
consent form to participants and review it with them, but a physician or ARNP must meet with the person (face-to-face or via telephone) to answer questions, and assess understanding and voluntariness prior to the participant signing the consent form. The physician or ARNP will also 
assess the competency to consent of each potential participant.  If an individual's capacity to 
consent is in doubt and the person does not have a guardian, the consent process will stop.  The physician or ARNP will consult with the individual's primary psychiatrist.  If in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_788705], the person cannot consent and the person lacks a guardian, the person will 
not be recruited.  If the treating psychiatrist believes that the diminished capacity is more of a 
transitory state, then the consent process will be tried again on another day. Potential participants are encouraged to read the consent form and ask questions.  They are further encouraged to solicit input from significant others and/or care providers, if appropriate. To 
minimize coercion, the consent form has language that clearly spells out that participation in 
V 01.15.[ADDRESS_1085847] a person's health/mental health 
care.   Because we do not have foreign language version of all of the assessments, we do not 
anticipate consenting persons who do not speak English.  We do not intend to recruit persons 
who are illiterate, but if illiteracy is a problem, our group follows the Dartmouth Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects procedure for consenting persons who cannot read or cannot read well.  Finally, our group makes a concerted effort to make the language in consent 
forms understandable to participants. 
 
17.  Privacy and Confidentiality :   
 
From the moment that a subject is approached to participate in the study, every effort to 
protect his/her confidentiality will be maintained. To minimize risk of divulging confidential 
information regarding substance use or other illegal activities as well as other study 
information, strict attention to confidentiality will be maintained throughout every aspect of this 
research with standard policies and procedures.  Unless contraindicated by [CONTACT_788775], a Certificate of Confidentiality (provided by [CONTACT_133312]) will be 
obtained.  All members of the research team, including investigators and research staff, will 
follow the procedures to protect confidentiality adhered to by [CONTACT_788776].   
Each patient will be assigned a unique identification number.  The list of subject names and 
identification numbers will be kept separate from the database.  This list will be maintained in a 
locked file cabinet. All hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_788706].  
Access to the computerized data system is carefully protected by a secured password entry 
system. Ratings done by [CONTACT_788777] a secure system (e.g. 
WebEx)  Subjects will be made aware of the various parties who will have access to their data 
in the informed consent document, including research personnel, IRBs and the DSMB. Access 
to participants' data will be restricted to project investigators on a need to know basis. Patient 
information, if reported, will be reported as group data or anonymously in case reports.  No 
patients will be individually identified.   
18.  Responsibility for costs of injury or illness related to research: 
Will the sponsor or other funding agency be responsible for costs of injury or illness related to 
the research?     
 Yes    No 
 
NIDA funding is unable to bear the cost of a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].  If a participant requires 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], it will be billed to their insurance.
V 01.15.2016 page 26 of 42 
19. Participant Remuneration: 
 
Participants will receive a $[ADDRESS_1085848] for each of the 14 scheduled research visits listed in 
Appendix II (14 x $50= $700). Participants will also receive $5 cash each week if they return 
their medication packs to monitor medication compliance (12 X $5 = $60).  This is a total of $760.  
In addition, participants will "win" between $15-$20 for completing the Rewards 
Responsiveness Task.  Because many vendors only provide gift cards in $[ADDRESS_1085849] $[ADDRESS_1085850] and the remainder in cash.  Over the three sessions, this would not total more than $50.  We do not state the exact amount in 
the consent because it invalidates the testing.   
 Individuals who attend appointments to learn about the study will be compensated with a $25 voucher for their time and travel (see p. 33 for details.) 
 
Finally, if additional in-clinic visits are required (e.g. due to switching medications to be eligible for the study or post-study blood tests conducted by [CONTACT_5051]), then participants will receive a $[ADDRESS_1085851] for these visits.  
 
20. Use of Drug or Biological Agent:    
List the drugs and biologic agents to be used in this study: 
 
The drugs used in this study are clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_146617].  The FDA has determined that an 
IND is not required for this study.  Dartmouth will provide a copy of the FDA’s determination to any site requiring this.    
21. Conflict of Interest:    
  No:  The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_500890] 
a. - g. above. 
  Yes:  The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_500891] a. - 
g. above. 
Only if you have answered yes to the question above  about study-specific financial interests for a 
member of the research team, please provide the following additional information. 
Name [CONTACT_500922] a listed financial interest:   
 
 
  
V 01.15.[ADDRESS_1085852]. 
If the research falls into category B. please respond to questions that follow.  
 
Respond to A or B: 
 
 A. The study is looking for an association between a genotype or a biomarker and a specific disease 
or condition, but at this point it is not clear if the genetic marker has predictive value. The uncertainty 
regarding the predictive value of the genetic marker is such that studies in this category will not involve 
referral of participants to genetic counseling. 
 
Comment: 
 
()'!,!!!!$,*()$#)$-%!$',)')+!+ !
#$).%".#).
)$((*)(,)"$()! !.)$'(%$#)$,) '(###(*(

+#)()($),$*!#"%$')#)+# )$!)$-!*
'$")')"#)#.%)#)#,$"(#$)! !.)$ )+	$!!$,#)
')"$*)*!#($'%'$))$#$*"#(*)(,,!! #$)#$'"%')%#)($)
'(*!)($)#))()#*('*().$#$) ))()"+#.!#!
'!+##,$*!%$)#)!!.$#*(#)$%')%#)( ,!!!($( #$'#
-)')*$!$$)$',#,)%'"(($##'$/# $'%$((!(*(&*#)
#))()#  
 
 
 
B. The study is based on the premise that a link between a genotype or a biomarker and a specific 
disease or condition is clinically useful in predicting the development of that specific disease or 
condition.  
 
 
  
V 01.15.2016 page 28 of 42Attachment G 
Research Involving Individuals With Impaired Decision-Making Capacity  
 
 
Please indicate the option(s) requested to allow for consent if a subject is incompetent to provide 
consent:    
Durable power of attorney for health care (DPAHC)  YES NO  
Court appointed legal guardian     YES NO 
Next-of-kin.         YES NO 
Even with the permission of a DPAHC, or court appointed legal guardian, the federal regulations will 
not permit a subject who lacks capacity to give informed consent to participate in a research study that 
offers little chance of DIRECT BENEFIT to the research subject over what they could receive outside 
the research setting and involves a meaningful increase in the risk of harm or discomfort, regardless of 
the potential gain to future subjects or society in general.  
Please complete a) and b): 
a) Does participating in this study offer the subject a chance of direct benefit over what they could 
receive outside the research setting? 
 
 
While both medications are FDA approved for the treatment of schizophrenia and 
available to prospective study participants, the level of care offered in this study (e.g. 
weekly physician visits, level of symptom and medical assessment) is not possible in 
standard care. 
 
b) Is there an increase in the risk of harm or discomfort for the subject over what they would 
experience outside the research setting?
 
 
$$)$)(")$#(''($#!)')"#)($') (%$%*!)$#$%)#)(
#.)#)'('$+!((#()"! '( ()$%')%#)(
*().$($#$)(")$#(#%*'!.)' )"#)())#).$*!
#$)))(!+!$"$#)$'#$#!.#'(#'( ( )*$'()'((*)$)
!+!$(((("#)(#')')#,)($'#()# ''  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
Clozaril for Cannabis Use Disorder in Schizophrenia 
V 01.15.2016 page 29 of 42 GLOSSARY OF ACRONYMS  
 
AIMS = Abnormal Involuntary Movements Scale 
AUS = alcohol use disorder BAS = Barnes Akathisia Scale  BPRS = Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale  
BVMT = Brief Visuospatial Memory Test 
CBC = complete blood count CGI = Clinical Global Inventory CIWA =  Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment for Alcohol Scale  
CLOZ = clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788707] = catechol- o-methyl transferase 
CPT IP = Continuous Performance Test –  Identical Pairs 
C-SSRS = Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale  
CUD = cannabis use disorder CWS = Cannabis Withdrawal Scale DA = dopamine DMI = desipramine 
DSM- IV TR  
ECA = Epi[INVESTIGATOR_788708] = electrocardiogram ES = effect size 
LC/MS/MS = liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry 
LRE = longitudinal random effects  
MAG = medication adjustment group 
NE = norepi[INVESTIGATOR_497961] = National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism NIDA = National Institute on Drug Abuse NP = neuropsychological 
PORT = Patient Outcomes Research Team 
QLI = Quality of Life interview  
QLS = Quality of Life scale RISP = risperidone 
RR = reward responsiveness 
S-A = Simpson- Angus Scale 
SANS = Schedule for the Assessment of Negative Symptoms SCID = Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV 
SCZ = schizophrenia SUD = substance use disorder TLFB = Timeline Followback TSR = Treatment Services Review  
WRAT- 4 = Wide Range Achievement Test Revision 4, Word Reading Subtest 
  
V 01.15.2016 page 30 of 42 APPENDIX I:  REFERENCES 
Clozaril for Cannabis Use Disorder in Schizophrenia  (Alan I. Greem, PI )  
 
1.  Brunette MF, Dawson R, O'Keefe CD, Narasimhan M, Noordsy DL, Wojcik J, Green AI. A 
randomized trial of clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_117342]. other antipsychotics for cannabis use disorder in patients 
with schizophrenia. Journal of Dual Diagnosis. 2011;7(1):[ADDRESS_1085853] Epi[INVESTIGATOR_788709]-Occurring Cannabis Use Disorder. 2nd Biennial Schizophrenia 
International Research Conference. Schizophrenia Research. 2010;117:[ADDRESS_1085854] J, Wahlbeck K, Klaukka T, Niskanen L, Tanskanen A, Hau kka J. 11-
year follow-up of mortality in patients with schizophrenia: a population -based cohort study 
(FIN11 study). Lancet. 2009;374(9690):620 -7. 
4.  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_96095], Jahn AL, O'Shea JP. Toward an objective characterization of an anhedonic 
phenotype: a signal-detection approach. Biol Psychiatry. 2005;57(4):[ADDRESS_1085855], Schildkraut JJ. Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788710]: do patients with schizophrenia have a reward -deficiency 
syndrome that can be ameliorated by [CONTACT_723234][INVESTIGATOR_050]? Harv Rev Psychiatry. 1999;6(6):287 -96. 
6.  Huestis MA, Cone EJ. Differentiating new marijuana use from residual drug excretion in 
occasional marijuana users. Journal of Analytical Toxicology. 1998;22:445 -54. 
7.  Schwilke EW, Gullberg RG, Darwin WD, Chiang CN, Cadet JL, Gorelick DA, Pope HG, 
Huestis MA. Differentiating new cannabis use from residual urinary cannabinoid excretion 
in chronic, daily cannabis users. Addiction. 2010;106(3):499 -506.  
8.  Smith ML, Barnes AJ, Huestis MA. Identifying new cannabis use with urine creatinine -
normalized THCCOOH concentrations and time intervals between specimen collections. J 
Anal Toxicol. 2009;33(4):185-9. PMCID: PMC3159564  
9.  Posner K, Brent D, Lucas C, Gould M, Stanley B, Brown G, Fisher P, Zelazny J, Burke A, 
Oquendo M, Mann J. Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS). The Reserach 
Foundation for Mental Hygiene, Inc. 2008.  
10.  Volavka J. The effects of clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788711]. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. 1999;60(Suppl 12):43 -6. 
11.  Spi[INVESTIGATOR_174105] B, Roitman S, Vered Y, Mester R, Graff E, Talmon Y, Guy N, Gonen N, Weizman 
A. Diminished suicidal and aggressive behavior, high plasma norepi[INVESTIGATOR_17216], and 
serum triglyceride levels in chronic ne uroleptic-resistant schizophrenic patients 
maintained on clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. Clin Neuropharmacol. 1998;21(4):[ADDRESS_1085856] G, Islam MZ, Kane J, Krishnan R, Lindenmayer JP, Potkin  S. Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788712]: International Suicide Prevention Trial (InterSePT). Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2003;60(1):82-91.  
13.  Buchanan RW, Kreyenbuhl J, Kelly DL, Noel JM, Boggs DL, Fischer BA, Himelhoch S, 
Fang B, Peterson E, Aquino PR, Keller W. The 2009 schizophrenia PORT 
psychopharmacological treatment recommendations and summary statements. Schizophr 
Bull. 2010;36(1):71-93 PMCID 2800144. PMCID: PMC2800144.  
14.  Swanson JW, Holzer CE, 3rd, Ganju VK, Jono RT. Violence and psyc hiatric disorder in 
the community: evidence from the Epi[INVESTIGATOR_788713]. Hosp 
Community Psychiatry. 1990;41(7):761-70.  
15.  Potkin SG, Alphs L, Hsu C, Krishnan KR, Anand R, Young FK, Meltzer H, Green A. 
Predicting suicidal risk in schizophrenic and schizoaffective patients in a prospective two -
year trial. Biol Psychiatry. 2003;54(4):444-52.  
16.  Caspi A, Moffitt TE, Cannon M, McClay J, Murray R, Harrington H, Taylor A, Arseneault L, 
Williams B, Braithwaite A, Poulton R, Craig IW. Moderation of the effect of adolescent -
onset cannabis use on adult psychosis by a functional polymorphism in the catechol -O-
V 01.15.2016 page 31 of 42 methyltransferase gene: longitudinal evidence of a gene X environment interaction. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2005;57(10):1117-27.  
17.  Alterman AI, Erdlen FR, Murphy E. Alcohol abuse in the psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_63840]. 
Addict Behav. 1981;6(1):69-73. 
18.  Ananth J, Vandewater S, Kamal M, Brodsky A, Gamal R, Miller M. Missed diagnosis of 
substance abuse in psychiatric patients. Hosp Community Psychiatry. 1989;40(3):297-9. 
19.  Freed EX. Alcoholism and schizophrenia: the search for perspectives. A review. J Stud 
Alcohol. 1975;36(7):853-81.  
20.  Kessler RC, McGonagle KA, Zhao S, Nelson CB, Hughes M, Eshleman S, Wittchen HU, 
Kendler KS. Lifetime and 12 -month prevalence of DSM-III-R psychiatric disorders in the 
[LOCATION_002]. Results from the National Comorbidity Survey. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1994;51(1):8-19.  
21.  Mueser KT, Yarnold PR, Levinson DF, Singh H, Bellack AS, Kee K, Morrison RL, Yadalam 
KG. Prevalence of substance abuse in schizophrenia: demographic and clinical 
correlates. Schizophr Bull. 1990;16(1):31 -56. 
22.  Regier DA, Farmer ME, Rae DS, Locke BZ, Keith SJ, Judd LL, Goodwin FK. Comorbidity 
of mental disorders with alcohol and other  drug abuse. Results from the Epi[INVESTIGATOR_788714] (ECA) Study. Jama. 1990;264(19):2511 -8. 
23.  Degenhardt L, Hall W. The association between psychosis and problematical drug use 
among Australian adults: findings from the National Survey of Mental Health and Well -
Being. Psychol Med. 2001;31(4):659 -68. 
24.  Koskinen J, Lohonen J, Koponen H, Isohanni M, Miettunen J. Rate of cannabis use 
disorders in clinical samples of patients with schizophrenia: a meta -analysis. Schizophr 
Bull. 2010;36(6):1115-30. P MCID: PMC2963055.  
25.  Ringen PA, Lagerberg TV, Birkenaes AB, Engn J, Faerden A, Jonsdottir H, Nesvag R, 
Friis S, Opjordsmoen S, Larsen F, Melle I, Andreassen OA. Differences in prevalence and patterns of substance use in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder . Psychol Med. 
2008;38(9):1241-9.  
26.  Dixon L, Haas G, Weiden PJ, Sweeney J, [LOCATION_009]s AJ. Drug abuse in schizophrenic 
patients: clinical correlates and reasons for use. Am J Psychiatry. 1991;148(2):224 -30. 
27.  Peralta V, Cuesta MJ. Influence of cannabis abuse on schizophrenic psychopathology. 
Acta Psychiatr Scand. 1992;85(2):127-30.  
28.  Mueser KT, Nishith P, Tracy JI, DeGirolamo J, Molinaro M. Expectations and motives for 
substance use in schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 1995;21(3):367 -78. 
29.  DeQuardo JR, Carpenter CF, Tandon R. Patterns of substance abuse in schizophrenia: 
nature and significance. J Psychiatr Res. 1994;28(3):267 -75. 
30.  Hambrecht M, Hafner H. Substance abuse and the onset of schizophrenia. Biol 
Psychiatry. 1996;40(11):1155-63.  
31.  Karam EG, Yabroudi PF, Melhem NM. Comorbidity of substance abuse and other 
psychiatric disorders in acute general psychiatric admissions: a study from Lebanon. Compr Psychiatry. 2002;43(6):463-8. 
32.  Rabinowitz J, Bromet EJ, Lavelle J, Carlson G, Kovasznay B, Schwartz JE. Prevalence 
and severity of substance use disorders and onset of psychosis in first -admission 
psychotic patients. Psychol Med. 1998;28(6):1411 -9. 
33.  Corse SJ, Hirschinger NB, Zanis D. The use of the Addiction Severity Index with people 
with s evere mental illness. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal. 1995;19:9 -18. 
34.  Drake RE, Rosenberg SD, Mueser KT. Assessing substance use disorder in persons with 
severe mental illness. New Dir Ment Health Serv. 1996(70):[ADDRESS_1085857] ML, Liskow BI, Perry PJ. Recent psychostimulant use in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_788715]. J Clin Psychiatry. 1985;46(3):79 -83. 
36.  Gupta S, Hendricks S, Kenkel AM, Bhatia SC, Haffke EA. Relapse in schizophrenia: is 
there a relationship to substance abuse? Schizophr Res. 1996;20( 1-2):153-6. 
V 01.15.2016 page 32 of 42 37.  Owen RR, Fischer EP, Booth BM, Cuffel BJ. Medication noncompliance and substance 
abuse among patients with schizophrenia. Psychiatr Serv. 1996;47(8):853 -8. 
38.  Bowers MB, Mazure CM, Nelson CJ, Jatlow PI. Psychotogenic drug use and neurole ptic 
response. Schizophrenia Bulletin. 1990;16:[ADDRESS_1085858] RB, Adinoff B, Selander J. Cocaine abuse among 
schizophrenic patients. Am J Psychiatry. 1990;147(9):1164 -7. 
40.  Abram KM, Teplin LA. Co-occurring disorders among mentally ill jail detainees. 
Implications for public policy. Am Psychol. 1991;46(10):1036 -45. 
41.  Treffert DA. Marijuana use in schizophrenia: a clear hazard. Am J Psychiatry. 
1978;135(10):1213-5. 
42.  Knudsen P, Vilmar T. Cannabis and neuroleptic ag ents in schizophrenia. Acta Psychiatr 
Scand. 1984;69(2):162-74. 
43.  Negrete JC, Knapp WP. The effects of cannabis use on the clinical condition of 
schizophrenics. NIDA Res Monogr. 1986;67:321 -7. 
44.  Linszen DH, Dingemans PM, Lenior ME. Cannabis abuse and  the course of recent-onset 
schizophrenic disorders. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1994;51(4):273 -9. 
45.  Swendsen J, Ben-Zeev D, Granholm E. Real-time electronic ambulatory monitoring of 
substance use and symptom expression in schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry. 
2011; 168(2):202-9. 
46.  Green AI, Tohen MF, Hamer RM, Strakowski SM, Lieberman JA, Glick I, Clark WS. First 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_34923]-related psychosis and substance use disorders: acute response to 
olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_444009]. Schizophr Res. 2004;66(2 -3):125-35.  
47.  Large M, Sharma S, Compton MT, Slade T, Nielssen O. Cannabis use and earlier onset of 
psychosis: a systematic meta-analysis. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011;68(6):555-61.  
48.  Schimmelmann BG, Conus P, Cotton SM, Kupferschmid S, Karow A, Schultze -Lutter F, 
McGorry PD, Lambert M. Cannabis use disorder and age at onset of psychosis --a study 
in first-epi[INVESTIGATOR_238281]. Schizophr Res. 2011;129(1):52 -6. 
49.  Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_788716], Buckley-Hunter L. What every adolescent needs to know: cannabis can 
cause psychosis. J Psychosom Res. 2010;69(6):533-9. 
50.  Kovasznay B, Fleischer J, Tanenberg-Karant M, Jandorf L, Miller AD, Bromet E. 
Substance use disorder and the early course of illness in schizophrenia and affective psychosis. Schizophrenia Bulletin. 1997;23(2):[ADDRESS_1085859]-Hughes A, Barnes TR, Jones PB, Burke M, Lewis G. 
Cannabis use and risk of psychotic or affective mental health outcomes: a systematic 
review. Lancet. 2007;370(9584):319 -28. 
52.  Eggan SM, Hashimoto T, Lewis DA. Reduced cor tical cannabinoid 1 receptor messenger 
RNA and protein expression in schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2008;65(7):772 -84. 
PMCID: PMC2890225.  
53.  Kivlahan DR, Heiman JR, Wright RC, Mundt JW, Shupe JA. Treatment cost and 
rehospi[INVESTIGATOR_788717] a history of substance abuse. 
Hosp Community Psychiatry. 1991;42(6):609 -14. 
54.  Dickey B, Azeni H. Persons with dual diagnoses of substance abuse and major mental 
illness: their excess costs of psychiatric care. Am J Public Health. 1996;86(7):973-7. 
55.  Siris SG. Pharmacological treatment of substance-abusing schizophrenic patients. 
Schizophr Bull. 1990;16(1):111-22.  
56.  Albanese MJ, Khantzian EJ, Murphy SL, Green AI. Decreased substance use in 
chronically psychotic patients treated with clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. Am J Psychiatry. 1994;151(5):[ADDRESS_1085860] L, Meltzer HY. Substance abuse among patients with 
treatment-resistant schizophrenia: characteristics and implications for clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_127245]. 
Am J Psychiatry. 1994;151(3):385 -9. 
58.  Marcus P, Snyder R. Reduction of comorbid substance abuse with clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. Am J 
Psychiatry. 1995;152(6):959.  
V 01.15.2016 page 33 of 42 59.  Yovell Y, Opler LA. Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788718] a treatment -resistant mentally ill 
chemical abuser: a case report and a hypothesis. J Nerv Ment Dis. 1994;182:591 -2. 
60.  McEvoy JP, Freudenreich O, McGee M, VanderZwaag C, Levin E, Rose J. Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788719]. Biological Psychiatry. 
1995;37:550 -2. 
61.  George TP, Sernyak MJ, Ziedonis DM, Woods SW. Effects of clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788720]. J Clin Psychiatry. 1995;56(8):344 -6. 
62.  D rake RE, Xie H, McHugo GJ, Green AI. The effects of clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788721]. Schizophr Bull. 2000;26(2):441 -9. 
63.  Brunette MF, Drake RE, Xie H, McHugo GJ, Green AI. Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788722] -occurring schizophrenia and substance 
use disorders. Schizophr Bull. 2006;32(4):[ADDRESS_1085861], Burgess ES, Kohnstamm S, Green AI. Effects of clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788723]: a retrospective 
survey. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2000;20(1):94 -8. 
65.  Green AI, Noordsy DL, Brunette MF, O'Keefe C. Substance abuse and schizophrenia: 
pharmacotherapeutic intervention. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2008;34(1):61 -71. 
66.  Buckley P, McCarthy M, Chapman P, Richman C, Yamamoto B. Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788724]. Schizophr Res. 1999;36::272.  
67.  Lee ML, Dickson RA, Campbell M, Oliphant J, Gretton H, Dalby [CONTACT_140521]. Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788725]. Can J Psychiatry. 1998;43(8):[ADDRESS_1085862] Abuse Treat. 2004;27(1):45-9.  
69.  Smelson DA, Losonczy MF, Davis CW, Kaune M, Williams J, Ziedonis D. Risperidone 
decreases craving and relapses in individuals with schizophrenia and cocaine 
dependence. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry. 2002;47(7):[ADDRESS_1085863]. Alcohol and cannabis use in 
schizophrenia: effects of clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_117342]. risperidone. Schizophr Res. 2003;60(1):81 -5. 
71.  Smelson DA, Ziedonis D, Williams J, Losonczy MF, Williams J, Steinberg ML, Kaune M. 
The efficacy of olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_788726] -elicited craving in individuals with 
schizophrenia and cocaine dependence: a preliminary report. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 
2006;26(1):9-12.  
72.  Akerele E, Levin FR. Comparison of olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_788727] -abusing 
individuals with schizophrenia. Am J Addict. 2007;16(4):260 -8. 
73.  Brunette MF, O'Keefe C, Zimmet SV, Wojcik JD, Dawson R, Green AI. Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050], 
Olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_050], or Typi[INVESTIGATOR_788728]. Journal of Dual Diagnosis. 2008;4(4):[ADDRESS_1085864]. 
2006;15(1):44-9.  
75.  Noordsy DL, O'Keefe C, Mueser KT, Xie H. Six-month outcomes for patients who switched 
to olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_99646]. Psychiatric Services. 2001;52(4):[ADDRESS_1085865] RH, 
Gendron A. Quetiapi[INVESTIGATOR_788729] -spectrum and substance 
use disorders: an open-label trial. Curr Med Res Opin. 2006;22(7):1277 -85. 
77.  Brunette MF, O'Keefe C, Dawson R, Buckley P, Green AI. An open label study of 
quetiapi[INVESTIGATOR_788730]. Journal of Mental Health 
and Substance Use Disorders. 2009;2(3):203 -11. 
V 01.15.2016 page 34 of 42 78.  Brown ES, Nejtec VA, Perantine DC, editors. Quetiapi[INVESTIGATOR_788731]. 40th Annual Meeting of the American College of 
Neuropsychopharmacology; 2001 Dec 9 -13; Waikoloa, HI. 
79.  Beresford TP, Clapp L, Martin B, Wiberg JL, Alfers J, Beresford HF. Aripi[INVESTIGATOR_788732]: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 
2005;25(4):363-6. 
80.  Brown ES, Jeffress J, Liggin JD, Garza M, Beard L. Switching outpatients with bipolar or 
schizoaffective disorders and substance abuse from th eir current antipsychotic to 
aripi[INVESTIGATOR_4253]. J Clin Psychiatry. 2005;66(6):756 -60. 
81.  Warsi M, Sattar SP, Bhatia SC, Petty F. Aripi[INVESTIGATOR_788733]. Canadian 
Journal of Psychiatry. 2005;50(4):244.  
82.  Baldessarini RJ, Frankenburg FR. Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050].  A novel antipsychotic agent. N Engl J Med. 
1991;324(11):746-54. 
83.  Marder SR, Wirshing DA. Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. In: Schatzberg AF, Nemeroff CB, editors. Textbook 
of psychopharmacology. Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc.; 2004.  
84.  Siris SG. Suicide and schizophrenia. J Psychopharmacol. 2001;15(2):127 -35. 
85.  Khantzian EJ. The self-medication hypothesis of substance use disorders: a 
reconsideration and recent applications. Harv Rev Psychiatry. 1997;4(5):231 -44. 
86.  Lysaker PH, Bell MD, Beam-Goulet J, Milstein R. Relationship of positive and negative 
symptoms to cocaine abuse in schizophrenia. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease. 
1994;182:109 -12. 
87.  Buchanan RW, Strauss ME, Breier A, Kirkpatrick B, Carpenter WT, Jr. Attentional 
impairments in deficit and nondeficit forms of schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry. 
1997;154(3):363-70.  
88.  Hambrecht M, Hafner H. Cannabis, vulnerability, and the onset of schizophrenia: an 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_71228]. Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 2000;34(3):[ADDRESS_1085866] approach to the prefrontal cortex. J Neuropsychiatry. 
1993;5(3):241-53.  
90.  Moghadamm B, Sesack SR. Cellular interactions in the prefrontal cortex: a major focus of 
schizophrenia research. In: Dickstein L, Riba M, Oldham J, edit ors. American Psychiatric 
Press Review of Psychiatry. Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association; 1996. p. [ADDRESS_1085867]. Implications of normal brain development for the pathogenesis of 
schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1987;44(7):[ADDRESS_1085868] Mechanisms. In: JH L, P R, RB M, JG. L, editors. Substance 
Abuse: A comprehensive textbook. 3 ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1997.  
93.  Jentsch JD, Andrusiak E, Tran A, Bowers MB, Jr., Roth RH. Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol 
increases prefrontal cortical catecholaminergic utilization and impairs spatial working 
memory in the rat: blockade of dopaminergic effects with HA966. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 1997;16(6):426 -32. 
94.  Tanda G, Pontieri FE, Di Chiara G. Cannabinoid a nd heroin activation of mesolimbic 
dopamine transmission by a common mu1 opi[INVESTIGATOR_788734]. Science. 
1997;276(5321):2048-50.  
95.  Gardner EL. Cannabinoid interaction with brain reward systems. In: GG. N, editor. 
Marijuana and Medicine. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press; 1998.  
96.  Gessa GL, Melis M, Muntoni AL, Diana M. Cannabinoids activate mesolimbic dopamine 
neurons by [CONTACT_788778]1 receptors. Eur J Pharmacol. 1998;341(1):39 -
44. 
97.  Diana M, Melis M, Gessa GL. Increase in meso-prefrontal dopaminergic activity after 
stimulation of CB1 receptors by [CONTACT_15376]. Eur J Neurosci. 1998;10(9):[ADDRESS_1085869] of spontaneous ingestion of ethanol on 
brain dopamine metabolism. Life Sci. 1989;44(4):281 -7. 
V 01.15.2016 page 35 of 42 99.  Goeders NE, Smith JE. Reinforcing properties of cocaine in the medical prefrontal cortex: 
primary action on presynaptic dopaminergic terminals. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 
1986;25(1):191-9. 
100.  Lupi[INVESTIGATOR_206612], Riegel AC, Hoffman AF. Marijuana and cannabinoid regulation of brain 
reward circuits. Br J Pharmacol. 2004;143(2):[ADDRESS_1085870]: emphasis on 
dopamine. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2005;81(2):263 -84. 
102.  Chen J, Paredes W, Lowinson JH, Gardner EL. Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol enhances 
presynaptic dopamine efflux in medial prefrontal cortex. Eur J Pharmacol. 1990;190(1 -
2):259-62.  
103.  Nissel M, Nomikos GG, Svensson TH. Nicotine dependence, midbrain dopamine 
systems and psychiatric disorders. Pharm and Toxicol. 1995;76:157 -62. 
104.  Tung CS, Grenhoff J, Svensson TH. Nicotine counteracts midbrain dopamine cell 
dysfunction induced by [CONTACT_788779]. Acta Physiol Scand. 1990;138(3):427-8.  
105.  Blum K, Sheridan PJ, Wood RC, Braverman ER, Chen TJ, Cull JG, Comings DE. The D2 
dopamine receptor gene as a determinant of reward deficiency syndrome. Journal of the 
Royal Society of Medicine. 1996;89(7):396 -400.  
106.  Chambers RA, Krystal JH, Self DW. A neurobiological basis for substance abuse 
comorbidity in schizophrenia. Biological Psychiatry. 2001;50(2):71 -83. 
107.  Gardner EL, Chen J, Paredes W. Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788735]. J Clin Psychiatry. 1994;[ADDRESS_1085871] B:15-22. 
108.  Imperato A, Angelucci L. The effects of clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788736]. Psychopharmacol Bull. 1989;25(3):[ADDRESS_1085872] study of regional cerebral perfusion in neuroleptic -
resistant schizophrenic patients who responded or did not respond to clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. American Journal of Psychiatry. 1996;153(10):1343-6. 
110.  Baldessarini RJ, Houston-Lyons D, Campell A, Marsh E, Cohen. Do central 
antiadrenergic actions contribute to the atypi[INVESTIGATOR_788737]? Br J Psychiatry. 
1992;[ADDRESS_1085873].:12-6. 
111.  Antelman SM, Caggiula AR. Norepi[INVESTIGATOR_238]-dopamine interactions and behavior. 
Science. 1977;195:646-53.  
112.  Breier A, Buchanan RW, Waltrip RW, Listwak S, Holems C, Goldstein DS. The effect of 
clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788738]: relationship to clinical efficacy. Neuropsychoph arm. 
1994;10:1 -7. 
113.  Green AI, Alam MY, Sobieraj JT, Pappalardo KM, Waternaux C, Salzman C, Schatzberg 
AF, Schildkraut JJ. Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788739]. Psychiatry Res. 1993;46(2):139 -49. 
114.  Horneykiewicz O. Brain catecholamines in schizophrenia -- A good case for 
noradrenaline. Nature. 1982;299:484 -6. 
115.  Lieberman J, Johns C, Pollack S, Masiar S, Bookstein P, Cooper T, Iadorola M, Kane J. 
Biochemical effects of clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788740]. In: 
Tamminga C, Schulz S, editors. Advances in neuropsychiatry and psychopharmacology vol 1: Schizophrenia research. [LOCATION_001]: Raven Press; 1991. p. 341 -9. 
116.  Rice HE, Smith CB, Silk KR, Rosen J. Platelet alpha 2-adrenergic receptors in 
schizophrenic patients before and after phenothiazine treatment. Psychiatry Res. 
1984;12:62 -77. 
117.  Sarafoff M, Davis L, Ruther E. Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050]-induced increase of human plasma 
norepi[INVESTIGATOR_238]. J Neural Transmission. 1979;46:175 -80. 
V 01.15.2016 page 36 of 42 118.  Svensson TH, Mathe JM, Andersson JL, Nomikos GG, Hildebrand BE, Marcus M. Mode 
of action of atypi[INVESTIGATOR_788741]: 
role of 5-HT2 receptor and alpha 1-adrenoceptor antagonism. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 
1995;15([ADDRESS_1085874] 1):11S-8S. 
119.  Thierry AM, Godbout R, Mantz J, Glowinski J. Influence of the ascending monoaminergic 
systems on the activity of the rat prefrontal cortex. Prog Brain Res. 1990;85:357 -64; 
discussion 64-5. 
120.  Van Kammen DP, Peters JL, Van Kammen WB, Neylan T, Yao JK, Shaw D, Doherty G. 
Noradrenaline, state dependency and relapse prediction in schizophrenia. In: Weller M, editor. International Perspectives in Schizophrenia. London: John Libbey; 1990. p. 253 -
68. 
121.  Grace AA. Phasic versus tonic dopamine release and the modulation of dopamine 
system responsivity: a hypothesis for the etiology of schizophrenia. Neuroscience. 1991;41(1):1-24.  
122.  Elman I, Goldstein DS, Green AI, Eisenhofer G, Folio CJ, Holmes CS, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_28876] D, Breier A. 
Effects of risperidone on the peripheral noradrenegic system in patients with 
schizophrenia: a comparison with clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788742]. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2002;27(2):293-300.  
123.  See RE, Fido AA, Maurice M, Ibrahim MM, Salama GM. Risperidone -induced increase of 
plasma norepi[INVESTIGATOR_788743]. Biol Psychiatry. 1999;45(12):[ADDRESS_1085875], Egan MF, Bertolino A, Callicott JH, Mattay VS, Lipska BK, Berman KF, 
Goldberg TE. Prefrontal neurons and the genetics of schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry. 
2001;50(11):825-44.  
125.  Funke B, Malhotra AK, Finn CT, Plocik AM, Lake SL, Lencz T, DeRosse P, Kane JM, 
Kucherlapati R. COMT genetic variation confers risk for psychotic and affective disorders: a case control study. Behav Brain Funct. 2005;1:19.  
126.  Egan MF, Goldberg TE, Kolachana BS, Callicott JH, Mazzanti CM, Straub RE, Goldman 
D, Weinberger DR. Effect of COMT Val108/158 Met genotype on frontal lobe function and 
risk for schizophrenia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001;98(12):6917-22.  
127.  Myers RD. New drugs for the treatment of experimental alcoholism. Alcohol. 
1994;11(6):439-51.  
128.  McBride WJ, Li TK. Animal models of alcoholism: neurobiology of high alcohol -drinking 
behavior in rodents. Crit Rev Neurobiol. 1998;12(4 ):339-69.  
129.  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_788744], Myers RD. Female Syrian golden hamster: drinking of high concentrations of 
ethanol aversive to other mammals. Alcohol. 1995;12(3):207 -11. 
130.  McCoy GD, Haisley AD, Powchik P, Tambone PC. Ethanol consumption by [CONTACT_788780]. Food intake and blood ethanol levels. J Stud Alcohol. 1981;42(5):508 -
13. 
131.  Kulkosky PJ, Cornell NW. Free-choice ethanol intake and ethanol metabolism in the 
hamster and rat. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1979;11(4):439 -44. 
132.  Keung WM, Kunze L, Li DJ, Lazo O. Volitional ethanol consumption affects overall 
serotonin metabolism in Syrian golden hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus). Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000;271(3):823 -30. 
133.  Arvola A, Forsander O. Comparison between water and alcohol consumption  in six 
animal species infree choice experiments. Nature. 1961;191:819 -20. 
134.  Arvola A, Forsander A. Hamsters in Experiments of Free Choice between Alcohol and 
Water. Q J Stud Alcohol. 1963;24:591-7. 
135.  Green AI, Chau DT, Keung WM, Dawson R, Mesholam RI, Schildkraut JJ. Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788745]. Psychiatry Res. 2004;128(1):9 -20. 
136.  Chau DT, Gulick D, Xie H, Dawson R, Green AI. Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788746]. Neuropharm acology. 2010;58(2):351-6. 
V 01.15.2016 page 37 of 42 137.  Chau DT, Ahmed J, Wang TT, Xie H, Dawson R, Green AI. Raclopride lessens the ability 
of clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788747]. Neuropharmacology. 
2011;61(4):646-52.  
138.  Kalkman HO, Loetscher E. alpha2C-Adrenoceptor blockade by [CONTACT_723234][INVESTIGATOR_788748]. European Journal of Pharmacology. 2003;462(1 -3):33-40. 
139.  Sobell LC, Sobell MB. Timeline Follow -Back Users Guide: Timeline followback instruction 
and materials for alcohol, cigarettes, marijuana and other drugs and SCQ and DTCQ 
feedback programs. 1996.  
140.  Alvir JMJ, Lieberman JA, Safferman AZ, Schwimmer JL, Schaaf JA. Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050] -induced 
agranulocytosis: Incidence and risk factors in the [LOCATION_002]. N Engl J Med. 
1993;329:162 -7. 
141.  Cuffel BJ, Heithoff KA, Lawson W. Correlates of patterns of substance abuse among 
patients with schizophrenia. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] & Community Psychiatry. 1993;44(3):247 -51. 
142.  Morrato EH, Dodd S, Oderda G, Haxby [CONTACT_24226], Allen R, Valuck RJ. Prevalence, utiliza tion 
patterns, and predictors of antipsychotic polypharmacy: experience in a multistate 
Medicaid population, 1998 -2003. Clin Ther. 2007;29(1):183-95.  
143.  Sankaranarayanan J, Puumala SE. Antipsychotic use at adult ambulatory care visits by 
[CONTACT_788781], 1996 -2003: national estimates 
and associated factors. Clin Ther. 2007;29(4):723 -41. 
144.  Chengappa KN, Gopalani A, Haught MK, McChesney K, Baker RW, Schooler NR. The 
treatment of clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050]-associated agranulocytosis with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). Psychopharmacology Bulletin. 1996;32(1):111 -21. 
145.  Sperner-Unterweger B, Czeipek I, Gaggl S, Geissler D, Spi[CONTACT_139020] G, Fleischhacker  WW. 
Treatment of severe clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050]-induced neutropenia with granulocyte colony -stimulating 
factor (G-CSF):  Remission despi[INVESTIGATOR_788749]. British Journal of Psychiatry. 1998;172:82-4. 
146.  Chengappa KN, Vasile J, Levine J, Ulrich R, Baker R, Gopalani A, Schooler N. 
Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050]: its impact on aggressive behavior among patients in a state psychiatric 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. Schizophr Res. 2002;53(1 -2):1-6. 
147.  Gut -Fayand A, Dervaux A, Olie JP, Loo H, Poirier MF, Krebs MO. Substance abuse and 
suicidality in schizophrenia: a common risk factor linked to impulsivity. Psychiatry Res. 
2001;102(1):65-72.  
148.  Drake RE, Wallach MA. Substance abuse among the chronic mentally ill. Hosp 
Community Psychiatry. 1989;40(10):[ADDRESS_1085876] Behav. 
2006;31(10):1797-805.  
150.  Soyka M. Substance abuse as a risk factor for violence in major mental disorders. Arch 
Gen Psychiatry. 1999;56(6):582.  
151.  Cuffel BJ, Shumway M, Chouljian TL, MacDonald T. A longitudinal study of substance 
use and community violence in schizophrenia. J Nerv Ment Dis. 1994;182(12):704 -8. 
152.  Stroup TS, Lieberman JA, McEvoy JP, Swartz MS, Davis SM, Rosenheck RA, Perkins 
DO, Keefe RS, Davis CE, Severe J, Hsiao JK. Effectiveness of olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_050], quetiapi[INVESTIGATOR_050], 
risperidone, and ziprasidone in patients with chronic schizophrenia following 
discontinuation of a previous atypi[INVESTIGATOR_67128]. Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163(4):611-22. 
153.  Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, Swartz MS, Rosenheck RA, Perkins DO, Keefe 
RS, Davis SM, Davis CE, Lebowitz BD, Severe J, Hsiao JK. Effectiveness of 
antipsychotic drugs in patients with chronic schizophrenia. N Engl J  Med. 
2005;353(12):1209-23.  
154.  Marder SR, Meibach RC. Risperidone in the treatment of schizophrenia. Am J 
Psychiatry. 1994;151:825-35. 
V 01.15.2016 page 38 of 42 155.  Jibson MD, Tandon R. New atypi[INVESTIGATOR_16703]. Journal of Psychiatric 
Research. 1998;32(3-4):215-28. 
156.  Breier AF, Malhotra AK, Su TP, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_60917], Elman I, Adler CM, Lafargue RT, Clifton A, 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_28876] D. Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788750]: effects on symptoms, 
parkinsonian side effects, and neuroendocrine response. Am J Psychiatry. 
1999;1 56(2):294-8. 
157.  Meyer RE. Some issues in the pharmacotherapy of alcoholism. In: Naranjo CA, Sellers 
EM, editors. Novel Pharmacological Interventions for Alcoholism. [LOCATION_001]: Springer -
Verlag; 1992. p. 40-55.  
158.  Drake RE, Brunette MF. Complications of  severe mental illness related to alcohol and 
other drug use disorders. In: Galanter M, editor. Recent Developments in Alcoholism: Consequences of Alcoholism. [LOCATION_001]: Plenum Publishing Company; 1998. p. 285 -99. 
159.  Greenberg RN. Overview of patients compliance with medication dosing: A literature 
reveiw. Clin Ther. 1984;6:592-9. 
160.  Pullar T, Jumar S, Tindall H, Feely M. Time to stop counting the tablets? Clin Pharmacol 
Ther. 1989;46:163-8.  
161.  Rudd P, By[CONTACT_492526], Zachary V, LoVerde ME, Titus C, Mitchell W, Marshall G. The natural 
history of medication compliance in a drug trial: Limitations of pi[INVESTIGATOR_10685]. Clin Pharmacol 
Ther. 1989;46:169-76.  
162.  Cheung R, Dickins J, Nicholson PW, Thomas AS, Smith H, Larson HE, Deshmulch  AA, 
Dobbs SM. Compliance with anti-tuberculous therapy: a field trial of a pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382] -box with a 
concealed electronic recording device. Eur J Clin, Pharmacol. 1988;35:[ADDRESS_1085877], Ovellette VL. How often is medicati on 
taken as prescribed? A novel assessment technique. Jama. 1989;261:3273 -7. 
164.  Rudd P, Marshall G, Taylor CB, Agras WS. Medication monitor dispenser for 
pharmaceutical and clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788751]. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1981;29:278.  
165.  Lee JY, Kusek JW, Greene PG, Bernhard S, Norris K, Smith D, Wilkening B, Wright JT, 
Jr. Assessing medication adherence by [CONTACT_21173][INVESTIGATOR_788752] (AASK) Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]. Am J 
Hypertens. 1996;9(8):719-25. 
166.  Cramer JA. Feedback on medication dosing enhances patient compliance. Chest. 
1993;104(2):333-4.  
167.  Assanangkornchai S, Srisurapanont M. The treatment of alcohol dependence. Curr Opin 
Psychiatry. 2007;20(3):222-7.  
168.  Miller WR, Rollnick SR. Motivational Interviewing. [LOCATION_001]: Guilford Press; 1993.  
169.  Monti PM, Abrams DB, Kadden RM, Cooney NL. Treating Alcohol Dependence. New 
York: Guilford Press; 1989. 
170.  Mueser KT, Noordsy DL. Group Interventions. In: Drake RE MK, editor. Dual Diagnosis  
of Major Mental Illness and Substance Abuse Disorder II: Recent Research and Clinical Implications. San Francisco: Jossy-Bass; 1996. 
171.  Sullivan JT, Sykora K, Schneiderman J, Naranjo CA, Sellers EM. Assessment of alcohol 
withdrawal: the revised clinical institute withdrawal assessment for alcohol scale (CIWA -
Ar). Br J Addict. 1989;84(11):1353-7. 
172.  Haney M, Ward AS, Comer SD, Foltin RW, Fischman MW. Abstinence symptoms 
following oral THC administration to humans. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1999;141(4):385-94.  
173.  Babor TF, Longabaugh R, Zweben A, Fuller RK, Stout RL, Anton RF, Randall CL. Issues 
in the definition and measurement of drinking outcomes in alcoholism treatment research. 
J Stud Alcohol Suppl. 1994;12:101 -11. 
174.  Teitelbaum LM, Carey KB. Alcohol assessment in psychiatric patients. Clin Psychol Sci 
Prac. 1996;3:323-38.  
V 01.15.2016 page 39 of 42 175.  Alterman AI. Methodological issues and prevalence estimates of substance abuse in 
schizophrenia. J of Nerv and Ment Disease. 1992;180(9):[ADDRESS_1085878] MB, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Gibbon M, Williams JBW. Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-
TR Axis I Disorders (SCID-I/P). Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc.; 
2002.  
177.  Drake RE, Osher FC, Noordsy DL, Hurlbut SC, Teague GB, Beaudett MS. Diagnosis of 
alcohol use disorders in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin. 1990;16:57 -67. 
178.  Kranzler HR, Kadden RM, Babor TF, Rounsavill BJ. Longitudinal, expert, all data 
procedure for psychiatric diagnosis in patients with psychoactive substance use 
disorders. Journ of Nerv and Ment Disorders. 1994;182:277 -83. 
179.  Meltzer HY. Treatment-resistant schizophrenia--the role of clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. Curr Med Res 
Opin. 1997;14(1):1-20.  
180.  Fagerstrom KO. Measuring degree of physical dependence to tobacco smoking with 
reference to individualization of treatment. Addict Behav. 1978;3(3 -4):235-41.  
181.  Sobell MB, Maisto SA, Sobell LC, Cooper AM, Sanders B. Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a prototype for 
evaluating alcohol treatment effectiveness. In: Sobell LC, Sobell MB, Ward E, editors. 
Evaluating Alcohol Drug Treatment Effectiveness. [LOCATION_001]: Pergamon; 1980. p. 129 -50. 
182.  Carey KB. Challenges in assessing substance use patterns in persons with comorbid 
mental and addictive disorders. NIDA Res Monogr. 1997;172:[ADDRESS_1085879] GL, Rosenberg SD, Drake RE, Mueser KT, Oxman TE, Hoffman D, Vidaver RM, 
Luckoor R, Carrieri KL. Evaluation of methods for detecting substance use disorder in 
persons with severe mental illness. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors. 1999;13:313 -26. 
184.  Sobell LC, Agrawal S,  Sobell MB. Factors affecting agreement between alcohol abusers' 
and their collaterals' reports. J Stud Alcohol. 1997;58(4):405 -13. 
185.  Moyer TP, Palman MA, Johnson P, Charlson JR, Ellefson PJ. Marijuana testing - how 
good is it? Mayo Clin Proc. 1987;62: 413-7. 
186.  Lowe RH, Abraham TT, Darwin WD, Herning R, Cadet JL, Huestis MA. Extended urinary 
Delta9 -tetrahydrocannabinol excretion in chronic cannabis users precludes use as a 
biomarker of new drug exposure. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2009;105(1 -2):24-32. PMCID: 
PMC2763020.  
187.  Carey KB, Cocco KM, Simons JS. Concurrent validity of clinicians' ratings of substance 
abuse among psychiatric outpatients. Psychiatric Services. 1996;47(8):842 -7. 
188.  Osher FC, Kofoed LL. Treatment of patients with psychiatric and psychoactive substance 
abuse disorders. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] & Community Psychiatry. 1989;40(10):1025 -30. 
189.  Drake RE, Mueser K, McHugo GJ. Using clinical rating scales to assess substance 
abuse among persons with severe mental illness. In: Sederer LI, Dickey B, editors. 
Outcome Assessment in Clinical Practice. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins; 1995.  
190.  Lukoff D, Nuechterlein KH, Ventura J. Manual for the Expanded Brief Psychiatric Rating 
Scale (BPRS). Schizophrenia Bulletin. 1986;12:594 -602.  
191.  Guy W. CGI.  ECDEU: NIMH; 1976. p. 217-22. 192.  Andreasen NC. Scale for the Assessment of Negative Symptoms (SANS). Iowa City: 
College of Medicine, University of Iowa; 1984.  
193.  Overall JE, Gorham DR. The Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale. Psychological Reports. 
1962;10:[ADDRESS_1085880]. 1970;212:11 -9. 
195.  Guy W. AIMS.  ECDEU Assessment Manual for Psychopharm: NIMH; 1976. p. 534-7. 
196.  Barnes TR. A rating scale for drug-induced akathisia. Br J Psychiatry. 1989;154:672 -6. 
197.  Malm U, May PRA, Dencker SJ. Evaluation of the quality of lif e of schizophrenic 
outpatient: A checklist. Schizophr Bull. 1981;7:[ADDRESS_1085881] -effectives Research Design Manual. unpublished. 1992.  
V 01.15.2016 page 40 of 42 199.  Heinrichs DW, Hanlon TE, Carpenter WTJ. The Quality of Life Scale: An instrument for 
rating the schizophrenia deficit syndrome. Schizophrenia Bulletin. 1984;10:388 -96. 
200.  Lehman AF. A quality of life interview for the chronically mentally ill. Evaluation and 
Program Planning. 1988;11:51 -2. 
201.  Solowij N, Stephens RS, Roffman RA, Babor  T, Kadden R, Miller M, Christiansen K, 
McRee B, Vendetti J. Cognitive functioning of long -term heavy cannabis users seeking 
treatment. Jama. 2002;287(9):1123-31. 
202.  Wilkinson G, Robertson G. Wide Range Achievement Test 4 Professional Manual. Lutz, 
FL: Psychological Assessment Resources; 2006.  
203.  Harvey PD, Moriarty PJ, Friedman JI, White L, Parrella M, Mohs RC, Davis KL. 
Differential preservation of cognitive functions in geriatric patients with lifelong chronic 
schizophrenia: less impairment in read ing compared with other skill areas. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2000;47(11):962-8. 
204.  Wechsler D. Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence. San Antonio, TX: The 
Psychological Corporation; 1999.  
205.  Green MF, Nuechterlein KH. The MATRICS initiative: developi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  a consensus cognitive 
battery for clinical trials. Schizophr Res. 2004;72(1):[ADDRESS_1085882] – Revised: Professional Manual. 
Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources; 1997.  
207.  Santesso DL, Dillon DG, Birk JL, Holmes AJ, Goetz E, Bogdan R, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_96095]. 
Individual differences in reinforcement learning: behavioral, electrophysiological, and neuroimaging correlates. Neuroimage. 2008;42(2):807 -16. PMCID: PMC2548326  
208.  Barr RS, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_96095], Culhane MA,  Goff DC, Evins AE. A single dose of nicotine 
enhances reward responsiveness in nonsmokers: implications for development of 
dependence. Biol Psychiatry. 2008;63(11):1061 -5. PMCID: PMC2441863.  
209.  AhnAllen CG, Liverant GI, Gregor KL, Kamholz BW, Levitt JJ, Gulliver SB, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_96095], 
Koneru VK, Kaplan GB. The relationship between reward -based learning and nicotine 
dependence in smokers with schizophrenia. Psychiatry Research. In Press.  
210.  Dutra SJ, Stoeckel LE, Carlini SV, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_96095], Evins AE. Varen icline as a smoking 
cessation aid in schizophrenia: effects on smoking behavior and reward sensitivity. Psychopharmacology (Berl). In Press.  
211.  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_96095], Evins AE, Schetter EC, Frank MJ, Pajtas PE, Santesso DL, Culhane M. 
Single dose of a dopamine agonist impairs reinforcement learning in humans: behavioral 
evidence from a laboratory-based measure of reward responsiveness. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2008;196(2):221 -32. PMCID: PMC2268635  
212.  Heerey EA, Bell-Warren KR, Gold JM. Decision-making impairments in the context of 
intact reward sensitivity in schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry. 2008;64(1):62 -9. PMCID: 
PMC2613513  
213.  Benowitz NL. Nicotine pharmacology and addiction. In: Benowitz NL, editor. Nicotine 
safety and toxicity. [LOCATION_001]: Oxford University Press; 1998. p. 3-16. 
214.  Ohlsson A, Lindgren JE, Wahlen A, Agurell S, Hollister LE, Gillespie HK. Plasma delta -9 
tetrahydrocannabinol concentrations and clinical effects after oral and intravenous administration and smoking. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1 980;28(3):409-16.  
215.  Bogdan R, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_96095]. The heritability of hedonic capacity and perceived stress: a twin 
study evaluation of candidate depressive phenotypes. Psychol Med. 2009;39(2):211 -8. 
PMCID: PMC2628414.  
216.  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_96095], Bogdan R, Ratner KG, Jahn AL. Increased perceived stress is associated 
with blunted hedonic capacity: potential implications for depression research. Behav Res Ther. 2007;45(11):2742-53. PMCID: PMC2080833.  
217.  Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A global measure of percei ved stress. Journal of 
Health and Social Behavior. 1983;24:386 -96. 
V 01.15.2016 page 41 of 42 218.  Simpson GM, Cooper TA. Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788753]. Am J Psychiatry. 
1978;135:[ADDRESS_1085883] S, Levron JC. Determination of risperidone and 9 -
hydroxyrisperidone in human plasma by [CONTACT_788782]. J Chromatogr. 1993;614:333 -9. 
220.  Lipsky RH, Sparling MB, Ryan LM, Xu K, Salazar AM, Goldman D, Warden DL. 
Association of COMT Val158Met genotype with executive functioning following traumatic 
brain injury. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2005;17(4):465 -71. 
221.  Clark RE, Teague GB, Ricketts SK, Bush PW, Keller AM, Zubkoff M, Drake RE. 
Measuring resource use in economic evaluations: determining the social costs of mental 
illness. J Ment Health Adm. 1994;21(1):32-41.  
222.  Laird NM, Ware JH. Random effects models for longitudinal data. Biometrics. 
1982;38:[ADDRESS_1085884] NM, Ware J. Methods for the analysis of longitudinal data: Blood 
concentrations and cognitive development. J Am Stat Assoc. 1989;84:33 -41. 
224.  Rotnitzky A, Robins JM. Semi-parametric regression estimation in the presence of 
dependent censoring. Biometrika. 1995;82(4):805 -20. 
225.  Honigfeld G, Arellano F, Sethi J, Bianchini A, Schein J. Reducing clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050] -related 
morbidity and mortality: 5 years of experience with the Clozaril National Registry. J Clin Psychiatry. 1998;[ADDRESS_1085885] 3:3-7. 
226.  Pacia SV, Devinsky O. Clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050]-related seizures: experience with 5,629 patients. 
Neurology. 1994;44(12):2247 -9. 
227.  Wilson WH, Claussen AM. Seizures associated with clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_193996] a state 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. J Clin Psychiatry. 1994;55(5):184 -8. 
228.  Merrill DB, Dec GW, Goff DC. Adverse cardiac effects associated with clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. J Clin 
Psychopharmacol. 2005;25(1):[ADDRESS_1085886] 
of race in aggressive inpatients randomized to double -blind clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050], olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_788754]. Schizophr Res. 2009;110(1 -3):95-102.  
230.  Russell JM, Mackell JA. Bodyweight gain associated with atypi[INVESTIGATOR_16709]: 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_788755]. CNS Drugs. 2001;15(7):537 -51. 
231.  Miller DD. Review and management of clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_788756]. J Clin Psychiatry. 2000;[ADDRESS_1085887] 8:14-7; discussion 8-9. 
232.  Conley RR. Risperidone side effects. J Clin Psychiatry. 2000;[ADDRESS_1085888] 8:20 -3; discussion 
4-5. 
233.  Miller DD, Caroff SN, Davis SM, Rosenheck RA, McEvoy JP, Saltz BL, Riggio S, Chakos 
MH, Swartz MS, Keefe RS, Stroup TS, Lieberman JA. Extrapyramidal side-effects of antipsychotics in a randomised trial. Br J Psychiatry. 2008;193(4):279 -88  PMCID 
2801816  
234.  Newcomer JW. Second-generation (atypi[INVESTIGATOR_2855]) antipsychotics and met abolic effects: a 
comprehensive literature review. CNS Drugs. 2005;[ADDRESS_1085889] 1:[ADDRESS_1085890] of risperidone and olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_788757], psychopathology and sexual functioning in male patients with schizophrenia. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 
2009;34(1):129-39.  
236.  Budney AJ, Hughes JR, Moore BA, Novy PL. Marijuana abstinence effects in marijuana 
smokers maintained in their home environment. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2001 ;58(10):917-
24. 
     
  