 IRB APPROVED  
 Oct 05, 2018  
  
 Page 1 of 7 Version Date: 0 1/16/[ADDRESS_1190242] CONSENT FORM  
 
Title:  SUNN STUDY Screening for Undiagnosed NAF LD and NASH  
 
Protocol No.:  flf-screen  1 
 WIRB® Protocol #20182311  
 
Sponsor:  Fatty Liver Foundation  
 
Investigator:  Wayne Eskridge , BS 
 [ADDRESS_1190243]  
 Boise, Idaho, [ZIP_CODE] -6923  
 [LOCATION_003]   
 
Daytime Phone Number:  [PHONE_17737]  
 
24-hour Phone Number:  [PHONE_17737]  
 
You are being invited to take part in a research study. A person who takes part in a research  
study  is called a research subject , or research participant .  
 
You have the opportunity to take part in a study that tests the stiffness of your liver  and 
simultaneously measures the amount of fat in the liver . You do not have to take part in this 
study i f you do not want to. Your participation is voluntary. The purpose of this information 
and consent form is to tell you about the study and your role in it.   Our healthcare staff will 
answer any questions you have about the study or the information you read  in this form.   You 
should read this form carefully and ask the staff to explain any words or information that you 
do not understand. Your questions should be answered clearly and to your satisfaction.  
 
In order to do the study, we will need to collect li mited medical information, but it will not 
identify you personally. We will then  perform an ultrasound  examination of your liver using a 
machine called the FibroScan®.   While  the FibroSc an is being  done, you will need to lie down 
on your back during the ex amination, and then a certified  FibroScan o perator will take a 
minimum of [ADDRESS_1190244] 
not been answered.  
 
The investigator is the sponsor, and is paying for this study .   
 
PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  
This is a “population study” of patients that have chronic health concerns , but no diagnosis  of 
liver disease , to determine how many  of them  have livers that are stiffer than normal.  
 
"Population study" means that the purpose of the study is to gather statistical information 
about people who are not known to have liver disease in order to find out how many have 
 IRB APPROVED  
 Oct 05, 2018  
  
 Page 2 of 7 Version Date: 0 1/16/[ADDRESS_1190245] (similar to an ultrasound), meaning it has no effect on the 
body and is painless. As part of this study you will not receive any medication or treatments of 
any kind. You will be given information about the health conce rns that are being studied and 
given educational materials which may help you practice a healthy lifestyle.  
 
To participate in the study you cannot have a diagnosed liver disease.  
 
If you qualify for the study, you will receive  
 Educational materials about  diet and other lifestyle issues which may be unhealthy  
 A FibroScan test of your liver  
 Printed output from the FibroScan test . Interpretation of the test results require a 
professional.  
 Information about resources available to you medically and/or nutriti onally to help you 
understand the results of your test and what steps you might take following the test  
 The study is a single test and there will be no follow up by [CONTACT_3019] .  You will be offered 
community services and professional contacts that will be provided  to you after the test  
 You will receive information about how  you may contact  a hepatologist , a liver specialist,  
about the test results but consulting with the specialist is your  responsibility . The study 
sponsor does not provide diagnosis or medical care  of any kind . 
 
HOW LONG THE STUDY WILL LAST AND HOW MANY PEOPLE WILL BE IN 
THE STUDY  
The study is expected to  last up to twelve weeks or until one thousand adults have been tested.  
There minimum number of participants  is 400  but there will be a maximum of  one thousand 
patients tested . 
 
Your participation will be a single FibroS can on one day.  
 
What should I know about this research ? 
 Someone will explain this research to you.  
 This form sums up  that explanation . 
 Taking part in this research is voluntary. Whether  you take part is up to you.  
 You can choose not to take part.  There will be no penalty or loss of benefits to which you 
are otherwise entitled . 
 You can agree to take part and later change your mind.  There will be no penalty or loss of 
benefits to wh ich you are otherwise entitled . 
 If you don’t understand, ask questions . 
 Ask all the questions you want before you decide.  
 
 IRB APPROVED  
 Oct 05, 2018  
  
 Page 3 of 7 Version Date: 0 1/16/2018  Why is this research being done?  
The purpose of this research  is to measure liver stiffness in a group of patients who are copi[INVESTIGATOR_854685] a liver disease.  This will help measure 
how many people may be a t risk to develop liver disease in the future.  
 
How long will I be in this research?  
We expect that your taking part in this research will be for one test on  one day.  
 
What happens if I agree to take part in this research?  
Before receiving the FibroScan, you will be asked to read and sign this consent form and provide 
some general informat ion about yourself and medical conditions you believe you have. You will 
not be asked to provide any information that personally identifies you.  The study questions are 
of a general nature to be used in statistical analysis.  You will be asked to identify  any medical 
conditions that you believe you have but no information will identify who you are.  
 
The investigator will ask some questions to find out if you can be in the study.  
 You must be at least 18 years old  
 You cannot be included if you already know that you have a liver disease  
 Pregnant women cannot be screened  
 Patients with battery operated, implanted devices of any kind cannot be screened  
 Being very overweight  may make the test unreliable  
 
Study Procedures:  
 
You will be asked to lie down on your ba ck during the examination, and then a certified 
FibroScan operator will apply a water -based gel to your abdomen.  They will then take a 
minimum of [ADDRESS_1190246] 
follow up medical resources.  You will be asked about how you feel about the testing and its 
value to you.  You will be given the opportunity to receive additional information about health 
and clinical trials through online educational programming. Participation in the education is 
voluntary and not part of the study.  
 
What are my responsibilities if I take part in this research?  
 If you take pa rt in this research, you will  volunteer to have a single noninvasive liver 
stiffness test  
 You will fast for at least [ADDRESS_1190247]  
 After the test you will be asked to p rovide information about what you think  the value of 
the testing is for you personally.   
 You will have no other responsibilities as part of the study but you will be offered 
information about how to take next s teps that may be beneficial to you.  
 
 IRB APPROVED  
 Oct 05, 2018  
  
 Page 4 of 7 Version Date: 0 1/16/2018  Could being in this research hurt  me? 
 While the FibroScan ultrasound probe touches the right upper side of your abdomen, you 
may feel a gentle tappi[INVESTIGATOR_854686], like the flick of 
a finger tappi[INVESTIGATOR_854687].  
 Fasting may cause lightheadedness.   If you are diabetic or have other medical conditions, 
with side effects from fasting , do not participate  without first talking with your doctor if  a 
fast of [ADDRESS_1190248] you.  
 Pregnant women or people with battery -operated,  implanted cardiac devices (cardiac or 
otherwise, e .g., pacemakers or implantable  cardioverter defibrillators [ ICDs]) cannot 
have a FibroScan.   
 Also, in patients with fluid in their abdomen (ascites), the examination m ay fail and 
would not be useful.  
 A very high BMI makes the test unreliable and participating will not be of value.  
 
ADDITIONAL RISKS OR DISCOMFORTS  
During the test you will be asked to lie on your back on a table with your right arm over your 
head. Some pa tients may have difficulty being on the table or positioning themselves for the test. 
Accommodations will be made if possible but some may not be able to move in that manner and 
should not take the test.  
 
If you do not understand what any of these side eff ects mean, please ask the  investigator or study 
staff to explain these terms to you.  
 
You must tell the investigator or study staff about any side effects that you have. If you are not 
honest about any side effects, you may harm yourself.  
 
There are no known side effects (or rare side effects) of the FibroScan.  
 
There is the risk of a loss of confidentiality of your research -related information.  
 
In addition to these risks, taking part in this research may harm  you in unknown ways.  
 
Will it cost me money  to take part in this research?  
Participating in this study is free to you.  
 
Taking part in this research may lead to added costs to you  such as the cost of medical care or 
testing that you choose after receiving the results of the test.  The cost of any consultation or  
medical care following the test is the responsibility of you or your insurance company.  
 
Will being in this research benefit me?  
We cannot promise any benefits to you or others from your taking part in this research. The goal 
of the study is  to better understand the health of the community so your participation may benefit 
you as a member of the community in the future.  
 
 IRB APPROVED  
 Oct 05, 2018  
  
 Page 5 of 7 Version Date: 0 1/16/[ADDRESS_1190249] besides taking part in this research?  
This research is not designed to diagnose, treat or prevent any disease.  Your alternative is to not 
take part in the research.  
 
What happens to the information collected for this research?  
Your private information is not being collected as part of this study so it will not become a part 
of your medical reco rd or be personally identifiable.  The community data will be available to 
any of these groups  
 The research  sponsor  
 People who work with the research  sponsor  
 Government agencies, such as the Food and Drug Administration  
 The Institutional Review Board (IRB)  that reviewed this research  
 Other groups working to improve the health of the community  
 
We may publish the results of this research  but no personal information will be part of the data.  
 
We protect your information from disclosure to others to the extent  required by [CONTACT_2371]. We cannot 
promise complete secrecy.  
 
Data collected in this research  might be used for future research or distributed to another 
investigator for future research without your consent.  
 
Who can answer my questions about this research?  
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think this research has hurt you  or made you 
sick, talk to the research team at the phone number listed above on the first page.  
 
This research is being overseen by [CONTACT_3551] (“IRB”). An IRB is a group of 
people who perform independent review of research studies. You may talk to them at  (800) 562 -
4789 ,  [EMAIL_6691]  if: 
 You have questions, concerns, or complaints that are not being answered by [CONTACT_854689].  
 You are not getting answers from the research team.  
 You cannot reach the research team.  
 You want to talk to someone else about the research.  
 You have questions about your rights as a research subject.  
 
What if I am injured because of taking part in this research?  
This study is non -invasive with no known risks so any post -test medical procedures are the 
responsibility of the patient. Please be aware that some insurance plans may not pay for claims of 
research -related injuries.  You should contact [CONTACT_183448].  
 
Can I be removed from this research without my approval ? 
The person in charge of this research can remove you from this research without your approval. 
Since the study is noninvasive and involves a single test, a typi[INVESTIGATOR_854688].  
 
 IRB APPROVED  
 Oct 05, 2018  
  
 Page 6 of 7 Version Date: 0 1/16/[ADDRESS_1190250] your he alth, welfare, or choice to 
participate  in this research.  
 
What happens if I agree to be in this research, but I change my mind later?  
You may change your mind at any time with no cost or consequences to you.  
 
Will I be paid for taking part in this research?  
You will not be paid for taking part in th is research.  
 
Your data may be used for commercial profit. You will not share in this commercial profit.  
 
Statement of Consent:  
 
By [CONTACT_854690].  
 
 
    
 Signature [CONTACT_854691] 05, 2018  
  
 Page 7 of 7 Version Date: 0 1/16/[ADDRESS_1190251] CONSENT FORM  
 
Title:  SUNN STUDY Screening for Undiagnosed NAF LD and NASH  
 
Protocol No.:  flf-screen  1 
 WIRB® Protocol #20182311  
 
Sponsor:  Fatty Liver Foundation  
 
Investigator:  Wayne Eskridge , BS 
 [ADDRESS_1190252]  
 Boise, Idaho, [ZIP_CODE] -6923  
 [LOCATION_003]   
 