 
MOD00001944  
UH IRB Approved  
5/3/2019 - 2/5/2020   
 
Title:  Life Story Book With Mentally Alert Residents of Nursing Homes  
NCT  Number :  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date:  May 3, 2019  
 
  
Consent to Take Part in a Human Research Study  
Life Story Book Research   Page 2 of 9 
MOD00001944 Version: Jan19  
UH IRB Approved  
5/3/2019 - 2/5/2020   
Consent to Take Part in a Human Research Study  
Title of research study:   The effectiveness of Life Story Book on depression 
and meaning in life for mentally alert residents of nursing homes.  This research 
is being carried out by a researcher from the University of Houston, Graduate 
College of Social Work, Theresa Chrisman. This study is a part of a PhD 
dissertation and being conducted under the supervision of [CONTACT_385385].  
Key Information: Life Story Book believes that every person has a story - a 
personal history - with events, people, circumstances, actions, feelings, insights, 
thoughts, learning, and milestone s that define who they are.  The purpose of 
this study is to find out how Life Story Book affects residents of nursing homes 
lives.  Does it make things better? Or do they stay the same? This study will 
measure aspects that affect a persons’ quality of lif e.  We will do this by [CONTACT_385378].   
What should I know about a research study?  
• Someone will explain this research study to you.  
• Taking part in the research is voluntary; whether or not you take part is up 
to you. 
• You can choose not to take part.  
• You can agree to take part and later change your mind.  
• Your decision will not be held against you.  
• You can ask all the questions you want before you decide, and can ask 
questions  at any time during the study . 
We invite you to take part in a research study about a reminiscence intervention 
called Life Story Book because you meet the following criteria:  mentally alert, 
over the age of 57 years, and a resident of this nursing home.   
In general, there are two nursing homes who will be participating in this study. 
This is a nine -week study and each participant will be visited six times, for one 
hour.  For three of those visits, a research team member will listen and write 

Consent to Take Part in a Human Research Study  
Life Story Book Research   Page 3 of 9 
MOD00001944 Version: Jan19  
UH IRB Approved  
5/3/2019 - 2/5/2020  your life sto ries.  These stories will be  typed, and photos and/or memorabilia 
can be added to create your Life Story Book.   
Life Story Book Research  Page 1 of 8  
The primary risk to you in taking part is:  There is the possibility of stress or 
discomfort when talkin g about difficult feelings, moods or sad memories. If the 
visits bring up negative feelings that you would like to discuss with the nursing 
home physical or mental health staff, a referral will be made.  
These feelings should be temporary.  Your Life Story  Book will be yours with all 
of the life stories you would like to include in it.       
Detailed Information:  
The following is more detailed information about this study, in addition to the 
information listed above.  
Two similar nursing homes will take par t in this study. For the purpose of this 
study, Theresa will flip a coin to determine which home will be A and which 
home will be B, which means, whichever home is A will build their Life Story 
Book first. While one home’s residents are receiving Life Stor y Book, the other 
home’s residents will continue receiving care as they usually do. We will then 
switch, and nursing home B will receive Life Story Book and nursing home A will 
continue receiving care as they usually do.   
A research team member will ask you questions about different times in your life 
beginning at your earliest memories.  They will have a list of questions, but you 
do not have to answer any question you do not like. The life stories will be audio 
recorded, typed, and nicely printed by  [CONTACT_5051].  The audio recordings 
will be deleted after they are transcribed into your stories. If you have any 
photos or memorabilia that you would like to include in your book, these will be  
scanned at the nursing home and added to your book. No  photos or 
memorabilia will be removed from the nursing home. The book is a fabric 
covered scrapbook with sleeves to insert your stories and photos.   
Why is this research being done?  
Depression and lack of meaning in life is a serious problem for many res idents 
of nursing homes.  This research is being done to find ways to help these 
residents without the use of drugs.  
Consent to Take Part in a Human Research Study  
Life Story Book Research   Page 4 of 9 
MOD00001944 Version: Jan19  
UH IRB Approved  
5/3/2019 - 2/5/[ADDRESS_482174]?  
We expect this research study to last for nine weeks.  You will be visited for a 
total of 6 one -hour visi ts.   
How many people will be studied?   We expect to enroll about 24 people from 
two nursing homes to participate in this research study:  12 from each nursing 
home.  
What happens if I say yes, I want to be in this research?  
You will be visited at the nursing home six times for about 1 hour.  
Week 1:  You will be visited by [CONTACT_385379] a research team member  We will 
review the study and this consent form again and answer any of your questions. 
We will also ask you some information about yourself and abo ut activities that 
you are able to do by [CONTACT_202699].  We will also ask you a few questions about if 
you have felt depressed in the last week and some questions about how you 
feel about your meaning in life.  
Weeks 2, 3 and 4: If your nursing home is chosen to  go first to receive Life Story 
Book, you will have three visits by a research team member so that they can 
listen to your stories.  If your nursing home is chosen to go second, you will wait 
three weeks before we come back to visit you.   
Week 5:  You wil l be visited again by [CONTACT_385379] a research team member so 
that we can ask you again  a few questions about if you have felt depressed in 
the last week and some questions about how you feel about your meaning in 
life. 
Weeks 6, 7, 8: If your nursing home w as chosen to go second to receive Life 
Story Book, you will have three visits by a research team member so that they 
can listen to your stories.  If your nursing home was chosen to go first you will 
now wait  three weeks before we come back to visit you.   
Week 9:  You will be visited again by [CONTACT_385379] a research team member so 
that we can ask you again  a few questions about if you have felt depressed in 
the last week and some questions about how you feel about your meaning in 
life. 
We will be asking yo u the following questionnaires:  
Consent to Take Part in a Human Research Study  
Life Story Book Research   Page 5 of 9 
MOD00001944 Version: Jan19  
UH IRB Approved  
5/3/2019 - 2/5/2020  1. Questions to assess your  ability to perform activities of daily living 
independently  
2. Depression questions about how you felt the previous week  
3. Questions about if you feel your life has meaning  
4. Questions about your persona l information: for example - age, gender, 
education  
  
During the three visits listening to your life stories we plan to audio record. We 
will audio record you during the Life Story Book Intervention and transcribe 
those stories.  Audio recording will free the researcher to listen attentively to 
your life stories and will help the researchers to accurately type up your stories. 
All audio files will be destroyed immediately after transcribing the stories.    
 I agree  to be audio recorded  during the rese arch study.  
 I do not agree  to be audio recorded  during the research study.  
If you do not wish to be audio recorded, the researcher will just take notes of 
your life stories and check with you for accuracy.  
What happens if I do not want to be in this res earch?  
You can choose not to take part in the research and it will not be held against 
you. Choosing not to take part will involve no penalty or loss of benefit to which 
you are otherwise entitled.  
 A decision to take part or not will have no effect on you r routine care.  
What happens if I say yes, but I change my mind later?  
You can leave the research at any time and it will not be held against you.  
If you stop being in the research, already collected data may not be removed 
from the study database.  
Is there any way being in this study could be bad for me?  
Participants may experience mild psychological discomfort.  The Life Story Book 
intervention may result in some temporary mild psy chological discomfort while 
discussing the past. The questionnaires will be administered by a Licensed 
Master Social Worker.  In addition, the research team members will be trained 
Consent to Take Part in a Human Research Study  
Life Story Book Research   Page 6 of 9 
MOD00001944 Version: Jan19  
UH IRB Approved  
5/3/2019 - 2/5/[ADDRESS_482175] at  
any time or may reschedule the visit if you are too fatigued to continue. The 
research team will be extr emely flexible and attentive as to adjusting 
intervention times, assessing for fatigue, being watchful for pain or other 
symptoms you may be experiencing.    
Will I receive anything for being in this study?  
You will receive a Life Story Book for participat ing.  We cannot promise any 
benefits to you or others from your taking part in this research. However, 
possible benefits include lower depression and an increase in meaning in your 
life.   
What happens to the information collected for the research?  
Efforts  will be made to keep your personal information private, including 
research study records, to people who have a need to review this information. 
Each subject’s name [CONTACT_353743] a code number, which will appear on all 
written study materials. The li st pairing the subject’s name [CONTACT_385381]. We cannot promise complete 
secrecy. Organizations that may inspect and copy your information include the 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) and other representatives  of this organization, 
as well as collaborating institutions and federal agencies that oversee our 
research. We may publish the results of this research. However, unless 
otherwise detailed in this document, we will keep your name [CONTACT_385382].  
With all assurances of confidentiality, we may still have to pass on information if 
it appears that you, or someone else, is at risk of serious harm.   
   
This study collects private information with identifiers (such as name, 
birthdate, etc.) . Following collection, researchers will remove all identifying 
information from these data. Once identifiers are removed, this information  
could be used for future research studies   
We m ay share and/or publish the results of this research. However, we will keep 
your name [CONTACT_20834].  
Can I be removed from the research without my OK?  
Consent to Take Part in a Human Research Study  
Life Story Book Research   Page 7 of 9 
MOD00001944 Version: Jan19  
UH IRB Approved  
5/3/2019 - 2/5/[ADDRESS_482176] learned.  
Who can I talk to?  
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt 
you, you should talk to the research team at University of Houston, Graduate 
College of Social Work, Theresa Chrisman, Telephone: 713 -447-3334 or Email:  
[EMAIL_7431]     
This research has been reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_385380] (IRB). You may also talk to them at (713) 743 -9204 
or [EMAIL_6771]  if: 
• Your questions, concerns, or complaints are not being answered by [CONTACT_5055].  
• You cannot reach the research team.  
• You want to talk to someone besides the research team.  
• You have questions about your rights as a research subject.  
• You want to get information or provide input about this research.  
 
A description of this clinical trial will be available on 
http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. This website will not 
include information that can identify you. At most, the Web site will include a 
summary of the results. You can search this website at any time.  
  
 
 
 
  
Consent to Take Part in a Human Research Study  
Life Story Book Research   Page 8 of 9 
MOD00001944 Version: Jan19  
UH IRB Approved  
5/3/2019 - 2/5/[ADDRESS_482177].  
 
 Signature [CONTACT_385383] a Human Research Study  
Life Story Book Research   Page 9 of 9 
MOD00001944 Version: Jan19  
UH IRB Approved  
5/3/2019 - 2/5/[ADDRESS_482178]  
 
 
Printed name [CONTACT_385384] 