Page 1 of 9 
 Proposed Research Protocol Form  
 
Title: Does Radiofrequency  Ablation of the Articular Nerves of the Knee Prior to Total 
Knee Replacemen t Improve Pain Outcomes?  A Prospective Randomized Sham -Control 
Trial  with 6 month Follow Up  
 
Principal Investigator :  [INVESTIGATOR_10086] R. Walega, MD, MSCI 
Associate [CONTACT_299817], Division of Pain Medicine  
Department of Anesthesiology  
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine   
Office (312) 695 -2500  
[EMAIL_5034]  
 
 
Co-PI: [INVESTIGATOR_634619], MD2, David Manning, MD2, Mark Kendall, MD1, Sabrina Robak, RN1  
 
Affiliatio n:  
1Department of Anesthesiology , Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine  
2Depa rtment of Orthopedic Surgery , Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine  
 
Version: 1.0 
 
Protocol Version Date: 1/30/2015  
  
1.0 Research Aims /Objective : 
 
1.1   Research Question(s):   
Does Cooled Radiofrequency Ablation (C -RFA) of the articular sensory nerve supply to 
the knee prior to unilateral total knee replacement result in improved post-operative knee 
pain scores  and decreased perioperative analgesic use as compared to standard 
perioperative medical therapy ? 
 
1.2   Null Hypothesis:  
Cooled Radiofrequency Ablation (C -RFA) prior to unilateral total knee replacement has 
no effect  on post-operative knee pain scores or pain medication use  as compared to 
standard perioperative medical therapy . 
 
2.0   Research significance:  
 
2.[ADDRESS_847216]-operative pain following TKR may be the use of cooled 
radiofrequency ablation  (C-RFA)  of the articular sensory nerve supply of the knee capsule prior 
to surgery, to desensitize the  knee by [CONTACT_634622] -operative pain.  The clinical efficacy of r adiofrequency neurotomy has 
been proven in chroni c spi[INVESTIGATOR_185775], cervicogenic headache and trigeminal neuralgia with a strong 
safety profile  in appropriately selected patients .  C-RFA  is similar in mechanism to conventional 
RFA: a thermal lesion is created by [CONTACT_634623] a percutaneous  
electrode placed at a target neural structure. However, in  C-RFA, a constant flow of ambient 
water is circulated through the e lectrode via a peristaltic pump, maintaining a lowered tissue 
temperature by [CONTACT_40397] a heat sink. By [CONTACT_634624], a lower but effective lesioning temperature is maintained, resulting in less tissue 
charring adjacent to the electrode, less tissue impedance10,[ADDRESS_847217] demonstrated the use of RFA for knee pain from OA. 
Choi et al used conventional RFA of the articular nerves in the knee in elderly patients with 
chronic knee pain from OA in a double blind randomized controlled trial published in 201115. 
RFA  at three nerve locations  was performe d with image guidance and each  lesion was performed 
at 70 degrees C for 90 seconds  with a 22 gauge cannula .  Needle placements were at the region 
connecting the shaft of the femur to the bilateral epi[INVESTIGATOR_100758]  (superior lateral and superior 
medial genicular nerves)  and the shaft of the tibia meeting the medial epi[INVESTIGATOR_100757] (inferior 
genicular nerve)16-18. Patients who underwent  RFA reported at least a 50% decrease in pain 
scores at one and three months following the procedure, whereas the sham control group had no 
demonstrable change i n pain at these time points15. Oxford knee disabi lity scores and p atient 
satisfaction scores were also significantly improved in the RFA group but  unchanged in the 
control grou p.  N o adverse event s were  reported in the [ADDRESS_847218] effective manner . 
 
3.0   Investigational Plan /Protocol Specifics  
 
General Design and Procedures.   
This study design is a prospective randomized trial  of C-RFA of [ADDRESS_847219] 48 hours after surgery (primary outcome ). We will obtain approval from the Institutional 
Review Board at Northwestern University and will complete an informed co nsent process before 
initiating any study procedure.  
 
Secondary Outcomes  include : 
 
a) Visual Analog Scale for pain : (0 (no pain) to 10 (unbearable pain) scale; at rest, mobilization/   
    weight bearing.  
b) Knee Society Scale  (clinician); WOMAC (patient)  
c) Time to Physical therapy milestones : 
a. Active SLR  
b. Time until patient can get out of bed  
c. Time until patient able to ambulate  < 100 feet  
d. Time until patient able to ambulate around room > 100 feet  
e. Time until patient is able to climb stairs (quantify specifi cs, 
how many steps are considered appropriate?)  
d) Patient Global Perception of Change (GPC ) 
Page 4 of 9 
 e) Patient Satisfaction (Likert  Scale ) 
f) Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_71010]  (HAD S) 
e) SF 12 Questionnaire  
f) McGill Pain Questionnaire  
g) Inpatient length of Stay (LOS; days)  and Physical Therapy “clearance for discharge” (days)   
h) Complications  of the injection procedure  
i) Medication related adverse effects  
 
A total of 60  patients  will be randomized. Participants wi ll complete assessme nts at these  time 
points:  
1) Baseline: immediately before the CRFA intervention,  
2) Immediately prior to surgery  (Day of Surgery)   
3) 48 hours after the surgery  procedure  
4) 1, [ADDRESS_847220] 
protected compu ter in the department of anesthesiology. Paper data sheets will be placed in a 
binder and stored in a locked filing cabinet in a locked office located in the department of 
anesthesiology.  
 
Participants   
Inclusion c riteria include:  
 1) Adults 30 to 80 years  old  
 2) OA of the knee scheduled to undergo their first unilateral knee joint replacement  
 3) Willingness  to undergo fluoroscopy -guided C -RFA  or sham treatment.  
 
Exclusion criteria include:   
1) Conditions  that preclude C -RFA  or sham intervention (e.g. pregnancy, severe   
    cardiac/pulmonary compromise; acute illness/infection; coagulopathy or bleeding  
    disorder; allergic reactions/contraindications to a local anesthetic ).  
                  2) Prior TKR on either knee  
                  3) Inability  to wr ite, speak  or read in English  
                  4) Patient  refusal  
 
Recruitment   
Site(s) where study will be performed:   
Department of Anesthesiology, [ADDRESS_847221] Clair, Suite 17 -200, Chicago, IL [ZIP_CODE]  
Department of Orthopedic Surgery, 259 E Erie, Suite 13 -100, Chicago, IL [ZIP_CODE]   
Page 5 of 9 
  
Patients who schedule a primary unilateral TKR with their orthopedic surgeon at NM will be 
asked to participate  in the study by [CONTACT_80282] . They will be screened  to 
determine candidacy for the study ; if they meet eligibility criteria, they will read and sign an 
informed consent form to participate . Each participant will be scheduled to see [CONTACT_634626] in the 
Pain Medicine Center for the intervention procedure. They  will be asked to be NPO for this visit 
and arrange a driver to accompany them home. This procedure will be performed 2 -4 weeks 
prior to their planned knee surgery.  The research assista nt will calculate Morphine Equivalents 
(ME) of all analgesic medication s including opi[INVESTIGATOR_858], anti -inflammatories and membrane 
stabilizers.  
 
Each participant will complete the following written outcome measures  prior to the intervention : 
It will take approximately 10 minutes to complete the questionnaires. * 
VAS pain  score  
WOMAC  questionnaire  
SF12 questionnaire  
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_634620]:  
VAS  pain score  
PGIC  Questionnaire  
Patient satisfaction  
 
Randomization and Masking Procedures  (Treatment vs Control; T vs C)  
A computer -generated 1:1 block randomization scheme will be used to assign participants to 
receive either a CRFA or a sham procedure (wherein no RF energy is delivered  after needle 
placem ent, and only local anesthetic is delivered) .  Randomization will be performed by [CONTACT_634625]. Par ticipants , 
surgeons  and all other study personnel, including those who will perform follow -up evaluations, 
will be blinded to group assignment. One board certified, fellowship traine d anesthesiologist 
(DRW) with [ADDRESS_847222]. Walega will not be 
involved in the collection of any pri mary or secondary data outcome.  
 
Intervention Procedure Description:   
At the time of the intervention  procedure, a 22 or 20-g angiocat heter will be placed in the 
participant’s  hand/arm for peripheral intravenous access for conscious sedation during the 
procedure. The patient will be positioned supi[INVESTIGATOR_72301] a fluoroscopy table with a positioning device 
under the patient’s knee to create 30 -40 degre es knee  flexion and hemodynamic mo nitor s will be 
placed including NIBP, pulse oximet er and nasal cannula oxygen at 1 -4 L/min. The knee will be 
prepped with chloroprep for 1 minute and draped in a sterile fashion. A grounding pad will be 
placed on the patient ’s contralateral thigh and conne cted to the RF generator  which will be 
turned on but will not be in the patient’s view . Regardless of group assignment, midazolam 0.5 -1 
mg IV aliquots and/or fentanyl  25-50 mcg IV aliquots will be gi ven as needed to provide 
Page 6 of 9 
 appropriate anxiolysis and analg esia for needle placement and manipulation for the duration of 
the procedure. NM policies and proc edures for conscious sedation will be followed.  
 
For active CRFA , three targets for ablation * will be identified with an AP view of the knee:   
1.) Superior lateral genicular nerve  
2.) Superior medial genicular nerve  
3) Inferior medial genicular nerve  
*=locations are based on anatomi c studies and Choi et al publication  
 
The skin and deep subcutaneous tissues overlying the se target sites will each will be anest hetized 
using 5 -10 mL of 1% lidocaine. An 18 G C -RFA cannulas  (Cooled Radiofrequency Kit, Halyard 
Health ), (75 or 100 mm)  will be placed through the skin to b e optimally positio ned via an anterior 
approach at the anatomic location of ea ch of the 3 targets u sing AP and  lateral fluoroscopic 
imaging. The disposable RF electrode that is supplied with RF kit will be placed into the cannula 
and attached to the RF generator; sensory and motor testing will be performed to confirm safe 
and appropriate placement. Following this confirmation, 2  cc of 2% lidocaine will be injected at  
each of these three sites . After 2 minutes, the targets will be lesioned at 60 degrees C elsius  for 2 
minutes 30 seconds .  Following this, all  needles will be removed and Band -Aids  placed  on the 
needle placement sites. Participants will be transferred to a recovery area and monitored in a 
reclining position for at leas t 30 minutes to allow sedation to wear off.   
 
For sham control , the three targets for ablation will be identified in a sim ilar manner. The skin 
overlying the  target sites identified with image guidance will each be anesthetized using 5 -10 mL 
of 1% lidocaine. A 3.5 or 5 inch 22 gauge Whitacre needle will be placed through  the skin to be 
optimally posit ioned at the anatomic location of each of the 3 targets using AP and lateral 
fluoroscopic imaging. Following this placement confirmation, 2  cc of 2% lidocaine will be 
injected at each o f these sites . Non-disposable radiofrequency electrodes will be placed throug h 
these needles and attached to a RF generator.  The same auditory and visual experience of RF 
lesioning will be mimicked in the sham group as presented in the treatment group  (see above) . 
After  [ADDRESS_847223] 30 minutes to  allow sedation to wear off.   
 
Economic Burden to Subjects :  None  
 
Subject Reim bursement : Participants will receive $100 after completing the 3 month  follow up 
and another $[ADDRESS_847224] mailing address prior to sending 
payment. Participants will be told there is a 4 to 6 week processing time.  They will be asked to 
sign an accountability log to document payment.  
 
Statistical Analyses :  
Baseline characteristics (e.g., sociodemographic variables, primary and secondary outcomes) 
will be compared between treatment groups using t -tests or chi -square tes ts for categorical 
variables. W e will conduct intent -to-treat (ITT) analyses for all primary and secondary outcomes 
Page 7 of 9 
 using a series of generalized mixed -effects regressions. All statistical tests will be two -sided with 
significance set at p≤.05.  SAS statistical software version 9.2 (SAS  Institute Inc., Cary, NC, 
[LOCATION_003]) will be used for statistical analyses.  
 
In preliminary analysis, the distributional aspects of the variables under consideration will be 
examined through descriptive statistics. These statistics will include measures of loc ation (mean, 
median, quartiles) and measures of dispersion (range, standard deviation, variance) for 
continuous variables and frequencies of the levels of categorical variables. These measures will 
also assist with a data cleaning/screening procedure to el iminate any possible copying, handling, 
recording or measurement errors. In addition to the features described above, the dependence of 
outcome measures will need to be properly accounted for in the data analysis as measures will be 
made at multiple times for the same participant. Consequently, these observations tend to be 
correlated and require statistical techniques that can properly account for the correlation in order 
to draw valid inference.  Our general approach for analyzing these multiple types of d ata in this 
trial will be the Generalized Line ar Mixed -Effect Models (GLMM).   
 
Statistical Power   
The power analysis for this study was performed using data from Choi et al and assumptions 
regarding perioperative opi[INVESTIGATOR_634621] . A sample size of [ADDRESS_847225] a 
difference in analgesic use of 15 morphine equivalents (ME) per [ADDRESS_847226] deviation of 19 ME with a power of .81  at 
alpha = 0.05. The sample size calculation was computed using a two -sided Mann -Whitney Test 
(PASS ). To correct for lost to follow up and dropout rates, we will recruit [ADDRESS_847227] protected file on a 
computer located in the department of anesthesiology.  
  
Risks/Benefits:  
The risks of C -RFA of the articular sensory branches of the knee are minimal. Sensory and 
motor testing of the target structure prior to lesioning  reduces the risk of any neurologic injury  
and the motor nerves are not located at the planned lesion sites . Bleeding or infection can occur 
with any needle intervention.  
 
Summary of Recruitment:  
 
 
 
4.0   Data Analysis:  
 
Primary outcome:  
 Between -group difference  in analgesic use ( MQS III score ) at 48 hours.  
 

Page 9 of 9 
 Secondary outcomes: Between groups at 48 hours, 1, 3, 6 months in: 
 
1. Visual Analog Scale for pain (at rest, with mobilization or weight bearing)   
2. Knee Society Scale (clinician); WOMAC (patient)    
4. Physical therapy milestones  
 a. Time to a ctive SLR  
      b. Time until patient can get out of bed  
c. Time until patient able to  ambulate < 100 feet  
d. Time until patient able to ambulate around room > 100 feet  
e. Time until patient is able to climb stairs (quantify spec ifics, how many steps are 
considered appropriate?)  
5. Patient Global Perception of Change (GPC)  
6.   Patient Satisfaction (Likert scale)  
6. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_71010] (HADI)  
7.  SF12  
8.   McGill Pain Questio nnaire  
9. Inpatient length of Stay (LOS; days)  and Physical Therapy “clearance for discharge” 
(days)   
10.   Complications of the injection procedure  
11.   Medication related adverse events ( i.e. sedation, nausea, pruritus , delirium)  
  
 
4.2   Interpretation of Anticipated Results:  
Statistical analysis  
Means and standard deviations of participant  demographic data, as well as mEQ, VAS, and other 
outcome scores will be calculated .  Two tailed paired t tests will be used for parametric data;  
Wilcoxon rank sum tests will be used for non -parametric data in order to compare differences in 
outcome m easures  between the two treatment groups .   
 
 