Page 1 of 25                                                   Version 26March2021   
 
Title: Modulating brain activity to improve goal -directed physical activity in older adults  
 
Date: 10-11-2022 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_253254] , Ph.D. [EMAIL_4878]   
Organization: Institute for Aging Research Address: [ADDRESS_995784] reet, [LOCATION_011], MA [ZIP_CODE] -1101  
Phone: 617 -971-5332  
 
Sponsor: National Institute on Aging - NIA/NIH : [ADDRESS_995785], MSC 2292, Bethesda, MD [ZIP_CODE]  
 
Advarra Protocol #Pro00044372  
HSL IRB #: IRB -2019 -26 
 
Resea rch Site: Institute for Aging Research Address: [ADDRESS_995786] reet, [LOCATION_011], MA [ZIP_CODE] -1101  
Phone: 617 -971-5332  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Team:  
Amy Lo, Ph.D  
Lewis Lipsitz, M.D.  
Andrea Ross, Ph.D. at University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_729157] a protocol.  A prior application from Cayuse was submitted to 
transfe r the study  to Advarra  for initial approval .   
Page [ADDRESS_995787] do not meet recommendations for daily exercise. This lack of 
engagement in ‘goal-directed ’ physical activity stems from numerous interrelated factors including lack of 
motivation, depressed mood, and cognitive  “executive ” impairments that diminish one ’s ability to regulate 
behavior over time. Intriguingly, each of these factors has been linked to the function of brain networks that 
include the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC). Transcranial direct cur rent stimulation (tDCS) is a 
noninvasive and safe means of modulating the excitability of specific brain regions and their connected neural 
networks. tDCS designed to facilitate the excitability of the left dlPFC has been shown to improve motivation, 
mood,  and multiple aspects of executive function in healthy adults. We thus hypothesize that tDCS holds 
promise to increase goal -directed physical activity in older adults.  
We aim to conduct a pi[INVESTIGATOR_729158] a 2-week, 10 -session tDCS 
intervention targeting the left dlPFC on physical activity  and community mobility , over a two -month period 
following the setting of a personalized physical activity goal, in relatively physically -inactive older adults without 
overt illness or disease.  
  
Page 3 of 25                                                   Version 26March2021   
Background  
 
Regular physical activity is an extremely effective, safe, and modifiable means of health promotion, especially in 
old age. Yet, nearly 60% of older adults do not reach recommended amounts of daily physical activity.[ADDRESS_995788] linked each of these 
barriers to functional integrity and/or activation of the left dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) and its 
connected neural networks.7-[ADDRESS_995789] current stimulation (tDCS) is a non -invasive device to modulate cortical excitability (i.e. the 
likelih ood of neuronal firing) by [CONTACT_729163].14,[ADDRESS_995790] been observed in younger and older adults of varying cognitive status .16,17  
Moreover, multiple exposures to tDCS over a relatively short time period (e.g., 10 once -daily sessions within two 
weeks) induces lon ger-lasting increases in both cortical excitability18,[ADDRESS_995791] suggested that single - and or 
multi -session interventions of this form of tDCS:   
- Increases the willingness of healthy adults to exert physical and cognitive efforts for reward s,21 Induces 
lasting improvements in mood, even in older a dults with moderate -to-severe depression ,22,23  
- Enhances multiple aspects of executive function relevant to goal -directed behavior, including  working 
memory,24 selective attention,25 task switching,26 multitasking,27 problem solving,27 and decision making.29 
Our team has demonstrated that this form of tDCS improves gait and balance —abilities critical to 
exercise and falls self -efficacy30—in older adults (details below).  
 
We have demonstrated through a series of studies that tDCS  improves executive function, as well as the 
executive control of gait and balance, in older adults.31-[ADDRESS_995792] recently, we reported that in a small sample 
(n=20) of non -demented ambulatory older adults without overt illness or disease, yet who presented w ith mild -to-
Page 4 of 25                                                   Version 26March2021  moderate executive dysfunction at baseline, that a two -week tDCS intervention targeting the left dlPFC, as 
compared to sham stimulation  induced clinically -meaningful improvements in the Montreal Cognitive Assessment 
(MoCA), and particularly wit hin the executive function sub -score of this exam.31 Moreover, tDCS, as compared to 
sham, improved the ability to stand and walk, especially while engaging in an additional cognitive task (i.e., 
verbalized serial subtractions of 3 from a random 3 -digit num ber). This ability to “dual task” is a sensitive 
predictor of both falls and cognitive decline in the future38-42 and is critical to safe mobility during physical activity. 
Furthermore, dual tasking requires multiple higher -level cognitive executive functi ons,42-47 including working 
memory, mental flexibility, and self -control, that are together needed to initiate and ultimately sustain physical 
activity in the presence of distractors. These results, combined with the aforementioned reports that this form o f 
tDCS may also improve motivation and mood, gives us confidence that 1) a 2 -week tDCS intervention is safe 
and feasible for older adults of varying functional status, and that 2) such an intervention will likely induce 
numerous functional benefits that wi ll together translate into improved effectiveness of a goal -directed physical 
activity behavioral intervention.  
 
References:  
1. Harvey JA, Chastin  SF, Skelton DA. Prevalence of sedentary behavior in older adults: a systematic review. 
International journal of environmental research and public health. 2013;10(12):6645 -6661.  
2. Lachman ME, Lipsitz L, Lubben J, Castaneda -Sceppa C, Jette AM. When Adults Don't Exercise: Behavioral 
Strategies to Increase Physical Activity in Sedentary Middle -Aged and Older Adults. Innovation in aging. 
2018;2(1):igy007.  
3. Win S, Parakh K, Eze -Nliam CM, Gottdiener JS, Kop WJ, Ziegelstein RC. Depressive symptoms, physical 
inactivity and risk of cardiovascular mortality in older adults: the Cardiovascular Health Study. Heart (British 
Cardiac Society). 2011;97(6):500 -505. 
4. Roshanaei -Moghaddam B, Katon WJ, Russo J. The longitudinal effects of depression on physical activity. 
General hospi[INVESTIGATOR_9417]. 2009;31(4):306 -315. 
5. Daly M, McMinn D, Allan JL. A bidirectional relationship between physical activity and executive function in 
older adults. Frontiers in human neuroscience. 2014;8:1044.  
6. Loprinzi PD, Nooe A. Executive fun ction influences sedentary behavior: A longitudinal study. Health promotion 
perspectives. 2016;6(4):180 -184. 
7. Alvarez JA, Emory E. Executive function and the frontal lobes: a meta -analytic review. Neuropsychology 
review. 2006;16(1):17 -42. 
8. Grimm S, Bec k J, Schuepbach D, et al. Imbalance between left and right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in 
major depression is linked to negative emotional judgment: an fMRI study in severe major depressive disorder. 
Biological psychiatry. 2008;63(4):369 -376. 
9. Koenigs  M, Grafman J. The functional neuroanatomy of depression: distinct roles for ventromedial and 
Page 5 of 25                                                   Version 26March2021  dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Behavioural brain research. 2009;201(2):239 -243. 
10. Simpson EH, Balsam PD. The Behavioral Neuroscience of Motivation: An Overview  of Concepts, Measures, 
and Translational Applications. Current topi[INVESTIGATOR_68262]. 2016;27:1 -12.  
11. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_156451], Miller GA, Warren SL, et al. A brain network instantiating approach and avoidance motivation. 
Psychophysiology. 2012;49(9): 1200 -1214.  
12. MacPherson SE, Phillips LH, Della Sala S. Age, executive function, and social decision making: a 
dorsolateral prefrontal theory of cognitive aging. Psychology and aging. 2002;17(4):598 -609.  
13. Carstensen LL, Mikels JA, Mather M. Aging and the intersection of cognition, motivation, and emotion. 
Handbook of the psychology of aging. 6th ed: Academic Pesss; 2006:343 -362.  
14. Ruffini G, Wendling F, Merlet I, et al. Transcranial current brain stimulation (tCS): models and technologies. 
IEEE tran sactions on neural systems and rehabilitation engineering : a publication of the IEEE Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society. 2013;21(3):[ADDRESS_995793] current stimulation --technical, safety and functional aspects. Supplements to Clinical neurophysiology. 
2003;56:[ADDRESS_995794] Current Stimulation (tDCS) Over the Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex in Healthy and 
Neuropsychiatric Samples: Influence of Stimulation Parameters. Brain stimulation. 2016;9(4):501 -517. 
17. Manenti R, Cotelli M, Robertson IH, Miniussi C. Transcrania l brain stimulation studies of epi[INVESTIGATOR_729159], elderly adults and individuals with memory dysfunction: a review. Brain stimulation. 2012;5(2):[ADDRESS_995795] current stimulation (tDCS) leads to 
greater increases in cortical excitability than second daily transcranial direct current stimulation. Brain 
stimulation. 2012;5(3):[ADDRESS_995796] current stimulation treatm ent protocols: should 
stimulus intensity be constant or incremental over multiple sessions? The international journal of 
neuropsychopharmacology. 2013;16(1):[ADDRESS_995797] current stimulation applied to the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. The Journal of 
neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2013;33(28):[ADDRESS_995798]. Biological psychiatry. 2018;84(1):[ADDRESS_995799] current stimulation in severe, drug -resistant 
major depression. Journal of affective disorders. 2009;118(1 -3):[ADDRESS_995800] current 
stimulation (tDCS): a review. Experimental neurology. 2009;219(1 ):14-19. 
Page [ADDRESS_995801] current stimulation of prefrontal cortex 
enhances working memory. Experimental brain research. 2005;166(1):23 -30. 25. Gladwin TE, den Uyl TE, 
Fregni FF, Wiers RW. Enhancement of  selective attention by [CONTACT_32101]: interaction with interference in a Sternberg 
task. Neuroscience letters. 2012;512(1):33 -37. 
26. Leite J, Carvalho S, Fregni F, Goncalves OF. Task -specific effects of tDCS -induced cortical excitability 
changes on cognitive and motor sequence set shifting performance. PloS one. 2011;6(9):e24140.  
27. Filmer HL, Mattingley JB, Dux PE. Improved multitasking following prefrontal tDCS. Cortex; a journal devoted 
to the study of the nervous system and behavior. 2013;49(10):2845 -2852.  
28. Metuki N, Sela T, Lavidor M. Enhancing cognitive control components of insight problems solving by [CONTACT_729164]. Brain stimulation. 2012;5(2):[ADDRESS_995802] current stimulation facilitates decision making in a 
probabilistic guessing task. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 
2010;30(12):4241 -4245.  
30. Rochat S, Martin E, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_159901] -Ziegler C, Najafi B, Aminian K, Bula CJ. Falls  self-efficacy and gait performance 
after gait and balance training in older people. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. 2008;56(6):1154 -1156.  
31. Manor B, Zhou J, Harrison R, et al. tDCS may improve cognitive -motor function in functionally -limited  older 
adults. Neurorehabilitation and neural repair. 2018, In press.  
32. Manor B, Zhou J, Jor'dan A, Zhang J, Fang J, Pascual -Leone A. Reduction of Dual -task Costs by 
[CONTACT_183878]. Journal of cognitive ne uroscience. 
2016;28(2):[ADDRESS_995803] current stimulation (tDCS) on 
multiscale complexity of dual -task postural control in older adults. Experimental brain research. 
2015;233(8): [ADDRESS_995804] of performing a 
cognitive task on gait and postural control. The European journal of neuroscience. 2014;39(8):1343 -1348.  
35. Goldstein MG, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_113333], Marcu s BH, et al. Physician -based physical activity counseling for middle -aged and 
older adults: a randomized trial. Annals of behavioral medicine : a publication of the Society of Behavioral 
Medicine. 1999;21(1):[ADDRESS_995805] -current stimulation treatment in responsive stroke patient. Brain stimulation. 2011;4(3):169 -
174. 
37. Ruffini G, Fox MD, Ripolles O, Miranda PC, Pascual -Leone A. Optimizatio n of multifocal transcranial current 
stimulation for weighted cortical pattern targeting from realistic modeling of electric fields. NeuroImage. 
2014;89:216 -225. 
38. Montero -Odasso MM, Sarquis -Adamson Y, Speechley M, et al. Association of Dual -Task Gait Wi th Incident 
Dementia in Mild Cognitive Impairment: Results From the Gait and Brain Study. JAMA neurology. 2017.  
Page [ADDRESS_995806] elderly adults. 
Journal of the American Geriatr ics Society. 2011;59(1):163 -164. 
40. Herman T, Mirelman A, Giladi N, Schweiger A, Hausdorff JM. Executive control deficits as a prodrome to falls 
in healthy older adults: a prospective study linking thinking, walking, and falling. The journals of gerontolo gy 
Series A, Biological sciences and medical sciences. 2010;65(10):1086 -1092.  
41. Mirelman A, Herman T, Brozgol M, et al. Executive function and falls in older adults: new findings from a five -
year prospective study link fall risk to cognition. PloS one. 2 012;7(6):e40297.  
42. Springer S, Giladi N, Peretz C, Yogev G, Simon ES, Hausdorff JM. Dual -tasking effects on gait variability: the 
role of aging, falls, and executive function. Movement disorders : official journal of the Movement Disorder 
Society. 2006; 21(7):950 -957. 
43. Amboni M, Barone P, Hausdorff JM. Cognitive contributions to gait and falls: evidence and implications. 
Movement disorders : official journal of the Movement Disorder Society. 2013;28(11):1520 -1533.  
44. Ansai JH, Andrade LP, Rossi PG, T akahashi ACM, Vale FAC, Rebelatto JR. Gait, dual task and history of 
falls in elderly with preserved cognition, mild cognitive impairment, and mild Alzheimer's disease. Brazilian 
journal of physical therapy. 2017;21(2):[ADDRESS_995807] -Cook A, Saczynski JS, et al. Association of executive function and performance of 
dual-task physical tests among older adults: analyses from the InChianti study. Age and ageing. 2006;35(6):619 -
624. 
46. Montero -Odasso M, Verghese J, Beauchet O, Hausdorff JM. Gai t and cognition: a complementary approach 
to understanding brain function and the risk of falling. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. 
2012;60(11):2127 -2136.  
47. Yogev -Seligmann G, Hausdorff JM, Giladi N. The role of executive function and attentio n in gait. Movement 
disorders : official journal of the Movement Disorder Society. 2008;23(3):329 -342; quiz 472.  
48. Nitsche MA, Paulus W. Excitability changes induced in the human motor cortex by [CONTACT_517342]. The Journal o f physiology. 2000;527 Pt 3:633 -639.  
  
Page 8 of 25                                                   Version 26March2021  Participant Selection  
Number of Subjects: 32 participants in total (16 participants per group, two groups: counseling+ real stimulation, 
counseling + sham stimulation)  
 
Inclusion criteria  
 Men and women aged 65 – 85 years  
 Live in subsidized housing in [LOCATION_011] area communities  
 Meet at least one the following : 1) s elf-report of exercising, on average, less than [ADDRESS_995808] 
moderate -intensity exercise per week, as determined by [CONTACT_648] -screen completion of the I nternational 
Physical Activity Questionnaire -Short Form (IPAQ short) , or 2) self -report ‘room to improve’ and the 
motivation to increase their current physical activity levels . 
 
Exclusion criteria  
 An inability to ambulate without the assistance of another person (canes or walkers allowed)  
 Self-report of falls for more than twice over the past six months.  
 Self-report of physician -diagnosed dementia, more than moderate cognitive impairment defined as a 
Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) score < 18, or an in ability to understand the study protocol as 
determined by [CONTACT_464]  
 A clinical history of stroke, Parkinson’s disease or parkinsonian syndromes, multiple sclerosis, normal 
pressure hydrocephalus or other movement disorder affecting gait  
 Any report of sev ere lower -extremity arthritis or physician -diagnosis of peripheral  
 neuropathy  
 Use of antipsychot ics, anti -seizure, benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], or other neuroactive medications Severe 
depression defined by a Geriatric Depression Scale score greater than 11  
 Any report or physician -diagnosis of schizophrenia, bipolar disorder or other psychiatric illness  
 Any unstable medical condition  
 Contraindications for tDCS, including reported seizure within the past two years, use of neuro -active 
drugs, self -reported presence of specific implanted medical devices (e.g., deep brain stimulator, 
medication infusion pump, cochlear implant, pacemaker, etc.), or the presence of any active 
dermatological condition, such as eczema, on the scalp  
 
Participant recruitment  
We will leverage ou r established relationships within the [LOCATION_011] area subsidized housing providers to recruit 
older individuals living in low income senior housing. We will meet with housing site administrators, and post 
flyers within these communities. We will also attend c ommunity meetings to raise awareness and meet with 
resident coun cil members to discuss the study. We will hold informational gatherings to allow housing site 
Page [ADDRESS_995809] flyers (attached) within  
local senior living communities and/or advertise in local media outlets targeting senior citizens  (e.g., 50+ 
Advocate) . 
 
Those displaying interest in participation will complete an initial phone screening which will provide an overview 
of the study and a series of questions related to initial inclusion and exclusion criteria (attached). Participants 
who are potentially eligible based upon the phone screen will be scheduled for the first study visit, which will 
begin with a formal consent p rocess and further in -person screening procedures.  
 
Consent Process  
Individuals will contact [CONTACT_729165]. A research assistant 
will give an overview of the study to the individual. At this point, the ind ividual will be asked if they are interested 
in participating. They will then be asked if they have time to complete a 10 -minute over -the-phone screening 
questionnaire based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria. If so, the research assistant will contin ue the 
screening (see attached phone screening form). If the potential subject does not have time, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_729160] a more convenient time to call the potential subject back. If the participant meets all 
criteria of the stud y, the formal in -person study visit will be scheduled. For these individuals, we will send a copy 
of the informed consent in the mail or via email (based on the participant's preference). This will allow the 
participant time to review the consent form prio r to their study visit.  
 
On the day of the scheduled visit, the Research Assistant will review the informed consent with the participant 
and answer any remaining questions. If the participant would like to continue, the participant and the research 
assista nt will sign the consent form. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or the Research Assistant will provide a copy of the signed 
consent form for the participant to keep for their records.  
 
  
Page 10 of 25                                                   Version 26March2021  Methods and Procedures  
 
Screening Procedures  
Phone screen : 
Interested individuals will fir st complete a phone screen, which will include the International  Physical Activity 
Questionnaires (IPAQ) -short to determine their physical activity level.  
 
Visit 1: In -person screen and introduction (1 hour); Participant's Housing Site  
Those potentially eligible will complete an in -person visit (Visit 1). This visit will take place in the participant's 
housing site, in a comfortable and private location that will be arranged in advance by [CONTACT_5051]. Written 
informed consent will be obtained at this time. A medical history questionnaire will be completed, medications, 
blood pressure, height, body mass and years of education will be recorded, and the MoCA will be administered. 
Eligible individuals will then be enrolled in the study.  
 
Physical Activity Monitoring: At the end of Visit 1, participants will be provided with a FitBit™ activity tracker and 
familiarized with its functionality. The FitBit Alta wireless and waterproof activity tracker wristband 
(https://www.fitbit.com) will b e used to record physical activity, including step counts and minutes of moderate -to-
vigorous activity. Participants will be asked to wear theFitBit™ every day , remo ving it only at night to recharge 
the battery. Participants will wear the FitBit™ for 2 wee ks. Baseline physical activity will then be recorded over 
this two -week period as participants go about their normal daily lives.  
 
Community Mobility Monitoring: At the end of Visit 1, participants will be also provided a global positioning 
system (GPS) de vice (Columbus V990) to wear for the entire study period. They will be asked to take it with 
them whenever they leave their home and keep it on their person. Devices will be returned at the end of the 
study. Data will be downloaded to a secure computed and  saved with only the study ID number. No personally 
identifying information will be included in the GPS data files.  
 
Baseline Procedure  
Visit 2: Baseline Assessment Visit (~ 1.5 hour) ; Participant's Housing site  
 
Baseline Assessments: (90 minutes) The  assessments described below have been designed to capture 
information on motivation, barriers, and self -efficacy related to physical activity, mood, cognition, and mobility.  
 
A 20-minute battery of validated questionnaires will be used to assess motivatio n for physical activity (Exercise 
Self-Regulation Questionnaire, SRQ -E), self -efficacy for exercise (SCI Exercise Self -Efficacy Scale, SES -E), 
self-efficacy for walking (Self Efficacy for Walking Scale, SES -W), barriers to exercise (Barriers Self -Efficacy 
Page 11 of 25                                                   Version 26March2021  Scale, BARSE), mood (15 -item Geriatric Depression Scale) , cognitive reserve (Cognitive Reserve 
Questionnaire)  
 
A 40-minute battery of tests will assess global cognitive function (MoCA), executive function (Trail Making Test A 
and B), working memory (WAIS -IV Digit Span Forwards and Backwards), sustained attention and motor speed 
(gradCPT and WAIS -IV Coding test), verbal learning (Category and Phonemic Fluency tests), and epi[INVESTIGATOR_6368] (Hopkins Verbal Learning Test .Revised, HVLT -R). These tests were selecte d because they are 
sensitive to cognitive status and/or self -regulation in older adults, are suitable for repeat testing as they have 
alternate forms or are resistant to practice effects, have excellent psychometric properties and normative data, 
and have minimal ceiling and floor effects.  
 
A 30-minute battery of functional tests will be completed. Dual task standing and walking will be assessed 
following recommendations that produce excellent test -retest reliability in older adults. Participants will compl ete 
two, 60 -second trials in each of six conditions: 1) Single task —seated cognitive task (see below for description); 
2) Single task —standing; 3) Single task —walking; 4) Single task -fast walking; 5) Dual task —standing with 
cognitive task; 6) Dual task —walking with cognitive task. The cognitive task will be verbalized serial subtractions 
of 3’s from a random three -digit number between [ADDRESS_995810] 
chosen this task because it activates a distributed cortical ne twork including the left dlPFC,67 induces 
meaningful dual task costs to both gait and posture in older adults, and is reliable and minimally influenced by 
[CONTACT_729166]. All trials will be completed using the portable Mobility Lab™ motion captur e system 
(APDM, Seattle WA).  Walking trials will be completed in a long hallway. Participants will be reminded to walk at 
their preferred, comfortable pace. During the fast walking trials, participants will be reminded to walk as fast as 
they can walk safe ly. Assistive devices will be allowed for trials of walking (but not standing). Finally, functional 
mobility will be assessed by [CONTACT_729167] -and-Go (TUG) test, which correlates with mobility disability73 and has 
excellent inter - and intra -rater reliabilit y. Participants will be randomized to tDCS intervention arm (to begin at 
Visit 3) at this time and the behavioral intervention will be initiated at the end of Visit 2.   
 
Visit 3: First Personalized Counseling Session (~0.5 hour ); Participant’s housing Site  
Behavioral intervention to promote physical activity (~30 min): We will utilize a modified version of a 
personalized, goal -based counseling approach to promote physical activity in older adults. Briefly, a physical 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] ( [CONTACT_729177]) or a nurse (Peggy Gagnon) will complete a face -to-face counseling session with each 
participant, tailored to their state of readiness to increase physical activity levels. [CONTACT_435018] or Peggy will provide the 
participant with a goal to increase the ir average daily step count by 20% from baseline, review their stated 
barriers to exercise and provide them with a list of strategies they may use to augment their step counts 
throughout  each day. The participant will also be encouraged to spend time each day to plan their walking 
activities for the next day. [CONTACT_435018] and the research staff will  conduct both in -person  and telephone counseling 
Page 12 of 25                                                   Version 26March2021  sessions, as noted above in Figure 1, over the eight week follow -up period to discuss challenges and provide 
additiona l tips for increasing physical activity.  Regular calls will be scheduled once a week for alternate weeks 
(i.e., weeks 3,5,7 and  between assessment visits and in -person counseling visits (i.e., weeks 2,4,6,8, and 10). 
The goals of these regular telephone ca lls will be to check in, review and discuss activity performance, and 
answer any questions the participant may have regarding their efforts to increase physical activity  
 
Physical Activity Monitoring:  All participants will continue to use the FitBit™ to tr ack their activity during the entire 
eight week follow -up period. At the end of visit 2, they will be instructed how to synchronize the FitBit™ to their 
computer or smartphone, and will be instructed to do this each day. If participants do not have access to a 
computer or smartphone, the research team will synchronize the participant's FitBit™ during scheduled in -person 
sessions. Research staff will confirm compliance and data uploads by  [CONTACT_094]-registering each FitBit and monitoring 
its activity via the compan y’s website.  
 
Participants will receive regular behavioral intervention calls from the study staff throughout their study 
enrollment, until the final study visit, Visit 15. Participants will be given contact [CONTACT_729168], so that they may reach the study team if needed at anytime between scheduled study activities.  
 
Experimental Procedures  
Visits 4-13: tDCS Brain Stimulation visits (30 minutes); Participant's Housing site  
Participants will complete 10 twenty minute brain stimulatio n sessions (Monday -Friday) over the next two weeks.  
 
tDCS intervention: Similar to our preliminary study, this intervention will consist of 10,  20-minute sessions 
delivered on Monday -Friday over two weeks. Stimulation will be delivered using the Startim -8™ device and 
software (Neuroelectrics Corp, Cambridge MA), which enables custom amounts of current to be delivered 
through an array of up to eight Pi™ gel Ag/AgCl electrodes placed on the scalp according to [ADDRESS_995811] session and every other session thereafter, participants will complete a side effects questionnaire.51 A 
blinding efficacy questionnaire will also be completed after the  final session, on which participants state whether 
they believe they received tDCS or sham and their confidence in this belief.  
 
Real tDCS: Similar to our preliminary studies, tDCS will be delivered via six gel electrodes with placement and 
current parame ters optimized based on a standard brain to maximize the average normal component of the 
generated electric field over the left dlPFC . Current delivered by [CONTACT_729169] 2.0 mA; the 
total amount of current from all electrodes will not exceed 4 mA. Each 20 -minute session will begin and end with 
a 60-second ramp up/down of current amplitude to maximize comfort.  
 
Page 13 of 25                                                   Version 26March2021  Sham stimulation: An ‘active’ sham will be used in which very low -level currents are transferred between the 
same electrodes use d in the active condition throughout the  20-minute session. However, currents will be 
designed to mimic the cutaneous sensations induced by [CONTACT_729170]. This 
approach effectively blinds participants and operators to  stimulation condition and does not affect functional 
outcomes.52  
 
Visit 1 4: Follow -Up Assessment (1.5 hours) ; Participant's Housing site  
Follow -up assessment , as described above in Visit 2, will be completed immediately after and 2 weeks after the 
tDCS  intervention.  
 
Visit 15, 16 and 17 : Follow -up Personalized  Counseling visit s (30 minutes); Participant's Housing site  
Three bi -weekly in-person counseling sessions will be completed after the tDCS intervention.  
 
Visit 1 8: Final Assessment visit (1.5 hours ); Participant's Housing site  
Final follow -up assessments, as described above in Visit 2, will be completed after [ADDRESS_995812] conservatively plann ed for approximately 20% attrition and have 
thus based our statistical plan on complete datasets of n = 26.  
 
Assessment of feasibility endpoints will be based on sample computations, including the screened to enrolled 
ratio, retention rate, assurance of bl inding, and safety assessment (see above). Adverse events (AE) will be 
organized according to the MedDRA classification system and reported in each DSMB communication both by 
[CONTACT_7204] (SOC) and overall. Both the number of individuals with one or more of AEs within 
each SOC, as well as the total count of all AEs within each SOC, will be reported. These will be accompanied by 
[CONTACT_729171] 95% confidence interval estimates of the proportion of individuals who would  experience AEs and the 
total co unt of AEs per person -time within each SOC, respectively. The latter computation will acknowledge 
clustering at the level of the participant by [CONTACT_729172] (GEE) in estimation with 
robust variance estimates used for computing con fidence intervals.  
 
We will use variance decomposition to generate estimates of within and between -individual variation in functional 
outcomes that would potentially be used in a subsequent trial (see above), along with confidence interval 
estimates for sa id variance measures, in order to assist in planning of the subsequent study. We will also 
conduct an exploratory analysis of the of mean change in these endpoints using mixed -effects linear regression 
of all time points, with a random effect included at t he participant level in acknowledgement of serial correlation 
of repeated measures. Dependent variables will be the change in outcomes related to average daily activity from 
baseline to the six -week post -tDCS follow -up period, as well as the change in labo ratory -based functional 
outcomes from baseline to each planned follow -up visit.  
 
Feasibility outcomes:  
The proposed sample size was motivated by [CONTACT_729173][INVESTIGATOR_7602], the need to develop a 
sufficiently detailed profile of the background population and convincing demonstration of the feasibility of our 
protocols, the anticipated drop -out rate, and the need to make resource and sample size estimations for the 
subsequent trial. We anticipate, based on prior work, that we will screen between 5 and 15 individuals for each 
participant enrolled. Enrollment of 32 individuals will allow us to determine to within 1 individual the expected 
number of participants screened to enrolled in the subsequent trial using an 80% confidence interval; similarly,  
we will be able by [CONTACT_729174] a given participant will complete intervention to 
within 0.10.  
 
Functional outcomes:  
Assuming type -I error probability = 0.05 and cumulative attrition and missingness approximately = 20% (i.e . 
Page 16 of 25                                                   Version 26March2021  evaluable data on 26 participants with complete data, the design will obtain 90% power to detect standardized 
differences [ratio of mean within –participant difference on endpoints to the standard deviation (SD) of same] of at 
least 0.41, and 80% power to  detect effects of 0.[ADDRESS_995813] 90% power to detect changes as small as 62 steps per week, and 80% 
power to detect [ADDRESS_995814] -protec ted secure server at HebrewSeniorLife.  
 
The Institute for Aging Research primarily employs the REDCap system to facilitate data management 
operations. REDCap is a full -featured clinical trials data management system (DMS) accessible to data entry and 
data analysis workstations using secure Web technologies. The REDCap product is developed and maintained 
by [CONTACT_729175], including Hebrew SeniorLife. HSL 
hosts and maintains a dedicated instance of REDCap for use across our research enterprise. Each research 
study is provided separate project workspace in which all of the study data are stored in a MySQL relational 
database on the private corporate network behind several firewalls and located physically wit hin the HSL data 
center.  
 
Data will be kept on a secure, password protected Hebrew SeniorLife server in a REDCap Database. Only study 
members at the Hebrew SeniorLife site will have access to the REDCap database. All hard copy forms will be 
kept in a locke d filing cabinet that only study members will be able to access.  
Data security measures  
 
Only those listed on the approved IRB protocol will have access to subject data. Subject  data will be coded and 
locked in a file cabinet in a locked office. Identifyin g information will not be used during discussion, presentation 
or research publication.  All data are password protected and only the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_349460] 
a direct role in data collection or data management will have access to the data files  and codes . 
 
We will follow the current Hebrew SeniorLife Record Management, Retention, Disposition and Destruction 
Guidelines for this study. Identifiers will be kept for [ADDRESS_995815] and minimizing loss of participant 
privacy:  
 Phone screening will be conducted in a private office space.  
 Study visits will be conducted in private rooms located within the participant's housing site.  
Page 18 of 25                                                   Version 26March2021   Each participant will be given a unique study identification number and data will not include any of the 
participant's PHI.  
 All participant - identifying i nformation will be stored and managed on a secured database server. The 
information will be password protected.  
 Participant confidentiality will be maintained in accordance with HIPAA regulations.  
 Only the PI [INVESTIGATOR_729161]  
 PHI will not be used during discussion, presentation or publication of any research data.  
 Files containing PHI data collected for recruitment and screening purposes will be kept in locked, secured 
file cabinets  accessible only to designated study personnel (research assistants and investigators.  
  
Page 19 of 25                                                   Version 26March2021    
 
Risks / Benefit Assessment  
 
Risks  
Possible risks associated with physical activity:   
Participants will be provided with a personalized goal to increase their average daily physical activity (i.e., step 
counts) during the study period. Participants are thus expected to increase their physical activity during this 
period. This activity is expected to be of low to moderate intensity. Potential risks are mini mal and most likely 
transient, including strains, sprains, muscle soreness, light -headedness and physical fatigue. In rare instances, 
more serious side effects such as an injurious fall may occur.  
 
Tests of walking and physical function : 
The proposed walki ng tests have  been adapted from the large -scale, population -based MOBILIZE [LOCATION_011] study 
(PI: L. Lipsitz) and multiple completed and ongoing clinical studies within the Clinical Research Laboratory at 
IFAR. They have been designed to be safe for individuals  of varying risk and  conditioning levels including older 
adult fallers. The physical activity associated with these tests is of low to moderate intensity. Potential risks 
include strains, sprains, muscle soreness, and light -headedness. In rare instances, m ore serious side effects 
such as an injurious fall may occur. For all functional tests, a trained "spotter" will stand behind or close to the 
subject to provide stabilizing assistance if necessary. Subjects will be instructed to stop performing or skip any  
test that makes them feel uncomfortable. Adequate rest will be given in between each test, and any reusable 
equipment will be cleaned with disinfectant after each use.  
 
Transcranial direct current stimulation  (tDCS):  
 
tDCS has been widely  used during the last decade demonstrating non -significant risk to participants. Expected 
side effects include:  
1) Sensations reported by [CONTACT_253284]: (These sensations can sometimes continue 
throughout and for a brief period following completion of the tDCS  but usually resolve shortly after the 
initiation of tDCS)  
Mild tingling (20 -70%)  
Light itching (30 -40%)  
Slight burning (10 -22%) Discomfort or mild pain (10 -18%)  
 
2) Other effects that can occur both during and after tDCS include:  
Mild fatigue (15%)  
Page 20 of 25                                                   Version 26March2021  Skin redness (20%)  
Headache (10 -15%)  
Difficulties in concentration (11%)  
 
3) Additionally , the following rare side effects have been described:  
Nausea (<1%)  
Nervousness (<1%)  
Although it has never been reported in tDCS, seizures are a theoretical risk. Individual s with a history of 
seizures and/or a diagnosis of epi[INVESTIGATOR_253267].  
 
Tests of mental function : 
Risks associated with answering the cognitive  test questions are minimal, but participants may experience 
mental fatigue and/or anxiety during this form of testing.  
 
Minimizing Inconvenience  
We will minimize the risk to subjects in this study by [CONTACT_586867]. The proposed protocol requires multiple visits and therefore cons iderable participant burden with respect 
to time and effort. Our study team has a  strong track record of successful clinical research requiring similar 
participation, and retention has been high in these projects. The Clinical Research Laboratory at IFAR i s located 
next to a cafeteria and equipped with comfortable seating, a TV, movies, books and magazines to keep 
individuals occupi[INVESTIGATOR_349457]. Several additional strategies will be employed to minimize participant 
burden and maximize adherence  to the  protocol. We will: Develop a personal relationship between participants 
and members of the staff by [CONTACT_349510]. Schedule appointments at 
convenient times with familiar staff. Explain to participants al l aspects of their participation and follow up. We will 
demonstrate and practice study procedures before beginning data collection. Provide reminders of all 
appointments and follow -up phone calls. Include  personal notes in the participant’s data file to re member events 
in the life of the participant; these  can be commented on at the next visit (e.g., birthday, birth of a grandchild). 
Provide snacks during all visits. Provide transportation for all visits, if required. Provide valet or dedicated, on -site 
parking spaces. Compensate participants for visits.  
  
COVID -19: 
During  the COVID [ADDRESS_995816] 
when possible by [CONTACT_729176] s on a remote basis.    
 
Potential Benefits  
Participants may not receive any significant health benefit from participation, although some may benefit from 
Page 21 of 25                                                   Version 26March2021  knowledge of their health status, as well as potential therapeutic effects of completing a behavioral intervention 
to increase physical activity. Participants will be provided  a $[ADDRESS_995817] the option to keep the Fitbit device that they use in the 
study.  
 
We belie ve that the potential benefits of establishing tDCS as a noninvasive intervention to improve goal -directed 
physical activity in physical inactive older adults significantly outweigh the above -outlined potential risks to 
participants, which are expected to be minor, transient and relatively rare.  
 
The observations from these studies are expected to provide important information regarding the effects of 
noninvasive electrical brain stimulation on goal -directed physical activity in older adults. Results are also 
expected to provide insights into the f easibility and effectiveness of such intervention within this population, thus 
increasing the potential for deployment of tDCS interventions to larger numbers of older adults.  
 
Costs incurred during the study for medical care/injury  
Any subject who suffers  an adverse event during the conduct of study protocols will receive the medical care 
necessary to treat the adverse event. If we cannot provide the care directly, we will arrange for the medical care 
to be provided to the subject. If the event meets the d efinition of a serious adverse event, the participant will be 
removed from the study, and will be referred to their primary care physician for ongoing care. The treating 
provider will bill the insurance company or other third parties, if appropriate, for t he care a participant receives for 
any injury. We will try to have these costs paid for, but the participant may be responsible for some of them. For 
example, they may be responsible for payment of any deductibles and  co-payments required by [CONTACT_349511]. 
There are no plans to provide any compensation for an injury beyond what is described above, should one occur.  
If the event does not meet the criteria of a serious adverse event, and the participant is willing and able to 
continue, he/she will be able to co ntinue and complete the study  
 
Payment to Participants  
Describe the type remuneration and the timing of remuneration to study procedures  e.g. participants will be 
provided with $50 per study visit, to be distributed as visits are completed, etc.  
Participan ts receive up to $160 for taking part in this study. Participants will also receive a FitBit and will be able 
to keep it when the study has ended if they wish. Specifically, participants will receive the following amounts for 
each visit completed:  
 
Visit 1  - In-person screening visit - $10 Visit 2 – Baseline visit - $10 
Visits 3 - 12: Brain stimulation – 10 visits over two weeks; $10 for each visit= total of $100  
Visits 13 -14: Follow -up assessment visits - $10 for each visit = $30 total for completion of all  3 follow -up visits.  
Page 22 of 25                                                   Version 26March2021  Visit 15: Final in -person counseling session - $10 Visit 16: Final follow -up study assessment - $[ADDRESS_995818] the participant, or that there are unmanageable factors which will interfere significantly with the study 
procedures and/or interpretation of results . The study participant will be informed of this and withdrawn from the 
study. The participant can, at any time, request the study be terminated and to be withdrawn. Any previously 
collected data prior to termination/withdrawal will be maintained in the st udy data set.  
 
Adverse Event Reporting  
An adverse event is any untoward medical occurrence in a participant, whether or not it is causally related to the 
study. An adverse event can therefore be any unfavorable  and unintended sign (including an abnormal 
laboratory finding, for example), symptom or disease temporally associated with the study. Adverse events will 
be recorded on the appropriate case report forms and source documents. The investigator and/or trained staff 
member will evaluate all adverse eve nts as to their severity and relation to the test article. The severity of 
adverse events will be graded as follows:  
 
Serious adverse events will be reported to the IRB, as well as the identified Safety Monitor, within 24hrs by [CONTACT_40742]. A related writ ten report will be submitted within [ADDRESS_995819] 
any adverse symptoms and/or study protocol de viations.  
 
All other adverse events/study incidents will be reported to the HSL IRB and identified Safety Monitor, according 
to policy, within 5 business days of learning of the event. A  related submission of the incident will be completed 
via the eIRB  system within one week of learning of the event.  
 
Safety Monitoring  
Safety monitoring procedures will be implemented and reviewed by a Safety Monitor (to be determined upon 
Notice of Grant Award), in accordance with NIA safety policies for human intervent ion studies.  
 
The criteria for discontinuing a participant's participation include the participant's request, as well as any 
unexpected life -threatening or potentially disabling event, including syncope, an injurious non -accidental fall, 
hemodynamic collap se, stroke, transient ischemic attack, dysrhythmia, renal insufficiency, angina, myocardial 
infarction, anaphylaxis, acute hemorrhage, or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_253269]. These adverse events will be 
recorded in accordance with IRB requirements and inclu ded in the study database. If a determination about 
Page [ADDRESS_995820] to participant safety, recruitment, randomization, intervention, data 
management, quality control, and confidentiality. The Safety Mo nitor will recommend any necessary changes of 
the protocol to the PIs and will review and approve revisions. The Safety Monitor will identify relevant data 
parameters and the format of the information to be regularly reported.  
 
The Safety Monitor will then  meet biannually with the investigators to review standardized reports. He/She will 
review the progress of recruitment and retention of participants, compliance with the protocol, and operating 
procedures. If they raise concerns about safety issues, they m ay request additional data and propose specific 
analyses. They will make recommendations to the PIs regarding recruitment, retention, compliance, and safety 
issues, and will  
 
The investigator and/or trained staff member will evaluate all adverse events as  to their severity and relation to 
the test article. The severity of adverse events will be graded as follows:  
- Mild: Awareness of a sign or symptom but easily tolerated.  
- Moderate: Discomfort sufficient to cause interference with usual activity or to affect  clinical status.  
- Severe: Incapacitating with inability to do usual activity or to significantly affect clinical status.  
- Life Threatening: The participant was at immediate risk of death from the adverse event as it occurred.  
 
The Investigator will also ass ess the relationship of any adverse event to study, based upon available 
information, using the following guidelines:  
- 0 = Unlikely: No temporal association, or the cause of the event has been identified.  
- 1 = Possible: Temporal association, but other etiol ogies are likely to be the cause; however, involvement 
of the study procedures cannot be excluded.  
- 2 = Probable: Temporal association, other etiologies are possible, but not likely.  
 
A serious adverse event is any experience that results in any of the foll owing outcomes: death, is life threatening, 
inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_318], a  persistent or significant disability/incapacity. 
Important medical events that may not result in death, be life -threatening, or require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_729162] a serious adverse event when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the 
patient or participant and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in 
this definition.  
 
Page 24 of 25                                                   Version 26March2021   
Unanticipated and adverse event  reporting  
Unanticipated problems and adverse events will be reported according to the IRB written guidelines for 
interventional studies. Serious adverse events will be reported to the Hebrew SeniorLife’s  IRB, as well as the 
identified Safety Monitor, within 24hrs by [CONTACT_40743]. A related written report will be submitted within [ADDRESS_995821] any adverse symptoms and/or study protocol deviations.  
 
All other adverse events/study incidents will be reported to the IRB and Safety Monitor, according to policy, 
within 5 business days of learning of the  event. A  related submission of the incident will be completed via the 
eIRB system within one week of learning of the event.  Safety monitoring procedures will be implemented and 
reviewed by a Safety Monitor (to be determined upon Notice of Grant Award), in  accordance with NIA safety 
policies for human intervention studies.  
 
Prior to the start of the study the Safety Monitor will review the IRB approved protocol, procedure manual and 
informed consent documents, with regard to participant safety, recruitment,  randomization, intervention, data 
management, quality control, and confidentiality. The Safety Monitor will recommend any necessary changes of 
the protocol to the PIs and will review and approve revisions. The Safety Monitor will identify relevant data 
parameters and the format of the information to be regularly reported.  
 
The Safety Monitor will then meet biannually with the investigators to review standardized reports. He/She will 
review the progress of recruitment and retention of participants, complian ce with the protocol, and operating 
procedures. If they raise concerns about safety issues, they may request additional data and propose specific 
analyses. They will make recommendations to the PIs regarding recruitment, retention, compliance, and safety 
issues, and will send a written report to the Program Administrator following each meeting. The Safety Monitor 
will be sent reports of research activity and summaries of safety monitoring information before each meeting.  
 
Participant discontinuation  
The cri teria for discontinuing a participant's participation include the participant's request, as well as any 
unexpected life -threatening or potentially disabling event, including syncope, an injurious non -accidental fall, 
hemodynamic collapse, stroke, transient  ischemic attack, dysrhythmia, renal insufficiency, angina, myocardial 
infarction, anaphylaxis, acute hemorrhage, or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_253269]. These adverse events will be 
recorded in accordance with IRB requirements and included in the study data base. If a determination about 
continued participation cannot be made according to these criteria, the adverse event report will be faxed to the 
un-blinded Safety Monitor, who will make the final decision.  
 
Page 25 of 25                                                   Version 26March2021  Publication Plan  
We will register this clinical t rial at ClinicalTrials.gov. We also will ensure that informed consent documents for 
this clinical trial will include a specific statement relating to posting of clinical trial information at ClinicalTrials.gov . 
Hebrew SeniorLife’s Institute for Aging Resea rch has an internal policy in place to ensure that clinical trials 
registration and results reporting occur in compliance with policy requirements. Results will be disseminated 
through  publications in peer -reviewed medical journals, presentations at nation al meetings, and announcements 
on the HSL website and other public media.  
 