Page 1 of 16 
 Protocol Title: Improving Medication Adherence in Hypertensive Individuals with Bipolar Disorder 
(iTAB -CV) - Phase 2 
 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_274097], PhD  
Co-investigators:   Martha Sajatovic, MD , Curtis Tatsuoka , PhD, Mahboob Rahman, MD, David Moore, PhD, 
Carol Blixen PhD, Colin Depp, PhD  
 
Draft date:  August 8, 2017  
 
Background and Rationale:  
 
Individuals with bipolar disorder (BD) are prone to chronic medical conditions leading to mortality rates 
two to three times that of the general population and  cardiovascular (CV) disease accounts for more than two -
thirds of these deaths  (Osby, Brandt, Correia, Ekbom, & Sparen, 2001; Ramsey et al., 2013) . While there are 
multiple factors contributing to the profound morbidity and premature mortality in people with BD, there is an 
immediate and correctable course of action to reduce CV risk in this population. Poor adherence to 
antihypertensives, estimated to occur in 50 -80% of pati ents (Costa, 1996; Cramer, Benedict, Muszbek, 
Keskinaslan, & Khan, 2008) , significantly increases the risk of acute CV events but  is a modifiable factor that 
when treated, can make a profound positive impact on health outcomes . Given the dramatic decrease in CV 
events since the introduction of antihypertensives  in the general populace (Corrao et al., 2011) , it is reasonable 
to expect that similar gains could be achieved by [CONTACT_274116] t o antihypertensives  in persons with 
BD. 
Current reviews indicate insufficient evidence for effective interventions that improve adherence to 
antihypertensives (Nieuwlaat et al., 2014; Viswanathan et al., 2012) . Similarly, while there is ample literature 
documenting the enormity and negative effects of psychotropic medication non -adherence in BD (Hong, Reed, 
Novick, Haro, & Aguado, 2011) , there are a lack of effective interventions to enhance psychotropic medication 
adherence and improve clinical outcomes (Nieuwlaat et al., 2014) . Given that addressing adherence to both 
psychotropic and non -psychotropic medications simultaneously is likely to be both more effective and 
sustainable, we propose developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a practical intervention which addresses both types of medication 
adherence.  
The Attitude -Social Influence -Efficacy (ASE) model (De Vries & Mudde, 1998)  frames adherence to 
medication as deriving from attitudes (A), social influence (S), and self -efficacy (E). However, adhe rence also 
requires intact prospective memory, the ability to remember to do a behavior in the future, which tends to be 
impaired in those with BD (Bogner, de Vries, O'Donnell, & Morales, 2013; Lee et al., 2010; Zogg, Woods, 
Sauceda, Wiebe, & Simoni, 2012) . Given this deficit, even when an individual has the intention to take 
medication, they lack the planning or organizational abilities to do so consistently (Zogg et al., 2012) . Thus, in 
order to change and sustain medication adherence in this and similar populations, one must address both ASE 
and prospective memory. This m-Health intervention primes habit formation by [CONTACT_274117], 
reminders, and immediate positive reinforcement, to create a strong and automatic habit of taking medication 
which will be sustainable despi[INVESTIGATOR_274098].  
 

Page [ADDRESS_334980] the feasibility, acceptability and effectiveness of a customized m -Health texting 
intervention built on the Individualized Texting for Adherence Building (iTAB) platform on antihypertensive 
adherence and systolic blood p ressure  in hypertensive persons with BD . This practical, customized 
intervention, intended to improve adherence to antihypertensives and BD medication among high risk 
individuals, will be suitable for implementation in either primary care or mental health settings and may reverse 
the unacceptably high morbidity and mortality in this population.  
 
This study has one specific aim : 
 
Specific Aim 1 : To test the acceptability, feasibility and effectiveness of iTAB -CV to improve adherence to 
antihypertensives based on self -reported Tablets Routine Questionnaire (TRQ) and a medication event 
monitoring system ( eCAP) . 
 
Hypothesis 1 : iTAB -CV will improve a dherence to antihypertensives in non -adherent persons with BD and 
HTN.  
Hypothesis 2: Participants will respond to at least 75% of text messages.  
Hypothesis 3: At least 75% of participants will find iTAB -CV acceptable based on exit interviews.  
 
Exploratory  Aims:   Secondary outcomes  Change in systolic BP, change in TRQ for BD medications, change 
in attitudes and self -efficacy for adherence,  health status, healthcare utilization (number of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_274099]), and psychiatric symptoms. Habit s trength, prospective memory and mood will be evaluated 
as possible variables of interest . 
 
Methods :  
Overview:  
This study will test an adherence intervention (iTAB -CV) delivered via interactive text messaging which first 
targets behavioral intent and then adds cues/reminders and reinforcement to form the habit of taking 
antihypertensives in non -adherent individuals with BD. Thirty  eight  individuals with BD and HTN being treated 
with evidence -based antihypertensive agents and mood stabilizing or antipsychotic medications who are non -
adherent with  their HTN medicine will be enrolled . This phase  uses a prospective cohort design with 
participants serving as their own control. We will test the iTAB -CV intervention quantitatively for feasibility and 
acceptability as well as for efficacy in increasing adherence to antihypertensives, decreasing systolic blood 
pressure, and increasing adhere nce to BD medication.   
 
 
 
All study participants will be followed for a 3-month period. iTAB -CV, delivered via mobile phone,  is intended to 
be a brief adjunct to standard primary care and mental health treatment .  All individuals will continue to receive 

Page 3 of 16 
 treatment as usual with their regular provider(s).  Individuals who meet eligibility criteria will have a [ADDRESS_334981] rength for both antihypertensive and BD medications will be conducted at four 
time points over a 3 -month time period (screening, baseline/week 4, week 8, and week 12).  Blood pressure 
will be measured at each of the four contacts. Individuals who drop out of the intervention, and who agree, will 
be followed up with outcomes assessments over the same [ADDRESS_334982] been 
evaluated had they remained in the study.  
 
Participant s:   
 
Inclusion criteria:  
1. Participants will have a clinical diagnosis of BD for at least 2 years as determined by a standardized 
diagnostic interview, the Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) (52)  
2. Have stage 1 or 2 HTN with a systolic pressure ≥ 130 
3. Carry a diagnosis of HTN per patient self -report ≥ [ADDRESS_334983] one regularly scheduled antihypertensive medication for ≥ [ADDRESS_334984] one antihypertensive medication defined as missing 20% or 
more of medication within either the past week or past month (53 -56) as identified by [CONTACT_274118] (TRQ)  
6. Be able to participate in psychiatric interviews  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
1. Unable or unwilling to participate in psychiatric intervie ws. This will include individuals, who may be too 
psychotic to participate in interviews/rating scales  
2. Unable or unwilling to give written informed consent to study participation  
3. Under the age of [ADDRESS_334985] of patient safety, individuals who are at high immediate risk for suicide will be excluded from 
study participation. The suicide risk assessment will be informed by [CONTACT_274119] -International  Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI). In the event that a 
potential study participant is determined to be at high risk for suicide, that individual will not be enrolled and 
the study staff will immediately implement procedures for the safety of the individua l. Once such individuals 
are deemed stable, they may be once again considered for inclusion in the research.  
5. Individuals who are monolingual, non -English speaking will be excluded. Given the relatively small sample 
size in this study, it would not be prac tical to conduct sub -group analyses. Also, the study assessment tools 
are not available in other languages and would be impractical to develop. Based upon our BD adherence 
work, which drew upon a populations similar to this trial, there were no potential s ubjects who were 
excluded from the studies due to inability to speak English.  
6. Illiterate participants will be excluded because reading is an essential skill required to complete self -report 
questionnaires administered during the study as well as to utilize  the text messaging intervention .  
7. Unwillingness to receive text messages  
 
The study will not exclude individuals based on physical health status, although some individuals may choose 
not to participate because of their own health status. Inclusion criteri a for study participation are purposely 
quite broad in order to represent a “real -world” BD population that typi[INVESTIGATOR_274100].  
 
  
Page 4 of 16 
 Vulnerable Populations:  
 
Pregnant Women:  
According to [ADDRESS_334986] no part in determining the 
viability of a neonate.  
If a women becomes pregnant while in the study, she may choose to continue or discontinue participation.  
Partners of pregnant subjects or pregnant partners  of subjects will not participate in this research.  
  
Employees of UHHS and Case:  
Employees of UHHS and Case may be included in the study provided the following:  
 they are not direct reports to the Department of Psychiatry at UHHS, or the Department of Psyc hiatry, 
Department of Neurology, or the Center for Health Care Research and Policy at Case Western Reserve 
University  
 they are not employees of the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_5768] -investigators, with direct involvement  in the 
proposed study or other studies u nder the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_5768] -investigators  
The informed consent documents contain the standard language informing any potential participant that is an 
employee that they are not being recruited specifically because of their employee status and tha t their choice 
to withdraw from the study does not in any way affect their status as an employee.  
 
Major Psychiatric Illness:  
Inclusion of participants with bipolar disorder is necessary, because the main purpose of the study is to find an 
effective psycho -educational intervention to improve psychiatric treatment adherence in those with bipolar 
disorder. Those with other major psychiatric illnesses will not be included because this study is specific to only 
those with bipolar disorder.  
Given that the incide nce of comorbid psychiatric conditions is high in patients with bipolar disorder, they will not 
be excluded for having additional psychiatric diagnoses.  
 
Relevant Excluded Populations  
Non-English Speaking Participants:  
Non-English speaking individuals will  be excluded, because study assessment tools are not available in other 
languages and would be impractical to develop.  
 
Illiterate Participants:  
Because reading is an essential skill required to complete self -report questionnaires administered and read 
text messages  during the study, illiterate individuals will be excluded from the study.  
 
Recruitment:  
Patients will be recruited by a variety of methods:  
 the Prin cipal Investigator's clinical practice  
 the Co -Investigators' clinical practices  
 Family Practi ce and Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_274101]  
 the inpatient psychiatric unit at the UH Richmond Medical Center:  
[ADDRESS_334987]  
Richmond Heights, OH [ZIP_CODE]  
 referrals from other mental health providers  
 responses from community outreach to different Community Mental Health Centers (CMHC), and 
other organizations that serve this population  
 IRB-approved study flyers  
Page [ADDRESS_334988] w ith eligible individuals.  Individuals referred with BD will be considered for 
possible inclusion  in the study. A Screening Form for each patient will be completed regardless of whether the 
patient is ultimately enrolled. The form will detail reasons for exclusion, allowing an estimate of sample 
generalizability  in relation to the wider population of people with BD .   
 
Patients recruited in response to an IRB -approved recruitment method may be prescreened under the IRB -
approved protocol, “Prescreening and Recruitment for the Mental Health Effectiveness Research Program and 
Neurological and Behavioral O utcomes Center” (MHERP/NBOC Prescreen) [IRB # 03 -10-09].  
 
Study Personnel:  
The study PI [INVESTIGATOR_274102], 
human subjects requirements, study implementation, study staff supervi sion, and data collection, analysis and 
reporting.   
 
Specific Procedures : 
In phase 2, all eligible participants will receive iTAB -CV. After providing informed consent, all participants will 
undergo screening followed by a [ADDRESS_334989] an interview in order to customize iTAB -CV for each participant at the baseline session.  
 
In stage one  of iTAB -CV, participants begin receiving 1 daily educational/motivational customized text 
messages addressing medication attitudes, social influences, and self -efficacy which will alternate between 
antihypertensives and BD medications without reminders and 1 daily mood rating. Participants will identify any 
stems that they don’t want to receive and can write in their own personalized messages . At the [ADDRESS_334990] a brief 2nd iTAB -CV interview to determine the types of 
medications taken (antihypertensives and/or bipolar medications) and at which times of day as well as to pi[INVESTIGATOR_274103]/reinforcement texts that the participant wants to receive for stage two .  
 
Stage two of iTAB -CV includes the addition of customized context cues/reminders and immediate 
reinforcement for medication taking behavior in addition to 1 daily motivational  mood rating . The number of 
texts per day will be determined based on the number o f times a day that medications are prescribed  (up to 
four a day) . Assessments that include evaluation of treatment adherence, psychiatric symptoms, health status, 
self-efficacy for medication taking behavior, illness beliefs, medication attitudes, and habi t strength for both 
antihypertensive and BD medications will be conducted at four time points over a 3 -month time period 
(screening, baseline/week 4, week 8, and week 12).  Blood pressure and weight will be measured at each of 
the four contacts. Height wil l be measured at screen . Individuals who drop out of the intervention, and who 
agree, will be followed up with outcomes assessments over the same [ADDRESS_334991] been evaluated had they remained in the study. Table  1 outlines the s tudy schedule of 
events/ assessments .  
 
Individuals  will receive reminder telephone calls or text messages during the [ADDRESS_334992] with the participant should the individual miss follow -up appointments and if difficulty arises in 
contact[CONTACT_274120] -schedule follow -up (for example, change of address or telephone number). In 
order to optimize study retention, study staff will maintain personal contacts with study participants via 
greeting/post cards for birthdays and holidays and regular contact [INVESTIGATOR_8178] “location checks” be tween assessment 
periods.   
Page [ADDRESS_334993] study completion, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_274104].  
 
 
 
Intervention : 
 
iTAB -CV Theoretical Basis, Content, Format  
Individuals with BD tend to have erratic lifestyles, and the present intervention is not dependent on frequent 
contact [CONTACT_274121]. People with BD have difficulty with adherence and rates of attendance at 
clinic -based sessi ons are poor. This intervention circumvents this problem by [CONTACT_274122] 
a mobile phone.  
 In iTAB -CV, sending texts is automated.  The iTAB -CV intervention is highly scalable within and across 
patient populations. The majority of effor t in a texting intervention is in the initial programming of the automated 
system. Once the script is in place, the intervention can be extended for longer periods of time, modified to 
increase the pool of queries and reminders, altered to include addition al medications. iTAB -CV is personalized 
with texts that are specific to the person, medication and timing. Moreover, iTAB -CV uses the participant’s own 
words for both reminders and reinforcers. iTAB -CV asks the participant to respond to reminders and queri es so 
the intervention is interactive unlike an alarm clock or other programmed devices. iTAB -CV is flexible and can 
send reminders consistent with the participant’s schedule. If medications are switched during the study, we can 
update iTAB -CV. Also, iTAB -CV will randomly select from a possible pool of reminders and reinforcers, 
assuring that texts do not become stale. The texts will be customized to overcome existing barriers to 
adherence.  
 
iTAB -CV:  
At the initial visit we will gather the following information to personalize electronic reminders about medications 
according to the following steps:  
1) Identify medications: At the initial assessment we will identify  the type of medications  taken by [CONTACT_274123]  (participants will be asked to bring all medications to their initial appointment) for 
hypertension and bipolar disorder. For tracking and reminders, we will identify regularly prescribed medicines 
for hypertension and bipo lar disorder.  
2) Create categorical description of medications: We will not refer to a specific medication name [CONTACT_274134] 
a medication category (antihypertensive versus bipolar medication)  ask participants what name [CONTACT_274135] s category . We considered using a code name [CONTACT_274136] [ADDRESS_334994] the option to pi[INVESTIGATOR_274105].   
3) Create personalized reminders: Participants will create their own personalized reminders  and remove 
stems that they don’t like . For e xample, persons may choose to say: “Remember to take …”, or “Your health is 
important, take…” We will provide a menu of reminder options for participants  and they will mark those that 
they don’t want to receive . In order to decrease the tendency to ignore a consistent reminder, the program will 
be automated to randomly choose and deliver one of the  reminder stems created by [CONTACT_2299].  
4) Identify ideal time for reminders: We will work with participants to identify the best time to send the 
reminders in order to comply with prescription recommendations. Reminders will be customized for each 
medication  or group of medications . We will also make note of times that participants don’t want to receive 
texts (before or after a certain time of day).  
5) Confir m receipt of message: Participants will be asked to confirm receipt of their message.  
 
 
A final personalized example of the reminder might be: “Your health is important, remember to take your HTN 
medication . Please reply 1 to confirm receipt of this message.”  
 
We will also send text messages once a week that reinforce good adherence to responding to text messages 
to keep participants engaged  (e.g., “ Great job responding to all the messages this week! ”) (See  Appendix #3 
Page 7 of 16 
 for sample texts).  If they did not respond, they will be encouraged to do so moving forward (e.g. “We really 
want to hear from you; we hope you will respond to your messages next week!”).  
 
Electronic Reminder Device: We will provide participan ts with mobile devices and we will purchases bulk 
‘minutes’ in order to provide the text message intervention. Importantly, participants will not be responsible 
should they lose or break the device.  Participants may use the device for other purposes (e.g. , phone calls , 
calendar functions) as they wish.  Participants along with research staff will collaboratively identify a time 
during the day in which the reminders will occur.   Once enrolled in the study, participants will receive full 
compensation even if they miss a ll reminders.   
 
Psychoeducation and t raining to use electronic device: All participants will receive a standardized brief 
psychoeducational presentation with information about hypertension and bipolar disorder as well as training on 
how to use the electro nic device  at the [ADDRESS_334995] the participant to go to the ER in case of 
emerg ency . After 3 such texts, the system will automatically notify study staff who will follow up with the 
participant  with a phone call .  
 
Measures :  
Assessments  will be conducted by a Research Assistant trained to administer the  study measures.  
 
Diagnosis:  Baseline diagnostic assessment of bipolar disorder will be verified with a  standardized diagnostic 
scale, Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview 7.0.2 (MINI) (Sheehan et al., 1998) . 
 
Adherence:  
a. Tablets Routine Questionnaire ( TRQ ) for antihypertensives and BD  medications  separately : This self -
report measure identifies non -adherence for the past [ADDRESS_334996] 30 days  (Scott & Pope, 2002a, 2002b) , by 
[CONTACT_274124] a given medication. Adherence will be assessed for 
each regularly scheduled antihypertensive prescribed for ≥ 3 months. For individuals who are on more than 
one medication, an average TRQ will be calculated for all antihypertensive medications . Adherence will then 
be assessed for each evidence -based BD regularly scheduled maintenance medication (lithium, 
anticonvulsant, antipsycho tic) prescribed for ≥ 3 months.  For individuals who are on more than one medication , 
an average TRQ will be calculat ed for all BD medications . According to our study team’s recent work, the 
correlation between a single “index” drug and all BD drugs was 0.95 providing support for measuring one 
medication as proxy for medication adherence (M. Sajatovic et al., 2015) . PRN medications will not be included  
for either hypertension or BD . 
 
b. eCAP : Study participants will be given an eCAP  device  for one of their pi[INVESTIGATOR_182586], which will record 
time/date of bottle opening.  eCAP  will be used for the antihypertensive medication that the patient missed the 
most frequently in the past week (in the case of multiple antihypertensive  medications missed the same 
proportion  of times, the medication dosed most often will be chosen ). This method was chosen over monitoring 
all medications to limit burden, and is appropriate since eCAP  is used to confirm the TRQ. A dose will be 
counted as “taken” if the bottle is opened within six hours of the prescribed time. We will calculate a percent of 
doses taken by [CONTACT_274125]. Participants who use organizers rather than bottles will be instructed to open 
and then shut an empty bottle with a n eCAP  as a “diary” each time they open their pi[INVESTIGATOR_274106].   Participants 
will be given the eCAP  at the screening visit if they fit inclusion/exclusion criteria . eCAP  will be assessed at the  
baseline visit  based upon pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382] -taking behavior during the interval between screening and baseline visit.  Baseline 
visits will be targeted at  4 weeks after completion of the screening visit.  At screening, p articipants will be asked 
when their index drug is up for a refill. They will then be reminded to refill their index drug and fill their eCAP  via 
the iTAB -CV system .  
 
BD Symptoms:   
Page 8 of 16 
 a. Brief Psychiatric  Symptom Scale ( BPRS ): The BPRS  is a clinician rated measure that  evaluates the 
spectrum of symptoms seen in individuals with BD (including mania, psychosis, depression and 
disorganization)  (Shafer, 2005) .  
b. Montgomery Asberg Depression Rating Scale ( MADRS ) (Montgomery & Asberg, 1979) : The 
MADRS measures symptoms  of depression . Total scores on MADRS range from 0 -60, with higher 
scores indicating more severe depression.  
c. Young Mania Rating Scale ( YMRS ): The YMRS is a clinician  rated measure of mania symptoms . 
Irritability, speech, thought content, and disruptive/aggressive behavior are doubly weighted and are 
rated on a 0 to 8 scale. T he remaining 7 items are rated on a 0 to 4 scale  (Martha Sajatovic et al., 
2015) .  
 
Additional Measures :   
a. Health r esource use in the 3-month period prior to study enrollment  and in the 3-month  study 
period (emergency care, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], outpatient mental health and primary care/other 
medical care visits)  
b. Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) : Self Report Version - Data on comorbid medical conditions will be  
collected based on the self -report version of the CCI  (Charlson, Pompei, Ales, & MacKenzie, 1987; 
Chaudhry, Jin, & Meltzer, 2005) . The CCI summary score is comprised of the presence of 10 medical 
conditions including respi[INVESTIGATOR_3748], rheumatological diseases, cancer, diabetes, digestive 
problems, heart trouble, HIV or A IDS, kidney disease, liver disease, and stroke. While the original CCI 
includes dementia, it was excluded from the self -report version given that those with dementia would 
not be able to provide informed consent. Each disease category is assigned a weight which represents 
mortality risk with lower scores indicative of lower risk.  
c. Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview  7.0.2. (MINI): The MINI is a diagnostic interview which 
takes approximately 15 minutes to administer and is based on the DSM and ICD psychiatric disorders 
(Sheehan et al., 1998) .  
d. Medical history  
e. The Memory for Intentions Screening Test (MIST):  The MIST is a task -oriented measure for 
prospective memory and t akes approximately [ADDRESS_334997], and is appropriate for those 
with neurological disorders  (Woods et al., 2008) . 
f. Rapid Estimate  of Adult Literacy in Medicine –Short Form (REALM -SF): The REALM -SF is a 7 
item measure that identifies patients that are at high risk for having limited health literacy . The measure 
is quick, taking only a minute or two, and identifies the grade level of the patient if they read below the 
ninth grade level (Davis et al., 1993) .  
g. Brief Illness Perception Questionnaire  (Brief IPQ) : The Brief IPQ is a nine item paper and pencil 
questionna ire that provides a  quick assessment of illness perceptions . Each item is rated on a five -point 
Likert scale (Broadbent, Petrie, Main, & Weinman, 2006) .  
h. Medication Adherence Self -Efficacy Scale - Revised (MASES -R): The MASES -R is a 13 item 
questionnaire that measures patient’s confidence to adhere t o their  antihypertensive medication  
regimen under various challenging conditions. The total score ranges from 1 -4 and is the average score 
of all 13 items. Higher scores are indicative of  higher self -efficacy (Fernandez, Chaplin, Schoenthaler, 
& Ogedegbe, 2008) .  
i. Self-Report Habit Index (SRHI) : The SRHI is a 12 item self -report questionnaire that measures habit 
strength and will be administered regarding the habit of taking medication (Verplanken & Orbell, 2003).  
j. Blood Pressure : Systolic and di astolic blood pressure will be taken with an automatic blood pressure 
monitor at each study visit.  
k. Height and Weight/BMI :  Height will be measured at the screen visit and weight will be taken at each 
visit so BMI can be calculated.  
 
Medication Attitudes  Measures :  
Page 9 of 16 
 a. Beliefs About Medicines Questionnaire  (BMQ) : The BMQ is an 18 -item measure split into two sections, 
one for beliefs regarding m edication in general  and one for  beliefs about a n individual’s own prescribed 
medications (Horne, Weinman, & Hankins, 1999; Ruppar, Dobbels,  & De Geest, 2012) . 
b. Attitude toward Mood Stabilizers Questionnaire ( AMSQ ):  A modification of the Lithium Attitudes 
Questionnaire, the 19 -item AMSQ evaluates an individual’s attitudes towards psychiatric medication  
(Chang, Sajatovic, & Tatsuoka, 2015) .   
 
Clinician involvement:  
Individual iTAB -CV interviews  will be administered by [CONTACT_9154] [INVESTIGATOR_4388] a trained research  team member . 
Clinician buy -in remains important. Providers will be encouraged to refer patients they believe are sub -
optimally adherent.  
 
Providers will be notified of participant enrollment  in the study.   
 
Risks associated with study participation:  
This study involves completing a set  of self -report instruments, along with rating interviews and an  intervention  
customization  interview. All of these instruments have been utilized in outpatient research settings and are not 
associated with risks to patients. The iTAB -CV intervention to en hance treatment adherence involves the use 
of cognitive and behavioral strategies including psychoeducation, motivational interviewing, context 
cues/reminders, and positive reinforcement all delivered via text messaging.   
 
The risks to the subjects will b e primarily those of talking about some matters, which they may find 
uncomfortable. Participants  do not have to answer upsetting questions , and may discontinue the interview if 
they wish. It is also possible that the intervention will have no effect on treatment adherence  and that receiving 
texts may become an annoyance. Participants have the option of not responding to texts . They can also 
stipulate times of the day during which they don’t want to receive texts.  
 
Furthermore, the text messages will quer y regarding daily mood ratings. These approaches are not generally 
known to increase risk to individuals. Individuals with bipolar disorder are already at risk for depression and 
possible suicidality. While this intervention is unlikely to increase these r isks, it may be able to detect them 
more readily given the daily mood ratings. There is an automated texting sequence to address texts indicating 
severely low or high mood which will provide the participant with information on how to access immediate 
emerg ency services. If there are [ADDRESS_334998] is exactly the same as the risk incurred by 
[CONTACT_274126].   The text messages used in this study are not specific to bipolar disorder 
and are purposefully generic.   Reminders do not use medication names but rather category of medication  (high 
blood pressure medicine or bipolar medicine) and the mood question  is generic.  While participants in the 
patient focus groups indicated that they prefer to have the text messages use the actual name [CONTACT_274137], 
participants will have the option of choosing an alternative name [CONTACT_116749].  The text messages will be 
delivered from a generic phone number that will not be linked to the specific study goals.   
 
If the phone were to be lost, persons could find responses to medication and mood queries. This will be clearly 
articulated to participants as a study risk and is sp ecified in the consent document.  If participants are 
uncomfortable with this risk, they may choose not to enroll in the study.  
 
Participants will have their blood pressure taken [ADDRESS_334999] their regular care with 
clinicians.  Individuals who do choose to participate in the study will continue to receive treatment as usual 
from their regular care provider(s).  
 
It is possible th at the subjects ’ physical or mental health may worsen during their participation.  Subjects  will be 
in close communication with the research study team to make sure they are monitored for unexpected 
worsening  and that the appropriate measures are taken .  
 
Subjects will be free to withdraw from the study at any time without penalty.  If during the course of the 
assessment, the subject communicates to the rater or investigator that the subject may be in immediate danger 
or at acute risk of harm to self or oth ers, (for example, reporting a suicide plan), the study staff interacting with 
the individual will immediately notify 1) The patient’s clinician and 2) The study PI [INVESTIGATOR_274107]. If at any point a subject presents  with what are deemed to be unsafe blood pressure readings (i.e. 
≥170mg Hg), the study PI, psychiatrist -investigator or internist -investigator will be notified. The study sta ff will 
notify the subject’s clinician and accompany them to the ER if it is deemed necessary.  
 
Potential benefits associated with study participation:  
It is the goal of this project to contribute knowledge  regarding adherence attitudes and effective inter ventions  to 
improve treatment adherence . It will be explained to subjects that their participation in the study ma y not 
benefit them directly . Participants may benefit from participation (e.g. improved symptoms). The iTAB -CV 
intervention  is hypothesized  to improve adherence, lower systolic blood pressure and decrease  psychiatric  
symptoms . 
 
Alternatives to Study Participation  
While participating in this study subjects  will continue to receive their usual treatment, including medication 
prescriptions from their regular mental healthcare provider. Therefore, the alternative to participating in this 
study is to not participate.  
 
Compensation for research participation:  
To help cover their costs and reimburse them for their time  and effort , each subject will be compensated  $40 
for the screening visit and $30 for each of the remaining three  assessment s: baseline (4 weeks), visit 1 (8 
weeks), and visit 2 (12 weeks).  Additionally, participants will receive $10 for bringing the eCAP to each of the 
baseline, 8 week, and 12 week visits. Participants will be given bus or parking passes with approximately a $5 
value for transportation for each assessment if needed. Each par ticipant for phase 2 will potentially receive a 
total of $160 plus $[ADDRESS_335000] to participants:  
Participants and th eir insurance will not be charged for any study visits , phones and free texting are provided 
for the duration of the study.  Subjects may incur costs such as travel, parking, and meals. These are 
reasonable costs that a subject will incur as a result of goi ng to study visits. Subjects are compensated for 
these costs as outlined above.  
 
Compensation for research -related injury:  
If injury occurs as a result of a subject's involvement in this research, medical treatment is available  from 
University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_274108]. There are no plans for payment of medical expenses or other payments, including 
lost wages, for any resear ch related injury.  
Page 11 of 16 
  
Plan for Obtaining Informed Consent : 
There will be three layers built into the consent process.  
First, all providers and research personnel will be prescreening patients for capacity to give consent – 
assessing both static factors (e.g.  comorbid diagnoses such as intellectual disability) and dynamic factors (e.g. 
acute psychopathology). Those who are deemed permanently unable to give informed consent will be 
excluded from studies. Clinicians will be instructed to defer referral of those with severe acute symptomatology 
until the patient is able to consent, i.e., severe mania accompanied by [CONTACT_274127].  
The second layer is an informal evaluation by [CONTACT_274128]’s capacity to give consent to 
participate.  Individuals  who are deemed capable of giving informed consent then proceed with screening and 
enrollment. An authorized member of the investigational staff will explain to potential subjects the aims, 
methods, reasonably anticipated benefits, and potential hazards of  the study, and any discomfort participation 
in the study may entail. Subjects will be informed that their participation is voluntary and that they may 
withdraw consent to participate at any time. They will be informed that choosing not to participate will  not affect 
the care they will receive for the treatment of their disease. Subjects will be told that alternative treatments are 
available if they refuse to take part and that such refusal will not prejudice any possible future treatment.  The 
subject will  be given sufficient time to read the informed consent form and the opportunity to ask questions.  
Potential participants are provided with the written copy of the consent form with HIPAA language, which they 
are asked to read and review fully.  Following t his, the researcher asks whether the participant has any 
questions and then orally summarizes all the points covered in the informed consent, again inquiring if there 
are any questions.  Prospective participants will be asked to explain what the study will  involve in their own 
words to confirm their understanding.  At this point, the third layer is employed by [CONTACT_274129] (see attached consent quiz).    If the subject agrees to participate, the 
researcher and subject sign the consent form prior to participation. A copy of the signed and witnessed 
consent form will be given to each subject. The researc h assistant will then record in the medical record that 
the consent was obtained and that the decision to participate in the research was “informed”.  
   
Due to the nature of bipolar disorder, a patient may be considered “impaired” in decision making capaci ty due 
to mania or depression, not due to cognitive impairment.  These individuals may be deemed “legally 
incompetent” and may have a court appointed legal guardian under the statutes of the State of Ohio.  If a 
patient with a legal guardian meets the stud y’s inclusion criteria, the investigator will discuss the study with 
both the patient and the legal guardian.  After obtaining proof of guardianship, both parties will be asked to 
consent to the patient’s participation.  If either the patient or the guardi an declines to participate, the patient will 
not be enrolled in this study.  
  
The person obtaining consent will complete the Consent Process document and will file it with the signed 
consent form in a secure file cabinet separate from the participant's stu dy documents  
 
Participant privacy:  
Privacy language is included  in the informed consent form.  Participants must be willing to allow the sharing of 
information between the research team and their regular mental health and primary care provider s.  
Participants have the option of withdrawing from the study at any time and can request that no further 
information be shared  about them from that point on.  Data that were  collected prior to their withdrawal will be 
de-identified and will still be used in t he data analysis for the study.  
 
Data confidentiality  
The study personnel at UHCMC whose responsibilities require access to personal data agree to keep the 
identity of study subjects confidential.  Study data will be collected and managed using REDcap (Harris et al., 
2009) , a secure, web -based application designed to support data capture for research studies.  
 
Careful attention will be given to confidentiality, which will be maintained using subject identification (ID) codes. 
Study ID codes will be the basis for linking information from data and results. Audio recordings will be assigned 
their respective subject  code. Research files are not available to any unauthorized person. The list that links 
Page [ADDRESS_335001] protected 
file in a folder only accessible to research team personnel  on the secure UH server.    
 
A Certificate of Confidentiality has been secured from NIMH by [CONTACT_473].  
 
Data security:   
Research files are not available to any unauthorized person. Research data are collected and stored using UH 
REDCap. Any paper a ssessment forms are stored in file cabinets in the locked research offices of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_274109] 7th floor of the W.O. Walker Center at [ADDRESS_335002] protected file in a folder 
only accessible to research team personnel on the secure UH server  and/or REDCap . Data analysis files will 
also be stored in the secure folder on the UH network.  
 
Data Safety and Monitoring will be the responsibility of 1) The study ’s principal investigator ([CONTACT_21145]) , 
2) The local I nstitutional Review Board (IRB) , and 3) a DSMB .  
 
With regard to loss of confidentiality associated with the mobile device, no personally identifying 
information will be texted by [CONTACT_274130] . 
Therefore, if a device is misplaced, there is minimal likelihood that any loss of confidential information will 
occur.  
 
Adverse events will be assessed and recorded at every visit following the Screening visit. Assessments 
will include observations by [CONTACT_431], spontaneous reporting by [CONTACT_1766], and standard non -leading 
questions. For every adverse event, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_274110], duration and causal 
relationship to study intervention, and document all actions taken with regard to study intervention, as well as 
any other treatment measures for the adverse event. If an outcome for an adverse eve nt is not available at the 
time of initial report, follow -up will proceed until the outcome is known.  
 
For the purposes of this investigation, a serious adverse event will be defined as any untoward medical 
occurrence believed to be possibly or probably du e to the study and:  
1. Results in death  
2. Is life threatening  
3. Results in persistent or significant disability  
4. Is a congenital anomaly  
5. Is an important medical event that may not be immediately life threatening or results in death or 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_274111], or any other unanticipated problems involving risks to 
subjects or others, the IRB will be notified. This notification will indicate what serious adverse events were 
noted, whether they appeared related to th e trial, and whether the trial was approved to continue. If found to be 
related to the trial, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_274112], notify the NHLBI  Project Officer, and report such 
events to appropriate institutional officials and the Office for H uman Research Protections.  
 
Data Analysis plan:  The aim of this project is to test the use of iTAB -CV in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_242028], acceptability and 
preliminary efficacy study in a sample of 38 individuals with BD and HTN.  Hypothesis: iTAB -CV will be feasible 
to conduct in an outpatient setting, will be acceptable to participants, and will be associated with improved HTN 
medication adherence among at -risk individuals with BD and HTN. Treatment acceptability/satisfaction will be 
measured via a self -report questionnaire and feasibility will be evaluated by [CONTACT_274131]. The 
primary dependent measure will be treatment adherence of antihypertensives evaluated with Tablets Routine 
Questionnaire (TRQ). Adherence will also be measured objectively through eCAP . The measurements will be 
taken at screening, baseline (4 weeks), [ADDRESS_335003] week and will be assessed for each regularly scheduled 
maintenance agent for HTN prescribed for three months or longer on a daily, routine basis.  For i ndividuals 
who are on more than one such agent, adherence will be assessed for each agent and an average will be 
Page 13 of 16 
 calculated. TRQ will be the main adherence measure, but eCAP  will also be analyzed and compared with the 
TRQ. Secondary outcome measures are: S ystolic blood pressure, TRQ for antipsychotic and/or mood 
stabilizers, psychiatric symptoms (BPRS  health utilization, Medication Adherence Self -Efficacy Scale - 
Revised, Self -Report Habit Index (64), Brief Illness Perception Questionnaire, Beliefs About Me dicines 
Questionnaire, AMSQ, treatment acceptability/satisfaction by [CONTACT_274132] , and feasibility 
via % texts answered.  
 
Main Hypothesis Testing: A paired t -test will be used to test significance for the TRQ and eCAP  adherence 
outcome s from baseline to 12 -week follow -up.  Nonparametric tests will also be considered.  Secondary 
Hypothesis Testing: Difference from baseline to 8 weeks, and 8 weeks to 12 weeks will also be analyzed. 
Corresponding TRQ and eCAP  values will be correlated and Bland -Altman plots will be used to help identify 
discrepancies.  Correlations will be computed for change in antihypertensive adherence values versus 
changes in TRQ for antipsychotic and/or mood stabilizers, medication attitudes, self -efficacy, and habit 
strength.  Exploratory longitudinal mixed models will be used to analyze repeated measurements at baseline, 8 
weeks, and 12 weeks.  Note that the preliminary analyses and model estimates will inform the future design of 
a more extensive study involving a co ntrolled trial.  
 
Attrition Analyses: Preliminary analyses will determine factors that are associated with attrition effects.  Attrition 
rates in a current BD adherence study at our institution is < 30%. Differential attrition by [CONTACT_274133], such as through log rank tests. Power Analysis: Given the preliminary data 
from a prior BD adherence study (35), difference in oral medication adherence after treatment was 21.7%. 
Standard deviation of this difference was 39%, resulting in an effect size of 0.56. We expect to observe a 
similar if not greater effect size. Using a t -test of difference between baseline and 12 week TRQ, power is 0.80 
at two -sided alpha = 0.[ADDRESS_335004] size is 0.549, and attrition is 25%.  The projected sample size should thus provide adequate power 
to detect expected changes in anti -hypertensive drug adherence levels.   
 
Page 14 of 16 
 Table 1: Schedule of Assessments and Study Events    
 Procedure  Screen  Baseline  Visit  1 Visit  2 
Visit Timing  Day 0  Week 4  Week 8  Week 12  
Informed Consent  X    
Inclusion/Exclusion  X    
Demographics, Charlson, medical history  X    
Diagnosis:  Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Interview  X    
Prospective Memory:  The Memory for Intentions Screening 
Test (MIST)  X    
Rapid Estimate of Adult Literacy in Medicine – Short Form 
(REALM -SF) X    
Brief Illness Perception Questionnaire (Brief IPQ)  X  X X 
Medication Adherence Self -Efficacy Scale - Revised 
(MASES -R) X  X X 
Medication Attitudes – Beliefs About Medicines 
Questionnaire, AMSQ  X  X X 
Self-Report Habit Index  X X X X 
Primary outcomes:  
Average TRQ for antihypertensive agents  
eCAP  for antihypertensive agent   
X 
  
X 
X  
X 
X  
X 
X 
Secondary outcomes:  
Systolic Blood Pressure  
Height (Screen only) and weight / BMI  
Average TRQ for bipolar medications   
X 
X 
X  
X 
X 
X  
X 
X 
X  
X 
X 
X 
Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS)  X X X X 
Montgomery -Åsberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS)  X X X X 
Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS)  X X X X 
Introduction of eCAP  for antihypertensive  X    
Brief powerpoint presentation providing psychoeducation on 
hypertension and bipolar disorder   X   
iTAB -CV interview and training;  
iTAB -CV stage 1 - initiation of behavioral priming via text + 
daily mood monitoring; phone given at this time   X   
iTAB -CV stage 2 –  
brief interview regarding iTAB -CV; frequency of text; choose 
stems for reminders and reinforcement    X  
Participant acceptability/satisfaction/feasibility/exit interviews     X 
Page 15 of 16 
 Literature citations:    
 
Bogner, H. R., de Vries, H. F., O'Donnell, A. J., & Morales, K. H. (2013). Measuring concurrent oral 
hypoglycemic and antidepressant adherence and clinical outcomes. Am J Manag Care, 19 (3), e85 -92.  
Broadbent, E., Petrie, K. J., Main, J., & Weinman, J. (20 06). The brief illness perception questionnaire. J 
Psychosom Res, 60 (6), 631 -637. doi:10.1016/j.jpsychores.2005.10.020  
Chang, C. W., Sajatovic, M., & Tatsuoka, C. (2015). Correlates of attitudes towards mood stabilizers in 
individuals with bipolar disorder . Bipolar Disord, 17 (1), 106 -112. doi:10.1111/bdi.[ZIP_CODE]  
Charlson, M. E., Pompei, P., Ales, K. L., & MacKenzie, C. R. (1987). A new method of classifying prognostic 
comorbidity in longitudinal studies: development and validation. J Chronic Dis, 40 (5), 373 -383.  
Chaudhry, S., Jin, L., & Meltzer, D. (2005). Use of a self -report -generated Charlson Comorbidity Index for 
predicting mortality. Med Care, 43 (6), 607 -615.  
Corrao, G., Parodi, A., Nicotra, F., Zambon, A., Merlino, L., Cesana, G., & Mancia, G. (2011). Better 
compliance to antihypertensive medications reduces cardiovascular risk. J Hypertens, 29 (3), 610 -618. 
doi:10.1097/HJH.0b013e328342ca97  
Costa, F. V. (1996). Compliance with antihypertensive treatment. Clin Exp Hypertens, 18 (3-4), [ADDRESS_335005], A., Muszbek, N., Keskinaslan, A., & Khan, Z. M. (2008). The significance of 
compliance and persistence in the treatment of diabetes, hypertension and dyslipi[INVESTIGATOR_17939]: a review. Int 
J Clin Pract, 62 (1), 76 -87. doi:10.1111/j.1742 -1241.2007.[ZIP_CODE]. x 
Davis, T. C., Long, S. W., Jackson, R. H., Mayeaux, E. J., George, R. B., Murphy, P. W., & Crouch, M. A. 
(1993). Rapid estimate of adult literacy in medicine: a shortened screening instrument. Fam Med, 25 (6), 
391-395.  
De Vries, H., & Mudde, A. N. (1998) . Predicting stage transitions for smoking cessation applying the attitude -
social influence -efficacy model. Psychology and Health, 13 (2), 369 -385.  
Devulapalli, K. K., Ignacio, R. V., Weiden, P., Cassidy, K. A., Williams, T. D., Safavi, R., . . . Sajatovic , M. 
(2010). Why do persons with bipolar disorder stop their medication? Psychopharmacol Bull, 43 (3), 5 -
14.  
Fernandez, S., Chaplin, W., Schoenthaler, A. M., & Ogedegbe, G. (2008). Revision and validation of the 
medication adherence self -efficacy scale (MA SES) in hypertensive African Americans. J Behav Med, 
31(6), 453 -462. doi:10.1007/s10865 -008-9170 -7 
Harris, P. A., Taylor, R., Thielke, R., Payne, J., Gonzalez, N., & Conde, J. G. (2009). Research electronic data 
capture (REDCap) --a metadata -driven methodol ogy and workflow process for providing translational 
research informatics support. J Biomed Inform, 42 (2), 377 -381. doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2008.08.010  
Hong, J., Reed, C., Novick, D., Haro, J. M., & Aguado, J. (2011). Clinical and economic consequences of 
medica tion non -adherence in the treatment of patients with a manic/mixed epi[INVESTIGATOR_274113]: 
results from the European Mania in Bipolar Longitudinal Evaluation of Medication (EMBLEM) study. 
Psychiatry Res, 190 (1), 110 -114. doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2011.04 .016 
Horne, R., Weinman, J., & Hankins, M. (1999). The beliefs about medicines questionnaire: The 
developmentand evaluation of a new method for assessing the cognitive representation of medication. 
Psychology and Health, 14 , 1-24.  
Lee, E., Xiang, Y. T., M an, D., Au, R. W., Shum, D., Tang, W. K., . . . Ungvari, G. S. (2010). Prospective 
memory deficits in patients with bipolar disorder: a preliminary study. Arch Clin Neuropsychol, 25 (7), 
640-647. doi:10.1093/arclin/acq061  
Montgomery, S. A., & Asberg, M. (19 79). A new depression scale designed to be sensitive to change. Br J 
Psychiatry, 134 , 382 -389.  
 
Nieuwlaat, R., Wilczynski, N., Navarro, T., Hobson, N., Jeffery, R., Keepanasseril, A., . . . Haynes, R. B. 
(2014). Interventions for enhancing medication adhe rence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 11 , 
CD000011. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD000011.pub4  
Osby, U., Brandt, L., Correia, N., Ekbom, A., & Sparen, P. (2001). Excess mortality in bipolar and unipolar 
disorder in Sweden. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 58 (9), 844 -850.  
Ramsey , C. M., Spi[INVESTIGATOR_20116], A. P., Mojtabai, R., Eaton, W. W., Roth, K., & Lee, H. B. (2013). Lifetime manic 
spectrum epi[INVESTIGATOR_274114] -cause mortality: [ADDRESS_335006], 151 (1), 337 -342. doi:10.1016/j.ja d.2013.06.019  
Page 16 of 16 
 Ruppar, T. M., Dobbels, F., & De Geest, S. (2012). Medication beliefs and antihypertensive adherence among 
older a  
 
dults: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Geriatr Nurs, 33 (2), 89 -95. doi:10.1016/j.gerinurse.2012.01.006  
Sajatovic, M., Levin, J., Sams, J., Cass idy, K., Akagi, K., Aebi, M., . . . Tatsuoka, C. (2015). Symptom severity, 
self-reported adherence, and electronic pi[INVESTIGATOR_274115]. 
BIPOLAR DISORDERS, 17 (6), 653 -661.  
Sajatovic, M., Tatsuoka, C., Sams, J.,  Cassidy, K., Akagi, K., Levin, J. B., & Ramirez, L. (2015). Association 
between symptom severity and medication adherence in poorly adherent patients with bipolar disorder . 
Paper presented at the American Psychiatric Association 168th Annual Meeting, Toro nto, Canada.  
Scott, J., & Pope, M. (2002a). Nonadherence with mood stabilizers: prevalence and predictors. J Clin 
Psychiatry, 63 (5), 384 -390.  
Scott, J., &  Pope, M. (2002b). Self -reported adherence to treatment with mood stabilizers, plasma levels, and 
psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. Am J Psychiatry, 159 (11), 1927 -1929.  
Shafer, A. (2005). Meta -analysis of the brief psychiatric rating scale factor structure. Psychol Assess, 17 (3), 
324-335. doi:10.1037/1040 -3590.17.3.324  
Sheehan, D. V., Lecrubier, Y., Sheehan, K. H., Amorim, P., Janavs, J., Weiller, E., . . . Dunbar, G. C. (1998). 
The Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): the development and  validation of a 
structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM -IV and ICD -10. J Clin Psychiatry, [ADDRESS_335007] 20 , 22-
33;quiz 34 -57.  
Verplanken, B., & Orbell, S. (2003). Reflections on Past Behavior: A Self -Report Index of Habit Strength. 
Journal of Appl ied Social Psychology, 33 (6), 1313 –1330.  
Viswanathan, M., Golin, C. E., Jones, C. D., Ashok, M., Blalock, S., Wines, R. C., . . . Lohr, K. N. (2012). 
Closing the quality gap: revisiting the state of the science (vol. 4: medication adherence interventions:  
comparative effectiveness). Evid Rep Technol Assess (Full Rep) (208.4), 1 -685.  
Weiden, P., Rapkin, B., Mott, T., Zygmunt, A., Goldman, D., Horvitz -Lennon, M., & [LOCATION_009]s, A. (1994). Rating 
of medication influences (ROMI) scale in schizophrenia. Schizophr B ull, 20 (2), 297 -310.  
Woods, S. P., Moran, L. M., Dawson, M. S., Carey, C. L., Grant, I., & Group, H. I. V. N. R. C. (2008). 
Psychometric characteristics of the memory for intentions screening test. Clin Neuropsychol, 22 (5), 
864-878. doi:10.1080/[PHONE_5693] 1595999  
Zogg, J. B., Woods, S. P., Sauceda, J. A., Wiebe, J. S., & Simoni, J. M. (2012). The role of prospective 
memory in medication adherence: a review of an emerging literature. J Behav Med, 35 (1), 47 -62. 
doi:10.1007/s10865 -011-9341 -9 
 
 