 
 
Is there an immediate effect on pectoralis minor length 
after performing  a prone scapular retraction exercise 
using typi[INVESTIGATOR_830318]?  
 
 
11/3 0/[ADDRESS_1152313] udy is to determine if there is an immediate 
length change of the Pectoralis Minor (PM) muscle after performing a prone scapular retraction 
exercise  in normal participants . 
 
Detailed Description  
A convenience sample comprised of [ADDRESS_1152314] of the coracoid process a nd a second mark on 
the anterior -inferior edge of the fourth rib one index finger’s width lateral to the sternum.  Then a 
caliper will be used to measure the distance between these marks as the participant holds a 
normal exh alation.  This caliper will then be set aside for measurement recording once all PM 
measurements have been collected in order to keep the tester blinded.  
The participant will then lie prone on a trea tment plinth with a small towel roll under their 
forehead.  The participant will form fists with their hands and place them on the plinth just 
superior to their head, fists touching the crown of their head, w ith their thumbs up and the ulna r 
side of the ha nd resting on the plinth with their arms relaxed so their elbows remain on the 
plinth.  The participan t will then lift their elbows  off the plinth as high as possible while keepi[INVESTIGATOR_830319].  The participant will repeat this motion  for [ADDRESS_1152315] in between each set.  The participant will 
be instructed to not hold the end range position and be monitored throughout the exercise to 
make sure they are performing the exercise correctly.  
The participant will then stand up and a second caliper will be used to once again measure PM 
length in resting standing position as above by [CONTACT_830320].  Only then 
will the two caliper measurements be recorded and Pecto ralis Minor  Index ( PMI) be calculated.  
This will conclude the testing procedure and the participant ’s involvement in the study.  
A Paired T test  will be used to analyze PM length and PMI pre-exercise versus PM length and 
PMI post-exercise using SPS S.  The Standard error of measurement (SEM) and the minimum 
detectable chang e (MDC) will also be analyzed.    