 
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
 
 
 
Effect of Hearing Aid Labeling on Speech 
Understanding Measures  
 
 
 
 
Version  1.0 
 
05/23/2022  
 
 
 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
Protocol Title  
 
Effect of Hearing Aid Labeling on Speech Understanding Measures  
 
[ADDRESS_243275] of labeling hearing aids as "OTC" (over -the-
counter) or "Pr escriptive " for inexperienced and experienced hearing aid users with mild to moderate 
hearing loss .  
Previous interest in placebo effects for hearing aid research have centered around labeling devices as 
"digital" vs. "conventional" (Bentler et al. 2003) and "new" vs . "old" (Dawes et al. 2011, 2013). These 
studies found that participants ha d strong preferences for devices labeled as "digital" and "new" even 
when all variables between conditions were equal besides the label. In addition to the effect of labeling, 
Rakita et al. (2021) have shown that end users are also susceptible to placebo e ffects stemming from the 
language used by [CONTACT_204051]. Specifically, it was found that when the participants were given a 
positive narrative for hearing aid expectations, they performed better in behavioral measurements ( i.e. 
lower SNRs via the QuickSIN) and anticipated needing less time to get used to the hearing aids as 
compared to a negative narrative. These findings have shown that placebo effects are measurable in 
hearing aid research and do have an impact not only on device preference but a lso hearing 
performance.  
The recent release of FDA guidelines for OTC hearing aids has created an urgency to understand the 
impact of these devices on the hearing aid market.  Device labeling has been proven to influence 
consumer preference in hearing aid r esearch, but the specific effect of labeling devices as "OTC" or 
"Prescriptive " has not been previously investigated; therefore,  it is worthwhile for Sonova to pursue this 
investigation in order to understand the impact of OTC labeling on consumer behavior  and perceptions.  
 
 
[ADDRESS_243276] of hearing aid labeling on objectively measured speech 
understanding in noise for inexperienced and experienced hearing aid users with mild to moderate 
hearing loss.  
 
 
3 Description of the investigational device  
 
The Audéo  P is a hearing aid on the Paradise platform and is worn with the processor behind the ear 
with the receiver in  the ear canal . The microphone(s) pi[INVESTIGATOR_9696](s) up sound waves, convert(s) them into an 
electrical signal which is sent to the Digital Signal Processor (DSP), which is part of the hybrid. The DSP 
applies the amplification to the electrical signal, which means that the amplitude of the signal gets 
modified. The modified electrical signal is fo rwarded to the external receiver, which is h eld in the ear 
canal with the aid of an earpi[INVESTIGATOR_13959]. The external receiver converts the electrical signal into an acoustic 
signal and submits it to the ear drum. An integrated Bluetooth antenna enables the hearing a id to also 
receive digital signals (e.g. streamed music), which will be processed in the same way.  
The overall intended purpose of the devic e is to amplify and transmit sound ot the ear and thereby 
[CONTACT_77672].  
 
 
4 Design of the clinical investigation  
 
This investigation is a single -center, randomized, double -blinded crossover study with two treatment 
conditions. Treatment conditions include an OTC device condition, wherein the participant believes they 
are wearing an OTC device, and a pre scriptive device condition, wherein the participant believes they are 
wearing a hearing aid that has been programmed prescriptively for their hearing loss. There will be two 
arms of the study; one group of participants will be new users, who have never wor n or owned a hearing 
aid, and the other group will consist of experienced hearing aid users, defined as having worn hearing aids 
for at least six months.  
During the investigation, the participants will be told which condition they are in because the aim of  this 
investigation is to measure bias. That being said, the investigators will use pre -planned scripts when 
conversing with the participants in the study to ensure that factors relating to the bias are equitable for 
the participants, notwithstanding the b ias the participants may or may not have prior to the study 
appointment. The QuickSiN test will be scored by a sub -investigator who will be blinded to the condition 
in order to minimize tester bias. Because this investigation follows a cross -over design, p articipants will 
be randomly assigned to one of two possible orders for exposure to the two treatment arms to counteract 
potential order effects.   
 
[ADDRESS_243277] hearing ability associated with participation in this 
study. All sounds used in this study will be presented at safe listening levels. While using hearing aids, 
the following are possible occurrences:  
 •Cerumen impaction  
 •Ear discomfort, pain or soreness  
 •Sweat or moisture accumulation in the ear canal or pi[INVESTIGATOR_24277]  
 •A feeling of pressure or fullness in the ear  
 •Itching, blisters, or sores in the ear canal or pi[INVESTIGATOR_24277]  
 •Headache  
 •Redness of tissue  
The research personnel will review  these risks with the subjects and answer any questions they have. 
Hearing aids are not a significant risk investigational device as defined in the FDA 21 CFR 812.3(m).  
 
6 Endpoints  
Primary endpoint:  
• Quick Speech -in-Noise (QuickSiN) benefit score. QuickSi N is an adaptive test of an individual’s 
ability to understand speech in noise.  The test adapts the relative levels of noise and speech to 
determine the signal -to-noise ratio (SNR) at which the individual can correctly identify 50% of key 
words.  This tes t was independently developed and validated and is available for use by [CONTACT_204052] (Killion, et al., 2004).  
 
7 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
 
Subjects fulfilling all of the following inclusion  criteria are eligible for the investigation:  
• Adults and adolescents 18 -95 years of age  
• Target recruitment is for [ADDRESS_243278] -time hearing aid users and 15 experienced hearing aid users  
• Mild to moderate (N1 -N3) bilateral hearing loss  
• Fluent in English; abilit y to read and write in English  
• Willing and able to provide informed consent  
Participants must meet the eligibility criteria for OTC hearing aids per the FDA. New -to-hearing aid 
participants must not have prior hearing aid experience, defined as never owning their own devices. 
Experienced hearing aid participants must have at least [ADDRESS_243279]:  
• Self-reported ear -related pathology (otorrhea w/in 90 days, dizziness, sudden hearing loss or 
worsening of hearing w/in 90 days, otalgia)  
• Visible deformity of the ear  
• Chronic, severe tinnitus  
• Unilateral hearing loss  
• Cognitive impairment  
 
8 Measurements and procedures  
. 
15 inexperienced users and 15 experienced hearing aids users will be recruited for this study. They will 
be told they are participating in a research study comparing two sets of hearing aids. One set of hearing 
aids will be labeled as "OTC" de vices, while the other will be labeled as "Prescriptive" devices. 
Definitions for OTC hearing aids and prescriptive hearing aids will be provided to the participants 
verbally; however, all the participants will see are two identical hard shell hearing aid cases with a 
physical label on them that say "OTC" and "Prescriptive." The participants will complete the QuickSIN for 
both conditions (OTC and prescriptive) in order to assess if there is a labeling effect on objective speech 
understanding performance in noise.  
Data will be captured at the time of testing . Data will be stored electronically on a Sonova -owned server 
and will be analyzed after all participants have completed all investigation tasks and appointments. Any 
computing code generated to conduct th e analysis will be stored with the data following the analysis.  
 
There will be two researchers involved in this study. One researcher  will speak with the participants, 
place the hearing aids in their ears, and administer the questionnaires. The other researcher will score 
the objective testing while blinded to the condition.  
 
9 Statistical design and analysis  
 
An a priori power analysis was conducted in G*Power3 for the primary objective. The primary objective 
will be measured for two groups (experienc ed and inexperienced) via repeated measures of the QuickSIN 
for two conditions (OTC and prescriptive). A repeated measures, within and between factors 
ANOVA,  using a medium effect size (f= .55) and alpha of .05, would require a sample of 14 participants 
per group (inexperienced and experienced) for a total of 28 participants to achieve a power of .95.  
Speech -in-noise (i.e. QuickSiN) data for the primary objective from all subjects will be analyzed.  
Participants will be grouped by [CONTACT_204053] (ei ther inexperienced or experienced) as a part of 
these analyses.  For the primary objective and its associated endpoint (QuickSiN benefit), two lists will 
be presented for each condition in order to expect a 1.8 dB critical difference between the conditions  
with a 80% confidence level. The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_204047].  
 
[ADDRESS_243280] approximately 10 weeks . Each participant’s duration will be one 
day of testing.  
 
 
[ADDRESS_243281]’s status at each phase during the course of study. 
Participants cannot be identified in th e CRF by [CONTACT_174316]. All study team members are authorized for the CRF entries and it is assured that 
any authorized person can be identified both for pCRFs and eCRFs. If pCRFs are used, the investigator’s 
initials and subject ID are documented and data are entered into an electronic file for analysis by [CONTACT_204054]. In case of a self -evident 
corrections, either the subject  does it by [CONTACT_204055]/sentence with a single horizontal line and by [CONTACT_174319].  
The results for the audiometer -based objective measure will be taken from the computer used to 
complete the test and imported into the EDC system or transferred via an excel or csv file. Real Ear 
Measurements will be imported from the verification system and stored as an exce l file.  
The pCRFs/eCRFs are only available to the local study team and to the monitor of the study.  
In the case of an audit or a serious adverse event, the CRFs may need to be de -anonymized and sent to 
the governing body (i.e FDA)  or insurance company.  
Any paper -based data will be stored in a locked filing cabinet at the investigation site. All electronic data 
will be stored on an access -restricted server owned, operated, and maintained by [CONTACT_204056]. Servers 
used to store data in this investigation are p hysically located in the US. Permission to access data will be 
limited to study manager, monitor, PI, and essential research staff, as designated by [CONTACT_1961].  
During data collection of the investigation, physical copi[INVESTIGATOR_204048]/investigator on a daily basis. Data will be reviewed for mis -entries or inaccuracies as 
each data set is entered.  
The extent and nature of monitoring appropriate for the clinical investigation including the s trategy for 
source data verification (SDV) are based on considerations such as the objective, design, complexity, size 
critical data points and endpoints of the clinical investigation. A de -tailed plan for monitoring 
arrangements is provided separately fro m this CIP.  
 
 
12 Amendments to the CIP  
 
Any necessary amendments to the CIP will be communicated to the study manager/sponsor.  
A new version of the CIP will be written, with the necessary changes and justification, and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_204049]. The amended CIP will go through the approval process and necessary 
signatures obtained from the study manager/sponsor, PI, and statistician. The amended CIP will be 
uploaded to the eQMS system as an additional revision.  
 
[ADDRESS_243282] the rights, safety and well -being of human participants under 
emergency circumstances may proceed without prior approval of the sponsor and the EC – such 
deviations will be documented and reported to the  sponsor representative (Study Manager) and the EC 
as soon as possible. Apart from that the investigator is not allowed to deviate from this CIP unless that 
deviation does not influence the investigation data.  
 
[ADDRESS_243283] in a private office 
located in the Phonak Audiology Research Center (PARC).  
 
Informed Consent will only be obtained by [CONTACT_204057].  
 
16 Adverse events, adverse device effects and device deficiencies  
 
Device deficiencies and all adverse events (AE) including all serious adverse events (SAE) are collected, 
fully investigated and documented in the source document and appropriate case report form (CRF ) 
during the entire investigation period, i.e. from participant’s informed con -sent until the last protocol -
specific procedure, including a safety follow -up period (ISO -[ZIP_CODE], 2020). Documentation includes dates 
of event, treatment, resolution, assessment of serious -ness and causal relationship to device and/or 
investigation procedure.  
Information on AEs is systematically collected during the regular investigation visits, and phone calls (if 
applicable).  
The investigator(s) will follow -up on a biweekly ba sis with any participant experiencing an AE until either 
a) the participant reports resolution of the AE or b) [ADDRESS_243284] passed since the participant’s final 
visit. If, however, the participant’s condition worsens throughout the 8 week follow -up period,  the 
investigator will continue to follow -up biweekly until the AE is resolved or the participant’s condition 
stabilizes over an 8 week period.  
The reporting of Serious Adverse Events and Device Deficiencies follows the Regulation (EU) 2017/745 
and the MD CG 2020 -10/1 Safety Reporting in Clinical Investigations of Medical Devices under Regulation 
(EU) 2017/745.  
The causality assessment of the SAE will be conducted according to MDCG 2020 -10/1 Safety Reporting 
in Clinical Investigations of Medical Devices und er Regulation (EU) 2017/745.  
 
17 Vulnerable populations  
 
This investigation will not include any vulnerable populations.  
 
18  Suspension or premature termination of the clinical investigation  
 
The study will be terminated if the majority of the participants are not able to wear the devices for the 
study visit.  
The study will be terminated if the participants or researchers are exposed to safety risks other than 
those outlined in this document.  
The study may be terminated in the event natural disasters, widespread outbreak of illness, 
compromised structure of the investigation site, etc. that would make continuation of the study 
impossible or impractical. The study will be suspended within 5 day s of determination that the study or 
device put participants at an unreasonable risk.  
If a participant is suspended, terminated, or withdraws from the study, their data can be traced with 
their unique study identification number.  
According to the FDA, fo llow-up is required for participants who experience Serious Adverse Events. 
Follow up will be conducted by [CONTACT_204058]/or the PI [INVESTIGATOR_204050].  
 
19 Publication policy  
 
The clinical investigation will be registered in c linicaltrials.gov, a publicly accessible database, as required 
by U.S. regulations.  
The results of the clinical investigation will be published on clinicaltrials.gov no later than one calendar 
year following the final participant appointment.  
An internal  report of the results of this investigation will be completed and uploaded to eQMS.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 