Official Title:  Use of a Fish Oil -Based Intravenous Lipid Emulsion (Omegaven®) in 
the Treatment of Parenteral Nutrition (PN) Induced Liver Injur y 
NCT0184511 6 
Date:  7/21/2010  
 
 - 2 - 
                            Patient Info rmation  CAROLINAS HEALTHCARE SYSTEM  
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN/STUDY PROTOCOL  
July 21, 2010  
 
Protocol Title:  
Use of a Fish Oil -Based Intravenous Lipid  Emulsion (Omegaven ®) in the Treatment 
of Parenteral Nutrition (PN) induced Liver Injury  
 
BRIEF SUMMARY OR ABSTRACT OF T HIS PHASE II CLINICAL TRIAL  
STUDY  PROTOCOL  
In the [LOCATION_002], patients dependent upon parenteral nutrition (PN) receive parenteral 
lipid emulsions composed of soybean oils. Lipi[INVESTIGATOR_309586] d essential fatty acid content. They have been implicated 
in predisposing patients to PN associated liver disease  (PNALD) . Phytosterols such as 
those contained in soybean oils are thought to have a deleterious effect on biliary 
secretion.  Accumulation of lipi[INVESTIGATOR_309587].  
 
Children requiring prolonged courses of PN are at risk for developi[INVESTIGATOR_309588].  It is s 
hypothesize d that although omega -6 fatty acid emulsions prevent fatty acid deficiency, 
they are no t cleared in a manner similar to enteral chylomicrons and therefore accumulate 
in the liver and result in steatotic liver injury. It is further hypothesize d that a fat 
emulsion comprised of omega -3 fatty acids (i.e., fish oil) such as Omegaven ® would be 
beneficial in the managemet of steatotic liver injury by [CONTACT_309619] s, the reduction of arachidonic acid-derived inflammatory mediators, 
prevention of essential fatty acid deficiency through the presence of small amounts of 
arachidon ic acid, and improved clearance of lipi[INVESTIGATOR_309589]. Animal studies have 
shown that IV fat emulsions (IFE) such as fish oil that are high in eicosapentaenic and 
docashexaaenoic acid reduce impairment of bile flow which is seen in cholestasis caused 
by [CONTACT_309620].  Furthermore, it is  hypothesize d that intravenous omega 
three fatty acids will be well tolerated and might reduce the inflammatory effect in the 
liver of prolonged PN exposure and could potentially reverse any hepatic  dysfunct ion due 
to PN/IFE use.  By [CONTACT_309621] ® in place of conventional 
phytosterol/soybean lipid emulsions , we may reverse or prevent the progression of PN 
associated cholestasis and thus allow the patient to be maintained on adequate PN until 
they are  able to ingest adequate nutrition enterally.  
 
PHASE II CLINICAL TRIAL HYPOTHESIS  
The a dminist ration of  Omegaven® in place of conventional phytosterol/soybean lipid 
emulsions  will be safely provided to children with intestinal failure  (defined as inability  
to wean from PN, with causes including short bowel syndrome) and PNALD and will 
reverse or prevent the progression of PN associated cholestasis and will allow the patient 
to be maintained on adequate PN until they are able to ingest adequate nutrition ent erally.  
 
 
 
 - 3 - 
                            Patient Info rmation  SPECIFIC AIMS/OBJECTIVES  
• To determine the impact of Omegaven ® on reversal of conjugated hyperbilirubinemia  
• To determine the impact of Omegaven ® on the prevention of essential fatty acid 
deficiency  
• To determine the impact of Omegaven ® administrat ion on serum triglyceride  
• To determine the impact of Omegaven ® administration on coagulation profiles  
 
BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
Parenteral Nutrition Associated Liver Disease  (PNALD)  
 
Parenteral nutrition (PN) provides intravenous nutritional supplementa tion for patients 
unable to absorb adequate enteral nutrients secondary to insufficient intestinal length or 
function. PN contains the macronutrient building blocks of the human diet in their most 
elemental forms (amino acids and dextrose) and is commonly administered with a lipid 
emulsion to avoid essential fatty acid deficiency and to provide a calorically dense source 
of non -protein calories. In addition, PN contains the essential micronutrients 
(electrolytes, trace elements, and vitamins) to provide an optimal nutritional regimen. 
Before the development of PN in the late 1960’s, patients with insufficient 
gastrointestinal absorptive function commonly died of starvation and subsequent 
complications of malnutrition (1, 2). Today, more than 30,000 patients are permanently 
dependent on PN for survival. However, PN continues to be associated with hepatic 
injury that occurs at an unpredictable rate and includes both biochemical, i.e., elevated 
serum aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase, and histologic alte rations such as 
steatosis, steatohepatitis, lipi[INVESTIGATOR_16215], cholestasis, fibrosis, and cirrhosis (3, 4). These 
abnormalities, which may worsen with the duration of PN administration, are more 
prevalent in the pediatric population. Additional risk factors for th is condition include 
prematurity, low birth weight, long -term use of PN, the lack of concomitant enteral 
intake, systemic infections, and multiple operative procedures(5).  
  
Although the pathological features of PN -induced liver injury have been well descr ibed, 
the etiology, prevention, and treatment of this complication are not well understood. 
Multiple hypotheses exist to explain the pathogenesis of PN -induced liver injury 
including altered gut hormonal profiles (6), the propensity for bacterial transloca tion in 
the absence of enteral intake (7, 8), intestinal stasis resulting in the reduced clearance of 
hepatotoxic bile acids (8), and direct deficiencies or toxic components of the PN solution 
itself resulting in excessive glucose calorie uptake, excessive  lipid infusion, or nutritional 
deficiencies such as essential fatty acid deficiency (9 -11). None of these theories has been 
confirmed consistently. The etiology of PN -associated liver disease is currently 
considered multifactorial. Available treatment opt ions for this disease process are limited 
and have achieved moderate success at best. Care of the PN -dependent patient is focused 
on gradually increasing enteral caloric intake as the residual bowel adapts allowing  PN 
to be discontinued  (12).  In fact, i t has been shown both experimentally and clinically 
that partial enteral nutrition, when tolerated, helps to protect against the development of 
PN-associated liver injury (13 -15). In severe cases of refractory hepatic failure, liver 
transplantation with or  without accompanying small bowel transplantation remains the 
only treatment option.  
 
 - 4 - 
                            Patient Info rmation  Role of Intravenous Fat Emulsion on PN Associated Liver Disease  
 
Recent evidence demonstrates that lipi[INVESTIGATOR_309590]. Enteral lipi[INVESTIGATOR_309591] a micelle and packaged into chylomicrons which are released into 
the portal venous system for ultimate uptake and disposal in the liver. Once in the 
bloodstream , these particles rapi[INVESTIGATOR_309592] -density 
lipoproteins and can subsequently be metabolized by [CONTACT_4852]. The emulsified particles of 
commercially made and intravenously administered lipid emulsions, such as Intralipid® , 
mimic the size and structure of chylomicrons, but differ in their content. In contrast to 
chylomicrons, artificial lipid particles primarily contain essential fatty acids and omega -[ADDRESS_379586], it appears that they may be cleared as whole particles by [CONTACT_309622].(16) These factors may account for the increased incidence of steatohepatitis 
associated with the intravenous administration of Intralipid®.  
 
The mec hanism of clearance of omega -3 fatty acid containing lipid emulsions is 
unknown, but appears to be largely independent of the pathways identified above (17). 
Furthermore, omega -[ADDRESS_379587] been shown to decrease de novo 
lipogenesis (18), pr event or attenuate PN -induced hepatosteatosis in rats (19) and guinea 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_14107], and ameliorate the severity of high -fat diet -induced hepatosteatosis in rats (20). In 
addition, omega -[ADDRESS_379588] of 
inflammation (18, 21). They can displace arachidonic acid from tissue fatty acid pools, 
thereby [CONTACT_309623] -synthesizing enzymes and inflammation 
(21).  
  
Table 1 summarizes the composition of Intralipid® and Omegaven fat emulsions.  
                                                                                                                                                  
Rationale for Omegaven ® Treatment  
 
Unlike conventional intravenous fat emulsions, Omegaven ®  is comprised solely of f ish 
oils containing primarily omega -[ADDRESS_379589] shown that IV lipid 
emulsions such as fish oil that are high in eicosapentaenic and docosahexaenoic acid 
reduce impairment of bile flow as seen in cholestasis caused by [CONTACT_309624](19,20). By [CONTACT_309621] ® in place of conventional 
phytosterol/soybean fat emulsions, the cholestasis may be reversed and  patients will be 
able to be maintained on adequate PN until they are able to ingest adequate nutrition 
enterally.  
 
PRELIMANARY STUDIES/PROGRESS REPORT  
Animal Studies  
 
 - [ADDRESS_379590] the development of  steatohepatitis in PN -dependent animals. In this murine 
model, steatohepatitis is largely due to a high carbohydrate load and essential fatty acid 
deficiency. Although this model is not replicative of the clinical setting, it is a model that 
maximizes liv er steatosis. In this model, mice are treated with oral PN for 19 days before 
being sacrificed. These animals develop severe fatty liver changes demonstrated by [CONTACT_309625] (H&E, PAS, and oil red O staining), and also have 
biochemical ch anges consistent with liver injury (elevated alkaline phosphatase and 
serum transaminases). Experimental groups were supplemented with Intralipid® by 
[CONTACT_309626], intravenously, and subcutaneously. 
Other groups were al so supplemented with omega -3 fatty acids (Omegaven ®) by [CONTACT_309627].  This study found a consistent pattern of protection against 
PN-associated steatohepatitis by [CONTACT_309628]® (22). In mice that 
received the highe st dose of enteral Intralipid®, there was a marked decrease in the extent 
of overall liver injury as measured by [CONTACT_309629], histologic analysis, liver fat 
content, and serum liver enzyme levels. In all areas of this investigation, mice treated 
with enteral lipid most closely resembled the control mice that did not receive PN as part 
of the experimental protocol. These results were in complete contrast to the extensive 
fatty infiltration and evidence of hepatic injury found in mice that received PN wi thout 
lipid supplementatio n, as well as in mice that received PN with intravenous Intralipid®. 
Mice receiving intravenous Intralipid® had the most severe liver changes.  Both groups 
of animals developed marked hepatic steatosis with macrovesicular fatty in filtration and 
significant elevations in spectroscopic liver fat content and serum transaminase levels. In 
addition, the effect of enteral Intralipid® supplementation appeared to be dose -
dependent; mice receiving one -third the dose of enteral Intralipid® s howed improved 
liver histology but still demonstrated a moderate degree of liver injury by [CONTACT_309630].  
 
The nutritional model employed in this study provided all experimental mice with enteral 
PN solution ad libitum. In th is way, mice were not force -fed PN and self -regulated their 
PN intake by [CONTACT_309631]. Importantly, all mice gained weight 
throughout the 19 -day protocol, and there were no differences in weight gain parameters 
between the groups. The PN s olution was a typi[INVESTIGATOR_309593] 20% 
dextrose and 2% amino acids. Each milliliter of this formula provides 0.2 g (0.68 
kilocalories) of dextrose and 0.02 g (0.08 kilocalories) amino acid. As the daily intake per 
animal of PN averaged 15 ml,  mice were ingesting approximately 11.4 kilocalories/day 
and 456 kilocalories/kg/day. This caloric load is similar to the established dietary energy 
needs of the mouse (23). The parenteral fat source used in this study was Intralipid® 20% 
(Baxter, Deerfiel d, Illinois), which is a soybean oil -based emulsion. Each milliliter of this 
emulsion co ntains 0.2 g (2.0 kcal) of fat.  It is recognize d that the model may not 
compl etely match the clinical, human  setting of intravenous PN -administration;  however, 
the goal was to produce a fatty liver with biochemical evidence of injury.  
 - 6 - 
                            Patient Info rmation    
In a second set of experiments, the same murine model was used to determine whether 
Omegaven ®, a commercial fish oil emulsion available in Europe, would prevent fatty 
liver changes by e nteral or parenteral routes  of administration, and to determine the 
serum fatty acid profile of these animals. Animals receiving Omegaven ® via the oral and  
intravenous routes had completely normal livers on histology and  MRI spectroscopy 
revealed normal li ver fat content. Liver functions tests in orally treated animals were also 
within the norm, while there were minimal elevations in intravenously treated groups. 
There was no fatty acid deficiency in these groups as determined by [CONTACT_309632] (5, 8, 11 -
Eicosat rienoic acid) levels in the serum fatty acid analysis. Mead acid  is the only 
polyunsaturated fatty acid of note produced de novo by [CONTACT_309633].  Furthermore, arachadonic acid 
levels were low in Omegaven ® treated animals consistent with previous reports. In a 
third set of experiments, mice were made severely fatty acid deficient. These mice were 
treated for 10 days with Omegaven ® and had complete reversal of their fatty acid 
deficiency . 
 
Similarly, other investigators studied livers in a newborn pig model and  showed that 
intravenous administration of fish oil, which consists primarily of omega -3 fatty acids, 
reduced parenteral nutrition -induced cholestasis.(22) However, the study was o nly [ADDRESS_379591] regime of nutritional support by [CONTACT_309634].   It has been 
thought that reduction of an essential fatty acid, such as omega -6, during long -term 
therapy would result  in fatty acid deficiency and deterioration of the health of the patient. 
The Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_7724]’s  experience to date, demonstrat es that the use of 
Omegaven ® as monotherapy does not result in the development of essential fatty acid 
deficiency and it can actually be used to as monotherapy to treat this deficiency state.   
 
Preliminary Safety and Efficacy Data for Use of Omegaven ® in Other Diseases  
 
Omegaven ® has been used for over [ADDRESS_379592] to conventional fat emulsions.  
According to current data, an increase in the proportion of omega -3 fatty acids is thought 
to optimize nutrition in general, but in particular benefit p atients whose underlying 
disease might benefit from an increase in omega -3 fatty acids.  An adequate intake of 
omega -3 fatty acids results in anti -inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects that are 
protective in nature from inflammatory tissue damage, capi [INVESTIGATOR_22425], and 
improved immunological resistance. It may also reduce the risk of thrombosis and 
increase microvascular perfusion due to its anti -aggregatory and vasodilatory effects.  
 
In Europe and Asia, the use of parenteral omega -3 fatty acids h as been used in the 
following adult patient populations (24 -28): 
 - Post traumatic and post surgical patients  
 - Patients  experiencing early stages of sepsis/SIRS  
 - Patients  at risk of hyperinflammatory processes  
 - Patients  with inflammatory bowel diseas e (Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis)  
 - 7 - 
                            Patient Info rmation   - Patients  with inflammatory skin diseases (psoriasis, atopic eczema)  
 
The dosing used in these patients was 0.1 g (1 ml) to a maximum of 0.2 (2 ml) /kg body 
weight. The infusion rate used did not exceed 0.5 ml/kg/b ody weight/hour.  Since it was 
intended to be infused in combination with conventional fat emulsions, the total fat intake 
was limited to 10 -20% as fish oil.  The duration of administration did not exceed 4 
weeks.  
 
Preliminary Safety and Efficacy Data for Use of Omegaven ® in Infants  
 
     Initial p ediatric experience with Omegaven ® was limited to 2 unpublished clinical 
trials (see reference ).  These trials were performed in [LOCATION_013] and Taiwan (29). The 
German study was a controlled, randomized, open paralle l-group clinical study to 
investigate whether or not omega -3 fatty acids could be incorporated into the plasma 
phospholipi[INVESTIGATOR_309594].  In this 7 -day safety trial, 
Omegaven ® use was evaluated on the basis of clinical, labora tory, and antioxidant 
parameters and lipid metabolism. Treatment was started on day 3 -5 of life and continued 
for a total of 7 days. Patients received Omegaven ® plus conventional soybean fat 
emulsion or soybean emulsion alone.  The maximum dose of Omegaven ® in the study 
was 0.2 gm/kg/day.  The study concluded that the Omegaven ® was well tolerated in this 
group of preterm infants in respect to both hematological and biochemical parameters. 
The incidence of reported adverse events between both study groups wa s similar. The 
eicosapentaenoic acid ( EPA) content of plasma phospholipi[INVESTIGATOR_309595] ® arm, with the proportion of EPA to the total fatty acids reaching almost 
three times the baseline value. The sum of omega -3 fatty acids show ed a significantly 
greater increase in the Omegaven ® group compared to the conventional treatment arm.  
 
     The Taiwanese study was a single center, controlled, open -labeled study conducted to 
investigate the safety of parenteral administration of Omegave n in preterm infants. The 
group of 20 infants were randomized to one of two treatment groups; one consisting of 
Omegaven ®/conventional lipi[INVESTIGATOR_309596].  
The average dose of Omegaven ® in the treatment group of th is 14 -day study was 0.13 + 
0.02 g/kg/day.  There were no significant differences between the two groups with regard 
to body weight and length. Similarly, there was no significant difference in the 
hematological or biochemical parameters.  There were no adv erse events that were 
attributable to Omegaven ® use. It was concluded that Omegaven ® was well tolerated in 
these preterm infants.  
 
Experience in PN Liver Injury  
 
A single patient with bridging fibrosis due to prolonged parenteral nutrition use has been 
treated by [CONTACT_309635] ® at Children's Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], [LOCATION_011] (IRB 
approval # E04 -09-006, FDA IND # 69,208). By [CONTACT_654] [ADDRESS_379593] proliferation, mild fibrosis, and mild 
periport al iron deposits. On a subsequent biopsy, he progressed to bridging fibrosis.  
Omegaven ® was started at a dose of 0.2 g/kg/day IV and advanced by 0.2 g/kg/day 
increments to 1 g/kg/day over a 14 -day period. In order to ensure adequate caloric intake, 
additi onal non -protein calories were provided as parenteral carbohydrates (as dextrose).  
No other parenteral form of fat emulsion was administered during Omegaven ® therapy.  
His enteral feeds were advanced while on the Omegaven ®. Once the goal dose of 
Omegaven ® was reached, the direct bilirubin declined and normalized.  His AST also 
normalized and he was removed from the liver -small bowel transplant list. Weekly CRP 
levels were obtained to monitor systemic inflammation. CRP levels decreased from a 
high of 1.85 t o 0.17 mg/dL (Normal <0.5). He continues to receive Omegaven ® at a dose 
1g/kg/day and has had no evidence of bleeding or clinical evidence of essential fatty acid 
deficiency. His direct bilirubin continues to be within the normal range and he has no 
eviden ce of jaundice. He is still receiving approximately 50% of his total caloric needs 
via the parenteral route. He continues to grow and is achieving his developmental 
milestones appropriately. This child has been on Omegaven ® for greater than [ADDRESS_379594] been treated with 
Omegaven ® at Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_309597] .  In addition to the aforementioned patient, 
24 child ren are  receiving Omegaven ® at home in conjunction with home paren teral 
nutrition. As of January 6, 2006, no patient s from Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_309598] ® have  died of PN associated liver disease or required a liver 
transplant . 
 
In a recent article by [CONTACT_309636], entitled  “Impact of fish oil -based lipid emulsion on serum 
triglyceride, bilirubin, and albumin levels in children with parenteral nutrition -
associated liver disease ”, published in Pediatric Research (December, 2009), t he authors 
demonstrated that sub stituting fish oil -based lipid emulsion for the standar d soybean -
based emulsion will result in normalizing, to some degree, the altered physiologic 
balance that comes to exist in patients dependent on PN.   The indices that have shown 
improvement were decreasing direct bilirubin and triglyceride levels and incr easing 
albumin levels.  In previous publications, these authors have also noted that the provision 
of fish -oil-based fat emulsion was not associated with essential fatty acid deficiency, 
hypertriglyceridemia, coagulopathy, infections, or growth delay.  
 
Researchers at The Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_309599], Toronto, Canada published their findings 
of their experience with Omegaven® in young children in a recent publication (February, 
2009) The median age was 7.5 (range 3.6 -46) months, and median parenteral nutrition  
duration before starting Omegaven® was 28.4 (range 15.3 -55.3) weeks. Median initial 
serum conjugated bilirubin was 137 (range 54 -203) micromole/L (8.06 [3.18 -11.94] 
mg/dL). Nine of the twelve patients had complete and sustained resolution of 
hyperbilirubi nemia within a median of 24 (range 7 -37) weeks, and all were no longer 
being considered for liver transplantation. Improvements in markers of hepatic 
inflammation as well as nutritional status also were noted in these patients. Three of the 
12 patients rec eived a liver -intestine transplant while taking Omegaven®. There were no 
complications attributable to Omegaven®.  
 - 9 - 
                            Patient Info rmation  DESIGN AND METHODS  
Study Design  
This phase II clinical trial will be a non -randomized, open -labeled, prospective study of 
intravenously admi nistered Omegaven ® fat emulsion  in the treatment of PN associated 
liver injury.  
 
Patient Selection and Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
After the diagnosis of PN liver injury is made, patients who are followed by [CONTACT_309637], Gastroenterology, Surgery, or the Critical Care Service in conjunction with 
the patient's primary physician  will contact [CONTACT_6283]. Caicedo, Chiu, or Lessaris, and an 
evaluation will be performed. If the patient's parents or guardians agree to participate in 
the study, informed consent will be obtained. The history of present illness and past 
medical history will be reviewed with the guardian and pertinent demographic and 
medical information will be record ed on data collection forms. The se form s will be used 
to record all laboratory results, nutritional history, and descriptions of any liver biopsies 
performed.  
 
Though most patients receiving parenteral nutrition do not develop end stage liver 
disease, there is a small percentage of patients, typi[INVESTIGATOR_309600] s of parenteral nutrition, who do go on to develop fulminant liver 
failure.  The study population of this protocol is limited to patients felt to fulfill the 
following conditions:  
 
a) The patient will be PN -dependent (unable to meet nutritional needs sole ly by [CONTACT_309638]) and  
b) The patient will have  significant hepatic dysfunction due to PN despi[INVESTIGATOR_309601] n of 
all conventional therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] (the patient must have failed standard therapi[INVESTIGATOR_309602]/her liver disease includin g surgical treatment, cycling of PN, 
reduction/removal of copper and manganese from PN, advancement of enteral feeding, 
and the use of ursodiol) . 
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
 
1. Children [ADDRESS_379595] PN -associated liver 
diseases . Other causes of liver disease (i.e., biliary atresia, galactosemia, alpha -1 
antitrypsin deficiency) will be excluded. A liver biopsy  is not nece ssary for treatment  
4. Direct bilirubin > 2.0 mg/dl  
5. Signed patient informed consent  
6. Signed patient assent where applicable.  
 
The patient will be hospi[INVESTIGATOR_309603]®.  
 
 
 
 - 10 - 
                            Patient Info rmation  Exclusion Criteria:  
 
1. Pregnancy  
2. Other causes  of chronic liver disease (cystic fibrosis, biliary atresia, alpha -1 
antitrypsin deficiency)  
3. Signs of advanced liver disease including cirrhosis on biopsy, varices, ascites  
4. The patient is allergic to eggs/shellfish  
5. The patient has a severe hemorrhagic diso rder 
6. The patient is enrolled in any other clinical trial involving an investigational agent  
(unless approved by [CONTACT_309639])  
7. The parent or guardian or child unwilling to provide consent or assent.  
 
Screening Pro cedures  
 
Prior historical and physical information, imaging studies, biopsies, and other available 
specialized tests will be reviewed by [CONTACT_309640].  Additional 
biochemical monitoring will be perfomed as necessary. If the patient’s status supports 
consideration of treatment, the option for non -experimental therapy will be investigated.  
 
Recruitment Methods  
With an anticipated enrollment of 3 -5 patient s per year, 20 -25 patients will be recruited 
over the course of the 5 year study.   
Patients in the trial will be recruited from the NICU, PI[INVESTIGATOR_6890], CVICU, surgery, 
gastroenterology, and general pediatrics services at Levine Children's Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (LCH). 
Approxim ately 5 -8 patients/year are diagnosed with severe PN associated liver injury at 
Levine Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  The Principal Investigator ([CONTACT_309668]) or Co -investigators 
([CONTACT_309669], [CONTACT_309670]) will discuss treatment options including study treatment with  the 
parents or legal guardians.  Informed consent for participation in the study will only be 
obtained by [CONTACT_309641].   If the patient is  a minor  but of sufficient  age and  understa nding , patient  
assent will also be obtained.  
 
Description of Study Treatments or Exposures/Predictors  
Bottles containing 50mL or 100 mL of 10% Omegaven ® will be purchased from 
International Pharmacy of Hamburg, [LOCATION_013]. Insurance companies will be billed t he 
cost of Omegaven ®.  If the insurance company does not provide payment, Healthy @ 
Home, LLC will cover all drug costs for patients enrolled in this protocol. Omegaven ® is 
manufactured by [CONTACT_309642], Bad Homburg, [LOCATION_013]. Omegaven ® is 
formulated as  an emulsion from fish oils.   
 
While inpatient, the emulsion for each patient will be provided in its original container 
for volumes more than 96 ml/day.  Doses less than 96 ml/day will be repacked into 
syringes to allow for administration via syringe pump.  If patients are to be dis charged 
home on Omegaven ®, all doses will be administered from the original manufacturer’s 
container.  
 - [ADDRESS_379596] lab oratory data monitored  (Table 2)  as do inpatients, with values 
reported to the pediatric gastroenterologists  via the Pediatric N utrition Support Clinic at 
the Levine Children’s Specialty Center .  Growth will be tracked weekly.  Home health 
nursing staff and guardians will be educated regarding Omegaven® and administration 
while the child is still an inpatient prior to discharge.  T his education will include 
Omegaven® adverse event monitoring  (Table 3)  and reporting; administration practices ; 
and information regarding monthly  or other mutually agreed upon schedules for clinical 
evaluation and follow up of the patient by [CONTACT_309643].  
 
All study materials will be stored securely until the time of administration. The bottles 
will be stored at room temperature below 30° C (do not freeze). Damaged or suspect drug 
will be returned unused to Fresenius - Kabi. Containers should be shak en before use.  
 
All supplies for the study  protocol  will be accompanied by [CONTACT_194472][INVESTIGATOR_309604] (e.g. research 
pharmacist). Information recorded on these accountability and shippi[INVESTIGATOR_309605], batch numbers, quantities received or dispensed, to whom 
dispensed, returned drug and drug lost or damaged.  
At the end of the protocol study, all used and unused Omegaven ® will be accounted for.  
If expi[INVESTIGATOR_5697], the remainin g drug supplies will be destroyed.  
 
Financial Consideration  
A request to charge for Omegaven® has been submitted to the FDA.   Healthy @ Home, 
LLC will assume all costs, in the event that third party payers do not cover the cost of 
Omegaven®.   Study inves tigators will not receive financial benefit in any form from this 
research study.  
 
Details of Omegaven ® Administration  
After baseline labs are obtained (Table II), therapy with Omegaven ® will be initiated at a 
starting dose of 0.5gm/kg/day infused over 12 -24 hours. After two days, the dose will be 
increased to 1 gm/kg/day, the goal dose. Omegaven ® will be infused intravenously 
through either a central or peripheral catheter in conjunction with parenteral nutrition.   
The same standards of care provided to a ll patients receiving parenteral nutrition solution 
will be followed.  Laboratory tests will be performed as detailed in Table 2.  Growth will 
be tracked weekly.  If additional fat calories are needed, they will be provided via the 
enteral route.  
 
In the event that a patient is unable to achieve adequate calories parenterally and is 
unable to tolerate enteral feeds, it may be necessary to evaluate whether or not the patient 
should continue the study with Omegaven ® as monotherapy or resume therapy with 
conv entional fat emulsions at 1 gm/kg in addition to the Omegaven® so that additional 
parenteral fat calories can be given. The clinical team, in conjunction with the patient's 
primary physician, will determine if the patient should be removed from the protoco l. 
 
 - 12 - 
                            Patient Info rmation  As previously mentioned, Omegaven ® may be infused in the same manner as 
conventional fat emulsions through either a central or peripheral line. The emulsion is 
isotonic. It is compatible with parenteral nutrition solutions and may be co -infused via y -
site. Omegaven ® may be infused through a 1.2micron inline filter.  
 
Dose Modification  
Hypertriglyceridemia : 
If hypertriglyceridemia develops, defined as serum triglyceride levels > 200 mg/dL, the 
following will be considered prior to reducing the dose:  
 
a) If the level was obtained while the patient was receiving a continuous 24 - hour 
infusion of Omegaven ®, the total dose should be infused over 20 hours, and a 
repeat serum triglyceride level obtained prior to resuming the infusion 4 hours later.  
 
b) Other sources o f hypertriglyceridemia should be considered and addressed (drugs, 
renal disease)  
 
If necessary , if the triglycerides continue to remain high despi[INVESTIGATOR_309606], a dosage reduction of 25% will be considered.  
 
Hyperglycemia : 
If hypergly cemia develops, defined as serum glucose levels >250mg/dL, o ther sources of 
hyperglycemia should be conside red and addressed (sepsis).  A minimum dosage 
reduction of 25% will occur.  Blood sugars will c ontinue to be monitored closely with 
additional adjust ments as warranted.  
 
Coagulopathy:  
Other sources of coagulopathy should be considered and addressed (sepsis, worsening 
liver failure).  Omegaven administration will be reduced or halted.  Coagulation profiles 
will continue to be monitored closely with addi tional adjustments as warranted.  
 
Duration of Therapy  
Patients will complete the study when he/she is completely off PN; develops a 
contraindication for further use; or the patient/family requests to be removed from the 
study protocol .  
 
In the event that a patient who has been listed for a liver or liver/intestinal transplant has 
an organ become  available, the participation in this protocol will not preclude them from 
receiving the transplant. Omegaven ® will not be administered post transplant.  
 
In the eve nt that a patient whose hepatic enzymes and serum bilir ubin have normalized 
still requires parenteral fat emulsion after receiving  Omegaven ® for more than 6 months, 
their c linical course will be reviewed, and a decision will be made whether to continue 
the Omegaven ® or rechallenge the patient with conventional therapy (Intralipid ®). 
 
 - 13 - 
                            Patient Info rmation   
 
 
Discontinuation of Therapy  
Patients will continue to be followed by [CONTACT_309644] (LCH Division 
of Gastroenterology) upon discontinuation of therapy with O megaven ® a minimum of [ADDRESS_379597] receive 
intravenous fat emulsion, treatment with Omegaven ® will resume only if the patient 
shows evidence of PN liver disease (elevations in direct bilirubin > 2 or pathology  
findings consistent w ith cholestasis). Otherwise, the patient will be treated with 
conventional lipid emulsion.  
 
Definition of Primary and Secondary Outcomes/Endpoints  
The primary outcome is normalization of direct bilirubin to less than 0.4mg/dL by 9 
months . 
Seconday outcomes  include:  
• Omegaven ® will prevent EFA deficiency as evidenced by [CONTACT_309645]  
• The rate of triglyceride levels > 400 mg/dL with Omegaven® will be similar to 
that seen with PN administered with soy oil IFE (conventional emulsion,  i.e., 
Intralipid®) as evidenced by [CONTACT_309646]  
• PN containing Omegaven® will be safe for patients with respect to t he risk of 
unexpected bleeding/ coagulopathies as evidenced by [CONTACT_309647] /Assessment and Schedules  
Data will be collected by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_5773] -investigators . Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_309607]. Results of liver biopsies and blood chemistries will be 
obtained from the  Cerner Pow er Chart computer system.  Specifically, the history of 
present illness, past medical history, and birth history, pertinent physical exam findings 
including patient weight, the results of liver biopsies, and parenteral and enteral feeding 
history will be c ollected. The information will be recorded on hard copy data collection 
forms.  
 
Study Protocol Timeline  
This study protocol will end five years following commencement of the study.  
 
Adverse Event Criteria and Reporting Procedures  
Adverse events (AEs) will be assessed from the time of the first Omegaven ® infusion 
until exit from the study. In particular, the patient will be observed during and shortly 
 - 14 - 
                            Patient Info rmation  after Omegaven ® administration for the occurrence of anaphylactic or allergic reactions.  
Patients experienc ing any adverse events that are moderate or severe in nature and that 
may be related to Omegaven ® will have their treatment temporarily halted until the 
adverse event has resolved. Dose modifications in the event of hypertriglyceridemia , 
hyperglycemia and coagulopathy  will occur as described above. Should patients be dose 
reduced for adverse events that are later considered to be unrelated to the study 
medication, treatment will recommence at the dose they had received prior to the dose 
reduction. Patients with anaphylactic or allergic reactions will not continue Omegaven ® 
treatment.  
 
Any serious or unsuspected adverse events will be reported to the Institutional Review 
Board and to the FDA within 72 hours of the occurrence, or immediately if the event is 
fatal or life threatening as per CHS IRB Policy on Adverse and Unexpected Events and 
Unanticipated Risks to Research Subjects and Others. This will be done in person or by 
[CONTACT_756], and by [CONTACT_309648]/unexpected event reporting.  
 
Unanticipated adverse events will be detected by [CONTACT_309649], physical 
exams and laboratory analysis for all participants, as well as by [CONTACT_309650] (following instruction) if participant is an outpatien t. Events 
will be reported to the investigators immediately by [CONTACT_309651], and subsequently 
to the appropriate board or committee.  
 
The IRB will be responsible for assuring that adverse event reporting requirements are 
met. Any patients who have ag reed to participate in the study protocol, but who have not 
yet undergone intervention, will be informed of the adverse event.  
 
All AEs will be assessed by [CONTACT_309652] a case report form, inclusive 
of the date of onset and res olution;  severity; relationship  to study medication; outcome 
and action taken with the study medication.  In addition, the clinical severity of all AEs 
will be recorded and graded using the standard definitions of mild, moderate, severe or 
potentially life threate ning with serious adverse events (SAE) deemed to be those severe 
to potentially life threatening (Table 3).   Once an AE or SAE is identified, research team 
members will ensure that the participants receive appropriate care and that all actions 
taken by [CONTACT_32816] [INVESTIGATOR_309608].  In addition, all AE or 
SAEs will be classified and documented by [CONTACT_309653], probably, 
possibly, or probably unrelated to administration of study drug.   
 
Patients will be withdrawn fro m the study for any of the following:  
 
a) Toxicity  considered unacceptable by [CONTACT_309654]: no adverse effects have been observed in patients receiving Omegaven ® that  
 could be attributed to its use  
b) Patient/guardian requests to disco ntinue treatment and/or observation for any reason  
c)   A suitable organ has been located and the patient is able to undergo a liver or  
 liver/intestinal transplant  
d) Decision by [CONTACT_309655]’s best medical interest  
 - 15 - 
                            Patient Info rmation  e) Patient is lost to follow -up. 
 
In the event that a patient is withdrawn, the Investigator will document the date of 
withdrawal, the reason for withdrawal, and the results of all assessments made up to the 
date of withdrawal . 
 
 
DATA MANAGEMENT AND STATIS TICAL ANALYLSIS  
 
Data Management Methods  
Overview  
 
This phase II clinical trial study will be supported by [CONTACT_309656] -based data management 
system (DMS). The system will include a protocol management system that assists study 
staff with accurate collection of study data and monitors protocol adherence. The system 
will provide and be linked to a data entry system. Features of the system include double 
data entry, data range and logic checks, cross form validations at the time of data entry 
and audit trails of  entered and corrected data.  
 
Protocol Management and Protocol Status  
 
All study related tasks will follow Good Clinical Practice Guidelines. Protocol status 
reports from the protocol management system will allow the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_309609] a regular basis.  
 
Data Entry and Databases  
 
Study results will be entered into the DMS from paper based case report forms that will 
be completed by [CONTACT_473].  
 
Confidentiality, Security, Back -Up 
The databases will be located on th e CHS Network and therefore backed  - up on a daily 
basis. All study files will be password protected to ensure patient confidentiality and 
security of the database.  
 
Quality Control Methods  
Dispensing of Study Drug  
 
Pharmacy dispensing records will be revi ewed by a study monitor on a monthly basis to 
ensure adherence with procedures for dispensing of Omegaven.  
 
Legal and Ethics Requirements  
 
This study is being conducted under a FDA Investigational New Drug Application. FDA 
guidelines must be followed. Fede ral regulations require all investigational studies be 
conducted under the auspi[INVESTIGATOR_18279], as defined in the Code of Federal Regulations, 
 - 16 - 
                            Patient Info rmation  Title 21, Part 56; and in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (1964) amended 
Edinburgh, Scotland (2000). T he IRB will approve all aspects of the study, including the 
protocol and informed consent to be used and any modifications made to the protocol or 
informed consent prior to the initiation of the study. All changes to the protocol or 
consent form must be re viewed and approved prior to implementation, except where 
necessary to eliminate apparent immediate hazards to human subjects.  
 
Informed Consent  
 
The Investigator will be responsible for obtaining an Informed Consent signed by [CONTACT_309657]/her legal ly authorized representative prior to his/her participation in the 
study in accordance with the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 21, Part 50.20. Informed 
Consent will be obtained from a patient or his/her legally authorized representative after a 
full ex planation of the purpose of the study, the risks and discomforts involved, potential 
benefits, etc. have been provided by [CONTACT_18370], both verbally and in 
writing. The original of the signed consent must be maintained in the patient’s med ical 
record. The person who signed the consent must also be given a copy of the signed 
consent form.  
 
Patient Confidentiality  
 
Individual patient medical information obtained as a result of this study is considered 
confidenti al, and disclosure to third par ties, other than those cited below, is prohibited. 
Patient confidentiality will be further ensured by [CONTACT_309658]. Data generated as a result of this study will be available for 
inspection, on request by [CONTACT_309659]. These shall include all study -
relevant documentation, including medical histories to verify eligibility, laboratory test 
results to verify transcription accuracy, treatment and diagnostic reports, 
admission/discharge summari es for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_309610], and autopsy reports (if available) for deaths occurring during or in temporal 
proximity to the study.  
 
As part of the required content of the informed consent, patients must be informed th at 
their records will be reviewed by [CONTACT_309659].  
 
Retention of Records  
 
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_309611] a comprehensive and centralized 
filing system of all study related documentation which is suitable for inspec tion at any 
time by [CONTACT_309659].  These include:  
 
a. Patient files including source documentation and Informed Consent  
b. Study files, including the protocol with all amendments, copi[INVESTIGATOR_309612], and all corresponde nce with the FDA and IRB  
c. Pharmacy files including drug shipment, dispensing, and accountability records,  
 and pharmacy -related correspondence  
 - 17 - 
                            Patient Info rmation   
Per FDA regulations, the Primary Investigator will retain records for a period of two (2) 
years following dis continuation of the study.  
 
Data Analysis Plan  
The study protocol is intended to evaluat e the safety and efficacy of Omegaven ® in the 
treatment of PN induced liver injury.  Safety is addressed in the Data and Safety 
Monitoring Plan. Serum markers for effic acy will be monitored (bilirubin and liver 
enzymes). The specific data analysis will be evaluated by [CONTACT_91724] . 
 
Statistical Power and Sample Considerations  
As discussed above, this study protocol is not intended to prove statistical significance.  
 
Study Organization  
[CONTACT_309668] wi ll serve as the principal investigator. The investigators will perform all 
data collection and data entry. Drs. Chiu and Lessaris will assist with patient enrollment .  
Drs. Caicedo, Chiu and Lessaris will assist in study de sign and data analysis.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
Monitoring for toxicity due to Omegaven will be assessed by [CONTACT_309660], hematological studies, serum 
triglycerides, total cholesterol, e ssential fatty acid profiles, blood and urine glucose and 
liver and renal function tests. Blood samples will be taken prior to the start of therapy, 
and weekly thereafter until direct bilirubin <2mg/dL.  Subsequent testing will be 
determined based on direc t bilirubin values (as this is the monitoring standard of care for 
liver failure) and will be bi month ly or monthly .  See Table 2 for additional information.  
Dose reduction will occur if there is evidence of hypertriglyceridemia (serum 
triglycerides > 200mg /dL), hyperglycemia  (serum glucose >250mg/dL) , or evidence of 
bleeding. Growth indices including weight, length/height, and head circumference will 
also be monitored.   [CONTACT_9688][INVESTIGATOR_20121], the director of Pediatric Gastroenterology at LCH will be 
the Data and Saf ety Monitor.  He will review patient data quarterly to ensure patient 
safety is upheld and that protocols are followed as described.  The study will be halted in 
the event of one life threatening epi[INVESTIGATOR_309613]® administration.  
 
RSKS AND DISCO MFORTS  
Description of Risks and Discomforts  
 
Potential Risk of Omegaven ® Treatment  
 
Omegaven ® has been studied in animal pre -clinical models as well as Phase I, II, III, and 
post marketing human trials in both Europe and Asia.  Prolonged bleeding time and an 
inhibited platelet aggregation can occur. It should not be administered to patients known 
to be allergic to fish or egg protein.  
 
Contraindications to Omegaven ® include the following:  
 
 - 18 - 
                            Patient Info rmation  Impaired lipid metabolism   
Severe hemorrhagic disorders  
Unstable di abetes mellitus  
Collapse and shock  
Stroke/  Embolism  
Recent cardiac infarction   
Undefined coma status  
Known allergy to fish or egg protein  
 
Side effects:  
 
The infusion of Omegaven ® can lead to a prolonged bleeding time and an inhibited 
platelet aggregation.  In rare cases, patients may experience a fishy taste.  
 
The administration of Omegaven ® should be stopped or reduced if there is a marked 
increased in blood glucose levels during the Omegaven ® infusion. Undesirable effects 
that are seen during the infusion  of Omegaven ® that may also occur with conventional 
fat emulsions (i.e., Intralipid®) include:  
 
Slight rise in body temperature   
Heat sensation and/or cold sensation  
Chills  
Flushing or cyanosis  
Lack of appetite, nausea, vomiting   
Dyspnea  
Headache, pain in the chest, bone pain  
Priapi[INVESTIGATOR_309614]/decrease blood pressure  
Anaphylactic reactions/erythema  
 
Overdose:  
 
In the event of an overdose of Omegaven ®, there is a risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_309615] >200 m g/dL acutely as a result 
of too rapid a rate of infusion, or chronically at high infusion rates in associated with a 
change in the patient’s clinical condition (e.g., renal dysfunction, sepsis).  In such cases, 
the infusion should be stopped or, if necessa ry, continued at a reduced dose.  
 
Metabolic acidosis has occurred in patients receiving Omegaven ® at excessive doses 
without simultaneous administration of dextrose.  
 
Potential Benefit of Omegaven ® Treatment  
 
Omegaven ® may be effective in stabilizing or r eversing hepatic injury associated with 
the use of parenteral nutrition. It may allow the patient to continue to receive the majority 
 - 19 - 
                            Patient Info rmation  of his/her caloric intake from parenteral nutrition while advancing on enteral nutrition or 
awaiting liver or liver/intest inal transplant . 
 
Potential Risks of No Treatment  
 
Since Omegaven ® will only be offered to those patients for whom no standard therapy is 
likely to be safe and effective, the risks of not being treated are those allowing for the 
natural history of their di sease and associated clinical manifestations to progress. These 
include fulminant liver failure and death.  
 
Summary – Overall Risk Assessment  
 
Patients will be at some risk inherent in taking a pharmaceutical agent that has not been 
fully evaluated for lon g duration treatment. However, the availability of safety data 
demonstrates no life -threatening risks or toxicities to vital organs or physiologic 
functions. Prolonged bleeding times and inhibition of platelet aggregation are a potential 
risk, especially t o those patients with an underlying coagulopathy or those being treated 
with an anticoagulant. The potential benefits of Omegaven ® in this patient population are 
mainly based on the experimental evidence ; a highlighted case of dramatic success ; and 
success  in phase I clinical trials . However, the study will only be available to those for 
whom no standard therapy is available or appropriate, or has already failed. The risks and 
potential benefits will require careful individual assessment by [CONTACT_309661].  The heterogeneity of clinical manifestations will lead to non -uniform risk -
benefit ratios across the eligible patient population.  
 
Privacy Provisions  
Individual patient medical information obtained as a result of this study protocol i s 
considered confidential and disclosure to third parties, other than those cited below, is 
prohibited. Patient confidentiality will be further ensured by [CONTACT_309662]. Data 
generated as a result of this study will be available for inspection, on req uest by [CONTACT_309663]. These shall include all study -relevant documentation, including 
medical histories to verify eligibility, laboratory test results to verify transcription 
accuracy, treatment and diagnostic reports, admission/discharge su mmaries for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_309616], and autopsy reports (if available) for 
deaths occurring during or in temporal proximity to the study.  
 
Confidentiality Provisions  
Loss of patient confidentiality is another risk in th is study. The risk of loss of 
confidentiality will be reduced by [CONTACT_309664] . 
 
POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
 
The potential benefits of this study protocol apply directly to those seen in phase I 
clinical trials and to possible improvement in the treatment of future patients. If 
successful, the  experimental treatment will provide a safe and effective means of 
 - 20 - 
                            Patient Info rmation  avoiding liver failure requiring transplant or that may  lead to death.  Thus, th e potenital 
complications of surgery or fulminant hepatic failure may be avoided.  
 
PN associated liver disease is a life threatening condition . Available therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] 
(liver/small bowel transplant, intestinal lengthening, ursodiol, combination 
enteral/paren teral feedings) are often inadequate or entail high risks.  Phytosterol -based 
intravenous fat emulsions containing large quantities of omega [ADDRESS_379598] been 
associated with PN associated liver disease. For example, o ne patient, with bridging 
fibros is secondary to prolonged PN/lipid therapy, treated with Omegaven ® has had a 
sustained dramatic response with resolution of jaundice and direct bilirubin levels < 2.  
The safety profile of Omegaven ® has been demonstrated to be acceptable for the diseases 
treated and should be considered as an option for patients requiring a form of intravenous 
fat emulsion.  
 
REFERENCES  
1.  Dudrick SJ, Wilmore DW, Vars HM, Rhoads JE. Long -term total parenteral nutrition 
with growth, development, and positive nitrogen balance.  Surgery 1968;64:134 -42. 
2.  Wilmore DW, Dudrick SJ. Growth and development of an infant receiving all 
nutrients exclusively by [CONTACT_59570]. Jama 1968;203:860 -4. 
3.  Mullick FG, Moran CA, Ishak KG. Total parenteral nutrition: a histopathologic 
analysis of the liv er changes in 20 children. Mod Pathol 1994;7:190 -4. 
4.  Freund HR. Abnormalities of liver function and hepatic damage associated with total 
parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1991;7:1 -5; discussion 5 -6. 
5.  Beath SV, Davies P, Papadopoulou A, Khan AR, Buick R G, Corkery JJ, Gornall P, 
Booth IW. Parenteral nutrition -related cholestasis in postsurgical neonates: multivariate 
analysis of risk factors. J Pediatr Surg 1996;31:[ADDRESS_379599] of 
total parenteral nutrition on gut hormone release in humans. Gastroenterology 
1981;80:988 -93. 
7.  Yeh SL, Chen WJ, Huang PC. Effects of L -glutamine on induced hepatosteatosis in 
rats receiving total parenteral nutrition. J Formos Med Assoc 1995;94:593 -9. 
8.  Kubota A, Yonekura T, Hoki M, Oyanagi H, Kawahara H, Yagi M, Imura K, Iiboshi 
Y, Wasa K, Kamata S, Okada A. Total parenteral nutrition -associated intrahepatic 
cholestasis in infants: 25 years' experience. J Pediatr Surg 2000;35:1049 -51. 
9.  Moss RL, Das JB , Ansari G, Raffensperger JG. Hepatobiliary dysfunction during total 
parenteral nutrition is caused by [CONTACT_309665], not the route of administration. J Pediatr Surg 
1993;28:391 -6; discussion [ADDRESS_379600] amino acid formulation in preterm neonates requiring parenteral nutrition. J 
Pediatr 1987;110:466 -70. 
11. Moss RL, Haynes AL, Pastuszyn A, Glew RH. Methionine infusion reproduces liver 
injury of parenteral nutrition cholestasi s. Pediatr Res 1999;45:664 -8. 
12. Meehan JJ, Georgeson KE. Prevention of liver failure in parenteral nutrition -
dependent children with short bowel syndrome. J Pediatr Surg 1997;32:473 -5. 
13. Whalen GF, Shamberger RC, Perez -Atayde A, Folkman J. A proposed c ause for the 
hepatic dysfunction associated with parenteral nutrition. J Pediatr Surg 1990;25:[ADDRESS_379601] of 
enteral feeding on hepatic steatosis induced by [CONTACT_309666]. JPEN J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 1994;18:[ADDRESS_379602] of hyperalimentation on hepatic lipid 
content and lipogenic enzyme activity in rats and man. Surgery 1980;88:[ADDRESS_379603] K, Ol ivecrona T. Intravenous lipid emulsions: 
removal mechanisms as compared to chylomicrons. J Lipid Res 1995;36:2174 -84. 
17. Qi K, Al -Haideri M, Seo T, Carpentier YA, Deckelbaum RJ. Effects of particle size 
on blood clearance and tissue uptake of lipid emulsi ons with different triglyceride 
compositions. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 2003;27:58 -64. 
18. Nestel PJ. Effects of N -3 fatty acids on lipid metabolism. Annu Rev Nutr 
1990;10:149 -67. 
19. Chen W. Effects of fat emulsions with different fatty acid compositio n on plasma and 
hepatic lipi[INVESTIGATOR_309617]. Clinical Nutrition 1996;15:24.  
20.  Yeh S. Effects of fish oil and safflower oil emulsions on diet -induced hepatic 
steatosis in rats receiving total parenteral nutrition. Clinical  Nutrition 1996;15:80.  
21. Kinsella JE, Lokesh B, Broughton S, Whelan J. Dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids 
and eicosanoids: potential effects on the modulation of inflammatory and immune cells: 
an overview. Nutrition 1990;6:24 -44; discussion 59 -62. 
22. A lwayn IPJ, Gura K, Nose V, Zausche B, Javid P, Garza J, Verbesey J, Voss S, 
Ollero M, Andersson C, Bistrian B, Folkman J, Puder M. Omega -3 fatty acid 
supplementation prevents hepatic steatosis in a murine model of nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease. Pediatr Res. 2005 Mar;57(3):[ADDRESS_379604], Gramlich L, Meddings JB, Chan G, Thomson AB, 
Clandinin MT 1999 Intravenous fish oil emulsion attenuates total parenteral nutrition -
induced cholestasis in newborn pi[INVESTIGATOR_1515]. Pediatr Res 45:[ADDRESS_379605] of parenteral fish oil n 
leukocyte membrane fatty acid composition and leukotriene synthesizing capacity in 
postoperative trauma. Metabolism 1996; 45:[ADDRESS_379606] 1993; 23:[ADDRESS_379607] 1993; 7:634 -43. 
27. Mayeser P, Mrowietz U, Arenberger P, et al. ω -3 fatty acid  based lipid emulsion in 
patients with chronic plaque psoriasis. J Am Acad Dermatol 1998; 38:[ADDRESS_379608] of n -3 fatty acid supplemented parenteral 
nutrit ion on haemostasis patterns after major abdominal surgery. Br J  Nutr 2002; 87; 
Suppl 1:[ADDRESS_379609] P. Fish oil in parenteral nutrition in infants: clinical evidence and 
experience. Data on file, Fresenius - Kabi AG, Bad Homburg v.d.h.  
30. Gura KM, Lee S, Valim C, Zhou J, Kim S, Modi BP, Arsenault DA, Strijbosch RA, 
Lopes S, Duggan C, Puder M. Safety and efficacy of a fish -oil-based fat emulsion in the 
 - 22 - 
                            Patient Info rmation  treatment of parenteral nutrition -associated liver disease. Pediatrics. 2008 Mar;  
121(3):e678 -86.  
31. Diamond IR, Sterescu A, Pencharz PB, Kim JH, Wales PW. Changing the paradigm: 
omegaven for the treatment of liver failure in pediatric short bowel syndrome. J Pediatr 
Gastroen terol Nutr. 2009 Feb;  48(2):[ADDRESS_379610];24(5):[ADDRESS_379611] of Fish Oil -Based Lipid Emulsion on Serum Triglyceride, Bilirubin, and 
Albumin Levels i n Children with Parenteral Nutrition -Associated Liver Disease . 
Pediatric Research. 2009 December, 66 (6): 698 -703. 
 - 23 - 
                            Patient Info rmation  Table 1  
Comparison of Parenteral Fat Emulsions (10 grams fat/100 mL)  
OIL Intralipid® Liposyn® II Omegave n® 
Soybean  10 5  
Safflower   5  
Fish   10 
% FATS     
Linoleic  50 65 0.1-0.7 
α-linolenic  9 4 <0.2 
E.P.A.    1.3-2.8 
D.H.A.    1.4-3.1 
Arachidonic acid    0.1 -0.4 
Glycerol  2.3 2.5 2.5 
Egg Phospholipid  1.2 1.2 1.2 
Available in the   
[LOCATION_002]  Yes Yes No 
 
 - 24 - 
                            Patient Info rmation  Table 3 : 
Laboratory Monitoring Schedule for Omegaven® T herapy  
 
Laborat ory test:  Baseline  
(pre-
Omega -
ven®) Q  week*  
Until  Direct  
Bilirubin  < 
2mg/dL  Bimonthly  * 
Until  
Direct  
Bilirubin <0.4 
mg/dL  Monthly* once       
direct bilirubin   
<0.4 mg/dL  
     
Sodium  X X X X 
Potassium  X X X X 
Chloride  X X X X 
Glucose  X X X X 
BUN  X X X X 
Creatinine  X X X X 
Triglycerides  X X X X 
Calcium  X X X X 
Magnesium  X X X X 
Phosphorus  X X X X 
Prealbumin  X X X X 
Albumin  X X X X 
Total protein  X X X X 
SGPT  X X X X 
Alkaline phosphatase  X X X X 
Bilirubin (total &  direct)  X X X X 
GGT  X X X X 
AST  X X X X 
Essential Fatty Acid  
Profile  X X X X 
Free cholesterol  X X X X 
Free fatty acids  X X X X 
Lipid Panel  X X X X 
Hemoglobin  X X X X 
Hematocrit  X X X X 
RBC  X X X X 
WBC  X X X X 
Platelets  X X X X 
PT X X X X 
PTT X X X X 
INR X X X X 
Fibrinogen  X X X X 
* Direct bilirubin evaluations guide further testing as this value is the standard of care for determining liver failure.  
more often as necessitated by [CONTACT_309667]; may be reduced in patients who are stable (i.e. outpatient) and whos e 
biochemical markers have improved  
 
 - 25 - 
                            Patient Info rmation   
 
Table 3 : 
 
Omegaven® Possible Adverse Events  
 
CLINICAL  
GRADE I  
(MILD)  GRADE II 
(MODERATE)  GRADE III - SAE  
(SEVERE)  GRADE IV - SAE 
(POTENTIALLY 
LIFE 
THREATENING/
DEATH)  
Phlebitis  Hypotension  Bowel obstruction  Uncontro lled 
bleeding  
Fever  Hypertension  Sepsis syndrome  Anaphylaxis  
Fishy taste  Urinary tract 
infection   Shock  
Chills  Poor growth   Death  
Flushing  Priapi[INVESTIGATOR_309618]/Vomiting     
Dehydration     
Rash     
LABORATORY  
Hyperglycemia  Anemia  Sepsis  Coagulopathy  
Hypertriglyceridemia  Leukopenia    
Essential fatty acid 
deficiency  Thrombocytopenia    
Electrolyte 
abnormalities  Abnormal liver 
function tests    
 Positive urine 
culture    
 
 