[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
IRB16 -[ZIP_CODE]  
6/24/16  
 
Title: Comparison of Miller and Macintosh laryngoscopes, CMAC 
and Glidescope videolaryngoscopes in inexperienced users: 
a pediatric manikin study.  
 
Investigators: Joseph D. Tobias, MD  
 
Describe the background  and rationale for this project :  
 
The commonly used method for endotracheal intubation in children 
is direct laryngoscopy using a Miller or Macintosh blade . 
Videolaryngoscopy is a widely accepted pediatric airway 
management . Videolaryngoscopes (VL) provide an indirect view of 
glottis without the need to align the oral, pharyngeal, and glottis 
structures . Some types of VLs provide also direct view of glottis 
with indirect view.  Videolaryngoscopes can be used as a te aching 
tool for learners as they can visualize  all the anatomical structures 
of larynx at the same time with the performer .  VLs may facilitate 
the learn ing of  endotracheal intubation in inexperienced users  in 
the pediatric population. There are limited data on the use of 
videolaryngoscopes  by [CONTACT_749571].  
 
How will your study be funded:  No funding is required for this 
study.  
 
Provide a potential start date  and end date  for your study to 
be included in the IRB application:  start date of 6/27/2016 – end 
date of  7/30/2016 (1 month period ). 
 
List any s ub-Investigators you want to participate as back -
up/support on the study  - Julie Rice , Heather Dellinger, SAM 
Barry  
 
Describe the significance of the proposed research : To 
compare the CMAC and Gli descope videolaryngoscopes (VL) to 
traditional direct laryngoscopy (DL) using either a Miller or 
Macintosh laryngoscope  by [CONTACT_749572]. 
This will involve the use  of an intubating pediatric man ikin to 
assess various aspects of endotracheal intubation by  [CONTACT_749573] . The inexperienced  users  in intubation of 
children will use VLs on a pediatric manikin. We will evaluate the 
success rate s of inexperienced  and experienced users and 
compare their results. These results will help us to see if 
inexperienced  users are successful with VLs .  Also we will  assess 
whether  VLs are a good teac hing tool  and if they can be preferred 
as a first line tool for  pediatric intubation . 
 
State the  primary and secondary objectives of the study : The 
goal of the study is to test whether time to intubation is shorter with 
VL as compared to DL. We hypothesize that this difference will be 
greatest for users with the least experience in DL. Secondary aims 
include comparing success rates and user -rated ease of intubation 
between VL and DL.  
 
If this research is hypothesis driven, succinctly state the 
hypothesis:  Performers who are inexperienced about direc t 
laryngoscopy  and VL will achieve higher overall success rates 
using videolaryngoscopes than using a direct laryngoscope.  
 
Outline the major steps and methodologies in the clinical 
protocol.   Direct laryngoscopy using a Miller and Macintosh 
laryngoscope as well as indirect laryngoscopy using a  CMAC and 
Glidescope VL devices  will be used .  Each participant will perform 
endotracheal intubation on the mannequin using both types of 
laryngoscope blades and both types of indirect laryngoscopes 
(total of 4 intub ation attempts each). In a given subgroup, a two -
tailed paired t -test on a sample of [ADDRESS_1024932] 80% 
power to detect a 15s difference in time to intubation between 
videolaryngoscopy and direct laryngoscopy at a 95% confidence 
level, assuming mea n time to intubation of 45 ± [ADDRESS_1024933] correlation (r=0.5) 
between times to intubation with the different methods in the study. 
Therefore, t he study will recruit 10-20 personnel from each of the 
following  4 groups : 
 
1. Faculty pediatric anesthesiologists  
2. CRNAs  
3. Trainees (SR NAs, residents, and fellows , and medical students )  
4. APNs from the PI[INVESTIGATOR_6890]/CTICU. Nurses at NCH   
 
 
Time to endotracheal intubation , the number of intubation 
attempts , and the rate of successful endotracheal intubation on  
first attempt and success of endotracheal intubation within 120 
seconds  will be recorded. The subjective (r ating 1 to 10) for ease 
of device use and laryngoscopic view judged by [CONTACT_749574] g score  (POGO ) will be recorded. Comparison of 
these values between experienced and inexperienced users will be 
performed as well as comparison of CMAC, Glidescope, Miller 
blade, and Macintosh blade .  
 
  
Identify the variables to be measured and how they will be 
statistically evaluated:   
Time to endotracheal intubation, the number of intubation 
attempts, and the rate of successful endotracheal intubation on 
first attempt and success of endotracheal intubation within 120 
seconds will be recorded. The subjec tive (rating 1 to 10) for ease 
of device use and laryngoscopic view judged by [CONTACT_749575]  (POGO) will be recorded. Comparison of 
these values between experienced and inexperienced users will be 
performed as well as comparison of  CMAC, Glidescope, Miller 
blade, and Macintosh blade.  Pairwise comparisons among 
laryngoscopy methods will be performed using paired t -tests for 
continuous data and McNemar tests for categorical data. 
Repeated measures ANOVA will be used to assess the 
mode rating effect of user experience on the difference in time to 
intubation between VL and DL.  
 
 
 
References  
 
1. Lye ST, Liaw CM, Seet E, Koh KF. Comparison of results 
from novice and trained personnel using the Macintosh 
laryngoscope, Pentax AWS®, C -MAC™ and Bonfils 
intubation fibrescope: a manikin study. Singapore Med J  
2013;54:[ADDRESS_1024934] Scope and McGrath Videolaryngoscope with 
the Macintosh laryngoscope in tracheal intubation by 
[CONTACT_749576]: a manikin 
study. Anaesth Intensive Care  2010;38:39 -42. 
3. Ray DC, Billington C, Kearns PK, Kirkbride R, Mackintosh K, 
Reeve CS, et al. A comparison of McGrath and Macintosh 
laryngoscopes in novice user s: a manikin study. Anaes thesia  
2009;64:1207 -10.  
 