Version 4.0; 3/3/2020 
 Page 1 of 10   Official title: Development of sensory augmentation methods to improve post -stroke gait 
stability  
 
 
NCT number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Document date: 3/3/20   
Version 4.0; 3/3/2020 
 Page 2 of 10   PROTOCOL TITLE: 
Development of sensory augmentation methods to improve post -stroke gait stability  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
[INVESTIGATOR_337255]  
 
 
1.0 Objectives  / Specific Aims  
The objective of this project is to develop and test a method of providing real -time 
augmentation of hip proprioceptive feedback during post -stroke walking. Our central 
hypothesis is that augmented proprioception will increase the mechanics -dependent 
modulation of step width, an important gait stabilization strategy.  The first aim of this 
study is to identify the physiological mechanism underlying the beneficial effects of 
sensory augmentation on step- by-step gait stabilization. Here, we will differentiate 
between the potential mechanisms of altered perception and cutaneous cueing. The second 
aim is to determine whether personalizing sensory augmentation methods to individual participants produces greater beneficial effects on post -stroke gait stability. Her e, we will 
identify the optimal combination of vibration pattern and location for each participant, and test whether this personalized stimulation is superior to standard methods. The third aim is to establish the safety, feasibility, and efficacy of a rehabilitation intervention centered on repeated exposure to sensory augmentation during gait. This will be accomplished through a small -scale clinical trial.   
 
2.0 Background  
Chronic stroke survivors often experience gait instability, which can reduce quality of life through an increased fall -risk and fear of falling [1- 5]. Unfortunately, recent clinical trials 
focused on strengthening and balance [6], multifactorial fall preve ntion [7], and locomotor 
training [8] have all failed to substantially impact this important problem, likely because they were not targeted to the specific mechanisms underlying post -stroke instability. To 
overcome this obstacle, we must design interventions based on a mechanistic understanding of gait instability, which can ultimately be accessed by [CONTACT_452154] -edge research laboratories   
As it is unlikely that a single intervention will “cure” post- stroke gait instability, our long-
term goal is to develop a toolbox of interventions, from which clinicians can select the most appropriate option for individual  patients. Toward this goal, this study will 
investigate the  real-time augmentation of hip proprioceptive feedback during post -stroke 
walking. Essentially, sensory stimulation will augment perceived movement errors, a direct extension of methods promoting useful gait adaptation by [CONTACT_452155] [9 -10].   
This proposal is based on our prior work revealing a sensorimotor strategy of sensing the body’s mechanical state using hip proprioceptive feedback [11] and actively adjusting foot placement in response [12]. This strategy is often disrupted in chronic str oke survivors 
with poor balance [13]. Our ongoing work indicates that deficits in this stabilization strategy can be improved through mechanical error -augmentation. Here, we will test 
Version 4.0; 3/3/[ADDRESS_576389] the safety, feasibility, and efficacy of a novel intervention involving low-intensity vibration applied over the bilateral hip abductor muscles of chronic stroke survivors during walking. This Aim will take the form of an early -stage, small -scale (n=44 participants) randomized controlled clinical trial.  
The precise intervention to be studied is novel, as the vibration amplitude applied during walking will be directly controlled by [CONTACT_28024]’s walking mechanics, allowing us to 
augment the sensory information available to users. However, the method and form of the vibration itself is not novel. Many prior studies have used vibrating motors (as in the present study) to deliver the same type of mechanical vibration to clinical populations during the performance of functional movement tasks (e.g. reaching, standing, walking) [14-17]. We ourselves have published work investigating the effects of mechanical vibration [11, 18-19], and have an IRB- approved project that involves these methods 
(Pro00046775).  
No medication is involved in the intervention, and FDA approval will not be required for the use of our vibrating tactors, which deliver minimal mechanical energy to users – instead simply evoking a sensory response.  
The rationale for the intervention is to use non-invasive methods (vibration) to improve the 
sensory accuracy of chronic stroke survivors. This low-risk method could have the potential to produce large improvements in patient functional mobility. While we have observed no adverse events in the use of these methods, and no such adverse events have been reported in the literature due to the use of these methods, one of the goals of this project will be to definitively establish the safety of this intervention .  
For the intervention, the control group will receive vibration applied over the bilateral hip abductors, just as the experimental group. However, the vibration will not be linked to the user’s mechanics, instead being randomly delivered – a method that has been used previously [11].  
 
4.0 Study Endpoints  
For the intervention in Aim 3, our outcome measure of safety  will be the proportion of 
participants who experience an adverse event potentially related to the intervention (e.g. skin irritation; falls) or any serious adverse event (e.g. hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]; death). Our primary measures of feasibility  will be participant adherence (percentage of training sessions 
attended) and drop-out (non- attendance of final assessment session). We will also track the 
total walking time across training sessions (of a maximum p ossible 312 minutes). Our 
primary measure of efficacy  will be changes in ρ disp, a metric that quantifies the extent to 
which participants effectively stabilize their gait by [CONTACT_452156] [20]. Our secondary measures of efficacy will be the common clinical measures of Functional Gait Assessment score, Activities -specific Balance Confidence 
score, overground gait speed, and fear of falling.  
Version 4.0; 3/3/2020 
 Page 4 of 10   5.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria / Study Population  
Participants will be recruited from an MUSC database containing the contact [CONTACT_337281] (Pro00 037803). Initial screening will be performed by [CONTACT_337282] a phone call to 
confirm basic participant characteristics (e.g. t iming of stroke ) and interest in research 
participation. The ability of potential participants to meet the more detailed inclusion and exclusion criteria will subsequently be determined in person. 
Inclusion Criteria  
• Age ≥ 21 years  
• Experience of a stroke ≥ 6 months prior to participation 
• Gait speed of at least 0.2 m/s  
• Ability to walk on a treadmill without a cane or walker  
• Provision of informed consent  
Exclusion Criteria  
• Evidence of cerebellar damage  
• Resting blood pressure higher than 220/110 mm Hg 
• History of unstable cardiac arrhythmias, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, severe aortic stenosis, angina or dyspnea at rest or during activities of daily living 
• Preexisting neurological disorders or dementia  
• Legal blindness or severe visual impairment  
• History of DVT or pulmonary embolism within 6 months  
• Uncontrolled diabetes with recent weight loss, diabetic coma, or frequent 
insulin reactions  
• Orthopedic injuries or conditions (e.g. joint replacements) in the lower extremities with the potential to alter the gait pattern  
• Recent (within last 6 months) Botox injections in the hip musculature  
We plan to include a diverse participant population, paralleling the general demographic characteristics of the Charleston area. This will be accomplished using the database referenced above, which currently contains contact [CONTACT_452157] 800 indivi duals. 
We will not exclude any sex/gender or racial/ethnic group. This study will not involve any special classes of subjects, including fetuses, neonates, pregnant women, children, prisoners, institutionalized individuals, or other vulnerable populations. Children will not be included because this study focuses on individuals who have experienced a stroke. This is rare among children, and would be expected to involve a quite different mechanism or pattern of recovery.  
 
6.0 Number of Subjects  
A total of 120 chronic stroke survivors will be accrued, all locally.  
 
Version 4.0; 3/3/[ADDRESS_576390]. Charleston, South Carolina. 
8.0 Recruitment Methods  
This study will recruit from the Registry for Stroke Recovery (RESTORE -Pro#00037803, 
IRB approved 9/6/14) , which is a research tool sponsored by [CONTACT_5052] (NIH) Center of Biomedical Research Excellence (COBRE) in Stroke Recovery with subjects consented for future contact [CONTACT_452158].  RESTORE st aff will query the registry for potential subjects and provide the 
Principal Investigator (PI) with the contact [CONTACT_247345].  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_452152].   
Additionally, we have developed a study flyer that will be shared through the COBRE and 
distributed through stroke support groups attended by [CONTACT_3462].  
 
9.[ADDRESS_576391] in a private room in the MUSC College of Health Professions Building. There will be no set period between informing the prospective participant and obtaining the consent. Participants will be reminded that they 
may end their participation in the study at any point.    
 
10.0 Study Design  / Methods  
A total of 120 chronic stroke survivors will be recruited for an initial Screening  session to 
determine eligibility for enrollment in the subsequent Aims. From this initial session, 40 stroke survivors will be recruited for Aim 1, and a separate 40 stroke survivors will be recruited for Aim 2. From these 80 participants in Aims 1 and 2, a total of 44 will be recruited  for Aim 3. Aim 1 involves a single -session experiment, Aim 2 involves two 
experimental sessions, while Aim 3 involves an intervention with a total of 10- 11 sessions. 
Participants will be enrolled in this study for a period of a year, allowing time to complete all potential sessions.  
In the initial Screening session, participants will walk on a n instrumented tread mill for 2 -
minutes. We will  calculate ρ
disp (a measure of the typi[INVESTIGATOR_337259] ) using 
LED markers and inertial measurement units placed over participants’ legs and pelvis . If 
ρdisp is less than 0.56 (well below control norms), participants will qualify to progress to 
the subsequent Aims. During the Screening session, we will also quantify the secondary 
Version 4.0; 3/3/2020 
 Page 6 of 10   measures of: Functional Gait Assessment; Activities -specific Balance Confidence scale, 
Fugl-Meyer Lower Extremity Motor Function subscale; Fugl -Meyer Lower Extremity 
Sensation subscale; self -selected and fastest -comfortable overground gait speed; fear of 
falling; fall history. All of these secondary measures are commonly used in clinical 
practice.   
In Aim 1, participants will complete a single -session experiment. We will quantify the 
cutaneous detection threshold for vibration delivered over the bilateral hip abductors. We 
will also calculate the lateral sway evoked by [CONTACT_452159], quantifi ed as the shift 
in center of pressure while standing on a force plate. Participants will then perform a series of treadmill walking trials. In some of these trials, vibration will be applied to the hip 
abductors or lateral trunk, while we quantify ρ
disp. 
In Aim 2, participants will complete two experimental sessions. In the first session, 
participants will perform a series of treadmill walking trials, across which we will vary the pattern and location of vibration applied over the bilateral hip abductors. We will identify 
the combination of pattern and location that produces the largest increase in ρ
disp for each 
participant. In the second session, participants will again perform a series of treadmill 
walking trials, across which we will compare the persona lized stimulation (optimal pattern 
and location for this individual) with the standard pattern of stimulation used in prior work.  
In Aim 3, participants will complete [ADDRESS_576392] had any previous experience of skin i rritation in reaction to 
specific gel or tape types, and by [CONTACT_452160]’ skin after each experiment.  
 
11.[ADDRESS_576393] analysis will be correlation -based, testing whether metrics of altered 
perception or cutaneous cueing are associated with the beneficial effects of sensory 
augmentation. For each participant, we will quantify four independent variables : cutaneous 
detection threshold (paretic and non- paretic legs); lateral sway distance evoked by [CONTACT_452161] (paretic and non- paretic legs). We will also quantify the effect of 
sensory augmentation during gait as the mean change in paretic ρ disp between the Normal 
and Vibrated Abduc tors trials ( ∆ ρdisp). We will test whether each of the four independent 
Version 4.0; 3/3/2020 
 Page 7 of 10   variables is significantly associated with ∆  ρdisp, using an alpha value of 0.0125 to account 
for multiple comparisons. Our second analysis will involve a repeated measures 
experimental design – directly testing whether vibration designed solely to provide cutaneous cues (Vibrated Trunk condition) has a s maller beneficial effect than vibration 
designed to elicit both cutaneous cues and an altered perception of pelvis mechanics (Vibrated  Abductors condition). For this analysis, we will use a repeated measure s 
ANOVA to compare mean paretic ρ
disp values during the Normal, Vibrated Abductors, and 
Vibrated Trunk trials. 
For Aim 2, our primary statistical analysis will compare the average increase in paretic 
ρdisp values during Standard Augmentation and Personalized Augmentation conditions 
(relative to Normal). We will use a paired t -test to compare these ∆  ρdisp values. 
Secondarily, we will use a repeated measures ANOVA to test for group -wide effects of 
vibration pattern and location, based on data from the first session .  
For Aim 3, our primary statistical analysis will use an independent t -test to determine 
whether the change in paretic ρ disp differs significantly between the Augmented and 
Control groups. 
Power analyses were performed for each Aim. For Aim 1, the proposed sample size (n=40) 
was selected to be able to detect a moderate correlation (r=0.5) between our input variables 
and ∆  ρdisp. Aim [ADDRESS_576394] size (Cohen’s d = 0.5) between 
Standard and Personaliz ed sensory augmentation methods. For our Aim [ADDRESS_576395] size of 1.0 and an alpha value of 0.05, we will need 17 participants per group for 0.80 power. We propose 22 participants per group to account for 20% dropout. 
Steps will be taken to minimize the risk of loss of confidentiality. All data will be stored on 
a password -protected  computer and password -protected  secure server that is backed -up 
nightly.  
The RESTORE registry (Pro#00037803), from which this study will recruit subjects, also serves as a data analysis tool by [CONTACT_247351]’s stroke recovery research community with a more complete regis try with key stroke elements. Some subjects may have participated or will participate 
in other stroke rel ated research studies at MUSC. Sharing data from this and other stroke 
research studies with RESTORE will allow for more targeted recruitment efforts in the future and could reduce the burden placed on subjec ts by [CONTACT_452162].   
Subjects are informed in the consent process if they enroll into the RESTORE registry, 
their data from this study will be shared. Subjects will be asked to sign a HIPAA authorization stating their health information may be disclosed to MUSC investigators requiring their data for their research projects upon approval by [CONTACT_3551].   
 
12.[ADDRESS_576396] (DSMB) will oversee the experiments in Aim 3  (a small -
scale randomized controlled trial). This board will consist of a neurologist, a statistician, 
Version 4.0; 3/3/2020 
 Page 8 of 10   and an experienced rehabilitation researcher (all with no direct ties to this study). On a 
quarterly basis, the DSMB will review the status of the study. The role of the DSMB will 
be to:  
• Protect the safety of study participants  
• Review the research protocol, informed consent documents, amendments, and plans for data safety and monitoring  
• Evaluate the progress of the trial, including periodic assessments of data quality 
and timeliness, recruitment, accrual, and retention, participant risk vs. benefit, and 
other factors that may potentially affect study outcome  
• Review study performance, make recommendations and assist in the resolution of 
problems reported by [CONTACT_079]  
• Report to the IRB on the safety and progress of the trial  
• Ensure the confidentiality of the study data and the results of the monitoring 
• Advise the IRB and the study investigators as to whether the protocol should continue as scheduled or undergo a modification due to a finding from the 
monitoring process  
Any adverse events will be recorded, monitored, and promptly reported to the IRB, following policy HRPP 4.7. Our exclusion criteria will minimize the risk of enrolling 
participants with severe cardiovascular risk. Scheduled rest breaks will be provided 
between trials during experimental testing, as well as whenever requested. Minimization of 
risk of adverse events will be accomplished by [CONTACT_337287]. Collected data and any events 
potentially affecting participant safety will be reviewed by [CONTACT_458] [INVESTIGATOR_452153].  
 
13.0 Withdrawal of Subjects  
Participants will be withdrawn from the study without their consent if study staff determine  
that the participants are at risk of negative health events (e.g. large increase in blood pressure from the initial screening assessment; consistent inability to maintain balance while walking on the treadmill). If a participant voluntarily withdraws from the study, their results will not be included in our data analysis, as our intervention sample size accounts for 20% dropout.  
 
14.0 Risks to Subjects  
 
Potential risks for participation in this study are low.   Participants will perform standing and walking trials, in which there is the risk of a loss of balance. To mitigate this risk, in these trials participants will wear a safety harness attached to an overhead rail. The harness is  designed to eliminate the consequences of falling as the 
device “catches” the subject should they trip or stumble. Additionally, in all walking trials, an investigator will be near the participant to provide assistance in the event of a loss of balance. T here is also the risk of mino r muscle soreness due to the exercise of walking. 
Version 4.0; 3/3/[ADDRESS_576397] always next to participants, as is common in a clinical context. The other 
clinical tests either involve verbal questions or are of minimal physical risk.  
 
In some treadmill walking trials, vibrating tactor motors will apply sensory stimuli to 
participants’ hip muscles. This stimulation will deliver minimal mechanical energy to 
participants, as the vibration amplitude will be less than [ADDRESS_576398] the risk of loss of participant confidentiality. Our Data Management Plan (see above) will minimize this risk.  
 
15.[ADDRESS_576399] beneficial effects on functional mobility and quality of life. Promising effects would justify larger -scale stud ies able to 
benefit a larger number of individuals. As the risks to participants are minimal (no more than a moderate period of exercise), we believe the risks are reasonable in relation to the anticipated benefits.   
 
16.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects  
Results will be in the form of research data, and  will not be shared with participants or 
others. 
 
17.0 Devices  
This study will involve the use of tactors (Engineering Acoustics, Inc.), which are small 
vibrating motors designed to cause the sensation of pressure or movement. These tactors are non -invasive and will not be distributed to participants, but will only be  used during 
research procedures in the laboratory setting over the course of this study.  
    
 
 
Version 4.0; 3/3/2020 
 Page 10 of 10   References  
1. Jones F, Riazi A. Self -efficacy  and self -management after stroke: a systematic review. Disabil 
Rehabil. 2011; 33:797- 810. 
2. Jorgensen L, Engstad, Jacobsen BK. Higher incidence of falls in long- term stroke survivors t han 
in population controls. Depressive symptoms predict falls after stroke. Stroke. 2002; 33:542- 547. 
3. Langhorne P, Stott DJ, Robertson L, et al. Medical complications after stroke. A multicenter 
study. Stroke. 2000; 31:1223- 1229. 
4. Hyndman D, Ashburn A, Stack E. Fall events among people with stroke living in the community: circumstances of falls and characteristics of fallers. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2002; 83:165- 170. 
5. Ng SSM. Contribution of subjective balance confidence on functional mobility in subjects with chronic stroke. Disabil Rehab. 2011; 33:2291- 2298. 
6. Dean CM, Rissel C, Sherrington C, et al. Exercise to enhance mobility and prevent falls after stroke: the community stroke club randomized trial. Neurorehab Neural Repair. 2012; 26:1046-1057. 
7. Batchelor FA, Hill KD, Mackintosh SF, et al. Effects of a multifactorial falls prevention program for people with stroke returning home after rehabilitation: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2012; 93:1648- 1655. 
8. Tilson JK, Wu SS, Cen SY, et al. Characterizing and identifying risk for falls in the LEAPS study. A randomized clinical trial of interventions to improve walking poststroke. Stroke. 2012; 43:446-452. 
9. Marchal -Crespo L, Reinkensmeyer  DJ. Review of control strategies for robotic movement training 
after neurological injury. J NeuroEng Rehabil. 2009; 6:20. 
10. Roemmich RT, Bastian AJ. Closing the loop: from motor neuroscience to neurorehabilitation. Ann Rev Neurosci. 2018; 41:415- 429. 
11. Roden- Reynolds DC, Walker MH, Wasserman CR, Dean JC. Hip proprioceptive feedback 
influences the control of mediolateral stability during human walking. J Neurophys. 2015; 114:2220- 2229. 
12. Rankin BL, Buffo SK, Dean JC. A neuromechanical strategy for mediolateral foot placement in walking humans. J Neurophys. 2014; 112:374- 383. 
13. Dean JC, Kautz SA. Foot placement control and gait instability among people with stroke. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2015; 52:577- 590. 
14. Paoloni M, Mangone M, Scretti  P, Procaccianti R, Cometa A, Santilli V. Segmental muscle 
vibration improves walking in chronic stroke patients with foot drop: a randomized controlled trial. Neurorehab Neural Rep. 2010; 24:254- 262. 
15. Ma CZ, Zheng YP, Lee WC. Changes in gait and plantar foot loading upon using vibrotactile wearable biofeedback system in patients with stroke. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2018; 25:20- 27. 
16. Bonan I, Butet S, Jamal K, Yelnik A, Tasseel Ponche S, Leplaideur S. Difference between individuals with left and right hemiparesis in the effect of gluteus medius vibration on body weight shifting. Neurophysiol Clin. 2017; 47:419- 426. 
17. Maupas E, Dyer JO, Melo SA, Forget R. Patellar tendon vibration reduces the increased facilitation from quadriceps to soleus in post -stroke hemiparetic individuals. Ann Phys Rehabil 
Med. 2017; 60:319- 328. 
18. Floyd LM, Holmes TC, Dean JC. Reduced effects of tendon vibration with increased task demand during active, cyclical ankle movements. Exp Brain Res. 2014; 232:283- 292. 
19.  Hubbuch JE, Bennett BW, Dean JC. Proprioceptive feedback contributes to the adaptation toward an economical gait pattern. J Biomech. 2015; 48:2925- 2931. 
20. Stimpson KH, Heitkamp LN, Horne JS, Dean JC. Effects of walking speed on the step- by-step 
control of step width. J Biomech. 2018; 68:78- 83. 
 