 
 
 
 
School Water Access, Food  and Beverage Intake, and Obesity  
Study Protocol  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
February 29, [ADDRESS_385239] of the School Water Access on Child 
Food and Beverage Intake and Obesity  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
August 17, 2021  
1. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  
a. Brief Summary  
The overall goal of this cluster randomized, controlled trial involving 26 elementary 
schools is to examine how a drinking water promotion intervention impacts students’ 
intake of beverages and food, and obesity. Data from this study will inform policy and  
practice guidelines regarding how schools can effectively decrease students’ risk of 
obesity related to caloric intake from beverages.  
 
The study aims are to:  
     1. To examine how a school -based program to promote drinking water access an d 
consumption in low -income public schools affects caloric intake from beverages.  
     2. To investigate how the school -based water promotion intervention affects caloric 
intake from food.  
     3. To assess whether the school -based water promotion interven tion impacts the 
prevalence of overweight/obesity.  
b. Objectives  
Our central hypothesis is that, in low -income, public elementary  schools, increased  
access to fresh water and rigorous promotion of its consumption will  reduce  students’ 
intake of caloric beverages thereby [CONTACT_312812]. We  also hypothesize 
that the  intervention will not adversely affect  students’ caloric  intake from food.  
   
Aim 1. To examine how a school -based program to promote drinking  water  access  and 
consumption in low -income public schools affects intake of water  and calories  from 
beverages. We hypothesize that the intervention will increase  intake of water  and 
decrease intake of daily beverage calories.  
   
Aim 2. To investigate how the school -based water promotion  intervention  affects  caloric 
intake from food. We hypothesize that the interven tion will  decrease daily  food calories 
consumed.  
   
Aim 3. To assess whether the school -based water promotion  intervention  impacts  the 
prevalence of overweight/obesity. We hypothesize there will be a  greater  decrease in the 
percentage of students who are o verweight/obese in  intervention  schools as compared to 
control schools . 
 
August 17, [ADDRESS_385240] of improved access to safe and 
appealing drinking water and promotion of water intake instead of sugar -sweetened 
beverages on food and beverage intake and obesity among children. Schools were ch osen 
for this research because they provide a setting for reaching a large population of 
children.  
2. STUDY PROCEDURES  
a. Procedures  
Each intervention site will receive school -wide intervention activities as well as activities 
for students in 4th grade classes  only. School -wide intervention components include: 1) 
installation of three new drinking water sources in high -traffic common areas, including 
one in the cafeteria with single -use disposable cups; 2) a promotional campai gn including 
a kick -off musical performance . We also post signage in classes and near newly installed 
drinking water sources. We  will also place decals (green smiley faces) in the cafeteria 
next to healthy beverages  (water and plain milk) and reinforce water intake by [CONTACT_312813] .    
 
Classroom -specific intervention components include: 1) Provision of reusable water 
bottles for students to be filled each morning (with teacher super vision) and kept on or 
near students’ desks. Class teachers will also facilitate weekly clean ing of reusable  water 
bottles . The research team will lead eight brief educational classroom lessons focused on 
the benefits of water consumption. These lessons were developed and refined in our 
previous studies. Family engagement activi ties will include home tools to reinforce 
educational content in class lessons (e.g., reusable water bottle for home) and homework 
activities (e.g., calculation of sugar in a drink at home). We will incentivize family 
involvement by [CONTACT_312814].  
 
To assess how intervention activities impact caloric intake from food and beverages, we 
will use a multiple -pass 24 -hour food and beverage diary protocol that has been ad apted 
from a previously validated instrument. After diary completion, trained research staff will 
meet with students individually within 1 -2 days of diary completion for approximately 20 
minutes to review the diary using a multiple -pass method. Because of the cuts made to 
the NIH grant budget, we will not complete food and beverage diaries at 15 months but 
will instead add a shorter beverage frequency questionnaire to assess intervention impacts 
on students' beverage intake from baseline to 15 months after the start of the study (this 
change is approved by [CONTACT_312815]).  
 
August 17, [ADDRESS_385241] procedures for obtaining length and weight as 
outlined in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey Anthropometry 
Procedures Manual. We will use privacy screens to take each student’s measurements 
one at a time in a private manner. At the same time at measurements are taken, we will 
conduct brief surveys with students about beverage intake, physical activity and screen 
time behaviors. Surveys will occur at baseline and at [ADDRESS_385242] study results. Surveys will  occur at baseline and 15 
months after the start of the intervention.  
b. Procedure Risks  
This stu dy, which involves surveying students about beverage and food intake and screen 
time and physical activity behaviors, as well as taking measurements of height and 
weight is of minimal risk to participants and includes no procedures for which written 
consen t is normally required outside of the research setting.  
 
Interviews with food service directors and principals include non -sensitive information 
about school -level policies or practices related to nutrition and physical activity and are 
also of minimal ri sk to participants.  
 
While childhood obesity is a major public health concern, there remain undernourished 
children in the US who rely on Free or Reduced Price Meals (FRPM) for their daily 
caloric intake. Increased water consumption amongst these underweight children holds a 
small but important risk of increasing satiety, thereby [CONTACT_312816]. For 
these children, we will take precautions. We will work with teachers and families 
(through consent processes) to identify students who have chronic diseases or conditions  
that require special dietary accommodations or who are underweight (BMI% < 5). We 
will then work with teachers and students’ families to develop individualized plans that 
allow students to participate in activities that do not interfere with the dietary 
prescriptions of physicians or nutritionists. For example, if a student drinks a special 
formula such as Pediasure® for poor weight gain, he/she could participate in classroom 
educational lessons but opt out of drinking water in the water bottle d istributed to 
students.  
 
A Data Safety and Monitoring Board has been established to evaluate any adverse impact 
of the study on underweight children. They have determined that the study to date has not 
adversely affected underweight children in the interve ntion as compared to the control 
group. The board also feels that repeat measurements could stigmatize students. For this 
reason, we measure all students at the baseline, 7- and [ADDRESS_385243] the student's parents to discuss strategies for healthy weight 
management and recommend consultation with a pediatrician.  
 
August 17, [ADDRESS_385244] -protected desktop 
computer located in the PI’s locked office. Only trained research staff will have access to 
these data. All data will be coded with number -only identifiers. A name -identification 
number master code list (which will be destroyed once all data collection is completed) 
and data files will be stored in separate secure locations (computer and locked file 
cabinets in the PI [INVESTIGATOR_312811]).  
c. Use of Deception in the Study  
NO 
d. Use of Audio and Video Recordings  
NO 
e. Alternative Procedures or Courses of Treatment  
There are no alternatives to study participation at this time . 
f. Will it be possible to continue the more (most) appropriat e therapy for the 
participant(s) after the conclusion of the study?  
Schools that are selected as intervention schools will have access to changes in the built 
school environment that will remain at the school even after the study is complete (e.g., 
reusabl e water bottle filling stations  and water dispensers  in the cafeteria, physical 
activity area, and another common area).  
 
Schools will also have access to educational curricula and promotional materials if they 
choose to implement them on their own. Most m aterials are low cost and can be printed 
and reproduced by [CONTACT_312817] a low -cost. 
 
Control schools will receive a reusable water bottle filling station and access to 
educational and promotional materials at the end of the study.  
 
All schools will receive $500 honoraria that can support continued education and 
promotion and/or any other health -related needs that the schools have at the time.  
 
g. Study Endpoint (s) 
While it is possible that there could be detectable differences in BMI  outcomes during the 
course of the study, this is unlikely given previous studies that were used for effect size 
for power calculations. If there are any unanticipated impact on BMI  prior to the end of 
the study or any adverse consequences, the Data Safety and Monitoring Board 
established for this study, will determine end points and action. Of note, the interventions 
August 17, 2021   Page 5 of 12 tested in this study (water station installation and promotion) are low -risk interventions 
and unlikely to have adverse consequences.  
3. BACKGROUND   
a. Past Experimental and/or Clinical Findings  
Reducing SSB consumption by [CONTACT_312818] a promising childhood 
obesity prevention strategy. Sugar -sweetened beverages (SSBs) are a major, non -nutritive 
calorie source. Intake of SSBs is associated with obesity and related comorbidities, such 
as Type 2 diabetes.  Yet low -income children – the population most affected by [CONTACT_139447] – 
consume more SSBs than their higher income counterparts. If children repla ce fruit juice 
and SSBs with water, they can reduce their daily caloric intake by 235 kilocalories (kcal).  
In randomized controlled trials (RCTs), adolescents receiving allotments of non -caloric 
beverages (e.g., water) at home, experience reductions in SS B intake and obesity. In the 
only RCT of a school -based intervention, in 32 low -income elementary schools in 
[LOCATION_013], installation of appealing water sources, coupled with classroom -based 
education, led to a 31% reduction in children’s risk of being overwe ight. However, in the 
German experiment, schools did not provide alluring alternatives to water, such as sugar 
sweetened milk and juice. Ours will be the first study to establish how best to promote 
water consumption in US public schools with SSBs, includ ing flavored milk, and juice.  
   
US public schools are a key setting for promoting water consumption. Children spend 
substantial time in schools, so these settings offer an opportunity for increasing intake of 
water to replace SSBs. Most public schools are  regulated by [CONTACT_941] [ADDRESS_385245] (HHFKA), which requires them to offer free water where meals are served, 
but not outside meals.  The HHFKA law has so far not sufficiently increased children’s 
intake of water in schools. Currently, most schools comply by [CONTACT_1541] a single fountain 
for hundreds of students. In our observations of students in public schools, rates of water 
fountain use range from 2 to 11%. Concerns about the safety and palatability of water 
from fountains are inhibiting fa ctors, along with poor maintenance and inadequate access. 
Providing more appealing water sources along with cups and reusable bottles may 
increase water intake in schools . In our survey of [LOCATION_004] public schools, only 20% 
offered a more appealing non -fountain water source and 18% provided cups or bottles.  
 
b. Findings from Past Animal Experiments  
N/A 
4. RADIOISOTOPES OR RADIATION  MACHINE S 
N/A 
5. DEVICES  USED IN THE STUDY  
N/A 
6. DRUGS , BIOLOGICS , REAGENTS , OR CHEMICALS  USED IN THE STUDY  
N/A 
August 17, 2021   Page 6 of 12 7. DISINFECTION PROCEDURES  FOR MEDICAL EQUIPMENT USED ON BOTH HUMANS AND 
ANIMALS  
N/A 
 
8. PARTICIPANT POPULATION  
a. Planned Enrollment  
1690  4th grade student participants (avg 65 per school site x 26 sites)  
26 school administrators/principals (1 per school site x 26 sites)  
26 food service directors/workers (1 per school site x 26 sites)  
b. Age, Gender, and Ethnic Background  
The age range of the participants is 7-64 years.  
Gender composition: 5 1% male, 49 % female  
Ethnic background: 53% Hispanic  
c. Vulnerable Population s 
Children: One main aim of this study is to understand how provision and promotion of 
drinking water in  schools affects student intake of food and beverages  and child 
overweight/obesity . Thus, it is important to include children in this research.  
   
Subjects unable to read, speak or understand English . Because the majority children in 
our study schools are Latino and may only speak Spanish, and some parents may only 
speak Spanish, we will not exclude Spanish -speaking populations in our study.  
 
We will ask parents to sign an informed consent form for their child to participate in the 
evaluation activities. Students will also be asked to sign a written assent before 
participating in evaluation activities. To encourage students to complete their food and 
beverage diaries, they will receive a $[ADDRESS_385246] one time after comp leting both 
diaries at home with their parents. School -wide, students seen consuming water from 
newly installed water sources will also receive small incentives such as stickers or 
pencils.  
d. Rationale for Exclusion of Ce rtain Populations  
We do not plan to exclude women or racial/ethnic groups from this study. Based on our 
previous experiences conducting research in school settings, study participants will likely 
be equally distributed between male and female gender. Given that one of our inclusion 
criteria is that schools have at least 50% of students who are eligible for free and reduced 
price meals (proxy for low -income households), our study population includes schools 
with a majority of non -White students. In our current study sample of [ADDRESS_385247] agreed to participate in the study, school populations are 66% Hispanic/Latino and 
6% Black/African American.  
e. Stanford Populations  

August 17, 2021   Page 7 of 12 None  
f. Healthy Volunteers  
None  
g. Recruitment Details  
Each school will receive an information letter describing the study and procedures. All 
students  in 4th grade classes  at participating schools will be sent home with an 
information letter and consent form for their parents. All principals  and food service 
directors  at participating schools will receive information letters and/or will attend 
meetings with research staff describing survey procedures.  
 
h. Eligibility Criteria  
i. Inclusion Criteria  
School -level inclusion crit eria include traditional public schools serving low -income 
students (≥50% student eligible for free/reduced price meals) that are located in the 
greater San Francisco Bay Area. Individual -level inclusion criteria include students in 
4th grade classes  in eligible intervention and control schools. We will also survey the 
food service director and the principal or other administrator at each participating 
school.  
ii. Exclusion Criteria  
Due to financial constraints of translation into other languages, we will exclude 
students or staff that cannot read and write in English and/or Spanish, and students 
whose parents cannot read and write in English and/or Spanish.  
   
Students with chronic diseases or conditions that require special dietary 
accommodations or who are underweight, meaning their BMI% is below 5 %, will 
also be excluded from the study classroom activities if their BMI % decreases from 
baseline over the course of the study period.   
i. Screening Procedures  
1. Students - We will se nd information letters and consent forms in Spanish/English to 
parents of students  in 4th grade classes  at participating schools. The information letter will 
inform them of the study and will include the principal investigator’s contact [CONTACT_312819]. Students who return consent forms will receive small 
incentives (e.g., pencils, stickers). As in our previous studies, we will visit schools to 
redistribute information letters and consent forms to students who have mispl aced or lost 
forms. 4th grade students whose parents provide consent to participate in the evaluation 
will also be asked to provide their written assent prior to study participation.  
 
To retain study participants, we will provide incentives to participants , use detailed 
confidential tracking systems for students, and use refusal conversion techniques in 
August 17, 2021   Page 8 of 12 which we work with school staff and students to understand and overcome non -
participation and attrition.  
   
2. Schools - School -level inclusion criteria inc lude traditional public schools serving low -
income students (≥50% student eligible for free/reduced price meals) that are located in 
the greater San Francisco Bay Area. We will recruit 13 elementary schools to serve as 
intervention sites and 13 elementary schools to serve as control sites  
   
3. Food Service Director and Principal - In order to track secular trends (i.e., nutrition and 
physical activity policies and practices at the school or district level) that may influence 
study outcomes, we will conduct  web-based or paper surveys with food service directors 
and principals at intervention and control schools at baseline and [ADDRESS_385248] 
obesity. School food service directors and principals will be provided an information 
letter to inform them about the study with the principal investigator’s contact [CONTACT_312820]. Staff will be asked to sign consent forms prior to 
participation and they will receive a reusable water bottle for their assistance with the 
study.  
 
j. Participation in Multiple Protocols  
When recruiting schools, we ask school administrators about other studies the school is 
participating in. If the school is participating in a study tha t could impact our primary or 
secondary outcomes , we evaluate whether or not the school is eligible for the current 
study. At this time, there are no plans for participants to be enrolled in any other studies.  
k. Payments to Parti cipants  
Participating intervention and control schools will receive a $500 honoraria to be used for 
physical activity or nutrition related activities.  
   
At intervention schools, $200 gift cards will be given to each participating 4th grade 
teacher.  
   
Participating 4th grade students at intervention and control schools will receive a $10 -
value  movie tickets after completing their final food/beverage diary.  
 
At intervention and control schools, staff will receive a $[ADDRESS_385249] for completing the 
two surve ys. 
 
l. Costs to Participants  
NONE  
m. Planned Duration  of the Study  
Entire study duration: [ADDRESS_385250] 17, 2021   Page 9 of 12  
Food Service Director and Principal: Trained Stanford staff will interview the food 
service director and principal at the school at 2 time points, totaling 1.5 hours  
 
Students: Trained Stanford staff will deliver eight 15-minute  interactive lessons about the 
benefits of drinking water. Food and beverage diaries, short surveys of physical activity, 
screen time, and beverage intake, and BMI data will be collected during 3 1 -hour time 
points (food and beverage diaries will not be completed during 15 month follow -up). 
Total commitment will be approximately 5 hours.  
 
 
9. RISKS 
a. Potential Risks  
i. Investigational devices  
N/A 
ii. Investigational drugs 
N/A 
iii. Commercially available drugs, biologics, reagents or chemicals  
N/A 
iv. Procedures  
We will measure student height and weight using a standard National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey protocol. As schools routinely measure student height and 
weight as a part of routine Fitnessgram testing in grades 5, 7, and 9, both school staff a nd 
students will be familiar with these assessments. We will use techniques (e.g., one 
student measured at a time behind a privacy screen) to make sure that we preserve 
student privacy while taking measurements. Study participation or non -participation wil l 
not adversely affect participants’ involvement at the school and this study poses no risk 
greater than that encountered by [CONTACT_312821]. We will take great 
effort to preserve participants’ privacy, but in the event that a loss of  privacy occurs, it is 
conceivable that some students may become mildly embarrassed.  
 
v. Radioisotopes/radiation -producing machines  
N/A 
vi. Physical  well-being  
We will ask participating students  in 4th grade classes  to complete food and beverage 
diaries and a survey regarding screen time, physical activity, beverage intake, and we will 
also measure student height and weight using a standard National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey protocol. As schools routine ly measure student height and weight as 
a part of routine Fitnessgram testing in grades 5, 7, and 9, both school staff and students 
August 17, 2021   Page 10 of 12 will be familiar with these assessments. We will use techniques (e.g., one student 
measured at a time behind a privacy scree n) to make sure that we preserve student 
privacy while taking measurements. Study participation or non -participation will not 
adversely affect participants’ involvement at the school and this study poses no risk 
greater than that encountered by [CONTACT_312822]. We will take great 
effort to preserve participants’ privacy, but in the event that a loss of privacy occurs, it is 
conceivable that some students may become mildly embarrassed.  
vii. Psych ological  well-being  
Study participation or non -participation will not adversely affect participants’ 
involvement at the school and this study poses no risk greater than that encountered by 
[CONTACT_312821]. We will take great ef fort to preserve participants’ 
privacy, but in the event that a loss of privacy occurs, it is conceivable that some students 
may become mildly embarrassed.  
viii. Economic well -being  
N/A 
ix. Social  well-being  
N/A 
x. Overall Evaluation of Risk  
Research not involving greater than minimal risk.  
b. International Research  Risk Procedures  
N/A 
c. Procedures to Minimize Risk  
While childhood obesity is a major public health concern, there remain undernourished 
children in the US who rely on FRPM for their daily caloric intake. Increased water 
consumption amongst these underweight children holds a small but important risk of 
increasing satiety, thereby [CONTACT_312816]. For these children, we will take 
precautions. We will work with teachers and families (through consent processes) to 
identify students who have chronic diseases or conditions that require special dietary 
accommodations. We will then work with teachers and students’ families to develop 
individualized plans that allow students to participate in activities that do not interfere 
with the dietary prescriptions of physicians or nutritionists. For example, if a 4 th grade 
student drinks a special formula such as Pediasure® for poor weight gain, he/she could 
participate in classroom educational lessons but opt out of drinking water in the water 
bottle distributed to students. These students, however, would be exclud ed from 
evaluation activities.  
 
A Data Safety and Monitoring Board has been established to evaluate any adverse impact 
of the study on underweight children. Members of the board include experts in 
gastroenterology, hepatology , and nu trition, public health , general pediatrics , and 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. They have determined that the study to date has not adversely affected 
August 17, [ADDRESS_385251] -protected desktop 
computer located in the PI’s locked office. Only trained research staff will have access to 
these data. All data will be coded with number - only identifiers. A na me-identification 
number master code list (which will be destroyed once all data collection is completed) 
and data files will be stored in separate secure locations (computer and locked file 
cabinets in the PI [INVESTIGATOR_312811]).  
d. Study Conclusion  
While it is possible that there could be detectable differences in BMI  outcomes  during the 
course of the study, this is unlikely given pr evious studies that were used for effect size 
for power calculations. If there are any unanticipated impact on BMI prior to the end of 
the study or any adverse consequences, the Data Safety and Monitoring Board 
established for this study, will determine en d points and action. Of note, the interventions 
tested in this study (water station installation and promotion) are low -risk interventions 
and unlikely to have adverse consequences.  
e. Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMC)  
N/A 
f. Risks to Special Po pulations  
Research not involving greater than minimal risk.  
10. BENEFITS  
Students who participate in the intervention are likely to benefit from improved access to water in 
schools and increased knowledge about the importance of drinking water through improved 
beverage consumption patterns and improved weight status. Although the focus of this current 
proposal is to examine the effect of water provision and promotion on food and beverage intake 
patterns and obesity, there is also potential to impact health outcomes not measured in t his study 
(e.g.,  dental caries).  
 
Students at control schools will not benefit from this intervention during the study period. It is 
possible, however, that water dispensers given to control schools following the study could lead 
to improved beverage intake  patterns in control schools as well. This study is beneficial to the 
larger population because study results can inform policies and programs that encourage children 
and their families to drink water instead of caloric beverages with added sugar. Subject risk is 
minimal, especially when compared to the potential benefits of this research.  
August 17, [ADDRESS_385252] (HIPAA)  and privacy policies of Stanford University, Stanford 
Health Ca re, and Stanford Children’s Health.  