Feasibility of Utilizing the Infinitome Program to Evaluate Abn ormal Large Scale 
Brian 
Networks in Alzheimer’s Disease 
  
IRB: A20-[ADDRESS_354161]: 04563767 
  
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
 
 
08/11/2020 
 
 
Sponsor 
HealthPartners Institute 
 
 
This study will be conducted in compliance with the protocol, I ND regulations and 
other applicable regulatory requirements. 
 
  
 
  
 
 
Confidential Information 
No use or disclosure of this document is permitted without prio r written 
authorization from 
HealthPartners  
Version: ϴͬϭϭͬϮϬϮϬ  [ADDRESS_354162] Narrative 
1. Summary
The Infinitome Program from Omni scient has the ability to study  abnormal brain networks or connectomes using resting 
state functional MRI (rs-fMRI).  This technology, which visuali zes brain networks in three dimensions, was originally 
developed to ensure neurosurgeons avoid inadvertently lesioning  cognitively eloquent brain regions during surgical 
operations.  The potential of Infinitome in identifying connect ome dysfunction for neurodegenerative diseases such as 
Alzheimer’s disease has yet to be explored.  This diagnostic te chnique may play a critical role for identifying disease 
brain networks that may benefit from targeted interventions in clinical trials.   
2. Study aims
To determine the feasibility of ut ilizing Infinitome Program for t he evaluation of network dysfunction in Alzheimer’s 
disease. We will report the rate of completion of rs-fMRI, rate  of completed analysis of images using the program, and 
list the abnormal networks as identified by [CONTACT_78311].  
3. Background, Rationale, Significance
In 2009, the Human Connectome Project (HCP) commenced one of th e most ambitious neuroscientific initiatives to map 
the brain 1,2. This project identified [ADDRESS_354163] on clinical care.  The techniques necessary to produce connectomic maps 
were feasible in research settings, but not clinical ones.  Muc h of the work depends on the  ability to perform rs-fMRI 
imaging as well as diffusion ten sor imaging, both techniques th at are time-consuming and impractical for clinical practice 
3. At the same time, structural bra in MRIs are too often read as “normal,” even though a patient may carry a chronic,
life-changing diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease or Lewy body dem entia.  These observations suggest that structural MRIs
lack precision for the detection of brain abnormalities in pati ents with neurodegenerative diseases.
The Infinitome Product developed by [CONTACT_290305] a ccelerate connectomic research and provide 
application of rs-fMRI findings to the clinical setting.  The p roduct is cloud-based, accessible via internet browser, and 
has the capability to analyze rs- fMRI data from a clinic-based image server (see attached Omniscient Overview pdf file).  
The program allows for personalized connectome mappi[INVESTIGATOR_007], which e nables visualization of brain networks with great 
accuracy, regardless of brain le sions.  Furthermore, the develo pers have used machine learning to measure connectivity 
between subregions and how they compare to normal controls.  Fo r instance, the default mode network (DMN) has 
been found to function abnormally in Alzheimer’s disease 4.  This technology has the capability of comparing the DMN in 
a suspected Alzheimer’s patient with a cohort of controls from the HCP.    
This fe asibility study may provide helpful clinical inf ormation relating to the underl ying disease process and guide our 
practice.  Furthermore, this inf ormation will be helpful in gui ding our decision about purchasing a subscription to 
Infinitome for future clinical research. In addition the result s will add preliminary data for a  future grant applications 
that will utilize the program to d etect abnormalities in AD and  guide individualized treatments.  
4. Approach
a. Study design
This is a prospective feasibility imaging study in patients wit h AD.  
b.Population
i. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
Inclusion Criteria
2 1. Patients with a diagnosis of mild, moderate, or severe Alzhei mer’s disease
2. Age: 40 – 90  Years
3. Patients who are clinically indicated for an MRI
Exclusion Criteria 
1. fMRI contraindicated (eg. Implantable device, pacemaker, meta llic implants, etc.)
2. Subject unable to tolerate sitting for a one hour fMRI
3. Other concerns as determined by [CONTACT_290306]. Sample Size
We plan to enroll [ADDRESS_354164]. Rosenbloom will identify poten tial study patients via sched uled clinic (or video visits) and ask
patient/caregiver if they would like information about a resear ch study and potential study participation.
2.If patient/caregiver i ndicates they would like more information, [CONTACT_290314], shar es the info with the
research staff, and let patient/caregiver to expect a call from  the research staff
3.Research staff reaches out to the patient/caregiver with a phon e call (phone script attached), and
patient/caregiver is offered an informed consent form to read o n their own time. If the patient/caregiver
requests additional time, then the research staff schedules a p hone appointment to answer any questions, and
to complete the electronic consent via REDCap. This process wil l be conducted prior to the scheduled imaging
visit.
4.After c ompletion of the informed consent process and upon confirmation  of eligibility (I/E criteria), subject will
undergo added imaging (research sequences).
5.Once the scan is complete, the d ata will be de-identified and u ploaded to the Omniscient Cloud server. Once
processed by [CONTACT_290307], the results will be collec ted by [CONTACT_290308] a secure
server.  This information will al so be shared with the patient and family.
i.Consent
Potential research subjects will be informed that participation  in this study is voluntary and that their decision to 
participate will not reflect upon  their relationships with the Center for Memory and Aging, Regions Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], or 
HealthPartners. Subjects will be i nformed that they can withdra w from the study at any time and will be given a copy of 
the consent form.  
With the electronic consent via REDCap the patient/caregiver pr oviding consent will be able to review the consent form 
themselves and sign electronically with a stylus, touch screen,  or cursor using a signature [CONTACT_290312]. After the 
individual has received the link and can view the consent form,  the research staff member will go through the consent 
form with the individual as would be typi[INVESTIGATOR_290302]. If the patient/caregiver consents to participate, then they will 
sign via REDCap. After the signed consent form is received by s tudy staff, the research staff member will sign another 
signature [CONTACT_290313] a copy to the same email address to w hich the link was sent. 
ii.Data sources
xElectronic medical records (EMR)
xCase Report Forms
xMRI Imaging
xInfinitome Program
d.Intervention, treatments
There is no proposed treatment intervention.  
Version: ϴͬϭϭͬϮϬϮϬ  
Version: ϴͬϭϭͬϮϬϮϬ  3 Imaging protocol described below : Once settings are in place, apply these parameters for the BO LD imaging (what we 
call a T2*EPI [INVESTIGATOR_79714]) 
Resting state fMRI  
x3 × 3 × 3-mm voxels
x128 volumes/run
xTE = 27 ms
xTR = 2.8 s
xfield of view = 256 mm
xflip angle = ϵϬȗ
xRun time about [ADDRESS_354165] 30 and ideally 50-60 directions+ one baseline b0 scan
xFOV=25.6 cm
xslice thickness 2mm
x0 mm gap between slices with no overlap
xfull brain coverage
xisotropic voxels
xsquare 128x128 matrix
x1 average/NEX
xaxial foot to head slice prescription
xDTI done before contrast images
e. Outcomes/endpoint and other variable definitions, and instrum ents used
Since this is a feasibility study,  we are mainly evaluating the  ability of the Infinitome program to detect connectome 
abnormalities in AD subjects.   
xRate of Completion of rs-fMRI  – % of subjects who completed the sequence of the fMRI protoco l
xRate of Completed Analysis  - %of subjects whose images were uploaded and analyzed by [CONTACT_290309]  – All the abnormal networks as identified by [CONTACT_290310]
(categorical) – such as default modal network..
Variable NameData Source Purpose Measurement Scale
(patient survey,
EMR, claims,
registry)(sample identification, description,
groupi[INVESTIGATOR_164572], study endpoint,
predictor, covariate)(binary, continuous)
Demographics (e.g., 
Age, Gender)EMR Description Continuous, Binary
 AD severity EMR Description Categorical
MoCA (Montreal Cognitive Assessment)EMR Description Continuous
fMRI – Program numbers and Post-processed Images MRI and
InfinitomeprogramDescription/endpoint Descriptive/Continuous
Version: ϴͬϭϭͬϮϬϮϬ  4 g. Statistical analysis plan
Demographics and baseline characteristics of study participants  will be summarized using descriptive statistics (mean 
and standard deviation, median, and proportions, as appropriate ).  
We will report the proportion of  successfully completed rs-fMRI s and completed Infinitome analyses. If all [ADDRESS_354166] 3 of 4 Infinitome analyses are completed , we will consider this feasibility study a success.  
We will also explore and report if  any and which networks are i dentified as abnormal by [CONTACT_290311]. The 
Infinitome output provides pairwise dysfunction between structu res/areas within each network. We will report the 
number of patients who have dysfunction in the DMN, overall, as  well as the number of pairwise structures within the 
DMN are dysfunctional. We may report on several other networks,  if abnormality is shown.  
h. No inferential statistics will be conducted for this study. We do not anticipate being able to definitively report
areas that have dysfunction in persons with Alzheimer’s; howeve r, this preliminary data will be very important
for future larger studies. Power analysis or statement of precision
If all [ADDRESS_354167] 3 of 4 Infinitome analyses are completed, we will consider this feasibility 
study a success. With a sample s ize of 4, we will be able to es timate a success rate of 75% to within a 95% confidence 
interval of +/- 21.7% assuming a true success rate of 75%. 
i. S trengths and limitations
Strengths of this application include the fact that we are test ing a novel program that leverages HCP data to determine 
dysfunctional connectomes in AD.  This work has never been done  before with this software and could lead to the 
design of clinical trials for targeted treatments to dysfunctio nal networks. 
Limitations of this study include the low number of subjects, b ut we are merely performing a feasibility study to justify 
standard use of the Infinitome program in clinical research  
5.Setting/Environment/Organizational feasibility
The study will be conducted at He althPartners Neuroscience Cent er, specifically the Center for Memory and Aging. This 
location is appropriate in that it is an established multidisci plinary clinic developed specifi cally for evaluating patients 
with dementia. It is adequately staffed and equipped to serve t his population.  
As this study involves in-person visits, here is a description of how the visits will be conducted 
xVisit would be added onto existing clinical care order. The onl y in-person visit is an increase in the amount of
time for an already ordered clinical care MRI.  NSC procedures would be followed. No additional scripting will be
added.
xWe plan to do the consent virtually. No in-person contact [INVESTIGATOR_8178] c onsent process.
6.Risks and Benefits
The risk is overall minimal for patients.  Structural MRI is a routine diagnostic procedure at HealthPartners, and the 
resting state portion merely requires an additional 8-15 minute s of scan time.   The patient may experience 
claustrophobia with the narrow imaging space.   
7.Data Confidentiality and Privacy
Omniscient uses an industrial grade cyber security that is supe rior to what is offered at the leading medical device 
companies.  No personal health information is stored on servers  and only de-identified scans stored on a dedicated edge 
node on an encrypted MinIO instances.  Patient data is only acc essed through authenticated calls form Kubernetes pods 
contained in the VPC.  The web service requires user authentica tion.  Only the data related to a specific facility can be 
retrieved through authenticated calls and are restricted to the ir use. 
Version: ϴͬϭϭͬϮϬϮϬ  5 For other data that is collected, the tools will be developed i nternally (i.e. CRFs and source documents).  This data 
collected will be stored electronically and remain confidential  and secure (e.g. secured server, encrypted data, password 
protected file) 
8.Timeline
xJune- July 2020 – IRB submission
xAugust -September 2020 – Enrollment and Data Collection
xSeptember -October 2020 - Compi[INVESTIGATOR_290303]
9.Dissemination/Sharing Resu lts/Integration and Impact
Study results will be used to pro vide preliminary data for futu re grants and clinical trial work. In addition, the study 
results and background may be presented during neurology/CMA co nferences, grand rounds, and within the 
HealthPartners Research Foundation newsletter. 
10.References
1. Fox MD. Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_290304]. New England Journal of Medicine.
2018;379(23):2237-2245.
2. Glasser MF, Smith SM, Marcus DS, et al. The human connectome project's neuroimaging approach. Nature
neuroscience. 2016;19(9):1175-1187.
3. Lv H, Wang Z, Tong E, et al. Resting-state functional MRI: ev erything that nonexperts have always wanted to
know. American Journal of Neuroradiology. 2018;39(8):1390-1399.
4. Greicius MD, Srivastava G, Rei ss AL, Menon V. Default-mode ne twork activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease
from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
2004;101(13):4637-4642.