  Version: 10/19/18 Molly  E. Hunt,  Pharm.D.  
 
IRB Protocol-  Hydrocortisone  and Fludrocortisone  versus  Hydrocortisone  Alone  in Critically  Ill 
Medical  Patients  with  Septic  Shock  
 
Investigators:  
Molly  E. Hunt,  Pharm.D.  
Jason  Frisbee,  D.O.,  Pharm.D.  
Shauna  Winters,  Pharm.D.,  BCPS  
Tina  M. Dudney,  M.D.  
Robert  E. Heidel,  Ph.D.  (Statistician)  
Paul  R. Branca,  M.D.  
 
Background  and Rationale : 
Fludrocortisone  is a synthetic  adrenocortical  steroid  that mimics  the endogenous  
activity  of aldosterone,  resulting  in an enhanced  reabsorption  of sodium  ions in the distal  
tubule  of the kidney  and resultant  increased  extracellular  fluid  volume.   The goal  of 
fludrocortisone  therapy  is to increase  blood  pressure  by [CONTACT_763133].   Hydrocortisone,  another  steroid  studied  in conjunction  with  
fludrocortisone  in septic  shock  patients,  displays  both  mineralocorticoid  and glucocorticoid  
activity,  unlike  fludrocortisone  which  has all mineralocorticoid  activity.   In septic  shock  patients  
that present  with  a potential  adrenal  insufficiency  due to impaired  glucocorticoid  and 
vasopressin  production,  it is not clear  whether  treatment  with  hydrocortisone  alone  or in 
combination  with  fludrocortisone  provides  any difference  in mortality  and morbidity.    
 In general,  low dose,  physiologic  dosed  steroid  use has consistently  shown  to reduce  
vasopressor  requirements,  but mortality  benefit  remains  controversial  despi[INVESTIGATOR_763129],  controlled  trials  (RCTs).   Recent  meta-analyses  have  concluded  that uncorrected  
data  do not demonstrate  mortality  benefit1.  Of the main  RCTs  conducted  in the past  20 years,  
there  are two main  differences  between  those  that find mortality  benefit  with  steroid  use 
(APROCCHSS  and Ger-Inf-05)  and those  that do not (CORTICUS,  HYPRESS,  and now  ADRENAL).   
The first difference  is the use of fludrocortisone  in combination  with  the standard  dose  of 
hydrocortisone  200 mg intravenously  (IV) daily.   The second  difference  is the focus  on patients  
with  septic  shock  who  did not improve  after  initial  resuscitation  and were  requiring  higher  
baseline  doses  of vasopressors.   The trials  finding  mortality  benefit  enrolled  sicker  patients  at 
baseline  than  the trials  that did not find mortality  benefit,  which  was identified  through  a 
variety  of severity  scores  (APACHE,  SAPSII,  and SOFA)  and baseline  mean  vasopressor  doses2,3.  
For example,  baseline  SOFA  scores  were  on average  12 in the treatment  arm of the APROCCHSS  
trial versus  10.6  in the CORTICUS  trial3,4.  In addition,  mean  norepi[INVESTIGATOR_763130]  30 mcg/min,  whereas  the mean  norepi[INVESTIGATOR_763131] 1 mcg/kg/min  (70 mcg/min  in a 70 kg patient)3,5. 
 The theory  for use of fludrocortisone  centers  around  data  that suggests  40-65%  of 
critically  ill patients  have  high  plasma  renin  activity  and low plasma  aldosterone  
concentrations2.  Moreover,  experimental  sepsis  studies  in murine  models  have  suggested  that 
a marked  NF-kB  mediated  down-regulation  of mineralocorticoid  receptors  occurs  during  the 
IRB NUMBER: 4421
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/27/2018
  Version: 10/19/[ADDRESS_1045726]  of care  
both  within  and outside  of the University  of Tennessee  Medical  Center  Knoxville.  
 
Objective:   To determine  if the use of hydrocortisone  plus fludrocortisone  is associated  with  a 
faster  resolution  of shock  (defined  as 24 hours  vasopressor  free)  when  compared  to the use of 
hydrocortisone  alone  in medical,  critically  ill septic  shock  patients  i 
 
Study  Design  and Methods:  
This study  is a single-center,  prospective,  open-label,  randomized  trial which  will evaluate  adult  
patients  admitted  with  septic  shock  to the medical  critical  care  unit (MCC).  
 Inclusion  Criteria:    
 Age ≥ 18 
 Critically  ill medicine  patients  requiring  addition  of stress  dose  steroid  therapy  
(hydrocortisone)  in addition  to pressors  for septic  shock  management  during  
their  ICU stay 
 Fludrocortisone  administered  within  24 hours  after  initiation  of hydrocortisone  if 
in combination  therapy  group  
 Exclusion  Criteria:  
 Use of fludrocortisone  and/or  hydrocortisone  for any reason  other  than  septic  
shock  management  during  ICU stay 
 Fludrocortisone/hydrocortisone  initiated  by [CONTACT_763134]  
 Prior  use of fludrocortisone/hydrocortisone  at time  of admission  (home  or 
outside  facility)  
 Patients  not appropriate  for study  inclusion  as determined  by [CONTACT_763135]   
 Patients  receiving  steroid  therapy  not in accordance  with  assigned  group  per 
location  (MCC1  or MCC2)   
 Patients  re-admitted  to the MCC  during  the same  admission  and restarted  on 
vasopressor  therapy  will be noted  during  data  collection  and only  the initial  
admission  will be included  for analysis   
 Any patient  receiving  greater  than  one dose  of hydrocortisone  100 mg 
 Physical  or medical  contraindication  to receiving  PO or PER FT (per feeding  tube)  
fludrocortisone.  
 
 
 
IRB NUMBER: 4421
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/27/2018
  Version: 10/19/18 Protocol:  
All patients  admitted  to the medical  critical  care  unit side 1 (MCC1)  or side 2 (MCC2)  will be 
provided  a “Notice  of Research.”   At any time,  refusal  or withdrawal  from  the study  can be 
requested  by [CONTACT_102],  patient  advocate,  or provider.    
 
Patients  that meet  inclusion  criteria  for the study  will receive  either  hydrocortisone  50 mg IV 
Q6h  alone  or a combination  of hydrocortisone  50 mg IV Q6h  plus fludrocortisone  50 mcg 
PO/PER  FT daily.   Fludrocortisone  must  be initiated  and administered  within  [ADDRESS_1045727] of patients  in the MCC  receiving  hydrocortisone  
therapy.    
 
While  each  included  patient’s  data  will be recorded  retrospectively  after  randomization,  we do 
believe  that it is necessary  to perform  this study  in a prospective  manner  rather  than  fully  
retrospective.   It is not feasible  to perform  this study  retrospectively  as we would  not be able  to 
ensure  adequate  and equal  numbers  in each  group  within  the medical  critical  care  unit,  
especially  considering  how  medical  critical  care  patients  are placed  in other  intensive  care  units  
within  our institution  based  on bed availability.   Unequal  groups  would  unduly  bias the results  
and make  the analysis  less meaningful  in terms  of contributing  to the current  body  of evidence.  
 
Any medication  events,  including  adverse  drug  reactions  or medication  errors,  will be routinely  
reported  throughout  the study  to the UTMC  Safety  Intelligence  system.   Routine  reports  of 
events  related  to the study  will be reviewed  weekly  by [CONTACT_763136].   
Data  will be collected  continuously  throughout  the study  duration  and investigators  will review  
the data  for any concerning  safety  or efficacy  differences  between  the treatment  groups.   Upon  
regular  screening  for adverse  drug  events,  if any are detected,  they  will be not only  be reported  
to the Safety  Intelligence  system  but will also be reported  for review  by [CONTACT_1201].   
 
IRB NUMBER: 4421
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/27/2018
  Version: 10/19/18 Per the FDA guidance  for clinical  investigators  regarding  the need  for an investigational  new  
drug  (IND)  application  in human  research  studies,   investigations  are exempt  if the drug  is 
lawfully  marketed  in the U.S.,  the investigation  is not intended  to support  a new  indication  or 
change  the labeling  of the drug,  the investigation  will not support  a change  in advertising  for 
the drug,  and the route  of administration,  dose,  or any other  factor  of the investigation  will not 
increase  the risk associated  with  the drug7.  Our study,  since  we are not changing  standard  of 
care  and are using  accepted,  studied  doses  of hydrocortisone  and fludrocortisone,  meet  these  
criteria  for exemption  from  IND application.  
 
Outcomes:  
 Primary  Endpoint:  
o Time  to resolution  of shock  (defined  as 24 hours  vasopressor  free)  
 Secondary  Endpoints:  
o ICU Length  of Stay  (LOS)  
o Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_408621] 
o All-cause  mortality  at ICU discharge  
o All-cause  mortality  at hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47850]   
o All-cause  mortality  at 28 days  of admission  
o All-cause  mortality  at 90 days  of admission  
o Withdrawal  of treatment  therapy  during  ICU stay 
o Reinitiation  of vasopressor  therapy  (after  vasopressor  free for 24 hours)  
o Reinitiation  of hydrocortisone  and/or  fludrocortisone  
o Mechanical  ventilator  free days  during  ICU admission  
o Duration  of steroid  therapy  
 Safety  Endpoints  
o Documentation  of two consecutive  point  of care  blood  glucose  checks  >180  
mg/dl  after  initiation  of hydrocortisone  and/or  hydrocortisone/fludrocortisone   
o Gastrointestinal  bleed  during  study  period  (as documented  by [CONTACT_48368])  
 Severity  of bleed  as determined  by [CONTACT_763137]  
 Severe:  deadly  bleeding;  intracerebral  bleeding  or substantial  
hemodynamic  compromise  
 Moderate:  bleeding  requiring  transfusion  
 Mild:  other  bleeding  not requiring  transfusion  or causing  
hemodynamic  compromise  
o New  initiation  of renal  replacement  therapy  during  study  period  
o Electrolyte  abnormalities  
 Sodium  level  greater  than  150 mEq/L  during  study  period  
 Potassium  level  greater  than  5.5 mEq/L  during  study  period  
 
Other  Data  Collected:  
 Demographics:  Age,  sex, weight,  height,  BMI,  ethnicity  (race)  
 Septic  Shock  Bundle  initiated  
 WBC  at time  of steroid  initiation  and at discontinuation  
IRB NUMBER: 4421
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/27/2018
  Version: 10/19/18  Initial  lactic  acid level  on admission  
 Lactic  acid level  at initiation  of vasopressors  
 Vasopressor  initiated  (norepi[INVESTIGATOR_238],  epi[INVESTIGATOR_238],  phenylephrine,  vasopressin,  
dopamine,  dobutamine)  
 Vasopressor  dose  when  steroid  therapy  was initiated  (mcg/min  and mcg/kg/min)  
 Max  vasopressor  dose during  study  period  
 SOFA  Score  
 APACHE  Score  
 Charlson  Comorbidity  Index  
 Site of infection  (lung,  intraabdominal,  urogenital,  skin,  CNS,  endocarditis,  bacteremia,  
unknown,  etc.)  
 Non-contaminant,  positive  culture  during  study  period  with  clinical  correlation  to septic  
shock  event  
o Site of culture  
o Gram  Positive  
o Gram  Negative  
o Viral  
o Fungal  
o Organism     
 Comorbidities:  
o Documented  heart  failure  
o Documented  chronic  kidney  disease  stage  III-IV  not requiring  renal  replacement  
therapy  at baseline  
 Documentation  of concurrent  cardiogenic  shock  during  study  period  
 Serum  creatinine  at initiation  of steroid  therapy  
 Serum  creatinine  at discontinuation  of steroid  therapy  
 Renal  replacement  therapy  at the initiation  of steroid  therapy  
 Mechanical  ventilation  at initiation  of steroid  therapy  
 Other  systemic  steroid  use (methylprednisolone,  dexamethasone,  prednisone)  prior  to 
pressor  initiation  
 Systemic  steroid  use prior  to admission  (home  medication)  
 Continuation  of baseline/prior  steroid  in combination  with  
hydrocortisone/fludrocortisone  
 Inhaled  corticosteroid  use  
 Intubation  with  etomidate  
 Amount  of diuretics  received  during  study  period  
 Acute  respi[INVESTIGATOR_763132]  
 Administration  of neuromuscular  blocker  during  study  period  
 
Statistical  Analysis:    
 
Statistical  Power  
IRB NUMBER: 4421
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/27/2018
  Version: 10/19/[ADDRESS_1045728]  size from  
the APROCCHSS  and CORTICUS  trials3,4. The evidence-based  difference  between  the treatment  
groups  was 24 hours  (Group  1 M = 96, SD = 36; Group  2 M = 72, SD = 36), leading  to a Cohen’s  d 
effect  size of 0.67.  With  a two-tailed  hypothesis,  an effect  size of d = 0.67,  an alpha  value  of 
0.05,  and equal  allocation  to treatment  groups  (1:1),  39 participants  would  be needed  for each  
treatment  group.  This means  the total  sample  size will be n = [ADDRESS_1045729]  for the sample.  Descriptive  statistics  will be 
used  to describe  the sample  characteristics  associated  with  continuous  variables.  The 
assumption  of normality  of continuous  distributions  will be assessed  using  skewness  and 
kurtosis  statistics.  If either  statistic  is above  an absolute  value  of 2.0, then  the distribution  will 
be assumed  to be non-normal.  Homogeneity  of variance  between  independent  groups  will be 
tested  using  Levene’s  Test  for Equality  of Variances.  When  both  statistical  assumptions  are met,  
independent  samples  t-tests  will be used  to compare  the treatment  groups  on continuous  
outcomes.  Means  and standard  deviations  will be reported  and interpreted  for these  analyses.  
Mann-Whitney  U tests  will be used  for comparisons  when  statistical  assumptions  are violated.  
Medians  and interquartile  ranges  will be presented  and analyzed  for non-parametric  
comparisons.  Chi-square  tests  will be used  to test for significant  associations  between  the 
treatment  groups  and categorical  outcomes.  Relative  risk with  95%  confidence  intervals  will be 
reported  for significant  categorical  associations.  Multiple  regression  analysis  will be performed  
with  time  to resolution  of shock  as the outcome.  Linearity,  normality,  homoscedasticity,  
multicollinearity,  and autocorrelation  assumptions  for the regression  analysis  will be 
performed.  Unstandardized  beta  coefficients,  standard  errors  of the coefficients,  and 
standardized  beta  coefficients  will be reported  and interpreted,  along  with  the change  in 
shared  variance  (R2) and respective  F-tests.  All analyses  will be conducted  using  SPSS  Version  
22 (Armonk,  NY: IBM Corporation)  and statistical  significance  will be assumed  at an alpha  value  
of 0.05.  
 
A priori  subanalysis  will be performed  on the following  subset  of patients:  documented  history  
of heart  failure  and documented  chronic  kidney  disease  stage  III and IV requiring  renal  
replacement  therapy  at baseline.  
 
Critical  Analysis/Limitations:  
Limitations  of this study  will include  the open-label  design  without  blinding  and placebo  
controls.   Also,  as data  collection  will be retrospective  in nature,  we will be relying  on nursing  
documentation  for timing  of vasopressor  initiation  and discontinuation  for our primary  
outcome.   This could  introduce  documentation  bias,  but it is important  to point  out that our 
critical  care  nursing  staff  document  pressor  requirements  hourly.   Also,  to note,  previous  trials  
have  utilized  fludrocortisone  [ADDRESS_1045730]  in the United  States  is a 100 mcg tablet.   In order  to comply  with  the 
IRB NUMBER: 4421
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/27/2018
  Version: 10/19/[ADDRESS_1045731] to order  the 
dose.  
 
Protected  Health  Information:  
Patients  and their  specific  health  information  will be de-identified  to protect  privacy.   Any 
information  collected  that contains  PHI will be stored  in a secure,  locked  area  on password-
protected  electronic  files that are only  accessible  to study  investigators.   Any information  
containing  PHI will be properly  disposed  of at the end of the study  period.  
 
Study  Budget:   Cost  of printing  of notification  of research  
 
Timeline:  
Estimated  October  2018  through  July 2019  
 
References:  
 
1.  Long  B and Koyfman  A.  Controversies  in corticosteroid  use for sepsis.   J Emerg  Med.   2017;  
53 (5): 653-661.    
 
2.  Annane  D, Sebille  V, Charpentier  C, et al. Effect  of treatment  with  low doses  of 
hydrocortisone  and fludrocortisone  on mortality  in patients  with  septic  shock.  JAMA . 
2002;288(7):862-871.  (Ger-Inf-05)  
3.  Annane  D, Renault  A, Brun-Buisson  C, et al.  Hydrocortisone  plus fludrocortisone  for adults  
with  septic  shock.   N Engl  J Med .  2018;  378:  809-18.   (APROCCHSS)  
 
4. Sprung  C, Annane  D, Keh D, et al.  Hydrocortisone  therapy  for patients  with  septic  shock.   N 
Engl  J Med .  2008;  358:  111-124.   (CORTICUS)  
 
5.  Balasubramanian  V, Finfer  S, Cohen  J, et al.  Adjunctive  glucocorticoid  therapy  in patients  
with  septic  shock.   N Engl  J Med .  2018;  378:  797-808.   (ADRENAL)  
 
6.  Fadel  F, Andre-Gregoire  G, Gravez  B, et al.  Aldosterone  and vascular  mineralocorticoid  
receptors  in murine  endotoxic  and human  septic  shock.   Crit Care  Med .  2017;  45(9):  954-62.    
 
7.  U.S. Department  of Health  and Human  Services,  Food  and Drug  Administration.   (2013).   
Guideline  for Clinical  Investigators,  Sponsors,  and IRBs:  Investigational  new  drug  applications  
(INDs)-determining  whether  human  research  studies  can be conducted  without  an IND.   
Retrieved  from  http://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/guidances/ucm229175.pdf.
IRB NUMBER: 4421
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/27/2018