A Multilevel G aming Intervention for Pe rsons on PrEP 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Latest Approval Date:7/12/2019
Version 9.14.2016 
Significance  
The primary prevention of HIV infection remains a crucial priority. In 2011 , there were 2.5 million new 
HIV infections worldwide.(1)  In the U .S., young minority men who have sex with men (MSM)  are most likely to 
become infected with HIV  and t he use of antiretroviral medications to reduce the risk of acquiring HIV infection 
(Pre-exposure Prophylaxis, PrEP) is an efficacious and promising new prevention strategy. (1,2)  There have 
been recent signific ant advances regarding PrEP i ncluding the definitive demonstration that PrEP reduces HIV 
acquisit ion, the regulatory approval of  Truvada  (tenofovir/emtricitabine)  with an indication for sexual HIV 
prevention, and the development of clinical prescribing guidelines . Despi[INVESTIGATOR_582521] , the 
practical implementation of PrEP is likely to be challenging. (3-10) Data shows that PrEP’s safety and 
effectiveness could be greatly compromised  by [CONTACT_582560] .(11-15) Due to these challenges, the 
prescribing of PrEP should be accompanied by [CONTACT_504785]. 
Adherence to medical care is an integral factor in PrEP’s effectiveness.  The iPrEx , TDF2, and 
Partners PrEP  clinical trials all conclusively  showed that the level of protection fro m HIV infection depended on 
how consistently partici pants took prescribed medication. Significantly greater levels of protection occurred 
among participants with detectable levels of  antiretroviral medication ( ARV) in all of  these  trials .(16,17,18 ) The 
impact  of adherence  was also  underscored in the FEM -PrEP  and VOICE studies, both of which found that  few 
women had detectable levels of ARV s and the studies were unable to demonstrate the efficacy of 
PrEP. (15,19,20)  Adherence to medication is critical to prevention with PrEP, however,  engaging  patients in 
comprehensive follow- up care  is also imperative. (21) Treatment with PrEP  will require consistent contact 
[CONTACT_582561], HIV testing, the detection and 
treatment of associated side effects,  and in cases of unsuccessful prevention, the treatment of newly acquired 
HIV infection. (5,10 -15) Individuals who are at highest risk of HIV infection, often come from populations that  
historically have been underserved by [CONTACT_574231] e.(23,24) The refore , engaging patients  in care could be 
challenging and will require reinforcement and support for doctors and patients. (13,23)  Behavioral 
Interventions promoting adherence  to comprehensive PrEP treatment will need to  be tailored to underserved 
and at risk populations  and will need to reinforce the clinician -patient relationship . 
PrEP could lead to increased behavioral risk in real world settings.  Although there is great 
optimism about the use of PrEP for HIV prevention, a  concern  is that PrEP users might take more sexual risks 
or decrease traditional risk reduction strategies such as condom use  and HIV/STI testing of partners . 
Behavioral models (Beh avioral Disinhibition and Risk Compensation) suggest that risk could increase by 
[CONTACT_582562] -imposed constraints or by [CONTACT_582563]. This , in turn, could 
lead to increased incidence of HIV and other STIs .(14,22,25,26,27)  Some mathematical and cost effectiveness 
models have suggested that even small increases in risk behavior could offset or reverse PrEP’s protective 
benefits at the population level.(13,14) Little evidence is available regarding the actual  impact of PREP on risk 
taking. Data from the iPREX study showed only indirect evidence of increased risk behaviors , as those 
participants who engaged in unprotected anal sex were more likely to have detectable tenofovir levels than 
those with less sexual risk taking.(17,28) In real world clinical settings , in which people know they are on an 
active medication, behavioral risk taking could  measurably  increase. Increases in risk behavior s have been 
documented in the context of microbicide trials, vaccine trials, and among patients living with HIV on antiretroviral therapy.(32) Therefore, HIV prevention counseling remains clinically relevant and prudent  when 
prescribing PrEP . This practice is consistent with good clinical care and is recommended in interim guidelines 
for prescribing PrEP  which state PrEP has the potential to contribute to effective and safe HIV prevention for 
MSM if  “ it is delivered as part of a comprehensive set of prevention services, including risk -reduction and 
PrEP medication adherence counseling.” (138)  
The b ehavioral inter ve
 ntions accompanying PrEP need to be scalable, cost -effective, and easily 
integrated into clinical settings.  In order to maximize the positive impact of PrEP, i t is necessary  to combine 
the prescription of PrEP with behavioral interventions  that promote both adherence and the reduction of  HIV 
risk behaviors  (2). However, these accompanying behavioral interventions need to be cost effective and easily 
integrated into clinical settings in which PrEP is prescribed. (33) Additionally , interventions should be enjoyable 
and tailored to populations targeted for prevention with PrEP . Without these necessary components , 
integration of behavioral interventions into clinical settings cannot be realistically sustained. Although data on 
behavioral interventions accompanying PrEP  treatment is limited , there is a comparatively large amount of 
information available on interventions that promote adherence and health behaviors in similar clinical 
Version 9.14.2016 
populations and settings . This data will be used to guide the development of our  promisin g multilevel gaming 
intervention .  
 Literature on adherence to antiretroviral treatment (ART) among persons living with HIV is 
available to inform  behavioral interventions accompanying PrEP .  Studies have examined the effects of a 
variety of technological aids in improving adherence in adults such as handheld devices, two- way pagers, and 
alarmed medication vials.(46,54- 61) However,  these studies show that reminder devices and alarms, utilized 
without informational  or motivational components, a re only minimally e ffective in enhancing sustained 
adherence.(48,57,60,69 ) Devices that record pi[INVESTIGATOR_582522].(62,67,68) There is a strong correlation between pi[INVESTIGATOR_582523] (or the electronic pi[INVESTIGATOR_582524] ) and virologic response to ARV. Therefore, pi[INVESTIGATOR_582525] g monitoring technology has remained a gold 
standard in measuring medication adherence.(62 -68) But, for  the successful promotion of sustained adherence  
to ARV s, the underlying causes of non -adherence must be targeted such as poor information about HIV and its 
consequences, inconsistent motivat ion, and a lack of skills needed for healthy behaviors .(70-72,77 ) The most  
promising adherence interventions have investigated multi- component interventions that couple electronic 
reminders and/or pi[INVESTIGATOR_582526] -person interventions to improve 
motivation for adherence behaviors .(48,62,76,78) Reviews suggest  that the optimal technology enhanced ART 
adherence interventions: a) utilize tools that are easy to use, do not attract at tention, are familiar , relevant , and 
tailored to the patient population (60,63,79,80); b) promote involvement with healthcare providers 
(69,73,81,75 ); c) incorporate strategies to increase information (e.g., HIV treatment knowledge and 
consequences of non -adherence), motivation (e.g., treatment benefits and concerns), and behavioral skills  
(e.g., methods for adherence). (46,63,69,71,73- 75,79,81 -83).  
 The Information- Motivation -Behavioral Skills (IMB) model is a well -established 
conceptualization for improving adherence to  treatment as well as decreasing HIV r isk b ehaviors.  HIV 
prevention and ART adherence interventions based on IMB  have demonstrated efficacy (86-88) and r eviews 
have suggested that interventions guided by [CONTACT_582564].( 47) According to the IMB model, health information, motivation, and behavioral skills are the 
fundamental determinants of health behavior. In order fo r a PrEP- related intervention to be successful, the 
PrEP user must learn i nformation that is directly relevant to PrEP adherence and HIV transmission. Knowledge 
is a necessary but not sufficient condition for change.  Personal motivation to engage in HIV pr eventat ive 
behav ior or adhere to treatment regimens (attitudes about health ) and social motivation (perceived social and 
cultural support for  performing these acts), is  essential for  change . Finally, skills for performing adherence 
behaviors and a sense of  self-efficacy must be easily applied to an individual’s cultural and social setting. A 
most recent review of factors associated with PrEP adherence suggest s that adherence can be facilitated by 
“accurate knowledge of medication benefits”, “medication optimism and self efficacy for adherence,” and 
“support provided by [CONTACT_582565].” (29). Our intervention will address these factors within  the context of 
the IMB model. This model, consistent with Social Learning Theory, is broadly applicable and can be used to 
create theoretically consistent intervention content.(89)  
 Utilizing  gaming t echnology to deliver behavioral  interventions for  MSM  has many advantages. 
Most technology -based  interventions that aim to improve intrinsic motivation, information, and build behavioral 
skills for adherence have involved in- person engagement  in combination with a variety of reminder or event 
recording technologies. However, there are  many advantages to using newer interactive technology to improve 
motivation and skills, rather than traditional face- to-face counseling, including scalability, efficiency and cost 
effectiveness. In this project, we will leverage technology, not to just remind and sensitively record adherence behaviors, but to also to engage patients in learning information, practicing behaviors and improving motivation for safe sexual behaviors and increased adherence to PrEP.  The use of a combination intervention that utilizes  
gaming technology  is particularly compelling for use with younger  adults , as this age group is most at risk for 
acquiring HIV  and this age group has most actively inquired about PrEP in our clinical settings. Young male 
adults  in the [LOCATION_002] , spend on average 1.13 hours per day playing interactive computer and video 
games.  According to the Pew Internet and American Life Report, Adults and Video G ames , 53% of all 
American adults play video games  and 81% of all younger  adults 18- 29 years old play video games. Fifty 
percent of these young adults state they play ‘everyday ’ or ‘a few times a week ’(90). Gaming technology is also 
popular among minority MSM, the sub -group most at risk for acquiring HIV . In the past, gaming was mistakenly 
identified as a primarily adolescent and heterosexually dominated activity , but current data supports that 
gaming is actually quite diverse. (90) MSM gamers, referred to as “gaymers”  in pop -culture and main stream 
Version 9.14.2016 
articles , are highly represented online and increasingly shape the market (34,35,36,38 ). Additionally, within the 
[LOCATION_002], African Americans ages [ADDRESS_766201] growing user group 
of the mobile Internet (37,39) and m ore than half of reported video gam ing occurs  on portable devices .(90,37) 
Furthermore, MSM have been shown to have greater access to and use of cell phone technologies compared 
to heterosexual populations(38) and m obile phone teledensity (i.e. number of phones per person) has reached 
above 90% in most developed  countries . The widespread appeal and use of smart phones and video game 
playing creates a unique opportunity to deliver health education  to MSM on PrEP, during leisure time, outside 
of the clinic, in a manner that is cost effective and easily scalable.(41,84,85,91)  
Interactive game play has been shown to enhance players' motivation to improve health 
behaviors and self -care in a va
riety of clinical settings and populations.  Games can attract and maintain 
attention; a key component  for effective behavior change.  Compelling interactive phone based games can 
expose players to essential health related content thousands of times and also give players unlimited 
opportunities to rehearse new skills and receive personalized feedback on health choices made within the 
game.  (92-94) Games have been shown to be ef ficacious  in promoting fitness, improving weight management, 
and improving safe r sex  skills .(91,92,94,100)  For example, a HIV/AIDS -prevention computer game called Life 
Challenge was developed by [CONTACT_582566].  The game showed significant improvement in self -efficacy for partner 
negotiation and condom skills for those who started with the least self -efficacy.(9 4)  Two pregnancy prevention 
games, The Baby [CONTACT_582567],  designed  for sexually active young adult s, showed trends in improving 
knowledge and attitudes about parenting and  unprotected sexual behaviors.(93)  
Video games have also been applied to improve self -managem ent skil ls and healthy behaviors in those 
living  with asthma, diabetes, and cancer.(95 -99) For example, a diabetes game called Packy and Marlon,  
demonstrates  that  a well -designed, educational video game can be effective in improving  diabetes -related 
self-efficacy (p = 0.07),  communication with clinicians and loved ones  about diabetes (p = 0.025), and self -care 
behaviors (p = 0.003). These changes oc curred after the game was played at home for six months, compared 
to no improvement in diabetes -related outcomes  in a cont rol gro up who took home an entertainment video 
game that had no health content. (96) In a game called Bronkie the  Bronchiasaurus, those with asthma  help a 
dinosaur character  avoid asthma triggers (pollen, cold viruses, dust) and keep his asthma under control. An 
empi[INVESTIGATOR_582527] a 
player’s asthma knowledge, self -efficacy for asthma self -management, and self -efficacy for talking with 
supports  about  asthma.(95,97) Another video game, named Re-Mission,  designed for a wide age range of 
patients  (13-29 yrs) with acute leukemia, lymphoma, and soft -tissue sarcoma, showed promising effects as 
well. Re-Mission  was designed as an action–adventure game with the main character or protagonist shooting 
cancer -causing agents in the  bloodstream. Players gain points and strength by [CONTACT_582568].  In a randomized control  study with a three month follow up, 375 male and female 
participants who played Re-Mission  had significantly improved adherence to trimethoprim -sulfamethoxazole 
(p=.012) and 6 -mercaptopurine (p=.002) compared to controls  after an average of only 10.7 hours  of play . 
Adherence to TMP/SMX was tracked by [CONTACT_582569][INVESTIGATOR_4382] -monitoring devices  (n=200) and the proportion of doses 
taken correctly by [CONTACT_582570]-Mission  was 19% greater than those in the control group.  Self-efficacy 
(p=.011) and knowledge (p=.035) also increased significantly  compared with the control group. Interestingly, 
the intervention did not affect subjective self -report measures of adherence but did effec t the above objective 
measure.(98,99) Thus, appealing interactive games can target information, motivation and s kills for medical 
care and have led to a broad spectrum of desirable outcomes including increases in knowledge, attitude 
changes,  and i ncreased medication adherence.(9 1,100,102 -104) 
The video games most successful in influencing behavior have common traits. Games that 
utilized a theo
ry of behavior change ( with behavior -change concepts  inserted in the game play) and involved 
the use of st ory and fantasy  were effective.(93 -103) The successful games reviewed above provided simulated 
interactive environments  where players engaged in behavioral rehearsal.(101- 102) The simulated 
environments of the games served as a safe place to  practice self -management skills. Players  could observe 
detrimental effects  of their own mismanagement of a disease without engaging in real danger. These findings 
support current efforts to develop effective video- game interventions for education and training in health care.  
Innovation  
The use of ant
iretroviral medications to reduce the risk of acquiring HIV infection (Pre- exposure 
Prophylaxis, PrEP) is a promising new prevention strategy. Optimal PrEP treatment will require simultaneous 
Version 9.14.[ADDRESS_766202] will result in the development of a cutting edge, engaging, and entertaining app/game that 
successfully achieves improvements in adherence to PrEP as well as improvements i n HIV prevention 
know ledge, skills, and behavior.  
Experti se in HIV P revention, Biomedical Research, and Technology for Behavioral Change.  [CONTACT_582611]  and [CONTACT_46792] are both psychiatrists with clinical and academic  expert ise HIV prevention , adherence, 
and gaming for behavior change.  [CONTACT_582612] has a research focus on the applicability of new technology for 
prom oting health and adherence. [CONTACT_403929] llip Chan , Director of the PrEP  clinic at Rhode Island Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307],  is an 
infectious disease doctor and researcher who specializ es in HIV care and prevention. [CONTACT_148011] chelle Lally  is also 
an infectious disease physician with experience in HIV care and HIV biomedical research  (including PrEP 
related research) as an investigator  in the NIH Adolescent Medicine Trials Network for HIV/AIDS Interventions 
(ATN)  and the HIV Vaccine Trials Network (HVTN)  (141) . She is Director of the Brown University AIDS 
Program (BRUNAP) , and co- Director (with [CONTACT_46792]) of the Prevention Sciences Core of the 
Lifespan/Tufts/Brown Center for AIDS Research.   
 [CONTACT_582612]  has done preparatory qualitative and quantitative work regarding PrEP  and has focused on 
the use of newer technologies and HIV related health behaviors . (111,112, 113) She is the PI [INVESTIGATOR_2394] a recent 
Center for AIDS Research (CFAR) developmental study  in which 60 African American  young adults at high risk 
for acquiring HIV (18-24 yrs old) were given an online  intervention that included gaming modules and 
informational modules  on PrEP. Quantitative data determined that interest in PrEP  was greatest among those 
with a history of anal sex (OR = 8.4, p<.05), even when controlling for  condom use at last sex in a multiple 
logistic regression. As part of this study, [CONTACT_582612] also conducted qualitative interviews about knowledge 
and attitudes towards PrEP with 25 predominately African American (79%)  young adults identifying as  MSM 
(18-24 yrs old). (139)   Most  participants (75%) interviewed were v ery interested in starting PrEP. Concerns 
about PrEP included:  that sexual risk could increase “cause people won’t worry about what they  could get ,” 
and participants stated they  would be “unlikely to take PrEP if I am with my  main person ,” participants also 
stated , “why bother using condoms, if this pi[INVESTIGATOR_582528]?” Also cultural themes emerged: “we worry 
that White doctors actually want us to get HIV.” These data reinforce  that young adults at behavioral risk for 
HIV, especially those engaging in anal sex, are interested in PrEP , and are concerned about issues of 
adherence, risk compensation, and healthcare provider motivations . 
Drs. Brown  and Whiteley are also PI [INVESTIGATOR_529926]-I respectively on an iPhone gaming inte rvention to improve 
adherence to antiretroviral treatment in young adults  living with HIV  (90% MSM, mean age  24 years)  [R01 
HD074846] . This game focuses on medication adherence and sexual risk reduction in those already living with 
HIV. [CONTACT_582612] and Brown have worked extensively  with the gaming company that we will use in this project  
(Mission Critical Studios -MCS,  see below)  and [CONTACT_582612] was able to develop and refine her idea of linking 
smart technology on pi[INVESTIGATOR_582529] . This technology and iPhone game 
have been evaluated by 23 predominately African American participants (20 MSM , mean age 24,  70% 
Black/African American ) living with HIV and all participants have had a very positive response  to the gaming 
graphics and Wisepi[INVESTIGATOR_582530]. Sixteen of the 20 MSM  played the game to completion and average game play 
measured approximately 10 hours per week  (as measured by  [CONTACT_582571]). MSM participants rated t he 
game very  highly (mean item scores of 3.7 on the Client Satisfaction Questionaire and 3.6 on the Session 
Evaluation Form ). Both measures are 4 point Likert items with higher numbers indicating more satisfaction 
Version 9.14.2016 
(See Approach: Open Trial/ Quantitative Assessment and  Appendix). (140) Our past gaming and technology 
experience greatly facilitates the development of  this proposed project  and similar, detailed quantitative and 
qualitative work will ensure the same level  of acceptability for minority MSM participants  on PrE P. 
 [CONTACT_46792] has also tailored HIV prevention interventions in four NIH-funded RO1 RCTs. All of these 
tailored interventions have reduced sexual risk and have focused on risk perception, decision making, and 
assertive prevention skills to reduce HIV risk.(105-109) One intervention outcome paper , with an im pact lasting 
for up to [ADDRESS_766203] for Scientific Achievement from the American Academy of Child 
and Adolescent Psychiatry .(137) This expertise in HIV prevention and the tailoring of prevention programs for 
high risk populations  is highly relevant for this project. [CONTACT_46792] is also PI [INVESTIGATOR_582531] (ATN) 
protocols that have adapted efficacious, theoretically  informed interventions for young adults living with HIV .  
ATN Protocol 080 delivers tailored cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and evidenced- based medication 
management to treat Depressive Disorders  and non- adherence  to ART . ATN 069 delivered a tailored CBT and 
contingency management intervention to treat substance use as well as non- adherence .(42)  
[CONTACT_582613]  has expertise in the areas of biomedical HIV prevention. She is the Director of HIV Vaccine 
Clinical Trials at Brown/Lifespan, Director of the Brown University AIDS Pr ogram (BRUNAP) , and Medical 
Director of the Rhode Island Clinical Research Center at Lifespan/Brown.  She is also an advisory board and 
faculty member of the STD/HIV Prevention Training Center of New England. She is an investigator in the HIV 
Vaccine Trials Network (HVTN) and was an investigator on a PrEP study  in the NIH Adolescent Medicine 
Trials Network fo r HIV/AIDS In terventions (ATN) entitled ATN 082 : Acceptability and Feasibility of a Pre-
exposure Prophylaxis (PrEP) Trial with Young Men Who Have Sex with Men.  This study found that a P rEP 
placebo controlled trial with a behavioral intervention was  acceptable to YMSM, however, only 63% of those 
taking PrEP had detectable tenofovir at  study week 4 and only 20% by [CONTACT_5875] 24.( 141). [CONTACT_582614]  is the 
director of the HIV/STD  Testing and Prevention Service at The Miriam Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_582532]. He is also 
the director of one of the first PrEP implementation projects  in the country (in Jackson, MS and in Providence 
RI) funded by [CONTACT_10866] (Chan PI), see Setting in Approach. [CONTACT_299819] ’s research focuses on HIV transmission 
networks  and incorporates molecular genetics, behavioral sciences, and clinical medicine.  
[CONTACT_582615] is  the co-developer if the IMB model and an expert in IMB guided interventions. He has 
published extensively on factors associated with adherence and has done conceptual and empi[INVESTIGATOR_582533]. [CONTACT_79783] has designed and evaluated ef fective HIV 
prevention interventions in multiple populations . [CONTACT_79783]'s research on HIV to date has involved MSM, 
injection drug users, heterosexual adolescents, and individuals who are HIV infected. He has been awarded 9 
major HIV risk reduction grants from  NIH since 1989. He has lectured and consulted internationally. He will be 
consulting regarding the use of IMB framework for  the gaming intervention. (142-145) 
Expertise in G aming Technology. Game development will be done by [CONTACT_582572]  (MCS) . 
They have extensive experience in developi[INVESTIGATOR_582534], Mac, Apple iOS, Android, 
iPhone and all major Internet browsers. Mission Critical Studios has received high acclaim for their own 
gaming projects including [CONTACT_582616] - 3D Artery Adventure, [CONTACT_582616] X: Incredible Voyage Inside The Body , 
and Frantic Freddy Bug Stomp .  Mission Critical Studios has contracted and partnered with the following 
companies: Unilever, IBM, Hamon, Bank of America, SNK/Neogeo, and IBM. This company  has also h ad an 
enjoyable and highly successful partnership with our research team in developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a gaming intervention for 
RO1 HD074846. Company skills include 3D Modeling , audio mixing, motion graphics, mocap cleanup, C#,  
JavaScript, Unreal Scripting, game design, animating characters, Photoshop cleanup and texturing, and UV mappi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (by [CONTACT_582573]). Company tools  include Lightwave, 3D Max, 
MotionBuilder, Photoshop, After Effects, Flash, Unity, and UDK. Platform experience includes Windows PC, Mac OS X, and Cell Phone/WAP. Mission Critical Studios is a licensed developer for Microsoft Xbox, Nintendo Wii, Nintendo Wii Ware and Nintendo DS. The IMB Adherence Game to be developed for this proj ect is 
preliminarily titled Viral Combat  (See Appendix 1, pp. [ADDRESS_766204] and screen shots of the preliminary 
IMB adherence app/game) . Viral Combat  will be adapted and refined from the popular Mission Critical Studios 
game [CONTACT_582616] X: Incredible Voyage Inside T he Body . Beginning with this existing game allows the 
project to be done in a cost effective and efficient manner.  Please see: 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lyHzSZFzU1Q , www.missioncriticalstudios.com .  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_582535].  Compliance Meds Technologies, LLC. is  the developer of the smart 
medication dispenser that we will be using. The CleverCap is a tamper -proof smart cap that fits onto a 
standard pi[INVESTIGATOR_73586]. The CleverCap device can monitor, measure, and securely relay pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382] -by-pi[INVESTIGATOR_582536] -by [CONTACT_582574]. The capability to record and analyze pi[INVESTIGATOR_582537]. However, the 
Version 9.14.2016 
CleverCap device can be programmed to integrate into an array of wireless technologies and other web 
application interfaces. Each time a person opens their CleverCap, it wirelessly relays the data to CleverCap’s 
HIPAA- compliant secure network. Adherence reminders are integrated through visual and auditory alerts. The 
CleverCap generates a CleverScore that can be used as a measure of the actual utilization of me dications 
versus the prescribed dosage over time. This instantaneous wireless capability differs from the traditional 
MEMS cap. Currently, the MEMS cap requires a MEMS reader linked to an office computer in a doctor’s office to update and collate bottle openings at weekly, monthly or other scheduled intervals. The wireless network 
infrastructure of the CleverCap device allows for timely applications to be instantly linked to their product. 
Compliance Meds Technologies, LLC was named the winner of the [ADDRESS_766205] & Sullivan for 
New Product Innovation Award.  
 
Design 
This research will be divided into two major phases: (1) a Development Phase (n=40) in which we will 
conduct formative research to guide the development of the gaming i ntervention and gain experience with its 
impleme ntation in an open trial and (2) a small, pi[INVESTIGATOR_582538] (n=50) in which we 
will evaluate the acceptability and preliminary efficacy of the IMB gaming  intervention compared to a 
comparison condition. (A project activities timeline is in the Budget Justification section).  
Sample.   All MSM  on PrEP over the age of 18 yrs old, will be eligible for enrollment in each phase of study 
according to the following criteria: 1) English speaking, 2) receiving prophylactic antiretroviral treatment 
(PrEP), 3) not enrolled in another PrEP related study, and 4) able to give consent/assent and not impaired by [CONTACT_582575].
  There will not be overlap between subjects in the 
Development and Controlled Trial Phase. We are enrolling only MSM because they are the group most at risk 
for acquiring HIV.  Limiting the study to MSM will allow for the development of an iPhone app/game that is 
targeted, acceptable, and engaging for this specific at risk population.  Based on data below, it is estimated 
that 65% of participants will be Black/African American, 30% will be Hispanic and the mean age will be 27. 
Setting . We will recruit participants from the PrEP Clinic directed by [CONTACT_349493] -investigator, [CONTACT_299819]. This 
clinic receives the majority of its referrals from the HIV/STI Te sting  Clinic at Miriam Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], which  is also 
directed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Chan.  More than 500 new patients were seen in HIV/STI Testing and Prevention Clinic in the 
past year . Those at risk are counseled about and offered PrEP. Approximately, [ADDRESS_766206] 6 months (average of 7/m onth). Of those started on PrEP in the past year , 
85% were male, all had a significant HIV sexual risk history including recent unprotected anal intercourse with 
a male partner , recent anal sex with an HIV infected male partner, or multiple male partners in the past [ADDRESS_766207] year. The age of the 
men on PrEP ranged from 19 -48 years old, with a  mean age of 27 years  (75% between ages18 -30). Racially, 
65% of the patients identified as Black/African American and ethnically, 30% identified as Hispanic.   During 
the Qualitative Interview phase we will recruit 10 participants from the PrEP Clinic at the University of 
Mississippi [INVESTIGATOR_582539], MS. These interviews will help us to develop a gam e that is widely 
acceptable to young MSM.   
Recruitment  and retention. We will recruit 90 participants  ([ADDRESS_766208] 
phase) over 2 recruitment periods, totaling 24 months. Conservatively estimating 6 new patients enrolled on 
PrEP each month and over 100 existing PrEP patients at the start of this study, we will be recruiting from a 
pool of 244 subjects, 85% of whom  will me et eligibility criteria ( 207 at-risk MSM, 18 yrs and older ). Therefore 
we will o nly need to recruit 43% of the  eligible sample. Our hospi[INVESTIGATOR_56756]  a long history of recruitment and 
engagement of adult and young patients with HIV for longitudinal and c linical treatment studies.(102,45) We 
have close ties with Miriam clinics and successful current  collaborations with Drs. Chan and Lally. We were 
able to recruit >80% of eligible HIV infected subjects for our current gaming study (R01 H D074846) and the 
majority were younger MSM. Rhode Island’s small size and few HIV treatment resources both aid in the 
retention of clinical samples. Previous ACTG trials in the Miriam clinic have retained more than 85% of enrolled patients after more than six months and we estimate similar retention rates.  Retention techniques for the study 
include maintaining updated participant contact [CONTACT_3031], frequent reminder cards, phone calls and emails, 
keepi[INVESTIGATOR_582540], and obtaining the name [CONTACT_582609] ’s whereabouts. The retention rate in [CONTACT_46792]’s previous 
community study (U01 MH066785) was 92% after [ADDRESS_766209]. Whiteley’s CFAR study with you ng adults at risk for HIV was 90%.  
 
Version 9.14.2016 
Development Phase  
The goal  of the development phase (n=40)  is to develop and refine the game ( Viral Combat , Appendix 1, 
pp.2- 17) for the intervention. This phase will establish acceptability and feasibility by [CONTACT_582576] . These steps will be accomplished by [CONTACT_582577] 20 subjects  (see Appendix 
2, pp. 43 -47) and a small open trial that also includes qualitative interviews  with [ADDRESS_766210] efficacious are tailored for the 
target population , and preceded by [CONTACT_582578].( 116-118) 
Game development will be accomplished using iterative and collaborative procedures to fully integrate the 
experiences of participants on PrEP.   As discussed in the Significance section, the app/game, Viral Combat , 
will be consistent  with the IMB Model of H ealth.(6 6) The game will promote increased self -efficacy for 
adherence and HIV preventative behaviors by [CONTACT_197849], increasing mas tery, improving information 
about health and prevention. Successful games  are intuitive, engaging and inherently rewarding through action 
and feedback. Thus, many of the attributes of a successful game are a natural fit for a successful IMB -informed 
intervention. Screen shots for our initial draft game are included in Appendix 1, pp. [ADDRESS_766211] for the IMB app/game 
proposed, Viral Combat , is currently d rafted ( Appendix 1, pp. 2 -17). Viral Combat  will be adapted and refined 
from the popular Mission Critical Studios game entitled [CONTACT_582616] X: Incredible Voyage Inside the Body  (see 
YouTube video- http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lyHzSZFzU1Q  , also see app store - 
http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/dr. -nano-x- incredible -voyage/id398001397?mt=8 ). This is a five star rated gam e 
in the iTunes app store and is available on both Android and iPhone. We have experience creating a game 
with MCS and tailoring it for predominately African American young adults living with HIV (See Preliminary 
Studies) and this past experience informs our protocol for the development process (See Appendix  1, 
Mission Critical Dev. Plan, pp. 18 -28).  
The proposed game in this a pplication (Viral Combat)  differs  significantly from the game previously 
developed for young adults living with HIV (R01 HD 074846) . Partic ipants playing the Viral Combat  will be 
fighting virus before it infects and enters the body. The game will take place on the surface of the skin, in the 
arterial system, in the penile and anal canals  (rather than in the brain, liver, kidneys as  developed for the R01 
HD074846) . HIV related educational material and games  will be tailored to prevent HIV  (i.e. importance of 
testing and using condoms) , and not  tailored to persons living with HIV  (i.e. how viral load affects transmis sion 
and health) . Adherence messages will be relevant  to participants using PrEP for HIV prevention (i.e. taking 
PrEP doses as prescribed corresponds to level of protection) rather than for persons livi ng with HIV (i.e. ARV 
adherence impacts viral mutations, CD4 counts, opportunisti c infections ). Similarities include software for 
motion controls, touch screen capabilities, integration with electronic pi[INVESTIGATOR_582541], and tracking game usage. 
These similarities  allow for the development of an iPhone app that is unique but within the proposed budget. 
Viral Combat  storyboard ( See Appendix 1, pp. 2- 17). The IMB game/app, Viral Combat, will employ 
graphics, characters, action content specifically chosen to be appealing to our target population . Viral Combat  
takes place inside the human body and starts with a narrator, in a d eep and dramatic voice, explaining the 
storyline and objectives of the game. The player is told by [CONTACT_582579], “you have been chosen to be cloned. 
Your clone will be shrunk by [CONTACT_582580] a nanobot!  As a 
nanobot, you will enter your own body to destroy attacking viruses that are trying to gain entry.” The narrator 
accompanies the player through the shrinking process. The narrator explains to each player “you will need 
weapons and tools to successfully destroy virus attempting to enter your body . You will earn protective gear , 
character enhancements  and weapons by [CONTACT_21173][INVESTIGATOR_582542], taking medication and building alliances  with 
doctors and clinicians .” Players can skip this narrative, if they prefer, after the first time gaming. At the start of 
play, participants  can also choose and design their individual, colorful nanobot characters  with skin tones that 
can be customized. T he first level begins on the skin’s surface. If players successfully battle virus, engage with 
providers, take medication, and make healthy decisions, they move to the next exciting level - the penis . 
During each mission, the player’s score (health status and adherence pi[INVESTIGATOR_692]) is shown. As players become expert nanobots, they move through the arterial system, and other body systems  such as the anal canal and 
the mouth. All organ systems are vibra nt and distinctive. Answering questions from the doctor/clinician, and 
building adherence and HIV prevention knowledge, allows each player to earn strength and poi nts throughout 
Viral Combat . During play, if an answer to a question or skill building exercise is wrong, the player is alerted, 
and the correct answer is  explained ( See Appendix 1, p.10).  “Health Facts” will reinforce HIV prevention 
information during scene changes. HIV p revention s kills will be built with a condom “puzzle” and the “condom 
Version 9.14.2016 
use challenge” that promotes continued condom use with all partners and models assertive safer sex  
discussions (See Appendix 1, p. 14 ) If a p articipant misses a  dose, the CleverCap software  will send a game 
graphic  and message to the participant’s phone.  Each level in Viral Combat provides new challenges and 
unique and colorful environments, however, the mission stays the same: kill virus and build strength t hrough 
taking medicine, learning  HIV prevention information, improving motivation , and engaging with healthy 
charcters in order to build skills. All character control and gaming is done by [CONTACT_582581], no additional accessories are needed for play. Throughout the game the terms “H IV,” 
“AIDS,” “antiretroviral” and  other identifying verbiage is avoided to protect the players ’ medical status and to 
avoid possible stigmatization that could occur from someone seeing a participant  playing the game  (see 
Appendix 1, p.10) . During the development stage we will also  illicit feedback from participants  regarding this 
issue and about the title. Necessary changes will be made if participants feel the game content or  title is 
revealing, insensitive or stigmatizing.  
At the beginning of the project, all investigators and the collaborators will review the above elements of the 
proposed game and suggest modifications to improve its appeal, understandability, utility, and enjoyment by 
[CONTACT_4317]. We will also be assessing its consistency with the IMB Model . Modifications will be made by 
[CONTACT_582572]. The process of development and initial adaptation will be done in the first [ADDRESS_766212].  
Individual qualitative interviews  (months 3- 9). Initial d etailed, in depth,  structured , audiotaped individual 
interviews about the utility and appeal of the preliminary I MB Gaming Intervention, electronic dispenser, and 
study procedures will occur with MSM partic ipants  (est. mean age 27) receiving PrEP  (See sample and setting)  
during months 4-9 . The interviews will ensure that the assembled i ntervention is relevant t o our target 
population. (116,117,119 ). We will perform interviews on a sufficient number of each relevant sub -group (Black 
vs. non -Black, older vs. younger than 25 yrs) until there is redundancy in themes and general feedback. All 
interviews will focus on how sexual orientation,  race,  stigma, culture, and age influence information, motivation 
and behavioral skills  for the major targets  of the gaming intervention ( PrEP adherence, medical ca re 
adherence, and HIV prevention behaviors ). Participants will give general reactions to intervention content and 
we will also look for deeper, or more complex, emerging themes to guide game graphics, content, and 
messages . For example,  participants will be asked “As a black,  gay male, how wor ried are you about getting 
HIV?  How effective do you think PrEP is at preventing someone from getting HIV.”  After viewing a preliminary 
storyboard or game, participants can be asked, “Which parts of the storyboard/game  would influence how 
concerned you are about HIV?” “Which parts of the game increase your knowledge about how protective PrEP 
is?” “Could these messages be made more relevant to you  and your friends, partners ?” Particip ants will also 
be queried about the acceptability and relevance of game actions and graphic s as they relate to race and 
culture. As currently proposed in our storyboard, players will be able to personalize their characters so that the 
game feels  racially,  culturally and personally relevant. Interviews will aid in determining the scope and design 
of this personalization. If characters are needed with darker or lighter skin, or  more  or less colorf ul clo thing is 
needed, this variability can be added to  game options.  
Drs. Brown and Whiteley have used qualitative and formative work to adapt interventions for persons at 
risk for HIV , those living with HIV, and minority MSM. For example, [CONTACT_46792] and collaborators designed, with 
extensive qualitative work, a c ulturally  tailored STI/HIV prevention campaign for African American teens with a 
TV/radio media component (119, 120), and [CONTACT_582612] also designed, with qualitative work,  a culturally 
tailored Internet based STI/HIV Intervention for African American young adults and MSM  (See Preliminary 
Studies ). Drs. Whiteley and Brown will conduct all interviews and code major topic and subtopi[INVESTIGATOR_582543].   
Revision to the IMB game (months 9 -11): Drs. Whiteley , Brown , and Fisher  will assess the inte rvention’s 
suitability for participants receiving PrEP, and its ability to improve adherence with material and techniques consistent with the IMB model. The team will assess the strengths and weaknesses of intervention 
components and indicate revisions to the preliminary IMB Gaming  Intervention. We will also put all written 
content through a reader program to ensure that the reading level is appropriate. Mission Critical Studios will 
implement  the changes using our iterative development process (see MCS Dev elopment Plan, Appendix pp. 
18-28).The investigators will review protocols and technological revisions for consistency, and potential 
technological problems .  
Open Trial: Qualitative and quantitative assessment of the gaming intervention (months 12 -18).  A 
[ADDRESS_766213] half of year 2. The preliminary intervention will be tested in 
Version 9.14.2016 
order to refine the protocol, IMB app/game, electronic pi[INVESTIGATOR_582541] , and any other technological requirements.  
Procedures:  After assessment and consent, each participant will receive ONLY a CleverCap  electronic pi[INVESTIGATOR_582544]. After one  month of using the CleverCap dispenser  only, participants will 
return for assessment. This intervening month will provide a period of time for participants to get or iented to the 
CleverCap dispenser , and it will also provide investigators with baseline measures of adherence without the 
IMB app/game. At this one month assessment participants will also be introduced and oriented to the 
adherence intervention game ( Viral Combat ) and the smartphone. The basic elements of the game wi ll be 
demonstrated and the participants  will have an opportunity to practice the game, with study staff, in order to 
build interest. Participant s will be shown that each pi[INVESTIGATOR_582545] , recorded by [CONTACT_582582], will 
trigger a game graphic text  (e.g. missed doses will receive encouraging messages ). Participant s will 
demonstrate that they can operate the smartphone, game, and CleverCap dispenser . They will also be given 
contact [CONTACT_582583] [ADDRESS_766214]. Whiteley, and the technical staff at Mission 
Critic al Studios .    
Quantitative Assessment : Participant’s overall satis faction with the preliminary IMB  Gaming  Intervention 
will be surveyed using a modified version of the Client Satisfaction Questionnaire (CSQ -8) at the 12 week 
assessment . The CSQ is an 8 -item measure with good reliability and validity. They will also complete a 
modified Session Evaluation Form (SEF), which has [ADDRESS_766215] areas of feasibility and perceived 
utility of the intervention. Responses to items on these questionnaires will help determine the initial feasibility 
and acceptability. Subjects will also complete measures of HIV -related knowledge, attitudes and behaviors at 
baseline and at 12 weeks during this open trial (See Appendix 2, pp. 29-42). These measures are described 
below in the RCT phase as well. Mission Critical Studios can collect generalized, non participant linked, data 
on game usage  through TestFlight software integrated into the game . This data shows the amount of time 
players spend on the ga me, percentage of times players complete levels, levels in which players spend more 
or less game time, etc.  
Qualitative Assessment : Drs. Whiteley, Brown, and staff will again use the structured individual qualitative 
interview s at the 12 week assessment to evaluate participants’ opi[INVESTIGATOR_582546], the clinical utility and relevance of the game, its strengths and weakness, its ease of use and 
barriers to use, and the ability of the study measures to  capture their experience (See Appendix 2, pp. 43 -52 
for preliminary structured interview guide, CSQ and SEF). There will be an emphasis on examining participant 
feedback for racial, cultural, or sexual  specific trends in order to further tailor intervention content.  The 
investigators will use all data to assess feasibility and acceptability of the intervention and make changes as 
needed. Based on these data, Viral Combat , will be modified by [CONTACT_582584] 19 -20 
using our iterative development process (see MCS Development Plan, Appendix pp. 18- 28). The game and 
intervention procedures will again be reviewed and revised by [CONTACT_582585] a final version of the IMB Gaming  Intervention for the RCT.  
 Randomi zed Controlled Trial Phase  
During months [ADDRESS_766216] of the IMB Intervention (IMB app/game  + 
CleverCap dispenser ), compared to a comparison group - COMP ( iPhone with non- IMB game  + CleverCap 
dispenser ) in a Randomized Controlled Trial with 5 0 participants  on PrEP (eligibility criteria above, see 
Sample). Smartphones will be available to participants in the IMB Gaming  Intervention and in COMP for the 
entire 24 week study period. The COMP participants will be g iven smartphones  and a non- PrEP comparison 
game (also designed by [CONTACT_582572], see below) to control for  attention, time, and  any influence the 
receipt of a smartphone or game has on adherence behavior s or the physician- patient  relationship. CleverCap 
dispensers in both conditions will record adherence. Our primary outcome will be the CleverCap openings 
measured daily  for 6 months.  Secondary outcomes such as s elf report of medication adherence and sexual 
risk, HIV related knowledge and attitudes, clinical records (appointments kept, STI treatment ), and ARV levels  
(tenofovir diphosphate, TFV-DP and Emtricitabine, FTC-TP) will be evaluated at 12 week s and 24 weeks . 
Randomization  will occur after enrollment, using a random assignment program, located on the PIs computer, 
with stratification based on history of PrEP (newly starting vs. already on PrEP  > 3 months) and age ( 18-25 vs 
25 and older), since these factors may be associated with adherence and response to the intervention.   
The I MB Gaming Intervention.   The IMB Gaming Intervention is designed to improve information, 
motivation, and skills about adherence and HIV preventative behaviors throughout play (See Appendix 1, pp. 
2-17). All content will be chosen for its appropriateness for the target population and with refinements made 
Version 9.14.2016 
during the Development Phase. With input from the research team and PrEP users, we will produce a 
sensi tive, stylistically and theoretically consistent intervention. Each level in Viral Combat provides new 
challenges and unique and colorful environments. However, the mission stays the same: kill virus and build 
strength through 1) taking medicine, 2) learning  HIV prevention information, 3) engaging with healthy 
characters in order to improve motivation and build skills. Participants will be told to take PrEP daily and 
phones and software will be coded to record and react to daily dosing. If a participant misses a dose, a 
messag e is sent from the CleverCap dispenser  to study investigators ’ database on a secure server. This data 
is then read electronically by a CleverCap  software program . This software in turn sends a game graphic with a 
supportive message such as “Missing you: Get in the Game” to the participant’s phone . A similar  procedure 
and software have been successfully developed, implemented and utilized in our R01 HD074846. At all times 
during the study , participants in both conditions  will be able to use their phone regularly, with all the features 
available to them within phone plan limits. Throughout the gaming intervention subjects will continue routine 
clinical care visits and HIV testing (as recommended by [CONTACT_582586]) in the PrEP clinic.  The 
developed IMB game, Viral Combat,  and the integration of the CleverCap dispenser with phone, are the two 
unique, necessary, and defining elements of the IMB Gaming Intervention.  
 Comparison condition  (COMP ): CleverCap and non- IMB iPhone game.   This condition will be matched 
with the IMB G aming  Intervention for appeal, time and attention. Subjects in COMP will each receive 
smartphones with the same data service plan as the active arm . Smartpho nes given to participants in COMP 
will have a stylistically similar non -PrEP , non- IMB game designed by [CONTACT_582572] ([CONTACT_582616] X: 
Incredible Voyage Inside The Body , http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lyHzSZFzU1Q  ). This is the same 
game that Viral Combat is being adapted from. Therefore , the iPhone game in COMP will have a  look and feel 
that is very similar to our i nterv ention game but without IMB, PrEP , and HIV prevention related content . 
Participants  will also receive a CleverCap de vice, which records pi[INVESTIGATOR_582547] , but there will be no 
dose related messaging.  Similar to the Intervention group , participants  will have routine clinical care visits in 
the PrEP  clinic (or more frequently if needed for urgent care).  
  
Design Considerations  
Intervention contamination.  Participant s in the COMP  condition could hear from those in the IMB 
Intervention about the IMB app/game but they will not have access to it on their phone. Although it is possible 
that the COMP  participants  could play the game once on an Intervention participant’s smartphone, it is unlikely 
to be a frequent occurrence. Nevertheless, we will assess familiarity and usage of the game by [CONTACT_582587]- up. In addition, we will assess the occurrence of cross talk between subjects in the two conditions at 
follow- ups and adjust the analyses accordingly, if needed.  
Smartphones: access and confidentiality .  Data suggest that average adults and young adults  have 
access to smartphones and studies suggest that within [ADDRESS_766217] these 
application capabilities, so the IMB app/game will be designed for this almost universal technology.  
(37,39,40,55)  Some participants  will a lready have a smartphone, if it is not an iPhone or Android, we will 
provide them with a new study phone for the duration of their participation. The phone will be provided to 
minimize technical di fficulties with the CleverCap data transfer and the operation of the game  that is designed 
for iP hones and androids but not other devices. This  ensures that all intervention subjects have the same 
gaming experience with the same  displays, graphics, sounds and controls. Loss of a phone is possible but 
other studies suggest that it is infrequent.(12 1,122 ) In our ART adherence study utilizing iPhones given to 
participants, not one phone was lost throughout the development stage and open trial. Participants report they 
are motivated to care for the phone because it becomes theirs after the study period. The phone will be password protected, so call logs and texts will not be accessible. None of our technology partners: Mission 
Critical S tudios, Compliance Meds Technologies, LLC , or the phone carrier will have PHI data. There will be no 
link to personal subject information because all phones will be purchased by a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_582548]/PI. Only the PI [INVESTIGATOR_582549] (designated by [CONTACT_582588]) with 
participant name. This information will be stored and destroyed following the same HIPPA and IRB procedures 
as all other personal data collected (See Human Subjects).  
Assessments. All assessments will take place in a quiet room near or in the PrEP clinic. Complete 
assessments of attitudes and behavior will occur at bas eline,  12 weeks and 24 weeks , and will take 45 minutes 
to complete. Clinic records will also be coded for biologic outcomes at these 3 assessments. We will use 
track ing procedures (See Sample and Recruitment ) to maintain contact.  
Version 9.14.2016 
Measures.  An audio- assisted computer self -interview (ACASI) will be used to assess behavior since it is 
confidential, allows for complex branching/skip patterns, and detects greater rates of risk behavior.(123) 
Standard instruments will be administered to gather demographic data (including age, educational level, sexual 
orientation, SES, race, ethnicity and stability of housing).  The measures below will be used to evaluate HIV 
related knowledge, attitudes, and risk behavior (see Table 1 below  for linkage to constructs and intervention).  
 
 
 
 
Table 1. Linkage between constructs, intervention foci, and assessment instruments  
 
Primary outcome (measured daily by [CONTACT_582589]):  
CleverCap openings.  The number of days participants take doses correctly in each of the six months will 
be our primary outcome. The data is collected wirelessly  by [CONTACT_582589] , and stored daily on a HIPAA compliant 
server as previously described.  
Secondary outcomes (measured at baseline, 12 and 24 weeks):  
Self-report of PrEP  adherence. This consists of two items: “How many days in the past month did you 
miss or not take your PrEP medication?”  and “How many days in the past week did you miss or not take your 
PrEP medication ?”  
ARV  (TFV-DP and FTC -TP) levels . Intracellular TFV -DP and FTC -TP will be measured in red blood cells 
using dried blood spots. TFV-DP levels provide a measure of long- term adherence over the preceding month 
(like hemoglobin A1C) and a detectable FTC- TP provides information about recent dosing (i.e. if FTC- TP is 
detectable, a recent dose was ingested  Y/N). The level of intracellular TFV -DP can be used to estimate how 
many doses/week the participant is taking on average (eg 7/wk on average, 4 -7/wk on average, 2- 4/wk on 
average, <2/wk on average).  25µL will be drawn each time.  The blood samples will be sent to Skaggs School 
of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences at The University of Colorado Aschutz Medical Campus. TFV-DP 
and FTC -TP levels and laboratory analyses will be done by [CONTACT_582590], Pharm.D who is the leading 
expert  in conducting and interpreting these results.( 148)  
Medical history . Staff will abstract from the clinic record the number of medical visits kept and missed in 
the past 12 weeks .  
The Risk Behavior Assessment . The RBA ( used in [CONTACT_46792]’s other federally -funded projects ) is a 
reliable and valid computer -assisted structured interview assessing self -reported sexual behaviors. It assesses 
type of sexual behavior (i.e., anal, oral, vaginal) in the past 12 weeks , frequ ency of sex, and number and 
gender of partners. Additional questions cover sex with high -risk partners , frequency and quantity of substance 
use and having sex while using alcohol/drugs.(132)   
IMB construct  outcomes (measured at baseline, 12 and 24 weeks):  
HIV & STI knowledge.  The HIV Knowledge Scale  assesses knowledge about issues such as  risks for HIV , 
using 18 items with “true,” “false,” or “do not know” response options. Test -retest reliability (r=0. 73) and internal 
consistency ( alpha=0.90 ) were  satisfactory in studies with at-risk young  adult s.(43) The STI Knowledge 
Questionnaire uses similar response options with [ADDRESS_766218] reliability (r=0. 88) and internal consistency ( alpha = 0.86) were both 
satisfactory in studies with at -risk young adults (Appendix 2, pp. 29- 30).(44) 
Attitudes towards adherence.  This checklist was from attitude items used from several  AIDS Clinical 
Trials Groups and will be modified to reflect adherence to a medication to prevent HIV . The checklist assesses IMB Constructs   Intervention Foci  Assessment Instruments  
Information : about HIV/STI sexual risk  
knowledge  
 
Motivation: for a dherence and risk  
attitudes and intentions   
 
 Behavior:  medical  adherence, sexual 
risk, behavioral self -efficacy   HIV knowledge , Perceived 
vulnerability to HIV /STIs  
 
 Motivation for adherence  
 Motivation for safer sex  
 Perceived barriers  
 
 Medication and visit 
adherence, safer sex skills  HIV/STI knowledge s cales  
 
 
Adherence & risk attitudes  scales  
 
 CleverCap dispenser  openings, 
adherence and sexual risk  self report, 
ARV levels , 
self-efficacy for adherence and sexual 
safety  
Version 9.14.2016 
16 common barriers to tak ing ARV  as prescribed and 10 aids to taking ARV . The original measure is being 
used in several on- going trials  (see Appendix 2, pp.31- 38). 
Motivational readiness for adherence.   Rollnick’s Readiness Ruler  (127) will be used to assess 
motivation for adherence to medication and medical vi sits.  Respondents rate how ready they are to take PrEP 
as prescribed and to keep medical appointments on two items from 1 (not ready) to 10 (ready to be consistent 
or already consistent) each month.   Subjects w ill also complete  the [ADDRESS_766219] Team. It will be modified to assess personal and social motivations for 
PrEP, rather than ART (Appendix 2, pp. 39 -40).(125) 
Medication & appointment self -efficacy .  This measure was developed based on Bandura’s ( 1986) 
theory of self -efficacy(8 9) and was shown to have strong reliability (alpha>0.8) in a study of HIV medication 
adherence.(128) The instrument consists of Likert style items (with five response options). Three items assess self efficacy for taking medication as prescribed and three items assess self efficacy for adherence to medical 
appointments (Appendix  2, pp. 36- 37). IMB PrEP Behavioral Skills Scale  has 14 Likert style items and will be 
modified to assess perception of the ability to perform the necessary PrEP  skills  rather than ART skills . It has 
an internal consistency of 0.9 with infected adults  (Appendix 2, pp. 41- 42).(125)  
 
Demographics and Sample Characteristics  (measured at baseline, 12 and 24 weeks) . We will assess 
these factors to further characterize the sample.  
Relationship with Providers.  This five item measure assesses the perceived relationship with health care 
providers using Likert type items suggested by [CONTACT_582591] (Project HEART) 
(Appendix 2, pp. 34- 35).(129)  
Social Support for Medication Adherence . This six item measure assesses social support for taking 
medications, going to medical appointments and other tasks related to adherence using Likert style items with a four point scale. It is  being used in AIDS Clinical Trials studies.  A single score for social support can be 
generated from these items or single items can be analyzed, such as support for medical appointments, as this project will do (See Appendix 2, pp. 37- 38).  
Brief Symptom Inventory.  Mental health issues will be assessed by [CONTACT_582592] (BSI), 
which requires only eight to ten minutes in which to complete. It yields nine primary symptom scales and global indices and has norms for adolescents and adults.  The reliability, validity, and utility of the BSI has been 
extensively tested and internal consistency for the sub- scales (dimensions) range from . 71 to .85.(130 )  
The Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test (ASSIST V2.0) . The ASSIST is an 
eight item questionnaire that screens for all levels of problem substance use.  The instrument covers tobacco, alcohol, cannabis, cocaine, amphetamine- type stimulants (including ecstasy), inhalants, sedatives, 
hallucinogens, opi[INVESTIGATOR_50942] “other drugs.”  It demonstrates significant concurrent, construct, predictive and 
discriminative validity and it is able to discriminate between low, moderate and high risk use.(131)  
 
Data Analytic Plan  
Hypothesis One: The I MB Adherence Intervention will b e judged by [CONTACT_582593], appealing, 
relevant, and useful. A total of 40 qualitative interviews  during the Development Phase will assess  acceptabil ity 
and appeal of the  Intervention, and 20 of the subjects will also complete an open trial of the intervention for 
perceived feasibility, participant motivation and en gagement (See Appendix 2, pp. 43- 52). We will review the 
interviews for any game material that is unfavorable to participants and we will make revisions. Any game 
modules  that receive a mean score on the Session Evaluation Form that is <20 (smaller scores = less 
satisfaction)  will be reviewed to determine what content should be revised, changed or discarded.  
Hypothesis Two: Compared to subjects in the control group, participants in the IMB Gaming Interventi on 
will show: improved adherence, improvements in biological measures (TFV -DP and FTC -TP), decreased HIV 
risk behaviors, greater increases in HIV knowledge, improved self efficacy and improved attitudes for treatment adherence. The primary outcome ( numb er of doses taken correctly recorded by  [CONTACT_582589] ) will be analyzed 
as the count of correct doses taken each month for the six study months . Generalized estimation equations 
(GEE) with a Poisson distribution and log link function will be used to model outcomes  with a count distributi on. 
The GEE analysis will account for nesting of assessments within participants and allows for data that follow 
non-normal distributions.  Secondary outcomes that have count data (self report of adherence, unprotected sex, 
medical appointments) will be sim ilarly an alyzed. The IMB constructs  and levels of TFV  are continuous 
variables and will be evaluated using Repeated Measures Analysis of Variance (RMANOVA) . FTC levels 
reveal a recent ingestion (yes/no)  and will be analyzed by [CONTACT_582594]. [CONTACT_32243] will 
Version 9.14.[ADDRESS_766220] sizes upon which to base large trial s.(135) 
Nevertheless, the pi[INVESTIGATOR_582550] a “signal” of impact on outcomes and IMB constructs .  Power was 
estimated using Monte Carlo simulation in Mplus 7.11. We assume 85% retention over the trial period. For the 
primary outcome, assuming an initial rate of [ADDRESS_766221] an increase from 16 to 20 doses per month  
(one additional dose each week) , assuming the control group maintains at [ADDRESS_766222] size (Cohen’s d = .80).  
Protection of Human Subjects and Safety Monitoring Plan  
 Human Subjects Involvement, Characteristics and Design  
 The proposed research study is comprised of two phases. Firstly, a Development Phase (n=40, 18 years 
of age and older, receiving PrEP) in which we will conduct formative research to guide the development of the 
IMB game and conduct an open trial in which the integration of the Information- Motivation -Behavioral Skills 
(IMB) based game and the CleverCap electronic dispenser is implemented. Secondly, a Controlled Trial 
Phase in which we will evaluate the preliminary efficacy of the IMB Gaming Intervention compared to a 
comparison condition (n=50, 18 yrs of age and older, receiving PrEP). Subjects will be recruited from the PrEP 
clinic at Miriam Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (See Facilities and Other Resources).  A project activities timeline is in the Budget 
Justification section.  
 Inclusion Criteria.   All male persons on PrEP over the age of 18 yrs old, will be eligible for enrollment in 
each phase of study according to the following criteria: 1) English speaking, 2) receiving prophylactic 
antiretroviral treatment, 3) not enrolled in another PrEP related study, and 4) able to give consent/assent and 
not impaired by [CONTACT_582575]. There will not be overlap between 
subjects in the Development Phases and Controlled Trial Phase.  
  Rationale for Including Special Classes of Subjects .  The age, gender, and medical status of our 
participants are dictated by [CONTACT_582595].  
 Sources of M aterials  
 
Research Material Obtained from Living Human Subjects.   Research material obtained from 
participants include the following 1) all questionnaire data, 2) audio-tapes from qualitative interviews, 3) ARV blood levels, 4) adherence data collected from the CleverCap dispenser, 5) subject engagement with IMB 
game. For the Development Phase, subjects will complete qualitative interviews in- person regarding their 
reactions to the IMB informed game and its integration with the wise pi[INVESTIGATOR_582541]. These interviews will be 
recorded and they will take place at the Miriam Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. The audio- taped interview and written surveys of their 
reactions to the Intervention will be the sources of material for this phase. For both the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_582551], participants will complete questionnaires about their demographic information, 
sexual behavior, adherence behaviors, and attitudes. Questionnaires will be completed at entry to the study 
and at [ADDRESS_766223] data on game usage 
like any other app or website owner that shows percentage of times players of the game complete levels, 
percentage of players that stop using the game in particular places. For example data collected by [CONTACT_582596]: x% of players quit the game in the skin Level, or x% of players stop playing the 
Version 9.14.2016 
game after 7 minutes. This data is not linked to a particular participant, and is not linked to the particular phone 
in use, which is designated as owned by [CONTACT_582597] (not the study patient/participant). This gaming data is not 
connected or linked to any participant’s name, demographic information or health status/diagnosis. Adherence data connected to a CleverCap device is also not linked to participant name, demographic information, health 
status or diagnosis. An exampl e of CleverCap data is the following. CleverCap ID 76781 opening 1/2/12, 1 
opening 1/3/12, etc.  
 
Linkages to Subjects and Access to Subject Identities.   For each stage of the research, participant 
names and contact [CONTACT_425027] a recruitment/enrollment database during the course of the study.  Once individuals enroll in the study, names will be linked to participant ID number in this database, 
which will be kept in a restricted access folder on a secure server. All name/ID number files will be assigned a code name [CONTACT_274629]. All phones will be purchased by [CONTACT_582598]/Rhode Island Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_582552]/Rhode Island Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_582553]. Study personnel will designate participant’s iPhone by 
[CONTACT_582599]’s ID number and this linkage will again be accessible only to study 
personnel. A similar process will occur with CleverCap adherence data. Subjects will be linked to CleverCap 
adherence technology and measurements by [CONTACT_409646]. CleverCap maintains a secure, HIPAA 
compliant data transfer platform and there is no identifying, or demographic information linked to a patient using a CleverCap dispenser. Access to adherence data measured by [CONTACT_582600] a secure network. Names of medications, names of study participants, or name [CONTACT_582610]. Only pi[INVESTIGATOR_582554], designated by a CleverCap 
ID number, are recorded in their database. In the case of investigator needing technological assistance (for an individual’s phone, smart cap, or game ( CleverCap , Mission Critical Studios), study personnel will only refer to 
a individual’s phone or technology by [CONTACT_582601], not by [CONTACT_2299]’s 
name. For example “ CleverCap ID number 7678 is not working properly.” Signed consent and assent forms will 
also be kept in a locked file cabinet, separate from any other project data.  Once data collection is completed, the corresponding recruitment/enrollment database will be deleted, as it is unnecessary to maintain the link 
between participant identity and study data. Destruction of the Master Clinic Patient Lists must be witnessed and documented on the Master List Verification of Destruction document, which will be maintained in the site’s 
regulatory files. Furthermore, any information collected as part of this study will be accessible only to research 
staff that has completed mandatory training in the protection of human subjects.  
 
Potential Risks  
 
 Every effort will be made to ensure that study participants are protected from risks.  The risks are as 
follows: 1) potential coercion, 2) loss of confidentiality, 3) emotional discomfort during the assessment and/or program sessions, 4) medical complications from venipuncture. The protection against each risk is described in 
detail below under Adequacy of Protection Against Risk. 
  
Adequacy of Protection Against Risk   
 
Recruitment and Informed Consent.  The risk of potential coercion will be minimized by [CONTACT_582602]. Study personnel will fully explain the study 
procedures, risks, benefits, and alternatives to participants. Participants will also be rem inded that study 
participation is voluntary and that refusing to participate or withdrawing from the study at any time will not result 
in any negative consequences. Recruitment for all phases of the project (Development Phase and 
Randomized Controlled Trial Phase) will involve the same screening procedures. Research staff will search for 
participants who are eligible for the study in the clinical setting of their routine care: Miriam Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_582555]/HIV 
Testing and Prevention Clinic. Subjects will be assured that their routine clinical care will not be disrupted, or 
negatively affected, by [CONTACT_582603]. Subjects approached about the study will be approached and consented regarding the phase of the study that is rel evant at that time (i.e. 
qualitative interviews, open trial, or randomized controlled trial). In all cases above, participants will be assured that they are free to withdraw from the study at any time and that if they do withdraw any data collected up to 
that point will be destroyed/stripped from any data files (see Protection Against Risk for data handling 
procedures).   
Version 9.14.[ADDRESS_766224] of 1996 and its regulations (“HIPAA”), and the DHHS Federal Policy for the Protection of 
Human Subjects (45 CFR Part 46 Subpart D). This  will include identifying participant research data by [CONTACT_274618] -identifying information separate from any research 
data. All research data (written records and audiotapes of program sessions) will be kept in a locked file and 
electronic data will be password- protected. All of these study -related materials will only be accessible to 
research staff.  No names, only identification codes, will be used in presenting data in lectures, seminars, and 
papers.   Information will be released only with written consent of the parent/guardian.  
 All data collection will take place in secure and supervised clinical settings at the Miriam Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. All 
study personnel on this application have completed training and received certification in Human Subjects 
Research Protection (CITI Program) and HIPAA regulations. They will continue to renew this training in 
compliance with hospi[INVESTIGATOR_13338].  
 Participants will be asked to provide informed written consent to audiotapi[INVESTIGATOR_582556]. To assure confidentiality and protection of the participants during audiotapi[INVESTIGATOR_007], all tapes will be stored in locked file cabinets in a secured 
office. Only Drs. Whitely and Brown will have access to the audiotapes so that ongoing guidance can be 
provided as to the conduct and design of the study.  
 To further protect the privacy of the study participants, we will obtain a Certificate of Confident iality from 
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS).  With this Certificate in place, the researchers cannot be forced to turn over identifying information about a study participant in any federal, state, or local 
criminal, administrative, legislative, or other proceedings.  This Certificate does not prevent a study participant 
from volunteering to turn over their research information nor does it prevent researchers from providing research -related information to others when requested by [CONTACT_87755].  
 
 Emotional Distress.  We will minimize distress by [CONTACT_197896]/program techniques in a 
supportive manner, assuring participants that they may refuse to answer any questions that make them uncomfortable, and may terminate participation in the intervention at any time. All subjects may receive 
medical or mental health treatment at any time during the study. Clinical need will determine whether it is 
appropriate for the participant to stop continuation in the study.  
 If a participant reports feeling distressed, or has any acute concerns, as a result of their involvement in 
any phase of the research project (i.e. consenting, baseline assessment, interview session, follow -up, 
collection of biological data), clinical resources will be offered on -site. The clinical locations used in this study 
are ideal as they each provide easy access to medical and mental health clinicians.   If a subject contacts study staff because of distress or concern due to participation in the study or directed a ctivities that occur away 
from the clinical space  (such as a concern that phone use or activities led to a dispute), the subject will be 
assessed first over the phone, and then, if needed, as described below.  
 During any phase of the study, if research staff determines that a participant is an acute medical or 
psychiatric risk, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_582557]. Acute risks would include severe medical illness, or the development of any other severe 
psychiatric symptoms or disclosure of sexual or physical abuse.  Any subjects who exhibit acute risks will be 
evaluated immediately by [CONTACT_582604][INVESTIGATOR_307], or if less acute, by [CONTACT_582605] n that day. Less severe medical needs or distress can be managed by [CONTACT_274623] [INVESTIGATOR_582558]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or staff will meet with participants to review concerns and to make referrals for continuing care as needed. Of note,  members of the proposed research team have substantial prior clinical 
(medical and psychiatric) and research experience in care of young adults and adults as evidenced through their biographical sketches.  
 
 Complications from Venipuncture. Participants will require venipuncture to collect blood samples for 
ARV blood level tests to be performed. This procedure may cause local discomfort, bleeding, or bruising; rarely small clot or infection can occur at the blood draw site. This assessment should not be considered greater than 
minimal risk in and of itself given its routine use in general health care delivery. However, if a medical 
Version 9.14.[ADDRESS_766225] population and think that the clear examination 
of these questions outweighs the previously mentioned risks.  The effectiveness of a novel, scalable, 
technology driven, intervention integrated into treatment with PrEP is understudied. Given the significant health 
sequel ae associated with HIV infections, and the paucity of data on PrEP related adherence and behavioral 
intervention programs, the knowledge to be gained from this research is significant.  The risks to participants are reasonable in relation to the importance  of the knowledge to be gained.  
 
 Reimbursement for Time and Effort.  Subjects will be reimbursed $50 for each qualitative interview 
during the Development phase.   During the Interview phase, participants will be reimbursed $5 for every level 
of the game t hey complete, up to $30.  Subjects will be reimbursed $50 for their baseline and 12 week 
assessments during the Open Trial and $[ADDRESS_766226] phase 
subjects will be reimbursed $[ADDRESS_766227] will also receive an iPhone with a paid data service plan for the study duration (iPhone 4S: $100, 
data package through Lifespan/ AT&T $60/month).  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
 
The nature of the population warrants the development of a Data Safety and Monitoring Plan.  To address 
the NIH policy for Data and Safety Monitoring, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_218147] a system for oversight of the proposed study and its participants.  The Data and Safety Monitoring Plan for this application will begin by [CONTACT_582606] -to-day monitoring of the study.  Weekly meetings with the research team will be 
conducted to evaluate the progress of the trial and to review data quality, recruitment, study  retention, and 
examine other factors that may affect outcome.  Participant experiences with the study procedures and the rates of adverse events will also be reviewed to determine any changes in participant risk.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_274581] (IRB) and 
NIMH.  Serious adverse events (SAEs) will be reported to the Lifespan IRB immediately by [CONTACT_274624] 24 hours of our receipt of information regarding the event; SAEs will also be reported in 
writing to NIMH. Actions taken by [CONTACT_274625], as will reports of 
changes or amendments to the protocol as a result of an SAE.  Reports of changes or amendments to the protocol in general must be requested first in writing to the Lifespan IRB, which then will grant or deny 
permission to make the requested change or amendment in protocol.  Modifications to study aims or design 
will also be submitted to NIMH for approval prior to instituting them. Finally, if significant medical or mental 
health risks occur during the study period evaluation by [CONTACT_582607][INVESTIGATOR_197835]. In  the event that a 
research participant either withdraws from the study or the investigator decides to discontinue a research participant due to SAE, the research participant will be monitored by [CONTACT_75264] a  resolution is reached (i.e. the problem requiring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_274583]), the SAE is determined to be clearly unrelated to the study intervention, or the SAE results in death. Outcome of all SAEs will be periodically reported to NIMH. A 
summary of the SAEs that occurred during the previous year will be included in the annual progress report to 
NIMH.  
 
Educational Training  
 
Since October 1, 2001, Lifespan has required that researchers and IRB members read Protecting Study 
Volunteers in Research  (Dunn & Chadwick) and complete the related exam.  This process has served as an 
Version 9.14.2016 
initial certification. In June, 2005, the Office of Research Administration contracted with CITI, a Collaborative 
Institutional (modular) Training Initiative program, for our Human Subjects Protection and HIPAA training for all 
research personnel.  Currently this program offers researchers a basic human subject's protection course as 
well as a refresher course that is required every three years.  Documentation of successful completion is 
automatically generated and can be printed directly by [CONTACT_582608] > 900 recipi[INVESTIGATOR_137362] 6 weeks. Relevant information concerning research review is available on the ORA web page at www.lifespan.org/research/ . In addition to standard 
institutional research information, the web page contains links to other sites such as CenterWatch, NIH, 
PRIM&R/ARENA.  
 
 
Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
 
Women.   Women will not be included in this study because this research focuses on the most at risk 
population for acquiring HIV in the U.S., MSM.  The PrEP clinic at Miriam Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_582559]. It is anticipated that approximately 100% of the sample will be males, reflecting the population of the PrEP clinic from which the sample will be recruited, so women will not be represented. 
Selection of only MSM for this study allows the iPhone app to be tailored to their specific needs as is 
appropriate for this phase of research.  
 
Minorities.   The aim of our recruitment strategy is for the resulting program materials to be appropriate for 
racial and ethnic minorities. We anticipate that in terms of race 65% of the enrolled participants will self -identify 
as Black/Afri can American and 30% will self -identify as Hispanic or Latino.  
 
Inclusion of Children  
 
Children.  Approximately 25% of the participants in this study will be comprised of youth ages 18- 21. 
Currently, the gaming content selected in the intervention has been designed for children 18 and older. 
Preliminary sessions are therefore designed to be appropriate for the developmental and cognitive level of 
youth. Thus, the proposed program is appropriate for children as defined by [CONTACT_4289]. During the Development 
Phase, intervention material and content will be further tailored to the developmental and cognitive level of our 
participants.   
 