Title: NeutraSal in the Management of Xerostomia in Obstructive Sleep 
Apnea Syndrome patients utilizing CPAP therapy  
 
 
Study Personnel: 
Principal Investigator, Research Team, and Study Site:  
Chitra Lal, MD, D-ABSM, FCCP, FAASM, FACP
Assistant Professor of Medicine
Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Sleep medicine, MUSC
[ADDRESS_906018], 
CSB Suite 812, MSC 630, 
Charleston, SC [ZIP_CODE]
Co-investigator: 
J. Terrill HugginsAssociate Professor of 
Medicine
Study Coordinator:  Pam 
Beck, CRA Consultants
Statistician: Sylvia Pell, 
PhD
 
Principal investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_670649], MD 
Research team and contact [CONTACT_7171]:  Tel:([PHONE_13926]
 
Abstract  
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome (OSAS) is a very common disorder with a high prevalence in the general population. Common manifestations of OSAS include 
snoring, excessive daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008], fatigue as well as long term sequalae like memory loss and attention deficits
1, hypertension, arrhythmias, coronary artery 
disease2, congestive heart failure, stroke3 and insulin resistance4. Given the significant 
impact of OSAS on overall health and quality of life, it is very important to treat it 
optimally. The treatment of OSAS most co mmonly involves the use of Continuous 
Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) to maintain patency of the upper airway.  Nonadherence rates to CPAP are variable and range from 29% to 83%
5-[ADDRESS_906019] 
underlying conditions predisposing to xerostomia. Anecdotally, in our clinical experience, approximately 80%-90% patients with OSAS on CPAP therapy complain of dry mouth. In about 1/[ADDRESS_906020] on CPAP compliance with some recent studies showin g no improvement in CPAP compliance at 
all
9. Given the significant adverse effects of OSAS on health, alternative measures to 
improve CPAP compliance in patients with OSAS need to be considered and evaluated. . As part of this initiative, our study aims to show improvement in patient CPAP compliance with the use of NeutraSal, a supersaturated calcium phosphate rinse, targeted at treating the dry mouth associated with CPAP therapy. 
 
 Study Trial (Post-market)  
 
NeutraSal in the Management of Xerostomia in Obstructive Sleep Apnea  Syndrome  patients 
utilizing CPAP therapy  
 
Study Population:  
Patients are male or female, ages 18-84, with a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome 
(OSAS), who have been started on CPAP treatment and have subsequently complained of dry mouth or developed worsening of a pre-existing dry mouth condition, as an effect of CPAP treatment.  
 
Study Design:  
Randomized, double- blinded, study of OSAS patients undergoing CPAP therapy designed to observe the impact of NeutraSal on compliance to CPAP therapy as compared to placebo. 
 
Sample Size  
~32 patients per site (16 in study group and 16 in placebo group)  
Population  
The population will be composed of patients with a confirmed diagnosis of OSAS who are on CPAP therapy, have developed new onset of dry mouth or have worsening of pre-existing dry mouth condition, as an effect of CPAP treatment, meet the other inclusion criteria and do not have any exclusion criteria. 
 
Trial Duration  
Ongoing recruitment; subjects will be followed for 12 weeks from the time of enrollment in the study.  
 
Trial Agent and Intervention Description (If applicable)  
NeutraSal, dosed 2 times per day at waking and bedtime (indications 2-10 times per day or PRN), swish and spit, daily for a term of [ADDRESS_906021] of NeutraSal on OSAS patients compliance to CPAP therapy compared to placebo. 
 
 
Secondary Objective  
To assess whether the daily use of NeutraSal w ill prevent or reduce dry mouth perception in 
patients undergoing CPAP therapy 
 
Tertiary Objective  
To assess whether NeutraSal will balance the pH of the oral mucosa long term (3 months) 
 
Efficacy Measurements : 
1.   Compliance with use of cpap 2.   Xerostomia Questionnaire 3.   Resting Saliva pH Testing  
4.   Product Utilization based on Patient Diary 
 
 
Exit Evaluation:  
1. 1. Brief Physical Exam for Overall Health   
2. Final collection of patient information during visit on data form 3.   Final review of efficacy measurements
 
Study Population:  
Inclusion /Exclusion Criteria  
The inclusion criteria will be as follows: 
 
1.   Patient should be above [ADDRESS_906022] of CPAP therapy. 3.   Ability to attend visits at the research site 4.   Patient should be able to read and/or understand and sign the consent form be willing 
to participate in the research study 
 
The exclusion criteria are as follows: 
 
1.   Patients with open mouth sores at study entry. 
2.   Any pathology that, based on the judgement of the researcher, could negatively affect 
the oral mucosa and subsequent treatment for xerostomia (immune disorders, etc.) 
3.   Patients using any other prophylactic mouthwashes. 
4.   Patients who are pregnant and/or nursing. 5.   Patients becoming pregnant during the treatment period will be removed from data. 
        6.   Patients on a low sodium diet 
7.  Patients currently on medication or treatment for xerostomia 
8.  Patients < 18 years of age 9. Hypersensitivity to any of the following ingredients- sodium chloride, sodium phosphate, 
calcium chloride and sodium bicarbonate 
 
Trial drug /Interventions:  
NeutraSal is a powder that when dissolved in water creates a supersaturated calcium 
phosphate rinse.  
Placebo is a powder consisting of sodium chloride only.  Sodium chloride has been chosen as a 
placebo because it looks like Neutrasal and can be pa ckaged (in foil) like Neutrasal for a double blind 
effect.  
 
For the study, NeutraSal or placebo will be di spensed by [CONTACT_670655] a randomized, double-blind procedure.  Patients will be provided pre-measured cups, timer to measure length of time patient gargles and patient instructions. Patients will mix product(s) at home in a clean glass or supplied pre-measured cup. 
 
Trial Schedule:  
Projected Start Date:  July 1st, 2013 
 
Patients with OSAS seen in MUSC (Medical Univer sity of South Carolina) sleep clinic who are on 
CPAP, meet the inclusion criteria and do not have any exclusion criteria, will be invited to 
participate. After obtaining informed consent, patients will be randomized to the study or 
placebo groups. The study sponsor, Invado pharmaceuticals will provide a randomization 
schedule and key. The packets of product an d placebo will be numbered 1-[ADDRESS_906023] and 
Xerostomia symptom relief. Patients will be monitored by [CONTACT_458] [INVESTIGATOR_670650], visit at 6 weeks and a final visit at 12 weeks. 
 
During these visits the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_670651]: 
xXerostomia Questionnaire 
xCPAP Compliance measured by [CONTACT_670656] (Patient Diary Reviewed) 
xAdverse Effects 
xResting salivary pH 
 
Schedule of Study Events: 
 Baseline Visit [ADDRESS_906024] X X X Informed Consent Form  X  
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  X 
Treatment Administration                 X  X   X  
Xerostomia Questionnaire              X   X   X  
Resting pH                                             X   X X  
Compliance Report/ Patient Diary     X X  X  
Adverse Effect Monitoring                  X  X     X 
 
Data collection instruments are included in the IRB submission. 
 
Screening Visit/ Initial Visit  
During this visit, OSAS patients on CPAP who are eligible for study enrollment will be given 
information about the study. An informed consent form will be reviewed and signed. Subjects will 
receive a brief physical medical exam and a baseline visual examination of the oral mucosa. Once 
enrolled in the research study, patients will receive either medication or placebo in a randomized selection. Patients will also complete an oral questionnaire on the state of 
xerostomia. Researchers will do a baseline pH test of the oral mucosa. Patients will be 
instructed on proper use of neutrasal or placebo. Patients will be given a diary or questionnaire 
to record compliance to the product and Xerostomia symptom relief. 
 
Follow Up Visits  
Patients will complete an oral questionnaire on the state of xerostomia since the initial visit and 
compliance with CPAP therapy will be reviewed by [CONTACT_670657].  Researchers will also review the patient diary for compliance to dosing for medication. CPAP compliance will be recorded as  the number of days that the patient used 
WWĨŽƌшϰŚŽƵƌƐͬ day and the average number of hours of nightly usage. CPAP compliance 
downloads are provided by [CONTACT_670658] (DME) providers and usually indicate both 
of these measures. The dates between which the compliance is measured are also indicated on 
the compliance downloads provided by [CONTACT_670659]. CPAP compliance will be recorded 
on the [ADDRESS_906025] visit at 12 weeks. Every effort will be made to obtain CPAP 
compliance from the date that subjects are star ted on neutrasal/placebo until the dates of the 
study visits. If CPAP compliance for the entire period of [ADDRESS_906026] utilization, compliance to dosing and xerostomia symptom relief. CPAP compliance downloads for these patients w ill be obtained from the DME providers. 
 
Adverse Event Reporting:  
Adverse Event (AEs) and Serious Adverse Event (SAEs) will be reported immediately, if 
suspected to be related to treatment.  
 
Subject Withdrawals:  
Subjects will be advised that they are free to withdraw from the study at any time for any reason, or, if necessary, the Investigators may wi thdraw a subject from the study, according to 
the following criteria, to protect the subject’s health: 
-Intolerable adverse effects 
-Major violation of study protocol procedures 
-Non-compliance with protocol 
-Subject unwilling to proceed or consent is withdrawn 
-     Pregnancy 
 Statistical Analysis Plan:  
This is a double-blind, randomized, intention to treat, controlled clinical trial comparing 
Neutrasal to Sodium Chloride placebo in a 1:1 randomization. The primary analysis is a comparison of CPAP compliance measured by [CONTACT_670660] ш 4 hours per night over 
12 weeks.    
 
 The secondary analyses include:  1)CPAP compliance as measured by [CONTACT_670661].  
2) improvement in the total score of the Xerostomia questionnaire measured at baseline and 12 
weeks.  3) Change in resting salivary pH between baseline and [ADDRESS_906027] with p<0.[ADDRESS_906028]. We estimate the 
treatment to be effective at improving CPAP compliance in 25% of subjects. This would translate 
to the same estimated increase in number of days in which CPAP is used for > 4 hours.  
Therefore, a sample size of 30 subjects is needed to obtain an 80% confidence level with a response rate of 25%. We estimate that 2 subjects will drop out, therefore we will need 32 subjects for this study.  
 
Informed Consent Process:  
The language and writing of an informed consent will be at a 6th grade level. No potentially vulnerable subjects will be enrolle d in the study, such as, pregnant and lactating 
women, children, prisoners, cognitively impaired and critically ill subjects. 
 
Privacy and confidentiality:  
Human subjects’ names will be kept on a password protected database, and will be linked only with a study identification number for this research. There will be no patient identifiers. All data will be entered into a computer and kept on pa ssword protected network storage. Hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_670652] a part of this study will be kept in a locked office. Only the study personnel will have access to the study records. 
 
Risk/Benefit:  
Risk to participants:  It is expected that there will be no risk or a limited risk to patients due to 
the safety profile of NeutraSal (i.e., NeutraSal can be swallowed with no adverse effects expected) and the placebo (sodium chloride). There has been only one adverse effect reported to the FDA due to NeutraSal till today which is the development of mouth sores in one patient after [ADDRESS_906029] reported a “too salty” taste of NeutraSal. The experience of our local rheumatologists at MUSC is that most Sjogren’s 
syndrome patients have liked NeutraSal although a few have reported some “burning” sensation in the mouth. Patients on a low sodium diet will be excluded. There are no interactions between NeutraSal and other medications or products. Patients with a hypersensitivity to any of the following ingredients- sodium chloride, sodium phosphate, calcium chloride and sodium bicarbonate will be excluded from this study. If an allergic reaction or adverse effect does o ccur, the subjects will be asked to stop taking the 
medication immediately, to seek medical help and to inform the study personnel.     
Benefits to Participants  
This study presents the prospect of a direct benefit to the participants in the reduction of 
xerostomia which will allow better compliance with CPAP treatment for OSAS. Patients will receive compensation of a $20.00 (gift card) after completion of each study visit. 
 
Data Safety Monitoring:
 
NeutraSal is an approved product with few known adverse effects; thus, this study is considered minimal risk.  Diligent safety monito ring will be conducted by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_670653], timely reporting of deficiencies related to informed consents or protocol deviations, conflicts of interest or changes in personnel. Any action resulting in a temporary or permanent suspension or delay of the study will be reported to the 
IRB. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_670654]. 
 
Drug Storage Conditions:  
NeutraSal is a powder in individual packets. Placebo is a powder in individual packets. NeutraSal and placebo are to be stored in a location with normal room temperature and avoidance of moisture. 
 
Conflict of Interest:  
There is no expected conflict of interest . 
 
Publication and Presentation Plans:  
Abstract presented as a poster or an oral presentation at upcoming national/international Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep meeti ngs, dental meetings and possible publication.  
 
STUDY SIGNIFICANCE:  
Xerostomia is excessive dryness of the mouth.  It is due to insufficient saliva secretion. 
 
Xerostomia is often accompanied by [CONTACT_670662], fetid breath and mouth ulcers, and it disturbs functions such as speech, chewing and swallowing. Because of reduced salivary secretion, there is disturbance of the microbial colonization of the buccal cavity, increased demineralization and decreased remineralization of the teeth, impaired retention of dentures, dehydration of the mucosa and reduced lubrication of the buccal mucosa. These complications may ta ke the form of dental caries, candidiasis, 
atrophy and feelings of burning of the mucosa, difficulty retaining dentures, impaired speech and swallowing and impression of decreased or impaired sense of taste. Xerostomia has significant harmful effects on the buccal cavity and on the quality of life of patients. Xerostomia is one of the major factors affecting compliance with cpap therapy. 
 
Treatments of xerostomia are saliva substitute s and saliva stimulants. NeutraSal is a saliva 
substitute. Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome (OSAS)  is a common disorder with a prevalence of  
(defined in this study as an apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) of 5 or higher and excessive daytime 
sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008]) to be 2% in women and 4% in men in the 30-60 year age group10. The estimated 
prevalence of an AHI of 5 or greater with no symptoms was even higher at 9% in women and 
24% in men in the same age group. Thus OSAS is a major public health problem.  
 
 
 
Common manifestations of OSAS include snoring, excessive daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_423302]. In 
addition, emerging data has linked OSAS to neur ocognitive deficits such as memory loss and 
attention deficits1, hypertension, arrhythmias, coronary artery disease2, congestive heart failure, 
stroke3 and insulin resistance4. Given the significant impact of OSAS on overall health and quality 
of life, it is very important to treat it optimally. 
 
The treatment of OSAS most commonly involves th e use of Continuous Positive Airway Pressure 
(CPAP) to maintain patency of the upper airway. CPAP being noninvasive and very effective at 
treating OSAS, is generally considered first line treatment for OSAS, in the absence of any 
contraindications to its use. CPAP machines blow mildly pressurized air into a connected tube and a mask or other attaching device that extends from the other end of the tube. This 
pressurized air gently opens the airways and ke eps them open. Patient compliance with CPAP 
usage is often limited by [CONTACT_670663] a common side effect.  This may be further 
exacerbated in patients who are mouth-breathers or have underlying conditions predisposing to 
Xerostomia. Heated humidificatio n may have some effect on improving the mouth dryness but 
does not eliminate it entirely in most cases, thus decreasing patient adherence to CPAP therapy. Neutrasal is a supersaturated calcium phosphate rinse which has been shown to improve 
xerostomia in Sjogren’s syndrome patients. Our study will attempt to show improvement in patient CPAP compliance, salivary parameters such as pH and salivary flow and overall quality of 
life with the use of NeutraSal, which will be used to prevent/treat the xerostomia associated 
with CPAP therapy.
References:
1 Verstraeten E. Neurocognitive effects of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 
2007; 7:161-[ADDRESS_906030] pressure: 
an observational study. Lancet 2005; 365:1046-1053 
3 Shahar E, Whitney CW, Redline S, et al. Sleep-diso rdered breathing and cardiovascular disease: cross-
sectional results of the Sleep Heart Health Study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001; 163:19-25 
4 Meslier N, Gagnadoux F, Giraud P, et al. Impaired  glucose-insulin metabolism in males with obstructive 
sleep apnoea syndrome. Eur Respir J 2003; 22:156-[ADDRESS_906031] three months 
of treatment. Sleep 1997; 20:278-[ADDRESS_906032] pressure therapy: the challenge to 
effective treatment. Proc Am Thorac Soc 2008; 5:173-178 
7 Sarrell EM, Chomsky O, Shechter D. [Treatment comp liance with continuous positive airway pressure 
device among adults with obstructive sleep ap nea (OSA): how many adhere to treatment?]. 
Harefuah 2013; 152:140-144, 184, [ADDRESS_906033] 2004; 126:1248-1254 
9 Ruhle KH, Franke KJ, Domanski U,  et al. Quality of life, compliance, sleep and nasopharyngeal side 
effects during CPAP therapy with and without controlled heated humidification. Sleep Breath 
2011; 15:479-485 
10 Young T, Palta M, Dempsey J, et al. The occurrence of sleep-disordered breathing among middle-aged 
adults. N Engl J Med 1993; 328:1230-1235 
 
 