Version 12, 15 May 2020, with Amendment 12    
CLINICAL RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
 
HRV Biofeedback in Pain Patients: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_588825], Fatigue & Sleep 
 
 Principal Investigator :   
[INVESTIGATOR_588826], MS, PhD, Associate [CONTACT_588912]  
WJB Dorn Department of Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center  
[ADDRESS_775530] 
Building 100, Room 3A156 
Columbia, SC [ZIP_CODE] 
Phone: ([PHONE_12222] ext. 1-6635  
E-mail:  [EMAIL_11222]  
and 
Cancer Prevention and Control Program, Dept. of Epi[INVESTIGATOR_69637], 
Arnold  School of Public Health, University of 
South Carolina, Columbia, SC  
[ADDRESS_775531]., Columbia, SC  [ZIP_CODE] 
Phone: [PHONE_12223] 
E-mail: [EMAIL_11223]  
  
Co-Investigator: 
 
Alexander McLain, PhD   
Assistant Professor  of Biostatistic s       
Department of Epi[INVESTIGATOR_588827], Columbia, SC   [ZIP_CODE] 
 
Consultants : 
 
Raouf (Ron) Gharbo, DO, PhD  
Adjunct Clinical Faculty   
Eastern Virginia Medical School  
Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation  
Eastern Virginia Medical School  
and 
Staff Physiatrist  
Riverside Medical Group 
Hampton Roads Riverside Regional Medical Center  
Newport News, VA  [ZIP_CODE] 
 
James   R.  Hebert, ScD  
Health Sciences Distinguished [CONTACT_588913], South Car olina Statewide Cancer Prevention and Control Program ,  
Dept. of Epi[INVESTIGATOR_69637] ,  
Arnold School of Public Health,  
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC   [ZIP_CODE] 
 
 
Version 12, 15 May 2020, with Amendment 12   Consultants (Continued) : 
 
Francis G. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_7992], MS, PhD, MD  
Distinguished Professor of Personalized Medicine Professor, Cell Biology Anatomy, and Surgery  
School of Medicine  
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC   [ADDRESS_775532]  
 
Pain initiates a stress response that increases sympathetic output and facilitates autonomic imbalance. Heart  
rate variability (HRV) is a valid, quantitative, noninvasive measure of autonomic function. HRV biofeedback  (HRV -B) is a novel biobehavioral procedure whereby [CONTACT_588872][INVESTIGATOR_007] ‘HRV coherence’. Patients in this s tate have improved mood, cognition, and executive function, and  
HRV -B interventions have been used to treat: pain, anxiety, depression, insomnia and symptoms of 
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and heart disease. We have found that HRV -B training among Veteran 
PTSD patients can enhance HRV coherence and improve cognition and sleep relative to controls. Importantly, our pi[INVESTIGATOR_588828] -B can alleviate chronic pain and stress among Veteran Pain Clinic patients. 
HRV -B thus has a pi[INVESTIGATOR_588829] i n restoring autonomic balance and managing pain and the symptoms that 
amplify it. The proposed project is a randomized, sham -controlled, biobehavioral intervention that will test the 
hypotheses that HRV -B increases HRV coherence and reduces pain, stress, fatigue, insomnia and depression 
and improves sleep, activity, and cognition. Because this is a behavioral intervention, it is difficult to blind the 
subjects to the active vs sham treatment, and the biofeedback coach who provides the training must know the 
condition to which the subject is assigned. However, all others in the study are blinded to the training. The 
specific aims are: 1.) Determine whether HRV -B increases HRV coherence and reduces pain or stress relative 
to a sham treatment among Veterans with chronic, nonmalignant, axial neuromusculoskeletal pain; 2.) 
Determine as an exploratory aim whether HRV -B reduces insomnia, fatigue or depressive symptoms, and 
increases sleep and activity and improves cognition among patents relative to sham treatment. We 
hypothesize that HRV -B will (1) reduce self-reported pain and stress ratings, (2) improve objective measures of 
actigraphic sleep parameters (sleep latency, duration, efficiency, fragmentation), rest/activity rhythms (dichotomy index, interdaily stabili ty) and cognitive function (reaction time, attention); and (3) alleviate self-
reported fatigue and depression symptoms. Patients from both groups will be randomized to our previously established HRV -B or sham protocol (n=40 each), and will complete a basel ine assessment, [ADDRESS_775533]-training 
follow -up evaluation, for a total of 10 visits to the research site. Portable, hand-held, data-logging devices wil l 
be used to practice attaining HRV coherence at home by [CONTACT_588873], while those in the sham training group will get a ‘stress squeeze ball’. Standard methods will quantify HRV coherence and other HRV 
measures, and validated instruments wil l be used to assess pain and stress. Wrist actigraphy is a valid, 
quantitative, and noninvasive procedure that will be used to characterize insomnia via continuous recordings collected 24 -hrs/day over three 1-week periods (at the baseline, post-treatment, and 8-week follow -up 
assessment). A small battery of tests measuring attention and reaction time will assess changes in cognitive 
performance. Data analyses will apply linear models for repeated measures to evaluate the effect of HRV -B on 
study outcomes, and on treatment persistence, after adjusting for confounding factors. For each measure we will calculate three estimates of change for each patient (post-training minus pre-training, 4-week booster 
minus post-training, and 8-week follow -up minus the 4-week  booster assessment). Path analyses will examine 
direct and indirect relationships between HRV -B, the primary and exploratory outcomes, and personal or social 
factors that may modify these relationships. This study will be the first to examine HRV -B for pain management 
among Veteran chronic pain patients. This study is directly responsive to a national VHA/DoD Task Force’s 
recommendations to provide complementary, integrative therapi[INVESTIGATOR_588830]. 
  
 
Version 12, [ADDRESS_775534] common reason for seeking health care in t he [LOCATION_002], impacting ~116 million 
Americans and generating >$[ADDRESS_775535] commonly diagnosed medical problem.4  Pain patients 
experience improved quality of life when pain is controlled and they are more likely to successfully manage 
other aspects of their daily lives .5  Because the prevalence and intensity of pain increases with disease 
progression, and since pain impacts multiple domains of quality of life (QoL),6,7 the ability to manage pain 
becomes increasingly important over time for medical patients of all types.   
Pain initiates a stress response that increases sympathetic output leading to autonomic imbalance and 
psychological stress; physical and psychological  stress in turn exacerbates pain, thus creating a self-
perpetuating cycle of autonomic dysregulation that facilitates persistent pain.8  Stress from  chronic pain leads 
to loss of the glucocorticoid (GC) -mediated negative feedback control of the hypothalamic -pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenal 
(HPA ) axis, producing positive HPA drive and down‐ regulation of central and peripheral GC receptors . In 
addition, peripheral cytokine pro-i nflammatory  signals from noci ceptive receptor chronic stimulation is sent to 
the  spi[INVESTIGATOR_588831], and gated in th alamus  prior to cognitive appraisal in primary 
somatosensory cortex.  This creates pain awareness.  As a result, m onoaminergic ( dopamine, norepi[INVESTIGATOR_588832]) neurons in the brainstem that normally descend to the spi[INVESTIGATOR_52952] ‘brake’ nociceptive 
transmission become depleted during chronic pain.[ADDRESS_775536] leads to enhancement of pain (‘central sensitization’) . In what is now a feed-forward system, the loss of 
GC inhibition of pro‐ inflammatory cytokines leads to proliferation of peripheral inflammatory agents, which are 
nociceptive transmitters , further contributing to central pain sensitization and an HPA driven stress response.10  
At the same time, down ‐regulation of GC negative-feedback modulation from chronic stress a lso promotes 
depressed mood.11  Thus, chronic pain can induce both stress and depression (Figure 1, ‘Disease Pathway’) . 
Pain Medication & Addiction. Pain remains a major healthcare problem despi[INVESTIGATOR_588833] -related pharmacological pain management.[ADDRESS_775537] clearly seen in behaviors and movement. Painful 
activities are avoided in an attempt to decrease the overall experience of pain. Though behavioral avoidance 
can lessen pain in the short term , it can also cause long term problems and decrease QoL.17 Complementary 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014], such as H eart Rate Variability (HRV) Biofeedback (HRV -B), that can help improve both physical and 
psychological well -being have been advocated for integration with conventional therapi[INVESTIGATOR_588834] m any 
medical patients are not satisfied with mainstream treatments in relieving their pain symptoms and the 
attendant erosion of their QoL .[ADDRESS_775538] relationships between HRV -B, the primary and 
exploratory outcomes, and other individual or social  factors that may modify this relationship. The relationship 
 
Version 12, 15 May 2020, with Amendment 12   between autonomic dysfunction and disrupted sleep has not been thoroughly examined. Our path analyses are 
thus important from a practical standpoint because HRV coherence and sleep represent potentially modifiable 
risk factors that can be targeted to reduc e symptom burdens and improve Q oL for Veteran patients . In addition, 
we will implement the use of portable, hand held finger plethysmographs (personal stress relievers) to reinforce 
the HRV -B training and promote practice outside the clinic. We have obtained encouraging preliminary results 
by [CONTACT_588874]. In our path analysis, we will identify factors predicting persistent HRV -B effects at the 8-week post-treatment follow -up. This information will be useful in designin g 
future interventions. The use of HRV -B to normalize autonomic function represents a novel, complementary  
strategy that engages patients in their own care and is directly responsive to the VHA/DoD Pain Management 
Task Force’s recommendations  to adopt complementary pain management strategies (including HRV -B) to 
alleviate pain among Veterans.
19  This application addresses several CSR&D priority research areas (Pain 
Management, Complementary and Alternative Medicine, Patient-Centered Care) and coincides with a 
nationwide VHA/DoD initiative to include complementary, integrative, therapi[INVESTIGATOR_588835].  To our knowledge, the use of HRV -B to improve chronic pain sy mptoms in a Veteran population has 
not previously been studied in a randomized clinical trial.     
Chronic Pain, Stress, Depression and  Autonomic Im balance.  HRV is a valid, noninvasive measure of 
autonomic function with both physiological and psychological attributes.  Reduced HRV is an established risk 
factor for mortality due to cardiovascular or other chronic diseases.20,21 For example, about 80% of advanced 
cancer patients exhibit autonomic 
dysregulation,20,22 and several recent studies 
report increased mortality risk among patients 
with reduced HRV.20-26 Furthermore, emotional 
disruption caused by a stressful experience is characterized by a chaotic, disordered pattern 
of inter -beat intervals as well as an increased 
heart rate, which lowers HR V (Figure 2, top 
panel). Irregular heart beat rhythm  due to 
disordered inter -beat intervals , reflects  
sympathetic nervous system over -activity and 
low HRV coherence. In contrast, emotional 
balance and a feeling of well -being results in 
an ordered, sine wave -like pattern of inter -beat 
interval changes and a narrow peak in the low frequency (LF) range of the power spectrum, 
centered around 0.1 Hz , which equals a period 
of 10 seconds, or 6 cycles per minute (Figure 
2, bottom panel ).
[ADDRESS_775539] been  documented. Appelhans and Luecken found an inverse relationship 
between HRV and sensitivity to cold thermal pain measured as ‘unpleasantness’, and ‘threshold for barely noticeable pain’.
 [ADDRESS_775540] examined relationships between disrupted sleep and autonomic function.16,32 In a study of 13 
healthy male volunteers randomized to 5 nights of partial sleep deprivation (<5 h), or 5 nights of control sleep 
(>7 h), those with sleep deprivation had a statistically significant increase in sympathetic activity as indicated 
by [CONTACT_588875] (LF) and decrease in high frequency (HF) components of HRV.33 The results 
were consistent with another study that reported increased sympathetic and decreased parasympathetic HRV 
measures after 36-hours of total sleep deprivation.32  
Depression is relatively common in patients with coronary heart disease (CHD) and its association with 
autonomic nervous system dysfunction has been investigated among CHD patients. HRV is lower among 
depressed patients with either stable CHD, or among those with a recent acute coronary event, compared with 
non-depressed patients.[ADDRESS_775541] expanded into other patient 
populations. A nother  recent meta-analysis concluded that depression in the absence of cardiovascular disease 
is also as sociated with reduced HRV, and that HRV decreases with increasing depression severity.35 Reduced 
HRV is an established predictor of increased mortality risk both in cardiovascular or other chronic disease 
patients, and in the general population.20,21  
 
Loss of HRV coherence is also associated with 
PTSD.  Our recently published meta-analysis of 
HRV and PTSD found that HRV variables are 
associated with PTSD, and these associations can 
be interpreted in terms of a basic and widespread 
model  of PTSD as a disorder comprising hyper -
arousal of the sympathetic  nervous system  (see 
Preliminary Studies ).[ADDRESS_775542] been advocated for 
integration with conventional therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] . HRV -B is 
an interactive procedure whereby [CONTACT_588876], 
positive emotion, and resonant frequency 
breathing. Previous research suggests that HRV -B interventions may be useful for reduc ing symptoms of: 
chronic pain,28,31,37,[ADDRESS_775543]-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD),43,44 heart disease,45 
and insomnia.46   
HRV -B is a complementary, non-pharmacological technique for improvement of HRV and autonomic function. 
It is an interactive procedure whereby [CONTACT_588877], positive emotion, and resonant frequency breathing. The resonant frequency of breathing (RFB) is the respi[INVESTIGATOR_588836]; RFB is necessary for attainment of HRV 
coherence.
47 HRV coherence is achieved when beat-to-beat intervals increase and decreas e in a smooth 
rhythm, producing a spi[INVESTIGATOR_588837] a 10 second period ( 0.[ADDRESS_775544] Fourier transformation to the power 
spectrum) of the instantaneous heart rate (Figure 2). It is defined according to consensus guidelines as the ratio of power in the LF peak to the remainder of power in the HRV spectrum .
27,44,48  Using HRV -B, patients 
learn how to produce HRV patterns indi cative of higher vagal parasympathetic tone. With practice, patients 
acquire the ability to enhance their HRV coherence on demand (see Figure 2) . High coherence has been 
associated with a favorable psychological state, including improved affect,  cognition,  and executive function.[ADDRESS_775545]/activity rhythms. If our aims are achieved, o ur study has 
importance from a practical standpoint because HRV coherence and sleep represent potentially m odifiable risk 
factors that can be targeted to reduce symptom burdens and improve Q oL for pain patients. The integrated 
path analysis model derived from this study  will aid in the development of more effective intervention strategies 
for addressing symptom s and thus targets for the design of future projects. If this study’s hypotheses are 
supported, we will seek funding for a full -scale intervention to comprehensively examine whether HRV -B 
therapy  alleviates pain in a wider population of Veterans  with pain.    
1.1.  Preliminar y Studies 
We are now conducting a randomized, single blind, sham -controlled study funded by [CONTACT_941] D epartment of 
Defense ( DoD) to examine the effectiveness of HRV -B in alleviating PTSD symptoms . Three groups of combat 
veterans are being studied: (1) PTSD patients who received active HRV -B training  (n=30); (2) PTSD patients 
who received sham HRV -B training (n=30); and (3) Veterans  without PTSD  who were assessed only at 
baseline and received no HRV -B training.  Training lasted six weeks.  Participants were assessed Pre-training, 
immediately Post-training, and [ADDRESS_775546] of HRV -B on HRV Coherence.  In this ongoing study, the time domain variable RMSSD was used as an 
indicator of coherence because it 
correlates very highly with vagal tone and 
parasympathetic output (r=0.853, 
p<0.001).52,53 Linear mixed model analysis 
of RMSSD for Group (Sham vs . HRVB)  x 
Time Period of Assessment (Pre-, Post-, Follow -up) showed that the interaction 
effect was significant, F(5, 125)=2.50, 
p=.034. Follow -up testing of the interaction 
effect revealed that the Group main effect was statistically significant, HRV -B > 
Sham, 60.2 (43.6) vs . 46.1 (37.3), 
F(1,127)=4.66, p=.033.  Contrasts within 
the HRV -B group revealed that Pre-
training RMSSD was statistically lower than combined Post-training and Follow -
up, 44.1 (22.8) vs . 72.6 (51.4), t(57)=-2.58, 
p=.013, but Post-training was not 
statistically different from Follow -up, 74.8 (63.2) vs . 69.7 (32.8), t(57)=0.346, p=.730. In summary, active HRV -
B increased HRV coherence and the increase persisted until  the Follow -up period (Figure 3). 

 
Version 12, [ADDRESS_775547]-intervention pain 
and stress scores among two 
groups of randomly assigned Veterans that met the chronic 
pain inclusion criterion. One group received HRV -B plus 
treatment as usual and the 
other group received only 
treatment as usual. The 
outcomes of this study were 
HRV coherence and four scale 
scores (pain, emotional 
distress, activity limitation, and 
stress) that were obtained from 
two previously  validated 
psychometric instruments (BPI [INVESTIGATOR_588838], respectively).  
Veterans receiving HRV -B 
training were coached to use 
constructive processes to 
engage and manage internal 
sensations of pain rather than rely on strategies of avoidance. All subjects received a baseline and a follow -up 
assessment after 6 weeks of HRV -B tra ining or treatment as usual. Retention for this pi[INVESTIGATOR_23366] 100%.
  
The HRV -B group received five weekly HRV -B training sessions. Treatment effects  were analyzed with 
ANCOVA of follow -up scores by [CONTACT_588878].  Eight Veterans completed the 
HRV -B intervention and six  Veterans in the usual treatment group returned for a follow -up assessment.  The 
mean baseline values for the two groups were not statistically different for any of the measures.  In the HRV -B 
group, there was a s tatistically significant increase in  HRV coherence and a reduction among each of the four 
outcome measures for pain or stress post-HRV -B training relative to the group that only received usual 
treatment (all p <0.05,  Figure 4).  Results from this study i ndicate that HRV -B can effectively reduce the 
negative perceptions of pain.  Data obtained from this investigation were used to develop statistical   power and 
sample size estimates since they are most directly relevant to the proposed intervention. 
Effect of HRV -B on PTSD among Combat Veterans . In 2010, we 
examined the effects of HRV -B on combat Veterans with PTSD 
in a small pi[INVESTIGATOR_588839] (n=10).  In our published findings, we reported that HRV -B significantly  improved HRV 
coherence as well as measures of attention and immediate memory (ATTN/IM).
44 In our current DoD -funded research, 
baseline PTSD symptoms were not significantly different 
between the active and sham training groups (Table 1). Linear 
mixed model analysis54 of PTSD rating (CAPS) for the Training 
Group by [CONTACT_588879], F(5, 
127)=2.60, p=.028; furthermore the Pre- to Follow -up difference within the HRV -B group was significant.  Paired 
t-test within the HRV -B group of Pre- to Follow -up was statistically significant, mean=16.7, t(12) =4.66, p=0.001 
(ηp2=0.663).  Thes e treatment effect was well beyond the accepted reliable change sc ore of 12 points 
reduction in CAPS55; a reduction of [ADDRESS_775548] of HRVB on PTSD (CAPS)  
Training  CAPS Pre- Post- 8-week 
Follow -up 
Sham  Mean  76.[ADDRESS_775549] of HRV -B on Depression in Combat Veterans with PTSD . Depression (BDI-II) was also measured in our 
current DoD -funded research.  The repeated measures contrast of Group x Time for the effect of HRV -B on 
Depression for Pre- to Post-Training was statistically significant, (F (1,28)=6.29, p=0.02 ( ηp2=0.173) ).  The 
reduction in BDI-II in the HRV -B group compared to Pre-training was statistically significant, (mean=5.9, 
t(16)=1.82, p(1-tail)=.045 (ηp2=0.180)),  while the BDI-II change in the S ham training group was not , p(1-
tail)=.23. These results indicate that depression was reduced by [CONTACT_588880] -B treatment compared to the Sham 
training at the Post-Training assessment.  A change of [ADDRESS_775550] of activ e versus sham HRV -B 
on sleep in our on-going DoD-funded PTSD study, we examined the self-rating of sleep difficulty from the PCL-
M. This rating is on a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means no difficulty and 5 corresponds to extreme sleep difficulty. 
Participant’ s scores on sleep difficulty, analyzed using a 
linear m ixed model , indicated a statistically sign ificant 
Group by [CONTACT_309215]  (F(5, 127)=2.41, p=.028) with 
better post-training sleep ratings in the HRV -B group 
(Figure  5).  Thus, there is preliminary evidence from our 
study among PTSD patients to suggest that active HRV -
B training reduces self-reported sleep difficulties . Data 
from more sources measuring sleep quantity and quality 
is required to fully evaluate this possibility. This study of 
HRV -B effectiveness for PTSD is still in progress and no 
conclusi ons can be drawn at this time. However, the 
results are encouraging and suggest that HRV -B may 
improve the negative impact of PTSD on sleep among 
combat Veterans.    
HRV & Shift Work among DVAMC Nurses .  Few studies have examined autonomic dysregulation or the 
circadian characteristics of HRV in relation to shift work. Dr . Burch  recently completeda study of the 
relationship between shift work and HRV  among DVAMC 
nurses . Participants were studied over one 36-hour period 
coinciding with the last two shifts of their work week. The night nurse’s schedule consisted of non-rotating 12-hour shifts from 
7:00 PM to 7:00 AM for 3 or 4 consecutive days in a 2-week 
period. Day nurses worked a similar schedule from 7:00 AM to 
7:00 PM. Each participant wore a portable, data-logging HRV 
monitor (Firstbeat Bodyguard, Jyväskylä, Finland) starting at 
the beginning of one 12- hour work shift and stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_588840] a given work week. This light weight heart 
rate monitor attaches directly to the skin with two chest electrodes and continuously logs the R -R heart beat interval in 
milliseconds. Data were processed using KUBIOS software. Hourly averages of frequency - (HRV coherence, 
VLF, LF, HF power, peak frequency, peak frequency power)  and time -domain variables (heart rate mean and 
standard deviation, NN50, pNN50, RMSSD)  were compared among two groups of nurses working either 
permanent day (n=7) or night (n=11) shifts  using repeated measures A NOVA . Results indicate that nurses 
working permanent day shifts had a clear circadian pattern of HRV coherence coinciding with their sleep period (hours ~15-23), whereas those working permanent night shifts had no apparent overnight amplitude in the 
circad ian rhythm of their HRV coherence (Figure 6). These results suggest a pattern of autonomic 
dysregulation among nurses working permanent night shifts.  
Sleep Actigraphy . The value of wrist actigraphy for sleep characterization is recognized in both clinical  and 
research settings as an alternative to polysomnography (PSG ), which is the most definitive method but can be 

 
Version 12, [ADDRESS_775551] studied actigraphic sleep profiles 
among: shiftworkers, patients with sleep apnea or cancer, and in the general population.58-[ADDRESS_775552]- or hip-
mounted actigraphs with PSG recordings. We also attempted to improve the correspondence between actigraphic and PSG s leep using a novel sleep scoring algorithm (spline regression). Compared to original 
wrist actigraphy data, spline-modified wrist actigraphy had better agreement with PSG -defined sleep. Thus, 
spline regression has the potential to improve sleep estimates obtained via wrist actigraphy.
61  
 
1.2.  Specific Aims  
 
This study fulfills the national VHA/DoD Task Force recommendation that complementary, integrative therapi[INVESTIGATOR_588841]. Chronic pain elicits stress which increases sympathetic output fostering autonomic nervous system imbalance, an overextended stress response, fatigue, depression and 
insomnia. Heart Rate Variability (HRV) is a measure of the interplay between the sympathetic and 
parasympathetic nervous systems, and thus is a useful and easily -measured index of autonomic balance that 
has a relationship to chronic pain effects. HRV biofeedback ( HRV -B) is a novel, biobehavioral procedure that 
restores normal autonomic balance. Through HRV -B, patients increase parasympathetic cardiac output and 
restore autonomic balance via induction of  ‘HRV coherence’.  Our pi[INVESTIGATOR_588842] -B produc ed 
coherence and alleviated self-reported ratings of chronic pain and stress among Veterans attending our Pain 
Clinic.
[ADDRESS_775553] hypotheses that HRV -B increases HRV coherence, 
reduces self -reported pain, stress, depression, fatigue, and insomnia, and im proves cognition among Veterans 
with chronic pain.  
 
The specific aims are to: (1) conduct a randomized, sham -controlled, pi[INVESTIGATOR_588843] -B increases HRV coherence among chronic pain patients (n=40 each for the HRV -B and s ham 
treatment groups; total N=80 patients); (2) determine whether HRV -B reduces self-reported pain and stress 
among chronic pain patients. The primary endpoints include HRV coherence, pain (Brief Pain Inventory or 
BPI), and stress (Perceived Stress Scale or PSS).    
 
Furthermore, chronic stress is associated with disrupted circadian rest/activity rhythms and domains of quality 
of life (QoL) including fatigue, insomnia, and reduced physical and social functioning.62,[ADDRESS_775554]/activity rhythms and these QoL domains among pain patients. We are also interested in assessing the effects of HRV -B on 
cognitive function in pain patients. Thus, our secondary exploratory objectives are to determine if HRV -B: 
(1) improves sleep and rest/activity rhythms; (2) alleviates self-reported fatigue and depression; and (3) 
improves cognitive function (reaction time, attention). Circadian endpoints will be measured as actigraphic parameters of sleep (e.g., duration, efficiency), and rest/activity (e.g., dichotomy index, interdaily stability), and 
with the Insomnia Symptom Questionnaire (ISQ); fatigue will be assessed using the Multi -Dimensional Fatigue 
Inventory (MFI), which assesses general physical and mental fatigue and motivation. Depression will be assessed via the Beck Depression Inventory II (BDI-II). Cognitive function will be measured w ith a cognitive 
battery comprised of the Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test (PASAT), the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT), and the Psychomotor Vigilance Test (PVT).     
2.0  STUDY  DESIGN AND METHODS  
 
Overview . The proposed i ntervention  will use a previously approved, standardized HRV -B training protocol.
44  
The primary (HRV coherence, pain, stress) and exploratory outcomes (insomnia, fatigue, depression, cognition) will be assessed at baseline, after the [ADDRESS_775555] pulse and respi[INVESTIGATOR_588844]; 
instead they will view a static, relaxing nature pi[INVESTIGATOR_457800] a computer screen. We will provide portable data-
logging devices for practicing HRV -B at home,  and sham devices . Wrist actigraphy will characterize insomnia 
via continuous, 24-hour/day personal monitoring of rest/activity rhythms at 1-week intervals coinciding with the 
baseline, post-training, and 8-week follow -up assessments  only.58,67-[ADDRESS_775556]-training booster /assessment, and [ADDRESS_775557] of HRV -B on coherence and other 
HRV variables will be analy zed using linear mixed models for repeated measures data from sequential time 
assessments, and a between-subjects factor to evaluate the intervention after adjusting for potential confounding factors (e.g., age, standard therapy, medications, co-morbid dis ease). Baseline relationships 
between HRV coherence and endpoints will be examined using multiple regression models. Few studies have 
examined the multivariate relationship between pain, autonomic dysfunction, stress, depression, sleep, 
rest/activity rhythms, fatigue, and cognition. Path analyses will be used to model interrelationships between 
HRV -B, primary and exploratory outcomes, and behavioral or social factors that facilitate the persistence of 
HRV coherence and pain management effectiveness.  
 
2.1  Study Population and Recruitment  
 
Subjects from the DVAMC Pain Clinic  who are: English literate, ≥18 years old, of any race, ethnicity, or sex 
meeting inclusion and exclusion criteria will be recruited. An additional inclusion criterion is that the patient reports having chronic pain as defined by [CONTACT_588881]. Our initial recruitment effort will target 
patients in the Dorn VAMC Pain Clinic . The Pain C linic runs an active Outpatient Interdisciplinary Pain 
Program, which consists of weekly sessions of Nursing Education, Nurse Triage, Behavioral Medicine (ACT, or 
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy), Physical Therapy, Pharmacy Education, Biofeedback, and Acupuncture. This patient population is appropriate for the proposed HRV -B intervention. If our accrual 
milestones are lagging recruitment goals, we will expand our search for eligible patients to include the Rehabilitative Medicine, Rheumatology , or Primary Care departments at the DVAMC . Our approved poster 
(Section 2.1) will be used to advertise the study at the DVAMC, the Columbia Veterans Center, the University 
of South Carolina Veterans Association office, or similar Veteran venues . Permission from local offices will be 
obtained prior to posting the advertisement.    
Inclusion criteri a for the Pain Clinic includes patients with: chronic, non-malignant, axial neuromusculoskeletal 
pain (e.g., osteoarthritis, degenerative discs or joints, scoliosis, spi[INVESTIGATOR_16078], spondylolisthesis, compression 
fractures, or other musculoskeletal conditions with primarily nociceptive pain, ICD -9: 715.x, 721.x, 722.x, 723.x, 
724.x, 729.x, 733.x, 738.x, 756.x). A Recruitment Coordinator  will be responsible for screening and applying 
inclusion and exclusion criteria to potential research subjects. 
 
We will exclude patients who are:  not appropriate for the intervention from a safety standpoint; have a 
condition that can bias HRV measures ; or those not able to cognitively complete the protocol . We will exclude 
patients with: a) history of arrhythmias requiring medication and/or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], including supraventricular tachycardia or atrial arrhythmias (e.g., atrial fibrillation); b) patients with a pacemaker or automatic implantable 
cardioverter -defibrillator; c) history of an acute coronary syndrome, revascularization, thrombolytic or other 
therapy related to ischemic heart disease; d) uncontrolled hypertension (systolic blood pressure <140 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure <90 mmHg), although pa tients with well -controlled hypertension (no change in 
medications for 6 months) will not be excluded; e) history of heart transplant or cardiovascular surgery within 1 year; f) patients receiving beta-adrenergic antagonists; g) patients receiving non-dihy dropyridine calcium 
channel blockers; h) patients receiving an antagonist of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system are eligible if 
their medication profile is stable; i) patients with [LOCATION_001] Heart Association class 3 or 4 congestive heart failure; j) history of seizure disorder or use of antiseizure or anticonvulsant medication; k) cognitive impairment 
(e.g., dementia), or a history of acquired neurocognitive deficit, or central nervous system or neurological 
 
Version 12, 15 May 2020, with Amendment 12   disorder (e.g., Gulf War Syndrome); l) moderate or severe head injury or stroke; m) evidence of active 
substance abuse or dependence (alcohol or tobacco use will not be an exclusion, patients will be asked to 
report their use via questionnaire); n) life history of bipolar, psychotic, panic or obses sive-compulsive disorder 
(history of depression will not be an exclusion) ; o) previous experience with HRV biofeedback . Eighty 
participants will be recruited into the study. All participants will be Veterans  being treated at the DVAMC . 
 
Recruitment will follow a multi-step process of: 1.) obtaining a HIPPA wavier to identify active patients who are 
eligible for the study based on inclusion and exclusion criteria; 2.) informing potential participants of the nature 
of the study by [CONTACT_31711], and excludin g those who decline from the potential participant list; 3.) for those who do 
not decline, making a follow -up telephone call to ascertain interest in study, and if the patient expresses 
interest in the study; 4.) screening them during the same telephone call for chronic pain and any other 
inclusions and exclusions not ascertained from the medical record; and 5.) obtaining informed consent from 
patients eligible and willing to participate. The PIs will obtain a HIPPA wavier to access the docket of patients 
with a new or current pain diagnosis (within 6 months). This list will be narrowed to eligible patients based on 
medical record review. A staff recruitment coordinator will be responsible for patient screening and recruitment.  
 
Patient contact [CONTACT_588882], and each patient will receive a 
packet of information about the study that includes a cover letter from the DVAMC Pain Clinic Director co-
signed by [CONTACT_45210], and a study brochure. The letter and broc hure will briefly describe: the nature of this 
study in lay terms, the extent of participation, confidentiality requirements, and contact [CONTACT_588883]. The letter will be written at no more than a sixth grade reading l evel using plain 
language. The letter will contain a coded, pre-addressed, postage-paid envelope that provides a ‘no contact’ 
response. The letter will also state that if a negative response is not received by [CONTACT_588884], 
then a recruitment specialist will contact [CONTACT_588885].  
Patients returning postcards who decline further contact [CONTACT_588886].  As an 
alternative, potentially eligible patients will be referred to a study coordinator by [CONTACT_588887]. A study brochure has been developed to provide information about the study to 
patients in the Pain Clinic. It may be provided to potentially eligible pati ents by [CONTACT_588888].  The 
study brochure was developed based on information in the consent form, and it is presented in Appendix VI. A 
poster that will be used to advertise the study  is presented below.  
 
Version 12, [ADDRESS_775558] in the study and 
perform the chronic pain eligibility screening (Pain 
Screening Questionnaire, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Center for Quality Aging, Nashville, 
TN). The pain screening instrument assesses pain 
using these questions: 1.) Do you have pain 
anywhere right now? 2.) Does pain ever keep you 
from sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_21693]? 3.) Does your pain ever keep 
you from participating in activities/doing things you enjoy? 4.) Do you have pain ever y day? Chronic pain 
is present if the patient answers yes to questions 1 -3, 
or to question 4 alone. During the study, patients will be asked to self-report the duration of their chronic 
pain. In addition, the patient’s medical record will be 
examined (via the CPRS) to determine the duration of 
time between their first pain clinic appointment and 
enrollment in the study. These variables will be 
included as covariates in the data analysis. Once 
enrolled in the study, we will record the pain 
treatments received by [CONTACT_588889].    
 
2.[ADDRESS_775559] in participation; scheduled at a mutually agreed upon date and time.  
Study staff will meet participants at the DVAMC in order to obtain informed consent, conduct an interview to 
include baseline ascertainment of primary outcomes, and initiate bas eline actigraphy.  Participants will receive 
a $30 reimbursement for each of the sessions they attend. A total of 10 sessions is planned: baseline (pre -
training), six weekly training sessions, post-training evaluation, a ‘booster session’ [ADDRESS_775560]-treatment follow -up session (4 weeks after the booster session) for a total of 10 sessions . 
(= $300 for protocol completion, Figure 7) . Patients attending the DVAMC Pain Clinic will be recruited over ~36 
months of the 48 month period funding for randomization to an active HRV -B (n=40) or sham (n=40) protocol. 
Given the purpose of the study (pain and stress reduction) and the accessibility of chronic non- malignant 
neuromusculoskeletal pain patients, we anticipate a recruitm ent rate of ~75%. Research personnel will 
annotate each participant’s CPRS medical record that the Veteran has enrolled in this research. Participants 
will be requested not to change their ongoing pain treatment for the duration of the study unless it is urgently 
indicated. The Veteran’s pain clinical provider will be advised to forego changes in the Veteran’s pain treatment 

 
Version 12, 15 May 2020, with Amendment 12   plan during the Veteran’s participation in the study unless a change in the pain treatment plan is imperative. 
Determination of the need to change the pain treatment plan will be made by [CONTACT_588890] ( [CONTACT_588914] ) 
or his designee.  When a change in pain treatment is made, the participant will remain in the study and 
specifics of the change in treatment will be recorded for later evaluation in the statistical analysis . Non-
participants will be asked to provide the following information: age, race/ethnicity, education, sex, 
and pain rating. This information will be compared among participants and non-participants to 
assess potential selection bias. Reasons for 
nonparticipation or noncompliance will be 
summarized and we will evaluate whether this 
inform ation may suggest selection bias and 
protocol modifications i n future research. The 
Rehabilitative Medicine and Rheumatology departments at the DVAMC will serve as 
alternative recruitment sites, if needed, to expand 
the pool of eligible patients. The study brochure 
and poster may be used to provide information 
about the study to patients attending these 
clinics. A project schedule is presented in Table 
2. A subject sign-in sheet for tracking site visits  is 
presented below . A list of frequently asked questions with answers is presented in Appendix VI.  
  
Figure 7. Intervention Timeline  
Booster  
 
Version 12, 15 May 2020, with Amendment 12    
 
 
Baseline HRV Assessment. Resting physiological measures to be recorded for 20 minutes at baseline. We will 
use our autonomic testing system (budgeted start-up equipment) to precisely determine HRV at the four  time 
periods (pre -testing, post-testing, booster, 8-week follow -up). Testing will be performed in a standardized, 
recognized, and quantified manner that is non-invasive. By [CONTACT_588891] a power spectrum of the inter -beat intervals in synchrony with respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516], it is possible to detect 
when a specific respi[INVESTIGATOR_588845], which defines the 
Table 2.  Project Schedule  
Project Month  1-[ADDRESS_775561] and Research & Development 
Committee approvals  X     
Hire Research Associate (Project Coordinator) and Graduate 
Research Assistant  X     
Finalize clinical protocol for HRV -B and sham treatments, subject 
recruitment and retention, actigraphic data collection, and database 
development, validation and quality control  X     
Purchase equipment and supplies for data collection and storage  X     
Data management and quality control review  X     
Initiate recruitment, data collection, and database development   X    
Continue and complete subject enrollment   X X X  
Complete database; Data management and quality control review     X  
Perform statistical data analyses     X  
Data management and quality control review      X 
Prepare and submit manuscripts for publication      X 
 
Version 12, [ADDRESS_775562] HRV in the LF band. 
Cardiovagal (parasympathetic) function is  monitored and HRV is derived using heart rate response to deep 
breathing and transformation of tachygram recordings, procedures that the investigator (JPG) is experienced with, using easy -to-perform, and time efficient measurements. Heart rate will be recorded via dry electrode 
wrist straps and respi[INVESTIGATOR_588846] a Pi[INVESTIGATOR_401038] -respi[INVESTIGATOR_588847]. Software integrated into the 
HRV physiological monitoring system will run on a laptop computer and be used to de-artifact raw data and 
calculate the FFT power spectrum of HRV for each patient (Appendix  I). This will provide data for frequency - 
(HRV coherence, VLF, LF, HF power, peak frequency, peak frequency power) and time-domain HRV 
measures (heart rate mean and standard deviation, NN50, pNN50, R MSSD).  HRV coherence is defined in 
accordance with consensus guidelines.
27,44,47,48  It is e stimated by [CONTACT_588892].  
Random Assignment to the 6-week HRV -B treatment or sham intervention group will occur following the 
baseline assessment. We will use a permuted block randomization procedure, with a block size of 4 and no 
stratification. Thus, for example, assuming 20 patients are to be assigned either to Sham (S) or Biofeedback, 
there would be 20 blocks of 4 patients, and two patients will be assigned each to the (S) treatment and two to 
the biofeedback by [CONTACT_588893] . 
The order of the blocks will be randomly generated. The treatment assignment will be determined before any patient is enrolled into the study and the documentation and assignment of patients will be kept confidential 
and known only to the PI (JPG). Only the Biofeedback professional, who delivers the treatment, will know the 
treatment status of the participant; other study personnel will be blinded to treatment status.  
 
HRV -B Training. HRV -B training will follow our previously established, standardized protocol that is consistent 
with recommendations of the Biofeedback Certification Institute of America (BCIA), consisting of a 15-minute 
resting period that includes HRV recording, and a 25-minute biofeedback training and coaching or sham 
period. The resting periods are the same for both the HRV -B treatment and sham groups. Participants will be 
affixed with HRV monitoring equipment and will be instructed to sit quietly for 15 minutes in a relaxed posture, 
viewing a static nature scene on a computer monitor, without any instruction, coaching or biofeedback . 
Coaching or instruction will start after the 15-minute resting period. Patients in the sham condition will be asked 
to ‘just relax’ or ‘take it easy’ for the remainder of the 25-minute session. Patients in the HRV -B group will be 
coached on how to achieve HRV coherence.  
 HRV -B training is conducted in an interactive manner using a computerized system to monitor and display the 
individuals ’ HRV patterns in real time while their heart rate, measured as blood volume pulse (BVP), is 
recorded with a fingertip photoplethysmograph (PPG). Visual HRV feedback (either a quantitative display or 
animated challenge games) is provided as participants pr actice attention focusing, resonant frequency 
breathing, imagery, and the induction of positive emotion. The resulting changes in HRV patterns are readily 
observed by [CONTACT_423]. The visual feedback enables associations to be formed between these techniques and HRV patterns indicative of higher vagal parasympathetic output. Before HRV -B training, the biofeedback 
trainer discusses individual issues and the training goals of the participant.  The physiological connection between resonant frequency breathing and heart rate is introduced. This is reinforced with corrective breathing 
instruction and help finding the resonant fr equency (~6 respi[INVESTIGATOR_1520]/min). Dual monitors also display the HRV 
power spectrum in real -time so that the participant can visualize the i mpact  of proper breathing on the 
coherence peak a 0.10 Hz. Positive emotion and interactive visual images are then introduced. This interactive 
process allows the participant to customize a sustainable system, with occasional shifts back to the power 
spec trum screen to observe the 0.10 Hz HRV peak.  During the recording period after coaching, subjects view 
a static nature scene on the computer while their heart rate is measured with the plethysmograph and recorded 
(Appendix  III). 
 
Home Practice. The biofeedback coach will instruct participants in both groups to practice their training at 
home a minimum of [ADDRESS_775563] their daily home practice. 
Home practice self-report data will be incorporated into the analysis to examine the potential dose-response 
 
Version 12, 15 May 2020, with Amendment 12   effects of home practice. Information will be solicited in the questionnaire regarding the factors that contributed 
to or detracted from home practice for inclusion in the analysis. One goal of this interventi on is to 
spontaneously and consistently achieve HRV coherence on demand outside a clinical environment. Therefore, participants will be provided with a portable colorimetric finger PPG (emWave® hand held personal stress 
reliever; dimensions similar to a cell phone; weight: 2.2 ounces) for home practice and use between weekly 
HRV -B training sessions. Home HRV -B practice period data from the device can be compared to self-report 
and further analyzed with regard to the outcomes  (see Appendix  III, IV).    
 
Intervention Integrity . Several procedures will be used to evaluate treatment integrity. The intervention will 
follow the HRV -B protocol adopted by [CONTACT_588894], and BCIA certification for HRV -B or its equivalent training will 
be required for trainers in this study. Protocol compliance integrity will be monitored and supervised by 
[CONTACT_361382] . Burch  , and via communication between them and the certified biofeedback professional 
(Jane Areve). We will ask patients about whether they thought they were enrolled in the active or control 
condition. We will then summarize these data along with the number and duration of participant visits over time, and compare these values between the sham and treatment groups. Contrasts between the sham and treatment condition for outcomes measured at baseline, post- treatment, booster, and at the 8-week follow -up 
will allow us to evaluate the accuracy and delivery of the intervention. Measures of HRV coherence will allow for direct, quantitative assessment of participant performance and receipt of intervention. 
 
Sham Treatment. To control for the laboratory environment or other placebo effects, participants assigned to 
the sham HRV -B training group will be scheduled by [CONTACT_588895] a weekly cl inic meeting 
during the [ADDRESS_775564] their heart rate, respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516], blood 
pressure and blood pressure volume recorded during a 15- minute resting period, but no active training or 
coaching will be provided.  
 During the ~ [ADDRESS_775565], but the recording input is switched off so no information 
on heart rate is delivered to the recording equipment. No active biofeedback coaching is delivered regarding 
resonant frequency breathing, imagery, or positive emotion induction. The Biofeedback professional uses 
passive relaxation statements such as: ‘try to relax’ and ‘please sit quietly’ during the coaching period. During 
the passive 15-minute HRV recording period after the coaching session, the recording input of the PPG is 
switched on, and the subjects view the same static relaxing nature scene on the monitor as is presented to the 
HRV -B group. F or home  practice, participants in the sham group are given a ‘squeeze stress ball’ and asked 
to use it throughout the normal activities of the day. Subjects in the sham group will be asked to self-report the frequency and duration of squeeze ball use.     
 
Primary & Exploratory Questionnaire Outcomes . In addition to HRV coherence, the primary outcomes (pain, 
stress), as well as the related exploratory measure, will be assessed at baseline, after the 6-week intervention 
period, during the booster session an d at the follow -up session. Validated instruments will be used to 
administer a structured questionnaire focusing on: 1). pain (BPI64,65) and stress (PSS66); 2). the exploratory 
outcomes (sleep, fatigue, depressive symptoms, cognitive performance); 3). well -being (copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], social 
support); 4). lifestyle (c hronotype, social jetlag); 5). socio-demographic and personal characteristics (age, 
height, weight, education, income, physical activity; 6). occupation (current or previous job title, combat history, 
shift work); 7). supplemental use of pain medications including over the counter anti -inflammatory agents [e.g., 
NSAIDs], as well as alcohol and tobacco consumption; and 8). whether they have a pending worker 
compensation claim or personal injury litigation related to their pain or other symptoms . Some items from the 
medical record (e.g., age, body weight) will be compared with questionnaire data to assess reporting validity. 
Questions focusing on the duration of symptoms (e.g., sleep disruption, fatigue) will be integrated into the 
study instrument (e.g., the duration of: sadness, fatigue, stress, or sleep disruption). Co-morbid diagnoses of:  
hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, stroke, obstructive sleep apnea or other sleep disorders, or 
 
Version 12, [ADDRESS_775566]-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and use of prescription medications (hypnotics and other sleep aids, 
antidepressants, anxiolytics), and will be assessed by [CONTACT_588896] a HIPAA release of medical 
information as part of the informed consent process. Questionnaires are presented in Appendix V.    
 
Pain. The BPI [INVESTIGATOR_588848] (WHO) specificall y for use among cancer 
patients, and it has since been widely adopted for assessment of clinical pain and pain treatment effectiveness 
in a variety of clinical and research settings.64,70 Among the barriers that result in under treatment of cancer 
pain, one key consideration is the adequate pain characterization. The BPI [INVESTIGATOR_588849] (sensory dimension) and the interference of pain in the patient's life (reactive 
dimension). The BPI [INVESTIGATOR_588850], and it 
has been applied to studies of clinical  pain assessment, as well as epi[INVESTIGATOR_588851].64,70  
 
Pain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS). The PCS was developed to facilitate research on the mechanisms by  
[CONTACT_588897]. I tems on the PCS  were drawn from previous experimental 
and clinical research on catastrophic thinking in relation to pain experience (http://sullivan-
painresearch.mcgill.ca/) .[ADDRESS_775567] painful  experiences, and to indicate the degree to which they experienced each 
of 13 thoughts or feelings when experiencing pain, on 5-point scales with the end points (0) not at all and (4) al l 
the time. The PCS yields a total score and three subscale scores assessing rumination, magnification and 
helplessness. The PCS has been shown to have adequate to excellent internal consistency (coefficient alphas: 
total PCS = .87, rumination = .87, magnification = .66, and helplessness = .78).[ADDRESS_775568] widely used psychological instrument for measuring the perception of stress. The 
original v ersion, published in 1983,72,73 has been refined over the years into its current form and is available a 
public domain instrument. It measures the degree to which situations in one’s life are appraised as stressful. Items were designed to tap how unpredictable, uncontrollable, and overloaded respondents find their lives. The 
items are easy to understand and general in nature, and hence relatively free of content specific to any 
subpopulation group. PSS scores are correlated with self-reported health, health behaviors, smoking status, and help seeking  behavior.
[ADDRESS_775569] validity and reliability.66  
 
Sleep & Rest/Activity Rhythms .  Wrist actigraphy is a non-invasive, quantitative, and validated method that will 
provide a primary means by [CONTACT_588898]. Weekly actigraphic monitoring 
will be performed once each at baseline, post-treatment, and at the 8-weeek follow -up using a standardized 
protocol.14,74-76 Actiwatch -Spectrum monitors (with built-in ambient multiple spectrum light sensor, event 
marker, digital watch, and off-wrist detection capability, Respi[INVESTIGATOR_5770], Bend, OR) will be used in this study. They 
are similar in size, weight, and appearance to a wr istwatch. Monitors will be worn on the non-dominant wrist, 
recording activity and light exposures at 1-minute intervals. Subjects will wear the monitors 24-hours per day 
for three 1-week intervals (baseline, post-treatment, and at the 8-week  post-training follow -up). Participants will 
be asked to follow their usual sleep-wake schedules and maintain a log of when they go to bed and awaken on 
days when they wear the actiwatch. At the end of each 1-week actigraphic monitoring period, a study 
technician will retrieve the monitor from the subject during their weekly training session. Alternatively, 
participants can mail the actiwatch to research staff using a pre-labeled, postage-paid envelope that will be 
provided to the participants, or a study investigator can retrieve the monitor from the individual’s residence. 
These methods have all been successfully implemented in previous studies among DVAMC patients and elsewhere.
14,[ADDRESS_775570]/activity rhythm assessment.79 A weekly average of sleep metrics (latency, 
duration, efficiency, fragmentation, wake time after sleep onset [WASO], daytime nap duration) will be 
quantified using the manufacturer’s accompanying software (Appendix  II).  
 
Version 12, 15 May 2020, with Amendment 12   Sleep disruption will be ascertained using the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2272] (PSQI) , which is a self-
administered 19 question instrument, categorized into 7 components, that assesses sleep duration as well as 
latency, frequency, and severity of sleep problems with a possible range of 0-21. The 7 components are 
subjective sleep quality, sleep latency, sleep duration, habitual sleep efficiency, sleep disturbances, use of sleep medication, and daytime dysfuncti on. The Cronbach’s alpha coefficient for all component scores was 
0.[ADDRESS_775571] validity. A cut -point score of 5.0 indicated a sensitivity of 90% and a specificity 
of 87% in identifying those with a sleep disorder .
[ADDRESS_775572] 
actigraphy measures. We will augment the use of this instrument by [CONTACT_588899] (with a HIPAA release) to identify diagnostic codes for insomnia or other sleep disorders.     
 
Using actigraphy data, insomnia may be defined using the following cut-off values: sleep onset latency > 12 
minutes, total sleep time < 440 minutes, WASO >25 minutes, sleep efficiency < 92%, or the number of 5 -minute 
wake epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]  ≥2.[ADDRESS_775573]/activity rhythms will be characterized via 
previously described non-parametric (interdaily stability, intradaily variability, relative amplitude, 24-hour autocorrelation coefficient) and cosinor statistics (acrophase, mesor, amplitude, amplitude/mesor ratio, 
goodness of fit).
67,68,81 Ambient light exposures collected via actiwatches will be summarized using the same 
descriptive, cosinor, and nonparametric statistics.  
 
Ambulatory Heart Rate Variability Monitoring. In a limited number of participants, a 
convenience sample (n=15-30 total) will be asked to wear a data-logging ambulatory 
heart rate monitor (Firstbeat Bodyguard 2; Firstbeat Technologies , Jyväskylä , 
Finland) for two 1-week periods that coincide with data collection for the wrist activity 
monitor  (i.e., at baseline and during the post-training week ). The heart monitor is 
lightweight, portable and noninvasive (see photo). It attaches to the skin with a snap 
electrode and does not require a belt around the body. There is no need for the 
participant to operate or adjust the monitor in any way, they only need to wear it. Note: it should be removed 
when taking a shower, or while bathing or swimming (extra skin patch electrodes will be provided to re-attach 
the device). P articipants will wear this device [ADDRESS_775574]  allows for time - (mean and std 
HR, NN50, pNN50, and RMSSD) and frequency -domain variables (VLF, LF and HF power, peak frequency, 
peak frequency power, and coherence)  to be generated for comparison with actigraphic sleep data and other 
exploratory research. Research staff will hand out and collect bot the heart rates  and wrist actigraphy  monitors 
at the same time for each participant. D ata are downloaded for processing with a cable attached to the 
computer’s USB port, and the battery is recharged in a similar  manner . Participants  will be provided with 
written and verbal  instructions on appropriate use (no showering, bathing or swimming) and with extra leads for 
re-attaching the monitor after showering, etc.     
 
Depression & Fatigue will be ascertained using several valid instruments. Fatigue will be assessed using the 
Multi -Dimensional Fatigue Inventory (MFI), comprised of 20 questions that assess general, physical, and 
mental fatigue, and reduced motivation and activity. It also has good internal consistency (Cronbach alpha: >0.75) and high convergent validity confirmed via strong correlations with several other validated 
instruments.
82,83  Depressive symptoms will be ascertained using the Beck Depression Inventory II (BDI-II).84-86  
The BDI-II is a 21-item self-report instrument that asses the existence and severity of symptoms of depression 
as listed in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 
Fourth Edition (DSM -IV).  The BDI-II has excellent clinical sensitivity (Cronbach alpha: 0.92).[ADDRESS_775575] periods: the Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test (PASAT), the Hopkins Verbal 
Learning Test (HVLT) , and the Psychomotor Vigilance Test (PVT).  These PASAT and HVLT  have alternate 
forms and the PVT has no significant practice effect. This battery of assessment instruments has sufficient 
reliability to detect changes over repeated test sessions.  Brief descriptions are provided below. 
 
Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test (PASAT) . The PASAT is a measure of cognitive function that assesses 
auditory information processing speed and flexibility, as well as calculation ability. It was developed in [ADDRESS_775576] of 12 semantically categorized words  and is asked to recall as many as he/she can. 
This process is repeated twice more, and the score is equal to the total number of words recalled across all 
three trials. The test takes approximately [ADDRESS_775577].  
 
Psychomotor Vigilance Task (PVT) . The psychomotor vigilance task (PVT) is a widely used and well -validated 
test of sustained-attention and reaction-time that measures the speed with which subjects respond to a visual stimulus.  The PVT correlates with lowered alertness, slower problem -solving, decreased psycho- motor skills, 
and increased rate of false responding. The PVT is popular because of its ease of administration and scoring, simple metrics, and convergent validity.  The PVT is a simple task where the subject presses a button as soon 
as a light appears on the computer screen. The light will turn on randomly every few seconds for [ADDRESS_775578].
 
 
Lifestyle and sociodemographic characteristics  will be assessed using instruments developed in our previous 
studies among Veterans.44,77,88  Chronotype refers to the self-reported characterization of individuals with 
inherent morning or evening preference (or neither).89,90 This trait has been associated with intrinsic circadian 
period,91 and the circadian timing of numerous psychophysiological processes,92-95 including sleep,96,97 arousal 
and alertness,98 mood,99 and the secretion of catecholamines ,100 and cortisol .101 The Munich Chronotype 
Questionnaire (MCTQ)102 will be used to ascertain self-reported chronotype and sleep/wake timing on free and 
work days. Disparities between chronotype and social schedules can result in chronically desynchronized 
sleep-wake timing or ‘Social Jetlag’ ,103,104 which will be quantified as the absolute difference between mid-sleep 
on weekdays and weekends, after adjusting for weekend make-up sleep.104 Other potential m odifiers of the 
HRV -B treatment that will be assessed include: social support,105 and copi[INVESTIGATOR_007].106  
 
Saliva Specimens . Saliva samples ( ~1/2 tablespoon) will be collected by [CONTACT_20908]; once at baseline, 
once at the post-treatment assessment, and another at the final follow -up visit. One ~2 mL saliva sample will 
be collected each time using the simple, noninvasive passive drool method with Oragene® DNA collection kits 
(model: OGR -500, DNA Genotek, Ontario, Canada, http://www.dnagenotek.com).[ADDRESS_775579] 
ethanol precipi[INVESTIGATOR_588852]. The median yield for a 2 mL sample using this 
device is 110 µg DNA. Good quality DNA will be defined as a 260/[ADDRESS_775580]. Another ~2 mL native saliva sample (without added reagent)  will be 
collected  for recovery of proteins or peptides using the same collection procedure.    
 
The samples will be archived in frozen storage for future research. Samples will be coded with a unique 
number that will not include participant’s name [CONTACT_354527]. O nly the Principal 
Investigators , or a study Co-Investigator, will have access to the code that links the sample to their identity. 
The samples will be stored indefinitely in a -80C freezer for future research purposes at the DVAMC  Building 
9A, basement. Analyses that are under consideration include the study  of genes involved in pain or other study 
endpoints, or responses to the HRV -B treatment.  This may include candidate gene or genomic sequences, 
gene expression, or genetic modifi cations (e.g., epi[INVESTIGATOR_14364], sequencing). Analyses may also include 
immune system  markers , hormones, or other compounds or microbes (e.g., bacteria)  in saliva. Some sample 
analyses will be performed in the laboratory of [CONTACT_588915],  [ADDRESS_775581], Hopkinton, MA [ZIP_CODE]. These measures will be for exploratory research and not for clinical use. 
Therefore, individual results will not be provided to participants . Use of these samples for future research is 
noted on the consent document. 
 
2.3  Data Analysi s Plan  
 
Statistical Power & Sample Size. Preliminary data for HRV coherence and the pain (BPI), and stress (PSS) 
scales from our HRV -B pi[INVESTIGATOR_588853] (HRV coherence, pain rating, negative emotion, activity 
limitation, perceived stress  scale). Two-sided, two sample t-tests were used for the statistical power 
calculations. The analysis for the proposed study will use more sophisticated methods that tend to reduce 
variance in the dependent variables and thus increase power, thus what is presented here is likely 
conservative. An overall significance level of 0.05 was used with correction for multiple testing via the 
Bonferroni method for the 5 outcomes (adjusted significance level = 0.01; 0.05/5).  Our pi[INVESTIGATOR_588854], no statistical differences were observed between treatment groups for any outcome. The 
detectable effect differences between treatment and sham groups with corresponding standard deviations are 
presented in Table 3. We assumed equal variances in the differ ences between pre- and post-treatment 
comparisons for both groups. A sample size of [ADDRESS_775582] 84.5% to detect the expected effect differences between treatment groups, and groups sizes of 40 patients will provide statistical power exceeding 95% for comparisons between treatment groups for each outcome. Thus, a 
sample size of 40 patients per group would achieve ample statistical power even with retentions on of 55-60%. 
 
Table 3. Estimated Power for Differenc es Between HRV -B Treatment & Sham Interventions  
Sample 
Size per 
Group  Negative Emotion 
(4.5±10; 
15.5±10)*  Activity limitation  
(4± 9.5; 14± 9.5)*  Pain Rating 
(1.8±5.0; 
10±5.0)*  Perceived Stress  
(-1.2±4.5; 
4±4.5)*  HRV 
Coherence 
(-0.03±0.15; 
-0.20±0.15)*  
22 82.3%  78.1%  99.6%  86.5%  84.9%  
25 88.1%  84.5%  99.9%  91.4%  90.2%  
30 94.1%  91.7%  99.9%  96.2%  95.4%  
40 98.7%  97.9%  99.9%  99.3%  99.1%  
*Average pre -post change ± SD in the control group; and average pre -post change ± SD in the treatment group, respectively  
 
Data Quality Control . Data collected by [CONTACT_588900]. Analysis and interpretation of data files also will be conducted without reference to any 
identifying information. Questionnaire data will be labeled using the participant’s identification number and will 
not have personal identifying information anywhere on the form . Once collated, coded questionnaire data will 
 
Version 12, [ADDRESS_775583] protected computer for further processing and analysis. We will use the double key 
entry method of data verification (or equivalent) to help ensure data entry accuracy.  
 
Data Security . Multiple steps will be taken to ensure complete confidentiality of the study data, and 
confidentiality will be maintained to the fullest extent allowed by [CONTACT_2371]. Data files will be stripped of personal 
identifiers and replaced with coded participant identification numbers that will be used to link data files from 
multiple sources (e.g., questionnaires). Once collated, coded data will be entered into encrypted VA 
workstation computers for further analysis and processing.  Data files will be stored on an access -controlled 
data server (network access to the server is by [CONTACT_588901] a limited set of study personnel : Building 106, 
Room E111; \\v07.med.va.gov \cms\vhacms \vhacmsburchj  for [CONTACT_588916] .. To minimize risk of loss of 
confidentiality, only authorized personnel will have access to research data. Participants will be informed that 
the local IRB may review de-identified or identified study data. The key linking participant identifiers to the 
coded data will be maintained by [CONTACT_588902] [INVESTIGATOR_2993] a locked file cabinet at the DVAM C. Hard copy records with 
patient identifiers (e.g., signed consent forms) will be maintained in the Contact [CONTACT_976]’s office at the DVAMC in a locked file cabinet, accessible only to authorized study personnel  (Building 106, Hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_588855]  E111A ). Consultants will not have access to any identifiable data. Data 
analyses will be performed at the DVAMC using coded data with personal identifiers removed, using coded 
data via an approved data use agreement with the Department of Epi[INVESTIGATOR_69637], Arnold 
School of Public Health, University of South Carolina, or using coded data without identifiers via a secure VA 
Virtual Private Network (VPN) workspace (see below) . All study personnel will maintain current VA training 
requirements (e.g., data securi ty, human subjects protection). If an investigator or research staff member 
terminates their work on the project, their access to the data will become restricted, and the Information 
Security Officer will be notified. Data will be maintained in a secure manner until it is no longer needed or until 
its maintenance is no longer legally required. Data destruction will be performed by [CONTACT_588903].  
 
VINCI Workspace. The VA Informatics and Computing Infrastructure (VINCI) is a Department of Veterans 
Affairs (VA) Health Ser vices Research & Development (HSR&D) resource center that provides a secure, 
central analytic platform for performing research and supporting clinical operations activities. It is a partnership 
between the VA Office of Information Technology (OI&T) and the Veterans Health Administration Office of 
Research and Development (VHA ORD). VINCI includes a cluster of servers for securely hosting suites of 
databases integrated from select national VA data sources , as well as statistical software packages for data 
analysis. VINCI servers for data, applications and virtual sessions are physically located at the VA Austin Information Technology Center (AITC) in Austin, [LOCATION_007]. This secure enclave with 105 high-performance 
servers and 1.5 petaby[CONTACT_92525]-speed data stor age has multiple layers of security and disaster recovery to 
prevent data loss. To ensure the protection of Veteran data, VINCI maintains compliance with the guidelines 
set forth by [CONTACT_92526] (VHA) Handbook 1200.12, Use of Data and Data Repositories in 
VHA Research, and other applicable VA and VHA policies and regulations. In addition, VINCI has undergone 
security certification activities in support of obtaining an Authorization to Operate (ATO). Access to VINCI 
resources are approved i n accordance with the requirements of National Data Systems (NDS), VHA Handbook 
1200.12, Use of Data and Data Repositories in VHA Research, and all other applicable VA and VHA policies 
and regulations. All data transferred from VINCI is subject to audit for compliance. 
 VA-credentialed investigators are granted access to study -specific data along with tools for analysis and 
reporting in the secure, virtual working environment through a certified VHA network computer within the VA.  If not working within a V A or VHA hosted office environment containing VA network access, researchers may 
apply for and then access VINCI through an approved VPN and Remote Desktop application. The remote computing environment enables data analysis to be performed directly on VINC I servers, offering a number of 
advantages: uniform security standards for access; a common point of entry for all investigators who use the data; tools for analysis and reporting; tighter and more consistent control of data quality; and the ability to 
standardize and update terminology and format as technology and methodology improve. Software used for 
 
Version 12, [ADDRESS_775584] Control Schedule 10-1 (RCS 10 -1). 
Data transferred to VINCI servers will be coded using a participant ID number as described above (see Data 
Security section) so that none of the data will be personally identifiable. Upon completion of the research 
project, the study Principal Investigators in conjunction with the VA Information Security Officer (ISO), and in 
accordance with VA policy, will ensure that, study data will be returned to the DVAMC . The study Principal 
Investigators have the responsibility for security of study data. Only explicitly authorized study personnel will 
have access to project data. When study personnel are no longer part of the research team, the study Principal Investigators will amend the data access request to terminate that person’s access to all study data and notify 
the VA Information Security Officer of such action. VINCI data managers and VA OI&T personnel not under the 
purview of the study Principal Investigators control the servers, network, processors, firewall and software in the VINCI environment, including access rights granted to study personnel. Study specific data stored on 
VINCI servers will be located at the Austin Information Technology Center, [ADDRESS_775585]., Austin, TX [ZIP_CODE]. The specific server where the data are stored within the VINCI environment will be chosen by 
[CONTACT_92531]. The server name [CONTACT_588911].  
 
Statistical Analyses . Analysis and interpretation of data files will be conducted without reference to 
any personal identifyi ng information. We will begin all analyses with an inspection of all variables for 
completeness, any missing values will be tabulated and range checks will be used to identify observations that 
need to be validated. Once the data set has been finalized, a locked version will be created to use for all 
analyses. Descriptive statistics will be applied to questionnaire scores, their potential predictors, demographic and lifestyle variables to evaluate their characteristics and assess their general inter -relationships (e.g., via 
correlations for numeric measures, or by [CONTACT_588904]). These analyses will provide an understanding of relationships among variables and will aid in planning subsequent 
analyses. The main analyses pertaining to aims [ADDRESS_775586] effects of the treatment on the primary (HRV coherence, pain, stress), and secondary (insomnia, fatigue, depression, cognition) outcomes.   
For each of the outcomes, there will be three measurements per subject ( post-training minus pre-training, 4-
week booster minus post-training, and 8-week follow -up minus the 4-week booster assessment ). To test the 
effect of HRV -B relative to controls, we will apply linear mixed models for repeated measures data. Models will 
include the group (intervention or sham), time, and the interaction between group and time as the main 
independent variables. The effect of the intervention on the outcome could be non-linear in time, thus we will 
evaluate the inclusion of time as a nominal or ordinal variable and choose the specification that has the best fit 
in terms of the model assumptions and the BIC statistic. Covariates to be considered in the models include (but 
are not limited to: age, type and duration of usual pain treatment or medi cation, or other outcomes that may 
modify the effect (e.g., stress, pain, sleep). We will use a variable selection procedure to screen and identify all 
variables that differ among the treatment and control groups (initial selection set at p<0.15), and we w ill include 
them in the final statistical model if their inclusion alters the effect estimate for HRV- B by ≥10%.  Linear mixed 
effect models will be implemented using the PROC MIXED procedure in SAS (v9.3, SAS Institute). The conceptual model of each linear mixed model is:  
, 
where Y is the dependent variable, X is the independent variable of interest (or a vector of covariates), s i is a 
subject-specific random effect, and t represents the outcome assessment time points (baseline, follow -up). The 
β coefficients measure each independent variable’s effect. If time is included as an ordinal variable, 01 2 3 ij i j j ij j i ij Y X t Xtsββ β β ε= + + + ×++
 
Version 12, [ADDRESS_775587]-intervention time points (post-training, 
booster, 8-week  follow -up). In this situation we will use a Bonferroni adjusted alpha level = 0.005 (0.05/10), 
which results in at least 78% power for all of the outcomes with 25 per group to account for attrition (data not 
shown). 
 
We will use "intention to treat" (ITT) analyses on all subjects without regard to level of compliance. ITT analysis 
is based on the assumption that once a subject is randomized to a group, data for that subject will enter into the final analysis. ITT assumes unrelated treatment events are equally likely across groups and that outcome 
data are complete. All data from non-adherent and dropout subjects are included; therefore, ITT provides 
conservative effect estimates. ITT is most appropriate for randomized, controlled clinical trials involving lengthy 
treatment protocols when an effective treatment arrests progression of disease. Because recommendations for 
treatment of primary and secondary outcomes will likely continue to include care (i.e., controls still receive usual care), ITT analysis will better reflect what will be observed if HRV -B is introduced into clinical practice. 
This analysis answers the question: What is the effect of HRV -B on outcome measures in a situation where 
individuals range from fully compliant to non-compliant? In this pi[INVESTIGATOR_52393], however, we also are 
interested in the actual effect of HRV -B on the outcomes. In ancillary analyses, we will perform multiple 
imputations for subjects with missing data (see below). These p ost hoc  analyses will answer the question: 
What is the effect of full HRV -B training on the outcomes? This will provide a more accurate pi[INVESTIGATOR_588856] -B 
effects because it focuses only on subjects who completed the training.  
 
Missing Data. Inevitably, missing data will arise and a variety of approaches will be considered to address this 
issue. First, our integrated team will meet and discuss the hypothesized nature of the missingness 
mechanism.[ADDRESS_775588] data that are missing completely at random or missi ng at 
random (MAR) then multiple imputation (MI) procedures can be used (e.g., “PROC MI”).[ADDRESS_775589] the robustness of the estimates to the missing data 
assumption (if any). We will create a number of locked datasets (e.g., 10) with imputed val ues that will be used 
in all analyses that require MI. This will ensure that all MI analyses are based on the same imputed data. 
 
Path analysis  is a useful statistical tool for modeling how multifaceted processes combine to influence specific 
outcomes. We will apply path analysis to evaluate the direct and indirect effects of HRV -B on the pain-related 
study outcomes (pain, stress, fatigue, insomnia, depression) via changes in HRV coherence (Figure 8). This analysis will estimate the direct effect of the intervention on the post-training minus pre-training measurements 
of the study outcomes. There are three paths 
that are depi[INVESTIGATOR_588857] 8. 
The path model will determine the path 
coefficients, variance explained, and statistical significance of direct and indirect (modifier) 
effects. Modifiers may include: race, income, 
lifestyle, duration or quality of hand held stress 
reliever use,  social jetlag, family or work 
history, physical activity, major life events, copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262], or social support. Other 
paths that consider the influence of modifiers 
or confounders will be explored to determine if they improve model fit. PROC CALIS in S AS will be used; 
satisfactory model parameters will be identified using a Bentler comparative fit index >0.93. This integrated 
model with appropriate modifiers and mediators will identify variables that contribute to, or detract from, the 
treatment effect on HRV coherence and pain, stress, fatigue, depression and insomnia. The above SEM is a 
relatively simple structure with only 6 baseline parameters per outcome, thus with a sample of 60 (30 per 

 
Version 12, 15 May 2020, with Amendment 12   group) the study will have the required minimum number of obs ervations based on the 10:[ADDRESS_775590] (CPRS) , after authorization has been signed by [CONTACT_102]. 
Data collection will be specifically for the proposed research. Data collection time points for HRV and 
questionnaire will be at pre-training (T-1), post-training (T-2),  4-week post-training booster  (T-3), and 8-week  
post-training  follow -up (T-4). Baseline measurements will occur after the patient has been screened for 
eligibility, and consented. Randomization will occur after baseline assessment. All variables will be measured 
at each time point except demographics (T-1 only) , and saliva ( T-1, T-2, T-4) . Measurements will be the same 
for both the active and sham intervention groups . 
 
Potential Benefits . This study is designed to elicit relief from pain and related symptoms, although the study  it 
is an experimental  intervention and subjects may not obtain direct personal benefit. However, benefit to future 
patients is possible. Patients  will receive an acknowledgement of their time and effort in participating in the 
study and they will receive financial compensation for each assessment and training session according to the 
schedule of incentives.  The knowledge generated by [CONTACT_588905] -B on pain, stress, fatigue, sleep and quality of life for Veterans with chronic pain, and may  
inform clinical practice and programmatic standards concerning appropriate ways to assist with pain 
management, sleep disturbance and fatigue among DVAMC patients.  
 
Potential Risks . No significant physical, social, or legal risk is anticipated with this study. All  proposed 
procedures have been widely used over  a long period of time by [CONTACT_87690]/or others. HRV -B is a 
noninvasive procedure. There have been a few cases of relaxation-induced anxiety noted (i.e., with 
progressive muscle relaxation), but these effects are not associated with HRV -B or controlled breathing. Other 
negative reactions that have been associated with other modalities of biofeedback -assisted relaxation (such as  
sensation of heaviness, feelings of sadness, disturbing thoughts, or m ind wandering) are rare, mild, and brief. 
All these reactions can be prevented by [CONTACT_588906], patient 
education, and careful monitoring.  
 
Risks to confidentiality are minimal  since all data will be coded with a study ID. Study ID and patient list will be 
kept separate, and the file linking study IDs with personal identifiers will be maintained in a locked file cabinet 
of password protected electronic file in one or both of the PI’s offices. Data safety and moni toring is described  
below. 
 No adverse events were observed during  other  HRV -B studies . . Subjects will be informed that the 
experimental protocol will  be provided in addition to their treatment as usual, will not affect their usual  care, and 
no other  intervention is available as an alternative intervention at the DVAMC. Minimal risks are anticipated for 
the subjects. 
 
Protection Against Risks . Veterans seeking care at the DVAMC who meet the eligibility criteria will be recruited 
for participation according to applicable laws, regulations, guidelines, and policies protecting privacy and 
 
Version 12, 15 May 2020, with Amendment 12   confidentiality, and not until after a HIPAA Waiver of Authorization is approved by [CONTACT_4158] R&D 
Committees. Following IRB  and R&D Committee approval s, recruitment will be initiated among patients in the 
DVAMC Pain Clinic. If accrual milestones are not met, we will expand our search for eligible patients to include 
the DVAMC Rehabilitative Medicine and Rheumatology departments. 
 
A waiver for release of protected health information will be requested to obtain the name, address, phone 
number, and screening information for patients with scheduled appointments in the Pain Clinic , or 
Rehabilitative Medicine or Rheumatology  departments. The use and destruction of this data will follow the 
policies and procedures of VA privacy regulations.  After receiving the authorization, the recruitment plan 
described in Section 2.[ADDRESS_775591]-protected VA computer for further  analysis and processing.  
 If patients  exhibit excessive anxiety, research staff will check with the patient to ascertain if data collection 
needs to be temporarily discontinued or rescheduled. Adverse physical or psychological events sometimes 
occur even if they are not be directly related to the study protocol. If a participant experiences a major or mi nor 
physical or psychological adverse event while enrolled in this study, supportive measures described in the 
section of the consent form labeled ‘possible risks’ in will be implemented. The Co-PIs will be contact[CONTACT_35857]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_588858] -up care, if 
needed. .  
Adverse Event Reporting. If patients develop a severe affective disorder or psychosis, these will be considered 
a serious adverse experience. The PIs will send an adverse events report to the VA IRB as soon as they are 
apprised that an adverse event has occurred. If the VA IRB or either of the PI’s recommend that the study be 
temporarily or permanently suspended, this  action will be reported to the VA grant program officer or director. 
 
Data and Safety Monitoring. The PIs and research staff will routinely monitor the progress of the trial and the 
safety of participants. The PIs, in collaboration with study staff, will check accrual and attrition on a weekly basis. Subject eligibility forms will be completed on all participants to assure appropriate subjects  are recruited. 
None of the study procedures  are considered invasive and the risks to subjects are expected to be minimal. 
Subjects will be informed that the experimental protocol will be provided in addition to their usual  care, will not 
affect their treatment as usual, and no other intervention is available as an alternative intervention. HRV -B 
training is a simple, non-invasive procedure and no major adverse reactions to the protocol are anticipated. The proposed procedures have been widely used; no adverse events were experienced by [INVESTIGATOR_124] .Burch  in 
previous studies  using HRV -B or actigraphy . Questionnaire d ata will be collected from the participants by [CONTACT_37126]-
to-face interview  using validated instruments and questions that are similar to those that might be encountered 
in a clinical setting. Participants will be informed that if they don’t want to answer a question, they can skip it. 
An actiwatch i s similar in size, weight, and configuration as a wristwatch. Saliva collection also is simple and 
non-invasive. Saliva biospecimens will be label ed in a manner that ensures participant confidentiality  without 
personal  identifiers . The participants will be fully informed of the procedures, including notification that their  
medical records will be examined. Participants will voluntarily sign an Informed Consent document and HIPAA 
Authorization approved by [CONTACT_588907]. 
 We are planning a follow -up HRV -B session plus questionnaire and cognitive evaluation at [ADDRESS_775592]- training (Figure 7). Subjects will be told that they may contact [CONTACT_12283] [INVESTIGATOR_588859] [ADDRESS_775593] their usual 
care at the DVAMC.  
 
The DVAMC uses a Research Compliance Officer (RCO) as the clinical trial monitor who performs audits of 
consent forms, reporting and regulatory compliance, and documentation according to Standard Operating Procedures of the VA Office of Research and Development, and the local DVAMC Research office. The  
monitor reports separately from the IRB structure. The monitor will also perform random audits on any trial  
including the proposed study.  
 
Data Accuracy and Protocol Compliance. Subject eligibility forms will be completed on all subjects to assure 
appropriate subjects are recruited. Biofeedback Certification Institute of America (BCIA) certification of training 
and skill in H RV-B or its equivalent will be required of the HRV -B professional. This research will follow the 
HRV -B training protocol adopted by [CONTACT_588894]. Protocol compliance integrity will be monitored by [CONTACT_588908], research staff, and the Co-PIs . 
   
 
Version 12, 15 May 2020, with Amendment 12   Literature Cited 
 
1. Simon LS. Relieving pain in America: A blueprint for transforming prevention, care, education, and 
research. Journal of Pain and Palliative Care Pharmacotherapy. 2012;26(2):197-198. 
2. Beckham JC, Crawford AL, Feldman ME, et al. Chronic posttraumatic stress disorder and chronic pain in Vietnam combat veterans. Journal of Psychosomatic Research 1997;43(4):379-389. 
3. Gironda RJ, Clark ME, Massengate JP, Walker RL. Pain among veterans of O perations Enduring 
Freedom and Iraqi Freedom. Pain Medicine. 2006;7(4):339-343. 
4. Kerns RD, Dobscha SK. Pain among veterans returning from deployment in Iraq and Afghanistan: 
Update on the Veterans Health Administration Pain Research Program. Pain Medicine. 
2009;10(7):1161-1164. 
5. Gatlin C, Schulmeister L. When Medicine is not enough: Nonpharmacological Management of Pain. 
Clinical Journal of Oncology Nursing. 2007;11(5):699-504. 
6. Patrick DL, Ferketich SL, Frame PS, et al. National Institutes of Health State-of-the-Science 
Conference Statement: Symptom management in cancer: pain, depression, and fatigue, July 15- 17, 
2002. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. Monographs. 2004(32):9-16. 
7. Gauthier LR, Rodin G, Zimmermann C, et al. Acceptance of pain: a study in patients with advanced 
cancer. Pain. May 2009;143(1-2):147-154. 
8. Pain Management Task Force OoTASG. Final Report2010. 
9. Blackburn‐ Munro G, Blackburn‐ Munro R. Chronic pain, chronic stress and depression: coincidence or 
consequence? Journal of neuroendocrinology. 2001;13(12):1009-1023. 
10. Turnbull AV, Rivier CL. Regulation of the hypothalamic -pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenal axis by [CONTACT_167356]: actions and 
mechanisms of action. Physiological reviews. 1999;79(1):1-71. 
11. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_97018] C, Duman RS. Stress, depression, and neuroplasticity: a convergence of mechanisms. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2007;33(1):88-109. 
12. Caraceni A, Portenoy RK. An international survey of cancer pain characteristics and syndromes. IASP 
Task Force on C ancer Pain. International Association for the Study of Pain. Pain. Sep 1999;82(3):263-
274. 
13. Trescot AM, Helm S, Hansen H, et al. Opi[INVESTIGATOR_588860]-cancer pain: an 
update of American Society of the Interventional Pain Physicians’(A SIPP) Guidelines. Pain physician. 
2008;11([ADDRESS_775594]):S5-S62. 
14. Institute of Medicine . Committee on Advancing Pain Research C, Education. Relieving pain in 
America: A blueprint for transforming prevention, care, education, and research: National Academies 
Press; 2011. 
15. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Vital signs: risk for overdose from methadone used for pain relief-[LOCATION_002], 1999-2010. MMWR. Morbidity and mortality weekly report. 2012;61(26):493. 
16. Meerlo P, Sgoifo A, Suchec ki D. Restricted and disrupted sleep: effects on autonomic function, 
neuroendocrine stress systems and stress responsivity. Sleep medicine reviews. Jun 2008;12(3):197-
210. 
17. Asmundson GJ, Norton PJ, Norton GR. Beyond pain: The role of fear and avoidance in chronicity. Clinical Psychology Review. 1999;19(1):97-119. 
18. Deng G, Cassileth BR. Integrative oncology: complementary therapi[INVESTIGATOR_402918], anxiety, and mood 
disturbance. CA: a cancer journal for clinicians. Mar-Apr 2005;55(2):109-116. 
19. Pain Managem ent Task Force Final Report: Office of The Army Surgeon General;2010. 
20. Fadul N, Strasser F, Palmer JL, et al. The Association Between Autonomic Dysfunction and Survival in 
Male Patients with Advanced Cancer: A Preliminary Report. J Pain Symptom Manag. F eb 
2010;39(2):283-290. 
21. Kim do H, Kim JA, Choi YS, Kim SH, Lee JY, Kim YE. Heart rate variability and length of survival in 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_588861]. J Korean Med Sci. Aug 2010;25(8):1140-1145. 
 
Version 12, 15 May 2020, with Amendment 12   22. Walsh D, Nelson KA. Autonomic nervous system dysfunction in advanced cancer. Supportive care in 
cancer : official journal of the Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer. Oct 
2002;10(7):523-528. 
23. Chiang JK, Koo M, Kuo TBJ, Fu CH. Association Between Cardiovascular Autonomic Functions and 
Time to Death in Patients With Terminal Hepatocellular Carcinoma. J Pain Symptom Manag. Apr 
2010;39(4):673-679. 
24. Hoffmann J, Grimm W, Menz V, et al. Prognostic value of heart rate variability analysis in patients with carcinoid syndrome. Digestion. 2001;63(1) :35-42. 
25. de Miguel Sanchez C, Elustondo SG, Estirado A, et al. Palliative performance status, heart rate and 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_588862]. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management. Jun 2006;31(6):485-492. 
26. Mouton C, Ronson A, Razavi D, et al. The relationship between heart rate variability and time-course of carcinoembryonic antigen in colorectal cancer. Autonomic neuroscience : basic & clinical. Jan 26 
2012;166(1-2):96-99. 
27. McCraty R, Chil dre D. Coherence: bridging personal, social, and global health. Altern Ther Health Med. 
Jul-Aug 2010;16(4):10-24. 
28. Appelhans BM, Luecken LJ. Heart rate variability and pain: associations of two interrelated homeostatic 
processes. Biological psychology. Feb 2008;77(2):174-182. 
29. Mostoufi SM, Afari N, Ahumada SM, Reis V, Wetherell JL. Health and distress predictors of heart rate 
variability in fibromyalgia and other forms of chronic pain. Journal of psychosomatic research. Jan 
2012;72(1):39-44. 
30. Logier R, Jeanne M, Tavernier B, De Jonckheere J. Pain/analgesia evaluation using heart rate 
variability analysis. Conference proceedings : ... Annual International Conference of the IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. 
Conference. 2006;1:4303-4306. 
31. Paine P, Kishor J, Worthen SF, Gregory LJ, Aziz Q. Exploring r elationships for visceral and somatic 
pain with autonomic control and personality. Pain. Aug 2009;144(3):236-244. 
32. Zhong X, Hilton HJ, Gates GJ, et al. Increased sympathetic and decreased parasympathetic 
cardiovascular modulation in normal humans with acute sleep deprivation. Journal of applied 
physiology. Jun 2005;98(6):2024-2032. 
33. Dettoni JL, Consolim -Colombo FM, Drager LF, et al. Cardiovascular effects of partial sleep deprivation 
in healthy volunteers. J Appl Physiol. Jul 2012;113(2):232-236. 
34. Carney RM, Freedland KE. Depression and heart rate variability in patients with coronary heart 
disease. Cleve Clin J Med. Apr 2009;[ADDRESS_775595] 2:S13-17. 
35. Kemp AH, Quintana DS, Gray MA, Felmingham KL, Brown K, Gatt JM. Impact of depression and 
antidepressant treatment on heart rate variability: a review and meta-analysis. Biological Psychiatry. 
Jun 1 2010;67(11):1067-1074. 
36. Nagpal M, Gleichauf K, Ginsberg JP. Meta-analysis of Heart Rate Variability as a psychophysiological 
indicator of Posttraumatic Stres s Disorder. Journal of Trauma and Treatment. in press.  
37. Hassett AL, Radvanski DC, Vaschillo EG, et al. A pi[INVESTIGATOR_588863] 
(HRV) biofeedback in patients with fibromyalgia. Applied psychophysiology and biofeedback. Mar  
2007;32(1):1-10. 
38. Kapi[INVESTIGATOR_588864], Passie T, Bernateck M, Karst M. First non-contingent respi[INVESTIGATOR_588865]: a randomized, controlled, double-blind trial. Applied psychophysiol ogy and biofeedback. Sep 2010;35(3):207-217. 
39. Henriques G, Keffer S, Abrahamson C, Horst SJ. Exploring the effectiveness of a computer -based 
heart rate variability biofeedback program in reducing anxiety in college students. Appl Psychophys Biof. Jun 2011;36(2):101-112. 
40. Reiner R. Integrating a por table biofeedback device into clinical practice for patients with anxiety 
disorders: results of a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Appl Psychophys Biof. Mar 2008;33(1):55-61. 
 
Version 12, 15 May 2020, with Amendment 12   41. Hallman DM, Olsson EM, von Scheele B, Melin L, Lyskov E. Effects of heart rate variability biofeedback 
in subjects with stress -related chronic neck pain: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Applied psychophysiology and 
biofeedback. Jun 2011;36(2):71-80. 
42. Siepmann M, Aykac V, Unterdorfer J, Petrowski K, Mueck -Weymann M. A pi[INVESTIGATOR_588866]. Applied 
Psychophysiology and Biofeedback. Dec 2008;33(4):195-201. 
43. Zucker TL, Samuelson KW, Muench F, Greenberg MA, Gevirtz RN. The effects of respi[INVESTIGATOR_588867]: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_11480]. Appl Psychophys Biof. Jun 2009;34(2):135-143. 
44. Ginsberg JP, Berry ME, Powell DA. Cardiac coherence and posttraumatic stress disorder in combat 
veterans. Alternative therapi[INVESTIGATOR_248675]. Jul -Aug 2010;16(4):52-60. 
45. Nolan RP, Kamath MV, Floras JS, et al. Heart rate variability biofeedback as a behavioral neurocardiac 
intervention to enhance vagal heart rate control. American heart journal. Jun 2005;149(6):1137. 
46. McLay RN, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_588868]. Use of a portable biofeedback device to improve insomnia in a combat zone, a 
case report. Appl Psychophys Biof. Dec 2009;34(4):319-321. 
47. Lehrer PM, Vaschillo E, Vaschillo B. Resonant frequency biofeedback training to increase cardiac 
variability: rationale and manual for training. Appl Psychophys Biof. Sep 2000;25(3):177-191. 
48. Camm AJ, Malik M, Bigger JT, et al. Heart rate variability - Standards of measurement, physiological 
interpretation, and clinical use. Circulation. Mar 1 1996;93(5):1043-1065. 
49. Chalaye P, Goffaux P, Lafrenaye S, Marchand S. Respi[INVESTIGATOR_588869]. Pain Med. Nov 2009;10(8):1334-1340. 
50. Berry ME, Chapple IT, Ginsberg JP, Gleichauf K, Meyer JA, Nagpal ML. Non-Pharmacological Intervention for Chronic Pain in Veterans: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_588870]. Global 
Advances in Health and Medicine. 2014;3(2):28-33. 
51. De Couck M, Mravec B, Gidron Y. You may need the vagus nerve to understand pathophysiology and 
to treat diseases. Clinical science. Apr 2012;122(7):323-328. 
52. Berntson GG, Lozano DL, Chen YJ. Filter properties of root  mean square successive difference 
(RMSSD) for heart rate. Psychophysiology. 2005;42(2):246-252. 
53. Wang H -M, Huang S -C. SDNN/RMSSD as a surrogate for LF/HF: a revised investigation. Modelling 
and Simulation in Engineering. 2012;2012:16. 
54. Singer JD, Wi llet JB. Applied Longitudinal data analysis: Modeling change and event occurence: Oxford 
University Press; 2003.  
55. Monson CM, Gradus JL, Young-Xu Y, Schnurr PP, Price JL, Schumm JA. Change in posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms: Do clinicians and pati ents agree? Psychological Assessment. 
2008;20(2):131-138. 
56. National Center for PTSD. Instruction manual for CAPS.  
https://
www.istss.org/AM/Template.cfm?Section=ResourcesforClinicians&Template=/CM/ContentDispla
y.cfm&ContentID=1551 . 
57. Brouwer D, Meijer RR, Zevalkink J. Measuring individual significant change on the Beck Depression Inventory -II through IRT-based statistics. Psychotherapy Research. 2013;23(5):489-501. 
58. Burch JB, Yost MG, Johnson W, Allen E. Melatonin, sleep, and shift work adaptation. Sep 
2005;47(9):893-901. 
59. Ray M, Youngstedt SD, Zhang H, et al. Examination of wrist and hip actigraphy using a novel sleep estimation procedure. Sleep Science. in press.  
60. Kline CE, Crowley EP, Ewing GB, et al. The effect of exercise training on obstructive sleep apnea and sleep quality: a randomized controlled trial. Sleep. Dec 2011;34(12):1631-1640. 
61. Ray M, Youngstedt SD, Zhang H, et al. Examination of wrist and hip actigraphy using a novel sleep estimation procedure. Sleep Science. 2014;In Press.  
62. Innominato PF, Focan C, Gorlia T, et al. Circadian rhythm in rest and activity: a biological correlate of 
quality of life and a predictor of survival in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Cancer research. 
Jun 1 2009;69(11):4700-4707. 
 
Version 12, [ADDRESS_775596]/activity rhythms are associated with 
better quality of life, better response, and longer survival in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer 
and good performance status. Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the American Association 
for Cancer Research. Aug 2000;6(8):3038-3045. 
64. Cleeland CS, Ryan KM. Pain assessment: global use of the Brief Pain Inventory. Ann Acad Med 
Singapore. Mar 1994;23(2):129-138. 
65. Keller S, Bann CM, Dodd SL, Schein J, Mendoza TR, Cleeland CS. Validity of the brief pain inventory for use in documenting the outcomes of patients with noncancer pain. The Clinical journal of pain. Sep -
Oct 2004;20(5):309-318. 
66. Hewitt PL, Flett GL, Mosher SW. The Perceived Stress Scale: Factor structure and relation to 
depression symptoms in a psychiatric sample. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral 
Assessment. 1992;14(3):247-257. 
67. Ancoli -Israel S, Cole R, Alessi C, Chambers M, Moorcraft W, Pollak CP. The role of actigraphy in the 
study of sleep and circadian rhythms. Sleep. 2003;26:342-392. 
68. de Souza L, Benedito AA, Nogueira ML, Poyares D, Tufik S, Calil HM. Further validation of actigraphy 
for sleep studies. Sleep. 2003;26:81-85. 
69. Natale V, Plazzi G, Martoni M. Actigraphy in the assessment of insomnia: a quantitative approach. 
Sleep. Jun 2009;32(6):767-771. 
70. Caraceni A. Evaluation and assessment of cancer pain and cancer pain treatment. Acta Anaesthesiol 
Scand. Oct 2001;45(9):1067-1075. 
71. Sullivan MJL, Bishop S, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_8331] J. The Pain Catastrophizing Scale: development and validation. Psychol Assessment. 1995;7:432 -524. 
72. Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A global measure of perceived stress. Journal of health and social behavior. Dec 1983;24(4):385-396. 
73. Cohen S, Williamson G. Perceived stress in a probability sample of the [LOCATION_002]. In: Spacapan 
SO, S ., ed. The social psychology of health. Newbury Park, CA: Sage; 1988:31-68. 
74. Van Someren EJW, Hagebeuk E, Lijzenga C, et al. Circadian rest-activity rhythm disturbances in 
alzheimer's disease. Biological Psychiatry. 1996;[ADDRESS_775597]-
activity rhythm disturbances in demented patients. Biological Psychiatry. 1997;41:[ADDRESS_775598]-activity patterns in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2005;11(5):1757-1764. 
77. Guess J, Burch JB, Ogoussan K, et al. Circadian disruption, Per3, and human cytokine secretion. Integrative Cancer Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. 2009;8(4):329-336. 
78. Kushida CA, Chang A, Gadkary C, Guilleminault C, Carrillo O, Dement WC. Comparison of actigraphic, polysomnographic, and subjective assessment of sleep parameters in sleep-disordered pati ents. Sleep 
Medicine. 2001;2:389-396. 
79. Jean-Louis G, Kripke DF, Mason WJ, Elliott JA, Youngstedt SD. Sleep estimation from wrist movement 
quantified by [CONTACT_588909]. J Neurosci Methods. 2001;105:185-191. 
80. Buysse DJ, Reynolds CF, 3rd, Monk TH, Berman SR, Kupfer DJ. The Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2272]: a 
new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Res. May 1989;28(2):193-213. 
81. Van Someren EJ, Swaab DF, Colenda CC, Cohen W, McCall WV, Rosenquist PB. Bright light therapy: 
improved sensitivity to its effects on rest-activity rhythms in Alzheimer patients by [CONTACT_588910]. Chronobiol Int. Jul 1999;16(4):505-518. 
82. Smets EM, Grassen B, Bonke B, De Haes J. The Multidimensional Fatigue Inventor y (MFI) 
psychometric qualities of an instrument to assess fatigue. J Psychosom Res. 1995;39:315-325. 
83. Smets EM, Garssen B, Cull A, de Haes JC. Application of the multidimensional fatigue inventory (MFI-
20) in cancer patients receiving radiotherapy. Br J Cancer. 1996;73:241-245. 
84. Beck AT, Steer RA, Brown GG. Manual for Beck Depression Inventory -II. San A ntonio, TX: 
Psychological Corporation; 1996. 
 
Version 12, [ADDRESS_775599] A. Sleep disorders and depressive feelings; a global survey with the Beck 
depression scale. Sleep Med Rev. 2003;4:343-345. 
86. Warmenhoven F, van Rijswijk E, Engels Y, et al. The Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II) and a single screening question as screening tools for depressive disorder in Dutch advanced cancer patients. 
Support Care Cancer. Feb 2012;20(2):319-324. 
87. Sharp LK, Lipsky MS. Screening for Depression across the lifespan: A r eview of measures for use in 
primary care settings. Am. Fam. Physician. 2002;66(6):1001-1008. 
88. Ginsberg JP, Ayers E, Burriss L, Powell DA. Disruption of bradycardia associated with discriminative 
conditioning in combat veterans with PTSD. Neuropsychiatr ic disease and treatment. Jun 
2008;4(3):635-646. 
89. Roenneberg T, Kuehnle T, Juda M, et al. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_588871]. Sleep medicine 
reviews. Dec 2007;11(6):429-438. 
90. Chelminski I, Petros TV, Plaud JJ, Ferraro FR. Psychometric properti es of the reduced Horne and 
Ostberg questionnaire. Pers Indiv Differ. Sep 2000;29(3):469-478. 
91. Duffy JF, Rimmer DW, Czeisler CA. Association of intrinsic circadian period with morningness -
eveningness, usual wake time, and circadian phase. Behav Neurosci . Aug 2001;115(4):895-899. 
92. Duffy JF, Dijk DJ, Hall EF, Czeisler CA. Relationship of endogenous circadian melatonin and 
temperature rhythms to self-reported preference for morning or evening activity in young and older 
people. J Investig Med. Mar 1999;47(3):141-150. 
93. Roeser K, Obergfell F, Meule A, Vogele C, Schlarb AA, Kubler A. Of larks and hearts - 
morningness/eveningness, heart rate variability and cardiovascular stress response at different times of 
day. Physiol Behav. Feb 5 2012;106(2):151-157. 
94. Nebel LE, Howell RH, Krantz DS, Falconer JJ, Gottdiener JS, Gabbay FH. The circadian variation of cardiovascular stress levels and reactivity: relationship to individual differences in 
morningness/eveningness. Psychophysiol. 1996;33:273-281. 
95. Costa G, Lievore F, Ferrari P, Gaffuri E. Usual meal times in relation to age, sex, work activity and 
morningness -eveningness. Chronobiologia. 1987;14(4):383-391. 
96. Mongrain V, Dumont M. Increased homeostatic response to behavioral sleep fragmentation in morning 
types compared to evening types. Sleep Med Rev. 2007;30(6):773-780. 
97. Taillard J, Philip P, Coste O, Sagaspe P, Bioulac B. The circadian and homeostatic modulation of sleep pressure during wakefulness differs between morning and evening chronotypes. Journal of sleep 
research. Dec 2003;12(4):275-282. 
98. Adan A, Guardia J, () , pp. . Circadian variations of self-reported activation: a multidimensional 
approach. Chronobiologia. 1993;20:233-244. 
99. Hasler BP, Allen JJ, Sbarra DA, Bootzin RR, Bernert RA. Morningness -eveningness and depression: 
preliminary evidence for the role of the behavioral activation system and positive affect. Psychiatry Res. 
Apr 30 2010;176(2-3):166-173. 
100. Akerstedt T, Fröberg JE. Interindividual differences in circadian patterns of catecholamine excretion, body temperature, performance, and subjective a rousal. Biol Psychol. 1976;4:277-292. 
101. Kudielka BM, Federenko IS, Hellhammer DH, Wüst S. Morningness and eveningness: the free cortisol 
rise after awakening in "early birds" and "night owls". Biol Psychol. 2006;72(2):141-146. 
102. Roenneberg T, Wirz -Justice A, Merrow M. Life between clocks: daily temporal patterns of human 
chronotypes. Journal of biological rhythms. Feb 2003;18(1):80-90. 
103. Roenneberg T, Allebrandt KV, Merrow M, Vetter C. Social jetlag and obesity. Current biology : CB. May 
22 2012;22(10):939-943. 
104. Wittmann M, Dinich J, Merrow M, Roenneberg T. Social jetlag: misalignment of biological and social 
time. Chronobiology International. 2006;23(1-2):497-509. 
105. Zimet GD, Dahlem NW, Zimet SG, Farley GK. The Multidimensional Scale of Perc eived Social Support. 
Journal of Personality Assessment. Journal of Personality Assessment;. Spring88 1988;52(1): 30-41. 
106. Carver CS. You want to measure copi[INVESTIGATOR_9418]'s too long: consider the brief COPE. Int J 
Behav Med. 1997;4(1):92-100. 
 
Version 12, 15 May 2020, with Amendment 12   107. Hofman LF. Human saliva as a diagnostic specimen. The Journal of nutrition. May 2001;131(5):1621S -
1625S. 
108. Little RJA, Rubin DB. Statistical Analysis with Missing Data (2nd ed.) . [LOCATION_001], NY: John Wiley; 2002. 
109. Rubin DB. Inference and missing data. Biometrika. 1976;63:581-592. 
110. Albert PS, Follmann DA. Modelling repeated count data subject to informative dropout. Biometrics. 
2000;56:[ADDRESS_775600] MG. Informative dropout in longitudinal data analysis (with discussion). Applie d 
Statistics. 1994;43:49-94. 
112. Kline RB. Principles and Practice of Structural Equation modeling (3rd ed). [LOCATION_001], NY: The Guilford 
Press; 2010. 
  
 
 
  