 
 
 
Study Protocol  
SkillJoy Randomized Controlled Trial  
Lucas S. LaFreniere, Ph.D.1,[ADDRESS_791849] pool . All 
those invited to participate via email met DSM -5 criteria for GAD  on the Generalized Anxiety 
Disorder Questionnaire -IV (GAD -Q-IV; Newman et al., 2002 ). Those who accept ed the 
invitation w ere then screen ed on the phone for GAD a second time by [CONTACT_298644]  (the 
GAD section of the Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) ; Sheehan et al., 
2015 ). They were required to  meet full criteria for GAD on both the GAD -Q-IV and the MINI to 
participate . All participants w ere 18 years of age or older, sp oke English, and were  able to 
consent . 
Measures  
Primary outcome measures  
 The Penn State Worry Questionnaire (PSWQ;  Meyer, Miller, Metzger, & Borkovec, 
1990 ) is a 16-item self -report scale of the severity and frequency of worry. It has strong internal 
consistency  .91, retest reliability (r = 0.92) , convergent and discriminant validity , and sensitivity 
to change from psychotherapy (Brown, Antony, & Barlow, 1992 ; Meyer et al., 1990 ). In our 
sample, internal consistency was  = .[ADDRESS_791850] Schedule, Expanded Form: Joviality Scale (PANAS -X 
Jovialit y; Watson & Clark, 1994 ) is an 8-item measure of positive emotions.  This joy sub-factor  
had an average factor loading of 0.73 (Egloff, Schmukle, Burns, Kohlmann, & Hock, 2003 ; 
Watson & Clark, 1994 ). It had strong internal consistency (median  = .93 ) across eight studies 
of various time intervals  (e.g., momen tary, daily , past few days, past week, or past month ;  
= .88 to .94) , as well as convergent and discriminant validity  (Watson & Clark, 1994 ). In our 
sample, internal consistency was good (pre:  = .90; post: .88; follow -up: .92).  
 The Savoring the Moment Subscale of the Savoring Beliefs Inventory (SBI; Bryant, 
2003 ). The SBI  is a 14 -item survey  that measures beliefs about one’s ability to savor. The 
savoring the moment subscale measures savoring of present -moment emotional experience. 
Confirmatory  factor analysis showed all subscales  had good fit (Bryant, 2003 ), had good -retest 
reliability ( r = .88) ,  and internal consistency reliability (α = . 78 for total scale ), convergent and 
divergent validity.  In our sample, internal consistency was good (pre:  = .80; post: .86; follow -
up: .84).  
Secondary Outcome Measures  
Responses to Positive Affect Scale  (RPAS; Feldman, Joormann, & Johnson, 2008 ) was 
used to measure kill -joy thinking ( a.k.a. “dampening”) . Participants rate d eight dampening items 
on a 5 -point scal e. The RPAS  showed good model fit (RMSEA = 0.043; CFI = 0.94; RMSR = 
0.049), internal consistency ( α = 0.76 – 0.83), convergent and discriminant validity (Feldman et 
al., 2008 ; Nelis, Holmes, & Raes, 2015 ). In our sample, internal consistency was good (pre:  
= .86; post: .88; follow -up: .88).  
The Prioritizing Positivity Scale (PPS; Catalino et al., 2014 ) measure d the degree to 
which participants prioritize d seeking positive experiences  on six items with which participants 
either agree or disagree on a nine -point scale. It had good model fit (CFI = .99; RMSEA = .04), 
internal consistency reliability (α = .81), and good construct validity (Catalino et  al., 2014 ). In 
our sample, internal consistency was good (pre:  = .83; post: .88; follow -up: .91).  
The Life Orientation Test – Revised  (LOT -R; Scheier, Carver, & Bridges, 1994 ) measure s 
optimism . It has 10 items r ated on a four -point scale . It showed  good model fit (CFI = .99, TLI 
= .99, RMSEA = .04 ), convergent , and discriminant validity  (Glaesmer et al., 2012 ; Herzberg, 
Glaesmer, & Hoyer, 2006 ). Internal consistency was acceptable in our sample  (pre:  = .78; 
post: .82; follow -up: .82).  
The Beck Depression Inventory II  (BDI-II; Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996 ) is a widely used, 
21-item self -report survey that measure s the presence and severity of depressive symptoms.   It 
has repeatedly demonstrated high internal consistency , such as  = 0.93 (Beck et al., 1996 ). 
Convergent and discriminant validity have been demonstrated  as well  (Beck et al., 1996 ). In our 
sample, internal consistency was good (pre:  = .88; post: .93; follow -up: .95 ). 
Smartphone Software Applications  
 PACO : The Personal Analytics Companion (PACO  Developers, 2018 ) is a mobile 
application software package for designing  ecological momentary studies. It allows for fixed, 
user-editable, and stratified random prompting  on personal iOS and Android phones . Quip  
(Taylor & Gibbs, 2018 ) is a mobile application for creating documents, task lists, and embedded 
spreadsheets that can be edited in real time by [CONTACT_598630].  
Procedure  
 All data was collected prior to the COVID -19 pandemic.  Eligible p articipants were 
randomly assigned to either the SkillJoy treatment condition or the active self -monitoring (ASM) 
control condition. The interventions and organization of prompt times were informed by  [CONTACT_598631][INVESTIGATOR_48124]. After arriving at the laboratory, all participants were  provide d informed 
consent. They then completed baseline  questionnaires using  PsychData on a laboratory computer  
as well as  a computerized task  (for another study) .  They  were  then given a description and 
rationale for their assigned treatment conditions regarding how it would reduce their GAD 
symptoms  and increase positive emotions  (see supplementary materials) . Subsequently, 
participants downloaded and started s tudy apps. Each participant also received a Quip document 
with their condition’s rationale and instructions on how to complete each part of the intervention, 
an organized scheduling spreadsheet , and a note -taking space . They  were trained on how to use 
their assigned app, assisted with a PowerPoint presentation to which participants had access 
throughout the study . At the end of the training session both groups were given information on 
following steps of the study, were remin ded of the compliance check phone call on their fifth day 
of EMI use, and post -trial study tasks, and were  given opportunit ies to ask questions .  
The EMI was delivered by [CONTACT_598632]’ 
natural environments . Each day participants received 8 prompts that required engagement and 
assessment. A 9th prompt in the afternoon reminded them to engage in a scheduled activity.  
Each  day’s first and last prompt times were user -editable, to fit their sleep schedules.  Other 
prompts were delivered at random times within pre -determined intervals between 9:00 AM and 
10:30 PM daily . All prompts included EMA ratings not reported here for brevity,  but were 
identical between conditions. Four daily prompts in both conditions included the PANAS -X 
Joviality scale. Participants also received a compliance check phone call on the fifth day of the 
trial, which asked about rate of compliance  and level of effort , if any harm had occurred , and 
encouraged  full participation  in the study . Participants were then directed to complete mid -
measures online before midnight that day  (not included in the current study).  Participants 
returned to the laboratory on the eighth day of the study  where  they completed the same series of 
questionnaires and tasks given at baseline. On the 30 th day, they  received an email with a link to 
PsychData  to complete follow -up measures and  were compensated for their participation.  
 SkillJoy Condition  
SkillJoy Traini ng: SkillJoy participants were initially trained in savoring practice 
exercises that resembled their intervention . They were guided through remembering and 
describing a positive moment from their past, as well as one good experience from their current 
day. Next, they engaged in present -moment savoring. They first chose a small candy or dried 
fruit from multiple options. They were then guided through attending to the sensory, emotional, 
and cognitive experience of eating it in the moment, purposefully attempting to amplify and 
extend the resulting positive emotion.  After,  they brainstormed,  and scheduled daily enjoyable 
activities for the week  that were rated a 7 or greater on a 10 point enjoyable scale and recorded 
them in a Quip template  along with five suggested activities . 
 SkillJoy EMI : Present -moment savoring prompts were delivered with in the  stratified 
random prompting. Al l other prompts were delivered at fixed time s distributed across the day.  
SkillJoy  included  a variety of  savoring  interventions modified to target GAD pathology. These 
interventions include d 1) Enjoyable Activity Savoring . Participants were  prompt ed at a time of 
their choosing (before 11:30  AM) to schedule an exact time for an enjoyable activity  for the 
following day. They were then  reminded and later prompted to practice savoring upcoming 
positive activit ies.  At the end of the day , they were asked to  focus on  what they liked  about their 
enjoyable  activity ; 2) Present -Moment Positive Evaluation . Participants received three identical 
daily prompts guiding them to focus on and savor what they enjoy ed about the presen t moment ; 
3) Savoring recent memories.  Participants received two daily prompts to encourage savoring of 
recent activities and events, focusing on amplifying and extending the duration of positive 
emotions  ; 4) “Counting Blessings” Technique.  Two times a day  participants received prompts 
guiding them  to consider and write abou t events that turned out better than expected and events 
that were enjoyable  or went well . 5) Looking forward to the day’s events . During participants’ 
first daily morning prompt, they were asked  to savor an upcoming activity for that day . 
Active Self-Monitoring Control EMI  
Active Self -Monitoring (ASM) Training: ASM control participants were trained using  
identical structure and content to SkillJoy participants , omitting  aspects theorized to increase 
positive emotion . They  were guided through remem bering a day one week in the past, as well as 
an event from the current day, to practice reflective thinking . After, they engaged in present -
moment self-awareness . They chose a small  candy or dried fruit and were asked to focus on and 
describe  their thoughts and feelings while eating it. This activity resembled a mindfulness 
exercise, but did not direct attention to any specifically positive  emotions or thoughts. Next, 
participants described and scheduled  possible future events they had to do o r planned to do 
during each day of the following week  and recorded them  in a condition -specific  Quip template.  
ASM  EMI : The ASM control included self -monitoring activities mirroring  SkillJoy 
interventions, but  omitting  components to increase or sustain positive emotion.  Careful attention 
was paid to match SkillJoy in its tone of language. Interventions  included : 1) Planning 
tomorrow’s activities.  Each morning at a time of their choosing (before 11:30AM) participants 
received a prompt to think about major events that w ould take place in the following day using 
their daily Quip schedule and notes  and were  directed to stay apprised of  their scheduled events . 
They also  receive d a daily prompt  about attending to their thoughts, feelings, and plans. At the 
end of the day , they were asked to  remember, record and focus on their thoughts and feelings 
from that day ; 2) In-the-moment thoughts and feelings . Participants received three identical 
strati fied random prompts to attend  to their thoughts and feelings at the  present  moment : 3) 
Remembering.  Participants received two prompts to encourage remembering  recent activities and 
events from their day , no matter what events these were . These prompts asked them to think of 
an event from their day, take 60 seconds to remember the event in detail , and complete a series 
of ratings about the event. 4) Recording the day’s events.  Two times a day  participants  received 
prompts guiding them  to record and think about events from their day . 5) Anticipating the day’s 
biggest event.  Each day during participants’ first morning prompt they were asked  to anticipate 
and record that days  most important event . 