Date: February 28, 2024  
 
  
 
WORKING PROTOCOL** 
 
Stories for Change : Digital Storytelling for Diabetes Self -Management among Hispanic Adults  
 
Funding: NIH NIDDK , R01 DK113999- 01A1  
Clinical Trials.gov: 18- [ADDRESS_973173] Coordinator  
 
Consortium Study Personnel  
Hennepin Healthcare, MN 
Katherine Vickery, MD, MPH, Site PI/Co -Investigator  
Rachel Silva, MD, MPH, Co -Investigator  
Becky Ford, PhD, Project Manager  
Breidy Garcia, Research Assistant  
 
Mountain Park Health Center, AZ  
Davinder Singh, MD, Site PI /Co-Investigator  
Valentina Hernandez,  Project Manager  
Crystal Ramos, Study Coordinator  
Sandra Bahena, Clinical Research Coordinator 
Elizabeth Hernandez, Research Assistant  
 
 
     
**The working protocol is a detailed description of how the funded grant will be implemented.  
Specific Aims  
     Hispanic adults are twice as likely to have type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) and 1.5 times more likely to die from 
the disease than non- Hispanic whites1,2. These disparities are mediated, in part, by [CONTACT_714549], dietary quality, medication adherence, and self -monitoring of blood glucose than non- Hispanic 
whites3-6. Innovative approaches that arise from affected communities are needed to address these health  
disparities.  Community -based participatory research  (CBPR) has been successful in targeting health issues 
among Hispanic and immigrant populations7-9; CBPR is  an engaging and effective approach for addressing 
health behaviors in a sociocultural context10.  In 2004, our research team developed a CBPR partnershi p 
between immigrant communities  and academic institutions in [COMPANY_002]ster, Minnesota.  Since its inception, 
[COMPANY_002]ster Healthy Community Partnership (RHCP) has matured, developed a community -based research 
infrastructure, and become productive and experienced at deploying data- driven programming and outcomes 
assessment among diverse immigrant populations in an effort to reduce health disparities11,12.   
 
     Storytelling or narrative- based interventions are designed to incorporate culture- centric health messaging to 
promote behavior change among vulnerable populations13,14. Previous research has shown that narrative based 
video interventions are more likely to elicit positive motivations for healthful behaviors than non -narrative video 
messaging for cancer screening15,[ADDRESS_973174] co -
created each of the formative phases leading up to this proposal.  Narrative theory and social cognitive theory 
formed the conceptual basis for intervention development. Our study team  conducted surveys
21,22 and focus 
groups23 to derive the approach and personnel for building an authentic intervention that was created in a digital 
storytelling workshop where stories about diabetes self -management were captured, recorded, and edited to 
derive the final intervention products  in video format23.  The respective digital storytelling videos were pi[INVESTIGATOR_714531] 25 patients across healthcare institutions in Minnesota and Arizona.  The intervention was rated as highly 
acceptable, culturally relevant, and perceived as efficacious for motivating behavioral change24.  
 
The overall objective  of this application is therefore to assess the efficacy of a digital storytelling intervention 
derived through a CBPR approach on self- management  of T2D among Hispanic adults.   
 
Specific Aim #1 : Evaluate the efficacy of a community -derived  digita l storytelling intervention among 
Hispanic adults with poorly controlled T2D.  
 
Hypothesis  1: The digital storytelling intervention will significantly improve glycemic control and diabetes self -
management behaviors among Hispanic adults with poorly controlled T2D compared with controls.  
 
We will conduct a two- group randomized controlled trial in primary care clinical settings at two healthcare 
institutions among 455 Hispanic adults with poorly controlled T2D (hemoglobin A1c≥8%).  The intervention group 
will view the [ADDRESS_973175] will also be explored.    
 
Specific Aim #2: Explore the effect of the digital storytelling intervention on proposed theory- based 
mediators of change . 
 
Hypothesis 2:  Digital story telling intervention effects on diabetes outcomes will be mediated by [CONTACT_714550] (sel f-efficacy, outcome expectancy , social support) and narrative factor constructs (story identification 
and transportation).    
We will assess whether these theoretical factors impact the relationship between intervention effects on diabetes 
outcomes . A conceptual framework for potential mechanisms will be constructed to describe how digital 
storytelling may improve these outcomes.    
 
     This work is significant  because it tests a scalable, low cost intervention targeting vulnerable populations 
implemented in primary care settings with the opportunity for rapid translation to practice. The innovation comes 
from utilizing a digital storytelling intervention created through a CBPR process for T2D management among 
Hispanic adults.  By [CONTACT_714551], we will establish a disseminable framework for 
community participation in digital  storytelling production for chronic disease management, providing a model that 
may be applied to other communities and health priorities.  
  
RESEARCH STRATEGY  
1.  Significance  
Racial and ethnic minorities with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) in the [LOCATION_002] (U.S.) are more likely to 
develop complications and die from the disease than the general population25.  The Hispanic/ Latino population 
is a heterogeneous mix of people born in and outside the U.S. who make up 17% of the population and who 
contributed to the majority of U.S. population growth (56%) over the last decade .  While there is significant 
variability between different Hispanic/Latino groups26, the age-adjusted prevalence of T2D among these 
populations as a whole was 22.6% in 2012, compared with 11.3% for non- Hispanic whit es1. Likewise, Hispanic 
groups are less likely to achieve optimal glycemic control27 and have 1.[ADDRESS_973176] with psychosocial constructs and health behaviors in complex 
ways through the life course30.  Higher levels of acculturation (however defined) among Hispanic groups are 
generally associated with improvements in some structural barriers to diabetes care (e.g., access to healthcare, 
education level), but significant worsening of diabetes risk and diabetes -related behaviors (e.g., dietary quality)31-
35.  Likewise, low health literacy is an important distal mediator of diabetes -related health disparities among 
Hispanic groups36. 
      This mechanistic complexity of diabetes -related health disparities highlights the difficulty in designing 
interventions to promote healthy behaviors among Hispanic and immigrant  populations
37,38.  Community -based 
participatory research  (CBPR) is a means to collaboratively investigate healthy living interventions, whereby  
[CONTACT_714552].39,40  
This is an approach to research that is well suited to intervention work that addresses the interplay between health behaviors and the social determinants of health , such that it empowers communities, promotes 
understanding of culturally pertinent issues, and targets the multi -faceted barriers to health.  
 
     Narrative -based ( storytelling ) interventions incorporate culture -centric heal th messaging to promote behavior 
change among vulnerable populations13,14.  Storytelling interventions for behavior change use narratives that 
resonate with target populations either through direct quotes from representative members or through story compositions inspi[INVESTIGATOR_714532]
15,41,42.  The ways in which stories elicit behavioral 
responses among target populations have been conceptualized as identification  and transportation.  When 
narrative is drawn from within populations, identification with the storytellers is an important step for engagement, empowerment, and re- framing social norms of the listener
43-47.  Transportation of the listener into the story is 
likewise important to generate persuasive effects for behavior change45,48-51.  For T2D, a group -based storytelling 
intervention in the [LOCATION_008]  demonstrated feasibility and acceptability of this approach among immigrants 
with T2D in face- to-face (workshop) settings .[ADDRESS_973177] randomized trial of a  storytelling  video  intervention for chronic disease management , 
Houston and colleagues demonstrated efficacy comparable to adding a medication for treatment of uncontrolled hypertension among African American women  viewers .
18 Finally, Campbell and colleagues established the 
promising role of storytelling videos in management of diabetes through a randomized trial among patients with T2D in Australia, which demonstrated significant improvements in self -reported diabetes self -management (diet, 
exercise, and glucose monitoring) among viewers
57.   
 
     Digital storytelling interventions  are narrative- based videos elicited through a CBPR approach to surface the 
authentic voices of participants overcoming obstacles to health promoting behaviors19.  They differ from other  
forms of  narrative -based videos in that participants are central to the production of knowledge.  Through a group-
based digital storytelling workshop, storytellers build their own narrative, choose images and sounds that best 
represent their experiences, and are guided through hands -on computer editing.  Through a process of social 
construction,  individuals and groups  derive concepts and actions to co -create meaning. This differs from the 
communication paradigm where “experts” generalize an experience for a community , e.g., d ocumentary  story . 
Instead, participants construct their own experiences in a group setting of peers who, through reaction and 
feedback, contribute in turn to the shared understanding of the individuals’ experiences.   This process has been 
used to empower participants through personal reflection58-[ADDRESS_973178], high reach intervention targeting vulnerable 
populations whose health is critical to the future of this country.  Furthermore, this intervention will be implemented in primary care settings with the opportunity for rapid translation to practice.  Finally, this work will 
advance the science of participatory intervention development among Hispanic  populations while providing a 
model (digital storytelling) that may be applied to other communities.    
 
2.  Innovation  
     The research proposed in this application is innovative because it focuses on digital storytelling to promote 
health behavior change  in an underserved  population.   Authors of a recent systematic review identified the need 
for more culturally tailored chronic disease management interventions that incorporate health technology63, but 
there are no published reports of interventions using narrative (storytelling) media for diabetes among minority or immigrant populations.  Moreover, c ommunity participation is a particularly powerful mechanism to maximize 
cultural and linguistic acceptability of the intervention, adding to the innovation. Furthermore, we have built a 
theoretical perspective within the context of the study design, extending beyond our pi[INVESTIGATOR_714533].  Finally, by [CONTACT_714551], we will establish 
a disseminable framework for community participation in digital storytelling production for chronic disease management, providing a model that may be applied to other communities and health priorities.  
 
 
 
 
3.  Approach  
     This work builds on our thirteen years of experience with CBPR through [COMPANY_002]ster Healthy Community 
Partnership (RHCP)  http://rochesterhealthy.org/ .  Past experience with CBPR interventions and partnership 
development has led us to collectively consider and derive an intervention to improve T2D  management among 
Hispanic adults  in our community through a CBPR approach using methods of digital storytelling.  
 
CBPR p artnership experience and narrative  
In 2004, a community -academic partnership developed between Mayo Clinic and Hawthorne Education 
Center (HEC), an adult education center that serves approximately 2,500 immigrants per year.  This partnership 
has matured by [CONTACT_714553], ado pting CBPR principles, adding many dedicated partners, 
conducting community health assessments, and completing several CBPR projects.    The mission of RHCP is 
to promote health and well -being among the [COMPANY_002]ster community through CBPR, education, and civi c 
engagement to achieve health equity64.  The definition of community by [CONTACT_714554]/cultural groups (e.g., Hispanic/Latino) as well as a shared sense  of experience of recent immigration, low 
English language and health literacy, and relatively low socioeconomic position among individuals from these heterogeneous groups.  Moreover, the partnership includes community -based organizations that work with 
members of these communities.  RHCP has developed an effective community- based research infrastructure  
that has facilitated human subjects protection training for community partners
65; more than [ADDRESS_973179] completed our training in qualitative moderation and analysis66.    
 
RHCP has become productive and experienced at deploying data- driven programming and outcomes 
assessment among immigrant and populations11,12.  RHCP obtained extramural funding in 2008 through the NIH  
Partners in Research Program (R03 AI [ZIP_CODE])  to strengthen the CBPR partnership through development of a 
culturally sensitive educational and health literacy infrastructure for immigrant populations. In 2011, RHCP 
received funding through the NIH Program Announcement for Community Participation in Research (R01 H L 
111407) to conduct a randomized controlled trial of a family -based behavioral lifestyle intervention.  Community 
and academic partners have conducted every phase of research and programming together, and disseminate 
research results j ointly at community forums and academic meetings.  
 
Experience with conducting a randomized controlled trial among Hispanic populations.   RHCP community 
and academic partners recently co -created and tested a multi -component physical activity and nutrition 
intervention with Hispanic and Somali  families through a CBPR approach.   Target enrollment was achieved (40 
families; 151 individuals) and randomization was successful12. All participating families assigned to the 
intervention group received 100% of the intervention with very high fidelity of the intervention67.  At 12 months, 
study retention was high (91% of families, 82% of individuals). We found statistically significant improvements in 
dietary quality among participants in the intervention group compared with wait list controls68.  
 
     Rationale for addressing T2D.  Previous community needs assessments including an open- ended survey 
among 175 immigrant adults at one of the community partner s ites (HEC) and a survey of RHCP community 
leaders in 2010 revealed that T2D was among the top health priorities for Hispanic populations in our city.  Their 
other top concerns (physical activity, nutrition, obesity, hypertension) mirror national trends reflecting increasing 
obesity and associated co- morbidities among immigrant s after arrival to the US69.  RHCP members  reflected on 
the seemingly high impact of T2D on their communities and the overwhelming burden this disease leaves on individuals and their families as they strive and struggle to understand and manage the condition.  
  
     Rationale for digital storytelling.   During RHCP brainstorming sessions, community partners were clear that 
the current systems for T2D  management among Hispanic adults  do not address the social, linguistic, or cultural 
needs of their communities , and that these limitations negatively impact diabetes -related outcomes.   Further, 
low health literacy was implicated as a common pathway for sub -optimal T2D care.  The idea of storytelling arose 
from this paradigm as a means to mitigate these variables.  Indeed, there are data to suggest that storytelling is 
a promising approach for  interventions to improve T2D management among immigrants52.  Finally , RHCP’s 
experience with the community -based qualitative work needed to build a foundation for storytelling70-73, and 
RHCP’s past experience with digital video produc tion for health promotion among immigrant groups74 were seen 
as predictors of successful implementation of a digital storytelling intervention.    
     Rationale for focusing on Hispanic populations.   RHCP has a history of successful collaborative work between 
many different immigrant groups (and non -immigrant Latinos) towards common goals.  Our recent RHCP 
partnership evaluation highlighted the positive impact of this unique collaboration on community building, 
collective advocacy, and health outcomes75.  For this project, community leaders and community -based 
organizations from both Hispanic and Somali populations have taken leadership roles for intervention co -
creation.  Work with these two groups occurred both in parallel and in collaboration, such that best practices and 
learning opportunities have been shared throughout the process.  Likewise, RHCP academic partners have 
documented local diabetes -related disparities for both groups76-78.  For this grant application, community and 
clinical partners elected to focus on the Hispanic population because of the disproportionately large number of 
eligible patients within this group, and to reduce implementation complexity of the research procedures.  Because 
of the relatively low number of eligible Somali patients, we intend to test the intervention in this group on a smaller 
scale and through a different funding mechanism.       
 
     In summary , over the last [ADDRESS_973180] strategies, a mixed community -academic RHCP grant 
writing sub -committee was established to prepare this grant  proposal.   Community leaders inside and outside of 
the Alliance for Chicanos, Hispanics, and Latin Americans co- created this work.   
  
     Step 1: Diabetes survey.   Drawing from existing validated instruments, a diabetes survey was created by 
[CONTACT_714555], knowledge,  and behaviors among community members with T2D .  The 
survey was adapt ed and pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] -tested to be culturally and linguistically appropriate through an RHCP -derived 
process for survey development and translation through a CBPR approach21. Survey administration was 
performed by [CONTACT_714556] 78 participants (39 Hispanic, 39 Somali) with T2D .  Respondents 
reported several barriers to optimal diabetes management for physical activity and glucose self -monitoring, as 
well as a high burden of disease and negative perceptions of diabetes. High participant engagement in disease management, self -effica cy, and social support were important assets
22. 
 
     Step 2:  Diabetes focus groups.   We conducted three focus groups  among a subset of Hispanic survey 
participants for a dual purpose: 1) to further inform the intervention as it related to four domains of diabetes self -
management (physical activity, healthful diet, medication management, self -monitoring of blood glucose); and, 
2) to identify persuasive storytellers for the intervention development.   Groups were led by [CONTACT_331505]- congruent 
RHCP community partners trained in focus groups moderation66; the qualitative results achieved our study 
objectives23. Storytellers were selected by [CONTACT_714557].  
 
     Step 3: Digital storytelling intervention development:   Four gifted storytellers identified  in the focus groups 
were recruited by [CONTACT_714558].  In February 2015, these 
participants completed a 4.5 -day story building workshop with RHCP staff and two facilitators from the Center 
for Digital Storytelling  (CDS, www.storycenter.org ).  CDS has more than 20 years of experience surfacing 
authentic voices around the world through participatory media creation. Through their Silence Speaks Initiative 
(www.silencespeaks.org ), CDS has experience coordinating complex projects in public health that involve 
multiple stakeholders, working cross -culturally in multiple languages.   
      At the end of the workshop, all participants for this project had created powerful stories about their struggles 
and accomplishments related to four domains of diabetes self -management: physical activity, dietary quality, 
medication adherence, and self -monitoring of blood glucose.  Stories reflected on motivation and self -efficacy  
for management of these components . An important aspect of this method of digital story production is that all 
steps, from the initial consideration of what story to tell, scripting/storyboarding, visuals, music, compi[INVESTIGATOR_714534].  Minor post -production editing was performed by [CONTACT_714559]/community partners, including the addition of a brief introduction and concluding educational message  for 
the Spanish language videos
23.  Participants provided written consent for dissemination of the final products.   
 
     Step 4:  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_280194]:    The 12-minute digital intervention package was viewed individually 
by 25  participants (52% female) with T2D in clinical settings at the institutions participating in the work described 
in this proposal ( Hennepin County Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN  and Mountain Park Health Center, Phoenix, 
AZ), as well as at clinical sites in [COMPANY_002]ster, MN.  Eligible patients were identified through existing registries of 
primary care patients with T2D  at each institution.   Recruitment  and enrollment was conducted among sequential 
eligible patients before or after clinic visits at each site.  There were no screening failures (i.e., all patients 
identified as eligible in diabetes registries met inclusion criteria), and only one patient approached for the study 
declined participation.  The intervention was delivered in the clinical setting following a regularly scheduled visit 
to the patient’s primary care clinic.   Recruitment, enrollment, and intervention delivery was completed within one  
week at two institutions, and within four weeks at the other institutions. 
 
     After participating in the intervention, a cross -sectional face -to-face structured survey instrument, delivered  
by a language- congruent study staff, was utilized to assess intervention acceptability and motivational constructs 
consistent with our theoretical framework.  The evaluation assessed the degree to which the intervention 
motivated the patient to improve self -management of diabetes overall and across the four behavioral domains.  
The evaluation also assessed overall acceptability of the intervention and cultural relevance.  Items for this 
survey were adapted from a health communication assessment t ool produced by [CONTACT_29630]90.  
Results demonstrated high acceptability and cultural relevance, with 100% of participants reporting that the 
intervention got their attention, was interesting, and was useful.  In an open -ended question, participants reported 
a range of “main messages” coinciding with each of the behavior domains24.   
• 25 (100%) participants reported that the video motivated them to change a specific behavior related to diabetes self -management.   
• 24 (95%) participants reported that they were more confident about managing their diabetes (self -
efficacy) than before they watched the video.  
• 25 (100%) of participants reported that they would show it to family members or friends with diabetes if made available.  
 
     We obtained follow -up clinical data from the electronic medical records for the subset of patients that viewed 
the intervention who were Hispanic/Latino and had a baseline hemoglobin A1c>7% (n=13).  
• There was a mean reduction in hemoglobin A1c  of 1.5% from baseline to the first follow- up value at three 
to six months  (p=0.03)
24.   
 
     We then derived a control cohort of Hispanic patients (n=13) matched to each intervention patient by [CONTACT_714560] A1c (+/ - 0.5%).  We abstracted follow- up blood test results up to six months  after baseline 
for all patients.  Patients in the intervention group had a hemoglobin A1c that was 37% times the standard deviation lower than the control group, a moderate effect size (Table 1)
24.  Hence, the estimated effect size 
gleaned from this small, non- randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_714535] a clinically relevant improvement 
in T2D outcomes as a result of intervention exposure.  
 
Table 1.  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_714536] T2D  
 Intervention Group (n=13)  Control Group (n=13)  p-value  
Age, mean (SD)  54.0 (12.7)  56.8 (7.7)  0.53 
Female sex, n  6 6 1.00 
Baseline hemoglobin A1c, mean % (SD)  10.3 (2.5)  9.9 (2.1)  0.[ADDRESS_973181] follow -up A1c, mean(SD)  -1.5 (2.0)  -0.8 (1.8)  0.[ADDRESS_973182] of a digital storytelling intervention 
derived through a CBPR approach on T2D  outcomes among Hispanic adults  with po orly controlled T2D in 
primary care settings through a randomized clinical trial.  
 
     Theoretical approach.  The theoretical framework for  this work is the application of Social Cognitive Theory 
(SCT)[ADDRESS_973183] are outcome expectations or the consequences that result from improved dietary quality (e.g.,  improved 
glycemic control). The SCT constructs of self -efficacy, social support, and outcome expectancy have been used 
successfully to explain self -cares for patients and populations with T2D .94  Furthermore, self -efficacy and social 
support are associated with diabetes self- management behaviors among Hispanic populations95-97.  Narrative 
Theory recognizes the critical role for narrative (stories) as strategies for navigating experience. In this case, the 
digital narrative will be used for behavior modeling to facilitate observational learning. Narratives incorporate information, communication and persuasion to encourage desired behavior change.
[ADDRESS_973184] of the proposed intervention on  T2D outcomes (physiologic, 
behavioral, psychological); it will also identify the potential mechanisms of behavior change (i.e., how the 
intervention works).  Figure 1 provides a logic model framework with intervention strategies and outcomes that 
are consistent with the theoretical framework . 
 
Figure 1.  Logic model of intervention strategies and outcomes  
 
 
Design Overview  
     This study (Figure 2) will evaluat e the intervention through a two- group, parallel randomized controlled trial 
in primary care clinical settings across two healthcare institutions among 455 Hispanic adults with poorly 
controlled T2D (hemoglobin A1c≥8%).  The intervention group will view the [ADDRESS_973185] been identified at both sites :  
• Hennepin Healthcare, Minneapolis, MN. H ennepin Healthcare is a large public academic healthcare 
institution that provides primary care to approximately 90,[ADDRESS_973186] three years  on diabetes  care for immigrant patients.   
• Mountain Park Health Center (MPHC), Phoenix, AZ.  MPHC is a community health center with more than [ADDRESS_973187] at Hennepin Healthcare sites and MPHC because 
of their high volume of adult Hispanic patients with T2D, their strong history of research collaboration with Mayo Clinic, and because of a personal history of collaboration between the PIs and site -PIs (including pi[INVESTIGATOR_714537]).  The intervention was initially created with RHCP community partners and [COMPANY_002]ster, MN was included as a pi[INVESTIGATOR_365883].  As in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], Mayo Clinic team members who have substantial expertise with 
clinical trial coordination and oversight will continue to perform this role (i.e., coordination and oversight) in the proposed study as described below.      
  
     Study  coordination and oversight.   The Mayo Clinic PIs  and project coordinator  will provide central oversight 
for the project, including implementation of communication plans with both sites, data handling, data safety monitoring, and data analysis.  Mayo Clinic has significant experience and infrastructure as a coordinating center for multi -site trials, including the pi[INVESTIGATOR_236986].  Study staff from both sites will conduct study 
procedures under direction of the site PIs (Drs. Vickery and Singh).  
      We will continue bi -weekly conference calls between Mayo Clinic and study teams at Hennepin Healthcare 
and MPHC that are on- going in the context of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_714538].  If this proposal is funded, 
the PIs and project coordinator will meet with the Hennepin Healthcare and MPHC study teams separately for a 
kickoff retreat followed by [CONTACT_714561] -to-face meetings.  
 
Study Participants   
     Eligibility criteria will includ e 1) self -identify as Hispanic  or Latino, 2) age  18 to 70 years, 3) receive primary 
care at one of the participating clinical sites, 4) at least one office visit within the previous 12 months to the 
primary care site, 5) diagnosis of T2D in the medical record,  6) T2D diagnosis for six months or longer, 7) most 
recent hemoglobin A1c≥8%, and 8) intention to continue to receive medical care at the recruitment clinic for the 
next six months.  The value of 8% is higher than the goals established by [CONTACT_714562] (hemoglobin A1c<7%)
98, but lower than the definition of poorly controlled T2D established by [CONTACT_714563] & Medicaid Services Core Quality Measures Collaborative (hemoglobin A1c>9%)99.  It is 
common practice to increase an individual patient’s goal hemoglobin A1c value in the context of clinical and social co -morbidities, but this goal value rarely exceeds 8%.  Furthermore, the Minnesota Department of Health 

has defined poorly controlled T2D as hemoglobin A1c≥8% for the purposes of mandatory reporting by [CONTACT_714564]100.  Therefore, we will use this value in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_714539].    
  
     The first step in screening for eligible participants is identi fication of Hispanic patients at both  study sites with 
T2D.  Per state -wide reporting mandates, each site maintains registries of their primary care patients with 
diabetes and the most recent hemoglobin A1c  value for each patient.  The second step in s creening is to identify 
Hispanic  adults  within the subset of patients with the most recent hemoglobin A1c ≥8% at both sites. Both sites 
have identified mechanisms for accurately identifying eli gible patients (see letters of support).  In our pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], 
we identified 3,[ADDRESS_973188] to recruit approximately 
50% women.  Children were not included because of perceived community need that resulted in an intervention created for adults, and because of the relatively higher prevalence of T2D among adults.  
 Recruitment, E nrollment , Randomization, and Retention  
     Once eligible patients are identified from institutional registries, the next office appointment for any diabetes -
related indication  (e.g., chronic disease management provider visit, diabetes educator visit, dietician visit, 
diabetes group class, etc .) will be recorded for each patient .  These patients will be contact[CONTACT_100180] a 
language- congruent study staff member to introduce them to the study and to assess preliminary interest in 
participation. Patients will be sequentially rec ruited at their next office visit  until the target accrual is reached. 
Patients may also be recruited, consented and participate in study activities over the phone.   
      A language- congruent study staff member  will confirm eligibility criteria with the patient and obtai n written 
informed consent  in an exam or private room before or immediately after  their office appointment.  Study staff 
will then obtain a baseline survey and biometric assessment (see measures) followed by [CONTACT_714565] (stratified by [CONTACT_547]) and deliver y of the digital storytelling intervention (for the intervention group) .  
Each site has developed slightly different protocols for effective recruitment and intervention implementation based on lessons learned from the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].   Based on data from our pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], we expect recruitment and 
enrollment t o occur over a period of no more than 24 months across all sites with the f ollowing distribution:  
 
• Hennepin Healthcare:  N=[ADDRESS_973189] Lake Clinic  
o Richfield Clinic  
• Mountain Park Health Center:  N=[ADDRESS_973190] the next six months 
(above).  Second, appointment cards for both subsequent study visits will be provided t o participants after they 
have completed enrollment.  Third, language -congruent study staff will contact [CONTACT_714566].  Fourth, participants who do not return phone calls from study staff will be sent a 
letter  asking them to call the study coordination to reschedule the appointment.  Fifth, participants will receive 
remuneration at enrollment and at the  of the 3 month visit .   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
Interventions  
     Digital storytelling intervention.   The digital intervention package, which is 12 minutes long,  includes a brief 
introduction by [CONTACT_714567], four stories with transitions, and a short closing educational 
message re- enforcing the four diabetes self -management behavioral goals (healthful diet, physical activity, 
medication adherence, glucose self -monitoring).  The storytellers include two women and two men; they reflect 
some of the heterogeneity among Hispanic/Latino subgroups (two Mexican, one Central American, and one South American)  in the U.S.  After obtaining consent  in the clinical setting  or over the phone , study staff will 
deliver the intervention  in the exam room ,a separate private room  or provide patient with a  web address to view  
the video on  YouTube from home.     
     Following the video exposure, study 
staff will ask these questions to each participant and record their answers: 1) 
What is your reaction to the video?, 2) 
What was the main message of the video, 
and 3) Does the video motivate you to 
make any changes to the way you manage 
your diabetes (probe positive responses)?  
These questions will confirm participant 
receipt of the intervention, which is an 
important fidelity construct to ensure that 
participants received and understood the 
intervention
101.    
     Participants will be offered a copy of 
the video  as a portable storage device (i.e., “flash drive”) for viewing on a 
computer ,  a DVD for viewing on a 
television , or a web address to watch  the 
video on Y ouTube. Participants will also 
be provided access to the storytelling 
intervention as an application on their mobile phones and/or tablets.  In our pi[INVESTIGATOR_714540], 
all participants cited the use of mobile smart phones.  Study staff will offer to assist participants in downloading 
this application during the baseline visit, and encourage participants to watch the video with family members or friends within their support network.  
 
     Rationale for implementation in the clinical setting.  The work proposed in this application is intentionally 
placed on the boundary of the efficacy -to-effectiveness transition102 in clinical trials.  We considered conducting 
a more traditional efficacy study, where participants would be invited to separate study visits for intervention delivery and measurements.  However, interventions that target improvements in diabetes self -management 
behaviors cannot be easily disarticulated from the clinical setting.  The hypothesized patient activation that may occur as a result of exposure to the digital storytelling intervention requires interaction with their healthcare home 
in order to tr anslate that activation into improved outcomes.  Therefore, we pi[INVESTIGATOR_714541]- based clinical settings.  We demonstrated feasibility of this approach while adapting interv ention 
implementation for both  sites. 
      
     Mobile short message service.   Mobile short message service, i.e., text messaging, has been shown to have 
some impact on diabetes self -care104 and cardiovascular -related lifestyle105 behaviors. Furthermore, a Cochrane 
review suggested moderate evidence for increasing self -efficacy for diabetes self -management using mobile 
phone messaging106.  Therefore, to increase the likelihood that participants will watch the storytelling video 
several times during the intervention interval, participants will receive a monthly automated text message (five 
total) that asks them to self -rate their motivatio nal level and self -efficacy for managing their T2D (0 = no 
motivation/self -confidence to 10 = extremely motivated/confident), and will recommend that they watch the 
storytelling intervention if they score lower than a 7.        The rationale for the addition of mobile messages is 
that this intervention augmentation re- enforces concepts consistent with our theoretical framework.  It increases   
  
Figure 3 . Still images from the existing digital storytelling 
intervention  

the potential treatment dose while maintaining an intervention package that is highly scalable.  As stated above, 
our pi[INVESTIGATOR_714542].   
Control Condition  
     The control group will participate in the same usual clinical care for diabetes (e.g., visits with primary care 
physician, nurse, diabetes educator, dietician, etc.) as the intervention group.   We will control for study 
coordinator attention time throughout the enrollment and measurement activities.  T he control group will be 
offered the digital storytelling intervention package after the study is completed.  
  
Measures  
Participant data will be collected at baseline, six weeks, three months, and six months in their preferred language.   
Biometric measurements will be obtained during clinic visits  at baseline and 3 months . The 3 month visit can 
occur up to 2 weeks prior to the visit due date and up to 4 weeks after the visit due date, to accommodate 
scheduling limitations during the COVID -19 outbreak. Participants will complete a survey  (administered by [CONTACT_714568]- congruent study staff)  to obtain secondary outcomes  and theory -based measures (Table 2) at clinic 
visits  or by [CONTACT_1382] 2 weeks following the clinic appointment, and during phone calls at 6 weeks and 6 
months . Surveys will be verbally administered to participants by [CONTACT_714569], and responses will be 
entered directly into an electronic database. Surveys are not printed and given directly to the participants to 
complete on their own. Participants will also receive appointment reminders (three total) prior to visits or calls.  
  Additional clinical data will be collected from the electronic medical records. Investigators and data analysts  
will remain blinded to group assignment throughout the study.   
 
Demographic, health status, acculturation,  health literacy, and diabetes knowledge measures.   At baseline, 
study participants will report on the following demographic data: sex, age, ethnicity, country of birth, annual 
household income, education level, employment status  and housing security.  Individuals will report on the 
following proxies for acculturation: time lived in the U.S., primary language spoken at home, and level of English 
language proficiency on a 5- point Likert scale107.  Health literacy will be measured with the Short Assessment of 
Health Literacy —Spanish and English108.  Diabetes knowledge will be measured using the Diabetes Knowledge 
Questionnaire, available in Spanish and English109. 
The following data will be obtained at baseline from manual abstraction of the electronic medical records :  
date of diabetes diagnosis,  diabetes medications,  diabetes microvascular complications (nephropathy, 
retinopathy, neuropathy), and presence or absence of provider -assigned diagnoses of coronary artery disease, 
cerebrovascular disease, peripheral arterial disease, and hypertension.  
 
     Primary outcome measure .  The primary outcome measure will be glycemic control as measured by 
[CONTACT_33308] A1c.  The rat ionale for use of hemoglobin A1c  as an indicator of diabetes control is based on  national 
and regional data that demonstrate significant dispar ities in reaching hemoglobin A1c  targets for Hispanic 
populations compared with non- Hispanic whites27,110.  The importance of glycemic control as part of the 
comprehensive management of diabetes is well documented, and hemoglobin A1c  testing is a well- established 
strategy to monitor glycemic control in patients with diabetes111.  Hemoglobin A1c  will be measured from whole 
blood samples obtained and analyzed in a blinded fashion by [CONTACT_714570] H ennepin Healthcare 
and MPHC; both laboratories use methods certified by [CONTACT_272261].  
Both laboratories are certified by [CONTACT_9891] . 
      
• Baselin e hemoglobin A1c values will be drawn at the baseline study visit , abstracted from the electronic 
medical records, or reported from an self -check A1c test kit . A1c values drawn up to two week s prior to the 
baseline visit date  as part of usual clinical care may be used as the baseline A1c value. 
 • Hemoglobin A1c values at 3 months (primary outcome) will be drawn at the [ADDRESS_973191] kit . A1c values drawn up to two 
weeks prior or 4 weeks after the 3 month visit date as part of usual clinical care may be used as the baseline 
A1c value.        
 
• Hemoglobin A1c values at 6 months will be abstracted from the electronic medical records at both institutions.  
A1c levels drawn 5- 7 months after the baseline value will be recorded.  
 
     Secondary outcome measures.   Diabetes self -management behaviors  will be assessed with the Summary of 
Diabetes Self -Care Activities Measure (SDSCA)112.  This is a brief survey instrument to assess the following 
domains:  general diet, specific (diabetes) diet, physical activity, diabetes medication use, and blood glucose 
monitoring.  In a [ADDRESS_973192] commonly used 
instrument for these domains worldwide, with good validity evidence in several languages, including Spanish
114,115.  Furthermore, we used this instrument with Hispanic/Latino patients during the early phase (Step 
1) for this project22.  The SDSCA will be administered by [CONTACT_714571]- congruent study staff at each 
measure.  
      Seated blood pressure measurements (systolic and diastolic) will be made on the right arm using an 
automated BP Tru BPM -200 device after sitting quietly for five minutes
116.  Blood pressure will be measured 
three times; the average of the second and third readings will be used in statistical analyses.  Most recent values 
may also be abstracted from the electronic medical records .  
      Weight will be measured to the nearest 0.1 kg using a single portable scale (Seca 880 Digital Floor Scale).  
Height will be measured to the nearest 0.1 cm at baseline only using a stadiometer.  Participants will be asked to remove shoes prior to both measurements.  Body mass index (BMI) is calculated as weight (kg)/height squared 
(m2).  Most recent values may also be abstracted from the electronic medical records .   
      Total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and triglycerides will be measured from the same blood sample used to 
derive the outcome measure. LDL -cholesterol will be calculated for each participant based on these values: LDL-
cholesterol=total cholesterol – HDL cholesterol – (triglycerides/5).    
• Baseline LDL- cholesterol values will be drawn at the baseline study visit.  LDL-cholesterol values 
drawn up to two weeks prior to the baseline visit date as part of usual clinical care may be used as the baseline LDL- cholesterol value. Recent values recorded as part of usual clinical care within a 
week prior to the study visit may be abstracted from the electronic medical records . 
• Cholesterol values at 3 months will be drawn at the 3 month study visit. Recent values  recorded as 
part of usual clinical care within two weeks  prior to the visit may be abstracted from the electronic 
medical records .   
• Subsequent cholesterol levels will not be drawn or abstracted.  
   
     The total volume of whole blood drawn from each participant will be approximately 8 mL (3 mL for hemoglobin 
A1C testing and 5 mL for cholesterol testing) when visiting the lab. Over -the-counter A1c Test kits will be mailed 
to patients unable to visit the lab. Study staff with call patients to confirm reception of kit and go through the 
instructions.  
 All study tasks can be completed in -person in the clinical setting, virtually, or a combination of both, to 
accommodate the growing interest of patients to perform tasks virtually, when possible. This flexibility is noted 
in the Study Tasks Table below.  
      The number of diabetes -related office visits will be abstracted from the electronic medical records and 
categorized as a visit with a primary care provider, endocrinologist, pharmacist, care manager, diabetes educator, dietician, community health worker or promotora. These visits will be recorded for the six-month interval 
before and after intervention (or control) delivery.      
 
     Theory -based measures.   We will measure diabetes -related self -efficacy with the Diabetes Self -Efficacy 
Scale (α=0.85)117, used in other studies with Spanish -speaking patients118, including one from our study team 
that we used to generate preliminary data for this proposal22.  We will measure diabetes -related outcome 
expectations with the Outcome Expectancies Questionnaire119, and social support for diabetes with items from 
the Diabetes Care Profile120, which we also used in our pi[INVESTIGATOR_27041] .   
     Story identification and transportation will be assessed through a 14- item scale developed by [CONTACT_714572], Spanish- speaking populations121,122, 
with initial predictive validity on the transportation (emotional engagement) scale84.  
 
     Intervention follow -up exposure.   During follow- up measures, we will assess the number of times each 
participant viewed the digital storytelling videos and whether they viewed it with friends or family.  This will provide 
an assessment of intervention dose for the intervention group following the supervised viewing at enrollment.   
Table [ADDRESS_973193] coordinator  will monitor quality control of the 
data through review of participant forms and procedures every three months.  Moreover, the study statistician 
will perform monthly data checks (i.e., missing data, outliers).   
 
Treatment Fidelity  
     Because this work will be conducted in clinical settings, it is important to evaluate barriers and facilitators to 
implementation across the two primary care sites123.  We will evaluate subset domains of the intervention delivery  
construct as outlined by [CONTACT_714573]-sponsored framework for enhancing the value of research for 
dissemination and implementation124.       
     In the design and conduct of this study, we have incorporated recommendations from the Treatment Fidelity 
Workgroup125.  An intervention guide and checklist will be developed by [CONTACT_714574].  Likewise, a checklist will be derived for collection of follow -up measures.  Site principal  
investigators  will randomly select and attend 5% of the patient visits.  Based on these observations, bi -weekly 
meetings will be held with the study staff at each site (via videoconference) to reinforce treatment fidelity, provide corrective feedback, and to conduct additional training if needed.     
  
     Implementation adaptation. There is increasing recognition of the need for transparent reporting on 
adaptations of intervention implementation to fit local contexts124,126.  The “core” component of the intervention 
for this study, i.e., viewing the video, will be standard across both sites.  However, during the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], we learned that the timing of intervention delivery (e.g., before or after office visit), associated visit type (e.g., during 
diabetes classes versus during provider visits), and recruitment procedures will vary slightly between sites.  We will conduct semi -structured interviews with study staff and clinical staff at both sites to assess rationale for sit e-
specific adaptations across each of these domains, and to further elucidate generalizable best practices for implementation of this intervention. These various conditions (timing, visit type) as well as study site will be 
tracked and assessed for any moderating effects.  
           
     Intervention reach and adoption.   Intervention reach will be reported as the percentage of invited patients who 
choose to participate.  The differential demographic and disease- specific characteristics of these two groups will 
be reported and compared.  Intervention adoption will be reported as the percentage of eligible patients invited to participate at each site.  These groups will likewise be compared.  Site- specific differences in reach and 
adoption will be explored through interviews with staff at each site as described above.     
 
Sample size considerations  
     Our preliminary data suggest that we may expect a moderate effect size for the intervention (25% -50% times 
the standard deviation).   This is similar to two recent meta -analyses127,[ADDRESS_973194] deviations127. The second 
meta -analysis of 20 randomized trials evaluated the efficacy of diabetes self -management education among 
racial/ethnic minority populations, which showed a similar hemoglobin A1c  reduction of 0.[ADDRESS_973195] pi[INVESTIGATOR_714543] (lower) estimate of effect size to ensure ample sample size.  Hence, we can expect an effect likely 
to be between 0.[ADDRESS_973196] sizes, assuming 80% power,  a two -tailed alternative 
and a 5% Type I error rate, are [ADDRESS_973197] 80% power to detect an effect size of 0.[ADDRESS_973198].  
Accounting for approximately 12% loss to follow -up, we intend to recruit 225 patients in each group, for a total 
sample size of 450 participants.  
 Data analysis plan   
Aim #1: Evaluate the efficacy of a community -derived digital storytelling intervention among Hispanic 
adults with poorly controlled T2D.  
     The primary analysis will be an independent samples t -test between the group average hemoglobin A1c 
values  at 3 months . A two -sided alternative with a 5% type I error rate will be employed.  
      
     Supplementary analysis for the primary endpoint.  Repeated measures modeling of the individual time point 
A1c values (including chart abstracted values at approximately 6 months) will allow for a more detailed 
investigation to the timing of the impact of the intervention by [CONTACT_714575] (including baseline) . Profile 
analysis (Srivastav a) will further assess for difference in overall means, time point, and treatment by [CONTACT_714576]. Covariates indicated above including demographics and clinical covariates will be included in the 
repeated measures and profile analysis models to assess the sensitivity of the primary analysis conditional on these potential concomitant (mediating) influences.  
      
Secondary analyses.  The analyses applied to the primary endpoint will also be applied to each of the secondary 
endpoints . The subscales from the SDSCA (general diet, diabetes diet, physical activity, diabetes medication 
use, blood glucose monitoring) and the physical measurements (blood pressure, LDL- cholesterol, BMI) will be 
compared between groups using t- tests and repeated measures monitoring similar to the primary endpoint.  As 
we have a single variable primary endpoint defined, there will be no adjustment for comparison -wise Type I error 
rate.  Additional analyses will be performed to identify potential effect modifiers for the primary and secondary 
outcomes, i.e., sex, age, socioeconomic position, acculturation, health literacy, and diabetes knowledge.  
       
 
Aim #2:  Explore the effect of the digital storytelling intervention on proposed theory -based mediators 
of change.  
  We will examine the correlational structure of the covariates and their impact on the intervention effect size 
via repeated measures models . We will include  procedures suggested by [CONTACT_38722]
129,[ADDRESS_973199] 
separately for the dependent variable (with  regression adjustment for covariates) ; that model provides an 
estimate of the total effect of the intervention.   Next, we will estimate the intervention effect for each mediator 
(with regression adjustment for covariates); that model provides an estimate of the effect of the intervention on the mediator.   Finally , we will estimate the mediated intervention effect for the dependent variable by [CONTACT_714577] (and covariates); that model provides an estimate of the unmediated (i.e., direct) intervention effect, and the intervention- adjusted effect of the mediator on the dependent variable.   These analyses will be 
done for the primary endpoint and each of the secondary endpoints to identify any mediators of the study results.  
 
 
Table [ADDRESS_973200].  The intervention  
is intentionally desi gned to be sustainable and scalable.   The behavioral messages contained in the stories 
(dietary quality, physical activity, medication adherence, glucose self -monitoring) are unlikely to loose clinical 
relevance over time.  Once effectiveness is established, the intervention will be housed online in the public domain and available as a mobile application for use in clinical settings across the country.  Furthermore, the 
process of participatory digital storytelling intervention development contained in this work will provide a flexible 
template to address  other health issues among diverse subset populations.  This template incorporates the digital 
storytelling CBPR process for message development and model factors to emphasize in selecting stories to share.  Furthermore, these products may be added to othe r evidence- based diabetes technologies to examine 
effectiveness of mobile applications for diabetes self -management among diverse populations.   
 
Potential Problems & Alternative Strategies  
     In addition to potential challenges elucidated above, it is expected to be challenging to  implement the 
intervention and conduct follow -up measurements in busy clinical settings.  We have prepared for this challenge 
by [CONTACT_21173][INVESTIGATOR_714544].  The pi[INVESTIGATOR_714545] i mplementation procedures at HCMC and MPHC.  We expect unforeseen site- specific implementation 
challenges to arise.  The communication scheme we have already devel oped between each of the sites will be 
used to brainstorm and adapt implementation strategies in the face of these new challenges.
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY AND REFERENCES CITED 
 
1. Menke A, Casagrande S, Geiss L, Cowie CC. Prevalence of and Trends in Diabetes Among Adults in 
the [LOCATION_002], 1988- 2012. JAMA 2015;314:1021- 9. 
2. Murphy SL, Xu J, Kochanek KD. Deaths: final data for 2010. Natl Vital Stat Rep 2013;61:1 -117. 
3. Neighbors CJ, Marquez DX, Marcus BH. Leisure- time physical activity disparities among Hispanic 
subgroups in the [LOCATION_002]. Am J Public Health 2008;98:1460 -4. 
4. Rehm CD, Penalvo JL, Afshin A, Mozaffarian D. Dietary Intake Among US Adults, 1999 -2012. JAMA 
2016;315:[ADDRESS_973201] RA, Langa KM, Blaum C, Weir D. Mechanisms for racial and ethnic 
disparities in glycemic control in middle- aged and older Americans in the health and retirement study. Arch 
Intern Med 2007;167:1853- 60. 
6. Levine DA, Allison JJ, Cherrington A, Richman J, Scarinci IC, Houston TK. Disparities in self -monitoring 
of blood glucose among low -income ethnic minority populations with diabetes, [LOCATION_002]. Ethnicity & 
disease 2009;19:97- 103. 
7. van der Velde J, Williamson DL, Ogilvie LD. Participatory action research: practical strategies for 
actively engaging and maintaining participation in immigrant and refugee communities. Qualitative health research 2009;19:1293 -302. 
8. Johnson CE, Ali SA, Shipp MP. Building community -based participatory research partnerships with a 
Somali refugee community. Am J Prev Med 2009;37:S230- 6. 
9. Wieland ML, Weis JA, Palmer T, Goodson M, Loth S, Omer F, Abbenyi A, Krucker K, Edens K, Sia IG. 
Physical activity and nutrition among immigrant and refugee women: a community -based participatory 
research approach. Women's health issues : official publi cation of the Jacobs Institute of Women's Health 
2012;22:e225 -32. 
10. Israel BA, Schulz AJ, Parker EA, Becker AB. Review of community -based research: assessing 
partnership approaches to improve public health. Annu Rev Public Health 1998;19:173 -202. 
11. Wieland ML, Weis JA, Olney MW, Aleman M, Sullivan S, Millington K, O'Hara C, Nigon JA, Sia IG. 
Screening for tuberculosis at an adult education center: results of a community -based participatory process. 
Am J Public Health 2011;101:1264 -7. 
12. Wieland ML, Weis JA, Hanza MM, Meiers SJ, Patten CA, Clark MM, Sloan JA, Novotny PJ, Njeru JW, 
Abbenyi A, Levine JA, Goodson M, Porraz Capetillo MG, Osman A, Hared A, Nigon JA, Sia IG. Healthy 
immigrant families: Participatory development and baseline characteristics of a community -based physical 
activity and nutrition intervention. Contemp Clin Trials 2015;47:[ADDRESS_973202] LJ, Kreuter MW. Using narrative communication as a tool for health behavior change: a 
conceptual, theoretical, and empi[INVESTIGATOR_347126]. Health education & behavior : the official publication of the 
Society for Public Health Education 2007;34:777- 92. 
14. Palacios JF, Salem B, Hodge FS, Albarran CR, Anaebere A, Hayes -Bautista TM. Storytelling: A 
Qualitative Tool to Promote Health Among Vulnerable Populations. J Transcult Nurs 2015;26:[ADDRESS_973203], Frank LB, Chatterjee JS, Baezconde -Garbanati L. Narrative versus Non -narrative: The 
Role of Identification, Transportation and Emotion in Reducing Health Disparities. J Commun 2013;63.  
16. Kreuter MW, Holmes K, Alcaraz K, Kalesan B, Rath S, Richert M, McQueen A, Caito N, Robinson L, 
Clark EM. Comparing narrative and informational videos to increase mammography in low -income African 
American women. Patient education and counseling 2010;[ADDRESS_973204]:S6- 14. 
17. Webb Hooper M, Baker EA, Robinson RG. Efficacy of a DVD -based smoking cessation intervention for 
African Americans. Nicotine Tob Res 2014;16:1327- 35. 
18. Houston TK, Allison JJ, Sussman M, Horn W, Holt CL, Trobaugh J, Salas M, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_87049] M, Cuffee YL, Larkin 
D, Person SD, Barton B, Kiefe CI, Hullett S. Culturally appropriate storytelling to improve blood pressure: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2011;154:77 -84. 
19. Gubrium A. Digital storytelling: an emergent method for health promotion research and practice. Health 
promotion practice 2009;10:186- 91. 
20. Gubrium AC, Hill AL, Flicker S. A situated practice of ethics for participatory visual and digital methods 
in public health research and practice: a focus on digital storytelling. Am J Public Health 2014;104:1606- 14. 
21. Formea CM, Mohamed AA, Hassan A, Osman A, Weis JA, Sia IG, Wieland ML. Lessons learned: 
cultural and linguistic enhancement of surveys through community -based participatory research. Progress in 
community health partnerships : research, education, and action 2014;8:331- 6. 
22. Njeru JW, Formea CM, Osman A, Goodson M, Hared A, Capetillo GP, Nigon JA, Cha SS, Weis JA, 
Hanza MM, Patten CA, Sia IG, Wieland ML. Diabetes Knowledge, Attitudes and Behaviors Among Somali and Latino Immigrants. Journal of immigrant and minority health / Center for Minority Public Health 2015.  
23. Njeru JW, Patten CA, Hanza MM, Brockman TA, Ridgeway JL, Weis JA, Clark MM, Goodson M, 
Osman A, Porraz -Capetillo G, Hared A, Myers A, Sia IG, Wieland ML. Stories for change: development of a 
diabetes digital storytelling intervention for refugees and i mmigrants to minnesota using qualitative methods. 
BMC Public Health 2015;15:1311.  
24. Wieland ML, Njeru JW, Hanza MM, Boehm DH, Singh D, Yawn BP, Patten CA, Clark MM, Weis JA, 
Osman A, Goodson M, Porraz Capetillo MD, Hared A, Hasley R, Guzman -Corrales L, Sandler R, Hernandez 
V, Novotny PJ, Sloan JA, Sia IG. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_158571] a Digital Storytelling Intervention for Immigrant and 
Refugee Adults With Diabetes. Diabetes Educ 2017:145721717713317.  
25. Lanting LC, Joung IM, Mackenbach JP, Lamberts SW, Bootsma AH. Ethnic differences in mortality, 
end-stage complications, and quality of care amo ng diabetic patients: a review. Diabetes Care 2005;28:2280 -8. 
26. Schneiderman N, Llabre M, Cowie CC, Barnhart J, Carnethon M, Gallo LC, Giachello AL, Heiss G, 
Kaplan RC, LaVange LM, Teng Y, Villa- Caballero L, Aviles -Santa ML. Prevalence of diabetes among 
Hispanics/Latinos from diverse backgrounds: the Hispanic Community Health Study/Study of Latinos 
(HCHS/SOL). Diabetes Care 2014;37:2233 -9. 
27. Aviles -Santa ML, Hsu LL, Arredondo M, Menke A, Werner E, Thyagarajan B, Heiss G, Teng Y, 
Schneiderman N, Giachello AL, Gallo LC, Talavera GA, Cowie CC. Differences in Hemoglobin A1c Between 
Hispanics/Latinos and Non- Hispanic Whites: An Analysis of the Hispanic Community Health Study/Study of 
Latinos and the 2007- 2012 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Diabetes Care 2016;39:1010 -7. 
28. Haas L, Maryniuk M, Beck J, Cox CE, Duker P, Edwards L, Fisher EB, Hanson L, Kent D, Kolb L, 
McLaughlin S, Orzeck E, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_74182], Rhinehart AS, Rothman R, Sklaroff S, Tomky D, Youssef G. National 
standards for diabetes self -management education and suppo rt. Diabetes Care 2014;[ADDRESS_973205] 1:S144- 53. 
29. Golden SH, Brown A, Cauley JA, Chin MH, Gary -Webb TL, Kim C, Sosa JA, Sumner AE, Anton B. 
Health disparities in endocrine disorders: biological, clinical, and nonclinical factors --an Endocrine Society 
scientific statement. The Journal of clinical endoc rinology and metabolism 2012;97:E1579 -639. 
30. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_714546], Subramanian SV, Pearce N, Florez JC, McKinlay JB. Relative Contributions of 
Socioeconomic, Local Environmental, Psychosocial, Lifestyle/Behavioral, Biophysiological, and Ancestral 
Factors to Racial/Ethnic Disparities in Type 2 Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2016;39:1208 -17. 
31. Daviglus ML, Talavera GA, Aviles -Santa ML, Allison M, Cai J, Criqui MH, Gellman M, Giachello AL, 
Gouskova N, Kaplan RC, LaVange L, Penedo F, Perreira K, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_97797] A, Schneiderman N, Wassertheil -Smoller 
S, Sorlie PD, Stamler J. Prevalence of major cardiov ascular risk factors and cardiovascular diseases among 
Hispanic/Latino individuals of diverse backgrounds in the [LOCATION_002]. JAMA 2012;308:1775 -84. 
32. Anderson C, Zhao H, Daniel CR, Hromi -Fiedler A, Dong Q, Elhor Gbito KY, Wu X, Chow WH. 
Acculturation and Diabetes Risk in the Mexican American Mano a Mano Cohort. Am J Public Health 2016;106:547 -9. 
33. Ayala GX, Baquero B, Klinger S. A systematic review of the relationship between acculturation and diet 
among Latinos in the [LOCATION_002]: implications for future research. J Am Diet Assoc 2008;108:1330- 44. 
34. Mainous AG, 3rd, Majeed A, Koopman RJ, Baker R, Everett CJ, Tilley BC, Diaz VA. Acculturation and 
diabetes among Hispanics: evidence from the 1999- 2002 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. 
Public health reports 2006;121:60 -6. 
35. Lara M, Gamboa C, Kahramanian MI, Morales LS, Bautista DE. Acculturation and Latino health in the 
[LOCATION_002]: a review of the literature and its sociopolitical context. Annu Rev Public Health 2005;26:367- 97. 
36. Osborn CY, Cavanaugh K, Wallston KA, Kripalani S, Elasy TA, Rothman RL, White RO. Health literacy 
explains racial disparities in diabetes medication adherence. J Health Commun 2011;[ADDRESS_973206] 3:268- 78. 
37. Malmusi D, Borrell C, Benach J. Migration- related health inequalities: showing the complex interactions 
between gender, social class and place of origin. Social science & medicine 2010;71:1610- 9. 
38. Vega WA, Rodriguez MA, Gruskin E. Health disparities in the Latino population. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_19274] 
2009;31:99 -112. 
39. Horowitz CR, Robinson M, Seifer S. Community -based participatory research from the margin to the 
mainstream: are researchers prepared? Circulation 2009;119:2633- 42. 
40. Israel BA, Schulz AJ, Parker EA, Becker AB. Review of community -based research: assessing 
partnership approaches to improve public health. Annu Rev Public Health 1998;19:173 -202. 
41. Larkey LK, Lopez AM, Minnal A, Gonzalez J. Storytelling for promoting colorectal cancer screening 
among underserved Latina women: a randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Cancer Control 2009;16:79 -87. 
42. Larkey LK, Gonzalez J. Storytelling for promoting colorectal cancer prevention and early detection 
among Latinos. Patient education and counseling 2007;67:[ADDRESS_973207], Frank L, Baezconde- Garbanati L. The Ability of Narrative Communication to 
Address Health -related Social Norms. Int Rev Soc Res 2013;3:131 -49. 
44. Lee JK, Hecht ML, Miller -Day M, Elek E. Evaluating Mediated Perception of Narrative Health 
Messages: The Perception of Narrative Performance Scale. Commun Methods Meas 2011;5:[ADDRESS_973208], D. Entertainment -education and elaboration likelihood: Understanding the processing of 
narrative persuasion. Communication Theory 2002;12:173 -91. 
46. Hodge FS, Pasqua A, Marquez CA, Geishirt -Cantrell B. Utilizing traditional storytelling to promote 
wellness in American Indian communities. J Transcult Nurs 2002;13:6- 11. 
47. Hoybye MT, Johansen C, Tjornhoj -Thomsen T. Online interaction. Effects of storytelling in an internet 
breast cancer support group. Psychooncology 2005;14:211 -20. 
48. Green MC, Brock TC. The role of transportation in the persuasiveness of public narratives. J Pers Soc 
Psychol 2000;79:701- 21. 
49. Strickland CJ, Squeoch MD, Chrisman NJ. Health promotion in cervical cancer prevention among the 
Yakama Indian women of the Wa'Shat Longhouse. J Transcult Nurs 1999;10:[ADDRESS_973209] of conversational and testimonial 
messages versus didactic presentations of nutrition information. Journal of nutrition education and behavior 
2003;35:[ADDRESS_973210] DE, 
Gerber BS, Shewchuk RM, Allison JJ. The art and science of patient storytelling- harnessing narrative 
communication for behavioral interventions: the ACCE pr oject. J Health Commun 2011;16:686- 97. 
52. Greenhalgh T, Campbell -Richards D, Vijayaraghavan S, Collard A, Malik F, Griffin M, Morris J, Claydon 
A, Macfarlane F. New models of self -management education for minority ethnic groups: pi[INVESTIGATOR_714547] a story -sharing intervention. J Health Serv Res Policy 2011;16:28 -36. 
53. Wilson E, Chen AH, Grumbach K, Wang F, Fernandez A. Effects of limited English proficiency and 
physician language on health care comprehension. J Gen Intern Med 2005;20:800 -6. 
54. Cueva M, Kuhnley R, Revels LJ, Cueva K, Dignan M, Lanier AP. Bridging storytelling traditions with 
digital technology. Int J Circumpolar Health 2013;72.  
55. Armistead SG. Pan -hispanic oral tradition. Oral Tradition 2004;18.  
56. Larkey LK, McClain D, Roe DJ, Hector RD, Lopez AM, Sillanpaa B, Gonzalez J. Randomized 
Controlled Trial of Storytelling Compared to a Personal Risk Tool Intervention on Colorectal Cancer Screening 
in Low -Income Patients. American journal of health promotion : AJHP 2015.  
57. Campbell T, Dunt D, Fitzgerald JL, Gordon I. The impact of patient narratives on self -efficacy and self -
care in Australians with type 2 diabetes:stage 1  results of a randomized trial.Health Promot Int 2015;30:438 -48. 
58. Gubrium AC, Krause EL, Jernigan K. Strategic Authenticity and Voice: New Ways of Seeing and Being 
Seen as Young Mothers through Digital Storytelling. Sex Res Social Policy 2014;11:337 -47. 
59. Toussaint DW, Villagrana M, Mora -Torres H, de Leon M, Haughey MH. Personal stories: voices of 
Latino youth health advocates in a diabetes prevention initiative. Progress in community health partnerships : 
research, education, and action 2011;5:313- 6. 
60. Wyatt TH, Hauenstein EJ. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_714548]: an online asthma intervention for school -age 
children. J Sch Nurs 2008;24:145 -50. 
61. Jernigan VB, Salvatore AL, Styne DM, Winkleby M. Addressing food insecurity in a Native American 
reservation using community -based participatory research. Health Educ Res 2012;27:645- 55. 
62. Cueva M, Kuhnley R, Revels L, Schoenberg NE, Dignan M. Digital storytelling: a tool for health 
promotion and cancer awareness in rural Alaskan communities. Int J Circumpolar Health 2015;74:[ZIP_CODE].  
63. Montague E, Perchonok J. Health and wellness technology use by [CONTACT_696325]: systematic review. J Med Internet Res 2012;14:e78. 64. [COMPANY_002]ster Healthy Community Partnership.  (Accessed September 3, 2016,  www.rochesterhealthy.org
.) 
65. Hawley NC, Wieland ML, Weis JA, Sia IG. Perceived impact of human subjects protection training on 
community partners in community -based participatory research. Progress in community health partnerships : 
research, education, and action 2014;8:241- 8. 
66. Amico KL, Wieland ML, Weis JA, Sullivan SM, Nigon JA, Sia IG. Capacity building through focus group 
training in community -based participatory research. Educ Health (Abingdon) 2011;24:638.  
67. Bronars CA, Hanza MM, Meiers SJ, Patten CA, Clark MM, Nigon JA, Weis JA, Wieland ML, Sia IG. 
Treatment Fidelity Among Family Health Promoters Delivering a Physical Activity and Nutrition Intervention to Immigrant and Refugee Families. Health Educ Behav  2017;44:262- 70. 
68. Hanza MM, Wieland ML, Weis JA, Meiers SJ, Patten CA, Clark MM, Sloan JA, Novotny PJ, Njeru JW, 
Abbenyi A, Levine JA, Goodson M, Porraz Capetillo MG, Osman A, Hared A, Nigon JA, Sia IG. Healthy 
Immigrant Families: Utilizing a CBPR approach to develop, implement and evaluate a community -based 
physical activity and nutrition intervention for immigrants and refugees. In: 8th Annual Conference on the 
Science of Dissemination and Implementation 2015; Washington DC; 2015.  
69. Goel MS, McCarthy EP, Phillips RS, Wee CC. Obesity among US immigrant subgroups by [CONTACT_714578]. JAMA 2004;292:2860- 7. 
70. Wieland ML, Tiedje K, Meiers SJ, Mohamed AA, Formea CM, Ridgeway JL, Asiedu GB, Boyum G, 
Weis JA, Nigon JA, Patten CA, Sia IG. Perspectives on physical activity among immigrants and refugees to a small urban community in Minnesota. Journal of immigrant  and minority health / Center for Minority Public 
Health 2015;17:263- 75. 
71. Tiedje K, Wieland ML, Meiers SJ, Mohamed AA, Formea CM, Ridgeway JL, Asiedu GB, Boyum G, 
Weis JA, Nigon JA, Patten CA, Sia IG. A focus group study of healthy eating knowledge, practices, and barriers among adult and adolescent immigrants and refugees in the [LOCATION_002]. The international journal of 
behavioral nutrition and physical activity 2014;11:63.  
72. Mohamed AA, Hassan AM, Weis JA, Sia IG, Wieland ML. Physical activity among Somali men in 
Minnesota: barriers, facilitators, and recommendations. Am J Mens Health 2014;8:35 -44. 
73. Wieland ML, Weis JA, Yawn BP, Sullivan SM, Millington KL, Smith CM, Bertram S, Nigon JA, Sia IG. 
Perceptions of tuberculosis among immigrants and refugees at an adult education center: a community -based 
participatory research approach. Journal of immigrant and minority health / Center for Minority Public Health 2012;14:14 -22. 
74. Wieland ML, Nelson J, Palmer T, O'Hara C, Weis JA, Nigon JA, Sia IG. Evaluation of a tuberculosis 
education video among immigrants and refugees at an adult education center: a community- based 
participatory approach. J Health Commun 2013;18:343- 53. 
75. [COMPANY_002]ster Healthy Community Partnership. (Accessed August 9, 2016, at 
http://cpr.unm.edu/research-
projects/cbpr -project/cbpr -model -additional- language.html .) 
76. Wilhelm AK, Jacobson DJ, Guzman- Corrales L, Fan C, Baker K, Njeru JW, Wieland ML, Boehm DH. 
Regional Variation in Diabetic Outcomes by [CONTACT_195882] -of-Origin and Language in an Urban Safety Net Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. 
J Community Health 2016.  
77. Wieland ML, Morrison TB, Cha SS, Rahman AS, Chaudhry R. Diabetes care among Somali immigrants 
and refugees. J Community Health 2012;37:680- 4. 
78. Njeru JW, Tan EM, St Sauver J, Jacobson DJ, Agunwamba AA, Wilson PM, Rutten LJ, Damodaran S, 
Wieland ML. High Rates of Diabetes Mellitus, Pre -diabetes and Obesity Among Somali Immigrants and 
Refugees in Minnesota: A Retrospective Chart Review. Journal of immigrant and minority health / Center for 
Minority Public Health 2015.  
79. Patten CA, Windsor RA, Renner CC, Enoch C, Hochreiter A, Nevak C, Smith CA, Decker PA, 
Bonnema S, Hughes CA, Brockman T. Feasibility of a tobacco cessation intervention for pregnant Alaska 
Native women. Nicotine Tob Res 2010;12:[ADDRESS_973211] 2008;2:33- 50. 
81. Patten CA, Offord KP, Ames SC, Decker PA, Croghan IT, Dornelas EA, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_154762] S, Boberg EW, 
Gustafson DH, Ahluwalia JS, Wolter TD, Hurt RD. Differences in adolescent smoker and nonsmoker 
perceptions of strategies that would help an adolescent quit smoking. Ann Behav Med 2003;26:[ADDRESS_973212], Sanderson Cox L, Thomas JL, Quigg SM, Croghan IT, Wolter TD, 
Decker PA. Training support persons to help smokers quit: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Am J Prev Med 2004;26:386- 90. 
83. Patten CA, Vickers KS, Martin JE, Williams CD. Exercise interventions for smokers with a history of 
alcoholism: exercise adherence rates and effect of depression on adherence. Addict Behav 2003;28:657- 67. 
84. Larkey LK, McClain D, Roe DJ, Hector RD, Lopez AM, Sillanpaa B, Gonzalez J. Randomized 
Controlled Trial of Storytelling Compared to a Personal Risk Tool Intervention on Colorectal Cancer Screening 
in Low -Income Patients. American journal of health prom otion : AJHP 2015;30:e59 -70. 
85. Clark MM, Abrams DB, Niaura RS, Eaton CA, Rossi JS. Self -efficacy in weight management. Journal of 
consulting and clinical psychology 1991;59:739- 44. 
86. Clark MM, Bradley KL, Jenkins SM, Mettler EA, Larson BG, Preston HR, Liesinger JT, Werneburg BL, 
Hagen PT, Harris AM, Riley BA, Olsen KD, Vickers Douglas KS. Improvements in Health Behaviors, Eating 
Self-Efficacy, and Goal -Setting Skills Following Part icipation in Wellness Coaching. American journal of health 
promotion : AJHP 2015.  
87. Singh JA, Satele D, Pattabasavaiah S, Buckner JC, Sloan JA. Normative data and clinically significant 
effect sizes for single- item numerical linear analogue self -assessment (LASA) scales. Health Qual Life 
Outcomes 2014;12:187.  
88. Shaibi G, Singh D, De Filippis E, Hernandez V, Rosenfeld B, Otu E, Montes de Oca G, Levey S, 
Radecki Breitkopf C, Sharp R, Olson J, Cerhan J, Thibodeau S, Winkler E, Mandarino L. The Sangre Por Salud Biobank: Facilitating Genetic Research in an Underrepresented Latino Community. Public Health 
Genomics 2016;19:[ADDRESS_973213] KJ, Shepel KK, Montori VM. Shared Decision Making for 
Antidepressants in Primary Care: A Cluster Randomized Trial. JAMA Intern Med 2015;175:1761- 70. 
90. US Department of Health and Human Services. Making health communication programs work. In. 
Washington DC: National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute; 2004.  
91. Lancaster GA, Dodd S, Williamson PR. Design and analysis of pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602]: recommendations for good 
practice. Journal of evaluation in clinical practice 2004;10:307 -12. 
92. Rounsaville BJ, Carrol, K. M., Onken, L.S. A stage model of behavioral therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11482]: getting 
started and moving on from stage 1. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice 2001;8:133 -42. 
93. Bandura A. Health promotion by [CONTACT_48164]. Health Educ Behav 2004;31:143- 64. 
94. Greenhalgh T, Collard A, Campbell -Richards D, Vijayaraghavan S, Malik F, Morris J, Claydon A. 
Storylines of self -management: narratives of people with diabetes from a multiethnic inner city population. J 
Health Serv Res Policy 2011;16:37 -43. 
95. Sarkar U, Fisher L, Schillinger D. Is self -efficacy associated with diabetes self -management across 
race/ethnicity and health literacy? Diabetes Care 2006;29:823 -9. 
96. Bernal H, Woolley S, Schensul JJ, Dickinson JK. Correlates of self -efficacy in diabetes self -care among 
Hispanic adults with diabetes. Diabetes Educ 2000;26:673 -80. 
97. Strizich G, Kaplan RC, Gonzalez HM, Daviglus ML, Giachello AL, Teng Y, Lipton RB, Grober E. 
Glycemic control, cognitive function, and family support among middle- aged and older Hispanics with diabetes: 
The Hispanic Community Health Study/Study of Latinos. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2016;117:64- 73. 
98. Standards of medical care in diabetes --2015: summary of revisions. Diabetes Care 2015;[ADDRESS_973214]:S4.  
99. Core Quality Measures. 2016. (Accessed February 23, 2016, at https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality -
Initiatives -Patient -Assessment -Instruments/QualityMeasures/Core- Measures.html .) 
100. The D5 for Diabetes. 2016. (Accessed at http://mncm.org/reports -and-websites/the- d5/.) 
101. Borrelli B, Sepi[INVESTIGATOR_115415] D, Ernst D, Bellg AJ, Czajkowski S, Breger R, De[LOCATION_009]sco C, Levesque C, Sharp 
DL, Ogedegbe G, Resnick B, Orwig D. A new tool to assess treatment fidelity and evaluation of treatment 
fidelity across 10 years of health behavior research. Journal of consulting and clinical psychology 2005;73:852 -
60. 
102. Glasgow RE, Lichtenstein E, Marcus AC. Why don't we see more translation of health promotion 
research to practice? Rethinking the efficacy -to-effectiveness transition. Am J Public Health 2003;93:1261- 7. 
103. Lorig KR, Sobel DS, Stewart AL, Brown BW, Jr., Bandura A, Ritter P, Gonzalez VM, Laurent DD, 
Holman HR. Evidence suggesting that a chronic disease self -management program can improve health status 
while reducing hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]: a randomized trial. Medical care 1999;37:5- 14. 
104. Peimani M, Rambod C, Omidvar M, Larijani B, Ghodssi- Ghassemabadi R, Tootee A, Esfahani EN. 
Effectiveness of short message service- based intervention (SMS) on self -care in type 2 diabetes: A feasibility 
study. Prim Care Diabetes 2015.  
105. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_74182], List J, Rana GK, Townsend W, Striplin D, Heisler M. Mobile Health Devices as Tools for 
Worldwide Cardiovascular Risk Reduction and Disease Management. Circulation 2015;132:2012- 27. 
106. de Jongh T, Gurol -Urganci I, Vodopi[INVESTIGATOR_37083] -Jamsek V, Car J, Atun R. Mobile phone messaging for 
facilitating self -management of long- term illnesses. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;12:CD007459.  
107. Flores G, Abreu M, Tomany -Korman SC. Limited english proficiency, primary language at home, and 
disparities in children's health care: how language barriers are measured matters. Public Health Rep 
2005;120:418 -30. 
108. Lee SY, Stucky BD, Lee JY, Rozier RG, Bender DE. Short Assessment of Health Literacy -Spanish and 
English: a comparable test of health literacy for Spanish and English speakers. Health services research 2010;45:1105 -20. 
109. Garcia AA, Villagomez ET, Brown SA, Kouzekanani K, Hanis CL. The Starr County Diabetes Education 
Study: development of the Spanish- language diabetes knowledge questionnaire.Diabetes Care 2001;24:16 -21. 
110. Laiteerapong N, Fairchild PC, Chou CH, Chin MH, Huang ES. Revisiting Disparities in Quality of Care 
Among US Adults With Diabetes in the Era of Individualized Care, NHANES 2007- 2010. Medical care 
2015;53:25 -31. 
111. Diabetes HbA1c  2016. (Accessed Sep 8, 2016, hrsa.gov/quality/toolbox/measures/diabetes/index.html .) 
112. Toobert DJ, Hampson SE, Glasgow RE. The summary of diabetes self -care activities measure: results 
from 7 studies and a revised scale. Diabetes Care 2000;23:943- 50. 
113. Eigenmann CA, Colagiuri R, Skinner TC, Trevena L. Are current psychometric tools suitable for 
measuring outcomes of diabetes education? Diabet Med 2009;26:425 -36. 
114. Caro -Bautista J, Morilla -Herrera JC, Villa -Estrada F, Cuevas -Fernandez -Gallego M, Lupi[INVESTIGATOR_655287] -Perez I, 
Morales -Asencio JM. [Spanish cultural adaptation and psychometric validation of the Summary of Diabetes 
Self-Care Activities measure (SDSCA) among persons with type 2 diabetes mellitus]. Aten Primaria 2015.  
115. Vincent D, McEwen MM, Pasvogel A. The validity and reliability of a Spanish version of the summary of 
diabetes self -care activities questionnaire. Nursing research 2008;57:101- 6. 
116. Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL, Jr., Jones DW, Materson BJ, 
Oparil S, Wright JT, Jr., Roccella EJ. The Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, 
Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure: the JNC 7 report. Jama 2003;289:2560- 72. 
117. Lorig K, Stewart, A., Ritter, P., González, V., Laurent, D., Lynch, J. Outcome Measures for Health 
Education and Other Health Care Interventions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 1996.  
118. Lorig K, Ritter PL, Villa FJ, Armas J. Community -based peer -led diabetes self -management: a 
randomized trial. Diabetes Educ 2009;35:641 -51. 
119. Glasgow RE, Toobert DJ, Riddle M, Donnelly J, Mitchell DL, Calder D. Diabetes -specific social learning 
variables and self -care behaviors among persons with type II diabetes. Health Psychol 1989;8:285 -303. 
120. Fitzgerald JT, Davis WK, Connell CM, Hess GE, Funnell MM, Hiss RG. Development and validation of 
the Diabetes Care Profile. Eval Health Prof 1996;19:208- 30. 
121. Larkey LK, Lopez AM, Roe DJ. Measures to assess narrative influences on cancer prevention 
behaviors. In: American Association for Cancer Research: Frontiers in Cancer Prevention Research. 
Washington, D.C.; 2008.  
122. Kim S, Shin CN, Larkey LK. Development and validation of measures of narrative factor effects on 
health behavior change. Under Review 2016.  
123. Glasgow RE, Vinson C, Chambers D, Khoury MJ, Kaplan RM, Hunter C. National Institutes of Health 
approaches to dissemination and implementation science: current and future directions. Am J Public Health 2012;102:1274 -81. 
124. Neta G, Glasgow RE, Carpenter CR, Grimshaw JM, Rabin BA, Fernandez ME, Brownson RC. A 
Framework for Enhancing the Value of Research for Dissemination and Implementation. Am J Public Health 
2015;105:[ADDRESS_973215] D, 
Czajkowski S. Enhancing treatment fidelity in health behavior change studies: best practices and recommendations from the NIH Behavior Change Consortium. Heal th psychology : official journal of the 
Division of Health Psychology, American Psychological Association 2004;23:443- 51. 
126. Hawe P, Shiell A, Riley T. Complex interventions: how "out of control" can a randomised controlled trial 
be? BMJ 2004;328:1561 -3. 
127. Ferguson S, Swan M, Smaldone A. Does diabetes self -management education in conjunction with 
primary care improve glycemic control in Hispanic patients? A systematic review and meta- analysis. Diabetes 
Educ 2015;41:472- 84. 
128. Ricci- Cabello I, Ruiz -Perez I, Rojas -Garcia A, Pastor G, Rodriguez -Barranco M, Goncalves DC. 
Characteristics and effectiveness of diabetes self -management educational programs targeted to racial/ethnic 
minority groups: a systematic review, meta- analys is and meta -regression. BMC Endocr Disord 2014;14:60.  
129. MacKinnon DP, Fairchild AJ, Fritz MS. Mediation analysis. Annu Rev Psychol 2007;58:593 -614. 
130. MacKinnon DP. Introduction to statistical mediation analysis. [LOCATION_001], NY: Taylor & Francis Group, 
LLC; 2008.  
 