 
 
Official Title: Oxygen Reserve Index: Utility as 
Early Warning for Desaturation in Morbidly Obese 
Patients  
 
Date of Protocol : 20 March 2018  
 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  

 CLINICAL INVESTIGATION PLAN  
FLEM000 4 
Oxygen Reserve Index: Utility as Early Warning for Desaturation 
in Morbidly Obese  Patients  Version: 3 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2022  Masimo Corporation (Unpublished)  
All Rights Reserved  Page 1 of 11 
 
 
Oxygen Reserve Index: Utility as Early Warning for Desaturation in Morbidly 
Obese  Patients  
 
 
Sponsor:  Masimo  
52 Discovery  
Irvine, [LOCATION_004] [ZIP_CODE]  
  
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_364618] W. Fleming , MD, PhD  
  
Study Device s: Masimo Radical 7 Rainbow monitoring device  
 Masimo Root Patient  Monitoring and Connectivity Platform  
Masimo Rainbow ReSposable disposable sensor   
Masimo Rainbow Disposable optical sensors  
Masimo Rainbow RC -4 20 pin patient cable (PN 2406)  
Masimo Fourboard  
ADC laptop for data collection  
Investigational device s and sensors of a similar use  and design as FDA -
cleared devices and sensors  
 
  
Sponsor Protocol Number:  FLEM 0004 
  
IRB:  Office of Research  
University of [LOCATION_004], Davis  
[ADDRESS_455398]  
Davis, [LOCATION_004] [ZIP_CODE]  
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator  
 
[INVESTIGATOR_364619], MD, PhD  Title  
 
Professor of  Anesthesiology  & Pain 
Medicine  Signature  
 
 [CONTACT_364629], Clinical Research  Signature  [CONTACT_364630]: Utility as Early Warning for Desaturation in Morbidly Obese Patients  
FLEM0 004 version 3                                                                                                                               
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2022  Masimo Corporation (Unpublished)  
All Rights Reserved  Page 3 of 11 12 
 
 
 Revision History : 
 
Version Number  Version Date  Summary of Revisions Made:  
[ADDRESS_455399] 2016  Added BMI < 40 m/kg2 to the inclusion criteria  
Removed BMI ≤ 30 m/kg2 and BMI ≥ 40 m/kg2 from the exclusion 
criteria  
3 27 Feb 2018  Added BMI > 18.5m/kg2, <25 m/kg2 to the inclusion criteria  
[ADDRESS_455400] management in these 
patients presents potential problems associated with both the phy sical and physiological changes of obesity.  Pre -oxygenation 
is more difficult and unpredictable  (Shah, et al.) , maintenance of a patent airway can be more difficult (Langeron et al.) and 
obese patients desaturate  more rapi[INVESTIGATOR_364620] (Jens e, et al.).  As a consequence, arterial oxygen desaturation 
is more common and more severe in this patient population (Bodily et al.).  
The measurement of arterial hemoglobin saturation by [CONTACT_364624], providing a standard monitor that has increased patient safety in nearly every 
clinical setting. Expansion of this technology to include the measurement of additional wavelengths (up to 8 or more) led to 
the deve lopment of continuous hemoglobin monitoring.  We have evaluated this hemoglobin monitoring system extensively 
under a relate d IRB protocol (IRB ID: 494171 : Prospective observational study characterizing noninvasive hemoglobin 
(SpHb) measured with Pulse CO -Oximetry technology in a variety of surgical cases).    
Additional i nformation that is obtainable from the expanded number of  wavelengths has also been shown to correlate with 
pA O2 values in the moderately hyperoxic region (Applegate et al.).  This informat ion can be characterized as the Oxygen 
Reserve Index (ORI).  This index is presented on a unit -less scale between [ADDRESS_455401] arterial h emoglobin saturation 
monitoring. (ORI Whitepaper) Preliminary studies have evaluated the relationship between ORI and pA O2 in the general 
surgical population (Applegate et al.). In addition, the ORI has been demonstrated to provide a clinically useful adva nced 
warning of impending arterial hemoglobin desaturation in pediatric patients. (Szmuk et al.)  The relationship between ORI 
and standard saturation monitoring is characterized by [CONTACT_364625]:  
Oxygen Reserve Index: Utility as Early Warning for Desaturation in Morbidly Obese Patients  
FLEM0 004 version 3                                                                                                                               
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2022  Masimo Corporation (Unpublished)  
All Rights Reserved  Page 4 of 11 12 
 
 
  
This protocol is designed to evaluate the potential utility of ORI to serve as an early warning of impending arterial 
hemoglobin desaturation during the induction of general anesthesia and endotracheal intubation in obese patients . 
References:  
Shah  U, Wong  J, Wong  DT, Chung  F. Pre-oxygenation and intraoperative ventilation  strategies in obese patients: a 
comprehensive  review . Curr Opin Anesthesiol 29:109 –118, [ADDRESS_455402] management in obese patient Minerva Aneste siol 80:382 -92, 2014  
 
Jense  HG, Dubin  SA, Silverstein  PI, O’Leary -Escolas  U. Effect of Obesity on Safe Duration of Apnea in  Anesthetized 
Humans .  Anesth & Analg ;72:89 -93, 1991  
 
Bodily  JB, Webb  HR, Weiss  SJ, Braude  DA. Incidence and Duration of Continuously  Measured Oxygen  Desaturation 
During Emergency Department Intubation . Ann Emerg Med;67:389 -395, 2016  
Applegate RL, Dorotta IL, Wells B, Juma D, Applegate PM. Relationship Between Oxygen Reserve Index and Arterial 
partial Pressure of Oxygen During Surgery.  Anesthesia & Analgesia, e-published ahead of print March 22 , 2016  
Oxygen Reserve Index (ORITM). Available at: http://www.masimo.co.uk/pdf/ori/LAB8543A_Whitepaper_ORI_British.pdf 
Accessed March 11, 2016  
Szmuk P, Steiner JW, Olomu PN, Ploski RP, Sessler DI,  Ezri T. Oxygen Reserve Index: A novel Noninvasive Measure of 
Oxygen Reserve – A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]. Anesthesiology;124:779 -84, 2016  
1.2 Study  Device  
The Masimo Radical -7 is a noninvasive monitor that measures arterial oxygen saturation (SpO2), pulse rate (PR), and 
perfusion index (PI), along with optional measurements of hemoglobin (SpHb), carboxyhemoglobin (SpCO®), total oxygen 
content (SpOC), methemoglobin (SpMet), Pleth Variability Index (PVI®), Oxygen Reserve Index (ORI™), Acoustic 
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_26452] (RRa®), and Pl eth Respi[INVESTIGATOR_26452] (RRp). Masimo SET® technology is clinically proven to satisfy all 
sensitivity and specificity requirements for pulse oximetry. Masimo rainbow® technology uses 7+ wavelengths of light to  
continuously and noninvasively measure carboxyhem oglobin (SpCO), methemoglobin (SpMet), and total hemoglobin 
(SpHb®), as well as providing a more reliable probe -off detection. Total oxygen content (SpOC) provides a calculated 
measurement of the amount of oxygen in arterial blood, which may provide useful  information about oxygen both dissolved 
in plasma and combined with hemoglobin. Perfusion Index (PI) with trending capability indicates arterial pulse signal 
strength and may be used as a diagnostic tool during low perfusion. Pleth Variability Index (PVI)  may show changes that 
reflect physiologic factors such as vascular tone, circulating blood volume, and intrathoracic pressure excursions. [The util ity 
of PVI is unknown at this time and requires further clinical studies. Technical factors that may affect PVI include probe 
 
Oxygen Reserve Index: Utility as Early Warning for Desaturation in Morbidly Obese Patients  
FLEM0 004 version 3                                                                                                                               
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2022  Masimo Corporation (Unpublished)  
All Rights Reserved  Page 5 of 11 12 
 
 
 malposition and patient motion.] Oxygen Reserve Index (ORI) is an index measured noninvasively and continuously to 
provide an earlier indication of impending hypoxia by [CONTACT_364626] -oximetry to the moderate 
hyperox ic regions.  Respi[INVESTIGATOR_364621] (RRa) or plethysmographic waveform (RRp). Signal 
IQ is a feature for signal identification and quality indication during excessive motion and low signal to noise situations. 
FastSat® tracks rap id changes in arterial O2. A detailed description of the Masimo Radical -7 can be found in the attached 
manual.  
1.3 Risk/Benefits  
Benefits:  There is no specific benefit to the individual subjects for participation in this research protocol .  
Sensor risks:  As with all optical sensors, the investigational device has the risk of thermal burn. Pulse CO -oximeter 
noninvasive measurement uses wavelengths in the red and near infrared range like a conventional pulse oximeter used in 
routine clinical practice for ov er [ADDRESS_455403] protected 
personal health information are described in the section on recruitment.  The risks associated with the anesthetic and surgic al 
procedure are not  discussed in this proposal  
2 STUDY OBJECTIVES  
This is a prospective, observational study of the Oxygen Reserve Index (ORI ) in a clinical setting designed to evaluate  its 
clinical utility as an early warning for arterial oxygen desaturation in a specific patient population .   
Specific aims : 
- evaluate the clinical utility of the change in the oxygen reserve index as an early warning of impending arterial 
oxygen desaturation in obese  patient s  
- characterize the impact of the  oxygen reserve index on the inc idence of arterial hemoglobin desaturation during the 
induction of general anesthesia and tracheal intubation in obese  patients  
Hypothesis (constructed as the null) :  
Intraoperative changes in the oxygen reserve index will not provide additional clinically significant data with respect 
to the efficacy of pre -oxygenation or warning for arterial desaturation and will not decrease the incidence of arterial 
hemoglobin desaturation during  induction of general anesthesia  and tracheal intubation in obese  patients . 
3 STUDY DESIGN  
This is a prospective, observational , clinical study designed to evaluate the clinical utility of the ORI as an early warning for 
arterial hemoglobin desaturation during the induction of general anesthesia and tracheal intubation in obese patients 
undergoing elective surgical procedures . In addition, data will collected from non -obese patients to serve as a control group 
population.  
3.1 Study Endpoints  
Primary study endpoints include a characterization of the utility of the oxygen reserv e index as a  guide for pre -oxygenation 
and a n earlier warning for arterial oxygen desaturation to decrease the incidence of arterial hemoglobin desaturation during 
the induction of general anesthesia and tracheal intubation in obese patients . 
Oxygen Reserve Index: Utility as Early Warning for Desaturation in Morbidly Obese Patients  
FLEM0 004 version 3                                                                                                                               
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2022  Masimo Corporation (Unpublished)  
All Rights Reserved  Page [ADDRESS_455404] SELECTION AN D WITHDRAWAL  
5.1 Number of Subjects  
Patients scheduled for elective surgical procedures in the UC Davis Medical Center main ORs will be screened for potential 
enrollment.  Up to 80 patients will be enrolled.  
5.2 Inclusion Criteria  
 Age greater than 18 years  
 BMI>30 , <40  m/kg2 
 Control group only:  BMI >18.5  m/kg2, <25 m/kg2 
 Scheduled for an elective surgical procedure requiring general anesthesia and endotracheal intubation  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
 Age less than 18 years  
 Adults unable to give primary consent  
 Pregnancy  
 Prisoners  
5.[ADDRESS_455405] sufficient time to review the consent 
form and discuss the study with friends and family.  
HIPAA  
The screeni ng of patients will require the investigators to access personal  health information to identify prospective subjects 
without HIPAA authorization .  The research could not be practicably carried out without this waiver of consent.   The risk of 
harm from cont acting the participants is greater than the risk of the  study procedures. The research is of minimal risk and 
does not involve any  procedures for which written consent is normally required outside the research  setting. The participants’ 
rights and welfare will not be adversely affected by  [CONTACT_108567]. This protected health information will not be 
inappropriately  reused or disclosed to any other person or entity. To further safeguard all  protected health information, the 
data will not be labeled with any  personal  identifying information, or with a code that this research team can link to personal  
identifying information. The data will not be stored with any protected health  information identifiers.  
5.[ADDRESS_455406] to withdraw at any time up to the 
induction of general anesthesia.  Because this is an observational trial, unforeseen changes in the clinical care plan (change in 
surgical procedure, emergent management changes) simply trigger a discontinuation of the additional monitoring . 
Oxygen Reserve Index: Utility as Early Warning for Desaturation in Morbidly Obese Patients  
FLEM0 004 version 3                                                                                                                               
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2022  Masimo Corporation (Unpublished)  
All Rights Reserved  Page 7 of 11 12 
 
 
 6 STUDY DEVICE  
 
Investigational Devices : 
Masimo investiga tional pulse CO -oximeter devices  and/or sensors , with the same or similar technology and materials as the 
Masimo FDA cleared devices and sensors , that pose no additional risk to human subjects than the FDA cleared devices  and 
sensors .  
Masimo Fourboard  system containing pulse CO -Oximeter mainboards connected to a laptop computer for ease of data 
acquisition from multiple devices. These are simply chipsets of the commercially available products encased in a common 
housing to acquire data more efficiently. Th ese devices pose no additional risk to subjects .  
 
FDA -cleared Devices : 
 
Masimo Radical 7 Rainbow monitoring device  
 Masimo Root Patient  Monitoring and Connectivity Platform  
Masimo Rainbow ReSposable disposable sensor   
Masimo Rainbow Disposable optical sensors  
Masimo Rainbow RC -4 20 pin patient cable (PN 2406)  
Masimo Fourboard  
ADC laptop for data collection  
Investigational device s and sensors of a similar use and design as FDA - cleared devices and sensors  
 
6.[ADDRESS_455407] notify the study sponsor of any damaged or unusable study 
devices  that were supplied to the investigator’s site.  
6.1.[ADDRESS_455408] . 
6.1.3 Return or Destruction of Study Device  
At the completion of the study, there will be a final reconciliation of study devices and sensors shipped, devices /sensors  used, 
and devices /sensors  remaining.  This reconciliation will be logged on the device accountability  log.  Any discrepancies noted 
will be investigated, resolved, and documented prior to return or destruction of unused study devices.  Devices destroyed on 
site will only be upon written instruction from the sponsor and will be documented in the study files.  
[ADDRESS_455409] and planned physiological monitors will be placed.  A 
baseline ORI will be measured . 
- As per routine, all patient s will be pre -oxygenated with 100% oxygen .   
- All patients will be managed with the additional information from the ORI monitor. During pre -oxygenation, when the ORI 
plateaus,  general anesthesia will be induced with a combination of amnestics, narcotics, intravenous induction agents and 
Oxygen Reserve Index: Utility as Early Warning for Desaturation in Morbidly Obese Patients  
FLEM0 004 version 3                                                                                                                               
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2022  Masimo Corporation (Unpublished)  
All Rights Reserved  Page [ADDRESS_455410] visualization using a GlideScope.  
When the arterial hemoglobin saturation reaches 94%  ventilation will be initiated with 100% oxygen  either via the 
endotracheal tube or resumed mask ven tilation.  The changes in ORI and arterial hemoglobin saturation will be recorded 
continuously from the initiation of pre -oxygenation until 5 minutes following placement of the endotracheal tube .  The time s 
from the initiation of endotracheal intubation (o nset of apnea) to the activation of the ORI alarm and to the decrease in 
arterial hemoglobin saturation of 9 8% will be measured.  In addition, t he time s from activation of the ORI alarm to the 
arterial hemoglobin saturation s of 94% and 90% will be compared  to the time s from the arterial hemoglobin saturation of 
98% to the arterial hemoglobin saturation s of 94%  and 90% . 
8 STATISTICAL PLAN  
Sample size estimate:  The planned sample size for this protocol is determined by [CONTACT_364627]: to evaluate the clinical 
utility of the change in the oxygen reserve index as an early warning of impending desaturation in the critically ill patient . A 
total of 80 patien ts are planned , 40 in the normal BMI range and 40 in the morbidly obese BMI range .  To determine the 
appropriate sample size we extrapolated from Szmuk et al. and their measurement of the times for arterial hemoglobin 
saturation to decrease from 98% to 90% .  Next, we then postulated that a clinically significant improvement would be [ADDRESS_455411] are provided below (ISO [ZIP_CODE]:2011, 21 CFR 812.3(s)).  
 Adverse Event (AE): an adver se event is any untoward medical occurrence in a subject which need not be related to 
the device under investigation.  
 Adverse Device Effect (ADE): an adverse device effect is any untoward or unintended response to a medical device 
which may result from ins ufficiencies in the instructions for use or deployment of the device, or from use error.  
 Serious Adverse Event (SAE): a serious adverse event is an adverse event that results in death, inpatient 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], severe or permanent disability, a life thre atening illness or injury, fetal distress, fetal death, a 
congenital abnormality, a birth defect, or medical or surgical intervention to prevent permanent impairment to body 
or structure.  
 Serious Adverse Device Effect (SADE): a serious adverse device effec t is an adverse device effect that results in 
death, inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], severe or permanent disability or is life threatening.  
 Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect (UADE): any serious adverse effect on health or safety or any life threatening 
proble m or death cause by [CONTACT_1282], a device, if the effect, problem, or death was not previously identified 
in nature, severity or degree of incidence in the investigational plan, or application (including a supplementary plan 
or application) or any o ther unanticipated serious problem associated with a device that related to the rights, safety 
or welfare of subjects.  Refer to the Device Risk Analysis and Risk Assessment section for details on anticipated 
adverse device effects.  
9.2 Anticipated Adverse Eve nts: 
Mild allergic reaction to sensor material and adhesives.  
Discomfort, redness or skin irritation.   
9.3 Adverse Event Reporting:  
 All Adverse Events, both Anticipated and Unanticipated, must be recorded in the within the CRF  and in the Adverse 
Event Report Form . 
Oxygen Reserve Index: Utility as Early Warning for Desaturation in Morbidly Obese Patients  
FLEM0 004 version 3                                                                                                                               
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2022  Masimo Corporation (Unpublished)  
All Rights Reserved  Page 9 of 11 12 
 
 
  All Adverse Events must be promptly reported to the Sponsor.  
 All Unanticipated Adverse Device Effects will be also reported to both the Sponsor and the IRB.   
 Both Serious Adverse Events and Unanticipated Adverse Device Effects must be reported to the Sponsor within 48 
hours. All other Adverse Events should be reported to the Sponsor within 5 business days.  
 All Serious Adverse Events will be also reported to th e IRB per IRB reporting requirements.  These reports may 
include, but will not be limited to: date of onset; brief description of the events; their treatment; whether they 
resulted in death, inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], severe or permanent disability or were  life threatening; their relationship 
to the study device; and resolution.  
Deviations from the study protocol  
Deviations from the protocol must receive both Sponsor and the investigator’s IRB approval before  they are initiated. Any 
protocol deviations init iated without Sponsor and the investigator’s IRB approval that may affect the scientific soundness of 
the study, or affect the rights, safety, or welfare of study subjects, must be reported to the Sponsor and to the investigato r’s 
IRB as soon as a possible , but no later than 5 working days  of the protocol deviation.  
 
Withdrawal of IRB approval  
An investigator shall report to the sponsor a withdrawal of approval by [CONTACT_093]’s reviewing IRB as soon as a 
possible, but no later than 5 working days  of the IRB notification of withdrawal of approval.  
 
Protocol Deviations  
Any protocol deviations initiated without Sponsor and/or  the investigator’s IRB approval that may affect the scientific 
soundness of the study, or affect the rights, safety, or welfare of s tudy subjects, must be reported to the Sponsor and to the 
investigator’s IRB as soon as a possible, but no later than [ADDRESS_455412] the 
subjects’ privacy interests.  P atient recruitment and informed consent will be obtained in the UCDMC perioperative suite 
only when there is sufficient time for a complete discussion between the investigator and the patient.  Recruitment will be b y 
direct discussion between the prospecti ve candidates and the study investigators prior to their scheduled surgical procedure.  
The investigators will provide the consent form in person and give the prospective subject sufficient time to review the 
consent form and discuss the study with friends  and family.  
10.[ADDRESS_455413] access 
to.  Data will be retained for up to 2 years following completion of the final analysis . 
10.3 Source Documents  
Source data is all information, original records of clinical findings, observations, or other activities in a clinical trial 
necessary for the reconstruction and evaluation of the trial.  Source data are contained in source documents.  Examples of 
these original documents and data records include: hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1097], clinical and office charts, laboratory n otes, memoranda,  
recorded data from automated instruments, and copi[INVESTIGATOR_16213].  
Oxygen Reserve Index: Utility as Early Warning for Desaturation in Morbidly Obese Patients  
FLEM0 004 version 3                                                                                                                               
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2022  Masimo Corporation (Unpublished)  
All Rights Reserved  Page 10 of 11 12 
 
 
 10.4 Case Report Forms  
The Sponsor shall provide a paper Case Report Form (CRF) template to the Site. The Site shall c apture study data in the 
CRFs for each subject enrolled. The CRFs will be completed and signed by [CONTACT_22660]. This also applies to those 
subjects who fail to complete the study. If a subject withdraws from the study, the reason must be noted on  the CRF. Case 
report forms are to be completed on an ongoing basis. CRF entries and corrections will only be performed by [CONTACT_108575],  
authorized by [CONTACT_093]. Entries and corrections to the CRF will be made following Good Documentation Practi ces.  
The CRF will include the following information, including but not limited to: inclusion / exclusion criteria, whether patient  
consent obtained before start of study, demographic information, device readings, and if occurrence of any adverse event, 
protocol deviation, and device deficiencies, etc.  The CRF will be signed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_364622].  
CRF entries will be checked by [CONTACT_108576]. Query resolution will  be assessed and confirmed by [CONTACT_108577]. The monitor or study manager will 
collect original completed and signed CRFs at the end of the case. A copy of the completed and signed CRFs will remain on 
site. 
10.[ADDRESS_455414] Retention  
Study data will be retained for the necessary period of time as required by [CONTACT_8236]’s regulations.  Study Records shall 
be retained for a minimum of two years after study cl osure. The Institution’s own retention policies and regulations may 
apply in addition to the minimal requirement.  
11 MONITORING PLAN  
11.1 As the sponsor of this clinical investigation, Masimo Corporation is required by 21 CFR, Part 812, of the Food and 
Drug Admin istration regulations to monitor and oversee the progress of the investigation.  The monitor(s) assigned 
by [CONTACT_108579] a direct employee from the Clinical Research department trained on 
departmental SOPs on conduct and monitori ng of sponsored studies.  
11.[ADDRESS_455415] three scheduled monitoring visits to 
ensure overall regulatory compliance of the study:  
• An initiation visit, prior to any subject enrollment to confirm s ite readiness, and to document training on the 
study protocol and procedures, and use of equipment.  
• At least one monitoring visit during enrollment , when about 10 -15% done and/or every year   
• A final close out visit after the last patient had finished the study.  
Oxygen Reserve Index: Utility as Early Warning for Desaturation in Morbidly Obese Patients  
FLEM0 004 version 3                                                                                                                               
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2022  Masimo Corporation (Unpublished)  
All Rights Reserved  Page [ADDRESS_455416] access to all source 
documents needed to verify the entries in the CRFs and other GCP -related documents (IRB approvals, IRB 
correspondences, and ICFs) provided that subject confidentiality is maintained in agreement with HIPAA 
regulations.  
11.4 It will be the monitor's responsibility to inspect the CRFs at regular intervals throughout the study, to verify the 
adherence to the CIP and the completeness, consistency and accuracy of the data being entered on them.  
11.5 During each visit, the monitor will also verify presence of informed consent, adherence to the inclusion/exclusion 
criteria, and documentatio n of SAEs/SADEs and protocol deviations/violations, and check CRF against source 
documentation.  
11.6 After each visit, the monitor will provide a monitoring report to the investigator within 4 weeks of visit completion. 
The monitoring report will detail finding s and open action items observed during the visit. It is the responsibility of 
the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_52695](s) to respond to the findings of the monitoring report, and complete 
any open action items as soon as possible but no later than  60 days of receiving the monitoring report. Any open 
action items not completed within the time allowed may be sufficient grounds for study site suspension or 
termination; it will be up to the sponsor to determine whether any incomplete action items are s ufficient grounds for 
suspension or termination. See Section 16 for details on suspension and termination.  
11.7 Depending on the quality of the data and/or changes to factors affecting patient safety, additional monitoring visits 
may be necessary according at the sponsor’s discretion.  
 
12 ADMINISTRATIVE ASPEC TS 
  
12.1 Confidentiality  
All data collected will be kept confidential and de -identified. It can only be accessed by [CONTACT_108581].  
12.2 Protocol Amendments  
Any changes made to  the clinical investigational plan/study protocol will be documented by [CONTACT_108582]. Before 
submitting protocol amendment to the IRB, the protocol amendment must be agreed upon and signed by [CONTACT_364628] [INVESTIGATOR_11305]. The prot ocol amendment will be submitted to the IRB for approval. At a minimum, a redline 
version and a clean version of the new protocol amendment will be kept on file by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_11305]. Protocol 
amendments will need to be version controlled. Both PI [INVESTIGATOR_364623].  
12.3 Suspension or Termination of Study Site  
The sponsor can suspend or prematurely terminate the PI’s and study site’s participation in the study, particular ly if sponsor 
finds serious non -compliance by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_108559], and if such non -compliance was not resolved in a timely manner. The sponsor 
will document the decision to suspend or terminate the investigation in writing. A suspended study site cannot enroll new 
subjects.  
If the sponsor determine that the study site’s compliance to be inadequate at any point during the study, and sponsor move to  
suspend or terminate the study site, the sponsor will provide notification in writing to the principal investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_329819]. The study site is eligible for reinstatement upon correction of any findings and any open action items prior to th e 
suspension, and provides a written guarantee that the same non -compliance will not reoccur in the future. Site can on ly 
resume patient enrollment upon receiving written notification of reinstatement from the sponsor.  
If for any GCP and Regulatory non -compliance reasons the study site is prematurely terminated by [CONTACT_456], then the 
study site is not eligible for reins tatement under the same Clinical Investigational Plan/Study Protocol.  
Oxygen Reserve Index: Utility as Early Warning for Desaturation in Morbidly Obese Patients  
FLEM0 004 version 3                                                                                                                               
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2022  Masimo Corporation (Unpublished)  
All Rights Reserved  Page 12 of 11 12 
 
 
 12.4 Termination of Clinical Investigation/Study due to UADE  
The clinical investigation may be terminated if sponsor determines that an unanticipated adverse device effect presents an 
unreas onable risk to the subjects. Termination shall occur not later than [ADDRESS_455417].  
The sponsor may resume the terminated clinical investigation with prior IRB approval if the device is non -significant risk.  
13 AGREEMENT BETWEEN IN VESTIGATOR AND SPONS OR REGARDING RESPONS IBILITIES FOR 
GOOD CLINICAL PRACTI CE 
International Conference of Harmonization (ICH) E6 Good Clinical Practice guidance is an international ethical and 
scientific quality standard for designing, conducting, recording, and reporting trials that involve the participation of huma n 
subjects.  
It specifies general requirements intended to:  
 Protect the rights, sa fety and well -being of human subjects,  
 Ensure the scientific conduct of the clinical investigation and the credibility of the clinical investigation results,  
 Assist sponsors, monitors, investigators, ethics committees, regulatory authorities and other bodi es involved in the 
conformity assessment of medical devices.  
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_329808]:  
 Obtain and maintain IRB approval of the study.  
 Ensure all subjects are consented prior to enrollment, per FDA Code of Federal Regul ations titled 21 CFR 50.  
 Ensure only appropriately trained personnel will be involved in clinical investigation.  
 Maintain study records mentioned in the CIP.  
 Maintain logs for study team delegation, site visit/monitoring, equipment disposition, study team training, subject 
recruitment and enrollment.  
 Evaluate all adverse events and adverse device effects and determining whether the study is safe to continue.  
 Allow the sponsor to conduct periodic monitoring of study activities to ensure GCP compliance.  
 Not p romote device prior to clearance by [CONTACT_108584], except for academic purposes and 
scientific presentations.  
The Sponsor shall insure existence and record of all necessary compliance documents, and wil l conduct monitoring visits to 
ensure appropriate conduct of the study.  