1 
 
Version 03-06-20 
 Title: Randomized Controlled Trial of ADHD Portal -Integrated Behavioral 
Reward Program Intervention  
 
Date Submitted: 3/6/20  
 
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_714090], Ph.D.  
 
Co-Investigators:  Bill Brinkman, MD, Kevin Hommel, Ph.D., Leanne Tamm, Ph.D., Aaron 
Vaughn, Ph.D., James Peugh, Ph.D. , Allison Zoromski, Ph.D . 
[ADDRESS_972469]:  
 
Though the most effective treatment for children with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
(ADHD)  consists of combined medication and behavioral strategies, the vast majority of children 
with ADHD are treated with medication only.  While effective, medication primarily targets ADHD 
symptoms and typi[INVESTIGATOR_714091] -related areas of  functional impairment 
such as academic underachievement, impaired social relationships, and disrupted family 
functioning.  One reason for the low rates of behavioral treatment is that primary care 
pediatricians, not mental health professionals, are respon sible for treating the vast majority of 
children with ADHD.  We have developed, tested, and are beginning to disseminate web -based 
software ( www. mehealth for ADHD .com ) that has been shown in randomized clinical t rials to 
improve the quality of ADHD medication care delivered by [CONTACT_153997]. However, the current 
software functionality is limited entirely to medication management. The goal of the proposed 
study is to test the integration of behavioral tools into th e evidence -based mehealth for 
ADHD .com software in order to improve access to behavioral treatment strategies, and 
ultimately improve outcomes for children with ADHD.  The automated algorithms and decision 
rules we develop ed for creating and monitoring the behavioral tools will ensure that behavioral 
treatments like daily report cards and token economies are delivered in a manner that is 
consistent with the e vidence -base. We will conduct a randomized control trial to assess whether 
those with access to the b ehavioral tools exhibit the following:  1) higher rates of behavioral 
treatment; 2) better integrity of behavioral treatments when they are used; 3) less functional 
impairment; and 4) higher satisfaction with ADHD treatment than families  in the control group.  
By [CONTACT_714103] .com software, we are 
increasing families’  access to evidence -based care.  This is especially critical for rural and 
underserved communities who have no or limited acc ess to evidence -based mental health 
services. Moreover, by [CONTACT_714104], teachers, and 
pediatricians, we are making it more likely that children will receive a high quality of care that 
includes both medication man agement and behavioral strategies, thereby [CONTACT_714105].   
 
PURPOSE OF STUDY:  
 
The primary goal of the proposed project is to test the integration of behavioral tools into the 
evidence -based mehealth for ADHD .com software in order to improve the access to and the 
integrity of evidence -based behavioral treatment strategies for children with ADHD.  
 
BACKGROUND:  
 
Statement of the problem  
The Center for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC’s) national survey o n ADHD 
diagnosis and treatment patterns in the [LOCATION_002] documented that 11% (6.4 million 
children) of children ages 4 – 17 years had been diagnosed with ADHD at some point in their 
lives, with 8.8% of all children currently diagnosed with ADHD (Susanna N Visser et al., 2014) . 
Children with ADHD experience significant impairments across multiple domains of functioning, 
including educational, interpersonal, and family functioning (DuPaul & Stoner, 2014; Efron et al., 
2014; Wehmeier, Schacht, & Barkley, 2010; Wymbs et al., 2008) . Fortunately, evidence -based 
treatments for children with ADHD exist (Steven W Evans, Owens, Mautone, DuPaul, & Power, 
2014) . Pharmacological treatment is by [CONTACT_714106] (S. N. 
Visser et al., 2015; Susanna N Visser et al., 2014) . Pharmacological treatments clearly produce 
marked improvement in ADHD symptoms (e.g., improved attention, reduced 
hyperactivity)36,(Pliszka, 2007) . However, ADHD symptom improvements do not translate into 
3 
 
Version 03-06-20 
 overall improvements in functional impairme nt(Currie, Stabile, & Jones, 2014; J.N.  Epstein et 
al., 2010; O'Connor, Garner, Peugh, Simon, & Epstein, 2015) . 
The other treatment strategy included i n evidence -based treatment guidelines is behavioral 
treatment. Behavioral treatments for ADHD specifically target areas of functional impairment 
such as noncompliance, social functioning, homework completion and organization 
skills (Chronis, Jones , & Raggi, 2006; DuPaul, Eckert, & Vilardo, 2012; Steven W Evans, 
Owens, & Bunford, 2013; Pfiffner, Villodas, Kaiser, Rooney, & McBurnett, 2013; Storer, Evans, 
& Langberg, 2014)  and have been shown to be quite effective (i.e., effect sizes on functional 
impairment approach 0.61 [Cohen’s d] (Vannest, Davis, Davis, Mason, & Burke, 2010) ; see 
Fabiano et al. (Gregory A Fabiano et al., 2009)  for a meta -analytic review). Given that 
pharmacological t reatment primarily improves ADHD symptoms and behavioral treatments 
improve impairments, it is perhaps not surprising that combining these two treatment modalities 
is the most effective treatment option and is universally recommended (Chronis et al., 2006;  Daly 
et al., 2007; Education, 2004; Pediatrics, 2011; Psychiatry, 2007) . Combined treatment results 
in larger improvements than either modality alone (Conners et  al., 2001) . Further, it has been 
documented that when children are receiving behavioral treatment, lower doses of medication 
can be used (Gregory A Fabiano et al., 2007; W. E. Pelham et al., 2014; Vitiello et al., 2001) . 
Also, parents and teachers view behavioral treatments as highly acceptable (Corkum, Bessey, 
McGonnell, & Dorbeck, 2015; Gage & Wilson, 2000; Liu, Robin, Brenner, & Eastman, 1991; 
Monastra, 2005; Power, Hess, & Bennett, 1995; Wilson & Jennings, 1996) . Despi[INVESTIGATOR_714092], either alone or in combination with 
medication, less than 25% of children with ADHD receive behavioral treatments (J.N. Ep stein et 
al., 2014; Gellad et al., 2014) . Hence, most children with ADHD are not receiving a critical 
modality of ADHD treatment - behavioral treatment - and thus remain functionally impaired.  
 
Why don’t children with ADHD recei ve evidence -based behavioral treatments?  
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_714093] a mental health disorder, the majority of children with ADHD are 
evaluated and treated by [CONTACT_200791] - generally pediatricians - rather than by 
[CONTACT_368894] (Bernal, 2003; Zito et al., 1999) . Most pediatricians accept the 
evaluation and treatment of children with ADHD as being a core job responsibility (Stein et al., 
2008) . However, pediatricians are inclined to provide medication to children with ADHD but v ery 
rarely provide, facilitate, or refer children/families for behavioral treatments (J.N. Epstein et al., 
2014; Gellad et al., 2014) .  
Fortunately, the reasons that t he vast majority of children with ADHD treated by [CONTACT_29436] -
based pediatricians do not receive behavioral treatments are fairly well understood. First, 
pediatricians consistently report that they do not have the time or knowledge to deliver 
behavioral trea tments to their patients with ADHD (S. M. Horwitz et al., 2007) . Second, most 
communities lack access to effective and affordable behavioral treatment. For example, only 
33% of pediatricians believe that behavioral treatments are readily accessible in their 
communities (Rushton, Fant, & Clark, 2004) . This belief is supported by [CONTACT_714107] t he 
Health Resour ces and Services Administration which concluded that more than four -fifths of US 
counties do not have enough mental health professionals to accommodate the need for mental 
health services (Services, 2012 ).  Further, pediatricians are concerned that if they refer families, 
the behavioral treatments available will be low quality, unaffordable (Fiks, Hughes, Gafen, 
Guevara, & Bar g, 2011)  and will require long wait times (S. M. Horwitz et al., 2007) . Third, 
parents of children with ADHD share these concerns, with 53% of parents reporting system 
barriers (e.g., insurance reimbursement) to receiving AD HD behavioral treatment (Bussing, 
Zima, Gary, & Garvan, 2003; P. L. Owens et al., 2002) .  
 
How can the accessibility and integrity of behavioral treatments be addressed?  
4 
 
Version 03-06-20 
 It is clear innovative methods are needed to 1) increase the accessibility  of behavioral 
treatments to children with AD HD as well as to 2) improve the integrity  of treatment delivery of 
behavioral treatments. Realizing that pediatricians are likely to remain the primary mental health 
providers, many have argued that the best approach to improving mental health outcomes is to 
support primary care physicians in their delivery of mental health services (J. Geller & Muus, 
1997; J. M. Geller, 1999) . One promising method for providing this support is through the use of 
technology.  In fact, the US government has promoted the use of technology to address health 
care disparities through both America n Recovery and Reinvestment Act funding initiatives and 
mandates within the recent Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act which specifically 
proposes the meaningful use of technology to improve health care for all citizens (Public Law 
111-148; March 23 , 2010).  
In response to these governmental mandates, technologically -based and telehealth 
interventions have increased rapi[INVESTIGATOR_714094] (Medicine, 2012) . While many of these 
online interventions offer some form of professional support, many are self -guided and involve 
merely interaction with a web -based interface. Though ear ly technological intervention research 
demonstrated the advantage of supported types vs. self -guided web -based 
interventions (Richards & Richardson, 2012) , several recent studies using more interactive 
interfaces h ave demonstrated that self -guided technological -interfaces are as effective as 
supported technological interventions (Berger, Hammerli, Gubser, Andersson, & Caspar, 2011; 
Dear et al., 2015; Furmark et al., 2009; Leykin, Muñoz, Contreras, & Latham, 2014) . Moreover, 
some of these web -based self -guided interventions produce similar treatment effect  sizes to 
clinician -delivered interventions (Carlbring, Westling, Ljungstrand, Ekselius, & Andersson, 2001; 
Proudfoot et al., 2004) , and have similar levels of satisfaction as traditional face -to-face 
interventions (Spence, Holmes, March, & Lipp, 20 06). To date, effective self -guided web -based 
cognitive -behavioral interventions have been developed and demonstrated to be efficacious for 
several disorders, which similar to ADHD have established evidence -based treatments. These 
include interventions for social phobia (Berger, Caspar, et al., 2011) , OCD (Wootton, Dear, 
Johnston, Ter ides, & Titov, 2014) , depression (Berger, Hammerli, e t al., 2011)  and 
insomnia (Lancee, van den Bout, van Straten, & Spoormaker, 2013) .   
The development of behavioral interventions for children with ADHD (e.g., daily report 
cards, token economies) which involve the development and refinement of appropriate 
behavioral goals, defining the monitoring schedule, monitoring performance, and deriv ing 
effective rewards can all be facilitated through web -based algorithms and interfaces. 
Specifically, we propose to develop web -based software that allows multiple users (e.g., 
parents, teachers) to work collaboratively to develop behavioral goals, monit oring schedules, 
and reward plans. Program routines, called wizards, will guide parents and teachers though a 
series of customized steps to develop and implement behavioral treatments for home and/or 
school. A software  wizard  or setup assistant  is a type o f user interface  that presents a sequence 
of dialog boxes  that lead the user through a series of steps t owards goal completion. Wizards 
can prompt parents and teachers to identify and prioritize behavioral targets, aid in the collection 
of baseline data on behavioral targets, and assist with the creation of rewards and reward 
schedules. Moreover, a web -based  platform allows for online data capture and graphing of 
children’s performance, providing a simple way for parents to track progress towards behavioral 
performance goals. Also, the wizard will be programmed to ensure that behavioral targets, 
monitoring sc hedules, and rewards are realistic and evidence -based. Further, the wizard can 
provide suggestions for improving the integrity of the intervention (e.g., frequency of monitoring, 
saliency of reward, level needed for goal attainment), when adequate progress  is not being 
made. A major advantage of such online behavioral tools is that they remove the need for a 
pediatrician to implement the behavioral treatments and do not require referral to a mental 
health professional when access is limited due to cost, tra nsportation issues, scheduling 
difficulties, or a shortage of mental health providers.  
5 
 
Version 03-06-20 
 STUDY DESIGN:  
 
The primary goal of the proposed project is to develop and test the integration of behavioral 
tools into the evidence -based myadhdportal.com software in o rder to improve the access to and 
the integrity of evidence -based behavioral treatment strategies for children with ADHD. To 
accomplish this objective, we propose the following specific aim : 
 
1) Conduct a cluster -randomized controlled trial in community pe diatric settings to test 
whether integration of the behavioral tools into the myADHDportal.com software:  
a) increases access to and rates of behavioral treatment;  
b) facilitates better integrity of behavioral interventions when implemented;  
c) improves fun ctional impairment in children with ADHD; and  
d) generates higher satisfaction with ADHD care.  
 
SELECTION AND RECRUITMENT OF PARTICIPANTS  
 
Up to [ADDRESS_972470] majority of research establishing the efficacy of behavioral 
treatments was conducted with elementary school age children. For medicated patients, we will 
require that they be on a stable medication/dosage for 1 month prior to their participation in the 
study to reduce the possibility that medication or dosing changes occur during the period of 
study enrollment. By [CONTACT_714108]/dosing changes, we can more accurately attribute 
child outcomes to implementation  of behavioral strategies. Even with this specification, 
medication/dosage changes will occur. We will assess for medication/dosage changes 
throughout the study and statistically control for these in analyses.  
To recruit participants, w e will ask local pediatricians that are  currently using the mehealth 
for ADHD portal to send out correspondence  to their patients ’ parents  that are registered  on the 
mehealth for ADHD portal inviting them to participate in the study . The pediatricians  we have 
identified to date  that we will use for this research protocol have more than 1,500  patients 
registered on the mehealth for ADHD portal. The correspondence from the physician’s office to 
their patient ’s parents  will either occur via  phone,  mail, e mail, or using the messaging system 
within the mehealth for ADHD portal.  It will be up to the physician’s office which method of 
correspondence to utilize for contact[CONTACT_192066] ’ parents .  If contact[CONTACT_3012], office 
staff will use a phone script . If parent expresses willingness to be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530], office staff will 
gather the parent’s contact [CONTACT_714109]’s contact 
[CONTACT_289271].  Email, mail, and messaging system correspondence will 
contain a link to a REDCap  form that will allow parents to enter their contact [CONTACT_714110] . As needed, we may also recruit additional pediatrician’s 
which use the mehealth for ADHD portal.  
Participants will also be recr uited from a patients previously seen at  Cincinnati Children’s 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_714095] (CCHMC) Division of Behavioral Medicine and Clinical Psychology  
(BMCP) who are in the right age range and have a diagnosis of ADHD . Potentially eligible 
families will be  sent a letter indicating that they were identified because of having been seen 
previously at BMCP  along with a “do not contact” postcard. The letter will include  a written link 
to a REDCap form that will allow parents to send their contact [CONTACT_30160]. Contact 
[CONTACT_714111]. Families not returning the “opt out” postcards within [ADDRESS_972471] the  parent  to provide  them with additional  information 
about the study.  If the parent is interested in participating, the parent will be asked several 
questions to ensure that the parent  meets the study’s inclusion criteria.  Specifically, the parent 
6 
 
Version 03-06-20 
 will be asked whether the ir child: 1) is in grades K -6; 2) has been  diagnosed with ADHD; 3) if 
currently being prescribed ADHD medication, ensuring they have been on a stable 
medication/dosag e for 1 month; and 4) is still experiencing ADHD -related impairment at school  
as evidenced by a score of [ADDRESS_972472] access to a computer or  
smartphone to participate. In order to characterize the sample and to ensure that the sample is 
representative, parents will  also be asked their Medicaid status and race/ethnicity information.  
Research staff will also explain to the parent that if their child is randomized to receive the 
intervention, they will be encouraged  to use the behavioral tools during the next year. If the 
parent states that they are not interested or unwilling to use t he tools, they will not be eligible to 
participate.   
 
PROCESS OF OBTAIN ING CONSENT  
 
In order to obtain physician consent, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_714096].  
If the parent  was recruited from  a participating pediatrician’s practice and meets criteria, the 
research assistant will review the consent and discuss the study in detail  with the parent . If the 
participant continues to be interested in participating, a study staff member will request specific 
information (i.e., parent’s  first and last name, date of birth, zip code, and e -mail address) in 
order to enroll them in the e -consent software. This information on all eligible participants will be 
entered/uploaded into the web -based cons ent management application hosted at CCHMC. An  
email notification will be sent to the email address provided by [CONTACT_7071]. All email notifications 
sent for this study will not contain any PHI. The email will contain  a link which will allow the 
parent  to view the e -consent web site.  This link will be unique to the participant and will have a 
pre-defined expi[INVESTIGATOR_320].  Parents will log into the consent application and the password will 
be their current ZIP code. They will then be presented with the conse nt form.  After reading 
through the form (i.e., scrolling to the bottom), they will have an opportunity to check a box 
stating that they agree to provide their consent.  There will also be fields for full name. Once 
they have typed their full name, they wi ll be able to submit . Included in the email and the e -
consent document will be contact [CONTACT_714112] a study staff member if 
they have questions. Parents can also provide a phone number via the e -consent application if 
they wish for st udy staff to call them about their questions.  If parents have questions, they will 
be asked to come back to the application after those questions have been resolved.  After a 
participant has submitted their consent, a link will appear giving them the opti on to print a copy 
or save the consent form.   
If the parent  was recruited because their child was a patient at BMCP  and meets criteria, 
the research assistant will review the consent and discuss the study in detail with the parent . If 
the participant conti nues to be interested in participating, a study staff member will request 
specific information (i.e., parent’s first and last name  [INVESTIGATOR_1238] e -mail address ) in order to send the 
parent a link to a REDCap consent form.  After reading through the form (i.e., scrolling to the 
bottom  and selecting “Yes” to consenting ), they will have an opportunity to submit  their 
consenting signature . All email  notifications sent for this study will not contain any PHI. The 
email will cont ain a link which will allow the parent to view the REDCap form and study consent 
form. This link will be unique to the participant.  Parents will view the REDCap application and 
will be presented with the consent form.   
As children are not the targeted re search participants and all data will be obtained from 
parents only, we do not intend to obtain children’s assent for this  study.  
In addition to the parent ’s participation , we will also recruit  one of the child’s teachers to 
participate in the study.  If participant is consented with less than a month remaining in the 
current school year, the child’s teacher for the subsequent school year will be contact[CONTACT_30111] 
[ADDRESS_972473] teachers , research staff will 
send the parent a letter that the parent can deliver to the child’s teacher telling them about the 
research and asking them for permission to be contact[CONTACT_136501]. In this letter, there 
will be a REDCap survey link allowing the m to provide their contact [CONTACT_3031] (i.e. first and last 
name, email address, phone number) as well as the first and last name [CONTACT_714131]. Two methods will be used to inform teachers about 
the stud y. Either  a member of the research staff will call the teacher and describe the research 
study to the teacher using a phone script for teachers.  Or a member of the research staff  will 
email teachers an email  script  describing  the study  and a link to their REDCap survey. The 
phone script and email text explicitly ask teachers  to complete forms about the child’s behavior 
at school . If a teacher is contact[CONTACT_714113]’s behavior , the family will not be eligible to participate 
in the study.  
 
 
STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_714097]. After this meeting, study staff will perform a brief orientation with pediatricians 
of the software and their role in the study.  
Once informed consent is collected from the parent, the parent will be emailed a link to 
complete baseline measures using REDCap survey. The parent will also b e called to complete 
a phone interview regarding service use assessment.  The teacher will be emailed a link to a 
REDCap survey to complete the teacher -completed forms.  Once parent and teacher  (for 
students whose parents consent prior to 1 month before th e end of the school year ) have 
completed the forms, the parent  will be randomly assigned to either receive 1) immediate 
access to the integrated behavioral tools on the mehealth for ADHD portal, or 2)  wait-list control 
group whereby [CONTACT_714114] 1 year .  In order to control for the types of patient populations and settings 
across the two groups, randomization will occu r within each pediatrician.  That is, an equal 
number of families  of each pediatrician will be assigned to the intervention and control groups.  
Randomizing in this manner should ensure equal representation of Medicaid status and 
race/ethnicity across the two groups.  During the  brief orientation with pediatricians , they will be 
made aware of the integrated behavioral tools intervention that their families may have access.  
Both intervention and control families  will continue to have  access to the mehealth for 
ADHD software. However, the intervention group will have access to integrated  behavioral tools  
immediately (see description below) while t he control group will not receive access to the 
behavioral tools for [ADDRESS_972474] parents  and teachers and administer measure s 
related to behavioral tool implementation, patient outcomes (i.e., functional impairment), and 
consumer satisfaction.  If the [ADDRESS_972475] an additional set of questionnaires from the parent and teacher at the 
end of the child’s academic year in order to capture how well the child is doing in school.  These 
surveys will be administered preferably using online surveys (REDCap) but research assistants 
will administer these survey s by [CONTACT_714115].   
At the end of the study, physicians will be asked to fill out a Pediatrician Consumer 
Satisfaction Survey that will ask how satisfied they were with the software.  
 
8 
 
Version 03-06-20 
 Integrated Behavioral Tools  
Evidence -based behavioral strategies employ operant procedures (i.e., rewarding desired 
behaviors) in order to increase the chances that the desired behavior will be emitted again in the 
future. For example, one of the most widely used behavioral treatments is a Daily Report Card 
(DRC). The DRC provides children with ADHD with specific, immediate, and frequent feedback 
to facilitate behavior change. A DRC typi[INVESTIGATOR_714098] a teacher monitors and tracks during the school day. The DRC is sent home to 
parents each  day after school where rewards/consequences are applied based upon the child’s 
performance. The efficacy of DRCs has been evaluated for children with ADHD as part of large 
multi -modal interventions (e.g., MTA Study (MTA Cooperative Group, 1999) ), as a stand -alone 
intervention (J. S. Owens et al., 2012) , and as implemented through IEPs (Gregory A Fabiano et 
al., 2010) . DRCs have been shown to improve parent -teacher communication and to improve 
the behavioral and academic functioning of children with ADHD (Gregory A Fabiano et al., 2010; 
J. S. Owens et al., 2012) . Other evidence -based behavioral interventions such as a token 
economies are effective (Reitman, Hupp, O'Callaghan, Gulley, & Northup)  (also see (Antshel & 
Barkley, 2008; W. E. Pelham, Jr. & Fabiano, 2008)  for reviews) and utilize the  same principles 
of behavior change, but instead focus on behavior in the home setting.  
 
Description of integrated behavioral tools  
1. Orientation to behavioral tools  
Within the existing mehealth for ADHD.com software, each registered patient has a record 
page which includes a section for treatment. As described above, there was previously  only 
functionality to initiate or track medication treatment. We have added a lin k that pediatricians 
can click to recommend the use of behavioral tools to a family. Once clicked, the parent will 
receive an email message via the mehealth for ADHD.com software’s communication system 
that 1) indicates that their pediatrician is recommend ing the use of this tool for their child; 2) 
describes the behavioral tool feature; and 3) provides them with a link to initiate the behavioral 
tool online within the parent -accessible module of the mehealth for ADHD.com software. A 
similar link exist s on the parent page that allow s a parent to initiate the behavioral tool for their 
child. Also, we include d a link on the teacher page that allow s a teacher to recommend the 
behavioral tool to parents. Whether initiated by [CONTACT_211634], parent, or teacher,  the 
behavioral tool wizard begin s with a description of the behavioral tool and a delineation of the 
required steps to create and implement the tool. A critical feature to orienting parents to the 
behavioral tools is motivating and engaging them to initia te the behavioral tool with their child. 
We have relied heavily on our stakeholders to provide feedback regarding best methods for 
engaging parents in this process. Indeed, in developi[INVESTIGATOR_714099].com 
software, we relied heavily on pedi atrician stakeholders to guide us regarding methods for 
engaging pediatricians in the use of the mehealth for ADHD.com software. As a result, the 
mehealth for ADHD.com homepage now employs video testimonials from pediatricians as well 
as a brief informatio nal video regarding functionality of the mehealth for ADHD.com software to 
motivate pediatricians to sign up to use the portal. We explore d similar methods with our 
stakeholders for motivating parents to utilize the behavioral tools.  
2. Identify the child’s b ehaviors that require targeting  
The next step is for parents and/or teachers to identify the child’s behaviors they would like 
to target with behavioral treatment. Parents or teachers can select  from a list of potential target 
behaviors or they can customi ze their own behaviors to target. If the parent has selected a 
school -based goal, the automated wizard send s a message to the teacher 1) describing the 
behavioral tool that the parent is in the process of creating; 2) delineating the steps that the 
teacher  will need to take to create and implement this tool at school; and 3) providing a link to 
allow the teacher to engage with the automated wizard to engage with the tool creation process. 
Similar to engaging parents to initiate the behavioral tool, we have also explore d methods for 
[ADDRESS_972476] been identified, a behavioral grid (see Figure 3) is generated 
that allow s behaviors to be tracked daily over the course of 
a single week to establish a baseline frequency for that 
behavior. The behavioral grid can be maintained online and 
is able to be accessed via computer or using a mobile 
interface on  a smartphone or it may be printed out and 
completed on paper and then entered daily into the online 
grid by [CONTACT_714116].  
4. Finalize target behavior goals   
After the baseline week’s behavioral data is 
collected/entered,  computerized algorithms within the 
wizard will derive SMART ( Specific, Measurable, Attainable, 
Relevant, and Time-limited) behavioral goals. Behavioral 
goals must be achievable during the initial weeks of the 
behavioral intervention in order for children to experience success and become motivated by 
[CONTACT_714117]. Thus initial SMART behavioral goals are set to require a defined, 
realistic, percent improvement from baseline for each behavior.  
5. Create plan for monitoring child’s target behavio rs 
After SMART behavioral goals are generated by [CONTACT_714118], a behavioral grid is generated 
along with a suggested monitoring schedule. Monitoring intervals are the time points each day 
when parents and/or teachers provide the student with feedback regardi ng their performance on 
the behavioral goals for the past interval. After parents / teachers have suggested modifications 
and agreed upon a final monitoring schedule, the behavioral grid will be finalized and behavioral 
monitoring will begin. As during base line data collection, parents and teachers can record the 
child’s performance directly into the online system or they can print out the behavioral grid, 
record on the printed version, and enter the data online at their convenience. Parents and 
teachers are also able to choose if they would like to receive reminders by [CONTACT_714119].  
6. Reward child for performance  
Right before monitoring begins, the automated wizard prompt s the family to develop a daily 
reward system. An effective daily rew ard system includes multiple reward levels. We use d 
green, yellow, and red levels based on children meeting defined thresholds for each level. 
Again, we collaborate d with our stakeholders to develop these thresholds. Parents and children 
derive a list of d aily rewards that will occur at each level if that behavioral target is met. The 
online wizard helps the parent and child come up with a suggested daily reward hierarchy (e.g., 
green level = 1 hour of video games; yellow level = ½ hour of video games; red level = no video 
games)  and a weekly reward . Once the behavioral monitoring begins, parents will receive daily 
and weekly email or text communications from the wizard alerting them to the daily rewards 
earned by [CONTACT_150359].  
7. Modify behavioral goals over t ime 
Behavioral performance over time is charted using annotated behavioral run charts (see 
Figure 4) which will be continuously monitored by [CONTACT_182880]. Parents are able to 
view these charts from within the software. In addition, teachers are able to view progress on 
school -based behaviors when they log on. If algorithms detect that a behavioral goal is being 
consistently met (e.g., child earns green level for 5 consecutive days), the parent and teacher 
are notified via messaging that performan ce goals have been met and need to be modified. 
Algorithms will then suggest a modification for the next performance goal. For example, if the 
 
Figure 3 : Sample behavioral grid for 
recording performance on target behaviors  
10 
 
Version 03-06-20 
 initial goal of raising your hand before speaking with less than 6 violations per day is being met 
consistently, the suggested next performance goal might be “interrupting the teacher less than 3 
times per day.” Once a child consistently meets a performance goal which eliminates that 
behavior (e.g., 0 class disruptions), the automated wizard will suggest another beha vior to target 
based on previously identified behaviors.  In addition, each time a new behavioral goal is 
selected, families are prompted to update the monitoring schedule and schedule of rewards if 
necessary.  
Interface with pediatrician  
While the behaviora l tools are designed in such a way to eliminate the need for 
pediatricians to manage the provision of these behavioral tools, it is important for pediatricians 
to be involved in monitoring the child’s progress. Pediatricians have the ability to review 
graphing of behavioral goals which have been  modified to not only show medication and dosage 
changes , but also annotate the initiation of behavioral treatment as well as modifications to the 
behavioral treatment. This allow s pediatricians to track any improvem ents or deterioration in 
behavior and functional impairment as a result of behavioral treatment.  
 
 Measures : The table below provides information about the measures and timeline for 
administration. Parent measures will take about 30 minutes to complete and teacher measures 
will take about 10 minutes to complete.  
 
*This time -point will only be collected if the 6 - or 12 -month timepoint falls during the summer 
months.  
a. Services Use Assessment:  This phone interview will be administered to parents at all 
assessment points to capture children’s ADHD service use  across mental health, 
primary care, school, and co mmunity settings. Data from th is interview  will be used to 
determine if behavioral treatments were implemented and whether mental health 
professionals were involved in setting up and monitoring its use  (access to behavioral 
treatments) . For each behavioral intervention, the Service Use Assessment will include 
detailed questions about the estimated percent of time that behavioral monitoring was Measure  Completed by  [CONTACT_714120]* 6-month 
post  12-month 
post  
Services Use 
Assessment  Parent  X X X X 
Impairment 
Rating Scale 
(IRS)  Parent, 
Teacher  X X X X 
Consumer 
Satisfaction  
Questionnaire  Parent, 
Teacher, 
Pediatrician   X X X 
Demographics 
Questionnaire  Parent  X    
Parental 
Motivation 
Inventory  Parent  X    
Adult ADHD 
Self-Report  Parent  X    
ADHD 
Knowledge 
and Opi[INVESTIGATOR_714100]  X    
[ADDRESS_972477] schedules will be coded on a 
similar 1 -10 scale. Reliability of codings will be established and monitored.  
b. Impairme nt Rating Scale  (IRS) : The IRS consists of 4 items included on both the 
parent - and teacher -report versions, including peer relations, academic progress, self -
esteem items as well as an overall severity/impairment rating. The parent -report version 
also has  items assessing sibling relations, parent –child relations, and impact of the 
child’s behavior on the family, whereas the teacher -report version has items assessing 
teacher -child relations and classroom functioning. Items are rated on a scale ranging 
from 0 (no impairment) to 6 (extreme impairment). The IRS demonstrates excellent 
temporal stability and evidence of convergent and discriminant validity (G.A. Fabiano et 
al., 2006)  and is sensitive to treatment effects (S. W. Evans, Langberg, Raggi, Allen, & 
Buvinger, 2005; S.W.  Evans, Serpell, Schultz, & Pastor, 2007) . Parents and teachers 
will complete their respective versions of  this scale at baseline, follow -up (if the 6 - or 12 -
month timepoint falls during the summer months ), 6- and [ADDRESS_972478] -baseline.  
c. Family/Teacher c onsumer satisfaction questionnaire : Parents’ and teacher s’ satisfaction 
will be assessed with a consumer satisfaction questionnaire that asks specifically about 
how satisfied they were with the myADHDportal.com software . Collected at baseline, 
follow -up (if the 6 - or 12 -month timepoint falls during the summer mon ths) and [ADDRESS_972479] us if interested.  
d. Pediatrician consumer satisfaction questionnaire : Pediatricians’  satisfaction will be 
assessed at the e nd of their participation in the research study with a consumer 
satisfaction questionnaire that asks specifically about how satisfied they were with the 
myADHDportal.com software .  
e. Demographics questionnaire : We will ask parents to report on race/ethnicity, 
socioeconomic status, and level of education. Collected at baseline only.  
f. Parental Motivation Inventory : [ADDRESS_972480] 
treatment adherence (Nock & Photos, 2006) .  Collected at baseline only.  
g. Adult ADHD Self -Report Scale : 18-item parent -complete d measure to screen parents 
for ADHD . Collected at baseline  assessment  only.  
h. ADHD Knowledge and Opi[INVESTIGATOR_714101] : Used to query parents about their acceptability, 
feasibility, and perceived competence of treatment .  Items are summed in each of these 
domains to provide estimates of these constructs (Bennett, Power, Rostain, & Carr, 
1996) .  Collected at baseline o nly. 
 
 
DURATION:  
 
The entire project will take place over a 2-year time period.  
 
12 
 
Version 03-06-20 
 DATA ANALYSIS:  
 
Data management and methods to prevent and handling of missing data  
Specific data structure routines will be utilized including double -entry bookkeepi[INVESTIGATOR_714102]. Data discrepancies will be resolved by [CONTACT_714121]. In order to ensure that missing data are not affecting th e pattern of our results 
or affecting the representativeness of our sample, we will conduct a missing data attrition 
analysis to identify potentials for non -random or systematic attrition (MNAR) related to key 
independent and dependent variables. In cases of MNAR missing data, selection and pattern 
mixture models will be used to appropriately address non -random attrition.  
 
Hypothesis testing  
The primary set of analyses will be conducted following “intent to treat” principles (i.e., 
including all randomized subjects). Specifically, Hierarchical Linear Mixed Models (HLMM) will 
be used to evaluate the effectiveness of the interventions. We will use HLMM models to model 
individual variability in developmental trajectories in response to treatment and to model 
potential non -linear effectiveness (Kreft & DeLeuw, 1998) . Further, HLMM models do not make 
assumptions requiring e qual sample sizes, and allow for missing observations, subjects being 
measured at differing time points, as well as estimation of random subgroup specific effects. 
Thus, HLMM provides an efficient and powerful means of assessing time -invariant 
characterist ics (e.g., gender or age) on mean changes in the dependent variable (Diggle, Liang, 
& Zeger, 1994) . 
Before conducting any analyses, comparability of patients across the intervention and 
control groups at baseline on a variety of variables will be assessed  (e.g. gender, age, % of 
public insurance patients). These variables should be held equal via our r andomization 
procedures. If they are not equal, these pediatrician variables will be used as covariates in the 
HLMM model s. 
 
Hypothesis #1 : Children with ADHD who have access to the behavioral treatment tools on 
mehealth for ADHD .com will receive behavioral treatments at significantly higher rates as 
compared to children who do not have access to mehealth for ADHD .com -integrated behavioral 
tools.  
Hypothesis #2 : Children with ADHD who have access to the behavioral treatment tools o n 
mehealth for ADHD .com will receive behavioral treatments of higher quality,  as indicated by 
[CONTACT_714122], compared to children 
who do not have access to mehealth for ADHD .com -integrated behaviora l tools.  
Analyses: A one -level (pediatricians) HLMM analysis will be conducted comparing intervention 
and control patients  on rates and quality of behavioral treatment over time. Using data regarding 
use of behavioral treatment from baseline, 6 -, and 12 -month SCA -PI [CONTACT_57245], we will include 
Group (Intervention vs. Control) and Time (baseline, 6 -, and 12 -months) variables i n the 
analyses. A Group x Time interaction term will indicate whether intervention effects are present.  
 
Hypothesis #3:  Children treated with access to the mehealth for ADHD .com enhanced with 
behavioral tools will have fewer areas of parent - and teacher -rated functional impairment than 
children treated for ADHD without access to the behavioral tools.  
Analyses : The primary dependent measures for measurement of child outcomes will be the IRS 
total score as rated by [CONTACT_714123]. HLMM modelin g will use a r ater variable to allow 
parent and teacher ratings to be entered into the same model . These HLMM analyses will 
evaluate whether growth curves using baseline, [ADDRESS_972481]. In order to control for additional treatments received by [CONTACT_714124], we will add time -varying covariates indicating medication/dosing changes (for 
children in both groups) and institution of behavioral treatment (for children in the control group) 
to the HLMM models. Exploratory analyses will also assess for interv ention effects across the 
separate IRS domains.  
 
Hypothesis #4:  Families treated for ADHD with access to the mehealth for ADHD .com 
enhanced with behavioral tools will have experience higher satisfaction with ADHD treatment 
compared to families treated for ADHD without access to the behavioral tools.  
Analyses: The dependent measure for these analyses will be satisfaction summary scores from 
the consumer satisfaction measures. Similar to the child outcome analyses (Hypothesis #3), a 
HLMM analysis will be cond ucted using between -group comparisons  of 6- and 12 -month data  
from the randomized trial.  
 
Exploratory moderator analyses: Possible moderators of treatment effects on rates of and 
integrity of behavioral treatment and patient outcomes include parental psyc hological distress, 
parental ADHD, and parental motivation for treatment. Each of these variables measured at 
baseline will be inserted into the hierarchical models as a main effect and as an interaction with 
time. Any interaction between the moderator var iable and time would indicate that the 
moderator variable is impacting intervention efficacy.  
 
Power analysis  
The proposed study was powered to detect treatment effects on improving child outcomes since 
this is the ultimate goal of the proposed interventi on. Effect size estimates for child outcomes 
were obtained from and from two randomized trials examining the efficacy of behavioral 
interventions (e.g., daily report cards) on functional impairment outcomes in children with ADHD 
(Gregory A Fabiano et al., 2010; J. S. Owens et al., 2012) . Both of these studies report 
behavioral treatment effect sizes on functional impairment outcomes in the range of . 40-.65 
(Cohen’s d). We used Optimal Design Software© (University of Michigan, 2005) to determine 
the appropriate sample size using the following assum ptions: 1) α = 0.05, 2) T = 3 repeated 
(baseline, 6 months, & 12 months) measurements, 3) repeated measures variance (σ2) equal to 
1, 4) family  level variance (τ 00&τ11) equal to 1, and 4) a maximum 20% rate of longitudinal 
attrition (based on Epstein et al .(J.N. Epstein et al., 2007) ). Based on these assumptions, we 
determined that power > 0.80 could be achieved if we recruited up to 200 parents .  
 
POTENTIAL BENEFITS:  
 
Although we cannot guarantee a benefit to any individual participating parent, or teacher, 
the behavioral tools are evidence -based strategies with significant support from the research 
and clinical literature. Thus, families have the p otential to benefit from state -of-the-art treatment 
(i.e., combined treatment with medication and behavioral interventions) which is recommended 
by [CONTACT_714125] (American Academy of Pediatrics, 
2011).  Benefits of the study outweigh any potential risks because our interventions are likely to 
improve care and outcomes for children who receive them.  
 
POTENTIAL RISKS, DISCOMFORTS, INCONVENIENCES, AND PRECAUTIONS:    
 
There is minimal risk to the participants in this study other than a potential for invasion of 
privacy. Because confidential information about study participants will be available to study staff, 
procedures to safeguard the confidentiality of this informat ion are required.  Several safeguards 
will be put in place.  Study staff will have access to view participant data upon e -consent.  
[ADDRESS_972482] access to the database in order to perform quality assurance and system 
maintenance.  The database of the consent management application is encrypted to prevent 
unauthorized data disclosure.  The connection between the application front -end and the 
database and between the appli cation front -end and the user’s web browser is also encrypted.  
Using e -consent methods, if a participant declines to participate, the parent’s records will be 
marked to denote his/her refusal.  If a parent chooses not to consent,  the data will no longer be 
used for research.  Similarly, if a participant elects to withdraw consent at a later date, the 
participant’s consent records will also be marked.  
 
DATA MANAGEMENT AND SECURITY  
 
All data collected on pediatricians, parents, and t eachers will be assigned a unique code 
that will be linked to identifying information.  The master coding sheet that will link the 
information will be kept in the study coordinator’s office under lock and key. In addition to 
assuring confidentiality of the  research data, it is also critical that the confidentiality of the 
family’s  clinical information is protected in mehealth for ADHD .com.  The HIPAA regulations and 
their application to this product will be clearly defined to ensure compliance within their 
guidelines.  Mehealth for ADHD .com was designed with a procedure for encrypting and storing 
the data in such a manner to only allow pediatricians to view identifiable data.  This design 
employs a key -based encryption structure.  This method does require ex tra security information 
to be maintained by [CONTACT_65748].  For example, parties needing 
access to the data are assigned a "key" that is used to encrypt and decrypt the data in addition 
to a user ID.  Such a key will be maintaine d by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_65717].  
Implementation of additional methodologies to keep the confidential information off the server 
will be implemented including such methodology as ensuring the CCHMC server is secure (i.e., 
firewalled).  
At the end of  the study after analysis have been complete and publication of results 
completed, data will be anonymized.  Any physical data will be kept in a locked file cabinet in 
the Center for ADHD.  Any electronic data will be kept on a secure server with access li mited to 
Center for ADHD employees.  An IRB amendment or new proposal will be submitted prior to 
using the data for any future research.  
 
PROTECTION OF VULNERABLE POPULATION:  
 
The following procedures will be followed to avoid issues related to coercion or undue 
influence. Parents will be told that they can opt not to participate or answer any questions which 
they do not want to answer at any time. This will be re -iterated whenev er necessary.  
 
RISK/BENEFIT ANALYSIS:  
 
The risks to participants are minimal and unlikely, largely stemming from the possibility 
of loss of confidentiality. We have instituted provisions to minimize this risk and will assure 
participants of the voluntarin ess of their participation and their right to withdraw participation at 
any time. We will also take appropriate steps to safeguard confidentiality. We would suggest 
that this study falls under the “Minimal Risk” category.  
 
ALTERNATIVES:  
  
           Participation in the present study is completely voluntary. The alternative to participation 
in the study is to choose not participate in the study.  
15 
 
Version 03-06-20 
  
DATA SAFETY & MONITORING:   
 
The randomized controlled trial will evaluate the effectiveness of the integration of 
behavioral tools into the mehealth for ADHD .com software compared to the wait list control 
group  on rates of behavioral treatment , quality of behavioral treatment, childr en’s functional 
impairment, and families’ satisfaction with pediatrician -delivered ADHD care among up to 200 
children with ADHD.  Participants assigned to the intervention group will receive access to the 
mehealth for ADHD .com software with integrated behavioral tools.  Participants assigned to the 
control condition will receive access to the regular mehealth for ADHD.com software  and access 
to the integrated behavioral tools after 1 year .  It is important to note here that  the mehealth for 
ADHD .com software includes functionality whereby [CONTACT_152561] a parent or teacher inputs rating scale 
information into the web portal during the course of monitoring treatment outcomes, 
computerized algorithms score and interpret this information  and a report is produced.  In 
addition, pediatricians are immediately alerted via email if there appears to be any exacerbation 
of side effects or deterioration in ADHD symptoms.  Since (1) most of the risk in treating children 
with ADHD comes from pharma cological treatment which is not a part of the proposed study 
and (2) all participants are already using the mehealth for ADHD .com software that includes 
functionalities to automatically warn the pediatrician  about side effects or behavioral 
deterioration,  the safety risks of the study are minimal and there does not appear to be the need 
for an external monitoring board.  Rather, Drs. Epstein (PI) and Brinkman (Co -I) will assume 
responsibility for the ongoing monitoring of the data and safety of the study, and will provide 
reports of this with annual renewal application to the IRB and annual progress report to the 
sponsor. Both are experts in ADHD research and have experience conducting community -
based research such as that proposed in this application.  [CONTACT_714132] has medical expert[INVESTIGATOR_714130]. Epstein has psychological expertise 
related to using behavioral treatments for use in treating children with ADHD to address study -
related psychological issues.  All r esearch staff will complete education in the protection of 
human research subjects prior to study approval by [CONTACT_714126].  
Drs. Epstein and Brinkman will continuously evaluate the project’s performance, safety, 
treatment fidelity, and need to stop.  Perf ormance will be monitored by [CONTACT_714127], comparison with targeted recruitment retention, protocol adherence, and quality of 
data collection procedures.  This will primarily be accomplished in weekly staff meetings 
attended by [CONTACT_6283]. Epstei n and Brinkman as well as at the periodic meetings with the 
stakeholders.  Any deviation in achieving recruitment targets will be reported to the program 
officer.  In order to assure intervention fidelity, mehealth for ADHD .com will capture and report 
on data elements to characterize the use of behavioral tools.  In order to assure the accuracy of 
data entry, data will be verified by [CONTACT_714128] a RedCap database.  
Inaccuracies will be addressed by [CONTACT_65752] -checking the report forms.    
 
COS T OF PARTICIPATION:   
 
There will be no costs to the subject for participating in this study.  
 
PAYMENT FOR PARTICIPATION:  
 
Materials collected from families will include questionnaires  and interviews including 
questions related to family demographic characteristics, service use, and outcomes measures.  
These will all be administered via REDCap online or via phone at the time of enrollment, 6 
months later, and finally 12 months later. An additional surv ey will be collected at the end of the 
school year if the 6 - or 12 -month assessment falls during the summer months.  Families will be 
16 
 
Version 03-06-20 
 reimbursed $20 for their time completing each set of  questionnaires at each time point .  
Teachers will be asked to complete  questionnaires by  [CONTACT_714129]’s behavior at the time of study entry, 6 months later, and 12 -months later.  An 
additional survey will be collected at the end of the school year if the 6 - or 12 -month 
assessment falls du ring the summer months.  Teachers will be reimbursed $20 for their time 
completing these questionnaires at each time point.  Parents and teachers will be reimbursed 
$[ADDRESS_972483]-study consumer satisfaction questionnaire feedback 
interview.  
Each pediatric practice will be compensated $[ADDRESS_972484] consented to participate, the practice wil l be compensated an additional $100.  
Participating pediatrician  practices will also have access to the mehealth for ADHD web portal 
for 2 years at no  charge.  
 
 
REFERENCES  
Antshel, K. M., &  Barkley, R. (2008). Psychosocial interventions in attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 17 (2), 421 -437, x. 
doi:10.1016/j.chc.2007.11.005  
Bennett, D. S., Power, T. J., Rostain, A. L., & Carr, D . E. (1996). Parent acceptability and feasibility of 
ADHD interventions: assessment, correlates, and predictive validity. Journal of Pediatric 
Psychology, 21 (5), 643 -657.  
Berger, T., Caspar, F., Richardson, R., Kneubuhler, B., Sutter, D., & Andersson, G. (2011). Internet -based 
treatment of social phobia: a randomized controlled trial comparing unguided with two types of 
guided self -help. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 49 (3), 158 -169. 
doi:10.1016/j.brat.2010.12.007  
Berger, T., Hammerli, K., Gubser, N., And ersson, G., & Caspar, F. (2011). Internet -based treatment of 
depression: a randomized controlled trial comparing guided with unguided self -help. Cogn 
Behav Ther, 40 (4), 251 -266. doi:10.1080/16506073.2011.616531  
Bernal, P. (2003). Hidden morbidity if pediat ric primary care. Pediatric Annals, 32 , 413 -418.  
Bussing, R., Zima, B. T., Gary, F. A., & Garvan, C. W. (2003). Barriers to detection, help -seeking, and 
service use for children with ADHD symptoms. Journal of Behavioral Health Services and 
Research, 30 (2), 176 -189.  
Carlbring, P., Westling, B. E., Ljungstrand, P., Ekselius, L., & Andersson, G. (2001). Treatment of panic 
disorder via the Internet: A randomized trial of a self -help program. Behavior Therapy, 32 (4), 
751-764.  
Chronis, A. M., Jones, H. A., & R aggi, V. L. (2006). Evidence -based psychosocial treatments for children 
and adolescents with attention -deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Clinical Psychology Review, 26 , 
486-502.  
Conners, C. K., Epstein, J. N., March, J. S., Angold, A., Wells, K. C., Klaric,  J., . . . Wigal, T. (2001). 
Multimodal treatment of ADHD in the MTA: an alternative outcome analysis. Journal of the 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 40 (2), 159 -167.  
Corkum, P., Bessey, M., McGonnell, M., & Dorbeck, A. (2015). Barrier s to evidence -based treatment for 
children with attention -deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Atten Defic Hyperact Disord, 7 (1), 49 -74. 
doi:10.1007/s12402 -014-0152 -z 
Currie, J., Stabile, M., & Jones, L. (2014). Do stimulant medications improve educational and behavioral 
outcomes for children with ADHD? Journal of Health Economics, 37 , 58-69. 
doi:10.1016/j.jhealeco.2014.05.002  
17 
 
Version 03-06-20 
 Daly, B. P., Creed, T., Xanthopoulos, M., Brown, R. T., Daly, B. P., Creed, T., . . . Brown, R. T. (2007). 
Psychosocial treatments for ch ildren with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. 
Neuropsychology Review, 17 (1), 73 -89.  
Dear, B. F., Zou, J. B., Ali, S., Lorian, C. N., Johnston, L., Terides, M. D., . . . Klein, B. (2015). Examining self -
guided internet -delivered cognitive behavior therapy for older adults with symptoms of anxiety 
and depression: Two feasibility open trials. Internet Interventions, 2 (1), 17 -23.  
Diggle, P., Liang, K., & Zeger, S. (1994). Analysis of Longitudinal Data . Oxford: Clarendon Press.  
DuPaul, G. J., Eckert, T . L., & Vilardo, B. (2012). The Effects of School -Based Interventions for Attention 
Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: A Meta -Analysis 1996 -2010. School Psychology Review, 41 (4), 
387-412.  
DuPaul, G. J., & Stoner, G. D. (2014). ADHD in the schools: Assessment  and intervention strategies  (3rd 
ed.). [LOCATION_001]: Guilford Press.  
Education, U. S. D. o. (2004). Teaching children with Attention -Deficit / Hyperactivity Disorder: 
Instructional strategies and practices . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education.  
Efron, D., Sciberras, E., Anderson, V., Hazell, P., Ukoumunne, O. C., Jongeling, B., . . . Nicholson, J. M. 
(2014). Functional status in children with ADHD at age 6 -8: a controlled community study. 
Pediatrics, 134 (4), e992 -e1000. doi:10.1542/peds.2014 -1027  
Epstein, J. N., Kelleher, K. J., Baum, R., Brinkman, W. B., Peugh, J., Gardner, W., . . . Langberg, J. (2014). 
Variability in ADHD care in community -based pediatrics. Pediatrics, 134 , 1136 -1143.  
Epstein, J. N., Langberg, J. M., Lichtenstein, P. K., Altaye, M ., Brinkman, W. B., House, K., & Stark, L. J. 
(2010). Attention -Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) outcomes for children treated in 
community -based pediatric settings. Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 164 , 160 -
165.  
Epstein, J. N., Rabine r, D., Johnson, D. E., FitzGerald, D., Chrisman, A., Erkanli, A., . . . Conners, C. K. 
(2007). Improving Attention -Deficit / Hyperactivity Disorder treatment outcome through use of 
a collaborative consultation treatment service by [CONTACT_29436] -based pediatric ians:  A cluster 
randomized trial. Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 161 , 835 -840.  
Evans, S. W., Langberg, J., Raggi, V. L., Allen, J., & Buvinger, E. (2005). Preliminary data from the school 
based treatment for young adolescents with ADHD. Journal of Attention Disorders, 9 , 343 -353.  
Evans, S. W., Owens, J. S., & Bunford, N. (2013). Evidence -Based Psychosocial Treatments for Children 
and Adolescents with Attention -Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Journal of Clinical Child & 
Adolescent Psychol ogy(ahead -of-print), 1 -25.  
Evans, S. W., Owens, J. S., Mautone, J. A., DuPaul, G. J., & Power, T. J. (2014). Toward a Comprehensive 
Life-Course Model of Care for Youth with Attention -Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. In Handbook 
of School Mental Health  (pp. 413-426): Springer.  
Evans, S. W., Serpell, Z. N., Schultz, B. K., & Pastor, D. A. (2007). Cumulative benefits of secondary 
school -based treatment of students with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. School 
Psychology Review, 36 (2), 256 -273.  
Fabiano , G. A., Pelham Jr, W. E., Coles, E. K., Gnagy, E. M., Chronis -Tuscano, A., & O'Connor, B. C. (2009). 
A meta -analysis of behavioral treatments for attention -deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Clinical 
Psychology Review, 29 (2), 129 -140.  
Fabiano, G. A., Pelham  Jr, W. E., Gnagy, E. M., Burrows -MacLean, L., Coles, E. K., Chacko, A., . . . Garefino, 
A. (2007). The single and combined effects of multiple intensities of behavior modification and 
methylphenidate for children with attention deficit hyperactivity disor der in a classroom setting. 
School Psychology Review, 36 (2), 195 -216.  
Fabiano, G. A., Pelham, W. E., Waschbusch, D. A., Gnagy, E. M., Lahey, B. B., Chronis, A. M., &  al., e. 
(2006). A practical measure of impairment: Psychometric properties of the impairment rating 
18 
 
Version 03-06-20 
 scale in samples of children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and two school -based 
samples. Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology,  35(3), 369 -385.  
Fabiano, G. A., Vujnovic, R. K., Pelham, W. E., Waschbusch, D. A., Massetti, G. M., Pariseau, M. E., . . . 
Robins, M. (2010). Enhancing the Effectiveness of Special Education Programming for Children 
With Attention Deficit Hyperactivity D isorder Using a Daily Report Card. School Psychology 
Review, 39 (2), 219 -239.  
Fiks, A. G., Hughes, C. C., Gafen, A., Guevara, J. P., & Barg, F. K. (2011). Contrasting parents' and 
pediatricians' perspectives on shared decision -making in ADHD. Pediatrics, 1 27(1), e188 -196. 
doi:10.1542/peds.2010 -1510  
peds.2010 -1510 [pii]  
Furmark, T., Carlbring, P., Hedman, E., Sonnenstein, A., Clevberger, P., Bohman, B., . . . Andersson, G. 
(2009). Guided and unguided self -help for social anxiety disorder: randomised controll ed trial. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 195 (5), 440 -447. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.108.060996  
Gage, J. D., & Wilson, L. J. (2000). Acceptability of Attention -Deficit! Hyperactivity Disorder 
interventions: A comparison of parents. Journal of Attention Disorders, 4, 174 -182.  
Gellad, W. F., Stein, B. D., Ruder, T., Henderson, R., Frazee, S. G., Mehrotra, A., & Donohue, J. M. (2014). 
Geographic Variation in Receipt of Psychotherapy in Children Receiving Attention -
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Medications. JAMA Pedi atr. 
doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2014.1647  
Geller, J., & Muus, K. (1997). Frontier mental health care and the integral role of the primary care 
physician. Letter to the Field, 5 .  
Geller, J. M. (1999). Rural primary care providers' perceptions of their role s in the provision of mental 
health services: voices from the plains. Journal of Rural Health, 15 (3), 326 -334.  
Hoagwood, K. E., Jensen, P. S., Arnold, L. E., Roper, M., Severe, J., Odbert, C., . . . Group, M. C. (2004). 
Reliability of the services for chi ldren and adolescents -parent interview. Journal of the American 
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 43 (11), 1345 -1354.  
Horwitz, S. M., Hoagwood, K., Stiffman, A. R., Summerfeld, T., Weisz, J. R., Costello, E. J., . . . Leaf, P. J. 
(2014). Reliabil ity of the services assessment for children and adolescents. Psychiatric Services .  
Horwitz, S. M., Kelleher, K. J., Stein, R. E., Storfer -Isser, A., Youngstrom, E. A., Park, E. R., . . . Hoagwood, 
K. E. (2007). Barriers to the identification and management of psychosocial issues in children 
and maternal depression. Pediatrics, 119 (1), e2 08-218. doi:119/1/e208 [pii]  
10.1542/peds.2005 -1997  
Jensen, P. S., Eaton Hoagwood, K., Roper, M., Arnold, L. E., Odbert, C., Crowe, M., . . . Wells, K. (2004). 
The services for children and adolescents -parent interview: development and performance 
characte ristics. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 43 , 1334 -
1344.  
Kreft, I., & DeLeuw, J. (1998). Introducing Multilevel Modeling . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 
Ltd. 
Lancee, J., van den Bout, J., van Straten, A., & Spoorm aker, V. I. (2013). Baseline depression levels do not 
affect efficacy of cognitive -behavioral self -help treatment for insomnia. Depression and Anxiety, 
30(2), 149 -156. doi:10.1002/da.[ZIP_CODE]  
Leykin, Y., Muñoz, R. F., Contreras, O., & Latham, M. D. (2014). Re sults from a trial of an unsupported 
internet intervention for depressive symptoms. Internet Interventions, 1 (4), 175 -181.  
Liu, C., Robin, A. L., Brenner, S., & Eastman, J. (1991). Social acceptability of methylphenidate and 
behavior modification for trea ting attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Pediatrics, 88 (3), 560 -
565.  
19 
 
Version 03-06-20 
 Medicine, I. o. (2012). The role of telehealth in an evolving health care environment: Workshop 
summary . Retrieved from  
Monastra, V. J. (2005). Overcoming the barriers to effectiv e treatment for attention -deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder: A neuro -educational approach. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 58 (1), 71 -80.  
MTA Cooperative Group. (1999). A 14 -month randomized clinical trial of treatment strategies for 
attention -deficit/hyperactivity disorder. The MTA Cooperative Group. Multimodal Treatment 
Study of Children with ADHD. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56 (12), 1073 -1086.  
Nock, M. K., & Photos, V. (2006). Parent motivation to participate in treatment: Assessment and 
prediction of subsequent participation. Journal of Child and Family Studies, 15 (3), 333 -346.  
O'Connor, B. C., Garner, A. A., Peugh, J. L., Simon, J., & Epstein, J. N. (2015). Improved but still impaired: 
symptom -impairment correspondence among youth with att ention -deficit hyperactivity 
disorder receiving community -based care. Journal of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, 
36(2), 106 -114. doi:10.1097/DBP.[ADDRESS_972485], A. S., Zoromski, A. K., Evans, S. W., Himawan, L. K., Girio -Herrera, E., & Murphy, 
C. E. (2012). Incremental benefits of a daily report card intervention over time for youth with 
disruptive behavior. Behavior Therapy, 43 (4), 848 -861.  
Owens, P. L., Hoagwood, K., Horwitz, S. M., Leaf, P. J., Poduska, J. M., Kellam, S . G., & Ialongo, N. S. 
(2002). Barriers to children's mental health services. Journal of the American Academy of Child 
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 41 (6), 731 -738. doi:10.1097/00004583 -200206000 -[ZIP_CODE]  
Pediatrics, A. A. o. (2011). ADHD:  Clinical practice guidelnie for the diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment 
of Attention -Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in children and adolescents. Pediatrics, 128 .  
Pelham, W. E., Burrows -MacLean, L., Gnagy, E. M., Fabian o, G. A., Coles, E. K., Wymbs, B. T., . . . 
Garefino, A. (2014). A Dose -Ranging Study of Behavioral and Pharmacological Treatment in 
Social Settings for Children with ADHD. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology , 1-13.  
Pelham, W. E., Jr., & Fabiano, G. A. ( 2008). Evidence -based psychosocial treatments for attention -
deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol, 37 (1), 184 -214. doi:792185156 [pii]  
10.1080/15374410701818681  
Pfiffner, L. J., Villodas, M., Kaiser, N., Rooney, M., & McBurnett, K. ( 2013). Educational outcomes of a 
collaborative school –home behavioral intervention for ADHD. School Psychology Quarterly, 
28(1), 25 -36.  
Pliszka, S. R. (2007). Pharmacologic treatment of attention -deficit/hyperactivity disorder: efficacy, safety 
and mechan isms of action. Neuropsychology Review, 17 (1), 61 -72.  
Power, T. J., Hess, L. E., & Bennett, D. S. (1995). The acceptability of interventions for attention -deficit 
hyperactivity disorder among elementary and middle school teachers. Journal of Developmental  
and Behavioral Pediatrics, 16 (4), 238 -243.  
Proudfoot, J., Ryden, C., Everitt, B., Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_2152], D. A., Goldberg, D., Mann, A., . . . Gray, J. A. (2004). Clinical 
efficacy of computerised cognitive –behavioural therapy for anxiety and depression in primary 
care : randomised controlled trial. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 185 (1), 46 -54.  
Psychiatry, A. A. o. C. a. A. (2007). Practice parameters for the assessment and treatment of children and 
adolescents with attention -deficit hyperactivity disorder. Journal of the American Academy of 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 46 , 894 -921.  
Reitman, D., Hupp, S. D. A., O'Callaghan, P. M., Gulley, V., & Northup, J. The influence of a token 
economy and methylphenidate on attentive and disruptive behavior during sports wit h ADHD -
diagnosed children. Behavior Modification, 25 , 305 -323.  
Richards, D., & Richardson, T. (2012). Computer -based psychological treatments for depression: a 
systematic review and meta -analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 32 (4), 329 -342. 
doi:10.1016/j. cpr.2012.02.004  
20 
 
Version 03-06-20 
 Rushton, J. L., Fant, K. E., & Clark, S. J. (2004). Use of practice guidelines in the primary care of children 
with attention -deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Pediatrics, 114 (1), e23 -28.  
Services, U. D. o. H. a. H.  (2012). 2011 -2012 Area Re source File (ARF) .  
Spence, S. H., Holmes, J. M., March, S., & Lipp, O. V. (2006). The feasibility and outcome of clinic plus 
internet delivery of cognitive -behavior therapy for childhood anxiety. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 74 (3), 614 -621.  
Stein, R., Horwitz, S. M., Storfer -Isser, A., Heneghan, A., Olson, L., & Hoagwood, K. E. (2008). Do 
pediatricians think they are responsible for identification and management of child mental 
health problems? Results of the AAP periodic survey. Ambulat ory Pediatrics, 8 , 11-17.  
Storer, J. L., Evans, S. W., & Langberg, J. M. (2014). Organization Interventions for Children and 
Adolescents with Attention -Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). In Handbook of School 
Mental Health  (pp. 385 -398): Springer.  
Vannest, K. J., Davis, J. L., Davis, C. R., Mason, B. A., & Burke, M. D. (2010). Effective intervention for 
behavior with a daily behavior report card:  A meta -analysis. School Psychology Review, 39 , 654 -
672.  
Visser, S. N., Bitsko, R. H., Danielson, M. L., G handour, R. M., Blumberg, S. J., Schieve, L. A., . . . Cuffe, S. 
P. (2015). Treatment of Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder among Children with Special 
Health Care Needs. Journal of Pediatrics, 166 (6), 1423 -1430 e1422. 
doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2015.02.018  
Visser, S. N., Danielson, M. L., Bitsko, R. H., Holbrook, J. R., Kogan, M. D., Ghandour, R. M., . . . Blumberg, 
S. J. (2014). Trends in the Parent -Report of Health Care Provider -Diagnosed and Medicated 
Attention -Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: United Stat es, 2003–2011. Journal of the American 
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 53 (1), 34 -46. e32.  
Vitiello, B., Severe, J., Greenhill, L., Arnold, L., Abikoff, H., Bukstein, O., . . . Cantwell, D. (2001). 
Methylphenidate dosage for children with ADHD over time under controlled conditions: Lessons 
from the MTA. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 40 , 188 -
196.  
Wehmeier, P. M., Schacht, A., & Barkley, R. A. (2010). Social and emotional impairment in children and 
adolescent s with ADHD and the impact on quality of life. Journal of Adolescent Health, 46 (3), 
209-217.  
Wilson, L. J., & Jennings, J. N. (1996). Parents' acceptability of alternative treatments for attention -
deficit hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Attention Disor ders, 1 (2), 114 -121.  
Wootton, B. M., Dear, B. F., Johnston, L., Terides, M. D., & Titov, N. (2014). Self -guided internet 
administered treatment for obsessive -compulsive disorder: Results from two open trials. Journal 
of Obsessive -Compulsive and Related Di sorders, 3 (2), 102 -108.  
Wymbs, B. T., Pelham, W. E., Jr., Molina, B. S., Gnagy, E. M., Wilson, T. K., & Greenhouse, J. B. (2008). 
Rate and predictors of divorce among parents of youths with ADHD. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 76 (5), 735 -744. doi:2008 -[ZIP_CODE] -003 [pii]  
10.1037/a0012719  
Zito, J. M., Safer, D. J., dosReis, S., Magder, L. S., Gardner, J. F., & Zarin, D. A. (1999). Psychotherapeutic 
medication patterns for youths with attention -deficit/hyperactivity disorder [see comments]. 
Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 153 (12), 1257 -1263.  
 