1 
 
 
 
 
 
Official Title:  Amped -PD: Amplifying Physical Activity Through a Novel Digital Music 
Therapeutic in Parkinson Disease   
 
NCT#:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Date : July 12, 2022  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Study Protocol  
 
Study  Design:  
The study is a parallel community -based 2-arm randomized controlled trial 
(RCT)  in which the study evaluations will take place at the Center  of 
Neurorehabilitation  (CNR)  at Sargent College,  [LOCATION_011] University.  We will enroll [ADDRESS_907803]  a comfortable  walking  speed  <0.4 m/s, and significant  cognitive  
or hearing impairments. Eligible  participants will be  randomly allocated  to either 
Figure 1 Study flow. Abbreviations: CoV: Coefficient of Variation; SAM: Step Activity Monitor; 
SRHI: Self -Report of Habit Index  
3 
 
Amped -PD (experimental arm) or Active Control (control arm). Assessments will 
include a standard set of motor and non - motor assessments and will be 
administered at Baseline, Post -Assessment (after 6 weeks of training), and Follow -
up (after 2 additional we eks of unstructured training). Figure 1 summarizes the 
study flow for the protocol.   
 
Study  Procedures  
 
Primary  Screen  (approximately  10 minutes):  
A primary screen will be conducted over the phone to make a preliminary 
determination if potential participants meet the initial inclusion / exclusion criteria 
prior to scheduling a more in -depth, in -person screening assessment. During the 
phone screen (see Appendix I: Primary Screen),  potential  participants  will be asked  
their age (exclude  if < 40 years  of age),  if they are currently participating in physical 
therapy (exclude if yes), if they are currently performing walking exercise of at least 
30 min for > 3x/week (exclude if yes), and if a medical doctor diagnosed them with 
Parkinson disease (exclude if no). Potential participants will be asked about their 
ability to walk independently without physical assistance or an assistive device  
(exclude if no), their history of falls  of > [ADDRESS_907804] 3 months that is PD -related , with a  fall defined as an unexpected 
event that caused a person to unintentionally land on a lower surface (e.g. floor, 
ground),  regardless  of presence  or absence  of resultant  injury  (exclude  if yes),  and 
whether  they experience freezing epi[INVESTIGATOR_328121] (exclude if 
moderately or significantly disturbing – see operational definition under exclusion 
criteria). Lastly, a brief medical history based on self -reports from the participant 
will be reviewed to  determine the following:  
• Those  with known  cardiac  problems  that interfere  with the ability  to safely  
exercise (e.g., congestive heart failure, uncontrolled cardiac arrhythmias, 
chest pain) will be excluded.  
• Those  with known  orthopedic  conditions  in the lower  extremities  or spi[INVESTIGATOR_671893]  (e.g.,  severe  arthritis,  spi[INVESTIGATOR_16083],  
significant  pain)  will be excluded.  
• Those with other medical conditions that would preclude successful 
participation, as determined  by a physical  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_671894],  
will be excluded.  The physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_671895] -report and a PTs informed questioning which is part of a 
licensed PTs training.  
It is possible to have self -reports of cardiac, orthopedic, or other medical conditions 
that may need  further  clarification  and clinical  assessment  due to limited  
information  from the participant or  unclear  description.  The physical  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_671896]-person  screening  will be appropriate. Additionally, 
communication with the participant’s physician may take place to understand their 
health status. A HIPAA authorization from the participant will be obtained prior to 
any communication with the participant’s health provider.  
 
If the participant  is deemed  eligible  based  on primary  screen,  the participant  will be 
[ADDRESS_907805] in-
clinic  visit prior to any study  procedure.  The researcher will coordinate scheduling 
with the participant.  
 
Data on the screening form will be entered into REDCap to allow investigators to 
monitor the  number  of persons  screened  and pass/failure  rate. Potential  
participants  who are deemed eligible  based  on the preliminary  phone  screen  will 
be scheduled  for an in-person  screening and baseline assessment visit at [LOCATION_011] 
University.  
 
1. First  Evaluation  Visit:  In-Person  Screening  & Baseline  Assessment  Visit  
(approximately  2-3 hours) : 
The in -person screening and baseline assessment visit will take place at the Center 
for Neurorehabilitation at [LOCATION_011] University. All participants will have completed 
and provided their informed consent prior to Screening and Baseline Assessment 
(see Appendix II: Informed Consent; see section K). After consenting, participants 
will be asked to sign a HIPAA Authorization to Disclose Protected Health 
Information for Research Purposes (see Appendix  III: HIPAA  Authorization).  This 
will allow  our team  to communicate  directly  with the participant’s healthcare 
provider during the study if needed.  
 
1.a In-Person  Screening : An in-person  Screening  will be administered  to 
determine  if participants meet all study inclusion/exclusion criteria. The elements 
included in the screening process are part of routine physical  therapy evaluation.  
A physical  exam  will be conducted  to assess  cognitive  status,  Parkinson’s  
symptoms  and walking capacity.  
1. A diagnosis  of Parkinson  disease  will be confirmed  per participant  report.  
2. The Mini -Mental State Exam (MMSE) will be administered to screen for 
significant cognitive impairment (exclude MMSE score < 24) (see Appendix 
VI: Screening Tools). The  MMSE  is a brief screening  tool that examines  
cognitive  impairment.  Participants  are tested on [ADDRESS_907806]  using  the 
Modified  
4. Hoehn & Yahr Scale (only H&Y 1 -3 will be included) (see Appendix VI: 
Screening Tools).  The Modified  H&Y Scale  includes  additional  criteria  to 
rate Parkinson  disease symptoms  on a scale  from 1 to 5. Higher  scores  
indicate  increased  disease  progression.  
5. Walking  capacity  assessments  instrumented  with wearable  sensors:  
o The following  tests  on walking  will be instrumented  with in-lab 
movement sensors (XSENS, Enschede, the Netherlands), which will 
be worn on both  mid-shank  (2) and mid-thigh  (2) areas,  and on mid-
5 
 
line low-back  area (1), and the sensors of the music -based device 
(MedRhythms, Portland, ME), which will be secured on to the outer 
sides of the shoes (2). The other components of the music -based 
device such as its audio -cue mechanism and headphones will not be 
used during this screening procedure.  
• The [ADDRESS_907807] (10MWT) will be administered by a 
licensed physical  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]  (comfortable  walking  speed  <0.4 m/s 
excluded  based  on the average of 3 trials at comfortable walking 
speed) (see Appendix VI: Screening  Tools).  The 10MWT  is an 
assessment  of gait speed  over a short distance  (2 meters  ramp  
up, 6 meters  walking,  2 meters  ramp  down).  The aforementioned  
distances  will be pre-measured  for accuracy  and only the middle 
[ADDRESS_907808] will be guarding  the 
participant  as necessary  to optimize safety.  
• The six -minute walk test (6MWT) (see Appendix VI: Screening 
Tools) will be administered by a physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]. The 6MWT, a 
measure of long - distance walking capacity, assesses how far a 
person can walk over a [ADDRESS_907809] will be 
performed along a pre -measured (30 -meter), level, obstacle -free 
hallway. Participants will be instructed to walk as far as possible 
in 6-minutes. The physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_671897]. 
Physiologic al measurements (e.g., heart rate, blood pressure) 
and perceived ratings of walking intensity (using Borg’s Rating of 
Perceived Exertion) will be taken prior to  initiation of the walking 
test to determine whether the participant is safe to participate  in 
the walking  program.  The participant  will be excluded  based  on 
the following: resting heart rate >100 beats/min; resting systolic 
BP >160 mmHg, resting diastolic BP >[ADDRESS_907810] to assess hemodynamic response to exercise.  
o Walking duration from both 10MWT and 6MWT will be used to generally 
gauge the  participant’s  walking  tolerance.  Exclude  if the physical  
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_671898] [ADDRESS_907811] (10MWT, 6MWT) during the 
Baseline Assessment, once the participant determined to be eligible to 
proceed.  
6. Based on clinical expertise and judgement, the physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_671899] - person screening will determine if a participant requires 
additional guarding and/or assistance  during  walking  activities  (i.e., 
occasional  hand  contact  [CONTACT_671911]/or an 
assistive device). If guarding is needed at any point during the evaluation, 
6 
 
the participant will be excluded.  
 
1.b Baseline  Assessment:  Participants  who are deemed  eligible  through  the in-
person  screen will continue on  to complete the remainder of the baseline 
assessment measures, including:  
• Demographic  questionnaire  consisting  of age, gender,  education  level,  living  
situation, employment, ethnicity, race, and PD -specific questions. This form 
will be completed interview -style by [CONTACT_20826][INVESTIGATOR_541].  
• Medication  form pertaining  to PD and non-PD medications  (see Appendix  
VII: Outcome Measures). Participants will be asked during the phone screen 
to bring their medication list to this first evaluation visit. The physical 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_671900]. 
Medication lists that contain identifiable information will be given back to the 
participant and not be kept by [CONTACT_5051].  
• Motor  & Functional  Measures:  
i. Dynamic balance will be measured using the Mini Balance Evaluation 
Systems Test (Mini BESTest). This test comprises of 14 items that span 
anticipatory postural adjustments, reactive postural control, sensory 
orientation, and dynamic gait.   
ii. Motor symptoms will be assessed using the Movement Disorder Society 
Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale (MDS -UPDRS) -III (see Appendix 
VII: Outcome Measures). The MDS UPDRS is the most widely used 
clinical rating scale fork Parkinson disease. Part III is  a motor examination 
(33 scores summed from 18 questions)  conducted  by [CONTACT_29975].  Total  
scores  can range  from 0 to 141, with higher scores indicating worse 
disease severity.  
iii. Quantification of movement will be performed using in -lab movement  
sensors (XSENS, Enschede, the Netherlands) and sensors of the music -
based device (MedRhythms, Portland, ME) (see Appendix VII: Schematic 
of Wearable Sensors). These sensors will be used to measure gait quality 
during performance of the 10MWT and 6MWT as performed  in the in-
person  screening, and to measure posture as examined in posture -related 
items within the UPDRS III and Mini BESTest. Sample  metrics include but 
are not limited to gait  velocity, stride length, cadence, and limb  velocities, 
and postural sway measures based on velocity,  magnitude, smoothness. 
As a clarification, the instrumented 10MWT and 6MWT as performed 
during the initial screen provide the data needed for this Baseline 
Assessment, therefore these tests will not be repeated.  
iv. Functional Mobility will be measured via the Five Times Sit to Stand 
(5xSTS).  The 5xSTS  objectively  assesses  the time it  takes  to complete [ADDRESS_907812] will be guarding the 
participant as necessary to optimize safety; however, if guarding is 
needed for the 5xSTS, participants will not be allowed to continue with the 
7 
 
intervention.  
• Self-report/  Interview  Measures:  
i. Section I and II of the Movement Disorder Society Unified Parkinson 
Disease Rating Scale  (MDS -UPDRS)  will be utilized  to assess  non-motor  
and motor  signs.  Section  IA includes 6 items related to non -motor 
experiences such as cognition, mood, and motivation which are assessed 
by [CONTACT_4921]. Section IB consists of 7 items related to non -motor 
aspects of experiences of  daily living  such  as sleep  and fatigue  which  are 
filled out by [CONTACT_2299]  (with  or without the help of a caregiver), but 
independent of the examiner. Section II is a self -administered 
questionnaire consisting of 13 items related to motor aspects of 
experiences of daily living.  
ii. The Self-Report  Habit  Index  (SRHI)  will be administered  to measure  
exercise -habit strength and automaticity. This self -report index comprises 
of 12 statements with constructs spanning behavior repetition, 
automaticity, and identity, with responses made on 11 -point Likert scales 
(0 = strongly disagree; 10 = strongly agree)  (see Appendix VII: Outcome 
Measures).  
iii. Self-Efficacy of Walking – Duration (SEW -D) is a 10 -item self -report that 
will be administered to determine participants’ beliefs of their physical 
capabilities to successfully  complete  incremental  5-minute  intervals  (5 to 
40 minutes)  of walking  at a moderately fast pace, with responses made 
on 11 -point Likert scale (0% = not at all  confident; 100% = highly 
confident).  
iv. Geriatric  Depression  Scale  (GDS)  is a brief,  self-report  involving  yes/no  
questions  instrument  on psychological  aspects  and social  consequences  
of depression in the elderly. The short form of GDS of 15 -items will be 
used in this study . 
v. Health -related quality of life will be measured by [CONTACT_328162]’s Disease 
Questionnaire  – 39 (PDQ -39)(see  Appendix  VII: Outcome  Measures).  The 
PDQ -[ADDRESS_907813] month across 8 different dimensions. Items are scored based on a 5 -
point ordinal system with lower scores reflecting better quality of life.  
• Walking Activity:  
o Step Activity Monitor: Walking activity will be measured using the 
StepWatch 4 Activity Monitor (SAM; Orthocare Innovations, Mountlake 
Terrace, Washington).  The SAM is a self -contained, maintenance -free 
device that combines acceleration, position  and timing  information  to 
count  complete  gait cycles  (strides)  of the user.  It is the size of a pager, 
weighs 38g (roughly the weight of  two AA batteries for comparison)  and 
will be attached  with self- adhesive  straps  above  the lateral  malleolus 
(where  the shin meets  the foot) of the participants’  less impaired  lower  
extremity.  Data from the SAM, which includes measurement of daily step 
counts and step intensities, will allow us to examine changes in physical 
activity in response to the intervention. The validity and reliability of the 
SAM for capturing stride counts has been dem onstrated in persons with 
various neurological disorders including PD (Shepard 1999, Coleman 
8 
 
1999, Macko 2002, Salarian 2004, Gaines 2005, Manns 2009,  
Speelman  2011).  
o General wear instructions and considerations: Participants will be 
instructed to wear the SAM for [ADDRESS_907814] will fill out the SAM researcher form to appropriately 
document the SAM calibration process for each participant. Participants 
will be given instructions on how to don/doff the device and will be 
provided with a form to record times the SAM is removed  over wear  
period.  The SAM  requires no maintenance by [CONTACT_671912]. The physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_671901] (e.g., if  the SAM is taken off at night, place it on  a nightstand 
next to the bed so it is seen in the morning).  
o Specific wear schedule for Baseline Assessment: For the Baseline 
Assessment, the SAM will be worn for 4 consecutive days prior to initiating 
the intervention (and  will continue  to wear  it for another  7 days  during  
training  – please  see next section  2. Intervention).  Participants  will be 
contact[CONTACT_671913]  24-[ADDRESS_907815] any 
questions.  
o Operation  and data download:  Using  the manufacturer’s  software,  the 
SAM  will be calibrated by a physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_328127]’s gait 
pattern based on height, typi[INVESTIGATOR_328128], and leg motion. Collected 
data will be downloaded to a  tablet  computer,  with which  manufacturer’s  
software  will convert  stride  counts  to step counts and calculate daily step 
count values. No identifiable information is collected  
by [CONTACT_112415].  
1.c Randomization  : At the completion  of procedures  for Baseline  Assessment,  
the participant will be randomized to receive either the experimental or control 
arm of the intervention. The experimental arm, called Amped -PD, is a 6 -week 
community -based structured walking program that uses a music -adaptive RAS 
followed by 2 weeks of unstructured walking protocol (continue as desired) for  a 
total of 8 weeks.  The control  arm, called Active -Control is a similarly structured 
6-week community -based walking program that does not use RAS, followed by 
2 weeks of unstructured walking protocol (continue as desired) for a total of [ADDRESS_907816] been completed.  
 
1.d Device Training Amped -PD Intervention:  
9 
 
Training  Procedures  / Instruction  to Participants:  
Music -Based  Device  Training  (Only  for Amped -PD) 
Participants  who are randomized  to receive  Amped -PD intervention  will 
undergo  training on how to use how to use the music -based device and 
independently conduct the remote walking program. The music -based 
device (MedRhythms, Portland, ME) is specifically designed for gait training 
in people with neuromotor impairments. Participants will be trained to 
independently use the device. A simple setup which takes < 2 min involves 
initiating the  smartphone application, wearing the headphones, and 
attaching a  movement sensor to the outer side of each shoe be low the 
ankle. The smartphone is kept in the user’s pocket throughout the session. 
The music -based device obtains real -time walking information through the 
shoe sensors that communicate wirelessly with the smartphone application 
software. The music -based d evice delivers music cues that are adjusted 
according to the user’s walking pace as detected by [CONTACT_671914]. 
These music cues serve as the substrate for rhythmic auditory stimulation 
during walking.  
Training  with the music -based  device  will be administered  after 
completing  the In-person screening and Baseline Assessment procedures. 
To ensure that the participant is able to hear the music, the physical 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_671902]. The physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_671903] s to listen to the music  
at a safe volume so they can still hear sounds in their environment.  The 
participant will then practice donning/doffing, adjusting  the volume, setting 
up, and  using the device (i.e., walk for 5 min utes) to demonstrate 
comprehension and independent use. A team member will  provide  the 
participant  with the necessary  equipment  (i.e., smartphone,  shoe sensors, 
headphones, study diary). The physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_671904] [ADDRESS_907817] determines that the participant will need 
continued assistance from another person to walk and perform  transitions  
(i.e. turns,  step initiation)  while  using  the music -based  device,  the participant 
will be withdrawn from the study. Otherwise, the physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_671905], and review space adequacy and safety 
considerations. A safe e nvironment will be considered to be the following: 
indoor spaces – level surfaces, obstacle -free, no slippery surfaces, no 
unsecure area rugs; outdoor spaces – avoid  auto or bike traffic, obstructive 
tree roots, divots in the asphalt and concrete. These en vironments  could  
include,  but are not limited  to: home,  apartment  building  hallway, 
neighborhood sidewalks, local track or park, office environments, and  
community/ recreation centers. Ideally the space is at least 50 feet in length 
that meet the above indoor and outdoor space criteria. This will decrease 
10 
 
the amount of pi[INVESTIGATOR_671906]. The purpose of the music -based device is to help participants 
entrain to a musical beat to improve the quality of their walking. Leveraging 
the benefits of RAS such as increased  stride length, cadence, and speed 
enable walking at faster speeds and higher  intensities,  thus making  it 
advantageous  to perform  greater  amounts  of walking  at moderate  
intensities – an important health objective set forth by [CONTACT_671915]. The device monitors a participant’s 
cadence using the sensor placed on the shoe. The musical tempo is 
matched to the baseline walking cadence of the participant. As th e quality 
of a participant’s walking improves and the participant accurately “entrains” 
to the tempo of the music, the tempo will adapt and increase cadence by 
5%. For example, if the participant starts off walking 100 steps/minute, once 
considered entrain ed, the tempo will increase to 105 steps/minute. This 
increase is very small and will most likely not be noticed by [CONTACT_2299]. 
If the participant  is unable to increase their cadence to match this tempo, 
the tempo is reduced back to baseline.  The algorithm  used  to set the tempo  
is dynamic  and adjusts  to the cadence  of the participant. If a participant feels 
that they cannot keep up with the faster  cadence, they can continue walking 
at their comfortable pace. Participants will also be instructed to stop  the 
intervention if they feel uncomfortable or anxious at any time.  
Following this training, it is expected that participants will be able to 
independently setup  (including  donning/doffing  the device),  perform  and 
conclude  a walking  session independently. Participants will have access to 
Instructions for Use (IFU) that will detail all procedures required for proper 
operation of the system. However, participants will be encouraged to 
contact [CONTACT_671916] l questions, issues or 
concerns. Participants will be excluded from the study if unable to 
demonstrate how to use the device independently as determined by [CONTACT_242246][INVESTIGATOR_541]. Please note, participants will be provided with a pre -
established username [CONTACT_2383]. No personally identifiable information 
will be recorded or stored in the devic e application.  
 
2. Intervention:  
 
Amped -PD: Remote  Walking  Program  Description  
(prescribed walking program of 15 hours total over six weeks + concurrent 
use of SAM  device 4 days during early training)  
Overview:  The remote  walking  program  is a self-directed,  structured  
walking  program held in home/community settings using the music -based 
device. Participants  will be instructed to complete five home/community -
based walking sessions per week (one  session/  day, 30 minutes  in duration)  
for six weeks. Participants  may choose  to perform these 5 training sessions 
on any days of the week according to their needs.  
Description of Walking Program: Using the music -based device , 
participants will conduct the walking sessions at their self -selected pace in 
11 
 
a home/community environment that limits the amount of stops and/or pi[INVESTIGATOR_671907]. For the purposes of this study, 
home/community environment is considered  any environment  outside  a 
professional  healthcare  facility.  This includes  but is not limited to the home, 
apartment building, independent living retirement homes, outdoor 
environments (tracks, parks, sidewalks), office environments and 
community/ recreation centers.  
Duration  of Walking  Session:  Each  individual  walking  session  will be 
completed within a 30 - minute timespan (i.e., should not be split up 
throughout the day).  Participants  are allowed  to rest as  needed  during  the 
30-minute  training  period.  The time clock will continue to run down 
continuously once the 30 minutes are started (i.e., if a participant rests for 
5 minutes, this will equate to 25 minutes of walking). Participants will be 
instructed to terminate any walking session in the event of tech nical or 
medical issues to allow for adequate resolution.  
Walking program diary: Participants will be asked to record in a study 
diary their schedule  (dates  and times)  of walking,  location,  record  of any falls 
they experience  and any comments/issues they experience while using the 
device (see Appendix VII: Outcome Measures).  
Safety  Considerations:  Participants  will be informed  of the potential  risk of 
falls that can occur  as part of the walking  program  in the community.  
Determination  of a safe environment (as described in the Music -Based 
Device Training section above) will be discussed with the participant to 
mitigate external risk factors that could lead to a fall.  Participants will be 
instructed to reach out to their healthcare provider if experiencing dizziness, 
chest pain, or other serious symptoms and will be asked to notify the study 
team  following  the epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865].  If participants  experience  a fall while  using  the 
device,  they are advised to seek medical attention (if needed) and record 
the incident in their study diary. In addition, participants will be asked to 
contact [CONTACT_671917]. The physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_671908] t he context of the 
fall. It is possible to discontinue the training program due to but not limited 
to the following reasons: (1) participant self -report of injuries that prevent 
them from participating fully and safely in the program; (2) participant self - 
reports on change in function and mobility after a fall; (3) concerns related 
to the execution of the walking program or proper use of the device, its 
components, and functionality; (4) considerations related to a change in 
participant’s walking function.  
The program  may be continued  based  on discretion  of the physical  
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_671909], unrelated to the training 
program or the device, resulted in negligible or insignificant injuries post -
fall, and no change in safety determination.  Participants  will be contact[CONTACT_671918] a member  of the study  team  weekly  to see if they have any questions or 
concerns with the walking program. However, participants will be 
encouraged  to reach  out to the research  team  at any point  if they do not feel 
comfortable using the device.  
12 
 
Physical therapy check -in call: During  the baseline  evaluation  visit, the 
research  team  will ask the participant  which time  each  week  is preferred  to 
have  a check -in call. This phone  call will last approximately 5 -10 minutes to 
check on participant engagement in the walking program, and to provide 
guidance regarding any questions/concerns and/or any medical/ technical 
issues. If participants are unable to carry out the walking program 5 - days 
per wee k, a study staff member will discuss the barriers to implementation 
(by [CONTACT_648]) and  suggest ways to  optimize adherence  to the program  (e.g., 
setting  a schedule). A  study  staff member  will also inquire  about  adverse  
events  during  the weekly  phone call and en sure that the participant is 
comfortable with the walking program.  
Step Activity Monitoring: After completing 4 days of wear prior to starting 
training,  the participant will continue to wear the SAM for an additional 7 
days upon intervention initiation  (total  of 11 days  continuous  wear).  During  
training,  both the SAM  and the shoe sensors of the music -based device can 
be worn simultaneously on the same side of the body without interfering 
with a participant’s walking and/or increasing the risk for trips/falls.  
Participants will return the SAM to study personnel via a pre -labeled, 
addressed envelope to mail following 11 days of continuous monitoring 
period. The researchers will download the data and will store in a secure 
server.  
Interruptions in training:  In the event of unavoidable interruptions in 
training, booster sessions may be implemented to promote treatment 
fidelity. For  training interruptions that last up to 2 weeks, the participant will 
continue the program and receive booster sessions at 100% of  the time 
missed. For training interruptions of greater than 2 weeks, the training will 
be restarted after a reasonable washout interval, as determined by [CONTACT_1268] (a licensed physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]). If training in terruption 
resulted in permanent change in eligibility, the participant will be withdrawn 
from the study.     
 
Active -Control  Intervention:  Remote  Walking  Program  Description  
 (Prescribed walking program of 15 hours total over six weeks + concurrent 
use of SAM  device 4 days during early training)  
Overview:  The Active -Control  Intervention  is similarly  structured  as Amped -
PD Intervention, with the only exception of not using RAS/ music -based 
device.  Participants  will be instructed  to complete  five home/community -
based  walking  sessions per week (one session/ day, 30 minutes in duration) 
for six weeks.  
Description  of Walking  Sessions:  Without  using  the music -based  device , 
participants will conduct the walking sessions at their self-selected pace in 
a home/community environment. All other considerations as outlined above 
apply to this intervention.  
Duration  of Walking  Session:  Each  individual  walking  session  will be 
completed within a 30 - minute timespan (i.e., should not be split up 
throughout the day.  Participants  will be asked  to use their own wristwatch,  
13 
 
timer,  or cellphone  to monitor  the time/ duration of walking session. 
Participants are allowed to rest as needed during the 30 -minute training 
period.  
Walking program diary: Participants will be asked to record in a study 
diary their schedule  (dates  and times)  of walking,  location,  record  of any falls 
they experience  and any comments/issues they experience while 
performing the walking program.  
Safety Considerations: Same as above as outlined in Amped -PD. 
Physical  therapy  check -in call: Same  as above  as outlined  in Amped -PD. 
Step  Activity  Monitoring:  Same  as above  as outlined  in Amped -PD. 
Interruptions in training:  In the event of unavoidable interruptions in 
training, booster sessions may be implemented to promote treatment 
fidelity. For  training interruptions that last up to 2 weeks, the participant will 
continue the program and receive booster sessions at 100% of  the time 
missed. For training interruptions of greater than 2 weeks, the training will 
be restarted after a reasonable washout interval, as determined by [CONTACT_1268] (a licensed physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]). If training interruption 
resulted in perm anent change in eligibility, the participant will be withdrawn 
from the study.     
 
3. Second  Evaluation  Visit:  Post -Assessment  Visit  (approximately  2-3 
hours):  
The post -intervention assessment visit will be scheduled within approximately 
[ADDRESS_907818] at the 
Center for Neurorehabilitation at [LOCATION_011] University. This visit will entail the 
same battery of assessments performed at Baseline Assessment including:  
10MWT, 6MWT , Borg’s RPE,  Mini BESTest, MDS -UPDRS  I/II/III,  5xSTS, 
PDQ -39, SRHI, GDS. Quantification of movement will be performed using 
wearable sensors to measure balance and walking as examined in the 
aforementioned battery of assessments.   
Further, a usability questionnaire will be administered for those who 
completed Amped -PD. For both Amped -PD and Active -Control  groups,  
participants  will be asked  to bring  in their study diary for study personnel to 
review and to make a copy for their data file. This  study diary will  be returned  
to the participant  for continued use  if needed  during  the Follow -up Period. For  
the Amped -PD group,  they will have  continued  access  to the music -based  
device  during the  Follow -up Period.  The SAM  monitor  will be given  to the 
participant  to wear  for [ADDRESS_907819] walking session may 
be asked to complete closing visit activities, if feasible.  
 
4. Follow -Up Walking Program  (2 weeks): Extended Remote Walking Program 
Description  for both groups (recommended continuation of routine walking + 
concurrent use of SAM  device 4 days during follow -up training)   
Overview: Participants in both Amped -PD and Active -Control groups will be 
recommended  to carry  out the walking  program  independently  for another  2 weeks,  
14 
 
with walking duration and amount similar to that of the 6 -week Remote Walking 
program (i.e. 30  min/ session x 5x/week). This recommendation  to continue  the 
walking program is similar to the common practice of a home exercise program  
that is recommended after discharge from an epi[INVESTIGATOR_671910]. 
The main difference in this Follow -up Training relative to  the prior Remote  Walking 
Program  is that  this Follow -up Training is completely self -managed by [CONTACT_32346], where participants will naturally make choices on how they will 
continue and adhere with the recommended balance and walking as examined in 
the aforementioned battery of assessments. F or both Amped -PD and Active -
Control  groups,  participants  will be asked  to bring  in their study  diary  for study  
personnel  to review  and to make  a copy  for their data file. For participants in the 
Amped -PD, they will return the music -based device to the research team.  
Step Activity Monitoring: The participant will wear the SAM for 4 days after this 
final assessment visit. Once completed, the participant will return the SAM to study 
personnel via a pre -labeled addressed mailing envelope which will be provided to 
them during the final  assessment.  The researchers  will download  the data and will 
store  in a secure  server.  
 
 
 