Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.2017  
1 
 I. BACKGROUND & SIGNIFICANCE  
 
A. Historical Background  
 
The scope of the problem : Heart failure (HF) is a common and progressively debilitating illness 
that affects nearly 6 million Americans.1 It has been associated with incre ased medical morbidity, 
including repeated hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], poor functioning, and reduced quality of life (QoL).2-5 
Furthermore, it is costly; in 2010, it led to approximately $[ADDRESS_1139034] costs in the 
[LOCATION_002].1 Finally, HF is lethal, with studies e stimating that 50% of HF patients die within 5 years 
of diagnosis.4 
The role of health behaviors in HF outcomes : Health behaviors significantly impact prognosis 
for patients with HF.  Maintenance of a low sodium diet, adherence to medications, and increased 
physical activity have been associated with improved  health, reduced hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5394], and lower 
rates of mortality in HF patients.6-[ADDRESS_1139035] been associated with improved exercise capacity, QoL, and survival in randomized, controlled 
trials.6,8 As a result, the American Heart Association (AHA) recommends exercise training for all 
patients with chronic, stable HF.10 
However, many HF patients struggle with adherence to health behavior recommendations.13,14 
Fifteen to 33% of patients with HF consume more sodium than is typi[INVESTIGATOR_203777].14 Up to 54% 
of HF patients have suboptimal adherence to their cardiac medications,[ADDRESS_1139036] to one -half of 
HF patients engage in physical exercise less than once a week.15,16 In sum, despi[INVESTIGATOR_821726], patients with HF still struggle to complete health behaviors.  
Interventions to improve health behaviors in HF : Interventions designed to increase adherence 
to health behaviors in HF have had mixed succe ss,17-[ADDRESS_1139037] readmissions or number of days in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].19 
Unfortunately, the intensity of more complex interventions (that require significant provider time) may 
make them cost -prohibitive.  
Impact of psychological states on cardiac outcomes and health behaviors : Positive 
psychological states such as positive affect or optimism have been linked to improved long -term health 
outcomes, including reduced mortality, in h ealthy individuals and in those with cardiovascular disease.  
Numerous studies have confirmed the prospective association between positive states and mortality, 
oftentimes independent of negative emotional states and relevant medical factors.21-[ADDRESS_1139038] positive emotional states has the potential to improve health behaviors and 
medical outcomes in the HF population.  
Positive psychology (PP) : PP is an area of study that aims to boost positive psychological states 
(e.g., optimism, gratitude, positive affect) through systematic exercises, such as performing kind acts, 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.[ADDRESS_1139039] -percutaneous coronary intervention 
patients, respectively.36,37 Furthermore, in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_821727], a formal, 4 -week PP intervention 
for cardiac inpatients was feasible, acceptable, and associated with greater numeri cal improvements in 
psychological outcomes compared to relaxation response and attentional control groups.38 In a second 
preliminary study in patients who had suffered an acute coronary syndrome  (ACS) , a PP intervention  
led to improvements in depression, anxiety, and positive affect compared to treatment as usual.39 
However, aside from our r esearch group’s work, no studies have evaluated formal PP 
interventions to promote health behaviors in cardiac patients in general or HF patients in particular.  
Such interventions have the potential to leverage positive psychological states to improve heal th 
behaviors in this high -risk group of patients.  Further study of these interventions is critical to 
determine how they can be applied to HF patients.  
To address this question, we recently completed  qualitative interviews with 32 HF patients 
(IRB # 2015P0 [ZIP_CODE]) to better understand their HF symptoms, examine the relationships between 
positive psychological constructs and health behaviors, and identify barriers and facilitators to 
completing health behaviors. The information gained from these interviews allowed for  the creation of 
an intervention that is adapted to this specific population and that has the greatest likelihood of 
providing benefit to these high risk patients.  The focus of this study is to examine the feasibility, 
acceptability, and preliminary impact of our customized PP -based health behavior intervention in a 
group of patients with mild to moderate HF.  
 
B. Preliminary Studies  
 
[CONTACT_814805] is ideally suited to complete the proposed st udy given his prior research experience.  
He has been co -investigator for both observational and intervention studies focusing on positive 
psychological states in cardiac patients, and he is the principal investigator (PI) of a PP intervention 
trial in psyc hiatric inpatients with bipolar depression.  The studies below demonstrate his ability to 
perform the proposed trial.  
Preliminary Studies #1 : Observational and Intervention Studies in Cardiovascular Disease . As 
part of the Cardiac Psychiatry Research Program ( CPRP ) team, [CONTACT_814805] has served as a co -
investigator for a number of intervention studies to investigate the use of psychological interventions in 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_821728].  This i ncludes a large (N=175) collaborative care depression 
management trial40,41 and a recently completed collaborative care study (N=183) for depression or 
anxiety disorders in patients with HF and other cardiac diseases.[ADDRESS_1139040] provided 
experience with the recruitment, enro llment, and retention of participant s with heart disease and with 
many of the outcome measures that will be used in the proposed study.  
Preliminary Studies #2 : Positive Psychology Interventions . [CONTACT_814805] also has experience 
with PP interventions in non -cardiac populations.  He served as a co -investigator for a study involving 
the systematic administration of PP exercises to psychiatric inpatients (N=61) with suicidal ideation.  In 
this study, 189 /213 (88.7%) assigned exercises were completed, suggesting that the intervention was 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.[ADDRESS_1139041] 
Director for two PP intervention trials —one in depression, the other in diabetes.  These studies 
introduced [CONTACT_814805] to t he measurement of positive psychological states using the same tools as 
those for the proposed study (e.g., LOT -R, PANAS), gave him experience with delivering PP 
interventions via telephone, and demonstrated our team’s ability to retain a high percentage o f patients 
despi[INVESTIGATOR_821729].   
Preliminary Studies #3 : Positive Psychological States in Cardiovascular Disease . Finally, [CONTACT_821763]’s  work as a co -investigator in the CPRP has exposed him to the study of positive psychological 
states in patients with cardiovascular disease.  In a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], our team developed and tested an 8 -
week PP intervention to cultivate gratitude, optimism, and ki ndness in 30 cardiac inpatients (N=9 in 
the PP group) and found the PP intervention to be feasible and well -accepted.[ADDRESS_1139042]. 
Celano has played an active rol e in a prospective, observational study (N=212) to examine the 
associations between positive psychological states and health behaviors in post -ACS patients.  
Preliminary results from this study suggest that higher levels of gratitude and optimism are 
prospe ctively associated with greater self -reported physical activity, heart -healthy diet, and medication 
adherence [ADDRESS_1139043]. Celano is the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_821730] (NYHA) class II or III HF.  He has reached his 
enrollment goal 32 participants  (follow -up is ongoing) , and preliminary results suggest that patients 
with HF identify bidir ectional links between positive psychological states and health behavior 
performance.  [CONTACT_814805] has used the information from these interviews to create a n 8-week PP -based 
health behavior intervention for this population.  [CONTACT_814805]’s involvement in these  ongoing studies has 
provided him with information about the links between positive states and outcomes in cardiac patients 
and experience with the outcome measures, accelerometers , and electronic pi[INVESTIGATOR_821731].  
Relevance of  Preliminary Work to the Proposed Project : [CONTACT_814805] now has experience 
recruiting and retaining patients at [LOCATION_005] General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] ( MGH ) who have HF and other 
cardiac illnesses, measuring psychological and medical variables effectively, and devel opi[INVESTIGATOR_821732].  These experiences make him well -positioned to 
successfully and efficiently complete the proposed project . 
 
C. Rationale/Potential Benefits/Overview of Proposed Research  
 
Creation of an intervention to increase positive emotions and promote health behaviors  in 
cardiac patients.  There is clear evidence linking positive emotions with superior cardiac 
outcomes .21,25,[ADDRESS_1139044] utilized 
relaxation or mindfulness,45,46 PP interventions had never been used in patients with HF until our pre -
pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], despi[INVESTIGATOR_184352] -documented o verall efficacy.35 Indeed, aside from our team’s work to 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.[ADDRESS_1139045] -ACS patients, we are aware of only one other trial that used 
PP in any cardiac population (outpatients with hypertension or undergoing angioplasty).[ADDRESS_1139046] —and more powerful —effects than simpl y attempting to dampen 
negative emotions.[ADDRESS_1139047] phase of treatment development (IRB # 2015P000069) , we aimed to 
adapt our prior PP -based intervention s to patients with HF . We successfully performed qualitative 
research (N=3 2) to: (a)  assess barriers to health behavior completion, (b) identify the causes and extent 
of positive emotional deficits, (c) examine potential links between positive emotional deficits and 
impaired health behaviors, and (d) inquire about the utility of potential  PP and goal-setting exercises in 
participant s with NYHA class II or III HF.  Using this information we developed a customized , PP-
based health behavior intervention based on these results and the existing literature.  
In the current phase of treatment development  (Phase 2: Refining the intervention),  we will 
perform a small (N= 11) proof -of-concept trial to ensure our intervention’s initial feasibility and to 
refine the intervention prior to a larger pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  
 
In this project, we hope to do the follo wing:  
1. Test a 10-week , telephone -delivered health behavior intervention utilizing PP exercises and 
systematic goal -setting in a brief, non -randomized, proof -of-concept trial (N= 11). 
2. Determine whether this initial intervention is feasible in a small cohort of HF patients.  
3. Explore potential benefits of the intervention on outcomes of interest (e.g., optimism, p ositive 
affect ). 
  
II. SPECIFIC AIMS  
 
Specific Aim #1 (Feasibility; primary aim):  To assess the feasibility of the PP -based health behavior 
interventio n, adherence methods, and  outcome assessments  in patients with NYHA class I -III HF . 
 
Hypothesis : The PP exercises and goal -setting sessions will be feasible (i.e., 5 of the 9 
exercises /sessions will be completed by a majority of patients) . Furthermore, we will obtain complete 
objective follow -up data in at least 80% of enrolled participant s at 10 weeks for both the medication 
and activity measurement methods.  
 
Specific Aim #2 (Acceptability and immediate impact):  To assess whether the intervention is 
acceptable to participants, as measured by [CONTACT_821742], as well as its 
immediate impact on optimism.  
 
Hypothesis : The intervention will be acceptable (mean score of at least 6 out of 10 on rat ings of ease of 
completion and subjective helpfulness of the exercises) and will have adequate immediate impact on 
optimism (post -exercise ratings of optimism will be higher than pre -exercise ratings).   
 
Specific Aim # 3 (Intermediate outcomes):  To assess w hether this preliminary intervention appears to 
result in improvement of psychological well -being  (as measured by [CONTACT_184369], positive 
affect , anxiety, and depression ). 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.2017  
5 
  
Hypothesis : The intervention will lead to improvements in optimism and positive affect and reductions 
in depression and anxiety  at 10 weeks compared to baseline.  
 
Exploratory A im (adherence and functional outcomes):  To examine the impact of the intervention 
on physical activity, medication adherence, sodium intake, HF-related  QoL, and generic HRQoL.  
 
Hypothesis : The intervention will lead to improvements in adherence and functional outcomes at 
follow -up.  
 
III. PARTICIPANT  SELECTION  
 
A. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
 Inclusion criteria:  
 Adult patients with NYHA class I, II, or III HF  admitted to an MGH inpatient unit  or 
outpatients at the MGH Heart Center .[ADDRESS_1139048], making it difficult for them to increase physical activity and other health 
behaviors; therefore, they will not be included.  HF diagnosis will be confirmed via chart 
review and with the patient’s treatment team as needed.  NYHA class wi ll be confirmed 
with the patient and adjudicated by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Januzzi  or the patient’s treatment team when 
necessary . 
 Suboptimal adherence to health behaviors . This will be defined as a total score of ≤15 on 
three Medical Outcomes Study Specific Adherence Scale ( MOS SAS)50 items regar ding 
diet/exercise/medications . The MOS SAS has been used in multiple prior studies assessing 
adherence in cardiac patients , including our own studies in this population.40,51,[ADDRESS_1139049] the potential to 
improve their health behaviors.  
 
 Exclusion criteria:  
 Cognitive deficits impeding a participant ’s ability to provide informed consent or 
participate, assessed via a [ADDRESS_1139050] that is sensitive and specific for screening 
for cognitive impairment in research participant s.53 
 Medical conditions precluding interviews or likely to lead to d eath within 6 months.  
 Inability to speak English, inability to read or write, inability to walk, or lack of a 
telephone.  
 
  Justification for inclusion and exclusion criteria : We will recruit individuals over age [ADDRESS_1139051] NYHA class I, II, or III HF an d endorse suboptimal adherence  to physical activity, diet, and /or 
medication use.  We will study HF because it is extremely common1 and has been associated with poor 
functioning2-5 and high rates of mortality (50% of individuals with HF die within 5 years of 
diagnosis) .4 We chose NYHA class I, II, and III HF patients beca use class II and III patients comprise 
the majority of participant s in studies that identify links between physical activity and improved 
exercise capacity, quality of life, and survival6,8 and because class I patients also likely would benefit 
from increases in physical activity and health behaviors.  We did not include NYHA class IV patients 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.[ADDRESS_1139052] mild deficiencies in health behaviors . 
  Exclusion criteria will include cognitive deficits, medical co nditions that preclude participation 
in the intervention  or are likely to lead to death within 6 months, inability to walk, inability to speak 
English, and lack of a telephone.  The main purpose of these exclusion criteria is to ensure that all 
participant s are able to fully participate in intervention procedure s and provide outcome data.  Children 
under age 18 will be excluded because they often are not directly responsible for their adherence to 
health behaviors (e.g., medication adherence) and because they will not be able to provide informed 
consent.  Individua ls with cognitive deficits may have difficulty recalling their affective states or 
providing informed consent for the study.  Patients who have medical impairments that lead to a high 
risk of dying within 6 months likely will struggle to complete the interv ention  and other study 
procedures.  Potential participant s without a telephone will be unable to perform the intervention  and 
therefore will be excluded.   
  As physical activity (as measured by [CONTACT_6317]) is our primary health behavior outcome 
measure, those patients who cannot walk will be excluded, as the accelerometers were primarily 
designed for step -based activities.  Finally, individuals who do not speak or read English will be 
excluded because our current  proposed  interventional materials are only available in English  and 
because it is unclear whether the intervention  and study assessments could be effectively administered 
over the phone using interpreter services —certainly this would add an additional potential barrier to 
assessment and might resul t in inaccurate conclusions about the course of illness when in fact the 
language barrier/interpreter presence may have been a confounding factor.  If our results suggest that 
the intervention is promising, we will work to expand our study to non -English -speaking populations.  
All potential participant s will be evaluated for exclusion criteria prior to enrollment, in concert with 
their treatment team . 
 
B. Sources of participant s and recruitment methods  
  All participant s will be adults with NYHA class I, II, or III HF admitted to an inpatient unit at 
MGH or seen as outpatients at the MGH Heart Center . 
 
  In hospi[INVESTIGATOR_122058].  Potent ial participant s will be identified through daily reviews of the 
inpatient unit censuses and contact [CONTACT_4490] (and subsequent clearance by) an inpatient team member  
(physician, nurse, or nurse practitioner) . If a potential participant  is identified , the study staff member 
will ask the treatment provider to inquire whether it would be okay for a study staff member to inform 
the patient about an optional study.  If the patient were amenable, a study staff member would meet 
with the patient, confirm that it is okay to describe an optional study, and then discuss the study with 
the patient and inquire about  inclusion/exclusion criteria.  Interested patients will undergo cognitive 
evaluation (with the six -item screen), discussion of medical history to review for exclusion criteria  and 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.2017  
7 
 confirm NYHA class , and assessment of adherence status with the MOS SAS.  
  Sociodemographic and medical data (age, gender, medical and psychiatric diagnoses, NYHA 
class, ejection fraction, alcohol consumption, and smoking history), and baseline assessments on self -
report measures (including health behaviors), will be obtained at e nroll ment.  
 
Outpatient  recruitment  via Research Patient Database Registry (RPDR ). All participant s 
will be adults with NYHA class I, II, or III HF listed in their electronic medical record.  Participant s 
can be referred to the study by [CONTACT_821743] (physician, nurse, or nurse 
practitioner) or through systematic searches using the RPDR at MGH.  The RPDR is a centralized 
clinical da ta registry that gathers data from various hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] l egacy systems and stores it in one place. 
Researchers access this data using the RPDR online  Query Tool . They may query the RPDR data for 
aggregate totals and, with proper IRB approval, obtain medical record data. The RPDR ensures the 
security of patient i nformation by [CONTACT_821744] -in, automated security measures.54  
To identify potentially eligible patients : 
1.) An RPDR query will be performed to identify those patients with a diagnosis of HF.  Study 
staff will review the medical record to confirm potential participant eligibility  and to 
identify their linkage to a cardiologist . 
2.) Study staff then will obtain permission for initial contact [CONTACT_821745]’s cardiologist via e -mail or by [CONTACT_821746].  
3.) For physician -approved patients, study staff will send a study introduction letter from  the 
patient’s cardiologist ( with the clinician’s name [CONTACT_122131] ) and a study opt -out letter 
signed by [CONTACT_821747], MD (PI).  The letter from the cardiologist informs the patient 
that he or she is allowing the study to contact [CONTACT_821748].  [CONTACT_814805]’s letter is an opt -out letter describing the study, the 
procedure to opt out of further contact, and whom to call for further information.  These 
letters will be sent from a central location at MGH.  
4.) Should study staff receive no reply within  [ADDRESS_1139053] visit. Note: If a participant  prefers t o perform all study visits 
by [CONTACT_648], a consent form will be mailed to the participant.  This will be reviewed over the 
phone, and if the patient remains interested, he or she will sign the consent form and mail it 
back to study staff at MGH.  Once the signed  consent form is received, study staff will mail 
study materials to the participant, and the participant will be called for the first study visit.  
 
For potentially eligible patients who are enrolled in the MGH Research Options Direct to You 
(RODY) Program,  we will directly contact [CONTACT_821749].  RODY 
identifies patients who are willing to be contact[CONTACT_821750].  Patients who have 
agreed to be contact[CONTACT_821751];  each patient’s RODY status 
is available in the demographics table included in the RPDR output.  
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.[ADDRESS_1139054] in the 
future.  
 
IV. PARTICIPANT  ENROLLMENT  
 
A. Methods of Enrollment  
 
We will enroll participant s through the recruitment procedures, described above, and the 
informed consent procedures, described below.   
 
B. Procedures for obtaining informed consent  
 
If the patient is interested in the study after the discussion /assessment for exclusion criteria  as 
mentioned above,  a licensed physician, psychologist, social work investigator , medical student, or 
research assistant  will approach the patient, verbally discuss the study in detail and give the patient 
adequate time to read a written IRB -approved consent form and to ask questions. If they desire, 
participant s will have at least [ADDRESS_1139055] the 
capacity to provide informed consent, we will ask potential participant s to describe their understanding 
of the study’s purpose  and their role (e.g., that they understand the timing of intervention  and its 
purpose, audiotapi[INVESTIGATOR_821733], confidentiality and its 
limits, our focused review of medical records, and their ability to end parti cipation in the study at any 
time for any reason). Patients will be given at least 24 hours if desired to consider participation in the 
study . In addition, patients  will be informed that they will receive $ 100 for completing the study 
(including the  10-week follow up phone call)  and returning the ActiGraph  GT3X+  device , mailed to 
them as a check at the end of the study . For tax reasons, we require a social security number in order to 
issue the full $100. However, if you are uncomfortable giving that inf ormation, we can compensate 
you with a $50 check  without requiring your social security number.  Outpatient participants who come 
to MGH for an initial in -person visit also will be informed that they will be reimbursed for parking.  
It is exceedingly unlikel y that a potential participant  will be a patient currently in an 
investigator’s clinical practice . However, if an investigator discovers that a potential participant  is a 
member of his/her clinical practice, an alternate investigator will be substituted to  provide a description 
of the study and obtain informed consent.  
Finally, once a participant  signs the consent for m, the investigator will perform a focused 
review of the participant ’s medical record (including laboratory data) to again confirm that the patient 
has HF, and will consult with the study cardiologist in the event that there is any need for further 
clarification.  If there is question about the patient’s medical prognosis ( to assess whether the patient 
has a condition likely to lead to death within 6 months) the study team will consult with the patient’s 
inpatient  or outpatient  team and/or the study cardiologist. Participant s will be asked to sign a release 
form at the time of consent to allow study staff to discuss their diagnosis and aforementioned medical 
variables during the study.  
Partners Healthcare has an electronic system that lets the participants’ study doctors know if they  
are admitted t o a Partners Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], or if  they visit a Partners H ospi[INVESTIGATOR_122066]. We will 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.2017  
9 
 use this system to ensure that the study doctors know about any possible problems  or side effects 
participants  experience while taking part in the study.  
 
C. Treatment assignment /randomization  
 
There is no randomization procedure required for this trial.  
 
V. STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
A. Study visits/evaluations  (See Table 1)  
 
  Initial visit (Week  1; in person ). The initial visit will occur in an MGH  inpatient unit , in the 
outpatient cardiac clinic , in a designated private office within the CPRP suite  (for those contact[CONTACT_821752]-out letter) , or over the phone (if a participant prefers to not come to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_807519] -person 
visit) . Participant s will meet with a member of the study staff (the study “t rainer”) and complete self -
report questionnaires. These questionnaires assess optimism (Life Orientation Test -Revised; LOT -R),55 
anxiety/depression (Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5620]; HADS) ,56 positive emotions (Positive and 
Negative Affect Schedule; PANAS),65 health -related quality of life (MOS Short Form -12; SF -12),57 
cardiac symptoms and  heart failure -related quality of life (Kansas Cit y Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire; 
KCCQ) ,58,59 medication adherence ( Self-Reported Medication Adherence  [adapted from the Heart and 
Soul Study] ; SRMA),60 and sodium intake  (Scored Sodium Questionnaire; SSQ ).61 Participants will 
also answer questions about their alcohol (using the AUDIT -C)[ADDRESS_1139056] exercise (gratitude for positive 
events) and will be instructed to perform the exercise within the next week.  Prior to completing the 
exercise, participan ts will be asked to rate their current level of happi[INVESTIGATOR_102904], using a [ADDRESS_1139057] week’s PP and goal -setting exercises , participants will receive an 
Actigraph GT3X+ accel erometer, and its use will be demonstrated by [CONTACT_222616].  We will measure 
activity at baseline (for 7 days ) and in the 7 days following the  10-week assessment  (we will send 
participants the Acti Graph in the mail at the appropriate time ). In contrast to th e pedometer, which is 
used for participants to monitor their activity, the Acti Graph accelerometer  provides no information to 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.[ADDRESS_1139058] been used in 
numerous studies of physical activity in patients with medical illness.64 The accelerometer  is a small 
1.5” square device that can be worn on an elastic band (around the lower waist) or clipped onto a belt . 
It tracks the number of steps taken. After explaining how to use the accelerometer , the study trainer 
will schedule an appointment to call the participant in [ADDRESS_1139059] exercise.  In total this 
initial  visit will take approximately 50-60 minutes.  
 
  Weekly phone sessions (Weeks 1-10). All participants will be asked to complete [ADDRESS_1139060] approximately 30 minutes . These calls will be recorded so that a percentage  (10%)  of 
these recordings can be reviewed to ensure that the PP and goal -setting  portions of the intervention are 
being delivered as described in the protocol and trainer manual.  
 
  Program Content . All phone sessions will include (a) a review of the week’s PP exercise 
(including the participant’s ratings of pre - and post -exercise happi[INVESTIGATOR_008], ease and helpfulness of the 
exercise, and optimism related to the future), (b) a discussio n of the rationale of the next week’s PP 
exercise through a guided review of the PP manual, and (c) assignment of the next we ek’s PP exercise. 
Additionally for the goal-setting portion,  participants will (a) review their goals and behaviors from the 
prior week, (b) discuss techniques for improving health behavior adherence (e.g., monitoring physical 
activity, reading nutrition labels), and (c) set goals for the next week. The exercises and content for 
both PP and MI will be assigned in the same order for al l participants receiving them.  During the calls, 
the trainer and participant  will also review the next section of the treatment manual and prepare for the 
upcoming week’s exercise.  
 
  Positive Psychology Exercises. The PP exercises used in this study were selected based on 
their superior performance in our pre -pi[INVESTIGATOR_122067]’ work . They will be grouped into three -
week modules focusing on a different psychological state : 
 
Module 1: Gratitude -based activities  
Week  1 (in-person visit): Gratitude for positive events .33  
Participants recall three events, small or large, in the preceding week that were associated with 
satisfaction, happi[INVESTIGATOR_008], pride, or other positive states.  
 
Week 2: Expressing g ratitude .[ADDRESS_1139061] of kindness; participants 
may, at their discretion, share the letter with the other person.  
 
Week 3: Integrating gratitude -based activiti es into daily life .  
Participants work to be more aware of positive things over the course of the week and then 
boost the positive feelings gained from them by [CONTACT_821753], or recording or 
celebrating the events in some way.  
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.2017  
11 
  
Module 2: S trength -based activities  
 Week 4: Recalling a past success.33 
Participants recall a prior event in which they experienced success.  They write about the even t, 
their contribution to the success, and the positive feelings evoked by [CONTACT_184375].  Finally, they 
consider how they might use the experience to be successful in the future.  
 
Week 5: Using personal strengths.[ADDRESS_1139062] to use 
that strength over the following week.  
 
Week  6: Integrati ng strength -based skills into daily life . 
Participants  work to be more aware of successes that occur in their daily life and how they can 
use their strengths on an everyday basis.  
 
Module 3:  Meaning -based activities  
Week 7: Enjoyable and meaningful activit ies.65  
Participants complete a series of self -selected activities that vary between those that bring 
immediate boosts in mood and those that are more deeply meaningful.  
 
Week 8: Performing acts of kindness .  
Participants complete three acts of kindness in one day. The acts can be small or large, planned 
or spontaneous, but must be expressly completed to be kind to another. Participants then write 
how doing the act made them feel.  
 
Week 9: Integrating meaning -based activities into daily life.  
Participants work to perform enjoyable and meaningful acts for themselves and others in daily 
life. Trainers help participants create a plan for using these  skills on their own in the near 
future.  
 
Week 10: Planning for th e Future . 
Participants review the skills they have used in the program and make a plan for using these 
skills in everyday life moving forward.  
 
  Goal -setting . The goal -setting portion of the program aims to provide patients with knowledge 
about important HF -related health behaviors and assist them with setting goals to become more 
adherent to these health behaviors.  This intervention will focus on three distinct  health behaviors: 
physical activity, low -sodium diet, and medication adherence.  These also will be divided into three -
session modules, which will be completed in parallel to the PP exercises.  
  Each session follows the same structure.  Study trainers will:  (a) ask participants about their 
health goals, (b) provide education about a health behavior  and/or refer them to their treatment team  if 
clarification is needed, and (c) set a health behavior goal for the next week . Health behavior goals will 
be individu alized to the participant , and participant s will be encouraged to speak with their treatment 
team if they have any questions about appropriate goals for diet or physical activity.  While all sessions 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.2017  
12 
 will involve tracking participants’ progress towards thei r health behavior goals, the educational 
components will vary from week to week:  
 
Module 1: Physical a ctivity  
Week 1 (in-person visit):  Introduction to increasing physical activity . 
The trainer will review with participants the potential  health benefits of  physical activity, as 
well as participants’ current physical activity.  Participants will receive a pedometer and set a 
goal of monitoring their physical activity (through steps measured by [CONTACT_799548]) over the 
next week.  
 
Week 2: Setting  a SMART physic al activity goal. 
Participants will learn about setting goals that are SMART (specific, measurable, attainable, 
relevant, and time -based) and will be encouraged to set a small behavioral goal  related to 
physical activity . 
 
Week 3: Physical activity resourc es. 
Participants will be asked to identify resources (community, friends/family, equipment) for 
engaging in  physical activity and how they can use them to work toward their goals.  They will 
also discuss ways to problem solve around barriers  to physical act ivity.  
 
Module 2: Heart -healthy  diet 
Week  4: Introduction to a heart -healthy diet . 
The trainer will review with participants the potential  health benefits of a low sodium diet , as 
well as participants’ current  dietary habits . Participants will be encouraged to keep track of 
their salt intake over the next week and contact [CONTACT_821754] . 
 
Week  5: Setting a SMART heart -healthy diet  goal. 
Participants will be encouraged to set a small behavioral goal related to diet  and to continue to 
monitor their sodium intake . 
 
Week 6: Heart -healthy diet resources . 
Participants will be asked to identify resources (community, friends/family, low sodium diet 
recipes/books) for having a low sodium diet and how they can use them to work toward their 
goals.  They will also discuss ways to problem solve around barriers to a heart -healthy diet.  
 
Module 3: Medicat ion adherence  
Week  7: Introduction to medication adherence . 
The train er will review with participants the importance of medication adherence, as well as 
participants’ current medication adherence.  Participants will be encouraged to monitor their 
medication adherence over the next week.  
 
Week 8: Setting a SMART medication go al. 
Participants will be encouraged to set a goal related to medication adherence and to continue to 
monitor their medication adherence.  
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.2017  
13 
  
Week 9: Medication resources . 
Trainers and participants will discuss different resources ( e.g., medication pi[INVESTIGATOR_16582],  electronic 
reminders) that can help participants remember to be adherent to their medications.  They will 
also discuss ways to problem solve around barriers to medication adherence . 
 
Week 10: Planning for the future . 
Trainers will assist participants with reviewing their accomplishments and benefits gained from 
health behavior adherence thus far, and help them to create a plan for physical activity, heart -
healthy diet, and medication adherence for the near future  
 
At each session, health behavior goals will  be reviewed with the participant, and if there are any 
concerns about the goals, participants will be encouraged to speak with their outpatient treatment team 
for clarification.  Educational information will be based on the Learning to Live with Heart Fail ure 
guide,[ADDRESS_1139063] if any other questions arise.  
 
Given the results of our prior PP studies, and given that this is a feasibility study (i.e., we want to 
assess participants’ willingness to complete the exercises), we will expect participants  to complete at 
least 5 PP exercises / goal -setting  sessions . In other words, if a participant co mpletes at least 5 
sessions , missed sessions  will not be considered a deviation from  the protocol.  
 
 Follow -up phone call  (Week 10). At Week  10, a member of the study staff will call participants to 
repeat the self -report questionnaires that were administe red at baseline. These questionnaires assess 
optimism (LOT -R), positive emotions (PANAS), overall  health behavior adherence (MOS SAS), 
anxiety/depression (HADS), health -related quality of life (SF -12), cardiac symptoms and heart failure -
related quality of life (KCCQ), medication adherence (SRMA), and sodium intake  (SSQ). Participants 
will also be asked about alcohol use  (AUDIT -C), cigarette smoking, cardiac -related hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5449] , and cardiac rehabilitation, and to rate their overall satisfaction with the treatment they 
received for their cardiac condition over t he last 10 weeks on a scale of 0 (not at all satisfied ) to 10 
(completely satisfied ). Finally, patients will be asked abo ut their experience in the study, including any 
aspects of the intervention or study procedures that could be improved,  during follow -up assessment.  
In sum, these scales should take approximately 30-[ADDRESS_1139064]. Celano  (PI) and Carol Mastromauro (LICSW) have substantial experience in 
explaining and delivering P P exercises from their studies in cardiac and psychiatric patients.  The PP 
exercises for this trial have been identified via published literature,33,65-[ADDRESS_1139065]. Celano and [CONTACT_821764] will engage in several training exercises prior to study initiation.  
Together, t hey will review the treatment manual and our team’s prior training manuals related to these 
exercises.  They then will complete all  exercises together to gain experience performing and reviewing 
each exercise.   
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.[ADDRESS_1139066] and complete each 
exercise together to  gain experience providing education and setting goals related to physical activity, 
sodium restriction, and medication adherence.  
 
 
Table 1. Schedule of study events.  
 Pre-enroll -ment  Baseline and 
Initial Visit  Phone Sessions 
(Weeks 2 -10) Follow -up Phone 
Call (Week 10)  
Cognitive screen  X    
Chart review to  
confirm eligibility  X    
Assessment of inclusion criteria 
(MOS SAS, NYHA class)  X    
Chart review for  
baseline characteristics   X   
PP exercise   X X  
Goal -setting exercise   X X  
Exercise ratings   X X  
Self-report measures  
(SSQ,  LOT -R, PANAS, HADS, 
KCCQ, SRMA, SF -12)  X  X 
Objective adherence data 
(Acti Graph step counter)   X  X 
 
B. Drugs to be used  
 
No specific medications are being studied or administered solely for research purposes in this 
study.  
 
C. Devices to be used  
 
No specific devices are being studied or administered solely for research purposes in this study.  
 
D. Procedur es/ surgical interventions  
 
No procedures or surgical interventions will be performed solely for research purposes in thi s 
study.  
 
E. Data to be collected (See Table 1)  
 
Baseline Data:  Participant s will com plete the  MOS SAS, SSQ, LOT -R, PANAS , HADS, 
KCCQ, SRMA, and SF -12 in person and will receive a n Actigraph  accelerometer.  They will be asked 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.[ADDRESS_1139067] as required for characterization of our population.  This 
information will include data regarding medical history (history of acute coronary syndrome, coronary 
artery by[CONTACT_804956] t, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035], and current smoking), current 
medical variables (renal function, N-terminal pro -B-type natriuretic peptide, left ventricular ejection 
fraction , NYHA class ), medications, and sociodemographic data (age, ge nder, race/ethnicity, living 
alone).  This information will help us to ensure that the population we recruit is a representative 
population of patients suffering from HF so that the health behavior  intervention  we are testing  is 
applicable to the broadest p opulation of patients.  
 
 Feasibility (primary study aim): Feasibility will be measured by [CONTACT_821755].  We will consider the intervention feasible if the majority of 
participants complete at least 5 of 9 exercises/ sessions . 
 
 Acceptability:  Following each PP exercise, participants will be asked to rate the ease of 
completion and subjective helpfulness of the exercise on a scale of 0 (very difficult/not helpful) to 10 
(very easy/very helpful).   
 
 Immediate impact : To examine the immediate impact of the PP exercises on positive affect 
and optimism, participants will be asked to rate these psychological states before and after each 
exercise on a 10 -point Likert scale (0 = not happy/optimistic, 10 = very happy/ optimistic).  
 
Measurement of health behaviors . We will assess three main health behaviors in this trial.   
 
(a) Physical activity (primary health behavior outcome measure) . We selected physical 
activity as our main health behavior outcome for several reasons.  Physical activity is a key modifiable 
prognostic factor in HF patients69,70 and has been associated with improved exercise capacity, QoL, 
and survival in this population.6,8 Furthermore, there are established links between higher levels of 
positive emotions (particularly optimism) and increased physical activity,26,29,[ADDRESS_1139068] approach, as compared to other behaviors, which may improve with simple 
interventions such as electronic reminders.  
Physical activity will be measured using the ActiGraph  GT3X+  three -axis accelerometer 
(ActiGraph, LLC, Pensacola,  FL). Accelerometers are often considered to be the standard for 
measuring habitual physical activity .71,72 ActiGraph  GT3X+ step counters are validated as measures of 
physical activity and have been used in numerous studies of physical activity in patients with medical 
illness.64 We chose to use ActiGraph  GT3X+ accelerometers because they are the most widely used 
monitors for research purposes and adequately discriminate between different levels of activity.73,74 In 
this trial , participant s will wear the accelerometer (for 1 week  at baseline and 1 week at follow -up) to 
assess the feasibility of doing so and to ensure adequate capture of physical activity.  We will measure 
the number of steps taken daily for the last [ADDRESS_1139069]  480 minutes of wear time to  be considered a valid day, 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.[ADDRESS_1139070] 5 valid days for a participant’s data to be considered complete.  If a participant does not 
provide at least this much data, we will as k the participant to re -wear the step counter until information 
from at least 5 v alid days has been captured.  
(b) Medication adherence . We will assess medication adherence using a self -report 
medication adherence (SRMA) measure.  Specifically, we will ask participants what percent of the 
time (in 10% increments) they took all of their medications as prescribed in the past week and in the 
past 2 weeks. These questions were adapted from the adherence measure used in the Heart and Soul 
Study.60 
 (c) Dietary adherence.  We will assess sodium intake over the past month using the Scored 
Sodium Questionnaire (SSQ).61  This scale assesses the frequency with which participants consume a 
variety of sodium -containing  foods, ranging from “Rarely or Never Eaten” to “At Least Once Daily.”  
Total SSQ score has been shown to correlate significantly with 24 -hour urinary sod ium, and the SSQ 
has been validated in patients with significant medical illness .61 If participant s are hosp italized, they 
will be asked to  describe their sodium intake prior to admission , given that their diet in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_821734].  The SSQ will be completed both at 
baseline and again at the  10-week follow up.  
(d) Self -reported adherence. We wi ll assess self -reported  adherence using the MOS SAS50 
items regarding diet/exercise/medications. Participants will be asked to rate how often they completed 
each health behavior over the last month, with choices rating from “none of the time” to “al l of the 
time.”  The MOS SAS has been used in multiple prior studies assessing adherence in cardiac patients, 
including our own studies in this population.40,51,[ADDRESS_1139071] and 
other psychological constructs that may potentially b e impacted by [CONTACT_821756]-based health behavior  
intervention that will be tested in subsequent trials.  Doing so in this study will allow us to evaluate the 
feasibility of using these scales in this specific patient population . 
 
(a) Dispositional optimism (primary psychological outcome measure) will be measured using 
the Life Orientation Test -Revised (LOT -R), a well -validated [ADDRESS_1139072] linked to cardiac outcomes,23,75,76 and the LOT -R has 
been used to measure optimism in man y studies of cardiac patients.77-79 Though dispositional optimism 
theoretically would be stable over time, research suggests that LOT -R scores can change quickly in 
response to  psychological interventions.38,80,81  
(b) Positive affect will be measured using the positive affect items on the Positive and 
Negative  Affect Schedule (PANAS),82 a well -validated scale used in other intervention trials and in 
patients with HF.83,84 
(c) Anxiety and depression  will be measured using the anxiety and depression subscales of the  
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5620] (HADS).85 This well -validated scale has been used in many 
studies of patients w ith heart disease (including our group’s studies),38,40,85-87 and has the advantage of 
having few somatic symptom items that can confound mood/anxiety assessment in medically -ill 
patients.  
 
Measurement of physical outcomes.  We will also assess selected physical outcomes.  
 
(a) Cardiac sympt oms and HF -related QoL  (primary functional outcome measure) will be 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.2017  
17 
 measured with the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire (KCCQ), a well -validated 
questionnaire of health status in HF.58 The full scale will be used to measure HF -specific health -related 
QoL (HRQoL), and an eight -question subset of the KCCQ will be used as a measure of HF symptoms.  
The KCCQ is a valid, reliable, and responsive instrument in patients with HF58,[ADDRESS_1139073] (physical activity, 
medication adherence, and diet).  
(b) Generic HRQoL will be assessed via the Medical Outcomes Study Short Form -12 (SF -
12),[ADDRESS_1139074], including our 
work.38,40,80,88-93 The SF -12 also is a reliable marker of QoL i n HF94 and has been associated with 
mortality in this high -risk cohort.95  
 
VI. BIOSTATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
 
A and B. Specific data variables and study endpoints  
 
Aim #1 (Feasibility; primary aim ): To assess whether PP exercises administered over the phone are 
feasible in patients with NYHA class I -III HF.  
 
Measures : 
 Rates of completion of exercises (recorded by [CONTACT_122117]).  
 Successful use of Acti Graph accelerometer . 
 
The intervention will be considered feasible if 5 of the 9 sessions  are completed by a majority of 
patients.  The objective assessment measures will be  considered feasible if we obtain adequate physical 
activity data (at least 5 valid days of accelerometer wear time) in at least 80% of enrolled participant s 
at 10 weeks.   
 
Aim #2  (Acceptability and immediate impact ): To assess whether PP exercises adminis tered over the 
phone are acceptable and lead to improvements in optimism in patients with NYHA class I -III HF.  
 
Measures:  
 Patient rating of immediate outcomes on 10 -point Likert scale: Ease of completion, overall utility, 
change in optimism from pre - to po st-exercise.  
 
The PP exercises will be considered to be acceptable if participant s have mean scores of at least 6/[ADDRESS_1139075] -exercise 
than pre -exercises across exercises (via one -sample t test).  
 
Aim #3 and Exploratory Aim (Impact on psychological outcomes , functional outcomes, and health 
behaviors ): To determine whether  the PP intervention is linked to improvements in psychological well -
being , functioning, and health behavior adherence  from baseline to 10 weeks.  
 
Measures : 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.2017  
18 
  Optimism: LOT -R (primary measure for this aim)  
 Positive emotions: PANAS  
 Anxiety/depression: HADS  
 HF-related QoL: KCCQ  
 Health related quality of life: SF -12 
 Self-reported adherence: MOS SAS  
 Physical activity: ActiGraph accelerometer  
 Medication adherence : SRMA   
 Sodium intake:  SSQ   
 
We will consider the PP intervention to show promise for improving psychological well -being if mean 
scores on all psychological outcome measures are superior at [ADDRESS_1139076] set a low bar for improvement (i.e., 
even slight pre -post improvement). If these basic pre -post improvements did not occur, it would be 
important to reassess the intervention before moving on. We will move to a next -step trial once we 
have develop ed an intervention that appears to be feasible, to match hypotheses generated by [CONTACT_821757], and to have some impact on optimism/positive affect based on a very small 
sample.  Similarly, we will consider the intervention to show promise for im proving other outcomes if 
there are pre -post improvements in the medical/functional outcomes.   
 
C. Statistical methods  
 
Data will be downloaded from REDCap into the Stata statistical package.  For Aim s 1 and 2 
(feasibility , acceptability,  and immediate imp act), descriptive statistics will be used to report 
proportion of exercise completion and mean scores on exercise ratings.  Differences between pre - and 
post-optimism scores will be compared using paired t tests.   
 
To compare mean scores on outcome variable s for Aim 3 and the exploratory aim , paired t tests will be 
used to explore mean differences between baseline and 10 week values.  All statistical tests will be two -
tailed and p<.[ADDRESS_1139077] statistically 
significant differences between baseline and follow -up points.  
 
 
D. Power analysis  
 
 This exploratory proof -of-concept study with 11 patients (maximum 15 patients enrolled to 
obtain 10 complete rs), as noted, will not be powered to detect statistically significant differences 
between baseline and follow -up points, and is designed to assess feasibility of methods.  
 
VII. RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS  
 
A. Complications of surgical/non -surgical procedures  
 
No procedures will be conducted as part of this study  
 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.2017  
19 
 B. Drug side effects and toxicities  
 
No specific medications are being studied or administered solely for research purposes in this 
study.  
 
C. Device complications  
 
No specific devices are being studied or admi nistered solel y for research purposes in this study.  
However, we are using an accelerometer that, although not determined to be a “device,” can 
malfunction.  
The device utilized to measure physical activity should pose minimal risk.  The accelerometer 
(ActiG raph GT3X+ ) used to measure activity is small, light, and without sharp edges.  Immersing the 
device in water for a prolonged period may render it unusable but does not pose a shock risk.  
Participant s will mail the device back after [ADDRESS_1139078] ructions regarding the use of the accelerometer and step counter  to 
ensure safety and proper use, and to reduce inconvenience/distress associated with uncer tainty about 
their safety or use. We will reduce technological failure by [CONTACT_821758] 
a techn ical help line as noted above.  The scientific team (i.e., [CONTACT_814805] , the PI) will liaise with 
participant s regarding any battery problems or  technical advice on the Actigraph accelerometer, step 
counter, and related equipment.  
 
D. Psychosocial risks  
 
Confidentiality. As with any study, there is the risk of a breach of confidentiality; these risks 
will be minimized by [CONTACT_821759], and by [CONTACT_184377]/offi ces and password -protected databases to store personal 
information. Only study staff (the PI, the research assistant entering data, and the research assistant 
doing follow -up assessments) will have any access to personally identifiable information about 
participant s, and such access will be limited only to information necessary to complete study tasks.   
All data regarding the objective adherence devices will be encoded only with the study 
participant  number that is linked to personal identifying information  in the study database. The devices 
will not be marked with any personal identifiable information, and the database that will be used to 
monitor accelerometer data will only contain participant  numbers. The accelerometers do not record or 
link participant s’ names with their data, and accelerometer data will only be accessed from a locked 
Partners computer in Warren 1226.  
We will ensure that contact [CONTACT_46144] s is confidential by [CONTACT_821760] s and not leaving study -
related messages for participant s unless expressly allowed by [CONTACT_3445] s. Upon enrollment, we ask all 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.[ADDRESS_1139079] to the consent process, we will approach/recruit 
participant s in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_821735]’ treatment team members (who would not be associated 
with the consent process in any way) ask patients if they are interested in hearing more about an 
optional study.  In the outpatient setting, we will only contact [CONTACT_821761] -out letter.  If an investigator is clinically caring for a 
potential participant, an alternate, trained study staff member will approach the patient and complete 
the informed consent process and all study procedures for that particip ant. When discussing the study, 
we will emphasize the study’s optional nature and p articipants’ ability to opt out/ un-enroll at any time, 
for any reason.  
 
Medical & psychiatric emergencies. If patients report acute medical symptoms, they will be 
directed to emergency medical care, and their primary medical physicians may be contact[CONTACT_122124].  
If study staff have questions regarding medical symptoms and their urgency, [CONTACT_122132]  (co-
investigator and cardiologist ) and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_184364] (and call patient) as needed. This 
study utilizes a questionnaire that assesses depressive symptoms (HADS), and thus, participants might 
disclose information about suicidal thinking or behavior. Due to this possibility, the follow -up call will 
be performed at a time when a psychiatrist study investigator is available to intervene as needed.  If 
participant s report suicidal ideation, study staff will complete specific suicide risk assessment 
questions to assess immediate risk of self -harm, and the psychiatrist  will immediately assess the 
situation/patient if there is either an acutely elevated risk of self -harm or if additional information is 
needed to clarify risk.  If the patient is at imminent risk, the study psychiatrist will take all needed steps 
to ensure emergent evaluation, which may include ensuring evaluat ion in the nearest emergency room. 
Participant s will be informed of all of these measures to ensure confidentiality —and the limits of 
confidentiality, such as arranging for emergent medical or psychiat ric care if safety is at imminent 
risk—as part of the informed consent process. However given that this is a medical rather than a 
psychiatric population we anticipate the rate of suicidality in this population will be low.  
We will ask participant s to repo rt adverse events related to study participation they may have 
experienced at any time throughout the study.  Any adverse events will be reported to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_821736].  
 
E. Radiation risks  
 
There will be no radiation exp osure in this study.  
 
VI.  POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
 
A. Pote ntial Benefits to Participants  
 
It is possible that participants will not receive benefit from participation. Patients will undergo 
a series of exercises that are designed to increase optimism, improve well-being, and potentially 
improve cardiac health behaviors. Analyses of PP studies have been that these interventions are 
associated with improved psychological well -being and decrease d depressive symptoms, and optimism 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.[ADDRESS_1139080] important public health 
benefits.  Optimism and other positive affective states are prospectively associated with increased 
participation in healthy behaviors and with superior cardiac outcomes.  The creation of a PP-based 
intervention —based on the previous  qualitative research phase —targeted at improving positive 
emotional states in HF patients could lead to a novel approach to enhancing adhere nce in this 
population, which in turn might result in decreased morbidity and mortality in this population. Future 
studies could investigate the feasibility of implementing this intervention in a similar population and 
examine the impact on cardiac and psy chological outcomes. If the PP-based health behavior  
intervention in this study prove s to be feasible, well -accepted, and associated with improvements in 
physical activity and other key outcomes, it may well be possible to utilize these easily -delivered an d 
completed exercises as part of a clinical care package for HF patients.  Thus participation in this study 
may result in substantial benefit to future patients.  
 
VIII.  MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  
 
A. Independent Monitoring of Source D ata 
 
All source data  (e.g., chart review data and participant self -report) will be entered into the 
REDCap database.  The PI ([CONTACT_814805]) will review this data to ensure that it is being entered correctly 
and will perform ‘test downloads’ of the data to ensure that it can be c aptured in the statistical package 
to be used in this study.  
 
B. Safety M onitoring (e.g., DSMB)  
 
Safety monitoring will be performed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Celano (PI), who will ensure that the study team is 
adequately identifying, reviewing, and reporting adverse events and  unanticipated problems to the 
Partners Institutional Review Board (IRB). Upon certification of IRB approval of this protocol, [CONTACT_821763] will submit this document to the NHLBI Grants Management Officer prior to beginning any 
study procedures. [CONTACT_814805] w ill also submit an annual progress report confirming adherence to the 
data and safety monitoring plan, including a summary of any data and safety monitoring issues that 
occurred since the previous reporting period, as well as any changes made to the protoc ol and any new 
and continuing IRB approvals since the last filed report. A more detailed description of monitoring 
mechanisms, intervals, and the information monitored is outlined below.  
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.2017  
22 
 Monitoring mechanism: [CONTACT_814805] (PI) will take primary responsibilit y for the data safety 
monitoring.  However,  this study will have a formal data safety monitoring board (DSMB), which will 
be chaired by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Jeff Huffman (psychiatry, primary mentor), and populated by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Elyse Park 
(psychology, co -mentor), [CONTACT_821765] (cardiology, external to study), and [CONTACT_821766] 
(psychology, external to study) .  
Monitoring intervals:  Monitoring of adverse events will occur  on an ongoing basis with 
notification of [CONTACT_814805] with any adverse study -related events.  More system atic weekly meetings for 
review of feasibility/acceptability information and minor IRB deviations will be  held between [CONTACT_821763] and study staff, including the lead research coordinator.  [CONTACT_814805] will then discuss  any 
potential issues regarding data saf ety or protocol deviations with [CONTACT_102974] during weekly 
supervision meetings. This allows the team to review this information and make adjustments to 
procedures as required.  Furthermore , weekly journal clubs are held with the study team; these include 
discussions of related projects (e.g., studies of physical activity in cardiac patients, studies of positive 
psychological interventions) and the general psychiatry and cardiology literature.  Finally, the formal 
DSMB will meet every four months to monitor pa tient safety outcomes.  These ongoing, weekly, and 
intermittent reviews ensure that the study procedures minimize research -related risk by [CONTACT_821762].  [CONTACT_814805] (study PI) is responsible for directly reporting serious study -related 
adverse events to the NIH/NHLBI, and even if there are no such events, a yearly report summarizing 
adherence to the DSMP, review of study -related enrollment and issues during the study period, and 
any relevant changes to the protocol, will be sent to NHLBI.  
Information to be monitored:  Information to be monitored will include: (a) a n evaluation of 
the progress of the research study, including assessments of da ta quality and timeliness and participant 
recruitment, accrual and retention consistent with plans for diversity and generalizability, (b) a review 
of study safety data —adverse event (and minor deviation) information —to determine whether the 
study should c ontinue as originally designed, be changed, or be stopped, (c) review of procedures to 
maintain participant confidentiality (e.g., storage of identifiable information in locked cabinets, 
ensuring study databases have no personal identifying information, us e of study participant  numbers on 
communicatio ns about the study), and (d) a n assessment of external factors or relevant information 
(e.g., developments in the literature, results of related studies, etc.) that may have an impact on the 
safety of participa nts or on the ethics of the research study, such as through the journal club listed 
above.  
 
C. Outcomes M onitoring  
 
As noted above, this study is a proof -of-concept trial to determine if all aspects of the protocol 
are feasible, acceptable, and effective. After [ADDRESS_1139081] completed the trial, we will briefly 
review the study and our outcomes. If participant s’ acceptability scores in the PP group are low (or 
optimism scores decrease following the exercises), or we sense more generally that some participant s 
have been dissatisfied with the program, we will likely alter the protocol to address these issues.  
Similar ly, if our rates of session completion are far below expected rates, we will reassess our protocol 
and likely make substantial changes.  We will then complete the more formal data analysis once [ADDRESS_1139082] completed the trial.  
On a weekly basis, th e research team will meet to review study progress. At that time, the 
principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_782436], study forms, and procedures completed 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.2017  
23 
 that week, as well as all chart review forms performed that week for completeness and  accuracy.  The 
study team will also discuss any procedural difficulties, recruitment issues, and adverse events at this 
meeting (and before if needed). Investigators will also review consent documents and address acute 
issues in real time throughout the we ek. We will take several measures to ensure the integrity of data 
collection/entry/analysis and the fidelity of our intervention.  [CONTACT_102974]  will periodically review the 
recordings of weekly phone calls  to ensure their fidelity .  
 
D. Adverse event reporting guidelines  
 
We will follow all PHRC guidelines with respect to reporting unanticipated problems, 
including adverse events.  Specifically, when a serious or nonserious adverse event occurs, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_821737].  For 
all unanticipated problems and adverse events deemed related or possibly related to the research, we 
will complete and submit an Other Event report through Insight/eIRB as soon as possible and within 5 
working days/ 7 calendar days (as defined in the March 2014 Reporting Unanticipated Problems 
Including Adverse Events report).  At Continuing Review, we will provide a summary of all 
unanticipated problems as per PHRC protocol.  Finally, if there are unanticip ated problems, especially 
if serious or recurrent, the PI ([CONTACT_814805] ) will amend the protocol if it is deemed necessary to protect 
the safety and welfare of the participant s. 
 
IX. R EFERENCES  
 
1. Lloyd -Jones D, Adams RJ, Brown TM, et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics --2010 update: a 
report from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2010;121:e46 -e215.  
2. Celano CM, Huffman JC. Depression and cardiac disease: a review. Cardiol Rev 2011;19:130 -
42. 
3. Chen J, Normand SL, Wang Y, Kr umholz HM. National and regional trends in heart failure 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_146496], 1998 -2008. JAMA 2011;306:1669 -78. 
4. Roger VL, Go AS, Lloyd -Jones DM, et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics --2011 update: a 
report  from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2011;123:e18 -e209.  
5. Coelho R, Ramos S, Prata J, Bettencourt P, Ferreira A, Cerqueira -Gomes M. Heart failure and 
health related quality of life. Clin Pract Epi[INVESTIGATOR_149698] 2005;1:19.  
6. O'Connor CM, Whellan DJ, Lee KL, et al. Efficacy and safety of exercise training in patients 
with chronic heart failure: HF -ACTION randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2009;301:1439 -50. 
7. Wright SP, Walsh H, Ingley KM, et al. Uptake of self -management strategies in a hea rt failure 
management programme. Eur J Heart Fail 2003;5:371 -80. 
8. Belardinelli R, Georgiou D, Cianci G, Purcaro A. Randomized, controlled trial of long -term 
moderate exercise training in chronic heart failure: effects on functional capacity, quality of l ife, and 
clinical outcome. Circulation 1999;99:[ADDRESS_1139083] heart 
failure: a review of the literature. Nurs Clin North Am 2008;43:133 -53; vii -viii. 
10. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_135164], Apstein CS, B alady GJ, et al. Exercise and heart failure: A statement from the 
American Heart Association Committee on exercise, rehabilitation, and prevention. Circulation 
2003;107:1210 -25. 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.2017  
24 
 11. Arcand J, Ivanov J, Sasson A, et al. A high -sodium diet is associated with  acute decompensated 
heart failure in ambulatory heart failure patients: a prospective follow -up study. Am J Clin Nutr 
2011;93:[ADDRESS_1139084] Fail 2011;17:325 -30. 
13. Corotto PS, McCarey MM, Adams S, Khazanie P, Whellan DJ. Heart failure patient adherence: 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], cause, and treatment. Heart Fail Clin 2013;9:49 -58. 
14. Lemon SC, Olendzki B, Magner R,  et al. The dietary quality of persons with heart failure in 
NHANES 1999 -2006. J Gen Intern Med 2010;25:135 -40. 
15. Ni H, Nauman D, Burgess D, Wise K, Crispell K, Hershberger RE. Factors influencing 
knowledge of and adherence to self -care among patients wi th heart failure. Arch Intern Med 
1999;159:1613 -9. 
16. Carlson B, Riegel B, Moser DK. Self -care abilities of patients with heart failure. Heart Lung 
2001;30:351 -9. 
17. Ditewig JB, Blok H, Havers J, van Veenendaal H. Effectiveness of self -management 
interve ntions on mortality, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5394], chronic heart failure hospi[INVESTIGATOR_821738]: a systematic review. Patient Educ Couns 2010;78:297 -315. 
18. Grady KL. Self -care and quality of life outcomes  in heart failure patients. J Cardiovasc Nurs 
2008;23:[ADDRESS_1139085] nurse -led heart failure clinics. A meta -
regression analysis. Eur J Heart Fail 2005;7:333 -41. 
20. Grady KL, de Leon CF, Kozak AT, et al. Does self -management counseling in patients with 
heart failure improve quality of life? Findings from the Heart Failure Adherence and Retention Trial 
(HART). Qua l Life Res 2013;23:31 -8. 
21. Chida Y, Steptoe A. Positive psychological well -being and mortality: a quantitative review of 
prospective observational studies. Psychosom Med 2008;70:741 -56. 
22. Rasmussen HN, Scheier MF, Greenhouse JB. Optimism and physical h ealth: a meta -analytic 
review. Ann Behav Med 2009;37:239 -56. 
23. Tindle HA, Chang YF, Kuller LH, et al. Optimism, cynical hostility, and incident coronary 
heart disease and mortality in the Women's Health Initiative. Circulation 2009;120:656 -62. 
24. Giltay  EJ, Geleijnse JM, Zitman FG, Hoekstra T, Schouten EG. Dispositional optimism and all -
cause and cardiovascular mortality in a prospective cohort of elderly Dutch men and women. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry 2004;61:1126 -35. 
25. Kubzansky LD, Thurston RC. Emotional v itality and incident coronary heart disease: benefits 
of healthy psychological functioning. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2007;64:1393 -401. 
26. Giltay EJ, Geleijnse JM, Zitman FG, Buijsse B, Kromhout D. Lifestyle and dietary correlates 
of dispositional optimism in m en: The Zutphen Elderly Study. J Psychosom Res 2007;63:483 -90. 
27. Kelloniemi H, Ek E, Laitinen J. Optimism, dietary habits, body mass index and smoking 
among young Finnish adults. Appetite 2005;45:169 -76. 
28. Tinker LF, Rosal MC, Young AF, et al. Predictors of dietary change and maintenance in the 
Women's Health Initiative Dietary Modification Trial. J Am Diet Assoc 2007;107:1155 -66. 
29. Browning C, Sims J, Kendig H, Teshuva K. Predictors of physical activity behavior in older 
community -dwelling ad ults. J Allied Health 2009;38:8 -17. 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.2017  
25 
 30. Steptoe A, Wright C, Kunz -Ebrecht SR, Iliffe S. Dispositional optimism and health behaviour 
in community -dwelling older people: associations with healthy ageing. Br J Health Psychol 
2006;11:[ADDRESS_1139086] health after 
heart transplantation. Health Psychol 1995;14:[ADDRESS_1139087] 
2006;61:774 -88. 
33. Seligman ME, Steen TA, Pa rk N, Peterson C. Positive psychology progress: empi[INVESTIGATOR_122083]. American Psychologist 2005;60:410 -21. 
34. Bolier L, Haverman M, Westerhof GJ, Riper H, Smit F, Bohlmeijer E. Positive psychology 
interventions: a meta -analysis of random ized controlled studies. BioMed Central Public Health 
2013;13:119.  
35. Sin NL, Lyubomirsky S. Enhancing well -being and alleviating depressive symptoms with 
positive psychology interventions: a practice -friendly meta -analysis. Journal of Clinical Psychology  
2009;65:[ADDRESS_1139088] intervention and medication adherence in hypertensive African Americans. Arch Intern Med 
2012;172:[ADDRESS_1139089] 
induction to promote physical activity after percutaneous coronary intervention. Arch Intern Med 
2012;172:329 -36. 
38. Huffman JC, Mastromauro CA, Boehm JK, et al. Development of a positive psyc hology 
intervention for patients with acute cardiovascular disease. Heart International 2011;6:e14.  
39. Huffman JC, Millstein RA, Mastromauro CA, et al. A positive psychology intervention for 
patients with an acute coronary syndrome: treatment development and proof -of-concept trial. J 
Happi[INVESTIGATOR_102917] 2015:[ADDRESS_1139090] of a 
depression care management program for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_114695]. Circ Cardiovasc Qual 
Outcomes 2011;4:1 98-205. 
41. Huffman JC, Mastromauro CA, Sowden GL, Wittmann C, Rodman R, Januzzi JL. A 
collaborative care depression management program for cardiac inpatients: depression characteristics 
and in -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_95209]. Psychosomatics 2011;52:26 -33. 
42. Celano CM , Suarez L, Mastromauro C, Januzzi JL, Huffman JC. Feasibility and utility of 
screening for depression and anxiety disorders in patients with cardiovascular disease. Circ Cardiovasc 
Qual Outcomes 2013;6:498 -504. 
43. Huffman JC, DuBois CM, Mastromauro CA, M oore SV, Suarez L, Park ER. Positive 
psychological states and health behaviors in acute coronary syndrome patients: a qualitative study. J 
Health Psychol 2014;21:1026 -36. 
44. Rasmussen HN, Scheier MF, Greenhouse JB. Optimism and physical health: a meta -analytic 
review. Ann Behav Med 2009;37:239 -56. 
45. Tacon AM, McComb J, Caldera Y, Randolph P. Mindfulness meditation, anxiety reduction, 
and heart disease: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Fam Community Health 2003;26:[ADDRESS_1139091], Buczynski B, et al. Stress  management versus lifestyle modification on 
systolic hypertension and medication elimination: a randomized trial. J Altern Complement Med 
2008;14:129 -38. 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.[ADDRESS_1139092] and self -affirmation to facilitate healthy behaviors in patients with cardiopulmonary diseases: 
rationale, trial design, and methods. Contemp Clin Trials 2007;28:748 -62. 
48. Fredrickson BL. The role of positive emotions in positive psychology. The broaden -and-build 
theory of positive emotions. Am Psychol 2001;56:218 -26. 
49. The Criteria Committee of the [LOCATION_001] Heart Association. Nomenclature and Criteria for 
Diagnosis of Diseases of the Heart and Great Vessels. [LOCATION_011]: Little, Brown & Co; 1994.  
50. DiMatt eo MR, Hays RD, Sherbourne CD. Adherence to cancer regimens: implications for 
treating the older patient. Oncology 1992;6:50 -7. 
51. Ziegelstein RC, Fauerbach JA, Stevens SS, Romanelli J, Richter DP, Bush DE. Patients with 
depression are less likely to foll ow recommendations to reduce cardiac risk during recovery from a 
myocardial infarction. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1818 -23. 
52. Bauer LK, Caro MA, Beach SR, et al. Effects of depression and anxiety improvement on 
adherence to medication and health behaviors in recently hospi[INVESTIGATOR_114695]. Am J Cardiol 
2012;109:1266 -71. 
53. Callahan CM, Unverzagt FW, Hui SL, Perkins AJ, Hendrie HC. Six -item screener to identify 
cognitive impairment among potential subjects for clinical research. Medical Care 2002;40 :771-81. 
54. Research Information Services & Computing: Research Patient Data Registry. (Accessed June 
3, 2016, 2016, at https://rpdrssl.partners.org/partners/rpdrinfo/home/overview.htm.)  
55. Scheier MF, Carver CS, Bridges MW. Distinguishing optimism from neuroticism (and trait 
anxiety, self -mastery, and self -esteem): a reevaluation of the Life Orientation Test. J Pers Soc Psychol 
1994;67:1063 -78. 
56. Zigmond AS, Snaith RP. The hospi[INVESTIGATOR_56105]. Acta Psychiatr Scand 
1983;67:361 -70. 
57. Ware J, Jr., Kosinski M, Keller SD. A 12 -Item Short -Form Health Survey: construction of 
scales and preliminary tests of reliability and validity. Med Care 1996;34:[ADDRESS_1139093], Spertus JA. Development and evaluation of the Kansas 
City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire: a new health status measure for heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2000;35:1245 -55. 
59. Garin O, Herdman M, Vilagut G, et al. Assessing health -related quality of life in patients with 
heart failure: a systematic, sta ndardized comparison of available measures. Heart Fail Rev 
2014;19:359 -67. 
60. Gehi AK, Ali S, Na B, Whooley MA. Self -reported medication adherence and cardiovascular 
events in patients with stable coronary heart disease: the heart and soul study. Arch Int ern Med 
2007;167:1798 -803. 
61. Mason B, Ross L, Gill E, Healy H, Juffs P, Kark A. Development and validation of a dietary 
screening tool for high sodium consumption in Australian renal patients. J Ren Nutr 2014;24:[ADDRESS_1139094]. AUDIT -C as a 
brief screen for alcohol misuse in primary care. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2007;31:1208 -17. 
63. Learning to Live with Heart Failure. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina; 2016.  
64. Kelly LA, M cMillan DG, Anderson A, Fippi[INVESTIGATOR_7646] M, Fillerup G, Rider J. Validity of actigraphs 
uniaxial and triaxial accelerometers for assessment of physical activity in adults in laboratory 
conditions. BMC Med Phys 2013;13:5.  
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.2017  
27 
 65. Krumholz HM, Peterson ED, Ayanian JZ, et al. Report of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute working group on outcomes research in cardiovascular disease. Circulation 2005;111:[ADDRESS_1139095] intervention for people 
experiencing h ealth -related stress: development and non -randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_21087]. J Health Psychol 
2012;17:676 -92. 
67. Gander F, Proyer RT, Ruch W, Wyss T. Strength -based positive interventions: Further 
evidence for their potential in enhancing well -being and alleviating d epression. J Happi[INVESTIGATOR_102917] 
2013;14:1241 -59. 
68. Emmons RA, McCullough ME. Counting blessings versus burdens: an experimental 
investigation of gratitude and subjective well -being in daily life. Journal of personality and social 
psychology 2003;84:377 -89. 
69. O'Connor CM, Whellan DJ, Wojdyla D, et al. Factors related to morbidity and mortality in 
patients with chronic heart failure with systolic dysfunction: the HF -ACTION predictive risk score 
model. Circ Heart Fail 2012;5:63 -71. 
70. Passantino A, Lagioia R,  Mastropasqua F, Scrutinio D. Short -term change in distance walked 
in 6 min is an indicator of outcome in patients with chronic heart failure in clinical practice. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2006;48:99 -105. 
71. Westerterp KR. Assessment of physical activity level i n relation to obesity: current evidence 
and research issues. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1999;31:S522 -5. 
72. Westerterp KR. Assessment of physical activity: a critical appraisal. Eur J Appl Physiol 
2009;105:823 -8. 
73. Welk G. Physical Activity Assessments for Health -related Research. Champaign, IL: Human 
Kinetics; 2002.  
74. Copeland JL, Esliger DW. Accelerometer assessment of physical activity in active, healthy 
older adults. Journal of Aging and Physical Activity 2009;17:17 -30. 
75. Tindle H, Davis E, Kuller L.  Attitudes and cardiovascular disease. Maturitas 2010;67:108 -13. 
76. Tindle H, Belnap BH, Houck PR, et al. Optimism, response to treatment of depression, and 
rehospi[INVESTIGATOR_821739]. Psychosom Med 2012;74:200 -7. 
77. Trivedi RB, Blumenthal JA, O'Connor C, et al. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_821740]. J Psychosom Res 2009;67:[ADDRESS_1139096] implantable defibrillator for primary or secondary prevention of sudden cardiac 
death. Int J Nurs Stud 2010;47:836 -45. 
79. Scheier MF, Matthews KA, Owens JF, et al. Optimism and rehospi[INVESTIGATOR_821741]. Arch Inter n Med 1999;159:829 -35. 
80. Huffman JC, DuBois CM, Mastromauro CA, et al. Positive psychological interventions in 
medical psychiatry patients. In: Academy of Psychosomatic Medicine Annual Meeting. Atlanta, GA; 
2012.  
81. Meevissen YM, Peters ML, Alberts HJ. Become more optimistic by [CONTACT_782466] a best possible 
self: effects of a two week intervention. J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry 2011;42:[ADDRESS_1139097]: the P ANAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1988;54:1063 -
70. 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a positive psychology intervention to promote healt h behaviors in heart failure: proof -of concept trial  
Christopher Celano, MD – Detai led Protocol – 3.28.[ADDRESS_1139098] of a brief motivational smoking intervention using a biomedical risk ass essment: the 
Get PHIT trial. Nicotine Tob Res 2009;11:[ADDRESS_1139099] dimensions and their 
association with inflammatory biomarkers in patients with chronic heart failure. Biol Psychol 
2013;92:220 -6. 
85. Bjelland I, Dahl AA, Haug TT, Neckelmann D. The validity of the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_234040]. An updated literature review. J Psychosom Res 2002;52:69 -77. 
86. Frasure -Smith N, Lesperance F. Depression and anxiety as predictors of 2 -year ca rdiac events 
in patients with stable coronary artery disease. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2008;65:[ADDRESS_1139100] N 
Z J Psychiatry 2010;44:658 -66. 
88. Lim LL, Fisher JD. Use of the 12 -item short -form (SF -12) Health Survey in an Australian heart 
and stroke population. Qual Life Res 1999;8:[ADDRESS_1139101] of anergia (lack of 
energy) in subjects with heart failure and its associations with actigraphy. J Card Fail 2009;15:145 -51. 
90. Muller -Nordhorn J, Roll S, Willich SN. Comparison of the short form (SF) -12 health status 
instrument  with the SF -36 in patients with coronary heart disease. Heart 2004;90:[ADDRESS_1139102] Fail 2 000;6:[ADDRESS_1139103] physical health status 12 months after an acute coronary 
syndrome. Am J Cardiol 2008;101:15 -9. 
93. Wootton R, G ramotnev H, Hailey D. A randomized controlled trial of telephone -supported care 
coordination in patients with congestive heart failure. J Telemed Telecare 2009;15:182 -6. 
94. Bennett SJ, Oldridge NB, Eckert GJ, et al. Comparison of quality of life measures in heart 
failure. Nurs Res 2003;52:[ADDRESS_1139104] all -
cause mortality in patients with heart failure. Circ Heart Fail 2013;6:669 -75. 
 
4 