Protocol Template, Version 3.0    
 
 
FY19_PI[INVESTIGATOR_8571]3_FORESTER_ IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CARE 
ECOSYSTEM TRAINING MODEL FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH 
DEMENTIA IN A HIGH -RISK, INTEGRATED CARE MANAGEMENT 
PROGRAM  
 
Study Chairman or Principal Investigator:  
[INVESTIGATOR_105013] P. Forester, MD, MSc  
Supported by : 
[CONTACT_45431]:  
Partners HealthCare  
 (Any modification to the protocol should be annotated on the coversheet or in an appendix.  The 
annotation should note the exact words that are changed, the location in the protocol, the date the 
modification was approved by [CONTACT_19305], and the date it became effective .)  
 
Protocol Template, Version 3.0   Version 3 
January 19, 202 2
Protocol Template, Version 3.0  i TABLE OF CONTENTS  

Protocol Template, Version 3.0  ii  

Protocol Template, Version 3.0  iii  
 
I. Procedures Schedule  
  
II. Informed Consent Form Template  
  
III. Other (add as many appendices as necessary)  
  

Protocol Template, Version 3.[ADDRESS_116630] proportions of minority / low SES  
patients.  15 iCMP nurse care managers will be randomly assigned to receive early Care 
Ecosystem training and the remaining 15 will be assigned to received delayed Care 
Ecosystem training.   Persons with dementia  (PWDs ) and their caregivers will not be 
informed whether their nurse care manager has received Care Ecosystem training,  and 
will therefore be masked to the assignment of their care manager.    
 
Data and outcomes to be included in the QI study  will include:  
(1) iCMP key process measures to be extracted from Epic documentation system  (patient 
status, number of contacts between nurse manager and patient and/or caregiver, 
community resource requests)  
(2) Medicare claims data (health care utilization and costs)  
(3) Epic clinical data (caregiver strain and depression, behavioral symptoms of dement ia, 
medication reconciliation, documented serious illness conversations/advance care 
planning)  
(4) Semi -structured interviews of nurse care managers  
(5) Surveys of caregivers to augment data captured in Epic clinical data and allow for 
evaluation of short -term imp acts of enhanced training ( caregiver strain and burden, 
caregiver depression symptoms , patient  behavioral symptoms of dementia and patient 
quality of life for PWD ).  
 
Interventions and Duration  
The adapted Care Ecosystem intervention will include three distinct phases:  
Protocol Template, Version 3.0  v (1) Developi[INVESTIGATOR_105014] a work group  consisting of recently retired highly experienced iCMP 
nurse care managers, an iCMP medical director, a dementia expert, pharmacist, and 
an active caregiver . 
(2) Training of iCMP nurse care managers in the adapted version of Care Ecosystem (e -
learning module s and workflows , 1-day in -person training) . 
(3) Implementing the adapted Care Ecosystem intervention with trained nurse care 
managers.  
(4) Boos ter sessions and process audits to augment intervention fidelity  
 
We will compare the outcomes detailed above between the early training nurse cohort 
and the delayed training nurse cohort . 
We plan to spend the first [ADDRESS_116631] proportions 
of minority / low SES patients. This pi[INVESTIGATOR_105015] -scale implementations of the adapted Care Ecosystem training inside and outside of 
Partners Healthcare.  
 
While a ll patients receiving care from these nurse care managers may be impacted, we 
will measure process and outcomes only among the estimated [ADDRESS_116632] an indication of dementia within Medicare claims data and are actively 
receiving care m anagement services from the nurse care manager at the time of early 
training (end of month 3).   
Protocol Template, Version 3.[ADDRESS_116633] individuals who play key roles in the development and execution of the study, especially 
those who may need to be contact[CONTACT_55654] s during the course of the study.  Include address, 
telephone, fax and e -mail address of each individual listed  and include a brief summary of each 
individual’s  main responsibilities.  
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_105013] P. Forester, MD, MSc  
Medical Director , Behavioral Health Integration   
 Quality and Patient Experience  
 Mass General Brigham  
 [ADDRESS_116634], Somerville, MA [ZIP_CODE]  
 Phone: (617) 855 -3622  
 Fax: (617) 855 -3246  
 [EMAIL_2056]  
 Main responsibilities /Key roles : [CONTACT_105053]  will oversee all 
aspects of the study including trainings, implementation of the model, regular communication 
with all members of the research and clinical teams, regulatory materials, data collection and 
analysis and manuscript preparation.  
Co-Investigators :  Christine Vogeli, PhD  
 Director of Evaluation and Research  
 Partners HealthCare Population Health  
 Phone: (857) 282 -6464  
 [EMAIL_2057]  
 Main responsibilities /Key roles:  [CONTACT_105054]  will supervise the 
creation of the quantitative data files from Partners data assets (including EPIC, claims data, 
programmatic data) and lead the analysis of outcomes based on these data.    
 
 Christine Ritchie, MD , MSPH  
  Director, Mongan Institute Ctr for Aging and Serious Illness  
  Director of Research  
  Division of Palliative Care and Geriatric Medicine  
  [LOCATION_005] General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]  
  [ADDRESS_116635], [LOCATION_011], MA [ZIP_CODE]  
  Phone: (617) 724 -9197  
  CSRitc [EMAIL_2058]  
  Main responsibilities/Key roles : [CONTACT_105055] will lead the 
adaptation of CareEco training with the Taskforce and will oversee iCMP care  manager training. 
She will advise on study implementation, assist in the interpretation of data an alyses and engage 
in relevant manuscript preparation. She will work with the study team in planning for the next 
phase of work after the completion of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268].  
 
 Karen Donelan, ScD, EdM  
Protocol Template, Version 3.[ADDRESS_116636], 16th floor , [LOCATION_011], MA [ZIP_CODE]  
  Phone: (617) 726 -0681  
  Fax: (617) 724 -3166  
  [EMAIL_2059]  
  Main responsibilities/Key roles:  [CONTACT_105056] nelan will develop the 
semi structured interview guides and caregiver surveys.  She will manage data  collection based 
on these tools  and will summarize findings from semi -structured interviews.   
PARTICIPATING STUDY SITES  
All Primary care practices, nurse  care managers who work within those practices, and patients 
who receive care from these providers are within Partners Healthcare.     
 
 
 Mass General Brigham  
 [ADDRESS_116637], Somerville, MA [ZIP_CODE]  
 Phone: (617) 855 -3622  
 Fax: (617) 855 -3246  
 [EMAIL_2056]  
  
 
  
Protocol Template, Version 3.0  3 1 STUDY OBJECTIVES  
1.1 Primary Objective  
The primary objective of this study is  to establish the feasibility of collecting emergency 
department visit  data among the PLWD cared for by [CONTACT_105025].  
1.2 Secondary Objectives  
The secondary objective of this study is to measure short term impacts of the adapted 
Care Ecosystem  training on PWD and their caregivers.   
 
2 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE   
2.1 Background on Condition, Disease, or Other Primary Study Focus  
The prevalence of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) and related dementias, currently affecting 
5.8 million Americans, is expected to increase to 14 million by [CONTACT_2892] 2050, with 
annual costs escalating  from $290 billion to $1.[ADDRESS_116638] those who are, 50% are not informed 
of their diagnosis, while most are identified during the moderate stage of the illness2. 
Dementia adversely impacts caregive rs, who provide [ADDRESS_116639] savings as high as $2800 annually per patient7. Many of these programs are, 
however, resource intensive, req uiring the creation of new clinical teams embedded in 
primary care settings. Recently, a telephone -based collaborative dementia care 
intervention (Care Ecosystem), that provides personalized support and standardized 
education through care plan protocols8 delivered by [CONTACT_105026], has 
demonstrated lower rates of ED utilization and reduced caregiver depression and burden9. 
The Car e Ecosystem (CareEco) model uses a telephone -based intervention to support 
persons with dementia (PWDs) and their caregivers, screening for common dementia -
related problems and providing modular standardized support protocols and caregiver 
education. Speci ally trained health care navigators systematically identify needs and 
address health status, advance care planning, medication management and management 
of challenging behaviors. Health care navigators receive backup support from a nurse, 
Protocol Template, Version 3.[ADDRESS_116640] an adapted form of 
the CareEco intervention with experienced Integrated Care Management Program 
(iCMP) nurse care managers engaged in the care of high -risk, high -cost patients in a large 
healt h system. The strategic priorities of our health system are aligned with this work, 
both as a tool to provide higher -quality care to a high -risk population and as an 
opportunity to reduce ED visits and avoidable costs.  
The integrated care management progr am (iCMP) at Partners HealthCare is a nurse -led 
longitudinal care management program embedded in Primary Care practices across the 
Partners network that provides care management support to the most medically complex 
and seriously ill patients. iCMP care ma nagers assess each patient to clarify problems, 
identify barriers to accessing clinical care and community -based services, including the 
social determinants of health, and create a patient -centric care plan. The iCMP program 
serves all payor populations an d has cared for over 38,000 patients since 2012. 
Approximately 14,000 patients are presently enrolled in iCMP, 64% of whom are 
Medicare beneficiaries. An independent evaluation of Medicare patients in iCMP, relying 
on [ADDRESS_116641] -iCMP ass essment, found an average savings in total 
medical expense (TME) of $101 per member per month10. iCMP teams care for many 
patients with dementia, but are not specifically trained in the care of persons with  
dementia (PWD) and their caregivers. iCMP care managers have described lower levels 
of self -efficacy in the care of PWD. An analysis of cognitive disorders within the 
Partners system identified a conservative estimate of dementia prevalence of 8.8% among 
iCMP Medicare patients based on ICD -10 diagnosis codes for dementia, as compared to a 
roughly 5.1% prevalence of dementia among all  Medicare patients. Thus, the iCMP 
program provides an opportunity to train nurse care managers in an adapted CareEco 
model f or dementia patients.  
2.2 Study Rationale  
The Care Ecosystem model is a telephone -based care program that provides standardized, 
proactive, personalized, and scalable support and education for caregivers, medication 
guidance, and promotion of proactive decision -making. It has demonstrated an 
improvement in patient quality of life and reduced unnecessary healthcare expenditures9. 
The CareEco intervention makes readily available an implementation protocol toolkit that 
that includes care protocols , educational materials, and online training.  
 
In the original study, a Care Team Navigator (CTN) and the PWD -caregiver dyad were at 
Protocol Template, Version 3.[ADDRESS_116642] conducted a structured needs assessment 
scripted for CTNs that covered immedi ate needs, responded to immediate concerns and 
then reached out proactively to work with the dyad on caregiver support and education; 
medications; planning ahead for medical, financial, and legal decisions; and managing 
behaviors. The needs assessment was either completed in the first call, or in several calls 
over the first few months. While the content of the care included structured components 
and evidence -based protocols, the focus of the care was always tailored to the needs of 
each dyad. Issues that e xceeded the CTN’s scope were triaged to a specialist team that 
included a dementia specialist, pharmacist, nurse and social worker. CTNs telephoned 
dyads at approximately monthly intervals for 12 months with phone frequency adjusted 
according to each dyad’ s needs and preferences. All follow -up calls included screening 
for significant incidents (that may or may not result in ED/hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6042]), as well as 
changes in medication, behavior, and function. They also followed -up on progress and/or 
adjustments to goals discussed previously as well as the caregiver's wellbeing. 
Participants who declined regular contact [CONTACT_105027] a “light” version of the 
intervention and were sent personalized educational materials via mail or email. This 
study was conducted in bo th urban (San Francisco Bay Area) and rural (Nebraska) 
settings.  
As noted in the background, PWD receiving CareEco had improved quality of life and 
reduced emergency department visits. Caregivers experienced decreased depression and 
caregiver burden within  the first [ADDRESS_116643] all adopted CareEco as a 
care delivery model. They used the Open -access CareEco tools (toolkit, educational 
materials, data dictionary) to develop projects at each of their sites, demonstrating that it 
is feasible to adapt and implement CareEco in diverse settings. While CareEco ha s been 
adopted by [ADDRESS_116644] an adaptation of Care Eco that involves uptraining existing primary 
care embedded nurse care managers rather than adding a new care navigator to address 
the needs of PWD and their caregivers. This adaption both improves the fit with our 
health system and would be applica ble to many other accountable care organizations with 
existing high -risk care management programs. We anticipate that this adaptation will 
enhance scalability by [CONTACT_105028] -existing staffing infrastructure, improve efficiency by 
[CONTACT_105029], and optimize 
sustai nability by [CONTACT_105030] -based workflow protocols with engaged clinicians 
(iCMP nurse care managers).  
3 STUDY DESIGN  
 A description of the trial design should include:  
Protocol Template, Version 3.0  6 • This is a pragmatic embedded randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_105016].   The primary outcomes 
will assess the feasibility  of collecting emergency department visit data 
among the PLWD cared for by [CONTACT_105025] .  Secondary 
outcomes will provide early indicators  of program effectiveness.    
• The setting for the intervention is the Partners HealthCare primary care -based 
integrated care management program (iCMP). The program is available in all 
182 Partners primary care practices serving adult patients. Partners 
HealthCa re is a non -profit integrated delivery system created by [CONTACT_105031][INVESTIGATOR_307] (MGH) and Brigham and Women’s 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (BWH). Partners primary practices serve patients residing in New 
Hampshire, and central and eastern Massachuset ts. iCMP has been a network -
wide population health program since 2012 , and has strong evidence of 
effectiveness 10, 12. iCMP employs registered nurses, social workers and 
community health workers who manage care for approximately 14,000 adult 
patients.  
• The original Care Ecosystem model that our intervention will be based on is a 
telephone -based intervention to support PW Ds and their caregiver, screening 
for common dementia -related problems and providing modular standardized 
support protocols and caregiver education. Specially trained health care 
navigators identify needs and address health status, advance care planning, 
medication management and management of challenging behaviors . The 
intervention will occur via 1) development of an adaptation of the CareEco 
training through feedback from a task group; 2) training of iCMP nurse care 
managers in the adapted CareEco model; 3) implementing the adapted 
CareEco intervention with existing  nurse care managers.  
• We will train iCMP nurse care managers , already assigned to work with PWD 
and their caregivers , in the Care Ecosystem model.   In collaboration with 
iCMP leadership we will identify [ADDRESS_116645] proportions of minority / low SES patients.  
These nurse care managers will be randomly assigned to receive either ea rly 
or delay ed Care Ecosystem training.   
• We anticipate that nurses who receive training will change the way they 
provide care to all their patients with dementia.  However, measurement of 
patient -level  process and outcome measures will be among patients who have 
an in dication of dementia within their Medicare claims data and who are 
actively engaged with  care management as of  the date care managers in the 
early training cohort are trained.   Preliminary estimates based on [ADDRESS_116646] 10 Medicare beneficiaries 
diagnosed with dementia on their panels, yielding approximately 300 PWDs 
and their caregivers (150 patients in each arm).   
• We will s pend the first [ADDRESS_116647] collecting feedback and 
adapting the training . The n urse care managers who are  assigned to receive 
Protocol Template, Version 3.0  7 early training will be trained at the end of month three, while those assigned 
to receive delayed training will be trained at the end of month 9.    
• Adapted Care Ecosystem t raining for the nurse care managers will occur via 
video -based learning as well as a 1-day in -person training held at  the 
Assembly Row headquarters of Partners He althCare .  
• Study subjects include patients receiving care from [ADDRESS_116648] proportions of minority / low 
SES patients .  Nurse care managers will be randomly assigned to early vs. late 
training.  Preliminary estimates based on [ADDRESS_116649] 10 Medicare beneficiaries diagnosed with dementia 
on their panels, yielding approximately 300 PWDs and their caregivers  
overall; 150 receiving care managem ent from nurses who receive early 
training, and 150 receiving care from nurses who receive delayed training.  
PWD and their caregivers will be blinded as to the timing of Adapted Care 
Ecosystem training of their iCMP care manager.   
• All measurement and ana lysis will be performed by [CONTACT_105032], or new quality improvement data collected by [CONTACT_105033] . 
[ADDRESS_116650] been completely trained and 
onboarded into iCMP and with existing patient panels (e.g. 6 or more months of 
experience) will be asked to participate in the Care Ecosystem Training during this pi[INVESTIGATOR_105017] .  The training will be provided as part of on -going QA activities within the 
program, and similar to other training programs participation by [CONTACT_105034].  The study team will work with clinical and operational 
leaders of the program to reach out to the 30 identified nurse care managers  and schedule 
them for  early or delayed  training .  As the enhanced Care Ecosystem training w ill 
provide necessary skills  for care managers , it will be implemented as a quality 
improvement trial.    
All PWD who are actively receiving care management services from a selected nurse 
care manager at the time of early training (end of month 3) will be included  in the study .  
PWD  will be identified based on the presence of one or more diagnosis code consistent 
with dementia during the year ending July [ADDRESS_116651] meet all of the following inclusion criteria in order to be 
enrolled in the study:  
• Actively providing care management services within the Partners HealthCare 
iCMP program  
• Ability to understand study procedures and to comply with them for the entire 
length of the study.  
• Nurse care managers will be considered subjects  for the structured interview 
component of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], with a waiver of documentation of consent  
PWD must meet all of  the following inclusion criteria in order to be enrolled in the study:  
• Medicare beneficiary aligned to the Partners Medicare ACO  
• ICD-[ADDRESS_116652] 1, 2019 and July 31, 2020 (excluding diagnos es for diagnostic testing 
services)  
•  Actively engaged in  care management services with a nurse care manager 
enrolled in the study  
• Must be at least [ADDRESS_116653] 18 years old or older.  
 
4.2 Exclusion  Criteria  
Nurse care managers meeting any of the following criteria will be excluded from the 
study:  
• Fewer than 6 months of employment as an iCMP nurse care manager  
 
PWD meeting any of the following criteria will be excluded from the study:  
• Permanent resident of long -term care or deceased  at the start of the study  
Caregivers of PWD meeting any  of the following criteria will be excluded from the 
study :   
• Preferred language other than Spanish or English  
Protocol Template, Version 3.0  9 • lives out of the country  
• unclear  relationship with PWD  
 
4.3 Study Enrollment Procedures  
• The investigative team has presented this study to iCMP leadership  prior to 
funding.  The  study  team will attend an iCMP operations team meeting to 
discuss the Care Ecosystem training and expectations for participation in 
training.  Calendar year 2019 data  will be used to determine the percentage of 
minority / lowest SES patients within the practices each care manager serves.  
The study team will collaborate with iCMP leadership to identify [ADDRESS_116654] disadvantaged pra ctices.  These nurses 
will be randomly assigned to either early or delayed training.  An e -mail co -
signed by [CONTACT_105035].  Limitations 
in funding do not allow for training of all 87 nurse care managers within this 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268].  
• Nurses will be asked to complete an assessment of baseline dementia care 
knowledge and skills  prior to their training.  
• Patients who actively receive care management from the [ADDRESS_116655] a diagnosis of dementia within Medicare claims data will be 
identified as PWD  for this study .  We will leverage existing data within EPIC 
to identify caregivers for th ese PWD .   
• Preliminary examination of the structured fields within Epic that are used to 
house information on caregivers suggests that we will likely need to develop 
alternative methods, including review of notes, for identifying caregivers.  
[ADDRESS_116656] phases:  
(1) Developi[INVESTIGATOR_105018] a task 
group . The CareEco model will be adapted for iCMP teams with input from a 
taskforce consisting of recently retired highly experiences iCMP nurse care managers, 
an iCMP medical director, a dementia expert, a pharmacist, and an active caregiver. 
The taskforce wil l provide information on current care management practices for 
PWDs and their caregivers and guide the development of 1) the adapted CareEco 
training, and 2) the needs -based protocols provided by [CONTACT_105036]. We anticipate that 
adaptation of the training will involve elimination of clinical content already well 
known by [CONTACT_105037]/refinement of content (i.e., management 
of behavioral symptoms, strategies to reduce caregiver stress) identified by [CONTACT_105038]. For example, nurse 
care managers currently receive training on serious illness conversations13, and 
advance care planning and documentation; these modules in the CareEco training will 
therefore be truncated. The current training content includes 23 6 -minute videos and 
Protocol Template, Version 3.0  10 hands -on practical training. Based out our review of these videos, the number of these 
videos will be substantively reduced; a [ADDRESS_116657].  
(2) Training iCMP nurse care manager s in the adapted version of CareEco.  Prior to 
the 1 -day in -person training, the care managers will engage  in approximately 60 
minutes of e -learning  of the abbreviated video training. The virtual  training through 
video technology (secure Zoom platform) will occur all in one day and will address 
communication skills, the use of the CareEco protocol s, documentation expectations 
and workflow concerns. For their involvement, iCMP care managers will receive a 
stipend and CEU credits. On a weekly basis, the intervention team will offer an 
hourly check -in to address any questions that arise. The iCMP nurse care managers 
will also have access to a dementia care expert, in addition to their pre -exiting social 
work an d pharmacy team. The intervention team will monitor for intervention fidelity 
and work with iCMP nurse care managers if deviation from the adapted assessment 
and protocols are observed. Nurses in the early training cohort will receive their 
training in mon th three or month four , while nurses in the delayed training cohort will 
receive their training at the beginning of month ten.  
(3) Implementing the adapted CareEco intervention with trained nurse care 
managers.  The adapted CareEco model will be delivered by [CONTACT_3433] e iCMP nurse 
managers within Partners HealthCare  to patients on their panels as clinically 
appropriate . All care to PWD and their caregivers will be delivered over the phone. 
The care managers will always address immediate needs first, then screen for 
comm on problems and provide personalized support and standardized education 
using the adapted CareEco Care Plan Protocols; Medications, Safety, Referrals and 
Caregiver Education, Caregiver Well -being, Behavior Management, and Advance 
Care Planning8. Call frequ ency will be about monthly but personalized to each dyad’s 
needs and preferences.  The study team will offer booster sessions and coaching over 
the course of the study to iCMP nurse managers who either ask for assistance or who, 
through chart audits, do not  appear to be integrating the training into the care of their 
PWD.  Implementation will occur following completion of training for the nurse care 
managers randomized to the early training cohort.  
5.[ADDRESS_116658] of dementia 
care management delivered via phone by [CONTACT_105039].  
Due to the pragmatic and embedded nature of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], iCMP nurse care managers will 
be informed t hat the intervention will include training on enhanced dementia care 
management. PWDs and their caregivers will not be informed when  their nurse care 
manager has received CareEco trainin g and will therefore be masked to CareEco training 
assignment of their care manager.  
Protocol Template, Version 3.0  11 5.3 Concomitant Interventions  
There will be no restrictions on the amount or nature of concomitant interventions for 
PWDs and their caregivers.  
5.4 Adherence Assessment  
iCMP nurse care managers will be expected to complete all e -learning modules and 
attend the entirety of the 1 -day in -person training.  The intervention team will monitor for 
intervention fidelity through iCMP data and work with iCMP nurse care managers if 
deviation from the adapted assessment and protocols are obser ved. 
  
Protocol Template, Version 3.0  12 6 STUDY PROCEDURES  
There will be five sources of data to be used in these analyses.   
• iCMP Program Data : iCMP collects key process measures including patient status within 
the program, the number of nurse care manager contacts with the patient / careg iver and 
community resource requests.  Nurses can document caregiver strain and PWD behavioral 
symptoms in structured fields or in iCMP visit notes.  Caregiver depression can likewise 
be assessed and documented in iCMP visit notes. These data will be used to measure iCMP 
visit frequency and documentation of key patient and caregiver outcomes in order to assess 
CareEco implementation fidelity. iCMP program data is captured within Epic and flows 
directly into the Partners data warehouse, where it is co -housed  with clinical and financial 
data from the Partners electronic health record (Epic) and linked claims data for patients in 
the Medicare MSSP contract.   
 
• Medicare Claims data  will be used to identify iCMP patients with dementia  at baseline and 
over time , and to construct measures of health care utilization and costs.   
 
• Epic clinical data  will be used to identify patient caregivers, capture PWD and caregiver 
outcomes documented in the iCMP note, and identify whether medication reconciliation 
and serious illness conversations / advance care planning occurred related to the iCMP 
interaction.  In addition, Epic contains structured assessments of caregiver strain and PWD 
behavioral symptoms.  All Epic elements flow to tables within the Partners data warehouse.  
For some PWD, outcome measures of caregiver strain and PWD behavioral symptoms 
have al ready been integrated into Epic documentation (see data sources above). We will 
compare EMR -integrated measures with measures derived from the surveys of PWD 
caregivers to determine the relative completeness and quality of the two data sources with 
a goal of reducing more resource -intensive primary data collection in future studies.  
 
• Caregiver Survey : All caregivers of PWD (among the eligible cohort) will be asked to 
participate in a survey at months three (prior to the launch of the CareEco intervention) 
and nine. A waiver of documentation of consent will be requested for the caregiver 
survey.  The survey will assess caregiver strain and burden, caregiver depression 
symptoms and behavioral symptoms of dementia and quality of life for the PWD.  To 
streamline  identification of caregivers of PWD, study staff will provide nurse care 
managers w ith a list of identified PWD and we will review medical records of persons 
with dementia to identify their caregivers. . Study staff will request that nurse care 
managers ve rify the primary caregiver for each PWD.   Caregivers of PWD will be sent 
an invitation letter by [CONTACT_2319] (caregivers).  The invitation letter will be accompanied by a 
study Fact Sheet about the study and will inform caregivers of their right to refuse 
partic ipation . The Fact Sheet will address the following points: the research involves no 
more than minimal risk to the subjects; the waiver or alteration will not adversely affect 
the rights and welfare of the subjects; the research could not practicably be car ried out 
without the waiver or alteration;  and whenever appropriate, the subjects will be provided 
Protocol Template, Version 3.[ADDRESS_116659]. If there is no response, we wil l call to confirm receipt of 
the letter, re -sending and/or and reviewing content as needed. If participant agrees to be 
interviewed, the interview will be scheduled. At the time of the interview, the interviewer 
will again repeat study fact sheet details a nd proceed if the respondent consents.   
• The survey of Caregivers will be administered by [CONTACT_105040].  Spanish versions will be 
administered by [CONTACT_105041].  Care -giver respondents will be offered a $[ADDRESS_116660] 
50% to 60% of PWD caregivers will respond.  We will assess the extent to which patients 
with less s evere dementia would be able to self -report their symptoms, but for this pi[INVESTIGATOR_105019].  
 
• Semi -structured interviews of nurse care managers :  All care managers selected for adapted 
CareEco will be invited to participate (via e -mail)  in individual semi -structured  quality 
assurance  interviews to debrief on their experiences.  The email will address include the 
following: the research involves no more than minimal risk to the subjects; the waiver or 
alteration will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the subjects; the research could 
not practicably be carried out without the waiver or alteration;  and whenever appropriate, 
the subjects will be provided with additional pertinent information after participation. 
Nurses will be in formed be informed of the potential benefits and risks of participation.  
Nurses have the right to refuse participation, and decisions to participate will not be linked 
to employment or be shared with iCMP leadership. This pi[INVESTIGATOR_105020] s 
to implementing the CareEco training; information on barriers and challenges will be used 
for research purposes only and will not become part of personnel files or result in 
disciplinary actions.  No identifiable data from nurse interviews will be shared  outside of 
the study team.  Nurses will be asked to approve recording to aid in transcription of the 
interviews; nurses can refuse recording, but still participate in the interviews. Nurses will 
receive a small stipend to compensate for their time.  Inter views will be performed by 
[CONTACT_648]; a waiver of documentation of consent will be requested for the nurse care manager 
interviews.  
Interviews will be scheduled two months after the launch of the CareEco  training (month 
five). These interviews will be conducted in care manager offices or by [CONTACT_16062] a 
video technology platform at the convenience of the care manager. The interviews will last 
approximately 30 to 40 minutes. Research with the iCMP care m anagement staff, 
conducted by [CONTACT_105042] 2017 and 2018 as part of a PCORI funded study of care 
management programs, achieved 75% participation rates. Interview domains will include 
1) general experience in caring for PWD and their caregivers; 2) expe rience in direct 
outreach to caregivers and patients (including identifying the most knowledgeable or 
engaged caregivers); 3) perceptions of services most needed and most difficult to arrange 
for patients with dementia and their caregivers; 4) assessment o f the adequacy of training 
as adapted to the iCMP context; 5) recommendations for further adaptation of the CareEco 
model, and 6) among care managers not participating in the training, implementation 
Protocol Template, Version 3.[ADDRESS_116661] and therefore consent is not applicable. Nurse care mangers will be recruited 
to participate in individual phone -based semi -structured  interviews  by [CONTACT_3476].  
We seek a waiver of documentation of con sent as interviews are low risk and  will not 
be performed in person.  
We will recruit  caregivers of PWD  to participate in a  telephone interview.  PWD will 
not be contact[CONTACT_105043].  We seek a waiver of documentation of consent  as 
surveys of caregi vers of PWD are low risk and will not be performed in person.  We 
will review medical records of persons with dementia to identify their caregivers.  
Caregivers will be informed that their responses to these surveys will be kept entirely 
confidential. They will be given the option to opt out of answering the survey 
questions; those who opt out will not have their data included in the final analysis.  
Finally , we will use existing Medicare Claims data and Epic medical record data to 
measure outcomes for PWD.  Outcomes, by [CONTACT_105044], are listed in Table 1 above.  We 
seek a waiver of informed consent for the use of these data.  All data will remain on 

Protocol Template, Version 3.0  16 secure drives within the health care delivery organization (as all study staff are part of 
the organization).  The u se of this secondary data is low risk and be presented in 
aggregate consistent with HIPPA protections when shared with members of the 
CRESCENT prime team.   
Screening   
There will not be screening procedures for this study.  
6.2.2 Enrollment, Baseline, and/or Randomization  
Enrollment  
Patients who actively receive care management from the [ADDRESS_116662] a diagnosis of dementia within Medicare claims data will be identified as PWD  
for this study .  We will leverage existing data within EPIC to identify caregivers for 
these PWD.  Both PWD and their caregivers will be considered study subjects.  
Preliminary examination of the structured fields within Epic that are u sed to house 
information on caregivers suggests that we will likely need to develop alternative 
methods, including review of notes, for identifying caregivers.  
Baseline Assessments  
Caregiver survey:  Caregivers will be sent an advance letter about the stud y, and then 
calls to caregivers will occur at month three (prior to the launch of the CareEco 
intervention) and again at month nine. The survey battery administered during these 
calls will include:  
• Caregiver Strain Index  
• Caregiver Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ -8) 
• Neuropsychiatric Inventory Questionnaire (NPI -Q) (includes caregiver 
distress)  
• Quality of Life in Alzheimer’s Disease (QOL -AD) (includes caregiver and 
patient measures)  
• Quick Dementia Rating Scale  (patient)  
• Experience of Care and Unmet Needs (adapted from CAHPS)   
The surveys will be administered by [CONTACT_105045]. Spanish versions will be 
administered by a trained, experienced bilingual interviewe r with over four years of 
experience. Based on prior experience, we expect 50 -60% of PWD caregivers will 
respond. We will assess the extent to which patients with less severe dementia would 
be able to self -report their symptoms, but for this pi[INVESTIGATOR_105021].  
Nurse care manager interview:  A semi -structured interview of nurse care managers 
will be conducted at month five (two months following the launch of the adapted 
CareEco intervention)  for quality assessment purposes . Interviews wil l be conducted 
by [CONTACT_105046] 30 to 
Protocol Template, Version 3.0  17 40 minutes. Interview domains will include 1)  General experience in caring for 
PWDs and their caregivers; 2) Experience in direct outreach to caregivers an d 
patients (including identifying the most knowledgeable or engaged caregivers); 3) 
Perceptions of services most needed and most difficult to arrange for patients with 
dementia and their caregivers; 4) Assessment of the adequacy of training as adapted 
to the iCMP context; and 5) Recommendations for further adaptation of the CareEco 
model.   These data will be used to identify implementation barriers, and improve care 
quality.  
Randomization  
Nurse care managers  selected by [CONTACT_105047]. delayed  training.  Preliminary estimates based on [ADDRESS_116663] 10 Medicare beneficiaries 
diagnosed with dementia on their panels, yielding approximately 300 PWDs and their  
caregivers  overall; 150 receiving care management from nurses who receive early 
training, and 150 receiving care from nurses who receive delayed training.  PWD and 
their caregivers will be blinded as to the timing of Adapted Care Ecosystem training 
of the ir iCMP care manager.   
6.2.3 Follow Up/Final Evaluation  
Refer to “Baseline Assessments” for a description of the assessments that will be used 
to collect data from PWDs/caregivers  at both baseline and follow -up.   
Medicare claims data  will be used to construct measures of health care utilization 
and costs. This data will be accessed in months eight and nine.  
Epic clinical data  will be used to capture PWD and caregiver outcomes documented 
in the iCMP note and  to identify whether medication reconciliation and seri ous illness 
conversations/advance care planning occurred related to the iCMP interaction. In 
addition, Epic elements flow to tables within the Partners data warehouse.  
[ADDRESS_116664] with patients 
and caregivers, all clinical and patient management decisions will remain in the RN, PCP 
and other care pro viders’ hands. Ou r investigative team includes that medical director of 
the iCMP program. Although we do not anticipate safety issues, if nurses do identify 
issues that are prompted by [CONTACT_105048], we will work with the iCMP team to update 
nurses or advis e them of the issues.  
The major risks to caregivers of PWD will be discomfort related to the survey questions. 
We will inform caregivers that they can refuse to answer any questions and can terminate 
their participation at any time. We will also inform caregivers that refusal to answer any 
questions will not have any impact on the care they are receiving.  
[ADDRESS_116665] sizes for a 
subsequent full -scale study if the initial pi[INVESTIGATOR_105022].   
9.3 Outcomes  
The primary outcome for the is pi[INVESTIGATOR_105023] 6 months.  We will 
rely on Epic and Medicare claims data for  all measures of healthcare service utilization 
and costs, care intensity / quality, documentation of advance care planning, and 
documentation of medication review. These outcomes will be assessed for all PWD who 
are cared for by [CONTACT_105049] .  We anticipate that this will include 1 50 PWD among care managers 
who receive early training and 150 PWD who receive delayed training.  These  data are 
housed in an existing data repository; we antic ipate minimal missing data.   Key 
secondary outcomes will assess the number of contacts between nurse care managers and 
care partners, and documented advance care planning ; these measures likewise available 
from the existing data warehouse  and we anticipate  minimal missing data.  
 
In order to ensure systematic capture of key clinical  outcomes within this pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], we will 
survey caregivers of PWD receiving care management from the [ADDRESS_116666] 
that a minimum of  50% of caregivers will complete each survey, yielding an expected 
sample of 75 PWD caregiver respondents completing each survey and 37 PWD caregiver 
respondents completing both an initial and follow - up survey  for nurses assigned to the 
early and the delayed training.   We will assess the completeness and correlation of 
behavioral symptoms of dementia, caregiver depression, caregiver burden, and PWD 
quality of life captured via trained nurse care manag ers (and documented in Epic or 
iCMP data) with caregiver survey responses.  
9.[ADDRESS_116667] either a linear, negative binomial, or 
logistic regression, with random effects for nurses, to account for multiple patients nested 
within the same nurse. The primary predictor will be intervention (iCMP nu rse care 
manager assignment  to early CareEco training versus delayed training). Models will be 
adjusted for a limited number of baseline covariates: dementia stage and severity; 
Elixhauser score; and patient characteristics. If there are many unbalanced pa tient or 
Protocol Template, Version 3.[ADDRESS_116668]. Donelan and will not be aware of  whether the PDW’s nurse care 
manager has undergone CareEco trraining . Data for all patients and caregivers will be 
maintained in RedC AP; survey data will be entered directly  into RedCAP using standard 
survey procedures.  Interviewers will maintain a record of all attempted contacts (Call 
Log) and their outcomes; a final disposition for each attempted case will be determined 
when all effor ts are exhausted.  
10.[ADDRESS_116669], a PWD/Caregiver list, 
apatient/caregiver baseline and follow up survey tools  
10.[ADDRESS_116670] 
protected Partners Healthcare system computers or locked file cabinets.   All data will 
be de -identified as soon as practically possible.   Regularly scheduled  meetings (2 
times per month) will be used to track progress and ensure compliance with study 
protocols. The study team will have established protocol and workflow to 
communicate with clinical teams in real time if patient safety issues are identified that  
need immediate attention.   
[ADDRESS_116671] (IRB) Review  
This protocol and any subsequent modifications will be reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_105050].   
11.[ADDRESS_116672] the site will be 
identified only by a participant identification number ( Participant ID, PID ) to maintain 
confidentiality.  All records will be kept in a locked file cabinet. Recordings will be s aved 
for the duration of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], and transcripts will be saved for seven years. All computer 
entry and networking programs will be done using PI[INVESTIGATOR_34107]. Information will not be 
released without written permission of the participant, except as necessary for monitoring 
by [CONTACT_1744], the FDA, the NIA, and the  OHRP . 
11.4 Study Discontinuation  
The study may be discontinued at any time by [CONTACT_1201], the NIA, the OHRP, or other 
government agencies as part of their duties to ensure that research participants are 
protected.  
12 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
Include in this section the guiding ethical principles being followed by [CONTACT_1758].  If the 
study is conducted at international sites, consider including reference to the Declaration 
of Helsinki, CIOMS, International Ethical Guidelin es for Biomedical Research Involving 
Protocol Template, Version 3.0  21 Human Subjects (2002), or another country’s ethical policy statement, whichever 
provides the most protection to human subjects.  
[ADDRESS_116673], or manuscript will be 
made available for review by [CONTACT_456] a nd the NIA prior to submission.  
14 REFERENCES  
1.  Association A. 2019 ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE FACTS AND FIGURES Includes a 
Special Report on Alzheimer’s Detection in the Primary Care Setting: Connecting Pati ents 
and Physicians .; 2019.  
2.  Prince M, Bryce R, Ferri C. The benefits of early diagnosis and intervention. World 
Alzheimer Rep 2011. 2011.  
3.  Thyrian JR, Eichler T, Hertel J, et al. Burden of behavioral and psychiatric symptoms in 
people screened posit ive for dementia in primary care: Results of the DelpHi -study. J 
Alzheimers Dis. 2015. doi:10.3233/JAD -143114  
4.  Dixon J, Karagiannidou M, Knapp M. The Effectiveness of Advance Care Planning in 
Improving End -of-Life Outcomes for People With Dementia and T heir Carers: A 
Systematic Review  and Critical Discussion.; 2018. doi:10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2017.04.009  
5.  Hinton L, Franz CE, Reddy G, Flores Y, Kravitz RL, Barker JC. Practice constraints, 
behavioral problems, and dementia care: Primary care physicians’ perspectives. J Gen 
Intern Med . 2007. doi:10.1007/s11606 -007-[ADDRESS_116674] A, Kunik ME, Schulz P, Williams SP, Singh H. Missed and Delayed Diagnosis of 
Dementia in Primary Care: Prevalence and Contributing Factors.; 2009. 
doi:10.1097/WAD.0b013e3181a6 bebc  
7.  Heintz H, Monette P, Epstein -Lubow G, Smith L, Rowlett S, Forester BP. Emerging 
Collaborative Care Models for Dementia Care in the Primary Care Setting: A Narrative 
Review.; 2019. doi:10.1016/j.jagp.2019.07.015  
8.  Possin KL, Merrilees J, Bonasera  SJ, et al. Development of an adaptive, personalized, and 
scalable dementia care program: Early findings from the Care Ecosystem. PLoS Med. 2017. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.[ADDRESS_116675] of Collaborative Dement ia Care via 
Telephone and Internet on Quality of Life, Caregiver Well -being, and Health Care Use: The 
Care Ecosystem Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Intern Med. 2019. 
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2019.4101  
Protocol Template, Version 3.0  22 10.  Hsu J, Price M, Vogeli C, et al. Bending the spe nding curve by [CONTACT_105051]: The role of care management within a pi[INVESTIGATOR_105024]. Health Aff (Millwood). 
2017. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2016.0922  
11.  Bodenheimer T, Berry -Millett R. Follow the Money — Controlling Expenditures by 
[CONTACT_105052]. N Engl J Med. 2009;361(16):1521 -
1523. doi:10.1056/NEJMp0907185  
12.  Urato C, McCall N, Cromwell J, Lenfestey N, Smith K, Raeder D. Evaluation of the 
Extended Medicare Care Management for High Cost Beneficiaries (CMHCB)  
Demonstration: [LOCATION_005] General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (MGH). :183.  
13.  Paladino J, Lakin JR, Sanders JJ. Communication Strategies for Sharing Prognostic 
Information With Patients: Beyond Survival Statistics. JAMA. 2019;322(14):1345 -1346. 
doi:10.1001/jama.2019.11 533 
15.  Zarit SH, Reever KE, Bach -Peterson J. Relatives of the Impaired Elderly: Correlates of 
Feelings of Burden. The Gerontologist. 1980;20(6):649 -655. doi:10.1093/geront/20.6.649  
16.  Kaufer D, Cummings J, Ketchel P, et al. Validation of the NPI -Q, a B rief Clinical Form of 
the Neuropsychiatric Inventory. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2000;12(2):233 -239. 
17.  Logsdon RG, Gibbons LE, McCurry SM, Teri L. Assessing Quality of Life in Older Adults 
With Cognitive Impairment: Psychosom Med. 2002;64(3):510 -519. doi:10.1097/00006842 -
200205000 -[ZIP_CODE]  
18.  CAHPS Clinician & Group Survey | Agency for Health Research and Quality. 
https://www.ahrq.gov/cahps/surveys -guidance/cg/index.html. Accessed December 6, 2019.  
19.  Galvin JE. The Quick Dementia Rating System (Q DRS): A rapid dementia staging tool. 
Alzheimers Dement Diagn Assess Dis Monit. 2015;1(2):249 -259. 
doi:10.1016/j.dadm.2015.03.[ADDRESS_116676], Coffey RM. Comorbidity Measures for Use with 
Administrative Data: Med Care. 1998;36(1) :8-27. doi:10.1097/00005650 -199801000 -
[ZIP_CODE]  
 