NCT 04592887  
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases ( FAST -01) 
 Page 2 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential  page, 2.1, 
2.8.5 & 2.8.6, 
2.14 , 9 other sections indicated; Updated 
Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_724516]; Updated 
potential risks; Addition of study 
name “FAST -Bone” to the study 
title,  Added the information for the 
single institutional study site; Added 
the term “baseline”,  Updated data 
collection list to include 
photographs (skin) , Added Chair 
and Vice Chair designations  
05 2.2.2, 2.8.7, 
2.8.8 ; 3.[ADDRESS_989158] -treatment follow -up visit 
time points ; included additional 
tissues under potential risks  Update per feedback from FDA 
review  
04 1.3; 2.2.1; 
2.2.2; 2.4 ; 
2.6; 2.7; 
2.8.3 ; 2.8.6; 
2.8.7; 2.13; 
7; 9, 10; 2.3, 
2.7 – 2.16, 3 , 
4, 5, 7 Updated  duration of investigation; 
Updated protocol summary; 
Revised Schedule of Activities table; 
Combined primary and secondary 
objectives assessing skin and other 
toxicities into one primary objective 
to assess toxicities of treatment , 
added use of pain medica tion and 
removed QOL  from secondary 
objective; Changed follow -up end 
point to death or lost to follow -up; 
Revised pre -defined field sizes to 
larger field sizes, lesions of the feet, 
hands, wrists excluded, diagnosis of 
hematological malignancy or 
patients at known risk of enhanced 
normal tissue radiosensitivity 
excluded, pacemakers or other 
implanted devices excluded;  
Included additional description of 
pre-defined field sizes and isodose 
line coverage ; Included patient 
questionnaire for assessing flare in 
bone pain; Included description of 
follow -up time points and activities; 
Revised analyses for objective 
measures, revised stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_004], 
sample size; Added text for IUO 
label; Removed reference to 
additional investigational sites ; 
Changed section headings to 
numerical  numbering  Update based on revisions to the 
protocol; To correspond with 
revisions to the protocol; Provide 
additional details for the schedule 
of study activities and incorporate 
the revisions to the protocol ; 
Assess all toxicities and not on ly 
skin toxicity, follow published 
methodology for pain assessment; 
Follow subjects for a longer time 
period to assess toxicity; 
Accommodate treatment sites, 
reduce potential for debilitating 
injury, exclude conditions that 
may result in higher 
radiosensit ivity, potential for 
malfunction due to neutron 
production; Provide additional 
information on PTV and dose ; 
Follow published methodology for 
pain assessment; Provide 
description in addition to 
Schedule of Activities of table; 
Assess all toxicities and not only 
skin toxicity, following published 
methodology for pain assessment; 
Text is being provided in the CIP 
and not separately; Study will be 
carried out at 1 investigational 
site; Revision for clarity ; Reference 
sections specifically  
 
 
[ADDRESS_989159] 
up to 3 bone metastases treated  Scientific review committee 
feedback  
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases ( FAST -01) 
 Page 3 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential  02 I, III A -C, IV C -
F, IV J, V A, V 
C, X Title text “painful” changed to 
“symptomatic”; metastasis( -es) in 
pelvis removed; skin toxicity 
assessment add ed to primary 
objective; inclusion criteria 
minimum age changed to 18 years; 
clarification added for assessment 
of inclusion criterion; added lesion 
size, CTV, PTV;  listed clinical 
centers for follow -up visits; details 
added for AE evaluation and 
manageme nt, and primary 
objective analyses; stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_724517]; updated risks and 
mitigation; updated device 
description  Scientific review committee 
feedback; clarifications  
01 N/A N/A New document  
 
 
 
 
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases ( FAST -01) 
 Page 4 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential  Table of Contents  
 
1 Purpose  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 5 
1.1 Name [CONTACT_532940]  ................................ ................................ .. 5 
1.2 Objectives of the Investigation  ................................ ................................ ..............  5 
1.3 Duration of the Investigation  ................................ ................................ .................  5 
2 Protocol  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 6 
2.1 Protocol Signature [CONTACT_3490]  ................................ ................................ .........................  6 
2.2 Protocol Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 7 
2.2.1  Protocol Synopsis  ................................ ................................ ......................  7 
2.2.2  Schedule of Activities  ................................ ................................ ................  9 
2.3 Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  11 
2.4 Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  12 
2.5 Outcome Measur es ................................ ................................ .............................  12 
2.6 Study Design  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  13 
2.7 Study Population (Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria)  ................................ ..................  [ADDRESS_989160]-based Simulation  ................................ ................................ ...............  16 
2.8.3  Treatment Plan Selection  ................................ ................................ .......  16 
2.8.4  QA ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  17 
2.8.5  FLASH Radiotherapy  Delivery (Day 1)  ................................ .....................  [ADDRESS_989161], Principal Investigator, and Chair  ...... 30 
10 Institutions  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  31 
11 References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  31 
 
  
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases ( FAST -01) 
 Page 5 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential  1 Purpose  
1.1 Name [CONTACT_724553]:   
FLASH enabled ProBeam Proton Therapy System  
 
Intended use of the FDA cleared ProBeam Proton Therapy System (510(k) K133191) : 
ProBeam Proton Therapy System provides protons for precision radiotherapy of lesions, tumors, 
and conditions anywhere in the body where radiation treatment is indicated.    
 
Intended use of the investigational  device for this clinical study:  
The FLASH enabled  ProBeam Proton  Therapy System is intended to deliver FLASH radiotherapy 
to patients with painful bone metastases  in extremities.  
 
1.2 Objectives of the Investigation  
The objectives of this investigation are to assess the workflow feasibility of FLASH radiotherapy  
in a clinical setting, toxicities , and pain relief at the treated site(s)  following treatment of painful 
bone metastasis( -es) in extremities.  
 
1.3 Duration of the  Investigation  
 
Enrollment for the study is expected to take 12 months.   
 
Subjects  will be on study prior to their radiation treatment  simulation  (approximately  1-2 
weeks ), during their radiation treatment  simulation,  plan selection , and delivery (≤ 7 business 
days ), and during post -treatment follow -up (until subject death or lost to follow -up).  In general, 
subjects with metastatic disease have a guarded prognosis. Their survival varies with their 
diagnosis and rate of disease progre ssion. Thus , it is not possible to specify the duration of a 
subject’s participation in the study. Subject participation may last from a few months to several 
years.  
 
The study may run from 1.5 years to several years (which covers enrollment, treatment, f ollow -
up, and completion of data analyses).  
 
 
 
  
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases ( FAST -01) 
 Page [ADDRESS_989162] (IRB ) requirements . I agree 
to collect and report all study data accordin g to this clinical investigational plan . 
 
 
 
Cincinnati Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_724518] C. Breneman, MD   
Cincinnati, OH  
Principal Cl inical Investigator  – Print Name   [INVESTIGATOR_146554] (city, state ) 
 
 
Principal Clinical Investigator Signature  
 
 
 
[CONTACT_724554], MD PhD, Vice President  Clinical Affairs    Date  
 
 
 
Palo Alto, CA  
Sponsor  Representative – Print Name [CONTACT_724555] (city, state ) 
 
 
Sponsor  Representative  Signature   [CONTACT_724556]: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases ( FAST -01) 
 Page 7 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential  2.2 Protocol Summary  
2.2.1 Protocol Synopsis  
 
Study Title  Feasibility study of FLASH radiotherapy for the treatment of symptomatic 
bone metastases  
Study 
Description  This clinical study is designed as a prospective feasibility study to assess  the 
workflow feasibility of FLASH radiotherapy in a clinical setting , toxicit ies, and 
pain relief  following  treatment of painful bone metastasis( -es) in the 
extremit ies. 
Objectives  Primary Objective:  
1. Assess workflow feasibility of FLASH radiotherapy in a clinical setting  
2. Assess toxicit ies of treatment  
 
Secondary Objective:  
3. Assess pain relief at the treated site(s)  
 
Outcome  
Measures  Primary Objective Outcome Measure:  
1. Workflow feasibility:  
• Patient time on the treatment table  
• Delays in study treatment related to the investigational 
device (excluding delays due to patient or facility factors 
not related to study treatment)  
2. Toxicit ies of treatment : 
• Toxicities that are possibly, probably, or definitely 
related to FLASH radiotherapy    
 
Secon dary Objective Outcome Measures:  
3. Pain relief:  
• Patient reported pain score overall and specifically for 
treated sites  
• Use of pain medication  
Study 
Population  The study population will consist of up to 10 patients  with painful bone 
metastasis( -es) in the extremities who are treated using FLASH radiotherapy 
to 1-[ADDRESS_989163] 18 years of age will be considered regardless of 
race or gender . 
Description of 
Study 
Intervention  Subjects  will be treated for painful metastases in the extremities  (limbs, 
excluding feet, hands, wrists) using FLASH radiotherapy . The FLASH enabled  
ProBeam  Proton Therapy System , which  deliver s proton radiation at a FLASH 
dose rate , will be used for subject  treatment s.  
Description of 
Sites Enrolling 
Participants  The study will be carried out at  1 investigational site with a ProBeam  Proton 
Therapy System  that is modified to deliver proton radiation at a FLASH dose 
rate.  
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases ( FAST -01) 
 Page [ADDRESS_989164] Study 
Participation 
Duration  Subjects  will be on study prior to their radiation treatment  simulation  
(approximately  1-2 weeks ), during their radiation treatment  simulation,  plan 
selection, and delivery (≤ 7 business days ), and during post -treatment 
follow -up (until subject death or lost to follow -up).  In general, subjects with 
metastatic disease have a guarded prognosis. Their survival varies with their 
diagnosis and rate of disease progression. Thus, it is not possible to specify 
the duration of a subject’s participation in the study. Subj ect participation 
may last from a few months to several years.  
Study 
Duration  Enrollment for the study is expected to take 12 months. The study may run 
from 1.5 years to several years (which covers enrollment, treatment, follow -
up, and completion of data analyses) . 
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page [ADDRESS_989165]’s inability or 
reluctance to travel  given the current COVID -[ADDRESS_989166]’s clinical status permits.  Subject evaluation (review of pain medications  (including steroid medications) , 
performance status , physical evaluation ) and adverse event evaluation may  be carried out using a combination of remote visits and/or records review  as an alternative 
to in -person visits  to accommodate the subject’s  inabili ty or reluctance to travel . 
4See section  2.8.6  for the description of the questionnaires.  
5Physical evaluation includes photographs of skin at entry and exit sites of beam . These should include an image that encompasses  the entire anatomi c region treated 
(upper leg, lower leg, upper arm, lower arm), with close -up photographs of the skin in each treated area (s), if the treated area (s) is readily identifiable.  
6Day 2 a dverse event evaluation will be carried out using a remote visit.  
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page 11 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential  2.3 Introduction  
Rationale for evaluating FLASH radiotherapy:  
Radiotherapy is one of the primary treatment modalities for the treatment of patients with 
cancer.  Most radiotherapy is delivered using linear accelerators or cyclotrons/synchrotrons to 
create ionizing radiation in the form of x -rays, electrons, or protons.  Th e radiation  is delivered 
to cancer -containing tissue with the intent of eradicating cancer whi le minimizing harm to 
surrounding normal tissue.  Creation of a favorable “therapeutic ratio” for radiotherapy damage 
to tumor with sparing of adjacent normal tissue is primarily accomplished through careful 
targeting of the tumor, conforming the delivered  radiation to the target volume, and delivery of 
modest “sub -lethal” amounts of radiation repeatedly over time (termed “dose fractionation”).  
One potential strategy for increasing the therapeutic ratio that has been largely unexplored is 
the delivery of r adiation at ultra -high dose rates.  
 
Due to technical limitations of current radiation -generating devices, most radiotherapy is 
delivered at dose rates of approximately 0 .03 Gy/s .  Decades of experimental and clinical 
experience have been obtained demonstrating the safety and efficacy of radiotherapy given at 
these dose rates, and this is the standard of care for treating patients with cancer.  More 
recently, radiation -generating devices have been devised that are capable of delivering much 
higher r adiation dose rates – 40 Gy/s or greater.  Radiation produced at these high dose rates 
has been termed “FLASH” radiotherapy  since the entire fraction of radiotherapy can be 
delivered in less than a second .   
 
The effects of FLASH radiotherapy  have been stu died in vitro and in animals with encouraging  
results.  Compared to radiotherapy given at conventional dose rates, FLASH radiotherapy  has 
been shown in multiple models to cause less injury to normal cells and tissue, while having  equal 
or greater tumor cel l killing.  Favaudon et al. irradiated mouse lungs in  vivo with both FLASH 
radiotherapy  and conventional dose  rate radiotherapy (CRT)  [1].  Using a single dose of 17 Gy, 
100% of mice given CRT developed pneumonitis and fibrosis  whereas none of the mice given 
FLASH radiotherapy  developed these toxicities .  FLASH radiotherapy  doses were escalated to 30 
Gy single dose before the mice began developi[INVESTIGATOR_724519].  The same 
investigators treated orthotopic lung tumors i n mice with single dose FLASH radiotherapy  and 
CRT.  15 Gy CRT controlled tumors in only 20% of mice , most of which developed significant 
pneumonitis.  27 Gy FLASH radiotherapy  controlled tumors in 70% of mice, none of which  
developed pneumonitis.  
 
Montay -Gruel et al.   treated mouse brains in vivo with [ADDRESS_989167]  [2].  The 
normal tissue sparing effects of FLASH have also been observed in several other tissues and 
animal models including mouse intestine  [3], mouse skin  [4], and cat and pig skin  [5]. The 
mechanism for FLASH is not fully understood, but there are data that suggest FLASH produces 
lower levels of toxic oxygen reactive species in  normal  tissues as compared to CRT  [6].  
To date, there has been one published case report of the use of FLASH radiotherapy  in a human.  
A single  patient with cutaneous T cell lymphoma and extensive prior radiotherapy to the skin 
was treated with electron FLASH radiotherapy  for a recurrent cutaneous lymphoma lesion.  A 
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page 12 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential  single dose of FLASH radiotherapy  using 15 Gy electron radiotherapy was delivere d.  This 
resulted in a complete response of the lesion with minimal toxicity to the surrounding skin  [7]. 
Given the preclinical data suggesting significant reduction in normal tissue toxicity using FLASH 
radiotherapy  compared to CRT and equivalent efficacy of treatment, we propose to assess the 
workflow feasibility of FLASH radiotherapy in a clinical setting, toxicities, and pain relief at the 
treated site(s) following treatment of painful bone metastasis( -es) in extr emities.  
 
 
Rationale for using protons for FLASH radiotherapy:   
Currently, there is no commercially available medical linear accelerator capable of delivering x -
rays at FLASH  dose rates.  However, some cyclotrons used to produce proton radiation for 
treat ment of cancer have high beam currents that are capable of these dose rates.  Therefore, 
this clinical  study will be carried out at investigational sites with  the ProBeam  Proton Therapy 
System, an FDA cleared device  (510(k) K133191 ), that utilizes a cyclot ron to deliver proton 
radiation , and that is  modified to deliver the proton radiation at a FLASH dose rate.  
 
 
Rationale for selecting patients with bone metastases for study:  
Patients with painful bone metastas es represent an ideal population for a feasibility  study of 
FLASH radiotherapy .  These patients are known to benefit from the palliative effects of 
radiotherapy using single dose radiation dose regimens , similar to those  tested in pre -clinical 
studies of FLASH radiotherapy  [8] [9].  If treated off -study with CRT, these patients’ photon 
treatment regimen and follow -up is expected to  be very similar to what would be performed on -
study using FLASH radiotherapy  with protons .  Therefore, the time and social burden imposed 
by [CONTACT_724534] .   
 
 
Amendments to th is Clinical Investigation Plan ( CIP) will be made by [CONTACT_724535] a “track changes” version showing changes from one version to another version.   
 
 
2.4 Objectives  
Primary Objective:  
1. Assess workflow feasibility of FLASH radiotherapy in a clinic al setting  
2. Assess toxicit ies of treatment  
 
Secondary Objective:  
3. Assess pain relief at the treated site (s)  
 
 
2.5 Outcome Measures  
The outcome measures corresponding to the study objectives are as follows:  
 
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page 13 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential  Primary Objective Outcome  Measures : 
 
1.  Workflow feasibility:  
• Patient time on  the treatment table  
• Delays in study treatment related to the investigational device (excluding delays due to 
patient or facility  factors not related to study treatment)  
 
2. Toxicities of treatment:  
• Toxicities that are possibly, probably, or definitely related to FLASH radiotherapy 
Toxicities will be classified per CTCAE1 version 5.0  
 
Secondary Objective Outcome Measures : 
 
3. Pain relief:  
• Patient reported pain score  overall and specifically for treated sites   
• Use of pain medication  
 
 
2.[ADDRESS_989168] to follow -up.  
 
The study patients will be enrolled and undergo FLASH radiotherapy  at 1 investigational site.  
 
 
2.7 Study Population  (Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria)  
Patients with up to 3 painful bone metastas is(-es) in the extremit ies (limbs , excluding feet, 
hands, wrists ) will be evaluated for this study. Only limb bones will be treated with FLASH  
(excluding feet, hands, wrists).  Other  bone metastases  (i.e., non -limbs or feet, hands, wrists)  
may be treated with conventional radiation therapy while the patient is on  study.  Painful 
lesions of the limb bones must be treatable with fixed protocol field sizes (see below) for each 
limb bone lesion, without overlap of radiation fields.  Patients should have expected life 
expectancy  >[ADDRESS_989169] 
verbally deny being pregnant at the time of consent (pregnancy test will be performed  prior to 
CT simulation  as per standard of care at the investigational site ). 
 
All inclusion criteria must be met and none of the e xclusion criteria may be present for a patient 
to be eligible for the study.  All eligibility criteria will be assessed prior to study enrollment . 
 
 
 
1 Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program (CTEP) home page : http://ctep.cancer.gov  
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page [ADDRESS_989170].  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
• Patient age at least 18 years  
• Up to 3 p ainful bone metasta sis(-es) in the extremit ies2 
• Bone m etastases  that can be treated using  pre-defined treatment field sizes (7.5 cm x 
7.5 cm; 7.5 cm x 10 cm; 7.5 cm x 12 cm; 7.5 cm x 14 cm; 7.5 cm x 16 cm; 7.5 cm x 18 cm; 
7.5 cm x 20 cm ), without overlap of radiation fields    
• Life expectancy of > 2 months  (in the judgement  of the investigator)  
• Patients who are able to comply with the protocol  
• Provision of signed and dated informed consent form  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
• Prior radiotherapy to the treatment  site(s)  
• Lesions of the feet, hands, wrists  are not eligible treatment sites  for FLASH  
• More than 3 painful  bone metastases  of the limbs  requiring palliative radiotherapy    
• Tumor lysis of >50% of the circumferential bone cortex, or other factors considered to 
place the subject at significant risk of pathologic fracture  
• Patients with bone fractures and/or metal implants in the treatment field3 
• Patients who will receive cytotoxic chemotherapy within 1 week prior to or 1 week 
following their planned radiation treatment4  
• Prior local therapy modality to the treatment site(s)  within 2 weeks of study enrollment  
• Patients with pa cemakers or other implanted device s at risk of malfunction during 
radiotherapy  
• Patients with a ny other medical condition or laboratory value that w ould, at the 
discretion of the investigator, preclude the patient from participation in this clinical 
investigation  
• Patients at known risk of enhanced normal tissue sensitivity to radiotherapy due to 
inherited predisposition or documented comorbidity that might lead to hypersensitivity 
to ionizing radiation  
• Patients enrolled in a ny other clinical studies the investigator believes to be in conflict 
with this clinical investigation .  
• Patients who are pregnan t or nursing   
 
2.[ADDRESS_989171] of  the following:  
1. Screening, Informed Consent, and Baseline Evaluation  
2. CT-based Simulation  
 
 
[ADDRESS_989172] the tissue response to radiation . 
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page [ADDRESS_989173]  will be given a  unique study identification code ; the link between  the identification 
code and the subject’s  identity will be maintained by [CONTACT_724536] . The code will be 
entered onto each subject’s case report forms and other study records.  
 
Replacement of subjects  
Only  subjects  who are treated  on this study protocol will be counted towards  the study patient 
limit . 
 
Subjects who sign the inform ed consent form and subsequently withdraw, or are withdrawn , 
from the study  prior to receiving the FLASH radiotherapy will not be counted towards the study 
patient limit and will be replaced.  
 
Subjects who sign the informed consent form, receive the FLASH radiotherapy , and 
subsequently withdraw, or are withdrawn from the study, will be counted towards the study 
patient limit  and will not be replaced.   
 
 
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page [ADDRESS_989174]  characteristics  will be recorded, including age, gender, performance status, history of 
medical comorbidities or autoimmune disorders, diagnosis date, prior cancer -directed 
treatments . Tumor characteristics will be recorded, including histology, anatomic l ocation of the 
original primary tumor and the anatomic location of treatment site(s), target lesion size, target 
lesion extent of bone circumferential involvement (if available ), metastasis type (i .e., lytic, 
blastic , mixed ). Subject evaluation data will b e recorded: review of pain medication s (including 
steroid medication s), performance status, photographs of skin and any physical findings on 
examination involving the skin or other normal tissue in the planned treatment site(s) . 
 
Subjects may continue to t ake steroids during their participation in the clinical trial if prescribed 
by [CONTACT_9682] .  Steroid medication  is optional and at the discretion of the prescribing 
physician.  
 
2.8.[ADDRESS_989175] simulator 
couch  in a stable and reproducible  position suitable for targeting the metastatic lesion(s). 
Immobilization  devic es such as a Vac-Lok bag will be used for all subjects  to aid in immobilizing 
the target site(s) and for reproducing the subject’s  positioning at the time of treatment. A CT 
scan will be obtained through the areas of interest  and used for radiotherapy plan ning.   
 
Adequate radiotherapy coverage of the target lesion (s) will be assessed using th is CT during the 
treatment plan selection process (see section 2.8.3 ). This a ssessment will be carried out for  each 
of the planned FLASH treatment sites  (up to [ADDRESS_989176] ). Subjects  
who cannot be treated using the available pre-defined treatment field sizes (see inclusion 
criteria) will be removed from the study  and replaced . 
 
Women of childbearing age must have a negative pregnancy test at the time of CT simulation. If 
the pregnancy test is positive, the subject will be removed from the study and replaced.  It is 
standard of care  at the investigational site to evaluate pregnancy status for women of 
childbearing age  at the time of CT simulation .  
2.8.[ADDRESS_989177] images will be electronically transferred to the Eclipse treatment planni ng 
workstation (Varian, Palo Alto, CA ; Eclipse is used without modification to the present 510(k) 
clearance ) and the target site(s) will be delineated by [CONTACT_724537].  A single -field 250 MeV transmission plan will be chose n from a pre -defined  library 
of plans having different field sizes  (see section 2.7). Based on a review of bone metastases 
cases treated at the investigational site over a 12 -month period, these field sizes will be 
adequate to treat sufficient patients successfully. Plans will be matched  for each of the FLASH 
treatment sites ( up to [ADDRESS_989178] ). Using image guidance, clinical 
lesions up to 6.5 cm in diameter  will be treated .  A Planning  Tumor Volume ( PTV) margin of 5 
mm will be added to the Gross Tumor Volume/Clinical Target Volume ( GTV/CTV ).  There will be 
no G TV to CTV margin.  This is consistent with standard clinical practice in the palliative 
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page 17 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential  treatment of bone metastases.  Patients who cannot be treated using the pre -defined treatment 
field sizes will be removed from the study and replaced.  
 
The pre -defined  plans are designed to deliver a prescription of 8 Gy in a single fraction at 40 
Gy/s  to the PTV . Since the treatment will be delivered with transmission FLASH, there will be no 
Bragg Peak within the body; t he relative biological effectiveness (RBE ) of 1. 0 will, therefore , 
apply since no correction is required for Bragg Peak . The volume of PTV receiving 90%  of the 
prescribed dose shall be greater than or equal to  90% , and the dose to 10%  of the PTV will not 
exceed 110% . The prescribed dose of [ADDRESS_989179] fractionation for 
painful bone met astases whose efficacy has been validated in prior multi -institutional 
prospective randomized clinical trial s [10, 11] .  
 
2.8.[ADDRESS_989180] ’s treatment confirming the FLASH dose and dose rate constancy  of the 
proton delivery  system .  
 
2.8.5 FLASH Radiotherap y Delivery (Day 1) 
The treatment plan will be  transferred from the ARIA Oncology Information System (Varian, Palo 
Alto, CA; ARIA  is used without modification to the present 510(k) clearance) to the FLASH 
enabled ProBeam Proton Therapy System console  for FLASH radiotherapy  delivery . Subjects  will 
be positioned on the treatment couch as determined at the time of their simulation visit.  Image 
guidance  will be used  to verify that the target is in the co rrect position for treatment . The 
treatment will be carried out for up to [ADDRESS_989181] , depending on the total 
number of painful bone metastases in limb bones (excluding feet, hands, wrists ) to be treated . 
 
On the day of treatment, but before start of treatment, the following baseline data will be 
recorded: patient reported pain score overall and specifically at each treated site  (see section 
2.8.6  for questionnaires to be used) ; subject evaluation (use of pain medication  (including 
steroid medications) , performance status, photographs of s kin and any physical findings on 
examination involving the skin or other normal tissue in the treatment site(s)).  
 
2.8.6 Pain Assessment Questionnaires  
There are several questionnaires used in this study as described below:  
 
Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) short form  questionnaire :  
Patient reported pain score (overall) at baseline and post -treatment (Day 15, Month 1, Month 2, 
Month 3 , long -term ) will be assessed using the BPI [INVESTIGATOR_724520]  (see section 2.2.2  
Schedule of Activities table) .  
 
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page 18 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential  The BPI [INVESTIGATOR_724521] a prior cooperative -group (Radiation Therapy 
Oncology Group) prospective, phase III, randomized study evaluati ng the efficacy of 8 Gy 
radiation for the treatment of painful bone metastases  [10]. Using the BPI [INVESTIGATOR_724522]. This 
form assesses overall  pain response without focus on an individual metastasis.  
 
Treated Sites Pain questionnaire : 
Additionally, p atient reported pain for each treated site at ba seline  and post -treatment (Day 15, 
Month 1, Month 2, Month 3 , long -term ) will be assessed using a four  item subset of the 
questions from the BPI [CONTACT_63496]  (see section 2.2.2  Schedule of Activities table ). This form 
assesses pain response in each treate d site . 
 
Pain Flare questionnaire : 
An additional three item questionnaire is required only at baseline  and for the first 10 days after 
treatment to assess radiation treatment related flare in bone pain   for each treated site (see 
section 2.2.2  Schedule of Activities table ). The questionnaire uses the methodology employed by 
[CONTACT_724538]. [12] to specifically identify flare in bone pain. The patient reported questionnaire 
will be use d to collect the following  information: for each treated site , worst pain over the last 
[ADDRESS_989182] pain in the treated site on the day of 
treatment ; pain medications usage, includ ing steroid medications.  
 
2.8.[ADDRESS_989183] on th e day of treatment (Day 1 after 
treatment delivery) and at the follow -up visit time points Day 15, Month 1, Month 2, Month 3 , 
and long -term follow -up (see section 2.2.2  Schedule of Activities table ). The adverse event check 
on Day 2 will be carried out by [CONTACT_724539]. All other a dverse event checks during follow -up 
may be carried out using a combination of remote visits and/or records review as an alternative 
to in -person visits to accommodate the subject’s inability or reluctance to travel . Adverse event 
checks will be recorded on the corresponding case report form.  All adverse events will be 
collected regardless of severity or attribution. Adverse events will be classified per CTCAE 
version 5.0. 
 
2.8.[ADDRESS_989184] 10 days after completion of FLASH radiotherapy, subjects will complete a 
questionnaire daily to assess radiation treatment related flare in bone pain for each treated site 
(see section 2.8.6  for questionnaires to be used ; see section 2.2.2  Schedule of Activities table ). 
 
Subjects are expected to have in-person  follow -up visits at Day 15 (+/- 2 business days ), Month 1  
(+/- 5 business days ), Month 2  (+/- 10 business days ), and Month 3  (+/- 10 business days);  long -
term follow -up 2 months  (+/- 10 business days) beyond Month [ADDRESS_989185] to 
follow -up.  
 
For the Day 15, Month 1, Month 2, Month 3  follow -up visits , the following data will be recorded : 
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page 19 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential  • Patient reported pain score overall and specifically at each treated site  (see section 2.8.6  
for questionnaires to be used; see section 2.2.2  Schedule of Activities table ) 
• Subject evaluation : use of pain medication s (including steroid medications) , 
performance status, physical evaluation including photographs of skin and any physical 
findings on examination involving the skin or other normal tissue in the treatment site(s)  
• Adverse event evaluatio n (including skin and other normal tissue toxicities)  
• It is desirable to have follow -up visits in -person.  However, it is acceptable to carry out 
remote follow -up visits as an alternative in the event of the subject’s inability or 
reluctance to travel give n the current COVID -19 pandemic. In these circumstances, 
photographs of the treatment site may be taken at home by [CONTACT_50633], and physical 
evaluation will be carried out to the extent that is feasible via telehealth.  
 
Long-term follow -up visit s beyond Mon th 3 may be carried out using a combination of remote 
visits and/or records review as an alternative to in -person visits to accommodate the subject’s 
inability or reluctance to travel . The following data will be recorded:  
• Patient reported pain score overal l and specifically at each treated site  (see section 2.8.6  
for questionnaires to be used; see section 2.2.2  Schedule of Activities table ). 
Questionnaires will b e completed as subject’s clinical status permits.  
• Subject evaluation  (use of pain medication  (including steroid medications) , performance 
status , physical evaluation ) 
• Adverse event evaluation  (including skin and other normal tissue toxicities)  
 
Follow -up v isits that are in-person  (Day 15, Month 1, Month 2, Month 3 ) and any in -person visits 
during long -term follow -up will take place at a location(s) listed in section  9, as determined by 
[CONTACT_724540].  
 
Choice of f ollow -up visit time point s was informed by [CONTACT_724541]. [12] and 
Hartsell [10]. 
 
Patients may continue to take steroids during their participation in the clinical trial if prescribed 
by [CONTACT_9682].  Steroid medication is optional and at the discretion of the prescribing 
physician.  
 
Subject s tudy participation will end following subject death or lost to follow -up. 
 
 
2.9 Adverse Events  
Adverse event evaluation and management will be conducted by [CONTACT_15009] /her  
designee (must be study physician, nurse, or PA/ARNP).  Radiation dermatitis within the 
irradiated field is the adverse event that would be most likely to occur.  This  adverse event  
would be managed as an outpatient treatment at the locations listed in section 9 by [CONTACT_107314]/her designee using an appropriate combination of topi[INVESTIGATOR_39669], topi[INVESTIGATOR_28709], topi[INVESTIGATOR_8163], and dressings as determined to be  necessary by [CONTACT_170270].  Other adverse events that might occur such as pathologic fracture of the treated 
bone would be referred to the appropriate specialist for management (note that pathologic 
fracture of a bony metastasis is a known  complication of the disease process ). 
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page 20 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential   
The CTCAE version 5.0 defines an adverse event (AE) as follows: “Any unfavorable and 
unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally 
associated with the use of a medical treatment or procedure that may or may not be considered 
related to the medical treatment or pr ocedure. An AE is a term that is a unique representation 
of a specific event used for medical documentation and scientific analyses.”  
 
AEs will be given an attribution by [CONTACT_3470]:  
• Definitely  related to the FLASH radiotherapy  delivery  
o AE has timely relationships to the investigational device administration and 
there is no known alternative etiology responsible for the AE . 
• Probably  related to the FLASH radiotherapy  delivery  
o AE has a timely relationship to the investigational device admini stration. 
No potential alternative etiology is apparent.  
• Possibly  related to the FLASH radiotherapy  delivery  
o AE has a timely relationship to the investigational device administration; 
however, a potential alternative etiology may be responsible for the AE. 
• Unlikely ( Probably not ) related to the FLASH radiotherapy  delivery  
o There is no definitive evidence that the AE has a relationship to the 
investigational device. It was either present before the study, a 
symptom(s) of primary disease, or due to use of c oncomitant 
medications . 
• Definitely not  related to the FLASH radiotherapy  delivery  
o There is clearly no evidence that the AE has a relationship to the 
investigational device.  
 
The investigator will document  whether the AE is attributable to the FLASH radioth erapy  
delivery.  
 
Grades will be assigned  to clinical AEs  by [CONTACT_15009] /her  designee per the CTCAE 
version 5.0, which consists of a scale from 1 to 5 to describe the severity of the AE. A copy of the 
CTCAE version 5.0 will be provided.  For refe rence, an overview  of the grades is given below , but 
the CTCAE v5 needs to be consulted for specific grading criteria : 
 
• Grade 1 – Mild, asymptomatic or mild symptoms; clinical or diagnostic observations 
only; intervention not indicated.  
 
• Grade 2 – Moderate; minimal, local or noninvasive intervention indicated; limited 
age-appropriate instrumental activities of daily living  (ADL) . Instrumental ADL refer 
to preparing meals, shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_3112], using the telephone, 
managing money, etc.  
 
• Grade 3 – Severe or medically significant but not immediately life -threatening; 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3111]; disabling; limiting self -
care ADL.  Self-care ADL refer to bathing, dressing and undressing, feeding self, using 
the toilet, taking medications, and not bedridden.  
 
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page 21 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential  • Grade 4 – Life-threatening consequences; urgent intervention indicated.  
 
• Grade 5 – Death related to AE.  
 
 
There are a nticipated adverse events associated with the delivery of [ADDRESS_989186] dose rates in a prior benchmark multi -institutional 
prospective randomized clinical trial [10] . In this trial, a cohort of 455 patients  (433  and 354  
patients analyzed  for acute and late toxicities, respectively ) were treated with 8 Gy for palliation 
of painful bone metastases . Grade 2 -3 acute toxicity (within 90 days after starting radiation 
therapy ) occurred in 10% of the patient s, and “late toxicity was rare (4%) ”. The most common 
toxicity  was gastrointestinal , which accounted for approximately half of all acute adverse events . 
Gastrointestinal toxicity  should not be relevant to th e present feasibility  study as treatment is 
limited to the extremities . No patients in the  cited study receiving [ADDRESS_989187] dose rates . Of the 433 patients, acute grade 1/ grade 2  / 
grade 3 / grade 4 skin toxicities occurred in 15 / 1 / 0 / 0 patients , respectively. Acute g rade 1 / 
grade 2 / grade 3 / grade 4 hematologic toxicities occurred in 1 0 / 7 / 2 / 0 patients, respectively. 
“Other” (not specified) acute grade 1 / grade 2 / grade 3 / grade 4 toxicities occurred in 11 / 6 / 
6 / 0 patients, respec tively.  These toxicities were scored using the (RTOG) Acute and Late 
Morbidity Criteria . This grading system has since been supplanted by [CONTACT_724542]. For the 
great majority of toxicities  (skin)  expected in the present clinical  study, the RTOG skin and CTCAE 
radiation dermatitis scoring systems are very similar. In addition, the hematologic scoring 
criteria for both RTOG and CTCAE are very similar or can be readily numerically converted  for 
comparison purposes .  
 
 
Serious  Adverse Events  
 
Per ISO [ZIP_CODE] :2011 , the following definitions apply:  
• A Serious Adverse E vent (SAE)  is any untoward medical occurrence, unintended 
disease or injury, or untoward clinical signs (including abnormal laboratory findings) 
in subjects, users or other persons, whether or not related to the investigational 
medical device*  that:  
o Led to a death , 
o Led to serious deterioration in the health of the subject , that either resulted 
in 
▪ a life -threatening illness or injury,  or 
▪ a permanent impairment of a body structure or a body function,  or 
▪ in-patient or prolong ed hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] **, or 
▪ medical or surgical intervention to prevent life-threatening illness or 
injury or permanent impairment to a body structure or a body 
function  
o Led to fetal distress, fetal death or a congenital  abnormality o r birth defect.  
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page 22 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential   
*NOTES : 
• NOTE 1 This definition includes events related to the investigational medical device 
or the comparator.  
• NOTE 2 This definition includes events related to the procedures involved.  
• NOTE 3 For users or other persons, thi s definition is restricted to events related to 
investigational medical devices.  
 
**NOTE Planned hospi[INVESTIGATOR_272] a pre -existing condition, or a procedure required by 
[CONTACT_10396], without serious deterioration in health, is not considered a serious adverse 
event.  
 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_724523] 24 hours. An emergency room , urgent 
care, or infusion center  visit is not a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].  
 
Per the US Code of Federal Regulations, Title 21, Part 812 , the following definition  applies : 
• Unanticipated adverse device effect (UADE) means any serious adverse effect on 
health or safety or any life -threatening problem or death caused by, or associated 
with, a device, if that effect, problem, or death was not previously identified in 
nature, severity, or degree of incidence in the  clinical  investigational plan or 
application (including a supplementary plan or application), or any other 
unanticipated serious problem associated with a device that relates to the rights, 
safety, or welfare of subjects.  
 
 
Adverse Event Reporting  
 
The Investigato r will notif y the Sponsor  of all serious adverse events  (SAEs) , including  UADEs , by 
[CONTACT_724543] [ADDRESS_989188] Information  for Adverse Event Reporting : 
 
Jennifer Woo  
 Jennifer.Woo @Varian.com  
  
 
Lisa Levine, PhD  
 [EMAIL_13853]  
  (voicemail)  or  (mobile)  
 
 
 
 
It is the responsibility of each Investigator to report all reportable adverse events and other 
reportable events  to the Institutional Review Board  (IRB) according to the requirements  of the 
IRB. 

CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page 23 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential   
Per the US Code of Federal Regulations, UADEs will be reported and evaluated as required in 21 
CFR Part 812.  
 
 
2.10 Device -Related Issues  
Any p roblems with the FLASH radiotherapy  delive ry (including any device failures or 
malfunctions)  will be documented and reported to the Sponsor.  
 
Per ISO [ZIP_CODE]:2011, the following definition appl ies: 
• Device Deficiency: inadequacy of a medical device with respect to its identity, 
quality, durability, reliability, safety or performance  
 
NOTE Device deficiencies include malfunctions, use errors, and inadequate labeling . 
 
 
2.[ADDRESS_989189] End of Study  case report form will be completed in the following situations:  
• The s ubject  complete d the study per protocol  
• The investigator terminate d the subject’s  participation  
• The subject  withdr ew from the study  
• The subject  was lost to follow -up (after a minimum of two phone calls on separate 
days and within a week of  a certified letter  being delivered ) 
• The s ubject  died on study  
• The Sponsor terminate d the study  
 
If the subject  leaves the study  for any reason  before the next scheduled follow-up visit is 
completed , the investigator will document the reason (s).  In addition,  the investigator will 
attempt to collect the following: p atient reported pain score  overall and specifically for  treated 
site(s), u se of pain medication s (including steroid medications) , and adverse events (including 
skin and other normal tissue toxicities).  
 
An investigator may withdraw  the subject’s participation in the study  for one or more of the 
following reasons : 
• Significant non-compliance with the study procedures  
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page 24 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential  • If an adverse event, laboratory abnormality, or other medical condition or situation 
occurs such that continued participation in the study would not be in the best interest 
of the subject  
• If the subject  meets an exc lusion criterion (either newly developed or not previously 
recognized) that precludes further study participation  
 
 
2.[ADDRESS_989190] the following analyses corresponding to the study objectives and 
prepare a clinical study report.  Where appropriate, descriptive statistics will be used.  
 
Primary Objective:  
1.  Workflow feasibility:    
For each subject, workflow feasibility will be judged as successful or not based on the 
following criteria:  
 
Treatment  for an individual subject  will be deemed NOT feasible  if:  
• Total treatment time on table is greater than one hour  OR  
• A delay in study treatment of more than 7 business days from simulation to 
treatment  occurs related to the investigational device  (excluding delays due to 
patient or facility factors not related to the study treatment ) 
 
2.  Toxicities of treatment:    
All toxicities will be tabulated and summarized. Toxicities that are possibly, probably, or 
definitely related to FLASH radiotherapy  will be used for the assessment of toxicity of 
the FLASH treatment.  
 
Note:  A dose -limiting toxicity (DLT) is defined as a Grade 3 toxicity attributed as 
possibly, probably, or definitely related to FLASH radiotherapy . The number of DLTs will 
be monitored through the duration  of the study  and will be used as a criterion  in the 
Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_1869] (see section 2.13  for a Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_724524].)  
 
Secondary Objective:  
3.  Pain relief :   
As discussed above in section  2.8.6  patient  reported pain score (overall) at baseline and 
post -treatment (Day 15, Month 1, Month 2, Month 3, long -term ) will be assessed using 
the Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) short form  questionnaire . Patient reported pain score for 
each treated site will be assessed using the Treated Sites Pain questionnaire . 
 
The BPI [INVESTIGATOR_724525]  [10].  
 
Per the methodology of  Hartsell, et  al. [10]: The worst pain score in the BPI [INVESTIGATOR_724526] ; a complete response will be defined  as 
having no pain at 3 months after radiation therapy ; a partial response will be defined as 
a pain score that is at least two points lower than the initial response ; a stable response 
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page 25 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential  will be defined as a one -point chang e in pain score in either direction ; a progressive 
response will be defined as a pain score that is at least two points higher than the initial 
score. The same analysis will be applied to the individual sites treated by [CONTACT_724544], as 
assessed by [CONTACT_724545] -item  subset of the BPI [CONTACT_63496].  
 
Per the methodology of Chow et al., flare in bone pain due to radiation will be assessed 
using the Pain Flare  questionnaire administered on Day 1 - Day 1 1. Pain flare is defined 
as either of the following: a minimum of a two -point increase in the worst pain score for 
the treated site without a reduction in analgesic intake; or a 25% or greater increase in 
analgesic intake based on daily oral morphine equivalence without a  reduction in the 
worst pain score. If the worst pain score before treatment was nine or ten, the criteria 
for pain flare were met if the follow -up worst pain score was ten and reported as worse 
than the worst pain before treatment with no decrease in anal gesic intake. To 
distinguish pain flare from progression of pain, the worst pain score and analgesic intake 
had to return to baseline levels during the 11 -day (Day 1 - Day 1 1) time  period.  
Consistent with the Chow study, we will document use of steroid med ication.   
 
Data on use of pain medication will be collected and changes in pain medication  use will 
be evaluated between baseline , during each of the first 10 days after treatment,  and 
follow -up visits  (Day 15, Month 1, Month 2, Month 3 ). The percentage o f patients 
requiring narcotic, non -narcotic analgesics, and no pain medications will be assessed 
and compared to literature values from prior clinical trials.  
 
 
Sample Size : 
For this feasibility study, a  sample size of up to 10 patients will apply .  
 
Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_1869] : 
Triggering of a stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_724527] a cessation of enrollment and in a review of  the study 
data  by [CONTACT_724546] (PI [INVESTIGATOR_6254] -investigators) . 
 
The study will be stopped if any of the following occurs:  
• 3 subjects experience a dose limiting toxicity (DLT) (see section 2.13  for definition of 
DLT)  
• [ADDRESS_989191]  time on  the treatment table >1 hour  
• [ADDRESS_989192]  a delay in study treatment of more than 7 business days from simulation 
to treatment related to the investigational device (excluding delays due to patient or 
facility factors not related to the study treatment.)  
• A major device malfunction in dose delivery (as indicated by [CONTACT_724547]) . This includes potential recordable or reportable medical events under the Ohio 
Department of Health  classification.   
 
 
2.14 Data Collection and Monitoring  
Data collection may include the following:  
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page 26 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential  • Case report forms  (electronic and/or paper)  
• Images from CT scans , planar x -ray, and other radiographic -based imaging  
• Dosimetry d ata from the selected treatment plan (printouts and/ or electronic files)  
• Treatment  delivery log files  from t he FLASH enabled  ProBeam  Proton Thera py 
System  
• Photographs (skin)  
• Written or emailed feedback from the investigators  
• Written or emailed observations from Sponsor representatives  
• Responses to data queries  
• Copi[INVESTIGATOR_349593], including patient charts, 
labor atory data, etc ., will be made available to the Sponsor on request with due 
precaution towards protecting the privacy of the patient.  
 
Data on the case report forms will be supported by [CONTACT_26300] .  Physician comments  
and feedback  may be recorded directly in the case report form s. 
 
All required data will be recorded on case report forms and/or collected  in another format .  All 
data will be reviewed by a clinical monitor from the Sponsor  or a representative of the Sponsor 
to ensure acceptab le accuracy and completeness.  If necessary, the study site will be contact[CONTACT_724548]/or clarifications.  
 
All efforts will be made to remove patient -identifying information and de-identify  the data. Only 
the minimum necessary information regard ing the patient’s health records and treatment while 
participating in this study will be collected. All reasonable efforts will be made to protect the 
privacy of the patient.  
 
Standardized e lectronic case report forms  and case report form completion guidel ines will be 
created for collection of study data within an electronic data capture system provided by [CONTACT_429]. Automated edit checks, queries and audit trail are built into the system to ensure 
accurate data collection. Data will be transmitted via se cure Internet connection to the 
electronic data capture system using industry -standard encryption modalities. Data access will 
be password protected. The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_724528] a timely manner.  
 
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_724529] (per 21 CFR part 
812.140(a) Investigator Records) to enable the conduct of the study to be fully documented and 
the study data to be subsequently verifi ed. After study closure, the investigator will maintain all 
source documents and study related documents.  
 
 
2.[ADDRESS_989193] patient on study . 
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page [ADDRESS_989194] the same spectrum of sympt oms or physical  findings that can 
result from conventional photon radiotherapy at conventional dose rates. Preclinical data 
suggests  that FLASH radiotherapy may  result in less toxicity  to normal tissues . 
 
Potential risks/toxicities  in this clinical study : 
• Skin 
o Red skin  
o Weepi[INVESTIGATOR_724530]  
o Ulceration  of skin  
o Necrosis  
o Fibrosis  
o Hyper - or hypopi[INVESTIGATOR_371]  
o Hair loss in the treated area  
• Swelling in the extremities (lymphedema)  
• Potential damage to other normal tissues in the radiation field, including to muscle, 
nerve, and/or bone  
• Insufficient pain relief  
• Fracture at the metastasis site  
• Decre ased blood cell count  
• Radiation related secondary  malignancy  
 
Patients who are pregnant or nursing are excluded from the study because radiation treatment 
can pose risk to an unborn or nursing child.  
 
The machine and patient specific QA processes outlined in section  2.8.[ADDRESS_989195] dose is delivered as prescribed.  
 
In the event of an interrupted FLASH treatment ( as sometimes can occur with standard dose 
rate radiation treatment delivery) , treatment may be resumed and the system will correctly 
execute the remainder of the plan such that the full absorbed dose of 8 Gy will be delivered t o 
the target volume .  If a spot is partially delivered, the system automatically recalculates the 
maximum allowed beam current to complete the remaining monitor units for that spot.   This 
may reduce the dose rate for the remainder of the field.   The potent ial normal tissue sparing 
benefit of the FLASH dose rate may be less. However, treatment can be completed likely 
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page [ADDRESS_989196] in treating the tumor. Based on reliability testing , treatment 
interruption is unlikely to occur.  
 
3.2 Justification for  the Investigation  
This study is designed to assess the workflow feasibility of delivering FLASH radiotherapy in a 
clinical setting , toxicities of treatment, and pain relief at the treated sites.  It is expected that the 
subjects with painful bone metastas is(-es) treated on this study protocol will receive the same 
benefits in terms of pain control as if treated with conventional dose rate photon radiotherapy . 
Normal tissue toxicity is expected to be no more than and potentially less than from treatment 
with conventional dose rate photon radiotherapy . The clinical implementation data acquired in 
this investigation will contribute to optimizing FLASH enabled ProBeam Proton Therapy System  
workflows and  making this technology routinely available to  radiation oncologists and their 
patients.  
 
3.[ADDRESS_989197] of up to 10 patients  with painful bone metastas is(-es) in the 
extremities who will be treated using FLASH radiotherapy  to 1-[ADDRESS_989198] Class IIb medical device 
that incorporates a superconducting cyclotron that produces 250 MeV protons. A degrader 
followed by [CONTACT_724549]. The adjusted energy, 
current, and size of the proton beam is sequentially channeled to a treatment room using a 
beamline. A treatment room is equipped with a robot -mounted tr eatment table and, in many 
installations, a gantry to allow the proton beam to be applied to a patient from all directions.  
 
The FLASH enabled version of the ProBeam Proton Therapy System is being developed under 
the regulations pertaining to 21CFR 820 . This FLASH enabled device is a modified and tested 
ProBeam Proton Therapy System with the ability to deliver pre -defined  high dose rate plans of 
fixed field sizes and total dose, using a specific treatment workflow. These pre-defined  plans will 
be delivered with a minimum dose rate to the target volume  of 40 Gy/s and a maximum 
fluctuation of 10% around the mean.  
 
No changes are anticipated to the device during the clinical investigation.  
 
 
5 Monitoring Procedures  
The study will be monit ored according to US FDA regulations and Good Clinical Practices.  
 
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page 29 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential  The study monitor is: 
 
Jennifer Woo  
Jennifer.Woo @Varian.com  
 
 
 
The Sponsor’s medical monitor is: 
Kenneth J. Russell, MD  (Radiation Oncologist)  
[EMAIL_13854]  
 (voicemail)  or  (mobile)  
 
 
The Investigator and the investig ating sites  will permit authorized clinical research  personnel, 
auditors and clinical monitors from the Sponsor  and/or designee(s)  employed by [CONTACT_1034] , 
the IRB, the FDA  and other applicable regulatory agencies to review subject medical  records, 
source documents, completed case report forms , IRB decisions, and Investigator and clinical  site 
records at regular intervals throughout the study. Subject charts and clinical records  will be 
requested and reviewed so that protocol adherence and source documentation can  be verified. 
In instances where data protection regulations and/or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_724531] (s), the Investigator will 
cooperate in a system of source data verification with the Sponsor.  
 
Monitoring procedures are provided separately.  
 
 
6 Additional Records and Reports  
No other records or reports are anticipated.  
 
 
7 Labeling  
The “For Investigational Use Only”  label  for the FLASH enabled ProBeam Proton Therapy System  
is: 
 
FLASH enabled ProBeam Proton Therapy System  
CAUTION -Investigational Device. Limited by [CONTACT_4496] (or [LOCATION_002]) Law to Investigational 
Use.  
 
The Instructions for Use document is  provided separately.  
 
 

CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page [ADDRESS_989199],  Principal Investigator , and Chair  
Investigational Site:  
This clini cal study will be carried out at Cincinnati Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_29349] . The study 
activities may take place at the following locations:  
 
Cincinnati Children’s Proton Therapy Center  
[ADDRESS_989200] Liberty Township  
Cincinnati, OH  [ZIP_CODE]  
 
Cincinnat i Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_29349]  
[ADDRESS_989201] at the Proton 
Therapy Center location: CT -based Simulation , Treatment Plan Selection, QA, FLASH 
Radiotherapy Delivery.  
 
All other study activities may  take place at any of th e three locations.  
 
 
IRB: 
Cincinnati Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_77696]  
[ADDRESS_989202], MLC#7040  
Cincinnati, OH  [ZIP_CODE]  
 
IRB Chairperson: Robert Frenck, MD  
 
 
Principal Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_724532] : 
John C. Breneman, MD  
Professor of Radiation Onco logy and Neurosurgery in the College of Medicine  
University of Cincinnati Medical Center  
[ADDRESS_989203] Cincinnati, OH  [ZIP_CODE]  
 
Vice Chair : 
John P. Perentesis, MD  
Director, Cancer and Blood Disease Institute  
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page 31 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential  Cincinnati Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_724533] r 
[ADDRESS_989204]  
Cincinnati, OH [ZIP_CODE]  
 
 
This clinical study will be reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_724550]. Any requirements imposed by [CONTACT_724551]. The investigator(s) 
will comply with all relevant human subject protection requiremen ts including informed 
consent. The study will be conducted in compliance with this clinical investigational plan, US 
FDA Good Clinical Practice s (GCPs) , applicable state  and local regulations, and IRB requirements.  
 
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all participant materials will 
be submitted to the IRB for review and approval.  Approval of both the protocol and the consent 
form must be obtained before any participant is enrolled.  Any amendment to the protocol will 
require review and approval by [CONTACT_3484].  In 
addition, all changes to the consent form will be IRB -approved; a determination will be made 
regarding whether a new consent needs to be obtained from participants who prov ided 
consent, using a previously approved consent form.  
 
Curriculum vitae for each investig ator will be maintained by [CONTACT_941] S ponsor.  
 
 
10 Institutions  
No other institution will participate or be used for any part of the investigation.  
 
 
11 References  
 
[1]  V. Favaudon, L. Caplier, V. Monceau and et al., "Ultrahigh dose -rate FLASH irradiation 
increases the differential response between normal and tumor tissue in mice," Sci Transl 
Med, vol. 6, no. 245, p. 245ra293, 2014.  
[2]  P. Montay -Gruel, K. Petersson, M. Jaccard and et al., "Irradiation in a flash: Unique sparing 
of memory in mice after whole brain irradiation with dose rates above 100Gy/s," 
Radiother Oncol, vol. 124, no. 3, pp. 365 -369, [ZIP_CODE].  
[3]  J. B. Loo, E. Schuler , F. Lartey and M. Rafat, "Delivery of ultra -rapid flash radiation therapy 
and demonstration of normal tissue sparing after abdominal irradiation of mice," Int J 
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys, vol. 98, no. [ADDRESS_989205], p. E16, 2017.  
[4]  S. Field and D. Bewley, "Ef fects of dose -rate on the radiation response of rat skin," Int J 
Radiat Biol Relat Stud Phys Chem Med, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 259 -267, 1974.  
[5]  M. Vozenin, P. De Fornel, K. Petersson and e. al., "The Advantage of FLASH Radiotherapy 
Confirmed in Mini -pig a nd Cat -cancer Patients," Clin Cancer Res, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 35 -42, 
2019.  
CIP: Feasibility Study of FLASH Radiotherapy for the Treatment of Symptomatic Bone Metastases (VAR -2019 -02) 
 Page 32 of 32 Version 08 29APR2021  
Varian Confidential  [6]  P. Montay -Gruel, M. Acharya, K. Petersson and et al., "Long -term neurocognitive benefits 
of FLASH radiotherapy driven by [CONTACT_724552]," Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A., vol. 116, no. 22, pp. [ZIP_CODE] -[ZIP_CODE], 2019.  
[7]  J. Bourhis, W. Sozzi, P. Jorge and e. al., "Treatment of a first patient with FLASH -
radiotherapy," Radiother Oncol, vol. 139, no. 18, pp. 18 -22, 2019.  
[8]  P. Foro Arnalot, A. Fontanals, J. Galceran and et al., "Randomized clinical trial with two 
palliative radiotherapy regimens in painful bone metastases: 30 Gy in 10 fractions 
compared with 8 Gy in single fraction," Radiother Oncol, vol. 89, no. 2, pp. 150 -155, 2008.  
[9]  M. Shuja, A. Elghazaly, A. Iqbal and et al., "Efficacy of 8 Gy Single Fraction Palliative 
Radiation Therapy in Painful Bone Metastases: A Single Institution Experience," Cureus, 
vol. 10, no. 1, p. e2036, 2018.  
[10]  W. Hartsell, C. Scott, D. Bruner and e t al., "Randomized trial of short - versus long -course 
radiotherapy for palliation of painful bone metastases," J Natl Cancer Inst, vol. 97, no. 11, 
pp. 798 -804, 1 June 2005.  
[11]  R. McDonald, K. Ding, M. Brundage and e. al., "Effect of Radiotherapy on P ainful Bone 
Metastases: A Secondary Analysis of the NCIC Clinical Trials Group Symptom Control Trial 
SC.23," JAMA Oncol, vol. 3, no. 7, pp. 953 -959, 2017.  
[12]  E. Chow, R. Meyer, K. Ding and e. al., "Dexamethasone in the prophylaxis of radiation -
induced  pain flare after palliative radiotherapy for bone metastases:a double -blind, 
randomised placebo -controlled, phase 3 trial," Lancet Oncol, vol. 16, pp. 1463 -72, 2015.  
  
 
 
 