 
 
 
 
 
 Web and Shared Decision Making for Reserve/National Guard Women’s PTSD Care  
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
Document Date: September 21, 2017  
 
1.0 SPECIFIC AIMS:  
“Women serving in the military are essential components of our Nation’s succ ess,” Secretary of Veterans 
Affairs Eric Shinseki acknowledges (2011). “In honor of their service, VA is committed to providing women 
Veterans with quality care and preparing for their evolving needs .” Indeed, women and OEF/OIF/OND 
Reserve/National Guard ( RNG) war Veterans  are among the fastest growing groups of new VA users . Women 
comprise 15% of the armed forces overall and 17% of RNG forces (Meehan,  2006). Of all recently discharged 
Veterans  eligible for VA care, approximately half are RNG members  (Deyto n & Kang, 2008). RNG members 
appear to have higher rates of post -deployment mental health (MH) problems, including PTSD,  with 
progressively increasing rates of MH problems at 3 and 12 month follow -up compared to stable rates for active 
component service members  (Thomas et al ., 2010). Unfortunately, the effects of military experiences, including 
combat, post -deployment readjustment, and sexual assa ult are not yet well characterized in RNG 
servicewomen. A recent study of both male and female Afghanistan combat Veterans  found that around half 
(56%) report that post -deployment reintegration is difficult (Sayer et al ., 2011). Yet, for a variety of reasons 
(e.g., stigma, prior military assault , VA care perceptions, established care prior to deployment) facilitatin g 
access to MH services for RNG OEF/OIF/OND female Veterans  with PTSD is challenging and will require new 
approaches to outreach. Indeed, such approaches are urgently needed to mediate the severity of post -
deployment MH conditions, alleviate concerns over MH diagnoses and interrupt the cycle of chronicity  found in 
many with PTSD.  A web -based interface tailored to consumer needs has the potential to promote active 
engagement by [CONTACT_169991], a process shown to be effective in civilian populations. 
Furthermore, researchers have found that when patients are educated about their physical health conditions 
and treatment alternatives, shared decision- making results in better health outcomes. However, more studies 
are needed with MH care (Perestelo- Perez et al ., 2011).  The long- term goals of this project are to: 1) increase 
RNG servicewomen’s knowledge about their own post -deployment adjustment, including PTSD,  enhance 
PTSD self-management while decreasing stigma about readjustment and MH conditions ; 2) improve non-VA 
user RNG servicewomen’s willingness to access VA MH care for PTSD and evidence based psychotherapy 
(EBP);  3) revise  an existing web- based interface, which is portable and can interface with My Health eVet 
(MHV)  and, 4) ultimately enhance RNG servicewomen’s engagement with VA and with MHV so that VA non-
users will be more likely to access VA care and current users will be more likely to receive the benefit of EBP 
for PTSD . The immediate goal s of this study are 1) to understand female war Veterans ’ perceptions, 
preferences and barriers to EBP for PTSD; 2) augment our current web-based interface with this information to 
incorporate educational interventions specific to EBP for PTSD; and 3) test  specific access routes to VA care in 
order to determine whether a  concierge nurse case manager shared decision- making intervention can increase 
linkages to VA services for PTSD  and initiation of  EBP initiation for  OEF/OIF/OND RNG post-deployment  
women Veterans compared to a more standard access route  (outreach) .  
 
Specific Aim #1:  Using focus groups,  identify VA enrolled OEF/OIF/OND RNG female war Veterans’ 
perceptions, preferences and identified barriers and facilitators to accessing VA MH services and EBP 
(including cognitive processing therapi[INVESTIGATOR_169979] ) for PTSD . 
 
Hypothesis 1.a : OEF/OIF/OND RNG servicewomen with PTSD who differ in factors associated with access to 
care based on Aday and Andersen’s (1974) model will identify different barriers and facilitators to VHA services 
for PTSD including EBP.  
Hypothesis 1. b: With improved understanding of the consumer’s perceptions of, or experiences with VA mental 
health care for PTSD and EBP, we can further tailor our existing web- based educational interface to better 
address the gap bet ween PTSD care need and EBP access. 
Specific Aim # 2:  To evaluate the participants’ perceptions of and satisfaction with the revised web -
based interface and to evaluate and test differences in VHA initiation and use for those who screen 
positive for PTSD by [CONTACT_169992] : 1) Study concierge nurse case manager ( NCM) or 2) 
existing outreach.   
Hypothesis 2.a:  Web- based interface is a  successful  way to improve Veterans ’ post -deployment  health 
education and VA access as demonstrated by [CONTACT_169993]- intervention satisfaction survey and subsequent enrollment.  
Hypothesis 2.b:  Use of a nurse case manager to promote shared decision- making regarding PTSD services 
and EBPs will result in increased use of MH care and initiation of EBP for PTSD compared to outreach 
counselors.  
RESEARCH PLAN  
2.0 BACKGROUND  
 
Women Frequently Choose not to use VHA Care :  
Many women Veterans  do not know that women’s health care is even available in the VHA and are concerned 
with the quality of care that exists (Washington et al., 2007). Women exposed to combat are less likely to use 
VHA care because they believe it is male- oriented. When they do use VA care, they have lower opi[INVESTIGATOR_169980] (Kelly et al., 2008). High rates of military sexual trauma (MST) are reported by [CONTACT_169994]- OEF/OIF and more recently in RNG populations with 15% of VA 
enrolled female Iraq/Afghani stan Veterans screening MST positive. MST is a major contributor to PTSD 
(Sadler et al., 2004; Street et al., 2007; Suris et al., 2004, Booth et al., 2011) . These women are significantly 
less likely to believe they are safe from sexual harassment at the VHA compared to non -traumatized peers 
(Mengeling et al., 2011). Despi[INVESTIGATOR_169981], women with MST are more likely to have less satisfaction with and poorer perceptions of VHA care than those without MST (Kelly et al., 2008) .  
 
War has Adverse Consequences on Relationship and Parenting
: 
Over 700,[ADDRESS_198925] one parent deployed and few events are more stressful than having a parent or loved one deployed. In response, the VA has extended services to the families of war 
Veterans through marital & family therapy. The returning veteran must reintegrate into a family different than 
the one they  left and they may have difficulty disengaging from combat and readjusting to family life, especially 
when redeployment is possible (Johnson et al., 2007). Returning women are demonstrating a higher risk for 
family readjustment problems as marriages of female troops are failing at almost three times the rate of male 
servi ce members (Mulhall, 2009).  
 
Mental Health Conditions (including PTSD) are Prevalent in Male and Female OEF/OIF War Veterans  but 
Many either don’t Seek VA Care  or Complete Recommended Treatment :  
Almost a third (32%) of OEF/OIF Veterans  in the VA have received a mental health diagnosis. Eleven to twenty 
percent of US soldiers will develop PTSD secondary to their combat experiences, but most still don’t seek care 
(Hoge et al., 2006) . PTSD is the most prevalent mental health condition among these Veterans , followed by 
[CONTACT_169995] (when non- dependent abuse of drugs and alcohol dependence syndrome are considered 
additively) and then depression (Deyton & Kang, 2008) . In recent work, OEF/OIF servicewomen have been 
found to have high levels of combat exposures, only slightly lower than men.  Yet, gender differences of the 
impact of these stressors, including post -traumatic stress symptoms, have been found to be minimal (Vogt, 
2011). Many OEF/OIF studies have included comparisons between men and women and gender differences in 
MH symptoma tology have shown insignificant differences (Street et al ., 2009). A RAND study using a 
community sample of OEF/OIF war Veterans  found rates of mental health disorders similar to VA populations 
but only half of those meeting criteria for current PTSD or major depression had sought help from a physician 
or mental health provider for a mental health problem in the past year (Taniel ian & Jaycox, 2008) . In a study of 
almost 50,000 Veterans with newly diagnosed PTSD, only a minority of Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans (9.5%) received the recommended number and intensity of VA MH treatment sessions within the first year (Seal et al ., 
2010)   
Women and EBP:  
Unfortunately, there is little data looking at gender differences across PTSD treatment outcomes . Litz et al . 
(2007) compared internet -based cognitive behavior therapy across male and femal e military service members 
with PTSD finding no differences in rates of treatment attrition  between men and women (with analysis of 
gender differences in treatment outcomes not presented).  The National Center for PTSD (Schnurr et al ., 2007) 
implemented the first randomized clinical trial to assess PTSD treatment outcomes for active- duty and Veteran 
women.  They found that women who received prolonged exposure (PE) therapy had a greater reduction of 
PTSD symptoms compared to women receiving present -centered therapy. Indeed, women in the PE group 
were relat ively more likely to no longer meet PTSD diagnostic criteria. Most prior studies in civilian populations 
have focused on PTSD treatment of women with sexual trauma and demonstrated similar  success (Foa et al ., 
1991; Foa et al ., 2005 ; McDonagh et al ., 2005) . Notably, combat is the second greatest risk for PTSD in the 
[LOCATION_002] following rape (Kessler et al. , 1995). Epi[INVESTIGATOR_169982] (Breslau et 
al., 1997) . 
 
Informed Patient’s are More Likely to Engage in and Be Satisfied with Their Care : 
Information plays a critical role in helpi[INVESTIGATOR_169983]-care strategies (Rogers, Entwistle, & Pencheon, 1998).  Considerable evidence suggests that patients who 
are better informed about their health/mental health conditions and treatment tend to have more favorable outcomes across a variety of domains.  For example, a lack of knowledge about PTSD, its causes, and 
available treatment services have been identified as important barriers to help- seeking among Veterans  (Sayer 
et al., 2009).  Conversely, having adequate information about one’s medical condition is associated with better 
adherence to treatment recommendations (Detmer et al., 2003; Karaeren et al., 2009).  In addition, patients 
who are better informed tend to be more satisfied with their care (Detmer et al., 2003; Deyo & Diehl, 1986; Jabbar, Casey, Schelten, & Kelly, 2011) and experience reduced uncertainty and anxiety regarding treatment (Detmer et al., 2003; Jensen, Madsen, Andersen, & Rose, 1993).  Patient -provider communication patterns 
involving more information sharing on the part of the provider have also been associated with greater patient satisfaction, knowledge, and adherence (Hall, Roter, and Katz, 1988) as well as better subjective (self -rated 
health), behavioral (functional status), and objectively -measured health outcomes (e.g., blood pressure and 
blood glucose levels; Kaplan, Greenfield, & Ware, 1989)  
 The accumulating data supporting a link between patients’ level of understanding of their medical conditions and various health outcomes combined with an increasing trend toward more patient -centered models of care 
have led to efforts to facilitate patient education and informed decision making. Collectively, these findings 
suggest that well -informed patients tend to be more satisfied with their care, are more engaged in and 
adherent to treatment recommendations, and experience better health outcomes.  
Online Mental Health Screening and Interventions  Promote Veteran Engagement in Care
:  
OEF/OIF combat Veterans  enrolled in VA care have reported a preference to seek readjustment services or 
information over the internet or web (53%) and virtually all (97%) had internet use, with most (70%) using it 
daily (Sayer, 2010). The majority of OEF/OIF Veterans  are computer -literate, and many use the internet as a 
daily part of their lives (Needham, 2008). Improving education about resources could help these Veterans  
obtain appropriate evidence- based care. There is a recent and growing precedent of web- based interventions 
in high risk populations, including identification of mental health conditions (such as depression, substance abuse, PTSD) and focus on behavior change to promote patient engagement in care (Wantland et al, 2004; De 
Salvo et al ., 2007; Khasanshina et al., 2008; King et al ., 2009; NIDA, 2009). Research investigating internet 
treatment of PTSD (Litz et al ., 2004) suggests t hat there may be greater follow through with internet -based 
approaches, which further supports the need for finding creative ways of safely extending education and services beyond traditional methods. Online feedback is already being provided to active component soldiers 
and DoD on topi[INVESTIGATOR_169984] (e.g., pre -and post -deployment deployment health) to 
educational resources (e.g. care promotion).  
 
Shared Decision Making Improves MH Care Outcomes and Patient Satisfaction: 
In the past decade t here has been growing interest in shared decision- making (SDM) , in which clinicians and 
patients engage in a decision- making process together, discuss treatment preferences, and reach agreement 
about treatment choice (Joosten et al ., 2008).  Such a participatory care model of decision making is a central 
theme of many evidence- based psychosocial MH treatments and a core component of the chronic care model 
(Woltman, 2011). Improved health outcomes and patient satisfaction of MH consumers have been associated 
with SDM  (Woltmann et al ., 2011). Both men and women report  improved patient satisfaction with SDM and 
MH care receipt  (Swanson et al ., 2007). In addition to greater satisfaction, improved self -management of 
mental health conditions has been found (e.g., greater follow -through with treatment plans, and improved 
therapeutic alliances with clinicians (Mahone et al ., 2011) ). To our knowledge, no prior research has 
investigated SDM and PTSD in Veteran populations. However, the fit is logical given PTSD is a chroni c care 
need and feeling powerless is a key element of PTSD symptomatology.  
 
Preliminary Work:  
Focus groups for our recent HSR&D funded study of OEF/OIF RNG servicewomen  (8 groups, 5 Mid-Western 
states, N=39). Our qualitative data suggests that women have significant mental health consequences (PTSD, depression, substance abuse) from deployment exposures which further confound their return to relationship 
and parenting roles. Thematic coding of transcripts revealed that (1) almost all of the participants had received 
no information regarding their VA eligibility for services or how to access VA services (48 references in 7 of 8 
groups), and (2) that post -deployment adjustment, including depression and PTSD symptoms as well as family 
re-adjustment, was one of  the most frequently noted concerns (51 references in all 8 groups). The majority of 
our focus group  participants didn’t know their post -deployment symptoms were treatable mental 
health conditions that influence readjustment.  
 
The quantitative findings from the cross -sectional phase of this study (N= 665)  indicates that most RNG 
servicewomen (79%) did not use mental health care in the past year despi[INVESTIGATOR_169985], and that RNG women who did use mental health services were more likely to 
seek mental health care outside of the VA (15%) instead of within (7%). Conversely, most (82%) endorsed the 
belief that mental health care counseling and services work, and were less likely to think that VA mental health professionals would not understand their problems (9%) than private care mental health professionals (23%). A 
fourth of participants reported that mental health care would cost them too much money. Thus, despi[INVESTIGATOR_169986], they chose to not seek care or to do so privately  at a financial cost. 
This incongruity indicates the existence of barriers to access and unaddressed concerns which are not yet adequately understood.   
Findings from our recently completed Mental Health QUERI RRP (N= 131) indicated that RNG servicewomen 
completing online screening have substantial post -deployment mental health and readjustment 
concerns. Nine post -deployment online screens (for PTSD, depression, substance abuse, prescription drug 
abuse, military sexual trauma (MST), traumatic brain injury (TBI), family readjustment, combat exposures ) 
were implemented. Less than 1% (n=1) of participants screened negatively for all mental health issues and 
deployment trauma exposures (recognizing the probable selection bias of participation). The maximum number 
of positive screens by [CONTACT_169996] 8/9. Most (48%) participants had 3- 4 positive screens, while 29% had 
1-2 positive screens and 22% had more than 4 positive screens. More importantly, using the VA screen for 
PTSD, 41% screened positive for PTSD . Most participants (95%) screened positive for combat trauma 
exposures, half met the VA screening criteria for MST, and 10% the VA screen for TBI.  Thus, the mental health 
care needs of this group are substantial. 
 
In this study, RNG servicewomen reported our web- based MH screening and tailored educational 
intervention for post -deployment readjustment provided needed education they felt they otherwise 
would not have received (48%), decreased MH stigma (32%) and improved access as two- thirds 
indicated they would subsequently seek MH care (38% VHA and 26% non- VA care).  Participating women 
endorsed the online interface for impro ving subsequent access to mental health care. Almost a third (32%) 
reported that the tailored information they received reduced their discomfort with seeking care, 38% 
indicated that they would subsequently seek assessment from a VA provider, and 26% would do so 
from a non -VA provider. The online method of education was shown to be a preferred source of information 
by [CONTACT_8333]. The majority of participants (74%) indicated they preferred to receive VA information through e-mail and 66% routinely use the interne t to seek health information. Most (74%) participants would recommend this 
web-based educational interface to other military women.  
 It is important to note here that in our reproductive health study (N=1,002), we found that  women who use the 
VA had more positive perceptions of VA services and gender specific care compared to non -users,  
recognizing that 88% were already VHA users  (Mengeling, 2011). Consequently, if we are able to decrease 
care barriers through our web- based interface  and NCM  intervention, post -deployed RNG women Veterans  
may be more likely to identify mental health care needs, initiate care more immediately, and subsequently 
address post -deployment mental health care issues using VA services.  
In summary , our preliminary work illustrates the complex  needs and barriers to MH care faced by [CONTACT_169997].  Our proposed study is appropriately directed at better understanding and addressing access to 
and engagement in mental care in general and EBP in particular  for RNG servicewomen with PTSD . We are 
building on our existing  web-based i nterface  to determine whether it can generate interest in accessing VA and 
EBP for PTSD  so that women will be interested in enrolling in the study comparing access routes . Moreover , 
we can determine the effectiveness o f a NCM  using shared decision- making  at increasing access to VA mental 
health services and EBT for PTSD . 
 
Conceptual Framework :  
Health disparities are “differences in the incidence, prevalence, mortality, and burden of disease and other 
adverse health conditions that exist among specific population groups in the [LOCATION_002]” (NIH, 2002).  
Disparities in health attributed to harmful health exposures  (e.g., combat or rape in military) or to factors related 
to limited access to health care  (e.g., barrier s to care while deployed or VA access) are considered inequities 
(Peters & Evans, 2001).  Although racial/ethnic minorities and low -income groups have traditionally been the 
focus of health disparities research, we propose that military women, as VA treatment minorities, deserve this consideration.  The identification and elimination of health disparities associated with female Veterans with 
PTSD is important because they are avoidable, unfair, and can affect our entire society (Woodward & Kawachi, 2000).  The two-year costs of major depression and PTSD (including treatment costs, lost productivity and 
costs associated with suicide) for those deployed to OIF/OEF on June 30,2008, were simulated to be close to 
$[ADDRESS_198926] that the savings generated would be $138 million (Kilmer et al ., 2011). We will use Aday 
and Andersen’s (Aday & Andersen, 1974)  framework for assessing equity in access to health care. Aday and 
Andersen identified three groups of factors that affect service use: predisposing, enabling, and need 
characteristics. This framework will be a guide to the key domains that will be queried in the Phase [ADDRESS_198927] service use include: predisposing (e.g., military rank, number of 
deployments), enabling (e.g., age, insurance, employment, rurality, VA care sites - primary care, MH, 
community -based outpatient clinic ( CBOC )) and need (e.g., medical and mental health co- morbidities) 
characteristics. 
 
3.[ADDRESS_198928] of the Findings  
While it is apparent that female OEF/OIF/OND RNG Veterans  are at significant risk of PTSD and other post -
deployment MH  problems , only a minority of these women seek VA MH care . This is d espi[INVESTIGATOR_169987]. This gap between need for 
and use of VA PTSD services suggests that further research is needed to understand  specific barriers to VA 
MH care and VA PTSD EBP. It is also currently unknown if women Veterans who have participated in PTSD 
EBP and are considered “drop outs” have actually had therapeutic benefit and/or are using community 
resources that fit their unique preferences (e.g., clergy support, Vet centers). Thus, our proposed research will 
provide valuable insights about this population’s perceptions of VA MH services and of PTSD EBP and their 
evolving use of VA and other community resources to address PTSD and other post -deployment MH needs.  
 
The US Government Accountability Office (GA O, 2011) summarized key barriers to VA mental health care as 
stigma, lack of understanding or awareness of MH care, logistical challenges to accessing MH care, and concerns about VA’s care, such as concern that VA services are primarily for older Veterans. Our proposed 
web-based interface and concierge NCM  address each of these barriers by  [CONTACT_169998]. A successful online educational program tailored to 
individuals’ needs for specific MH services may represent an effective and relatively low cost approach to 
provide more immediate ly responsive education to address  PTSD and other common post -deployment MH 
conditions . Web-based screening using existing VA screens has the potential to improve VA interface and care 
engagement . Women Vete rans concerned about MH stigma can determine if they meet screening criteria for 
PTSD, or other post -deployment MH conditions, within the privacy of their homes, and if they screen positive, 
they can find out if and how these conditions are treatable.  Furthermore , RNG female Veterans participating in 
our pi[INVESTIGATOR_169988]- based post -deployment education program indicated they were more likely to respond honestly to 
screening questions in their own home and own timeframe. Thus, women using web- based screening may 
have more valid screens and become more engaged in their own care.  Furthermore, women who may have 
challenges with VA access, e.g. because of rurality, transportation, work or childcare demands, may prefer 
web-based screening and education to provide on demand access to information. Paired with NCM telephone 
follow -up to explore their PTSD care options and facilitate more informed choices , women may demonstrate a 
greater willingness to overcome barriers to face-to-face care.   
 
From a VA resource perspective, web-based screening with results available to clinicians behind the VA 
firewall on the intranet (or ultimately through MHV) alleviates unnecessary clinician time to implement and 
score screens.  Women Veterans who do not screen positively for PTSD or MH conditions will consequently not 
unnecessarily utilize MH services.  Women Veterans who do screen positively will have the added impact of 
web-based educational modules so that they arrive at their initial PTSD or MH appointment more informed and 
can ultimately be more goal directed , thus result ing in more efficient clinician interface.  In short , the proposed 
educational interface and nurse care manager intervention holds the potential to engage women early after 
returning from combat in an effort to mediate the severity of post- deployment  PTSD and other  mental health 
conditions, interrupt the cycle of chronicity found in many war Veterans , blunt the development of multiple 
mental health co -morbidities  associated with PTSD , address family readjustment concerns, and facilitate self -
initiated care seeking.  The VA collaborative care model for treating depression in primary care has 
demonstrated the effectiveness of NCM in roles that interface with and educate Veterans to be partners in their 
own care (Cheney et al ., 2011).   Given this success, such an approach appears very promising for facilitating 
access to VA MH care for PTSD, as well.  
 Implications for Policy and Practice, Feasibility of VA Adoption: This study has direct implications for women’s mental health c are education practice and policy.  Interventions 
that this proposal plans to deliver are readily and/or  relatively inexpensively importable into existing VA care 
delivery with next step implementations readily feasible. Our NCM intervention can be a FTEE neutral 
undertaking  as Patient Aligned Care Team (PACT) models of care currently have NCMs in key roles as points 
of contact [CONTACT_169999]’s Health Care and MH Care clinics  that are already interfacing with female RNG 
Veterans and their post-deployment needs.  Consequently , our proposed research can provid e standardized 
shared decision- making protocols that will facilitate  the care of female RNG Veterans with PTSD. This NCM 
interface has the potential to improve patient engagement in PTSD care and EBP. Furthe rmore, while the 
proposed web interface and shared decision- making intervention is currently directed at RNG women Veterans  
post-deployment , there are  clear  implications for expansion to other populations or health concerns. At a policy 
level, there are unique benefit s to multiple partners who have stakes in different facets of our evidence- based 
implementation of web -based education and screening  interface and shared- decision making interventions.  It 
should be noted that the NCM will be a complementary role with existing OEF/OIF/OND outreach counselors who focus on educating returning Veterans about their VA eligibility, facilitating enrollment and subsequently 
appointment scheduling as needed in a variety of areas..    
Deliverable  VA Portability/Adoption  VA Benefit/Sustainability  Partners that Benefit  
Web-Based Post -
Deployment Readjustment Screening 
and Educational 
Intervention Immediately 
implementable, i.e. , 
accessible as is from 
anywhere (web- based).  
 Next Steps:  
1. My Healthe Vet  (MHV) 
integration:  (MHV 
Diseases and Conditions 
Center, MHV My 
Recovery Plan).  
 
2. Phone Applications.   1. Low cost to translate to 
care.  
 
2. Improves access to 
information for Veterans  
with potential barriers, e.g. , 
rural employed, caring for 
children, and can be accessed in the privacy of 
home.  
 3. Promotes convenient 
VA interface and education 
with RNG, a population 
that might not otherwise 
access VA MH or EBP.  
 
4. Replace clinician-administered screening 
with web -based screening.  
Maximizes efficiency by [CONTACT_170000], e.g. , Office of Mental Health 
Services  
 
Office of Primary Care 
Services  
 
National Center for 
PTSD  
 Office of Rural Health  
 Women Veteran’s Strategic Healthcare 
Group  
 Women’s Health 
Innovation Office  
 
Office of Family 
Services, Women’s 
Health and Military 
Sexual Trauma  
 OEF/OIF/OND Outreach Teams  
 
EBP.  
 
5. VA Promotes Accurate education and available 
VA health care services, 
e.g., EBP for PTSD and 
gender -specific care.  
 Non-VA Partners:  
Vet Centers, Veteran Service Officers, Veteran Groups  
  
 
 
NCM Manualized Shared 
Decision -making Protocol  Adoption by [CONTACT_170001]:  
1. Patient Aligned 
Care Teams 
(PACT)  
2. Mental Health Service  
3. Women’s Health 
Clinic  FTEE Neutral  
NCM point of contacts will not change but with this 
protocol NCMs will 
efficiently be able to use a 
standardized method to 
implement treatment triage and support informed 
consumer -based decision 
making about PTSD treatment benefit and 
options, e.g. , EBP. 
 
Participation  by [CONTACT_145485]: 
Findings from this study will be immediately relayed to the partners who will be able to take action accordingly. 
As VISN MH Medical Director, co -Investigator [CONTACT_170025] will assist with these communications.  He and PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_124]. Anne Sadler  have routine interface (weekly and monthly , respectively) with different facets of O ffice of 
Mental Health Services (O MHS ) in their roles as VA MH administrators.  Partners include OMHS ( S. Batten); 
OMH  Operations ( M. Schohn); NCPTSD (M. Friedman and P. Schnurr); Primary Care Program Office (G. 
Schectman); VISN 23 (J. Murphy)  and MH QUERI (J. Kirchner).  In addition to a briefing version of the final 
report, we plan to write a technical monograph to summarize the study outcomes and recommendations . 
Offices w ith special interest that we will also inform include partners : Mental Health Program (T Zeiss. , Ph.D) , 
the Women Veterans  Strategic Healthcare Group ( P. Hayes, Ph.D., Chief Consultant) , the Director of Family 
Services, Women’s Mental Health, and Military Sexual Trauma ( S. McCutheon, Ph.D., R.N.) , the Director of 
Web Services , (K. Weingardt, Ph.D ). 
 
4.0 RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
 Methods:  
We propose a mixed- methods study building upon the HSR&D Women’s Practice Based Research Network 
(PBRN) to leverage th e research infrastructure and the research and clinical relationships already in place to 
optimize the successful completion of this study. To the PBRN sites (Iowa, North Carolina, [LOCATION_004] - 2 sites) 
we will also add Minneapolis, the EBT4PTSD CREATE site . This established PBRN and CREATE network will 
also facilitate access to VA services and enhance safety for study participants. This study will include two 
phases. Phase 1
 will use focus groups to build on our knowledge from community sample focus groups with 
prior HSR&D funded research and to take advantage of VA computerized health records to identify VA enrolled 
RNG servicewomen diagnosed with PTSD post -deployment. Focus groups will characterize predisposing, 
enabling and need factors associated with both PTSD/EBP access facilitators and barriers as well as better 
define this group’s unique perceptions of mental health care and EBP treatment preferences (e.g. type, timing 
following deployment, concurrent MH treatments) . Phase 2  will include (a) modificat ion of our current web-
based screening and educational interface from focus group findings , and (b) a comparative study with a 
community sample of  RNG women screening  positive for PTSD who are randomly assigned by [CONTACT_170002]: 1) a study -specific nurse case manager ( NCM ) who will use shared 
decision- making to assist with local VA PTSD/MH evaluation and treatment in the Veteran’s locale, or 2) 
OEF/OIF/OND outreach coordinators in place nationally at every V HA facility . 
 
Aim #1:  Using focus groups, identify VA enrolled OEF/OIF/OND RNG female war Veterans’ perceptions, 
preferences and identified barriers and facilitators to accessing VA MH services and EBP (including cognitive 
processing therapi[INVESTIGATOR_169979]) for PTSD . 
 
Phase 1: This phase will build upon knowledge that we gained from focus groups implemented for a prior 
HSR&D funded study.  Topi[INVESTIGATOR_169989]’s 
perceptions of VA care and access to care.  The majority of women in these focus groups  did not use VA  health 
services .  
 
Phase 1: Focus Groups
SitesStratifications
VA Iowa City
(6 groups)
VA Greater Los Angeles
(6 groups)Clinics EBP Participation Population
VA Enrolled
PTSD positive 
OEF/OIF/OND 
female R/NG 
VeteransPrimary 
Care
(3 IC/3 GLA)
Mental 
Health
(3 IC/3 GLA)1. Completed or currently participating 
in any type of EBP  (2 IC/ 2 GLA)
2. EBP drop out  (2 IC/ 2 GLA)
3. Never participated in EBP
(2 IC/ 2 GLA)
 
Setting:  In order to obtain samples that are diverse (e.g., rural vs. urban, race/ethnicity , CBOC utilization ) and 
improve VHA generalizability , focus groups will be held at the Greater Los Angeles (GLA) and the Iowa City 
(IC) VA Health Care Systems . The focus groups will be held in conference rooms at the respective V As so that 
the groups are readily accessible and in a familiar environment.  
 Participants:
 Potential focus group participants will be identified through VA administrative databases at the 
respective medical centers. Focus group participants will be delimited to OEF/OIF/OND Reserve and National Guard (RNG) servicewomen with PTSD who have returned from deployment in Iraq or Afghanistan within the 
prior [ADDRESS_198929] one VA encounter within the preceding 18 months. Participation inclusion, described in the informed consent, will be limited to those with no 
disabilities that would impair their ability to provide consent and participate in the groups.  Following chart 
review and consultation with evidence- based coordinators at each VA site, three focus groups with RNG 
women will be held for each specialty care group  (Primary C are and specialty mental healthcare [ MH]) 
according to EBT participation: 1) current or completed EBP, 2) EBP drop out, 3) never participated in EBP. 
Two VA sites (Greater Los Angeles and Iowa City) will be used, for a total of 12 focus groups ( 2x3x2). These 
data will be used to modify our current web- based tailored educational interface with modules specific to VA 
MH and PTSD/EBT perceptions and post -intervention satisfaction survey questions. Prior to implementation, 
the modified web- based interface will be pi[INVESTIGATOR_169990] a sample of 20 OEF/OIF/OND RNG women within two 
years post -deployment to Iraq or Afghanistan and within our study catchment areas (per Defense Manpower 
Data Center (DMDC) data) regardless of VA enrollment.  
 Feasibility:
 We ve rified sufficient participant availability for Phase 1 using administrative data (2011) at the IC 
VA using these eligibility criteria. We found that more RNG women with PTSD are seeking care in mental 
health (n=161) and have a greater range of visits than those seen in primary care (n=82). The GLA VA has an 
even larger women Veteran population. 
 Focus Group Process:
 Following IRB approval, participants will be recruited by [CONTACT_170003] a goal of [ADDRESS_198930]. Sadler, who is well experienced in performing 
focus groups with RNG servicewomen. Participants will be reimbursed $30.00. and refreshments will be 
provided. Women who contact [CONTACT_170004] $10.00. A protocol will be in place to address any mental health emergency or  safety issues that 
may arise, but noting that this research team has experienced no adverse outcomes from prior focus groups 
with RNG servicewomen post -deployment.  
 
Qualitative Analysis:  The Aday and Andersen (Aday & Andersen, 1974)  framework for assessing equity in 
access to health care will be a guide to the key domains that will be queried in the Phase [ADDRESS_198931] to barriers and facilitators to VA mental health care and, moreover, EBP. Our initial analytic approach to 
the focus group data will use the constant comparison method, whereby [CONTACT_170005]. These open codes will be examined by [CONTACT_170006], with a focus 
on addressing the specific aims of the study (rather than all emergent themes). These themes will also be 
analyzed for their potential “fit” with the Aday and Andersen model, i.e., their relevance to the concepts of 
predisposing, enabling, and need characteristics. Assuming that there will be some degree of fit between emergent themes and conceptual domains, each conceptual domain will be summarized with reference to its 
applicability to refinements to the intervention as well as overall implementation processes.  Focus groups will 
be digitally recorded and the Iowa City CADRE Qualitative Team will complete verbatim transcription.  
ATLAS.ti, a qualita tive data analysis software program, will be used to assist this process.  A codebook will be 
developed initially by [CONTACT_170007] -facilitators with subsequent co -investigator independent coding of 
manuscripts from each of the focus groups specific to EBP participation (current or completed, never  used , 
drop-o ut) and ultimately team consensus of codebook themes.   
 
Aim # 2:  To evaluate the participants’ perceptions of and satisfaction with the revised web -based interface and 
to evaluate and test differences in VHA initiation and use for those who screen positive for PTSD by [CONTACT_170008]: 1) Study concierge nurse case manager (NCM) or 2) existing outreach.  
 
Phase 2 :  
Phase 2 of the study will involve 5 Steps: 1)  Web-based pre -interface survey; 2 ) web -based screening and 
tailored education and resource links; 3) post -interface satisfaction and intended care survey; 4)random 
assignment to concierge nurse case manager versus in place OEF/OIF/OND outreach workers 5) post-
intervention follow -up. 
 
Phase 2: Web-based Interface & Concierge Intervention
Web-InterfacePTSD Screening/Education
Human InterfacePost-Intervention 
Follow-up
Pre-
information/
satisfaction 
and care 
utilization 
survey Participants 
receive tailored 
Education/
Screening 
&
links to VA 
services and 
web-based 
resources
(400 participants)Post-information/
satisfaction surveyRandom 
assignment via 
web-interface to 
VA contact
1. Concierge Nurse 
Case Manager 
(n=60)
2. OEF/OIF/OND 
Outreach 
Coordinator 
(n=60)6 & [ADDRESS_198932]-information/
satisfaction and 
care utilization 
survey 
1. VA & Non-VA 
Care sought
(n=60)  
2.  EBP & MH 
Care Seeking 
Barriers/Facilitators
(n=60)
3.  PTSD-negative
(n=280)PTSD 
NegativePTSD 
PositivePopulation
OEF/OIF/
OND female
R/NG 
Veterans
4 State Cohort
(IA, MN, CA, NC)
obtained from
DMDC
(N=2,000)Intervention
Next steps based on PTSD 
screening results
 
Setting: The study will be based in Iowa City but implemented by [CONTACT_170009].  The concierge NCM  will be based in Iowa City and perfor m interventions by [CONTACT_170010]. There will be pre- study briefing with key VA staff (OEF/OIF /OND  Outreach 
Counselors, Women Veteran and MST Coordinators) within each of these states. The existing infrast ructure of 
the PBRN and CREATE relationships and resources will assist us to provide optimal subject education and 
access to VA care.  
 Participants : 
Participants will be delimited to RNG servicewomen returning from deployment within the 24 
months preceding study participation to PBRN and CREATE study states ([LOCATION_004], Iowa, North Carolina and 
Minnesota) and who have no disabilities that would interfere with their capacity to complete a web- based 
survey.  
 Sampling :
 Subjects will be selected through the Defense Manpower Data Center (DMDC) with which [CONTACT_170026] has a successful working relationship. Our previous work, on which this study builds, used military e-mail as the sole method of contact.  We learned several lessons:  (1) RNG servicewomen only sporadically 
checked their military e- mails  which was problematic for recruitment; (2) feedback from participants told us that 
e-mailing a traditional IRB study invitation and informed consent (6- 7 pages) was a participation deterrent ; (3) 
we were unable to follow up with non- responders and determine a true response rate because our original 
QUERI sampling specifications to DMDC did not request additional information.  Consequently, we have 
revised our protocol for recruiting:  (1) we have increased the recruitment and follow -up duration; (2) we have 
worked with our IRB and Pharos Innovations (developer of the web- based program) to streamline the subject 
information and consent process; and (3) we have thus revised our DMDC registry requirements to sample potential participants with both e- mail and postal mail. Our respondents will be contact[CONTACT_170011]- based study link and notification that an e- mail is being mailed the same week for 
their convenience. Non -responders will be re-contact[CONTACT_99017] 10 days following initial mailing.  DMDC is able to 
provide sociodemographic and military information (e.g. age, marital status, race, rank, number of 
deployments) that will subsequently allow us to compare study participants with refusers and non -responders . 
This will facilitate follow up and better analysis of the generalizability of findings . Web- based interface 
participants  will be reimbursed $30.00 for their participation. 
 
Sample Size : Taking into account a conservatively estimated e-m ail only response rate (15%) and response 
rates based on letter contact [CONTACT_170012] -up (48% - 70%), we conservatively estimate a 20% response 
rate using e- mail and letter recruitment and therefore will request a sample of 2,000 women from DMDC to 
achieve a final sample size of 400. Assuming conservatively that 30% of the sample will screen positively for 
PTSD  (45% of RNG women participating in our original QUERI web- based screen met criteria for PTSD) , this 
will allow us to have at least 120 women with a positive screen for PTSD .  
 
Phase 2 Intervention Process: The web- based interface provides online screening scores and individually 
tailored educational and referral information to participants (see appendix for current version). Following IRB 
approval,  potential subjects will receive a postal mail invitation and information summary.  This will be f ollowed 
within the same week by [CONTACT_1629] e- mail summary of the project and invit ation to complete an online tailored 
questionnaire that will be administered using software developed by [CONTACT_170013]. In the 
email, potential subjects will be provided with an embedded web link and a subject identification number that 
can be used to access the online survey/educational interface. A consent document will be included in the initial survey screens prior to beginning the survey. The survey and responses will be maintained on a secure 
server behind the VA firewall. The 
web-based pre -screening survey  will query prior and current VA utilization 
and their reasons  for accessing it or not, knowledge about post -deployment VA eligibility and services and 
satisfaction with VA care, a brief check list of barriers and facilitators to VA MH care and to EBP (gathered from 
focus group information) , and non -VA MH service use.  
 
The web- based s creens will include the following:  
 
1. PTSD - VA Post -Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) Screen  
2. Sexual Trauma - VA Military Sexual Trauma Screen 
3. Combat Exposure - Exposures to Combat Screen (Hoge et al (2009)  
4. Domestic Violence - American College of Obstetrician and Gynecologist domestic violence screen  
5. Family Readjustment - developed from PI’s focus groups from another HSR&D funded study  
6. Substance Abuse - AUDIT -C Substance Abuse Screen (VA screen)  
7. Prescription Drug Abuse - DoD Survey of Health Related Behaviors modified for web 
8. TBI - VA Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) Screen, modified to include more descriptive questions  
9. Depression - Physician’s Health Questionnaire (PHQ -9) depression questions  
Even though the focus of this study is on PTSD, these additional screens are necessary because of 
frequent comorbidities with PTSD and also to inform the NCM  regarding the comorbid conditions.  In our 
preliminary study of this web- interface, most participants completed the screening and education on the same 
day (92%). Those who did finish the interview on the same day had an average completion time of 26 minutes 
(median of 17 minutes), ranging from [ADDRESS_198933] completed question. Participants who screen positive for PTSD or other mental 
health disorders/concerns will be given immediate web- based feedback about the domains for which they 
screened positively . On-line notification for those who meet screening criteria for PTSD or other conditions will 
include an indication to the participant of the importance of  face-to-face evaluation, education about each 
mental health domain there is a positive screen for, and links to contact [CONTACT_170014]/OIF/OND outreach 
personnel and VA services in their geographic region to facilitate access to care. Educational materials will include information about what PTSD or the mental health or adjustment concern is , what to expect, how 
commonly it occurs, treatment options, and what treatments are available in the VA. Key information about PTSD EBP will be provided.  Following completion of questions and access to educational information, 
participants will be asked to complete the post -intervention information and satisfaction survey online.  The VA 
Crisis Hotline toll free number available [ADDRESS_198934] professionals and PBRN/CREATE  sites will be involved prior to study initiation, educated about this 
study, and engaged in facilitating outreach and care. It is noteworthy that our research team’s studies that use 
focus groups and telephone interviews with more intensive questions about sexual assault in RNG populations have not resulted in any subsequent clinical emergencies. Women who have no positive screens will be able to 
access the same educational information and web links if they choose to.  
The web-based post -screening 
survey  immediately following th e screening and education interface will be revised f rom our original web- and 
semi -structured survey to include satisfaction with information about VA MH and EBP for PTSD that they 
receive in the web education intervention. We will also repeat the check -list of barriers and facilitators to VA 
MH care and to PTSD EBP tailored from the participant’ s prior responses to determine if the web- based 
intervention altered their perceptions.  We will also query those who are PTSD positive and who are not 
engaged in PTSD EBP and other MH care whether they  intend to seek care as a result of their participation 
and why or why not . Participants will be reimbursed $30.[ADDRESS_198935] surveys within two 
weeks following their initial postal or e -mail invitation then they will receive an additional $10.[ADDRESS_198936] IRB consent. VA health services utilization will be obtained from all consenting participants in this phase of the study, including initiation of mental health services 
(either in primary care or specialty care) and extent of participation in EBP. Participation will be measured by 
[CONTACT_6270]-report of EBP engagement, type, and number of sessions.  This will be validated by [CONTACT_170015].   
Random Assignment to Route of VA PTSD EBP  Access : As indicated in their IRB informed consent document  
for study Phase 2, RNG women Veterans who screen positive for PTSD will be randomly assigned by [CONTACT_170016]: 1) a study -specific nurse NCM using  shared decision- making to assist with 
local VA mental health and PTSD evaluation and treatment in the Veteran’s locale, or 2) OEF/OIF/OND 
outreach coordinators in place at every VA.  A toll -free number will be provided to participants assigned to the 
NCM with information that they can initiate contact [CONTACT_170017] [ADDRESS_198937]- intervention survey. Pharos Innovations (web- interface 
developer) will provide immediate notification to the study NCM of participants who are assigned to  each group 
and she will be able to access  web results of  participant study screens.  Upon telephone contact  [CONTACT_151525] , the concierge NCM will engage the patient and by [CONTACT_170018] a [ADDRESS_198938] 
(PCL)  developed by [CONTACT_170019] -IV criteri a for PTSD. She 
will use the PCL -S that allows identification of a specific traumatic event . This w ill assist with PTSD validation 
and allow for individualized referral. The NCM will then  follow shared decision making  protocols  for specific  
domains  (Joosten et al ., 2008) . Domains include (pending focus group augmentation): 1) Actively reporting all 
information and PTSD treatment possibilities to the patient/consumer . The NCM can recommend an option but 
PTSD treatment and therapy are decided jointly ; 2) Enco urages the patient to discuss preferences and form 
their own judgment  regarding the harms and benefits of PTSD treatment /EBP  options; 3)  Makes sure that the 
information exchange is two -way between patient and NCM; 4)  NCM informs partner or key family membe rs 
who the Veteran includes in the telephone interface in the PTSD treatment decision- making process; 5)  
Inform s Veteran about  routes of access to VA or if already enrolled ways to access PTSD EBP and facilitates 
as needed and actively links with care ; and 6) Addresses barriers and facilitators checked by [CONTACT_170020]- based interface and assists the Veteran in addressing these (e.g., education regarding night clinics, 
transportation) . The NCM will review all PTSD treatment options, including pharmacotherapy and site specific 
options, e.g. unique groups.  Subjects will be educated about the efficacy, risks and benefits, duration of each 
treatment option. Participants are welcome to re- contact [CONTACT_170021]. However, the NCM will not 
initiate further follow -up. The study concierge NCM , Linda Niebes, R.N., M.S.  will build on her own skills as a 
career Army nurse and prior OEF/OIF outreach counselor.  She will be trained in the intervention protocol by [CONTACT_976] 
(AGS) and co- I (MV)  who are MH care professionals with unique clinical and research expertise specific to this 
intervention. NCM model fidelity and tools developed (manual, check li sts for PTSD and MH utilization, 
satisfaction) will be guided by [CONTACT_170022] J. Smith, who has expertise specifically useful to this with his work 
with the VA’s Translating Initiatives for Depression into Effective Solutions (TIDES) project in his QUERI 
implementation expert role. It should be noted that the NCM will use VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guidelines for 
The Management of PTSD ( http://www.healthquality.vagov
) for assistance with patient education, 
management, and tracking utilization specific to EBP but also other PTSD treatment interventions documented 
on the treatment checklist tracking utilization in post -intervention follow -up. Use of PBRN and CREATE study 
sites will allow NCM interface with PC, WHC, an d MH teams already sophisticated about and engaged in 
evolving women’s health care and research. This existing infrastructure of relationships and resources will facilitate the successful implementation and evaluation of the NCM linkage intervention.  Tradi tional 
OEF/OIF/OND outreach counselors educate returning Veterans about their VA eligibility, facilitate enrollment and subsequent appointment scheduling.  The NCM will have a complementary role in that her interventions will be specific to PTSD and EBP tr eatment.   
 
Post-Intervention Follow -up: Women who screened positive for PTSD and were randomly assigned to NCM or 
usual OEF/OIF/OND outreach VA PTSD treatment access route will be contact[CONTACT_170023] [ADDRESS_198939] protocol varying times of day and days of week (used successfully by [CONTACT_78168]) and ask willing participants brief questions using computer -assisted telephone interview data collection. 
Satisfaction with access route and consumer feedback regarding these will be assessed. Those who did not 
engage in VA MH or EBP will be queried to  determine if they have sought non- VA care for their PTSD , 
including EBP,  and current fac tors influencing needed PTSD services. Using DMDC data, this group will be 
compared to VA users with regard to access and military characteristics (e.g. rank, number of deployments) in addition to web- based screening data.  Women who did engage in VA MH or EBP will be asked about their 
experiences and satisfaction with EBP and VA care. VA service use will be validated by [CONTACT_170024].  
Participants will be also asked about their current satisfaction with the effectiveness of the web- based interface 
and subsequent utilization of educational links . Non-users will be asked about current barriers to VA and MH 
services and again offered assistance with access to VA care and EBP if desired.   We will use DMDC data to 
provide comparison to women who initially screened positive for PTSD. Women completing the 6 and 12 
month follow -up interviews will be reimbursed $15.00 for each completed interview .  
Sample Size Analysis and Statistical Plan : The pre- and post -satisfaction surveys integrated within the Phase [ADDRESS_198940] -interface knowledge, satisfaction, and participants’ 
intentions to seek services for mental health care needs identified through the web- based screening. 
Descriptive statistics will be used to analyze individual items and mean scores on each of the various screens . 
Estimated power for within group mean differences (i.e., paired t- tests) based on the smaller of the two groups 
(i.e., N=400: 120 PTSD positive/280 PTSD negative) and assuming a conservative variance=2 and a mean 
difference of .5, then power=97%.  A larger sample size n=280), a smaller observed variance, or a larger 
observed mean difference would all provide additional power. The power to detect mean differences between 
groups (120 PTSD positive v. 280 PTSD negative) assuming a conservative variance=2 and a mean difference 
is calculated to be of .5, then power=90%. Power estimates for differences in proportions are expectedly lower but are estimated to be over 90% to detect medium effect sizes (>.4) and 54% to detect small (>.2) effect 
sizes. Using nQuery 4.[ADDRESS_198941] a 25% difference in the proportion of 
women with mental health service use (which can be measured for all participants using VA databases) comparing NCM with existing outreach with 81% power using a simple test of proportions. Using logistic 
regression for the dependent variable of mental health service use and adjusting for covariates such as 
comorbid substance abuse, depression, and other post -deployment problems, we estimate that we can detect 
an odds ratio of 2.3 with 84% power or 2.0 with 76% power for NCM vs existing outreach. Given the appealing 
and personal nature of the concierge NCM, we believe we will find a large OR of these magnitudes.  
 
OMB Considerations : Our QUERI RRP  that serves as the foundation for this CREATE  proposal was exempt 
from OMB review since the survey and collection of information being conducted was in connection with research to prevent a clinical disorder (identified as a basis for exemption under 5 CFR 1320.3). We anticipate that this will be the case with this study as it addresses prevention of chronic PTSD entr enchment and 
associated mental health or social issues (e.g., depression, substance abuse, marital or family maladjustment). We readily obtained OMB exemption for our HSR&D and DoD funded studies with similar domains in 
OEF/OIF /OND  servicewomen.  
 
Study Feasibility : We know that this study is feasible as DMDC has identified that there are currently 3,[ADDRESS_198942] (RNG) servicewomen who have returned in the past two years from deployment 
to Iraq or Afghanistan from the PBRN- and CREATE associ ated study states of [LOCATION_004], Iowa, North Carolina 
and Minnesota. Of these nearly all (99.5%) have a postal address and 93% have an e -mail address.  
 This study is also feasible because of our successful relationship with Pharos Innovations, the corporation that 
assists with the web- based implementation and has a dedicated research server behind the VA Firewall. 
Pharos follows standards for Section [ADDRESS_198943] with a different title during study implementation in order to make it more engaging and easy to remember. Our title “Web and Shared Decision Making for Reserve/National Guard 
Women’s PTSD Care” will be replaced with the following working title:  
Encouraging Vet Engagement: Participation in Treatment with Shared Decision Making  
(EVE- PTSD)  