Page 1 of 25   
 
Protocol Title: Circadian Rhythm as a Novel Therapeutic Target in the Intensive Care Unit  
Brief Title: Feasibility Pi[INVESTIGATOR_567768]: Melissa Knauert, MD, PhD  
  
Version Date : v8 approval date 10.20.22  
Excerpted from full IRB protocol for observational aims and described pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  
 
Unique Protocol ID: [PHONE_11796]  
Clinicaltrials.gov Registration #:   Aim 3 Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
      
   
  
Page 2 of 25  TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
Statement of Purpose: Specific Aims  ............................................................................................................. 3 
Background:  ................................................................................................................................................... 4 
Research Plan:  ................................................................................................................................................ [ADDRESS_745868] for Waiver of HIPPA Authorization for Recruitment/ Screening .................................................. 14 
Process of Consent/Assent  ........................................................................................................................... 14 
Protection of Participant Privacy  ................................................................................................................. 15 
Methods for security of storage and sharing materials  ................................................................................ 15 
Study Risks  .................................................................................................................................................. 16 
Minimizing Risks  ......................................................................................................................................... 16 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan ................................................................................................................. 17 
Potential Benefits  ......................................................................................................................................... 19 
Research Alternatives and Economic Considerations  ................................................................................. 19 
References  .................................................................................................................................................... 21 
 
 
  
Page 3 of 25  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE : SPECIFIC AIMS 
 
The overall objectives of this research project are to prospectively investigate ICU day -night light 
patterns and their association with circadian abnormalities; investigate the association between 
circadian abnormalities and the duration of delirium; and evaluate the feasibility of providing daytime bright light to treat circadian abnormalities among critically ill patients. Our central 
hypothesis is that exposure to abnormally h igh overnight light and abnormally low daytime light 
(non -circadian light patterns) disrupts the circadian master clock and causes circadian abnormalities 
in ICU patients. In turn, circadian abnormalities contribute to sleep disruption and ultimately ICU 
delirium. The rationale for the proposed project is that circadian abnormalities may constitute a 
novel therapeutic target for interventions to prevent or shorten delirium and improve ICU outcomes. This work builds upon our own work and published studies that describe circadian abnormalities in critically ill patients. Prior studies are limited by [CONTACT_567785].
17-23 We will use a melatonin metabolite, 
urinary 6 -sulfatoxymelato nin (aMT6s), to measure circadian abnormalities; this measure has been 
successfully used in critically ill patients.24 We plan to accomplish our overall objectives via the 
following specific aims:  
 
Aim 1: Determine the association between ICU day -night light patterns and circadian abnormalities 
(i.e., circadian misalignment and decreased circadian amplitude).  
 
Hypothesis 1: Non -circadian ICU light patterns (i.e., abnormally low daytime light levels and 
abnormally high overnight light levels) are associated with increased circadian misalignment 
and decreased circadian amplitude as measured by [CONTACT_567786]6s.  
 Aim 2: Determine the association between circadian abnormalities and the duration of delirium.  
 
Hypothesis 2:  Increased circadian misalignment and decreased circadian amplitude are associated 
with more days of delirium.  
 Aim 3: Evaluate the feasibility of providing daytime bright light in the ICU and  examine the effect size 
of daytime bright light on circadian abnormalities in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_2269].  
 
Hypothesis 3.1:  Daytime bright light is acceptable and tolerable to patients and has high fidelity and 
sustainability as an intervention.  
Hypothesis 3.2: Daytime bright light will be associated with decreased circadian misalignment and 
increased circadian amplitude (effect size).  
 
 
 
  
Page 4 of 25  BACKGROUND :  
 
Overall Premise: This research project addresses intensive care unit (ICU) delirium which is a 
significant, modifiable source of ICU morbidity and mortality . Delirium affects 50 -80% of patients 
admitted to the medical ICU (MICU).[ADDRESS_745869] influential external entrainment cue. Under normal entrainment, the circadian system promotes arousal during the day and allows sleep during the night. Sleep quality and length are optimal when they occur during an individual’s “biologic” or “circadian” night. Circadian abnormalities contribute to 
inappropriate sleep timing, impaired sleep quality and decreased sleep quantity. These three elements of sleep disruption have been clearly shown in critically ill 
patients,
15-[ADDRESS_745870] supports this by [CONTACT_567787] -night light patterns on c ircadian abnormalities, examining the association between 
circadian abnormalities and duration of delirium and pi[INVESTIGATOR_28882] a daytime bright light intervention (Figure  
1).  
Premise for Aims 1 and 2: ICU day -night light patterns conflict with circadian entrainment and cause 
circadian abnormalities. External cues for entrainment include light, meal schedule, and physical activity. 
As noted above, light has by [CONTACT_567788] .18 The robustness of 
entrainment and vulnerability to disruption are determined by [CONTACT_469421], intensity (lux), and duration of a light dose.
19 Normal entrainment requires bright light exposure during the day (wake) period and dim 
or no light during the night (sleep) period. Daytime bright light interventions deliver at least 1,000 lux and more typi[INVESTIGATOR_567769] 2,500 to 10,000 lux over 30 minute s to several hours.
20, 21 During the night, short 
bursts of bright light (e.g., 5 minutes) at relatively lower intensities (e.g., 100 or 250 lux) can cause circadian abnormalities.
[ADDRESS_745871] not addressed the significant problem of daytime light being too low for 
entrainment (See preliminary data). It is our premise in Aim 1 that non -circadian day -night light patterns 
in the ICU cause circadian abnormalities. Circadian abnormalities are present in critical illness, associated 
with delirium, and feasible to study. Studies of urinary 6 -sulfatoxymelatonin (aMT6s), continuous heart 
rate, and actigraphic rest -activity have shown associations between critical illness and circadian 
abnormalities.23-28 In these studies, roughly 75% of ICU patients studied have evidence of circadian 
abnormalities. One small study has shown that delirium is associated with circadian misalignment in patients weaning from mechanical ventilation.
29 These studies (Table 1 ) demonstrate the feasibility  of 
studying circadian rhythms in the ICU but have been limited by [CONTACT_567789] (<30 patients), brief periods of observation (24 hours), or periods of observation that start days after ICU admission (>[ADDRESS_745872] admission) . It is our premise in Aim [ADDRESS_745873] between circadian abnormality and delirium.  
 
 
Premise for Aim 3: Daytime b right light therapy in acute medical settings and nursing homes 
improves patient outcomes.  Small studies of post -operative patients exposed to a bright light dose in the 
morning showed 40 to 42% reductions in delirium.33-35 Increased exposure to sunlight in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_567770] (cardiac ICU).[ADDRESS_745874] influential circadian entrainment cue 
(light) and to take the first step towards a multi -modality entrainment intervention, the proposed project 
will investigate the feasibility and effect size (on circadian abnormalities) of a daytime bright light 
intervention. It is our premise in Aim 3 that an intervention that improves circadian function via exposure 
to daytime bright light will improve circadian abnormalities and ultimately delirium.  
Significance of research contribution: We expect that the results of this study will improve 
understanding of circadian abnormalities in the ICU. We expect that pi[INVESTIGATOR_567771] [ADDRESS_745875] will focus on ICU light 
exposure, this line of investigation will also lead to a multi- modality intervention using multiple 
entrainment cues: (1) daytime bright light, (2) intermittent daytime feeding (e.g., meals or bolus enteral 
feeding), and (3 ) promotion of physical activity.  
 Table 1: Circadian Rhythm Measurements and Related ICU Studies  
Variable  Strengths  ICU Studies Using this Variable  
Urinary [ADDRESS_745876]  Septic patients (n=17) v. non -septic ICU (n=7) and healthy controls (n=21); 
enrollment [ADDRESS_745877] ICU admission; abnormal aMT6s patterns in 
septic patients but not controls.27 Additional References: Gehlbach,30 
Frisk24 Verceles28 
Heart rate  Recorded as part of usual 
care; starts at ICU admission  Medical ICU sedated patients (N=11); time post ICU admission not listed; 
heart rate with circadian variability but misaligned.[ADDRESS_745878] for long -term 
monitoring; non -invasive  Neurologic ICU with traumatic brain injury patients (N=16); enrollment [ADDRESS_745879] injury; rest -activity consolidation associated with better 
recovery.32 
Page 6 of 25  RESEARCH PLAN:  
 
Overall Project Rationale  
Optimal sleep promotion and therefore optimal treatment and prevention of delirium requires the 
promotion of normal circadian entrainment. The project supports this by [CONTACT_567790], examining the association between circadian abnormalities 
and delirium, and pi[INVESTIGATOR_28882] a daytime bright ligh t intervention. To study the most relevant patients, our 
inclusion/exclusion criteria will select patients at increased risk for delirium.  
 
Project Overview  
a. Setting:  The study site is the medical intensive care unit (MICU)  at Yale -New Haven Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (YNHH), 
York Street Campus and St. Raphael’s Campus . Median ICU stay is 3 days. Predominant reasons for 
admission are sepsis and acute respi[INVESTIGATOR_1399]. MICU rooms are private. There is currently a unit -
wide sleep promotion protocol which limits care activities from 00:00 to 04:00.  
b. Design: Aim 1 and 2, prospective cohort study; Aim 3 pi[INVESTIGATOR_2269] (RCT). Aim [ADDRESS_745880].  
c. Cohort: We will enroll 100 subjects at risk for ICU delirium. In addition,  we will enroll  16 subjects into 
the pi[INVESTIGATOR_567772].  
d. Inclusion and exclusion criteria: This study will focus on adults at an increased risk for ICU delirium. We have selected age ≥[ADDRESS_745881] patients 
based on admission severity of illness (APACHE II) because we think this is a critically important confounder and would like to study the effect of the full spectrum of severity of illness on our outcome s. We will exclude patients at significant risk for pre -existing circadian abnormalities  (e.g. shift 
work) . We will also exclude patients with co -morbid disease or medication use that makes 
measurement of urinary aMT6s or actigraphy unreliable. Table 2 lists inclusion and exclusion criteria.   
Table 2: Inclusion Criteria  Exclusion Criteria  
1. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_567773] 30 hours as of noon 
on day of enrollment  
2. Expected to say in the MICU ≥24 hours after 
enrollment  
3. Expected to produce ≥250 
mL urine / day 
4. Age ≥50 years  
5. Able to understand 
English.  At significant risk for pre -existing circadian abnormalities:  
− Severe chronic brain injury (Injury greater than 30 days ago resulting in the inability 
to live independently) OR Acute brain injury of any severity (Injury less than 30 
days ago including acute intracranial bleed, traumatic brain injury, central nervous system infection, tumor, hepatic encephalopathy)  
− Documented circadian disorder (<1% population) or blind/disease of the optic 
nerve 
− Current history of substance abuse including alcohol (use in last 30 days)  
− Transferred from an outside hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]  
− Homeless  
 
Unable to participate in study activities:  
− History of bipolar disease (Bright light therapy possibly unsafe in this population).  
− Paralyzed (due to injury, disease or medications)  
 
e. Recruitment: Patient recruitment will follow Yale University consent procedures, and we will obtain 
HIC approval before starting study activities. MICU admissions will be screened daily via the EMR. 
Eligible patients will be approached within 30 hours of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_191433]. Before consent, the patient 
will be assessed for delirium via the Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU (CAM- ICU). If not 
delirious and able to communicate, the patient can provide consent; otherwise, a legally authorized 
Page 7 of 25  representative (LAR) as delineated by [CONTACT_567791].  
a. In cases which the LAR provides consent, assent from the patient will be attempted daily and 
obtained whenever possible via simple verbal explanation of the purpose, activities, risks and benefits of the study.  
b. In the event a patient originally enrolled via LAR were to regain their capacity to consent themselves, trained study staff will follow the below protocol for re -consent.  
i. Study staff will introduce identify themselves as a member of the research team and clarify that they are not part of the primary ICU team.  
ii. The protocol will be described to the patient; this description will include an overview of student events they already completed, cover in detail the study intervention and any remaining/future study procedures/events, and cover the risks associated with participation.  
iii. We will assure study subjects that participation is voluntary and that the decision to continue their participation will have no impact on their current or future care.  
iv. A copy of the consent document will be provided to the patient.  
 
f. Timeline of Study Activities (Fig 2 ): Patients will be enrolled within 30 hours of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_567774] 12:00 on the day of enrollment which is designated “Study Day 1 (D1).” Actigraphy, delirium monitoring, and light measurement (part of feasibility) will start no later than 12:00 on  D1. Actigraphy  
and light measurement  will continue until D5 or MICU discharge whichever is longer. If the patient is 
discharged from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_97011] 5, all study activities stop upon hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2345]. Stud y 
activities will continue if/when the patient is transferred to the general medical floor if the patient 
completes at least D2 (13:00) in the MICU. Delirium monitoring will occur until D 30 or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_7954].   
 
Figure 2: Study activities timeline.  
 

Page 8 of 25   
APPROACH TO AIMS 
 
Aim 1: Determine the association between ICU day -night light patterns and circadian abnormalities (i.e., 
circadian misalignment and decreased circadian amplitude).  
 
Rationale: Aim [ADDRESS_745882] our hypothesis  that non -circadian ICU light patterns are associated with 
increased circadian abnormalities as measured by [CONTACT_567786]6s. Our approach  is to measure light levels 
(10-second intervals) and aMT6s ( 1-hour intervals, gold standard) for 72 hours following study enrollment; 
we will also collect exploratory measures of circadian rhythm, namely, actigraphy and heart rate. We will 
collect descriptive patient data to allow model adjustment during analysis. W e define non- circadian ICU 
light patterns as abnormally low daytime light levels and abnormally high overnight light levels. We define circadian abnormalities as circadian misalignment and decreased circadian amplitude. The absence of circadian rhythm is an extreme decrease in amplitude (i.e., 100%). This work will establish if non -circadian 
ICU light patterns are associated with the development of circadian abnormalities.   
 
Research Design: We will enroll 100 subjects  at increased risk for ICU delirium; subjects will be screened 
and consented as above. We will collect the following measures:  
a. Room light levels  will be monitored from enrollment until Study D5  or until MICU discharge . We will 
set the light meter (HD450, Extech Instruments, New Hampshire) to read levels in lux at [ADDRESS_745883] location on the wall above the head of the bed as close as possible to eye level.  Additional light measures will be taken adjacent to the patient’s face (by 
[CONTACT_567792]); these measures will be taken several times pe r day to assess light levels at or close to the eye.  
b. Urinary aMT6s ( 1-hour intervals)  is the primary circadian measure for this aim. Melatonin is normally 
released just before habitual sleep time, and peak levels occur during sleep midpoint; urinary aMT6s 
peaks [ADDRESS_745884].  Urinary 
aMT6s will not be collected after MICU discharge. A 10mL aliquot of pooled urine 
sample collected every 1 hour  will be used for analysis; total volume of urine will 
be recorded to allow for calculation of total aMT6s excreted.  Total aMT6s 
excreted can be measured and is valid in patients with acute kidney injury, patients receiving diuretics,
[ADDRESS_745885] these samples. Samples are stable at 
room temperature for 24 hours, will be transported to the lab daily, and stored 
at -80°C in the Trans lational Research Core. Samples will be batched and 
subsequently analyzed using a highly sensitive, competitive ELISA kit (IBL Laboratories, [LOCATION_013]).  
c. Secondary measures  of actigraphy , surface body temperature, and continuous heart rate monitoring 
will be used in an exploratory manner. We plan to examine correlation with urinary aMT6s for use in 
future studies.  
i. Actigraphy  (Fig 3)  via the Actiwatch Spectrum (Philips Healthcare, Netherlands) set at 15 -second 
epochs and placed on the patient’s wrist will be used to measure rest -activity from enrollment until 
Study Day [ADDRESS_745886] versus activity of the wearer. This data device allows 
time series monitoring with a high sampling frequency and has been successfully used in the ICU 
Figure 1: Actiwatch  
Page 9 of 25  setting.41, 42  
ii. Heart rate  varies around the clock with peaks in the late morning and early evening and a nadir 
during the sleep midpoint in normal patients.43 Heart rate (5 -second intervals) will be recorded per 
MICU standard of care from MICU admission until MICU discharge; this extended period of 
monitoring will provide insight into circadian abnormalities before study enrollment and after melatonin monitorin g has been completed.  
 
d. Patient characteristics  for calculation of sleep midpoint, confounders, and effect modifiers will  include 
collection of age, gender, sleep habits and timing, medical history (including hypertension and risk of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) based on STOP -Bang Score
46), home medications, MICU admission 
diagnosis, sepsis presence and severity ( as defined by [CONTACT_567793] -3 criteria47), illness severity (APACHE 
II score elements), ventilator support, and MICU medication use (including sedative -hypnotic 
medications) . This data will be obtained via the EMR and via patient/surrogate interviews. Though the 
study is observational, melatonin, melatonin agonists, and non -benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_34900] (zolpi[INVESTIGATOR_6730], 
zopi[INVESTIGATOR_11123], zaleplon) will not be given to study subjects while in the MICU . These agents are not part 
of usual care, and MICU leadership is agreeable to this restriction.  ICU care event s including 
phlebotomy, medication administration, transfusion, radiology studies, and procedures (e.g., line 
placement, intubation, endoscopy, catheterization, etc.) will be tracked by [CONTACT_567794]. This process of obtainin g timestamped care events has been automated via a 
collaboration with Yale ITS and requires minimal person -time.  
 
Expected Outcomes: We expect that a low day/night dose ratio will be associated with increased 
misalignment and decreased amplitude of urinary aMT6s. We expect that this relationship will remain after controlling for listed confounders. We anticipate that we will see effect modification by [CONTACT_567795].  
  
Aim 2: Determine the association between circadian abnormalities and the duration of delirium.   
 
Rationale: Aim [ADDRESS_745887] s hown that 
additional days of delirium convey additional risk for mortality and cognitive impairment.
4, 5 We will 
measure (and control for) total amount of sleep (sleep quantity) and overnight sleep efficiency (sleep 
quality) via actigraphy. We propose that these metrics of sleep disruption act as potential confounders 
and/or effect modifiers of the associati on between circadian abnormalities and delirium. For this project 
focused upon circadian patterns and sleep disruption rather than detailed sleep architecture (e.g., sleep stages), actigraphy, rather than polysomnography, is the sleep measure of choice. It  is our expectation  
that circadian abnormalities will be associated with increased days of delirium. This aim will be the basis for investigation of circadian entrainment as a means of treating ICU delirium.   
 Research Design: The [ADDRESS_745888] the following measures: Circadian measures, actigraphy, and patient characteristics will be collected as described in Aim 1. Delirium: Research staff blinded to patient circadian 
Page 10 of 25  status and trained in the CAM -ICU will assess patients for delirium once daily from the time of MICU 
admission until hospi[INVESTIGATOR_287960] 30.48 The CAM -ICU is a guideline recommended, 
validated delirium detection tool with a sensitivity >93% and a specificity >98%.2, 48, 49 We are increasing 
sensitivity in our study by [CONTACT_567796].50 
 
Expected Outcomes:  For patients with circadian abnormalities, we predict more days of delirium. We 
expect this relationship will remain after controlling for age, gender, severity of illness and ventilator- free 
days. We expect that age, sedative -hypnotic medication dose and measures of sleep disruption will act as 
effect modifiers .  
 
Aim 3: Evaluate the feasibility of providing daytime bright light in the ICU and examine the effect size 
of daytime bright light on circadian abnormalities in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_2269].  
 
Rationale: Aim [ADDRESS_745889] our hypothesis  that daytime bright light (hereafter bright light) is acceptable and 
tolerable to patients and has high fidelity and sustainability. Our approach  to testing this hypothesis is a 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_4265]. We will randomize patients to usual care or to bright light daily while in the MICU. We will collect metrics of acceptability, tolerability, fidelity, and sustainability. The rationale  for selecting bright light for 
this pi[INVESTIGATOR_567775].[ADDRESS_745890] their eyes open or look directly into the light.
52 In addition, brief light delivery early in the morning (e.g., 30 minutes of 10,000 lux 
directed at the patient), could cause undesirable circadian phase shifts in patient population who have circadian misalignment of the delayed type
[ADDRESS_745891].  
 Research Design: For Aim 3, we will screen and enroll 16  patients using the same inclusion/exclusion 
criteria as Aims [ADDRESS_745892] room light levels, circadian measurements, patient characteristics, and ICU care events as before. Patients will be randomized via simple randomization  with assignment via 
random number generator to either usual care (n= 5 patients) or to bright light  for 4 hours daily (n=5 
patients) or to bright light for 8 hours daily (n=5 patients).  The bright light intervention wi ll be delivered 
from 0 9:00 to 13:00 daily  (4 hour group) or 0 9:00 to 1 7:00 daily (8 hour group).  The bright light will be 
delivered from study day 2 until study day 5. The bright light will continue if the patient is transferred to the floor. Bright light will be delivered by a free -standing apparatus  that delivers 10,000 lux at a 
temperature 5000K. The device will be placed at the bedside within 36 inches of the patient’s head and is 
expected to provide at least 1,[ADDRESS_745893] be in the ICU through D2 (e.g., the first day of potential 
intervention and the night following). After D2, bright light and other study activities will continue if the patient is transferred out of the ICU to the g eneral medical floor. To maintain as much control of the 
environment as possible, study patients will be booked only to private rooms on the general medical floor.  
If symptoms of eye strain, visual disturbance or headache occur, patients will not continue bright 
light exposure. These reversible symptoms of direct bright light therapy are unlikely, but they will be tracked as a metric of feasibility under the category of patient tolerance. Feasibility Metrics will include 
patient acceptance (percent of patients/surrogates who agree to bright light when described to them); patient tolerance (percent of days that patients continue with additional treatments once exposed to bright light); intervention fidelity (percent of time per day that device delivers the planned dose of light); and intervention sustainability (percent of intended intervention days that device is used).  
Page 11 of 25   
Expected Outcomes:  We expect that bright light exposure is feasible, will decrease circadian 
misalignment, and will increase circadian amplitude.  
  
STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
Aim 1 Analytical Approach: Individual sleep midpoint will be calculated as halfway between habitual 
bedtime and habitual waketime as indicated during patient/surrogate interview questionnaires. Light 
dose  will be calculated as the sum of mean lux per hour for each hour between 08:00 and 17:00 (day dose) 
and 22:00 and 06:00 (overnight dose). A day/night dose ratio will then be calculated by [CONTACT_567797]. Light dose ratio will be treated as continuous exposure 
variables, with higher numbers indicating a more favorable (circadian) exposure and lower numbers 
indicating a less favorable (non -circadian) exposure. Circadian alignment and amplitude  will be calculated 
using time series analysis of urinary aMT6s using smoothing techniques to examine characteristics of circadian rhythm: acrophase (maxima) and nadir (minima). Statistical measures will evaluate for serial correlation, seasonality (period icity), and trend. Longitudinal cosinor techniques will be used to test f or 
alignment of nadir and acrophase with normal circadian phase and amplitude (e.g., individual sleep midpoint and estimated normal peak aMT6s).
55 The degree of misalignment versus normal will be 
recorded in minutes. The amplitude of the cycle will be defined as one -half of the difference between the 
acrophase and nadir and will be recorded in nanograms (ng) per hour.[ADDRESS_745894] been 
identified for aMT6s.30, 56 The assessment of circadian abnormalities for association with light patterns will 
be solely based on aMT6s analysis . Heart rate, iButton gradient readings, and actigraphy activity counts 
will be evaluated via cosinor techniques analogous to the aMT6s analysis described above. Actigraphy activity counts will also be evaluated by [CONTACT_567798] (Fig 3) and as described by [CONTACT_567799].
[ADDRESS_745895] modifier variables:  Severity of illness will be 
calculated according to the APACHE II algorithm57 and expressed as a continuous variable. Sepsis will be 
expressed as a categorical variable (absent, septic, septic shock) based on the sepsis -3 criteria.47 The risk 
of OSA will be expressed as a categorical variable (low risk, high risk) based on the STOP -BANG 
algorithm.46, 58 Overnight ICU care events per the timestamp data described above will be calculated as 
the number of ICU care events per hour between 22:00 and 06:00. Average daytime and overnight room 
temperature will be calculated as a continuous variable.  
Testing for Associations:  Because both measures of circadian abnormality (misalignment and decreased 
amplitude) are continuous and normally distributed, multivariable linear regression models  will test for 
associations, with light dose ratio serving as the exposure. Linearity of the associations will be examined 
graphically, and higher order terms will be considered as necessary. Models will be adjusted for age, gender, severity of illness, se psis, risk of OSA, ICU care events per hour, and room temperature variables. 
We will test for modification of the association between light dose ratio and the outcomes by [CONTACT_567800]. Because of the non -trivial intra- correlation coefficient expected from the serial correlation of 
the repeated outcome measures over time, models will e mploy generalized estimating equations with an 
auto -regressive correlation structure. Model fit will be evaluated with residual analysis, and significance 
will be defined as a two -sided p -value ≤ 0.05. Power Calculations.  For both continuous, normally 
distributed outcomes, power calculations assume a two -sided alpha of 0.05, power of 90%, a sample size 
of 100, and prevalence of covariates ranging from 20% to 50%. For minutes of misalignment, we further assume a mean of [ADDRESS_745896] a range of 
minimal average shifts between 52 -65 minutes of misalignment, and 98 -123 ng of urinary aMT6 per 
Page 12 of 25  incremental change in the explanatory variables.  
 
Aim 2 Analytic Approach: Circadian measures  will be analyzed as in Aim 1. Sleep disruption  will include 
two measures: (1) total amount of sleep, a continuous variable calculated as the number of sleep epochs 
in a 24 hour period and (2) overnight sleep efficiency, a continuous variable calculated as the percent of epochs scored as sleep between 22:00 and 06:00. Sleep will be based on standard Philips Actiwatch 
Software algorithms. Days of Delirium  will be calculated as the sum of days on which the patient is 
delirious. Delirium will be considered present if either the CAM -ICU or the chart abstrac tion is positive for 
a given calendar day. Patients will be censored at day [ADDRESS_745897] mediator variables:  Severity of illness, age, and gender will be treated as in Aim 1. Ventilator use 
will include invasive and noninvasive positive pressure ventilation and will be quantified as ventilator- free 
days based on published algorithms.61 For sedative -hypnotic medications, equivalent daily doses of 
benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_567776].62, 63 Propofol and 
dexmedetomidine total daily dose will be recorded and included in the models.  
Testing for Associations: Multivariable Poisson models  will assess the associations between circadian 
misalignment and amplitude and days of delirium. Models will be adjusted for age, severity of illness, ventilator -free days, dose of sedative medication, and measures of sleep disruption. We will test for 
mod ification of the associations between misalignment and amplitude and days of delirium by [CONTACT_654], 
sedative -hypnotic medication dose and measures of sleep disruption. Linearity, serial correlation, and 
model  fit will be addressed as in Aim 1. Power Calculation:  Patients with delirium on the day of enrollment 
will be excluded, our effective sample size will be reduced by 20% to 80 participants.  Assuming two -sided 
alpha of 0.05, 90% power, overdispersion of 20%, and a mean of [ADDRESS_745898] a minimal risk ratio of 1.08 for each change of 100ng of aMT6s.
64 
 
Aim 3 Analytical Approach: Feasibility:  Based on qualitative analysis, we will judge the intervention as 
feasible if it achieves at least 70% in each of the feasibility metrics: acceptance, tolerance, fidelity, and sustainability. Effect Size: Circadian abnormalities will be assessed as described under Aim 1. Using 
multivariable logistic regression , we will test for associations between bright light exposure and decreases 
in circadian misalignment and increases in circadian amplitude. The estimated associat ion will inform the 
effect size in the design of future interventional studies.  
  
 
 
Page [ADDRESS_745899] POPULATION  
Patients admitted to the Medical ICU and who meet inclusion / exclusion criteria will be recruited into 
this study. Decisionally impaired persons, females of childbearing potential and pregnant women who are 
admitted to the MICU and who meet inclusion / exclusion criteria might be recruited into this study; however, they will not be specifically recruited and subjects will be ≥ 50 years old and severe chronic brain injury is an exclusion criteria.  
 
Table 2 (repeated)  
Inclusion Criteria  Exclusion Criteria  
- Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_567773] 30 hours as of noon 
on day of enrollment  
- Expected to say in the 
MICU ≥24 hours after 
enrollment  
- Expected to produce ≥250 mL urine / day 
- Age ≥50 years  
- Able to understand English.  At significant risk for pre -existing circadian abnormalities:  
− Severe chronic brain injury (Injury greater than 30 days ago resulting in the inability 
to live independently) OR Acute brain injury of any severity (Injury less than 30 
days ago including acute intracranial bleed, traumatic brain injury, central nervous 
system infection, tumor, hepatic encephalopathy)  
− Documented circadian disorder (<1% population) or blind/disease of the optic 
nerve 
− Current history of substance abuse including alcohol (use in last 30 days)  
− Transferred from an outside hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]  
− Homeless  
 
Unable to participate in study activities:  
− History of bipolar disease (Bright light therapy possibly unsafe in this population).  
− Paralyzed (due to injury, disease or medications)  
 
 
RECRUITMENT PROCEDURES  
Patients will be screened daily from an automated list generated from the YNHH EMR. Patients who opt out of research participation via MyChart (patient information portal) will be excluded from this list.  
Potential patients and/or their legally authorized representatives will be contact[CONTACT_567801] . Such contact [CONTACT_567802]. Knauert or her trained research staff.  
 
Prior to approaching patients for study recruitment, we will obtain permission from their attending 
physician. Physicians in the Medical ICU will either sign a MD permission form which will provide permission to approach any of their patients or, if the physician prefers, we will request permission on a case -by-case basis.   
 
DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY  
Eligibility will be determined by [CONTACT_567803]; staff will be appropriately trained in HIPAA, screening and consent and enrollment procedures. Currently this will be PI [INVESTIGATOR_567777] d to the protocol when identified and trained.  
  
ASSESSMENT OF CURRENT HEALTH PROVIDER RELATIONSHIP FOR HIPAA  CONSIDERATION  
It is possible that some of the research subjects may be on the MICU service for which [CONTACT_567817], [CONTACT_9688][INVESTIGATOR_567778]. Yaggi are the attending. This will be a relatively rare event. Participation in the study will not alter usual MICU care (other than possible Daytime Bright Light for Aim 3 subjects randomized to this intervention).  
 
Page [ADDRESS_745900] FOR WAIVER OF HIPPA  AUTHORIZATION FOR RECRUITMENT / SCREENING  
This study was granted a waiver of HIPPA Authorization for recruitment and screening procedures.  
 
 
PROCESS OF CONSENT /ASSENT  
Patient and patient surrogates will be approached about enrolling their family member into this study.  When appropriate, both the surrogate and patient will be approached together to explain the study and obtain consent.  Patient’s ability to make an info rmed decision will be assessed by [CONTACT_567804]’s family (legally authorized representative).  An assessment for delirium will be performed to determine if the  
patient is delirious (CAM -ICU).  Informed consent will be obtained from the surrogate when the patient 
is unable to provide consent and from the patient when they are deemed able to provide consent. If the patient is conscious and communicating with study  staff, but unable to provide formal consent, we will 
ask them for assent regarding study activities. Specifically, if the patient refuses study related blood draws including before and during phlebotomy attempts, we will not continue. Blood draw attempts will 
be limited to two (2). Furthermore, if during the course of the study, the subject should become sufficiently cognitively capable of understanding the nature of his/her participation in the research study and is capable of communicating, consent will be obtained from the subject. If the subject does not give consent to continue study activities, study participation will stop.  When the surrogate is not physically present at the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (i.e., COVID -19 visitor restrictions or other reasons). They will be contact[CONTACT_14901]. We will request permission to discuss the study and, if permitted, provide a summary of study activities. If the surrogate is interested, we will email consent paperwork and the study information sheet to the surrogate. We will then  review the consent paperwork and answer any questions. If the 
surrogate gives consent, we will have them sign the consent paperwork and return it to us via our lab email ( [EMAIL_10836]
). Study activities will start only after signed consent is obtained. Alternatively, 
we may use the EPIC -based consent system to transmit and receive the signed consent. Use of the EPIC -
based consent system will not alter communication over the phone with the surrogate.  
 
Evaluation of Subject(s) Capacity to Provide Informed Consent/Assent:  Subject ability to consent will 
be assessed via standard delirium assessment (CAM -ICU) and agitation assessment (RASS).  Barriers to 
communication between the patient and study staff (visual, hearing impairment) will also be assessed.  In the case of delir ium, agitation, or communication difficulty, formal surrogate consent will be obtained 
along with informal agreement from the patient (assent) when possible.  
 
  
Page [ADDRESS_745901] data will be collected and maintained electronically. Data management procedures will 
ensure accurate and efficient data collection and analysis; confidentiality and real -time, on -demand study 
monitoring reports. All data will be maintained in accordance with HIPAA guidelines for participant 
confidentiality and privacy. All data will reside on secure, HIPAA- compliant database and file -sharing 
resources managed by [CONTACT_567805] (DMIC) of the POA and by [CONTACT_34756].  
Access to data resources will be strictly limited to research staff and investigators, and all such resources 
will reside on a local network not accessible outside the secure Yale environment. All study data will be 
managed using REDCap, a secure, web -based data collection and workflow management system 
developed at Vanderbilt University and supported by [CONTACT_567806] (CTSA) program. REDCap's authentication, security and auditing features comply with the FDA Title 21  CFR 
Part 11 guidelines for Electronic Records and Electronic Signatures. Yale's implementation of REDCap is managed jointly by [CONTACT_567807]/DMIC and by [CONTACT_34756], and has been certified by [CONTACT_74674]'s Information Compliance Office as meeting HIPAA privacy and security g uidelines.  
 
 
METHODS FOR SECURITY OF STORAGE AND SHARING MATERIALS  
 
Outcome data will be shared, along with associated demographic and clinical data including age, gender, race/ethnicity, evaluation of functional status, and medical conditions. To enable the widest dissemination of data, while also protecting the privacy of study parti cipants and the utility of the data, 
we will de -identify and mask potentially sensitive data elements, consistent with HIPAA considerations 
and in full compliance with the NIH public data sharing policy (for further details, see http://grants.nih.gov/grants/policy/data_sharing
).  Data sets will be subjected to cleaning and quality 
control measures. Following these procedures, for experiment types such as RNAseq and metabolomics, 
the data will be deposited in relevant public databases (e.g., the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), the 
Sequence Read Archive (SRA), the database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP) and the Metabolomics Workbench) as required by [CONTACT_567808].  We will comply with NIH expectations for data release specified in the Supplemental Information to the GDS Policy (as outlined at 
http://gds.nih.gov/pdf/supplemental_info_GDS_Policy.pdf ). Data will be shared once the data have been cleaned and quality control procedures are completed. Generally speaking, these procedures should be completed by 3 -6 months a fter data generation. As per the GDS policy, after submission begins, data will 
be held in an exchange area accessible only to the submitting investigators and collaborators for a six - 
month period, after which the data will be available for research acces s without restrictions on 
publication. Final analyses relating these data to specific biologic outcomes will be released with publication. The consent form provides consent for the data to be used for future research purposes and to be shared broadly throu gh unrestricted- access databases.  
 
  
Page 16 of 25  STUDY RISKS 
 
There is minimal risk to  subjects . There are no changes to usual MICU care during the observational 
portion of this study (Aim 1 and 2). For all enrolled patients, there is minimal risk of breach of 
confidentiality. There is a risk of minor skin irritation caused by [CONTACT_567809] e application. 
Urine collection will be from catheterized urine that would otherwise be discarded; patients will not be 
catheterized to collect urine for the study. Patients  who are enrolled in Aim [ADDRESS_745902] size of daytime bri ght light will also be exposed to a bright light device set to deliver 10,000 
lux at the surface of the lamp; at the planned distance of 36 inches this will degrade to <[ADDRESS_745903] bright light exposure (i.e. during treatment for outpatient circadian disorders)  has minor and reversible 
side effects of eye strain, visual disturbance, and headache. If symptoms develop, light therapy will be discontinued, and the side effect will be tracked as a metric of feasibility. Also, hypomania and mania in patients  with a history of bipolar disease have also been reported as uncommon but serious side effects 
of overexposure to light therapy. Patients with a history of bipolar disease will be excluded from the study.  
  
MINIMIZING RISKS 
 
The above -mentioned risks will be minimized  in the following manner: Risks regarding patient 
confidentiality are minimized via data management strategies which isolate all personal identifying data 
elements. Only users having project -specific access rights can view or modify personal identifying 
information or print reports  that include patient names or other identifying information. This study will 
have no paper records other than the consent forms which are stored within a locked file cabinet in the PI’s offi ce. The office is locked when not occupi[INVESTIGATOR_530]. All electronic data will be maintained on a secure, 
firewalled server.  
 
Skin irritation from the Actiwatch Spectrum or iButton device can be mitigated by [CONTACT_567810] a contralateral site. If skin irritation is severe, the Actiwatch Spectrum or iButton will be removed, and 
study participation will be discontinued. If symptoms (eye strain, visual disturbance or headache) 
develop, light therapy will be discontinued, and the side effect will be tracked as a metric of feasibility. In addition, hypomania and mania in patients with a history of bipolar disease have also been  reported as 
uncommon but serious side effects of overexposure to light therapy. Patients with a history of bipolar disease will be excluded from the study.  
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 25  DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring for Clinical Trials : This protocol presents minimal risks to the subjects and 
Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects or Others (UPI[INVESTIGATOR_20865]), including adverse events, are 
not anticipated. In the unlikely event that such events occur, the following Data and Safety Monitoring 
for Clinical Trials Plan will be followed.  
 
Main Study DSMP  
 
A medical monitor  will oversee the proposed research project. [CONTACT_567818] , Yale -New Haven 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_567779], has agreed to serve as project medical monitor. She has no conflicts of interest with this role. [CONTACT_567819] will conduct interim monitoring of accumulated data from re search activities to assure the continuing safety of participants 
and integrity of the accumulating data. The medical monitor is independent of the study investigative team and will report prog ress including safety concerns to the project principal investigator. Safety 
concerns will be also be reported to the IRB . 
 
1. Safety: Safety will be monitored at intervals related to patient enrollment. Safety and device protocols 
will be reviewed by [CONTACT_567811]. Research staff will report skin irrita tion or bright light related symptoms as they 
occur via event evaluation forms. In addition, research staff will identify and immediately report unanticipated problems, unexpected adverse events and serious adverse events (defined below). Safety  concerns will be also be reported to the IRB.  
2. Protocol Compliance:  The project medical monitor will check enrolled patients for compliance with IRB 
requirements, conformance with informed consent procedures, verification of source documents and investigator compliance. One in ten patients will be randomly selected for co nformance.  
3. Event Evaluation:  Adverse event or unanticipated problem occurrence will prompt an event evaluation 
and a report to the project medical monitor. The adverse event report will NOT include identifying patient information but will otherwise provide a clinical summary of the s tudy patient and the 
circumstances immediately associated with the adverse event / unanticipated problem including date 
of the event, type of event and a narrative event description.  
 
Flow Diagram for Adverse Event / Unanticipated Problem Detection, Review and Reporting:  
 
 
Unanticipated Problems  are defined as any incident, experience, or outcome that meets all of the 
following criteria: 1) unexpected, 2) related or possibly related to participation in the research, and 3) 
suggests that the research places subjects or others at a greater risk of harm than was previously known 
or recognized.  Unanticipated 
Problem or
Adverse Event
•Detected by 
[CONTACT_567812]
•Reported by [CONTACT_3647] 
(within 24 hours)Project Medical 
Monitor
•Reviews problem or 
event and reports to 
PI (within 3 days).Project 
Principal 
Investigator
•Acts on 
recommendation of 
project medical 
monitor (within 3 
days).Reporting to 
IRB and NHLBI
•Designated 
problems or events 
reported to IRB and 
NHLBI within 5 days 
of occurrence.
Page 18 of 25   
Adverse Events : An adverse event  will be defined as any untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence in 
a human subject, including any abnormal sign, symptom, or disease, temporally associated with the 
subject’s participation in the research, whether or not considered related to the subjec t’s participation 
in the research (modified from the definition of adverse events in the 1996 International Conference on Harmonization E -6 Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice). Adverse events that occur during study 
enrollment will be reported by [CONTACT_567813].  
 
A serious adverse event is any  adverse event temporally  associated with the subject’s participation in 
research that meets any of the following criteria (modified from the definition of serious adverse drug experience in FDA regulations at 21 CFR 312.32(a)):  
1. results in death or is life -threatening  
2. requires prolongation of existing hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]  
3. results in a persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
4. results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect  
5. any other adverse event that, based upon appropriate medical judgment, may jeopardize the subject’s health and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes listed in this definition  
 
Response to Adverse Event : All study patients are (by [CONTACT_108]) concurrently admitted to the MICU. The 
response to any adverse event will be appropriate medical care. Adverse event occurrence will prompt an event evaluation and report to the project medical monitor by [CONTACT_567814].  
 
The project medical monitor will evaluate adverse events along the parameters of relationship, severity, and expectedness:  
Relatedness :  
1. Unrelated: Adverse event(s) clearly not related to the project  
2. Unlikely: Adverse event(s) doubtfully related to the project  
3. Possibly: Adverse events(s) may be related to the project; known to occur, but the temporal relationship is unclear; other causes are possible or biologically very plausible  
4. Probably: Adverse event(s) likely associated with the project; known to occur and temporal relationship is appropriate; other causes are unlikely  
5. Definitely: Adverse event(s) clearly associated with the project  
 
Severity : The following scale will be used to grade the severity of adverse events noted during the 
study:  
1. Mild adverse event: Did not interfere with normal activity, minimal symptoms, no intervention required  
2. Moderate adverse event: Interfered with normal activity to some extent, moderate symptoms, minimal or local intervention required  
3. Severe adverse event: Prolonged hospi[INVESTIGATOR_567780]  
4. Life-threatening / disabling adverse event: Event that puts the patient at risk of death at the 
time of the event if immediate intervention is not undertaken  
5. Fatal adverse event  
 
Page 19 of 25  Expectedness : An unexpected adverse event is any adverse event occurring in one or more 
subjects in a research protocol, the nature, severity, or frequency of which is not consistent with 
either (1) the known or foreseeable risk of adverse events associated with the procedures involved in the research that are described in (a) the protocol- related documents such as the IRB -approved 
research protocol and the current IRB -approved informed consent document, and (b) other 
relevant sources of information, such as product labeling and package inserts; or (2) the expected natural progression of any underlying disease, disorder, or condition of the subject(s) experiencing the adverse event and the subject’s predisposing risk factor profile for the adverse event.  
 
The principal investigator (Knauert) will have overall responsibility for adverse event reporting to Yale 
University's IRB and NHLBI. Unanticipated problems, unexpected adverse events or serious adverse events will be reviewed by [CONTACT_7195]. The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_567781] 5 days of occurrence:  
1. Unanticipated problems, unexpected adverse events or serious adverse events that are possibly, probably or definitely related to study protocols.  
2. IRB approved revisions to the project which change participant risk.  
3. Notice of any actions taken by [CONTACT_567815].  
   
POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
 
This research has the potential to benefit future patients admitted to the MICU via improved circadian entrainment. There is minimal risk involved in this study, and appropriate precautions to guard against risk have been taken. This protocol is intended for broad distribution following the research study. The findings of this research will be generalizable to a significant portion of MICU patients and thus provide potential future benefit to many critically ill patients, especially those at greatest risk for delirium (older age, history of hypertension).  
  
RESEARCH ALTERNATIVES AND ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS  
 
1. Alternatives:  What other alternatives are available to the study subjects outside of the research?   
The alternative is to not participate and to receive usual care in the Medical ICU.  
 
2. Payments for Participation (Economic Considerations):  
Study subjects will receive a $[ADDRESS_745904]. Gift cards will be provided to the patient in a marked envelope. In the event a patient lacks the capacity to accept study payment at the tim e of study day 5, payment for participation will be 
included in the patient’s secured personal belongings or provided to the patient’s surrogate contact [CONTACT_567816].  
 
3. Costs for Participation (Economic Considerations):  No cost   
Page 21 of 25  REFERENCES  
 
1. Jones SF, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_99657]. ICU delirium: an update. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2012;18(2):146 -151. Epub 
2012/02/11. doi: 10.1097/MCC.0b013e32835132b9. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
2. Barr J, Fraser GL, Puntillo K, Ely EW, Gelinas C, Dasta JF, Davidson JE, Devlin JW, Kress JP, Joffe 
AM, Coursin DB, Herr DL, Tung A, Robinson BR, Fontaine DK, Ramsay MA, Riker RR, Sessler CN, Pun B, 
Skrobik Y, Jaeschke R, American College of Critical Care M. Clinical practice guidelines for the 
management of pain, agitation, and delirium in adult patients in the intensive care unit. Crit Care Med. 
2013;41(1):263- 306. Epub 2012/12/28. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e3182783b72. MID: Accession 
Number|; PMCID|.  
3. Pandharipande PP, Girard TD, Jackson JC, Morandi A, Thompson JL, Pun BT, Brummel NE, Hughes 
CG, Vasilevskis EE, Shintani AK, Moons KG, Geevarghese SK, Canonico A, Hopkins RO, Bernard GR, Dittus RS, Ely EW, Investigators B -IS. Long -term cognitive impairm ent after critical illness. N Engl J Med. 
2013;369(14):1306- 1316. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1301372. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
4. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_99657], Kong SY, Kasl SV, Murphy TE, Araujo KL, Van Ness PH. Days of delirium are associated 
with 1 -year mortality in an older intensive care unit population. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2009;180(11):1092- 1097. doi: 10.1164/rccm.200904- 0537OC. MID: Ac cession Number|; PMCID|.  
5. Girard TD, Jackson JC, Pandharipande PP, Pun BT, Thompson JL, Shintani AK, Gordon SM, 
Canonico AE, Dittus RS, Bernard GR, Ely EW. Delirium as a predictor of long -term cognitive impairment in 
survivors of critical illness. Crit Care Med. 2010;38(7):1513 -1520. Epub 2010/05/18. doi: 
10.1097/CCM.0b013e3181e47be1. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
6. Kiely DK, Bergmann MA, Jones RN, Murphy KM, Orav EJ, Marcantonio ER. Characteristics 
associated with delirium persistence among newly admitted post- acute facility patients. J Gerontol A 
Biol Sci Med Sci. 2004;59(4):344- 349. Epub 2004/04/09. MID: Accessi on Number|; PMCID|.  
7. Thomason JW, Shintani A, Peterson JF, Pun BT, Jackson JC, Ely EW. Intensive care unit delirium is 
an independent predictor of longer hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408]: a prospective analysis of 261 non- ventilated patients. 
Crit Care. 2005;9(4):R375 -381. Epub 2005/09/03. doi: 10.1186/cc3729. MID: Accession Number|; 
PMCID|.  
8. Thomason JW, Ely EW. Delirium in the intensive care unit is bad: what is the confusion? Crit Care 
Med. 2004;32(11):2352- 2354. Epub 2005/01/11. doi: 00003246- 200411000- [ZIP_CODE] [pii]. MID: Accession 
Number|; PMCID|.  
9. Ely EW, Gautam S, Margolin R, Francis J, May L, Speroff T, Truman B, Dittus R, Bernard R, Inouye 
SK. The impact of delirium in the intensive care unit on hospi[INVESTIGATOR_7577]. Intensive Care Med. 2001;27(12):1892- 1900. doi: 10.1007/s00134- 001-1132- 2. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
10. Ely EW, Shintani A, Truman B, Speroff T, Gordon SM, Harrell FE, Jr., Inouye SK, Bernard GR, Dittus 
RS. Delirium as a predictor of mortality in mechanically ventilated patients in the intensive care unit. JAMA. 2004;291(14):1753- 1762. Epub 2004/04/15. d oi: 10.1001/jama.291.14.1753. MID: Accession 
Number|; PMCID|.  
11. Salluh JI, Wang H, Schneider EB, Nagaraja N, Yenokyan G, Damluji A, Serafim RB, Stevens RD. 
Outcome of delirium in critically ill patients: systematic review and meta- analysis. BMJ. 2015;350:h2538. 
doi: 10.1136/bmj.h2538. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID| . 
12. Weinhouse GL, Schwab RJ, Watson PL, Patil N, Vaccaro B, Pandharipande P, Ely EW. Bench -to-
bedside review: delirium in ICU patients -  importance of sleep deprivation. Crit Care. 2009;13(6):234. 
doi: 10.1186/cc8131. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
13. Kamdar BB, King LM, Collop NA, Sakamuri S, Colantuoni E, Neufeld KJ, Bienvenu OJ, Rowden AM, 
Touradji P, Brower RG, Needham DM. The effect of a quality improvement intervention on perceived 
Page 22 of 25  sleep quality and cognition in a medical ICU. Crit Care Med. 2013;41(3):800 -809. Epub 2013/01/15. doi: 
10.1097/CCM.0b013e3182746442. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
14. Poongkunran C, John SG, Kannan AS, Shetty S, Bime C, Parthasarathy S. A meta- analysis of sleep -
promoting interventions during critical illness. Am J Med. 2015;128(10):1126- 1137 e1121. doi: 
10.1016/j.amjmed.2015.05.026. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
15. Elliott R, McKinley S, Cistulli P, Fien M. Characterisation of sleep in intensive care using 24 -hour 
polysomnography: an observational study. Crit Care. 2013;17(2):R46. Epub 2013/03/20. doi: 
10.1186/cc12565. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
16. Knauert MP, Yaggi HK, Redeker NS, Murphy TE, Araujo KL, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_99657]. Feasibility study of 
unattended polysomnography in medical intensive care unit patients. Heart Lung. 2014;43(5):445 -452. 
doi: 10.1016/j.hrtlng.2014.06.049. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID |. 
17. Gabor JY, Cooper AB, Crombach SA, Lee B, Kadikar N, Bettger HE, Hanly PJ. Contribution of the 
intensive care unit environment to sleep disruption in mechanically ventilated patients and healthy 
subjects. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2003;167(5):708 -715. doi: 10.1164/rccm.2201090. MID: Accession 
Number|; PMCID|.  
18. Wright KP, Gooley JJ. Chronobiology Mechanisms and Circadian Sleep Disorders. 2009.  
19. Duffy JF, Czeisler CA. Effect of Light on Human Circadian Physiology. Sleep Med Clin. 
2009;4(2):165- 177. doi: 10.1016/j.jsmc.2009.01.004. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
20. Dewan K, Benloucif S, Reid K, Wolfe LF, Zee PC. Light -induced changes of the circadian clock of 
humans: increasing duration is more effective than increasing light intensity. Sleep. 2011;34(5):593 -599. 
MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
21. van Maanen A, Meijer AM, van der Heijden KB, Oort FJ. The effects of light therapy on sleep 
problems: A systematic review and meta -analysis. Sleep Med Rev. 2016;29:52 -62. doi: 
10.1016/j.smrv.2015.08.009. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
22. Walder B, Francioli D, Meyer JJ, Lancon M, Romand JA. Effects of guidelines implementation in a 
surgical intensive care unit to control nighttime light and noise levels. Crit Care Med. 2000;28(7):2242 -
2247. Epub 2000/08/02. MID: Accession Number|; PMCI D|. 
23. Shilo L, Dagan Y, Smorjik Y, Weinberg U, Dolev S, Komptel B, Balaum H, Shenkman L. Patients in 
the intensive care unit suffer from severe lack of sleep associated with loss of normal melatonin secretion pattern. Am J Med Sci. 1999;317(5):278- 281. Epub 1999/05/20. MID: Accession Number|; 
PMCID|.  
24. Frisk U, Olsson J, Nylen P, Hahn RG. Low melatonin excretion during mechanical ventilation in the 
intensive care unit. Clin Sci (Lond). 2004;107(1):47 -53. Epub 2004/02/26. doi: 10.1042/CS20030374. 
MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
25. Paul T, Lemmer B. Disturbance of circadian rhythms in analgosedated intensive care unit patients 
with and without craniocerebral injury. Chronobiol Int. 2007;24(1):45 -61. Epub 2007/03/17. doi: 
10.1080/07420520601142569. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
26. Gazendam JA, Van Dongen HP, Grant DA, Freedman NS, Zwaveling JH, Schwab RJ. Altered 
circadian rhythmicity in patients in the ICU. Chest. 2013;144(2):483 -489. Epub 2013/03/09. doi: 
10.1378/chest.12 -2405. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
27. Mundigler G, Delle -Karth G, Koreny M, Zehetgruber M, Steindl- Munda P, Marktl W, Ferti L, 
Siostrzonek P. Impaired circadian rhythm of melatonin secretion in sedated critically ill patients with severe sepsis. Crit Care Med. 2002;30(3):536 -540. Epub 2002/05/07. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
28. Verceles AC, Silhan L, Terrin M, Netzer G, Shanholtz C, Scharf SM. Circadian rhythm disruption in 
severe sepsis: the effect of ambient light on urinary 6 -sulfatoxymelatonin secretion. Intensive Care Med. 
2012;38(5):804- 810. doi: 10.1007/s00134- 012-2494- 3. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
Page [ADDRESS_745905] L. Delirium and Circadian Rhythm of Melatonin During Weaning From Mechanical Ventilation: 
An Ancillary Study of a Weaning Trial. Chest. 2015;148(5):123 1-1241. doi: 10.1378/chest.15 -0525. MID: 
Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
30. Gehlbach BK, Chapotot F, Leproult R, Whitmore H, Poston J, Pohlman M, Miller A, Pohlman AS, 
Nedeltcheva A, Jacobsen JH, Hall JB, Van Cauter E. Temporal disorganization of circadian rhythmicity and sleep -wake regulation in mechanically ventilated patien ts receiving continuous intravenous sedation. 
Sleep. 2012;35(8):1105 -1114. doi: 10.5665/sleep.1998. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
31. Bienert A, Kusza K, Wawrzyniak K, Grzeskowiak E, Kokot ZJ, Matysiak J, Grabowski T, Wolc A, 
Wiczling P, Regulski M. Assessing circadian rhythms in propofol PK and PD during prolonged infusion in ICU patients. J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn. 2010;37(3):289 -304. Epub 2010/06/15. doi: 
10.1007/s10928 -010-9161 -5. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
32. Duclos C, Dumont M, Blais H, Paquet J, Laflamme E, de Beaumont L, Wiseman -Hakes C, Menon 
DK, Bernard F, Gosselin N. Rest -Activity Cycle Disturbances in the Acute Phase of Moderate to Severe 
Traumatic Brain Injury. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2014;28(5) :472 -482. doi: 
10.1177/1545968313517756. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
33. Oldham MA, Lee HB, Desan PH. Circadian Rhythm Disruption in the Critically Ill: An Opportunity 
for Improving Outcomes. Crit Care Med. 2016;44(1):207 -217. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000001282. 
MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
34. Ono H, Taguchi T, Kido Y, Fujino Y, Doki Y. The usefulness of bright light therapy for patients after 
oesophagectomy. Intensive Crit Care Nurs. 2011;27(3):158 -166. doi: 10.1016/j.iccn.2011.03.003. MID: 
Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
35. Taguchi T, Yano M, Kido Y. Influence of bright light therapy on postoperative patients: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_11480]. Intensive Crit Care Nurs. 2007;23(5):289 -297. Epub 2007/08/19. doi: 10.1016/j.iccn.2007.04.004. 
MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
36. Beauchemin KM, Hays P. Dying in the dark: sunshine, gender and outcomes in myocardial 
infarction. J R Soc Med. 1998;91(7):352- 354. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
37. Ritchie HK, Stothard ER, Wright KP. Entrainment of the Human Circadian Clock to the Light -Dark 
Cycle and its Impact on Patients in the ICU and Nursing Home Settings. Curr Pharm Des. 2015;21(24):3438- 3442. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
38. Mahlberg R, Tilmann A, Salewski L, Kunz D. Normative data on the daily profile of urinary 6 -
sulfatoxymelatonin in healthy subjects between the ages of 20 and 84. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2006;31(5):634- 641. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2006.01.009. MID: Ac cession Number|; PMCID|.  
39. Wright KP, Drake CL, Lockley SW. Diagnostic Tools for Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorders. In: 
Kushida C, editor. Handbook of Sleep Disorders: Taylor & Francis Group; 2008. p. 147 -173.  
40. De Rui M, Middleton B, Sticca A, Gatta A, Amodio P, Skene DJ, Montagnese S. Sleep and circadian 
rhythms in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_567782]: effect of light therapy. Neurochem Res. 
2015;40(2):284- 292. doi: 10.1007/s11064- 014-1414- z. M ID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
41. Redeker NS, Wykpi[INVESTIGATOR_567783] E. Effects of age on activity patterns after coronary artery by[CONTACT_4897]. 
Heart Lung. 1999;28(1):5 -14. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
42. Kamdar BB, Kadden DJ, Vangala S, Elashoff DA, Ong MK, Martin JL, Needham DM. Feasibility of 
Continuous Actigraphy in Medical Intensive Care Unit Patients. American Journal of Critical Care. 2017;In 
press. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
43. Degaute JP, van de Borne P, Linkowski P, Van Cauter E. Quantitative analysis of the 24 -hour blood 
pressure and heart rate patterns in young men. Hypertension. 1991;18(2):199 -210. MID: Accession 
Number|; PMCID|.  
Page [ADDRESS_745906] 2018;128:3826 -39. doi: 10.1172/JCI120874.  
45. Braun R, Kath WL, Iwanaszko M, Kula -Eversole E, Abbott SM, Reid KJ, Zee PC, Allada R. Universal 
method for robust detection of circadian state from gene expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
2018;115:E9247- E56.  doi: 10.1073/pnas.[PHONE_11797].  
46. Chung F, Yegneswaran B, Liao P, Chung SA, Vairavanathan S, Islam S, Khajehdehi A, Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_33596]. 
STOP questionnaire: a tool to screen patients for obstructive sleep apnea. Anesthesiology. 2008;108(5):812 -821. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0b013e31816d83e4. MID: Access ion Number|; PMCID|.  
47. Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, Shankar -Hari M, Annane D, Bauer M, Bellomo R, 
Bernard GR, Chiche JD, Coopersmith CM, Hotchkiss RS, Levy MM, Marshall JC, Martin GS, Opal SM, Rubenfeld GD, van der Poll T, Vincent JL, Angus DC. The Third Internationa l Consensus Definitions for 
Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis -3). JAMA. 2016;315(8):801 -810. doi: 10.1001/jama.2016.0287. MID: 
Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
48. Ely EW, Margolin R, Francis J, May L, Truman B, Dittus R, Speroff T, Gautam S, Bernard GR, Inouye 
SK. Evaluation of delirium in critically ill patients: validation of the Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit (CAM -ICU). Crit Care Med.  2001;29(7):1370- 1379. MID: Accession Number|; 
PMCID|.  
49. Ely EW, Inouye SK, Bernard GR, Gordon S, Francis J, May L, Truman B, Speroff T, Gautam S, 
Margolin R, Hart RP, Dittus R. Delirium in mechanically ventilated patients: validity and reliability of the confusion assessment method for the intensive care unit (CAM -ICU). JAMA. 2001;286(21):2703 -2710. 
MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
50. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_99657], Araujo KL, Van Ness PH, Zhang Y, Ely EW, Inouye SK. A research algorithm to improve 
detection of delirium in the intensive care unit. Crit Care. 2006;10(4):R121. doi: 10.1186/cc5027. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
51. Duffy JF, Wright KP, Jr. Entrainment of the human circadian system by [CONTACT_60230]. J Biol Rhythms. 
2005;20(4):326- 338. doi: 10.1177/0748730405277983. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
52. Figueiro MG. Individually tailored light intervention through closed eyelids to promote circadian 
alignment and sleep health. Sleep Health. 2015;1(1):75 -82. doi: 10.1016/j.sleh.2014.12.009. MID: 
Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
53. McKee PA, Castelli WP, McNamara PM, Kannel WB. The natural history of congestive heart 
failure: the Framingham study. N Engl J Med. 1971;285(26):1441 -1446. doi: 
10.1056/NEJM197112232852601. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
54. Stoschitzky K, Sakotnik A, Lercher P, Zweiker R, Maier R, Liebmann P, Lindner W. Influence of 
beta -blockers on melatonin release. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 1999;55(2):111 -115. MID: Accession Number|; 
PMCID|.  
55. Benloucif S, Burgess HJ, Klerman EB, Lewy AJ, Middleton B, Murphy PJ, Parry BL, Revell VL. 
Measuring melatonin in humans. J Clin Sleep Med. 2008;4(1):66 -69. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
56. Van Cauter E. Method for characterization of 24 -h temporal variation of blood components. Am J 
Physiol. 1979;237(3):E255- 264. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
57. Knaus WA, Draper EA, Wagner DP, Zimmerman JE. APACHE II: a severity of disease classification 
system. Crit Care Med. 1985;13(10):818- 829. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
58. Chung F, Memtsoudis SG, Ramachandran SK, Nagappa M, Opperer M, Cozowicz C, Patrawala S, 
Lam D, Kumar A, Joshi GP, Fleetham J, Ayas N, Collop N, Doufas AG, Eikermann M, Englesakis M, Gali B, Gay P, Hernandez AV, Kaw R, Kezirian EJ, Malhotra A, Mokhlesi B, Parthasarathy S, Stierer T, Wappler F, Hillman DR, Auckley D. Society of Anesthesia and Sleep Medicine Guidelines on Preoperative Screening 
Page 25 of 25  and Assessment of Adult Patients With Obstructive Sleep Apnea. Anesth Analg. 2016;123(2):452 -473. 
doi: 10.1213/ANE.0000000000001416. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
59. Pandharipande PP, Pun BT, Herr DL, Maze M, Girard TD, Miller RR, Shintani AK, Thompson JL, 
Jackson JC, Deppen SA, Stiles RA, Dittus RS, Bernard GR, Ely EW. Effect of sedation with 
dexmedetomidine vs lorazepam on acute brain dysfunction in mechanically ventilated patients: the MENDS randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2007;298(22):2644 -2653. doi: 10.1001/jama.298.22.2644. 
MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
60. Girard TD, Kress JP, Fuchs BD, Thomason JWW, Schweickert WD, Pun BT, Taichman DB, Dunn JG, 
Pohlman AS, Kinniry PA, Jackson JC, Canonico AE, Light RW, Shintani AK, Thompson JL, Gordon SM, Hall JB, Dittus RS, Bernard GR, Ely EW. Efficacy and safety of a paired sedation and ventilator weaning 
protocol for mechanically ventilated patients in intensive care (Awakening and Breathing Controlled trial): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2008;371(9607):126 -134. doi: Doi 10.1016/S0140 -
6736(08)[ZIP_CODE]- 1. MID: A ccession Number|; PMCID|.  
61. Schoenfeld DA, Bernard GR, Network A. Statistical evaluation of ventilator -free days as an 
efficacy measure in clinical trials of treatments for acute respi[INVESTIGATOR_1505]. Crit Care Med. 2002;30(8):1772 -1777. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
62. Barr J, Zomorodi K, Bertaccini EJ, Shafer SL, Geller E. A double -blind, randomized comparison of 
i.v. lorazepam versus midazolam for sedation of ICU patients via a pharmacologic model. Anesthesiology. 2001;95(2):286- 298. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
63. Patanwala AE, Duby J, Waters D, Erstad BL. Opi[INVESTIGATOR_567784]. Ann Pharmacother. 
2007;41(2):255- 266. doi: 10.1345/aph.1H421. MID: Accession Number|; PMCID|.  
64. Hsieh FY, Bloch DA, Larsen MD. A simple method of sample size calculation for linear and logistic 
regression. Statistics in Medicine. 1998;17(14):1623- 1634. doi: Doi 10.1002/(Sici)1097 -
0258(19980730)17:14<1623::Aid -Sim871>3.0.Co;2- S. MID: Accession Num ber|; PMCID|.  
  