[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Study ID: RAP‐MD‐03 
 
 
 
Title: A Randomized, Double‐blind, Placebo‐controlled, Multicenter St udy of Rapastinel 
as Adjunctive Therapy in Major Depressive Disorder 
 
 
Protocol Amendment 2 Date: [ADDRESS_1079646] subsidiary of Allergan, plc.
Harborside Financial Center, Plaza V
Jersey City, NJ [ZIP_CODE]
A Randomized, Double -blind, Placebo -controlled, Multicenter Study of Rapastinel 
as Adjunctive Therapy in Major Depressive Disorder
RAP-MD-03
IND # 107,974
Original Protocol Date: 20 May2016
Amendment 1: 10Oct 2016
Amendment 2: 20Nov2018
Confidentiality Statement
This document is the property of Allergan, plc and may not —in full or part— be passed 
on, reproduced, published, distributed, or submitted to any regulatory authority without 
the express written permission of Allergan, plc.
2
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov20182.0 SYNOPSIS AND SCHEDUL E OF EVALUATIONS
CLINICAL STUDY SYNOPSIS: Study RAP-MD-03
Study Number RAP-MD-03
Title of StudyA Randomized, Double -blind, Placebo -controlled, Multicenter 
Study of Rapastinel as Adjunctive Therapy in Major 
Depressive Disorder 
Study Centers (Country) Approximately 35 study centers ([LOCATION_002])
Development Phase 3
ObjectiveTo evaluate the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of rapastinel 
adjunctive to antidepressant therapy (ADT) in patients with 
major depressive disorder (MDD) who have a partial response 
to ADT
MethodologyMulticenter, randomized, double- blind, placebo -controlled, 
parallel-group, 3-week study in patients with MDD who have a 
partial response to ongoing ADT
Number of Patients Approximately 360 planned to be enrolled
Diagnosis and Main Criteria for 
InclusionMale and female outpatients who are 18 to 65 years of age
Meet Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM -5) criteria for MDD witha 
current major depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_153864] 8 weeks and 
not exceeding 18 months in duration at Visit 1
 
 
Have no more than partial response (< 50% improvement) 
to ongoing treatment with a protocol -allowed ADT   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Test Product, Dosage, and Mode 
of AdministrationRapastinel (450 mg weekly intravenous [IV] administration ) 
adjunctive to ongoing ADT, prefilled syringe

[ADDRESS_1079647] dose of randomized treatment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pharmacokinetic SamplingOptional: sparse pharmacokinetic (PK) samples will be taken 
from consented patients to determine plasma concentrations of 
rapastinel using a validated bioanalytical method.
Safety MeasuresAdverse event (AE) re cording, clinical laboratory measures, 
vital sign parameters, electrocardiograms (ECGs), and physical 
examinations
 
 

4
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
Statistical MethodsThe primary efficacy parameter will be the change from 
baseline in MADRS total score at end of study . The primary 
analysis will be performed using a mixed-effects model for
repeated measures (MMRM) with terms for treatment , pooled 
study center, visit, and t reatment-by-visit interaction as the 
fixed effects , and baseline MADRS total score, baseline 
MADRS total score -by-visit as covariates . The key secondary 
efficacy parameter, change from baseline in MADRS total 
score [ADDRESS_1079648] 1 dose of randomized treatment . Efficacy analyses will be 
based on the modified Intent-to-Treat (mITT) Population, 
defined as all patients who arerandomized and receive at 
least [ADDRESS_1079649] of the Study ............................................................................................ 12
5.3Patient Information and Informed Consent ....................................................................... 12
6.0INVESTIGATORS AND STUDY ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURE ...................................... 13
7.0INTRODUCTION ................................................................
.......................................................... 14
8.0STUDY OBJECTIVES ................................................................................................................... 18
9.0INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN ......................................................................................................... 20
9.1Overall Study Design and Plan: Description ................................
.................................... [ADDRESS_1079650] of the Study or Planned Analyses .............................................. 72
9.10Protocol Deviations ................................
.......................................................................... 72
10.0STUDY SPONSORSHIP ................................................................................................................ 73
10.1Study Termination ............................................................................................................ 73
10.2Reporting and Publication ................................................................................................ 73
11.0INVESTIGATOR OBLIGATIONS ................................................................................................ 74
11.1Documentation .................................................................................................................. 74
11.2Performance ...................................................................................................................... 74
11.3Use of Investigational Materials ....................................................................................... 75
11.4Case Report Forms ........................................................................................................... 75
11.5Retention and Revie w of Records..................................................................................... 75
11.6Patient Confidentiality ...................................................................................................... 76
12.0INVESTIGATOR’S STATEMENT ............................................................................................... [ADDRESS_1079651] of 1996
ICF informed consent form

11
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018ICH International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements
IND Investigational New Drug (application)
IP investigational product
IRB Institutional Review Board
ITT Intent-to-Treat
IV intravenous
IWRS interactive web response system
MADRS Montgomery -Asberg Depression Rating Scale
MDD major depressive disorder
MMRM mixed-effectsmodel for repeated measures
NMDAR N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor
PCS potentially clinically significant
PID patient identification
QTc QT interval corrected for heart rate
QTcB QT interval corrected for heart rate using the Bazett formula 
(QTcB=QT/[RR]½)
QTcF QT interval corrected for heart rate using the Fridericia formula 
(QTcF=QT/[RR]⅓)
SAE serious adverse event
SAP Statistical Analys is Plan
SCID Structured Clinical Interview for Diagnostic Statistic Manual of Mental Health 
Disorders, Fifth Edition
SD standard deviation
SDMT Symbol Digit Modalities Test
SNRI selective serotonin and norepi[INVESTIGATOR_153865] -emergent adverse event
UDS urine drug screen
ULN upper limit of normal

[ADDRESS_1079652] (I RB) before the start of the study  will be the 
responsibility  of the Investigator. A copy  of the approval letter will be supplied to the 
Sponsor, along with a roster of IRB members or the US Department of Health and 
Human Services general assura nce number. During the course of the study , the 
Investigator will provide timely  and accurate reports to the I RB on the progress of the 
study, at intervals not exceeding 1 year (or as appropriate), and will notify  the IRB of 
serious adverse events (SAEs) o r other significant safet y findings. The study protocol, 
informed consent form (ICF), information sheet advertisements, and amendments (if an y) 
will be approved b y the IRBs at the study centersin conformance with the US CFR, 
Title21, Part 56.
5.[ADDRESS_1079653] 
their origins in the Declaration of Helsinki.
This clinical study  will comply  with the ICH Guidance on General Considerations for 
Clinical Trials (ICH-E8; 62FR66113, 17 Dec1997) and GCP (ICH-E6; 62 FR [ZIP_CODE], 
09May1997), as well as Part [ADDRESS_1079654] provide written informed consent in compliance with 
21 CFR, Parts 50 and 312 and give HIPAA authorization. 
Each patient will read and sign an ICF and/or other authorization form as per local 
regulations; each patient will be made aware that he or she may  withdraw from the study  
at any time.
The ICF contains all the elements of informed consent listed in Appendix I of this 
protocol. Signed copi[INVESTIGATOR_1093] I CF and the HIPAA or other locall y applicable form will 
be given to the patient, and both documents will be placed in the Investigator’s study  
files.
[ADDRESS_1079655] UDY ADMINISTRATIVE 
STRUCTURE
This study  will be performed at approximately  35study centers in the U nited States.
The Investigator is re sponsible for ensuring that theinvestigation is conducted according 
to the signed Investigator statement, the investigational plan, GCP guidelines, and 
applicable regulations; for protecting the rights, safety, and welfare of patients under the 
Investigator’s care; and for the control of investigational products under investigation. An 
investigator shall obtain the informed consent foreach patient prior to the patient 
enrolling in the stud y and/or prior to participating in any stud y-related activ ity. 
The Investigator at each s tudy centermust meet his or her obligations to the patients, 
ethics committee, Sponsor, and regulatory  authorities by  [CONTACT_242298] ’s conduct and the study  staff. It is the responsibility  ofthe 
Investigator to ensure that any  and all delegated duties be assigned to qualified staff by  
[CONTACT_8640], experience, and licensure (in accordance with local regulations) and that the 
Investigator oversight is documented and assessment of staff capabilities and 
performance is consistent with the study  investigational plan. The Investigator at each 
study centerwill beresponsible for the management of the study , including maintaining 
the study file and the patient records, corresponding with the IRB, and c ompleting the 
electronic case report forms (eCRFs).
14
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov20187.0 INTRODUCTION
Disease Burden of M ajor Depressive Disorder
Major depressive disorder ( MDD)is a highly disabling, serious condition which is 
associated with significant morbidity  and mortality . MDDmanifests as amajor 
depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865] (which may  be singular or recurrent) in which the affected individual 
experiences 1) depressed mood , or2) loss of interest or pleasure (as well as other 
symptoms) for most of the day , nearly every day,for at least 2 weeks. MDD affects 
approximately  14.8 million American adults, or about 6.7 % of the US population 
18years of age and older, in a given year (Kessler et al, 2005 ). Worldwide, about 15% of 
the adult popul ation is at lifetime risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_153866] ( Kessler et al, 1994 ).
Depression may  cause serious, long -lasting symptoms and often disrupts a person’s 
ability to perform routine tasks. I n 2000, unipolar depressive disord ers were by  [CONTACT_242299] (11.9%) of worldwide years of life lived with disability  (World Health 
Organization, 2001 ), and the total economic burden of treating depression in the United 
States was $83.[ADDRESS_1079656] of the total economic burden (62%). 
Other economic burdens in 2000 included $26.1 billion (31%) for treatment costs and 
$5.4 billion (7%) for suicide -related costs ( Greenberg et al, 2003 ). 
MDD is a leading cause of disability in the [LOCATION_002] ( Murray et al, 2013). Moreover, 
MDD is known to be a significant risk factor for suic ide and ischemic heart disease, as it 
accounted for 16 million of the disability  adjusted life y ears (DALYs) associated with 
suicide and 4 million of the DALYs associated with ischemic heart disease. Research has 
shown that untreated depression has both a functional (social and work role) as well as a 
neuroanatomical (hippocampal shrinkage) effect on the patient ( Videbech and 
Ravnkilde,2004). Given the disease burden and link to suicidality  as well as increased 
mortality with other comorbid conditions, MDD is a serious and life- threatening 
condition which is a leading cause of disability  in the world.
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors and Selective Serotonin and Norepi[INVESTIGATOR_242290] (SSRI s) and selective serotonin and 
norepi[INVESTIGATOR_5608] (SNRI s)currently represent the first line of treatment 
of depression in the [LOCATION_002]. Unfortunatel y, a large number of p atients do not 
experience therapeutic benefit from these first- line agents ( Rosenzweig -Lipson et al, 
2007). Lack of sufficient response to adequate treatment remains a critical problem in the 
management of patients with MDD. Up to two-thirds of patients treated with first -line 
antidepressant monotherapy  do not reach full remission, and as many  as a third become 
treatment resistant ( Fava and Davidson, 1996; Trivedi et al, 2006 ). Not achieving 
remission has been shown to be predictive of poorer ps ychosocial functioning, higher 
rates of relapse ,and higher rates of rehospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] ( McIntyre and O’Donovan, 2004 ). 
15
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018The results of the STAR*D study  suggest that with successive failures of treatment, 
patients are less and less likely  to respond to subsequent treatment, and those who do 
respond are more likel y to relapse ( Rush et al, 2006 ). Present strategies available to treat 
patients who do not respond to first- line antidepressant monotherap y include switching of 
antidepressant (either within or between classes); combination therap y in which multiple 
antidepressants are used simultaneously ; augmentation of ongoing an tidepressant 
monotherap y with adjunctive use of drugs such as mood stabilizers or atypi[INVESTIGATOR_91874] (Boland and Keller, 2006) ;and nonpharmacologic treatments including 
psychotherap y and phototherap y, vagus nerve stimulation, transcranial magnetic 
stimulation, and electroconvulsive therap y(ECT).Clearly, there remains a critically  
important unmet medical need for this patient population.
Existing antidepressants have a number of limitations, leading to considerabl e unmet 
medical need in the effective treatment of MDD ,with up to 50% of patients with MDD
having an inadequate response or failing current antidepressant therapy  (ADT). Currentl y 
available first -line antidepressants (SSRI s, SNRIs) ty pi[INVESTIGATOR_19236] 3 to 4 w eeks or more of 
continuous daily  dosing to relieve s ymptoms of MDD and are associated with side effects 
related to their pharmacological mechanisms of action (sexual dy sfunction, weight gain, 
jitteriness, sleep disturbances), which are further associated with poor patient compliance 
(Masand 2003, Ashton et al, 2005) . Patients often experience undesirable side effects 
before they  experience an improvement in depressive sy mptoms, which could lead to 
premature discontinuation of therap y. Taken together, these factors define significant 
areas for improvement of ADT . 
Patients vary greatly in their response to antidepressants and it is not possible to reliably 
predict whether an individual patient will respond to a given antidepressant. This leads to 
clinicians often using a trial -and-error approach to identify  an effective antidepressant. 
Due to the gradual development ofthe full therapeutic effect of currently  available 
antidepressants, each antidepressant needs to be administered for [ADDRESS_1079657] substantial safet y and 
efficacy limitations. The drugs currently  approved for use as adjunctive therapy  to 
antidepressants for the treatment of MDD —namely, the atypi[INVESTIGATOR_242291]®
(aripi[INVESTIGATOR_4253]), Seroquel XR®(quetiapi[INVESTIGATOR_123111]), and Rexulti®(brexpi[INVESTIGATOR_4253])—are 
associated with significant adverse reactions, as well as a number of serious warnings and
precautions. Originall y developed for the treatment of psychotic disorders, these drugs 
share a number of clinically  relevant adverse effects based on their mechanisms of action. 
16
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018As all current antipsy chotic agents modulate central dopaminergic s ystems, they all carry 
a risk of extrap yramidal symptoms such as muscular rigidity, acute d ystonia, as well as 
akathisia, which is a particularly relevant adverse event (AE) that complicates clinical 
management in a significant number of treated individuals, as hi gh as 45% 
(Sachdev, 1995). In addition, these compounds are associated with a risk of neuroleptic 
malignant s yndrome andtardive dyskinesia. Depending on their individual 
pharmacological profile, antipsy chotics also car ry a risk for metabolic changes including 
hyperglycemia/diabetes mellitus, dy slipi[INVESTIGATOR_242292]; blood dy skrasias 
such as leucopenia, neutropenia, and agranulocy tosis; orthostatic hy potension; cognitive 
and motor impairment; cataracts; and ins omnia (Abilify,2014; Seroquel, 2013; 
Rexulti,2015). The range of clinicall y relevant side effects with antips ychotics has to be 
balanced carefull y against the potential for therapeutic benefits in patients with major 
depression. In this context it is important to highlight that for the approved aty pi[INVESTIGATOR_651601] , and in many  subjects adverse effects occurred substant ially 
earlier than the mood -alleviating effects of these drugs . 
Furthermore, the drugs currentl y approved for adjunctive treatment of MDD also have 
limited efficacy . The pi[INVESTIGATOR_153872] , the atypi[INVESTIGATOR_242294], showed a delay ed onset of effect 
(1-2 weeks), a modest magnitude of effect (effect sizes were 0.35- 0.39 after 6 weeks of 
repeat dosing) and modest rates of response and remission after 6 weeks of repeat dosing 
(response rates were 32 -34% and remission rates were 25 -26%) (Berman et al, 2007; 
Marcus et al, 2008 ). 
Clearly, there is a substantial need for the development of novel treatments with a better 
safety/tolerability  profile and a faster onset of full therapeutic benefit . Rapastinel has 
initially shown substantially  improved safet y/tolerability  as well as promising efficacy, in 
both speed of onset and overall magnitude, for adjunctive therap y in MDD. 
Rapastinel as a Novel Approach to Major Depr essive Disorder T reatment
The mechanism of action of rapastinel is entirel y different from that of at ypi[INVESTIGATOR_91874].Rapastinel is a n N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) modulator
with a novel and complex pharmacological mechanism of action, acting as a nonselective 
agent at NR2 subunits and display ing properties as a functional partial agonist in a 
number of pharmacological assay s. 
Rapastinel has demonstrated antidepressant prope rties in relevant animal models, 
displays cognitive enhanc ing properties in treated animals, and facilitates hippocampal 
long-term potentiation of sy naptic transmission in preclinical models. In contrast to 
ketamine, no signal of abuse liability  was detect ed in informative animal models. 
17
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018Rapastinel is available as an intravenous (IV) formulation only . In 2Phase 2 clinical 
studiesin patients with MDD, single IV doses of rapastinel 5 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg have 
been shown to produce marked antidepressant effec ts within 1 day  that lasted for
approximately 1 week or longer in responding patients . These antidepressant effects are 
very similar to ketamine’s effects when administered at a low dose as an infusion . In a 
systematic review and meta -analysis of ketamine and other NMDAR antagonists in the 
treatment of major depression, a single infusion of ketamine produced a rapid, y et 
transient antidepressant effect, accompanied b y brief ps ychotomimetic and dissociative 
effects(Newport et al, 2015 ). 
The available Phase [ADDRESS_1079658] a partial response 
to ADT.
Efficacy Objectives
Primary efficacy objective: To evaluate the efficacy  of rapastinel ( 450mgIV) versus
placebo in the treatment of MDD as an adjunct to ongoing ADT, as measured by  [CONTACT_784811] -Asberg Depression Rating 
Scale (MADRS)total score .
Key secondary  efficacy objective: To evaluate the efficacy  of rapastinel ( 450mgIV) 
versusplacebo in the treatment of MDD as an adjunct to ongoing ADT, as measured 
by [CONTACT_784812] [ADDRESS_1079659] dose of 
treatment.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

19
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

20
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov20189.0 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN
9.1 OVERALL STUDY DESIGN AND PLAN: DESCRIPTIO N
This study  is a multicenter, randomized, double- blind, placebo -controlled, parallel -group, 
3-week stud y in patients with MDD who have a partial response t o ADT. The study  will 
include a total of 12 visits and will be approximately  4 to 6weeks in duration 
(Figure9.1-1): 
Up to 2-week screening period 
3-week double -blind treatment period 
1-week safet y follow-up period (for patients who do not enter the RAP- MD-04 
maintenance stud y)
9.1.1 Screening Period
After providing written consent, patients will enter a screening period of up to 14 day s.
The screening/washout period will be up to 2 weeks prior to Visit 2. Screening 
procedures may  be conducted on up to 2 separate dates where necessary  to accommodate 
patient and study center schedule; however, every  effort should be made to conduct all 
procedures as earl y as possible in the screening period and the rater -administered 
MADRS and computer -administered MADRS must be collected on the same date.   
Patients will not re ceive any  investigational product ( IP)during the screening period but 
must continue their background ADT at the same dose. Patients meeting the eligibility  
criteria at the end of Visit 2 (Baseline) will be assigned a treatment by  [CONTACT_354127] (IWRS) and enter the double -blind treatment period.
9.1.2 Double-blind Treatment Period
Approximately  700patients are planned for enrollment in the double -blind treatment 
period (350 patients each in the rapastinel 450 mg and placebo groups). Patients will be 
randomized in a ratio of 1:1 to 1 of 2 treatment groups: rapastinel 450 mg IV weekly or 
placebo IV weekl y (both adjunctive to ongoing ADT). 
[ADDRESS_1079660] 3 study  visits per week. The 
visits willoccur in the following pattern: treatment day , 1 day following the treatment 
day, 4 days following the treatment day , and 7 days following the treatment day  (which is 
the next treatment day ). If necessary , study visits may  be conducted up to 2 day s before 
or after the scheduled visits with the exception of visits thatare 24 hours apart
(eg,Visits2 and [ADDRESS_1079661] be conducted 1 day  apart; similarly, Visits [ADDRESS_1079662] be conducted 1 day  apart).All patients who receive IP must complete 
Visit11. Upon completion of the double -blind treatment p eriod,patients are eligible to 
enterthe RAP-MD-04 maintenance study .Patients who do not enter RAP -MD-04 will 
enter a 1-week safety  follow-up period.
9.1.3 Safety Follow -up Period
Patients who do not enter the RAP -MD-04 maintenance study  upon completing the 
double-blind treatment period and patients who prematurel y discontinue from the study  
before completing 3 weeks of double -blind treatment should enter the 1-week safet y 
follow-up period. 
Additional follow -up visits may  be scheduled within 30 day s, if necessary  for safety 
reasons.
A schematic of the study  design is presented in Figure 9.1-1. The Schedule of 
Evaluations is provided in Section 2.0and detailed descriptions of each stud y visit can be 
found in Section 9.5.6.
22
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov20189.2 DISCUSSION OF STUDY DESIGN, INCLUDING TH E CHOICE 
OF CONTROL GROUPS
This multicenter, randomized, pla cebo-controlled, parallel -groupstudy,with a 3-week 
double-blind treatment period, was designed based on prior studies that established 
rapastinel efficacy  and safety  in adult patients with MDD. In this study , Investigators will 
enroll patients 18 through 65 years of age who meet the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition ( DSM-5) criteria for MDD (American 
Psychiatric Association, 2013 ). The MDD diagnosis will be confirmed using the 
Modified Structured Clinical Intervie w for Diagnostic Statistic Manual of Mental Health 
Disorders, Fifth Edition (SCI D). The symptoms and severit y of MDD will be assessed 
using the MADRS (Section [IP_ADDRESS].1). 
Study centers will have experience with the study  population and will be encouraged to 
apply available guidelines to minimize patient risk or distress. 
Dose selection information is presented in Section 9.4.6. The planned dosing regimen is 
based on experience from previous rapastinel studies. 

23
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018A placebo treatment group is included in the study to comply  with worldwide regulatory  
preferences ( Laughren, 2001; Gispen -de Wied et al, 2012), since placebo -controlled 
superiority  trials have been shown to be conducive to higher quality  studies and to 
provide more reliable outcomes ( Feifel, 2008 ; Laughren, 2001; Gispen- de Wied et al, 
2012). Additionally , from a scientific point of view, randomized double- blind 
comparisons versus placebo are needed to permit adequate evaluation of efficacy . 
Comparison to a placebo treatment is also o f value for distinguishing disease 
manifestations from adverse reactions tothe IP (EMA guidance, 2013)
. The use of 
placebo in place of the standard therap y should not cause irreversible health problems or 
extreme suffe ring (depression is recognized b y the FDA as a condition in which there is 
substantial improvement and variability  in placebo groups) ( FDA Guidance for Industry : 
E10, May  2001). 
In Study RAP-MD-03, safety  and efficacy  assessments are included at every visit to 
determine adequacy  of response, safet y, and tolerability . In the event of insufficient 
therapeutic response or worsening of the patient’s initial condition, the I P should be 
discontinued and an alternative treatme nt will then be all owed (Section 9.4.13). An
independent Data and Safety  Monitoring Board (DSMB) will evaluate safety  data during 
the study (Section 9.8).
9.[ADDRESS_1079663] meet the following criteria:
1. Written informed consent, obtained 
from the patient before the initiation of any  
study-specific procedures (Section 5.3) 
2. Male or female outpatients
, 18to 65years of age
3.Meet DSM -5 criteria for MDD (based on confirmation from the modified SCI D
), 
with a current major depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_153864] [ADDRESS_1079664] no more than partial response (< 50% improvement) to ongoing treatment 
with a protocol -allowed ADT   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. If female of childbearing potential, have a negative serum β- human chorionic 
gonadotropin (β- hCG) pregnancy  test
9.3.2 Exclusion Criteria
Patients who meet an y of the following criteria will not be eligible to participate in the 
study:
Exclusion criteria to be assessed at Scr eening (V isit 1)
Psychiatric and Treatment -Related Criteria
1.DSM-5–based diagnosis of an y disorder other than MDD that was the primary focus 
of treatment within 6 months before Visit 1. Comorbid generalized anxiety  disorder, 
social anxiety  disorder, or specific phobias are acceptable provided they  play a 
secondary  role in the balance of s ymptoms and are not the primary  driver of treatment 
decisions.
2.Lifetime history  of meeting DSM -5 criteria for:
a.Schizophrenia spectrum or other ps ychotic disorder
b.Bipolar or related disorder
c.Major neurocognitive disorder 

25
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018d.Neurodevelopmental disorder of greater than mild severit y or of a 
severity that impacts the patient’s ability to consent, follow study 
directions, or otherwise safel y participate in the study
e.Dissociative disorder
f.Posttraumatic stress disorder
g.MDD with psy chotic feat ures
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

26
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

27
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

28
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
 
 
 
9.3.3 Removal of Patient s from Therapy or Assessment
A premature discontinuation will occur when a patient who signed the ICF ceases 
participation in the study , regardless of circumstanc es, before the completion of the study  
visits and procedures. Patients can be prematurel y discontinued from the study  after 
careful consideration for one of the following reasons:
Screen failure (f ailure to meet inclusion/exclusion criteria)
Pregnancy
Withdrawal of consent 
AE
oAny patient may  be withdrawn due to AE at the discretion of the 
Investigator
oAny patient who meets any  of the following criteria at any  point during 
the study must be withdrawn from participation, due to AEs related to 
suicide:
a)A suicide attempt
In the event that a patient is withdrawn for a suicide-
related AE, the patient should be 
referred for additional treatment or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], as clinically  indicated, in addition 
to withdrawing the patient from the study .

29
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018Lack of efficacy
Protocol violation
Noncompliance with IP
Noncompliance with ADT
Lost to follow -up 
Study terminated by  [CONTACT_2728]
Study center terminated by  [CONTACT_2728]
Other 
All randomized patients who prematurely  discontinue from the study , regardless of cause, 
should be seen for a final assessment at an Earl y Termination (ET) Visit. A final 
assessment will be defined as completion of the evaluations scheduled for all patients at 
Visit11. All patients discontinuing the study prematurel y should enter the [ADDRESS_1079665] be requested in writing to return to the study  center for a final 
assessment. A cop y of the letter, together with the source docume ntation, will be kept in 
the Investigator’s files. The reason for premature discontinuation from the study  will be 
recorded on the Study  Termination Page of the eCRF. Study center staff will be contact[CONTACT_651604] d.
9.3.4 PatientReplacement Procedures
Patients in this study  who prematurel y discontinue treatment will not be replaced.
9.4 TREATMENTS
Patients meeting the eligibility  criteria at the end of Visit 2 (Baseline) will be randomized 
in double-blind fashion to 1of 2treatment groups: placebo or rapastinel [ADDRESS_1079666] enter the study  while havingno more than partial response (< 50% 
improvement) to ongoing treatment with a protocol-allowed ADT   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Upon entry  into the study at Screening ( Visit 1),the dosage of the ADT must be held 
constant at a dose allowed in the respective label through Visit 11/ET. I f a patient 
experiences an AE, intercurrent illness, or s ymptoms of intolerance, he or she will be 
permitted to stop taking the ADT for a maximum o f [ADDRESS_1079667] patients bring their background ADT to
Visits5, 8, and 11 for verification of patient- reported compliance by  [CONTACT_21173][INVESTIGATOR_692] (to the 
extentpossible).
9.4.2 Treatments Administered
The IPwill only be administered to eligible patient s by a medically  qualified person as 
per the local state regulations. The range of persons who ca n administer an IV can be a 
physician, a phy sician assistant, nurse, or nurse practitioner, etc, depending on the local 
and/or state law.  
IP should be administered after all efficacy  and safety  assessments with the exception of 
the post-dose assessments described below. IP will be administered in a “slow bolus” 
injection to each stud y patient in an upper extremity vein within approximately [ADDRESS_1079668] be immediately  available and in close proximity  to the patient(s) 
to attend to medical emergencies.  The study center must have the capabilities, in 
accordance with the applicable country, local, and/or state regulations and standard of 
care, to resuscitate a patient in the event of a medical emergency.   

31
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018The patient should not be discharged from the study center until the following are 
completed:
Postadministration vital sign measures (approximately  15 minutes after 
administration)
Patient is clinically  assessed and determined to not be at increased risk of 
suicidality in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_689] (or medically  qualified 
subinvestigator)
Patient is assessed for mental status and is determined to be free of perceptual 
disturbances or other conditions that would deem them not read y for discharge 
from the study  center, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_689] (or medically  qualified 
subinvestigator)
A physician licensed in the state (Investigator or subinvestigator) determines that 
they are medicall y able to leave the stud y center and provides written sign -off not 
less than 15 minutes following administration (see IV Administration and 
Discharge Notes docume nt in Program Reference Manual)
9.4.3 Identity of Investigat ional Products
Rapastinel 450 mg IV Prefilled Sy ringes: 
 
 
Placebo rapastinel IV Prefilled Sy ringes: prefilled single -dose syringes for injection
containing [ADDRESS_1079669] be accounted for. In addition, a t the end of the study , 
all unused IPshould be returned to the Sponsor or the local distributor at the address 
provided in the Study  Reference Manual.
9.4.5 Method of Assigning Patients to Treatment Groups
After a patient signs the ICF at Screening (Visit 1), study personnel will register the 
patient in the I WRS, and the sy stem will assign the patient a sequential PID.  
 
 
 
 
 This PID number will be used to identify  the patient 
throughout the stud y (ie, at all periods of the stud y).
The IPwill be labeled with me dication kit numbers. The IWRS will provide the study 
centerwith the specific medication kit number(s) for each randomized patient at the time 
of randomization. Study  centerswill dispense IP according to the IWRS instructions. 
Study centerswill also log onto the IWRS at subsequent visits to obtain a study  
medication kit number for dispensing the IP. Study centers will receive the IWRS 
confirmati on notifications for each trans action. All notifications are to be maintained with 
the study source documents.

33
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov20189.4.6 Selection of Dos agesin the Study
The dose of rapastinel in this study  was selected based on 2Phase 2 clinical studiesin 
patients with MDD, in whichsingle IV doses of rapastinel 5 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg were
shown to produce marked antidepressant effects within [ADDRESS_1079670] patients as this represents a 
dose of 4.5 mg/kg in a 100 kg patient and a dose of 9 mg/kg in a 50 kg patient.
9.4.7 Selection and Timing of Dose for Each Patient
The IPwill be administered IV using the assigned single- use prefilled sy ringes at 
Visits2, 5,and 8.
[IP_ADDRESS] Screening Period
At Screening (Visit 1) after written consent is obtained, patients enter a screening period 
of up to 14 days. No IP is administe red during the screening period; however, patients 
must continue their background ADT at a stable dose.
[IP_ADDRESS] Double-blind Treatment Period
Patients who meet all eligibility  criteria at Screening (Visit 1) and who continue to meet 
all the eligibility criteria for participation in the study  at the Baseline Visit (Visit 2) will 
be assigned an IP kit number via IWRS at Baseline (Visit 2). Patients will receive the 
first dose of IP that day . The IP kit numbers will also be assigned by  [CONTACT_784813] (ie, Visits 5 and 8).
Patients will receive either rapastinel 450 mg or placebo from a prefilled sin gle-dose 
syringe at Visits 2, 5, and 8. 
[IP_ADDRESS] Safety Follow -up Period 
Patients who complete 3 weeks of randomized treatment are eligible to enter the 
RAP-MD-04 maintenance study . If they do not enter RAP -MD-04, theyshould enter the 
safety follow-up period. Pa tients who discontinue the study  prematurel y should enter the 
safety follow-up period. No I P is administered during the safet y follow-up period and 
patients’ background ADT may  be modified as deemed appropriate by  [CONTACT_737].
[ADDRESS_1079671] of patie nt randomization codes will be generated b y Statistical Programming and 
implemented by  [CONTACT_153889] (an electronic version will be stored on a secure 
server). This list will identify  each patient b y randomization number and include the 
patient’s corresp onding treatment assignment.
All study treatments will be provided in identical sy ringes and cartons to maintain 
masking of the stud y.
9.4.9 Unblinding
Any unblinding at the study  center level should be done only  in an emergency  that 
requires identification of the IPfor the medical management of the patient. The 
Investigator mustnotify the Study Physician immediately  (refer toAppendix II) and a 
full written explanation must be provided if the blind is broken. Before IPis unblinded, 
every attempt should be made to discuss the case with the Study  Physician. Breaking the 
code at the stud y center will immediately  disqualify  the patient from further participation 
in the study .
Treatment codes may  be broken b y Global Drug Saf ety for regulatory reporting purposes. 
In such cases, the stud y staff will be kept blinded and the patient will not need to be 
disqualified from the study .
For IWRS Unblinding
In an emergency , the Investigator can obtain the treatment assignment of any  patient at 
his or her study  centerthrough the I WRS. The Investigator will access the IWRS to break 
the blind and record the unblinding in the eCRF.
9.4.[ADDRESS_1079672] of example medications that are allowed and not allowed as concomitant 
medications for either epi[INVESTIGATOR_153874] . Medication 
history (psychotropic medication history  during the previous [ADDRESS_1079673] 12 months) will be recorded at Screening (Visit 1) in the 
eCRF. Thereafter, an y changes in concomitant medications or any  new medications 
added will be recorded in the eCRF.
35
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For Anxiety or Agitation
 
 
 
 

36
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
 
 
 
9.4.11 Other Restrictions
[IP_ADDRESS] Alcohol 
It is recommended that p atients abstain from alcohol consumption duringthe study.
[IP_ADDRESS] Contracept ion
For purposes of this study, females will be considered of childbearing potential unless 
they are naturall y postmenopausal or permanentl y sterilized (ie, hy sterectomy ). Natural 
menopause is defined as the permanent cessation of menstrual periods, determined 
retrospectivel y after a woman has experienced 12 months of amenorrhea without any  
other obvious pathological or phy siological cause . 
For women of childbearing potential and male partners of childbearing potential who 
may participate in the study , the following methods of contraception, if properly  used, are 
generally considered reliable: hormonal contraceptives (ie, oral, patch, injection, 
implant), male condom with intravaginal spermicide, diaphragm or cervical cap with 
spermicide, vaginal contraceptive ring, intrauterine device, surgical sterilization (bilateral 
tubal ligation, bilateral salpi[INVESTIGATOR_61502]), vasectomized partner, or sexual abstinence.
The Investigator and each patient will determine the appropriate method of contraception 
for the patient during the participation in the study .

[ADDRESS_1079674] patients bring their background ADT to 
Visits5, 8, and 11 for verification of patient- reported compliance by  [CONTACT_21173][INVESTIGATOR_692] (to the 
extent possible). Missed doses or other changes in the dose of ADT and the reason should 
be captured in the eCRF.
9.4.13 Treatment After Discontinuation
Patients whose MDD s ymptoms worsen or are determined by [CONTACT_153891] y controlled prior to completing the double -blind treatment period will be 
allowed to discontinue th e study and start appropriate treatment at the Investigator’s 
discretion. This new treatment will not be provided by  [CONTACT_1034]. Patients who initiate 
a new treatment must be discontinued from the study .
9.5 EFFICACY AND SAFETY VARIABLES
9.5.1 Diagnostic and Effica cy Assessments
[IP_ADDRESS] Diagnostic Assessments
The SCID will be administered during the screening interviews b y a psychiatrist, doctoral 
level clinical ps ychologist ,or other clinician who has extensive professional training and 
experience in the diagnosis of menta l illness and who meets the training requirements and 
qualifications standards set by  [CONTACT_153892].
38
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018Patients will complete a computer -administered Diagnostic Validation (Dx V) assessment 
at the Screening V isit prior to the rater -administered SCI D, on a tablet computer provided 
to the study  center. The DxV will collect data about the patients’ history relative to 
lifelong history  of MDD. The patient’s diagnostic information, based on the responses to 
the computerized interview, will be reviewed b y the independent clinical reviewers team 
appointed by  [CONTACT_1034], and any  uncertaint y raised by [CONTACT_102]’s responses on the 
diagnostic interview will be discussed with the Investigator/stud y center clinician in order 
to establish confiden ce in the diagnosis. Patients for whom diagnostic agreement between 
the Investigator/study  center clinician and the rater vendor clinician cannot be reached, 
may not be appropriate for study  participation.
 
 
 
 
 
[IP_ADDRESS] Efficacy Assessment s
The efficacy assessments (MADRS will be administered by a psychiatrist, 
doctoral level clinical psychologist, or other clinician who has extensive professional 
training and experience in the diagnosis of mental illness and who meets the training 
requirements and qualifications standards set b y the Sponsor and rater training vendor.
[IP_ADDRESS].1 The Montgomery -Åsberg Depression Rating Scale
The MADRS ( Montgomery  and Åsberg, 1979 ) is a clinician -rated scale. The MADRS 
will be used to assess depressive s ymptomatology  during the past week. Pa tients are rated 
on [ADDRESS_1079675]. Each item will be 
scored on a 7 -point scale. A score of 0 indicates the absence of s ymptoms, and a score of 
6 indicates sy mptoms of maximum severity . 
[IP_ADDRESS].1.1 MedAvante Central Ratings for MADRS
In order to control for possible bias in face -to-face ratings and to obtain a “blinded” 
rating of patient symptom severity  and change, blinded expert raters will administer, 
through remote teleconference, the MADRS. The remote (or centralized) raters will be 
blind to the study  design, entry  criteria, and visit number (except for Screening [Visit 1] 
and Baseline [Visit 2]).

[ADDRESS_1079676] be 
conducted in a private room, with the door closed and a stud y center representative 
(eg,study coordinator) maybe present during the rating session at the discretion of the 
Investigator .Every effort should be made to administer the MADRS prior to other 
assessments.
 
 
9.5.[ADDRESS_1079677] be documented. The procedures 
discussed below will be completed at the designated visits.
[IP_ADDRESS] Adverse Events
An AE is an y untoward medical occurrence in a patient or clinical investigation patient 
administere d a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have to have a 
causal relationship with this treatment. An AE can therefore be any  unfavorable and 
unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding, for example), symptom, or 
disease tempor ally associated with the use of a medicinal product, whether or not 
considered related to the medicinal product (ICH -E2A).
For the purpose of the study center’sdata collection responsibilities, any  untoward event 
that was reported from the time the patien
t signed the ICFuntil 30days after the final 
protocol-defined stud y visit or the last known dose of IP (if the final visit does not occur)
is to be considered an AE.
Examples of AEs are as follows:
Changes in the general condition of the patient
Subjective symptoms offered by  [CONTACT_44742]
Objective signs observed by  [CONTACT_651606]

40
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018All diseases that occur after signing inform edconsent, including an y change in 
severity or frequency of pre -existing disease
All clinically  relevant abnormalities in laboratory  values or clinicall y relevant 
physical findings that occur during the study  schedule
Please note that medical procedures scheduled prior to consenting, but occurring during 
the study should not be capture das AEs, but should be listed in the medical history  if 
related to a pre -existing condition .
[IP_ADDRESS].[ADDRESS_1079678] be recorded on the appropriate AE reporting page of the 
patient’s eCRF. Causal relationship must be assessed by [CONTACT_134868]:
Is there a reasonable possibility  the IPcaused the event?
Yes:There is evidence to suggest a causal relationship between the IPand AE,ie: 
There is a reasonable temporal relationship between the IPand the 
event, and/or 
The event is unlikel y to be attributed to underl ying/concurrent 
diseaseor other factors, and/or
Positive dechallenge and/or rechallenge exist
No:There is no evidence to suggest a causal relationship between the IPand AE, 
ie:
There is no reasonable temporal relationship between the IPand 
the event, or
The patient did not take the IP, or
The event is likel y to be attributed to underl ying/concurrent 
disease or other factors, or
The event is commonl y occurring in the (stud y) population 
independent of IPexposure
41
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov20189.[IP_ADDRESS] Severity Assessment
The Investigator will provide an assessment of the severit y of each AE b y recording a 
severity rating on the appropriate AE reporting page of the patient’s eCRF. Severity,
which is a description of the intensity  of manifestation of the AE, is distinct from 
seriousness,which implies a patient outcome or AE -required treatment measure 
associated with a threat to life or functionalit y (Section [IP_ADDRESS].3). Severity will be 
assessed according to the following scale:
Mild: A type of AE that is usually  transient and may  require only minimal 
treatment or therapeutic intervention. The event does not generally  
interfere with usual activities of daily  living.
Moderate :A type of AEthat is usually  alleviated with additional specific therapeutic 
intervention. The event interferes with usual activities of daily  living, 
causing discomfort , but poses no significant or permanent risk of harm to 
the research participant.
Severe: A type of AEthat interrupts usual activities of daily  living, or significantl y 
affects clinical status, or may require intensive therapeutic intervention.
[IP_ADDRESS].[ADDRESS_1079679] medical occurrence that at any  dose:
Results in death
Is life threatening
Requires inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081]
Results in persistent or significant disability /incapacity , or
Is a congenital anomal y/birth defect
Important medical events that may  not result in dea th, be life threatening, or require 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_44719], based on appropriate medical judgment, 
they may jeopardize the patient and may  require medical or surgical intervention to 
prevent one of the outcomes listed in this defini tion. Examples of such medical events 
include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at 
home, blood dy scrasias or convulsions that do not result in patient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or the 
development of IPdependency  or drug abuse.
Emergency  room visits that do not result in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_242295].
42
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018Preplanned hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602] ( eg, elective procedures for pre -existing conditions that did 
not worsen, such as cosmetic surgery  and hysterectomy ) are excluded from SAE 
reporting.
[IP_ADDRESS].[ADDRESS_1079680] occurred 
since the previous visit. Patients will be asked to volunteer information with a nonleading 
question such as, “How do y ou feel since your last visit?” Study  centerpersonnel will 
record all pertinent information in the patient’s eCRF. 
All AEs must be recorded on the appropriate AE reporting page of the patient’s eCRF 
whether or not they  are considered causally  related to the IP.
For every  AE, the Investigator must:
Provide an assessment of the seriousness of the event ( ie, is it an SAE?), as well as 
the severit y and casual relationshi p
Document all actions taken with regard to the IP
Detail any other treatment measures taken for the AE
Document the outcome of the AE
In addition, patients are to be reminded, as described in the I CF and in accordance with 
Section [IP_ADDRESS], to notify  study centerpersonnel of any AEs occurring during the 30 -day 
poststudy period. An y AEs reported b y the patient (or patient representative) during this 
period are to be re corded in original source documents. AEsare also to be recorded in the 
eCRF if at least one of the following condition sismet: 1) the event meets the criteria for 
an SAE (see Section [IP_ADDRESS].3and [IP_ADDRESS].4), and/or 2) the event is judged by  [CONTACT_242302] I P.
Any AEs that are ongoing at the time of the final protocol -defined stud y visit will be 
followed until the condition returns to prestudy  status, has resolved or stabilized, or can 
be explained as being unrelated to the IP. If a follow -up visit is deemed necessary  for 
appropriate safet y surveillance, it will take place within 30 day s of the final 
protocol-defined stud y visit.
43
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov20189.[IP_ADDRESS].1 MedAvante Reporting of Safety/Adverse Events
MedAvante Raters will complete a safety reporting form (ie, Potential Clinical Events 
Notification Form), including an additional risk assessment form if certain triggers are 
met during t heir interviews with the patientsat the study centers(ie, risk assessment 
forms for suicide, homicide, suspected child abuse, and suspected elder/dependent adult 
abuse). MedAvante Raters feel morally  and ethically  obligated to report this information 
to the study center, and the principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_651602] -up, including 
management of the patientand further reporting as necessary . 
Patientsmay spontaneously  report possible clinical events to the centralized rater during 
an assessment . Possible clinical events as determined by [CONTACT_651608] a central rater source document and will be forwarded to the study centerfor 
further evaluation at the conclusion of the assessment. I t is the study center’s
responsibil ity to determine, with further patientquestioning, whether this event qualifies 
as an AE or SAE and to adhere to the methods described in Section [IP_ADDRESS].[ADDRESS_1079681] b y the patient.
[IP_ADDRESS] Immediate Reporting of Serious Adverse Events and Events of 
Interest
The Sponsor is required to inform worldwide regulatory  authorities of SAEs that meet 
specific criteria. Therefore, the Sponsor must be notified immediately  regarding an y SAE 
that occurs after informed consent is obtained.
Within [ADDRESS_1079682] be 
recorded on the appropriate pages of the patient’s eCRF. All SAEs are to be followed b y 
the study staff until resolution or until the SAE is deemed stable. The Sponsor may  
contact [CONTACT_784814].
Fax the SAE Form for Clinical Trials to the Sponsor .
[IP_ADDRESS] Reporting of Pregnancies Occurring During the Study
Study centerpersonnel must report every  pregnancy  from the time the patient signs the 
ICF until [ADDRESS_1079683] ug Safety on the Clinical 
Trial Pregnancy  Form and fax it to the SAE/ Pregnancy fax number provided in 
Section9.5.2.2, even if no AE has occurred. Pregnancies in f emale partners of male 
patients occurring during the time frame described above must also be reported. 
Any pregnancy  of a patient treated with IP (or in female partners of male patients 
occurring during the time frame described above) must be followed to term and the 
outcome reported b y completing a follow -up Clinical Trial Pregnancy  Form. If the 
pregnancy  is associated with an SAE (eg, if the mother is hospi[INVESTIGATOR_143460]), a 
separate SAE Form for Clinical Trials must be filed as described in Sect ion9.5.2.2
, with 
the appropriate serious criterion (eg, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]) indicated in addition to the 
pregnancy  form.

45
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

46
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

48
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018Whenever possible, the patient’s weight willbe measured at the same time of day ; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

[ADDRESS_1079684] 3 study  visits 
per week. The visits occur in the following pattern: treatment day , 1 day following the 
treatment day , 4 days following 
the treatment day , and 7 day s following the treatment day  
(which is the next treatment day ).If necessary , study visits may  be conducted up to 
2days before or after the scheduled visits with the exception of visits that are 24 hours 
apart(ie, Visits [ADDRESS_1079685] be conducted 1 day  apart; s
imilarly,Visits [ADDRESS_1079686] be conducted 1 day  apart). Upon completion of the double-blind 
treatment period ,
patients are eligible to enter the RAP-MD-04 maint enance study  or 
enter a 1-week s
afety follow-u p period.
 
 
 

52
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
 
 
 

53
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
 
 
 

54
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
 

55
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
 
 
 

56
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 

57
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018  
 
 
 

58
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
 
 
 
 

59
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
 
[IP_ADDRESS] Unscheduled Visits
Unscheduled visits can be performed if safet y concerns arise and at the discretion of the 
Investigator. Additional examinations may  be performed as necessary  to ensure the safet y 
and well-being of the patients during the study .

60
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov20189.6 DATA QUALITY ASSURANCE
9.6.1 Data Monitoring
Before an y patient enters the study , a representative of the Sponsor will meet with the 
Investigator and the study  center staff to review the procedures to be followed during the 
study. Electronic data capture (EDC) functionality  training is provided via 
computer -based training to train investigators and authorized designees on recording the 
data in the eCRFs using the EDC sy stem. After the first patient is enrolled, the Sponsor
representative, a Regional Site Manager or designee , will periodicall y monitor the 
progress of the stud y by [CONTACT_143505] -site visits. This Regional Site Manager or 
designee will review query  statuses remotel y, possibly  warranting more frequent 
communication and/ or study center visits with the Investigator and the study  centerstaff. 
The Investigator will make available to the Regional Site Manager or designee source 
documents (written notes and electronic medical records, if used), signed consent forms, 
and all other stud y-related documents. The Investigator and the study  centerstaff will be 
responsible for data entry of patient data into the eCRFs via the EDC sy stem, resolving 
data queries generated via the EDC s ystem and providing missing or corrected data. The
Investigator or designee will be responsible for approving all changes performed on the 
data, and endorsing the patient data within the EDC sy stem. This approval method will 
include appl ying an electronic signature [CONTACT_153914] a uniquely  assigned username a nd 
password that together will represent a traditional handwritten signature [CONTACT_153916].
9.6.[ADDRESS_1079687] access. Patient’s data are to be entered into the EDC sy stem by [CONTACT_651610]. After data entry  into the 
EDC system by [CONTACT_18370], a combination of manual and programmatic 
edit checks will be used to review the d ata for completeness, logic, and adherence to 
study protocol. As a result of these edit checks, data monitoring ,and reviews, queries 
may be electronicall y issued to the study  centerand should be answered electronicall y via 
the EDC sy stem.
Each query  willcarry identifying information (assigned username, date, and time) to 
assist 
the Sponsor and the Investigator on the origin of the data clarification request and 
the response provided b y the Investigator. All data changes made to the patient’s data via 
a data query will be approved by  [CONTACT_143506].
After all data have been reviewed and all issues have been resolved, the database will be 
locked.
[ADDRESS_1079688]  as to guarantee patient confidentiality  in accordance with the 
legal stipulations apply ing to confidentiality  of data. Study  records (eg, copi[INVESTIGATOR_1495], 
laboratory  reports, and regulatory  documents) will be retained at the study center, along 
with adequate source documentation, according to FDA and ICH requirements. All study  
records must be available for inspection b ythe Sponsor, its authorized representatives, 
the FDA, or other health authorities.
 
 Source documents will be used 
at the study centersand may include a patient’s medical record, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1332], clinic 
charts, the I nvestigator’s patient study  files, as well as the results of diagnostic tests such 
as laboratory  tests, ECGs ,etc. Acentralized clinical laboratory  will be used for the 
analysis of all blood samples. Additional information on the collection and handling of 
samples is detailed in the L ab Procedure Manual.
9.7 STATISTICAL METHODS AND DETERMINATION OF
SAMPLE SIZE
9.7.1 Analysis Populations
Threepopulations will be considered in the statisti cal analysis of the study ,as specified 
in the following subsections.
[IP_ADDRESS] Enrolled Population
The Enrolled Population will consist of all patients who sign informed consent, receive a 
patient identification ( PID)number, and enter into screening .
[IP_ADDRESS] Safety Population
The Safet y Population will consist of all patients who receiveat least 1 dose of 
randomized IP.
[IP_ADDRESS] Modified Intent-to-Treat Population
The modified Intent-to-Treat (mITT) Population will consist of all patients who are 
randomized, 
receiveat least1 dose of IP and haveat least 1 postbaseline assessment of 
the MADRS total score. 

62
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov20189.7.2 PatientDisposition
The number and percentage of patients in theEnrolled, Safety, and mITTpopulations
will be summarized by  [CONTACT_44747].
Screen-failurepatients(ie, patients screened but not included in the Enrolled 
Population ) and the associated reasons for failure to randomize will be tabulated overall 
for all screened patients . 
The number and percentage of patients in the mITT Population who complete the 
double-blind treatment period and ofpatients who prematurel y discontinue during the 
same period will be presented for each treatment group and pooled across treatment 
groups. The reasons for premature discontinuation duringthe double- blind treatment 
periodas recorded on the disposition pages of the eCRFs will be summarized by 
[CONTACT_153898].
9.7.3 Demographics and Other Baseline Characteristics
Demographic parameters ( eg, age, race, ethnicit y, sex, weight, height, body mass index ) 
and other baseline characteristics will be summarized by  [CONTACT_44748] y 
and mITT populations. 
9.7.4 Extent of Exposure and Treatment Compliance
[IP_ADDRESS] Extent of Exposure
Patients in the Safety Population will be categorized by [CONTACT_3433] e number of IP doses 
received. The number and percent ageof patients in each category will be summarized 
by [CONTACT_1570].
Prior medication is defined as an y medication taken before the date of the first dose of 
randomized I P. Concomitant medication is defined as a ny medication taken on or after 
the date of the first dose of I P. 
Both prior and concomitant medication use will be summarized by [CONTACT_784815]. Multiple medication use by a patient will 
only be counted once.
63
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018IV administration notes including site reaction at placement of IV, reaction to 
adhesive, infusion interruption, failure of administration device, increase in suicidality 
based on clinical evaluation, and perceptual disturbance based on mental s tatus 
assessment are collected. For each item, the number and percentage of patients who 
had a ‘yes’ response will be summarized by [CONTACT_651612] .The number and percentage of patients taking each qualifying ADT will be 
summarized by  [CONTACT_153898]. Mean daily  dose foreach 
qualifying ADT will be summarized using descriptive statistics (number of patients, 
mean, standard de viation [SD], median, Q1, Q3,minimum, and maximum) by [CONTACT_651613].
[IP_ADDRESS] Measurement of Treatment Compliance
Dosing compliance for the background ADT during a specified period is defined as the 
total daily dose administered to a patient during that period divided by [CONTACT_784816] 100, as captured in the eCRF.. 
Descriptive statistics for ADT compliance will be presented for each ADT and overal lby 
[CONTACT_153898].
9.7.[ADDRESS_1079689] dose of randomized treatment. All statistical hy pothesis tests will be performed at the 
2-sided 5% significance level for main effects. All confidence intervals (CIs) will be 
2-sided 95% CIs, unless stated otherwise.
For efficacy  analyses in which study  center is a factor, a small center will be defined as a 
center with < 2 patients in ≥ 1 treatment group in the mITT Population. Small centers will 
be pooled to form pseudo -centers so that each treatment group includes ≥ 2 mITT 
patients within the center. Details of the pooling algorithm will be provided in the 
Statistical Analysis Plan ( SAP).
64
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov20189.7.5.1 Primary Efficacy Parameter
The primary  efficacy parameter will be the change from baseline in MADRS total score 
at end of study . The primary  analysis will be performe d using a mixed-effects model for 
repeated measures (MMRM )with treatment group, pooled study  center,visit and 
randomized treatment -by-visit interaction as the fixed effects , and baseline MADRS 
total score and baseline MADRS total score -by-visit interaction as covariates . An 
unstructured covariance matrix will be used to model the covari ance of within -patient 
scores. The Kenward- Roger approximation will be used to estimate the denominator 
degrees of freedom ( Kenward et al, 1997; Kenward et al, 2003). The treatment 
difference for rapastinel versus placebo will be estimated and reported along with the 
corresponding 95% CI  and nominalp-value.
In the case that the MMRM model with unstructured covariance fails to converge with 
thedefault algorithm, then the Fisher scoring algorithm will be used to provide better 
initial values of the covariance parameters; if the model still does not converge, a 
simplified model without term for study center will be used to find the initial values of 
the covariance parameters. In the rare event that the model still does not converge after 
using those initial values, simplified covariance structures will be used to fit the model 
in the following order: (1) ante -dependence, (2) heterogeneous autoregr essive, 
(3) Toeplitz, and (4) compound symmetry.
To assess the robustness of the primary MMRM results to the possible violation of the 
missing-at-random assumption, a sensitivity analysis using a pattern -mixture model 
based on non -future dependent missing value restrictions ( Kenward et al, 2003 ) will be 
performed. The pattern for the pattern -mixture model will be defined by [CONTACT_102]’s 
last visit with observed value. The observed MADRS total score at a visit is assumed to 
have a linear relationship with the patient’s prior measurements. The missing values 
will be imputed under the assumption that the distribution of the missing observations 
differs from the observed only by a shift parameter value Δ. The dataset with missing 
values will be analyzed using the same model as the primary analysis for between-
treatment group comparisons at the end of the treatment. The imputation of missing 
values and the analysis will be performed multiple times and the inference of this 
sensitivity analysis will be based on the combined estimates using the standard multiple 
imputation technique. The values ofΔ will be selected as 0 to 8.
[IP_ADDRESS] Key Secondary Efficacy Parameter
The key secondary  efficacy parameter will be the change from baseline to [ADDRESS_1079690] dose of treatment in MADRS total score. Thisparameter will be anal yzed using the 
same MMRMas will beused for the primary efficacy param eter.The treatment 
difference for rapastinel versus placebo will be estimated and reported along with the 
corresponding 95% CI and nominalp-value.
65
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018A sequential testing procedure will be used to control the overall type I error rate at 
5% for the primary andsecondary efficacy parameters. 
 
 
 
 
 

66
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[IP_ADDRESS] Adverse Events
All AEswill be coded b y system organ class and preferred term using the Medical 
Dictionary for Regulatory Activities .

67
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018An AE (classified b y preferred term) will be considered a treatment -emergent adverse 
event (TEAE) if it was notpresent beforethe first dose of IP or was present before the 
date of the first dose of IP and increased in severity after the first dose of IP. An AE that 
becomes serious after the date of first dose of IP will also be considered as a TEAE.
If more than [ADDRESS_1079691] causalit y for the summarization by  [CONTACT_651615].
Aserious adverse event (SAE)that occurred between the date of the first dose of IP and 
[ADDRESS_1079692] dose of IP, inclusive, will be considered a treatment-
emergent SAE(TESAE) . The number and percentage of patients who have TESAEs will 
be summarized by  [CONTACT_153906]. In addition, the incidence of 
TESAEs that lead to death will be summarized separatel y by [CONTACT_651616].
Overall summaries of AEs will be provided on a per
-patient bas is for categories of all 
TEAEs, treatment -related TEAEs, TE SAEs, and TEAEs leading to study 
discontinuation.
 
 
 

68
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

69
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.7.8 Interim Analysis
At the time of preparation for Protocol Amendment 2, a blinded interim analysis 
was performed as part of data quality review as the study was progressing. In this 
review, it was observed that the SDfor the primary and secondary endpoints were 
substantially lower than the originally assumed values for sample size calculations. 
The observed SDs in the blinded reviews of this study and other ongoing acute 
studies at the same time (RAP -MD-01 and RAP -MD-02) were taken into 
consideration for revising the estimate of the sample size as proposed in the next 
section (Section 9.7.9Determination of Sample Size) . 
9.7.[ADDRESS_1079693] dose of treatment. The study was 
planned to randomize 700 patients assuming SD of 10 points, which prov ides 99% 
power to detect a difference of 3.[ADDRESS_1079694] visit, Da y 21,and included in Amendment 2 of 
the protocol. At the same time of Amendment 2, a blinded data review was 
conducted for Studies RAP -MD-01, RAP-MD-02, and RAP -MD-03. The pooled SD 
for the 3 studies were 7.4, 8.0, and 8.7, respectively, all smaller than the originally 
assumed 10 points. Sample size was re- calculated using 8.7 as the common SD. The 
calculation used MMRM model with simulations; it also assumed correlation of 0.5 
between the repeated measures and an overall drop -out rate of 15%. To have 90% 
power, the total sample size required is 360 patients. However, the study had 
already enrolled more than 390 patients with less than 5% of overall drop -out rate, 
surpassing the re -estimated sample size of 360 patients. The study enrollment was 
halted as s oon as operationally feasible. The final sample size is approximately 420 
patients (210 patients pertreatment group).
9.7.10 Computer Methods
Statistical analy ses will be performed using version 9.3 (or newer) of SAS.
9.[ADDRESS_1079695]
The study  will be conducted under the supervision of an independent DSMB tobe 
chartered to review safety  data at predetermined points during the study .The DSMB may  
also decide to meet and review safety data at other timepoints should it be deemed 
necessary .The DSM B is responsible for the ongoing review of safety data in the clinical 
studyand for making recommendations concerning the continuation, modification, and 
termination of the study (FDA Guidance for Clinical Trial Sponso rs: Establishment and 
Operation of Clinical Trial Data Monitoring Committees, March 2006 ).
All analyses that are required to support the DSMB will be performed b y anindependent
unblinded statistician not otherwise involved in the study. Details of the DSMB 
membership, meeting schedule, and data review and anal ysis will be documented in the 
DSMB Charter.
[ADDRESS_1079696] OF THE STUDY OR P LANNED 
ANALYSES
Any amendment to this protocol will be provided to the Investigator in writing by  [CONTACT_429]. No protocol amendment may  be implemented (with the exceptions noted below) 
before it has been approved by  [CONTACT_242317], signed by  [CONTACT_3786] , has been received by  [CONTACT_1034] . If the protocol is amended to eliminate or 
reduce the risk to patients, the amendment may  be implemented before IRB review and 
approval. However, the IRB must be informed in writing of such an amendment, and 
approval must be obtained within reasonable time limits. 
9.10 PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS
A protocol deviation is any change, divergence, or departure from the study  design or 
procedures that is under the I nvestigator’s responsibility  and oversight (as defined by  
[CONTACT_19124]) without prior written IRB approval or favorable opi[INVESTIGATOR_134844] a major impact on the patient’s rights, safety , or 
wellbeing, or on the integrity and authenticity of the study data. Deviations may include, 
but are not limited to, departure from inclusion/exclusion criteria, dosing, duration of 
treatment, failure to perform the required assessments at specified timepoints, scheduling 
of visits not in accordance with specifications, or patient safet y. Deviating from the 
protocol is permitted only if absolutel y necessary  for the safet y or clinical management of 
the patients and must immediately  be reported to the Sponsor .
Asignificant protocol deviation is a form of protocol deviation that has a major impact 
on the patient’s rights, safety , or well-being, or on the integrit y and authenticity  of the 
study data.Important protocol deviations must be reported to the Sponsor within 
24hours, if possible. The I RB must be notified within the time period dictated by  [CONTACT_784817]. 
[ADDRESS_1079697] to mutual agreement between 
the Investigator and the Sponsor and will follow 
the Sponsor’s S tandard O perating 
Procedureon publications.
[ADDRESS_1079698] provide the following to the Sponsorbeforethe start of the study :
A completed and signed Form FDA 1572. If,during the course of the study ,any 
changes are made that are not reflected on Form FDA 1572, a new Form FDA [ADDRESS_1079699] be completed and returned to the Sponsor for submission to the FDA
A fully executed contract
The curriculavitae for the Investigator and all subinvestigator s listed on Form FDA 
1572, including a cop y of each ph ysician’s license
A copy of the original IRB approval for conducting the study . If the study is ongoing, 
renewals must be submitted at yearly intervals . All subsequent modifications must be 
submitted and approved by [CONTACT_1201], as stated in Section 5.1.
A copy of the IRB -approved ICF
A copy of the H IPAA authorization form , or other local privacy applicable forms
A list of the IRB members or the US Department of Health and Human Services 
general assurance number
A copy of the laboratory  certifications and reference ranges
The Investigator ’s Statement page in this protocol signed and dated by  [CONTACT_3786]
Financial disclosure agreement ,completed and signed by  [CONTACT_153909] s listed on Form FDA 1572. The Investigator and all subinvestigator s 
will provide an updated financial disclosure agreement to the Sponsor1 year after the 
completion of the study .
11.[ADDRESS_1079700] each patient’s use . All unused IPmust be returned to the Sponsor . 
11.[ADDRESS_1079701] of this study , including eCRFs
, source 
documents, consent forms, regulatory  documents, clinical laboratory  results, calibrati on 
logs,or reports (including, but not limited to, all local and central laboratory  results and 
ECG reports), and medication inventory  records in all formats (including, but not limited 
to, written, electronic, magnetic, and optical records, and scans, x -rays, and ECGs) must 
be retained b y the Investigator for a period of at least [ADDRESS_1079702] 
be notified in writing of the name [CONTACT_784818].
76
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov201811.6 PATIENT CONFIDENTIALITY
All patientrecords will only  be identified by [CONTACT_44750][INVESTIGATOR_44723]. Patients’ names are 
not to be transmitted to the Sponsor. The Investigator will keep a m aster patientlist on 
which the PI [INVESTIGATOR_44724], address, and telephone number of each patient
are listed.
77
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov201812.0 INVESTIGATOR’S STATE MENT
I agree to conduct the study  in accordance with this protocol ( RAP-MD-03Amendment 
2, dated 20Nov2018) and with all applicable government regulations and good clinical 
practiceguidance.
_______________________________________ _____/_____/______
Investigator ’s Signature [CONTACT_1782]
_______________________________________
Investigator ’s Name
[ADDRESS_1079703] 
include the following items:
A statement that the study involves research and an e xplanation of the purposes of the 
research; a description of the procedures to be followed and the identification of any  
procedures that are experimental; and the expected duration of the patient’s 
participation
A description of an y reasonably  foreseeable risks or discomforts to the patient
A description of an y benefits to the patientor to others that may  reasonably  be 
expected from the research
. If the patientis to be paid for participating in the study , 
the consent form must state the amount that he/she will receive and the schedule of 
payment (to ensure neither coercion nor undue influence).
A disclosure of appropriate alternative procedures or courses of treatment, if an y, that 
might be advantageous to the pa tient
A statement describing the extent, if any , to which confidentiality  of records 
identifying the patient will be maintained and noting the possibility  that the FDA, the 
Sponsor, the IRB,or an authorized contract research organization may  inspect the 
records
For research involving more than minimal risk, an explanation of whether any  
medical treatment is available if injury  occurs and, if so, what it consists of or where 
further information may  be obtained
An explanation of whom to contact, including th e relevant telephone number, for 
answers to pertinent questions about the research and the research patient’s rights and 
whom to contact [CONTACT_44751] a research -related injury  to the patient . (Note: In 
some cases ,it may be necessary  to identify  a person other than the Investigator as the 
contact. The guidance of the I RB may be required)
A statement that participation is voluntary , that refusal to participate will involve no 
penalty or loss of benefits to which the patientis otherwise entitled, and that the 
patientmay discontinue participation at any  time without penalty  or loss of benefits to 
which the patient is otherwise entitled
A statement that the particular treatment or procedures may  involve risks to the 
patient(or to the embry o or fetus if the patientis, or may  become, pregnant) that are 
at present unforeseeable
80
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018The expected circumstances forwhich the patient ’s participation may  be terminated 
by [CONTACT_242319]’s consent
Any additional costs to the patient that may result from participation in the research
The consequences of a patient’s decision to withdraw from the research and 
procedures for an orderly termination of the patient’s participation
A statement that significant new findings developed during t he course of the research 
that may relate to the patient’s willingness to continue participation will be provided 
to the patient
The approximate number of patients involved in the study
A statement of permission, providing consent for the patient to participate
(eg, “I agree to participate . . .”)
A place for the patient’s signature [CONTACT_153919]
A statement indicating that information about this study  has been, or will be, entered 
into a databank that is publicly  accessible at www.ClinicalTr ials.gov.
A copy of the signed consent form must be given to the patient.
[ADDRESS_1079704] information for the Sponsor personnel is maintained in the Study  Reference 
Manual.
82
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

83
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

84
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

85
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

86
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

87
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

88
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

89
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

90
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

91
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018APPENDIX V.MONTGOMERY -ASBERG DEPRESSION RA TING SCALE
1. APPARENT SADNESS —Representing despondency , gloom and despair (more than 
just ordinary  transient low spi[INVESTIGATOR_2120]) reflected in speech, facial expression, and posture. 
Rate by [CONTACT_153911].
0No sadness.
[ADDRESS_1079705] of the time.
5
6Looks miserable all the time. Extremely  despondent.
2.REPORTED SADNESS —Representing reports of depressed mood, regardless of 
whether it is reflected in appearance or not. Includes low spi[INVESTIGATOR_2120], despondency , or the 
feeling of being bey ond help and without hope. Rate according to intensity, duration 
and the extent to which the mood is reported to be influenced b y events.
0Occasional sadness in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_153878].
1
2Sad or low but brightens up without difficulty .
3
4Pervasive feelings of sadness or gloominess. The mood is still influenced by  
[CONTACT_182138].
5
6Continuous or unvary ing sadness, misery  or despondency .
3INNER TENSION —Representing feelings of ill -defined discomfort, edginess, inner 
turmoil, mental tension mounting to either panic, dread, or anguish. Rate according to 
intensity, frequency , duration, and the extent of reassurance called for.
0Placid. Only  fleeting inner tension.
1
2Occasional feelings of edginess and ill -defined discomfort.
3
4 Continuous feelings of inner tension or intermittent panic which the patient can 
only master with some difficulty .
5
6 Unrelenting dread or anguish. O verwhelming panic.
92
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov20184.REDUCED SLEEP —Representing the experience of reduced duration or depth of 
sleep compared to the patient’s own normal pattern when well.
0Sleeps as usual.
[ADDRESS_1079706] 2 hours.
5
6Less than 2or 3 hours sleep.
5. REDUCED APPETITE —Representing the feeling of a loss of appetite compared 
with when well. Rate b y loss of desire for food or the need to force oneself to ea t.
0 Normal or increased appetite.
1
2Slightly reduced appetite.
3
4No appetite. Food is tasteless.
5
6 Needs persuasion to eat at all.
6.CONCENTRATION DIFFICULTIES —Representing difficulties in collecting 
one’s thoughts mounting to incapacitating lac k of concentration. Rate according to 
intensity, frequency , and degree of incapacit y produced.
0No difficulties in concentrating.
1
2 Occasional difficulties in collecting one’s thoughts.
3
4Difficulties in concentrating and sustaining thought which reduces ability  to read 
or hold a conversation.
5
6Unable to read or converse without great difficulty.
93
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov20187.LASSITUDE —Representing a difficulty getting started or slowness initiating and 
performing every day activities.
0Hardly any difficulty getting star ted. No sluggishness.
1
2Difficulties in starting activities.
3
4Difficulties in starting simple routine activities which are carried out with effort.
5
6 Complete lassitude. Unable to do any thing without help.
8.INABILITY TO FEEL —Representing the subjective experience of reduced interest 
in the surroundings, or activities that normally  give pleasure. The abilit y to react with 
adequate emotion to circumstances or people is reduced.
[ADDRESS_1079707] in the surroundings. Loss of feelings for friends and 
acquaintances.
5
6The experience of being emotionally  paralyzed, inability  to feel anger, grief or 
pleasure and a complete or even painful f ailure to feel for close relatives or 
friends.
9.PESSIMISTIC THOUGHTS —Representing thoughts of guilt, inferiority, 
self-reproach, sinfulness, remorse and ruin.
[ADDRESS_1079708] and unshakable.
94
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov201810.SUICIDAL THOUGH TS—Representing the feeling that life is not worth living, 
that a natural death would be welcome, suicidal thoughts, and preparations for 
suicide. Suicidal attempts should not in themselves influence the rating.
0Enjoys life or takes it as it comes.
1
2Weary of life. Onl y fleeting suicidal thoughts.
3
4Probably better off dead. Suicidal thoughts are common, and suicide is considered 
as a possible solution, but without specific plans or intention.
5
6 Explicit plans for suicide when there is an opportu nity. Active preparations for 
suicide.
95
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

96
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

97
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

98
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

99
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

100
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

101
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

102
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

103
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

104
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

105
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

106
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

107
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

108
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

109
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

110
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

111
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018

112
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov201814.0 LITERATURE CITED
Abilify [package insert]. Toky o, Japan; Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., L td. December 2014.
American Ps ychiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders: DSM-5. Washington, D C: American Psychiatric Association
Ashton AK, Jamerson BD, Weinstein W, et al. Antidepressant-related adverse effects 
impacting treatment compliance: Results of a patient survey. Current Therapeutic 
Research, Clinical and Experimental 2005;66(2):96 -
106.doi:10.1016/j.curtheres.2005.04.006.
Berman RM, Marcus RN, Swanink R, et al. The efficacy  and safety  of aripi[INVESTIGATOR_153881] y in major depressive disorder: a multicenter, randomized, double -blind, 
placebo-controlled study . J Clin Psy chiatry 2007;68(6):843 -53.
Boland RJ, Keller MB. Treatment of depression. In: Schatzberg AF, Nemeroff CB, 
editors. Essentials of clinical psy chopharmacology . 2nd ed. Arlington, VA: American 
Psychiatric Publishing, Inc.; 2006. p 465-78.
Bremner JD, Kry stal JH, Putnam FW, et al. Measurement of dissociative states with the 
Clinician Administered Dissociative States Scale (CADSS). J Trauma Stress 
1998;11:125 –36.
EMA/CHMP/185423/2010 Rev. 2 previously  (CPMP/EWP/518/97, Rev. 1) Committee 
for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP) 30 May 2013 Guideline on clinical 
investigation of medicinal products in the treatment of depression
Fava M, Davidson KG. Definition and epi[INVESTIGATOR_153880] -resistant depression. 
Psychiatr Clin No rth Am. 1996 Jun;19(2):179 -200.
FDA Guidance for Clinical Trial Sponsors: Establishment and Operation of Clinical Trial 
Data Monitoring Committees, March 2006 
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/RegulatoryInformation/Guidan ces/ucm127073.pdf
FDA Guidance for Industry : Drug Induced L iver Injury -Pre-Marketing Clinical 
Evaluation ,July 2009
FDA Guidance for Industry : E10, Choice of Control Group and Related Issues in 
ClinicalTrials, May  2001
Feifel D. The use of placebo -controlled clinical trials for the approval of psy chiatric 
drugs: Part I— Statistics and the Case for the “Greater Good”. Ps ychiatry (Edgemont) 
2008; 6(3)41–43
113
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018Gispen-de Wied C, Stoy anova V, Yu Y, et al. The placebo arm in clinical studies for 
treatment of Psy chiatric Disorders: A Regulatory  Dilemma. Eur Neurops ychopharmacol, 
2012;14 June (published ahead of print)
Greenberg PE, Kessler RC, Birnbaum HG, et al . The economic burden of depression in 
the [LOCATION_002]: how did it change between 1990 and 2000? J Clin Psy chiatry 
2003;64(12):[ADDRESS_1079709];21(7):623 -43.
Guy W: ECDEU Assessment Manual for Ps ychopharmacology -Revised, in 
(edDHEWPubl No ADM 76- 338). Rockville, MD, U.S., U.S. Department of Health, 
Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, a nd Mental Health 
Administration, NI MH Psychopharmacology  Research Branch, Division of Extramural 
Research Programs, 1976, pp 218-222
Herdman M, Gudex C, Lloy d A, et al. Development and preliminary  testing of the new 
five-level version of EQ- 5D (EQ-5D-5L). Qual Life Res.2011 Dec; 20 (10):1727-36.
Kenward MG, Molenberghs G, Thijs H. Pattern -mixture models with proper time 
dependence. Biometrika 2003; 90(1): 53-[ADDRESS_1079710] MG, Roger JH. Small sample inference for fixed effects from restricted 
maximum likelihood . Biometrics 1997; 53:983 -97
Kessler RC, McGonagle KA, Zhao S, et al. Lifetime and 12 -month prevalence of DSM -
III-R psychiatric disorders in the [LOCATION_002]: results from the National Comorbidity  
Study. Arch Gen Psy chiatry 1994;51:8-19.
Kessler RC, Chiu WJ, Demler O, et al . Prevalence, severit y, and comorbidity  of 12-
month DSM -IV disorders in the National Comorbidity  Survey. Arch Gen Psy chiatry 
2005;62(6): 617 -27.
Laughren TP. The scientific and ethical basis for placebo -controlled trials in depression 
and schizophrenia: an FDA perspective. Eur Ps ychiatry. 2001; 16(7):[ADDRESS_1079711], Carson WH, et al. The efficacy  and safet y of aripi[INVESTIGATOR_153881] y in major depressive disorder: a second multicenter, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled study .J Clin Psy chopharmacol 2008;28(2):156 -65.
Masand PS. Tolerability  and adherence issues in antidepressant therapy . Clin Ther 
2003;25(8):2289 -304.
114
Naurex, Inc
RAP-MD-03 Protocol Amendment 2 20Nov2018McIntyre RS and O’Donovan C . The human cost of not achieving full remission in 
depression. Can J Psy chiatry 2004;49(suppl 1):10S -16S.
Montgomery  SA, Åsberg M. A new depression scale designed to be sensitive to change. 
Br J Psychiatry 1979; 134:382 -9
Murray CJ, Atkinson C, Bhalla K, et al. The state of US health, 1990- 2010: burden of 
diseases, injuries, and risk factors. JAMA 2013;310(6):591 -608.
Newport DJ, Carpenter LL, McDonald WM, et al . Ketamine and other NMDA 
antagonists: earl y clinical trials and possible mechanisms in d epression. Am J Psy chiatry 
2015;172(10):[ADDRESS_1079712]. The brief ps ychiatric rating scale. Psychological Reports 
1962;10:799 -812.
Rapastinel: I nvestigator’s Brochure. Edition 7. Evanston, IL : Naurex, I nc; 01Jul2014. 
Rexulti [package insert] . Tokyo, Japan; Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., L td. August 2015.
Rosenzweig -Lipson S, Beyer CG, Hughes ZA, et al . Differentiating antidepressants of 
the future: efficacy  and safet y. Pharmacol Ther 2007;113(1):134-53.
Rush AJ, Trivedi MH, Wisniewski SR, et al . Acute and longer -term outcomes in 
depressed outpatients req uiring one or several treatment steps: a STAR*D report. Am J 
Psychiatry 2006;163:1905 -17.
Sachdev P . The epi[INVESTIGATOR_153882]-induced akathisia part II. Chronic, tardive, and 
withdrawal akathisias . Schizophren Bull 1995;21(3):451 -61.
Seroquel [package insert] . Wilmington, DE; [COMPANY_008] Pharmaceuticals LP . October 
2013.
Smith DW andJones KL(1982). Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation. (3 ed.) 
Philadelphia: Saunders.
Trivedi MH, Fava M, Wisniewski SR, et al. Medication augmentations after the failure of 
SSRIs for depression. N Engl J Med 2006;354(12):1243-52.
Videbech P and Ravnkilde B . Hippocampal volume and depression: a meta -analysis of 
MRI studies. Am J Psy chiatry 2004;161:1957-66.
World Health Organization. Mental health: new understanding , new hope . World Health 
Report 2001