Study Protocol and Statis tical Analysis Plan  
 
Title: Effects of an exercise program for people with diabetic foot ulcers:  A feasibility study with 
outcomes  
 
Registration number : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Document date: Updated 2022- 07-07 
  
Aim of study : 
This research aimed  to address the  concerning cycle of deconditioning and disablement in people 
with DFUs by [CONTACT_2359] a seated exercise intervention to improve meaningful health and 
quality of life outcomes. We examined t he feasibility of conducting a randomized controlled trial  
to assess the effects of [ADDRESS_938339]- care control 
group, who were instructed not to engage in regular exercise (i.e., not to change their current habit of no regular exercise).  
 Materials and m ethods  
A pi[INVESTIGATOR_691853] . Study participants were randomly assigned to 
a group- based exercise program with a seated option for participation ( the EnhanceFitness 
intervention, described below) or to the control group. Participants in the exercise group attended  
fitness classes for a 12 -week period; those in the control group receive d standard care, which did 
not include exercise. Both groups of participants were assessed at two time points, baseline and 
12-week follow -up. 
 
Participants  
Participants  (target n=40) were enrolled and randomly assigned to either the intervention or 
control group. A randomi zation schedule was created  using random number generator in 
Microsoft Excel (Micro soft Corporation, Redmond, [LOCATION_003]). The  study research  coordinator 
created the randomization schedule for 40 potential participants prior to any study enrollment . 
Group assignment  was placed in sealed envelopes to blind study investigators to randomization 
allocation. Correspo nding e nvelopes  were not opened until  the participant  was enroll ed into the 
study.   Eligibility criteria for this study include d: (1) 18 or more years of age, (2) diagnosis of diabetes, 
(3) current or recently -healed  DFU (in the last six  months) , (4) and able to attend regular 
exercise classes and two data collection sessions. Exclusion criteria included: (1) medical conditions where aerobic or resistance exercise was  contraindicated
8 (e.g., uncontrolled 
cardiovascular problems), (2) a score of less than 18 on the Montreal Cognitive Assessment 
indicating moderate cognitive impairment,9 (3) response from primary physician requesting that 
the particip ant not engage in exercise, (4) current participation in a regular exercise program 
(more than 30 minutes, more than 2 times a week).  
 
Study participants were recruited from podiatry and wound care c linics in the metro area using 
posted recruitment materials. Potential participants were also identified through targeted 
mailings to patients in the University of Washington medical system with ICD -10 codes that 
indicate the presence of a DFU. Interested patients were screened by [CONTACT_691855], if eligible to participate, were  enrolled and randomized to either the exercise 
group or the control group. For those randomized to the exercise group, we sent a letter to each 
participant’s primary physician to inform them of participatio n in the EnhanceFitness program . 
Physicians  were asked to respond if their patient should not engage in moderate, non -weight 
bearing exercise. Informed consent was  obtained from all participants prior to their involvement 
in the study.   Outcomes   
Feasibil ity Outcomes. We assess ed feasibility outcomes to inform future, large -scale RCT 
research in this area. The feasibility of conducting a RCT to assess effects of seated exercise in people with DFUs was evaluated using the following parameters: (1) r ecruitment and retention; 
(2) adherence to the exercise protocol; (3) participant satisfaction with the exercise program; and 
(4) presence of serious adverse events. Retention was quantified as the p ercent of participants 
that completed the study ( i.e., attended both the baseline and 12- week follow up appointments ), 
as well as percent of those who withdrew during the study or were lost to follow -up in each arm.  
Adherence was quantified as percent  of exercise sessions attended by [CONTACT_691856] (out of 36 possible sessions) . Satisfaction with EnhanceFitness was  quantified as 
a continuous score on a measure of satisfaction, ranging from 0 ( not at all satisfied ) to 5 ( very 
satisfied ). Finally, presence of serious adverse events ( SAEs:  adverse outcomes , related or 
unrelated to the study, such as hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], emergency room  visits, increase in wound size, 
and infection, over the course of the study) was quantified as the total number of SAEs reported 
by [CONTACT_691857] m. 
 Health  Outcomes.  We anticipated that exercise might affect many aspects of health and health -
related quality of life in people with current or recently -healed DFUs. The following health 
outcomes were assessed : (1) g lycated hemoglobin (HbA1c
10); Five-times sit- to-stand test 
(5xSTS , a measure of lower extremity strength11); Timed -up-and-go (TUG, a measure of 
functional mobility12); and 30- second biceps curls (a measure of upper extremity strength). We 
also asked participants to complete a  survey comprised of standardized self -reported health 
measures , including t he Patient -reported Outcome Measurement Information System measures 
of global health (PROMIS -Global 10- item short form),13 depression (PROMIS -Depression 4-
item short form),14 fatigue (PROMIS -Fatigue 8 -item short form), and physical function 
(PROMIS -Physical Function 11- item short form) .15 The Activities -Specific Balance Confidence 
Scale was used to assess balance confidence.16  
 Additional  variables. Participant characteristics (e.g., age, sex, body- mass index, duration of 
diabetes) were collected at baseline to characterize the sample and evaluate the comparability 
between the exercise and control groups.  
 Procedures  
Participants were asked to come to the University of Washington for two data collection 
sessio ns. All study procedures were  reviewed and approved by a University of Washington 
institutional review board (IRB). The study was also registered with clinicaltrials.gov 
(registration number [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]).  Participants were compensated for their time and 
participation in the study. 
 Exercise i ntervention . EnhanceFitness, an existing, evidence -based exercise program, was  the 
intervention for this study. These group classes were offered at no cost to particip ants. 
EnhanceFitness classes were designed specifically for older adults at all fitness levels and may be performed in a seated position. Classes were offered at multiple locations across the Seattle metropolitan region, including community and senior cent ers, making them a convenient option 
for participants in the study. Each hour -long EnhanceFitness class incorporate d cardiovascular 
exercise (20 minutes), strength training (20 minutes), and stretching (10 minutes). Evidence suggests that EnhanceFitness im proves strength,
7 and reduces depression3 and falls5 in older 
adults. Participants i n the exercise group attend ed EnhanceFitness classes three times a week for 
12 weeks  and were contact[CONTACT_691858].   
 Control. Participants in the control group were contact[CONTACT_691859]  (self -reported as less  than 30 minutes  of activity , less  than 2 times a week ) 
while enrolled in the study. They were asked not to start new exercise regimens, or begin a 
regular exercise program.  Any changes in their exercise r outines were noted by [CONTACT_33365].   
 
Baseline data collection session. At the baseline session, a study investigator  explain ed the study 
to participants and obtain ed informed consent. We then  administer ed a baseline survey and 
obtained  performance measurements. The baseline survey include d all self -reported health 
outcomes  as well as demographic and health questions. Following the baseline survey, we  
administer ed the 5xSTS, TUG, and biceps curls  to assess each participant’s baseline strength and 
mobility. At the end of the session, participant s went  to a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] -based laboratory to have their 
blood drawn to test for HbA1c.  
 
12-week data collection session. At the 12- week session, we administer ed a follow -up survey to 
assess changes in the previously listed self -reported health outcomes. The survey also include d 
questions to assess satisfaction with the EnhanceFitness intervention  for participants in the 
exercise group. Following the survey, we  asked participants to perform  the 5xSTS, TUG, and 
biceps curls . At the end of the session, the participant returned to the laboratory to have their 
blood drawn and tested for HbA1c.  
 Analysis  
Sample Characteristics. D escriptive statistics (mean, standard deviation, frequency distributions) 
were calculated for variables used to characterize the sample (e.g., participant  characteristics). 
Student t -tests (numeric data) and Chi -square tests (nominal data) were  used to compare the 
intervention and control groups based on participant  characteristics. The alpha level for these 
tests was  set at α=0.05 and significant findings for sample variables indicate that there are 
differences in demographic or clinical characteristics (e.g., age, sex, duration of diabetes) between the exercise and control  groups.  
 Feasibility Outcomes . The ability to meet recruitment targets (20 participants per group, 40 total) 
was assessed. Retention (or percent of participants that complet ed the study) and percent attri tion 
was calculated and reported separately for the intervention and control groups. P re-intervention 
characteristics w ere compared between participants who d id and did  not com plete the study to 
determine if there wa s a biasing effect. Adherence to the protocol was  assessed in the 
intervention group to quantify the extent to which participants attended exercise classes. 
Satisfaction with EnhanceFitness was  assessed in the intervention group to ensure that 
participants reported a minimum of 4 on a 5- scale measure of satisfaction with the exercise 
intervention.  
 Health Outcome s. Descriptive statistics were calculated for all physical, physiological, and 
psychosocial outcomes. Separate repeated measures analyses of variance (ANOVA) were 
performed for each health outcome.  The ANOVA models include d two factors, each with two 
levels (group: intervention, control; time: pre -intervention, post -intervention). The al pha level 
was set at α=0.[ADDRESS_938340]. Significant interactions of group x time (with corresponding evidence of improved outcomes in the intervention group) would indicate that the exercise program imp roved physical, physiological, and psychosocial outcomes 
in the exercise group compared to the control group.     
References  
 
1. Snyder SJ, Thompson M, Denison P. EnhanceFitness: A 20- Year Dissemination History. 
Front Public Health. 2014;2:270. 
2. Tomioka M, Sugihara N, Braun KL. Replicating the EnhanceFitness physical activity program in Hawai`i's multicultural population, 2007- 2010. Prev Chronic Dis. 2012;9:E74.  
3. Wallace JI, Buchner DM, Grothaus L, Leveille S, Tyll L, LaCroix AZ, et al. Implementation and effectiveness of a community -based health promotion program for older adults. J 
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 1998;53(4):M301- 6. 
4. Moore -Harrison TL , Johnson MA, Quinn ME, Cress ME. An evidence -based exercise 
program implemented in congregate -meal sites. J Phys Act Health. 2009;6(2):247- 51. 
5. Greenwood -Hickman MA, Rosenberg DE, Phelan EA, Fitzpatrick AL. Participation in Older 
Adult Physical Activity Programs and Risk for Falls Requiring Medical Care, Washington State, 2005- 2011. Prev Chronic Dis. 2015;12:E90. 
6. Agmon M, Kelly VE, Logsdon R G, Nguyen H, Belza B. The Effects of EnhanceFitness (EF) 
training on dual -task walking in older adults. J Appl Gerontol. 2015;34(3):Np128- 42. 
7. Belza B, Shumway -Cook A, Phelan EA, Williams B, Snyder SJ, LoGerfo JP. The Effects of 
a Community -Based Exercis e Program on Function and Health in Older Adults: The 
EnhanceFitness Program. Journal of Applied Gerontology. 2006;25(4):291- 306. 
8. Dugan JA. Exercise recommendations for patients with type 2 diabetes. Jaapa. 2016;29(1):13- 8. 
9. Nasreddine ZS, Phillips NA , Bedirian V, Charbonneau S, Whitehead V, Collin I, et al. The 
Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2005;53(4):695- 9. 
10. Gorst C, Kwok CS, Aslam S, Buchan I, Kontopantelis E, Myint PK , et al. Long- term 
Glycemic Variability and Risk of Adverse Outcomes: A Systematic Review and Meta -
analysis. Diabetes Care. 2015;38(12):2354- 69. 
11. Bohannon RW, Shove ME, Barreca SR, Masters LM, Sigouin CS. Five -repetition sit- to-stand 
test performance by  [CONTACT_29436] -dwelling adults: a preliminary investigation of times, 
determinants, and relationship with self -reported physical performance. Isokinetics & 
Exercise Science. 2007;15(2):77- 81. 
12. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_691854]. The timed up and go test. Am J Nurs. 2013;113(3):56- 9. 
13. Hays RD, Bjorner JB, Revicki DA, Spritzer KL, Cella D. Development of physical and 
mental health summary scores from the patient- reported outcomes measurement information 
system (PROMIS) global items. Qual Life Res. 2009;18(7):873- 80. 
14. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_5544] , Choi SW, Reise SP, Stover AM, Riley WT, Cella D. Item banks for measuring 
emotional distress from the Patient- Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System 
(PROMIS(R)): depression, anxiety, and anger. Assessment. 2011;18(3):263- 83. 
15. Amtmann D, Bame r A, Cook K, Harniss M, Johnson K. Adapting PROMIS physical 
function items for users of assistive technology. Disability and Health Journal. 2010;3:e1- e9. 
16. Powell LE, Myers AM. The Activities -specific Balance Confidence (ABC) Scale. J Gerontol 
A Biol Sc i Med Sci. 1995;50a(1):M28- 34. 
 