19-225H, Armijo -Garcia, Form CT, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx  1 COVER PAGE FOR PROTOCOL AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
 
 
 
 
Official Study Title : Improving Retention of Nasoenteric Feeding Tubes in Pediatric 
Patients Using a Nasal Bridle  
 
 
NCT number : NCT  04621734 
 
IRB Approval Date:  04/09/2020  
 Unique Protocol ID: HSC20190225H  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
19-225H, Armijo -Garcia, Form CT, [ADDRESS_711689]  
UTHSA Clinical Trial Description 
This form is not  mandatory.  Other documents are acceptable if  equivalent  information  is provided.  
UTHSCSA Tracking Number  
(internal use only)  HSC20190225H  1. Original Version 
Date  07/01/2019 
  1.1. Revision Date(s)  
add rows as needed  10/08 /19, 04/09/[ADDRESS_711690] of replacement tubes and radiographs. The nasal bridle (BridlePro) is an FDA approved device invented and 
manufactured by [CONTACT_544425], Inc (AMT) and is an alternative securement met hod using the structure of the nasal 
cavity to secure the nasoenteric tube  in both adults and children. There have been several studies in the adult population revealing a 
reduction in dislodgment but only [ADDRESS_711691] a regulatory purpose.   
Complete the table – add rows as needed.   
3.1. Objective (s)  
Clearly and concisely define  the primary and 
secondary outcomes.  3.2. Endpoint  
Clearly define the endpoints.  
(endpoints  are the basis for concluding that the 
objective  has been met) . 3.3. Justification for Endpoint  
Briefly explain why the endpoint(s) were chosen.  
Primary outcome: Tube dislodgment rate  
Secondary outcomes: Time to tube 
dislodgment, c ost of additional feeding 
tubes and radiographs, number of 
additional radiographs needed for tube 
replacement, time of missed nutrition  The endpoint will be when a patient 
no longer requires a nasoenteric tube because ful l oral feedings have been 
met,  when a tube is dislodged and 
successfully replaced, or when the bridle has been in place for [ADDRESS_711692] to 
secure nasoenteric feeding tubes to improve ret ention rates.  
 
5. Study Design  
5.1. Number of Groups /Arms  2 Group name(s)  Control arm and study arm  
5.2. Overall Design  
Select all applicable    
☒ Randomization  ☐ Cluster Randomized  
☐ Group -Sequential  ☐ Adaptive Design  
19-225H, Armijo -Garcia, Form CT, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx  3 
V November 19, 2018  ☐ Parallel Design  ☐ Placebo -Controlled  
☐ Superiority  ☐ Equivalence  ☐ Non -inferiority  
Device  ☐ Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]  ☐ Pi[INVESTIGATOR_22735]  ☐ Post -Approval  
Drug/Biologic  ☐ Phase 1  ☐ Phase 1/2  ☐ Phase 2  ☐ Phase 2/3  ☐ Phase 3  ☐ Phase 4  
☐ Dose escalation  If yes, details →   
☐ Dose ranging  If yes, details →   
☐ Sub-studies  If yes, details →   
5.3. Other Design Details : 
 
6.  Study Population  
6.1.  Study Population(s)  
Label/Name  
 
 
 
 
[CONTACT_132108]  – select a row, copy & 
paste  6.2.  Identify the criteria for inclusion  
The criteria that every potential participant must satisfy, 
to qualify for study entry.  
 
All individuals in this study population must meet 
all of the inclusion criteria in order to be eligible to 
participate in the study  6.3.  Identify the criteria for exclusion  
The characteristics that make an individual ineligible for 
study participation.   
 
All individuals in this study population meeting 
any of the exclusion criteria at baseline will be 
excluded from study participation.  
Patient s who require a nasoenteric 
feeding tube, admitted at University 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] , ages 0- [ADDRESS_711693] obstructions, 
thrombocytopenia (<100 K/ μL), s/p 
septoplasty, patients with vomer bone graft , 
nasoenteric feeding tube placed and secured prior to being screened for study , 
contraindication for the use of the BRIDLEPro 
Does not meet inclusion criteria  
 
6.4.  
Will screen failures be allowed to 
re-screen  at a later date?  ☒ No ☐ Yes            If yes, describe criteria below  ↓ 
 
 
 
7.  Study Intervention(s) being tested or evaluated  
This can include prevention, diagnostic or therapeutic interventions (e.g., drug or device) or educational, health services or  basic science interventions (e.g., 
educational program, health care delivery model,  or examining basic physiology)  
Dislodgment rates of nasoenteric feeding t ubes when secured with the AMT B ridle Pro compared to adhesive tape.  The adhesive 
tape will be  the tape available in the unit and  will be placed by [CONTACT_544426]. The 
tape will be placed around the tube and secured to the cheek on the side of tube. The tape will be replaced as needed per nursing 
discretion when soiled or the adhesive properties are failing and this information will be tracked. The AMT BridlePro will be  placed 
by [CONTACT_544426]. Placement will use the BridlePro  system  included in the 
individual BridlePro packaging. Placement and securement will follow manufacturer recommendations and teaching. The BridlePro 
encircles  the vomer bone of the nasal cavity to secure the tube. Sedation medication may be given per standard of care for 
nasoenteric tube placement at the discretion of the provider team but no separate or additional sedation medication will be g iven 
for secureme nt with adhesive tape or the BridlePro.  
 
 
8.  Protocol -Directed procedures, items, services or tests  
List all procedure s directed by [CONTACT_92167] -  including items or services provided as part of routine or conventional care and those needed to diagnosis or treat 
research related complications.    
Important Note – The protocol directed procedures listed must match those in the Schedule of Activities  (attachment ) 
8.1. Drugs (trade and generic, dosage, route of administration)     
N/A 
 
19-225H, Armijo -Garcia, Form CT, [ADDRESS_711694] d by [CONTACT_544427] s on the study arm of the trial.  
 
8.3. Biologics  
N/A 
 
8.4. Laboratory Tests  
N/A 
 
8.5. Imaging Procedures  
No additional imaging will occur as part of the study. However, c onfirmatory radiograph for proper placement of the initial 
nasoenteric tube as part of our current standard of care wi ll continue.  Additional confirmatory radiographs for proper placement of 
replacement nasoenteric tubes as part of routine care when a tube is dislodged  will also continue.  
 
8.6. Other  Research Procedures (e.g., other safety and efficacy assessments .)  
Chart review/Data collection  
8.7  Attach a Schedule of Activities (SOA) Excel File  [Download the Template here: Schedule of Activities ] Check to indicate that the  
SOA Excel File is attached  →  ☐ 
 
9. Preparation/Handling/ Storage/Accountability of  Investigational Drug, Biologic, or Device  
N/A  - This study does not include any investigational product s (e.g. drugs, devices or biologics)  
N/A  - An Investigator Brochure is attached  
N/A  -  A Drug/Device Manual is attached  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
9.1.  Acquisition and accountability  
State how the study intervention and control product will be provided to the investigator. Describe plans about how and by [CONTACT_544428], including participation of a drug repository or  pharmacy, and plans for disposal of expi[INVESTIGATOR_92162].  
AMT representative will provide in -person training for the nurses and providers  placing the BridlePro  and will provide the nasal 
bridles as per  the clinical trial  material transfer  agreement. The nasoenteric  tubes that will be used in the control and study arm are 
the standard tubes used  in the unit and  adhesive tape that is used for securing tubes in the control group.  
9.2. Formulation, Appearance, Packaging, and Labeling  
Describe the formulation, appearance, packaging, and labeling of the study intervention and control product, as supplied.  Information in this section can usually be 
obtained from the IB or the package insert, or device labeling. This section should include the name [CONTACT_544430] t he study intervention and control product.  
AMT manufactures and provides the s tudy inte rvention product. The B ridle Pro will be labeled as part of standard device labeling 
indicating the appropriate sized bridle based on the nasoenteric tube used.  
9.3.  Product Storage and Stability  
Describe storage and stability requirements (e.g., protect ion from light, temperature, humidity) for the study intervention and control product.  For studies in which 
multi -dose vials are utilized, provide additional information regarding stability and expi[INVESTIGATOR_92163] (e.g., the seal is broken).  
The nasogastric tubes and nasal bridles will be stored in the supply room in each unit ( 7th Floor Sky Tower and PCCU).  
9.4.  Preparation  
Describe the preparation of the study intervention and control product, including any preparation required by [CONTACT_85602]/or study participants.  Include thawing, 
diluting, mixing, and reconstitution/preparation instructions in this section. For devices, include any relevant assembly or use instructions.  
Device assembly of the B ridle Pro system per package instructions and training provided by [CONTACT_544429].  
 
10.  Study Intervention Additional Details  
10.1.  Measures to Minimize Bias: Randomization and Blinding  
This section should contain a description of randomization and blinding procedures (if applicable to the study design).  It should include a description or a table that 
describes how study participants will be assigned to study groups, without being so specific that blinding or randomization m ight be  compromised.  Plans for the 
maintenance of trial randomization codes and appropriate blinding for the study should be discussed. The timing and procedure s for planned and unplanned breaking 
of randomization codes should be included.  Include a statement r egarding when unblinding may occur and who may unblind. Provide the criteria for breaking the 
study blind or participant code.  Discuss the circumstances in which the blind would be broken for an individual or for all participants (e.g., for serious advers e evets 
(SAEs)). Indicate to whom the intentional and unintentional breaking of the blind should be reported.  
Study participants will be randomized to the control or study arm using REDCap Randomization Module . Sealed envelopes will be 
locked in the PI[INVESTIGATOR_6890]/ PCCU wh ere nasogastric tubes and bridles will be stored. When a patient meets criteria for the study, the study 
administrator will be notified, an envelope will be drawn to randomize the participant into one of the two groups and patient 
19-225H, Armijo -Garcia, Form CT, [ADDRESS_711695].  
10.2.  Study Intervention Compliance  
Define how adherence to the protocol (e.g., administration of study intervention, use of device,) will be assessed, and verif ied (if applicable, e.g., plasma assays, 
electronic monitoring devices, daily diaries).  
Study participants will be monitored daily to confirm if patient  has had any dislodgements or has reported any issues with the 
placement of the securement method. Data will be  collected in REDCap.  
10.3.  Permitted Concomitant Therapy  
This section should be consistent with the medication restrictions in the inclusion/exclusion criteria previously listed .  Describe how allowed concomitant therapy might 
affect the outcome (e.g.,  drug -drug interaction, direct effects on the study endpoints).  
N/A 
10.4.   
 Rescue Medicine  
List all medications, treatments, and/or procedures that may be provided during the study for “rescue therapy” and relevant i nstructions.  
☒ N/A, no rescue medicine  
 
 
 
11.  Study Intervention Discontinuation  
11.1.  Discontinuation of Study Intervention  
Describe the criteria for discontinuing the study intervention (e.g., halting rules), including any monitoring test(s) and as sociated clinical decision point(s). Include 
reasons for temporary discontinuation of the study intervention (e.g., type and quanti ty of adverse events), clearly stating the length of time, if applicable, and 
describe the data to be collected at the time of study intervention discontinuation and approaches for restarting administrat ion of or re- challenging with study 
intervention.   
The endpoint of the study is device removal (either intentionally at up to 30 days or inadvertently  prior to that time.) If the tube is 
dislodged prior to end of needing a feeding tube the device will not be used on subsequent insertion/maintenance of the new 
feeding tube.  
11.2.  Continued Follow -up Discontinuation of Study Intervention  
Describe efforts that will be made to continue follow -up of participants who discontinue the study intervention, but remain in the study for follow -up, especially for 
safety and efficacy study endpoints (if applicable).  Reasonable efforts must be made to undertake protocol -specified safety follow -up procedures to capture adverse 
events (AE), serious adverse events (SAE), and unanticipated problems involving risks to su bjects or others (UPI[INVESTIGATOR_20865]).  
N/A – no follow up is performed after intervention is complete   
 
 
12.  Statistical Considerations  
12.1. Statistical Hypotheses   
State the formal and testable null and alternative hypotheses for primary and key secondary endpoints, specifying the type of comparison (e.g., superiority, 
equivalence or non -inferiority, dose response) and time period for which each endpoint will be analyzed.  
Hypothesis: The use of a nasal bridle system will i mprove retention of naso enteric feeding tubes in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_544424] 0 -18 
years of age.  
Null hypothesis: The use of nasal bridle system will not improve retention of nasoenteric  feeding tubes in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_544424] 
0-18 years of age.  
Time point: Analysis for duration  of nasoenteric feeding tube requirement or until tube becomes dislodged  but no longer than [ADDRESS_711696] the key hypotheses for the study.  Provide all information needed to 
validate your calculations and judge the feasibility of enrolling and following the necessary number of participants.  
Plan to enroll 30 patient s in the study arm and 30 patient s in the control a rm.  
12.3.  Populations for Analyses  
Clearly identify and describe the analysis datasets (e.g., which participants will be included in each).  
19-225H, Armijo -Garcia, Form CT, 04 -09-20, AMD.docx  6 
V November 19, 2018  Study group: patients with nasoenteric tubes secured using the AMT BridlePro  
Control group: patients with nasoenteric tubes secured using adhesive tape  
12.4.  Statistical Analyses    
Include analysis of primary efficacy endpoints, secondary endpoints, safety analyses, and any planned interim analyses  
Primary endpoint: Tube dislodgment  
Secondary endpoints: Time to dislodgment, number of follow up radiographs for tube replacement, cost of replacement tube and 
follow up radiographs, time of missed nutrition  
 