  Evaluating the Effectiveness of Immersive Technologies, Virtual Reality and 
Augmented Reality, to Increase Pain Threshold During Ice Immersion  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
June 10, [ADDRESS_155082] be used.  
2. STUDY PROCEDURES  
a. Procedures  
1500 participants ( adults, undergraduate, graduate students) recruited by [CONTACT_136652] a booth set up 
on or near the Stanford University campus. They will have the option of completing the study at the booth, or scheduling an appointment to participate at LPCH at a l ater time to do all the study. If interested in the 
study, the research staff will gauge their preferred availability to participate in the study. During the day of their scheduled study appointment, the research assistant will review the study, go over th e consent forms, 
and answer any questions they may have about the study. Exclusion criteria includes (i) patients who do not consent (ii) are currently taking beta blockers or other chronotropic heart medication(s) (iii) have a history 
of severe motion sickness (iv) currently have nausea (v) currently experiencing seizures(vi) are clinically 
unstable (vii) have taken pain medications in the last 12 hours Inclusion criteria includes (i) greater than 18 years of age (ii)English speaking (iii) hearing intact  
 PHASE 1  
Part 1a: 3 groups of 250 healthy volunteers will be recruited for this 2 part study. Once they consent to 
participate in the study, the research personnel will do a Sensory perception threshold (time, amplitude) captured via biosensors (Neurometer). Then the first group of 250 participants will be randomized into 
either control arm (they will not receive any kind of distraction, no technologies) or the use of Virtual 
Reality. The second group of [ADDRESS_155083] group of 250 will be randomized into Augmented Reality (AR) or VR. The three groups will wait 5 minutes and each participant will switch to the opposite group ( i.e. in the first group, VR group will switch to no VR group). Part 1b: Ice bath: 
Participants immerse hand in ice bath and starting again with their original assigned group (see attached Dahlquist et al., 2007) and keep hand submerged as long as they can withstand the cold or until [ADDRESS_155084]. Participants will not be told of the specifics of the time limit, to avoid 
competitiveness and expectations and will be asked for pain scores every 30 seconds.  
 PHASE 2  
Once they consent t o participate in the study, the research personnel will do a Sensory perception threshold 
(time, amplitude) captured via biosensors (Neurometer). Part 2a: 250 participants will be recruited and 
randomized into either VR or VR + Cognitive Load Modulation. C ognitive  Load Modulation, increase the 
intensity of a game to provide more distraction; the game's audio and visuals will intensify, thereby [CONTACT_136653]. Ice bath: Participants immerse hand in ice bath and starting again with their 
origin al assigned group and keep hand submerged as long as they can withstand the cold or until [ADDRESS_155085]. They will be asked to inform research staff when they think they can only keep their hand immersed for 5 more seconds at which point the Cognitive Load Modulation (CLM) 
group will have the virtual experience intensity increased, while the controls will not. Participants will not be told of the specifics of the [ADDRESS_155086] period.  
 Part 2b:  
250 participants will be recruited and randomized into either VR or VR with Positive Encouragement 
Coaching (PEC). One of the research assistants will be encour aging the participants to distract them. Ice 
bath: Participants immerse hand in ice bath and starting again with their original assigned group and keep hand submerged as long as they can withstand the cold or until [ADDRESS_155087] period.  
 Part 2c: 250 participants will be recruited and randomized into eithe r CLM VR or PEC VR Ice bath: 
Participants immerse hand in ice bath and starting again with their original assigned group and keep hand submerged as long as they can withstand the cold or until [ADDRESS_155088] period. All the technologies: VR headset/AR headsets have been approved and meet  
standards established by [CONTACT_80826][INVESTIGATOR_136646]. All participants will have biometric sensors that will be collecting 
physiological metrics such as vital signs, hear t rate variability, respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], etc. , which will be entered 
into a REDCap database. The study will be conducted in LPCH and SHC facilities and clinics.  
 We use a calculator to determine the minimum number of subjects that need to be enrolled in a study in 
order to have sufficient statistical power to detect a treatment effect. For 2 independent sample study with 
mean of 7(SD of 1.5) in group 1, mean of [ADDRESS_155089] sufficient statistical power with the data we collected. The new sample size needs to be 250 participants in each group.  
 
b. Procedure Risks  

June 10, 2020   Page 3 of 8 Using AR/VR carries minimal risk. The main risk is developi[INVESTIGATOR_89370]/or dizziness, which will be 
monitored for and can be easily treated by [CONTACT_136654]. Ice bath protocols have been performed 
for decades and we will adhere to safety standards set by [CONTACT_136655], hard time limit, rest period between phases, and heart rate monitoring 
via pulse oximeter.  
 
c. Use of Deception in the Study  
NA 
d. Use of Aud io and Video Recordings 
NA 
e. Alternative Procedures or Courses of Treatment  
This does not involve specific treatments. No standard treatment will be withheld, the alternative to this 
study is for the participant not to engage in our research study. 
f. Will it be possible to continue the more (most) appropriate therapy for the 
participant(s) after the conclusion of the study?  
Yes - VR/AR technologies described here are currently in use for the entire hospi [INVESTIGATOR_307]. 
g. Study Endpoint (s) 
The endpoint of the study will be determined by [CONTACT_136656]. The 
target number of participants 1500.  
3. BACKGROUND  
a. Past Experimental and/or Clinical Findings  
While there have been previous studies that evaluate virtual distraction for decreasing pain in the medical 
setting, to our knowledge this will be the first to evaluate the effectiveness of several modifications 
includ ing augmented reality, cognitive load modulation, and positive encouragement coaching.  
 [1] Tsui, B. C., Shakespeare, T. J., Leung, D. H., Tsui, J. H., & Corry, G. N. (2013). Reproducibility of 
current perception threshold with the Neurometer® vs the Stimpod NMS450 peripheral nerve stimulator in healthy volunteers: an observational study. Canadian Journal of Anesthesia/Journal canadien d'anesthésie, 
60(8), 753- 760. 
 [2] Dahlquist, L. M., Herbert, L. J., Weiss, K. E., & Jimeno, M. (2010). Virtual -reality distraction and cold -
pressor pain tolerance: does avatar point of view matter?. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social 
Networking, 13(5), 587- 591. 
 [3] Dahlquist, L. M., McKenna, K. D., Jones, K. K., Dillinger, L., Weiss, K. E., & Ackerman, C. S. (2007). 
Active and passive distraction using a headmounted display helmet: Effects on cold pressor pain in 
children. Health Psychology, 26(6), 794.  
 [4] Forys, K. L., & Dahlquist, L. M. (2007). The influence of preferred copi[INVESTIGATOR_136647] -induced pain. Health psychology, 26(1), 22.  
 
June 10, 2020   Page 4 of 8 [5] Dahlquist, L. M., Pendley, J. S., Landtrip, D. S., Jones, C. L., & Steuber, C. P. (2002). Distraction 
intervention for preschoolers undergoing intramuscular injections and subcutaneous port access. Health 
Psychology, 21(1), 94.  
 [6] Gershon, J., Zimand, E., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_11721], M., Rothbaum, B. O., & Hodges, L. (2004). A pi[INVESTIGATOR_136648] a distraction for children with cancer. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psy chiatry, 43(10), 1243- 1249.  
 
b. Findings from Past Animal Experiments  
 
4. DEVICES  USED IN THE STUDY  
a. Investigational Devices (Including Commercial Devices Used Off -Label)  
Investigational  Device 1  
Name:  [CONTACT_136661] -Gear VR  
Description:  Portable VR headset to display a passive relaxing 
experience such as sitting on beach or exploring the 
ocean by [CONTACT_136657]. The active experience may include playing a game to collect bananas as monkey, flying a paper airplane, or catching balls in a basket.  
 
Significant Risk? (Y/N)  N 
Rationale for Non -Significant Risk  VR headsets are commercially available devices for 
gaming and relaxation with insignificant risks. The possible side effects are nausea and dizziness, they can be solve with removing the headset.  
 
 
5. PARTICIPANT POPULATION  
a. Planned E nrollment  
(i) 1500 participants will be enrolled during our study  
(ii) Students, adults, visitors and personnel working or volunteering at LPCH or SHC facilities  
(iii) These participants are being chosen because we are focusing on a low risk population  
b. Age, Gender, and Ethnic Background  
Patients 18 and older of mixed genders and ethnic backgrounds.  
c. Vulnerable Populations 
Up to 1500 healthy volunteers, students, adults, visitors and personnel working or volunteering at LPCH or  
SHC facilities could potentially be enrolled in this study. This is necessary as this study aims to investigate  
the effectiveness of non -invasive technologies (AR/VR/Tablet) with modifications at altering pain  
tolerance. . Although we expect minimal risks in this study, there may be a chance of patients experiencing  
intolerable symptoms such as dizziness and nausea from VR/AR use. In such case our health care providers  
will be notified and appropriate measures will be taken to ensure patient safety. The risk discovery of an  
individual's participation is mitigated by [CONTACT_136658] -identified and stored in a  
secure and encrypted da tabase.  
June 10, [ADDRESS_155090] Campus after receiving University approval and at LPCH.  
At the booth and at LPCH some research assistant will be running the study and other research assistants  
will be around to booth to inform the people about the study. The research assistants will not coerce or  
influence an volunteer's decision to participate.  If volunteer declines interest, research personnel will 
respect their decision and will not pursue them for any further involvement in this study.  
 
h. Eligibility Criteria  
i. Inclusion Criteria 
(i) greater than 18 years of age (ii) English speaking (iii) hearing intact  
 
ii. Exclusion Criteria 
(i) patients who do not consent  
(ii) are currently taking beta blockers or other chronotropic heart medication(s)  
(iii) have a history of severe motion sickness  
(iv) currently  
have nausea  
(v) currently experiencing seizures  
(vi) are clinically unstable  
 
i. Screening Procedures  
No PHI will be collected prior to enrollment. If the participant expresses interest they will be approached 
by a research assistant. I f they decline they will not receive any further information about the study. If the 
participant expresses interest, the RA will proceed with the consent and appropriate stage placement, randomization will occur for the second phase (either standard of car e of VR/AR/table simulation) If the 
potential candidate declines interest, we will respect their decision and will not pursue them for any further 
involvement in this study. Only authorized members of the study team will have access to patient 
information.  
 
j. Participation in Multiple Protocols  
Participants will be asked if they are participating or intend to enroll in other studies. Participants will be  
allowed to participate in more than one study if it can be determined that this poses no increased risk to the  
June 10, 2020   Page 6 of 8 participants or the integrity of the data collected for either study.  
 
k. Payments to Participants  
Participants will receive a $5.[ADDRESS_155091] for participation in this study.  
l. Costs to Participants  
NA 
m. Planned Duration of the Study  
i) Screening per patient will take approximately 10- 15 minutes.  
ii) Active participation for the participant will last the duration of the proc edure, we estimate about 1 hour,  
from the time of consent to the debrief.  
iii) The analysis of the data will take approximately [ADDRESS_155092]  a low incidence of intolerability (primarily nausea and  
dizziness) in less than 5% of all cases, in which case VR headset can simply be removed and any follow -up 
care can be assessed by [CONTACT_136659].  
ii. Investigational d rugs 
NA 
iii. Commercially available drugs, biologics, reagents or chemicals 
NA 
iv. Procedures 
The VR and AR headsets unit will be placed on patients by [CONTACT_136660]. VR and AR headsets will be set up by [CONTACT_3665]. All devices are wiped with hospi[INVESTIGATOR_136649]. All devices are compliant with infection control  
standards at LPCH and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_136650].  
 
v. Radioisotopes/radiation -producing machines 
NA 
vi. Physical  well -being 
NA 
vii. Psych ological  well -being 
NA 
June 10, 2020   Page 7 of 8 viii. Economic well-being 
NA 
ix. Social  well -being 
NA 
x. Overall evaluation of risk  
NA 
b. International Research  Risk Procedures  
NA 
c. Procedures to Minimize Risk  
Participants/patients will be informed that they may withdraw from the study at any time, for any reason,  
with no consequences for withdrawing, and the standard clinical care and procedures for their care will  
continue as normal. All data will be de -identified and stored in a secure, encrypted database for clinical 
analysis.  
 
d. Study Conclusion  
The experiment will terminate at the co nclusion or enrollment. There is no anticipated interim analysis, and  
no reason to consider early termination based on the low level of risk associated with this study. If the  
patient decides that he/she does not want to participate in the study at any time, we will terminate the study.  
 
e. Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMC) 
i. Data and/or events subject to review  
NA 
ii. Person(s) responsible for Data and Safety Monitoring 
NA 
iii. Frequency of DSMB meetings NA 
iv. Specific triggers or stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_136651] 
v. DSMB Reporting  
NA 
vi. Will the Protocol Director be the only monitoring entity? (Y/N)  
NA 
June 10, [ADDRESS_155093], committee, or safety monitor be responsible for study monitoring? 
(Y/N)  
NA 
f. Risks to Special Po pulations  
NA 
7. BENEFITS  
It is unknown if participants enrolled in the study will directly benefit, but we anticipate that the 
technology- based distractions have great potential to be used in future  medical encounters.  
8. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
All participant information  and specimens are handled in compliance with the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and privacy policies of Stanford University, Stanford 
Health Care, and Stanford Children’s Health. 