 
 
 
 
Impact of Plant Sterol Supplement on LDL- C Lowering in Low -to-Moderate 
Risk South Asian Patients Participating in a Cardiovascular Disease 
Prevention Program  
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
June 25, 2020  
Version 3.0  June 25, 2020 Title: Impact of Plant Sterol Supplement on LDL- C Lowering in Low- to-Moderate Risk South Asian Patients 
Participating in a Cardiovascular Disease Prevention Program  
 
PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_783758], MD PhD 
  Asst Prof, Stanford University Medical Center  
  Medical & Scientific Director, SSATHI Clinic  
  Medical Director, CardioClick Telemedicine Clinic  
 Sites (2):  -      Stanford SSATHI Clinic, [ADDRESS_1077857], CA [ZIP_CODE] 
 Purpose:  
The purpose of t his study is to measure the effectiveness of a twice daily plant sterol supplement, which is in a gummy 
format and packaged with health insights, in a population of South Asian patients who have low to moderate 
cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk  by [CONTACT_783759].  Defined as a 10-year cardiovascular risk score (ASCVD Score) 
of < 7.5%, and a LDL-C level of 120 -189mg/dl, these individuals do not meet guideline-based criteria (2018 ACC/AHA 
Lipid Guidelines) for medical lowering of their L DL-C with an HMG CoA reductase inhibitor (statin) drug, and they are 
recommended to improve their lipid -risk profile through diet and exercise primarily.  Additional lipid lowering is 
routinely desired yet often never achieved solely through a lifestyle approach. In addition, patients who may qualify for 
statin therapy , those with ASCVD score > 7.5% or LDL > 189 mg/dl, but are deemed to be intolerant of statins or who 
refuse d lipid lowering medication may also qualify . While the safety and benefits of plant sterol supplements have been 
established and are incorporated into many lipid lowering guidelines, their effects have not been measured in the 
highest CVD risk population in the world, namely South Asians.  In this st udy, we aim to measure the LDL -C reducing 
impact of regular plant sterol supplementation for these low -to-moderate risk South Asians.  
 
The Clinic  
Founded in 2014, the Stanford South Asian Translational Heart Initiative (SSATHI) is the only preventive cardiology clinic 
in the U.S. dedicated to exclusively treating South Asian patients for both traditional and non -traditional cardiovascular 
risk factors.  The clinic includes an intensive program combining physician visits and serial laboratory testing . The 
patients also benefit from frequent dietitian/ health coach visits during the program, all of which are conducted virtually 
through SSATHI’s telehealth arm, CardioClick. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_897], lipid lowering effects from lifestyle changes are manifest within 
[ADDRESS_1077858].  
 
Study Design   
This single arm study will include one in -person  or video baseline visit, with a virtual follow up visit with the treating 
physician. 
 
At the baseline visit, subjects will complete informed consent, a medical history, and clinic visit procedures, 
inclusion/exclusion criteria, medication review, measurement of morphometrics (body weight, height, BMI, hip and waist circumference, blood pressure, heart rate). A fasting blood draw for baseline labs will be performed within [ADDRESS_1077859] -study su rveys , will 
be administered.  
Version 3.0  June 25, 2020  
Baseline visit  
• Informed consent/HIPAA  
• Medical history 
• Clinic visit  
 Baseline measurements, lab testing  
 Assess prior and current medication/supplement use  
 Review inclusion/exclusion criteria  
• Diet assessment  
• Fasting Lipid prof ile 
• In-clinic urine pregnancy test for female subjects , if applicable 
• Dispense study product  
• Provide study instructions  
 
Regular product compliance assessment  
• Weekly Twilio  or SMS text messaging question with a numeric response to assess product compliance  
 
End of Study Visit  
• Assess prior and current medication/supplement use  
• Fasting Lipid profile  
• Questionnaire  
 SSATHI questionnaire 
 Sponsor questionnaire  
• Assess product comp liance 
• Assess adverse events  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Subject is a South Asian male or female, ≥[ADDRESS_1077860] has LDL -C ≥1 20 and <1 90 mg/dL measured in the past 3 months (or measured at the baseline visit), 
while not taking cholesterol -lowering medication  or cholesterol -lowering supplement for at least 1 month 
prior , and having a ASCVD Risk score <7.5% .  
3. Subjects with LDL-C ≥1 20 and <190 mg/dL with ASCVD risk scores >7.5% who are known to be intolerant of 
statin therapy drugs.  
4. Subjects with LDL-C > 189 mg/dl or ASC VD > 7.5% who have declined prescription medical therapy.  
5. If current smoker, subject does not have any plans to change current smoking status or frequency.   
6. Subject is willing to fast (10 -14 h, target 12 h, water only) prior to each clinic visit . 
7. Subject understands the study procedures and signs forms documenting informed consent to participate in 
the study and authorization for release of relevant protected health information to the study Investigator and is willing to complete study procedures . 
8. Subject is agreeable to receiving clinical care virtually.   
 
Exclusion Criteria  
1. Subject has taken a prescription cholesterol -lowering medication in the past [ADDRESS_1077861] rice, niacin >100 mg/d or 
omega -3 fatty acid supplements providing ≥1000 mg/d eicosapentaenoic acid and/or docosahexaenoic acid.  
(Stable use of viscous fiber laxative ≤2 teaspoons/d is allowed.)  
4. Subject is a female, who is pregnant, planning to be pregnant during the study period, or lactating.  Subjects should agree to use contraception during study period to avoid pregnancy.  
Version 3.0  June 25, 2020 5. Individual has active angina, stab le or unstable, requiring urgent cardiovascular functional risk stratification 
(stress testing or catheterization) or intervention. Or has congestive heart failure that is not compensated or 
in which the subject is not euvolemic, as determined by [CONTACT_87333].  
6. Individual has a condition the Investigator believes would interfere with his or her ability to provide 
informed consent, comply with the study protocol, which might confound the interpretation of the study results or put the person at undue risk.  
 
Primary Outcome  
% change in  LDL Direct , or LDL-C if LDL Direct is not available, from baseline at 3 months  
 
Exploratory Outcomes  
 % changes from baseline to 3 months in following:  
- Total cholesterol 
- Calculated LDL -C or LDL Direct  
- HDL-C 
- Non-HDL-C 
- Triglycerides 
- Fasting Glucose  
- Fasting Insulin 
- Hba1c  
- Lp(a)  
- Apoprotein B -100 
- Apoprotein A1  
- Ratio, ApoB -100/Apo A1 
- C-reactive protein  
 
Changes from baseline to [ADDRESS_1077862] compliance  
 
Subjects’ interest in continuing to use product  
 
Statistical Analysis  
Because of the pre -post nature of this single group study, either a paired t -test or a non -parametric paired test will be 
employed to analyze the statistical significance of any differences at the end of the study. This decision will depend upon 
the normal ity of the data set.  
 
Sample Size  
A sample size of [ADDRESS_1077863] deviation of 25mg/dl  in baseline LDL -C, the 
primary outcome variable.  As a result, an evaluable sample of 40 subjects will provide 80% power to detect a difference 
of 10% based on a paired t -test and a two -sided alpha of 0.05.  A larger enrolled sample will allow for subject attrition of 
up to 2 0%. 
  
Statistical Analysis  
Baseline characteristics will be described using means and standard deviations or medians and interquartile range limits as appropriate based on the distribution for continuous variables.  Numbers of subjects and percentages will be used to describe catego rical variables.  Responses to the intervention will be assessed using paired t -tests for continuous 
variables.  For categorical variables, McNemar’s test will be employed to assess differences in frequencies between baseline and end-of -study.  All tests o f statistical significance will be completed using alpha = 0.05, two -sided. 
 