Statistical analysis plan for study: 1550- nm Non- Ablative Laser (Fraxel) Versus Ablative 10,600- nm 
Carbon Dioxide (CO 2) Fractional Laser in the Treatment of Surgical and Traumatic Scars: A Comparison 
Study on Efficacy and Treatment Regimen.  
 
Background  
The main objective of this study is to compare the effectiveness of 10,600- nm carbon dioxide 
(C02) fractional laser and 1550- nm non- ablative  laser (Fraxel) in the treatment of surgical and traumatic 
scars as well as identify the minimum number of treatments required to achieve the highest benefit at the 
lowest cost. This was a split -scar study, so each laser was randomly assigned to half of the scar and then 
each half of the scar was evaluated separately. Patients assessed scars prior to the first treatment  
(baseline) and [ADDRESS_127826] treatment  using the Patient and Observer Scar Assessment Scale 
(POSAS) . At both visits, photographs were taken using identical camera settings, lighting and patient 
positioning. Four blinded examiners then evaluated these photographs using the Manchester scar scale. 
There were [ADDRESS_127827] photo evaluator scores for the 6-month follow -up (ID LSS108.2 was missing in the 
patient scores) . The data was analyzed using SAS v9.4 s oftware.  
Hypothes es 
1) The ablative 10,600- nm carbon dioxide (C02) fractional laser and the 1550- nm non ablative laser 
(Fraxel) will both lead to improvement in the appearance of a surgical or traumatic scar as  well as 
reduction of symptoms such as pain and itch.  
2) The ablative 10,600- nm carbon dioxide (C02) fractional will lead to a superior cosmetic outc ome 
compared to the 1550- nm non- ablative laser (Fraxel) over the same number of treatments, 
thereby [CONTACT_114220] a more cost effective treatment.  
Analysis Approach 
 First, we looked at the scoring distributions for each photo evaluator to check for differences in 
scoring patterns. Six  paired  t-tests were conducted to compare the total scores for all possible 
combinations of observers for each laser at both time points. Next, to assess the effectiveness of the C02 
and Fraxel lasers, five paired t -tests were performed on both the patient self -scores and the photo 
evaluator scores from the 6-month follow -up: 
1) C02 laser vs. Fraxel laser at baseline.  
2) C02 laser vs. Fraxel laser at 6- month follow -up. 
3) C02 laser at 6-month follow -up vs. C02 laser at baseline.  
4) Fraxel laser at 6-month follow -up vs. Fraxel laser at baseline.  
5) Difference in C02 laser after 6 months vs. difference in Fraxel laser after 6 months.  
Paired t -tests compare whether the mean of the differences in two paired samples differs from 0. A 
statistically significant difference would indicate that the average scores are not the same for either the C02/Fraxel lasers or  for each laser at different time periods.  
We also used McNemar’s test to investigate the agreement between the C02 and Fraxel lasers for 
both the POSAS and photo examiner scores, as well as the agreement between the POSAS and photo examiner scores for the C02 and Fraxel lasers separately.  
 