Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 1 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022  
CLINICAL INVESTIGATION PLAN  
 
TITLE:  A multi -centre, randomised, open -label, home use, parallel group, clinical investigation of 
topi[INVESTIGATOR_897] -applied MED3000  gel and oral tadalafil (5 mg) tablets for the treatment of erectile 
dysfunction (ED) over a 24 week period  
 
SPONSORS REF. NUMBER :   FM71 
  
VERSION AND DATE:    7.0 dated 02Mar2022 
   
PHASE:     Pi[INVESTIGATOR_17416]:     MED3000 
 
REVISION  HISTORY:  
Version 1.0  New clinical investigation p lan prepared to form the basis of pre -
submission discussions with the US Food and Drugs Administration 
(CDRH) only. This version  was not formally submitted for approval by 
[CONTACT_17468].    
Version 2.0  FM71 clinical investigat ion plan revised  to include US Food and Drug 
Administration (CDRH) recommendations on the design of the 
proposed clinical investigation.  This version  was not formally 
submitted for approval by [CONTACT_17469].  
Version 3.0  The age of eligibility has been increased from 18 to 22 years of age 
which is in accordance with the US Food and Drug Administration 
(CDRH ) definition of an adult population .  
Version 4.0  • Section 21 updated to include AE expectedness review as part 
of the FMD Medical Advisor’s assessment .  
• Corrected addresses in section 5.  
• Changed the term “Unexpected Serious Adverse Device Effect” to “Unanticipated Serious Adverse Device Effect” throughout.  
• Inclusion of an AE category of “expectedness” . 
• Clarification on how AEs from female partners will be collected.  
• Section 14.9 updated stating that the number of intercourse attempts during treatment will be estimated using the number 
of completed onset of action questionnaires . 
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 2 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022   
 
Information in this Clinical Investigation Plan  is confidential and should not be disclosed other 
than to those directly involved in the execution or the ethical regulatory review of the 
investigation without written authorisation from Futura Medical Developments Ltd (here in after 
known as FMD)  
  Version 5.0  • The volume o f blood drawn from each patient during the 
investigation has been corrected from 50 mL to 150 mL 
(Section 13.1)  
Version 6.0  (US Only)  • Section 12.1 updated to include text that patients will be 
expected to complete IIEF and SEAR questionnaires using a 
tablet device.  
Version 7.0  • Deletion  of text “who, in completing the relevant eCRF, must 
answer ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to the question: ‘Do you cons ider that there 
is a reasonable possibility that the event may have been caused 
by [CONTACT_17470]?’”  in section 13.11 . As per the 
preceding sentence in section  13.11.1 , the PI [INVESTIGATOR_17417] , 
probably related, possibly related or unrelated, and this is what is captured in the eCRF.  
• Sections 6, 11, and 14.8.[ADDRESS_16535] on treatment during the 24- week treatment period , as 
detailed in the Statistical Analysis Plan ( V1.0 dated 02  Sep 
2021)  which was finalised before first patient enrolled . 
• Section s 6 , 11 and 14.5  updated with a c larification on the 
statistical analysis  if randomisation/treatment errors occur, as 
detailed in the Statistical Analysis Plan ( V1.0 dated 02  Sep 
2021) . In the case of randomisation/treatment errors, patients 
will be analysed according to treatment initially received at 
randomisation.  
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 4 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 Investigator’s Agreement:  
 
I have read this FMD Clinical Investigation Plan  No. FM71  
A multi- centre, randomised, open- label, home use, parallel group, clinical 
investigation of topi[INVESTIGATOR_897]- applied MED3000 gel and oral tadalafil  (5 mg) tablets for the 
treatment of erectile dysfunction (ED) over a [ADDRESS_16536] fully discussed the objectives of this clinical Investigation and the contents of this 
Clinical Investigation Plan (CIP)  with FMD (the Sponsor).  
I understand that the information in this CIP  is confidential and should not be disclosed, 
other than to those directly involved in the execution or the ethical/regulatory review of the 
investigation, without written authorisation from FMD.   It is, however, permissible to provide 
information to a patient  in order to obtain consent.  
I agree to conduct this investigation according to this CIP and to comply with its 
requirements, subject to ethical and safety considerations and guidelines, and to conduct the 
investigation in accordance with the EN ISO [ZIP_CODE]:[ADDRESS_16537] on Good Clinical Practice 
(GCP) and with the applicable regulatory requirements. 
I understand that FMD may decide to suspend or prematurely terminate the clinical 
investigation at any time for whatever reason; such a decision will be communicated to me in 
writing.   Conversely, should I decide to withdraw from execution of the investigation I will 
communicate my intention immediately in writing to FMD.  
 
Principal Investigator:  
 
[INVESTIGATOR_17418]:     
 
Signature:   [CONTACT_1782]:  
  
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page [ADDRESS_16538] OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................ 9 
5. SPONSOR, COORDINATING INVESTIGATOR, PRINCIPAL 
INVESTIGATORS AND INVESTIGATIONAL SITE(S)  .................................... 12 
6. SYNOPSIS OF THE CLINICAL INVESTIGATION  .......................................... 14 
7. IDENTIFICATION AND DESCRIPTION OF THE INVESTIGATION DEVICE  . 19 
7.1 Description of the Medication/Device  ............................................................. [ADDRESS_16539] of Erectile Dysfunction ........................................................................ 22 
8.3 Management of Erectile Dysfunction  .............................................................. 22 
8.4 Potential of MED3000 in the Market for Erectile Dysfunction .......................... 24 
8.5 FM57 Study  .................................................................................................... 26 
9. JUSTIFICATION OF CLINICAL ENDPOINTS  ................................................ 27 
9.1 International Index for Erectile Function (IIEF) questionnaire  ......................... 27 
9.2 Onset of Action (Erection)  Questions  ............................................................. 27 
9.3 Self-Esteem And Relationship (SEAR) questionnaire ..................................... [ADDRESS_16540]  Clinical Investigation Report  
CK Creatine Kinase  
CRO  Clinical Research Organisation  
CRP  C-reactive Protein  
CTCAE  Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events  
CVD  Cardiovascular Disease  
EC(s) Ethics Committee(s)  
ECG(s)  Electrocardiogram (s)  
eCRF  electronic Case Report Form  
ED Erectile Dysfunction  
EF Erectile Function  
EU European Union  
FAS Full Analysis Set  
FDA Food and Drug Administration  
FMD  Futura Medical Developments Ltd  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
GDPR  General Data Protection Regulation 
GGT γ-Glutamyl Transpeptidase  
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 10 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 GP General Practitioner  
GTN Glyceryl Trinitrate  
HBc Hepatitis B Core antibodies  
HBsAG Hepatitis B Surface Antigen  
HCV Hepatitis C Virus  
HIV  Human Immunodeficiency Virus  
HR Heart Rate  
IB Investigator’s Brochure  
ICF  Informed Consent Form  
ICH International Council for Harmonisation  
IgG Immunoglobulin G  
IgM Immunoglobulin M  
IIEF  International Index for Erectile Function  
IP Inorganic Phosphate  
IRB(s) Institutional Review Board(s)   
IUD Intrauterine Device  
IUS Intrauterine System  
IWRS  Interactive Web Response System  
LDH Lactate Dehydrogenase  
LS Least -Squares  
MCID  Minimal Clinically Important Difference  
MedDRA  Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities  
NAION  Non-arteritic Anterior Ischaemic Optic Neuropathy  
NF National Formulary  
NHS  National Health Service  
NIH National Institutes of Health  
NSAID  Non -Steroidal Anti- Inflammatory Drug  
OPC  Objective Performance Criteria 
OTC Over the Counter  
PDE-[ADDRESS_16541]  
USP [LOCATION_002] Pharmacopeia  
v/v Volume per volume  
w/w  Weight in weight  
 
  
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 12 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 5. SPONSOR, COORDINATING INVESTIGATOR, PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR S AND 
INVESTIGATIONAL SITE(S)  
SPONSOR    
COORDINATING INVESTIGATOR  
[INVESTIGATOR_17419], AN D
 INVESTIGATION SITES:  
Details of the Principal Investigators (PIs) and sites  involved in this investigation  will be 
maintained in a separate tracker.   
CENTRA L LABORATORY:   
CLINICAL REASEARCH ORGANI S
ATION  
 
 

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 13 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 European Union Legal Representative  
 

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 15 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 Safety Objecti
ves: 
The safety objectives are to evaluate the safety of MED3000 and tadalafil using occurrence and severity of 
treatment -emergent adverse events (TEAEs) and standard physical and laboratory assessments.  Safety will 
be evaluated using a “while on treatment” strategy.  
Investigation Design:  

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 16 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 17 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 Statistical Methods:  
Effectiveness Analyses:  
 
 
 
t 
 
 
Safety Analyses:  

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 19 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 7. IDENTIFICATION AND DESCRIPTION OF THE INVESTIGATION DEVICE  
7.1 Description of the Medication/ Device  
The clinical investigational device is MED3000, a gel formulation currently under development by 
[CONTACT_17471] (FMD ) as a topi[INVESTIGATOR_17420] ( ED).  
MED3000 will be provided to patients in tubes, e ach tube containin g 800 mg  of MED3000 gel.  Each  
tube will contain sufficient gel to apply a single dose (approximately 300  mg) of MED3000 at each 
application.  
Tadalafil (5 mg) tablets will also be used in this clinical investigation .  The medication will be 
packaged in boxes; each box containing twelve [ADDRESS_16542] will be administered using a specific dosing frequency regimen.   
Instead, they should be administered on an ‘as needed’ basis  (i.e. the investigational product is 
taken prior to  a sexual intercourse attempt). 
Details of the manufacturer:  
Name/Number of model to permit full identification:  
Not applicable .  
Device traceability:   
MED3000 gel will be supplied to the sites in single -dose tubes contained within an outer carton 
(i.e. each carton contains 4 tubes).   Both carton and tubes will display details of the investigational 
device’s batch number and unique kit identification number.  
Tadalafil (5 mg) tablets will b e provided to patient s in boxes ; each box containing [ADDRESS_16543] ( i.e. MED3000 gel and tadalafil [5 mg] 
tablets) will be managed using a combination of Interactive Web Response System ( IWRS ) and site 
maintained dispensing /return  logs.  
Intended use :  
The intended use of MED3000 gel is for the treatment of ED in adult males.   The clinical investigation 
will be conducted in patients with ED in both the [LOCATION_002] (US) and Europe to demonstrate the 
performance  over a 24 -week period .  The US site will recruit African- Americans  exclusively  to ensure 
patient ethnic diversity  and associated comorbidities . 
Patients with hypogonadism, prostatectomy and uncontrolled or severe diabetes will be specifically 
excluded from the c linical investigation (see Section  12.3.1  Inclusion and exclusion criteria).  The 
rationale for this exclusion is based on the fact that these groups respond poorly to all current 
treatments for ED , including PDE5 inhibitors, and there is no evidence to suggest MED3000 will 
overcome this  unresponsiveness.  

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page [ADDRESS_16544] the absence of data in these groups.  The proposed indication for use of 
MED3000 will be for the treatment of ED in adult males and include an appropriate caveat excluding 
relevant comorbidities.  
Details of the device components:  
Table 1 MED3000 Qualitative Formula  
Summary of required training: The device is applied to  t he glans penis immediately prior to sexual 
intercourse.   Training will be provided by [CONTACT_17472] a model phallus  to demonstrate how 
the patient or partner applies the medication.   Further training may be provided to the participants 
as required.  Previous studies have assessed that MED3000 is a safe product with an extremely 
favourable safety profile.  
Description of specific medical procedures: This product is intended for home use .  No specific 
medical or interventional procedures are necessary.  
Investigator ’s Brochure:  Details of previously conducted clinical and non- clinical studies can be 
found in the MED3000 investigator’s brochure  (IB). 
8. JUSTIFICATION OF THE DESIGN OF THE CLINICAL INVESTIGATION  
8.1 Introduction 
ED is the consistent or recurrent inability to attain and/or maintain a penile erection sufficient for 
satisfactory sexual performance.  Although not seen as life -threatening, ED is closely associated with 
a number of physical conditions and may affect psy chosocial health [1 ]. 
ED is a highly prevalent condition.  The pi[INVESTIGATOR_17421] 52% of men aged [ADDRESS_16545] some degree of ED (combined prevalence of 
minimal, moderate and complete ED) [ 2].  More than [ADDRESS_16546] in excess of 320  million men worldwide by 2025 [ 3, 4].  

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 21 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 Factors that might contribute to this increasing prevalence include the ageing of the world’s 
population, as well as dietary changes, health behaviours and an emerging diabetes pandemic [ 3, 4]. 
ED can affect all age groups; however,  the frequency of ED clearly increases with age [ 2].  As an 
example, men aged 60 –69 years of age experience more than four times the level of ED comp ared 
with men in the 40 –49 year age group [ 3].  Nevertheless, ED is increasingly affecting men younger 
than 40 years with the prevalence of ED in you ng men estimated to be as high as 30% [ 5].  The 
burden of ED among differing racial and ethnic groups is uncertain and under studied.  While one stud y suggested that Asian and black men are less likely to have severe ED compared with white 
men, another suggested an increased risk in black and Hispanic men, and a third found no effect of 
race/ethnicity on ED [ 6, 7, 8].  Smith et al . (2009) suggests that the effects of race or ethnicity may 
depend o n a complex interaction between socioeconomic, demographic, cultural and lifestyle 
characteristics [ 6].   
The degree of severity of ED is highly variable among men, but is often described as mild, moderate 
or severe.  The International Index for Erectile Function (IIEF), a widely used, multidimensional, 
self- report instrument for the assessment of ED, is commonly used for diagnostic evaluation of ED 
severity.  The IIEF consists of 15 questions divided into five domains of sexual function: erectile 
function (EF), orgasmic function, sexual desire, intercourse satisfaction and overall satisfaction.  An 
evaluation of severity is based on the EF domain, class ified into five categories based on the score 
achieved: no ED, mild ED, mild to moderate, moderate, and severe [ 9].  The IIEF is discussed further 
in Justification of Clinical Endpoints of the Clinical Investigation Plan ( CIP) (Section 9). 
There are many potential causes of ED.  These can be psychological, organic or of mixed aetiology  
[10].   
The pathophysiology of ED is complex and may be anatomical, vascular, neuronal, hormonal, traumatic or drug -induced, among others.  ED is often attributable to organic causes such as altered 
blood flow to and from the penis possibly o wing to damage to the arteries, endothelium or smooth 
muscle.  Damage can be the result of a chronic condition, with an increased risk particularly evident 
in men with cardiovascular diseases (CVD) such as hypertension, heart disease and diabetes [ 4].  
Indeed, the underlying risk factors associated with ED (e.g.  age, sedentary lifestyle, obesity, smoking, 
metabolic syndrome) are common to CVD in general, and the pathophysiologies of ED and CVD are 
thought to share several similarities, including atherosclerosis, endothelial dysfunction, structural 
vascular damage and subclinical inflammation [ 1, 10, 11, 12].   
ED is also common in men with other conditions such as depression, spi[INVESTIGATOR_1828], chronic 
kidney disease, those undergoing cancer treatment and following prostatectomy [ 4].  Common 
medications, such as antihypertensives, non -steroidal anti- inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and 
antacids, may also be linked to ED [ 11, 13].  Furthermore, ED has been associated with the use of 
less common medications, such as psychotrop ic drugs (e.g. antidepressants, atypi[INVESTIGATOR_17422]) [ 13, 14]. 
Situational or psychosocial factors may also play a causative role and can be complex and multidimensional.  Situational/psychosocial causes can  be related to performance anxiety, 
psychological distress (e.g. depression, general anxiety, post -traumatic stress disorder) or 
relationship problems, as well as age -related reductions in libido or chronic sexual intimacy disorders 
[5].  High levels of performance anxiety may worsen or maintain ED which can cause a vicious cycle 
of anxieties and stress leading to impaired sexual arousal and sexual avoidance [ 1, 5, 12]. 
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page [ADDRESS_16547] been con sistently replicated 
across ED models [15 ]. 
In summary, ED is a common but complex condition with a multifaceted aetiology that is still not fully understood.  
8.[ADDRESS_16548] worldwide [ 16, 17, 18].   
On an individual  level, ED can be a major factor contributing to an unsatisfactory sexual life, may 
impact physical and psychosocial health and can negatively affect a man’s quality of life ( QoL), 
including his mental health (including causing anxiety and depression), his  relationship and his 
general wellbeing [ 1, 2, 19].  There is a wealth of evidence suggesting ED has a detrimental effect of 
many aspects of QoL for both men and their partners, and that treatment can help [ 20].  
Nevertheless, despi[INVESTIGATOR_17423], many men avoid seeking medical help for the condition, which only adds to the problem [ 1]. 
ED is a serious public health problem and is costly to both the individual men who suffer from ED and also healthcare systems, with the largest costs attributable to diagnosis and treatment [ 17].  
Between 1997 and 2000, the costs to the [LOCATION_006] National Health Service (NHS) increased from £29.4 to £73.[ADDRESS_16549] and general practitioner (GP) 
consultations, sildenafil prescriptions and psychosexual therapy.  The authors thought the increased 
costs were mainly owing to a three -fold increase in the number of men presenting to GPs with ED, 
many of  whom were then referred for specialist consultations [ 21].  Of note, minimal research has 
been carried out to assess the costs of modern therapeutic approaches to ED, and many studies are 
dated [ 18].  The economic landscape for ED treatment is changing and costs to healthcare systems 
have increased owing to ageing populations, increasing ED prevalence accompanied by [CONTACT_17473] [ 18]. 
In light of this, a correct diagnosis of ED and its comorbidities, as well as a better understanding of 
the causes and treatments of ED should not only improve QoL, sexual and general health, but also reduce the burden of ED on societies [ 4].  Furthermore, because of the strong link between ED and 
CVD (and other conditions), ED could potentially act as a marker for various other disorders, helpi[INVESTIGATOR_17424] h ealthcare costs in these areas as well.  
8.3 Management of E rectile Dysfunction 
There are a number of published evidence -based and multidisciplinary expert consensus -based 
guidelines for the management of ED [ 1, 10, 12, 19, 22, 23].  The goal of ED treatment is to restore 
or enhance sexual function and to improve the individual and his partner’s physical health and QoL while minimising adverse events (AEs ) and diagnosis - and treatment -associated burden [ 22]. 
The management of ED usually follows a stepwise progression.  
Following a thorough medical/sexual history, physical examination and appropriate lab oratory 
testing (e.g. fasting serum glucose and/or glycated haemoglobin, lipid profile, morning total 
testosterone), the first- line approach for the treatment of ED is often lifestyle changes (e.g.  changes 
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 23 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 in diet and increased physical activity) and modif ications to risk factors (e.g.  smoking cessation, 
alcohol/drug intake, blood pressure [BP] treatment).   
If the ED is thought to be associated with an underlying medical condition, all of the guidelines 
recommended that this should be managed accordingly a s a first step of treatment.  Most men will 
however be treated with therapeutic options that are not cause- specific.  Lifestyle modifications are 
usually followed by (or used concurrently with) first -line oral pharmacotherapy with a selective 
phosphodieste rase type 5 (PDE-5) inhibitor such as sildenafil (sold under the brand name [CONTACT_17515] ® 
[[COMPANY_007] Inc], among others), tadalafil (sold under the brand name [CONTACT_17516] ® [Eli Lilly and Company], 
among others), vardenafil (sold under the brand name [CONTACT_17517] ® [Bayer Healthcare, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Schering- Plough], among others) and avanafil (sold under the brand names Stendra ®/Spedra ® 
[Vivus  Inc, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Menarini]).   
The enzyme PDE -[ADDRESS_16550] the PDE -5 enzyme from 
breaking down cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) in the cavernosal tissue, the accumulation 
of which acts to increase arterial blood flow which causes  smooth muscle relaxation in the corpora 
cavernosa, vasodilation and consequent penile erection [ 2, 19, 22]. 
Although PDE -[ADDRESS_16551] been wel l documented, 
all PDE -5 drugs are contraindicated in men taking nitrates in any form (such as glyceryl trinitrate 
[GTN] , isosorbide dinitrate and isosorbide mononitrate) for CVD; e.g. for angina or heart failure.  In 
addition, dose adjustments may be requi red in certain populations; for example, older men, those 
with hepatic or renal impairments and those taking certain medications [ 1].  As oral drugs, PDE-5 
inhibitors are commonly associated with systemic AEs such as headache, flushing and dyspepsia, which although often mild in intensity can contribute to significant treatment dropouts [ 20, 24, 25].  
Furthermore, PDE -5 inhibitors are associated with treatment failure in a sizeable proportion of users, 
and compliance with treatment has been shown to decrease over time [ 26, 27].  One estimate 
suggests oral therapi[INVESTIGATOR_17425] 75% of users, but almost 50 % of men discontinue 
PDE-5 inhibitor treatment within one year [ 1, 28].  This is discussed further in the next section 
(Section  8.4). 
PDE-[ADDRESS_16552] ranging from 15  minutes to up to 1  hour, and peak circulating drug concentrations are 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_17426] 1 –2 hours following administration [ 19, 22].  Add to this their relatively 
long- half life, meaning effects last beyond the usual duration of sexual intercourse.  Furthermore, 
the absorption of sildenafil can be delayed by [CONTACT_17474], and absorption of vardenafil and avanafil can be delayed by a high fat meal [ 19, 22]. 
The British Society for Sexual Medicine mention the recent European Union ( EU) approval of an over 
the counter (OTC) formula tion of sildenafil (Viagra Connect ® 50 mg; approved in November 2017 for 
commencement of sales in 2018) in their 2017 guidelines on the management of ED [ 1].  However, 
as the guidelines were published before Viagra Connect ® went on general sale, it has not yet been 
incorporated into the treatment model.  
In general, PDE -[ADDRESS_16553] -line 
treatment options include vacuum erection devices, intracavernosal injections (e.g.  alprostadil, 
papaverine), intraurethral suppositories (e.g.  alprostadil) and penile prosthesis implantations.  
Second/third- line therapi[INVESTIGATOR_17427] -5 inhibitors.  However, 
these treatments are frequently associated with AEs such as local pain, fibrosis and priapi[INVESTIGATOR_8801] (a 
persistent and painful erection) and can lead to poor compliance owing to their invasive nature.  In 
light of this, the benefit -risk profile of these second- line therapi[INVESTIGATOR_17428].  Newer treatments include low -intensity extracorporeal shock 
wave therapy, intracavernosal stem cell therapy and platele t-rich plasma therapy; however, these 
treatments should be considered experimental as they are still undergoing testing and further studies are required to establish effectiveness . 
Owing to their less invasive route of administration and ease of use, topi[INVESTIGATOR_17429].  
Alprostadil, a synthetic analogue of prostaglandin E
1 (PGE1), has been marketed for many years as 
an intracavernosal injection and a urethral stick for the treatment of ED.  Alprostadil cream (Vitaros ®/Virirec ®), PGE1 combined with a skin permeation enhancing drug delivery system, has 
been developed for the treatment of ED, although clinical data are limited [ 1, 19].  Alprostadil cream 
is not approved for use in the US.   Administered at a dose of 300  µg inserted into the urethra, 
topi[INVESTIGATOR_897] -applied alprostadil has shown to be safe and effective (increased  penile blood flow, 
improved erections, increased successful intercourse attempts) versus baseline and placebo in a 
broad range of men with mild to severe ED [ 26, 29].  Side effects tend to be mild to moderate, 
transient and localised, including genital pain, burning, tenderness and erythema; but have been seen in up to 78% of patient s [30].  Owing to its low systemic absorption, systemic AEs are usually 
rare or absent.  Furthermore, the effectiv eness  and safety of topi[INVESTIGATOR_17430] 9  months in an open -label study in 1,161  men [ 26, 31]. 
There are little long -term safety data for alprostadil cream, and no published comparisons with 
other treatments [ 26, 32].  Furthermore, alprostadil cream should not be used in combinatio n with 
oral PDE -5 inhibitors because an additive increased cardiovascular risk cannot be excluded [ 32]. 
In summary, there are a number of treatment options available to men with ED.  Most men will 
follow a structured treatment strategy that will depend on effectiveness , tolerability, invasiveness, 
cost and preference.  As there is a continually expanding literature on ED, management strategies 
should evolve as our understanding of ED expands.  Importantly, the American Urological Association (AUA) suggests a ‘shared decision- making’ approach is the cornerstone of the 
patient -centred management of ED, during which the man, in collaboration with his physician and in 
consultation with his partner when applicable, is enabled to fully consider all of the treatment options available to him and supported in the decision making process.  The AUA believe the model should rely on concepts of autonomy and respect fo r the individual; i.e.  every man who presents 
with ED is unique, and the most effective approach for a particular man is best determined by [CONTACT_17475] [ 22]. 
8.4 Potential of MED3000 in the M arket for Erectile Dysfunction  
The aim of MED3000 is to target a large potential patient population with a clear unmet need.  
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 25 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 The ED market is well -established with sales of ED treatments worth 5.6  billion US dollars in 2018 
[33].  Tadalafil (Cialis ®) is the current market leader; however, brand and generic markets for ED 
medications are changing allowing patients and providers more flexibility in prescribing and in their 
treatment decisions and enabling tailoring to patient preference and needs.  For example, sildenafil 
and tadalafil are both now available as generic medications: [COMPANY_007]’s patent on sildenafil expi[INVESTIGATOR_17431] 2013, and the patent for tadalafil expi[INVESTIGATOR_17432] 2017.  Previously only available via doctor’s prescription, the ED market is also changing with the EU approval of OTC pharmaceutical 
products such as Viagra Connect ®. 
Existing treatments have significant limitations.  There are four main issues with the current treatment landscape: AEs, drug interactions, slow onset of action and treatment failure.   
Oral PDE -5 inhibitors may be the cornerstone of modern ED therapy, but do not meet the needs of 
many men and their partners.  Firstly, there is a subset of ED sufferers who are not able to be prescribed any of the PDE -5 inhibitors owing to contraindications with other medications taken by 
[CONTACT_17476].  PDE -5 inhibitors are contraindicated in men who are taking any form 
of organic nitrates or nitrate -containing compounds, both regularly or intermittently; e.g. in patients 
who have stable angina or heart failure.  Both PDE -5 inhibitors and nitrates are vasodilators, and 
when taken together their additive and synergistic effects may cause an augmented hypotensive 
response, potentially leading to unpredictable reductions in BP [34].  According to recent 
independent market research commissioned by [CONTACT_17477], this group represents at least 10% 
of ED patients [data on file: market research from Cello Health Consulting amongst physicians 
carried out in the US, [LOCATION_009] and [LOCATION_013] and commissioned by [CONTACT_17478] 2017].  
Interactions have also been reported in men taking concomitant antihypertensives or alpha blockers, and drugs inhibiting the P450 cytochrome pathway [ 26, 35, 36].  Secondly, in a significant proportion 
of men this class of drugs is associated with treatment failure; and thirdly, compliance with PDE -5 
inhibitors has been shown to decrease over time [ 26, 27].  In 2016, a review and meta -analysis of 
22 clinical trials, including more than 162,000 ED patients, found that the mean discontinuation rate 
was 4% per month, equivalent to almost 5 0% after 1  year.  The main reasons for discontinuation 
were partner- related problems and lack of effectiveness  [28].  On top of this, many second - and 
third -line therapi[INVESTIGATOR_17433].  
Access to therapi[INVESTIGATOR_17434].  Despi[INVESTIGATOR_17423], many men do not seek medical help for the condition [ 1].  Futura Medical’s market research indicates that only 15 –30% of 
men with ED consult a doctor [data on file].  Apart from some limited products, existing treatments for ED requi re a prescription from a doctor, and there has been little innovation in the ED space in 
recent years.  
User satisfaction is also an issue: the currently available ED treatments do not always reflect a patient’s preference.  According to Futura Medical’s in dependent market research, 68% of ED 
patients are not fully satisfied with their treatment, citing concerns which include barriers to spontaneity and intimacy, insufficient effectiveness and side effects [data on file].  D octors expect 
that within just one  year of treatment initiation, 25% of all ED patients will have discontinued their 
therapy [data on file].  ED affects the patient’s emotions and relationships, and an ideal ED treatment should address more than the ability to have and maintain an erection .  The delayed 
speed of onset associated with PDE- [ADDRESS_16554] and is an attractive proposition [ 37].  The market research showed th at 
72% of doctors considered that helpi[INVESTIGATOR_17435] [ADDRESS_16555] -acting and 
non-invasive local therapy that is easy to administer and well- tolerated with a low risk of systemic 
AEs; i.e. with a more favourable benefit -risk balance than the majority of currently available 
treatments.   Any therapy matching t his profile would make a prime candidate for OTC availability .  
Futura Medical suggest that a topi[INVESTIGATOR_17436]3000 gel could offer an alternative to oral medications and represents a potential new treatment option for men contraindicated to oral 
PDE-5 inhibitors, for those who find the side -effects associated with PDE- 5 inhibitors (or other 
second- or third -line therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014])  unacceptable and for those who have – due to dissatisfaction with 
PDE-5 inhibitor treatment regimens – discontinued use of those products.  

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 27 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 9. JUSTIFICATION OF CLINICAL ENDPOINTS  
9.1 International Index for Erectile Function (IIEF) questionnaire  
The IIEF was developed a nd validated in 1996 –[ADDRESS_16556] International Consultation on Erectile 
Dysfunction as the primary effectiveness  endpoint of choice for clinical studies in ED [ 9, 39].  After 
years of use, the IIEF is considered the gold standard self- report questionnaire for measuring EF . 
The IIEF has been validated, is widely used in numerous countries,  and has demonstrated specificity 
for detecting treatment- related changes in EF  [40].  The IIEF consists of 15 questions divided into five 
domains of sexual function: EF (6 questions), orgasmic function (2  questions), sexual desire, 
(2 questions), intercourse satisfaction (3  questions) and overall satisfaction (2 questions).  A score of 
0 to 5 is awarded to each of the 15 questions [39].  Higher scores indicate better sexual function.   
The IIEF- EF, a subset of the IIEF measuring EF, is commonly used as the primary endpoint in clinical 
trials and comprises Questions 1 –5 and 15 of the IIEF.  
The questionnaire is completed by  a patient ’s recollection of the effects that his  erection problems 
have  had on his sex life over the previous 4 weeks.  
9.2 Onset of Action (Erection) Questions  
The purpose of the estimation of the time of onset is to provide useful clinical guidance to both 
patients and healthcare professionals.  An accessible presentation of th e time of onset is the mean 
percentage of uses, per patient, that led to the onset of an erection and result in  the ability to have 
penetrative sex within a stated timeframe.  
The Onset of Action  (Erection ) and Erection Hardness questionnaire was used in the FM57 study.  
This patient -reported outcome (PRO) instrument was designed to capture details  of various 
time -related events  associated with sexual intercourse , including the time that the patient and 
partner noticed the onset of an erection after the application of the MED3000 gel and when the 
patient and partner were able to have penetrative sexual intercourse.   An abbreviated version of this  
instrument will be used in this clinical investigation to determine how rapi[INVESTIGATOR_17437] 
(i.e. MED3000 or tadalafil [5 mg]) becomes effective after dosing  (i.e. the onset of an erection and 
the ability of the patient to have penetrative intercourse) .  
In this clinical investigation , the Onset of Action (Erection) questionnaire is completed by [CONTACT_17479] 
(i.e. MED3000 gel or tadalafil [5 mg]) . 
The onset of action assessments using this questionnaire do not require the use of a  stopwatch to 
time events as the questions have a time component included.  A study  investigating the earliest 
time within [ADDRESS_16557] of tadalafil 10 mg and 20 mg [ 41], suggested that a 
limitation of stopwatch studies in general is the potential lack of clinical application.  It is therefore 
concluded that using a stopwatch in this clinical investigation  could have a potentially  detrimental 
effect  on the sexual experience which could, in turn, influence the IIEF scores (i.e. the Primary 
Objective) reported by [CONTACT_13935].  

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 28 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 9.3 Self-Esteem And Relationship (SEAR) questionnaire  
The Self-Esteem And Relationship ( SEAR ) questionnaire has strong psychometric properties that 
support its validity and reliability for measuring sexual relationship satisfaction, confidence and 
particularly self-esteem in men with ED  [42].   
It consists of 14 items investigating two dimensions: sexual relationship satisfaction (8 items) and 
confidence (6 items; subdivided into self -esteem and overall relationship satisfaction).  All items are 
scored on a 5- point Likert- type scale.  A higher score signifies a more favourable response for all 
14 items.  
9.4 Objective Performance Criteria and Clinically Meaningful Differences  
Objective performance criteria ( OPC ) are standardised numerical target value s derived from 
historical data taken from clinical studies and/or registries that may be useful for the review and 
comparison of safety or effectiveness endpoints in novel trials.  OPC serve as additional evidence for the effectiveness of MED3000.  
In 201 1 Rosen et al . published a paper titled ‘ Minimally clinically important differences in the erectile 
function domain of the International Index of Erectile Function scale ’ [43].  In this paper, the EF 
domain of the IIEF questionnaire were questions 1 to 5, inclusive, and question 15.   The study used 
anchor -based minimal clinically important  difference s (MCIDs ) estim ated using data from 
17 randomised, double -blind, placebo -controlled, parallel-group clinical trials of the PDE -5 inhibitor 
tadalafil (Cialis ®) for 3 ,345 men with ED  who received treat ment for 12  weeks (meta -analysis).  The 
overall MCID for IIEF -EF change from baseline was established as 4.  MCIDs for IIEF- EF changes from 
baseline were also established for different ED severities as follows : mild , 2; moderate , 5; and 
severe, 7.  These ‘Rosen ’ criteria have now been widely accepted and used for responder definitions 
by [CONTACT_17480], and are cited by [CONTACT_17481] a recent strategic 
review as an acceptable PRO.   
9.[ADDRESS_16558] assessments including physical examinations and visual examination of the penis, vital signs (BP, heart rate [HR], body temperature), standard clinical laboratory safety tests (haematology, biochemistry, urinalysis), 12 -lead electrocardiograms ( ECGs ) and monitoring of AEs and concomitant 
medications with paper diaries (any AEs experienced by [CONTACT_17482] 
[Visits 1, 2 and 8] or in the paper diaries. If information is missing from  the paper diar ies then the 
site should make every effort to obtain the required information ).  
9.6 Patient Population  
All patients who meet the eligibility criteria may be enrolled in this investigation , irrespective of their 
ED severity (i.e.  mild, moderate or severe).  However, limits will be imposed on the number of 
patients recruited into each severity cohort (i.e. mild, moderate or severe) to ensure that these are 
broadly similar to that in PDE -5 studies and the M assachusetts Aging S tudy  [2].  It is anticipated that 
enrolled patients in this clinical investigation  will be ethnically diverse as sites will be located in both 
the US and Eu rope.   The US site will enrol African -American patients exclusively to ensure that a 
representative population of this ethnic group are included in the clinical investigation . 
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 29 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 A publication by [CONTACT_17483] . (2016) stated that the overwhelming majority of clinical trials involving 
patients with ED required the enrolment of patients in a heterosexual relationship for a minimum of 
3 months  [44].  As the majority of ED studies involve heterosexual patients, a n exclusively  
heterosexual population will be enrolled  in this clinical investigation .   
10. BENEFITS AND RISKS OF THE DEVICE, CLIN ICAL PROCEDURES AND INVESTIGATION  
MED3000 is being developed for the treatment of ED and as such, the anticipated clinical benefits for patient s receiving treatment with MED3000 are improvements in EF with consequent  
improvements in QoL for themselves and their partners. 
The risks associated with participation in the investigation are dire ctly related to the two products 
involved, namely MED3000 and tadalafil [ADDRESS_16559] commonly reported adverse reactions in patients taking tadalafil for the 
treatment of ED are headache, dyspepsia, back pain and myalgia, in which the incidences increase 
with increasing dose of tadalafil.  The adverse reactions reported are transient, and generally mild or 
moderate.  As a 5 mg dose of tadalafil will be used in this clinical investigation, risks associated with 
participation are therefore mild and will further be mitigated by [CONTACT_17484] . 
The rationale for the benefit-risk ratio for both products  is based on their individual safety profiles 
and clinical effectiveness.   In the case of MED3000 this has been established in developmental 
clinical trials.  In the case of tadalafil this has been established by [CONTACT_17485]. 
11. OBJECTIVES AND HYPOTHESES OF THE CLINICAL INVESTIGATION  
This clinical investigation  is intended to asses s the effectiveness and safety of MED3000 gel over a 
24-week period  in male patients  clinically diagnosed with ED .  
Primary Effectiveness Objective:  
• To demonstrate an improvement compared to baseline of the EF domain of the IIEF in patients 
randomised to MED3000, assessed at [ADDRESS_16560]-randomisation by [CONTACT_17486].  
• To observe a mean change from baseline of the IIEF -EF in patients randomised to MED3000, 
assessed at [ADDRESS_16561] -randomisation, greater than or equal to the MCID of 4, as published by 
[CONTACT_17487] 2011  [43]).
  
The endpoint for the primary effectiveness objective is the EF domain of the IIEF, assessed at 
[ADDRESS_16562] -randomisation.  

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 30 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 The primary objective  will be assessed according to the outcomes in all randomised patients at 
24 weeks attributed to the initially received  treatment  [45].  Treatment discontinuation reasons 
considered to be adversely related to randomised treatment (for example, lack of effectiveness  or 
related AEs) are considered as attributable and will be treated as an unfavourable outcome; while a 
hypothetical estimand strategy, that is, as if the patient  carried on  treatment, will be used for 
intercurrent events not considered to be related to randomised treatment (for example lost to 
follow -up or unrelated AEs ). 
Secondary Effectiveness  Objective s: 
The secondary effectiveness objectives are: 
• To demonstrate a speed of onset of action from the application of MED3000 gel to the time when 
the patient notice s their erection starting.   Specifically, the objective is to provide evidence that 
the mean percentage of MED3000 uses per patient that result in  the patient noticing their erection 
starting  within a certain period of time is greater than 30%, assessed whilst on treatment during 
the 24 -week treatment period.  
• To demonstrate a speed of onset of action from the application of MED3000 gel to the time  when 
the patient is able to have  penetrative sex.  Specifically, the objective is to provide evidence that 
the mean percentage of MED3000 uses per patient that result in  the ability to have  penetrative 
sex within a certain period of time is greater than 30%, assessed whilst on treatment during the 
24-week treatment period.  
Only on -treatment assessments made up to the time of treatment discontinuation will be used.   
Time from  application of MED3000 gel  will be assessed at 5 minutes, 10 minutes and 1 5 minutes.  
The endpoint s for the secondary effectiveness objectives are: 
• The percentage of times that a patient indicates that they began to notice their erection starting 
within 5 minutes (10 minutes, 15 minutes) out of the total number of intercourse attempts made 
using the product during the [ADDRESS_16563] -randomisation.  
• The percentage of times that a patient indicates that they were able to have penetrative sex within 
5 minutes (10 minutes, 15 minutes)  out of the total number of intercourse attempts made using 
the product during the [ADDRESS_16564] -randomisation.  
The justification for th e definition s is a clinically accepted and published prece dent.  The objective is 
based on the results from a study which assessed the effectiveness of a vanafil within approximately 
15 minutes after dosing in men with ED [46].  This study observed a mean of 29.1% for the per 
subject percentage of sexual attempts in which men were able to have penetrative sexual 
intercourse within 15 minutes of using avanafil (200 mg).  Subjects were encouraged to attempt 
intercourse approximately 15 minutes after dosing and made use of a stopwatch.   This study allowed 
the following text to be included on the a vanafil on the prescribing information, “The starting dose is 
100 mg take n as early as approximately 15 minutes before sexual activity”.  
A study  investigating the earliest time within [ADDRESS_16565] of tadalafil 10 mg and 
20 mg [41], suggested that a limitation of stopwatch studies in general is the potential lack of clinical 
application.  
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 31 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 Safety Objectives:  
12. DESIGN OF THE CLINICAL INVESTIGATION  

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 32 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 33 of 74  
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                             CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 34 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                             CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 35 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                             CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 36 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                             CONFIDENTIAL                                Page 37 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 Table 3 Schedule of Questionnaires  

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 39 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 12.3 Patients   
Ethnicity and FM71 : 
Patients will be recruited from across Europe and in the US.  The latter group will specifically focus 
on American Afro -Caribbeans for two reasons.  First, to guarantee that a selection of Afro -Caribbean 
patients are included in the investigation.  Second,  because Afro -Caribbean ethnicity has a relatively 
higher prevalence of diabetes and CVD , which can  frequently be associated with obesity , this can  
impact the severity of ED.  
The US population also includes Hispanics and Asians who may not be represented i n the cohort of 
European patients.   However, these ethnicities do not have a similarly high prevalence for these 
comorbidities.  The prevalence of hypertension among Mexicans, for instance, is lower than the 
prevalence of hypertension in the general Americ an population [ 57].  In the same publication The 
American Heart Association advised that there was “a remarkable lack of consistent information 
regard ing the prevalence of hypertension among US Hispanics”.  
The American Heart Association has also stated that Asian Americans (Asian Indian, Chinese, Filipi[INVESTIGATOR_8614], Japanese, Korean  and Vietnamese) comprise a widespread ethnic group which has differing patterns 
of disease tendencies within its many sub -groups.   However, aggregated as a single group they are at 
lower risk of CVD [ 58]. 
The comparability of European and American populations within this context is further supported by [CONTACT_17488] a measure of ED when used in different geographic populations or etiologic sub -groups.  Baseline and post treatment IIEF scores were “almost identical” 
in the first European and US studies [ 9]. 
In addition, a literature review (data on file) shows that the results reported on studies in the US were similar to those reported in the rest of the world thereby [CONTACT_17489] 40 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 studying the effectiveness  and safety of treatments of ED, the US population is comparable with 
Europe.  
12.3.1 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
MED3000 is being developed to treat ED.  In this clinical investigation , patients with  mild, moderate 
and severe ED will be enrolled.  The severity (i.e. mild , moderate or severe) of the patients’ ED at 
baseline (i.e. Visit 2) will be determined using the IIEF questionnaire.  Additionally, prior to 
randomisation, all patients must meet the eligibility criteria as detailed below.  
Inclusion criteria:  All patients  must meet all of the following inclusion criteria to be eligible for the 
investigation  (following screening [Visit  1], an eligibility check will be carried out on Day  1 of the 
treatment period [Visit  2]): 
1. Patient  is a male aged between 22 and 70 years inclusive, at screening  
2. Confirmed clinical diagnosis of ED for more than 3  months according to the National Institutes 
of Health  (NIH) Consensus Statement (‘the inability to achieve or maintain penile erection 
sufficient for satisfactory sexual performance at least once’)  
3. Patient  answers ‘yes’ to the question regarding the presence of residual EF over the past 
3 months: ‘At home over the past [ADDRESS_16566] some growth of your 
penis in response to: (1) mechanical stimulation by [CONTACT_17490], or (2) visual 
stimulation?’  
4. Patient  has been involved in a continuous heterosexual relationship for at least 6  months prior 
to screening  
5. Documented written informed consent from both patient  and his female partner 
6. If the male patient ’s female partner is of childbearing potential from the time of first sexual 
intercourse attempt during the screening period until the last administration of investigational 
treatment, then the couple must have been using a medically acceptable form of cont raception 
for at least [ADDRESS_16567] administration of MED3000 or tadalafil (5 mg) 
Acceptable methods of contraception are listed below; it should be noted that condoms, 
femidoms, diaphragms, caps or hormone rings are not permitted as a form of contraception in this investigation:  
− Surgical sterilisation of the male partner (vasectomy with documentation of azoospermia if 
possible)  
− The female partner has undergone documented tubal ligation (female sterilisation)  
− The female partner uses combined hormone injectables  
− The female partner uses medically prescribed hormonal implants  
− The female partner has undergone documented placement of an intrauterine device (IUD) or intrauterine system (IUS)  
− The female partner uses combined oral contraceptives  
− The female partner uses progesterone only contraceptives  
− The female partner uses combined hormonal patches  
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 41 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 Other than for male/female sterilisation, if any o f these above listed methods are being used 
then their effectiveness must be determined by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_17438], taking into 
consideration the compliance and tolerance of the female partner with this method of 
contraception.  
As an additional precaution  against pregnancy, the date of the Last Menstrual Period (LMP) of 
the female partner will be recorded in the CRF before proceeding with the investigation.  Any 
history of irregularity of periods will also be recorded.  
Patients  who are or wish to become pregnant will not be included in the investigation .  
7. Patient  and his female partner are capable of understanding and complying with the 
requirements of the CIP and must have signed the informed consent form ( ICF) prior to 
participation in any investigation -related procedures  
8. Low IIEF- EF scores (≤ 25) at the end of  the screening period  (i.e. Visit 2)  
Exclusion Criteria:  Patients  are prohibited from participating in the investigation if they meet any of 
the following exclusion criteria (following screening [Vis it 1], an eligibility check will be carried out on 
Day 1 of the treatment period [Visit 2]): 
1. Any significant or serious cardiovascular, pulmonary, hepatic, renal, gastrointestinal, 
haematological, endocrinological, metabolic, neurological or psychiatric disease which, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_17439], renders the patient  unfit to take part in the investig ation  
2. Patient  has any history of an unstable medical or psychiatric condition or using any medication 
that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_17439], is likely to affect the patient ’s ability to complete the investigation  
or precludes the patient ’s participation in the in vestigation  
Certain concomitant medications; e.g. other vasodilators, calcium channel blockers, 
angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, beta blockers, diuretics, anti -hypertensives, 
tricyclic anti-depressants and major tranquillisers, as well as t he consumption of alcohol, may 
potentiate the BP lowering effects of tadalafil; therefore, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_17440]  
3. Any presence of a symptomatic, active urinary tract infection diagnosed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_17441]  
4. Any presence of chronic indwelling urethral catheterisation or penile anatomical abnormalities 
(e.g. penile fibrosis) that would significantly impair EF  
5. Any history of operations for Peyronie’s disease  
6. Primary hypoactive sexual desire or any history of hypogonadism  
7. Any history of radical prostatectomy  
8. Any history of severe/uncontrolled diabetes  
9. Patients  taking two or more anti -hypertensives for the treatment of BP  
10. Hypersensitivity to any of the excipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]  
11. Concomitant treatment with sildenafil citrate, vardenafil and other PDE -[ADDRESS_16568] loss of vision in one eye because of non -arteritic anterior ischaemic optic 
neuropathy (NAION) 
18. Increased intracranial pressure (e.g. head trauma or cerebral haemorrhage) or inadequate 
cerebral circulation  
19. Any history of migraine or recurrent headache  
20. Aortic or mitral stenosis  
21. Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy  
22. Constrictive pericarditis or pericardial tamponade  
23. Closed -angle glaucoma  
24. Patients  with nursing partners, known pregnant partners or with partners who wish to become 
pregnant during the course of the investigation  
25. Confirmed positive results from urine drug screen (amphetamines, benzodiaze pi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], cocaine, 
cannabinoids, opi[INVESTIGATOR_858], barbiturates, tricyclic antidepressants and methadone) or from the alcohol breath test at screening (for clarification, any positive result from the urine drug screen or alcohol breath tests at screening will mean the  patient  will be excluded from the 
investigation).  In the instance that a patient  is using medication which may give a positive 
result, exclusion will be at the PI’s discretion  
26. Patient  has recent (last 12  months) clinical evidence of alcoholism or drug ab use 
27. Patient  has a positive screen for hepatitis B, consisting of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAG), 
hepatitis C antibody, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)  
28. Any clinically significant abnormal laboratory, vital signs or other safety findings as deter mined 
by [CONTACT_9870], physical examination or other evaluations conducted at screening or on admission  
29. Patients  unwilling to cease use of vacuum devices, intracavernosal injections, PDE -5s or other 
non-clinical investigation  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_17442]  
30. Unwillingness of the patient  or their partner to agree to make the required attempts at sexual 
intercourse during treatment period  
31. Any history of unresponsiveness to PDE -[ADDRESS_16569] during the 90  days prior to dosing for this 
investigation  
35. Patient  or his partner cannot communicate reliably with the PI  
36. Patients  with severe premature ejaculation (little or no control of ejaculation at the time of 
penetration)  
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page [ADDRESS_16570] to comply with the following restrictions:  
• Blood donation will not be allowed at any time during the investigation  and up to 3  months 
(90 days) after completion of the investigation  
• Male patients  should not donate spe rm and their female partners should not donate egg(s) from 
the time of the first administration of i nvestigational product  until [ADDRESS_16571]  
12.5 Withdrawal of Patients  
Each patient  (and their female partner) will be informed of their right to withdraw from the  
investigation  at any time and for any reason.  The reasons for any patient  withdrawal will be 
recorded on the electronic Case Report Form (eCRF).  
Reasons for withdrawing a patient from the investigation can include:  
• Voluntary discontinuation by [CONTACT_17491]/or his female partner, who are free to discontinue 
participation in the investigation at any time  
• Severe non -compliance to the CIP as judged by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or Sponsor  
• Any other reason as judged by [CONTACT_978]  
[INVESTIGATOR_17443] a low dropout rate is anticipated in this  clinical investigation , investigation sites should 
make every effort (in accordance with the CRO’s agreed standard operating procedures [ SOPs ] on 
follow -up) to encourage  withdrawn patients (and their partners) to the site to undertake all required 
assessments. 
Various strategies will be employed throughout the clinical investigation to promote  the retention of 
patients in the clinical investigation  without compromising patients’ rights as stated in  the 
Declaration of Helsinki.  
12.5.[ADDRESS_16572]  
Patients  (and their female partners) may be withdrawn from the investigational product at any time.  
A PI [INVESTIGATOR_17444] a patient  from the investigational product at any time for any of the following 
reasons:  
• If a patient  experiences a serious or intolerable AE, that prevents them from continuing  
• If a patient  incurs a significant CIP violation which impacts on their safety (this will be discussed 
on a case -by-case basis with the Sponsor)  
• At the request of the Sponsor  
• If it is considered that the patient ’s health is compromised by [CONTACT_17492] 44 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 12.5.2 Procedur es for Patient  Withdrawal  
Patients  who withdraw from the investigation (and their female partners) should always be asked 
about the  specific  reason(s) for withdrawal, the presence of any AEs and any concomitant 
medication that the patient (and/or partner) may be taking.   Investigation -related AEs will be 
monitored closely and provided with the appropriate medical care and follow -up as necessary.  
A patient will be enrolled into the investigation at Day 1 (i.e. the start of the screening period), 
having satisfied all of the eligibility.  After completing the run -in period (Visit 2), the patient’s 
eligibility will be reassessed, and the IIEF- EF scores evaluate d.  If the patient satisfies the eligibility 
criteria and scores ≤ 25 on the IIEF -EF questionnaire, they will be randomised into the investigation 
and a treatment type (i.e. MED3000 gel or tadalafil [5 mg] tablets) assigned.  The investigation is 
expected to have a duration of 9 months (i.e. first patient first visit until last patient last visit) with 
each patient being on the investigation for up to 30 weeks (including the screening period and follow -up visit) .  
One hundred ran domised patient s (50 patients on each treatment arm) with ED are required in this 
investigation.  The recruitment period is expected to be approximately [ADDRESS_16573] of activities can be found in the Schedule of Events table  (Table 2).  
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page [ADDRESS_16574] investigation  data, patient  medical records and eCRFs 
in accordance with GCP and the respective local and national government regulations and 
guidelines.  Records and data may additionally be reviewed by [CONTACT_17493]  
14. STATISTICAL DESIGN AND ANALYSIS 
14.1 General  
Methodology for summary and statistical analyses of the data collected in th is investigation is 
described here.   Further details of the proposed statistical analysis will be documented in a statistical 
analysis plan (SAP), which will be written following completion of the CIP and prior to randomisation 
of any patient  into the tria l.  The SAP may modify what is outlined in the  CIP where appropriate; 
however , any major modifications of the primary and secondary definitions or their analyses will 
also be reflected in a CIP amendment.  Any deviations from the planned statistical analys es post -SAP 
finalisation will be detailed in the investigation  report.  

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page [ADDRESS_16575] 
deviation ( SD), median, first and third quartiles, minimum and maximum.  Categorical variables will 
be presented using number of patients and percentages, with percentages based on the number of 
non-missing values .  For ordered categorical variables, cumulative percentages may also be 
presented.  Two -sided, 95%  confidence intervals will be presented as part of the descriptive 
statistics.  Summaries will be based on observed data.   In addition, multiple imputation will be used 
to produce summaries whilst taking into ac count treatment discontinuations and other missing data.  
Data will be pooled across all sites .  Descriptive statistics will be produced for sub -groups according 
to baseline ED severity and according to country.  
There will be no planned interim analyses.  A nalyses will be conducted once all patients  have 
completed the investigation  and the database has been locked.  
14.[ADDRESS_16576] of Hypotheses  

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 52 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 14.3 Sample Size and Power  
A total sample size of 100 patients  (50 per arm) is deemed appropriate for this investigation .  

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 53 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 14.4 Randomisation 
Patients  will be randomised to receive MED3000 gel or t adalafil (5 mg) tablets  using a 1:1 allocation 
ratio.  Randomisation will be stratified based on the  patients  baseline ED severity scores (from the 
end of the screening period) ; mild (IIEF- EF domain score of 17 –25), moderate (IIEF -EF domain score 
of 11–16) or severe (IIEF -EF dom ain score ≤ 10) .  Stratified recruitment will be used, with the aim to 
randomise and treat approximately 40, [ADDRESS_16577] assessments prior to randomisation at Visit 2 unless stated otherwise.  
Assessments made at screeni ng and at baseline will be summarised overall and for each treatment 
group.  These assessments will include demographic and other relevant baseline characteristics 
(such as medical history, physical examination and the assessments made during the screening 
period).  There will be no formal comparison of baseline data via statistical hypothesis testing as this 
is not appropriate methodology . 
14.[ADDRESS_16578] controlled access (e.g. password protection) to ensure the privacy of the patient’s 
and partner’s information , whilst maintaining data integrity .  The clinical database used will be CFR 
[ADDRESS_16579] current version of the  WHODrug dictionary.  
Listings of the coded AEs and concomitant medication will be reviewed by [CONTACT_1034]’s Medical 
Advisor prior to the database lock.  
Any missing, impossible (inconsistent with human life) or inconsistent recordings in the eCRFs will be referred back to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_17445].  
All data queries raised by [CONTACT_17494].  Once all outstanding points requiring data clarification have been address ed, the 
Data Manager or designee will notify the Sponsor and request to lock the clinical database.  Only 
when permission has been given by [CONTACT_17495].  No formal statistical 
analysis of the capture d clinical investigation data will be performed until the database has been 
locked.  
A copy of the collected clinical investigation  data will be pro vided to the Sponsor in a Compact Disc 
(CD) media format at the end of the clinical investigation .  This will be stored in a suitable archiving 
facility.  
Each site will also receive all eCRF data, pertinent to that site, in a CD media format.  All such CDs  will 
be stored along with all site -related clinical investigation documentation.  
All clinical investigation  related data will be stored for a minimum of 10 years.  
16. AMENDMENTS TO THE CIP  
If it becomes necessary to issue an amendment during the course of the investigation , the 
amendment will be developed by [CONTACT_17496]/or the CRO  in consultation with the Coordinating 
Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_17446] B iostatistician as necessary.  
FMD will notify the CRO and collect documented Investigator Ag reements to the amendment.   No 
amendments to the CIP may be implemented until the Regulatory Authorities and E Cs (as 
appropriate) provide  a favourable opi[INVESTIGATOR_17447] . 
17. DEVIATIONS FROM THE CIP  
Emergencies exc epting, under no circumstances will prospective deviations (waivers) from the 
approved CIP and subsequent amendments be permitted.  Any changes to the CIP should be covered 
by [CONTACT_17497] E Cs as 
necessary. 
The Sponsor will be notified of all major deviations from the CIP within 24 hours of their discovery.  
All deviations that are identified during the course of the investigation, be they major or minor in 
severity, will be recorded on a CIP deviations tracking log.  This log will be reviewed by [CONTACT_17498], and corrective and preventative action taken as 
necessary.  
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 58 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 18. DEVICE ACCOUNTABILITY  
The PI, trained delegate or pharmacy staff (as applicable) is responsible for the correct storage of the 
investigational product according to the manufacturer’s recommendations (see current version of the IB or SmPC as applicable).  The investigational products made available for this clinical 
investigation  must be used in accordance with the CIP and must only be handled by [CONTACT_17499].  The pharmacy staff must maintain complete and accurate 
records, showing the receipt and disposition of all supplies of the investigatio nal product.  These 
records must include a master record which lists the date of receipt of all investigational products  
(i.e. MED3000 or tadalafil [5 mg])  and the quantities received, and a dispensing record which 
includes all quantities dispensed, the patient  numbers to whom the medication was dispensed, the 
date of each dispensing and the identification of the dispenser.  Patients  will be expected to return 
all dispensed investigational product (used and unused) to the site to allow full reconciliation  to be 
undertaken.  
No investigational products will be destroyed until full reconciliation has been performed nor without prior written confirmation from the Sponsor.  The CRO will be responsible for coordinating 
the destruction of any unused or returned medication at the sites.  Written proof of destruction 
must be kept in the Sponsor Oversight File and/or the Trial Master File (TMF) and Investigator Site File. 
19. STATEMENTS OF COMPLIANCE  
This clinical investigation  will be conducted in accordance with the et hical principles that have their 
origins in the Declaration of Helsinki, the requirements of GCP, and all necessary regional or national 
regulatory and ethical legislation . 
The clinical investigation  may not commence in a particular country or region until all required 
approvals have been provided, in writing, by [CONTACT_17500] s or 
Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) or the required review timeframe has elapsed, as necessary .  Any 
additional requirements imposed by [CONTACT_1201]/EC or the Regulatory Authority as a condition of approval must also be followed.   
FMD will ensure that local Regulatory Authority requirements are met, if required, before the start of the clinical investigation .  FMD (or a nominated delegate) will be responsible for the preparation, 
submission and confirmation of receipt of any Regulatory Authority approvals required prior to 
clinical investigation commencement.  
It is the responsibility of the CRO to submit this CIP, the informed consent documents (approved by [CONTACT_17501]), relevant supporting information and all types of patient  recruitment information to the 
relevant EC for review, and all must be approved prior to the start of patient  screening.  
Advertisements must be approved by [CONTACT_17502], if applicable.  
Prior to implementing changes in the investigation , FMD and the ECs must also approve any 
substantial amendments to the CIP  and corresponding updates to the informed consent documents .  
For non -substantial CIP amendments (that do not require EC approval) and subsequent updates of 
the informed consent documents , all changes will be done in agreement with FMD and the 
investigati on sites. 
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 59 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 The CRO is responsible for keepi[INVESTIGATOR_17448] .  FMD (or a nominated delegate) will keep the ECs  informed of any 
serious and significant AEs.  
The Sponsor will ensure that suitable insurance cover is in place prior to the start of the 
investigation.   The Sponsor will adhere to the recommendations of the Association of the British 
Pharmaceutical Industry (ABPI) guidelines and all other requirements of insurance in the countries 
where the clinical investigation will be conducted.  
This investigation is being sponsored by [CONTACT_17503]  (FMD) .  Before a site 
can begin any investigation related  activity a fully executed clinical trial agreement is in place 
between FMD and each site.  
20. INFORMED CONSENT PROCESS  
It is the responsibility of the PI  [INVESTIGATOR_17449] (e.g. sub -investigators)  to obtain 
written informed consent from all patients  and their female partners at Visit [ADDRESS_16580] both read the written patient  information and received an explanation of 
what the investigation  involves.  This can include, but is not limited to: the objectives, potential 
benefits and risks, inconveniences and the patient’s/partner’s rights and responsibilities.   Signed 
consent forms must remain on file and must be available for verification by [CONTACT_17504].  A signed original copy of the informed consent documentation (ICF or Patient  Information 
and ICF, as ap plicable) must be given to the patient  and his partner or the patient ’s/partner’s legally 
authorised representative.  
The CRO will provide the Sponsor with a copy of the EC approved consent forms, and a copy of the EC written approval, prior to the start of the investigation .  Additionally, if the EC required 
modification of the sample Patient  Information and ICF documents provided by [CONTACT_1034], the 
documentation supporting this requirement must be provided to the Sponsor.  
It is not anticipated that there will be any circumstances whereby a patient  or his female partner will 
not be able to provide their informed consent in this investigation .  
21. ADVERSE EVENTS, ADVERSE DEVICE EFFECTS, AND DEVICE DEFICIENCIES  
21.1 Definitions  
Adverse Event  (AE) : Any untoward medical occurrence, unintended disease or injury, or untoward 
clinical signs (including abnormal laboratory findings) in patients  and their partners whether or not 
related to the investigational medical device or the control used in the investigation . 
Adverse Device E ffect  (ADE ): An AE related to the use of the investigational medical device.   This 
definition includes:  
• AEs resulting from insufficient or inadequate instructions for use, deployment, implantation, 
installation, or operation, or any malfunction of the investigational medical device  (malfunction is 
the failure of an investigational medical device to perform in accordance with its intended purpose when used in accordance with the CIP)  
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 60 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 • Any event resulting from use error or from intentional misuse of the investigational medical device  
(use error is user action or lack of user action while using the medical device that leads to a 
different result than that intended by [CONTACT_3460])  
Serious Adver se Event  (SAE) : An AE that leads to any of the following:  
• Death  
• A serious deterioration in the health of the patient  or the patient ’s partner by [CONTACT_17505]:  
o A life -threatening illness or injury, or  
o A permanent impairment of a body structure or a body function including chronic diseases, or  
o In-patient or prolongation of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_11956], or  
o Medical or surgical intervention to prevent life -threatening illness or injury, or permanent 
impairment to a bod y structure or body function  
• Foetal distress, foetal death, a congenital abnormality, or birth defect including physical or mental impairment  
Note: In this investigation, planned hospi[INVESTIGATOR_17450] a pre -existing condition, or procedure required 
by [CONTACT_17506], is not considered an SAE . 
Serious Adverse Device Effect  (SADE) : An ADE which results  in any of the consequences as 
characterised in an SAE . 
Serious Health Threat: Signal from any AE  or device deficiency  that indic ates an imminent risk of 
death or a serious deterioration in the health in patients , users or other persons, and that requires 
prompt remedial action for other patients , users or other persons .  A device deficiency is the 
inadequacy of a medical device with res pect to its identity, quality, durability, reliability, usability, 
safety or performance.  
Unanticipated Serious Adverse Device Effect ([LOCATION_003]DE): A SADE which by [CONTACT_5942], incidenc e, 
severity or outcome has not been identified in the current risk assessment.   In some regions, this 
may be referred to as an Unanticipated Adverse Device E ffect . 
AEs/ADEs  will be collected from the signing of the ICF at screening (Visit 1) until the end of the 
investigation .  Any AEs that are unresolved at the patient ’s last AE assessment during the 
investigation  (i.e. at the patient ’s final investigation  visit) are to be followed up by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_17451], but without further recording in the eCRF.  FMD retains the right to request 
additional information for any patient  and/or their female partner with ongoing AE(s)/SAE(s) at the 
end of the investigation , if judged necessary.  
All AEs/ ADEs will be recorded in the patient’s paper diary and entered into the eCRF after review by 
[CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_17449] (e.g. sub -investigators ) at the next investigation visit.  The 
details to be recorded are:  
• The date of the AE/ ADE onset  and its resolution  
• Treatment (if any)  
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 61 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 • Seriousness  
• Relationship to the investigational device or control and the related procedure  
Any SAE/SADE /[LOCATION_003]DE  will be notified by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_17452] [ADDRESS_16581] details for the 
Medical Device Vigilance Service Provider are included in the Medical Device Vigilance manual.  
Assessment of relationship and seriousness will be made by [CONTACT_17507]  (see Section  13.11.1) .  
The FMD Medical Advisor will not be able to downgrade the opi[INVESTIGATOR_17453].  Assessment of expectedness of all AEs will be conducted 
by [CONTACT_17508] ‘Reference Safety Information’ section of the IB.  
Occurrence of SAEs/ SADE /[LOCATION_003]DE s will be notified to the Regulatory Authority and/or the IRB/ECs by 
[CONTACT_17509].  
SAEs/SADE /[LOCATION_003]DE s must be recorded and reported whether or not the PI [INVESTIGATOR_17454]/SADE /[LOCATION_003]DE s to be related to the investigational device or the control . 
Photocopi[INVESTIGATOR_17455], consultant report(s), a sum mary of the outcome of the reaction and the PI ’s 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_17456]’s  relationship to the SAE/ SADE /[LOCATION_003]DE  will accompany the 
SAE/SADE /[LOCATION_003]DE  reporting  form if and when available.  
A Data Monitoring Committee will not be established for this  clinical investigation. 
22. VULNERABLE POPULATION  
This investigation  will involve adult male patients (i.e. 22 to 70 years of age ) who are not vulnerable.  
23. SUSPENSION OR PREMATURE TERMINATION OF THE CLINICAL INVESTIGATION  
The Sponsor may take the decision to prematurely terminate the investigation at any time and for 
whatever reason; such a decision will be communicated to all PIs participating in the investigation . 
As this is an open -label investigation , unblinding of trea tment allocation will not be necessary if the 
investigation  is suspended or terminated.  
If the investigation  is terminated, all ongoing patients will be invited to attend the Follow-up Visit 
and undertake the assessments scheduled for that visit.  
24. PUBLICAT ION POLICY  
Details of the clinical investigation  will be registered on a publicly accessible database 
(e.g.  clinicaltrials.gov).   Upon completion of the investigation and publication of the Clinical 
Investigation Report (CIR).  FMD will provide a summary o f the CIR within [ADDRESS_16582].  
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 62 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 If the Sponsor, CRO and Coordinating Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_17457] ; all parties will liaise in good faith to publish the results.  The CRO/C oordinating 
Investigator agree to obtain the Sponsor’s prior written approval of such publications.  
25. INVESTIGATOR RESPONSIBILITIES  
25.[ADDRESS_16583] been assigned by [CONTACT_17510] 
[ZIP_CODE]:[ADDRESS_16584] their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki, 
EU Directive 2001/20/EC  and all other  applicable regulatory and ethical requirements.  
It is the PI’s responsibility to ensure that adequate time and appropriate resources are available at 
the individual investigation  sites prior to commitment to participate in this investigatio n.  The PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_17458] a potential for recruiting the required number of 
suitable patient s within the agreed recruitment period.  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_17459] a list of appropriately Qualified Persons (QPs) to whom the PI [INVESTIGATOR_17460] -related tasks.  Up- to-date copi[INVESTIGATOR_17461], 
Sub-Investigator(s) and essential investigation  staff will be provided to FMD (or their delegate) 
before starting the investigation . 
Agreement with the fi nal CIR will be documented by a dated signature [CONTACT_17518] r and local regulatory requirements.  
25.[ADDRESS_16585] met CIP  eligibility criteria.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_17462]-Investigator(s) to comply with the CIP. 
25.[ADDRESS_16586].  FMD will control all data collected during the investigation  and 
will abide by [CONTACT_17511] (GDPR) (EU) 2016/679 concerning the processing and use of patient s’ personal data.  For the purpose of GDPR, FMD will be the data 
controll er. 
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page [ADDRESS_16587] consented to take part in the investigation, their medical records and the data 
collected during the investigation will be reviewed by [CONTACT_17496]/or its representatives.  These records 
and data may, in addition, be reviewed by [CONTACT_716]: independent auditors who validate the data 
on behalf of FMD, national or local Regulatory Authorities, and the ECs which gave approval for this 
investigation  to proceed.  
Patient s will be known by a unique patient  number.   The results of this investi gation  containing the 
unique patient  number and relevant medical information including ethnicity may be recorded and 
transferred to and used in other countries throughout the world, which may not afford the same level of protection that applies within the EU and countries participating this investigation .  The 
purpose of any such transfer would be to support regulatory submissions made by [CONTACT_17512].  
27. QUALITY ASSURANCE AND QUALITY CONTROL 
To ensure GCP compliance and compliance with all applicable regulatory requirements, the Sponsor or site may conduct a quality assurance (QA) audit.  A regulatory inspection of this investigation  may 
be carried out by [CONTACT_17513].  Such audits/insp ections can occur at any time during or after 
completion of the investigation .  If an audit or inspection occurs, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_17463]/inspector direct access to all relevant documents and to allocate their time and the time of their staff to the auditor/inspector to discuss any findings or relevant issues.   Quality 
control (QC) procedures at the site will be implemented to ensure data recorded into the eCRFs are 
accurate before eCRFs are sent for data entry purposes.  
  
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 64 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 28. BIBLI OGRAPHY  
1. Hackett G, Kirby M, Wylie K, et al . British Society for Sexual Medicine g uidelines on the 
management of e rectile dysfunction in men-2017. J Sex Med.  2018;15(4):430- 57. 
2. Feldman HA, Goldstein I, Hatzichristou DG, Krane RJ, McKinlay JB. Impotence and its medical 
and psychosocial correlates: results of the [LOCATION_005] Male Aging Study. J Urol . 
1994;151(1):54– 61. 
3. McKinlay JB. The worldwide prevalence and epi[INVESTIGATOR_17464]. Int J Impot Res. 2000;12(Suppl 4):S6– S11.  
4. Aytaç IA, McKinlay JB, Krane RJ. The likely worldwide increase in erectile dysfunction between 
1995 and 2025 and some possible policy consequences. BJU Int . 1999;84(1):50 –6. 
5. Nguyen HMT, Gabrielson AT, Hellstrom WJG. Erectile dysfunction in young men– a review of the 
prevalenc e and risk factors. Sex Med Rev . 2017;5(4):508– 20. 
6. Smith JF, Caan BJ, Sternfeld B, et al . Racial disparities in erectile dysfunction among participants 
in the [LOCATION_004] Men's Health Study. J Sex Med. 2009;6(12):3433 –9. 
7. Kupelian V, Link CL, Rosen RC, McKinlay JB. Socioeconomic status, not race/ethnicity, contributes to variation in the prevalence of erectile dysfunction: results from the [LOCATION_011] Area Community Health (BACH) Survey. J Sex Med . 2008;5(6):1325 –33.  
8. Laumann EO, West S, Glasser D, et al . Prevalence and correlates of erectile dysfunction by [CONTACT_17514] 40 or older in the [LOCATION_002]: from the male attitudes regarding sexual health survey. J Sex Med . 2007;4(1):57 –65.  
9. Rosen RC, Cappelleri JC, Gendrano N 3rd. The International Index of Erectile Function (IIEF): a 
state- of-the-science review. Int J Impot Res . 2002;14(4):226 –44. 
10. Bella AJ, Lee JC, Carrier S, Bénard F, Brock GB. 2015 CUA Practice guidelines for erectile dysfunction. Can Urol Assoc J. 2015;9(1– 2):23 –9. 
11. Imprialos KP,  Stavropoulos K, Doumas M, et al . Sexual dysfunction, cardiovascular risk and 
effects of pharmacotherapy. Curr Vasc Pharmacol . 2018;16(2):130 –42. 
12. Rew KT, Heidelbaugh JJ. Erectile Dysfunction. Am Fam Physician. 2016;94(10):820 –7. 
13. Razdan  S, Greer AB, Patel A, et al . Effect of prescription medications on erectile dysfunction. 
Postgrad Med J . 2018;94(1109):171 –8.  
14. Mazzilli R, Angeletti G, Olana S, et al . Erectile dysfunction in patients taking psychotropic drugs 
and treated with phosphodies terase -5 inhibitors. Arch Ital Urol Androl . 2018;90(1):44– 8. 
15. Lopushnyan NA, Chitaley K. Genetics of erectile dysfunction. J Urol . 2012;188(5):1676– 83. 
16. Tan HL. Economic cost of male erectile dysfunction using a decision analytic model. Pharmacoeconomics . 2000;17(1):77 –107.  
17. Anastasiadis AG, Ghafar MA, Burchardt M, Shabsigh R. Economic aspects of medical erectile dysfunction therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. Expert Opin Pharmacother . 2002;3(3):257 –63. 
18. Rezaee ME, Ward CE, Brandes ER, Munarriz RM, Gross MS. A review of economic evaluations of erectile dysfunction therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. Sex Med Rev . 2019;pii:S2050- 0521(19)[ZIP_CODE] -7. 
19. Hatzimouratidis K, Giuliano F, Moncada I, et al . EAU guidelines on erectile dysfunction, 
premature ejaculation, penile curvature and priapi[INVESTIGATOR_8801]. 2016. Available from: https://uroweb.org/wp -content/upload s/EAU -Guidelines -Male -Sexual -Dysfunction -2016.pdf
.  
Accessed 14 April 2020.  
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 65 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 20. Yafi FA, Jenkins L, Albersen M, et al . Erectile dysfunction. Nat Rev Dis Primers . 2016;2:[ZIP_CODE].  
21. Wilson EC, McKeen ES, Scuffham PA, et al . The cost to the [LOCATION_008] National Health 
Service of managing erectile dysfunction: the impact of sildenafil and prescribing restrictions. 
Pharmacoeconomics . 2002;20(13):879 –89. 
22. Burnett AL, Nehra A, Breau RH, et al . Erectile Dysfunction: AUA Guideline. J Urol . 
2018;200(3):633 –41. 
23. Mulhall JP, Giraldi A, Hackett G, et al . The 2018 revision to the process of care model for 
management of erectile dysfunction. J Sex Med . 2018;15(10):1434 –45.  
24. Yafi FA, Sharlip ID, Becher EF. Update on the safety of phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors for the treatment of erectile dysfunction. Sex Med Rev . 2018;6(2):242 –52.  
25. Yuan J, Zhang R, Yang Z, et al . Comparative effectiveness and safety of oral phosphodiesterase 
type 5 inhibitors for erectile dysfunction: a systematic review and network meta- analysis. Eur 
Urol . 2013;63(5):902 –12.  
26. Cuzin B. Alprostadil cream in the treatment of erectile dysfunction: clinical evidence and experience. Ther Adv Urol . 2016;8(4):249 –56.  
27. Carvalheira AA, Pereira NM, Maroco J, Forjaz V. Dropout in the treatment of erectile dysfunction with PDE5: a study on predictors and a qualitative analysis of reasons for discontinuation. J Sex 
Med . 2012;9(9):2361 –9. 
28. Corona G, Rastrelli G, Burri A, et al . First -generation phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors 
dropout: a comprehensive review and meta -analysis. Andrology . 2016;4(6):1002 –9. 
29. Padma -Nathan H, Yeager JL.  An integrated analysis of alprostadil topi[INVESTIGATOR_17465] 1732 patients. Urology . 2006;68(2):386– 91. 
30. Anaissie J, Hellstrom WJ. Clinical use of alprostadil topi[INVESTIGATOR_17466]: a review. Res Rep Urol. 2016;8:123 –31. 
31. Mulhall J, Porst H, Goldstein I. Comparison of Vitaros ® efficacy and safety with short -term and 
longer term use. J Sex Med. 2013;10:264 –5. 
32. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Erectile dysfunction: Alprostadil cream. 2014. Available from: 
http://www.nice.org. uk/advice/esnm50/resources/erectile-
dysfunctionalprostadil -cream -pdf-1502681038037701 . Accessed 15 April 2020.  
33. IQVIA IMS Health. Manufacturers’ Selling Prices 2018.  
34. Kloner RA, Goggin P, Goldstein I, et al . A new perspective on the nitrate- phosphodiesterase  type 
5 inhibitor interaction. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther . 2018;23(5):375 –86. 
35. Kloner RA, Goldstein I, Kirby [CONTACT_4224], Parker JD, Sadovsky R. Cardiovascular safety of phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors after nearly 2 decades on the market. Sex Med Rev . 
2018;6(4):583 –94.  
36. Gur S, Kadowitz PJ, Gokce A, et al . Update on drug interactions with phosphodiesterase -[ADDRESS_16588] -line therapy for patients with erectile dysfunction or pulmonary 
hypertension. Curr Drug Metab. 2013;14(2):265– 9. 
37. Davis A, Reisman Y. Development of a novel topi[INVESTIGATOR_17467]. Int J Impot Res . 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41443- 019- 0227- 7. [Epub 
ahead of print].  
38. Futura Medical Developments Ltd. A phase III, dose -ranging,  multi -centre, randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled, home use, parallel group clinical trial of topi[INVESTIGATOR_897] -applied glyceryl 
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 66 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 trinitrate (GTN) for the treatment of erectile dysfunction (ED), with an open label extension. 
Futura Medical Report Study FM57. Clinical Study Report dated 06  April 2020.  
39. Rosen RC, Riley A, Wagner G, et al . The international index of erectile function (IIEF): a 
multidimensional scale for assessment of erectile dysfunction. Urology . 1997;49(6):822– 30. 
40. Cappelleri JC, Rosen RC, Sm ith MD, et al . Diagnostic evaluation of the erectile function domain 
of the International Index of Erectile Function. Urology . 1999;54(2):346– 51. 
41. Rosen RC, Padma -Nathan H, Shabsigh R, et al . Determining the earliest time within [ADDRESS_16589] after tadalafil 10 and 20 mg: a multicenter, randomized, double -blind, 
placebo -controlled, at -home study. J Sex Med. 2004;1(2):193– 200.  
42. Cappelleri JC, Althof SE, Siegel RL, et al . Deve lopment and validation of the Self -Esteem And 
Relationship (SEAR) questionnaire in erectile dysfunction. Int J Impot Res . 2004;16(1):30 –8. 
43. Rosen RC, Allen KR, Ni X, Araujo AB. Minimal clinically important differences in the erectile function domain of the International Index of Erectile Function scale. Eur Urol . 
2011;60(5):1010– 6. 
44. Fisher WA, Gruenwald I, Jannini EA, et al . Standards for clinical trials in male and female sexual 
dysfunction: III. Unique aspects of clinical trials in male sexual dysfunction. J Sex Med. 2017;14(1):3 –18. 
45. Darken P, Nyberg J, Ballal S, Wright D. The attributable estimand: A new approach to account for intercurrent events. Pharm Stat . 2020;19(5):626– 35. 
46. Hellstrom WJ, Kaminetsky J, Belkoff LH, et al . Efficacy of avanafil 15 minutes after dosing in men 
with erectile dysfunction: A randomized, double -blind, placebo controlled study. J Urol. 
2015;194(2):485 –92. 
47. Cox G, Krieger JN, Morris BJ. Histological c orrelates of penile sexual sensation: Does 
circumcision make a d ifference? Sex Med . 2015;3(2):76– 85. 
48. Halata Z, Munger BL. The neuroanatomical basis for the protopathic sensibility of the human glans penis. Brain Res . 1986;371(2):205 –30. 
49. Thompson TJ, Thompson N, O’Brien A, Young MR, McCleane G. To determine whether the temperature of 2% lignocaine gel affects the initial discomfort which may be associated with its instillation into the male urethra. BJU Int . 1999;84(9):1035– 7. 
50. Ng EY, Ng WK, Huang J, Tan YK. The engineering analysis of bioheat equation and penile hemodyna mic relationships in the diagnosis of erectile dysfunction: part II -model optimization 
using the ANOVA and Taguchi method. Int J Impot Res . 2008;20(3):285– 94. 
51. Bleustein CB, Arezzo JC, Eckholdt H, Melman A. The neuropathy of erectile dysfunction. Int J Impot Res . 2002;14(6):433 –9. 
52. Bleustein CB, Eckholdt H, Arezzo JC, Melman A. Quantitative somatosensory testing of the penis: optimizing the clinical neurological examination. J Urol . 2003;169(6):2266– 9. 
53. Kukkonen TM, Binik YM, Amsel R, Carrier S. An evaluation of the validity of thermography as a physiological measure of sexual arousal in a non -university adult sample. Arch Sex Behav . 
2010;39(4):861 –73.  
54. Payne K, Thaler L, Kukkonen T, Carrier S, Binik Y. Sensation and sexual arousal in circumcised and uncircumcised men. J Sex Med . 2007;4(3):667 –74. 
55. Sarin S, Amsel R, Binik YM. How hot is he? A psychophysiological and psychosocial examination of the arousal patterns of sexually functional and dysfunctional men. J Sex Med . 
2014;11(7):1725– 40. 
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 67 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 56. Borreli L. Am I ‘normal?’ Average sex frequency per week linked to age. 2017. Available from: 
https://www.medicaldaily.com/am -i-normal -average -sex- frequency -week- linked -age-421328 . 
Accessed November 2020.  
57. Rodriguez CJ, Allison M, Daviglus ML, et al . Status of cardiovascular disease and stroke in 
Hispanics/Latinos in the [LOCATION_002]. A science advisory from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2014;130(7):593 –625.  
58. Volgman AS, Palaniappan LS, Aggarwal NT, et al . Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in south 
Asians in the [LOCATION_002]: Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], risk factors, and treatments: A scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2018;138(1): e1– e34.  
 
Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 68 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 29. APPENDICES  
29.1 APPENDIX 1  IIEF Questio nnaire  
 
 
 

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 69 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022  

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 70 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 29.2 APPENDIX 2  SEAR Questionnaire  
 

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 71 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022  

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 72 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022  

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 73 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022  
 
 
  

Futura Medical Developments Ltd                            CONFIDENTIAL                               Page 74 of 74  
 
FM71 Clinical Investigation Plan   Final version 7.0 dated 02Mar2022 29.3 APPENDIX 3  Onset of Action Questions  
