Self-administered lidocaine gel for pain-control 
during cervical preparation for dilation and 
evacuation: A randomized controlled trial 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
07/18/[ADDRESS_50949], [LOCATION_004] [ZIP_CODE] 
 
Self-administered lidocaine ge l for pain-control during cervica l preparation 
for dilation and evacuation: A  randomized controlled trial 
 
Background 
Methods of cervical preparati on prior to dilation and evacuatio n (D&E) after [ADDRESS_50950] ates use 
misoprostol, mifepristone, osmot ic dilators, and laminaria—either independently 
or in conjunction wit h each other. Efforts to research the use of mifepristone and 
misoprostol alone for cervical p reparation are motivated by [CONTACT_48472] a or osmotic dilators. 
To compliment these efforts, more research is needed to investi gate methods of 
pain control for cervical prepar ation with osmotic dilators and  laminaria to 
decrease patient discomfort. Wom en report laminaria and osmotic  dilator 
placement to be painful.  
 Pain control trials in the abortion literature often focus on pain with the abortion procedure itself. Those studies  that report on pain with osmoti c dilators show that 
insertion is painful. Few studies have focused on the methods o f pain control for 
laminaria or osmotic dilator in sertion alone. A recent study showed that 
paracervical block reduced pain with osmotic dilator insertion compared to a 
sham block [Soon R, et al abstrac t SFP). Self-administered lidocaine gel is a 
method of pain control found to be no worse than a paracervical  block for pain 
control during surgical abortion at gestations of less than 12 weeks. We 
hypothesize that self-administered lidocaine gel is no worse than paracervical 
block for pain control wit h cervical preparation.  
 
This study seeks to compare self-administered lidocaine gel for  pain control 
during cervical preparation (lam inaria and/or osmotic dilator i nsertion) for D&E to 
paracervical block.   
Objectives 
 
Primary Objective 
Pain perceived at the time of dila tor insertion measured by [CONTACT_48473] (VAS) (0-100mm).  
Secondary Objectives 
 Pain perceived at additional time points before , during, and after the 
procedure (all measured by [CONTACT_8298] (0-100mm): 
o Anticipated Pain: 30 minutes prior to procedure 
o Baseline Pain: Immediately prior to procedure o Dilator Insertion: I mmediately following dilator insertion 
o Post-Procedure Pain: 10-15 minutes following procedure 
o Overall Pain: Assessed after procedure 
 Incidence of complications 
 Provider reported ease of insertion 
 Global satisfaction (acceptability) of procedure 
 
Study Drugs 
 Experimental Group: 
Xylocaine (lidocaine HCl) is a common local anesthetic that wor ks by [CONTACT_48474] f or the initiation 
and conduction of impulses. Local  anesthetics of the amide type  are thought to 
act within the sodium channels o f the nerve membrane. According  to the 
packaging insert, anesthesia is achieved within 5 minutes, depe nding on the area 
of application, and duration o f anesthesia is approximately 20- 30 minutes.  It is 
used prior to many genitourinary procedures involving mucus mem branes 
including the urethra, anus, and vulva. While no recommended do se is known for 
vaginal use prior to surgical abortion, recommended doses are k nown for the 
following procedures: 20 ml for proctoscopy/anoscopy; 10 ml for  female urethral 
anesthesia as in cystoscopy. A s ingle maximum dosage for 2% Xyl ocaine jelly is 
not established [Blanco 1982], howev er Lexicomp drug informatio n for topi[INVESTIGATOR_48469] a maximum  dose of 600 mg in any 12-hour p eriod. 
 
The serum toxicity of intracervical lidocaine is thought to be around 5 ug/ml 
[Blanco 1982] and a study looking at serum lidocaine levels 10 minutes after 
paracervical injection of 20 ml of 1% lidocaine (200 mg total) found mean blood 
levels of 0.9 to 1.61 ug/ml [McKenzie 1978].    
Similarly, a study investigating vaginal anesthes ia with 4ml of  10% lidocaine 
spray (400mg total) 5 minutes prior to high dose intracavitary brachytherapy 
found a significant decrease in  procedural pain [Chen 1998]. This study also 
looked at serum lidocaine levels  at various time points following administration 
and found that the 400mg dose never  reached toxic levels in par ticipants. These 
data are further supported by [CONTACT_105]- toxic levels seen after nasop haryngeal and 
oropharyngeal application in  the studies sited above. 
 
Based on this information, par ticipants in the lidocaine gel gr oup will self-
administer 20 ml of 2% lidocaine  HCl vaginally (400 mg total) [ADDRESS_50951]: 
 XYLOCAINE® JELLY 2% (lidocai ne hydrochloride) [COMPANY_008] 
o 20 mL (20 mg/mL) – 400mg total 
 Control Group: 
Paracervical block technique: 
 Syringe loaded with 12 mL of 1 % lidocaine (120 mg); 22-gauge spi[INVESTIGATOR_48470] (x mg total) 
 2 mL injected at the tenaculum site, either 6 or 12 o’clock su perficially into 
the cervix 
 The tenaculum is immediately placed at the previously injected  site 
 The remaining 10 mL are slowly i njected into the cervicovaginal junction in 
two equal aliquots at 4 and 8 o’cl ock; the injection is continu ous from 
superficial to deep (1-2 cm) to sup erficial (injecting with ins ertion and 
withdrawal) 
 
Study Population 
Women presenting for abortion ≥16 weeks gestation will be invit ed to participate 
in the study protocol. This popu lation was selected, as they typi[INVESTIGATOR_48471] a t lower gestational ages.  
 
Explanation of Sample Size 
Studies of patient reported pain scores indicate that the minimum, significant 
difference in pain score on a 100mm Visual Analogue Scale (VAS)  is 13-16mm. 
Studies of laminaria insertion doc ument pain scores ranging fro m 43-70mm, with 
standard deviation of 22-23. We det ermined Considering the cont inuous primary 
outcome and our non-inferiority hypothesis, if there is truly n o difference between 
paracervical block an d self-administered lidocaine gel for pain  control with 
cervical preparation for D&E a fter 16 weeks gestation, 68 parti cipants are 
required to be 80% sure that t he lower limit of a one-sided 97. 5% confidence 
interval (or equivalently a 95%  two-sided confidence interval) will be above the 
non-inferiority limit of 15mm. A ccounting for participant drop- out, we will recruit 
72 women to participate in this study (significance level, alpha of 2.5%; power of 
80%; standard deviation of 22; non-inferiority limit of 15).  
 
Overview of Study Design  Recruitment and Allo cation of Subjects 
Subjects will be recruited from  the Stanford Gy necology Clinic in Palo Alto, 
[LOCATION_004]. They will be identified for participation through p rospective chart 
review. Informed consent will be obtained from a trained resear ch coordinator. 
Upon agreeing to participant, s ubjects will be randomized throu gh block 
randomization to a study arm.   
Criteria for Subject Selection  
Inclusion: 
 Women 18 and older 
 Intrauterine pregnancy ≥16 weeks gestation  
 English speaking competency 
 Willing and able to sign consent forms 
 Agree to comply with study procedures 
 
Exclusion: 
 Women less than 18 years of age 
 IV conscious sedation 
 Known allergy to study  medication (lidocaine) 
 Any women not meeting inclusion criteria above will be exclude d from 
participation 
 
Study Procedures  
This study will take place duri ng subjects’ cervical preparatio n visit. Following 
informed consent, participants will  be randomized to a study gr oup—group 
allocation information will be kept in a sealed, opaque envelop e. Upon 
consenting for the study, a res earch coordinator will assign a unique subject ID 
number to the participant. This subject ID number’s envelope wi ll be opened to 
determine allocation. Participant s, research staff, and health care provider will 
not be blinded to the allocation.    If the subject is randomized to th e experimental group (self-ad ministered 
lidocaine gel), she will be inst ructed on how to self-administe r the gel vaginally by 
[CONTACT_9137]. S he will insert 20ml of 2% lidocaine gel  into her vagina 
using a pre-loaded syringe. Afte r [ADDRESS_50952] is randomized to th e control group (provider-adm inistered 
paracervical block), cervical ane sthesia and pr eparation will c ommence to 
standard.   For both groups, the research c oordinator will co llect demograp hic and medical 
history and document procedure dat a. For VAS scores, the resear ch coordinator 
will administer the 100mm VAS on an iPad. Pain scores will take n “in real time”. 
There is no follow-up for this study.  
 
Data Collection 
Data collection will be obtai ned through a REDCap survey.  
 
Data to be collected include: 
 Demographics 
o Location of procedure o MRN o Date enrolled o First name o Last name o Date of birth o A g e  o Phone number o R a c e  o Ethnicity 
 Medical History (Physical Exam and Ob/Gyn History) 
o H e i g h t  
o Weight 
o B M I  
o Gestational age o Medication allergies o Current medications o Number of previous pregnancies 
 Number of previous vaginal deliveries 
 Number of previous cesarean sections 
 Number of previous abortions 
 Number of previous abortions  after 16 weeks gestation 
 Number of miscarriages  
o Medical problems o Previous surgeries  
 Previous cervical surgeries 
 Procedure Data 
o Provider type (i.e. resident, fellow, attending) o Provider reported ease of procedure o Uterine position o Initial cervical dilation o Number of osmotic dilato rs or laminaria placed 
o Time with lidocaine gel before tenaculum 
o Time with paracervical block before tenaculum 
o Total speculum time o Complications 
 Procedure VAS Data 
o Anticipated o Baseline o Speculum insertion o Paracervical block (control group only) 
o Tenaculum placement o Laminaria/osmotic dilator insertion o Post-procedure  o Overall pain 
 Acceptability Data 
o Gel leakage acceptability (experimental group only) o Likelihood to recommend procedure o Comfort with tampons o Maximum time willing to  wait for pain control 
 
Data Analysis and Monitoring 
Enrollment will be reviewed bi-w eekly by [CONTACT_5051]. Giv en that there are 
minimal safety risks involved in  this study, we do not plan to convene an 
independent Data Safety M onitoring Board (DSMB). 
 
Data Management and Storage 
Data will be entered into and stored on REDCap.  
 
Methods of Analysis 
Data will be exported from REDCap to SPSS Version 23.[ADDRESS_50953] and fisher’s exact test, where appropriate; mean an d median VAS 
pain scores will be analyzed with Student’s t-tests and non-parametric tests, 
respectively; mean and median ov erall satisfaction with pain co ntrol and provider 
reported ease of procedure via VAS scores will be compared usin g Student’s t-
tests and non-parametric tests, r espectively; linear regression  will be completed 
in multivariable analysis to i dentify predictors of pain. 
 
Analysis and Dissemin ation of Results 
Analysis will occur upon comple tion of study enrollment. The co -investigators 
plan to prepare at least one manuscript for submission to a pee r-reviewed 
journal. In addition, the co-investigators will present the res ults of the study at 
conferences and meeti ngs where appropriate.  
 Risks and Benefits 
Participants are not promised any  benefits from participating i n the study. 
 
Potential risks associated with this study are minimal. The risk to the participants’ physical, psychological, economic , or social well-being in this  study is not 
anticipated to be any different or greater from women not parti cipating in the 
study.   
The risks, side effects, and di scomforts of the study, whether the subject receives 
lidocaine gel or lidocaine paracer vical block, are expected to be similar and 
include:  
 Side effects with medications 
o Lidocaine - with numbing medicine  in a woman's cervix, there is an 
infrequent risk of getting a unusual taste in the woman's mouth , 
ringing in her ears, nausea or light-headedness. Rarely, a pers on 
can have a seizure from  the numbing medicine.  
 Pelvic examination: Subjects m ay infrequently experience some 
discomfort during the pelvic exams  
 Emotional Discomfort: Some of  the questions the subject will be asked in 
this study may make the subject feel uncomfortable or embarrass ed. She 
can refuse to answer any question that makes her uncomfortable or 
embarrassed, from any person, at any time. 
 
Cost to the Participant and Compensation for Participation 
Participants will not be compensat ed for their time of participation in this study. 
There will be no additional cos t for participation in the study .  
 
 