Protocol Summary (ERICA)  IRB_00152581  
Page 1 of 9 IRB Approval 4/10/[ADDRESS_811599] of  levodopa on cardiovascular autonomic function 
in Parkinson’s disease with and without orthostatic 
hypotension: a cross -over study  
NCT number: 05487300  
Document date: 10/10/2024 
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)   IRB_00152581  
Page 2 of 9  IRB Approval 4/10/2023  
 Protocol Summary  
 
 
 
IRB Approval 
Date of 
Current 
Version:  4/10/2023  
University of 
Utah IRB #:  IRB_00152581  
Sponsor:  UNIVERSITY OF UTAH RESEARCH FOUNDATION  
  
Principal 
Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_612162]-
Investigators:  Site Name  [CONTACT_612179]  [INVESTIGATOR_612163]. The document is created 
from study  information approved by [CONTACT_35610].  Any alteration to the original content of this 
document may not be considered t o represent the study as approved by [CONTACT_1201].  
  
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)   IRB_00152581  
Page 3 of 9  IRB Approval 4/10/2023  
 Background and Introduction  
 
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is characterized by [CONTACT_612172], rigidity, tremor, gait difficulties and postural instability, as well as n on-motor 
symptoms such as cognitive impairment and autonomic dysfunction among others [1]. 
Neurogenic orthostatic hypotension (nOH) is the main clinical manifestation of cardiovascular 
autonomic dysfunction [2]. The arterial baroreflex allows for beat -to- beat regulation of the 
blood pressure and heart rate via differential modulation of its cardiovagal (parasympathetic) 
and noradrenergic (sympathetic) efferent limbs [3]. Several mechanisms may contribute to 
nOH in PD including baroreflex -cardiovagal and ba roreflex -sympathetic noradrenergic failure 
[2]. The prevalence of nOH in PD increases with age and disease duration; however, several 
studies have documented that nOH may appear early in the course of PD and reported 
prevalence of nOH in PD ranges from 30%  to 65% [4, 5]. The presence of nOH in PD is 
associated with poor outcomes related to cardiovascular events, increased morbidity and 
mortality, more rapid disease progression, cognitive impairment, and falls [6].  
  
Levodopa is a precursor of dopamine and i s the treatment of choice to treat the motor 
symptoms of PD; however, the effect of levodopa on cardiovascular autonomic function in PD 
is poorly understood. Orthostatic hypotension has been documented as a potential side effect 
of levodopa in different st udies [7, 8]. As a result, clinicians may be reluctant to prescribe 
levodopa in patients with PD with nOH (PD+OH), which leads to suboptimal management of 
motor symptoms. On the other hand, several studies failed to show any clear relationship 
between levo dopa and orthostatic hypotension in patients with PD [9 -12]. Important 
limitations of prior studies include the lack of detailed investigation of baroreflex cardiovagal 
and sympathetic noradrenergic functions and the fact that the same patients were not te sted on 
and off levodopa.  
We propose to investigate the effects of levodopa on cardiovascular autonomic function in 
patients with PD+OH and PD without nOH (PD -OH) by [CONTACT_612173].  
  
References : 
1. Kalia LV, Lang AE. Parkinson's disease. Lancet (London, England) 2015;386:896 -912. 
2. Pfeiffer RF. Autonomic Dysfunction in Parkinson's Disease. Neurotherapeutics : the 
journal of the American Society for Experimental NeuroTherapeutics 2020;17:1464 -
1479.  
3. Kaufmann H, Norcliffe -Kaufmann L, Palma JA. Baroreflex Dysfunction. The New 
England journal of medicine 2020;382:163 -178. 
4. Velseboer DC, de Haan RJ, Wieling W, Goldstein DS, de Bie RM. Prevalence of 
orthostatic hypotensi on in Parkinson's disease: a systematic review and meta -analysis. 
Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2011;17:724 -729. 
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)   IRB_00152581  
Page 4 of 9  IRB Approval 4/10/2023  
 5. Hiorth YH, Pedersen KF, Dalen I, Tysnes OB, Alves G. Orthostatic hypotension in 
Parkinson disease: A 7 -year prospective population -based study. Neu rology 
2019;93:e1526 -e1534.  
6. De Pablo -Fernandez E, Tur C, Revesz T, Lees AJ, Holton JL, Warner TT. Association 
of Autonomic Dysfunction With Disease Progression and Survival in Parkinson 
Disease. JAMA neurology 2017;74:970 -976. 
7. Bouhaddi M, Vuillier F, Fortr at JO et al. Impaired cardiovascular autonomic control in 
newly and long -term-treated patients with Parkinson's disease: involvement of L -dopa 
therapy. Auton Neurosci 2004;116:[ADDRESS_811600] JM, Rai S, Lapeyre -Mestre M et al. Prevalence of orthostatic hypote nsion in 
Parkinson's disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1997;63:584 -589. 
9. Goldstein DS, Eldadah BA, Holmes C et al. Neurocirculatory abnormalities in 
Parkinson disease with orthostatic hypotension: independence from levodopa 
treatment. Hypertension 2005 ;46:[ADDRESS_811601] WH, Altmann C, Fiesel T, Becht B, Ringwald S, Hoppe T. Influence of levodopa 
on orthostatic hypotension in Parkinson's Disease. Neurol Neurochir Pol 2020;54:200 -
203. 
11. Perez -Lloret S, Rey MV, Fabre N et al. Factors related to orthostatic hyp otension in 
Parkinson's disease. Parkinsonism & related disorders 2012;18:501 -5. 
 
 
 
Purpose and Objectives  
 
We propose to investigate the effects of levodopa on cardiovascular autonomic function in 
patients with Parkinson’s Disease with orthostatic hypotension (PD+OH) and Parkinson’s 
Disease without neurogenic orthostatic hypotension (PD -OH) by [CONTACT_612174].  
Objectives  
AIM #1.  The primary objective of the study is to investigate the effect of levodopa on 
cardiovascular autonomic function in participants with PD (with and without OH)  
Participants with PD+OH and PD -OH will undergo autonomic testing of baroreflex 
cardiovagal and sympathetic noradrenergic functions on and off of levodopa on two separate 
days. The primary endpoint will be the change in systol ic blood pressure from supi[INVESTIGATOR_612164] 
[ADDRESS_811602], we hypothesize that 
levodopa will not induce or worsen  the drop in blood pressure from supi[INVESTIGATOR_612164] 3 minutes  
and will not w orsen  neurogenic orthostatic hypotension. Planned secondary endpoints will also 
investigate the differences in orthostatic vital signs with active standing and tilt table testing in 
patients with PD and the relationship between autonomic testing  and the orthostatic symptom 
severity questionnaire.  
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)   IRB_00152581  
Page 5 of 9  IRB Approval 4/10/2023  
   
AIM #2. Determine if levodopa has a different effect on cardiovascular autonomic function in 
participants with PD+OH compared to participants with PD -OH 
The data from autonomic testing performed for AIM#1 will be used to assess AIM#2. The 
primary endpoint for AIM#2 will be  indices of  baroreflex cardiovagal and noradrenergic  
functio n. We hypothesize that levodopa will not alter baroreflex cardiovagal and sympathetic 
noradrenergic functions in either PD+OH or PD -OH.  
 
 
 
Study Population  
 
Age of Participants:  18+ 
 
Sample Size:  
At Utah:    
All Centers:  40 
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
All participants : 
- Age 18 or older  
- Diagnosis of PD based on consensus criteria (Movement Disorder Society Criteria for 
Parkinson’s disease) [13].  
For PD+OH group : 
 
- Orthostatic hypotension defined by [CONTACT_612175] > 20 mmHg 
and/or a drop in diastolic blood pressure > 10 mmHg within 3 minutes from supi[INVESTIGATOR_612165] [14].  
- Autonomic testing and a ratio orthost atic heart rate change / systolic blood pressure change 
< 0.5 bpm/mmHg will confirm a neurogenic etiology [15].  
References  
13. Postuma RB, Berg D, Stern M, Poewe W, Olanow CW, Oertel W, et al. MDS clinical 
diagnostic criteria for Parkinson's disease. Movem ent disorders : official journal of the 
Movement Disorder Society. 2015;30(12):1591 -601. 
14. Freeman R, Wieling W, Axelrod FB, Benditt DG, Benarroch E, Biaggioni I, et al. 
Consensus statement on the definition of orthostatic hypotension, neurally mediated syncope 
and the postural tachycardia syndrome. Clin Auton Res. 2011;21(2):69 -72. 
15. Norcliffe -Kaufmann L, Kaufmann H, Palma JA, Shibao CA, Biaggioni I, Peltier AC, et 
al. Orthostatic heart rate changes in patients with autonomic failure caused by 
[CONTACT_612176]. Ann Neurol. 2018;83(3):522 -31. 
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)   IRB_00152581  
Page 6 of 9  IRB Approval 4/10/2023  
  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
Participant exclusion criteria  
- Current usage of medications with potential to affect autonomic or sensory testing, in 
which the medication can’t be held 48 hours prior to testing (e.g. antihypertensives, muscle 
relaxants, stimulants, and some antidepressants that alter sympathetic function). Participants 
will be instructed to obtain approval from prescribing providers in cases a medication must 
be held  
- Cognitive impairment according to the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_612166]  
- Usage of dopamine agonists -- this class of medication is associated with orthostatic 
hypotension and residual medication effects may co nfound the results of the study due to the 
long half -life 
- Contraindication to the Valsalva maneuver (known middle ear damage or disease, Moya -
Moya disease, myocardial infarction within 6 months, and retinal detachment within 6 
months)  
 
 
 
Design  
 
Prospective Biomedical Intervention or Experiment  
 
 
 
 
Study Procedures  
 
Recruitment/Participant Identification Process : 
- Potential participants with PD will be identified from the movement disorders clinic. The 
principal investigator ([CONTACT_612180]) will be responsible to review charts and 
medical records to ensure eligibility. Co -investigators listed on the IRB as well as other U of 
Utah Healthcare providers who have been made aware of the study, may offer enrollment to 
potential p articipants in person in a clinic setting. In the event that a patient expresses interest 
in participating in research, our principal investigator (or approved study personnel) will 
contact [CONTACT_612177].  
- Information about the study will also be displayed in the movement disorder bi -annual 
newsletter. Research study flyers will be available for all patients seen in the movement 
disorders clinic. The flyers will be available in the waiting room.  Participa nts can also be 
recruited from the community through local PD Support Groups and word of mouth, and can 
contact [CONTACT_34351] (or approved study personnel) to inquire about screening for 
the study. Advertisement on the University of Utah study l ocator website may also be used as 
a recruitment method.  
 
 
Informed Consent:  
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)   IRB_00152581  
Page 7 of 9  IRB Approval 4/10/2023  
 Description of location(s) where consent will be obtained:  
Consent will be obtained in a dedicated space for clinical assessments of research subjects at 
University of Utah Headache Clinic (INC), University of Utah Neurology/Neurosurgery Clinic 
(INC and CNC), or Headache Physiology Laboratory ([ADDRESS_811603]).  
 
Description of the consent process(es), including the timing of consent:  
The principal investigator (or approved personnel) will obtain consent prior to performing any 
of the study procedures, and will explain the necessary information to allow the subject to 
make an informed decision about participation in the study. During the consent process, the 
background and purpose of the study, the study procedures, review the risks and benefits of 
the study, and review the process involved in the protection of personal identifiable 
information will be explained. Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the study will also be 
reviewed. Participants will have time to discuss any questions or concerns with the principal 
investigator. Throughout the study, study pers onnel will also give participants opportunities to 
ask questions and get more information about the study protocol for ongoing informed 
consent.  
 
Procedures:  
Screening:  When the PI (or approved study personnel) makes contact [CONTACT_612178], ba sic information will be obtained to determine eligibility, including: medical 
history, PD diagnosis date and symptoms, current medications, among others.  
Consent Process: I nformed consent will be completed. Participants will complete the 
informed consent f orm on paper, or via REDCap. Participants will receive a paper copy per 
their request. Prior to signing the consent form, study personnel will thoroughly explain all 
study procedures and provide participants with ample time to ask any questions. The study 
team will continue to provide participants with opportunities to ask questions to ensure 
ongoing informed consent throughout the progress of the study.  
Clinical assessment: The primary investigator will perform a medical history and physical 
examination be fore the testing procedures (baseline visit). The baseline visit will be performed 
on levodopa. The scales and assessments will include the Composite Autonomic Symptoms 
Score 31 (COMPASS 31), the Movement Disorder Society -Sponsored Revision of the Unified 
Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (MDS -UPDRS) part I, II, III, and Hoehn and Yahr stage. 
The clinical assessment and scales are part of the standard of care in PD. Orthostatic vital 
signs (standing and supi[INVESTIGATOR_612167]) will be performed 
during the baseline visit with active standing and the day of off -levodopa autonomic testing.  
 
Autonomic testing: All participants will undergo autonomic testing on two separate days. The 
first autonomic testing will occur within 4 weeks of th e baseline visit. The two autonomic tests 
will occur within a 2 -week timeframe. To avoid any confounding of treatment effects and 
period effects, the order of testing (on versus off levodopa) will be randomized so testing on 
the first day will be on -levodo pa for half of the participants and off -levodopa for the other 
participants. The procedures performed in this study are part of standardized clinical 
autonomic function testing. Autonomic testing will be performed by a research assistant with 
expertise in autonomic testing.  
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)   IRB_00152581  
Page 8 of 9  IRB Approval 4/10/2023  
 Each participant will undergo testing in the on -levodopa state (45min to 1h after taking their 
regular dose of levodopa in the morning) and off -levodopa state. For testing in the off -state, 
the last dose of levodopa will be taken at least 12 hours before testing. Off -state in PD is 
expected to cause some degree of discomfort related to re -emergence / exacerbation of the 
motor and non -motor symptoms of PD. To limit the duration of the off -state, autonomic 
testing will be performed earl y in the morning between 7am and 8am. As soon as the 
autonomic testing is completed, the participant will be allowed to take levodopa. A participant 
may not be eligible for the study if the investigator believes that holding levodopa for testing 
is not saf e. Briefly withholding levodopa, and/or medications that can interfere with heart rate 
or blood pressure measures, on the morning of the test is part of standard clinical autonomic 
function testing and is known to be well tolerated based on extensive clini cal experience of the 
PI. 
Participants will be instructed to have a standardized low -carbohydrate meal in the morning to 
avoid the confounding effects of postprandial hypotension and instructed to maintain a stable 
fluid intake to avoid volume shifts.  
Auto nomic testing will include non -invasive monitoring of blood pressure and heart rate 
during the Valsalva maneuver and during a 10 -minutes head -up tilt.  
Electrocardiogram (ECG): For monitoring the ECG, electrocardiographic leads are applied to 
the chest, abd omen, neck, or arms. All participants have ECG monitoring during the Valsalva 
maneuver and tilt table testing described below. Measurement of beat -to-beat heart rate part of 
standard clinical autonomic function testing.  
 
Finger blood pressure measurement : A finger cuff is applied for non -invasive measurement of 
continuous blood pressure. All participants have finger blood pressure monitoring during the 
Valsalva maneuver and tilt table testing described below. Tracking blood pressure 
continuously via a finge r cuff device is part of standard clinical autonomic function testing.  
 
Brachial blood pressure : A clinical automated brachial cuff is applied for measurement of 
brachial blood pressure. All participants have brachial blood pressure monitoring before and 
during head -up tilt table testing. Measuring brachial blood pressure is part of standard clinical 
autonomic function testing.  
 
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516] : A device for continuous monitoring of respi[INVESTIGATOR_612168]. All 
participants have respi[INVESTIGATOR_612169], unless technical limitations obviate such monitoring. Monitoring respi[INVESTIGATOR_612170].  
Valsalva maneuver:  Assessment of beat -to-beat blood pressure and  heart rate during and after 
performance of the Valsalva maneuver is a well -accepted standard autonomic function test. 
The participant lies supi[INVESTIGATOR_72301] a tilt table with head on pi[INVESTIGATOR_6356]. The participant blows or strains 
against a resistance for 12 seconds at 40 mmHg and then relaxes. If a “square wave” 
phenomenon is observed, the subject may be tilted at [ADDRESS_811604] 3 Valsalva maneuvers are done. The maneuvers are repeated (at least 1 
minute between repetitions), unt il a technically adequate recording is obtained. Indices of 
 
Protocol Summary (ERICA)   IRB_00152581  
Page 9 of 9  IRB Approval 4/10/[ADDRESS_811605] heart rate occurring within 30 s of the peak heart rate 
and the slope of the relationship between cardiac R -R interval vs. systolic bloo d pressure in 
Phase II of the Valsalva maneuver is taken as a measure of baroreflex -cardiovagal gain (BRS -
V). Indices of baroreflex cardiovascular noradrenergic function include the difference in BP 
between baseline and the end of Phase II, the pressure re covery time (PRT) which is the time 
from the nadir of the systolic blood pressure in Phase III of the Valsalva maneuver to complete 
return of systolic blood pressure to baseline, the adrenergic baroreflex sensitivity which is 
calculated from the slope of t he line reflecting the difference of the baseline systolic blood 
pressure and the lowest systolic blood pressure in Phase III and the areas below the baseline 
systolic blood pressure calculated in Phase II (BRA -II) and IV (BRA -IV) of the Valsalva 
maneuver.  
 
Head -up tilt table testing : The participant lies supi[INVESTIGATOR_1919] [ADDRESS_811606] clinical autonomic  function testing.  
 
 
Statistical Methods, Data Analysis and Interpretation  
 
Summary statistics will be used to describe demographic and clinical variables. A sample size 
of 40 will achieve  a power of 80% and a level  of significance  of 5%, for detecting a mean of 8 
mmHg in  ΔSBP -3’ between the ON and OFF states with a within  subject standard deviation of 
[ADDRESS_811607]  of levodopa on supi[INVESTIGATOR_612171] i n people with PD . The main statistical analysis will be  conducted using mixed -
effects  regression models  (linear mixed models), which will allow for the correlation of  
repeated measures within subjects. The response variable in  our models will be  ΔSBP -3’, and 
the pr imary predictors will be  the ON vs. OFF levodopa state and the period (visit 2 versus  
visit 3). A random intercept will be  included for each subject  to account for the within -subject 
correlation. For analyses  of secondary outcomes, we  will fit a mixed effect  model an d adjus t 
the p value for multiple comparisons using the  Hochberg multiple comparison procedure. 
Changes in blood  pressure and heart rate  with active standing and indices of baroreflex  
cardiovagal and sympathetic noradrenergic function  OFF levodopa will be compared b etween 
PD+OH and PD−OH  with Student t tests.  
 