   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
 
Project Title:  Version Date:  
Alternative exercise program to improve skeletal muscle function and fatigue in cancer survivors  1-15-[ADDRESS_394794] number:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
  
Principal Investigator:   [INVESTIGATOR_68020] J. Toth  
 
Grant Sponsor:  National Cancer Institute  Grant Number:  R21 CA191532        
 
 
 
  
 
Lay S ummary:   
Exercise training is effective at mitigating the negative health effects of cancer  and its treatment and 
improving long-term prognosis, but t here are substantial hurdles to disseminating exercise to the  large,  
and rapi[INVESTIGATOR_319909] (~1 8 million  by 2022).  Clinical populations have 
traditionally participated in exercise primarily through facility -based programs (eg, cardiac and 
pulmonary rehabilitation). However, very few of these exist for oncology patients and such programs 
may not be feasible for both practical and clinical reasons; in particular, during chemotherapy, where 
logistical and clinical hurdles to participation are hi gh, but when muscle adaptations likely evolve. 
Moreover, access to exercise facilities may be limited, particularly for patients living in rural communities 
(20% of US population), such as Vermont. Moreover, fatigue and other functional morbidities arising 
from cancer and its treatment deter participation. As positive results from randomized, controlled trials 
move exercise closer to standard of care in cancer survivors, a critical barrier to its broad dissemination 
will be the development of effective exer cise modalities for p atients who are underserved by [CONTACT_159580] -
based programs .  
Our long-term goal  is to develop a clinically useful , exercise intervention that can serve as an 
alternative to facility -based programs, with the objectives of alleviating fatigue, forestalling disability and 
improving prognosis. Our objective in this application is to determine whether  exercise training via 
neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES) has beneficial effects on skeletal muscle size and function 
in cancer patients . We hypothesi ze that NMES will  improve skeletal muscle size, contractile function and 
oxidative capacity, based on our seminal observations in cancer patients that functional disability 
derives, in part, from deficits in skeletal muscle contractile protein and mitochondrial content and 
function, as well as our data showing that NMES counters such deficits. Our rationale underlying this 
proposal is that establishing proof-of -principle, mechanistic evidence for the utility of NMES to remediate 
these skeletal muscle deficits in cancer pati ents receiving treatment will provide a solid foundation upon 
which to support more definitive trials of the utility of NMES in the cancer survivor population.  
We will use data from cancer patients studied prior to and [ADDRESS_394795]  and the availability of FDA -approved 
devices for NMES and clinicians trained in its application (physi cal and occupational therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437]), reduces 
logistical, financial and regulatory barriers to its broader repurposing for the cancer survivor population.  
 
 
Purpose :  
Exercise in cancer survivors is safe and has numerous health benefits ( 1-4). Less clear is how to 
disseminate the benefits of exercise to the large and growing number of cancer survivors (5 , 6). In 
cardiac and pulmonary disease populations, this occurs primarily through facility -based programs. 
However, very few of these programs currently exist for cancer survivors and participation rates in other 
conditions are quite low (eg, 10-20% for cardiac rehab ( 7)). Participation may be further hindered in 
cancer survivors because of limited access to exercise facilities, particularly in rural populations (8 ), and 
disease/treatment-related side-effects, such as fatigue (9 ). Thus, alternatives to facility -based exercise 
programs are needed that effectively promote an exercise training response, integrate easily into 
outpatient and home environments, are easy to use and require minimal costs and equipment. 
Neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES) fulfills these criteria. An inexpensive (~$500), hand-
held NMES unit permits extracorporeal initiation of muscle contractions that can mimic resistance - or 
aerobic -type exercise (10 ), producing a training response similar to these modalities (11) with near 
comparable effects (12, 13). The non-volitional nature of NMES is also attractive, as cancer-related 
fatigue may deter motivation towards volitional exercise (9 ). NMES improves muscle size, strength and 
performance in older adults with chronic disease (14) and counteracts muscle atrophy coincident with 
disuse (15) and catabolic clinical conditions (16- 18). Despi[INVESTIGATOR_319910], NMES has 
received almost no attention in cancer patients, where factors related to the disease (19, 20) and/or its 
treatment (21) may hinder exercise adaptations, although preliminary results from a case report (22) and 
small clinical trial (23) are encouraging. 
The proposed studies are designed to determine the effect of NMES on skeletal muscle in 
cancer patients receiving chemotherapy, with the expectation that our results will demonstrate salutary effects on muscle morphology and function. These findings would advance the oncology rehabilitation field by [CONTACT_1541] a solid, mechanistic evidence base to support the utility of NMES as 
a surrogate exercise modality during cancer treatment. Such evidence would reduce the risk for 
failure of this modality in more definitive, randomized, controlled trials in the broader cancer population.    
The proposed studies are innovative in seeking to develop effective exercise modalities for cancer 
survivors who are underserved by [CONTACT_159580] -based programs. They build on our seminal work describing 
fundamental cellular and sub -cellular deficits in skeletal muscle structure and function that contribute to 
disability in cancer survivors (24) by [CONTACT_319931]. 
In this context, our experimental approach is also innovative  in seeking to provide mechanistic evidence 
for the beneficial effects of NMES on skeletal muscle. We believe that this approach can economize the initial exploratory phase of developi[INVESTIGATOR_319911]: size, contractility and oxidative function.  
Background, Preliminary Results and Hypothesis for Aim 1  
Cancer survivors often experience skeletal muscle weakness (25), due, in part, to atrophy resulting 
from cancer and its treatments (26). However, strength deficits exceed the loss of muscle (24, 27), due 
to intrinsic muscle contractile dysfunction, as our seminal work (24) showed that cancer (mostly lung) 
was associated with reductions in both slow -twitch, myosin heavy chain (MHC) I and fast-twitch, MHC II 
fiber contractility, which scaled to the whole muscle level. Whole muscle weakness, in turn, contributed to real -world disability, as it was associated with diminished walking performance (24). Our preliminary 
data show that functional deficits in MHC I and IIA fibers are apparent in women with breast cancer 
tested during chemotherapy similar to women with lung cancer from our prior work (24) and scale to the 
whole muscle level . In fact, contractile deficits tended to be greater in breast vs. lung cancer patients  
when compared to women without cancer . Our new data further show that muscle fiber atrophy and 
dysfunction develop during chemotherapy  in lung cancer patients. Collectively, these results suggest 
both atrophy and intrinsic contractile deficiencies as determinants of reduced muscle functionality in breast cancer patients and identify treatment as a time when these phenotypes may evolve, 
emphasizing the need to identify interventions that counter muscle adaptations at this time. 
NMES improves muscle size and contractile function at the whole muscle level in other diseases 
(14). That NMES has effects in cancer patients is supported by [CONTACT_319932] a trend toward increased whole muscle strength after 4 wks of stimulation in lung cancer patients  (23), although it is 
unclear whether these improvements were due to enhanced neural activation (28
) or durable changes in 
muscle fiber size and/or contractility. This is an important distinction, as the former would diminish following cessation of NMES, whereas the latter would provide more lasting functional benefits. Our  new 
data suggest that NMES directly regulates muscle fiber size and function, as it counters both single fiber 
atrophy and functional deterioration  in older adul ts following total knee arthroplasty, a period 
characterized by p rofound atrophy and dysfunction . These effects of NMES to prevent atrophy in MHC I 
fibers and cut atrophy in ~½ in MHC II fibers is remarkably similar to our data on the effects of classical 
training to prevent atrophy in lung cancer patients receiving treatment, suggesting NMES may function 
as a surrogate of classical training programs. Collectively, these data support the hypothesis that NMES 
will increa se single skeletal muscle fiber contractile function and size in breast cancer patients 
compared to patients  randomized to control intervention. Aim [ADDRESS_394796] of cancer and its treatment, affecting a large majority of patients 
(29). It is multi-factorial in nature, comprising both central neural and periperal physiological adaptations 
(30). One peripheral muscle adaptation that may promote fatigue is reduced oxidative capacity (31 ). We 
recently showed, for the first time in humans, that cancer and its treatment are associated with 
mitochondrial rarefaction (24), which we have subsequently observed in breast cancer patients studied during chemotherapy. Further compounding reductions in mitochondrial content, cancer (32, 33) and 
chemotherapeutic agents used in breast cancer (34) have been shown to impair mitochondrial function 
in pre-clin ical models. Mitochondrial loss and dysfunction during cancer treatment, therefore, may 
contribute to cancer-related fatigue and functional disability.  
NMES improves skeletal muscle oxidative function, with effects that rival those found with classic 
aerobic -type exercise training (12, 13). In fact, our preliminary data show that NMES can activate 
mitochondrial biogenesis and improve mitochondrial function. NMES use in patients for [ADDRESS_394797] of 
TKA to reduce mitochondrial function. Our new preliminary data show that reductions in ADP -stimulated 
OCR during treatment in lung cancer patients are attenuated by [CONTACT_23066], suggesting that 
NMES may function similar to classical training to prevent mitochondrial functional decline in cancer patients during treatment. Collectively, these results support the hypothesis that: Skeletal muscle mitochondrial content and function will be increased by [CONTACT_319933]. This hypothesis will be tested in Aim 2 of these studies.
 
References . 
1. Velthuis, M. J., Agasi -Idenburg, S. C., Aufdemkampe, G., and Wittink, H. M. (2010) The effect of physical exercise on 
cancer -related fatigue during cancer treatment: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Clin Oncol  22, 208- 221 
2. Meyerhardt,  J. A., Giovannucci, E. L., Holmes, M. D., Chan, A. T., Chan, J. A., Colditz, G. A., and Fuchs, C. S. (2006) 
Physical activity and survival after colorectal cancer diagnosis. J Clin Oncol  24, 3527- 3534  
3. Holmes, M. D., Chen, W. Y., Feskanich, D., Kroenke,  C. H., and Colditz, G. A. (2005) Physical activity and survival after 
breast cancer diagnosis. JAMA 293, 2479-[ADDRESS_394798], D., Martin, L. W., and Chlebowski, R. (2011) Physical activity and survival in postmenopausal women with breast cancer: results from the Women's Health Initiative. Cancer Prev Res  4, 522-[ADDRESS_394799], E. P., Dorell, C., Noone, A.-M., Markowitz, L. E. , Kohler, B., Eheman, C., Saraiya, M., Bandi, P., 
Saslow, D., Cronin, K. A., Watson, M., Schiffman, M., Henley, S. J., Schymura, M. J., Anderson, R. N., Yankey, D., and 
Edwards, B. K. (2013) Annual Report to the Nation on the Status of Cancer, 1975 –2009, featuring the burden and trends in 
human papi[INVESTIGATOR_28597] (HPV) –associated cancers and HPV vaccination coverage levels. J Natl Cancer Inst  105, 175-[ADDRESS_394800], E. (2012) Cancer treatment 
and survivorship statistics, 2012. CA Cancer J Clin  62, 220- 241 
7. Ades, P. A. (2001) Cardiac rehabilitation and secondary prevention of doronary heart disease. N Engl J Med 345, 892- [ADDRESS_394801], S., McAuley, E., and Courneya, K. S. (2009) Rural breast cancer survivors: 
exercise preferences and their determinants. Psycho-Oncology  18, 412-421  
9. Blaney, J. M., Lowe-Strong, A., Rankin-Watt, J., Campbell, A., and Gracey, J. H. (2013) Cancer survivors' exercise barriers, facilitators and preferences in the context of fatigue, quality of life and physical activity participation: a 
questionnaire–survey. Psycho-Oncology  22, 186- 194 
10. Atherton, P. J., Babraj, J. A., Smith, K., Singh, J., Rennie, M. J., and Wackerhage, H. (2005) Selective activation of AMPK -
PGC-1α or PKB-TSC2 -mTOR signaling can explain specific adaptive responses to endurance or resistance training-like 
electrical muscle stimulation. FASEB J 19, 786-788  
11. Laufer, Y., and Snyder -Mackler, L. (2010) Response of male and female subjects after total knee arthroplasty to repeated 
neuromuscular electrical stimulation of the quadriceps femoris muscle. Am J Phys Med Rehabil  89, 464-472  
12. Deley, G., Eicher, J. C., Verges, B., Wolf, J. E., and Casillas, J. (2008) Do low -frequency electrical myostimulation and 
aerobic training similarly improve performance in chronic heart failure patients with different exercise capacities? J Rehabil Med 40, 219-224  
13. Harris, S., LeMaitre, J. P., Mackenzie, G., Fox, K. A. A., and Denvir, M. A. (2003) A randomised study of home- based 
electrical stimulation of the legs and conventional bicycle exercise training for patients with chronic heart failure. Eur Heart 
J 24, 871-878  
14. Maddocks, M., Gao, W., Higginson, I. J., and Wilcock, A. (2013) Neuromuscular electrical stimulation for muscle weakness 
in adults with advanced disease. In Cochrane Database Syst Rev  Vol. 1  
15. Gibson, J. N. A., Smith, K., and Rennie, M. J. (1988) Pre vention of disuse muscle atrophy by [CONTACT_163146]: maintenance of protein synthesis. Lancet  332, 767-770  
16. Hirose, T., Shiozaki, T., Shimizu, K., Mouri, T., Noguchi, K., Ohnishi, M., and Shimazu, T. (2013) The effect of electrical 
muscl e stimulation on the prevention of disuse muscle atrophy in patients with consciousness disturbance in the intensive 
care unit. J Crit Care  28, 536.e531-536.e537  
17. Martin, T. P., Gundersen, L. A., Blevins, F. T., and Coutts, R. D. (1991) The influence of  functional electrical stimulation on 
the properties of the vastus lateralis fibers following total knee arthroplasty. Scand J Rehabil Med 23, 207-210  
18. Gerovasili, V., Stefanidis, K., Vitzilaios, K., Karatzanos, E., Politis, P., Koroneos, A., Chatzimich ail, A., Routsi, C., Roussos, 
C., and Nanas, S. (2009) Electrical muscle stimulation preserves the muscle mass of critically ill patients: a randomized study. Crit Care  13, R161  
19. He, W. A., Berardi, E., Cardillo, V. M., Acharyya, S., Aulino, P., Thomas -Ahner, J., Wang, J., Bloomston, M., Muscarella, 
P., Nau, P., Shah, N., Butchbach, M. E. R., Ladner, K., Adamo, S., Rudnicki, M. A., Keller, C., Coletti, D., Montanaro, F., 
and Guttridge, D. C. (2013) NF -κB–mediated Pax7 dysregulation in the muscle microenvironment promotes cancer 
cachexia. J Clin Invest  123, 4821- 4835  
20. He, W. A., Calore, F., Londhe, P., Canella, A., Guttridge, D. C., and Croce, C. M. (2014) Microvesicles containing miRNAs 
promote muscle cell death in cancer cachexia via TLR7. Proc Natl Acad Sci  111, 4525- [ADDRESS_394802]. Clair, D. K. (2011) Chemotherapy -induced weakness and fatigue in skeletal muscle: the role of 
oxidative stress. Antioxid Redox S ignal  15, 2543- 2563  
22. Crevenna, R., Marosi, C., Schmidinger, M., and Fialka-Moser, V. (2006) Neuromuscular electrical stimulation for a patient with metastatic lung cancer -a case report. Support Care Cancer  14, 970-973  
23. Maddocks, M., Lewis, M., Chauhan, A., Manderson, C., Hocknell, J., and Wilcock, A. (2009) Randomized controlled pi[INVESTIGATOR_319912]-small cell lung cancer. J Pain Symptom 
Manage 38, 950-956  
24. Toth, M. J., Miller, M. S., Callahan, D. M., Sweeny, A. P., Nunez, I., Grunberg, S. M., Der -Torossian, H., Couch, M. E., and 
Dittus, K. (2013) Molecular mechanisms underlying skeletal muscle weakness in human cancer: reduced myosin-actin cross-bridge formation and kinetics. J Appl Physiol  114, 858-868  
25. Der-Torossian, H., Couch, M. E., Dittus, K., and Toth, M. J. (2013) Skeletal muscle adaptations to cancer and its treatment: 
their fundamental basis and contribution to functional disability. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr  23, 283-297  
26. Sheean, P., Hoskins, K., and Stolley, M. (2012) Body composition changes in females treated for breast cancer: a review of the evidence. Breast Cancer Res Treat  135, 663-680  
27. Stephens, N. A., Gray, C., MacDonald, A. J., Tan, B. H., Gallagher, I. J., Skipworth, R. J. E., Ross, J. A., Fearon, K. C. H., and Greig, C. A. (2012) Sexual dimorphism modulates the impact of cancer cachexia on lower limb muscle mass and 
function. Clin Nutr  31, 499- 505 
28. Hortobagyi, T., and Maffiuletti, N. A. (2011) Neural adaptations to electrical stimulation strength training. Eur J Appl Physiol  
111, 2439- 2449 
29. Cella, D., Davis, K., Breitbart, W., Curt, G., and Coalition, f. t. F. (2001) Cancer -related fatigue: prevalence of proposed 
diagnostic criteria in a [LOCATION_002] sample of cancer survivors. J Clin Oncol 19, 3385- 3391  
30. Maughan, D., and Toth, M. J. (2014) Discerning primary and secondary factors responsible for clinical fatigue in multisystem diseases. Biology  3, 606-622  
31. Jones, L. W., Eves, N. D., Haykowsky, M., Freedland, S. J., and Mackey, J. R. (2009) Exercise intolerance in cancer and the role of  exercise therapy to reverse dysfunction. Lancet Oncol  10, 598- 605 
32. Julienne, C., Dumas, J. -F., Goupi[INVESTIGATOR_5975], C., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_319913], M., Berri, C., Collin, A., Tesseraud, S., Couet, C., and Servais, S. (2012) 
Cancer cachexia is associated with a decrease in skeletal muscle mitochondrial oxidative capacities without alteration of 
ATP production efficiency. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle 3, 265-275  
33. Tzika, A. A., Fontes -Oliveria, C. C., Shestova, A. A., Constantinou, C., Psychogios, N., Righi, V., Mintzopoulos, D., 
Busquets, S., Lopez -Soriano, F. J., Milote, S., Lepi[INVESTIGATOR_050], F., Mindrinos, M. N., Rahme, L. G., and Argiles, J. M. (2013) 
Skeletal muscle mitochondrial uncoupling in a murine cancer cachexia model. Int J Oncol  43, 886-894  
34. Gilliam, L. A. A., Fisher -Wellman, K.  H., Lin, C. -T., Maples, J. M., Cathey, B. L., and Neufer, P. D. (2013) The anticancer 
agent doxorubicin disrupts mitochondrial energy metabolism and redox balance in skeletal muscle. Free Rad Biol Med 65, 
988-996 
 
Objectives:   
Our objective of this study  is to determine whether exercise training via neuromuscular electrical 
stimulation (NMES) has beneficial effects on skeletal muscle size and function in cancer p atients . We 
hypothesi ze that NMES will  improve skeletal muscle size, contractile function and oxidative capacity, 
based on our seminal observations in cancer patients that functional disability derives, in part, from 
deficits in skeletal muscle contractile protein and mitochondrial content and function, as well as our 
preliminary data showing that NMES counters such deficits. To test this hypothesis, we propose two specific aims:  
Aim 1:  Det
ermine the effect of NMES on skeletal muscle fiber size and contractile function.  
We hypothesize that skeletal muscle fiber size and contractile function will be greater  in cancer 
patients receiving treatment who are randomized to NMES compared to controls. 
 
Aim 2:  Determine the effect of NMES on skeletal muscle mitochondrial content and function. 
We hypothesize  that skeletal muscle mitochondrial content and function will be  greater 
in cancer patients receiving treatment randomized to NMES compared to controls.  
 
Study Design:    
We will use a prospective , randomized controlled  design, in which recently -diagnosed, breast cancer 
patients (40 to 75 yrs) will be recruited (see Appendices I-VI for recruitment materials/data collection 
sheets)  and undergo Baseline Testing during the 1st cycle of neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy. 
Patients will then be randomized (1:1) to 8 wks of NMES  or Attention control  intervention (n=12/group; 
Treatment Phase), with stratification for age and adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Following 
completion of the intervention, they will undergo Post-intervention Testing. 
Baseline testing will include assessments of single muscle fiber size and mechanical function and 
mitochondrial content and function, as well as whole muscle size and contractile function and walking 
performance. Detailed descriptions of these assessments are provided below . 
Treatment Phase V olunteers randomized to both NMES and attention control groups will receive 
instruction to maintain or increase their physical activity according to the clinics usual standard of care. Both interventions are described below in detail.  
Post-
 Intervention Testing will occur in patients who complete the NMES program and controls  and will 
include measurements identical to Baseline Testing, with post-training biopsies performed ≥[ADDRESS_394803]-intervention testing will occur within ±14 d from the 8 week intervention poi nt 
New methodology: O ur study employs cellular and organellar level measurements of skeletal muscle 
structure and function. Although the methodology used in these studies is not new per se, it has not been used in the setting of exercise intervention trials in cancer patients. We feel that our approach is 
innovative in  circumventing limitations in the detection of exercise effects at the whole body or whole 
muscle level due to methodological shortcomings, subjective motivation and, specific to NMES, effects 
on neural activati on. T his approach can economize the initial exploratory phase of developi[INVESTIGATOR_319914] ; namely, muscle size, contractility and oxidative function. 
Procedures:    
All of the procedures and interventions in this study are carried out solely for research purposes, as none are part of standard therapy/care in breast cancer patients. 
Primary outcomes  include: skeletal muscle fiber cross-sectional area ( CSA) and function and 
mitochondrial content, morphology and function. Secondary outcomes  include: whole muscle 
size/function  and 6 min walk performance and indices of chemotherapy -induced peripheral neuropathy 
(CIPN) . Procedures that will be performed on volunteers to obtain these primary and secondary 
outcome measures are described below. 
Biopsy  of th e vastus lateralis (VL) will be performed, as used by [CONTACT_319934] a range of 
patient populations, including cancer patients ( 1), with the study leg chosen as the stronger leg in ½ of 
patients and the weaker leg in the other ½ so as not to bias adaptations based on minor functional asymmetries. T issue will be proportioned for mechanical, immunohistochemical (IHC), mitochondrial 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_319915] (EM) measurements, with remaining tissue frozen in liquid N
2. The 
VL was chosen because of its importance in determining functional disability (2 ) and its structural and 
functional deficiencies in cancer patients  previously described by [CONTACT_319935]  (1). 
Single fiber function, including tension, velocity and power, will be measured on chemically -skinned, 
muscle fiber segments (n≈25/subject/biopsy)  using isotonic load clamps, as described by [CONTACT_3019] ( 3), with 
data available on MHC I and IIA fibers, the two most prevalent fiber types in human muscle (1 , 4). 
Single fiber cross -sectional area (CSA) will be measured by [CONTACT_4658], as we have described (1 , 3), with 
minor modifications to permit assessment of all MHC isoforms, as described ( 5).  
Whole muscle contractile function will be measured, as described by [CONTACT_3019] ( 6). Maximal peak isometric 
(70°, 90° ) and isokinetic knee extensor torque (60 and 180 °/sec) will be adjusted for thigh muscle CSA 
to account for variation in muscle size.  Additionally, muscle fatigue will be assessed following repeated 
(n=24) isometric contractions.  Briefly, 24 maxim al voluntary isometric contractions (2 min  of intermitte nt 
contractions at 70º), following a duty ratio of [ADDRESS_394804] peak torque 
achieved prior to initiation of the fatigue protocol (ie, Isometric knee extensor strength determination prior to the fatigue m easure). 
Thigh muscle size  will be measured by [CONTACT_11323] x -ray absorptiometry, as described by [CONTACT_3019] (1 ). 
Additionally, anthropometrics and body mass will be assessed. Height will be measured without shoes, 
using a stadiometer to the nearest 0.5cm. Weight will be obtained from the DEXA estimate. BMI will be calculated as weight (kg)/height(m
2). 
[ADDRESS_394805] w ill be performed, as described (1), to assess changes in physical functional 
capacity.  
Single legged stance w ill be performed to test balance in each leg separately. The participants place 
their hands on their hips then raise the [ADDRESS_394806] will be stopped at that time. 
Accelerometry  will be performed, as described (6 ), to monitor weight-bearing activity levels, which 
can be used to account for possible variati on in muscle use between groups (Appendix VII). 
Questionnaires  ( provided in Appendix VIII) will be provided to assess fatigue symptoms (Fatigue 
Symptom Index), physical activity level (Stanford Brief Physical Activity Questionnaire) , general 
health/well -being (MOS SF-36)  and CIPN (EORTC CIPN 20). 
Nerve conductions studies (NCS)  will include the sural, peroneal and tibial nerves bilaterally  and are 
the best measure of large nerve fiber function that is affected by [CONTACT_319936]. N CS 
take about ten minutes and record electrical signal after providing a very mild electrical stimulus to the skin. The amplitude, distal latency, and conduction velocity will be recorded for each nerve. Study of 
both legs require a total of 15-20 stimulus applications, some of which are too weak to be felt. 
Clinical neur
 opathy assessment: The Utah Early Neuropathy Scale (UENS) is a lower extremity 
examination performed by a neurologist that tests different modalities of strength, sensation and reflexes to detect neuropathy. It examines great toe strength, pin sensation, allodynia, vibratory sensation and Achilles reflexes in both legs.  
 
Treatment Phase 
     Volunteers randomized to both the NMES intervention and control  groups will receive instruction to 
maintain or increase their physical activity according to the clinics usual standard of care.  
NMES will be carried out bilaterally on the quadriceps using a portable stimulation device (EMPI 
[INVESTIGATOR_319916] 300PV). Study personnel will teach volunteers to use the NMES device and provide 
detailed directions for its use (Appendix IX). Briefly, two adhesive electrodes will be affixed to anterior 
surface of each thigh: ~1 cm distal to the inguinal crease and ~5 cm proximal to the patella, with the leg maintained in isometric conditions by [CONTACT_1299] a bolster under the knees and using ankle weights . 
Symmetrical, biphasic pulses (400 µs duration at 50 Hz) will be used, with a duty cycle of 2 5% (10 s on, 
30 s off) at stimulation intensities sufficient to cause visible muscle contractions below pain threshold. 
NMES sessions will occur 5 d/wk for 1 hr/d (two 30 min or one 60 min session)  for 8 wk s. This regimen 
(lower duty cycle and 60 min/d) differs slightly from that put forth in the grant proposal in lieu of reviewer’s comments on the resubmission and consultation with out co-investigator ([CONTACT_6034] -
Lapsley), as well as comments from volunteers in our VCC/LCCRO Pi[INVESTIGATOR_319917], where volunteers suggested that we offer shorter sessions, as finding time for longer sessions was problematic for women with family and work commitments. We will monitor adherence to the NMES program 
covertly using  the compliance monitoring feature built in to the NMES device software. Additionally, 
volunteers will self-report compliance, stimulation intensity and muscle soreness/side effects (Appendix VIII and X) and these reports will be reviewed during weekly pho ne contacts by [CONTACT_3462]. Finally, 
we will assess acceptability of the program using a questionnaire. These measures are taken to inform future RCTs if our hypotheses are supported. 
Attention control  patients will not receive an NMES device. They wil l receive weekly phone calls to 
discuss measurements of leg muscle soreness  to standardize the amount of interaction with study 
personnel to the NMES group.  
1. Toth, M. J., Miller, M. S., Callahan, D. M., Sweeny, A. P., Nunez, I., Grunbe rg, S. M., Der-Torossian, H., Couch, M. E., and 
Dittus, K. (2013) Molecular mechanisms underlying skeletal muscle weakness in human cancer: reduced myosin-actin 
cross-bridge formation and kinetics. J Appl Physiol  114, 858-868  
2. Bean, J. F., Kiely, D. K., LaRose, S., and Leveille, S. G. (2008) Which impairments are most associated with high mobility performance in older adults? Implications for a rehabilitation prescription. Arch Phys Med Rehabil  89, 2278-2284  
3. Callahan, D. M., Miller, M. S., Sweeny, A. P., Tourville, T. W., Slauterbeck, J. R., Savage, P. D., Maughan, D. W., Ades, P. A., Beynnon, B. D., and Toth, M. J. (2014) Muscle disuse alters skeletal muscle contractile function at the molecular and 
cellular levels in older adult humans in a sex -specific manner. J Physiol  592, 4555-4573  
4. Callahan, D. M., Tourville, T. W., Miller, M. S., Hackett, S. B., Sharma, H., Cruickshank, N. C., Slauterbeck, J. R., Savage, P. D., Ades, P. A., Maughan, D. W., Beynnon, B. D., and Toth, M.  J. (2015) Chronic disuse and skeletal muscle structure in 
older adults: sex differences and relationships to contractile function. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol  308, C932-C943  
5. Fry, C. S., Noehren, B., Mula, J., Ubele, M. F., Westgate, P. M., Kern, P. A., and Peterson, C. A. (2014) Fibre type-specific 
satellite cell response to aerobic training in sedentary adults. J Physiol  592, 2625- 2635  
6. Toth, M. J., Shaw, A. O., Miller, M. S., VanBuren, P., LeWinter, M. M., Maughan, D., and Ades, P. A. (2010) Reduced knee extensor function in heart failure is not explained by [CONTACT_163151]. Int J Cardiol  143, 276-282  
 
Surveys/Q uestionnaires :  
The Fatigue Symptom Inventory (FSI; Appendix VII) has been tested in several cancer patient 
populations  and is a 14-item self-report of severity, frequency and pattern of fatigue. An 11 point scale is 
used (0=not at all fatigued; 10=as fatigued as I could be). Frequency is measured in numbers of days in 
the past week. Interference is measured on an 11 point scale (0=interference none of the day; 
10=interference the entire day). A mean score of ≥ 3 across the three-item FSI severity composite has 
been established as a cutoff for clinically significant c ancer-related fatigue. 
Statistical Analysis  Plan :  
Our primary goal is to assess the effect of NMES on: single fiber tension (force/CSA), velocity and CSA 
and mitochondrial content and ADP -stimulated oxygen consumption rate. A general linear mixed model 
will be used, with treatment group as between-subject and time as within-subject effects. A random 
effect will be included to account for clustering of observations within subjects (ie, fibers within each subject), as described (1), with the model conceptualized as a multi -level analysis with single 
fiber/organellar -level outcomes comprising level 1 variables and person-level covariates comprising 
level 2 variables  (2). Covariates (eg, stage, chemotherapeutics, and activity level) can be included in the 
model as level [ADDRESS_394807] previously observed that molecular - and organellar -level function 
scale to the tissue and whole-body level in cancer (3 ), aging ( 4) and chronic disease (5). 
For Aim 1, based on whole muscle results in cancer patients (3, 6), other diseased populations (7 , 8) 
and our preliminary data, we anticipate that volunteers randomized to NMES will have greater single muscle fiber tension (20%) and CSA (20%) versus controls. We focused on these variables because they represent the two most disabling effects of cancer on muscle contractility : weakness and atrophy 
(3, 9
). We would need n=12/group to detect these differences between groups (power=90% and 
significance of 5%). Of note, we will likely have greater improvements in contractile velocity, per our 
preliminary data, which should further increase aggregate muscle power output and functionality and is 
readily detectable with this sample size. For Aim 2, based on our preliminary data showing the ability of NMES to improve mitochondrial content and function in the context of a profoundly atrophyic stimulit (ie, knee replacement surgery), we expect that patients randomized to NMES will have greater 
mitochondrial content (50%) and function (40%). Our sample size is driven by [CONTACT_319937], which would require n=12/group with a power of 90% and a significance of 5%. Using this sample size, our minimal detectable differences for changes in mitochondrial function would be 14%. We have not performed sample size estimates on secondary outcomes because of the 
exploratory nature of these studies, but also because it is likely that we will either not be able to detect effects at this  anatomic level because of confounding factors or we will detect effects at this level that 
are unrelated to the effects of NMES to improve skeletal muscle size and/or function (eg, enhanced 
neural activation related to NMES training  improves whole muscle strength ). This was a primary impetus 
for our studies to evaluate the effects of NMES at the cellular/organellar level. However, we wil l evaluate 
these outcomes nonetheless, as they will provide important preliminary data for future trials if our 
hypotheses are supported by [CONTACT_319938].  
1. Toth, M. J., Miller, M. S., VanBuren, P., Bedrin, N. G., LeWinter, M. M., Ades, P. A., and Palmer, B. M. (2012) Resistance 
training alters skeletal muscle structure and function in human heart failure: effects at the tissue, cellular and molecular levels. J Physiol  590, 1243-1259  
2. Hox, J. J. (2002) Multilevel Analysis: Techniques and Applications. , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., Mahwah, NJ  
3. Toth, M. J., Miller, M. S., Callahan, D. M., Sweeny, A. P., Nunez, I., Grunberg, S. M., Der -Torossian, H., Couch, M. E., and 
Dittus, K. (2013) Molecular mechanisms underlying skeletal muscle weakness in human cancer: reduced myosin-actin cross-bridge formation and kinetics. J Appl Physiol  114, 858-868  
4. Miller, M. S., Bedrin, N. G., Callahan, D. M., Previs, M. J., Jennings, M. E., Ades, P. A., Maughan, D. W., Palmer, B. M., an d 
Toth, M. J. (20 13) Age-related slowing of myosin actin cross -bridge kinetics is sex specific and predicts decrements in whole 
skeletal muscle performance in humans. J Appl Physiol  115, 1004-1014 
5. Miller, M. S., Callahan, D. M., and Toth, M. J. (2014) Skeletal muscle myofilament adaptations to aging, disease and disuse 
and their effects on whole muscle performance in older adult humans. Front Physiol  5, 369 
6. Maddocks, M., Lewis, M., Chauhan, A., Manderson, C., Hocknell, J., and Wilcock, A. (2009) Randomized controlled pi[INVESTIGATOR_319912]-small cell lung cancer. J Pain Symptom 
Manage 38, 950-956  
7. Vivodtzev, I., Debigaré, R., Gagnon, P., Mainguy, V., Saey, D., Dubé, A., Paré, M. -È., Bélanger, M., and Maltais, F. (2012) 
Functional and muscular effects of neuromuscular electrical stimulation in patients with severe copd: A randomized clinical 
trial. CHEST  141, 716- 725 
8. Quittan, M., Wiesinger, G. F., Sturm, B., Puig, S., Mayr, W., Sochor, A., Paternostro, T., Resch, K. L., Pacher, R., and Fialka -Moser, V. (2001) Improvement of thigh muscles by [CONTACT_319939] w ith refractory 
heart failure: a single-blind, randomized, controlled trial. Am J Phys Med Rehabil  80, 206-214  
9. Der-Torossian, H., Couch, M. E., Dittus, K., and Toth, M. J. (2013) Skeletal muscle adaptations to cancer and its treatment: 
their fundamental basis and contribution to functional disability. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr  23, 283-297  
 
Risks/Benefits:   
Potential risks: Below we have highlighted those procedures that have anything greater than negligible 
risk to the volunteers’ health for each phase of the study.   
Baseline/Post-intervention Testing: There is a minimal risk for hematoma or infection from the muscle 
biopsy. All equipment used will be sterile and every precaution will be taken to reduce the possibility of infection. Risks associated with the muscle biopsy procedure include excessive bleeding, persistent 
numbness or infection. Regarding bleeding risk, we will exclude any patients taking anti -coagulant 
medication or with known coagulopathies. All of these risks are well below 1% (
81) and our laboratory 
has never had an adverse event related to the muscle biopsy procedure. Although evidence is limited, 
there is some evidence that the rhythmic muscle contraction induced by [CONTACT_319940] a lower extremity  blood clot.  However, several  published reports  show  
that NMES  reduces  the risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_319918]. Thus, the risk of NMES  causing or dislodging 
such  a clot is minimal, but difficult to measure exactly . There is a risk for having an allergic reaction to 
the antiseptic that we use to clean the site of the biopsy.  The risk for such a reaction is relatively low 
(1% or less).  Finally, the adhesive strips use to close the biopsy incision could cause irritati on to the 
skin in individuals with sensitive skin, which could cause a rash or blister.  The muscle biopsy will be 
performed by [CONTACT_23872], qualified clinicians in a closely controlled, medical environment. There is risk for 
muscle soreness or damage from whole muscle functional testing. Appropriate warm up exercises will 
be performed to prevent muscle injury. The DEXA scan exposes the volunteers to x -rays, although the 
total exposure is equivalent to approximately 1 d of normal daily background radiation. 
Anti-coagulant therapy/muscle biopsy: Stage [ADDRESS_394808] prior to the biopsy to limit the 
possibility of forming a hematoma or excessive bleeding during the biopsy. The following schemes detail 
the types of possible medications that could be taken and the discontinuation and resumption procedures for each (note: these schemes have been approved by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Chris Holmes, who oversees this treatment program for patients in the Division of Hematology/Oncology):  
Api[INVESTIGATOR_106757] (Eliquis)  
Prophylactic dose:  2.5 mg BID  
Treatment dose:  10 mg BID for 7 days then 5mg BID  
 
Discontinue: 48 hours p rior to biopsy  
Resumption:  Day following the biopsy  
 
Rivaroxaban (Xarelto)  
Prophylactic dose:  10mg  
Treatment dose:   15mg BID x 21 days than 20 mg daily  
 
Discontinue: 48 hours prior to biopsy 
Resumption:  Day following the biopsy  
 
Enoxaparin ( Lovenox)  
Prophylactic dose:  40 mg subcutaneous daily 
 
Discontinue:  If taken in the morning do not take am dose day of biopsy  
If taken in the evening, hold evening dose 
Resumption: Day following the biopsy if taken in the am  
Evening after the muscle biopsy  if taken in the evening 
 Treatment dose:  1mg/kg BID  
 
Discontinue: Hold dose evening prior to biopsy  
Resumption:  Evening after the muscle biopsy 
 
Dalteparin (Fragmin)  
Prophylactic dose:  5,000 units subcutaneous daily Treatment dose:  200 units/kg daily first month than 150 units/kg daily  
  Discontinue:  If taken in the morning do not take am dose day of biopsy  
If taken in the evening, hold evening dose 
Resumption: Day following the biopsy if taken in the am;   Evening after the muscle biopsy if taken in the evening 
 UF Heparin 
Prophylactic dose:  5000 units subcutaneous TID  
Treatment dose:  Variable 
 
Discontinue: Day prior to biopsy  
Resumption:  Day following the biopsy  
 Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_49267]  – Discontinue 5 days prior  
Resume day following biopsy  
 
NMES intervention:  NMES is a generally safe procedure, delivered in this study by [CONTACT_13247] -approved 
device. Although evidence is limited, some groups have suggested that NMES could increase the risk of dislodging a deep vein thrombosis (DVT), which may have serious health consequences. However, 
several published reports show that NMES significantly reduces the risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_319919] a known coagulopathy. Because of the location of the stimulating electrodes (upper leg), the risk of NMES dislodging a DVT is likely minimal. Electrical stimulations associated with NMES of the upper leg may be sensed by [CONTACT_319941], 
causing the device to discharge inappropriately. Thus, consistent with current clinical practice 
guidelines, w e will exclude any volunteers that currently have an implanted cardiac defibrillator or 
pacemaker. 
     Patients will be encouraged to adjust stimulation to a tolerable level and will have full control over the 
stimulator to continue to make adjustments as necessary. During the first couple of NMES sessions, muscle soreness may occur. The level of fatigue and/or soreness  will be similar to that which occurs 
following a standard exercise training session and will dissipate over time as the volunteer’s muscles 
become accustomed to the electrically -stimulated contractions (ie, they become trained). Nonetheless, 
in response to concerns of the NIH reviewers, w e have instituted a regimen of assessing muscle pain 
each week using a hand-held pressure algometer , with r esults being reviewed with volunteers during 
weekly phone contacts. Volunteers  will be instructed on how to assess muscle soreness manually at 
standardized points along their quadriceps. Briefly, the volunteer will provide 2 kg/cm2 of pressure using 
the algometer at each site, which will provide mild pressure over 1 cm2-size of rubber algometer probe 
that will be below pain threshold. If muscle soreness related to the NMES is present, there may be mild 
soreness/pain at the site of algometer testing and the volunteer will note her level of discomfort using 
the Wong pain scale  (0-10). Any level of discomfort greater than 6, or if the patient reports muscle 
soreness that hinders simple activities of daily living, such as walking, the research coordinator will 
contact [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_319920]. The Safety Officer will then follow up with the patient by 
[CONTACT_648] ( or in person,  if deemed necessary) to assess the volunteer’s level of discomfort and whether she 
should continue in the study. In our past experience with exerci se training and NMES, there is some 
level of discomfort expected as the muscle is trained. However, in all cases , muscle soreness has not 
been sufficient that volunteers have chosen to discontinue the study or that it substantially hinders daily 
activities .  
 Benefits:  The direct benefit of the research to volunteers is  not immediately known because of the 
paucity of studies that have evaluate NMES in cancer survivors . NMES may improve skeletal muscle 
structure or function and, in turn, improve physical functional capacity. Because of this, patients may 
experience improved physiological capacity, which could reduce fatigue and disability. If NMES is shown 
to have beneficial effects on skeletal muscle, further research and application of the technique to canc er 
patients may help to extend the benefits of exercise to cancer survivors not able to participate in facility -
based exercise training programs.  
More broadly, the results of these studies may impact supportive care regimens for cancer patients in 
the future. Our studies will provide seminal information regarding the effects of NMES on skeletal 
muscle at the cellular and organellar levels. If successful, our results will provide a solid, mechanistic 
evidence base on which clinical trials designed to further examine the utility of NMES in cancer patients 
can be launched. Because of the mechanistic nature of our data, our findings may also be used to guide 
the development and refinement of clinical rehabilitation interventions designed to counter detrimental 
skeletal muscle adaptations in cancer patients, as guidelines for oncology rehabilitation are still in the 
early stage of development. Additionally, because we will be obtaining evidence on the mechanisms 
whereby [CONTACT_319942]/cellular 
level, our data could stimulate further basic science research into the mechanisms of action of NMES 
and how stimulation of these signaling pathways counteracts the effect s of cancer and its treatment. 
Thus , our work may identify the mechanisms whereby [CONTACT_319943].  
Overall, the risks to general health and well -being of the volunteers are  quite minimal and, based on the 
utility of NMES in other diseased populations to increase muscle size and functionality, the likelihood that NMES will improve physiological function in patients is quite high. For these reasons, and together 
with the advances in knowledge to be gained from these studies, we believe that the risks of this study are reasonable given the potential gains in functionality for the patients and knowledge to improve 
exercise interventions for future cancer survivors.  
Therapeutic A lternatives :   
NMES seeks to provide an exercise training stimulus to volunteers to help maintain skeletal muscle size 
and functionality. During treatment, there is generally not an alternative exercise program available, as our institutional oncology rehabilitation program does not typi[INVESTIGATOR_319921]. 
This lack of therapeutic alternatives during treatment was a primary impetus for undertaking these 
studies. Volunteers  can chose to exercise on their own, however, and not participate in the current 
study.  
Data Safety and Monitoring:    
Our study is a clinical trial, but not a phase III clinical trial. Thus, pursuant to NIH regulation, we will 
establish a formal Data Safety Monitoring Plan, which will provide additional oversights to further pr otect 
against risk to safety and confidentiality.  
     The PI (Toth) and [CONTACT_319951] will monitor the safety of the research procedures for this study. [CONTACT_319952] will be available on -site for all major experimental procedures (eg, muscle biopsy) that might 
reasonably be expected to pose safety concerns for volunteers. In this context, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_319922]. If an event occurs that affects participant 
safety, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or [CONTACT_319951] will alert the Safety Officer ( [CONTACT_319953]), who will adjudicate the 
event with respect to its severity, expectedness and relatedness to participation in the study according 
to the aforementioned criteria. Because numerous clinical trials in our laboratory have demons trated the 
safety of this regimen of testing in patients from a broad range of clinical backgrounds (eg, heart failure 
patients, cancer survivors, healthy elderly), we expect minimal problems related to testing. NMES is 
generally a very safe intervention, having been used in a variety of acute and chronic conditions, from 
heart failure patients awaiting transplant to ICU patients. Additionally, we will actively monitor volunteers 
at regular intervals (weekly phone calls) to assure that no problems develop. Thus, we do not feel that it 
is reasonable to incorporate "stoppage criteria" for the overall study. Instead, the Safety Officer will decide whether an individual participant should continue with the study following occurrence of any 
adverse events or unanticipated problems taking into consideration what is in the best interest of that 
individual, including instances of undue muscle soreness related to the NMES device.
 
 
Adverse Event and Unanticipated Problem (UAP) Reporting:   
Adverse events will be reported by [CONTACT_127958] [ADDRESS_394809], the UVM/UVM Medical Center 
Committee for Human Subject Research Adverse Event Reporting Form. Report of any event will be 
forwarded to the office of the Committee for Human Research in the Medical Science (CHRMS) within 2 
days of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_319923]. Repor ting adverse events will be the responsibility of the PI. The 
CHRMS will  determine  whether additional reporting requirements are indicated. Second, the Patient 
Safety Reporting system (SAFE) through UVM Medical Center  can also be used, whi ch may be initiated 
by [CONTACT_319944]. These forms will be forwarded within 3 days to the PI, UVM Medical Center Risk Management Office, CHRMS and other appropriate agencies, as 
indicated by [CONTACT_163158]. Finally, the UVM  Medical Center Medication/IV Event Report Form, 
with distribution and timing as noted above. This latter mechanism might be used with events related to 
blood sampling or other invasive procedure, such as the biopsy . Reviews of protocol specifi c adverse 
events will be performed no less than annually. Additionally, any adverse event that occurs will be 
forwarded to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_319924] [ADDRESS_394810]. Toth will evaluate data collection and storage to 
ensure the confidentiality of data and quality . Each of these evaluations will be followed by [CONTACT_319945] U niversity of Vermont Committee on H uman Research in the 
Medical Sciences  via yearly progress reports and to the appropriate NCI program officer . The report will 
include information regarding study status, participant information and safety information. This report will 
also be forwarded to the Safety Officer for his review. 
Withdrawal Procedures:   
Patients will be removed from study if they are found to have cancer progression during the study, if 
they experience a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_319925] [ADDRESS_394811] of the volunteer’s health . 
Sources of Materials:    
An individual research record will be kept on each volunteer in compliance with HIPAA standards. This 
record will contain identifying data, demographic information and results from all clinical research 
measurements and evaluations. Data  will be gathered from the volunteer and her medical records after 
she freely gives consent. The results of all testing will be kept confidential. In addition, skeletal muscle 
tissue samples will be taken and will be used for measure ment of muscle size, structure and function. All 
materials gathered in conjunction with the proposed studies will be used for research purposes only and 
will be available only to research personnel working on these studies, who have obtained proper training 
in human subjects research and privacy protection.  All materials collected for this study will be used for 
research purposes only.  
 
Device (s) :   
The interventional device used in this trial: EMPI [INVESTIGATOR_319926] s have both 
received FDA approval for retarding disuse-related atrophy , which we believe is one of the primary 
mechanisms whereby [CONTACT_319946]. That is, fatigue and weakness 
associated with chemotherapy cause patients to be less physically active, which, in turn, causes skeletal 
muscle fiber atrophy and weakness and mitochon drial rarefaction and dysfunction.  
Is it FDA approved:  
Yes. It is approved to mitigate muscle atrophy/dysfunction associated with muscle disuse, which we 
hypothesize is one of the major underlying precipi[INVESTIGATOR_319927], as others have characterized profound reductions i n muscle use with cancer treatment (1) . 
1. Ferriolli E, Skipworth RJE, Hendry P, Scott A, Stensteth J, Dahele  M, et al. Physical activity monitoring: a responsive and 
meaningful patient -centered outcome for surgery, chemotherapy, or radiotherapy? J Pain Symptom Manage. 2012;43:1025-
35. 
Risk assessment :  
The device (and similar devices) has been used extensively in the orthopedic and neural rehabilitation 
settings by [CONTACT_163162][INVESTIGATOR_319928] (heart failure, chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease, knee replacement) to improve muscle size and function in clinical trial 
settings. Thus, NMES is a generally safe procedure with a long safety r ecord. Although evidence is 
limited, some have suggested that NMES could increase the risk of dislodging a deep vein thrombosis 
(DVT) because of the rhythmic muscle contractions induced by [CONTACT_163163]. However, 
several published reports show  that NMES significantly reduces the risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_163137] . In fact, the 
device we are using is FDA -approved for prevention of DVT of the calf muscles immediately following 
surgery. Moreover, we will actively exclude any individual with a known coagulopathy  or DVT . Because 
of the location of the stimulating electrodes (upper leg), the risk of NMES dislodging a DVT is likely 
minimal. There are also several case reports that NMES may be sensed by [CONTACT_319947], causing the device to discharge inappropriately. Thus, consistent with current clinical  
practice guidelines, w e will exclude any volunteers that currently have an implanted cardiac defibrillator 
or pacemaker. Finally, d uring the first couple of NMES sessions, muscle s oreness may occur . Thus, we 
will actively monitor muscle soreness in volunteers to prevent undue discomfort.  
 
Subject Selection:   
We propose to study NMES in breast cancer patients receiving chemotherapy for several reasons. First, 
breast cancer is the most prevalent cancer in women and the second most prevalent cancer overall, 
making our results broadly relevant. Second, women show higher disability rates than men (1 , 2), which 
may relate to their more detrimental skeletal muscle molecular and cellular functional adaptations that 
we have character ized with aging (3) and muscle disuse (4 , 5). Third, breast cancer patients show 
structural and functional muscle changes similar to those we have found in other cancers that relate to 
disability (6). Finally, we include a broad age range of patients because we have observed phenotypic 
adaptations in younger patients (mitochondrial rarefaction) and prior reports suggest that cancer and its 
treatment cause the greatest functional deficits in younger patients (7), arguing that younger women 
may benefit from NMES. We exclude “old” and “oldest old” populations (> 75 yrs) because of their higher 
rates of co- morbidities, which could affect the ability to detect NMES effects.  
We chose to examine effects of NMES during chemotherapy for several reasons. This is a logical time for exercise intervention to counteract concomitant reductions in habitual physical activity (8 -10) and 
their physiological sequelae (11). Support of muscular activity and maintenance of physiological reserve may be critical to improving long-term outcomes, as inactivity is associated with increased mortality in breast cancer patients ( 12, 13
). Moreover, in light of our new preliminary data in cancer survivors, this  
period is characterized by [CONTACT_319948], with the latter effects being similar to those observed with NMES in 
other populations. In this context, our study  promotes a more proactive, preventative approach to 
functional deterioration in cancer patients, which, by [CONTACT_319949], may lead to 
greater functional and long-term health benefits ( 14). 
1. Hardy, S. E., Allore, H. G., Guo, Z., and Gill, T. M. (2008) Explaining the effect of gender on functional transitions in old er 
persons. Gerontology  54, 79- 86 
2. Newman, A. B., and Brach, J. S. (2001) Gender gap in longevity and disability in older persons. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_19274]  23, 343- 355 
3. Miller, M. S., Bedrin, N. G., Callahan, D. M., Previs, M. J., Jennings, M. E., Ades, P. A., Maughan, D. W., Palmer, B. M., and Toth, M. J. (2013) Age-related slowing of myosin actin cross -bridge kinetics is sex specific and predicts decrements in 
whole skeletal muscle performance in humans. J Appl Physiol  115, 1004 -1014  
4. Callahan, D. M., Miller, M. S., Sweeny, A. P., Tourville, T. W ., Slauterbeck, J. R., Savage, P. D., Maughan, D. W., Ades, P. 
A., Beynnon, B. D., and Toth, M. J. (2014) Muscle disuse alters skeletal muscle contractile function at the molecular and cellular levels in older adult humans in a sex -specific manner. J Physi ol 592, 4555-4573  
5. Callahan, D. M., Tourville, T. W., Miller, M. S., Hackett, S. B., Sharma, H., Cruickshank, N. C., Slauterbeck, J. R., Savage, P. D., Ades, P. A., Maughan, D. W., Beynnon, B. D., and Toth, M. J. (2015) Chronic disuse and skeletal muscle structure in 
older adults: sex differences and relationships to contractile function. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol  308, C932-C943  
6. Toth, M. J., Miller, M. S., Callahan, D. M., Sweeny, A. P., Nunez, I., Grunberg, S. M., Der -Torossian, H., Couch, M. E., and 
Dittus, K. (2013) Molecular mechanisms underlying skeletal muscle weakness in human cancer: reduced myosin-actin cross-bridge formation and kinetics. J Appl Physiol  114, 858-868  
7. Kroenke, C. H., Rosner, B., Chen, W. Y., Kawachi, I., Colditz, G. A., and H olmes, M. D. (2004) Functional impact of breast 
cancer by [CONTACT_158585]. J Clin Oncol  22, 1849-1856  
8. Courneya, K. S., and Friedenreich, C. M. (1998) Relationship between exercise during treatment and current quality of life among survivors of breast cancer. J Psych Oncol  15, 35 -57 
9. Ferriolli, E., Skipworth, R. J. E., Hendry, P., Scott, A., Stensteth, J., Dahele, M., Wall, L., Greig, C., Fallon, M., Strass er, F., 
Preston, T., and Fearon, K. C. H. (2012) Physical activity monitoring: a responsive and meaningful patient -centered 
outcome for surgery, chemotherapy, or radiotherapy? J Pain Symptom Manage  43, 1025-1035  
10. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_1946], B. M., Trunzo, J. J., Reiss, P., and Shiu, S.-Y. (2002) Exercise participation after diagnosis of breast cancer: trends and effects on mood and quality of life. Psycho-Oncology  11, 389-[ADDRESS_394812], N., Thomas, S., Herndon, J., II, Peppercorn, J., Douglas, P., and Jones, L. (2013) The influence of adjuvant therapy on cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_319929] -
stage breast cancer seven years after diagnosis: the Cooper Center Longitudinal Study. Breast Cancer Res Treat  138, 
909-916 
12. Holmes, M. D., Chen, W. Y., Feskanich, D., Kroenke, C. H., and Colditz, G. A. (2005) Physical activity and survival after breast cancer diagnosis. JAMA 293, 2479-[ADDRESS_394813], D., Martin, L. W., and Chlebowski, R. (2011) Physical activity and survival in postmenopausal women with breast 
cancer: results from the Women's Health Initiative. Cancer Prev Res  4, 522-529  
14. Dittus, K. L., Lakoski, S. G., Savage, P. D., Kokinda, N., Toth, M. J., Stevens, D., Woods, K., O'Brien, P., and Ades, P. A. (2015) Exercise -based oncology rehabilitation: leveraging the cardiac rehabilitation model. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev  35, 
130-139 
Number of Subjects:    
We anticipate enrolling and completing testing on n=24 patients. We will recruit 28 volunteers with the 
anticipation of a dropout rate of ~15%. This is a reasonable dropout rate considering that, in our 
experience with other clinical populations (eg, heart failure patients, advanced stage knee osteoarthritis patients) we have had minimal dropouts during facility -based exercise interventions  (<5%)  that pose a 
greater  burden on volunteers than the home -base d NMES intervention in the current study.  
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria:   
Patients will be considered for study if they are/have /will: 1)  40-75 y ears of age; 2) stage I, II or III breast 
cancer; 3) receive neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy and 4) a body mass index <38 kg/m2. 
Patients will be excluded if they have/had: 1)  a prior history of cancer  that required chemotherapy , 
excluding non-melanoma skin cancer; 2) autoimmune, vascular or neuromuscular disease that could alter skeletal muscle (eg, rheumatoid arthritis, peripheral arterial disease); 3) prior knee or hip replacement; 4) an implanted cardiac defibrillator or pacemaker; 5) a known coagulopathy , current lower 
extremity DVT or are taking anti -coagulant therapy  (patients taking prophylactic anti -coagulation therapy 
are eligible if they discontinue this therapy according to the schemes detailed in the Risks/Benefits section) or 6) oral corticosteroid medication for non-cancer indications, excluding inhaled or topi[INVESTIGATOR_84695] . We will exclude women who report being highly active prior to diagnosis (Stanford Brief 
Activity Survey), as these individuals may be less responsive to NMES (ie, ceiling effect), though this is likely to be a small fraction (<10%) of the overall population.  
Inclusion of Minorities and Women :.  
Inclusion of Women  
     This study will include only women. The rationale for this decision is based on our choice to study 
women with breast cancer, as detailed above in the Subject Selection section. Briefly, this decision was 
based partially on the fact that breast cancer  is the second most prevalent type of cancer in the US, but 
also on work by [CONTACT_319950]. Thus, we believe that women breast cancer patients would have more necessity for alternative exercise interventions, such as NMES. We recognize that, if our studies are successful, our work will have to be duplicated in other cancer populations, including male volunteers. For these proof-of -principle studies, however, we 
felt that it was prudent to limit our investigation.  
Inclusion of Minorities 
     Every effort will be made to recruit minorities for the proposed studies. The contribution of minorities to the total population of Vermont is 3.2%, with a similar minority profile in Chittenden County (3.6%), where the University of Vermont (UVM) is located.  
Inclusion of Children:   
The proposed studies will not include children. The rationale for this decision is based on the fact that breast cancer is confined to the adult population. There may be instances where the NMES exercise intervention being tested in the proposed studies may be useful in children with cancer. However, the Belmont Report (Part C, §3) stipulates that research that does not contain a therapeutic component, or by [CONTACT_163166], where the utility of the therapeutic component is in question, 
those less burdened populations should be called upon first to accept the risks of research. Accordingly, 
this would mean that adults be studied before children. If our  studies are successful, future work could 
determine whether this training modality would be useful in childhood cancers.  
Recruitment :   
Patients will be recruited from the Multi -disciplinary Breast Cancer Clinic of the Division of 
Hematology/Oncology , as well as local, private pract ices. 
 
Consent Procedures :   
Someone with a treatment relationship will introduce the study  to potential volunteers. If the patient 
expresses interest in the study and would like more information about the study, the research coordinator 
or PI [INVESTIGATOR_163142], briefly explain  the study and will provide a copy of the informed consent. 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or the research coordinator will answer any questions by [CONTACT_48052]. Moreover, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_319930].  
 
  