 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
The Impact of Modifiable Psychosocia l Factors on Veterans' Long-term 
Trajectories of Functioning and Quality of Life: Promoting Recovery by 
[CONTACT_751419]  
(Study Evaluating Returning Veterans Experienced: Post-Deployment 
Functioning (Project SERVE)) 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
v. 06/13/[ADDRESS_1028743] SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1028744] SERVE: POST-DEPLOYMENT FUNCTIONING (Project SERVE: FX) 
 
SPECIFIC AIMS 
 Understanding the process of functional recovery among returning Operation Enduring (OEF) and Iraqi 
(OIF) Freedom and New Dawn (OND) Veterans is of the utmost importance, both to  VA and to the national 
economy. Although most returning OEF/OIF/OND soldiers are resilient, concerning rates of PTSD (12-20%) 
and depression (14-15%) have  been found, and as many as 24-35% re port drinking more alcohol than they 
intended (Hoge et al., 2004). Notabl y, these figures are likely underestim ates due to stigma associated with 
mental health services in military culture (Wright et al., 2009). Certainly, the course and impact of mental health 
conditions among returning OEF/OIF/OND Veterans are not well established, with most studies being cross-
sectional and retrospective in nature. It is critical to understand the long-term trajectories and functional impact 
of exposure to war zone stressors and associated mental  health disorders, particularly in the context of the 
current economic environment, which differs considerably from past eras of war zone service. 
 The purpose of the proposed longit udinal project is to better unders tand the functional impairment and 
recovery of returning OEF/OIF/OND Veterans and to id entify potentially-malleable risk and resilience factors 
that predict level of functioning over time. Up to 600 OEF/OIF/OND Veterans will be evaluated over a two-year 
period in Phase III of this project, including as ma ny participants from Phase I and Phase II as possible. 
Veterans will complete a detailed baseline assessment, as well as follow-up assessments. The most recently 
funded continuation Phase (Phase III) will continue and extend the long itudinal assessment study examining 
predictors of post-deployment functioning, referred to as  Project SERVE. The specific aims of Phase III are to 
1) identify treatment targets that may predict functional disability and self-directed violence 2) identify gender 
differences in the sample. 
 
STUDY METHODS 
 Overview of Study Methods.  This study will investigate the course of functioning over time among 
returning OEF/OIF/OND Veterans enrolled at CTVHCS . The primary outcome measures will assess multiple 
domains of functioning, including: 1) o ccupational functioning; 2) social relationships; 3) family functioning; 4) 
physical functioning; and 5) quality of life. Hypothesized predictors of functioning include: 1) level of exposure 
to deployment-related stressors, including potentially trau matic events (PTEs) and head  injuries/traumatic brain 
injury (TBI); 2) level of pre-deployment stress and trau ma exposure; 3) level of exposure to post-deployment 
stress and trauma, including “everyday” stressors; 4) modifiable psychological factors including copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], 
emotion regulation, self-compassion, attributional style, ps ychological flexibility, and mindfulness; 5) perceived 
social support; 6) psychopathology including PTSD an d depression; 7) substance misuse; 8) physical health 
symptoms including chronic pain; and 9) exposure to mo rally injurious events. Sali va/blood samples will also 
be collected (on an opti onal basis) to examine genetic contributions. 
The proposed longitudinal design will include a baseli ne assessment and follow-up assessments in order to 
examine predictors of functioning during post-warzone  readjustment. This design  enables us to examine 
mechanisms of action in the developmen t of functional impairment over time. 
    
Participants.  In Phase III, we propose to continue foll owing as many of the Phase I and Phase II 
participants as volunteer and to recr uit additional participants until we reach the target sample size of 500 
eligible OEF/OIF/OND Veterans. This will increase the tota l sample size across study phases to approximately 
1,[ADDRESS_1028745] SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1028746] has relatively 
few exclusionary criteria. Potential participants in clude male and female, English-speaking OEF/OIF/OND 
Veterans, [ADDRESS_1028747] be: 1)  able to comprehend and sign the informed consent form; 
2) able to complete the structured interviews and self -report assessments; 3) willing to be contact[CONTACT_51095]-
up assessments; 4) (for newly enrolled participants), given that we have already recruited a large sample of 
veterans who are reporting relatively little functional im pairment, we will require newly  enrolled participants to 
self-report global functional impai rment on the WHODAS 2.[ADDRESS_1028748] ed, we will remove this inclusion 
criterion; 5) deemed stable on p sychotropic medications (defined as t3 months on a selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitor or monoamine oxidase inhibitor; >1  month on an anxiolytic or beta-blocker; >1 month 
medication discontinuation or “wash out” for all me dications) at the time of the BL assessment; and 6) deemed 
stable in psychotherapy ( t3 months stabilization for psychotherapy and 1-month psychotherapy wash-out) at 
the time of the BL assessment. These latter two criteria  are instated to ensure that symptoms assessed during 
the baseline assessment are due to any underlying psychiatric condition and not due to the effects of starting 
or stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_751357]/or psychotherapy. Change s in treatment will be permissible during the current 
study, as this reflects real-world  practice. All changes in medications will be monitored over time, and 
appropriately covaried, as treatment can have importan t effects on functioning over time. Individuals with 
current and lifetime psychiatric diagnoses, with the e xception of schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, 
schizoaffective disorder, delusional di sorder, unspecified schizophrenia spectrum/other psychotic disorder, and 
bipolar disorder, will be eligible to participate.     
 
Exclusion Criteria.  Veterans will be excluded if they: 1) plan to relocate out of the CTVHCS system within 
four months of protocol initiation; 2) meet criteria fo r a diagnosis of schizophrenia , schizophreniform disorder, 
schizoaffective disorder, delusional disorder, or a mani c/hypomanic epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865]; 3) report current suicidal or 
homicidal risk warranting crisis intervention; 4) report symptoms consistent with severe traumatic brain injury 
(TBI) that interfere with their ability to complete the consent process or assessment (i.e., due to ethical 
concerns about obtaining informed cons ent and difficulties with completing the structured assessment); or 5) 
report current non-military related hallucinations or delusions that cause significant distress and/or impairment.   
 
Procedures.  In Phase III, assessments occur at 0, 8-, 16-, and 24-month time points. Veterans will 
complete a baseline assessment, lasting approximately  2-3 hours, and a two-year follow-up assessment 
lasting approximately 1-2 hours. Please note that these times are approximat ed, and could be shorter or longer 
depending on the nature of the interview (e.g., diagno stic complexity, taking breaks, talkative Veteran). The 
baseline and annual assessments includ e clinical assessments and self-report questionnaires. In addition, 
follow-up questionnaire assessments (~45 minutes) are administered to track functional impairment and 
recovery over time. For those who opt to participate in the genetic component of the study, saliva/blood 
samples will be collected at the baseline and two- year follow-up assessments. Participation in the 
genetic/biomarker component of the stud y is completely optional and does no t affect participation in the study 
as a whole. Self-report data at in-person assessments will be collected either using pencil and paper surveys 
or on VA-issued iPads. These iPads are FIPS-140-[ADDRESS_1028749] tolerated the assessment length well. Those for whom the assessment 
length poses a problem (e.g. due to work, childcare, et c.) will be offered to split the assessment into two days 
(preferably consecutive). We will also make efforts to conveniently schedule the assessment around other 
medical appointments at CTVHCS, whic h could result in needing to comp lete two appointments. As needed 
and appropriate, Veterans may also be given the option to complete assessments by [CONTACT_751420], telephone or  online. Veterans who are scheduled for a video appointment, may be 
sent an encrypted email from study staff with the details of their appointment (i.e., date, time, associated links). 
We will examine outpatient medical records for the SERVE participants to investigate the association between 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
4 
 PTSD and other mental health symptoms  a range of health-related outcomes, including incident heart failure.  
 
Recruitment.  Multiple strategies will be used to recruit new participants for Phase II I, which are in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_751358]. Participants in Phase I and Phas e II will be invited to participate in Phase III (i.e., 
“transfers”) . Newly enrolled participants will pa rticipate in Phase III only. Part icipants will be recruited through 
advertisement at enrollment sites, vet centers, Veteran ’s networks and service organizations, through in -
service presentations to primary care staff, mental health staff, and othe r relevant VA staff (e.g., OEF/OIF/OND 
coordinators, etc.), and through the community (e.g. groc ery stores, churches, shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_49459], and so forth). 
In-person recruiting will also be conducted at enrollment and community sites. In these cases, one or more 
research team members will sit at a table/booth in a high visibility area (e.g., a main VA lobby [CONTACT_49492] a 
grocery store) with a sign indicating that OEF/OIF/OND  Veterans are being recruited to participate in a 
research study. Staff members will provide interested Veterans with a flyer (see attached flyer and brochure) 
about the study. In addition, Veterans interested in participating in the study will be given the option of 
providing staff members with their contac t information so that they can be contact[CONTACT_10073] a later point in 
time to complete a telephone screen interview. If a privat e office is available, as a convenience, participants 
may be given the option to complete the screening inte rview in person. We will also place advertisements in 
local newspapers, local community-based advertisement sources, on local Craigslist pages, and in other 
locally-based media platforms, on re levant VA and other Veteran-oriented websites, and social media outlets, 
pending required approvals from VA public  relations office (see attached ad). 
We also request permission to conduct periodic querie s to recruit new participants using VISTA, VINCI, the 
corporate data warehouse, or other approved VA me thods for accessing Veteran mailing list information 
(frequency approximately 1x/year, to be  determined based on the number of names generated; i.e. if there are 
too few or too many names we will adjust the frequency correspondent with staffing so potential participants 
would not need to wait too long fo r a research assessment appointment; as the list is exhausted, we will 
update the list more frequently; maximum number of names generated = 100,000). We will use these VA 
approved methods to identify OEF/OIF/OND Veterans who meet some of our inclusion criteria (e.g. 
OEF/OIF/OND Veteran status) so that we can reach out to  returning Veterans to let them know that the study 
is being conducted. Up to two letters per study phase will be sent to participants (see attached). The second 
letter will be mailed approximately [ADDRESS_1028750] potential 
participants by [CONTACT_751421] (allowing  at least 4 days for them to receive the second letter). 
In the first letter, unique veteran (i.e., those who have not participated in a prior phase) will receive a post-card 
or form with a potage paid envelope to opt-out. If a Ve teran returns this opt-out card or says he/she is not 
interested at any point in this process (e.g., after the firs t letter, second letter, or during the follow-up call), their 
name [CONTACT_751512][CONTACT_751422]. We will also send a text message to Veterans to let them know that they are invited to participate (see attached for wording of 
text messages). Interested Veterans will complete a telephone screen to dete rmine their eligibility (see below). 
This recruitment procedure requires a waiver of consent and waiver of  HIPAA authorization (attached). The 
retrieval of names and addresses to recruit study particip ants involves no more than minimal risk to subjects, 
and will not adversely affect the rights  and welfare of subjects . This research could not practically be carried 
out without the waiver, which enables us to reach out to as many Veterans as possible to make participation in 
the study available to them. The mailing list of contac t information generated by [CONTACT_751423]/or VINCI project folder for this study, 
depending on the required data stor age location associated with the appr oved method of requesting and 
storing this information. After a Veteran contacts th e CoE (or we contact [CONTACT_49498]), a brief 
screening will be conducted by [CONTACT_756] (see below) . Every effort will be made to schedule eligible 
participants for the baseline assessment appointment at the enrollment site (CTVHCS campuses and CBOCs) 
of their choice, pending availability of staffi ng resources and research space at that time. 
Eligible Veterans who participated in Phase I or Phas e II will be contact[CONTACT_751424] a part of Phase III (as indicated in original ICF; see attached recruitment letters). As enrollment for 
Phase I began in [ADDRESS_1028751] SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
5 
 contact[CONTACT_751425] 4-year follow-up if they entered 
the study in Phase II and their 8-year follow-up if th ey entered the study in Phase I. They would then be 
followed for another two-year time-fra me, which would culminate with either their 6-year or 10-year follow-up, 
depending on when they entered the research program. A series of two form letters will be sent to “transfer” 
participants (attached). The second letter will be mailed approximately 1-[ADDRESS_1028752] an ex isting relationship. Recruitment letters may include a small token (e.g., 
magnet, pen or pin with SERVE logo). We will attempt to co ntact potential participants by [CONTACT_18623]/or text 
message at least [ADDRESS_1028753] with us, we retain the option of sendin g up to two additional letter s (e.g., personally-written 
note card) informing them that we have tried unsuccessf ully to reach them. In addition, we will utilize the 
contact [CONTACT_751426] I and Phase II to ca ll contact [CONTACT_9702](s) provided by [CONTACT_751427]/her in order to get updat ed contact [CONTACT_3031]. If a Ve teran says he/she is not 
interested at any point in this process, his/her name [CONTACT_751513] s/he will not be contact[CONTACT_751091]. Interested Veterans will complete a telephone scree n to confirm their eligibility (i.e., to ensure they are 
not actively suicidal, etc.; see attached Telephone Scre ening Form FX3). This recruitment procedure requires 
a waiver of consent (see attached).  
To facilitate recruitment, the study will have a dedicated phone line. After a Veteran calls about the study 
(or we contact [CONTACT_92524]), a brief screening assessment  will be conducted by [CONTACT_751428]. This 
should help minimize participant burden, as those who ar e not eligible will be save d time and transportation 
costs associated with attending a screening appointment in person. If the Veteran is determined to be ineligible 
based on the telephone eligibility screening procedur e, we will not collect any personally identifying 
information. For veterans determined to be initially el igible, we will collect identifying information for the 
purpose of scheduling a baseline assessment appointment.  This identifying information will be recorded on an 
electronic telephone screen registry of initially-eligib le participants, including Screen ID#, date of screen, 
salutation, name, contact [CONTACT_3031], whether or not it is ok to leave telephone messages (e.g., for 
appointment reminders), the appointmen t campus/date/time, indication that  telephone note entered in CPRS, 
enrollment date, and reason not enrolled (e.g., unable to schedule, no longer has time to participate). Coded 
hardcopy eligibility screening documents will be stored in  separate files for those deemed initially eligible 
versus ineligible. Final eligib ility will be determined at the baseline assessment (e.g., from the diagnostic 
evaluation). Telephone screen informat ion will be used in aggregate to re port the recruitment process (e.g., 
number screened, number eligible, numb er ineligible, percentage/reasons for ineligibility, etc.). The telephone 
screen asks about mental health prob lems, and therefore is possible that a veteran who is screened will 
provide information about a substance use disorder (SUD) . The substance data is used to conduct scientific 
research and will be reported in aggregate such that no in dividual participant is iden tified. However, should the 
participant desire treatment for SUD or mental health  services, appropriate clinical referrals will be made. 
Following the phone screen, for those deemed initially eligible, a cover letter will be mailed to the Veteran 
in advance of the baseline assessment appointment wit h directions and parking instructions. In addition, a 
copy of the Informed Consent Form (ICF and HIPAA author ization; attached) will be ma iled to the Veteran in 
advance of the appointment (time perm itting depending on when appointmen t is scheduled) for the Veteran to 
read and consider participation. Mailing the ICF/HIPAA authorization to  the Veteran in advance will benefit 
Veterans in two ways. First, it will pr ovide them with additional information ab out the study prior to their initial 
appointment. In the event Veterans read the ICF/HIPAA au thorization at home and decide they do not wish to 
participate, they will be able to cancel the appointmen t ahead of time, saving them the time and expense of 
travelling to the appointment unnecessarily. Second, this procedure will reduce participants’ time burden on the 
day of the assessment, as Veterans will have had the ti me to read and consider the ICF/HIPAA authorization 
prior to coming to the initial intake appointment. Upon arrival, the Veteran will be asked if s/he had a chance to 
read the ICF/HIPAA authorization, and if not, will be asked to read the consent form at that time. It should be 
noted that, regardless of whether or not participants read the ICF/HIPAA authorization ahead of time, the study 
staff member will always explain the nature of the study to participants at the time of the baseline assessment, 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
6 
 as well as the potential risks/benefits of participating in  the study. In addition, written informed consent will only 
be obtained prior to the baseline assessment and will not be  obtained until the researcher is satisfied that the 
participant has a good understanding of  the risks/benefits of participating in the study. In situations where a 
Veteran unique to the Project SERVE Phase III study is unable to attend a baseli ne appointment in person 
(e.g., due to COVID-19), they may enroll remotely by  [CONTACT_751429]. Potential participants will be given the opportunity to ask questions and encouraged to contact [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_751359] s or concerns related to the study. 
In order to recruit as many Phase I and Phase II partic ipants as possible, we will offer the option of signing 
an informed consent form remotely for transfer partic ipants who have moved out of the area. Following the 
phone screen, if the Veteran is intere sted in participation, he/she will be  mailed the informed consent form and 
HIPAA authorization.
 Participants will be provided cl ear instructions for signing the forms, and a postage-paid 
envelope for returning them to the study team.  Participants will be informed that study procedures will not 
begin until the forms have been receiv ed by a study team member. Any potential participant who wishes to 
travel to the VA Medical Center to provide informed co nsent in person will be allowed to do so, unless it is 
deemed unsafe for the veteran or study staff (e.g., due to COVID-19). Veterans who enrolled in a prior study 
phase and who are unable to attend an in-person appointment due to havi ng moved out of the area or some 
other logistical barrier will have the option of renewing th eir consent online in order to participate in the current 
study phase. This requires a waiver of documentation of sign ed informed consent. The elements of informed 
consent will be displayed on the screen along with a bu tton indicating “I consent/agree to participate.” The 
screen displaying the study information will be designed so th at the participant is required to take an action to 
signify their acknowledgment of the information before th ey can proceed. The instruction tells participants that 
pressing the button confirms they have read the stud y information and that they agree to participate. 
Participants will be informed that they have the option of printing the page for their records, or to request study 
staff to send them a copy of the summary of the element s of informed consent. In addition, these participants 
will already have of copy of the full informed consen t form, which has been mailed to them. Potential 
participants will be given the opportunity to ask questions and encouraged to contact [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_751360]. Because these pa rticipants are unable to attend in 
person, they will not have the opportunity to participate in the biomarkers component of the study. Their 
participation will be limited to completing an assessment by [CONTACT_751430]. 
 
Research Setting.  Veterans will be recruited from the three primary campuses of CTVHCS (Waco, 
Temple, Austin) as well as CBOCs in order to represent  Veterans from different geographic regions within 
CTVHCS. Research intervie ws will be conducted in Waco, Temple and Austin. In Waco, private offices are 
available in the Center of Excellen ce Building. In Temple, Research Service Space is available in the 
Domiciliary, Building 146 and Building 205. In addition, interviews will be conducted in private offices available 
on the Temple campus (e.g., swing space through Me ntal Health/Behavioral Medicine, OEF/OIF program, 
library, etc.). In Austin, only swing space is available at  this time, however, we wi ll continue working on other 
available space. As needed, w e will also use the CoE’s Mobile Supp ort Vehicle, which includes two sound -
proofed offices and can be relocate d as needed (e.g., Waco, Temple, Austin, CBOCs, Vet Centers). The 
Mobile Support Vehicle is VA/CoE-owned and includes tw o offices. Laptops that are used for the study will not 
be locked up in the Mobile Support vehicle, and will stay  with the VA employee as assigned/issued by [CONTACT_142039]. 
The laptops have locking cables  and are password protected.  
Every effort will be made to conduct assessments at the site of the Veterans ’ choice, pending availability of 
staffing resources and research space at that time. Due to research space limitations, the need may arise to 
invite participants to come to anothe r campus to complete the interviews (i.e., different campus from where 
they usually receive their care). When space is not readily available (and budget dependent), we will offer the 
option to participants to travel to another campus to complete the assessment. In such instances, participants 
will be provided with supplementary compensation to a ccount for extra time and travel expenses. Calculations 
will be made using VA mileage rates at the time (current ly: 41.5 cents/mile). For example, based on current 
rates, participants would be paid the following (round ed to nearest 5 or 10): 1) Austin/Temple ([ADDRESS_1028754] SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
7 
 roundtrip) = $60; 2) Austin/Waco (204 miles roundtrip) = $85; 3) Temple/Waco (68 miles roundtrip) = $30. This 
strategy will also be used to appropriately compensate Veterans who have relocated out of the CTVHCS area, 
but are still within reasonable distance to participate at  a CTVHCS site (e.g., travel from College Station, 
Dallas, Houston, San Antonio). Rate s for these cities will be similarl y calculated. This procedure is critical  to 
the research mission in order to continue following as  many transfer participan ts as possible (i.e., the 
importance of the Phase I/Phase II to Phase III design is  to answer scienti fic questions over longer periods of 
time). Numerous participants have expressed a preference  for driving to the VA to complete the procedures in 
person rather than remotely. Thus, we are requesting to have flexibility on this front. These rates are based on 
federal standards and provide appropriate remuneration to participants (i.e., standard payments do not 
properly compensate Veterans for time and travel wh en traveling longer distances). Participants will be 
informed that they cannot receive compensation for trav el to other appointments an d research simultaneously 
(i.e., no double dippi[INVESTIGATOR_007]). 
 
Enhancing Retention.  In a longitudinal study (Aim 1), retention is  as important as recruitment. Every effort 
will be made to establish personal rela tionships with participants and to help them feel connected to the study 
and to CTVHCS. Appointment reminders will be used to decrease attrition.  Research assistants will mail 
appointment confirmation letters to participants and call, text, or email participants prior to their appointment. 
For follow-up assessments, two methods of completing self -report questionnaires will be offered: filling out the 
questionnaires via paper and pencil an d returning them through the mail, or  filling out questionnaires online via 
a secure web-based survey application. Those who chose the online option will be mailed, texted, or emailed 
instructions, information regarding our procedures for ensuring their confidentia lity and privacy, and a web 
address and unique code that they will enter as indication  of their consent to this procedure. Veterans who do 
not complete the follow-up assessments will be contact[CONTACT_300747]/or letter as a friendly reminder; 
they will be offered to complete the assessment by [CONTACT_97535] e if they find that to be more convenient than filling 
out the written forms or completing them online. Alternatel y, if it is deemed safe to do so, participants will be 
offered the opportunity to schedule an appointment to complete the questionna ires in-person, if that is more 
convenient for them (our experience is that some Vete rans prefer this option). At each assessment point, 
Veterans will complete (or update) a contact [CONTACT_33655]. In addition, research staff will also periodically 
contact [CONTACT_751431] (e.g. in advance of a follow-up appointment or 
to confirm mailing address for payment purposes). It is possible that some Veterans will relocate between 
assessment points and our contact [CONTACT_751432]. In these instances, the Veteran ’s 
medical record and contact [CONTACT_751433]/her updated telephone/address so s/he 
can be contact[CONTACT_751434] y. Veterans will also be given the option of completing 
telephone or VA approved video communication technology  interviews in the event that they decline or are 
unable to attend a follow-up assessment or decline or ar e unable to complete the packets by [CONTACT_473627]. 
Additionally, if the Veteran declines or is unable to participate in a telephone/video interview, s/he will be 
offered the option of completing onl y the self-report measures either via mail, online, or telephone. These 
procedures give flexibility to the Veteran to choose to co ntinue participating in a mann er that is feasible given 
life circumstances. 
Several incentive strategies will also be used to decr ease attrition and optimize retention. Participants will 
be compensated $75 each for the baseline and annual assessment and $25 for mailed follow-up assessments. 
That is, a Veteran would be compensated a total of $[ADDRESS_1028755] from 
a national chain store (e.g. Walmart) should that opti on become approved for us e in VA research. These 
incentives should reduce part icipant burden related to their time spent,  travel costs, and other expenses (e.g. 
childcare coverage). To demonstrate our appreciation for their participation, other incentive strategies will also 
be used. At the baseline an d annual assessment, participants will be gi ven small appreciation gifts that make 
them feel part of the study (e.g. water bottle with study logo; Veteran-oriented magnetic poetry, candy with 
logo, baseball cap with study logo). In centives will be used to encourage pa rticipants to mail back their self-
report questionnaires. Specifically, a raffle will be held every 4-6 months (prize ranging from $50-200; e.g. gift 
certificate to canteen, amazon.com, Best Buy, cash/che ck/direct deposit, etc.). Every participant who mails 
back his/her questionnaires wi ll be entered into the raffle. Raffle ticke ts will be entered into a drawing and a 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1028756] won. 
 
Assessment Procedures . The assessment instruments for Phase III are presented in Table 1 (see 
attached). Assessment domains were selected based on  the empi[INVESTIGATOR_751361]: 1) pre-de ployment characteristics 
(demographic variables, pre-deployment psychiatric hist ory; pre-deployment stress and trauma); 2) cognitive 
functioning; 3) deployment related stress, trauma, expo sure to potentially morall y injurious events, and TBI 
(number of deployments, deployment-related PTEs); 4) post-deployment stress and trauma (exposure to PTEs 
following deployment, exposure to everyday/chronic stressors); 5) psychopath ology (PTSD, depression, 
alcohol and substance use, abuse and dependence); 6) copi[INVESTIGATOR_751362] (acceptance, self-compassion, 
emotion regulation, attribution style, mindfulness, psycholog ical flexibility, active copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]); 7) multi-dimensional 
functioning; 8) response style/validity ; and 9) information from VA electronic  health records such as diagnoses, 
progress notes, medications, la b or radiology findings, etc.  
 
Table 1. Phase III Assessment Instruments. 
Measures/ 
Proposed 
Indicators  Purpose Assessment 
Time Point  
Description/Rationale BL 8 & 
16
mo 24 
mo 
 
Telephone Screen E    Administered prior to the baseline assessment to determine initial eligibility. Assesses inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
Contact [CONTACT_751435] [ADDRESS_1028757] for follow-up, etc. 
Demographic Questionnaire & Military History 
Form  (DHMQ) Demographic, 
PV 9  9 Assesses basic demographic and Veterans-specific characteristics (e.g., years of education, years of military service, family history of military service). 
Re-administered at annual to assess changeable demographics 
(e.g. marital status, employment). 
Mini International 
Neuropsychiatric 
Interview (MINI)  E 9   Modules administered from this widely used screening Interview to 
assess for exclusionary criteria (manic/hypomanic epi[INVESTIGATOR_751363]).  
Full Combat Experiences Scale (FCES)
 PV 9  9 Self-report measure of exposure to co mbat situations (Hoge et al., 2004). 
Re-administered if re- deployed. Items added from the National Vietnam 
Veterans Readjustment Survey to assess potentially morally injurious 
combat events. 
Nash Moral Injury Events Sc
ale 
(MIES)  PV 9  9 Self-report questionnaire developed as a measure of exposure to potentially morally injurious events
 (Nash, et al, 2013). Re- administered if 
re-deployed. The MIES has excellent internal consistency, both the 
overall scale and the [ADDRESS_1028758] validity (Nash, et al., 
2013).  
Deployment Risk and Resilience Inventory (DRRI) PV 9  9 The DRRI (King, King, and Vogt, 2003) is a collection of scales assessing pre
-deployment, deployment, and post- deployment risk and 
resilience factors . The DRRI was validated for use with OIF Veterans 
(Vogt et al., 2008). Scales administered will include the military sexual 
trauma scale at b aseline and the post- deployment social support scale at 
baseline and 24 months.   
Acquired 
Capability for 
Suicide Scale PV 9  9 Self-report of perceived ability to tolerate fear and pain associated with 
suicide. Has adequate internal consistency in a study that built on 
SERVE (.80). 
Interpersonal Needs 
Questionnaire 
(INQ)  PV 9  9 Self-report measure that assess thwarted belongingness and perceived burdensomeness (Van Orden et al.,  2012). The INQ has demonstrated 
good convergent valid
ity, internal consistency and concurrent validity 
(Van Orden et al., 2012). 
Treatment 
Involvement Form 
(TIF) CV 9 9 9 Form created for the current study that will be used to assess treatment 
involvement during the prior interval , including medical, psychiatric and 
psychological treatment, as well as supportive interventions (e.g. 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
9 
 Alcoholics Anonymous, Narcotics Anonymous).  
Columbia Suicide 
Scale  DV 9  9 The Columbia Suicide Scale (Posner et al., 2008) is a state-of-the-art 
suicide assessment for individuals perceived to be at high risk for suicidality. Internal consistency ranged from .73 to .95 (Posner et al., 2011). 
Clinician 
Administered NSSI Disorder Index (CANDI) DV 9  9 The CANDI is a clinical interview that diagnoses Nonsuicidal Self Injury 
(NSSI)  disorder and type and frequency of NSSI. Demonstrated good 
reliability  and validity in prior research, including in Co- I Kimbrel’s VA -
funded study of NSSI in veterans. Administered in tandem with the  NSSI 
Screen developed by [CONTACT_15957]-I Kimbrel. 
Beck Scale for 
Suicide Ideation 
(BSSI)   DV, Med [ADDRESS_1028759] 
recent attempt. Prior research shows that endorsement of suicidal  
thoughts and behaviors can be greater on self -report questionnaires 
compared to interviews. Thus, this measure complements the suicide 
focused interviews. 
Suicide 
Cognitions Scale-Brief
  DV, Med 9  9 Self-report measure of suicide-related thoughts that load onto the 
following subscales: unsolvability, unlovability, and unbearability. Brief version was recently validated across 3 chronic pain samples (Bryan et 
al., 2016). 
PTSD Checklist -5 
(PCL -5)  Med  9 9 9 Self-report of symptoms of PTSD during the previous month. 
Demonstrates high sensitivity and specificity in relation to a lengthy 
diagnostic interview  for PTSD (CAPS), with which it was co-developed . 
Strong psychometric properties, including in numerous Project SERVE papers. 
Patient Health 
Questionnaire -9  Med, DV 9 9 9 Self-report measure used for screening, diagnosing, and monitoring 
depression. It incorporates DSM -IV diagnostic criteria (Question 9 
screens for suicidal ideation; Kroenke, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626] & Williams, 2001). 
Alcohol Use 
Disorders 
Identification Test (AUDIT)
  Med 9 9 9 Self-report measure to screen for alcohol-use disorders (Saunders, 
Aasland, Babor, Fuente, & Grant, 1993). [ADDRESS_1028760] screening for alcohol use disorders in mental 
health and primary care clinics.  Good internal cons istency (α=.80 - .94) 
and test -retest reliability ( r=.86), and strong concurrent validity with the 
MAST and CAGE screening measur es (Babor et al., 2001). 
Drug Abuse 
Screening Test (DAST) 
 Med 9 9 9 Self-report measure to quantify drug misuse and related psychosocial 
impairment . Good internal consistency and concurrent validity with 
frequency of drug use over 12 -months (Skinner, 1982). Moderately 
correlated with denial and social desirability. The instructions will be 
updated to more explicitly assess for misuse of opi[INVESTIGATOR_751364]. 
Substance Use 
Screen Med 9  9 Form created for the current study that will be used to assess current and 
lifetime substance use (e.g., stimulants, cannabis, etc.) 
TBI—Vasterling 
Assessment 
Interview    E, Med 9    9 This clinician-administered structured interview developed by [CONTACT_751436] 
(2008) assesses the number, recency, type of injury, and clinical 
sequelae associated with traumatic brain injury during deployment. Total 
number of lifetime head injuries leading to any s ymptoms will also be 
assessed. TBI will be assessed at baseline for lifetime history and then 
re-assessed at the annual interview for any new TBIs that may have 
occurred during the past two years. 
Ten-item 
Personality 
Inventory (TIPI) PV 9   10-item self-report measure of the Five-Factor Model of personality 
(Gosling, Rentfrow  & Swann, 2003). 
Patient Health 
Questionnaire –15 
(PHQ -15) Med, DV 9  9 Self-report (Kroenke, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626] & W illiams, 2002) of somatic symptom 
clusters including pain (musculoskeletal, headaches), cardiac, gastrointestinal, respi[INVESTIGATOR_696], etc. that account for more than 90% of 
outpatient physical complaints (Kroenke, Arrington & Mang
lesdorff, 
1990). The PHQ -15 had strong internal reliability in the initial validation 
(α=.80) and was associated with functional status and disability (Kroenke 
et al., 2002). 
Chronic Pain 
Screen Quest. Med 9   9 Self-report of pain type/intensity. Internal consistency in SERVE was .67. 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
10 
 Acceptance and 
Action 
Questionnaire  
(AAQ -II)  PV 9 9 9 Self-report measure assessing acceptance, experiential avoidance 
(attempting to alter the form or frequency of unwanted internal 
experiences), and taking action despi[INVESTIGATOR_751365]  (Bond, et al, 2011). Strong psychometrics in multiple SERVE 
publications (Meyer  et al., 2013; 2018; in press, DeBeer, Meyer, et al., 
2017).  
Brief Experiential 
Avoidance Quest. (BEAQ)  PV [ADDRESS_1028761] 
of experiential avoidance (Gamez et al., 2013).  
Self-Compassion 
Scale – Short 
Form (SCS -SF)  PV 9 9 9 Self-report measure of self-compassion,  consisting of a total scale score 
and six subscale scores: self -kindness, self-judgment, common 
humanity, isolation, mindfulness, and over -identified (Neff, 2003; Raes, 
Pommier, Neff, & Van Gucht, 2011).  The SCS-SF is strongly correlated 
with the original long form (r=.97) and has the same 6 -factor structure 
with one higher -order factor. Internal consistency was .86 for the whole 
measure, with subscale alphas ranging from .54 to .75 (Raes et al., 2011). 
Difficulties i n 
Emotion 
Regulation Scale 
(DERS -Brief)  PV 9 9 9 Self-report measure (Bjureber et al ., 2016) of 6 domains of emotion 
dysregulation : nonacceptance of emotional responses, difficulty 
engaging in goal -directed behavior, difficulty with impulse control, lack of 
emotional awareness, poor emotion copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262], and lack of 
emotional clarity.  
Five Facet 
Mindfulness  
Questionnaire  PV [ADDRESS_1028762] validity and 
internal consistency. Good predictive validity in research with veterans. 
World Health 
Organization 
Disability 
Assessment Schedule II (WHODAS
 2.0)  
 DV 9 9 9 Self-report assessment of functional disability with total score and 6 
domains of functioning: understanding and communicating, mobility, 
getting along with others, life activities  (i.e., work, education, household 
responsibilities), participation in society, and self -care (Üstün et al., 
2010). Both global and specific areas of functioning are crucial in 
thoroughly understanding functional recovery, as Veterans may function well in one area and have difficulty in another. Moreover, some domains 
may be affected by [CONTACT_751437] (e.g., work functioning in a struggling economy independent of 
impairment). 
Inventory of 
Psychosocial Functioning (IPF) –
 Brief  DV 9 9 
 9 Self-report measure (Co-I Marx et al., 2009; Bovin et al., 2018) of 
Romantic Relationships with a Spouse/Partner, Family, Work, Friendships and Socializing, Pa renting, Education, and Self
-Care. The 
short version has a .90 correlation with the full 80 -item instrument (Co -I 
Marx, personal communication). Higher scores indicate greater functional 
impairment.   
Quality of Life 
Scale (QLS)   DV 9 9 9 Self-report (Burkhardt, et al., 1989) assessing how satisfied people are in 
areas distinct from health status (mate, physical well -being, relationships 
with others, social, community, and civic activities, personal development 
and fulfillment, recreation, and independence). Good internal consistency and high test-retest reliability (Burckhardt et al. 2003).   
Values Tracker  DV 9 9 9 Brief self-report measure of value engagement. Good predictive validity 
in research with chronic pain samples. 
Meaning in Life 
Questionnaire  PV 9  9 Brief self-report assesses presence and search for meaning in life 
(Steger et al., 2006). 
Social Connection 
Index  DV, Med [ADDRESS_1028763] with others, number of close 
friends and relatives, level of secure attachment in relationships, 
frequency of problems getting along with friends and family members. 
Brief Loneliness 
Measure   DV, Med 9  9 Brief self-report measure of loneliness for use in large survey studies. 
Highly correlated with lengthier measures such as the UCLA Loneliness 
Scale. 
Interpersonal 
Reactivity Index-
Brief (B-IRI)  DV, Med 9    Brief self-report measure of disposition to empathic responding; 2 
subscales assess perspective taking and empathic concern. Good 
reliability and validity (Ingoglia et al., 2016).  
Flexible 
Regulation of Emotional DV, Med [ADDRESS_1028764] SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
11 
 Expression 
(FREE) Scale emotion suppression and enhancement (Burton & Bonanno, 2016). 
Perceived Ability 
to Cope with Trauma (PACT) 
Scale DV, Med 9    Self-report measure of trauma-focus ed and future-oriented copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. In 
addition, a copi[INVESTIGATOR_751366].
 
Differential 
Emotions Scale -IV 
(DES -IV) DV, Med 9    Self-report of frequency of emotional responses across 9 types of 
emotions: guilt, shame, fear, anger, shyness, self -hostility, contempt, 
disgust, sadness. Good reliability and associations with personality and MH
 symptoms (Izard et al., 1993). M odified to assess participants’ 
emotional responses to thinking about their most traumatic and 
potentially morally distressing experiences. 
Traumatic Life 
Events Questionnaire (TLEQ
-Lite) PV 9  9 24 items (Kubany et al., 2000); assesses frequency of exposure to 22 
potentially traumatic events encountered outside of military service, resulting in a continuous trauma exposure score.
 The psychometric 
properties were carefully established in 5 studies, including a sample of 
combat Veterans (Kubany et al., 2000).  Modified for this study to no 
longer assess DSM -IV criteria for PTSD Criterion A2, as this is no longer 
required in DSM -5, and to include  an item assessing exposure to 
COVID-19 as a potential stressor. 
Multidimensional 
Psychological Flexibility Inventory (MPFI)
  PV 9  9 60-item self-report (Rolffs, Rogge, & Wilson, 2018) used to assess the 
dimensions of the psychological flexibility model that underlies Acceptance and Commitment Therapy
 
 
Expressions of 
Moral Injury Scale (EMIS)
  DV    17-item self- report (Currier et al., 2018) to assess for problems 
associated with exposure to morally injurious events  
Credibility & 
Expectancy  
Questionnaire   PV    Widely-used 6-item self-report measure of the credibility of the treatment 
approach and expectations for positive response to the treatment  
(Borkovec & Nau, 1972 ). Used in [CONTACT_99770]’s prior ACT studies  
(Hermann, Meyer et al., 2016; Meyer et al., in press). 
Client Satisfaction 
Questionnaire  DV    Widely-used 8-item self-report measure of treatment satisfaction (Larsen 
et al., 1979) . Used in [CONTACT_99770]’s prior ACT studies  (Hermann, Meyer et 
al., 2016; Meyer et al., in press). 
Working Alliance 
Inventory   PV    Widely-used, brief self-report measure of clients’ perceptions of working 
alliance with therapi[INVESTIGATOR_292415] 3 dimensions: goal, task, and bond (Horvath, 
1981).  
Parenting Stress 
Index Short Form 
(PSI-SF) PV [ADDRESS_1028765] concerned about. Thirty -six items are 
divided into three domains: Parental Distress (PD), Parent -Child 
Dysfunctional Interaction (P -CDI), and Difficult Child (DC), which 
combine to form a Total Stress scale. 
Quality of 
Marriage Index (QMI)  PV 9 9 9 6-item self-report questionnaire used to measure relationship distress 
(Norton, 1983). The measure was developed based on an empi[INVESTIGATOR_751367]. 
Saliva sample and 
saliva collection questionnaire
 PV, Med [ADDRESS_1028766] quality of saliva sa mple and associated biomarkers (e.g., 
time since last meal). Provision of saliva sample is optional. 
Blood sample PV, Med 9   DNA and other products will be extracted from blood samples. Provision 
of blood sample is optional.   
BL = Baseline; E = Eligibility; DV = Dependent/Outcome Variabl e; PV = Predictor Variable; Med = Mediator; CV = Covariate 
 
 Training of Clinical Interviewers.  Clinical interviews will be conducted by [CONTACT_751438]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_751368] e clinical interviews and will provide ongoing, weekly 
supervision of interviews conducted. Further, all in terviews will be video or audio-recorded through a VA 
computer using a microphone directly onto the secure, approved drive behind the VA firewall or using a FIPS 
140-2 validated digital voice recorder. In  any instance in which technical or logistical difficulties interfere with 
video recording, audio recording will be used. All video/au dio files will be stored on the secure, approved drive 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1028767] an approved Authorization to Transport memora ndum on file with the Research Office. After being 
uploaded to these secure folders, au dio files will be accessible to approved research staff. Approved research 
staff will listen to recordings for training purposes (e.g., practice coding, learn administration procedures), or for 
the purposes of assessing inter-rater reliability. An in terviewer training manual has been developed, which 
details the training method , scoring procedures, and process for syste matic DRG to ensure consistency across 
interviewers (Meyer, Morissette & Kimbrel, unpublished). Interviews (10% or more if necessary) will be rated 
for inter-rater reliability as an added measure. Recordings  will also be coded for observable, clinically relevant 
behaviors. 
 
Biological Markers.   
Overview. Subjects will donate saliva  and blood for genetic and biomarker research studies. Both saliva 
and blood will be collected because some biomarkers are kn own to be present in both  blood and saliva. If we 
find a biomarker for PTSD symptoms in  blood, and it is also in saliva , that would be a great advantage for 
monitoring. Also, there are species of proteins in saliva that are not carried in the bl ood, and which change with 
stress. These may also be biomarkers for PTSD symptoms.  No clinically validated tests will be performed. The 
genetics/biomarker component of the protocol will be su pervised by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Rakeshwar Guleria (CoE Biomarkers 
and Genetics Core; Phase I, II, III), an expert in this  area, in collaboration with the PI, [CONTACT_459352]. See 
Appendix for Safety Survey. At the BL assessment, part icipants will be given the option of consenting to all 
study procedures or all procedures excluding the saliva /blood sample (depending on the phase) and genetic 
research.  
Study participants will be donating their samples for biomarker and genetic-related studies. The samples 
(blood/saliva) will be collected from the study particip ants and will be analyzed for identifying molecular 
biomarkers for early diagno sis and prevention of traumatic brain injury and PTSD in our returning war 
Veterans. Genetic variation will also be studied between th e patient vs. the control group of participants for 
predicting PTSD susceptibility and progression. The study participants will be donating their samples for the 
biomarker and genetics related studies. The process of biomarker identification and validation will be 
conducted in two stages 1) Unbiased appro ach (discovery) and 2) Targeted approach. 
Stage I (unbiased approach):  This is the discovery phase where samples will be analyzed globally to identify 
potential biomarkers (protein, geneti c, epi[INVESTIGATOR_18193], metabolic, and immunological markers). Protein (proteomics) 
and metabolite (metabolomics) biomarkers will be screened with mass spectrometric analysis at the Mass 
Spectrometry Core facility, Baylor University, Waco, TX (under CTVHCS ’s MOU  with Baylor). Genetic markers 
(allelic, mutations, CNV’s, SNPs, miRNA) will be screened at the VA by [CONTACT_751439], Real-Time Quantitative PCR, 
Droplet Digital PCR, and next-generation sequencing. Inflammation and immune biomarkers will be screened 
by [CONTACT_751440] & Ge netics Core laboratory. If de-identified samples are sent 
outside the VA for analysis, we will follow all VA rules an d regulations and obtain appropriate Research Service, 
IRB, safety and data monitoring approval. 
Stage II (targeted approach):  Once we narrow down the potential biomarkers, we will move to the 
qualification, verification, and validation steps where we will target the specific potential biomarker and proceed 
with a targeted screening approach. Once validated, th e markers identified will be segregated according to 
susceptibility, diagnostic, and therapy biomarkers.  
Sample Collection : Participants will donate saliva by [CONTACT_751441] l, a method of pooling saliva in the mouth 
and pushing it through a straw or collection device into a collection tube. Staff will be trained to avert their eyes 
when participants are depositing saliva into the test tube to reduce potential embarrassment. Because many 
factors can influence salivary biomarkers, participants will complete a saliva questionnaire (included in Table 3 
and appendices). The saliva samples will be stored in a cooler with an ice pack or in a refrigerator until 
transported to the Center of Excellence (Build ing 93), processed and stored until assay.  
Subjects can also opt to donate bl ood by [CONTACT_751442]. All blood processing will take place at the VA by [CONTACT_751443]. Compression bandages will 
be used to cover the puncture. Bloo d will be placed in 1 RNA (Paxgene Red-top), 1 DNA (Paxgene Blue-top), 
2 purple top (plasma) and two red top (serum, activator coat ed), all coded, and stored in a cooler with an ice 
pack or refrigerator until transported to the Center of Excellence (Waco Building 93) within 4-[ADDRESS_1028768] SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
13 
 Tubes will either be frozen (RNA, DNA) or processed (redtop and purple top tubes) for cell protein and 
other constituents in Waco building 93 (2A113, 2A116,  2A117). DNA/RNA extraction from the DNA/RNA tubes 
will be performed by [CONTACT_751444]/RNA extraction kits and coded DNA/RNA samples will be 
stored at -20/-80 and in liquid nitrog en until testing. Blood will also be an alyzed for immune and inflammatory 
markers (cluster of differentiation (CD) immunomarkers, chemokines, cytoki nes), as well as for other blood and 
saliva-based biomarkers. Remaining blood product samples will be stored at -20/-800C and in liquid nitrogen 
for future use, with appropriate IRB approval at CoE (Freezer Room 2A13). DNA genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_751369] (Waco buildin g 93; room 2A113, 2A116, 2A117). The results of any 
biomarker analysis will be saved in a coded, de-identified datas et and stored on VA computers on the secure 
CTVHCS Research Service-approved drives that will only be accessible to study staff.  
 Data Management: 
Identifiers: A study ID number will be used to identify each participant across assessments. 
 
Identifiers/linking data: A password pr otected master participant tracking  spreadsheet will contain the linking 
information that matches the participant IDs to partic ipant names. This spreadsheet will reside only on the 
secure research drive. Other PHI su ch as participant addresses and phone numbers (for follow-up contact), 
and date of participation will only be accessible to PI [INVESTIGATOR_751370]. The Master tracker will be kept separately from study databases on the secure research drive. 
Paper files will be stored at the VISN 17 Center of Excellence in Waco, TX in Building 93, room 1A-137. 
 
Confidentiality: No particip ant will be identified in any publications or  presentations arising from this study. 
Records will be maintained in accordance with the Depa rtment of Veterans Affairs Record Control Schedule 
10-1. It may be necessary or required for the study inve stigators to break confidentiality and release personal 
identifiers and health information when mandated by [CONTACT_2371].  For example, state law requires health care workers 
to report any suspected abuse or neglec t of a child, or person [ADDRESS_1028769] sensitive informat ion. No information about pa rticipants will be released 
without their permission or where required by  [CONTACT_2371] (such as the examples given above).  
All employees who are to handle data will be trained in confidentiality polic ies and procedures. If theft, loss, 
or other unauthorized access of sensitive data and non-com pliance with security controls occur, study staff has 
been instructed to follow the CTVHCS standard  operating procedure on  incidence reporting. 
 
Delineation of research tasks performed by [CONTACT_751445]: All participant contact [CONTACT_751446], Temple or Waco campuses of CTVHCS. Following approved CTVHCS methods for 
sharing a study dataset with collab orators, some secondary outcomes  analyses may be performed by 
[CONTACT_751447]. 
 
Primary users of the study dataset are those individuals listed on the study staff list and are those who will 
conduct pre- specified analyses consistent with the study’s hypotheses and its primary, secondary and 
exploratory aims as described in the aims and analysis plan. 
 
Disposition of the data: Paper files containing identifiers will be kept in locked file cabinets in a locked room at 
the Center of Excellence in Waco, TX. Coded paper file s will be kept in separate locked file cabinets. Only 
approved study staff will have access to the files. Electronic data will be stored on the secure VA password-
protected server with access restricted to research st aff. These records will be maintained and retained in 
accordance with the Department of Veterans  Affairs Record Control Schedule 10-1. 
 
Incident Reporting: Any incidents affecting the security of  the data such as theft, loss, or unauthorized access 
of sensitive data will be reported to the ISO and PO per VA regulations. 
Data Use within CTVHCS: Only IRB approved personnel on the study staff list will have access to the data 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
14 
 collected in this study. Access to the study data will be terminated when personnel are no longer part of the 
research team. The primary repository of paper files generated by [CONTACT_751448] 17 CoE. Data to 
be transported to the CoE includes: consent document s and measures completed after each appointment. 
Study data collected at the Temple or  Austin campus will be transported to the approved data storage location 
at the Waco Campus where it will be uploaded to the secu re research drive. Personally-identifying information 
(e.g. Informed Consent Form with name [CONTACT_459349]) will be kept in a separate locked carrying case from the data during transport. 
 
Records destruction information: "All paper AND electron ic documentation containing confidential, personally 
identifiable information, protec ted health information, and any other sensitive information will be 
disposed/destroyed per current VA regulations at the time of disposal/destruction of documentation."  
Records retention information:  "The required records, including the investigator's research records, must be 
retained until disposition instructions  are approved by [CONTACT_751449]'s Records Control Schedule ( RCS 10-1)." All de-identified data will be managed in 
accordance with the VHA Handbook 1605.1 APPENDIX B. All original data will be stored at VA. 
 
Reporting: Any incidents involving thef t or loss of data or storage media, unauthorized access of sensitive data 
or storage devices or non-compliance with security controls will be immediately reported to the IRB chair, 
Privacy Officer and Information Security Officer. 
 
Data Analysis Software: Data will be analyzed using the so ftware programs that are already owned by [CONTACT_41309] 
(e.g., SPSS, SAS, mPLUS, AMOS) either using local co pi[INVESTIGATOR_751371] (VINCI). 
 
Data Collection.  Data will be visually inspected for complet eness by [CONTACT_751450]. Data will be gathered in two ways: collect ed and entered using hard-copy assessment measures or 
through the use of Qualtrics, a secure web-based su rvey application. Qualtrics is a secure, web-based 
application for building and managing online surveys and databases. This syst em is similar to REDCap and is 
flexible enough to be  used for a variety of types of research, and pr ovides an intuitive interface for participants 
to complete surveys. It also offers easy data manipulations with audit tr ails for reporting, monitoring, and 
querying patient records, and an automated export  mechanism to common statistical packages. As with 
REDCap, all web-based information transmission is en crypted. Data from Project SERVE: FX ([ZIP_CODE]) will be 
stored on VA servers, including data downloaded/exported from Qualtrics. Data will be entered and managed 
using statistical software (SPSS, SAS, Stata, R/S-Plus , and others) and through Research Electronic Data 
Capture (REDCap). REDCap is a serv ice through the VA Information Reso urce Center (VIReC; for more 
information, please see: http://vaww.virec.research.va.gov/REDCap/Overview.htm). REDCap is a secure, web-
based application for building and managing online surve ys and databases. REDCap data collection projects 
rely on a thorough study-specific data dictionary de fined in an iterative self-documenting process by [CONTACT_751451]. The iterative development  and testing process results in a well-planned data 
collection strategy for individual studies. The REDCap system provides secure, web-based applications that 
are flexible enough to be used for a va riety of types of research, provide an intuitive interface for users to enter 
data and have real time va lidation rules (with automated data type and range checks) at the time of entry. 
These systems offer easy data manipu lation with audit trails for reportin g, monitoring and querying patient 
records, and an automated export mechanism to common  statistical packages (SPSS, SAS, Stata, R/S-Plus). 
REDCap servers are housed in the secure, VA Informatio n Technology Center on a VINCI server, located in 
Austin, TX. All web-based informatio n transmission is encrypted. REDCap was developed specifically around 
HIPAA-Security guidelines. REDCap has been disseminated for use locally at other institutions and currently 
supports 240+ academic/non-profit consortium partners on six continents and over 26,000 research end-users 
(www.project-redcap.org). Interview and self-report data will be entered continuously by [CONTACT_751452]. Data entry training will consist of  both didactic sessions in which staff members are 
provided with information about the da ta entry system in place at the CoE as  well as actual entry of mock data 
as a validity and accuracy check.  
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1028770] SERVE: FX is one of several studies 
that will comprise the Project SERVE research program. Each study aims to independently contribute to 
scientific understanding of the impact of warzone ex periences on OEF/OIF/OND Veterans. A data sharing 
agreement is requested between Proje ct SERVE studies and a SERVE Data Repository has been established 
for future research. Data from Project SERVE will be included in the SERVE Data Repository.  
 
AIMS AND HYPOTHESES.  
Specific Aim 1: Identify treatment targets that pr ospectively predict function al disability and self-
directed violence (SDV) in post-9/11  Veterans with PTSD, depression, chronic pain, TBI, and/or AUD. 
Hypothesis 1:  Novel factors (mindfulness, perceived burd ensomeness, thwarted belongingness, and 
moral injury) along with established treatment targets (psychological flexib ility, self-compassion, and emotion 
regulation) will prospectively predict functional di sability and SDV after accounting for covariates.   
 
Analytical Plan. 
Aim 1: The proposed analyses are grounded in the SERVE conc eptual framework (Figure H1a). Our team has 
expertise in a variety of advanced statistical modelin g procedures, including latent growth models, growth 
mixture models, longitudinal analyses, and measuremen t invariance. The design is  based on a measurement 
model that collects predetermined, repeated assessments every [ADDRESS_1028771] of 
treatment will be examined via dummy variables in all hypotheses. We will use both traditional (e.g., maximum-
likelihood regression) and advanced approaches (e.g., latent growth models, growth mixture models, and 
mediation models with bias-corrected bootstrap confidence intervals) to analyze the data. For example, to test 
Hypothesis 1a (H1a) in a traditio nal manner, principal component analysis (PCA) will be used to create a 
composite functional impairment factor. This approach will greatly reduce the number of tests conducted and 
provide us with a broad index of functional impairment. Variables used to create this factor score will include 
measures of functional impairment (WHODAS 2.0, IPF), QoL (QLS), and va lues-based behavior (VT). Change 
scores for these measures will be calculated and regre ssed onto the hypothesized predictors and covariates 
(including prior level of functi onal impairment) to test H1a. Latent growth modeling (LGM) —which allows for 
modeling of the change/growth trajectory of differen t variables assessed on multiple occasions across time —
will also be used to analyze the data. We expect that scores on repeated measures will be correlated. Growth 
models take this dependency into acco unt by [CONTACT_751453], and fitting a 
proposed trajectory shape to the scores across time. Ad vantages of using LGM over other approaches include 
the flexibility of placing constraints on the model whil e allowing growth parameters  describing participants’ 
trajectories to serve as predictors or outcomes. LG M assumes that individuals come from a homogeneous 
population while Growth Mixture Modeling (GMM) allows multiple subpopulations to be  inferred from the data. 
GMM is a general latent class analytical framework that ha s the capacity to model both random variation of the 
latent growth factors and the unknown heterogeneous subpopulations simultaneous ly. The proposed mediation 
effects will be examined with bias-corrected bootstrap confidence intervals that have been shown to produce 
the unbiased test with highest statistical power. We will ensure adequate data quality by [CONTACT_751454], outlier,  and psychometric analyse s for each data wave. We will use alternative 
robust estimators (e.g., WLSM, WLSMV, MLM, and MLMV) when analyzing non-normal data. All SEMs 
including the LGM and mediation analyse s will be evaluated with the chi-sq uare test and commonly used fit 
indices such as RMSEA, SRMR, CFI and TLI. Additional ly, for GMM, we will evalua te the results using the 
recommended information criteria (e.g., BIC, BLRT) and other related fit statistics (e.g., entropy). Analyses will 
be registered in the NIH clinical trials online database prior to data collection. 
The statistical power of the hypothesized models was estimated using the Monte Ca rlo procedure in Mplus. 
For each power analysis, [ADDRESS_1028772]. The mode l(s) of interest were then estimated for each dataset, 
and the proportion of datasets in which the null hypothes is was rejected was taken as the (empi[INVESTIGATOR_10477]) power of 
the test. To examine the effect of the novel and established treatment targets on functional impairment over 
time in Hypothesis 1a, we will use LG M with the treatment targets measured at baseline predicting functioning 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
16 
 over time (Figure H1a). The statistical power of the target effect, the direct 
arrow from the treatment targets to the slope of functional impairment over 
time, is evaluated. Given the proposed sample size (500 participants with 4 
repeated measures), the power for detecting a medium direct effect (based 
on our preliminary analyses) from th e treatment targets to the slope of 
functional impairment is > .90. GMM will be used to test Hypothesis 1b 
(Figure H1b). Based on our preliminar y studies, the statistical power for 
detecting a three-class solution is larger than .90 given the proposed 
sample size (500 participants). We calculated statistical power for the 
effects of the novel and established treatment targets on latent class 
membership. Assuming a small to medium effect size (odds-ratio = 1.82, which roughly corresponds to Cohen’ s d of 0.34), the power of the 
treatment targets on predicting class membership ranged from .72 to .91. 
In Hypothesis 1c, risk for SDV is measured in multiple ways including a 
continuous variable (severity of suicidal thoughts), a frequency/count 
variable (number of instances of NSSI), and a dichotomous variable 
(attempted suicide). A latent factor  will be created and analyzed in Mplus 
which uses the MLR estimation to handle non-normally distributed 
variables. The longitudinal property of  this latent factor will be examined 
via the longitudinal measurement invari ance. Once the risk for SDV factor 
model is confirmed, we will regress it on the latent class membership 
(based on H1b results), hypothesizing that the most severely impaired 
class will predict greater risk of SDV.  The proposed mediation model in Hy pothesis 1d (i.e., the treatment 
targets mediate the effects of mental and physical woun ds on functional impairme nt and risk for SDV over 
time) will be tested by [CONTACT_751455]. By [CONTACT_7702] a 
medium mediation effect, the correspondi ng statistical power is larger than  .[ADDRESS_1028773] ratios and 95% 
confidence intervals for the development of heart failure by [CONTACT_751456]. 
 
Missing Data Management: Longitudinal designs po se several challenges with respect to missing 
observations (e.g., length of data co llection, multiple assessment points, participant attrition). Based on our 
prior research and multiple methods of  maximizing retention, we anticipa te low attrition and minimal missing 
data. Nonetheless, we conservatively expect up to 20% missing data. Mplus, wh ich uses full information 
maximum likelihood (FIML) estimation for handling missing data, will be used for analyses. FIML is a principled 
approach that is considered “sta te of the art” in missing dat a management. FIML is a maximum-likelihood 
based estimation procedure that directly estimates para meters and their standard errors for the full sample 
from the existing and limited data. Thus, there is no attempt to replace missing data values. Instead, as 
“maximum likelihood” suggests, the parameter estimates ar e derived in a manner that  maximizes the likelihood 
that the data were drawn from the population of inte rest. FIML is the optimal pr ocedure for handling missing 
data within both SEM and LGM frameworks primarily be cause it produces relatively unbiased parameter 
estimates and standard errors. In fact, using method s other than FIML in SEM requires justification. 
 
HUMAN SUBJECTS RESEARCH AND PROTECTION FROM RISK 
1. Risks to Subjects 
 A. Human Subjects Involvement and Characteristics:  Up to 600 male and female OEF/OIF/OND Veterans 
enrolled for healthcare at the CTVHCS will be particip ants in Phase III. Veterans from all races/ethnic 
backgrounds will be recruited. Veterans with mental health  conditions will be over-sam pled. Participants will be 

Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1028774] 18 years of age. The telephone screen will determin e initial study eligibility. Eligible participants will be 
scheduled for a baseline assessment, at the beginning of which participants will complete a written informed 
consent form (ICF) for all Phases. Final eligibility will be  confirmed at the baseline assessment. Participation is 
voluntary, with no penalty for withdrawal. Consistent with HIPAA and institutional IR B guidelines, the utmost 
care will be taken to protect the welfare and interests of human subjects. All key personnel are thoroughly 
trained in the conduct of human- subjects research. See also below “Protection Against Risk” and “Data Safety 
and Monitori ng Plan.”   
 B. Sources of Material: The baseline and annual fo llow-up assessments will be collected by [CONTACT_63496], 
clinical interview, and saliva/blood sa mples. In addition, questionnaire fo llow-up assessments will be mailed to 
participants 8- and 16-months post baseline; the Ve teran will have the option to complete the follow-up 
assessment either by [CONTACT_751457].  Participants who pref er to receive email 
reminders via the Qualtrics system will have their email addresses temporarily stored in the secure Qualtrics 
database using the “Contact [CONTACT_46979]” fe ature. The Contact [CONTACT_49509] a featur e within a PI’s individual, password 
protected, online Qualtrics account. This feature allows the PI [INVESTIGATOR_751372] a list of 
study participant email addresses. Only through this feat ure are study personnel able to send a survey link via 
an email from Qualtri cs to participant’s who  request this method. Only approved study staff will have access to 
this online account and will be able to enter or see par ticipant’s email addresses. No PHI will be sent or 
received using this feature. The Contact [CONTACT_751458], which will not require participants to provide any identifying 
information. All email addresses will be deleted from the Qualtrics Contact [CONTACT_49532]. 
For further description of the Qualtrics security struct ure, please see the “Qualtrics Security White Paper.”  All 
data will be collected for research purposes only. The data will be protected as  mandated by [CONTACT_751459]. Face-to- face interview and questionnaire data obtained during 
baseline and follow-up assessments by [CONTACT_751460]. A list linking names with code numbers will be kept to ensure that no participants re-
enter the protocol and to facilitate scheduling for follow-up assessments; this list will be kept electronically on 
the secure research drive. All research staff involved with the study will be made fully conversant with relevant 
ethical principles related to the cond uct of human subjects research (inc luding completion of HIPAA training 
and CITI training in human subjects research) and will be trained to be sensitive to the potential need for 
clinical referral.  
In the event that an assessment conducted by [CONTACT_751461] a participant is 
severely debilitated and/or needs a cl inical referral (e.g., reports suicidality, homicidality, and/or severe 
symptomatology), the assessor will conduct a risk assessment, develop a safety plan (if necessary), and make an appropriate clinical referral. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_751373]. All CoE staff have 
been fully trained by a doctoral-level  staff member or the local suicid e prevention coordinator using the 
Operation SAVE (Signs, Ask, Validate, Encourage) prog ram developed by [CONTACT_751462]. Emergency 
response (i.e. if the Veteran is actively suicidal or homicidal warranting crisis intervention) varies based on the 
campus in which the Veteran is bein g interviewed. In Waco, during regular business hours, Veterans can be 
escorted to the Mental Health Clinic for further eval uation, stabilization and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_751374]. After 
business hours, staff is instructed to call 911. In Temple, Veterans in cr isis are brought to urgent care for 
evaluation, stabilization and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_751375]. In Austin, staff is  instructed to call 911, as no 
emergency services are available on site. However, Veterans who would like immediate outpatient services 
can be referred to Primary Care Mental Health in  Austin for same-day ou tpatient appointments.  
In the event that a follow-up assessment received in the mail, online, telephone, or by [CONTACT_751463] a participant is  severely debilitated and/or needs a clinical referral 
(e.g., reports suicidality and/or severe symptomatology), the assessor will contact [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_97318]. The PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_751376] a risk assessment, develop a safety plan (if 
necessary), and provide appropriate  local treatment referral(s).  
With respect to connecting Veterans with appropriate me ntal health services, a system of providing clinical 
referrals across each campus in which Veterans will be interviewed (Waco, Temple, Austin) has been 
established during the Projec t SERVE pi[INVESTIGATOR_751377]. We anticipate that 
some Veterans will refuse referrals, particularly in li ght of data suggesting strong concerns about stigma 
among returning OEF/OIF Veterans (Hoge et al. 2004). We will make every effort to make Veterans feel 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1028775].   
In addition to interviews and self-report questionna ires, saliva/blood  samp les will be collected from 
participants. All specimens will be used strictly for re search purposes. Providing a saliva/blood sample is 
optional and declining to provide a saliva/blood sample does  not impact participation in  the rest of the study.  
With respect to the saliva sample, staff will be trained to  avert their eyes when participants are spi[INVESTIGATOR_751378]. The procedure will ta ke approximately [ADDRESS_1028776] a 
fully self-contained phlebotomy kit for each participant. Personnel draw 19 ml (= 4 teaspoons)  of blood. The 
procedure will take approximately 10-15 minutes. Sa mples will be labeled with code numbers only and 
transported by [CONTACT_751464] (Build ing 93: room 2A 113) for DNA extraction and storage. 
Participants will complete a layered informed consent proc ess in which they will be informed of all procedures 
and will be given the opportunity to pa rticipate in the larger observational study while opting out of providing 
saliva/blood samples for later studie s. Further, participants may specify that their DNA samples may not 
become part of the shared dataset/tissue repository. 
C. Potential Risks: Potential risks include breach of conf identiality, coercion to participate, and possible 
discomfort from processing and retrieving memories of traumatic events. There is also some concern that a 
seriously impaired Veteran could be iden tified by [CONTACT_751465]-report 
questionnaires. As discussed in greater detail below, we believe that the likelihood of breach of confidentiality 
and coercion are low, given the steps we have taken to  obviate these risks (e.g., numeric coding, informed 
consent). This study assesses sensitive information (e.g. alcohol and drug history). To protect confidentiality, 
we have obtained a Certificate of Confidentiality through the NIH for th is research program, which will be 
amended to include Phase III.  The risk of discomfort from discussion  of mental health issues, including 
disclosure of traumatic material is mo derate; however, the increased discomf ort would be expected to be short-
term and participants expressing severe distress wo uld be referred for evalua tion and treatment. The 
identification of a Veteran whose impairment is debilit ating is expected to be a low-frequency occurrence. 
However, should an impaired Veterans be identified in  the proposed project, appropriate referrals will be made. 
The saliva sample may cause embarrassment for some peop le. The risks of having blood taken from a vein in 
your arm are pain, bleeding, bruising, and rarely, infecti on at the site where the needle is inserted. Fainting or 
light-headedness may occur, but they seldom happen. If the Veteran is injured as a result of having blood drawn, VA will provide medical treatment for his/her resear ch-related injury at no cost to the Veteran. There is a 
very remote risk that the Veteran’s  DNA sample might be obtained by [CONTACT_751466], 
and enough information mi ght be determined from DNA to  identify him/her even if on ly a code is attached to 
the sample. There might be identity ri sks involved if this information fa lls into the wrong hands (e.g., the 
Veteran could be denied insurance coverage or empl oyment because of certai n genetic information about 
him/her). Federal laws and policies provide protection from discrimination by [CONTACT_751467], 
group health plans, and most employers based on genetic information. A new federal law, the Genetic 
Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA), will generally provide protection in the following ways: 1) Health 
insurance companies and group health plans may not request the Veteran’s  genetic information obtained from 
this research; 2) Health insurance companies and group health plans may not use the Veteran’s  genetic 
information obtained from this research when making decisions regarding his/her eligibility or premiums; and 3) 
Employers with 15 or more employees may not use the Veteran’s  genetic information obtained from this 
research when making a decision to hire, promote, or fire you or when setting the terms of employment. 
However, this new Federal law does not protect the Vete ran against genetic discrimination by [CONTACT_55178], disability insurance, or long-term care insurance.  
 
2. Adequacy of Protection From Risks 
A. Recruitment and Informed Consent:  Several recruitment strategies will be used to obtain a broad sample 
of OEF/OIF/OND Veterans. Participants will be recruited from the preceding longitudinal study, as indicated in 
the ICF. New participants will be recruited through advertisement at enrollment sites, vet centers, Veteran ’s 
networks and service organizations, thr ough in-service presentations to primar y care staff, mental health staff, 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
19 
 and other relevant VA staff (e.g., OE F/OIF/OND coordinators, etc.), and through the community (e.g. grocery 
stores, churches, shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_49459], and so forth). In-person recruiting will also be conducted at enrollment and 
community sites. In these cases, one or more research team members will sit at a table/booth in a high 
visibility area (e.g., a main VA lobby [CONTACT_49492] a grocery store) with a sign indicating that OEF/OIF/OND 
Veterans are being recruited to participate in a research study. Staff members will provide interested Veterans 
with a flyer (see attached flye r and brochure) about the study. In addition , Veterans interested in participating in 
the study will be given the option of providing staff member s with their contact [CONTACT_49493] a later point in time to complete a telephone screen interview.  
In addition, as described in more detail above, we will request that IT/study staff conduct periodic searches 
for OEF/OIF/OND Veterans who meet some of our inclusion criteria (e.g. OEF/OIF/OND Veteran, diagnosis of 
PTSD or depression, no mental health  disorder) so that we can reach out to returning Veterans to let them 
know that the study is being conducted.  
 Interested participants will complete a telephone sc reen. Eligible participan ts will be scheduled for a 
baseline assessment appointment, at the beginning of which informed written consent will be obtained. A cover 
letter will be mailed to the Veteran in advance of th e baseline assessment appointment with directions and 
parking instructions. In addition, a copy of the Informed Consent Form (ICF) will be mailed to the Veteran along 
with a cover letter in advance of th e appointment (time permitting de pending on when appointment is 
scheduled) for the Veteran to read and consider partic ipation in advance. Upon arrival, the Veteran will be 
asked if s/he had a chance to read the ICF, and if not,  will be asked to read the consent form at that time. It 
should be noted that, regardless of whether or not participants read the ICF ahead of time, the study staff 
member will always explain the nature of the study to participants at the time of the baseline assessment, as 
well as the potential risks/benefits of participating in th e study. Participants will be pr ovided with a photocopy of 
signed forms. Related to the saliva/blood sample, th e participant will be informed: 1) DNA will be extracted 
from their sample ; 2) Researchers may use the participant’s DNA to conduct studies of genetic markers in the 
future; 3) Researchers may conduct DNA studies with new technology in development that is currently 
unknown to the researchers; 4) Gene  material and the gene information obtained will be used for research 
purposes only and will not be releas ed to health insurance companies ; 5) Researchers will not give the 
participant feedback or information about the results of hi s/her genetic testing; and 6) Participants can decline 
the saliva/blood sample and still participate in all other study procedures. 
Written informed consent will not be obtained until the researcher is satisfied that the participant has a good 
understanding of the risks/benefits of participating in the study. The Veteran will be informed that s/he may 
discontinue participation at any time or revoke consent to the stor age of DNA without any professional or 
personal consequences. We anticipate that participants will be in adequate health to  attend and participate in 
all assessments. In order to maximize retention of participan ts in Phase III, we will offer the option of signing an 
informed consent form remotely for transfer participants who have moved out of the area. Following the phone 
screen, if the Veteran is interested in participation, he/she will be mailed  the informed consent form and HIPAA 
authorization. Participants will be provided clear in structions for signing the forms, and a postage-paid 
envelope for returning them to the study team. Part icipants will be informed that study procedures will not 
begin until the forms have been receiv ed by a study team member. Any potential participant who wishes to 
travel to the VA Medical Center to provide informed co nsent in person will be allowed to do so, unless it is 
deemed unsafe for the veteran or study staff (e.g., due to COVID-19). 
B. Protection Against Risk: Breach of confidentiality is unlikely beca use of our numeric coding system. 
Assessment procedures will be closely supervised by [CONTACT_3433] e PI. Study evaluators may identify a seriously 
impaired Veteran based on the measures proposed in this study. This will be addressed through risk 
assessment, safety planning, and clinical referral.  
Issues related to coercion are unlikely, as Veterans  who do not wish to participate in the study will not 
experience any impact on their care as Veterans. We will seek to protect Veterans from the emotional distress 
that might be aroused by [CONTACT_751468]: (a) structured training and ongoing 
supervision of all assessment staff; (b) PI [CONTACT_101583] [ADDRESS_1028777] in any necessary referrals; (c) referrals made for emergency or 
other inpatient or outpatient psychiatric services to identified local clinicians through existing referral 
mechanisms; and (d) Data Safety an d Monitoring Plan  (DSMP) and Data Safety  and Monitoring Board 
(DSMB), descri bed below.  
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1028778] linking participant ID numbers to names will be 
on the secure Research and S:\CoE Data\FX drives, which will allow for identification  of participants in the 
event that a Veteran evidences serious impairment on the assessment battery, so that  an appropriate referral 
for intervention may occur, as needed. Hardcopy asse ssment information will be kept in a locked office 
(Building 93, 1A-137). Study identifiable information (I CF, HIPAA, payment forms, and contact [CONTACT_3031]) are 
stored separately from coded hardcopy data. 
Informed consent forms and forms with any identifiable in formation (e.g., payment records) will be kept in a 
locked file cabinet of a locked office (Building 93, 1A-137) with limited acce ss at the Center of Excellence for 
Research on Returning War Veterans. Coded hardcopy pho ne screen data from both eligible and ineligible 
participants and assessment data will be kept in separa te locked file cabinets from identifiable information 
(Building 93, 1A-137). Additionally , coded phone screen information will be placed in separate files to 
distinguish screen eligible/enrolled,  screen eligible/not enrolled, and ineligible screens. Data may be 
temporarily (i.e., no more than 7 business days) stored at  the Temple research space in locked offices, inside 
locked file cabinets, with identifying information se parated from coded data using locked containers. 
Video/Audio recordings will be recorded on FIPS 140- [ADDRESS_1028779] an ap proved Authorization to Transport memorandum on file 
with the Research Office. Video/Audio f iles will be stored as electronic f iles in the secure, approved drive and 
on encrypted SD memory cards that are stored as hard copy data in the CoE data rooms (Building 93, 1A-
137). Once video/audio files are transferred to the secure  server folders and to the encrypted SD card, they will 
be erased from individual research st aff members’ digital voice recorders. Approved research staff will listen to 
video/audio-recordings on site using VA computers; thus, once video/audio f iles are transferred to storage, the 
only copi[INVESTIGATOR_751379]-secured servers (electronic)  and in locked data rooms (hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_751380]). 
Coded data collected at other interview sites (Templ e, Austin, CBOCs) will be transferred in a locked 
suitcase by a credentialed interviewer/research team member. All data will be marked with code numbers only. Informed consent forms, payment forms, and contact [CONTACT_751469] 
(name, date of consent, SS#, etc.) will be transferred in  a separate carrying case from the coded data (see 
Data Transport Agreements). For online data collection , a unique code will be assigned to participants. IP 
address will be blocked for additional  protection, and no email addresses, names, or PHI will be collected. 
Research records will be retained unt il disposition instructions are approved by [CONTACT_751470]’s Reco rds Control Schedule (RCS  10-1). Any and all paper 
documentation containing confidential, personally identi fiable information, protec ted health information, and 
any other sensitive information will be disposed/destroyed  according to current VA regulations at the time of 
disposal/destruction of documentation. Original data will remain at VA. Only copi[INVESTIGATOR_751381]-identified data will be 
shared outside VA with study collaborators, after approval from the Privacy Officer as de-identified. We will request that collaborators share any newly-created vari ables. However, as the da tabases are de-identified, 
they will not be required to be returned for destruction.  
Access to identifiable data will be terminated when staff are no longer part of the team. Procedures are in 
place for reporting any incidents (i.e., theft or loss of data or storage media, unauthorized access of sensitive 
data or storage devices or non-compli ance with security controls) by [CONTACT_49536] (i.e., 
privacy officer and/or information security officer, IRB, first line supervisor). 
Every effort will be made to keep information both private and confidential. Study records may only be 
disclosed in accordance with federal law, includin g the Federal Privacy Act,  5 U.S.C.552a, and its 
implementing regulations. Records may be reviewed by [CONTACT_3433] e U.S. Food & Drug Administ ration (FDA), other U.S. 
government agencies, Institutional Review Boards incl uding the Central [LOCATION_007] Veterans Health Care System 
Institutional Review Board and by [CONTACT_751471]. As a result, they may see participant names; howeve r, they are also bound by [CONTACT_49538].  
 
3. Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to Su bjects and Others: There ar e no known benefits for the 
assessment study participants. It is possible that Veterans  may benefit from clinical referrals received following 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1028780]-warzone. 
 
4. Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained: The prop osed project results may represent important advances 
in the study of functional recovery and impairment related to commonly-occurring disorders in OEF/OIF/OND 
Veterans, such as PTSD, depression, TBI, chronic pa in, and substance-use disorders. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_751382], relatively little is known about the specific biopsychosocial factors, including 
clinically relevant and modifiable treatment targets, that  predict risk and resilience to these disorders in trauma-
exposed populations. This programmatic line of resear ch will help to elucidate those factors. Longitudinal 
examination of individuals at increased risk psychopatho logy based on varying levels  of trauma exposure is 
essential for advancing our understanding of copi[INVESTIGATOR_116803]. This study will contribute to our overall 
understanding of the long-term psychological impact of  combat exposure and empi[INVESTIGATOR_751383].  
 
5. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan.  
Due to the sensitive nature of the information collec ted during the observational study and the fact that 
clinical referrals may be made for a number of partic ipants, we have established a DSMP. Given our team’s 
expertise with the behavioral health of Veterans, we hav e well-established mechanisms  for ensuring safety and 
confidentiality of referrals that have been in place during  Phases I and II and will continue in Phase III. A final 
measure of governance designed to protect the part icipants in this project is the following DSMP.  
The DSMP will consist of examination of the accruing st udy data for indications that participating Veterans 
are being appropriately referred for treatment when necessary. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_751384]-level staff will provide 
ongoing supervision through weekly Diagnostic Review Gr oups (DRG), which will include discussion of referral 
information for each Veteran who is identified as having mental health difficulties. In addition, self-report data 
will be reviewed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_157888]. Specifically, each time a participant completes the PHQ-9, item 9 
(suicidality) will be visually scanned to make sure that  participants are not endo rsing suicidal intent. Any 
participants who are identi fied as at risk for suicidality (i.e., endorse “Several days” or “More than half the days” 
or “nearly every day”  on PHQ-9 item #[ADDRESS_1028781] two weeks the Veteran was thinking s/he 
would be better or dead or was wanting to hurt him/herself in some  way) will be contact[CONTACT_68938] [INVESTIGATOR_1660] a 
trained clinician to conduct a clinical risk assessment, safety plan (if necessary) , and appropriate clinical 
referral. Additionally, each time the participant comp letes the Treatment Involvement Form (TIF), it will be 
reviewed for serious adverse events o ccurring during the study pe riod by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_40640]. The PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_751385], in accordance with federal regulations. If a participant is hospi[INVESTIGATOR_28344] a crisis, deter mination as to continuation in the study will be handled 
on a case-by-case basis. Veterans who feel that participation in the study is overwhelming can certainly 
discontinue. Veterans will also be given the option of ski ppi[INVESTIGATOR_751386]. In 
many cases, it may be beneficial for the Veteran to cont inue, for example: 1) Although  not a substitute for good 
clinical care, Project SERVE: FX can serve as an “extra set of eyes” to monitor how Veterans are doing over 
time; and 2) study discontinuation may feel penalizing fo r Veterans who have reported suicidality, when such 
reporting should be encouraged. Additi onally, understanding suicidality over time is a crucial area of scientific 
research that has benefit for our understanding of th e adjustment process following deployments, and for 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_751387].  
 
Inclusion of Women, Minorities, and Children 
1. Inclusion of Women. Both male and female Veterans who meet inclusion criteria will be recruited for 
participation in this study. We expect that the gender di stribution in the proposed st udy sample will be similar to 
that in deployed samples. In SERVE FX-Phase I, we successfully oversampled women at the level of 33%, 
and 25% at Phase II. As women constitute 18.61%  of recent Veterans residing in [LOCATION_007], we will continue to 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
22 
 oversample to achieve 30% in Phase III. In order to ma ximize recruitment of women, we will actively recruit 
women through targeted advert isements and outreach efforts to wo men’s groups within the VA and local 
Veteran ’s Service Organizations.  
2. Inclusion of Minorities. We expect that completed response rates among minority participants will be similar 
to the breakdown of minorities in the armed forces residing in [LOCATION_007] (11.6% African-American and 16.4% 
Latino). We plan to collect data from all participants on  their ethnic and racial self -identification. As with our 
efforts to maximize recruitment of women, we will actively recruit minority participants within Veterans, 
including outreach meetings with mi nority Veterans organizations (possi bly outside the VA), where available.  
3. Inclusion of Children. Adults ages [ADDRESS_1028782] SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
23 
 COMPLETED PHASES 
 
Phase I 
A total of 309 VA-service-seeking returning OEF/OIF/OND Veterans were evaluated over a one-year period in 
Phase I. All data collection was completed in June 2014, and data was moved to the SERVE Data Repository 
on November 23, 2021. Primary activities for this st udy phase are no longer active, and any remaining 
biological samples have been destroyed. 
Specific Aims 
The specific aims of Phase I include: 1) examining th e relationship between level of exposure to stressors 
(pre-deployment, deployment-related, and post-deplo yment) and functioning over time; 2) examining 
whether potentially malleable resilience factors predict higher levels of functioning in returning Veterans 
over time; 3) examining whether psychopathology pr edicts lower levels of functioning in returning 
Veterans over time; 4) testing the theoretical model that psychopathology partially mediates the effects 
of stress, social support, copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], and neurocogniti on on functioning over time; 5) examining whether 
changes in the use of healthy copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262], social support, post-deployment stress, and 
psychopathology predict changes in functioning over  time; and 6) exploring whether stress, social 
support, copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], neurocognition, an d psychopathology have differential effects on specific aspects of 
functioning (e.g., occupational, family, social, and physical functioning) over time. 
Study Methods 
This study will investigate the course of functioning over time among returning OEF/OIF/OND Veterans enrolled at CTVHCS. The primary outcome measures will assess multiple domains of functioning, 
including: 1) occupational functioning; 2) social relationships; 3) family functioning; 4) physical 
functioning; and 5) quality of life. Hypothesized predictors of functioning include: 1) level of exposure to 
deployment-related stressors, including potentially tr aumatic events (PTEs) and head injuries/traumatic 
brain injury (TBI); 2) level of pre-deployment stress  and trauma exposure; 3) level of exposure to post-
deployment stress and trauma, including “everyda y” stressors; 4) modifiable psychological facto rs 
including copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], emotion regulation, self-compassion, attributional style, psychological flexibility, and 
mindfulness; 5) perceived social support; 6) p sychopathology including PTSD and depression; 7) 
substance misuse; 8) physical health symptoms including chronic pain; and 9) exposure to morally 
injurious events. Hair samples will be collected for bioc hemical validation of drug use. Saliva samples will 
also be collected (on an optional basi s) to examine geneti c contributions. 
Procedures 
Phase I assessments occur at 0 (baseline), 4-, 8-, an d 12-month time points. Veterans will complete an 
in-person baseline assessment lasting approximately 4-[ADDRESS_1028783], although participants may sit 
in a waiting room to complete their questionnaires (a ny questions that arise will be answered in a private 
area). The baseline and annual a ssessments include clinical assessm ents, self-report questionnaires, 
and a hair sample (for biochemical va lidation of drug use report). Veterans are required to provide a hair 
sample; thus, Veterans who decline to provide a ha ir sample decline to participate in the study. 
  Validity Checks 
Self-report of substance use will be verified via analysis of hair samples gathered at BL and annual 
assessment. Although only 10% of samples will be analyzed, this samp ling has been shown to increase 
accuracy of self-reported substance use (Marlatt & Go rdon, 1985). Hair samples will be collected as per 
standard procedures recommended, and kits provided , by [CONTACT_751472], Inc. Participants are 
given the option of providing a sample of head hair or  from another part of the body (underarm, arm, leg, 
pubic). In the case of pubic hair, participants are instructed in how to take the hair sample and do this 
themselves in the bathroom. Hair (amount approximately the width of a pencil) is cut as closely as 
possible to the root and laid in a pi [INVESTIGATOR_18090] (root in one direction) , which is folded. Hair samples are 
then placed in a small sealed envelope, which is pl aced in a larger sealed envelope with associated 
paperwork marked with a code number only. A total of 10% of the samples will be shipped to Omega 
Laboratories, Inc. for testing. Hair samples are stor ed with other coded data in locked file cabinets until 
testing. Hair samples will be disposed/destroyed after testing. 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
24 
  
Phase I Assessment Instruments. [DATA COLLECTION COMPLETED] 
 
Measures/ Proposed 
Indicators  
Purpose Assessment  
Time Point  
Description/Rationale 
BL 4/8m 12m 
Telephone Screen E    Assesses inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
Contact [CONTACT_751435] [ADDRESS_1028784] for follow-up, etc. 
Demographic 
Questionnaire & Military 
History Form  Demographic, 
PV 9  9 Assesses basic demographic and Veterans-specific 
characteristics (e.g., years of education, years of military service, 
family history of military servic e). Readministered at annual to 
assess changeable demographics (e.g. marital status, employment). 
Medical History Form  [ADDRESS_1028785] to participant health and family history. 
Treatment Involvement 
Form  CV 9 9 9 Form created for the current study that will be used to assess 
treatment involvement during the prior 4 months, including 
medical, psychiatric and psychological treatment, as well as 
supportive interventions (e.g. Alcoholics Anonymous, Narcotics 
Anonymous). Duration of untreated symptoms will be assessed. 
Mini International 
Neuropsychiatric 
Interview (MINI)  - 
Psychosis modules E 9  9  Screening Interview for exclusionary criteria (bipolar disorder and 
psychosis unrelated to PTSD). Assessment of PTSD related to 
civilian events.  
Clinician Administered 
PTSD Scale (CAPS)  Med, DV 9  9 Interview. Will assess current and lifetime PTSD using DSM-IV 
criteria . Criterion F assesses functional impairment associated 
with PTSD. Both categorical diagnoses and symptom severity 
ratings will be obtained.  The CAPS format allows the interviewer 
to link PTSD symptoms to spec ific Criterion A events (i.e., a 
traumatic event that includes the experience of fear, 
helplessness or horror) and separately assesses for Criterion A1 (a potentially
-traumatic event) and A2. Scoring according to 
criteria established by  [CONTACT_751473]. (19 94) has excellent retest 
and inter -rater reliability, and high sensitivity and specificity for 
PTSD diagnosis.  
Structured Clinical 
Interview for DSM -IV 
(SCID) Med, DV [ADDRESS_1028786] (WRAT4)  CV, PV [ADDRESS_1028787] (Wilkinson and Robertson, 
2007) is a brief (2 minutes) test that provides an estimate of 
native intellectual potential that is considered to be unaffected by [CONTACT_751474].
 This will allow a measure of 
pre-deployment/pre- morbid intellectual potential to serve as both 
a predictor and as a covariate in analyses of neurocognitive 
performance, given previous findings of lower pre -military 
intellectual functioning among individuals diagnosed with PTSD 
(Kremen,  et al., 2007; McNally & Shin, 1995; Vasterling, et al., 
1997).  
Neuropsych-ological 
screening  PV 9  9 A brief (35 minutes) neuropsychological assessment will be 
conducted, from which a composite neuropsychological functioning index will be 
computed. The influence of cognitive 
functioning on functional outcomes among returning Veterans is 
not fully understood. Whether influenced by [CONTACT_751475], TBI, mental health problems, or the complex interactions among them, impaired cognitive processing may impact risk, recovery, 
or lead to greater chronicity of functional impairment. Domains 
include: 1) basic processing speed and attentional and memory processes frequently observed among individuals with mild TBI, as well as psychiatric conditions including PTSD (Brewin, et al., 
2007), substance abuse/dependence, and sleep disturbance; 2) 
working memory, which exhibits a robust relationship with a range of functional outcomes in psychiatric populations (Green, 1996) and may serve as a protective factor against development 
of PTSD (Parslow & Jorm, 2007); and 3) executive functioning, 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
25 
 which is associated with impulsivity and PTSD (e.g., Vasterling, 
et al, 1998; Gilbertson et al., 2006).  
Domains will be assessed as follows:  
· Processing  speed - Digit Symbol Coding (WAIS-IV), Trail 
Making Test A  
· Attention - Digits Forward and Backward (WAIS-IV)  
· Auditory  working memory - Digits Forward and Backward 
(WAIS -IV)  
· Auditory  learning and memory - [LOCATION_004] Verbal Learning Test 
2nd Ed. (CVLT) 
· Executive functioning – Trail Making Test B, Stroop test 
The neuropsychological assessment will be re -administered at 
the annual assessment in order to assess changes in cognitive functioning that may have occurred during the past year. 
TBI Assessment 
Interview   E, PV 9    9 This clinician-administered structured interview developed by 
[CONTACT_751436]  (2008) assesses the number, recency, type of injury, 
and clinical sequelae associated with traumatic brain injury during deployment. Total number of lifetime head injuries leading 
to any symptoms will also be assessed.
 TBI will be assessed at 
baseline for  lifetime history and then re- assessed at the annual 
interview for any new TBIs that may have occurred during the past year. 
Traumatic Life Events 
Questionnaire (TLEQ) PV 9  9 23 items (Kubany et al., 2000); assesses frequency of exposure 
to 22 potentially traumatic events encountered outside of military service, resulting in a continuous trauma exposure score.
 The 
psychometric properties were carefully established in 5 studies, 
including a sample of combat Veterans (Kubany et al., 2000).  
Deployment Risk and 
Resilience Inventory 
(DRRI)  PV 9  9 The DRRI (King, King, and Vogt, 2003) is a collection of [ADDRESS_1028788]-deployment risk and resilience factors. The DRRI was 
recently validated for  use with OIF Veterans (Vogt et al., 2008). 
The full DRRI will be readministered at the annual interview if participants have been deployed again. In addition, the social 
support scale of the DRRI will be re
-administered to all 
participants at Annual [ADDRESS_1028789] reliability (r=.85), internal 
consistency ( D = .83) and construct validity, and correlated 
moderately with PTSD symptomatology (Marshall et al., 2002). 
Posttraumatic growth 
Inventory  PV 9  9 21 items (Tedeschi & Calhoun, 2005); factors include new 
possibilities, relating to others, personal strength, spi[INVESTIGATOR_751388]. 
Full Combat Experiences 
Scale  PV 9   34 items. Newly developed and adapted from the DRRI to 
assess experiences and trauma exposure in land combat 
situations such as OEF/OIF (Hoge et al., 2004).  Will be re-
administered if re-deployed. 
PTSD Checklist-5 (PCL-
5) Military and Civilian  Med  9 9 9 20 items. Measures symptoms of PTSD during the previous 
month. Demonstrates high sensitivity and specificity for a CAPS 
diagnosis of PTSD. Prior research demonstrates the value of including both self
-report and clinical interview assessment of 
PTSD (cf. National Vietnam Veteran Readjustment Study; Kulka 
et al., 1988). 
Schedule of Recent 
Exper -iences (SRE) PV 9 9 9 42 items. The SRE (Holmes & Rahe, 1967) will be used to 
assess exposure to common, “everyday” stressful life events (e.g., job loss, relationship difficulties, illness or death of a loved 
one).  
Beck Depression 
Inventory -II (BDI-II) Med  9 9 9 21 items; The BDI-II (Beck, St eer, Ball, & Ranieri,1996) is a 
widely -used measure of depressive symptoms with high internal 
consistency (Beck, Steer, Ball & Ranieri, 1996) and test -retest 
reliability (Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996). 
Depression, Anxiety, 
Stress Scales Med 9  9 21 items; [ADDRESS_1028790] subscales: depression, anxiety, 
and general stress. Reliable and valid measure of these 
constructs, and discriminates between anxiety and depression 
better than other commonly used indices (Antony et al., 1998; 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
26 
 Brown et al., 1997; Lovibond & Lovibond, 1995) 
Columbia Suicide Scale DV 9  9 The Columbia Suicide Scale (Posner et al., 2008) is a state-of-
the-art suicide assessment for individuals perceived to be at high 
risk for suicidality.  
Daily Drinking Quest. Revised (DDQ
-R) Med 9 9 9 Yields typi[INVESTIGATOR_751389] (average number of drinking days per week), typi[INVESTIGATOR_751390] (number of drinks/drinking day), week 
sum (total number of drinks during an average week). Binge drinking and tolerance questions added.  
Rutgers Alcohol Problem 
Index (RAPI)  Med 9  9 23-items; measures the frequency of physical (e.g., had 
withdrawal symptoms, passed out or fainted suddenly), psychological (e.g., noticed a change in your personality, felt that you had a problem with alcohol), and social (e.g., caused shame 
or embarrassment to someone, had a fight, argument, or bad 
feelings with a friend) consequences experienced during the past three months (White & Labouvie, 1989). Internal reliability for the 
23-item RAPI [INVESTIGATOR_751391] (α= .94; White & Labouvie, 1989).    
Drug Abuse Screening 
Test (DAST)  Med 9  9 20-items to quantify drug misuse. Good internal consistency 
(alpha = 0.92) and concurrent validity with frequency of drug use 
over 12 -months (Skinner, 1982). Moderately correlated with 
denial and social desirability. 92% of individuals with drug abuse scored greater than 10. 
Fagerstrom Test for 
Nicotine De - pendence 
(FTND)  DV, Med 9 9 9 6 items that quantify nicotine dependence that exhibits 
satisfactory inter nal consistency ( α = .61), as well as convergent 
validity with biochemical indices of heaviness of smoking 
(Heatherton et al., 1991). 
Brief COPE  PV 9  9 The widely-used Brief COPE assesses a range of behavioral and 
cognitive copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262] (Carver, et al., 1989).  
Acceptance and Action 
Questionnaire  
(AAQ -II) PV 9 9 9 10 items; The AAQ-II (Hayes, Biss ett, et al, 2004) assesses 
acceptance, experiential avoidance (attempting to alter the form 
or frequency of unwanted internal experiences), and taking 
action despi[INVESTIGATOR_751392].  Lower 
scores indicate greater levels of experiential avoidance, whereas 
higher scores indicate greater experiential acceptance and 
willingness.  The AAQ- II exhibits a single factor structure, good 
internal consistency (mean α = .83 across multiple samples ) and 
test-retest reliability (α = .80 at 3 months, .78 at one year), and 
convergent associations  with symptoms of depression (r = - .71), 
anxiety (r = -.58), and global distress (r = -.65).  
Distress Tolerance Scale 
(DTS) –  
Emotional and Physical 
Distress Scales  PV  9  9 16 items (Simons & Gaher, 2005) assessing the extent to which 
participants can tolerate physical (6 items; e.g., “I’ll take fairly extreme measures to stop physical discomfort or pain”) and emotional (10 items; e.g., “I usually follow through with tasks that 
are emotionally upset
ting”) distress. The ability to tolerate 
distress may explain why a disorder develops. For example, if 
one is low on distress tolerance, this may increase risk for reliance on other maladaptive copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262], particularly 
substance misuse. 
Brief Resilience Scale PV 9  9 6-item scale measuring resilience (Smith et al., 2008); ability to 
bounce back or recover from stress. Significantly correlated with 
25-item Connor Davidson Resilience Scale. 
World Health 
Organization Disability 
Assessment Schedule II 
(WHODAS II)  DV 9 9 9 36 item self-report version assessing functional disability across 
7 domains (understanding and communicating, getting around, 
getting along with people, life activities, work, participation in 
society, self -care) as well as a total score. The WHODAS- II is 
becoming widely used in investigations of functional disability with wide
-ranging populations and is a primary measure in an 
ongoing VA/DoD study aimed at developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a measure of 
functional impairment in active duty servic e members and 
Veterans (Marx, PI, Schnurr and Hoge, Co-Investigators).  
Inventory of Functional 
Impairment (IFI)  DV 9  9 87 items (Marx et al, 2009). The IFI yields an overall score and 7 
subscales: Romantic Relationships with a Spouse or Partner, 
Family, Work, Friendships and Soci alizing, Parenting, Education, 
and Day -to-Day functioning. Higher scores indicate greater 
functional impairment. Preliminary  analyses (n = 170) with 
Veterans show strong psychometric properties, including strong 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
27 
 internal consistency (Cronbach’s alpha ranging from .76 to .91) 
and construct validity.  
Employment Survey (ES) DV 9 9 9  12 item self-report version adapted from the measure developed 
by [CONTACT_751476] (Mueser, Glynn, and McGurk, 2006) to assess employment status, number of hours worked, income, 
reasons for not working or working 
less than full- time, satisfaction 
with various aspects of current employment, an d stability of 
employment (number of jobs held, reasons for leaving previous 
jobs) since discharge from active duty military.  
Quality of Life Scale 
(QLS)  DV 9 9 9 16 items (Burkhardt, et al., 1989) assessing how satisfied people 
are in regards to [ADDRESS_1028791] from health status (mate, 
physical well -being, relationships with others, social, community, 
and civic activities, personal development and fulfillment, 
recreation, and independence). Good internal consistency and 
(alpha .82 to .92) and high tes t-retest reliability (r = .78 to .84; 
Burckhardt et al. 2003).  Life satisfaction is a central goal of 
recovery and rehabilitation, and diminished quality of life may influence suicidality and other key outcomes. 
Strengths and Difficulties 
Questionnaire (SDQ)  DV 9  9 25 items; Administered only to participants with one or more 
children living at home. Measures emotional and behavioral 
disturbance in children aged 4 -17 (Goodman, 1997). Consists of 
5 5-item subscales: emotional symptoms, conduct problems, 
hyperactivity/inattention, peer relationship problems, and pro -
social behavior.  First 4 scales sum to yield a total difficulties 
score. Strong psychometric properties (Muris et al., 2004), 
concurrent validity (i.e., highl y correlated with CBCL; Klasen et 
al., 2000), good convergent validity with structured interviews (Goodman & Scott, 1999), and divergent validity (i.e., 
distinguishing psychiatric and community samples; Klasen et al., 
2000). The proposed approach of using the CBCL annually and the SDQ at each time point should provide a thorough 
assessment of child psychopathology and functional dimensions 
over time.   
NEO Five-Factor 
Inventory (NEO -FFI) PV 9  9 60 items (Costa & McCrae, 1989) ; shortened version of the NEO 
PI-R. Reliable and valid measure of the five- factor model of adult 
personality. Good internal consistency for the five subscales 
(range .74 - .89).  
Pain Disability Index   [ADDRESS_1028792] that pain has on the 
ability of a person to participate in essential life activities. 
Marlow-Crowne Social 
Desirability Scale  QA 9  9 10 item abbreviated version of the original Social Desirability 
Scale (Crowne & Marlowe, 1960) assessing the extent to which 
responses are influenced by [CONTACT_751477]. Measures the 
same construct as the full scale and has good internal consistency (Fraboni & Cooper, 1989; Strahan & Gerbasi, 1973). 
Hair Sample QA 9  9 To verify self-report of drug use, hair samples will be gathered at 
BL and annual assessments. The hair sample is a required 
component of the study. Participants will be told that hair may be 
tested for drug use; however, only 10% of samples will be 
analyzed for use of nicotine, cocaine, marijuana, opi[INVESTIGATOR_858], amphetamines, phencyclidine, hydrocodone, hydromorphone, 
and oxycodone.  
Saliva sample PV, Med 9   DNA and other products will be extracted from saliva samples. 
Provision of saliva sample is optional. 
Monetary Choice 
Questionnaire (MCQ) PV   9 27-item instrument (Kirby, Petry, & Bickel, 1999) used to 
estimate the rate at which re spondents discount the value of 
future rewards.  Higher rates of discounting on this measure have 
been associated with both self -reported impulsivity and real-
world engagement in impulsive behaviors. 
BL = Baseline; BI-ANN = Bi-Annual; ANL = A nnually; E = Eligibility; DV = Dependent/Out come Variable; PV = Predictor Variable; 
Med = Mediator; CV = Covariate; QA = Quality Assurance/Validity Check 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
28 
 Biological Markers  
In Phase I, subjects will donate DNA/RNA/Saliva for genetic and research studies. No clinically validated 
tests will be performed. The genetics/biomarker compon ent of the protocol will be supervised by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Keith 
Young (CTVHCS Neuropsychiatry Research Program, Building 205, 3R05 and 3R08) and [CONTACT_751514] (CoE Biomarkers and Genetics Core) expert s in this area, in collaboration with the PI. See 
Appendix for Safety Survey. At the BL assessment, pa rticipants will be given the option of consenting to 
all study procedures or all procedures excluding the saliva/blood sample (depending on the phase) and 
genetic research.  
For those who consent to that aspect of the study, pa rticipants will donate saliva by [CONTACT_15209][INVESTIGATOR_17270] a coded 
OragenTM tube at the assessment site. Staff will be trai ned to avert their eyes when participants are 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_751393]. The saliva samples will be stored at room temperature in a locked - cabinet present inside a lo cked office (Building 93,1A-137) until transported at 
room temperature by [CONTACT_751478]. Young’s lab in Temple  or Waco Building 93 (rooms 2A 116, 
2A 117), where the samples will be stored until DNA extraction and testing. Phase I genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_751394] 205 and Waco  Building 93. According to the work load, the 
genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_751395] (Drs. Guleria & Young).  
Aims and Hypotheses 
Specific Aim 1. Identify whether a dose-response re lationship exists between level of exposure to 
stressors and subsequent level of functioning.  
Hypothesis 1a.  Greater exposure to pre-deployment stress and trauma will predict lower levels of 
functioning concurrently and over time. 
Hypothesis 1b . Greater exposure to deployment-related stress and trauma will predict lower levels 
of functioning concurrently and over time. Hypothesis 1c.  Greater exposure to post-deployment stressors will predict lower levels of  
functioning concurrently and over time. 
Specific Aim 2. Examine whether potentially mallea ble resilience factors predict higher levels of 
functioning in returning OEF/OIF Veterans. 
Hypothesis 2a . Greater use of healthy copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262] (i.e., acceptance and active copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]) will 
predict higher levels of functioning concurrently and over time. 
Hypothesis 2b . Greater levels of social support will predict higher levels of functioning 
concurrently and over time.   
Hypothesis 2c . Higher levels of neurocognition will predict higher levels of functioning concurrently 
and over time. 
Specific Aim 3. Examine whether psychopathology predicts lower levels of functioning.  
Hypothesis 3a.  Greater PTSD-Depression symptoms will predict lower levels of functioning 
concurrently and over time. 
Hypothesis 3b.  Greater AUD symptoms will predict lower levels of functioning concurrently and 
over time. 
Specific Aim 4. Test the theoretical model that psych opathology partially mediates the effects of stress, 
social support, copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], and neurocognition on  functioning concurrently and over time. 
Hypothesis 4a . The hypothesized model (Figure 1)  in which PTSD-Depression and AUD 
symptoms fully mediate the effects of pre-deployme nt stress, post-deployment stress, and active 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_751396], deployment stress, 
acceptance, and social support on functioning will show significantly better fit to the data 
compared to any of the following alternative models: an independent main effects model, a fully mediated model, or a full partial mediation model. 
Hypothesis 4b.  PTSD-Depression symptoms will fully-mediate the effects of active copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], pre-
deployment stress, and post-deployment stress on functioning and will partially-mediate the 
effects of deployment stress, acceptance , and social support on functioning.  
Hypothesis 4c . AUD symptoms will partially mediate the effects of neurocognition on functioning.  
Specific Aim 5. Examine the influenc e of changes in copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], social support, post-deployment stress, and 
psychopathology on changes in functioning over time. 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
29 
 Hypothesis 5a . Sustained use of healthy copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262]  (i.e., acceptance and active copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]), 
or increases in healthy copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262], will pr edict higher levels of functioning over time. 
Hypothesis 5b . Sustained higher levels of social supp ort, or increases in social support, will 
predict lower levels of functioning over time. 
Hypothesis 5c . Sustained higher levels of PTSD-Depression and AUD symptoms, or increases in 
PTSD-Depression and AUD symptoms, will predict lower levels of functioning over time. 
Specific Aim 6. Explore whether stress, social suppor t, copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], neurocognition, or psychopathology have 
differential effects on different facets of functionin g (e.g., occupational, family, social, and physical 
functioning). 
Hypothesis 6a . Neurocognition will be most strongly related to occupational functioning. 
Hypothesis 6b . PTSD- Depression and AUD symptoms will be most strongly related to family 
functioning. 
Planned Analyses 
The purpose of the longitudinal de sign is to better understand the functional recovery of returning 
OEF/OIF/OND Veterans over time and to identify potentially-malleable risk and resilience factors 
associated with functioning. The study design is based on a measurement model that collects 
predetermined, repeated assessments every [ADDRESS_1028793] of the 
proposed research. Various statistical software programs will be utilized to accomplish the study aims, 
as appropriate (e.g., SPSS, SAS, mPLUS, AMOS). VA software will be used. Licenses are supported by 
[CONTACT_169452] 17 CoE as well as local IT (as indicated in original grant budgets). We will also use access 
software through the secure VA VINCI system (e .g., SPSS). VINCI requires documentation of IRB 
approval before analyzing data on the VINCI system. With respect to the proposed primary hypotheses, 
structural equation modeling (SEM; Jöreskog, 1970, 1993) will be the statistical approach employed to 
examine the relationships among the variables. SEM is  essentially a combination of factor analysis and 
path analysis (Kline, 2005). This ty pe of statistical analysis was chosen to test the hypotheses because 
it has several advantages over tradit ional statistical techniques (e.g., multiple regression). For example, 
SEM corrects for measurement error, which, in turn, improves statistical power. SEM also allows both 
latent and observed variables to be evaluated within the same model, and it is an especially effective 
analytical procedure for studying complex relationsh ips among many variables. However, the two most 
important advantages of SEM over other traditional statistical analyses are: 1) SEM enables users to 
conduct tests of entire models in a single analysis; and 2) SEM allows for entire models to be tested 
against other competing models  (Kline, 2005). Given that the one of the primary aims of the current 
proposal is to provide a direct test of our hypothesized  model of functional outcomes in returning Veterans 
(Specific Aim 4, Figure 1), SEM appe ars to be the most appropriate type  of statistical analysis to employ 
as it will enable us to: 1) examine the overall fit of our hypothesized model to the data; and 2) statistically 
compare our hypothesized model to other competin g models (e.g., a main effects only model).  
A two-step modeling approach will be used to test ea ch aim (Anderson & Gerbing, 1988; Kline, 2005). 
First, a confirmatory-factor analysis (CFA) measurement model will be computed to determine the degree 
to which the underlying latent constructs are st atistically accounted for by [CONTACT_751479]. The hypothesized measurement model that we have proposed (see 
Table 3) is based on a combination of findings from our pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299], pr evious research, and current theory 
and represents our best estimate of what the measurement model will be. If the hypothesized 
measurement models are supported by [CONTACT_654378], the stru ctural relationships among the latent variables will 
be tested in the second step. If the initial hypoth esized measurement model is rejected, the suggestions 
for model respecification offered by [CONTACT_751480] (2005, pp 165 - 208) will be followed until an acceptable 
measurement model is found. Once an acceptable measurement model has been identified, the fit of the 
hypothesized structural model will be assessed with multiple goodness-of-fit indices, including the Root 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
30 
 Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA), Stan dardized Root Mean Square Residual (SRMR), 
Comparative Fit Index (CFI), Normed Fit Index (NFI), and the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC). The 
hypothesized models will also be compared with other competing models using either the chi-square 
difference test for hierarchically-rel ated models or the AIC for models that are not nested. Alpha will be 
set conservatively ( α = .01) for all analyses in order to mi nimize the probability of Type I error.  
Specific Aims 1, 2, and 3, which hypothesize that stress, copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], neurocognition, and psychopathology 
will predict functioning in returning Veterans concurrently and over time will be initially tested within the 
context of an independent main effects model in which each of the hypothesized factors will be 
simultaneously regressed onto the functioning factor while accounting for the covariances among the 
predictors. Hypotheses will be considered to be reject ed if the regression coefficients are either non-
significant (i.e., > .01) or are in the opposite direction of our predicti ons. To test these hypotheses over 
time, an identical model will be constructed using level of functioning at 1-year follow-up as the primary 
outcome variable while co-varying for level of func tioning at baseline. In addition, a Cross-Lag Panel 
design (Ecob, 1987; Farrell,  1994; King et al., 2000; Williams & Peodsakoff, 1989)  will be employed  to 
examine the autoregressive associatio ns (i.e., the value of interest is  assumed to be a function of the 
previous values plus a random component) and cross-lag associations between the predictors and 
functional impairment across time. For example, Figure [ADDRESS_1028794] the competing models. It is predicted that the hypothesized 
model will show good overall fit to the model (e.g., RMSEA < .05, CFI > .95) and that the hypothesized 
model will fit the data significantly better than the competing models. The regression coefficients for the hypothesized indirect pathways will also be examined for statistical significance (i.e., p < .01). The 
hypothesized model will also be tested over time. Specifically, level of functioning at year 1 follow-up will 
be regressed on to PTSD-Depression and AUD sympto ms at 8-months, which, in turn, will be regressed 
on to ongoing stress, social support, acceptance, an d active copi[INVESTIGATOR_25577] 4 mont hs and deployment stress, 
pre-deployment stress, and neurocognitive functioning at baseline. By [CONTACT_751481], we will be able to reduce the possibility that response bias during a particular assessment 
accounts for the hypothesized mediation results. Testing the model in this manner will also take into 
account the hypothesized causal ordering (i.e., stress,  copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], social support, and neurocognition predict 
psychopathology, which, in turn, predicts functioning).  
Specific Aim 5, which hypothesizes that changes in the use of healthy copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262], social support, 
post-deployment stress, and psychopathology will predi ct changes in functioning over time, will be 
achieved by [CONTACT_751482] (LGMs) to test hypotheses 5a – 5c. LGMs characterize 
the trends in growth and change functions for indivi duals over time (Figure 4). This analytic method 
assumes that individuals change at different rates and that underlying latent  variables determine the 
overall level and shape of individual  trajectories (Lawrence & Hancock, 1998; McArdle, 1998). LGMs can 
be fit using structural equation models, and are capabl e of describing the behavi or or symptom status of 
individuals in terms of their initia l measurement levels and by [CONTACT_751483]. LGM techniques can also analyze variability in initial levels and trajectories across persons, while 
providing means to test the contribution of other pr edictor variables and constructs as determinants of 
the different levels and trajectories . LGM techniques offer great flexibi lity for modeling individual growth 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1028795] 
differential effects on specific aspects of functioning, will be achieved by [CONTACT_751484] 
(or an alternative model found to provide the best overall fit to the data in relation to global functioning) 
in relation to each specific aspect of functioning at bo th baseline and at 1-year follow-up. That is, separate 
tests of the hypothesized model will be conducted for each specific aspect of functioning (e.g., occupational, family, social, physical). We hypothesize that neurocognition will be most strongly related 
to occupational functioning, whereas PTSD-Depression and AUD symptoms will be most strongly related 
to family functioning. 
Power and Sample Size Considerat ions. SEM will be used as the analytic strategy for testing all 
hypotheses. MacCallum, Browne, & Sugawara (1996)  describe a method for estimating the required 
sample size to achieve a given power estimate at specified degrees of freedom ( df) for both close fitting 
(i.e., RMSEA = .05) and not close fitting (i.e., RMSEA = .08) models. These RMSEA values are chosen 
as points of estimate, since values below .08 are sh own to indicate an acceptable but not necessarily 
close model fit to the data, and values below .05 are sh own to indicate an accept able and close fit to the 
data (Stieger, 1990; Browne & Cude k, 1993; Hu & Bentler, 1993). Th e method described by [CONTACT_751485] a po wer estimate for close and not-close fitting models. 
For the purposes of the current proposal, the softwa re developed by [CONTACT_751486] (2006) to 
calculate power from df, RMSEA,  N, and alpha using the method described by [CONTACT_751487]. (1996) 
were used to conduct a power analysis for the proposed study. For SEM equations, df are equal to the 
number of observations [i.e., observed variables * (o bserved variables + 1) / 2] minus the number of free 
parameters in the model. Due to the complexity of the proposed models, the df for our proposed models 
are high and range from [ADDRESS_1028796] degrees of freedom to estimate power, as 
power increases with df (MacCallum et al., 1996). Setting alpha co nservatively at .01, a final sample size 
of 300 participants (from 400 enrolled) would provide a power estimate of .997 for a close-fitting model 
with 137 df and .988 for a not-clos e fitting model with 137 df. In addition, in the event that there is even 
greater than expected attrition (i.e., attrition rates are greater than 20%), the proposed study would still 
remain well powered even if as much as 35% of the sample were lost to attrition. For example, leaving 
alpha set conservatively at .01, a sample size of 195 participants (65% of the original sample size) would 
still provide a power estimate of .936 for a close-fitting model with 137 df and .822 for a not-close fitting 
model with 137 df. These results are also consistent with Kline’s (20 05) rule-of-thumb that sample sizes 
of 200 or greater are generally well-powered for SEM analyses. Thus, by [CONTACT_751488] 
400 participants, we will be well-posit ioned to retain a sufficiently lar ge sample to remain well-powered 
throughout the duration of the study, even in the event that attrition rates are higher than expected. 
 
Phase II 
Five hundred and one OEF/OIF/OND Vetera ns were evaluated over a two-year  period in Phase II. All data 
collection for this phase was completed in in June 2018, and data was moved to  the SERVE Data Repository 
November 23, 2021. Primary ac tivities for this st udy phase are no longer active, and any remaining biological 
samples have been destroyed. 
Specific Aims 
The specific aims of Phase II are to identify clinically-relevant, modifiable psychosocial factors that: 1) 
prospectively predict improvements in long-term func tioning; (2) predict membership in latent class 
trajectories of functioning; and (3) predict transitions between trajectories of functioning. 
Study Methods 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
32 
 This study will investigate the course of functioning over time among returning OEF/OIF/OND Veterans 
enrolled at CTVHCS. The primary outcome measures will assess multiple domains of functioning, 
including: 1) occupational function ing; 2) social relationships; 3) family functioning; 4) physical 
functioning; and 5) quality of life. Hypothesized predictors of functioning include: 1) level of exposure to 
deployment-related stressors, including potentially tr aumatic events (PTEs) and head injuries/traumatic 
brain injury (TBI); 2) level of pre-deployment stress  and trauma exposure; 3) level of exposure to post-
deployment stress and trauma, including “everyday”  stressors; 4) modifiable psychological factors 
including copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], emotion regulation, self-compassion, attributional style, psychological flexibility, and 
mindfulness; 5) perceived social support; 6) p sychopathology including PTSD and depression; 7) 
substance misuse; 8) physical health symptoms including chronic pain; and 9) exposure to morally 
injurious events. Hair samples will be collected for bi ochemical validation of drug use. Saliva/blood 
samples will also be collected (on an optional  basis) to examine ge netic contributions. 
Procedures 
Phase II assessments occur at 0, 8-, 16-, and 24-month time points. Veterans will complete an in-person baseline assessment lasting approximately 4-[ADDRESS_1028797], although participants may sit in a waiting 
room to complete their questionnaires (any questions that arise will be answered in a private area). The 
baseline and annual assessments include clinical a ssessments, self-report questionnaires, and a hair 
sample (for biochemical validation of drug use report ). Veterans are required to provide a hair sample; 
thus, Veterans who decline to provide a hair sample decline to participate in the study. 
  Validity Checks 
Self-report of substance use will be verified via analysis of hair samples gathered at BL and annual 
assessment. Although only 10% of samples will be analyzed, this samp ling has been shown to increase 
accuracy of self-reported substance use (Marlatt & Go rdon, 1985). Hair samples will be collected as per 
standard procedures recommended, and kits provided , by [CONTACT_751472], Inc. Participants are 
given the option of providing a sample of head hair or from another part of the body (underarm, arm, leg, 
pubic). In the case of pubic hair, participants are instructed in how to take the hair sample and do this themselves in the bathroom. Hair (amount approximately the width of a pencil) is cut as closely as 
possible to the root and laid in a pi [INVESTIGATOR_18090] (root in one direction) , which is folded. Hair samples are 
then placed in a small sealed envelope, which is pl aced in a larger sealed envelope with associated 
paperwork marked with a code number only. A total of 10% of the samples will be shipped to Omega 
Laboratories, Inc. for testing. Hair samples are stor ed with other coded data in locked file cabinets until 
testing. Hair samples will be disposed/destroyed after testing. 
 
Phase II Assessment Instruments. [DATA COLLECTION COMPLETED] 
Measures/ Proposed 
Indicators  
 
 
Purpose  Assessment  
Time Point  
  
Description/Rationale BL 8 & 
16mo 24 
mo 
 
Telephone Screen E    Administered prior to the baseline assessment to determine initial 
eligibility. Assesses inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
Contact [CONTACT_751435] [ADDRESS_1028798] for follow-up, etc. 
Service Connection (SC-S) Demographic,  
PV 9  9 Assess service-connected disability.  
Demographic 
Questionnaire & 
Military History Form  
(DHMQ)  Demographic, 
PV 9  9 Assesses basic demographic and Veterans-specific 
characteristics (e.g., years of education, years of military service, 
family history of military service). Re-administered at annual to 
assess changeable demographics (e.g. marital status, employment). 
Patient Health Questionnaire
–15 
(PHQ -15) Med, DV 9 9 9 15-item self-report (Kroenke, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626] & Williams, 2002) of 
somatic symptom clusters including pain (musculoskeletal, headaches), cardiac, gastrointest inal, respi[INVESTIGATOR_696], etc. that 
account for more than 90% of outpatient physical complaints 
(Kroenke, Arrington & Manglesdorff, 1990). The PHQ-[ADDRESS_1028799] SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
33 
 strong internal reliability in the initial validation ( α=.80) and was 
associated with functional status and disability (Kroenke et al., 
2002). 
Treatment Involvement 
Form (TIF)  CV 9 9 9 Form created for the current study that will be used to assess 
treatment involvement during the prior interval , including medical, 
psychiatric and psychological treatment, as well as supportive 
interventions (e.g. Alcoholics Anonymous, Narcotics Anonymous). Duration of untreated symptoms will be assessed. 
Mini International Neuropsychiatric 
Interview (MINI) 
- 
Psychosis modules E 9  9  Screening Interview for exclusionary criteria (manic/hypomanic epi[INVESTIGATOR_751397]). Assessment of 
PTSD related to civilian events.  
Clinician Administered 
PTSD Scale (CAPS) Med, DV 9  9 Interview. Will assess current and lifetime PTSD using DSM-5 
criteria . Criterion F assesses functional impairment associated 
with PTSD. Both categorical diagnoses and symptom severity 
ratings will be obtained.  The CAPS format allows the interviewer 
to link PTSD symptoms to specific Criterion A events (i.e., a 
traumatic event that includes the experience of fear, 
helplessness or horror) and separately assesses for Criterion A1 
(a potentially -traumatic event) and A2. E xcellent retest and inter-
rater reliability, and high sensitivity and specificity for PTSD 
diagnosis. Questions will reflect both DSM -IV for continuity 
across phases and new DSM-5 criteria. 
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM
-IV 
(SCID)  Med, DV [ADDRESS_1028800] 
(WRAT4)  CV, PV [ADDRESS_1028801] (Wilkinson and Robertson, 
2007) is a brief (2 minute) test that  provides an estimate of native 
intellectual potential that is considered to be unaffected by [CONTACT_751474].
 This will allow a measure of 
pre-deployment/pre- morbid intellectual potential to serve as both 
a predictor and as a covariate in analyses of neurocognitive 
performance, given previous findings of lower pre -military 
intellectual functioning among individuals diagnosed with PTSD 
(Kremen, et al., 2007; McNally & Shin, 1995; Vasterling, et al., 
1997).  
TBI—Vasterling 
Assessment Interview   E, PV 9    9 This clinician-administered structured interview developed by 
[CONTACT_751436] (2008) assesses the number, recency, type of injury, 
and clinical s equelae associated with traumatic brain injury 
during deployment. Total number of lifetime head injuries leading 
to any symptoms will also be assessed.  TBI will be assessed at 
baseline for lifetime history and then re -assessed at the annual 
interview for any new TBIs that may have occurred during the 
past year. 
Traumatic Life Events 
Questionnaire (TLEQ-
Lite) PV 9  9 23 items (Kubany et al., 2000); assesses frequency of exposure 
to 22 potentially traumatic events encountered outside of military 
service, resulting in a continuous trauma exposure score.  The 
psychometric properties were carefully established in 5 studies, including a sam
ple of combat Veterans (Kubany et al., 2000). 
Modified for this study to no longer assess DSM -IV criteria for 
PTSD Criterion A2, as this is no longer required in DSM-5. 
Deployment Risk and 
Resilience Inventory 
(DRRI)  PV 9 9 9 The DRRI (King, King, and Vogt, 2003) is a collection of [ADDRESS_1028802]-deployment risk and resilience factors. The DRRI was 
recently validated for use with OI F Veterans (Vogt et al., 2008). 
The select scales of the DRRI will be readministered at the 
annual interview if participants have been deployed again. The 
social support scale of the DRRI will be  administered to all 
participants at all time points, and the Exposure to Nuclear, 
Biological , or Chemical Agents- Modified (ENBCA-M) scale will 
be administered to all participants at 16 months.  
Full Combat 
Experiences Scale (FCES) PV 9  9 25 items. Newly developed and adapted from the DRRI to 
assess experiences and trauma exposure in land combat situations such as OEF/OIF (Hoge et al., 2004). Will be re-
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1028803]-5 
(PCL -5) Military and 
Civilian  Med  9 9 9 21 items. Measures symptoms of PTSD during the previous 
month. Demonstrates high sensitivity and specificity for a CAPS 
diagnosis of PTS D. Prior research demonstrates the value of 
including both self -report and clinical interview assessment of 
PTSD (cf. National Vietnam Veteran Readjustment Study; Kulka 
et al., 1988). 
Schedule of Recent 
Experiences  (SRE)  PV 9 9 9 42 items. The SRE (Holmes & Rahe, 1967) will be used to 
assess exposure to common, “everyday” stressful life events 
(e.g., job loss, relationship difficulties, illness or death of a loved 
one). 
Patient Health Questionnaire
-9 Med, DV 9 9 9 9-item measure used for screening, diagnosing, and monitoring depression. It incorporates DSM
-IV diagnostic criteria (Question 
9 screens for suicidal ideation; Kroenke, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626] & Williams, 2001).  
Columbia Suicide Scale
 DV 9  9 The Columbia Suicide Scale (Posner et al., 2008) is a state-of-the
-art suicide assessment for individuals perceived to be at high 
risk for suicidality. Internal consistency ranged from .73 to .95 
(Posner et al., 2011). 
Alcohol Use Disorders 
Identification Test (AUDIT)
 Med 9 9 9 Administered at every time point to screen for alcohol-use 
disorders (Saunders, Aasland, Ba bor, Fuente, & Grant, 1993). 
10-item measures adopted by [CONTACT_751489]- standard screening 
for alcohol use disorders in mental health and primary care 
clinics.  Good internal consistency ( α=.80 - .94) and test- retest 
reliability ( r=.86), and strong concurrent validity with the MAST 
and CAGE screening measures (Babor et al., 2001). 
Drug Abuse Screening 
Test (DAST -20) Med 9  9 20-items to quantify drug misuse. Good internal consistency 
(alpha = 0.92) and concurrent validity with frequency of drug use 
over 12 -months (Skinner, 1982). Moderately correlated with 
denial and social desirability. 92% of individuals with drug abuse 
scored greater than 10. 
Fagerstrom Test for 
Nicotine De - pendence 
(FTND)  DV, Med 9 9 9 6 items that quantify nicotine dependence that exhibits 
satisfactory internal consistency ( α = .61), as well as convergent 
validity with biochemical indices of heaviness of smoking 
(Heatherton et al., 1991).  
Brief COPE (b-COPE) PV 9  9 The 28-item measure is widely-used Brief COPE assesses a 
range of behavioral and cognitive copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262] (Carver, et al., 1989).  
Acceptance and Action 
Questionnaire  
(AAQ -II) PV 9  9 10 items; The AAQ-II (Bond, et al, 2011) assesses acceptance, 
experiential avoidance (attempting to alter the form or frequency of unwanted internal experiences), and taking action despi[INVESTIGATOR_751398].
 The AAQ-II exhibits a 
single factor structure, good internal consistency (mean α = .83 
across multiple samples ) and test-retest reliability (α = .80 at 3 
months, .78 at one year), and convergent associations with 
symptoms of depression (r = -.71), anxiety (r = - .58), and global 
distress (r = -.65).  
Brief Experiential 
Avoidance 
Questionnaire (BEAQ) PV 9 9 9 15 items; The BEAQ is a single-factor item that assesses the 
modifiable construct of experiential avoidance (Gamez et al., 
2013). 
Self-Compassion 
Scale – Short Form 
(SCS -SF) PV 9 9 9 12-item self-report measure of self-compassion, consisting of a 
total scale  score and six subscale scores: self-kindness, self-
judgment, common humanity, isolation, mindfulness, and over-
identified (Neff, 2003; Raes, Pommier, Neff, & Van Gucht, 2011). The SCS
-SF is strongly correlated with the original long form 
(r=.97) and has t he same 6-factor structure with one higher- order 
factor.  Internal consistency was .86 for the whole measure, with 
subscale alphas ranging from .54 to .75 (Raes et al., 2011). 
Attributional Style 
Questionnaire (ASQ) PV 9   9 This 12-item self-report measure assesses attributions for 
positive and negative events along three causal dimensions: 
internal vs. external, stable vs. unstable, and global vs. specific 
(Peterson, Semmel, von Baeyer, Abramson, Metalsky, & Seligman, 1982).
 Internal consistency ( α=.72-.75) and test- retest 
reliability (r=.58-.70) are adequate. 
Difficulties in Emotion PV 9 9 9 36-item self-report measure (Gratz & Roemer, 2004) of multiple 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
35 
 Regulation Scale 
(DERS)  domains of emotion dysregulation. Comprised of 6 scales: 
nonacceptance of emotional responses, difficulty engaging in 
goal-directed behavior, difficulty with impulse control, lack of 
emotional awareness, poor emotion copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262], and lack 
of emotional clarity.  Internal consistency ( α=.84 to .93) and test -
retest reliability (r=.57 -.89) were strong (Gratz & Roemer, 2004). 
Individual subscale consistencies (range from α=.81 to .92) have 
also been strong (Perez et al., 2012). 
Monetary Choice 
Questionnaire (MCQ) PV 9   27-item instrument (Kirby, Petry, & Bickel, 1999) used to 
estimate the rate at which re spondents discount the value of 
future rewards.  Higher rates of discounting on this me asure have 
been associated with both self -reported impulsivity and real-
world engagement in impulsive behaviors. 
Endorsed and 
Anticipated Stigma Inventory (EASI)
 Med 9   Three of five 8-item scales that assess a variety of stigma-related 
beliefs within the broader categories of self- and public stigma 
will be used (beliefs about mental illness, mental health treatment, treatment seeking). The EASI was developed for use 
with military and Veteran populations. Evidence is available for 
the internal consistency reliability of these scales, with alphas 
ranging from .[ADDRESS_1028804] strong content validity, 
convergent and discriminant valid ity, and discriminative validity. 
Confirmatory factor analysis resu lts support the proposed five-
factor structure (Vogt et al., in press). 
World Health 
Organization Disability 
Assessment Schedule 
II (WHODAS  2.0) 
 DV 9 9 9 36-item self-report assessment of functional disability with total 
score and 6 domains of functioning: understanding and 
communicating, mobility, getting along with others, life activities 
(i.e., work, education, household responsibilities), participation in society, and self
-care (Üstün et al., 2010). Both global and 
specific areas of functioning are crucial in thoroughly understanding functional recovery, as Veterans may function well 
in one area and have difficulty in another. Moreover, some domains may be affected by [CONTACT_751490] (e.g., work functioning in a struggling economy independent of impairment). 
Inventory of 
Psychosocial 
Functioning (IPF) 
[Previously named Inventory of Functional Impairment, IFI]
 DV 9 9 
(Brief) 9 87-item self-report measure (Co-I Marx et al., 2009) of Romantic 
Relationships with a Spouse/Partner, Family, Work, Friendships 
and Socializing, Parenting, Education, and Self -Care. The short 
version has a .90 correlation with the full 80 -item instrument (C o-
Marx, personal communication). Higher scores indicate greater functional impairment.
 For the 80- item IPF, preliminary analyses 
(n = 236) with Veterans show strong psychometric properties, 
including excellent internal consistency (Cronbach’s α ranging 
from .79 to .90) and concurrent validity with other measures of impairment and QoL, as well as PTSD and depressive symptoms (McQuaid et al., 2012).
 A 7-item brief version will be 
administered at 8- and 16-month. 
Community Integration 
Questionnaire (CIQ) DV 9 9 9 This 15-item measure (Willer,  Ottenbacher, & Coad, 1994) 
assesses frequency of participation in and ability to 
independently complete home, social, and goal -directed 
activities.  The CIQ demonstrates excellent internal consisten cy 
(α=.83 to .97) and test -retest reliability (r=.91-.97). Although there 
is no gold -standard measure of community integration, this 
measure is recognized by [CONTACT_751491] (Resnik et al., 2012). 
Quality of Life Scale 
(QLS)  DV 9 9 9 16 items (Burkhardt, et al., 1989) assessing how satisfied people 
are in [ADDRESS_1028805] from health status (mate, physical well-
being, relationships with others, social, community, and civic 
activities, personal development and fulfillment, recreation, and independence). Good internal consistency
 and (alpha .82 to .92) 
and high test -retest reliability (r = .78 to .84; Burckhardt et al. 
2003).  
NEO Five-Factor 
Inventory (NEO -FFI) PV 9   60 items (Costa & McCrae, 1989) ; shortened version of the NEO 
PI-R. Reliable and valid measure of the five- factor model of adult 
personality. Good internal consistency for the five subscales 
(range .74 - .89). New participants only. 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
36 
 Employment 
Survey (ES)  Demographic, 
DV 9 9 9 12 item self-report version adapted from the measure developed 
by [CONTACT_751492] (Mueser, Glynn, and McGurk, 2006) to 
assess employment  status, number of hours worked, income, 
reasons for not working or working  less than full- time, satisfaction 
with v arious aspects of current employment, and stability of 
employment (number of jobs held, reasons for leaving previous jobs) since discharge from active duty military. 
Health-Promoting 
Lifestyle Profile II (HPLP
-II) PV 9  9 52-item questionnaire that measures frequency of health-
promoting behaviors in several domains: physical activity, spi[INVESTIGATOR_288123], health responsibility, interpersonal relations, 
nutrition, and stress management. The total score ( α= .94) and 
each of the 
subscales ( α= .70 -.87) demonstrate good internal 
consistency.  
Interpersonal Needs 
Questionnaire (INQ) DV 9   18-item self-report measure that assess thwarted belongingness 
and perceived burdensomeness (Van Orden et al., 2012). The INQ has demonstrated good convergent validity, internal consistency and concurrent validity (Van Orden et al., 2012). 
Modified Habits 
Questionnaire 4 
(MHQ-4) DV 9   4-item questionnaire assessing self-injurious behavior  
Nash Moral Injury 
Events Scale (MIES) PV  9 9 9-item self-report questionnaire developed as a measure of 
potentially morally injurious events  (Nash, Carper, Mills, Au, 
Goldsmith, & Lizt, 2013). The MIES has  excellent internal 
consistency, both the overall scale and the [ADDRESS_1028806] validity (Nash, et al., 2013). 
Moral Injury 
Questionnaire - Military 
Version (MIQ -M) PV  9 9 20-item self-report measure for assessing morally injurious 
experiences  or MIEs among military populations (Currier, 
Holland, Drescher, & Foy, 2013). Research supports the 
factorial, concurrent, and incremental  validity of the MIQ- M for 
use in both clinical and research contexts (Currier, et al., 2013). 
Family Assessment 
Device 12 (FAD)  PV  9 9 12-item self-report questionnaire, widely used as a measure of 
general family functioning (Epstein, Baldwin, & Bishop, 1983). Measure is noted to have adequate test
-retest reliability and cut-
off scores which differentiate between clinician –rated healthy 
and unhealthy families (Miller, Epst ein, Bishop, & Keitner, 1985). 
Quality of Marriage 
Index (QMI)  PV  9 9 6-item self-report questionnaire used to measure relationship 
distress (Norton, 1983). The measure was developed based on 
an empi[INVESTIGATOR_751399]. 
State Shame and Guilt 
Scale  (SSGS) PV  9 9 10-item self-report questionnaire used to assess 
phenomenological aspects of shame and guilt  (Marschall, 
Saftner, & Tangney, 1994).  
Gratitude 
Questionnaire -6 (GQ-
6) PV   9 6-item self-report measure of tr ait gratitude. Items are rated on a 
7-point scale from 1 = strongly disagree to 7 = strongly agree.  
(GQ-6; McCullough, Emmons, & Tsang, 2001) 
Hair Sample QA 9  9 To verify self-report of drug use, hair samples will be gathered at 
BL and annual assessments.  The hair sample is a required 
component of the study. Participants will be told that hair may be 
tested for drug use; however, only 10% of samples will be 
analyzed for use  of nicotine, cocaine, marijuana, opi[INVESTIGATOR_858], 
amphetamines, phencyclidine, hydrocodone, hydromorphone, 
and oxycodone.  
Saliva sample PV, Med 9  9 DNA and other products will be extracted from saliva samples. 
Provision of saliva sample is optional. 
Blood sample PV, Med 9  9 DNA and other products will be extracted from blood samples. 
Provision of blood sample is optional.   
BL = Baseline; E = Eligibility; DV = Dependent/Outcome Variable; PV = Predictor Variable; Med = Mediator; CV = Covariate; QA = 
Quality Assurance/Validity Check 
 
Biological Markers  
Subjects will donate saliva and blood for genetic and biomarker research studies. Both saliva and blood 
will be collected because some biomarke rs are known to be present in both blood and saliva. If we find 
a biomarker for PTSD symptoms in blood, and it is also in saliva, that would be a great advantage for 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
37 
 monitoring. Also, there are species of proteins in saliva  that are not carried in the blood, and which change 
with stress. These may also be biomarkers for PTSD symptoms.  No clinically validated tests will be 
performed. The genetics/biomarker component of th e protocol will be supervised by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Keith Young 
(CTVHCS Neuropsychiatry Research Program, Buil ding 205, 3R05 and 3R08) and [CONTACT_751514] (CoE Biomarkers and Genetics Core) an expe rts in this area, in collaboration with the PI. See 
Appendix for Safety Survey. At the BL assessment, participants will be gi ven the option of consenting to 
all study procedures or all procedures excludin g the saliva/blood sample and genetic research. 
Subjects will donate saliva in a coded Oragen tube at baseline and in a 1ml test tube at follow-up. Staff 
will be trained to avert their eyes when participants are spi[INVESTIGATOR_751400]. The Oragen saliva test tubes will stor ed in Building 93 (2A 113) until transported by 
[CONTACT_751478]. Young’s lab in Temple and the small tube collected at follow-up will be frozen at -
80* in Waco Building 93 (2A 113). Subjects can also  opt to donate blood by [CONTACT_751493]. Compression bandages will be used to cover the 
puncture. Blood will be placed in one yellow top, one red top (no additives), one purple top, 1 RNA 
(Paxgene Red-top) and 1 Green-top tubes (Plasma-lithi um-heparin), all coded, and stored at 4 degrees 
on ice until separation (green top) or frozen (RNA  and Yellow top). The original green top tube will be 
recapped and all tubes frozen in temporary storage at the VA lab, [CONTACT_99780]’s lab  or Waco Building 93 
(rooms 2A 116, 2A 117). Whole blood in the gr een-top EDTA tubes will be spun and supernatant 
separated into three test tubes (coded). Blood products will be temporarily stored in a freezer at -20 and 
will be periodically (depending on patient flow) transported by [CONTACT_751494], or by [CONTACT_751495]. Y oung’s  lab (Building 205, 3R05 and 3R08 or to Waco Building 93, 2A 113, 2A  116, 2A 117). Blood 
from redtop and purple top tubes will be processed for cell protein and other constituents in Waco building 93 (2A 113, 2A 116, 2A 117). All blood preparatio n will take place at the VA by [CONTACT_21724]. 
DNA/RNA extraction from the DNA/RNA tubes will be performed by [CONTACT_751444]/RNA 
extraction kits (Amplicon: Building 205, 3R05 and 3R08). Coded DNA/RNA samples will be stored at -
20/-80 and in liquid nitrogen until testing (Buildin g 205, 3R05 and 3R08). Blood product samples will be 
stored at -20/-80 and in liquid nitr ogen for future use, with appropriat e IRB approval (Building 205, 3R05 
and 3R08). Initial genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (Stage 1 and 2) and lab work will be performed in [CONTACT_99780]’s lab (Temple 
Building 205, 3R05 and 3R08). The results of the genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_751401] a coded, de-identified 
dataset and stored on VA computers on the secure CTVHCS Research Service-approved drive  and 
S:\CoE Data\FX drive that will only be accessible to study staff. Below is a 3-phase description of the 
genetics research. If research staff do not have access to phlebotomy se rvice (or if, for example, participants have a fear of 
needles), no blood will be drawn in Phase II. Instead, pa rticipants can volunteer to donate a second saliva 
sample in Phase II, using Oragen
TM DNA tubes as in Phase I. OragenTM test tubes do not need to be 
frozen, and will be stored at room temperature (Building 93, 1A-137, 2A 113) until transport by [CONTACT_751496]. Young’s lab in Temple for long -term storage at RT (Building 205: 3R05 and 3R08). 
Stage 1:  
SERT (SLC6A4). We will perform SERT genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_18499] a triplex/double digestion PCR protocol as 
adapted from Young et al., 2006 and Wendland et al., 2006 to genotype for the 5HTTLPR + rs25531 
variants, the inton 2 VNTR 9, 10 and 12 repeats (I N2) and the Ile425Val a-g mu tation (Ile/Val425). The 
digestion protocol using HpaII and BccI yields Sa, Sg , La, Lg, IN2-9, IN2-10, IN2-12, Ile425, Val425. All 
possible haplotypes will constructed from the variants and used in the analysis. Although the Sg and Val 
425 are quite rare (0.25%), we expe ct to genotype a few subjects wit h these variants subjects (0.5%). 
We will carefully monitor information on the additional Leu425 (and other) functional polymorphism(s) to 
ascertain whether resequencing will be required. Genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_751402] 205. 
Stage 2:  
5HT-2A, 5HT1A, 5HT6, CRHR1, CRHR1, MAOA, P11,  FKBP5, GR, GNB3, CRH, TPH1, TPH2, BDNF, 
TrkB, microRNA panel (exigon mirnome panel or equivalent).  Phase 2 SNP genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_751403]/lymphocyte RNA/methylation/hormone assays will be performed serially on ABI TaqMan SNP 
Genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_418785] (Applied Biosystems, Inc., Foster  City, CA) and bead-based saliva hormone assays 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
38 
 in duplicate with negative controls. TaqMan fluorogenic 5’ nuclease assay (Applied Biosystems) using a 
final volume of 5ul (2 ng genomic DNA and 2.5u l TaqMan Universal PCR Master Mix) will be used. 
Thermal cycle conditions (508C for 2 min, 958C for 10 min, 40 cycles of 928C for 15 sec and 608C for 1 
min) in 384-well plates processed in a Dual 384- Well GeneAmp PCR System 9700 (Applied Biosystems) 
with endpoint fluorescent readings performed on an  ABI PRISM 7900 HT Sequence Detection System 
(Applied Biosystems). For assessment of haplotype coverage, we will us e International HapMap project 
(release 19 October 2005 2006-01-24 or later), which remaps release 19 based on NCBI Build 35 
coordinates.  
Stage 3:  
SNP, gene expression, copy number analysis, gene ep igenetic modifications, pr otein analysis, and deep 
resequencing. We will use commercially available SNP chips, microarray panels or commercial 
resequencing to assay fo r additional for polymorphisms in al l genes and for microRNA and gene 
expression changes. Pooled samples may be used initially to investigate clinical subsets. Data from 
SNPs will be used to generate haplotype data which will be assayed for linkage and association as above.  
Aims and Hypotheses   
Specific Aim 1: Identify clinically-relevant, modifiable psychosocial factors that predict improved 
functioning over time. 
Hypothesis 1a:  Higher levels of acceptance, self-compassion, and positive attributions, and better 
emotion regulation will predict improved functioning over time after accounting for the covariates 
(number of TBI exposures, combat exposure, time since deployment, physical health symptoms).  
Specific Aim 2: Identify clinically-relevant, modifiable psychosocial factors that predict membership in 
latent class trajectories of functioning. 
Hypothesis 2a: Higher levels of acceptance, self-compassion, and positive attributions, and better 
emotion regulation will predict membership in the le ast impaired trajectory after accounting for the 
covariates.  
Hypothesis 2b:  Lower levels of acceptance and self-com passion, and greater ne gative attributions 
and emotion dysregulation will predict membersh ip in the most impaired trajectory after 
accounting for the covariates.  
Specific Aim 3: Identify clinically-relevant, modifi able psychosocial predictors of transitions between 
trajectories of functioning. 
Hypothesis 3a:  Higher levels of acceptance, positive attributions, self-compassion, and emotion 
regulation will predict recovery (i.e., moving to a less impaired trajectory) after accounting for the 
covariates.  Hypothesis 3b:  Lower acceptance and self-compassion and higher levels of negative attributions 
and emotion dysregulation will pr edict chronicity (i.e., staying on an impaired trajectory) after accounting 
for the covariates. 
Planned Analyses 
We will use both traditional (e.g., maximum-likelihood regression) and advanced approaches (e.g., latent 
growth models, parallel process models, growth mixtur e models, latent transition models) to analyze the 
data. For example, to test Aim 1 in a traditional manner, principal component analysis (PCA) will be used 
to create a composite functional impairment factor (s ee Preliminary Studies section for data in support of 
this approach). This approach will greatly reduce the overall number of tests conducted and provide us 
with a broad index of functional impairment. Variables used to create the functional impairment factor will 
include measures of functional disability (WHODAS 2.0, IPF), community reintegration (CIQ), quality of 
life (QLS), and mental health problems (e.g., CAPS, SCID, PCL-M, BDI-II). Either a clinical interview (i.e., 
CAPS, SCID) or self-report measure (PCL-M, BDI-II ) will be used to assess mental health problems 
depending upon the time po int (interviews for the post-deployment,  baseline, and 24-month time points, 
self-reports for the 8- and 16-month time points). Change scores will then be calculated and regressed 
onto the hypothesized predictors an d covariates (including prior level of functional impairment) to test 
Hypothesis 1a.  
Advanced approaches for longitudinal data analysi s will be employed in the current proposal that 
generally fall under the latent grow th modeling (LGM) framework (Bolle n & Curran, 2006; Preacher et al., 
2008), which allows modeling of the change/growth trajectory of different variables assessed on multiple 
Project SERVE: FX
Suzannah Creech
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1028807] that 
they are measures of the same participants over ti me. The growth models take  this dependency into 
account by [CONTACT_751497], and fitting a proposed trajectory shape 
to the scores across time. The initial status and growth rate of the growth trajectory are modeled as latent 
variables (i.e., growth factors). The means of the late nt variables represent the overall starting point and 
the overall growth rate of the population, respective ly. The variances of the growth factors capture the 
variability of individual growth trajectories. The ad vantages of using LGM over other approaches include 
the flexibility of placing constraints on the model while allowing growth parameters d escribing participants’ 
trajectories to serve as predictors of other variable s as well as growth models (Bollen & Curran, 2006; 
Preacher et al., 2008).
LGM assumes that individuals come from a homogene ous population while latent class growth analysis 
(LCGA; Nagin, 1999; 2005) allows multiple subpopulat ions to be inferred from the data. However, LCGA 
imposes an unrealistic restriction that the random va riations of the latent growth factors within classes 
are not modeled (Muthén, 2004; Palardy & Vermunt, 2010). Combining LCGM and LCGA, Growth 
Mixture Modeling (GMM) is a more general modeling framework that has the capacity of modeling both 
random variation of the latent growth factor s and the unknown hetero geneous subpopulations 
simultaneously. Latent tran sition models (LTMs) are related to gr owth mixture models but study changes 
in class membership rather than growth of observed  variables (Collins & Lanza, 2010). For reasons of 
compactness and ease of understand ing, we present path diagrams of the main analyses below rather 
than their multi equation  algebraic equivalents.
Power Analysis. Research questions ar e translated into testable hypothesized models and are presented 
below in path diagrams. The corresponding statistica l power of the hypothesized models was estimated 
using the Monte Carlo procedure available in Mplus (Muthén & Muthén, 1998-2012). For each power analysis, [ADDRESS_1028808]. The model(s) of interest were th en estimated for each dataset, and 
the proportion of datasets in which the null hypothes is was rejected was taken as the (empi[INVESTIGATOR_10477]) power 
of the test (L. K. Muthén & Muthén, 2002).
Hypotheses 1a. The regression models used to test hypothesis 1a (H1a) will be well-powered (>.99) to 
detect effect sizes of the magnitude we expect to 
find (i.e., medium to large) based on our 
preliminary analyses. To examine the effect of 
the change in the malleable/modifiable factors on 
the change/improvement in the long term functional recovery, we propose using a parallel 
growth model (Cheong, MacKinnon, & Khoo, 
2003) as presented in Figure H1ab in which 
linear growth models are specified for individual 
modifiable factors functional recovery. The statistical power of the target effect, the direct 
effect from the slope of the modifiable factor to 
the slope of the long term functioning (i.e., the 
bolded arrow in Figure H2ab), is evaluated. 
Given the proposed sample size (500 
participants with 5 repeated measures), the 
empi[INVESTIGATOR_751404] a medium direct 
effect from the slope of modifiable factor to the 
slope of long term functioning is larger than .90.  
Hypotheses 2a & 2b. These two hypotheses can 
be examined by [CONTACT_751498]  H2ab. Based on the results from the preliminary 
studies, the statistical power for detecting a three-cl ass solution is larger than .90 given the proposed 
sample size (500 participants). We also calculated st atistical power for the effects of the modifiable factors 
on latent class membership. Assuming a small to me dium effect size (odds-ratio = 1.82, which roughly 

Project SERVE: FX
Suzannah Creech
Version 5.9 06.16.2023
40corresponds to a Cohen’s dof 0.34), the empi[INVESTIGATOR_751405] .72 to .91.
Hypotheses 3a & 3b. These two hypotheses can 
be examined by [CONTACT_751499] (L. K. Muthén & Muthén, 2012) as 
presented in Figure H3ab. These power analyses used similar growth factor parameters from 
hypotheses 2a and 2b, and assumed a small 
transition probability of .20. Measurement 
invariance of the latent class formed by [CONTACT_751500]. The statistical power 
for detecting transitions from latent trajectory 
class 1 to latent trajectory class 2 was larger than 
.79 given the proposed sample size (500 
participants). We also calculated statistical power 
for the effects of the modifiable factors on 
predicting transitions. St atistical power for one 
modifiable factor pred icting one or more 
transitions was larger than .72, assuming small to 
medium effect sizes (odds-ratios ranging from 1.6 
to 2.7).
Missing Data Management. Longitudinal 
designs, by [CONTACT_20698] (i.e., the length of 
data collection, the presence of multiple 
assessment points), pose challenges regarding 
missing observations, with partial participation 
and participant attrition being of particular concern. Based on past research by [CONTACT_751501], we anticipate that retention rates will 
be good and that missing data will be minimal. Nonetheless, a limited amount of missed data are 
anticipated to occur. Base d on our pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299], we 
expect the amount of missing data to be 20% or less. In addition, we will implement multiple methods to 
reduce participant attrition (e.g., reminder and follow -up calls, thank you notes, incentives; cf. Kleschinsky 
et al., 2009; Scott et al ., 2006). We will also implement data screens using Mplus (Muthen & Muthen, 
2009) to characterize and elucidate pa tterns of missing data. When missing  data do occur, full information 
maximum likelihood (FIML) estimation will be used to estimate parameters and standard errors. FIML is 
aprincipled approach to missing data management that is considered  “state of the art” by [CONTACT_751502] (e.g., Schafer & Graham, 2002). FIML is a maximum-likelihood based 
estimation procedure that directly estimates parameters  and their standard errors for the full sample from 
the existing and limited data. Thus, there is no atte mpt to replace missing data values (e.g., Arbuckle, 
1996; Hedeker & Gibbons, 1994, 1997 ; Horn & McArdle, 1980; McArdle & Bell, 2000; Neale et al., 1999). 
Instead, as the term “maximum likelihood” suggests , the parameter estimates are derived in a manner 
that maximizes the likelihood that the data were drawn from the population of interest (Kline, 2005). FIML 
is the optimal procedure for handling missing data within both SEM and LGM frameworks, and, in fact, 
using estimation methods other than maximum likeliho od in SEM requires explicit justification (Kline, 
2005; Hoyle, 2000). The primary advantage of using FIML over other procedures is that it produces 
relatively unbiased parameter estimates and standard errors (Schafer & Graham, 2002).

Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1028809] 
Due to a change in PI, on December 18, 2019, the trea tment arm of Phase III of this study (aka: IMPACT) was 
put on hold, and ultimately closed prior to the RCT stag e. Sixteen veterans were en rolled into the adaptation 
and refinement stages of IM PACT. All data collection for this arm was completed by [CONTACT_30097] 2020. Primary 
activities for this arm of the study are no longer ac tive. Data from IMPACT will be moved to the SERVE Data 
Repository with the rest of the Phase III data at the completion of the study. 
Specific Aims 
A sub-study is integrated into the scientific aims in which we will translate knowledge gained in prior 
Phases regarding modifiable factors that predict functional impairment as well as in [CONTACT_99770]’s broader 
treatment outcome research program to  adapt an intervention specifically  designed to promote functional 
recovery among the most severely fu nctionally impaired war veterans. This study component is referred 
to as: Intervening on Modifiable Predictors us ing Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (IMPACT). 
IMPACT involves use of a Successive Cohort Desi gn (SCD) to refine Acceptance and Commitment 
Therapy for promoting functional recovery (ACT-FX). ACT is an empi[INVESTIGATOR_3675]-su pported, acceptance and 
mindfulness-based form of behavior therapy that ha s been used with a range of mental and physical 
health conditions commonly experienced by [CONTACT_751503]. We will first pi[INVESTIGATOR_751406]-FX with two cohorts of 
[ADDRESS_1028810]-FX or mental health 
treatment as usual (TAU) while continuing the long itudinal assessments for long-term follow-ups. The 
over-arching goal of this research is to provide da ta to inform evidence-based prevention and treatment 
programs designed to assist returning Veterans with achieving optimal functionin g upon reintegrating into 
civilian life. The specific aims of IMPACT are: 1) develop, refine, and evaluate the feasibility and 
acceptability of Acceptance and Commitment Therapy specifically designed to improve functioning in Veterans (ACT-FX); 2) evaluate if participation in ACT-FX leads to the emergence of a new trajectory 
class that is characterized by [CONTACT_7419]-term functional recovery. 
Description of ACT-FX 
ACT-FX will be an adaptation of the ACT treatment model aimed at reducing functional impairment associated with any combination of the most common  mental and physical wounds of war. ACT is a 
mindfulness-based behavioral treatment in which the primary goal is improved functioning. In ACT, clients 
are guided through a series of be havioral and experiential exercises focused on six core processes: 
mindful awareness, emotional acceptance, defusion  from maladaptive thoughts, self-as-context, 
clarification of personal values, an d committed action. The theory underlying ACT posits that low levels 
of psychological flexibility, which arises from lack of connection with the present moment, experiential 
avoidance, and disengagement from values-based be havior, leads to functional impairment across a 
range of mental and physical health problems. Such  a transdiagnostic approach  appears essential given 
high comorbidity in severely impaired Veterans. ACT is currently being disseminated across VA as an 
evidence-based treatment for depr ession. Moreover, several studies support the efficacy of ACT for 
several of the other most common mental and physical health conditions experienced by [CONTACT_751504], in turn, associated with functional impairment and disability. As part of Aim 1, our expert 
treatment adaptation team (Drs. Meyer, Vowles, Walser, Morissette, DeBeer, and Elliott) will integrate PI 
[CONTACT_389302]’s ACT manual that focuses on promoting reco very in Veterans with co-occurring PTSD-AUD with 
content drawn from Co- Is Vowles’ and Walser’s ACT manuals focusi ng on reducing functional impairment 
associated with chronic pain and depr ession, each of which has empi[INVESTIGATOR_205552]. An integrated session 
overview and treatment blueprint (i.e., the values and goals worksheet) have also been developed (see 
appendices). ACT-FX will be an individual, ou tpatient psychotherapy, with sessions occurring 
approximately weekly for approximately 12 sessions. Each session includes: 1) mindfulness training; 2) 
review of between-session mindfulness practice and behavioral assignment s; 3) new content and 
experiential exercises; and 4) development of va lues-consistent behavioral  assignments to improve 
functioning. Daily mindfulness practice will be facilitated by [CONTACT_751505]-session exercises and 
using free mindfulness websites, apps, and CDs. Veterans will document their between-session practice 
using paper-and-pencil logs. Veterans will be given the op tion to invite a support person (e.g. spouse or 
significant other) to sit in on a session Thus, the number of sessions will typi[INVESTIGATOR_175640] [ADDRESS_1028811] SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1028812]-FX 
treatment protocol to include additional sessions (e.g., up to 16 sessions).  
Study Methods and Procedures 
Veterans enrolled in the Phase III longitudinal study who meet a few additional eligibility criteria will be 
recruited into the successive cohort treatment component of the Phase III study (Aims 2 and 3; total n = 100). Participants who are eligible and who elect to  enroll in the treatment portion of the study will 
participate in outpatient psychotherapy. This trea tment is currently designed as [ADDRESS_1028813]-FX over 3 to 4 months, th ough treatment length may be modified based on 
veterans’ feedback, followed by a post -treatment assessment that will be virtually identical to the 8- and 
16-month follow-up assessments in the observational study, and for those in the treatment adaptation 
phase only, a 30 minute Veterans’ Experi ences Qualitative Interview conducted post -treatment. The 
Successive Cohort Design (SCD) method involves seve ral steps:1) identifying a promising, theory-driven 
treatment approach; 2) developi[INVESTIGATOR_751407], supporting materials (e.g., 
handouts), and measures; and 3) iter ative revisions based on qualitativ e and quantitative data collected 
through providing the treatment to successive cohort s of patients. We already identified the general 
treatment approach (ACT) and reported on its ut ility in promoting recove ry in people living with 
depression, chronic pain, an d co-occurring PTSD-AUD.  
Stage 1: Adaptation. Our treatment adaptation team  will continue the process of forming ACT-FX by 
[CONTACT_751506], AUD, 
depression, and chronic pain, and by [CONTACT_751507], resulting in a 
personalized intervention to promote broad functional recovery. Clinician and Veteran qualitative 
feedback provided from the first Veteran cohort (n = 15) will provide the treatment adaptation team with 
recommendations for improvements. We will consider changes to the sequencing of treatment sessions 
and whether to add a session(s). Also, where therapi[INVESTIGATOR_751408], additional or refined questions 
for the semi-structured interview guide (see Append ix) will be used for subsequent Veteran interviews. 
For Veteran feedback, individual qualitative interviews will be conducted immediately following 
completion of ACT-FX. The current interview guide is  a modified version of the interview guide used 
during our ACT for PTSD-AUD study. A Co-I experienced in qualitative interviewing will conduct all 
recorded phone interviews, and lead coding and analysis of the interviews. Project staff will provide live 
transcription as close to verbatim as  possible as a safeguard in the event of a recording failure. Following 
each interview, staff will review and edit transcription s using recordings to ensure completeness. Guiding 
our analytic approach, we will use an integration of matrix and grounded theory techniques. Immediately following interviews for each treatment cohort, the coders will independently use a summary template to 
capture key information relevant to key domains from  the interview guide releva nt to guiding treatment 
adaptation (e.g., Treatment Initiation, Engagement, Experiences). Summaries will then be compared in 
a matrix, and discrepancies resolved by [CONTACT_21128]. These matrices will be reviewed and compared 
across participants in each cohort. In the second round of coding, grounded theory analysis will be used 
to identify new or emergent themes. The coders will review transcripts and repeatedly meet to discuss 
an identify novel themes emerging in the data. This will result in a secondary set of inductively derived 
codes. Once this coding schema is finalized, the coders will code transcri pts independently using 
qualitative software. Discrepancies during this round of coding will be reviewed to allow for discussion 
toward consensus. The final content of thematic codes will then be reviewed with constant comparison 
among participants to identify Veteran attitudes and perspectives to inform potential revisions for further 
adapting ACT-FX. Qualitat ive findings be presented to the tr eatment adaptation team to aid in 
modifications to the ACT-FX manual.  
Stage 2: Treatment refinement. We will treat a second cohort (n = 15), followed by [CONTACT_751508] [ADDRESS_1028814] competence, and treatment outcomes will 
also be reviewed and compared with Stage 1 to verify that prior modifications had the intended benefits.  
Stage 3: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_4265]. We will conduct a pi[INVESTIGATOR_751409]-FX protocol compared to mental 
health TAU with 90 Veterans (45 per group). The goals of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_751410]: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
43 
 (enrollment with randomization, treatment completion) and acceptability (treatment satisfaction). We will 
also examine whether changes in the treatment ta rgets are correlated with changes in outcomes. 
Description of TAU and randomization. Our preliminary data indicate that most SERVE participants who 
will be eligible for the pi[INVESTIGATOR_751411]. Among Veterans 
randomized to TAU, those already receiving TAU will continue in TAU. Those who are not already 
receiving TAU will be offered a clinical referral to address the Veterans’ most pre ssing mental or 
behavioral health concern (e.g., to the PTSD clin ic or to primary care-behavioral health for pain 
management). Offering such referrals has been our procedure throughout SERVE. Because of the 
complexity of our target population, TAU will involve a variety of interventions. In accordance with 
recommendations for tracking TAU in RCTs, a brief (5 minute) weekly phone call will be conducted with 
TAU participants to closely track their use of VA an d non-VA mental health services using our treatment 
involvement form. Our statistician [CONTACT_80974] will use permuted-block randomization with varying block 
sizes to determine tr eatment assignment. 
  Treatment Discontinuation 
Treatment will be discontinued for participants who: (1) become actively suicidal or homicidal; engage in 
an uncontrolled epi[INVESTIGATOR_751412], (2) require inpatient 
psychiatric treatment and further study treatment is de termined to be clinically inappropriate, (3) resume 
or initiate a relationship in which they are being physically or sexu ally abused, or (4) fail to attend [ADDRESS_1028815], and allows us to confirm 
that newly enrolled Veterans’ level of functional  impairment has remained high across two time -points 
before treating them. Participants in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_751413] a post-treatment assessment upon 
completion of treatment approximately 4 months following randomization lasting 1 hour, which will closely 
mirror the 8- and 16-month follow-ups from the Aim 1 study. These participants will complete the 16- and 
24-month follow-up assessments (i.e., 4- and 12-months post-treatment) as part of the Aim [ADDRESS_1028816] Assessment Instruments. [DATA COLLECTION COMPLETED] 
Measures/ Proposed 
Indicators Purpose  
Description/Rationale 
Interpersonal Needs 
Questionnaire (INQ) a,b PV Self-report measure that assess thwarted belongingness and perceived 
burdensomeness (Van Orden et al., 20 12). The INQ has demonstrated good 
convergent validity, internal consistency an d concurrent validity (Van Orden et al., 
2012). 
Beck Scale for Suicide 
Ideation (BSSI) a,b DV, Med Widely-used self-report measure of intensity of thoughts and behaviors associated with 
suicide. Includes [ADDRESS_1028817] recent attempt. Prior research shows that 
endorsement of suicidal thoughts and behaviors can be greater on self -report 
questionnaires compared to interviews. Thus , this measure complements the suicide 
focused interviews. 
Suicide Cognitions Scale-Brief 
a,b  DV, Med Self-report measure of suicide-related thoughts that load onto the following subscales: unsolvability, unlovability, and unbearability. Brief version was recently validated across 
3 chronic pain samples (Bryan et al., 2016). 
PTSD Checklist -5 (PCL -5) a Med  Self-report of symptoms of PTSD during the previous month. Demonstrates high sensitivity and specificity in relation to a lengthy diagnostic interview for PTSD (CAPS), 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1028818] SERVE papers. 
Patient Health Questionnaire-
9 a Med, DV Self-report measure used for screening, diagnosing, and monitoring depression. It 
incorporates DSM -IV diagnostic criteria (Question 9 screens for suicidal ideation; 
Kroenke, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626] & Williams, 2001). 
Alcohol Use Disorders 
Identification Test (AUDIT) a Med Self-report measure to screen for alcohol-use disorders (Saunders, Aasland, Babor, 
Fuente, & Grant, 1993). [ADDRESS_1028819] 
screening for alcohol use disorders in mental health and primary care clinics.  Good 
internal consistency ( α=.80 - .94) and test-retest reliability ( r=.86), and strong concurrent 
validity with the MAST and CAGE screening measures (Babor et al., 2001). 
Drug Abuse Screening Test 
(DAST) a Med Self-report measure to quantify drug misuse and related psychosocial impairment. Good 
internal consistency and concurrent validity with frequency of drug use over 12 -months 
(Skinner, 1982). Moderately correlated with denial and social desirability. The 
instructions will be updated to more explicitly assess for misuse of opi[INVESTIGATOR_751414]. 
Acceptance and Action 
Questionnaire  
(AAQ -II) a,b,c PV Self-report measure assessing acceptance, experiential avoidance (attempting to alter 
the form or frequency of unwanted internal experiences), and taking action despi[INVESTIGATOR_751398]  (Bond, et al, 2011). Strong psychometrics in 
multiple SERVE publications (Meyer  et al., 2013; 2018; in press, DeBeer, Meyer, et al., 
2017).  
Brief Experiential Avoidance 
Quest. (BEAQ) a,b,c PV The BEAQ is a single-factor item that assesses  the modifiable construct of experiential 
avoidance (Gamez et al., 2013). 
Self-Compassion Scale – 
Short Form (SCS -SF) a PV Self-report measure of self-compassion, co nsisting of a total scale score and six 
subscale scores: self -kindness, self-judgment, common humanity, isolation, 
mindfulness, and over -identified (Neff, 2003; Raes , Pommier, Neff, & Van Gucht, 2011). 
The SCS -SF is strongly correlated with the original long form (r=.97) and has the same 
6-factor structure with one higher-order factor. Internal consistency was .86 for the 
whole measure, with subscale alphas ranging from .54 to .75 (Raes et al., 2011). 
Difficulties in Emotion 
Regulation Scale (DERS -
Brief) a PV Self-report measure (Bjureber et al., 2016 ) of 6 domains of emotion dysregulation: 
nonacceptance of emotional responses, difficulty engaging in goal- directed behavior, 
difficulty with impulse control, lack of emotional awareness, poor emotion copi[INVESTIGATOR_152274], and lack of emotional clarity.  
Five Facet Mindfulness 
Questionnaire a PV Self-report measure assessing multiple facets of the modifiable factor of mindfulness. 
The FFMQ has demonstrated good construct validity and internal consistency.  Good 
predictive validity in research with veterans. 
World Health Organization 
Disability Assessment 
Schedule II (WHODAS 2.0) a 
 DV Self-report assessment of functional disability with total score and 6 domains of 
functioning: understanding and communicating , mobility, getting along with others, life 
activities (i.e., work, education, household responsibilities), participation in society, and 
self-care (Üst ün et al., 2010). Both global and specific areas of functioning are crucial in 
thoroughly understanding functional recovery, as Veterans may function well in one area and have difficulty in another. Moreover, some domains may be affected by 
[CONTACT_751509] (e.g., work functioning in a 
struggling economy independent of impairment). 
Inventory of Psychosocial 
Functioning (IPF) – Brief a DV Self-report measure (Co-I Marx et al., 2009; Bovin et al., 2018) of Romantic 
Relationships with a Spouse/Partner, Family, Work, Friendships and Socializing, 
Parenting, Education, and Self -Care. The short version has a .90 correlation with the full 
80-item instrument (Co-I Marx, personal communication). Higher scores indicate greater 
functional impairment.   
Quality of Life Scale (QLS) a DV Self-report (Burkhardt, et al., 1989) assessin g how satisfied people are in areas distinct 
from health status (mate, physical well -being, relationships with others, social, 
community, and civic activities, personal development and fulfillment, recreation, and 
independence). Good internal consistency an d high test-retest reliability ( Burckhardt et 
al. 2003).   
Values Tracker a DV Brief self-report measure of value engagement. Go od predictive validity in research with 
chronic pain samples. 
Meaning in Life Questionnaire 
a,b PV Brief self-report assesses presence and search for meaning in life (Steger et al., 2006). 
Social Connection Index a,b DV, Med Self-report measure of frequency of contac t with others, number of close friends and 
relatives, level of secure attachment in relations hips, frequency of problems getting 
along with friends and family members. 
Brief Loneliness Measure a,b DV, Med Brief self-report measure of loneliness for use in large survey studies. Highly correlated 
with lengthier measures such as the UCLA Loneliness Scale. 
Interpersonal Reactivity 
Index -Brief (B-IRI) a,b DV, Med Brief self-report measure of disposition to empathic responding; 2 subscales assess 
perspective taking and empathic concern. Good reliability and validity (Ingoglia et al., 
2016).  
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.9 06.16.2023 
 
45 
 Multidimensional 
Psychological Flexibility 
Inventory (MPFI) a,b PV 60-item self-report (Rolffs, Rogge, & Wilson,  2018) used to assess the dimensions of 
the psychological flexibility model that underlies Acceptance and Commitment Therapy 
 
Expressions of Moral Injury 
Scale (EMIS) a,b DV 17-item self- report (Currier et al., 2018)  to assess for problems associated with 
exposure to morally injurious events 
Credibility & Expectancy Questionnaire 
b PV Widely-used 6-item self-report measure of the credibility of the treatment approach and expectations for positive response to the treatment
 (Borkovec & Nau, 1972) . Used in [CONTACT_751515]’s prior ACT studies  (Hermann, Meyer et al., 2016; Meyer et al., in press). 
Client Satisfaction Questionnaire 
a DV Widely-used 8-item self-report measure of trea tment satisfaction (Larsen et al., 1979). 
Used in [CONTACT_99770]’s prior ACT studies  (Hermann, Meyer et al., 2016; Meyer et al., in 
press). 
Working Alliance Inventory d PV Widely-used, brief self-report measure of clients’ perceptions of working alliance with 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_292415] 3 dimensions: goal, task, and bond (Horvath, 1981).  
Note: a = Included in post-treatment assessment for thos e participating in the IMPACT treatment component; b = pre-treatment 
assessment, c administered weekly during IMPACT; d administered after session [ADDRESS_1028820]-FX  
 
Participants 
Veterans will be recruited (total n = 100 across 3 stages) from the ongoing longitudinal assessment study.  
Additional inclusion criteria are: 1) Veterans will have a global disability (mean item) score on the 
WHODAS 2.[ADDRESS_1028821] 2 assessments; and 2) Those enrolling in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_751415]. Additional exclusion criteria are: 1) recent (1 month) or anticipated 
change in psycho-pharmacological treatment. Vete rans may stay on current medications but will be 
asked to refrain from changes to the extent possible  based on safety; 2) for those randomized to ACT-
FX, current participation in another form of individual  or group psychotherapy; 3) logistical circumstances 
that would interfere with study completion; 4) Presen ce of a non-alcohol substance use disorder (SUD) 
deemed to be the primary focus of treatment. Those with a principal AUD will be eligible. Additional 
diagnoses of non-alcohol SUD are allowed, unless th ey are deemed the principal focus of treatment. 
Potentially eligible Vetera ns who score above the clinical cutoff on the DAST will be asked additional 
questions during the eligibility screening to determi ne whether they meet criteria for a principal non-
alcohol SUD (see phone screen); and 5) AUD/SUD of su fficient severity that residential, rather than 
outpatient, treatment is indicated based on potentia l safety concerns associated with withdrawal. This 
determination will be made by [CONTACT_978], with consultation from the Veteran’s existing treatment providers, 
as appropriate. We will begin the treatment adaptation (Stage 1) and refinement (Stage 2) by [CONTACT_751510] d over time immediately following their baseline 
assessment. The pi[INVESTIGATOR_751416]. 
Recruitment and Retention 
We expect that our total sample of [ADDRESS_1028822] (210 transfers and 150 new Veterans), of whom we 
will attempt to enroll 100. This plan is highly feasible based on PI [CONTACT_389302]’s prior ACT for PTSD -AUD study 
completed at CTVHCS. In addition to being compensated for their time completing the assessments for the longitudinal assessment study as described above, IMPACT participants  will be compensated as 
follows: Those in the adaptation phase will be paid $[ADDRESS_1028823]-treatment assessment 
$10 for completing weekly assessments at each stud y visit, and $[ADDRESS_1028824]-treatment 
qualitative interview ($200 total). Those in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_48085] t RCT will be paid $25 for completing supplemental 
pre-treatment measures, $[ADDRESS_1028825]-treatment assessment, and $10 for completing 
weekly assessments at each study visit ($175 total) . During the treatment adaptation and refinement 
stages, the weekly assessment will involve comp leting the AAQ-II and BEAQ and documenting 
completion of between-session assignments as part of ACT-FX. During the pi[INVESTIGATOR_4265], those assigned to 
the ACT-FX group will be compensated $10 we ekly for completing the AAQ-II and BEAQ and 
documenting between-session assignments; those assigned to TAU will be compensated for completing 
the AAQ-II and BEAQ and docum enting ongoing treatment involvement (by [CONTACT_648]).  
Training of study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_751417]- level therapi[INVESTIGATOR_751418]. Meyer’s supervision. [CONTACT_99770] has served 
as both a national training consulta nt and as a regional trainer in VA’ s national training program in ACT 
Project SERVE: FX 
Suzannah Creech 
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1028826] ed. Following the initial training case, 20% of 
subsequent sessions will be rated for competency and adherence. Weekly case consultation will continue 
throughout the study. Aims and Hypotheses  
Specific Aim 1: Develop, refine, and evaluate the feasibility and acceptability of a transdiagnostic, 
personalized ACT-based beha vioral therapy (ACT-FX) specifically designed to improve functioning in 
Veterans. 
Hypothesis 1:  ACT-FX will be feasible and acceptable to Veterans with complex mental and 
physical wounds of war. 
Specific Aim 2: Evaluate if partic ipation in ACT-FX leads to the em ergence of a new trajectory class 
among Veterans in Project SERVE that is charac terized by [CONTACT_7419]-term functional recovery. 
Hypothesis 2:  ACT-FX treatment will predict membership in a new trajectory class characterized 
by [CONTACT_751511]. 
Planned Analyses 
Aim 1:  All randomized participants will be included in these analyses. ACT-FX will be considered 
feasible and acceptable if: 1) we are able to recruit, enroll, [and randomize] the target sample within the 
specified timeframe; 2) given our complex sample, we have treatment completion rates > 60% based 
on completing > 9 treatment sessions. Our treatment completion rate was 67% in our ACT for PTSD-
AUD pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251], which is high for this population, desp ite our stringent completion criterion; and 3) client 
satisfaction ratings are eq uivalent or better (maximum of d = .2 lower) than those for Veterans 
randomized to TAU. 
Aim 2:  We will test whether ACT-FX is associated with the emergence of a functional recovery 
trajectory by [INVESTIGATOR_1312]-running the GMM analyses describe d above (H1b), focusing on  treatment involvement 
as a predictor. Our preliminary analyses indicate that we have previously detected latent class 
memberships comprised of similar numbers of partic ipants even without an intervention. Thus, we 
should be able to detect emergence of a recovery cl ass should ACT-FX yield effects similar to our pi[INVESTIGATOR_611006]. 
 
  
 
 