PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
1 
  
 
 
 
Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) Integration into 
Rheumatology Clinical Practice  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
16 July 2021  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
2 
 Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) Integration into 
Rheumatology Clinical Practice  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_4238]  
1.0. Background  
Chronic medical conditions, such as rheumatic diseases (RD), have a detrimental effect on self -reported 
physical, mental, and social health, i.e., health -related quality of life (HRQOL) [1, 2]. RDs are diverse with 
variable impact on HRQOL, can fluctuate o ver time, and may mirror disease flares [3 -5]. A patient -
reported outcome (PRO) is any report of the status of a patient’s health condition that comes directly 
from the patient, without interpretation of the patient’s response by a clinician or anyone else  [6]. PROs 
can supplement clinical decision making by [CONTACT_148018]. 
There is increased enthusiasm within the rheumatology research community to integrate PRO measures 
with clinical assessments [7 -9]. 
The National Institutes of Health Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System 
(PROMIS®) Roadmap initiative (available at http://www.nihpromisorg) is a cooperative research 
program designed to develop, evaluate, and standardize item banks to me asure PROs across patients 
with varying medical conditions and in a cross section of the US population [10]. PROMIS ® aims to use 
item response theory (IRT) to develop reliable and valid item banks that can be administered as short 
forms and computerized a daptive tests (CAT) [11, 12]. As it improves measurement precision, it lessens 
burden on the patient. PROMIS short forms are available for incorporation in the electronic medical 
records [13].  
The overarching aim of our project  is to  lay the groundwork for a well powered  randomized controlled 
trial to  assess the impact of incorporating PROs – specifically PROMIS questionnaires – at the point of 
care in clinical rheumatology practice . This IRB application is for a pi[INVESTIGATOR_148013] a 
future randomized controlled trial  (RCT)  of strategies to promote review and discussion of PROs during 
rheumatology consultations . The current pi[INVESTIGATOR_148014] a future RCT, including assessment of  the following : 
• Recruitment and  retention  
• Data collection  procedures  
• Required resources and management capacity  
• Intervention acceptability and feasibility  
• Expected intervention effect and variability   
• Provide data to assess sample size for definitive trial  
We will also qualitatively assess health care provider (HCP) and patient perspectives on the barriers and 
facilitators of integrating PRO use into rheumatology care   
PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
[ADDRESS_169624] providers – (a) PRO data should be collected completely and 
accurately with little effort, (b) the scoring of the data should b e automated and happen in real time 
during the clinic visit, (c) the PRO data should be longitudinally stored in patient’s electronic medical 
record and should be easily retrievable to allow monitoring, and (d) the scores should be represented i n 
a format that is easy to understand for both the provider and patient [14 -16]. 
We conducted a multi -phase study at MM titled Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information 
System (PROMIS) in Rheumatology - HUM00076269. In this study, we iteratively collected data to 1) 
identify the PROMIS health domains most relevant to the care o f patients with RDs; 2) identify clinically 
meaningful cut -points for PROMIS domains with input from patients and HCPs using real patient data 
collected at MM, and 3) incorporate PROMIS domains in the MM EMR.  
Completed Preliminary Work Phase 1: Consensus from rheumatology care providers  
We conducted focus group discussions with practicing rheumatologists at MM to identify PROMIS 
domains that are clinically relevant and actionable at the point of care. They identified four domains —
physical function, pain interference, sleep disturbance, an d depression —as important in patients with 
rheumatic diseases and actionable in clinical practice [7]. There was also consensus among HCPs to  
incorporate PROMIS domains in the EMR along with guidance where appropriate action needs 
consideration.  
Completed Preliminary Work Phase 2: Identify clinically meaningful cut -points for chosen domains  
Initially, data on T -scores across different domains - physical function, pain interference, sleep 
disturbance, and depression – were collected in a convenience sample of patients with RDs at MM. 
Subjects were enrolled, and data was collected using the Ass essment Center® (a free, online data 
collection tool that enables researchers to create study -specific websites for capturing PROMIS) . The 
scores in PROMIS measures are computed to a T -score metric, where [ADDRESS_169625] deviation. A higher PROMIS T -score represents more of the 
concept being measured (except physical function where a lower T -score indicates increased  
impairment). The team adapted the bookmark standard -setting procedure for creating clinical vignettes 
at different cut -points. This method is routinely used in educational and psychological testing and was 
recently used to develop vignettes in multiple sc lerosis, juvenile inflammatory arthritis, and in oncology 
settings [17 -19]. 
Nine patients and 10 HCPs participated in a 2 -day expert panel meeting at MM. Eight of the nine 
patients were women. There was large variability in patients classified as having severe impairment in 
physical function (24% by [CONTACT_8097] 2% by [CONTACT_148019]).  
  
PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
4 
 Table 1: Clinically Meaningful Scores for Different Severity of Physical Function  
 
Table [ADDRESS_169626] a T -score 
distribution that was within 0.5 -1 SD of HCPs, except for moderate and severe  problems where the 
difference was 1 SD. Based on these, a majority of the patients [75 -96%] would be classified as having 
none to mild to moderate problems with physical function.  
Completed Preliminary Work Phase 3: Incorporate PROMIS short forms in MM EMR  
The PROMIS item banks for physical function , pain intensity , and sleep disturbance  have now been 
integrated into MiChart (EPIC EMR at MM). The PROMIS data is collected in selected MM rheumatology 
clinic locations and by [CONTACT_148020]. The PROMIS questionnaires are 
completed by [CONTACT_148021] l or on tablet at check -in before the clinic appointment 
with the HCP). Currently, two rheumatology clinic locations are equipped with portable tablet s for 
collecting PROMIS questionnaire  data. Rheumatology HCPs currently participate in this set -up where in, 
all their patients are given these tablets to complete the questionnaire while in the waiting room. The 
scores from these PROMIS questionnaires are available for display in two formats (Figures  1-2) on 
MiChart (electronic medical record used at MM). The box labeled ‘PROMIS score interpretation’ denotes 
the interpretation of the physical function score and also provides an actionable cut point (chosen as 30 
[Table 1] —the ave rage between patients’ and HCPs’ cut -scores for severe physical limitations in Table 1) 
and recommendations. While the tabular format ( Figure 1 ) is importable into the encounter note, the 
graphical format is not importable. HCPs can generate the graphical format with numerical scores 
(Figure 2) for discussions with the patients during the encounter. Figure 2 shows incorporation of the 
PROMIS item bank (physical function and pain intensity are shown as examples) in the MM EMR. Also, 
HCPs can track changes in  PROMIS scores over time (red arrow). The pre -visit PROMIS questionnaires 
are administered as standard of care to patients across all MM Rheumatology clinics.  
  Clinically Meaningful Scores for Different Severity of Physical Function  
Clinical vignettes  
Category  Cut scores*  Severity level when applied to UM cohort 
(N=233)  
Patient 
classification  HCP classification  Patient classification  HCP classification  
% % 
No problem  >65 >60 0.4 1 
Mild problem  45-65 45-60 27 26 
Moderate problem  35-45 25-45 48 70 
Severe problem  <35 <25 24 2 
*Mean for US population is 50 with higher score is better physical function  
PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
5 
 Figure 1: Tabular display of PROMIS physical function, pain intensity, and sleep disturbance imported 
into the EMR note  
 
  

PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
6 
 Figure 2: Screenshot of PROMIS physical function , pain intensity , and sleep disturbance  on MiChart  
 
2.1. Phase I (HUM00145286)  
Part A:  The feasibility of administering the PROMIS questionnaire to patients using a tablet in multi -HCP 
rheumatology clinics at Michigan Medicine was assessed between July 1, 2016 and March 31, 2018 [20]. 
Of all patients seen in clinic, 87.2% completed the PROMIS® questionnaires, of which 82.4% used tablets 
at check -in, 14.1% comp leted at home (portal), and 3.4% were assisted on a clinic desktop computer to 
complete the questionnaire. Around 13% of patients did not complete questionnaires due to various 
reasons – lack of portal access, limited tablet availability at check -in, time constraints for MAs in a busy 
clinic, and rarely, patient refusal to complete.  
Part B:  Seven rheumatology HCPs were invited to participate in a study from January [ADDRESS_169627] of training on use of the PROMIS scores. Participating HCPs were 
educated in a session on how to import the PROMIS scores in to the encounter note. Of 5041 clinical 
encounters reviewed, patients had not completed PROMIS® questionnaires in 1072 (21%) of the 
encounters. Of the remaining 3969 encounters, PROMIS® scores were imported to the note in 2745 
encounters (69.2%). In these encounters, providers ha d documented their interpretation of the 
PROMIS® scores in 2261 (82.3%) notes. In feedback sessions over the course of the year, HCPs shared 
challenges they encountered with using PROs in practice. The most frequent reason for not importing 
the scores to t he note was a new workflow pattern for the providers to remember during their office 
encounters. Another less common reason for not importing PRO scores into the note was the presence 
of a trainee participating in the visit and doing the initial documentat ion. Overall, the providers felt it 
was easy to import the scores using the dot phrase and to complete the subsequent documentation.  
  

PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
7 
 3.0. The Proposed Study: PROMIS Integration into Clinical Rheumatology Practice ( Pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251] ) 
3.1. Specific Aims  
The goals  identified for th is study are centered on appraising  HCP documentation  and referrals as well 
as patien t-provider communication.  
Aim 1: To assess  the HCP documentation of PROs in the electronic medical record (EMR) as a 
result of PROMIS report card availability at the point -of-care . 
Aim 2: To determine the presence or absence of appropriate HCP referrals in the electronic 
medical record (EMR) as a result of PROMIS report card availability at point -of-care.  
Aim 3: To evaluate the patient -provider communication due to PROMIS score availability at 
point -of-care.  
 
3.2. Hypotheses  
Providing PROMIS scores to patients and HCPs at point -of-care  will give both patients and HCPs an  
objective tool to track symptom s’ progress ion over time. Patients will be empowered  to discuss 
symptoms and issues of concern with their HCP s, and can be actively involved in decisions about 
medications and other treatments . We hypothesize that , compared to not , provid ing PROMIS scores to 
patients and  HCPs  at the  point -of-care will be associated with : 
1. Improved documentation of PRO scores in the EMR ( primary  outcome)  
2. Incorporation of the interpreted data in medical decision -making about treatments or 
referrals ( secondary  outcome)  
3. Improved patient -provider communication ( secondary  outcome ) 
4. Improved PROMIS symptoms (seconda ry outcome)  
5. Improvements in health outcomes as measured by [CONTACT_148022] (exploratory)  
6. Improved patient satisfaction with treatment (exploratory outcome)  
7. Improved patient satisfaction with care (exploratory outcome)  
A comprehensive integration of PROs into clinical care involves not only patients, but also HCPs, and  
may be even more effective than providing PRO scores to patients alone. In addition, we will use 
qualitative research approaches to explore the effects of PRO implementation a s well as  patient and 
HCP expectations and doubts regarding PRO implementation.  
  
PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
8 
 Table 2. Primary , Secondary , and Exploratory  Endpoints  
Assessment  Description  Time frame  
PRIMARY ENDPOINTS  
Percent  of appointments at which 
PROMIS scores are documented in 
the EMR  note  by [CONTACT_148023] ‘yes’ or ‘no’ and 
identified through EMR data pulls . Each appointment  
with the HCP during 
the trial period  
SECONDARY ENDPOINTS  
Percent of appointments at which 
referrals /recommendations  related 
to PROMIS scores are documented 
in the EMR note by [CONTACT_148024] ‘yes’ or ‘no’ and identified through 
EMR data pulls.  Each appointment 
with the HCP during 
the trial period  
Quality of patient -provider 
communication  Patient -reported assessment of different 
aspects of patient -provider 
communication using the Interpersonal 
Processes of Care  (IPC) Survey (29 items), 
which measures 7 subscales: hurried 
communication, elicited 
concerns/responded, explained 
results/medications, patient -centered 
decision making, compassion, 
discrimination, and disrespectful office 
staff (score for each subscale ranges f rom 
1-5; a higher score indicates better IPC ) 
[24].  Up to [ADDRESS_169628] -
baseline 
appointment  
EXPLORATORY ENDPOINTS  
Percent  of participants reporting 
discussion of PROs with their 
rheumatology provider during 
appointments  Patient report of whether or not PROs 
were discussed during appointment 
(assessed via survey).  Up to 2 weeks after 
baseline 
appointment  
PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
9 
 Patient satisfaction with treatment  Patient reported satisfaction with 
treatment, assessed with the Treatment 
Satisfaction Questionnaire for Medication 
1.4 (TSQM) [25]. (Measures 4 domains, 
including Effectiveness, Side Effects, 
Convenience, and one global scale item, 
Global Satisfaction; ea ch domain score 
ranges from 0 -100, with higher score 
indicating greater satisfaction) . Up to 2 weeks after 
baseline 
appointment  
Patient satisfaction with care  Patient reported satisfaction with 
rheumatology care, assessed with the 
Leeds Satisfaction with Care 
Questionnaire (score ranges from 1 -5, 
with higher value indicating greater 
satisfaction) [26].  Up to [ADDRESS_169629] bothersome PROMIS domain T-
score  in sleep disturbance and physical 
function domains and actual score on 0 -
10 scale for pain intensity domain  from 
baseline to 3 month ’s post -baseline.  [ADDRESS_169630] -
baseline 
appointment  
3.3. Study Period  
PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
[ADDRESS_169631] 12 months  or until  the adequate sample size 
is recruited.  
3.4. Study Population  
The study will include participation of patients with rheumatic disease s. 
1. Patients: New and established patients seeking care at Michigan Medicine rheumatology clinics.  
a. Eligibility criteria:  
i. Age ≥ [ADDRESS_169632] access to the internet to be able to complete the PROMIS 
PRO measures and study surveys online  
b. Trial inclusion criteria:  
i. Patients should have completed PROMIS pain, physical function, and sleep 
disturbance measures at least one day before their baseline appointment  
ii. At least one of the PROMIS PRO scores should be in the concerning zone (pain 
intensity ≥ 5  (0-10), physical function ≤ 40  (on a T -score) , or sleep disturbance ≥ 
60 (on a T -score) ). 
2. Providers: Rheumatology HCPs, including clinicians and advanced practice providers at Michigan 
Medicine  
a. Eligibility criteria:  
i. Currently treating rheumatology patients  
3.5. Recruitment  
We will inform HCPs in the Division of Rheumatology about the study and what it will entail for patients 
who decide to participate. To ensure that non -participating HCPs will not be surprised by [CONTACT_1962]’ 
questions about interventions in the study, we will  also inform the rheumatology HCPs about where 
they can view PROMIS scores in the EMR and about the information  that will be shared with patient 
participants.  
We will approach eligible patients with upcoming appointments scheduled  with an initial recruitment 
email, with follow -up contact [INVESTIGATOR_137095], phone call, or text . Patients will be able to opt out of further 
communications regarding this study at any time.  We will also approach rheumatology HCPs at 
University of Michigan clinics interested in participating.   
Interested patients and HCPs will be contact[CONTACT_148025]. All 
interested patients and HCPs will be given an informed consent. Patients will be given the choice to opt 
in to participating in the qualitative portions of the study if interested.  
3.6. Study Activities  
This study will have two components: a controlled trial to assess the impact of integrating PROs into 
clinical practice, and qualitative interviewing  (optional for patients and HCP’s) to identify barriers to and 
facilitators of effective integration.  This protocol is for the controlled trial.  
PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
11 
 Figure 3 (Study Flowchart) and Figure 4 (Study Schedule of Events) show how the different parts of the 
study will fit together.  
Figure 3. Study Flowchart  
 
 

PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
12 
 Figure 4. Study Schedule of Events   
Screening* Baseline/ 
enrollment** 3 months after 
baseline 
appointment  End of study  
For patients :     
Informed consent  X    
Patient background survey  X    
PROMIS questionnaires *** (pain intensity, 
physical function, and sleep disturbance)  X  
X  
Email with PRO score s to patients in Arm 1 ****  
X   
Post -appointment survey   
X   
3 month follow -up survey    
X  
Patient interview (Optional)     
X 
For HCPs :     
Informed consent  X    
Email Arm [ADDRESS_169633] -study interview     
X 
*Patients will be in the screening phase from time of consent to first reported concerning PROMIS score.  
**Patients are enrolled only after reporting a  concerning PROMIS score.  
***Patients are asked to complete PROMIS questionnaires  prior to visits as part of standard of care; 
only PROMIS scores from patients who opt in for screening will be reviewed for eligibility . 
**** Only Arm [ADDRESS_169634] up to 2 weeks to complete surveys/questionnaires . 
PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
13 
 3.6.1. Pre -trial Period  
Once consented to the study, patients will be asked to complete PRO questionnaire s online (which 
includes PROMIS pain intensity, physical function, and sleep disturbance) that are integrated in the 
MiChart before their next rheumatology appointment  (within 3 weeks prior to their scheduled 
appointment) , as part of the current standard of care for UM rheumatology patients. To promote 
completion of the PRO questionnaire s, we will send email and/or text reminders to all consented 
patients.  
Patients will be enrolled in the trial the first time that they report a concerning level of symptoms (pain 
intensity ≥ 5, physical function ≤ 40, or sleep disturbance ≥ 60). Enrolled p atient s will be randomized to 
Arm 1 or Arm 2  in 1:[ADDRESS_169635] concerning scores will not be enrolled and 
excluded from the trial . 
3.6.2. Controlled Trial  
[IP_ADDRESS]. Trial Study Design  
There will be two arms (1: 1 randomization) of the trial to assess PRO integration into care (Figure 3).  
• Arm 1:  PRO Integration into Clinical Practice Intervention Group  
• Arm 2: Usual Care Control Group  
[IP_ADDRESS]. Interventions  
PRO Integration into Clinical Practice  Treatment Group  
For Arm 1, PRO scores will be shared with patients and HCPs via an email ed report  card  in order to  
facilitate discussion of the PRO scores during consultation. HCPs will document their discussion and 
recommendations /referrals  using the dot phrase in MiChart (Epic EMR).  
Usual Care  Control Group  
For Arm 2, patients and HCPs will not receive a n emailed  PROMIS score report. PROMIS scores, 
however, will be available in the EMR as usual. This arm will receive usual care .  
[IP_ADDRESS] Stratification, Randomization, and Blinding/masking  
Patients eligible for randomization to Arm [ADDRESS_169636] stratified based on their concerning 
PRO domain.  
• If the patient has only one concerning PRO domain:  
o Patients will be placed into one of 3 groups: “Concerning pain”, “Concerning sleep” or 
“Concerning physical function”  
• If the patient has more than one concerning PRO domain:  
PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
[ADDRESS_169637] concerning to them, patients 
will be placed into one of 3 groups: “Concerning pain”, “Concerning sleep”, or 
“Concerning physical function”.  
A permuted block randomization scheme stratified by [CONTACT_148026] (pain, sleep, 
physical function) will be created before enrollment begins . Once a participant has completed the 
screening  and evaluation for inclusion/exclusion criteria, the  participant will enter the  randomization 
process. Participants will be randomized to Arm 1 and A rm 2 with equal probability (1:1)  in RedCap . At 
time of randomization, the investigator or study coordinator  will use the randomization sheet  to obtain 
the assign ed randomizati on number and intervention assignment . In this study, participants and 
physicians will know the assigned treatment group.  
[IP_ADDRESS]. Outcome Assessment  
Health outcomes (PROMIS pain intensity, physical function and sleep disturbance) will be assessed 
before appointments and at three ( 3) months post appointment with a n online  patient -reported survey.  
Patient -provider communication, the patient’s experience with the PRO scores, and satisfaction with 
disease management will be assessed with a patient -reported survey after the appointment.  
Process of care measures (documentation and interpretation of PRO scores, clinical decisions) will be 
assessed for each appointment using data from the EMR (notes, medication changes, and referrals). We 
will utilize the Data Direct tool to assist with expo rting quantitative data from the EMR, and the EMERSE 
tool to assist with reviewing textual data from the EMR (https://research.medicine.umich.edu/our -
units/data -office -clinical -translational -research/data -access/self -serve -data -tools).  
Study Measures/outcome  Variables  
Table 3 below summarizes the measures and outcomes to be used to compare health outcomes and 
processes of care for the different study arms.  
Patient -provider communication will be measured using the Interpersonal Process of Care Survey (IPCS) 
with a 12 -item communication subscale and an 8 -item patient -centered decision making subscale [24]. It 
has been used to predict patient  satisfaction  [30]. 
Satisfaction with treatment will be measured using the Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire for 
Medication (TSQM version 1.4) [ 25].  
Satisfaction with care will be measured using the Leeds Satisfaction with Care Questionnaire, which was 
developed for patients to assess quality of rheumatology care [ 26].  
PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
15 
 Table 3. Study Measures/outcome  Variable s 
Measure/ variable  name  [CONTACT_148027] v1.0 – 
Pain Intensity 1a  Patient reported rating of average pain 
intensity over the last 7 days 
(instrument, 1 item)  Continuous. Ranges from 0 (no 
pain) to 10 (worst pain you can 
think of)  
PROMIS Physical Function Computer 
Adaptive Test (CAT)  Patient reported ability to do activities 
of daily living (computer adaptive test 
instrument)  Continuous. T -score ranges from 
approximately 20 (extreme 
impairment) -80 (no impairment)  
PROMIS Sleep Disturbance CAT  Patient reported sleep quality 
(computer adaptive test instrument)  Continuous. T -score ranges from 
approximately 20 (no problems 
with sleep) -80 (severe problems 
with sleep)  
Interpersonal Processes of Care 
Survey  Patient reported quality of patient -
provider communication (instrument, 
29 items)  [24] Continuous scores for 7 domains: 
hurried communication, elicited 
concerns/responded, explained 
results/medications, patient -
centered decision making, 
compassion, discrimination, and 
disrespectful office staff . Scores 
range from 1 -5 for each domain.  
Discussion of PRO scores with patient 
during the appointment  Patient report of whether the physician 
discussed the PRO scores during the 
appointment (post -appointment survey 
question).  Binary  
Satisfaction with rheumatology  care Leeds Satisfaction with Care 
Questionnaire  (post -appointment 
survey)  [26] Continuous .  Score ranges from 1 -
5, with higher value indicating 
greater satisfaction .  
Satisfaction with treatment  Treatment  Satisfaction Questionnaire 
for Medication 1.4 (post -appointment 
survey) [25] Continuous. Measures 4 domains, 
including Effectiveness, Side 
Effects, Convenience, and one 
global scale item, Global 
Satisfaction; each domain score 
ranges from 0 -100, with higher 
score indicating greater 
satisfaction.  
Documentation of PRO scores in the 
EMR note  Whether the HCP imported the PRO 
scores into the EMR note (outcome)  Binary  
PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
16 
 Interpretation of PRO scores  Whether the HCP interpreted the PRO 
scores (outcome)  Binary  
Clinical decision  What decision was taken at the 
appointment to address the patient’s 
issues (outcome).  Categorical. Possible decisions 
include:  medication change, 
referral to another provider, and 
no action taken.  
3.6.2 .5. Qualitative Assessment of the PRO Integration Process  
We will use a combination of qualitative interviews with patients and HCPs participating in the study, 
and open -ended survey questions to identify the barriers and facilitators to integrating PROs into the 
clinical workflow, as well as the reasons these barriers and facilitators are arising , and how they may be 
addressed in the future. Using varied  sources of information collected from different stakeholders 
(patients and HCPs) and at different times will allow us to develop a more objective and richer pi[INVESTIGATOR_148015] e 
usage in the future.   
The RE -AIM model will [ 31] be used to guide investigation of specific aspects of implementation, 
including recruitment and retention of patient and HCP participants, the impact of interventions on 
study outcomes, adaptations made to the interventions during the study, factors influencing use of 
PROs during the study, intention to continue using PROs after the study, and long -term sustainability of 
the interventions and behaviors.  
3.6.2. 5.1. Qualitative Interviews with Patients and HCPs  
We will conduct semi -structured interviews with up to 10 patients from Arm  1 to understand patients’ 
perspectives on how the PRO information was discussed and used during their appointments, and how 
PROs fit into their overall care. Interviews will take place after completion of the  three (3) month 
PROMIS questionnaire. During interviews, patients will be asked to discuss their rheumatic disease 
status, their needs and expectations for the appointment, how the PRO information was discussed or 
used during the appointment, what decisions were made to address their needs, an d their satis faction 
with the appointment.  
We will also conduct semi -structured interviews with up to [ADDRESS_169638] patients  in Arm 1. During 
the interview, HCPs will be asked to discuss their experience using PROs in clinical practice, what went 
well/not well, why, and what changes could help facilitate integration of PROs into practice.  HCP 
interviews will take place toward the  end of the study.  
Interviews  for both patients and HCPs will  be conducted via telephone or Zoom Health, and will be 
recorded and transcribed. Transcripts will be deidentified before analysis to protect interviewees’ 
privacy.  
  
PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
[ADDRESS_169639] -appointment survey for patients  and the 3 -
month follow -up surveys for patients.  
These questions will allow patients and to communicate anything they think is relevant about their 
experience which cannot be otherwise conveyed through the remaining  survey questions.  
3.7. Study Analyses  
Our data sources for this study will be electronic medical records (EMR), survey responses collected 
through REDCap, and qualitative data collected through semi -structured interviews. We will utilize the 
Data Direct tool to assist with exporting quantitative data from the EMR, and the EMERSE tool to assist 
with reviewing textual data from the EMR (https://research.medicine.umich.edu/our -units/data -office -
clinical -translation al-research/data -access/self -serve -data -tools).  
3.7.1. Statistical Analysis  
Sample Size Calculation:   
Up to 300 patients will be  randomize d. Based on our preliminary review, we believe that 70% of the 
consented patients  will meet the inclusion criteria with concerning zone. We expect to screen up to 
1,000 patients to meet the randomization goals.  
The current study is a convenience sample size since we don’t have a priori data to calculate sample size. 
We believe that approximately 300 patients randomized in 1:[ADDRESS_169640] point estimates 
to design a Phase 3 trial.  
Planned Analyses:  
Characteristics of patients will be summarized descriptively, by [CONTACT_6654], using 
numerical and graphical methods. We will compare Intervention groups on baseline characteristics, 
including demographics and PRO measurements, using descriptive statistics. Fisher’s exact test and 
ANOVA/Kruskal -Wallis will be used to comparing the three treatment arms.  
For categorical outcomes, count  and proportion and 95% confidence interval will be reported. For 
continuous outcomes, mean, standard deviation, median, and inter -quartile range will be reported.  P 
value < 0.05 will be considered statistically significant.  
T-scores for the physical function, sleep disturbance and actual score on 0 -10 scale for pain intensityat 
baseline and 3 month follow -up will be calculated based on the guidelines provided by 
[CONTACT_83040]://www.healthmeasures.net/media/kunena/attachments/257/PROMIS29_Scoring_08082018.pdf . 
The planned statistical analyses will enable us to assess the feasibility of the study  and assess the 
potential effects of the interventions . The information gained from this project will help us design the 
PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
[ADDRESS_169641] -appointment surveys. Analysts will  code the deidentified data using CAQDAS software such as 
NVIVO. The analysts will perform inter -rater reliability checks periodically to ensure coding is reconciled . 
Coded concepts will be organized into themes describing barriers and facilitators to PRO integration into 
clinical practice, and ways to facilitate more effective PRO integration and uptake in the future.  
PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
[ADDRESS_169642]. The future of measuring patient -
reported outcomes in rheumatology: Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information 
System (PROMIS) . Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 2011, [ADDRESS_169643] 11 :S486 -490.  
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Measuring Healthy Days: Population assessment of 
health -related quality of life. Atlanta, Georgia: CDC; November 2000.  
3. Devilliers H, Amoura Z, Besancenot JF, Bonnotte B, Pasquali JL, Wahl D, Maurier F, Kaminsky P, 
Pennaforte JL, Magy -Bertrand N  et al.  Responsiveness of the 36 -item Short Form Health Survey 
and the Lupus Quality of Life questionnaire in SLE . Rheumatology (Oxford) 2015, 54(5):940 -949.  
4. Husted JA, Gladman DD, Farewell VT, Cook RJ. Health -related quality of life of patients with psoriatic 
arthritis: a comparison with patients with rheumatoid arthritis . Arthritis Rheum 2001, 
45(2):151 -158.  
5. Uhlig T, Loge JH, Kristiansen IS, Kvien TK. Quantification of reduced health -related quality of life in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis compared to the general population . J Rheumatol 2007, 
34(6):1241 -1247.  
6. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services FDA Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services FDA Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services FDA Center for Devices and  Radiological Health. 
Guidance for industry: patient -reported outcome measures: use in medical product 
development to support labeling claims: draft guidance. Health Qual Life Outcomes 2006;4:79.  
7. Nagaraja V, Mara C, Khanna PP, Namas R, Young A, Fox DA, Laing T, McCune WJ, Dodge C, Rizzo D  et 
al. Establishing clinical severity for PROMIS((R)) measures in adult patients with rheumatic 
diseases . Qual Life Res 2018, 27(3):755 -764.  
8. Singh JA, Saag KG, Bridges SL, Jr., Akl EA, Bannuru RR, Sullivan MC, Vaysbrot E, McNaughton C, Osani 
M, Shmerling RH  et al.  2015 American College of Rheumatology Guideline for the Treatment of 
Rheumatoid Arthritis . Arthritis Rheumatol 2016, 68(1):1 -26. 
9. Witter JP. The Promise of Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System -Turning 
Theory into Reality: A Uniform Approach to Patient -Reported Outcomes Across Rheumatic 
Diseases . Rheum Dis Clin North Am 2016, 42(2):377 -394.  
10. Cella D, Yount S, Rothrock N, Gershon R, Cook K, Reeve B, Ader D, Fries JF, Bruce B, Rose M  et al.  The 
Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS): progress of an NIH 
Roadmap cooperative group during its first two years . Medical care 2007, 45([ADDRESS_169644] 1):S3 -S11.  
11. Hays RD, Liu H, Spritzer K, Cella D. Item response theory analyses of physical functioning items in 
the medical outcomes study . Medical care 2007, 45([ADDRESS_169645] 1):S32 -38. 
PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
[ADDRESS_169646], Bjorner JB, Cook KF, Crane PK, Teresi JA, Thissen D, Revicki DA, Weiss DJ, 
Hambleton RK  et al.  Psychometric evaluation and calibration of health -related quality of life 
item banks: plans for the Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System 
(PROMIS) . Medical care 2007, 45([ADDRESS_169647] 1):S22 -31. 
13. Khullar OV, Rajaei MH, Force SD, Binongo JN, Lasanajak Y, Robertson S, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_148016] A, Sancheti MS, 
Lipscomb J, Gillespie TW  et al.  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_148017] . Ann Thorac Surg 2017, 
104(1):245 -253.  
14. Bushnell DM, Martin ML, Parasuraman B. Electronic versus paper questionnaires: a further 
comparison in persons with asthma . J Asthma 2003, 40(7):751 -762.  
15. Chang CH, Cella D, Masters GA, Laliberte N, O'Brien P, Peterman A, Shervin D. Real -time clinical 
application of quality -of-life assessment in advanced lung cancer . Clin Lung Cancer 2002, 
4(2):[ADDRESS_169648] MH, Dueck A. Integrating QOL assessments for clinical and research purposes . 
Curr Probl Cancer 2006, 30(6):319 -330.  
17. Cella D, Choi S, Garcia S, Cook KF, Rosenbloom S, Lai JS, Tatum DS, Gershon R. Setting standards for 
severity of common symptoms in oncology using the PROMIS item banks and expert 
judgment . Qual Life Res 2014, 23(10):[ADDRESS_169649] setting with 
patients and providers . Qual Life Res 2015, 24(3):575 -589.  
19. Morgan EM, Mara CA, Huang B, Barnett K, Carle AC, Farrell JE, Cook KF. Establishing clinical meaning 
and defining important differences for Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information 
System (PROMIS((R))) measures in juvenile idiopathic arthritis using standard setting with 
patients, parents, and providers . Qual Life Res 2017, 26(3):565 -586.  
20. Nagaraja V, Mara C, Dodge CV, Fox DA, Khanna P, Laing T, McCune WJ, Namas R, Bancroft Rizzo D, 
Vanoverbeke K  et al.  The American College of Rheumatology Annual Meeting in Washington 
DC (November 2016): Establishing Clinical Severity for Patient Reported Outcomes 
Measurement Information System Measures in Adult Patients with Rheumatic Diseases 
(Poster Presentation, Abstr act 1413).  
21. Wolfe F, Michaud K. Assessment of pain in rheumatoid arthritis: minimal clinically significant 
difference, predictors, and the effect of anti -tumor necrosis factor therapy. The Journal of 
Rheumatology;34(8):1674 –83. 
22. Hays RD, Spritzer KL, Fries JF, Krishnan E. Responsiveness and minimally important difference for the 
Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) 20 -item physical 
functioning short form in a prospective observational study of rheu matoid arthritis. Ann Rheum 
Dis 2015;74:104 –107.  
PROMIS Integration Phase II (HUM00149448)  
21 
 23. Katz P, Pedro S, Alemao E, Yazdany J, Dall’Era M, Trupin L, et al. Estimates of Responsiveness, 
Minimally Important Differences, and Patient Acceptable Symptom State in Five Patient‐
Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System Short Forms in System ic Lupus 
Erythematosus. ACR Open Rheuma 2020;2:53 –60. 
24. Stewart AL, Napoles -Springer AM, Gregorich SE, Santoyo -Olsson J. Interpersonal processes of care 
survey: patient -reported measures for diverse groups . Health services research 2007, 42(3 Pt 
1):1235 -1256.  
25. Atkinson MJ, Sinha A, Hass SL, Colman SS, Kumar RN, Brod M, et al. Validation of a general measure 
of treatment satisfaction, the Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire for Medication (TSQM), 
using a national panel study of chronic disease. Health and Qualit y of Life Outcomes 2004:13.  
26. Hill J, Bird HA, Hopkins R, Lawton C, Wright V. Survey of satisfaction with care in a rheumatology 
outpatient clinic. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases 1992;51:195 –197.  
27. Williams DA, Kuper D, Segar M, Mohan N, Sheth M, Clauw DJ. Internet -enhanced management of 
fibromyalgia: A randomized controlled trial. Pain 2010;151:694 –702.  
28. Fitzcharles M -A, Perrot S, Häuser  W. Comorbid fibromyalgia: A qualitative review of prevalence and 
importance. Eur J Pain 2018;22:1565 –1576.  
29. Gee PM, Greenwood DA, Paterniti DA, Ward D, Miller LMS. The eHealth Enhanced Chronic Care 
Model: A Theory Derivation Approach. Journal of Medical Internet Research 2015;17:e86.  
30. Napoles AM, Gregorich SE, Santoyo -Olsson J, O'Brien H, Stewart AL. Interpersonal processes of care 
and patient satisfaction: do associations differ by [CONTACT_545], ethnicity, and language?  Health 
services research 2009, 44(4):1326 -1344.  
31. Kessler RS, Purcell EP, Glasgow RE, Klesges LM, Benkeser RM, Peek CJ. What Does It Mean to 
“Employ” the RE -AIM Model? Eval Health Prof 2013;36:44 –66. 
32. Hubbard AE, Ahern J, Fleischer NL, Laan MV der, Lippman SA, Jewell N, et al. To GEE or Not to GEE: 
Comparing Population Average and Mixed Models for Estimating the Associations Between 
Neighborhood Risk Factors and Health. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623] 2010;21:467 –474.  