1 
 
 
 STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
STUDY TITLE:  
Mindfulness -based Smoking Cessation Enhanced with Mobile Technology   
 DATE OF DOCUMENT:  
June 14, 2021  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: 
[INVESTIGATOR_699815] , Ph.D., Associate [CONTACT_3348] of Health Policy  & Behavioral Sciences, School of Public Health, Georgia State University  
 FUNDING : 
National Cancer  Institute  R01CA237004 (“Mindfulness -based Smoking Cessation Enhanced with 
Mobile Technology for Low- Income Smokers ”) 
 
CO-INVESTIGATORS : 
• Michael Eriksen, Sc.D., Regents’ Professor , School of Public Health, Georgia State University   
• Matt Hayat , Ph.D. , Professor  of Biostatistics , School of Public Health, Georgia State University   
• David W. Wetter, Ph.D., Professor, University of Utah and Huntsman Cancer Institute  
• Donald Hedeker , Ph.D., Professor of Biostatistics, University of Chicago  
 
CONSULTANTS: 
• Lorien Abroms, Sc.D., Professor, George Washington University School of Public Health (Consultant regarding text messaging intervention)  
• Mark Dannenfelser, MA, LPC, Founding Director, Mindfulness Center of Atlanta ( study     
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541])  
• Stephanie Swann, PhD, Owner and Instructor, Atlanta Mindfulness Institute (study     
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541])  
 
PARTICIPATING STUDY SITE : 
School of Public Health, Georgia State University  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_699816], Ph.D., Associate [CONTACT_699849]: 404- 413-9335 
Email: [EMAIL_13375]  
 
2 
 
 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
Page 
 
Tool Revision History  .............................................................................................................. 3  
PRÉCIS  .................................................................................................................................. 4  
1. STUDY OBJECTIVES ............................................................................................................ 5 
2. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  ........................................................................................ 6 
3. STUDY DESIGN  ..................................................................................................................... 7 
4. SELECTION AND ENROLLMENT OF PARTICIPANTS ......................................................... 8 
5. STUDY INTERVENTIONS  .................................................................................................... 10 
6. STUDY PROCEDURES  ....................................................................................................... 12 
7. SAFETY ASSESSMENTS .................................................................................................... 1 7 
8. INTERVENTION DISCONTINUATION  ................................................................................. 17 
9. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  ...................................................................................... 18 
10. DATA COLLECTION AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  ........................................................... 20 
11. PARTICIPANT R IGHTS AND CONFIDENTIALITY  ............................................................. 22 
12. PUBLICATION OF RESEARCH FINDINGS  ....................................................................... 22 
13. REFERENCES  ................................................................................................................... 23 
 
  
  
3 
 
 
 Tool Revision History  
 
Version Number: 1  
Version Date: 2/10/20  
Version Number: 2  
Version Date: 2/01/21  
Changes:  
• Additional safety precautions were added for the context of the COVID -19 pandemic.  
• Eight  weeks of nicotine patches will be provided (vs. the 6 weeks originally proposed).  
• Text messages include quotes sharing the experiences of former smokers in our program. 
These messages are all anonymous and described as being from either “Mike” or “Kim,” depending on the participant’s preference.  
• Telephone consent will be documented using REDCap.  
• Questionnaires were updated.  
Version Number: 3  
Version Date: 5/ 19/21  
Changes:  
• Mindfulness group sessions will be delivered virtually (via Zoom) rather than in person. This 
change was made for participant safety during the COVID -[ADDRESS_950066] in 
person at GSU , with phone/online surveys as back -up. Surveys at weeks 1, 3, and 5 will be 
administered  online, or by [CONTACT_699824].  
• In addition to nicotine patches, participants will be provided nicotine lozenges . Accordingly , the 
following contraindications for nicotine lozenges have been added to the exclusion criteria: 
high blood pressure not controlled with medication; stomach ulcers; and diabetes  that is not 
controlled with medication.  
• Since participants will not come for as many in- person sessions, they will be given 4 weeks of 
nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) at baseline and the other 4 weeks of NRT will be mailed 
when needed.  
• The requirement for participants to have adequate health literacy was removed.  
• A program evaluation question was added for the usual care condition.  
• Trialfac ts will assist with the social media recruitment.  
Version Number: 4 
Version Date: 5/26/21  
Change:  
• Participants will be excluded if they are currently pregnant, plan to become pregnant in the next 5 months, or breastfeeding. In the unlikely case that a woman becomes pregnant during 
the study (since we are now excluding those who plan to become pregnant), she will still have 
access to behavioral treatment depending on her treatment condition, but she will be referred 
to her healthcare provider to inquire about and potentially obtain nicotine replacement therapy . 
Version Number: 5 Version Date: 6/14/21  
Change:  
• The schedule of questionnaires was updated, and participant compensation was updated.   
4 
 
 
 PRÉCIS  
 
Study Title  
iQuit Mindfully: Mindfulness -based Smoking Cessation Enhanced with Mobile Technology  
 Objectives  
Aim I : Test the efficacy of a mindfulness -based text messaging program for smoking cessation (“iQuit 
Mindfully”) , both as a standalone intervention and in combination with in -person counseling.  
Aim II : Investigate the mechanisms through which mindfulness training impact s smoking cessation.  
 Design, Interventions and Outcomes   
This study is a 2 X 2  randomized controlled trial to investigate the effects of the iQuit Mindfully text 
messaging program, both as a standalone intervention and in combination with in- person counseling 
(Mindfulness -based Addiction Treatment; MBAT) , compared to usual care. Participants will b e 
randomized to one of four  groups  based on assignment to iQuit Mindfully text messages (yes/no) and 
in-person MBAT (yes/no) :  
• Usual Care (self-help materials + nicotine patch treatment)  
• MBAT  (8 weekly virtual  MBAT sessions  + self -help materials + nicotine patch treatment ) 
• iQuit Mindfully  (iQuit Mindfully text messages + self -help materials + nicotine patch treatment)  
• MBAT + iQuit Mindfully  (8 weekly virtual  MBAT sessions + iQuit Mindfully text messages + 
self-help materials + nicotine patch treatment)  
 All study participants will receive self -help smoking cessation materials, including the “Clearing the 
Air” booklet developed by [CONTACT_29630] (NCI) and a referral to the Tobacco Cess ation 
Quitline (1 -800-QUIT -NOW) . All study participants will also receive nicotine patches. Assessments will 
occur at baseline and weeks 1, 3, 5, 8, 12, and 24 . Primary outcomes are smoking abstinence at 8 
weeks  after the start  of treatment  (7-day abstinence, biochemically verified by [CONTACT_46761][INVESTIGATOR_33516] <6 ppm), 12 weeks after the start of treatment (3 month follow -up; 7 -day abstinence, 
biochemically verified by [CONTACT_46761][INVESTIGATOR_33514] <6 ppm),  and 24 weeks after the start  of treatment 
(6-month follow -up; 7-day abstinence, biochemically verified by [CONTACT_249899] < 20 ng/ml). Secondary 
outcomes include frequency of home mindfulness practice and self -reported levels of mindfulness, 
emotions, craving, withdrawal, dependence, self -efficacy, and social support.   
 Sample Size and Population  
Participants will include English -speaking adult smokers (ages 18  and above). Recruitment will target 
a racially/ethnically diverse sample of individuals with relatively low income levels, with a target 
sample size of 485 (maximum 500) .  
[ADDRESS_950067]  the efficacy of a mindfulness -based text messaging program for smoking 
cessation ( “iQuit Mindfully”) , both as a standalone intervention and in combination with in- person 
counseling, and examine underlying mechanisms  of mindfulness treatment . Approximately 485 
participants (maximum 500) will be randomized to one of four  groups:  
• Usual Care (self-help materials + nicotine patch treatment)  
• MBAT  (8 weekly virtual  MBAT sessions + self -help materials + nicotine patch treatment ) 
• iQuit Mindfully  (iQuit Mindfully text messages + self -help materials + nicotine patch treatment)  
• MBAT + iQuit Mindfully  (8 weekly virtual  MBAT sessions + iQuit Mindfully text messages + 
self-help materials + nicotine patch treatment)  
 
All study participants will receive self -help smoking cessation materials, including the “Clearing the 
Air” booklet developed by [CONTACT_29630] (NCI) and a referral to the Tobacco Cessation Quitlin e (1-800-QUIT -NOW). All study participants will also receive nicotine patches. Assessments will 
occur at baseline and weeks 1, 3, 5, 8, 12, and 24. Primary outcomes are smoking abstinence at 8 
weeks after the start of treatment (7- day abstinence, biochemically verified by [CONTACT_46761][INVESTIGATOR_33516] <6 ppm), 12 weeks after the start of treatment (3 month follow -up; 7 -day abstinence, 
biochemically verified by [CONTACT_46761][INVESTIGATOR_33514] <6 ppm), and 24 weeks after the start of treatment 
(6-month follow -up; 7- day abstinence, biochemically verified by [CONTACT_249899] < 20 ng/ml). Secondary 
outcomes include frequency of home mindfulness practice and self -reported levels of mindfulness, 
emotions, craving, withdrawal, dependence, self -efficacy, and social support.  Aims an d hypotheses 
are outlined below:  
Aim I. Test the efficacy of a mindfulness -based text messaging program for smoking cessation (“iQuit 
Mindfully”), both as a standalone intervention and in combination with in -person counseling.  
We hypothesize that:  
1a) MBAT + iQuit Mindfully will result in high er rates of smoking cessation and lapse recovery than 
MBAT, which will produce higher cessation and lapse recovery than UC. iQuit Mindfully as a 
standalone intervention will also produce higher cessation and lapse recovery than UC.  
1b) As an exploratory ai m, we will examine whether poverty status moderates treatment efficacy                            
(i.e., poverty status will predict worse cessation outcomes in MBAT but not MBAT + iQuit Mindfully).  
Aim II.  Investigate the mechanisms through which mindfulness training impacts  smoking cessation. 
Participants will complete questionnaires from baseline through 24 weeks after the start of treatment , 
in addition to intensive diary assessments for 6 contiguous week s during treatment. We hypothesize 
that:  
2a) Compared to UC, the mindfulness treatment arms ( MBAT, iQuit Mindfully , and MBAT + iQuit 
Mindfully ) will increase mindfulness; reduce negative affect (NA) and volatility of NA (i.e., greater 
affective stability); increase positive affect; reduce craving and withdrawal; and increase self -
efficacy and social support, all of which will mediate effects of the mindfulness -based treatment 
arms  vs. UC on abstinence.  
2b) Compared to UC, MBAT , iQuit Mindfully, and MBAT + iQuit Mindfully will all attenuate links 
between NA/craving and smoking. That is, in addition to reducing NA and craving (2a), 
mindfulness training is hypothesized to weaken the relationships between NA/craving and smoking.  
6 
 
 
 2c) Compared to MBAT, MBAT + iQuit Mindfully will produce stronger effects on the above 
mechanisms (2a, 2b). Mechanisms outlined in 2a will mediate effects of MBAT + iQuit Mindfully 
vs. MBAT on abstinence.  
 
2. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
 
Tobacco use, a primary behavioral risk factor for cancer, is the leading cause of preventable 
morbidity and mortality in the U.S.1-5 Only 7% of smokers quit each year despi[INVESTIGATOR_699817].6 Adults with low socioeconomic status (SES) and members of certain racial/ethnic 
minority groups (e.g., African Americans) are less likely to quit and consequently experience profound tobacco- related cancer disparities.
6-10 There is an urgent need to improve upon evidence- based 
smoking cessation interventions to better serve these populations. Mindfulness training substantially 
increases rates of smoking cessation and lapse recovery.11,12 There is a dearth of research on 
mindfulness in low -SES and racial/ethnic minority groups, but these interventions do show promise f or 
smoking cessation in these populations.12-[ADDRESS_950068] lower access to smoking 
cessation resources.  
Mobile health technology (“mHealth”) could increase treatment engagement and provide vital 24/[ADDRESS_950069], thus enhancing treatment effectiveness. Based on 
iterative feedback from low -SES smokers, we developed a text messaging program (“iQuit Mindfully”) 
as an adjunct to in- person mindfulness -based smoking cessation treatment. In a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] ( N=71), 
participants were highly engaged and benefited from tailored, in- the-moment strategies and social 
support from the mHealth messages.
[ADDRESS_950070], 23.1% of participants living in poverty who 
received iQuit Mindfully achieved biochemically -confirmed abstinence at end of treatment and 1-
month follow -up, while none of those living in poverty quit in the in- person- only treatment.16 Building 
on this initial work, we incorporated participant feedback to further increase interactivity and 
personalization so that iQuit Mindfully can more flexibly adapt to participants’ changing needs.  We 
have also developed a version of iQuit Mindfully that can be implemented as a standalone program (i.e., without weekly MBAT sessions) . Pending clinical trial results,  iQuit Mindfully could be highly 
scalable and cost -effective as a standalone program.  
  
7 
 
 
 3. STUDY DESIGN  
 
This study is a 2 X 2  randomized controlled trial to investigate the effects of the iQu it Mindfully text 
messaging program, both as a standalone intervention and in combination with virtual  counseling 
(Mindfulness -based Addiction Treatment; MBAT) , compared to usual care. Participants will be 
randomized to one of 4 groups  based on assignment to iQuit Mindfully text messages (yes/no) and 
virtual  MBAT (yes/no)  as shown below :  
   
Mindfulness -Based Addiction Treatment  
(MBAT; virtual  group treatment)    
No Yes 
 
iQuit Mindfully 
(text messages)  No Usual Care  MBAT  
Yes iQuit Mindfully  MBAT + iQuit Mindfully  
 
The four conditions are:  
• Usual Care (self-help materials + nicotine patch treatment)  
• MBAT  (8 weekly virtual  MBAT sessions + self -help materials + nicotine patch treatment ) 
• iQuit Mindfully  (iQuit Mindfully text messages + self -help materials + nicotine patch treatment)  
• MBAT + iQuit Mindfully  (8 weekly virtual MBAT sessions + iQuit Mindfully text messages + 
self-help materi als + nicotine patch treatment)  
 
All study participants will receive self -help smoking cessation materials, including the “Clearing the 
Air” booklet developed by [CONTACT_29630] (NCI) and a referral to the Tobacco Cessation Quitline (1 -800-QUIT -NOW). All study participants will also receive nicotine patches. A ssessments will 
occur at baseline and weeks 1, 3, 5, 8, 12, and 24. Primary outcomes are smoking abstinence at 8 
weeks after the start of treatment (7- day abstinence, biochemically verified by [CONTACT_46761][INVESTIGATOR_33516] <6 ppm), 12 weeks after the start of tr eatment (3 month follow -up; 7 -day abstinence, 
biochemically verified by [CONTACT_46761][INVESTIGATOR_33514] <6 ppm), and 24 weeks after the start of treatment 
(6-month follow -up; 7- day abstinence, biochemically verified by [CONTACT_249899] < 20 ng/ml). Secondary 
outcom es include frequency of home mindfulness practice and self -reported levels of mindfulness, 
emotions, craving, withdrawal, dependence, self -efficacy, and social support.  
  
8 
 
 
 4. SELECTION AND ENROLLMENT OF PARTICIPANTS  
 
Participants will include English -speaking adult smokers (ages 18  and above). Recruitment will target 
a racially/ethnically diverse sample of individuals with relatively low income levels.  
 Inclusion criteria are:  
• at least 18 years of age  
• current smoker with history of >3 cigaret tes/day (and expi[INVESTIGATOR_33514] [CO] >6ppm)  
• motivated to quit within next 30 days  
• valid home address in the greater Atlanta, GA area 
• functioning telephone number 
• can speak, read, and write in English  
 
Exclusion criteria are:  
• contraindication for nicotine patch  or nicotine lozenge 
• active substance abuse/dependence or clinically significant depressive symptoms  
• current use of tobacco cessation medications  
• pregnancy , planning to become pregnant in the next 5 months,  or lactation  
• household member enrolled in the study  
• enrolled in previous smoking cessation study  based on mindfulness and/or text messaging at 
Georgia State University ( PI [INVESTIGATOR_699818] 2017- 2020 studies entitled “Mindfulness -based Smoking 
Cessation Treatment ,” “Qualitative Study of Text Messages for Smoking Cessation,” iQuit 
iText Study: Feasibility Study of Mindfulness and Text Messaging for Quitting Smoking,” or 
“Evaluation of Mindfulness and Text Messaging for Smoking Cessation” ) 
 
Recruitment and Enrollment Procedures   
Recruitment will focus  on flyers; print, radio, and social media; community outreach; and partnerships 
with local healthcare systems, with targeted recruitment of low -income and racially/ethnically diverse 
smokers in Atlanta, GA. Study flyers and example social media recruitment advertisements are 
attached.  
 Participants will be recruited through flyers ( posted at local clinics /community health centers and other 
community organizations (e.g., YMCA, libraries , non -profit organizations, organizations serving the 
LGBTQ community, etc. ); on and near GSU campuses; in coffee shops, restaurants , and stores 
selling tobacco products; near MARTA train/bus stops, shelters, etc.) and media (e.g., radio; print 
media in local newspapers /magazines (both online and paper versions); through GSU digital signage;  
and on M ARTA buses/trains). Participants may also share flyers or the survey link with other 
individuals who are interested in participating.  
 
The research team will attend meetings sponsored by [CONTACT_699825]. We will give presentations, talk with staff, and provide flyers at local clinics and community organizations. For example, we will provide both print 
and digital flyers to contacts affiliated with Grady Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_48214]; Fulton, DeKalb and other County 
Boards of Health; Atlanta -based universities; community health centers (e.g., HEALing Community 
Center , Mercy Care, etc.); primary care practices ; health fairs; and other healthcar e and community 
organizations . Information about the study will also be provided to the GSU community (e.g., through 
presentations and print and digital flyers).  
 
Online recruitment strategies will entail targeted ads posted on social media and internet advertising 
channels including Facebook, Google Adwords, Instagram, Reddit, YouTube, Twitter, Craigslist, 
Nextdoor , etc. Ads will be tailored according to the platform (e.g., reliance on text vs. images) and the 
target audience’s digital native lifestyle (e.g., informal vs. formal tone), to encourage high levels of 
9 
 
 
 participation (e.g., clear calls to action). Ads will include content to appeal to a broad range of adult 
smokers who are interested in quitting. We will monitor ad performance closely and make ti mely 
decisions to improve content or change social media channel strategies  as appropriate. E xample 
recruitment images and text  for social media advertisements  are attached . The digital flyer will also be 
shared through GSU social media and online platforms (e.g., Craigslist, Nextdoor), with a link 
provided to the Qualtrics online screener. Individuals who are interested in the study will either call our 
research office to complete telephone screening (with verbal informed consent; see details below) or 
click on a link to be taken to an online (GSU- hosted Qualtrics) screener survey (with online informed 
consent; see details below).  Individuals will also be able to share the link to the online screener with 
others who might be interested.  
 Trialfacts will assist with  the social media recruitment. Trialfacts creates compliant advertisements 
used in its social media recruitment strategy. Trialfacts creates a mobile and tablet friendly study Web 
page, which is the central destination for all interested patients. Trialfacts promotes the study to its 
database of 60,000+ volunteers interested in participating in clinical trials. Trialfacts accesses highly targeted patients searching online for relevant health information and treatment options through social 
media i.e. Facebook, Instagram, Youtube, Reddit, Quora, Craigslist, and Google search. Trialfacts 
creates and manages an automated pre -screening solution (online survey that asks the same 
eligibility criteria in our IRB- approved online screener). Information about those individuals who pass 
the pre- screening is sent immediately via email in a password- protected PDF and in a private referral 
spreadsheet to the study staff. Data is stored in a secure Google Drive folder  (more details about 
Trialfacts privacy policy can be found here: https://trialfacts.com/privacy -policy/
). Trialfacts  will delete 
all information at the conclusion of recruitment  at [CONTACT_699850]’ request. Participants may also request 
that Trialfacts  delete their information at any time.  As with all participants who complete screening 
online, for  participants are recruited through Trial Facts, GSU research staff will follow -up with a 
phone call to confirm eligibility and tell these individuals more about the study.   
 Enrollment will be ongoing over approximately 3 years. For people who are interested in participating 
but not able to participate at the time that they initially call (e.g., if the session times do not work for 
their current schedule), the study team will ask if they would like to be contact[CONTACT_6811] a later date ( within 
the next year ) to see if they may be able to participate.  
 
For our  previous  smoking cessation study  at GSU , the inclusion criteria were slightly more rigid. For 
example, interested individuals were excluded if they also used tobacco products other than cigarettes. Given that use of other tobacco products (e.g., cigars, l ittle cigars, cigarillos) is common 
among low -income adult smokers, we believe it is important to include these people and help them 
quit smoking cigarettes as well as other tobacco products. Accordingly, we will contact [CONTACT_699826]. We will describe the current study and if they are interested, they 
will comp lete the same screening procedures as other potential par ticipants.  
 Randomization.  Randomization will take place at the end of the baseline session, after baseline 
assessments have been administered. Stratified permutated block randomization will be implemented. 
Block randomization can achieve balance in the number of assignments to each treatment group. This 
form of randomization can be conducted within each stratum (i.e., stratified permutated block design) 
in efforts to achieve both covariate balance and treatment balance .
17 Given the dangers of over -
stratification (e.g., with too many strata, there may be insufficient numbers of participants within each 
block ), researchers have recommended using one or two stratification variables that are expected to 
be most strongly associated with the outcome .[ADDRESS_950071] to 
race/ethnicity  and poverty status, both of which are predictors of smoking cessation success.  
  
10 
 
 
 5. STUDY INTERVENTIONS  
  
Nicotine Replacement  Therapy (all conditions) . Nicotine patch therapy for participants who 
smoke >10 cigarettes/day will consist of 4 weeks of 21 mg patches, 2 weeks of 14 mg patches, and 2 
weeks of 7 mg patches. Patch therapy for participants who smoke 5 -10 cigarettes/day will consist of [ADDRESS_950072] of 8 weeks of 4mg mini lozenges (6 -
9 4mg mini lozenges per day). Nicotine lozenge therapy for participants who smo ke their first cigarette 
over [ADDRESS_950073] of 8 weeks of 2mg mini lozenges (6- 9 2mg mini lozenges per 
day).  
Participants will receive 4 weeks of nicotine patches and lozenges at baseline, and they will be 
mailed the additional 4 weeks of nicotine replacement therapy when needed. Research staff will confirm participants’ mailing addresses with them over the phone and notify them of the mail date for 
the nicotine patches  and lozenges . Patches will be mailed to participants in padded envelopes via 
certified mail with 2 -day delivery. The package will include the nicotine patch instructions and a cover 
page indicating: “When you receive this, please call [ Research staff telephone number ] so that we can 
go over it with you.” Participants will also be told to call research staff with any side effects or questions.  
In the unlikely case that a woman becomes pregnant during the study (since we are now 
excluding those who plan to become pregnant), she will still have access to all of the behavioral  
treatment depending on her treatment condition (MBAT groups, text messages, self -help materials), 
but she will be referred to her healthcare provider to inquire about and potentially obtain nicotine 
replacement therapy  
 
Self-Help Materials  (all conditions) . All participants will be given evidence- based self -help 
materials for smoking cessation (based on the Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence Clinical 
Practice Guideline) .18 Materials include the “Clearing the Air” booklet developed by [CONTACT_699827] a 
referral to the Tobacco Cessation Quitline (1 -800-QUIT -NOW) . Paper materials will be given at 
baseline and then reviewed in detail at treatment session 1 (with additional copi[INVESTIGATOR_699819]).  
 
MBAT Treatment (MBAT and MBAT + iQuit Mindfully conditions).  Participants  in the MBAT 
and MBAT + iQuit Mindfully conditions  will receive virtual  group counseling based on the  Mindfulness -
Based Addiction Treatment (MBAT) group protocol.19 [CONTACT_699851] (certified mindfulness -based 
stress reduction teacher and licensed professional counselor), [CONTACT_699852] (certified mindfulness -
based stress reduction teacher and licensed clinical social worker ) and/or their  trained colleagues will 
lead MBAT sessions. MBAT closely follows Mindfulness -based Cognitive Therapy (MBCT) 
procedures, but replaces the depression -related material with nicotine dependence- related material. 
MBAT consists of 8 weekly 2 -hour sessions. The core aims are to: 1) become more aware of 
thoughts, feelings, and sensations from moment to moment, 2) develop a different way of relating to thoughts, feelings, and sensations, and 3) obtain the ability to disengage attention and choose skillful 
responses to thoughts, feelings, and situations. Participants are encouraged to choose their own quit date between day [ADDRESS_950074] 
and focus attention. Participants become aware of how little attention is usually paid to activities in their daily life (“automatic pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]”). Next, they learn how to not only notice th at the mind is wandering, 
but to bring it back to focus on the breath. Participants learn how a wandering mind can increase negative thoughts and feelings (e.g., fantasies about smoking can lead to feelings of anger about being deprived). Engaging in these  thoughts can escalate to severe craving such that it becomes 
more difficult to enact purposeful, adaptive responses. By [CONTACT_699828], one can disengage from unhelpful thoughts and deal with the situation more flexibly (e.g., one could note 
11 
 
 
 that craving is a sensation as opposed to an imperative and notice it nonjudgmentally until it passes, 
choose to engage in a copi[INVESTIGATOR_172510], or bring attention back to the breath). MBAT emphasizes daily 
practice in several forms: sitting meditation, body scan meditation, walking meditation, eating 
meditation, and gentle yoga. Each of these practices share a focus on awareness of the breath. By 
[CONTACT_14659] a menu of practices, differing preferences and learning styles can be accommodated. Sessions 5- 8 focus on continued development of awareness of the present, along with expansion of 
techniques for dealing with thoughts, feelings, and situations.  
Zoom group sessions will be audio and video recorded. These recordings will be used to assess 
treatment fidelity. Also, if a group member is unable to attend a session they may make it up by 
[CONTACT_699829]. They will only be able to do this by [CONTACT_699830], who will play the recording while on Zoom with the participant . 
 
iQuit Mindfully Text Messages (iQuit Mindfully and MBAT + iQuit Mindfully conditions) .  
Participants the iQuit Mindfully and MBAT + iQuit Mindfully conditions  will receive text messages 
throughout the 8- week treatment  period, as well as less frequent messages during the follow -up 
period depending on participant preferences . Upland Mobile Commons, a service that supports the 
development and implementation of automated SMS applications, will be used to build the automated 
text message system and send and receive the text messages. iQuit Mindfully t ext messages were 
designed to encourage participants to practice mindfulness (e.g., reminders for informal practice, such 
as awareness of the breath throughout the day, and reminders for formal practice  such as the body 
scan and sitting meditation). They also remind participants to use specific strategies to aid in cessation (e.g., removing cues to smoke, reaching out for social support, and trying other copi[INVESTIGATOR_699820] 
19). The messages are designed to be interactive. That is, 
participants are asked questions through a series of flow logic (e.g., “Would you like to practice mindfulness right now?”; if participant replies yes, they are then provided a mindfulness technique; 
later asked about how it went; and provided encouragement for continued practice). Participants can also text CRAVE, STRESS, SLIP , or FACT  at any point to receive additional text message support for 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_277576], stress, smoking lapses,  or to receive facts about the effects of smoking,  
respectively. Participants can also answer “group poll” questions so that they later receive a text with 
the most common responses (without any identifying information). Text messages include quotes 
sharing the experiences of former smokers in our program. These messages are all anonymous and described as being from either “Mike” or “Kim,” depending on the participant’s preference. Participants 
can also text keywords (MIND, BODY, 3MIN) to receive a phone call with a short recording of a 
mindfulness practice after receiving a prompting text message . Participants will be given small pocket 
cards with  basic information on the text messaging program and reminders about the text keywords . 
Messages are personalized based on first names, personal reasons for quitting, and amount of 
money to be saved based on individual smoking habits and price paid per pack. Texts are also tailored based on responses to text questions (e.g., whether or not they have smoked or practiced 
mindfulness). Texts include messages timed around major holidays and personalized messages on 
participants’ birthdays. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_699821]. Our 
previously developed program sent  2-3 messages per day during Week 1, 3- 4/day during Week 2, 4-
5/day during Week 3, 5 -7/day during Week 4, 6 -7/day during Week 5, 4/day during Week 6, and 3 -
4/day during Week 7  (See Appendix for example text messages  and Spears et al. 2019
20 for details 
on the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] ). Based on feedback from our previous message testing,  message timing and 
frequency is more flexible and personalized for the current  project. This study offer s participants the 
option to be included in the frequency of their choice (e.g.: very low, low, medium, high, very  high) as 
well as a 12- hour time slot of their choice (e.g.: 7am -7pm or 10am -10pm). Text messages will 
periodically ask participants about their preferred text message frequency and timing  so that 
participants can change their message schedule as needed.   
12 
 
 
 Financial Compensation and Retention Procedures. Participants receive financial 
compensation for the time and inconvenience associated with participation, as well as parking 
validation/MARTA vouchers to defray the cost of travel. Participants will be compensated up to $30 for 
assessments during weeks 1, 3, and 5, for a total of $90. (Specifically, for each of the week 1, [ADDRESS_950075] online, participants will be compensated $25 for doing the survey and a $5 bonus if they do it within 24 hours). Participants will be compensated $40 for the assessment 
completed at week 8 (this is an in- person visit). Participants will be compensated $[ADDRESS_950076] -
treatment fol low-up assessment at week 12 and $[ADDRESS_950077] -treatment follow -up 
assessment at week 24 (both follow- up visits are in -person visits). Participants will also be 
compensated $5 per survey for the every other day surveys, for a total of $120 for all 6 weeks. 
Maximum compensation per person for completing all aspects of the study is $380.  
 Other procedures to increase adherence include: 1) reminder phone calls , emails  and text 
messages  (including checking in with participants between baseline and start of treatment, during 
treatment and during follow- up period as well as messages timed on participants’ birthdays and major 
holidays) , 2) requiring a phone number and valid home address so that participants can be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530], 
and 3) obtaining names, addresses, and phone numbers of up to three collaterals who can provide 
information on participants’ whereabouts if necessary. Written permission to contact [CONTACT_699831].  
 Participants who do not  complete assessments or attend in -person visits will be contact[CONTACT_14901], email, text message, and/or mail to reschedule or (if not able to reschedule) provide self -
reported smoking status and feedback about the program/reasons for discontinuation.  These 
individuals will also be emailed a link to the REDCap survey assessment.   
 
   6. STUDY PROCEDURES  
6.1 Schedule of  Treatment Procedures and Evaluations  
   Weeks    
 Phone /
Online  
Screen  Base -
line 1 
Start of 
Tx 2 3 4  5 6 7 8 
End of 
Tx 12 (3 
Month 
Follow -
Up) 24 (6 
Month 
Follow -
Up) 
Telephone /Online  Screening   X             
Compensation    $30  $30   $30   $40 $60 $70 
Electronic Diary Assessments   Every other day surveys from week 2 to week 8; $5 per survey for up to $120 total    
TREATMENT PROCEDURES               
Virtual  MBAT groups ( MBAT & 
MBAT + iQuit Mindfully conditions )   Tx 1 Tx 2 Tx 3 Tx 4  Tx 5 Tx 6 Tx 7 Tx 8   
iQuit Mindfully text messages 
(iQuit Mindfully  & MBAT + iQuit 
Mindfully conditions )  Text messages based upon participants’ choice  
in frequency and timing of messages    
Self-Help Materials (all conditions )  X X           
Nicotine Replacement Therapy  
Dispensation (all)   Participants receive 4 weeks of patches and lozenges in person at baseline, 
and then the remaining 4 weeks of patches are mailed.    
IN-PERSON ELIGIBILITY               
Carbon Monoxide   X         X X X 
Cotinine (Saliva Sample)              X 
Screening for Depression  and 
Substance Dependence   X            
SMOKING               
Informatio n for Setting Up Text 
Messages   X            
Tobacco History  X             
Smoking Status, use of other 
tobacco products, electronic vapor 
products, NRT,  pharmacotherapy   X X  X   X   X X X 
13 
 
 
  Phone /
Online  
Screen  Base -
line 1 
Start of 
Tx 2 3 4  5 6 7 8 
End of 
Tx 12 (3 
Month 
Follow -
Up) 24 (6 
Month 
Follow -
Up) 
Additional Resources Used for 
Smoking Cessation           X X X 
Wisconsin Inventory of Smoking 
Dependence Motives  (WISDM)   X         X X X 
Wisconsin Smoking Withdrawal 
Scale  (WSWS)    X  X   X   X X X 
Self-Efficacy Scale   X X  X   X   X X X 
MINDFULNESS               
Mindfulness Attention Awareness 
Scale  (MAAS)   X         X X X 
Five Facet Mindfulness 
Questionnaire ( FFMQ short form)   X         X X X 
Mindfulness Practice Frequency      X   X   X X X 
Self-Compassion Scale (short 
form)  X         X X X 
STRESS/ NEGATIVE AFFECT               
Perceived Stress Scale   X         X X X 
Positive and Negative Affect Scale   X X  X   X   X X X 
Experiences with Discrimination   X            
SOCIAL SUPPORT               
Multidimensional Scale of 
Perceived Social Support    X        X X X 
Group Climate Questionnaire  
(MBAT & MBAT + iQuit Mindfully )           X   
PROGRAM EVALUATION               
Text Message Feedback      X    X     X X 
Perceived Benefits            X X X 
Program Evaluation Questionnaire            X   
 
6.2 Description of Evaluations  
 Screening Evaluation and Consenting Procedure 
 
Telephone Screening. Interested individuals who prefer to complete initial screening by [CONTACT_699832] a detailed description of the study over the phone. The voluntary nature of the study will 
be emphasized, and it will be made clear that if they decide not to participate, there will be no 
repercussions. Research staff will read the telephone consent form to potential participants and 
answer any questions. After provision of verbal informed consent (a Waiver of Documentation of 
Consent  has been included in the GSU IRB protocol), the research staff member will document verbal 
consent and sign and date the consent form  through REDCap. Potential participants will then be 
screened for inclusion/exclusion and answer questions about demographic information (to be 
documented through Qualtrics as noted below). Eligible individuals who are interested in participating 
will be scheduled for an initial in- person session. Participants will receive a reminder telephone call, 
text, and/or email on the day before their scheduled session.  
 
Online Screening.  Individuals who click on the study link through an adve rtisement or digital flyer will 
be taken to an online (GSU- hosted Qualtrics) screener survey. Before beginning the survey, 
participants will be given information about the study, including the voluntary nature of the study, 
through an online informed consent form. After providing consent, participants can complete the 
survey online. Data collected via this screener survey will be encrypted with access limited to select 
study personnel. Eligible individuals who are interested in participating will provide their contact 
[CONTACT_699833] 
14 
 
 
 questions. Eligible individuals who are interested in participating will then be scheduled for an initial in-
person session. Participants  will receive a reminder telephone call, text, and/or email on the day 
before their scheduled session.  Qualtrics includes survey protection features to prevent people from 
taking an online survey more than once. If it appears that an individual has attempted m ore than one 
screening method (e.g., telephone and online), research staff will call the person again to confirm 
eligibility and resolve any inconsistencies if needed.  
 In-Person Baseline Visit and Consent Procedure. Following the tele phone or online scre ener, 
interested individuals will attend an in- person session to finalize eligibility, engage in further 
discussion about the study, and provide written informed consent.  
 
Before in -person assessment of eligibility criteria, participants will review the c onsent form for in-
person screening. Study personnel will offer an opportunity for participants to ask questions and have them answered, the consent form for in- person screening will be signed and dated by [CONTACT_699834], and a copy of this form will be given to the participants. Then, in order to confirm 
eligibility, participants will provide a breath sample for assessment of expi[INVESTIGATOR_33514]. 
Health literacy will be assessed with the Rapid Estimate of Adult Literacy in Medicine (R EALM
21), and 
for the proposed study participants who have at least a sixth -grade level will be eligible. Individuals 
who decline or are ineligible will be given self -help materials and referral to other cessation programs. 
In addition, potential participants will complete the Patient Health Questionnaire- 2 PHQ -2; 22,23 and 
Severity of Dependence Scale (SDS24) in order to screen for clinically significant depressive 
symptoms and substance dependence, respectively. Individuals who are not eligible for these reasons 
will be provided with appropriate mental health referrals in addition to  smoking cessation referrals.  
 Next, the research staff will engage eligible individuals in a discussion of pros and cons of participating, as well as participants’ ambivalence about behavior change and research participation 
(these methods have been suggested to improve retenti on
25). 
 For eligible individuals who are interested in participating, study personnel will initiate the informed 
consent process which will include: 1) A thorough review of the Informed Consent Form (ICF; see 
Appendix ), particularly study procedures; 2) Study personnel will offer an opportunity for participants 
to ask questions and have them answered; 3) The ICF will be signed and dated by [CONTACT_699835]; and 4) A copy of the ICF will be given to the participants . 
 Participants will be given the choice of using their  own tablet or laptop computer or one provided by 
[CONTACT_1758]. For participants in MBAT  and MBAT + iQuit Mindfully conditions, study  personnel will 
explain the requiremen ts for joining the treatment session via the video conferencing program, Zoom. 
Research staff will conduct separate sessions with participants to ensure they can access Zoom.  
 Participants who choose to use the basic tablet  provided by [CONTACT_699836]: 
 - do not own a tablet or other device with a web camera,  
 - do not have access to consistent wireless internet needed to join virtual group sessions, or  
 - prefer to use a study tablet  
 Participants will be given the choice of using their own mobile phone or one provided by [CONTACT_1758]. For 
participants in the iQuit Mindfully and MBAT + iQuit Mindfully conditions, s tudy personnel will explain 
the text messaging procedures in detail and send a test message to the participant, who will respond 
and ask any questions.  
 Participants who choose to use the basic cellphone provided by [CONTACT_699836]:  
 - do not own a wireless cellphone,  
[ADDRESS_950078] be returned at the week 8 
assessment. Wireless devices that are borrowed  will be wiped upon returning them to the research 
team. All sim -cards will be wiped clean. New sim -cards will be used for each participant requesting a 
phone. All data collected via text message will be stored either on the Mobile Commons platform or the REDCap platform. No data will be saved to the device. For text messages and all other data 
remaining on the study devices when they are turned in from participants, the research team will wipe 
and reset the device. 
 Individuals who would like to participate and express informed consent will then be asked to complete 
questionnaires (see Appendix ). Questionnaires will be administered through REDCap, to be taken 
either in- person at GSU (baseline and weeks 8, 12, and 24) or off site (REDCap links to be 
emailed/texted when participants do not come to GSU in person). See Table 6.1 for schedule of questionnaire assessments. Descriptions of the assessments are provided below:  
 
• The Telephone Screening assesses eligibility criteria and demographic characteristics, 
including age, race, ethnicity, education, employment, and income.  
• The Patient Health Questionnaire-2  PHQ -2; 
22,23 is a 2 -item questionnaire designed to screen 
for symptoms of depression. Participants are asked, “Over the last [ADDRESS_950079] 
you been bothered by [CONTACT_9443]?”: “feeling down, depressed or hopeless” and 
“little interest or pleasure in doing things.” These items which correspond to the two core 
diagnostic criteria for Major  Depressive Disorder; 26 are rated on a 0- 3 scale (0 = not at all, 3 = 
nearly every day). Individuals with scores of 3 or above which has been identified as the cut-
off for obtaining optimal sensitivity and specificity for identifying depressive disorders; 22,23 will 
not be eligible but will be provided with appropriate mental health referrals.  
• The Severity of Dependence Scale (SDS) is a [ADDRESS_950080] 12 months.24 The scale has been 
validated for several  illicit drugs  including cannabis, cocaine, amphetamine s, benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], 
and heroin. Each of the five items is scored on a 4 -point scale ranging from 0 (Never/Almost 
Never) to 3 (Always/Nearly Always)  and summed for a total score . Individuals with scores of 4 
or higher27,28 will not be eligible but will be provided with appropriate mental health referrals.  
 
• The Information for Setting Up Text Messages  questions assess participants’ amount of 
money spent on cigarettes, personal reasons for quitting, preferences about timing and 
frequency of text messages, and quit date. This information is  incorporated into iQuit Mindfully 
to personalize the content, frequency and timing of text messages.  
• Tobacco History assesses onset of regular smoking, previous quit attempts, abstinence history, smoking rate, and partner smoking status. This includes t he Heaviness  of Smoking  
Index  comprises two  items from the Fagerstr öm Te st for Nicotine D ependence (FTND ) 
29: self-
reported average number of cigarettes smoked per day and time to first cigarette upon waking (“time to first cigarette”). The HSI is a strong indicator of nicotine dependence 
30. 
• Smoking Stat us (SRN T) surveys t obacco  use, use of othe r tobacco pr oduct s, and nicoti ne 
replacemen t medicati ons. Smoking Abstinence  will be assessed according to the SRNT 
guidelines 31, which suggest reporting point prevalence abstinence (i.e., no smoking during 
[ADDRESS_950081] week), continuous abstinence (i.e., no smoking since quit date), and time to relapse (i.e., 
any tobacco use over 7 consecutive days or 2 consecutive weeks). All self -reported 
abstinence will be biochemically confirmed by [INVESTIGATOR_609]<6ppm. Use of novel tobacco products (e.g., e-cigarettes and heated tobacco products) will also be assessed. Participants will also indicate 
which forms of nicotine replacement therapy and/or pharmacotherapy (if any) they used in the 
past week.   
• Additional resources used for smoking cessation will ask participants about various strategies 
for quitting smoking (e.g., acupuncture, hypnosis , other text messaging programs or mobile 
apps ). This will allow  the researchers to capture resources participants might be using to help 
them quit smoking apart from what they receive in the study.  
• The Brief Wisconsin Dependence Motives Questionnaire
32 is a 37- item measures that yields 
an overall dependence score and subscale scores for other dimensions (i.e., cognitive 
enhancement, affective enhancement, automaticity, affiliative attachment, loss of control, 
craving, cue exposure/associative processes, social/environmental goals, taste/sensory processes, weight control, tolerance).  
• The Wisconsin Smoking Withdrawal Scale 
[ADDRESS_950082] excellent internal 
consistency and validity .34  
• The Self-Efficacy Scale assesses confidence for resisting smoking urges in specific types of 
situations (e.g., when feeling stressed, when with friends) [ADDRESS_950083], 
pleasure, social image, social influence, and diet. Scores are predictive of relapse.36 
• The Mindful Attention Awareness Scale  MAAS; 37 is a 15- item self -report measure of 
dispositional mindfulness that has shown good reliability and validity.37 
• The Five-Facet  Mindfulness Questionnaire -Short Form38 is a 24- item self -report questionnaire 
of facets of dispositional mindfulness. The scale yields five factors: 1) Nonreactivity, 2) Observing, 3) Acting with Awareness, 4) Describing/Labeling with Words, and 5) Nonjudging 
of Experience, with strong psychometric properties.   
• The Self-Compassion Scale Short Form
45 is a 12 -item self- report  measure of self -compassion. 
Subscales include self -kindness, self -judgement, common humanity, isolation, mindfulness, 
and over -identification.45 
• Participants will fill out a Mindfulness Practice Log12 to indicate how frequently they practice 
each of the mindfulness techniques taught in treatment.  
• The Perceived Stress Scale39 is a 10- item self- report measure of the extent to which 
individuals view their lives as stressful. The scale shows good psychometric properties.  
• The Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS 40) is a 20 -item self- report measure of 
affective experience yielding two factors (Positive and Negative Affect) with strong 
psychometric properties 40. 
• The Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support41 is a 12 -item scale, with subscales 
assessing perceived social support from family, friends, and significant others.  
• The Group C limate Questionnaire (GCQ -S)48 is a 12 -item self- report scale which measures 
climate and cohesion of the group  (only applicable for MBAT participants) . Sub -scales include 
engaged, conflict, and avoiding.48 
• Participants will be asked to provide feedback about their experiences receiving the text 
messages ( Text Message Feedback ). 
17 
 
 
 • Participants will complete 4 items to indicate perceived benefits of the quit smoking program. 
As described by [CONTACT_699837]. (2017),[ADDRESS_950084] them confidence to quit smoking, made them think that it was worthwhile to quit , made 
them feel that someone cared if they quit , and made them feel that they  knew the right steps to 
take to quit . Items are rated from 1 (completely disagree) to 5 (completely agree).  
• Participants will complete Program Evaluations  to provide for their feedback about and 
suggestions for improving the intervention (both MBAT and iQuit Mindfully text messages). 
Usual care participants will answer 1 program evaluation question: “On the scale below, 
please circle the number that best represents whether you would recommend this quit smoking program (or something similar) for others who are interested in quitting smoking.” 
(rated on 1- 10 scale).  
The maximum time between telephone screening and enrollment will be 1 month. The maximum time between baseline assessment and start of treatment will be 1 month. However, we will employ a 
variety of strategies to ensure that these timeframes are as short as possible. For example, in order to reduce the time between telephone screening and baseline we will offer a variety of days and times 
for baseline assessment. We will also time our recruitment efforts around planned baseline 
assessments to maximize potential participants’ interest (in order to prevent longer wait time to accrue 
a sufficient number of participants to start a group).  
 
Electronic Diary Assessments . Electronic Diary Assessments  (also referred to as short -surveys)  will 
be administered in the evening on every other  day from Week 2 to Week 8, thus capturing key 
processes surrounding quitting smoking. Diary assessments  will assess smoking behavior (“How 
many cigarettes did you smoke today?”) and each of the hypothesized mechanisms (mindfulness, 
emotions, craving and withdrawal, self -efficacy, and social support). Participants will also indicate their 
mindfulness practice that day (See Appendix).  Participants will receive an email and/or text with the 
REDCap link to the electronic diary assessment survey. Both participant -initiated options allow 
respondents to complete assessments at a time that is convenient to them  between that evening and 
the next morning (by 9am) . 
 Saliva Samples for Cotinine Analysis. At the last study visit (approximately 24 weeks after the start 
of treatment), participants  will provide a saliva sample by [CONTACT_699838] 
1-2 minutes (Salimetrics; 
https://www.salimetrics.com/collection -method/oral -swab -saliva -collection -
device/ ). Per Salimetrics instructions, consumption of alcohol, caffeine, nicotine and prescription/over -
the-counter medications within the past [ADDRESS_950085] the saliva after 1 year. Self -report ed 7-day 
abstinence will be confirmed by [CONTACT_249899] <20 ng/ml.
12,43 Use of NRT and other nicotine-
containing products (e.g., e -cigarettes) will be assessed to ensure that saliva cotinine levels are not 
affected by [CONTACT_105] -combusted nicotine products. Participants who do not attend the in- person 24 -week 
assessment visit will be as ked to provide a saliva cotinine sample via mail.  
 
*Procedures for Participant and Research Team Safety in the Context of the COVID -[ADDRESS_950086] Public Health Precautions  for On -Campus 
Visits Related to Human Subjects Research . For example:  
18 
 
 
 • Pre-visit phone screening and arrival phone screening will be conducted to inquire about 
possible COVID -19 symptoms and exposure.  
• Visitors cleared for study visits will be advised that  they must wear face mask coverage while 
on campus. Research staff will also wear masks.  
• Signage to encourage hand hygiene, respi[INVESTIGATOR_699822], cough etiquette, and social 
distancing will be posted in and around the Waiting Area and Research Space.  
• All visitors will be directed to wash hands or use hand sanitizer upon entry to Waiting 
Area/Research Space. Hand sanitizer will be provided.  
• Researchers will wash hands or use hand sanitizer prior to and after each participant visit.  
• Frequently touched surfac es will be cleaned and disinfected before and after study visits.  
• Chairs will be placed at least 6 feet apart to maintain social distance.  
• The research space will be regularly cleaned by [CONTACT_699839].  
It is possible that people who smoke cigarettes may be at higher risk for COVID -19 
(https://www.who.int/news -room/commentaries/detail/smoking- and-covid- 19). Accordingly, the 
following additional measures are proposed during the COVID -19 pandemic:  
• The research team will provide a new disposable mask and pair of gloves to each participant 
for each in- person visit.  After that, treatment groups will be held virtually using a video 
conferencing program, Zoom.  Since some participants may not have the appropriate space or 
technology to join virtually, the research team will giv e them the option to  borrow  a tablet study 
device for 8 weeks.  
• If participants do not have access to a private or quiet place to join the weekly group session, 
they can come to campus and join in a separate room at GSU. They will still be able to us e a 
GSU computer with internet and camera to join the live group sessions. 
• Participating in a video conference session presents no more than minimal risk of harm to 
subjects . The purpose of the video conference is to be able to continue providing the quit 
smoking group to participants while minimizing the risk of exposure to COVID -19 through 
elimination of in- person group sessions.  
*Strategies for Promoting Engagement with Virtual Group Sessions:  
We will use  the following strategies to promote engagement: 
• Participants in MBAT  and MBAT + iQuit  will be able to borrow  a study tablet for the [ADDRESS_950087] equal access to join sessions through the 
video conferencing software, Zoom.   
• Participants will attend an in- person baseline session at GSU, where research staff will help 
them set up Zoom, practice using Zoom, and troubleshoot any issues. Participants will be 
given a packet of Zoom instructions/tips to take with them. For those who will be joining virtual 
sessions from home, study staff will discuss ways to ensure that they have a quiet, private 
location as best as possible. They will also be encouraged to use a virtual background for 
privacy, and study staff will help them set this up.    
• Participants will be given the option to join virtual groups in an individual room at GSU. In our 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_699823], some participants did not have a private place to join. Being able to 
use a tablet in a private room at GSU would provide a solution.  
• MBAT participants will attend a group Zoom orientation within two  week s before the first 
treatment session. This will give them a chance to meet each other, practice using Zoom together (e.g., muting/unmuting, turning camera on and off), and ask questions of the study 
staff.  
19 
 
 
 • When participants connect to Zoom, study staff will admit them individually into a separate 
breakout room to ensure that they are in a private location and troubleshoot any issues.  
• We will encourage participants to join Zoom sessions a few minutes early so that they have a chance to get to know their fellow group members better.  
• Both mindfulness instructors (certified Mindfulness -Based Stress Reduction teachers through 
the University of [LOCATION_005] Medical School) have experience leading online mindfulness groups through Zoom and will draw on their past experience. For example, they will encourage 
participants to stay unmuted during discussion to facilitate natural conversation (unless there 
is excessive background noise); mute participants during mindfulness practices; and provide 
brief breaks.  
 
*GSU continues to update guidelines for on- campus research. We will follow updated guidelines as 
they become available.  
 
7. SAFETY ASSESSMENTS  
 
Reporting of Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events  
 An adverse event (AE)  is defined as any unfavorable and unintended diagnosis, symptom, sign, 
syndrome or disease which either occurs during the study, having been absent at baseline, or if present at baseline, appears to worsen. Adverse events are to be recorded regardless of their 
relationship to the study intervention.   
 A serious adverse event (SAE)  is defined as any untoward medical occurrence that results in death, 
is life threatening, requires inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081], results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or is a congenital anomal y. 
 
[CONTACT_699850] will conduct daily oversight of participant safety, and will meet regularly with staff to review progress and discuss any problems or concerns. Adverse events that are not deemed “serious 
adverse events” will be included in the final report to the investigators, IRB, and NCI.  
SAEs that are unanticipated, serious, and possibly related to the study intervention will be reported to 
the IRB and NCI in accordance with requirements. Georgia State University defines an unanticipated 
event as an event that was (1) unforeseen; (2) more likely than not related to the research; and (3) 
either caused harm to participants or others, or placed them at increased risk of harm. Unanticipated 
events include any harm or injury (physical, psychological, social or economic) or other unexpected 
events occurring during the course of participation in a research study. As required by [CONTACT_699840], 
[CONTACT_699850] will report a summary of each unanticipated event to the IRB using the IRB Unanticipated 
Event form within 7 business days.  
Unexpected fatal or life- threatening SAEs related to the intervention will also be reported to the NCI 
Program Officer  and investigators within 7 days. Other serious and unexpected AEs related to the 
intervention will be reported to the NCI Program Official within 15 days. Anticipated or unrelated SAEs 
will be handled in a less urgent manner but will be reported to the IRB and NCI.  
 8. INTERVENTION DISCONTINUATION  
 
This study will be stopped prior to its  completion if: (1) the intervention is associated with adverse 
effects that call into question the safety of the intervention; (2) any new information becomes available 
during the trial that necessitates stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_21356]; or (3) other situations occur t hat might warrant 
stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_21356].  
[ADDRESS_950088] both intent -to-treat (ITT) and per protocol analyses. ITT  includes all participants 
that were randomized, regardless of compliance, withdrawal, and other events after randomization. A 
strength of ITT is that it is based on original randomization. However, effect estimation using ITT may 
be conservative and misleading with increasing attrition. Per protocol analysis considers only 
participants who fully complied and completed the study. Per protocol is less conservative and may reflect true treatment differences for those with full compliance. Including both approaches will provide 
a more complete understanding of treatment effects.   
Analyses will be performed using SAS. Descriptive statistics for all measurements will be reported. 
Frequency distributions will be created to screen for any coding or entry errors. Fr equency 
distributions summarize categorical data, and measures of central tendency and dispersion will summarize continuous data. All data will be examined for bivariate relationships with the outcomes 
and with each other. All analyses will control for demographics (age, gender, race/ethnicity, education level, partner status) and baseline nicotine dependence (cigarettes per day and time to first cigarette). 
The overall study level of significance will be α=.05.  
Aim I. Test the efficacy of a mindfulness- based text messaging program for smoking 
cessation (“iQuit Mindfully”), both as a standalone intervention and in combination with virtual  
counseling.   
 The relationship between treatment condition and each dichotomous study outcome (smoking 
cessation, lapse r ecovery) will be assessed with a generalized linear mixed model (GzLMM) with a 
Binomial distribution and logit link function. This is an appropriate statistical model with repeated 
measures data collected over time.[ADDRESS_950089] treatment session.
12 In addition, gender and 
race/ethnicity will be assessed as potential moderators of treatment effects. 
The moderating effect of poverty status will be examined with the addition of a poverty status by 
[CONTACT_699841] 1a). This will be tested using both 
dichotomous (i.e., below vs. at or above federal poverty threshold) and continuous poverty status  
variables (i.e., depth of poverty as indicated by [CONTACT_545914]- to-poverty ratio and income deficit/surplus) 
according to U.S. Census guidelines.45,[ADDRESS_950090] s smoking 
cessation.   
Hypotheses regarding mechanisms will be tested with both traditional questionnaire data (collected 
from baseline through 24 weeks after the start of treatment) and el ectronic diary data (collected for 6 
continuous weeks during treatment), separately. Mediation testing will be conducted regardless of statistical significance of intervention effects because of statistical, conceptual, and practical reasons for testing mediation in such cases.
47 Volatility will be calculated using the mean square successive 
22 
 
 
 difference (MSSD;48 average of the squared difference between successive observations at times i  + 
1 and i ) to capture both within- person variability and temporal instability. Mediation will be examined 
with multilevel mediation analyses for binary outcomes in the developed GzLMM. Bootstrappi[INVESTIGATOR_18499] 
[ADDRESS_950091] moderated mediation using a model proposed by [CONTACT_305207], Rucker, and Hayes49 that 
fits the hypothesized model (Figure 3), as the independent variable (mindfulness training) also 
functions as a moderator. Kline50 termed this “second- stage moderation,” as the second path of the 
indirect effect of the predictor on the dependent variable depends on the moderator. Conditional mediation and  moderation effects will be tested using bootstrappi[INVESTIGATOR_63980].
[ADDRESS_950092]/craving at a given 
assessment and smoking at the next assessment (using both questionnaire and daily diary data). For example, using daily diary assessments, we will examine whether the association between negative 
affect  on a given day and next -day smoking is weaker among MBAT vs. UC participants.  
Missing Data.  Although there is no complete, comprehensive method for handling missing data 
for generalized linear mixed models, there are several different approaches that we can draw upon to address this issue.
[ADDRESS_950093] sizes (converted to Cohen’s d for comparability across measures)  
from relevant meta- analyses and used the Optimal Design program to estimate sample size for 
GzLMM models.52 Smoking abstinence in MBIs vs. UC was quantified as d =0.[ADDRESS_950094] size of d=0.33. Assuming 80% power, level of significance of .05, two- tailed 
statistical tests, error variance of 1.0, coefficient variance of 2.0, and oversampling to account for 20% 
attrition, this results in 145 participants in each treatment group. An unequal allocation ratio was used 
to allocate fewer participants to usual care ( n=50),55,56 for an overall  sample size of  485 participants 
(145 per treatment group and 50 in usual care). We expect this sample size to adequately allow for 
mediational testing (Aim 2) at the 80% power level. Fritz and MacKinnon57 offer a guide regarding 
sample size required to detect mediated effects and report that 79.9% of studies in their literature review applied mediational testing with less than [ADDRESS_950095] containing participant numbers and participants’ names will be kept in a 
locked file, accessible to study staff only. Although participants will sign informed consent documents, 
these forms will be kept in a separate locked file and will never be connected to the study data. No 
names will ever be recorded on the questionnaires, which will be stored in a locked file cabinet and available only to the research personnel.   
The online screener will be conducted using the GSU -hosted Qualtrics platform. The qualtricsxm 
Security Statement (January 31, 2020) reads: “ Qualtrics’ most important concern is the protection and 
reliability of cus tomer data. Our servers are protected by [CONTACT_5019]- end firewall systems and scans are 
performed regularly to ensure that any vulnerabilities are quickly found and patched. Application 
penetration tests are performed annually by [CONTACT_120620]- party. All s ervices have quick 
failover points and redundant hardware, with backups performed daily. Access to systems is restricted 
to specific individuals who have a need- to-know such information and who are bound by 
[CONTACT_174416]. Access is monitored and audited for compliance.  Qualtrics uses Transport 
Layer Security (TLS) encryption (also known as HTTPS) for all transmitted data. Surveys may be 
protected with passwords. Our services are hosted by [CONTACT_699842] s tandar d SSAE-18 method.”  
Questionnaire data will be collected using the REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) system available at Georgia State University. This will provide a secure way to collect and manage data, while 
avoiding potential issues with manual data entry. Georgia State University belongs to a consortium of 
institutional partners that work to maintain a software toolset and workflow methodology for electronic collection and management of research data. REDCap data collection projects rely on a study -specific 
data dictionary defined by [CONTACT_5051]. REDCap also contains a Survey tool for building and managing online surveys. The research team can create and design surveys in a web browser and 
engage potential respondents using a variety of notification methods. Both REDCap and REDCap Survey systems provide secure, web- based applications that are flexible enough to be used for a 
variety of types of research, provide an intuitive interface for users to enter data  and have real time 
validation rules (with automated data type and range checks) at the time of entry. These systems offer 
easy data manipulation with audit trails and reporting for monitoring, reporting,  and querying patient 
records, and an automated export mechanism to common statistical packages (SPSS, SAS, Stata, 
R/S-Plus). REDCap application is securely housed in Amazon AWS and managed by [CONTACT_699843]. All web- based information transmission is 
encrypted and the data is encrypted at rest. Amazon AWS’s data centers are state of the art 
nondescript and secured facilities. Data will be downloaded from REDCap into a secure server that is managed by [CONTACT_699844], password -protected, and available only to research personnel 
who have completed training in research with human subjects.  
Additional safeguards will include appropriate password protection and physical security for all computer systems and physical data. Personal names will not be stored in electronic data files. 
Physical data will be stored in a locked file cabinet and available only to the research personnel. The 
master list containing participant numbers and participants’ names will be kept in a separate locked file, also accessible to study staff only.    
The Mobile Commons platform maintains a high level of security control for sending and receiving text 
messages. The Mobile Commons HIPAA and Text Messaging Security White Paper indicates: “All 
[ADDRESS_950096] of physical security controls…. The Mobile 
Commons information security program includes comprehensive technical security measures geared towards protecting the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of sensitive client data…. 
Authentication controls are in place for access to all systems and applications that deal with sensitive 
client data. All activity regarding access to, and transmission of, this data is logged. Sessions are configured to timeout after a period of inactivity. All sensitive data, including PHI and authentication credentials for system and application access, are transmitted via encrypted protocols (SSL or 
SSHv2) when traversing public or untrusted networks. Strong encryption is used for sensitive data 
stored on Mobile Commons systems. Multiple layers of procedures and technical controls are in place to verify the identity of any person or entity seeking access to any sensitive client information” (https://www.mobilecommons.com/wp/wp- content/uploads/2014/07/Mobile- Commons -HIPAA- Text-
Messaging- Security -White -Paper1.pdf).  
  
[ADDRESS_950097] (IRB) Review   
This protocol and the informed consent document s (see Appendix) and any subsequent modifications 
will be reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_699845].  
 
Informed Consent Forms  
The consent form s (see Appendix ) describe the purpose of the study, the procedures to be followed, 
and the risks and benefits of participation.  
 
The informed consent process will include:  
1) A thorough review of the Informed Consent Form s (ICF), particularly study procedures; 2) Study 
personnel will offer an opportunity for participants to ask questions and have them answered; 3) The 
ICF will be signed and dated by [CONTACT_699835]; and 4) A copy of the ICF will be 
given to the participants. (For the consent process prior to telephone screening, the research staff will 
document participants’ verbal consent after reviewing the ICF).  
 
Participant Confidentiality  
Participants  will be assured that the information gathered  from the study  (including responses to 
questionnaires , diary assessments  and text messages ) will be kept confidential  to the extent  of the 
law, and that the findings  of the study  may be published,  but that participants  will not be identified.  
Upon enrollment, participants will receive an ID number. Assessment data will be linked to this number. Personal/identifying information, including consent forms, will be maintained separat ely from 
study assess ment data. Although participants will sign informed consent documents, these forms will 
be kept in a separate locked file and will never be connected to the study data. Data will be stored on 
a secure  server to protect  the data and to prevent  unauthorized access. Databases  will be accessed  
only by [CONTACT_699846]’s  requirements  for training in Human  
Subjects’  Protection.   
 Participants’ first names will be used in the text messages that participants receive (in efforts to 
increase the personalization of the text messaging, as suggested by [CONTACT_699847]). However, their full names will never be entered into the Mobile Commons platform. First names will be deleted from the data when downloaded from the Mobile Commons platform.  
 By [CONTACT_699848] a treatment group with other people, participants’ verbal responses during 
MBAT  treatment will be known to others in the group. Thus, we will request (in the consent form and 
verbally  at the start of the group) that participants keep what they hear confidential. Of course, we 
cannot guarantee that the other members of the treatment group will maintain confidentiality of responses, and this is made clear in the consent form.  
Study Discontinuation  
The study may be discontinued at any time by [CONTACT_1201], NCI , or other government agencies as part of 
their duties to ensure that research participants are protected.  
  
12. PUBLICATION OF RESEARCH FINDINGS  
In accordance with NIH public access policy, final peer -reviewed journal manuscripts that arise from 
this study will be deposited to PubMed Central immediately upon acceptance for publication.  
  
26 
 
 
 13. REFERENCES  
 
1. USDHHS. The Health Consequences of Smoking -50 Years of Progress: A Report of the 
Surgeon General. In. Atlanta (GA): U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health; 2014. 
2. USDHHS. How tobacco smoke causes disease: the biology, and behavioral basis for smoking-attributable disease: a report of the Surgeon General. In. Atlanta, GA: US Department of 
Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for 
Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health; 2010.  
3. CDC. Smoking -attributable mortality, years of potential life lost, and productivity losses --United 
States, 2000 -2004. MMWR Morb Morta l Wkly Rep. 2008;57(45):1226 -1228.  
4. Mokdad AH, Marks JS, Stroup DF, Gerberding JL. Actual causes of death in the United 
States, 2000. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association. 2004;291:1238 -1245.  
5. Taghizadeh N, Vonk JM, Boezen HM. Lifetime Smoking History and Cause- Specific Mortality 
in a Cohort Study with 43 Years of Follow -Up. PLoS One. 2016;11(4):e0153310. 
6. Babb S, Malarcher A, Schauer G, Asman K, Jamal A. Quitting Smoking Among Adults - United  
States, 2000 -2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2017;65(52):1457 -1464.  
7. CDC. Quitting smoking among adults --[LOCATION_002], 2001 -2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep. 2011;60(44):1513 -1519.  
8. U.S. National Cancer Institute. A sociological approach to addressing tobacco- related health 
disparities. National Cancer Institute Tobacco Control Monograph 22. NIH Publication No. 17 -
CA-8035A. In: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, 
National Cancer Institute; 2017. 
9. Drope J, Liber AC, Cahn Z, et al. Who's still smoking? Disparities in adult cigarette smoking 
prevalence in the [LOCATION_002]. CA Cancer J Clin. 2018;68(2):106 -115. 
10. Jamal A, Phillips E, Gentzke AS, et al. Current Cigarette Smoking Among Adults - United 
States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2018;67(2):53 -59. 
11. Brewer JA, Mallik S, Babuscio TA, et al. Mindfulness training for smoking cessation: results from a randomized controlled trial. Drug and Alcohol Dependence. 2011;119:72- 80. 
12. Vidrine JI, Spears CA, Heppner WL, et al. Efficacy of mindfulness -based addiction treatment 
(MBAT) for smoking cessation and lapse recovery: A randomized clinical trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 2016;84(9):824- 838. 
13. Davis JM, Goldberg SB, Anderson MC, Manley AR, Smith SS, Baker TB. Randomized trial on mindfulness training for smokers targeted to a disadvantaged population. Substance Use and 
Misuse. 2014;49(5):571- 585. 
14. Davis JM, Manley AR, Goldberg SB, Smith SS, Jorenby [CONTACT_34479]. Randomized trial comparing 
mind fulness training for smokers to a matched control. Journal of Substance Abuse 
Treatment. 2014;47(3):213- 221. 
15. Spears CA, Carter BP, Bell SA, et al. Experiences with text messaging for smoking cessation 
among low -income, primarily African American smoker s. Annals of Behavioral Medicine. 
2018;52(S1):S435. 
16. Spears CA, Carter BP, Bell SA, Scarlett CA, Abroms L, Wetter DW. Development and evaluation of mindfulness -based smoking cessation treatment enhanced with mobile 
technology. Society for Research on Nicotine & Tobacco; 2018; Baltimore, MD.  
17. Hedden SL, Woolson RF, Malcolm RJ. Randomization in substance abuse clinical trials. Subst 
Abuse Treat Prev Policy. 2006;1:6.  
18. Fiore MC, Jaen CR, Baker TB, et al. A Clinical Practice Guideline for Treating Tobacco Use 
and Dependence: 2008 Update - A US Public Health Service report. American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine. 2008;35(2):158 -176. 
19. Wetter DW, Vidrine JI, Fine M, Rowan PJ, Reitzel LR, Tindle H. Mindfulness -Based Addiction 
Treatment (MBAT) Manual. In :2009.  
27 
 
 
 20. Spears CA, Abroms L, Glass CR, et al. Mindfulness -based smoking cessation enhanced with 
mobile technology (iQuit Mindfully): Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2269]. Jmir Mhealth Uhealth. 
2019;7(6):e13059.  
21. Davis TC, Crouch MA, Long SW, et al. Rapid assessment of literacy levels of adult primary care patients. Fam Med. 1991;23(6):433 -435. 
22. Kroenke K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Williams JB. The Patient Health Questionnaire- 2: validity of a two -item 
depression screener. Med Care. 2003;41(11):1284- 1292.  
23. Lowe B, Kroenke K, Grafe K. Detecting and monitoring depression with a two- item 
questionnaire (PHQ -2). J Psychosom Res. 2005;58(2):163- 171. 
24. Gossop M, Darke S, Griffiths P, et al. The Severity of Dependence Scale (SDS): psychometric properties of the SDS in English and Australian samples of heroin, cocaine and amphetamine 
users. Addiction. 1995;90(5):607- 614. 
25. Goldberg JH, Kiernan M. Innovative techniques to address retention in a behavioral weight -
loss trial. Health Educ Res. 2005;20(4):439 -447. 
26. APA. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.).  Arlington, VA: American 
Psychiatr ic Publishing; 2013.  
27. Swift W, Copeland J, Hall W. Choosing a diagnostic cut -off for cannabis dependence. 
Addiction. 1998;93(11):1681- 1692.  
28. Topp L, Mattick RP. Choosing a cut -off on the Severity of Dependence Scale (SDS) for 
amphetamine users. Addic tion. 1997;92(7):[ADDRESS_950098] for Nicotine Dependence: a revision of the Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire. Br J Addict. 
1991;86(9):[ADDRESS_950099], Pope MA, Heatherton T. Predicting smoking cessation 
with self -reported measures of nicotine dependence: FTQ, FTND, and HSI. Drug and Alcohol 
Dependence. 1994;34(3):211- 216. 
31. Hughes JR, Keely JP, Niaura RS, Ossip- Klein DJ, Richmond RL, Swan GE. Meas ures of 
abstinence in clinical trials: issues and recommendations. Nicotine Tob Res. 2003;5(1):13 -25. 
32. Smith SS, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_46746], Bolt DM, et al. Development of the Brief Wisconsin Inventory of Smoking Dependence Motives. Nicotine Tob Res. 2010;12(5):489- 499. 
33. Welsch SK, Smith SS, Wetter DW, Jorenby [CONTACT_34479], Fiore MC, Baker TB. Development and validation of the Wisconsin Smoking Withdrawal Scale. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol. 
1999;7(4):354 -361. 
34. Wetter DW, Carmack CL, Anderson CB, et al. Tobacco withdrawal signs and symptoms among women with and without a history of depression. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol. 
2000;8(1):88 -96. 
35. Condiotte MM, Lichtenstein E. Self -efficacy and relapse in smoking cessation programs. J 
Consult Clin Psychol. 1981;49(5):648 -658. 
36. Cincirip ini PM, Cinciripi[INVESTIGATOR_316441], Wallfisch A, Haque W, Van Vunakis H. Behavior therapy and the 
transdermal nicotine patch: effects on cessation outcome, affect, and copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. J Consult Clin Psychol. 1996;64(2):314 -323. 
37. Brown KW, Ryan RM. The benefits of being present: mindfulness and its role in psychological 
well-being. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 2003;84:822 -848. 
38. Baer RA, Smith GT, Hopkins J, Krietemeyer J, Toney L. Using self -report assessment 
methods to explore facets of mindfulness. Assessment. 2006;13:27 -45. 
39. Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A global measure of perceived stress. J Health Soc 
Behav. 1983;24(4):[ADDRESS_950100]: the PANAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 
1988;54(6):1063 -1070.  
41. Zimet GD, Powell SS, Farley GK, Werkman S, Berkoff KA. Psychometric characteristics of the 
Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support. J Pers Assess. 1990;55(3- 4):610 -617. 
28 
 
 
 42. Hoeppner BB, Hoeppner SS, Abroms LC. How do text -messaging smoking cessation 
interventions confer benefit? A multiple mediation analysis of Text2Quit. Addiction. 
2017;112(4):[ADDRESS_950101], Grothaus LC, Nelson JC. Prevention of relapse in 
women who quit smoking during pregnancy. Am J Public Health. 1999;89(5):706- 711. 
44. Diggle PJ, Heagerty P, Liang KY, Zeger SL. Analysis of longitudinal data. (2nd ed.).  [LOCATION_001], 
NY: Oxford University Press; 2002.  
45. Semega JL, Fontenot KR, Kollar MA. Income and Poverty in the [LOCATION_002]: 2016. In. 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statisitics Administration, 
U.S. Census Bureau; 2017:1- 59. 
46. U.S. Census Bureau. Poverty Thresholds. https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time -
series/demo/income- poverty/historical -poverty -thresholds.html . Published 2018. Accessed.  
47. O'Rourke HP, MacKinnon DP. Reasons for Testing Mediation in the Absence of an 
Intervention Effect: A Research Imperative in Prevention and Intervention Research. J Stud 
Alcohol Drugs. 2018;79(2):171 -181. 
48. Jahng S, Wood PK, Trull TJ. Analysis of affective instability in ecological momentary 
assessment: Indices using successive difference and group comparison via multilevel 
modeling. Psychological Methods. 2008;13(4):354- 375. 
49. Preacher KJ, Rucker DD, Hayes AF. Addressing moderated mediation hypotheses: Theory, methods, and prescriptions. Multivar Behav Res. 2007;42(1):[ADDRESS_950102] Ed.  [LOCATION_001]: Guilford; 
2011.  
51. Siddique J, Harel O, Crespi [CONTACT_32021], Hedeker D. Binary variable multiple- model multiple imputation 
to address missing data mechanism uncertainty: application to a smoking cessation trial. Statistics in Medicine. 2014;33(17):3013 -3028.  
52. Sprybrook J, Bloom H, Congdon R, Hill CL, Martinez A, Raudenbush SW. Optimal Design 
Plus Empi[INVESTIGATOR_124591]: Documentation for the “Optimal Design” Software. 
http://hlmsoft.net/od/2011
. Published 2011. Accessed.  
53. Oikonomou MT, Arvanitis M, Sokolove RL. Mindfulness training for smoking cessation: A meta -analysis of randomized- controlled trials. J Health Psychol. 2017;22(14):1841 -1850.  
54. Whittaker R, McRobbie H, Bullen C, Rodgers A, Gu Y. Mobile phone- based interventions for 
smoking cessation. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2016;4:CD006611.  
55. Peto R. Clinical trial methodology. Biomedicine. 1978;28 Spec No:24 -36. 
56. Friedman LM, Furberg CD, DeMets DL, Reboussin DM, Granger CB. Fundamentals of Clinical Trials, 5th Ed. . [LOCATION_001], NY: Springer; 2015.  
57. Fritz MS, Mackinnon DP. Required sample size to detect the mediated effect. Psychol Sci. 2007;18(3):233 -239. 
 