The Influence  of Bone  Allograft  Particle  Sizes  
on the Quantity  and Quality  of New Bone  
Formation  in Grafted  Extraction  Sockets  and 
Edentulous  Ridges
Study  Protocol  & Statistical  Analysis  Plan  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
February 6, [ADDRESS_353707]:     
 
Ridge  deficiency  is an unfortunate  obstacle  that obviates  the placement  of dental  implants  or 
results  in placing  them  at an angle  that compromises  the prosthetic  restoration.An  ideal  volume  
is essential  for implant  placement  in the buccal/pal atal, api[INVESTIGATOR_2855]/coronal,  mesial/distal  dimensions.  
Several  methods  for augmenting  the alveolar  ridge  in preparation  for implant  placement  have  
been  described.  Autogenous  bone  grafts,  which  are considered  to be the “gold  standard”  ,are 
associated  with signific ant morbidity  and require  a second  surgical  site.Guided  bone  regeneration  
(GBR),  is an alternative  technique  that use bone -substitute  materials  as adjuncts  to or 
replacements  for autografts  in bone  augmentation  procedures  to overcome  the limitations  relate d 
to the use of autografts.Freeze -dried  bone  allograft  (FDBA),  of various  particle  sizes,  is commonly  
used  today  and has shown  success   in augmenting  deficient  ridges.  A graft material  that promotes  
a high percentage  of new vital bone  is beneficial  for implant placement  and stability.The  effect  of 
particle  size on the clinical  and histological  outcomes  of lateral  ridge  augmentation  (insufficient  
edentulous  ridge  width)  has been  scarcely  studied  or reported  in the literature.This  randomized  
clinical  trial aims to clinically  and histologically  compare  the amount  of the bone  gained  after lateral  
ridge  augmentation  procedures  performed  using  small  (100-300μm)  versus  large(1000 -2000μm)  
particle  size bone  cortico -cancellous  allograft  (MaxxeusTM Dental,  Community  Tissue  Services,  
Kettering,  OH) at 6 months  following  surgical  intervention.  
 
 
 
2. Introduction/Background:  
 
Dental  rehabilitation  of partially  or totally  edentulous  patients  
with oral implants  has become  a routine  treatment  modality  in the last 
decades,  with reliable  long-term results(1 -7).However,  early  loss of 
the teeth  due to trauma  or periodontitis  often  leads  to deformities  in 
these  resulting  edentulous  ridges.  Studies  have  demonstrated  that 
bone  resorption  will occur  secondary  to tooth  extraction(8 -10). This 
tends  to occur  over a [ADDRESS_353708] 4 
months  following  extraction  (Fig. 1) and, depending  upon  location,  
may range  up to 5–7 mm bucco -lingually.  In addition,  2–4 mm of 
vertical  height  loss frequently  accompanies  the horizontal  loss and 
usually  is seen  when  multiple  adjacent  extraction  sites are 
combined(8 -10). 
 
Fig. 1. Ridge  resorption  following  tooth  
extraction.  (A) 1 week  after tooth  extraction  
(B) 12 weeks  after extraction   A) B 
 
            
 
Unfavorable  local conditions  of the alveolar  ridge,  may provide  
insufficient  bone  volume  or unfavorable  vertical,  horizontal,  and 
sagittal  inter-maxillary  relationships,  which  may render  implant  
placement  impossible  or incorrect  from a functional  and esthetic  
viewpoint  (11).Several  methods  for augmenting  the alveolar  ridge  in 
preparation  for implant  placement  have  been  described.  Among  
these  techniques,  guided  bone  regeneration  (GBR)  has probably  
generated  the most  interest(12,13).The  concept  of GBR  (Fig. 2) is 
based  upon  the use of a barrier  membrane  to exclude  rapi[INVESTIGATOR_289971] a bony  defect  and, more  importantly,  to 
maintain  a space  for the slower  process  of bone  formation.  Bone  
grafts  or bone  substitutes  are commonly  used  in GBR  procedures  to 
provide  support  for the barrier  membrane,  for additional  space  
maintenance,  and/or  for their osteoconductive  / osteoinductive  
properties.  
 
Autogenous  bone  grafts  are still considered  the gold standard  in bone  regenerat ion 
procedures(14).  However,  donor  site morbidity,  unpredictable  resorption,  limited  quantities  
available,  and the need  to include  additional  surgical  sites are drawbacks  related  to autografts  
that have  intensified  the search  for suitable  alternatives(15 -16). Bone -substitute  materials  have  
increased  in popularity  as adjuncts  to or replacements  for autografts  in bone  augmentation  
procedures  to overcome  the limitations  related  to the use of autografts.  Bone -substitute  materials  
can be categorized  in three  groups: (1) allogenic,  from another  individual  within  the same  species;  
(2) xenogenic,  from another  species;  or (3) alloplastic,  synthetically  produced.  
 
Due to the success  in space  maintenance,  rapid  bone  turnover,  biocompatibility,  and the 
lack of need  to harvest  from another  site, allograft  materials  have  become  increasingly  popular.  
Evidence -based  treatment  results  indicate  that guided  bone  regeneration  (GBR)  for localized  
alveolar  ridge  deformities  can effectively  augment  the ridge  with new bone  in the range of 1.5 to 
5.5 mm(14,16,17).  Freeze -dried  bone  allograft  (FDBA)  is commonly  used  today  and has shown  
success,  both clinically  and histologically  in augmenting  deficient  ridges.  A graft material  that 
promotes  a high percentage  of new vital bone  is benefi cial for implant  placement  and stability.  
Because  particulate  mineralized  freeze -dried  bone  allograft  (FDBA)  is effective  in producing  
dense  new bone,  it is often  preferred  to decalcified  freeze -dried  bone  allograft  (DFDBA)  for lateral  
ridge augmentation  prior to implant  placement (18,19).  However,  there  is a paucity  of 
documentation  to verify  this clinical  impression.  Both clinical  and histologic  results  indicate  a 
beneficial  effect  from the addition  of DFDBA  to GBR  procedures  in humans(20).This  combination  
results  in the formation  of viable  new bone  at 9 months(21)  . Histologic  examination  of biopsy  
samples  from the sub-membranous  hard tissue  reveals  particles  of DFDBA  partially  surrounded  
by [CONTACT_50000]-inflamed  connective  tissue  and by [CONTACT_289976](22).  The histologic  results  of a study  comparing  FDBA  and DFDBA  showed  that in 
DFDBA  sites,  only the particles  near the host bone  are involved  in the mineralization  processes,  
while  in FDBA  sites,  even  the particles  that are farthest from the host bone  are lined  by 
[CONTACT_289977]. 2. GBR  concept    
 
 osteoblasts,  actively  secreting  osteoid  matrix  and newly  
formed  bone(23).  This suggests  more  of an osteo -conductive  
effect  with FDBA  than DFDBA.  
 
The effect  of particle  size (Fig. 3) on the clinical  and 
histological  outcomes  of lateral  ridge  augmentation  
(insufficient  edentulous  ridge  width)  has been  scarcely  studied  
or reported  in the literature.  Shapoff  et al  (24) did a study  
Rhesus  Monkeys  to determine  if particle  size should  be 
considered  as a factor  for evaluation  of osteogenic  activity  of 
FDBA.He  found  that there  is a significantly  more  new bone  
formation  associated  with small  particle  FDBA  when  mixed  
with autogenous  marrow  than that of the large particles.Also,  
he found  that there  is a marked  resolution  of small  graft 
particles  in the new bone  formed.  He concluded  that small  
particles  FDBA  enhance  osteogenesis  when  mixed  with 
autogenous  marrow  by [CONTACT_289978].  
 
In a prospective  randomized  controlled  clinical  trial, 
Testori  et al. (25) compared  the histologic  and 
histomorphometric  vital bone  formation  and residual  graft 
volume  in human  bilateral  sinus  augmentations  performed  with 
either  large  (1.0 to 2.0 mm) or small  (0.25  to 1 mm) particle  
size anorganic  bovine  bone  matrix  in 13 patients.  For each  
patient,  one subantral  compartment  was grafted  with 100%  
large  particle Bio-Oss and the contralateral  subantral  
compartment  was grafted  with small  particle  Bio-Oss. At stage -
one implant  placement  surgery  24 to 32 weeks  later,  a trephine  core sample  was taken  (10 × 3 
mm) from the superior -distal  area of the former  lateral  window  site as identified  by [CONTACT_289979].  Blinded  paired  histomorphometric   and histologic  analysis  
was subsequently  performed  on 11 bilateral  cases.  Vital bone  formation  was 26.77%  ± 9.63%  vs 
18.77%  ± 4.74%  for the large particle  and small  particle  grafts,  respectively.  Residual  xenograft  
was 20.01%  ± 8.97%  vs 21.66%  ± 10.47%  for the large  and small  particle  grafts,  respectively.  At 
the 24- to 32-week  time interval,  the new bone  appeared  as woven  bone  with several  large 
rounded  osteocyte  lacunae.  Close  contact  [CONTACT_289980].   Hence,  the histologic  results  of this study  reaffirm  the 
osteoconductive  ability  of the ABBM  (Bio-Oss)  when  used  as the sole grafting  material  in maxillary  
sinus  augmentation  and the histomorphometric  results  indicate  a statistically  significant  increase  
in vital bone  formation  when  the larger  particle  size is used.  These  findings  were  not shown  in a 
previous  maxillary  sinus  augm entation  study  where  there  was not a statistically  significant  
difference  in the percentage  of new vital bone  formation.  (26) The authors  related  the difference  
between  studies  to the small  sample  size included  in both.  (25) 
 
 
3. Objectives/Specific  Aims:   
 
The aim of this study  is to histologically  and clinically  compare  the amount  of the 
bone  gained  after lateral  ridge  augmentation  (edentulous  ridge)  procedures  performed  
using  small  versus  large  particle  size bone  cortico -cancellous  allograft  (MaxxeusTM 
Dental, Community  Tissue  Services,  Kettering,  OH).   
 
 
 Fig. 3. Maxxeus  Allograft  ;  
(A)Small  particles  (100-300μm).(B)Large  
particles  (1000 -2000μm).   (A) 
(B) 
 
 
9 
(A) 
(B) 
 
 Hi st o m or p h o m etri c  o ut c o m e s( Pri m ar y  O ut c o m e s):   
               -e v al u at e  t h e q u alit y  of  b o n e  r e g e n er at e d wit h  t h e u s e  of  t h e t w o a v ail a bl e  b o n e  
all o gr aft  p arti cl e  si z e s  
          -e v al u at e  w h et h er  t h e si z e  of  c o m m er ci all y  a v ail a bl e  b o n e  all o gr aft s  i nfl u e n c e s 
t h e o ut c o m e s  of  g ui d e d  b o n e  r e g e n er ati o n ( G B R) pr o c e d ur e s  
 
Cli ni c al  a n d  R a di o gr a p hi c  o ut c o m e s( S e c o n d ar y  O ut c o m e s):   
           -q u a ntif y  t h e a m o u nt  of  b o n e  a u g m e nt ati o n  a c hi e v e d  b y  t h e t w o a v ail a bl e  b o n e   
all o gr aft  p arti cl e  si z e s  b y  dir e ct  cli ni c al  m e a s ur e m e nt s  
          -q u a ntif y  t h e a m o u nt  of  b o n e  a u g m e nt ati o n  a c hi e v e d  b y  t h e t w o a v ail a bl e  b o n e  
all o gr aft  p arti cl e  si z e s  b y  r a di o gr a p hi c m e a s ur e m e nt s  ( C B C T) 
          -e v al u at e  t h e h a n dli n g  c h ar a ct eri sti c s  of  t h e t w o a v ail a bl e  b o n e  all o gr aft  p arti cl e  
si z e s.   
 
 
4.  M at eri al s  a n d  M et h o d:  
 
St u d y  p o p ul ati o n   
A  t ot al of  [ADDRESS_353709] u d y  vi sit s  w h e n  cli ni c al  m e a s ur e m e nt s  ar e  r e q uir e d. P h ot o gr a p h s  will  b e  
t a k e n d uri n g  all  vi sit s  u si n g  a  S L R  di git a l c a m er a  i n a  1: [ADDRESS_353710] a c e  o n  t h e d a y  of  s ur g er y  vi a  s e al e d  e n v el o p e s  i n di c ati n g t h e s ur gi c al  
a p pr o a c h  t h e p ati e nt  will  r e c ei v e, a s  f oll o w s: 
• Gr o u p  1:  S m all  p arti cl e  ( S P) b o n e  all o gr aft  ( 0. 2 5-1. 0  m m),  or   
• Gr o u p  2:  L ar g e  p arti cl e  ( L P) b o n e  all o gr aft  ( 1. 0-2. 0  m m)  
 
 
 
T a bl e  1.  St u d y  I n cl u si o n a n d  E x cl u si o n  Crit eri a  
I n cl u si o n Crit eri a  E x cl u si o n  Crit eri a  
P ati e nt s:  
  E n gli s h  s p e a ki n g  
  At  l e a st 1 8  y e ar s  ol d  
  A bl e  t o r e a d a n d  u n d er st a n d  i nf or m e d c o n s e nt  
d o c u m e nt  
  N e e d  i m pl a nt s t o r e pl a c e mi s si n g  t o ot h or  t e et h i n at  
l e a st o n e  q u a dr a nt  of  t h e m o ut h.  
  P ati e nt  at  U A B  d e nt al  s c h o ol  
  willi n g  a n d  a bl e  t o c o m pl y  wit h  t h e pr e o p er ati v e  a n d  
p o st o p er ati v e  di a g n o sti c  a n d  cli ni c al  e v al u ati o n s  
r e q uir e d. • S y st e mi c  c o n diti o n s  c o ntr ai n di c a ti n g or al  s ur gi c al  
pr o c e d ur e s  or  a d v er s el y  aff e cti n g  w o u n d  h e ali n g  
• si g nifi c a nt  m e di c al  c o n diti o n s  or  h a bit s  e x p e ct e d  t o 
i nt erf er e wit h  b o n y  h e ali n g.  
S m o ki n g  > 1 0  ci g ar ett e s/ d a y  
P ati e nt  i s a  p o or  c o m pli a n c e  ri s k (i. e., p o or  or al  h y gi e n e,  
hi st or y  of  al c o h ol  or  dr u g  a b u s e)  
I n s uffi ci e nt al v e ol ar  ri d g e wi dt h  f or e n d o s s e o u s  i m pl a nt 
pl a c e m e nt  d efi n e d  a s  5 m m  or  l e s s a s  d et er mi n e d  b y  b o n e  
s o u n di n g  a n d  c o n e  b e a m  c o m p ut e d  t o m o gr a p h y ( C B C T) 
s c a n.   V erti c al  l o s s of  b o n e  at  e d e nt ul o u s  ri d g e  
 
 
 
 
  
Screening/baseline  visit:   
Upon  enrollment  into the study  the patient’s  medical  history  and electronic  records  will be 
reviewed.  Patients  will be treatment  planned  by [CONTACT_289981] a 
surgeon  and a prosthodontist  or restoring  dentist.  Cone  Beam  Computed  Tomography  
(CBCT)  scan  will be taken  to optimize  the treatment  plan and determine  the feasibility  of 
implant  placement  following  bone  grafting.  Clinical  examiners  will conduct  clinical  and 
radiographic  exams  to determine  eligibility  according  to the above  inclusion  criteria.  Study  
visits  and objectives  will be explained  to all participants.  IRB approved  written  informed  
consent  will be obtained  from all the participants.  
 
Surgical  visit (Visit  1):(Fig.  4) 
A course  of prophylactic  antibiotics  will be dispensed  at the time of surgery  (mostly  
Amoxicillin  2 g or Clindamycin  600 mg, 30 minutes  to one hour prior to surgery).   After  
preparation  and isolation  of the surgical  area,  anesthesia  will be accomplished  by [CONTACT_289982]  (when  indicated)  plus local anesthesia.   
 
The graft material  utilized  for all surgical  procedures,  for all patients,  will be obtained  from one 
manufactured  lot, from the same  donor  to account  for variation  in age, race,  gender  and 
related  healing  potential  of different  grafts  (MaxxeusTM Dental,  cortico -cancellous  bone 
allograft,  Community  Tissue  Services,  Kettering,  OH).     
 
For patients  that present  with an edentulous  ridge  insufficient  to house  one or more  dental  
implants,  requiring  a lateral  ridge  augmentation  procedure:  
A crestal  incision  will be made  on the study quadrant.  A superficial  split thickness  will be made  
on the facial  surface  to allow  flap extension  to achieve  complete  coverage  of the barrier  
membrane  material.   The secondary  periosteal  flaps  will be fully reflected  to allow  adequate  
access  to the surgical site.  The surgical  site will be debrided  and degranulated.   After  
exposure  of the bone  the implant  sites will be located  with the use of the surgical  stent  and 
the ridge  width  will be measured  at the crest  and [ADDRESS_353711]  with the a 
standardized  caliper.  The area of augmentation  will be decorticated  using  a high speed  hand  
pi[INVESTIGATOR_289972] a #2 round  bur perforating  the cortical  plate  every  4 mm throughout  the area 
needing  the augmentation.  The defects  will be grafted  with the randomized  bone  allograft  (SP 
or LP). The graft sites will be covered  with a resorbable  barrier  membrane.   The same  type of 
membrane  from the same  manufactured  lot will be used  for all defect  sites;  however,  the 
membrane  will be trimmed  for the individual  defects  during  surgery.   All surgical  sites will be 
closed  with the same,  vicryl  PGA  Hu-Friedy  Perma  Sharp®  suture.    
 
Post-surgical  analgesics  will be prescribed  and/or  dispensed  as necessary.   All subjects  
will be dispensed  Peridex®  chlorhexidine  mouth  rinse  and instruct ed to rinse  twice  daily for 
two weeks  following  the regenerative  surgery,  to help guard  against  possible  infection.   Pre-
surgical  antibiotics  will also be dispensed  and prescriptions  for relief  of post-surgical  
discomfort,  follow -up antibiotics  and written  home  care instructions  will be provided.  
Immediately  following  the surgery  the surgeon  will complete  a handling  character istics  survey  
on the properties  of bone  graft material.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Visit  2 (Follow -up): (Fig.  5) 
The sutures  will be removed  
after two weeks  after cleaning  the 
sutures  with a gauze  stacked  with 
Peridex®  chlorhexidine  mouth  
rinse  . Surgical  sites will be evaluated  for healing  status  and postoperative  instructions  on 
resuming  oral hygiene  measures  will be instructed  to patients.  
 
 
 
Visit  3 (Bone  Biopsy  and Implant  Placement):   
Six months  post-ridge  augmentation,  a second  CBCT  scan  will be taken  to evaluate  the 
success  of the grafting  procedures  and to plan the optimal  implant  position.  The sites will be 
exposed  for surgical  placement  of implants.  The surgical  approach  will be similar  to the 
(A) (B) (C) 
(D) (E) (F) 
(G) (H) (I) 
Fig. 4. Surgical  steps  .(A) Clinical  appearance  of horizontal  ridge  defect,  (B) Crestal  and vertical  incisions,  (C) Full thickness  
flap elevation  .notice  horizontal  defect,  (D) Mucoperiosteal  release,(E)  Bone  decortication,  (F) Particulate  bone  graft placed  
to rebuild  defect,(G)  bioresorbable  collagen  membrane  shapi[INVESTIGATOR_007],(H)  Placing  the collagen  membrane  over grafted  area,(I)  
Suturing  
Fig. 5 . (A) initial  appearance  (B) 2 weeks  follow -up and suture  removal   (A) (B) 
 
 procedures  for the graft procedures.  After  exposure  of the bone  the 
implant  sites will be located  with the use of the surgical  stent  (prepared  
by [CONTACT_289983])  and the ridge  width  will be measured  at the 
crest  and [ADDRESS_353712] with the same  standardized  caliper.  
If ridge  width  permits  implant  placement,  root form dental  implants  will 
be placed.  Prior  to implant  placement  a bone  biopsy  will be taken  from 
the implant  sites using  a 2 mm internal  diameter  trephine (Fig. 6). For 
the bone  biopsy,  first the new bone  will be measured,  next the center  
of the new bone  will be identified,  and finally  the core will be taken  from 
the center  of the new bone.   The biopsy  will be stored  in the correct  
medium  and will be sent to the Histomor phometry  and Molecular  
Analysis  Core  for histomorphometric  analysis.  The implant  preparation  
will be completed  and implants  will be placed  according  to 
manufacturer  protocol.  
 
All clinical measurements  will be taken  by [CONTACT_289984]  (small  vs. large  particles)  before  grafting  and 
at time of implant  placement.Another  examiner  will perform  the radiographic  evaluations  and will 
also be blinde d to the randomization  process.  Intra-examiner  calibration  will be conducted  to 
ensure  reliability  of measuring  method.  
 
Sample  size rationale:   
To reject  the null hypothesis  of equal  means  with a significance  level (alpha)  of 0.[ADDRESS_353713], 22 patients  in each  group  (total  of 44) will reach  
0.90 statistical  power.  Accounting  for a 8 patient  loss-to-follow  up, 50 patients  will be enrolled  in 
the study.  
 
Histomorphometric  Analysis  
Immediately  following  the bone  biopsy  at the center  of the healed  and regenerated  ridge  
with a trephine  (2-mm internal  diameter),  the specimen  is placed  in a formalin  solution.  Following  
fixation  with 10% neutral  buffered  formalin  for 48h, the bone  biopsy  specimens  will be dehydrated,  
embedded  in methylmethacrylate,  ground  sectioned  at the center  of the biopsy  in its long axis into 
50-70 micron -thick section s (Exakt  Technologies,  Inc., Oklahoma  City, OK), and polished  with 
4000  grit sandpaper  and Novus  Polish  to create  as smooth  a surface  a possible . All sections  will 
be stained  with Sanderson’s  Bone  Stain  and imaged  for quantification  of bone  formation.  
Histomorphometry  will be done  using  the Bioquant®  Image  Analysis  Software  (R&M  Biometrics,  
Nashville,  TN) by [CONTACT_289985],  residual  graft particles,  organic  matrix  
and artifact/air  components.  Corresponding  percentages  will be calculated  for each  of these  
tissues  and compared  between  small  and large  particle  grafts  for ridge  preservation  and 
augmentation  separately.   
These  experiments  will be conducted  at the UAB Histomorphometry  and Molecular  Analysis  Core  
and all measurements  made by [CONTACT_289986]  2. Clinical  parameters  and their respective  timing  of measurement   
Clinical  parameters  Timing  of measurements  
Cone  Beam  CT Scan   Screening,  [ADDRESS_353714]  level and 4mm  api[INVESTIGATOR_289973]  a gauge(Pre -surgical)  and 
a surgical  stent  (surgical  ) Screening,  Surgery  (Pre-surgical),  
[ADDRESS_353715]-surgery  
 
 
Fig.6  Bone  Biopsy  taken  
prior to implant  placement  
using  a trephine   
 
 References  
 
1.Albrektsson  T, Zarb G,Worthington  P,ErikssonAR.  The long term efficacy  of currently  
used  dental  implants:  A review  and proposed  criteria  of success.  Int J Oral Maxillofac  
Implants  1986;1:11 –25. 
 
2. VanSteenberghe  D. A retrospective  multi  center  evaluation  of the survival  rate of 
osseointegrated  fixtures  supporting  fixed  partial  prostheses  in the treatment  of partial  
edentulism.  J Prosthet  Dent  1989;61:217 –223. 
 
3. VanSteenberghe  D,Lekholm  U,Bolender  C,et al.The  applicability  of osseo -integrated  
oral implantsthe  rehabilitation  of partial  edentulism:  A prospec tive multi -center  study  of 
558 fixtures.  Int J Oral Maxillofac  Implants  1990;5:272 –281. 
 
4. Lekholm  U,Gunne  J,Henry  P,et al.Survival  of the Branemark  implant  in partially  
edentulous  jaws:  A 10-year prospective  multi -center  study.  Int J Oral Maxillofac  Implants  
1999;14:  639–645. 
 
5. Lindquist  LW,Carlsson  GE,Jemt  TA .A prospective15 -year follow -up study  of 
mandibular  fixed  prostheses  supported  by [CONTACT_289987].  Clinical  results  and 
marginal  bone  loss. Clin Oral Implants  Res 1996;7:329 –336. 
 
6. Buser  D,Mericske -Stern  R,Bernard  JP,et  al.Long -term evaluation  of non-submerged  
ITI implants.  Part I: 8-year life table  analysis  of a prospective  multi -center  study  with 
2359  implants.  Clin Oral Implants  Res 1997;8:161 –172 
 
7. WeberHP,Crohin  CC,Fiorellini  JP. A 5-year prospective  clinical  and radiographic  study  
of non-submerged  dental  implants.  Clin Oral Implants  Res 2000;11:144 –153 
 
8. Nevins  M, Camelo  M, De Paoli  S, et al. A study  of the fate of the buccal  wall of 
extraction  sockets  of teeth  with prominent  roots.  Int J Periodontics  Restorative  Dent.  
2006;26:19 –29. 
 
9. Cardaropoli  G, Araujo  M, Lindhe  J. Dynamics  of bone  tissue  formation  in tooth  
extraction  sites:  an experimental  study  in dogs.  J Clin Periodontol.  2003;30:  809–818. 
 
10. Araujo  MG, Lindhe  J. Dimensional  ridge  alterations  following  tooth  extraction:  an 
experimental  study  in the dog. J Clin Periodontol.  2005;32:212 –21 
 
11. Khraisat  A, Abu-Hamma d O, Dar-Odeh  N, et al. Abutment  screw  loosening  and 
bending  resistance  of external  hexagon  implant  system  after lateral  cycle  loading.  Clin 
Implant  Dent  Relat  Res. 2004;6:157 – 164. 
12. Fiorellini  JP, Nevins  ML. Localized  ridge  augmentation/preservation.  A systematic  
review.  Ann Periodon - tol 2003;8:321 -327. 
 
13. Buser  D, Martin  W, Belser  UC. Optimizing  esthetics  for implant  restorations  in the 
anterior  maxilla:  Anatomic  and surgical  considerations . Int J Oral Maxillofac  Implants  
2004;19(suppl):  43–61 
 
14. Buser  D, Dula K, Hirt HP, Schenk  RK. Lateral  ridge  augmentation  using  autografts  
and barrier  membranes:  A clinical  study  with 40 partially  edentulous  patients.  J Oral 
Maxillofac  Surg  1996;54:420 -432. 
 
 
 15. Hjørting-Hansen  E. Bone  grafting  to the jaws with special  reference  to reconstructive  
preprosthetic  surgery.  A historical  review.  Mund  Kiefer  Gesichtschir  2002;6:6 –14. 
 
16. Buses  DA,Brägger U,LangNP,Nyman  S. Regeneration  and enlargement  of jaw bone 
using  guided  tissue  regeneration.  Clin Oral Implants  Res 1990;1:22 –32 
 
17. Mellonig  JT, Nevins  M. Guided  bone  regeneration  of bone  defects  associated  with 
implants:  An evidence -based  outcome  assessment.  Int J Periodontics  Restorative  Dent  
1995;15:168 –185. 
 
18. Nevins  M, Mellonig  JT. Enhancement  of damaged  edentulous  ridges  to receive  
dental  implants:  A combination  of allograft  and the Gore -Tex membrane.  Int J 
Periodontics  Restorative  Dent  1992;12:  97–112. 
19. Shanaman  RH. A retrospective  study  of 237 sites treated  consecutively  with guid- ed 
tissue  regeneration.  Int J Periodontics  Restorative  Dent  1994;14:293 –301 
 
20. Simon  M,Jovanovic  SA,Trisi  P,Scarano  A, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69029]  A. Vertical  ridge  augmentation  
around  dental  implants  using  a membrane  technique  and autogenous  bone  or allografts  
in humans.  Int J Periodontics  Restorative  Dent  1998;18:8 –23. 
 
21. Doblin  JM, Salkin  LM, Mellado  JR, Freedman  AL, Stein  MD. A histologic  evaluation  
of localized  ridge  augmentation  utilizing  DFDBA  in combination  with e-PTFE  membrane s 
and stainless  steel  bone  pi[INVESTIGATOR_289974].  Int J Periodontics  Restorative  Dent  
1996;16:120 –129. 
 
22. TalH,OelgiesserD,MosesO.  Pre implant  guided  bone  regeneration  in the anterior  
maxilla.  Int J Periodontics  Restorative  Dent  1997;17:436 –447. 
 
23. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69029]  A, Scarano  A, Corigliano  M, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69029]  M. Comparison  of bone  regeneration  
with the use of mineralized  and demineralized  freeze -dried  bone  allografts:  A histological  
and histochemical  study  in man.  Biomaterials  1996;17:1127 –1131.  
 
24. Shapoff  CA, Bowers  GM, Levy  B, Mellonig  JT, Yukna  RA. The effect  of particle  size 
on the osteogenic  activity  of composite  grafts  of allogenic  freeze -dried  bone  and 
autogenous  marrow.  J Periodontal  1980;  51:[ADDRESS_353716]  of xenograft  
(ABBM)  particle  size on vital bone  formation  following  maxillary  sinus  augmentation:  a 
multicenter,  randomized,  controlled,  clinical  histomorphometric  trial. Int J Periodontics  
Restorative  Dent.  2013  Jul-Aug;33(4):467 -75.26.  26.  
 
26.Chackartchi  T, Iezzi G, Goldstein  M, Klinger  A, Soskolne  A, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69029]  A, Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_20116]  L. 
Sinus  floor augmentation  using  large  (1-2 mm) or small  (0.25 -1 mm) bovine  bone  
mineral  particles:  a prospective,  intra-individual  controlled  clinical,  micro -computerized  
tomography  and histomorphometric  study.  Clin Oral Implants  Res. 2011  May;22(5):[ADDRESS_353717]   
 
Ridge preservation  (socket  grafting)  at the time of tooth  extraction  is a commonly  performed  procedure  that prevent s 
extensive  ridge  resorption  and allows  for optimal  implant  placement.  Ridge  preservation  can be achieved  with 
different  graft  materials  from  autogenous,  allogenic,  xenograft,  and alloplast  sources.  Due to its success  in space  
maintenance,  rapid  turnover,  biocompatibility,  and the lack of need  to harvest  from  another  site, small -sized  bone  
allograft  materials  (especially  freeze -dried  bone  allografts,  FDBA ) have  become  increasingly  popular. However , the 
effect  of particle  size on the clinical  and histological  outcomes  following  site preservation  at the time of tooth  
extraction  has not been well studied  or reported  in the literature.  This randomized  trial aims  to clinically  and 
histologically  compare  the amount  and quality  of the bone  gained  following  ridge  preservation  procedures  when  using  
small  (250-1000 μm) versus  large  (1000 -2000μm)  particle  size bone  cortico -cancellous  allografts  at time of dental  
implant  placement,  3 months  following  surgical  intervention. 
 
 
2. Introduction/Background  
 
Studi es have  demonstrated  that bone  resorption  occurs  
secondary  to tooth  extraction  with the majority  of dimensional  
changes  occurring  within  the first 3 to 6 months  [1-5]. The 
buccal  wall of the socket  (Fig.  1) tends  to be resorbed  to a greater  
degree  than the lingual  wall because  the coronal  aspect  of the 
buccal  plate  is often  comprised  of bundle  bone,  a very thin layer  
(≤1mm  in most  cases)  of bone  [6]. Cardaropoli  et al. [1] reported  
a meaningful  negative  correlation  between  baseline  buccal  wall 
thickness  and ridge  width  change  at sites receiving  tooth  
extraction  but no ridge  preservation  procedures.  Vertical  height  loss frequently  accompanies  the horizontal  loss and 
usually  is seen when  multiple  adjacent  extraction  sites are combined  (Fig.  2). Some  have  described  a loss of up to 
50% of the overall  ridge  width  without  ridge  preservation   at time of tooth  extraction  [7]. 
 
Implant  dentistry  has become  a success ful routine  treatment  modality  for partially  or totally  edentulous  patients  [8-
14]. Socket  grafting  at the time of tooth  extraction  (referred  to as ridge  preservation)  tends  to maintain  the bone  
volume  necessary  for the esthetic  and functional  placement  of a dental  implant  [5, 7, 15-19]. In post-extraction  ridge  
preservation  procedures,  a systematic  review  by [CONTACT_289988]. [5] reported  on the histologic  outcomes  and/or  
changes  in the bucco -lingual  dimension  and buccal  wall height  for a total of [ADDRESS_353718]  was 0.58 
mm [5]. These  average  dimensional  changes  are dramatically  less than those  observed  following  tooth  loss in the 
absence  of socket  preservation.   
 
Allografts  are the most  widely  used bone  replacement  grafts  for intra-oral applications  in the US. Certified  tissue  
banks  use typi[INVESTIGATOR_289975],  to ensure  their safety  and 
Fig 1. A. Socket  anatomy,  B. Loss  of buccal  bone  
following  tooth  extraction.   
Fig. [ADDRESS_353719]  commonly  used allografts  in dentistry  are freeze -dried  bone  allografts  
(FDBA)  and demine ralized  freeze -dried  bone  allografts  (DFDBA).  It has been  reported  that FDBA  physically  
maintains  the socket  space  and acts as a scaffold  for host osteoprogenitor  cells during  the healing  phase.  On the other  
hand,  released  bone  morphogenetic  proteins  (BMPs ) from  DFDBA  give the allograft  the added  benefit  of 
osteoinductivity  by [CONTACT_289989]  [20].  
 
Eskow  and Mealey  [16] histologically  evaluated  in a randomized  clinica l trial the new bone  formation  following  ridge  
preservation  with cortical  FDBA  compared  with cancellous  FDBA.  All bone  graft  materials  were  obtained  from  the 
same  donor  and a standard  particle  size of 250 to 1,000  μm was chosen  for the study.  A greater  percentage  of residual  
graft  material  was found  in the cortical  group  compared  with the cancellous  group  and as the percentage  of new bone  
formation  increased,  the percentage  of residual  graft  material  decreased.  No difference  was found  in the percentage  
of new bone  formation  between  the two groups  when  core biopsies  were  harvested  an average  of 18 weeks  after 
extraction  and socket  grafting.   
 
Whitman  and Mealey  [19] reported  on the differences  in healing  after tooth  extraction  and ridge  preservation  of non-
molar teeth  using  DFDBA  at 8 to 10 weeks  of healing  compared  with 18 to 20 weeks  of healing.  There  was no 
difference  in ridge  dimensional  changes  between  sites healing  for an average  of 9 weeks  compared  with 19 weeks.  
There  was a significantly  different  percentage  of new vital bone  between  the short -term group  and the long-term 
group.  The short -term group  had a mean  of 32.63%  vital bone  compared  with 47.41%  in the long-term group.  
However,  the authors  stated  that it was uncertain  if the percentage  of vital bone at an implant  site would  directly  affect  
implant  survival  or success.  
 
In another  ridge  preservation  randomized  clinical  study,  Wood  and Mealey  [15] histologically  evaluated  and 
compared  the healing  of non-molar  extraction  sockets  grafted  with DFDBA  versus FDBA.  There  were  no statistically  
significant  differences  in the changes  in ridge  dimensions  after ridge  preservation  is performed  with DFDBA  versus  
FDBA.  However,  histology  showed  a significantly  greater  percentage  of vital bone  in sites grafted  with DFDBA  
(81.26%)  versus  FDBA  (50.63%),  and DFDBA  sites had significantly  fewer  residual  graft  particles.  
 
The effect  of particle  size on the clinical  and histological  outcomes  of ridge  preservation  has been  scarcely  studied  or 
reported  in the literature.  Hoang and Mealey  [21] conducted  a ridge  preservation  randomized  clinical  trial after molar  
extractions.  The objectives  were  to histologically  and clinically  compare  human  demineralized  bone  matrix  (DBM)  
putty  with one size of bone  particles  (SPS)  to human  DBM  putty  with two different  sizes  of bone  particles  (multiple  
particle  sizes  [MPS]).  After  20 weeks  of healing,  core biopsies  were  obtained  during  implant  placement  and analyzed  
for the percentage  area of vital bone,  residual  graft  particles,  and non-mineral ized structures  (connective  tissue/other  
non-mineralized  tissue  [CT]).  Changes  in alveolar  ridge  dimensions  were  also determined.  The SPS group  had a mean  
of 49% vital bone,  8% residual  graft,  and 43% CT. The MPS  group  had 53%,  5%, and 42%,  respectively.  Patients  in 
both groups  lost a mean  of <1 mm alveolar  height  on the buccal  and lingual  aspects  and <1.[ADDRESS_353720]  commercially  available  grafts  are categorized  in either  small  or large  particle  sizes.  
 
The use of large  sized  particles  of anorganic  bovine  bone  matrix  resulted  in significantly  more  vital bone  formation  
than small  particle  grafts  (26.77%  ± 9.63%  vs 18.77%  ± 4.74%,  respectivel y) in a prospective  randomized  controlled  
clinical  trial of bilateral  sinus  augmentations  [22].  While  the histomorphometric  results  of this study  indicated  a 
statistically  significant  increase  in vital bone  formation  when  the larger  particle  size was used,  these  findings  were  
not shown  in a previous  maxillary  sinus  augmentation  study  where  there  was not a statistically  significant  difference  
in the percentage  of new vital bone  formation  [23].  The authors  related  the difference  between  studies  to the small  
sample  size included  in both (<15  patients).  Due to the conflicting  information  and paucity  of the literature  on this 
topic,  this proposed  study  will help shed the light on the influence  of bone  graft  particle  size on the amount  of new 
bone  formation  in the most  common  bone  defect  in the oral cavity,  i.e. the extraction  socket,  after ridge  preservation.   
 
 
 
 3. Objectives/Specific  Aims  
 
The aim of the study  is to clinically  and histologically  analyze  the amount  of the bone  gained  after ridge  preservation  
procedures  performed  using  small  (250-1000μm)  versus  large  (1000 -2000μm)  particle  size bone  cortico -cancellous  
allograft  (MaxxeusTM Dental,  Community  Tissue  Services,  Kettering,  OH) at time of implant  placement,  3 months  
following  surgical  intervention.  
 
Specific  objectives  include:  
A. To compare  the bone  quantity  (bucco -lingual  ridge  width)  between  the two bone  allograft  particle  sizes  by [CONTACT_289990]  
B. To compare  the bone  quantity  (bucco -lingual  ridge  width  and api[CONTACT_3252] -coronal  ridge  height)  between  the two bone  
allograft  particle  sizes  by 3-dimensional  radiographic  measurements  (CBCT  scan)  
C. To evaluate  the quality  of bone  regenerated  with the use of the two bone  allograft  particle  sizes  via histologic al 
and histomorphometric  analyse s. 
 
Primary  outcome : histologic  and histomorphometric  bone  core analyse s (from  the implant  preparation  site).  
Secondary  outcomes : clinical  and radiographic  dimensional  changes  of the edentulous  ridges.  
Null Hypothe sis: Large -sized  particle  bone  allografts  will achieve  similar  histologic  and clinical  outcomes  as small -
sized  particle  allografts.  
 
 
4. Materials  and Method s 
 
Patients  presenting  to the graduate  periodontal  clinic  at the University  of Alabama  at Birmingham  School  of 
Dentistry  will be screened  according  to the following  criteria:  
 
Inclusion  criteria  Exclusion  criteria  
• English  speaking,  able to read and understand  
informed  consent  document   • Less than 18 years  old 
• Hopeless  non-molar  tooth  or teeth  that are planned  
to be replaced  with dental  implants  after ridge  
preservation   • Smokers/tobacco  users  (>10  cigarettes/day)  
• Socket  with residual  4 walls  following  minimally  
invasive  tooth  extraction  (a dehiscence  ≤ 3 mm 
may be included)   • Patients  with systemic  pathologies  or conditions  
contraindicating  oral surgical  procedures  or adversely  
affecting  wound  healing  as uncontrolle d diabetes  
• Healthy  adjacent  teeth  must  be present  and not 
planned  for extraction  • Poor  compliance  risk (i.e., poor oral hygiene,  
history  of alcohol  or drug abuse)  
 
 To reject  the null hypothesis  of equal  means  with a significance  level  (alpha)  of 0.[ADDRESS_353721], 22 patients  in each group  (total  of 44) will be required  to reach  0.90 statistical  power.  
Accounting  for 8-patient  loss-to-follow  up, 50 patients  will be enrolled  in the study.  
 
All clinical  measurements  are being taken  by [CONTACT_289991]  (small  
vs. large  particles)  before  grafting  and at time of implant  placement.  Another  examiner  will perform  the radiographic  
evaluations  and will also be blinded  to the randomization  process.  Intra -examiner  calibration  will be conducted  to 
ensure  reliability  of measuring  method.  
 
Screening/baseline  visit:  
Patients’  medical  history  and electronic  records  will be reviewed.  A treatment  plan will be developed  by [CONTACT_289992] a periodontist  and a restoring  dentist  and respective  residents.  Study  examiners  
will conduct  clinical  and radiographic  exams  to determine  eligibility  according  to the above  criteria.  If deemed  
eligible,  study  visits  and objectives  will be explained  to all participants  and IRB approved  written  informed  consent  
will be obtained.  
 
Surgical  visit - Study  visit 1:  
Patients  will be randomized  on the day of surgery  to receive  either  Small  Particle  (SP) (Group  1) or Large  Particle  
(LP) bone  allograft  (Group  2) by [CONTACT_289993],  using  computer -generated  random  number  list. A course of prophylactic  antibiotics  will be dispensed  at 
the time of surgery  (Amoxicillin  2 g or Clindamycin  600 mg, 30 minutes  to one hour prior  to surgery).  The graft 
material  utilized  for all surgical  procedures,  for all patients,  will be obtained  from  one manufactured  lot, from  the 
same  donor  to account  for variation  in age, race,  gender  and related  healing  potential  of different  grafts  (MaxxeusTM 
Dental,  cortico -cancellous  FDBA,  Community  Tissue  Services,  Kettering,  OH).  Following  local anesthesia , tooth or 
teeth  will be gently  elevated  using  a minimally  traumatic  technique  that prevents  loss of supporting  bone.  Socket(s)  
will be curetted,  irrigated  and inspected  following  extraction  and the presence  of intact  walls  or minimal  dehiscence  
(≤3mm)  will be verified.  The randomized  bone  allograft  (SP or LP) will be hydrated  in saline  and then placed  in the 
socket  and covered  with a collagen  dressing.  Vicryl  sutures  will be used to achieve  stability  of the collagen  dressing  
over the graft  material  (Fig.  3). Stand ardized  photographs  will be taken  to document  the procedure.  
 
 
 
Figure  3.  
A. Tooth  is elevated , B. 
Extracted  tooth, C. Socket  is 
curetted,  irrigated  and 
inspected  for presence  of bone  
walls  D. Graft  is placed  in the 
socket and covered  with a 
collagen  dressing  and sutures . 
 
 
 
Cone  Beam  Computed  Tomography  (CBCT)  scan will be taken  immediately  after socket  preservation  and will serve  
for baseline  measurements.  
Post-surgical  antibiotics  will be prescribed  for the first post-operative  week  and analgesics  will be prescribed  as 
necessary.   All subjects  will be dispensed  Peridex®  chlorhexidine  mouth  rinse  and instructed  to rinse  twice  daily  for 
two weeks  following  the surgery,  to help guard  against  possible  infection.  Verbal  and written  home  care instructions  
will be provided.   
 
Follow -up visit- Study  visit 2 
The sutures  will be removed  after two weeks.  Surgical  sites will be evaluated  for healing  status  and postoperative  
instructions  on resuming  oral hygiene  measures  will be instructed  to patients.  
 
 
 

 
 Bone  Biopsy  and Implant  Placement  - Study  visit 3 
Three  months’  post-socket  grafting , a second  CBCT  scan will be taken  to evaluate  the success  of the grafting  
procedures  and to plan the optimal  implant  position.  The site(s)  will be exposed  for surgical  placement  of the 
implant(s).  After  exposure  of the healed  edentulous  ridge,  the implant  sites will be located  with the use of the surgical  
stent  (prepared  by [CONTACT_289983])  and the ridge  width  will be measured  at the crest  and [ADDRESS_353722]  
with the same  standardized  caliper.  If ridge  width  is deemed  adequate,  a dental  implant  of appropriate  size will be 
placed.  Prior  to implant  placement  a bone  biopsy  will be taken  from  the implant  site using  a 2-mm internal  diame ter 
trephine.  The biopsy  will be stored  in formalin  and sent to the UAB  Histomorphometry  and Molecular  Analysis  Core  
for histomorphometric  analysis.   
 
 
Fig 4.  A. Site after 3 months  
of healing , B. Flap elevation , 
C. Core  biopsy  trephine,  D. 
Implant  placement , E. Flap 
replaced  and sutured . 
  
 
 
 
 
Histomorphometric  Analysis  
Each  specimen  will be fixated  with 10% neutral  buffered  formalin  for 48 hours  prior  to be dehydrated  and embedded  
in methylmethacrylate.  It will be ground  sectioned  at the center  of the biopsy  in its long axis into 50-70 micron -thick  
sections  (Exakt  Technologies,  Inc., Oklahoma  City,  OK),  and polished  with 4000  grit sandpaper  and Novus  Polish  to 
create  a surface  as smooth  as possible.  All sections  will be stained  with Goldner ’s Trichrome  stain and imaged  for 
quantification  of bone  formation.  Histomorphometry  will be done  using  the Bioquant®  Image  Analysis  Software  
(R&M  Biometrics,  Nashville,  TN) by [CONTACT_289985],  residual  graft  particles,  organic  matrix 
and artifact/air  components.   
Corresponding  percentages  will be calculated  for each of these  tissues  and compared  between  small  and large  particle  
grafts  for ridge  preservation  and augmentation  separately.  These  experiments  will be conducted  at the UAB 
Histomorphometry  and Molecular  Analysis  Core  and all measurements  made  by [CONTACT_289994].  
 
Clinical  and Radiographic  Measurements  
Direct  measurements  (in mm)  of the bucco -lingual  ridge  width  will be taken  following  tooth  extraction  at the largest  
area of the socket  orifice,  using  a UNC -[ADDRESS_353723]  data,  the 2 scans  will be superimpo sed in a virtual  implant  planning  
software  (coDiagnostix)  to evaluate  3-D volumetric  changes  (in cc). In addition,  a virtual  tooth  (planned  in optimal  
position  at the implant  site) will serve  as reference  point  for standardized  assessment  of 2-dimensional  ridge  width  
and height  changes  (in mm)  from  the time of grafting  until time of implant  placement.   
 
Statistical  Analysis  
To reject  the null hypothesis  of equal  means  with a significance  level  (alpha)  of 0.[ADDRESS_353724], 22 patients  in each group  (total  of 44) will be required  to reach  0.[ADDRESS_353725] and the influence  of the type of tooth  site on the 
radiographic  dimensional  changes  were  evaluated  with two-sample  t-tests.  
 

 
 References  
 
 
1. Cardaropoli,  G., M. Araujo,  and J. Lindhe , Dynamics  of bone  tissue  formation  in tooth  extraction  
sites.  An experimental  study  in dogs.  J Clin Periodontol,  2003.  30(9): p. 809-18. 
2. Araujo,  M.G.  and J. Lindhe,  Dimensional  ridge  alterations  following  tooth  extraction.  An 
experimental  study  in the dog. J Clin Periodontol,  2005.  32(2): p. 212-8. 
3. Nevins,  M., et al., A study  of the fate of the buccal  wall of extraction  sockets  of teeth  with prominent  
roots.  Int J Periodontics  Restorative  Dent,  2006.  26(1): p. 19-29. 
4. Tan, W.L.,  et al., A systemati c review  of post-extractional  alveolar  hard and soft tissue  dimensional  
changes  in humans.  Clin Oral Implants  Res, 2012.  [ADDRESS_353726]  5: p. 1-21. 
5. Jambhekar,  S., F. Kernen,  and A.S. Bidra,  Clinical  and histologic  outcomes  of socket  grafting  after 
flapless  tooth extraction:  a systematic  review  of randomized  controlled  clinical  trials.  J Prosthet  Dent,  2015.  
113(5): p. 371-82. 
6. Van der Weijden,  F., F. Dell'Acqua,  and D.E. Slot, Alveolar  bone  dimensional  changes  of post-
extraction  sockets  in humans:  a systemat ic review.  J Clin Periodontol,  2009.  36(12):  p. 1048 -58. 
7. Albrektsson,  T., et al., The long-term efficacy  of currently  used dental  implants:  a review  and 
proposed  criteria  of success.  Int J Oral Maxillofac  Implants,  1986.  1(1): p. 11-25. 
8. van Steenberg he, D., A retrospective  multicenter  evaluation  of the survival  rate of osseointegrated  
fixtures  supporting  fixed  partial  prostheses  in the treatment  of partial  edentulism.  J Prosthet  Dent,  1989.  
61(2): p. 217-23. 
9. van Steenberghe,  D., et al., Applicabili ty of osseointegrated  oral implants  in the rehabilitation  of 
partial  edentulism:  a prospective  multicenter  study  on 558 fixtures.  Int J Oral Maxillofac  Implants,  1990.  
5(3): p. 272-81. 
10. Lindquist,  L.W.,  G.E. Carlsson,  and T. Jemt,  A prospective  15-year follow -up study  of mandibular  
fixed  prostheses  supported  by [CONTACT_289995].  Clinical  results  and marginal  bone  loss. Clin Oral 
Implants  Res, 1996.  7(4): p. 329-36. 
11. Buser,  D., et al., Long -term evaluation  of non-submerged  ITI implants.  Part 1: 8-year life table  
analysis  of a prospective  multi -center  study  with 2359  implants.  Clin Oral Implants  Res, 1997.  8(3): p. 161-
72. 
12. Lekholm,  U., et al., Survival  of the Branemark  implant  in partially  edentulous  jaws:  a 10-year 
prospective  multicenter  study. Int J Oral Maxillofac  Implants,  1999.  14(5): p. 639-45. 
13. Weber,  H.P.,  C.C. Crohin,  and J.P. Fiorellini,  A 5-year prospective  clinical  and radiographic  study  
of non-submerged  dental  implants.  Clin Oral Implants  Res, 2000.  11(2): p. 144-53. 
14. Wood,  R.A.  and B.L. Mealey,  Histologic  comparison  of healing  after tooth  extraction  with ridge  
preservation  using  mineralized  versus  demineralized  freeze -dried  bone  allograft.  J Periodontol,  2012.  83(3): 
p. 329-36. 
15. Eskow,  A.J. and B.L. Mealey,  Evaluation  of healing  following  tooth  extraction  with ridge  
preservation  using  cortical  versus  cancellous  freeze -dried  bone  allograft.  J Periodontol,  2014.  85(4): p. 514-
24. 
16. Geurs,  N., et al., Using  growth  factors  in human  extraction  sockets:  a histologic  and 
histo morphometric  evaluation  of short -term healing.  Int J Oral Maxillofac  Implants,  2014.  29(2): p. 485-
96. 
17. Ntounis , A., et al., Clinical  assessment  of bone  quality  of human  extraction  sockets  after conversion  
with growth  factors.  Int J Oral Maxillofac  Implants,  2015.  30(1): p. 196-201. 
18. Whetman,  J. and B.L. Mealey,  Effect  of Healing  Time  on New  Bone  Formation  After  Tooth  
Extraction  and Ridge  Preservation  With  Demineralized  Freeze -Dried  Bone  Allograft:  A Randomized  
Controlled  Clinical  Trial.  J Periodontol,  2016.  87(9): p. 1022 -9. 
19. Burchardt,  H., The biology  of bone  graft  repair.  Clin Orthop  Relat  Res, 1983(174):  p. 28-42. 
20. Testori,  T., et al., Effect  of xenograft  (ABBM)  particle  size on vital bone  formation  following  
maxillary  sinus  augmentation:  a multicenter,  randomized,  controlled,  clinical  histomorphometric  trial. Int 
J Periodontics  Restorative  Dent,  2013.  33(4): p. 467-75. 
 
 21. Chackartchi,  T., et al., Sinus  floor  augmentation  using  large  (1-2 mm)  or small  (0.25 -1 mm)  bovine  
bone  mineral  particles:  a prospective,  intra-individual  controlled  clinical,  micro -computerized  tomography  
and histomorphometric  study.  Clin Oral Implants  Res, 2011.  22(5): p. 473-80. 
 
 
 
 