 
Page 1 of 34  Study Protocol (including Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP))  
 
Official Title: Vaper to Vaper: A Multimodal Mobile Peer Driven Intervention to Support 
Adolescents in Quitting Vapi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (V2V)  
 
NCT# : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
 
IRB Approval Date : March 3, 2023  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
      
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
Page 2 of 34 1. TITLE  
Vaper to Vaper (V2V): A Multimodal Mobile Peer Driven Intervention to Support Adolescents 
in Quitting Vapi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  2.
 EXTERNAL IRB  REVIEW HISTORY * 
None.  3.
 PRIOR APPROVALS : 
None.  4.
 OBJECTIVES * 
In this study, we will develop Vaper -to-Vaper (V2V), a suite of mobile peer driven tools, including 
peer texting and coaching, based on lessons learned in our prior tobacco intervention work. These 
tools will engage and help adolescents use strategies to manage cravings and successfully quit e -
cigarettes. The specific aims of the V2V study are to:  
Aim 1: Adapt the existing peer -driven and gamification mobile tools to develop the V2V 
intervention.  
1A. Conduct a qualitative study to (1) explore issues unique to e -cigarette use (e.g., concerns, 
motivations, triggers, symptoms of nicotine dependence), and (2) understand perceived needs for cessation support (preferences for technology (e.g., texting, app- based) to inform adaptation 
of the toolset. 
1B. Work with these users to build the V2V innovations, including peer messaging for 
adolescents, peer -to-peer videos, and game narratives for gamification.  
1C. Refine the V2V mobile toolset with iterative usability testing  (mini- pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]) . 
 
There are no hypotheses for Aim 1. Aim [ADDRESS_1140288] to adapt the existing peer -driven and gamification 
mobile tools to develop the V2V intervention. 
 
Aim 2: Evaluate the feasibility of the research protocols and the feasibility and acceptability of the V2V intervention (peer messaging, peer coaching, and gamification) compared to e -
cigarette cessation written materials (control) in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_242028] s tudy.  
2A. Assess the feasibility of the research protocols, including participant recruitment and 
retention.   
Hypothesis H1: We will be able to recruit 80 adolescents (20/school, 40 per study condition), 
and >85% will be retained in each study condition at 6-month follow-up.  
2B. Monitor V2V engagement (e.g., number of responses to texting quizzes, peer coaching 
interactions, peer videos viewed) and assess acceptability of and satisfaction with the program.  
2C. Assess preliminary effect size estimates of the V2V intervention on cotinine- validated [ADDRESS_1140289] quit attempt, and amount of use.   
Hypothesis H2: The intervention will be associated with greater cotinine-validated 7-day point 
prevalence vapi[INVESTIGATOR_822320], lower time to first quit attempt, and less amount of e-
cigarette use compared to control at 6-month follow-up. 
 5.
 BACKGROUND * 
Adolescent e -cigarette use has now exceeded combustible cigarette use, leading the FDA and the 
U.S. Surgeon General to call the increasing use of e-cigarettes among U.S. adolescents an epi[INVESTIGATOR_901].
1-4 The 2018 National Youth Tobacco Survey found a 78% increase in e- cigarette use 
in just one year,5 with over 3.5 million youth currently using e-cigarettes. Alarmingly, 28% of 
high school e-cigarette users are vapi[INVESTIGATOR_54139] [ADDRESS_1140290] month.5 The high 
amounts of nicotine in e-cigarettes harm adolescent brain development, impacting learning, 
 
Page 3 of 34 memory, attention, mood, and impulse control.6  Further, adolescent e- cigarette users are at 
higher risk than non- users of transitioning to traditional cigarettes.1,2,6 -10 Tobacco use continues 
to be the leading cause of preventable morbidity and mortality in the U.S., with nearly all 
tobacco use beginning during youth and young adulthood.11,12 Once transitioned, 80% of these 
adolescent smokers will continue to smoke into adulthood and, of those, one- half will die [ADDRESS_1140291] adolescent e- cigarette users in quitting.1,2,7 E-cigarette users are a complex 
group, including all race and ethnic groups as well as youth of higher and lower socioeconomic status (SES).
15 Although recent concerns regarding vapi[INVESTIGATOR_822321] 
(increasing purchasing age, banning flavors) may increase adolescent interest in quitting and demand for e-cigarette cessation interventions, the perception of lower risk of e -cigarettes may 
lead to a lower intention to quit,
16,[ADDRESS_1140292] and October 2017, weighted to be representative of the overall U.S. population, 43% of adolescents who were from lower SES groups indicated that they were current e- cigarette 
users.
[ADDRESS_1140293] 
to NIDA as stated in the PAR (PAR -19-213).22 Consequently, we decided to target lo wer SES 
groups in our study to prevent these disparities in the future.  
 The V2V multi-modal mobile peer driven intervention adapts our innovative, existing mobile 
technology into an e-cigarette cessation program for adolescents, creating a highly accessible, engaging and disseminatable treatment option. Delivery of treatment via multi- modal mobile 
technology may improve efficacy by [CONTACT_822351], and in quitting when ready, within their real-world contexts. The use of multi-modal mobile technology overcomes many of the challenges youth experience in accessing treatment for their nicotine dependence, potentially increasing reach and creating a highly accessible and disseminatable treatment option.    6.
 INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION CRITERIA * 
 Aim 1 Study Population (20 adolescent e- cigarette users  (Peer Advisory Panel) and two key 
informants) 
 
Page 4 of 34 The study population will be derived from 20 adolescent e-cigarette users in one high school 
selected for its high rate of racial/ethnic minorities and low SES status. We will also recruit two key informants (school nurse and Vice Principal) from the same high school.  Inclusion criteria for peer advisory panel:  (1) enrolled in grade 9- 12 at a local high school ; (2) 
current e-cigarette user; (3) have a smartphone; and (4) English- or Spanish-speaking. Current e-
cigarette user is defined as a response greater than “0 days” to the question: “During the past 90 days, on how many days did you use e- cigarettes?” This eligibility criterion is modeled on a 
question in the 2018 National Youth Tobacco Survey (NYTS), a survey of U.S. middle and high school students which used a 30- day timeframe.  
 Exclusion criteria  for peer advisory panel : (1) unable or unwilling to provide informed assent 
or consent (in the case of those aged 18 years or older).  Inclusion criteria for two key informants:  (1) employed as a school nurse or Vice Principal at 
the Aim 1 h igh school. 
 Exclusion criteria for two key informants:  (1) unable or unwilling to participate in the study . 
 Aim 2 (80 adolescent e- cigarette users and up to 12 key informants) 
In Year [ADDRESS_1140294], 80 adolescent e- cigarette users in 4-7 high schools selected for their high 
rates of racial/ethnic minorities and low SES status (20/school, 40/study condition) will be recruited and complete assessments at baseline and 6 -month follow-up. 
 Inclusion criteria  for 80 adolescent e- cigarette users:  (1) enrolled in grade 9-12 at a 
participating high school ; (2) current e -cigarette user; (3) have a smartphone; and (4) English- or 
Spanish-speaking. Current e- cigarette use is defined as a response greater than “0 days” to the 
question: “During the past 90 days, on how many days did you use e- cigarettes?” This eligibility 
criterion is modeled on a question in the 2018 National Youth Tobacco Survey (NYTS), a survey of U.S. middle and high school students which used a 30- day timeframe.  
  Exclusion criteria  for 80 adolescent e- cigarette users: (1) unable or unwilling to provide 
informed assent or consent (in the case of those aged 18 years or older).   Inclusion criteria for key informants:  (1) employed as a school nurse, Vice Principal , or other 
academic administrator  at a participating high school. 
 Exclusion criteria for key informants : (1) unable or unwilling to participate in the study . 
 Vulnerable Populations  
 
Pregnant Women  
Pregnant women may be included in this study as an incidental population.  
Adults Unable to Consent  
Adults unable to consent will not be included in the study population. 
 
Page [ADDRESS_1140295] extensive experience with conducting research with adolescents and a reputatio n for designing culturally 
sensitive, patient- centered programs, and we are accountable to those standards. Please see 
Section #11, Procedures Involved,  and Section #30, Consent Process , for more information. 
 We will include English - and Spanish-speaking individuals in this study. Should the intervention 
be proven efficacious, we will apply for further funding and plan to include additional non-English speaking populations in future studies.  
7. STUDY -WIDE NUMBER OF SUBJECTS * 
N/A; this is not a multi-site study.  
8. STUDY -WIDE RECRUITMENT METHODS * 
N/A; this is not a multi-site study.  9.
 STUDY TIMELINES * 
The overall project timeline is described in the table below (Table 1):  
 Table 1. Project Timeline 
          
This study is planned to take place over the course of two years. Primary analysis is expected to be complete by [CONTACT_822352].  Duration of an Individual Subject’s Participation 

 
Page 6 of 34  Aim 1 adolescent participants (peer advisory panel) are expected to actively participate in the 
study for no more than one month. The peer advisory panel members will be invited to 
participate in four activities: 1) Semi- structured interview and brief survey; 2) Text message 
writing activity; 3) Peer video activity; and 4) Meaningful stories writing session. The semi -
structured interview for adolescent participants is expected to last 30- [ADDRESS_1140296] no more than one hour. In addition to the 
four activities, a fter the completion of the qualitative interview s and text message/story 
development, peer advisory panel members will be invited to  participate in a mini- pi[INVESTIGATOR_822322] . The mini -pi[INVESTIGATOR_822323] [ADDRESS_1140297] a qualitative interview at the end of the mini -
pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]; this interview is expected to take no more than one hour.  
 
Each activity and the mini -pi[INVESTIGATOR_822324]; activities and the 
mini- pi[INVESTIGATOR_822325]. 
 Aim [ADDRESS_1140298] brief (30 -60 minute) qualitative interviews with all adolescents at 
their six -month follow -up appointment  to deepen our understanding of their experience with the 
V2V program and obtain specific feedback on ways to improve the program for future 
refinements.  
 Aim [ADDRESS_1140299] outside of academic instructional hours.  
 10.
 STUDY ENDPOINTS * 
The primary outcome for Aim 2 is the  feasibility of the research protocols, including participant  
recruitment and retention. Secondary outcomes include: preliminary effect size estimates of the intervention on cotinine -validated [ADDRESS_1140300] quit attempt, 
and amount of use; acceptability of and satisfaction with the intervention;  system use and 
adoption of cessation supporting strategies;  Social Cognitive Theory (SCT) constructs; and 
demographics and tobacco use.  11.
 PROCEDURES INVOLVED * 
 
As with our prior studies, all study activities will occur outside of academic instructional time. 
This means no student will be removed from their academic classes in order to participate in the 
study. We will use non- academic times such as physical education, study halls, etc. Study 
 
Page [ADDRESS_1140301] in the evenings 
and/or on the weekends.  
Aim 1:  
Peer Advisory Panel  Recruitment : Letters will be sent to all parents (or legal guardians) of 
grade [ADDRESS_1140302] sheet describing the study to all parents (or legal guardians). In the event that two parents (or legal guardians) are involved and residing at separate addresses, we will send letters and fact sheets to each individual parent (or legal guardian) – a letter and fact sheet will go to 
each parent at each individual address. Parents (or legal guardians) will have two weeks from the 
date the letter is sent to them to contact [CONTACT_822353]. Objection from one parent /legal 
guardian would be sufficient in order to opt the student out from study participation. The Research Coordinator will maintain a list of all parents (or legal guardians) who have contact[CONTACT_822354]. If parents (or 
legal guardians) do not contact [CONTACT_822355] -week timeframe, their 
child will be eligible to meet with the Research Coordinator to discuss the study. Parental letters 
and fact sheets will be sent to all parents (or legal guardians) in the top [ADDRESS_1140303] that their parent or parents’ (or legal guardians’) primary language is a language other than English. We will send a written letter to parents (or legal guardians) to confirm that  their  opt-out 
decision has been  received and r ecorded .   
 For mailing information to  parents/guardians, the study team will use the same mailing address 
that is used by [CONTACT_822356]-related information.  After two  weeks, we will recruit adolescent participants with approaches successfully used in our 
prior school-based studies, excluding those whose parents (or legal guardians) have indicated that their child may not participate in the study . Recruitment packets containing an informational 
brochure, eligibility criteria, and adolescent assent/consent form s will be given to all students. 
Flyers and posters will be placed in the school nurse’s office and throughout the school. The study will be announced in health education classes and through school- wide and class 
announcements. Flyers, posters, and announcements will be submitted to the IRB for review and approval prior to use in the study. Recruitment materials will be available in English and Spanish.  Recruitment of the two key informants (school nurse and Vice Principal) will take place in -
person at one local high School.  
Enrollment:  Recruitment materials will include the Research Coordinator’s contact [CONTACT_3031]. 
After flyers and posters are placed in the school nurse’s office and throughout the school, and after the study has been announced in health education classes and through school- wide class 
announcements, interested adolescents will contact [CONTACT_822357]. The Research Coordinator will then confirm that the adolescent’s parents (or legal guardians) have not indicated that their child may not 
 
Page [ADDRESS_1140304] possible 
date. Interested adolescents whose parents (or legal guardians)  have not opted out, or who are 18 
or older, will meet with the Research Coordinator in the privacy of the high school nurse’s office.  The adolescent will not meet with the school nurse. After a brief screening, assent , or 
informed consent if the student is [ADDRESS_1140305] a right to refuse to participate, that their care in the school health clinic and their grades will not be affected by [CONTACT_822358], and confidentiality will be emphasized . The two  consent forms will be used with 
Aim 1 participants  are 18 years of  age or older . See also #30, Consent Process. The brief 
screening form will be submitted to the IRB for review and approval prior to use in the study.   
Study Activities:  
The 20 peer advisory panel members will be asked to participate in four activities, as detailed below. Peer advisory panel members will be given the option to participate in all activities, but may choose to participate in only one or some of the activities. In addition, all peer advisory members will be invited to join a mini- pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268].  
 
Activity 1: Semi -Structured Interviews  with Adolescents : We will employ semi- structured 
individual interviews with the 20 members of the peer advisory panel. We will develop an 
interview guide, specific to  adolescents.  Interview topi[INVESTIGATOR_822326] i)  
understanding their e -cigarette use and triggers; ii)  positive and negative aspects of use, symptoms 
of nicotine dependence; iii)  prior quit attempts; iv) what would help them and their friends quit, v)  
technologies they use; vi)  their thoughts regarding our initial concepts and feedback on our prior 
technologies; and vii)  what would support them in using a mobile program. To gather input on the 
technology, following an open- ended discussion, we will provide the participants’ access to our 
prior tools. This is a recommended approach for gathering input for technology development, and 
will facilitate more focused input as the participants will have a better understanding of how users 
will interact with the technology. Further, during this process, we will also seek their input on intensity/frequency of peer messages, peer coaching, and the texting assessments.  
 
The semi -structured interview is expected to last no more than 60 minutes. We will provide a 
$[ADDRESS_1140306] for the completion of this activity. The interview will be conducted in -person or via 
phone/Zoom, depending upon a student’s preference. 
 
To keep interview questions to a minimum and use the interview time efficiently, we have 
developed a brief survey for Aim [ADDRESS_1140307] online via REDCap or will be completed in- person via a 
paper survey, which will then be entered into REDCap (see #13, Data Analysis and Management , 
for more information).   
Activity 2: Peer Messages (70- 75 messages) : We will develop a comprehensive set of peer 
messages using multiple strategies. First, members of the peer advisory panel will be asked questions about their e -cigarette vapi[INVESTIGATOR_47677], and history of quit attempts. They also will be 
asked to describe 3-5 factors/situations that have facilitated or challenged their vapi[INVESTIGATOR_822327], and strategies that have been helpful to overcome barriers. Next, for each scenario described, they will be as ked to write messages to assist other adolescents who might face 
the same situation. Second, we will ask peers to write messages by [CONTACT_20230] 4 scenarios. 
Scenarios will be matched to the peer writer’s gender, vapi[INVESTIGATOR_21550], and other variables of inte rest. 
Third, because we may want to ensure inclusion of certain key messages (for example, messages 
 
Page 9 of 34 encouraging use of peer coaches), we will use a co -writing strategy. Our team will write specific 
messages for these topi[INVESTIGATOR_822328]. Co- writing has been 
shown to improve tone and relatedness of the message.  
 This activity is expected to last no more than one hour. We will provide a $[ADDRESS_1140308] for the 
completion of this activity.  
 
Activity 3: Peer videos (8 -10 videos):  Based on the first qualitative interview  and examin ation 
of the peer messages, we will identify key themes and  develop a peer video interview guide. We 
will invite those students who provide assent/consent to participate in the Aim [ADDRESS_1140309] active parental consent as well as adolescent assent  for 
adolescents under the age of 18 prior to videotapi[INVESTIGATOR_822329] . In addition, we will require 
all adolescents under the age of 18 and their parent to sign a video release authorization form 
prior to filming the peer videos . The video release form will state that the adolescent  agrees to be 
videotaped responding to peer video  interview questions, and that they understand that selected 
portions of their video will be digitally archived in a secure online video-sharing platform (example: Vimeo)  and shared with others. We will require written consent for Aim 1 adolescents  
who agree to film the peer videos and are 18 years of age or older. We will also require that adolescents 18 years of age or older sign the video release form (but will not require that their parents (or legal guardians)  also sign). Please see  #30, Consent Process  for a description of 
consent and assent procedures. 
 
Only those adolescents under the age of [ADDRESS_1140310] signed 
the video release authorization,  will be videotaped responding to the peer video interview 
questions for the videos. As we did for the messages, we will generate meta -data for each of these 
clips. These meta- data will allow us to tailor presentation of these clips to the participant’s status.  
 This activity is expected to last no more than one hour. We will provide a $[ADDRESS_1140311] for the 
completion of this activity.  The peer video  will be conducted in- person or via phone/Zoom, 
depending upon a student’s preference.  
Peer coaching : In adapting the peer coaching scripts for V2V, we will include how to deal with 
common issues likely to be raised by [CONTACT_105118] e-cigarette users based on our qualitative work 
in Aim 1 (e.g., improving motivation and maximizing the teen’s readiness to change, learning to anticipate situations likely to lead to vapi[INVESTIGATOR_007], developi[INVESTIGATOR_822330]’s skills and strategies to manage vapi[INVESTIGATOR_822331], and how to maintain abstinence). We will submit peer coachin g texting scripts to the IRB for review and approval 
prior to use in the study. As we have done in the past, peer coaches will receive training in the peer coaching protocol and motivational interviewing strategies, and ongoing fidelity checks will be conducted, with feedback provided to ensure the content of their texts are consistent with protocol. This activity is expected to last no more than one hour. 
 V2V will differ from the approach we have used in our adult asynchronous coaching study in five ways. First, we will use texting instead of email, as texting is widely used by [CONTACT_65754]. 
 
Page [ADDRESS_1140312] 
proactively connecting adolescents via texting to a peer coach who has successfully quit vapi[INVESTIGATOR_822332] (a mastery model, as used in our prior work). Each particip ant will receive periodic 
texts from their coach inviting them to chat by [CONTACT_3649]. Fourth, we will tailor the facilitation texts to the adolescent’s gender and vapi[INVESTIGATOR_822333].  
 
Activity 4: Gamification (2 game narratives) : We will use a similar procedure to the 
development of peer messages. We will ask the peer advisory panel about their top 1- [ADDRESS_1140313] no more than one hour. We will provide a $[ADDRESS_1140314] for the 
completion of this activity.  
 
Activity 5: Mini -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]:  We will conduct 2-[ADDRESS_1140315] the mini-pi[INVESTIGATOR_822334], 
but we may also invite other students from the high school to join the mini pi[INVESTIGATOR_48409] (please see the description of Aim 1 recruitment strategies listed at the beginning of this section; all flyers, posters, and announcements will include mention of the mini-pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]). We will ask adolescents to provide separate assent for mini- pi[INVESTIGATOR_822335] . 
 We will use the mini- pi[INVESTIGATOR_822336] i)  V2V’s technical functioning; and ii)  our protocols (e.g., data 
collection, peer coaching, gamification, frequency of texting quizzes). The mini-pi[INVESTIGATOR_822337].
23 The mini- pi[INVESTIGATOR_822338] 2 protocol; however, adolescents will have access to V2V for only a period of [ADDRESS_1140316] no more than 2 weeks.  The qualitative interview at the end of the mini-pi[INVESTIGATOR_822339] 60 minutes. We will provide a $[ADDRESS_1140317] for 
the completion of the mini- pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268].  
  
Key Informant Recruitment and Enrollment:   
Recruitment of the two key informants (school nurse and Vice Principal) will take place in -
person at the high school. We are requesting a waiver of documentation of consent for the two key informants. We will provide the key informants with a fact sheet. 
 
Semi -Structured Interviews  with Adult Key informants : We will employ semi-structured 
individual interviews with the school nurse and vice principal (2 key informants) from the high 
school . We will develop  two complementary interview guides, one for adolescents and one for 
adult key informants. The interview guides will be submitted to the IRB for review and approval 
prior to use in the study. 
 
Interview topi[INVESTIGATOR_822340] i)  understanding the use of e- cigarettes in 
their school; ii)  what they think might help students stop e- cigarette use, what they have tried and 
 
Page 11 of 34 how it worked/did not work; iii)  their thoughts regarding our initial concepts; and iv)  what they 
feel would help students use a mobile program.  Interviews will employ a semi-structured open-
ended approach, allowing for natural conversation with opportunities to explore unanticipated issues. Interviews will be recorded, transcribed, and coded . 
 The semi -structured interview is expected to last no more than 60 minutes. We will provide a 
$[ADDRESS_1140318] to the key informants for completion of this interview.  
Compensation:  Gift cards totaling up to $120 ($ 20-$30 for each activity  and the mini pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268])  will 
be provided to adolescents for completion of Aim 1 activities. Gift cards of $100 will also be provided to the key informants (school nurse and Vice Principal) and to the school nurses assisting with study activities  (e.g., serving as the on-site point person for study recruitment, 
referring students requesting additional information regarding the study to research staff). There are two nurses at the high school, and we will provide a $[ADDRESS_1140319] per nurse. 
 See also Section #30, Consent Process.  
 
Aim 2   
 We will recruit from 4-7 local high schools (that were not involved in Aim 1), selected for their 
high rates of racial/ethnic minorities and low SES status. P rior to recruitment, the study team will 
obtain IRB approval for the specific schools. To reduce the chances of imbalance across conditions, the schools will be matched based on percentage low income, percentage African American, and number of students, and divided into two sets of two. Within each set of two, we will randomly assign one school to each of the study conditions.   
Adolescent Recruitment:  Letters will be sent to all parents (or legal guardians) of grade [ADDRESS_1140320] sheet describing the study to all parents (or legal guardians). In the event that two parents (or legal guardians) are involved and residing at separate addresses, we will send letters and fact 
sheets to each indivi dual parent /legal guardian – a letter and fact sheet will go to each 
parent /legal guardian at each individual address. Parents (or legal guardians) will have two  
weeks from the date the letter is sent to them to contact [CONTACT_822353]. Objection from one parent /legal guardian  would be sufficient in order to opt the student out from study 
participation.  The Research Coordinator will maintain a list of all parents (or legal guardians) 
who have contact[CONTACT_822359]. If parents (or legal guardians) do not contact [CONTACT_822360] l within the two -week 
timeframe, their child will be eligible to meet with the Research Coordinator to discuss the study. Parental letters and fact sheets will be sent to all parents (or legal guardians) in the top [ADDRESS_1140321] that their parent or parents’ (or legal guardians’) primary language is a language other than English. We will send a written letter to parents (or legal guardians)  to 
confirm that their  opt-out decision has been received and recorded .  
 
 
Page 12 of 34 For mailing information to  parents/guardians, the study team will use the same mailing address 
that is used by [CONTACT_822356]-related information. 
 We will recruit participants with approaches successfully used in our prior school-based studies. Recruitment packets containing an informational brochure, eligibility criteria, and adolescent assent /consent form s will be sent to all students. Flyers and posters will be placed in the school 
nurse’s office and throughout the school. The study will be announced in health education classes and through school- wide class announcements.  Recruitment materials will include the 
Research Coordinator’s contact [CONTACT_3031]. After flyers and posters are placed in the school nurse’s office and throughout the school, and after the study has been announced in health education classes and through school- wide class announcements, interested adolescents will 
contact [CONTACT_822361]. 
The Research Coordinator will then confirm that the adolescent’s parents (or legal guardians) have not indicated that their child may not participate in the study and will sche dule a meeting 
with the adolescent for the earliest possible date. Meetings with the Research  Coordinator will 
take place in the privacy of the school nurse’s office. The adolescent will not meet with the school nurse.  Informed assent, or informed consent if the student is [ADDRESS_1140322] a right to refuse to participate, that their care in the school health clinic and their grades will not be affected by [CONTACT_822362], and confidentiality will be emphasized. Eligible students will be enrolled and 
follow the protocol for their school condition. All students in each school will receive the same intervention. Flyers, posters, and announcements will be submitted to the IRB for review and approval prior to use in the study. All recruitment materials will be available in both English and Spanish.   
Enrollment:  Interested adolescents whose parents (or legal guardians) have not opted out, or 
who are 18 or older, will meet with the Research Coordinator in the privacy of the high school nurse’s office. The adolescent will not meet with the school nurse. After a brief screening, assent , or informed consent if the student is [ADDRESS_1140323] a right to refuse to participate, that their care in the school health clinic  and their grades will not be affected by [CONTACT_822358], and 
confidentiality will be emphasized. See also  #30, Consent Process. The screening form will be 
submitted to the IRB for review and approval prior to use in the study. 
 
Study Activities: 
 
Trial:  The control group will be provided written e- cigarette cessation materials. To the 
intervention group, we will provide access to the V2V toolkit, including access to peer coaches and peer messaging, detail how the peer messages and videos were pre-developed and set expectations for the response time from their peer coaches.   
 Baseline (study entry) and 6-month follow- up data will be collected from all enrolled Aim 2 
participants in the privacy of the school nurse’s office. Baseline and 6- month data collection 
forms will be submitted to the IRB for review and approval prior to use in the study; see Table [ADDRESS_1140324] also included measures  in the baseline and 6-
month data collection forms to assess psychosocial factors (including the Perceived Stress Scale 
 
Page 13 of 34 and Depressive Symptoms Scale). We will calculate and monitor the scores for these scales in 
real-time. If we find a score above the pre- established  clinically significant cutoff for that scale, 
we will notify the school nurse as soon as possible (within two business days) via phone and 
encrypted email . The school nurse will then follow the school’s established policies for 
addressing depressed, anxious, or stressed students. Scoring for the Perceived Stress Scale is as  
follows: Individual scores on the 4-i tem PSS (PSS-4) can range from 0 to 16 , with higher scores 
indicating higher perceived stress. Scores ranging from 0-5 would be considered low stress. Scores ranging from 6- 11 would be considered moderate stress. Scores ranging from 12-16 
would be considered high perceived stress. For the purposes of this study, we will consider any score in the 12-16 range to be clinically significant. The scoring for the Depressive Scale is as follows:
 Survey respondents are provided with four response categories, including "Never ”, 
“Rarely”, Sometimes", and "Often." These four responses are assigned scores of 1, 2, 3, and 4, 
respectivel y, and then summed to produce an overall depressive symptom score which ranges 
from 6 to 24 points. In addition, these scores are increased by 10 to produce a new range of 16 to 34 points. The cutoff score of 29 or greater indicates notable depressive symptoms. For the purposes of this study, we will consider a score of 29 or greater to be clinically significant. 
 After completion of the surveys, we will  verbally encourage all participants to speak with their 
health care provider or call or text the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline at [ADDRESS_1140325] sheet will 
be completed by [CONTACT_822363]. Care will be taken to maintain the confidentiality of the student’s participation; therefore all students will be asked to provide us with the individuals or contact [CONTACT_822364]. The other contacts provided by [CONTACT_822365]’s vapi[INVESTIGATOR_21550]. We have found in prior studies that cell phone numbers and e- mail 
addresses are particularly helpful in remaining in contact [CONTACT_822366].  Tracking procedures will be implemented for any student who does not attend a scheduled study visit or who is not accessible by [CONTACT_16062] e- mail at the contact [CONTACT_822367].  Attempts to locate 
students will be made mainly through the schools and by [CONTACT_822368].   
 
Semi -Structured Interviews:  In addition to the above assessments, we will conduct brief 
qualitative interviews with all intervention participants after they have completed six -month 
follow-up to deepen our understanding of their experience with the V2V program and obtain Table 2. Study Assessments, Measures and Data Collection Timing  
Variable and Measure  
Relevant 
Aim 
Baseline  
6-month 
follow-up 
Recruitment: # screened and eligible, # and reasons for refusal  2A •   
Retention: # of dropouts, reasons for droppi[INVESTIGATOR_41248]  2A  •  
Engagement (V2V only): # of completed responses to texting quizzes, peer 
videos viewed, peer coaching interactions  2B  * 
Acceptability and satisfaction: Client Satisfaction Questionnaire (CSQ -8) 
semi -structured interview  2B  •  
Cotinine -validated 7 -day point prevalence abstinence: saliva samples 
collected from all; analyzed for those reporting 7- day abstinence; cut -off 11.4 
ng/ml  2C  •  
E-cigarette use frequency (past 7 and 30 day) and intensity             (# days 
and amount vaped in past 7 and 30 day) 2C •  •  
THC/marijuana and other tobacco use frequency (past 7 and 30 day) and 
intensity (# days and amount vaped)   •  •  
Social Cognitive Theory (SCT) constructs  
Self-efficacy, confidence to quit: Self -efficacy Questionnaire (SEQ -12)   •  •  
Demographics and tobacco use  
Demographics : age, gender, socio -economic status, race/ethnicity, grade in 
school, academic performance   •  •  
History of all tobacco use, past and recent quit attempts, cessation strategies 
used  •   
Attitudes about e -cigarette and other tobacco use   •  •  
Stage of change : Prochaska's Stages of Change   •  •  
Severity of nicotine addiction: Hooked on Nicotine Checklist (HONC) 
(adapted for vapi[INVESTIGATOR_007])   •  •  
 
Page [ADDRESS_1140326] valued and to elicit recommendations for further intervention enhancement. I nterviews will be semi-
structured, allowing for natural conversation with opportunities to explore unanticipated issues. We anticipate interviews to be no more than 60 minutes in duration. The interview guides will be submitted to the IRB for review and approval prior to use in the study.  
Compensation:  Gift cards worth $25 will be provided to adolescents  for completion of each 
assessment  (baseline and 6 -months; $50 total). 
 
Key Informant Recruitment and Enrollment:   
Recruitment of eight key informants (school nurse , Vice Principal, or other academic 
administrator) will take place in -person at the high school. We are requesting a waiver of 
document of consent for the key informants. We will provide key informants with a fact sheet. 
 
Semi -Structured Interviews  with Adult Key informants : We will employ semi-structured 
individual interviews with the school nurse , vice principal , or other academic administrator  
(minimum of 2 key informants) from  each participating high school . We will develop  two 
complementary interview guides, one for adolescents and one for adult key informants. The 
interview guides will be submitted to the IRB for review and approval prior to use in the study.  
The semi -structured interview is expected to last no more than 60 minutes.  
 
Compensation:  Gift cards of $100 will also be provided to the key informants (school nurse, 
Vice Principal , or other academic administrator ). 
 
See also #30, Consent Process  and #9, Study Timelines . 
 12.
 DATA AND SPECIMEN BANKING * 
N/A  13.
 DATA ANALYSIS AND MANAGEMENT * 
 
Aim 1:  
Data collection:  Data collected from participants during Aim 1 will be obtained through semi -
structured individual interviews, peer video interviews, a survey and writing/material development 
sessions. Data confidentiality will be emphasized during the informed assent /consent process with 
adolescents  (see section #30 for more details). Any data captured via the writing sessions and 
surveys will be entered into the regulated environment through a secure Research Electronic Data 
Capture (REDCap) form. REDCap is a secure web application for building and managing online surveys and databases that was funded by [CONTACT_7681]. REDCap data is also 
stored in a regulated and secure environment. With the exception of the peer videos, we  will retain 
study records and  documents for a  period of [ADDRESS_1140327] noted in the active parental consent form, adolescent assent form, the consent form for adolescents 18 years or older, and the video release form that there is no limit on the length of time 
we will store the peer videos and that it is possible that we might use the peer videos in future 
iterations of the V2V Intervention.   
 
Page 16 of 34  
Data Analysis:  
Data gathered through qualitative interviews will be managed and coded using NVivo 10. An 
integrated approach to coding will be used, employing a coding start -list based on protocol 
questions (deductive coding) and open coding driven by [CONTACT_822369] (inductive 
coding).[ADDRESS_1140328] 10% of the interview transcripts and 
coding comparisons will be run to ensure inter -rater reliability.[ADDRESS_1140329] and refine coding until we attain a Kappa >.80.  NVivo qualitative analysis software will be employed to generate 
coding reports that summari ze participant responses, ideas, and reflections related to relevant 
research questions.26 Two members  of the research team will complete the thematic analysis  
 
Aim 2:  
Data collection:  Data collected from participants will be obtained through interviews, paper and 
pencil surveys, and collection of saliva samples for cotinine assessment by [CONTACT_822370]-person at the school nurse office at baseline and 6- months post -study entry. The 
student survey and assessment tools for this study will be adapted from our prior adolescent smoking cessation trials and will be submitted to the IRB for review and approval prior to use in 
the study. Survey and assessment tools are described in Table 2 on page 10 of the ISP. Data 
confidentiality will be emphasized on the surveys and verbally by [CONTACT_25257] (see 
section #30), and by [CONTACT_2224] a unique identification number. Data will be entered into the 
regulated environment through a secure Research Electronic Da ta Capture (REDCap) form. 
REDCap is a secure web application for building and managing online surveys and databases that 
was funded by [CONTACT_7681]. REDCap data is also stored in a regulated 
environment. These files will be deleted after study completion.  Portable devices  used to collect 
data (audio and film recordings)  will be UMMS -issued devices and files will not be encrypted 
during the recording, but the recordings will be transferred as soon as possible (i.e.: typi[INVESTIGATOR_822341]) to UMMS servers. O nce the files are transferred, they will be deleted from the 
portable devices. 
 
We will conduct biochemical verification using a saliva NicAlert® test (Nymox Corporation), 
which is a semi- quantitative method that uses a dipstick to measure the level of cotinine in a sample 
of saliva. The test strip displays the result in seven zones with each zone representing a range of 
levels of cotinine/smoking (e.g.: zone 0 [0–10 ng/mL, a nonsmoker] to zone 6 [>1000 ng/mL, a 
heavy smoker]). The results are read as 0 -6, and as recommended, any value ≥ 1 is considered as 
tobacco use. Research staff w ill enter these values into the database, using the participant ID as an 
identifier, and destroy the samples.   Data  Analysis: 
Aim 2A (Feasibility)  Hypothesis H1: We will be able to recruit 80 adolescents (20/school, 40 per 
study condition), and > 85% will be retained in each study condition at 6- month follow -up. We 
will estimate recruitment rates, overall and per condition.   Also, for each condition, we will model 
6-month retention, using generalized estimating equation (GEE) logistic regression to account for within -school clustering and dependence over time.  
 
Proposed Sample Size . As appropriate for a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], we are estimating our power and sample 
size based on the feasibility hypothesis  (H1). Because pi[INVESTIGATOR_822342],  we base our proposed 
sample size of 40 students per condition (20 per school) on obtaining precision in estimating condition- specific retention rates, providing important information for design and recruitment for 
the future R01 study.  Based on our prior study of adolescent smoking cessation, estimated intra -
school correlation=0.01, for a design effect due to within- school clustering of 1 + [0.01 × (20 – 1)] 
= 1.19, and an effective sample size per condition of 40/1.19 = 34.  Based on our prior studies i n 
 
Page [ADDRESS_1140330] 85% retention.  Thus, a conservatively wide 
95% exact CI for per-condition retention rate is (68.9%, 95.0%).   
 
Aim 2B (Monitor V2V Engagement and Assess Program Satisfaction) As the trial progresses, 
we will monitor engagement overall and by [CONTACT_822371] (e.g. by [CONTACT_547], race, age) as a 
formative assessment. Then, as the trial ends, we will also use this information as a component of 
our summative evaluation. We anticipate that engagement will lead to positive changes in acceptability, and satisfaction, and cessation.  
 
Defining V2V Engagement level : Engagement measures include: Number of intervention 
assessments completed, peer videos viewed, and peer coaching interactions. To assess each of these, we will first categorize an adolescent’s engagement with each component.  For example, for 
intervention a ssessments, we will calculate percent of assessments completed (number of 
assessments divided by [CONTACT_822372]). Second, we will then 
calculate the median percent complete across the sample and dichotomize into higher engaged  
(adolescent’s percent completed was at the median or higher) or lower engaged (under the median). 
We will use a similar procedure for the peer videos viewed.  Third, for peer coaching, we will use 
the count of the number of messages to the peer coach. We anticipate that this count could vary 
considerably, as some will have sent 0 messages and there is no absolute maximum number of messages sent.  We will base the higher versus lower engaged based on the distribution (median 
split or another reasonable quantile). We could then look at the distribution of engagement with 
each component, and predictors of engagement (by [CONTACT_469753]’s characteristics).   
 
From these three measures, we will create an engagement summary score .  The range for the 
summary score would be from 0 to 3 (0 = lower engagement in all 3 measures, 3 = higher 
engagement in all 3). We will assess the association of this score with the acceptability and 
satisfactions score using linear mixed modeling. A cceptability and satisfaction scores will be 
calculated using the Client Satisfaction Questionnaire (CSQ -8). The overall score is calculated by 
[CONTACT_822373]'s rating (item rating) s core for each scale item. Scores therefore range 
from [ADDRESS_1140331] estimates upon which to base 
estimates for power calculations. These analyses are conducted to guide our future R01.  Aim 2C (Cessation Outcomes)  Hypothesis H2: The intervention will be associated with greater 
cotinine- validated 7- day point prevalence vapi[INVESTIGATOR_822320], lower time to first quit attempt, 
and less amount of e -cigarette use compared to control at 6- month follow -up. We recognize that 
there is some controversy about estimating effect sizes from pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602]. However, we are 
calculating effect sizes in our study to provide a range, recognizing that there might be 
uncertainties because of our small sample size.  To estimate effect sizes for V2V intervention 
versus control, between -condition differences over time will be estimated for cotinine -validated 
7-day point prevalence abstinence  using GEE logistic regression  with a random effect for school 
and fixed effects of condition, time point (baseline and 6 months), and their interaction.  Missing 
data is handled using inverse probability weighting. By [CONTACT_822374], the GEE model is able to increase the power to test the difference in the outcome.  
COX regression modeling will be used to examine the intervention effect on time to first quit attempt adjusting for other covariates. Amount of e -cigarette use will be calculated as a reduction 
from baseline. We will model this reduction using negative binomial regression modeling
 if the 
variance of the distribution of risk reduction is over dispersed.   
Other information important for the design of a future study includes standard deviations, as well 
as preliminary assessment of possible mediators  such as engagement, behavioral capability, and 
self-efficacy . We will identify important mediators in exploratory analyses. Guided by [CONTACT_822375], we will assess effects of intervention on the mediator and the 
 
Page [ADDRESS_1140332].  
 
Brief Interviews for Future Refinements: In addition to the above assessments, we will 
conduct brief qualitative interviews with all study participants after they have completed six -
month follow -up to deepen our understanding of their experience with the V2V program and 
obtain specific feedback o n ways to improve the program for future refinements. We will use the 
same approach as Aim 1A to analyze these interviews. Data gathered through qualitative interviews will be managed and coded using NVivo
10. An int egrated approach to coding will be 
used, employing a coding start -list based on protocol questions (deductive coding) and open 
coding driven by [CONTACT_822369] (inductive coding). Duplicate coding will be 
conducted with at least 10% of the  interview transcripts and coding comparisons will be run to 
ensure inter -rater reliability.  Disputes in coding decisions will be discussed within the research 
group until resolved. We will continue to test and refine coding until we attain a Kappa >.80.  
NVivo qualitative analysis software will be employed to generate coding reports that summarize participant responses, ideas, and reflections related to relevant research questions. Two members of the research team will complete the thematic analysis.  
 Data Security (Aim 1 and Aim 2)  
All persons collecting or handling data will be trained in human subjects’ procedures, confidentiality, and privacy protection. All investigators and project staff are required to receive, and complete, Human Subjects and HIPAA training.   All computerized data, excluding data stored in REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture), will be kept on secured computers or network servers, behind University of [LOCATION_005]  
firewalls. These data will be accessible only to research staff with approved access, using confidential usernames and passwords. Any paper data will be kept in locked cabinets or a locked file room accessible only by [CONTACT_3647]. Data downloaded from R EDCap will be 
stored and secured according to these methods.  Participant confidentiality will be maintained through a number of strategies. Each participant will be assigned a unique study identification number. Subsequent protection of study data will 
be assured by [CONTACT_457057] -protected com puter databases. A key to link 
each code with subjects’ names and identifiers will be kept will be kept separate from the 
research dataset in a locked filing cabinet in the study office and in a password- protected excel 
sheet, stored on secure University of [LOCATION_005] computers. This linkage data is necessary to implement the intervention and conduct the study. The linkage data file will be destroyed at the earliest possible time, once data collection is complete and data accuracy are verified.  
 
Film recordings of peer video interviews will be recorded on portable devices, which will be stored in a secure location (locked drawer that only study staff can access). Portable devices  will 
be UMMS -issued devices and files will not be encrypted during the recording, but the recordings 
will be transferred as soon as possible (i.e.: typi[INVESTIGATOR_822341]) to UMMS servers. Once the files are transferred, they will be deleted from the portable devices.  We will obtain 
 
Page 19 of 34 assent and active parental consent from adolescents  under the age of 18, and written consent for 
adolescents 18 years of age or older (see also section #30). Peer videos  will be made available to 
study participants via a secure website (example: Vimeo) , and will be password protected. As 
these peer videos will become part of our V2V multi-modal intervention, we may use them in 
future iterations of the intervention. Thus, the peer videos will not be deleted at the conclusion of the study. We have noted in the active parental consent form, adolescent assent form, the consent form for adolescents 18 years or older, and the video release form that there is no limit on the length of time we will store the peer videos and that it is possible that we might use the peer videos in future iterations of the V2V Intervention.    
We will utilize professional transcription services for interview transcription. Recordings will be 
uploaded to https://www.sendthisfile.com , a HIPAA compliant website, to be transferred to a 
professional transcriptionist. Send This File uses SAS70 type II/SSAE16 compliant data centers 
to ensure that private data is protected; features of this service include 128 -bit Transport Layer 
Security (TLS) encryption and password protection, among other security precautions. The 
transcriptionist uses a password to access uploaded materials to Send This File, works on a 
password-protected desktop computer, and once transcribed and the transcript is received by [CONTACT_528541], the transcriptionist deletes the recording. Recordings w ill be transcribed verbatim without 
subject identifiers. Once transcripts have been reviewed for completeness and accuracy, 
recordings will be deleted from the secure network drive and devices, but will remain on the 
secure website mentioned above for the duration of the study. Transcriptions will be kept in 
locked file cabinets in locked offices, and on password-protected computers. 
 All data will be used for research purposes only; published data will not contain any individual identifiers and will be reported in the aggregate.    See also #14, Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects , #26, 
Confidentiality  and #27, Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects.   
 14.
 PROVISIONS TO MONITOR THE DATA TO ENSURE THE SAFETY OF SUBJECTS * 
The proposed study involves no more than minimal risk to participants. Please see Section #11,  
Study Activities, Trial for further information . 
 All study data will be stored in a HIPAA compliant regulated environment and access will be only through a secure VPN network. All participant- related identifiers are encrypted in the 
database. The study’s biostatistician will organize data security and ar chiving. In no way will 
individual participant data be released to the public or cited in a publication. We have substantial experience with successfully implementing these methods.  Participant confidentiality will be maintained through a number of strategies. As noted in Section #13, Data Analysis and Management , each participant will be assigned a unique study 
identification number. The only individual who will have access to these identifiers will be the Research  Coordinator responsible for data collection. Other UMMS personnel will not be privy 
to identifying information about the individual participants. The survey data collected from participants will not be accessible to the school nurse or other school personnel, as all completed surveys will be placed in a sealed envelope by [CONTACT_822376] 20 of 34 Coordinator to be brought to UMMS for data entry. However, if we find a survey score above 
the pre- established clinically significant cutoff for the Perceived Stress of Depressive scales, the 
school nurse will be notified of this survey result as soon as possible (within two business days) via phone and e ncrypted email.  Subsequent protection of study data will be assured by [CONTACT_822377]- protected computer data bases with access available only to the 
principal study personnel. Data collected via texting will be identified only by a study subject specific numerical code to ensure protection of confidentiality. Data will be automatically downloaded to our secure server and checked for errors and completeness. A key to link each code with  subjects’ names and identifiers will be kept in a locked filing cabinet in the study 
office and in a password -protected excel sheet, stored secure University of [LOCATION_005] 
computers.  
Data and Safety Monitory Board: This trial is not a Phase III study of a pharmaceutical 
treatment, but as it is a behavioral intervention, we will establish a Data and Safety Monitor ing 
Board (DSMB). The DSMB will be charged with reviewing protocols and consent documents for this trial, monitoring safety issues throughout the study, monitoring the quality of the accumulating data, providing guidance on interim analyses, and providing guidance on stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_004]. They will also serve as a liaison among the study investigators, the University of [LOCATION_005] Medical School’s Office of Human Research Protections (IRB), and the National Institute of Health (NIH). The DSMB will be comprised of persons with no direct involvement in the study or conflict of interest with the research team conducting the randomized trial. The DSMB will include individuals with expertise in: 1) Biostatistics; and 2) Pediatric Psychology. Once recruitment for the trial has begun, the DSMB will meet two times per year or more frequently as determined by [CONTACT_87110]. The DSMB and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_187077]. Additional telephone conferences will be held if doing so is recommended by [CONTACT_4318]. We will develop the DSMB Charter within the first three months of the study and will provide the IRB with a copy of the DSMB Charter once the document is available.  
 15.
 WITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS WITHOUT THEIR CONSENT * 
We do not anticipate withdrawing any participants without their assent (for those under the age of 18), consent (for those 18 years of age or older), or without parental/guardian permission ( for 
the videotaped interviews of minors).  16.
 RISKS TO SUBJECTS * 
 Potential Loss of Confidentiality  
There are potential risks associated with data collection and information management. These include inadvertent disclosure of research variables collected.  Participants may also feel uneasy 
about participating in the interviews. Reasonable efforts will be made to inform the subject of these potential risks  and to minimize the risks.  
 Protection Against Risks 
Minimizing Risks: Reasonable efforts will be made to minimize risks and participant 
inconvenience. Risks will be minimized by: 1) adequate training of all staff; 2) ensuring participants are verbally informed of the details of the semi-structured interviews and other study 
 
Page [ADDRESS_1140333] to 
answer any interview questions that they are not comfortable answering, and that they can stop 
the interviews at any time ; and 3) frequently encouraging participant questions throughout the 
semi -structured interviews and other study activities. 
  
17. POTENTIAL DIRECT  BENEFITS TO SUBJECTS * 
One potential benefit of being in this study is preventing personal health risks that can be caused by [CONTACT_158982][INVESTIGATOR_007]. Participants will also be helpi[INVESTIGATOR_822343].  However, t here are no direct benefits to 
participants from study participation.   
 18.
 VULNERABLE POPULATIONS * 
  Adolescents  
This study includes adolescent e- cigarette users , ages 13-19. For these participants, we will send 
letters and fact sheets to  all parents (or legal guardians) of grade [ADDRESS_1140334] special permission during the assent/consent process to film the peer videos with our Aim [ADDRESS_1140335] active parental consent for those under the age of 18 to film the peer videos before proceeding with enrollment.    For adolescents under the age of 18, we will obtain the adolescent’s overt agreement to participate in our study by [CONTACT_822378]. We will go through the assent process and study expectations with the adolescent and ensure any questions the adolescent may have about the study or their participation are answered. We will not enroll a child if there is any sign of unwillingness .  
  Pregnant Women Pregnant women may be included in the study as an incidental population. We confirm the following criteria for federally -funded research involving this population: 
1. No inducements, monetary or otherwise, will be offered to terminate a pregnancy. 
2. Individuals engaged in the research will have no part in any decisions as to the timing, method, or procedures used to terminate a pregnancy. 
3. Individuals engaged in the research will have no part in determining the viability of a neonate.  
 Prisoners  
Prisoners will not be knowingly included in the study.   19.
 MULTI -SITE RESEARCH * 
 
Page 22 of 34  N/A; this is not a multi- site study. 
 
20. COMMUNITY -BASED PARTICIPATORY RESEARCH * 
N/A  
21.
 SHARING OF RESEARCH RESULTS WITH SUBJECTS * 
We do not plan on sharing the research results , including individual results, with study 
participants.  
 
22. SETTING  
The setting for this study (all aims)  is five  to eight high schools throughout [LOCATION_005]. 
Assent /consent  procedures  and baseline and six -month data collection will take place in the 
privacy of the school nurse’s office. All other study activities (semi- structured interviews, pe er 
message development, peer videos, peer coaching trainings, and gamification development) will take place in the privacy of the school nurse’s office or virtually via a secure Z oom call.  
 23.
 RESOURCES AVAILABLE  
All study personnel will read the study protocol, receive the appropriate supervision and possess the appropriate experience (both higher education and related work experience) needed to fulfill their roles and complete their responsibilities for this stud y. All investigators and project staff are 
required to receive and complete Human Subjects and HIPAA training. All research personnel will hold a current Human Subjects Training Certificates. All study staff have adequate time budgeted to fulfill their res ponsibilities in the study and will meet periodically to ensure that they 
are adequately informed about the protocol, the research procedures, and their duties and functions. As study personnel roles are filled, we will update the list of Active Study Staf f in the 
eIRB system. The Principal Investigators will oversee all personnel and all research activities conducted within this study.  The Multiple Principal Investigators  (MPIs)  will also have responsibility for the overall conduct 
of the project at the study site. They will have primary oversight of all study personnel. They will participate in the design and the execution of the respective study analyses and will be responsible  for the reporting and dissemination of study results.  
 The Biostatisticians will assist in the design and performance of analyses relevant to the project and will assist in the development of study deliverables. The biostatisticians will direct the creation of data collection systems in year 1, monitoring of data collected in years [ADDRESS_1140336], will  be responsible for maintaining the study’s REDCap database, and will 
conduct data analysis for the study.   The Qualitative Expert will be responsible for designing and analyzing the project’s qualitative interviews.  
 The Programmer will perform a range of programming and data management activities essential to conduct of the project. S/he will assist in the development of study databases, data cleaning 
 
Page [ADDRESS_1140337], including:  developi[INVESTIGATOR_79762], work allocation, workflow 
plans, monitoring project progress and task completion, monitoring spending and effort allocation, and managing correspondence and administrative tasks. They will monitor/manage ethics and regulatory approvals (IRB, HIPAA), attend and plan for all project- related meetings, 
oversee recruitment, retention, data collection, and the distribution of incentives to participant.  The project directors will also assist in supervising the Research Coordinator and initial set-up of recruitment. They will be responsible for maintaining communications with all parties 
participating in the project.   The Research Coordinator will be the primary study staff member responsible for participant recruitment, enrollment, and retention. This includes scheduling and conducting participant baseline interviews, entering collected data into the project’s database, administering six-month follow-up assessments, including cotinine validation, and preparing and assembling all materials for the study.  The Peer C oaches will be  students from local colleges who had smoked as adolescents and 
successfully quit with difficulty, providing a mastery model for smoking cessation. They will be  
trained in motivational interviewing and behavior change counseling, and will be  required to 
demonstrate competency prior to delivering the intervention. The Peer Coaches will be responsible for sending periodic texts to Aim 2 intervention participants.  
 24.
 LOCAL RECRUITMENT METHODS  
Aim 1:  
Letters will be sent to all parents (or legal guardians) of grade [ADDRESS_1140338] sheet describing the study to all parents (or legal guardians). In the event that two parents (or legal guardians) are 
involved and residing at separate addresses, we will send letters and fact sheets to each individual parent – a letter and fact sheet will go to each parent at each individual address. Parents (or legal guardians) will have two  weeks from the date the letter is sent to them to 
contact [CONTACT_822353]. Objection from one parent /legal guardian  would be sufficient in 
order to opt the student out from study participation. The Research Coordinator will maintain a list of all parents (or legal guardians) who have contact[CONTACT_822354]. If parents (or legal guardians) do not contact [CONTACT_822379] -week timeframe, their child will be eligible to meet with the 
Research Coordinator to discuss the study. Parental letters and fact sheets will be sent to all parents (or legal guardians) in the top 4-[ADDRESS_1140339] that their parent or parents’ (or legal guardians’) primary language is a language other than English. We will send a written letter to parents (or legal guardians) to confirm that  their  opt-out decision has been received and 
 
Page 24 of 34 recorded . 
 
For mailing information to  parents/guardians, the study team will use the same mailing address 
that is used by [CONTACT_822356]-related information.  After two  weeks, we will recruit participants with approaches successfully used in our prior 
school-based studies, excluding those whose parents (or legal guardians) indicated that their child may not participate in the study. Recruitment packets containing an informational brochure, eligibility criteria, and adolescent assent/consent form will be given to all students, using the procedure(s) selected by [CONTACT_52721]. Flyers and posters will be placed in the school nurse’s office and throughout the school. The study will be announced in health education classes and through school- wide and class announcements.  Recruitment materials will be available in both English 
and Spanish. Recruitment materials will include the Research Coordinator’s contact [CONTACT_3031]. After recruitment materials and announcements have been distributed throughout the school, interested adolescents will contact [CONTACT_822380]. The Research Coordinator will then confirm that the adolescent’s parents (or legal guardians) have not indicated that their child may not participate  in the study and will 
schedule a meeting with the adolescent for the earliest possible date. Interested adolescents 
whose parents (or legal guardians) have not indicated that their child may not participate will meet with the Research Coordinator in the privacy of the school nurse’s office. Assent for those under the age of 18, or informed consent for those [ADDRESS_1140340] special permission during the assent/consent process to film the peer videos  with our Aim 1 
participants. After student participant assent/consent is obtained, we will request active parental consent to film the peer videos  before proceeding with enrollment. In addition, only adolescents 
under the age of [ADDRESS_1140341] active parental consent to be videotaped and whose parent signs the video release authorization, or adolescents 18 years of age or older and who provide informed written consent and who sign the video release authorization, will be videotaped responding to interview  questions for the videos . 
 Recruitment of the two key informants (school nurse and Vice Principal) will take place in -
person at the high school.   
Aim 2:  
Letters will be sent to all parents (or legal guardians) of grade [ADDRESS_1140342] sheet describing the study to all parents (or legal guardians). In the event that two parents (or legal guardians) are involved and residing at separate addresses, we will send letters and fact sheets to each individual parent – a letter and fact sheet will go to each parent at each individual address. Parents (or legal guardians) will have two weeks from the date the letter is sent to them to contact [CONTACT_822353]. Objection 
from one parent /legal guardian  would be sufficient in order to opt the student out from study 
 
Page [ADDRESS_1140343] of all parents (or legal guardians) 
who have contact[CONTACT_822381]. If parents (or legal guardians) do not contact [CONTACT_822355] -week 
timeframe, their child will be eligible to meet with the Research Coordinator to discuss the study. 
Parental letters and fact sheets will be sent to all parents (or legal guardians) in the top 4- [ADDRESS_1140344] that their parent or parents’ (or legal guardians’) primary language is a 
language other than English. We will send a written letter to parents (or legal guardians) to 
confirm that  their  opt-out decision has been  received and recorded . 
 
For mailing information to  parents/guardians, the study team will use the same mailing address 
that is used by [CONTACT_822356] -related information. 
 
Recruitment packets containing an informational brochure, eligibility criteria, and adolescent 
assent /consent  form will be sent to all students. Flyers and posters will be placed in the school 
nurse’s office and throughout the school. The study will be announced in health education 
classes and through school -wide and class announcements.  Recruitment materials will be 
available in both English and Spanish. Recruitment materials will include the Research Coordinator’s contact [CONTACT_3031]. After recruitment materials and announcements have been 
distributed throughout the school, interested adolescents will contact [CONTACT_822382]. The Research Coordinator will then 
confirm th at the adolescent’s parents (or legal guardians) have not indicated that their child may 
not participate  in the study and will schedule a meeting with the adolescent for the earliest 
possible date. Interested adolescents will meet with the Research Coordin ator in the privacy of 
the school nurse’s office. Informed assent /consent  will be explained such that students 
understand they have a right to refuse to participate, that their care in the school health clinic and their grades will not be affected by [CONTACT_822358], and confidentiality 
will be emphasized. Eligible students will be enrolled and follow the protocol for their school 
condition. All students in each school will receive the same intervention .  
 Recruitment of the two key informants (school nurse s, Vice Principal s, or other academic 
administrators ) will take place in -person at the participating high school s.  
 25.
 LOCAL NUMBER OF SUBJECTS  
The local number of subjects for this study is as follows:  
 Aim 1:  20 adolescent e -cigarette users (peer advisory panel) and 2 key informants (school nurse 
and vice principal) from 1 high school.  Aim 2:  80 adolescent e -cigarette users from four high schools selected for their high rates of 
racial/ethnic minorities and low SES status (20/school, 40/study condition) will be recruited and complete assessments at baseline and 6 -month follow -up. With a conser vative 85% retention 
rate, we will achieve a total of 68 e- cigarette users (17/school, 34/study condition) at 6- month 
follow -up. We will also recruit up to 12key informants (school nurse s, vice principal , or other 
academic administrator ) from  partici pating high school s. 
 
Page [ADDRESS_1140345]- protected computer databases. A key to link each 
code with subjects’ names and identifiers w ill be kept will be kept separate from the research 
dataset in a locked filing cabinet in the study office and in a password- protected excel sheet, 
stored on secure University of [LOCATION_005] computers  on the UMMS regulated environment . 
This linkage data is necessary to implement the intervention and conduct the study. The linkage data file will be destroyed at the earliest possible time, once data collection is complete and data accuracy are verified.  
 
Recordings of the semi -structured interviews will be transcribed by a professional transcriptionist 
and will have identifiers redacted during transcription. All recordings will be destroyed after study 
completion. Portable devices will be used for the recordings. P ortable devices  used to collect data 
(audio and film recordings)  will be UMMS -issued devices and files will not be encrypted during 
the recording, but the recordings will be transferred as soon as possible (i.e.: typi[INVESTIGATOR_822341]) to UMMS servers. O nce the files are transferred, they will be deleted from the portable 
devices.  
 
As adolescents are particularly engaged by [CONTACT_822383], a novel approach we will explore in this study 
is use of peer videos as an additional tool to deliver peer messages regarding vapi[INVESTIGATOR_822344].  
Peer videos will be made available to study participan ts via a secure website (example: Vimeo) , 
and will be password protected. As described in Section # 11, Procedures Involved, peer videos 
will be filmed as part of the Aim 1  activities, and will be used in Aim 2 of the study, when we  
will explore use of peer videos to deliver our messaging intervention. Our considerations for 
using peer  videos is as follows : video -based peer -to-peer communication is very popular among 
adolescents, and videos (e. g., YouTube) are among the most engaged content by [CONTACT_822384]. Most adolescents (69%) watch online videos every day (increasing from 34% in 2015) , and prefer watching these videos on their phones rather than on their computers. Further, 
the presence of disparities does not mean that we don’t consider these technologies for disadvantaged groups, rather that we explore different opt ions to identify the best fit for the 
targeted groups. Otherwise, we might further perpetuate health disparities. These videos will be  designed to be short (< 2 minutes) and each video will focus on one specific point. We will develop them to use less bandwidth for smartphone consumption. Please note that adolescents can wait to watch these videos when they have access to wi -fi. Further, we are delivering these 
videos as part of a multi -modal intervention; thus, adolescents can still benefit from V2V even if 
they are unable to view the videos. Our goal with this R34 is to explore engagement, acceptability and satisfaction with these technologies.  As noted, we will require that all 
adolescents appearing in these peer videos provide assent (or consent for those 18 years or older) and sign a video release form . We will also require active parental consent  and parental signature 
[CONTACT_822400] 18. As these peer videos will become part of our V2V multi- modal intervention, we may use them in future iterations of the intervention. 
Thus, the peer videos will not be deleted at the conclusion of the study. We have noted in the active parental consent form, adolescent assent form, the consent form for adolescents [ADDRESS_1140346] -study entry. 
Data confidentiality will be emphasized on the surveys and verbally by [CONTACT_247327], and by [CONTACT_2224] a unique identification number. Data will be ent ered into the  
UMMS  regulated environment through a secure Research El ectronic Data Capture (REDCap) 
form. Data (excluding peer videos) will not be distributed. Peer videos will be distributed to study participants via a secure website (example: Vimeo) , and will be password protecte d. With 
the exception of the peer videos, we  will retain study records and  documents for a  period of 3 
years after the completion  of the  study.  
 
See also #13, Data Analysis and Management . 
 
Protection for Risks Associated with Potential Loss of Confidentiality  
The study team have systems, oversight, experienced personnel, and an organizational culture that supports the appropriate use, access and storage of confidential information.  All persons 
collecting or handling data will be trained in human subjects’ proc edures, confidentiality and 
privacy protection.  All investigators and project staff are required to receive and complete 
Human Subjects and HIPAA training. All research personnel will hold a current Human Subjects 
Training Certificate.  
 
Because the study will be funded by [CONTACT_18121], we will follow the guidelines in the NIH certificate 
of confidentiality. The certificate keeps us from sharing identifiable sensitive information 
collected for the research unless the participants allow us to do  so. This is included in the assent 
and consent form that was included as part of this IRB application. We will only disclose 
information about the students if they plan to harm themselves or others , or if they have a 
clinically significant score  on the  psychosocial factors scales included in the  baseline and follow 
up data collection forms . We will not be disclosing information about illicit drugs issues to law 
enforcement agencies, parents, the school, or others.  If a parent (or legal guardian) calls the study team to request information that their child provides 
regarding their substance use, such information will not be disclosed to the parent/legal guardian 
per the NIH Certificate of Confidentiality.  
 
We will not inform parents (or legal guardians) about their adolescent’s vapi[INVESTIGATOR_822345]. In that case, parental/legal guardian consent will 
indicate that the child is an e -cigarette user. The student will be informed that their parent (or 
legal guardian) will be notified of their vapi[INVESTIGATOR_822346].  
 
See also #13, Data Analysis and Management . 
 
 
Page 28 of 34 Data Collected via REDCap 
Study data will be captured via REDCap. The REDCap Consortium is comprised of hundreds of active institutional partners from CTSA and other institutions, and it supports a secure web application (REDCap) designed exclusively to support data capture for res earch studies 
(http://www.project-redcap.org
).  University of [LOCATION_005] Medical School is a REDCap 
Consortium site.   
 REDCap is used to build and manage online surveys and databases.  The front end of REDCap is written in PHP, which is widely used, robust, open source scripting language.  Web servers, database servers, and security of communication between servers occur l ocally at each 
Consortium site where data capture is stored.  Thus, all study data is stored and hosted at the local institution, and no project data is ever transmitted at any time by [CONTACT_822385].  Some additional security features include: a) specification of “user access”: by [CONTACT_822386], by [CONTACT_495988], or by [CONTACT_822387]; b) system Log-in: assigned username [CONTACT_822401]- identified 
password required, automatic inactivity logout, password specificity requirements, passwords must be changed every [ADDRESS_1140347]; c) system lock-out: following succession of unsuccessful login attempts, or if no login to the system within 30 days.   Data Destruction  
We will retain study records and  documents (excluding peer videos) for a period of [ADDRESS_1140348] THE PRIVACY INTERESTS OF SUBJECTS  
All participants will be told that participation is voluntary, that they are free to not respond or to terminate involvement at any time, with no adverse consequences.   28.
 COMPENSATION FOR RESEARCH -RELATED INJURY  
None; there are no resources available. We do not anticipate any research -related injuries. We 
believe the research poses no more than minimal risk to subjects.  29.
 ECONOMIC BURDEN TO SUBJECTS  
N/A. There are no anticipated costs to participate in the study.    30.
 CONSENT PROCESS  
 
Aim 1:  
• V2V_Aim 1 Parental Letter _English: This letter will be sent to all parents (or legal 
guardians) of grade 9 -12 students at a local  high school. The parental letter will inform 
parents (or legal guardians) of the study and will ask them to contact [CONTACT_822388] . Parents (or legal guardians) will have two weeks 
from the date the letter is sent to them to contact [CONTACT_822353]. The Research 
 
Page [ADDRESS_1140349] of all parents (or legal guardians) who have contact[CONTACT_822389]. If parents (or 
legal guardians) do not contact [CONTACT_822355] -week timeframe, 
their child will be eligible to meet with the Research Coordinator to discuss the study. 
Parental letters will be sent to all parents (or legal guardians) in the top [ADDRESS_1140350] that their parent or parents’ (or legal guardians’) primary language is a language 
other than English.  
• V2V_Aim [ADDRESS_1140351] Sheet : This fact sheet  will be sent to all parents (or legal 
guardians) of grade [ADDRESS_1140352] sheet will be sent in the top 4 -5 
languages spoken at each school, including in English and Spanish. 
• V2V_Aim 1 Adolescent Assent Form: This assent form will be used with  interested  
adolescents  under the age of 18 whose parents (or legal guardians) have not contact[CONTACT_822390] [ADDRESS_1140353] special permission during the assent process to film the peer videos  with our Aim 1 participants . Assent will be obtained by [CONTACT_822391]’s office. Assent will be explained such that students 
understand they have a right to refuse to participate, that their care in the school health clinic 
and their grades will not be affected by [CONTACT_822358], and 
confidentiality will be emphasized. We will obtain the adolescent’s overt agreement to 
participate in our study by [CONTACT_822378]. 
We will go through the assent process and study expectations with the adolescent and ensure 
any questions the adolescent may have about the study or their participation are answered. We will not enroll a child if there is any sign of unwillingness .  
• V2V_Aim [ADDRESS_1140354] a right to refuse to participate, that their care in the school 
health clinic and  their  grades will not be affected by [CONTACT_822392], and confidentiality will be emphasized. We will obtain the adolescent’s overt 
agreement to participate in the mini- pi[INVESTIGATOR_822347]. 
We will go through the assent process and mi ni-pi[INVESTIGATOR_822348] -pi[INVESTIGATOR_822349]. We will not enroll a child if there is any sign of unwillingness .   
• V2V Aim 1_Parental Consent Form : This consent form will be used with parents (or legal 
guardians)  of adolescents  under the age of [ADDRESS_1140355] active parental consent to film the peer 
videos  before proceeding with filming.  
• V2V_Aim 1 Students 18 or Older Consent Form_Mini -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]:  This consent form will be 
used with adolescents  aged 18 years or older who are  participating in the Aim 1 Mini- Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268].  
• V2V_Aim 1  Students 18 and Older Consent Form : This  consent form will be used with 
Aim 1 participants  who agree to participate in Aim 1 activities and are 18 years of age or 
older . We will also require that these participants sign the video release form, as described 
below. 
 
Page 30 of 34 • V2V_Aim 1 Video Release Form:  This form will be used for both adolescents and parents 
(or legal guardians) of adolescents who agree to film the peer videos. While this is not a 
consent document, we do feel it is important to note that both adolescents under the age of 18 and their parents (or legal guardians) will be required to sign this form prior to proceeding with the filming of the peer videos. We will also require adolescents 18 or older to sign this form, but will not require parental signature [CONTACT_822402] 18 or older. This form emphasizes that the adolescent and their parent  (in the case of those under the age of 18) agree to participate 
in the filming of the adolescent’s interview about e-cigarette use, and that they understand that selected portions of the adolescent’s video regarding e- cigarette use will be digitally 
archived in a secure online video-sharing platform (example: Vimeo) and shared with others participating in the V2V multi-modal intervention without disclosing the adolescent’s identity . 
• V2V_Aim [ADDRESS_1140356] Sheet:  As per prior IRB recommendation, this fact sheet 
will be provided to the Aim 1 Key Informants (school nurse and vice principal) in lieu of a written consent form. We are requesting a waiver of documentation of consent for key informants.  
 
Aim 2:  
• V2V_Aim 2_Parental Letter_English:  This l etter will be sent to all parents (or legal 
guardians) of grade [ADDRESS_1140357] us or the school if they do not wish their child to participate. Parents (or legal guardians) will have two weeks from the date the letter is sent to them to contact [CONTACT_822353]. The Research Coordinator will maintain a list of all parents (or legal guardians) who have contact[CONTACT_822354]. If parents (or legal guardians) do not contact [CONTACT_822393] -week timeframe, their child will be eligible to meet with the 
Research Coordinator to discuss the study. Parental letters and fact sheets will be sent to all parents (or legal guardians) in the top 4-[ADDRESS_1140358] that their parent or parents’ (or legal guardians’) primary language is a language other than English. We will send a written letter to parents (or legal guardians) to confirm that  their  opt-out 
decision has been  received and recorded . 
• V2V Aim [ADDRESS_1140359] Sheet : This fact sheet  will be sent to all parents (or legal 
guardians) of grade [ADDRESS_1140360] sheet will be sent in both English and Spanish. 
• V2V Aim 2 Adolescent Assent Form_Intervention and V2V_Aim 2 Adolescent Assent 
Form_Control: This assent form will be used with  interested  adolescents  under the age of 
18 whose parents (or legal guardians) have not contact[CONTACT_822394] 2 study activities . Assent will be obtained 
by [CONTACT_822395]’s office. Assent will be explained such that students understand they have a right to refuse to participate, that their care in the school health clinic and  their  grades will not be affected by [CONTACT_822396], and con fidentiality will be emphasized. We will obtain the adolescent’s 
overt agreement to participate in our study by [CONTACT_822397] [ADDRESS_1140361] about the study or their participation are answered. We will not enroll a child if there is any sign of unwillingness . 
Eligible students will be enrolled and follow the protocol for their school condition.  
• V2V Aim 2_Students 18 and Older Consent Form_Control : This consent form will be 
used in place of informed assent  with Aim 2 participants who are 18 years of age or older and 
will be participating in the control arm of the study.  
• V2V Aim 2_Students 18 and Older Consent Form_Intervention: This consent form will be used in place of informed assent  with Aim 2 participants who are 18 years of age or older 
and who will be participating in the intervention arm of the study. 
•  V2V Aim [ADDRESS_1140362] Sheet :  Per prior IRB guidance, this fact sheet will be 
provided to Aim 2 Key Informants (school nurses, vice principal s, or other academic 
administrator ) in lieu of a written consent from. We are requesting a waiver of 
documentation of consent for key informants.  
  For the consent process for both aims, we will follow 
HRP -802 INVESTIGATOR GUIDANCE: 
Informed Consent .   
 31.
 PROCESS TO DOCUMENT CONSENT IN WRITING  
We are requesting a waiver of written documentation of consent permission  for all participants  in 
Aim 1 and Aim 2 of the study, excluding adolescents aged 18 years or older . We feel that the 
waiver of documentation of written consent is reasonable in this instance, as: 
1. The research presents no more than minimal risk to subjects because it consists of materials development, semi-structured interviews, and surveys. This is a low-risk study. The intervention is fundamentally educational.   
2. The research involves no procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research context. Recorded semi-structured interviews and surveys have appropriate confidentiality protections. 
3. The investigator will provide a written statement regarding the research that embodies the elements of consent . 
4. The investigator will provide participants with that written statement.  
 We are also requesting a waiver of parental permission for all adolescent participants under the age of 18 who participate in Aim 1 and Aim 2 of the study, excluding those who chose to participate in the filmed interview activity.  In accordance with § 46.117, w e feel that the waiver 
of parental permission  is reasonable in this instance, as:  
1. The research presents no more than minimal risk to subjects because it consists of materials development, semi-structured interviews, and surveys. This is a low-risk study. The intervention is fundamentally educational.   
2. The research could not practicably be carried out without a waiver of parental permission, as adolescent e- cigarette users may be reluctant to participate if their e- cigarette use 
status is revealed to their parents (or legal guardians). Most 9 -12 graders do not tell their 
parents (or legal guardians) that they use e-cigarettes. We would not be able to recruit enough students who both meet our eligibility criteria and tell their parents (or legal guardians) that they use e- cigarettes.   
3. A waiver of p arental permission will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the 
 
Page 32 of 34 subjects , as we will be obtaining adolescent assent for participation in the study and 
providing parents (or legal guardians) with an opportunity to let us know if they do not 
wish to have their child participate in the study. 
4. The research could not practicably be carried out without using identifiable private 
information because we need access to participant names and contact [CONTACT_822398]-up. 
5. If clinically relevant information is discovered over the course of the research, we will contact [CONTACT_822399]/or their parents (or legal guardians). 
 We will request parental  written consent for all adolescents participating in the filming of peer 
videos in Aim 1  and for participants aged 18 years or older. Each signed consent form will be 
maintained for a minimum of six years after the completion of the research.   We will follow HRP -803 INVESTIGATOR GUIDANCE: Documentation of Informed Consent
 
for the written consent forms. 
 32.
 DRUGS OR DEVICES  
N/A; this research does not involve testing drugs or device.  REFERENCES  
1. Statement from FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb, M.D., on new steps to address epi[INVESTIGATOR_304203] e-cigarette use [press release]. September 2018 2018. 
2. Statement of Susanne E. Tanski On behalf of the American Academy of Pediatrics Before the Food and Drug Administration. Public Hearing on “Eliminating Youth Electronic Cigarette and Other Tobacco Product Use: The Role for Drug Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]”. 2019; 
https://www.fda.gov/downloads/NewsEvents/MeetingsConferencesWorkshops/UCM631355.
pdf. 
3. Surgeon General’s Advisory on E-cigarette Use Among Youth: The E- cigarette Epi[INVESTIGATOR_822350].  https://e -cigarettes.surgeongeneral.gov/documents/surgeon- generals -
advisory-on-e- cigarette -use-among-youth-2018.pdf . Accessed June, 2019. 
4. Jenssen BP, Boykan R. Electronic Cigarettes and Youth in the [LOCATION_002]: A Call to Action (at the Local, National and Global Levels). Children (Basel, Switzerland). 2019;6(2). 
5. Jenssen BP, Walley SC, Section On Tobacco C. Policy Statement: E- Cigarettes and Similar 
Devices (Organizational Principles to Guide and Define the Child Health Care System and/or Improve the Health of all Children). Pediatrics. 2019;143(2). 
6. Eliminating Youth Electronic Cigarette and Other Tobacco Product Use: The Role for Drug Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014].  Statement of Susanne E. Tanski, MD, MPH, FAAP on behalf of the American Academy of Pediatrics. American Academy of Pediatrics, 2019:5. 
7. Willett JG, Bennett M, Hair EC, et al. Recognition, use and perceptions of JUUL among youth and young adults. Tobacco Control. 2019;28(1):115-116. 
8. Barrington-Trimis JL, Kong G, Leventhal AM, et al. E- cigarette Use and Subsequent 
Smoking Frequency Among Adolescents. Pediatrics. 2018;142(6). 
9. Conner M, Grogan S, Simms- Ellis R, et al. Evidence that an intervention weakens the 
relationship between adolescent electronic cigarette use and tobacco smoking: a 24-month prospective study. Tobacco Control. 2019:tobaccocontrol-2018-054905. 
 
Page 33 of 34 10. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. E-Cigarette Use Among Youth and Young 
Adults. A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA2016. 
11. Perikleous EP, Steiropoulos P, Paraskakis E, Constantinidis TC, Nena E. E- Cigarette Use 
Among Adolescents: An Overview of the Literature and Future Perspectives. Frontiers in 
public health. 2018;6:86. 
12. Giovacchini CX, Pacek L, McClernon FJ, Que LG. Use and Perceived Risk of Electronic Cigarettes Among North Carolina Middle and High School Students. North Carolina medical journal. 2017;78(1):7-13. 
13. Georgie JM, Sean H, Deborah MC, Matthew H, Rona C. Peer-led interventions to prevent tobacco, alcohol and/or drug use among young people aged 11- 21 years: a systematic review 
and meta- analysis. Addiction (Abingdon, England). 2016;111(3):391-407. 
14. Pbert L, Flint AJ, Fletcher KE, Young MH, Druker S, DiFranza JR. Effect of a pediatric practice -based smoking prevention and cessation intervention for adolescents: a randomized, 
controlled trial. Pediatrics. 2008;121(4):e738-747. 
15. Anderson M, Jiang J. Teens, Social Media & Technology 2018 (Pew Internet Research). 2018; https://www.pewinternet.org/2018/05/31/teens- social -media -technology-2018/
. 
Accessed March, 2019. 
16. PERRIN A. 5 facts about Americans and video games (Pew Research).  
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2018/09/17/5- facts -about- americans -and-video-
games/ . Accessed June, 2019. 
17. Coley HL, Sadasivam RS, Williams JH, et al. Crowdsourced peer- versus expert -written 
smoking- cessation messages. Am J Prev Med. 2013;45(5):543-550. 
18. Houston TK, Sadasivam RS, Ford DE, Richman J, Ray MN, Allison JJ. The QUIT- PRIMO 
provider- patient Internet -delivered smoking cessation referral intervention: a cluster -
randomized comparative effectiveness trial: study protocol. Implement Sci. 2010;5:87. 
19. Vu TT, Groom A, Hart JL, et al. Socioeconomic and Demographic Status and Perceived Health Risks of E-Cigarette Product Contents Among Youth: Results From a National Survey. Health promotion practice. 2020;21(1_suppl):148s-156s. 
20. CDC. Smoking & Tobacco Use. http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/fast_facts/
. Published 2015. Updated 
April 15, 2015. Accessed June 18, 2015. 
21. NCI Board of Directors Report - Tobacco Control Research Priorities for the Next Decade:  Working Group Recommendations for 2016 - 2025. 
http://cancercontrol.cancer.gov/pdf/nci-
tobacco -control- research -priorities -rpt-feb-2016.pdf . Published March 2016. Updated March. 
Accessed.  
22. PAR -19-213: Behavioral & Integrative Treatment Development Program (R34 Clinical Trial 
Optional). https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa- files/PAR -19-213.html . Accessed.  
23. Kong G, Morean ME, Cavallo DA, Camenga DR, Krishnan- Sarin S. Reasons for Electronic 
Cigarette Experimentation and Discontinuation Among Adolescents and Young Adults. Nicotine Tob Res. 2015;17(7):847-854. 
24. Fanshawe TR, Halliwell W, Lindson N, Aveyard P, Livingstone-Banks J, Hartmann-Boyce J. Tobacco cessation interventions for young people. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2017;11:CD003289. 
25. DiFranza JR, Rigotti NA, McNeill AD, et al. Initial symptoms of nicotine dependence in adolescents. Tob Control. 2000;9(3):313-319. 
 
Page 34 of 34 26. U.S. Department of Commerce, Census Bureau, Historical Statistics of the [LOCATION_002], 
Colonial Times to 1970; Current Population Reports, Series P-20, various years; CPS Historical Time Series Tables on School Enrollment; and Current Population Survey (C PS), 
October, 1970 through 2016. .  https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d17/tables/dt17_103.20.asp
  