ID: [ZIP_CODE] Cystic Fibrosis and Gut Dysmotility: The Effect of 
Polyethylene Glycol (PEG) on Intestinal Transit 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Date: 06/08/2023  
 
Background:  
Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive disorder involving mutation of the cystic 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein. The consequence of this genetic 
mutation leads to dysregulated epi[INVESTIGATOR_62446]. Abnormalities of the CFTR protein have multisystem motility complications - it affects primarily the lungs, pancreas, 
vas deferens, and the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Cystic  Fibrosis causes multiple issues in 
the GI tract. The CFTR protein is expressed throughout the GI tract at the api[INVESTIGATOR_62447]. Per recent studies, it has the highest concentration in the 
duodenum and decreases as the small bowel terminates into  the large intestine (1). 
Patients often experience symptoms secondary to dysmotility from abnormal salt and water regulation into the gastrointestinal lumen. Cystic Fibrosis patients are at risk for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO), intestinal  dysbiosis, inflammation, distal 
intestinal obstruction syndrome (DIOS), constipation, and postprandial delayed gastric emptying.  
   
Multiple studies have been done to evaluate gastrointestinal motility in CF  patients. 
Bentur et al studied gastric muscle r hythms in CF patients via pre - and post -prandial 
electrogastrography (EGG) and found postprandial bradygastria (2). Patients had 
symptom improvement with initiation of cisapride however this drug is not FDA approved in different continents. Hedsund et al studied GI transit times via the magnet -based 
motility tracking system and found increased transit in the upper small intestine compared 
to control populations (3). Overall, CF patients were found to have delayed small intestine transit time with the magnet ic pi[INVESTIGATOR_62448] [ADDRESS_67201] shown that use of Miralax (brand 
name) or polyethylene glycol (PEG) laxative decreased bacterial overgrowth in 90% of Cystic Fibrosis mice1 . Further studies showed that daily PEG use decreases positive 
breath tests in a small study of CF patients. While there have been multiple studies showing symptomatic improvement of SIBO and DIOS with PEG and/or other laxative agents, none have measured whether these medications improve intestinal transit time.   
Objective:  The main goal of this research project is to evaluate total intraluminal transit 
time in CF patients and the effects of PEG on transit time and patient symptoms.  Primary 
outcomes include gastrointestinal transit time and symptom improvement.  
Design  and Methods:  
This is a prospective cohort study. This is also an investigator -initiated study. Once 
enrolled, patients will spend 4 weeks in the study. All participants will receive the intervention. There will be no randomization in this study.  
Information pulled from the patient's medical record includes the patient's name, medical record number, date of birth, cystic fibrosis genotype, medication list, and medical history.  
Study Protocol  
1. Initial recruiting visit: Informed consent to participate in the research study will be obtained. The patient will need to have a 2-week  washout period where all non-
essential medications that alter gut motility are temporarily stopped. The medications withheld will be at the discretion of the physician. This  list will be 
provided to the patient. The patients on pancreatic enzyme replacement must remain on this so as  to not affect study outcomes.  
 
2. Second visit: The patient will complete Rome IV Diagnosti c Questionnaire for 
Adult FGIDs (R4DQ); This Questionnaire is considered a research procedure. 
Once procedural informed consent is obtained, the patient will be fitted for the recorder and ingest the SmartPi[INVESTIGATOR_4382]. The patient will return the receiver up to seven 
days after the capsule was ingested. The  SmartPi[INVESTIGATOR_62449] a research 
procedure. If the SmartPi[INVESTIGATOR_62450] 7, the patient will obtain an outpatient abdominal X-ray to determine if the SmartPi[INVESTIGATOR_62451]. A pregnancy test will be performed prior to any potential radiation exposure for female patients of child- bearing ages, 13- 50 years old. The X Ray, if 
completed, is considered a research procedure.  
**If there is concern the SmartPi[INVESTIGATOR_62452], the patient may be asked to take a Patency agile capsule. This will require the patient to obtain a abdominal X Ray 24 hours after ingestion as an outpatient to localize the capsule's location. This is considered standard of care.  
 
3. Study period (two weeks): After 7 days, the patient will begin intervention with 
polyethylene glycol (PEG) 17 g therapy for total of 2 weeks. If persistent symptoms 
(no bowel movements in > 24 hours, abdominal pain, straining, bloating), then the 
patient can increase to [ADDRESS_67202] time of PEG ingestion, if PEG was taken 
with meals, a log of other medications taken during the intervention timeline and 
recording symptoms of constipation. Patients will be advised to avoid non- essential 
drugs that can alter gut motility (see attached list found on the patient log) during 
the treatment period. The study drug is considered standard of care procedure.  
 
4. Third visit: Two weeks following initiation of therapy, the patient will repeat the 
Rome IV Diagnostic Questionnaire for Adult FGIDs (R4DQ) and ingest the second SmartPi[INVESTIGATOR_62453]. Procedural informed consent will be obtained prior the questionnaire and ingestion of the SmartPi[INVESTIGATOR_4382]. This Questionnaire and SmartPi[INVESTIGATOR_62454] a research procedure. The patient will return 
the receiver up to seven days after the capsule was ingested.The SmartPi[INVESTIGATOR_62449] a research procedure. If the SmartPi[INVESTIGATOR_62450] 7, the 
patient will obtain an outp atient abdominal XRay to determine if the SmartPi[INVESTIGATOR_62455]. A pregnancy test will be performed prior to any 
potential radiation exposure for female patients of child- bearing ages, 13- 50 years 
old.The X Ray, if completed, is co nsidered a research procedure.  
**If there is concern the SmartPi[INVESTIGATOR_62452], the patient may be asked to take a Patency agile capsule. This will require the patient to obtain a abdominal X Ray 24 hours after ingestion as an outpatient to localize the capsule's location. This is considered standard of care.  
 
5. Fourth visit: The patient will return the recorder equipment for analysis and will 
complete a post study questionnaire and undergo review of their therapy log detailing how the medication was taken. This Questionnaire is considered a 
research  procedure.  
 
The subject participation in the study ends at this point.  
 
Statistical Plan:  
The data analyzed includes SmartPi[INVESTIGATOR_62456] (R4DQ). Statistical analysis will compare the relationship of GI transit time pre and post treatment.  
Statistical Analysis  
Final statistical analysis will be completed with a Department of Health Sciences statistician.  Results are considered statistically significant using a p value of <0.05 alpha 
level.  
 
Due to less -than-optimal numbers of participants, this study was closed after enrolling 
three patients. Therefore, the above statistical methods could not be applied. No data 
analysis was performed due to insufficient data.  
 
 