Page [ADDRESS_957437]  
Columbus, Ohio [ZIP_CODE]  
[LOCATION_002]  
Page 4  of 38 
 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
  Protocol Signature [CONTACT_354916] : A prospective efficacy study comparing frequency of use of a surgery -free 
wearable and personalized bladder modulation system with objective confirmation of nerve 
activation for use in the home by [CONTACT_704645].  
Protocol Number: AMHOAB 2001  
Version: V 2.0, February 15, 2021  
Investigator’s Statement  
I agree to conduct this clinical investigation in accordance with the design and specific 
provisions of this protocol; modifications to the study are acceptable only with a 
mutually agreed upon protocol amendm ent as approved by [CONTACT_704646]. I agree to await ethics review board approval of the protocol and 
informed consent before initiating the study, to obtain consent from participants 
prior to their enrollment  in the study, to collect a nd record data as required by [CONTACT_704647], and to maintain study documents for the period of 
time required.  
 
Confidential  
This document contains confidential information belonging to Avation Medical 
except as may be otherwise agreed to in writing, by [CONTACT_170803], I agree to hold such information in confidence and not to disclose it to others (except where required by [CONTACT_1289]), nor use it for unauthorized purposes.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
Investigator’s Signature         [CONTACT_704673] [ADDRESS_957438] Questionnaire – Short Form  
I-QOL  Incontinence Quality of Life  
ISF Investigator Site File  
OAB  Overactive Bladder  
OAB -q Overactive Bladder questionnaire  
OHQ  Oxford Happi[INVESTIGATOR_704634]’s Global Impression of Change  
PTNS  Percutaneous Tibial Nerve Stimulation  
SAE  Serious Adverse Event  
SNS  Sacral Nerve Stimulation  
UUI  Urge Urinary Incontinence  
WiFi  Wireless Fidelity  
Page [ADDRESS_957439] Article  Avation Medical’s surgery -free wearable and personalized bladder 
modulation system that provides objective confirmation of nerve activation, 
can be used in a home environment,  and is controlled with a tablet -based 
application  
Protocol  
Number  AMHOAB 2001  
Objectives  • To compare the effectiveness of [ADDRESS_957440] 
Article . 
• To evaluate the overall effectiveness.  
• To evaluate any side effects of the Test Article . 
• To evaluate the tolerability, usability, and satisfaction of the Test Article . 
• To evaluate the compliance of subjects using the Test Article . 
Subject 
Population  Subjects diagnosed with OAB.  
Population 
Size  80 completed subjects  
Number of 
Centers  Up to 12 sites  
Structure  Prospective open label study, 12 -week treatment duration with an optional  
additional 21 -month  long -term follow -up perio d, for a total participation 
time of 24 months.  
Method of 
Assignment  All subjects who meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria and sign the informed consent will be enrol led. Subjects will be randomized to  
once a week or three times a week of stimulation for a twelve- week 
period . Eligible subjects  that elect to enroll in the long -term follow 
up study will sign a new informed consent  and  then  be instructed  to 
slowly taper down their treatment frequency  stepwise  from three 
treatment sessions  per week, to two per week, to one per week, 
and finally one session every other week. The subjects that were assigned to  one treatment session per week  in the lead -in portion 
of the study  will move directly to twice  month ly treatment 
sessions. Subjects will then be instructed to perfor m treatments as 
needed or a mi nimum of twice per  month.  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 8  of 38 
 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
  Randomization  1:1, 1 treatment session per week: 3 treatment sessions per week  
Selection 
Criteria  Inclusion Criteria : To be eligible for study entry, subjects must satisfy all of 
the following inclusion criteria:  
1. Male or female and [ADDRESS_957441] their OAB symptoms, is on a stable dose (no new, discontinued, or change in dose) of all prescribed medication for at least [ADDRESS_957442]  weekly  
16. Are capable of using the tablet -based controlling  app 
 
Page 9  of 38 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
   Exclusion Criteria : Subjects will be excluded from the study if 1 or more of 
the following exclusion criteria are applicable:  
1. Have  evidence of an active  disruptive  psychological  or psychiatric 
disorder or other known condition significant enough to impact 
perception of  pain, compliance of intervention and/or ability to 
evaluate treatment outcomes, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_15863].  
2. Allergic, or have shown hypersensitivity, to any materials of the 
system which come into contact [CONTACT_704648]  
3. Have a pacemaker or implanted  defib rillator  
4. Have a documented current or reoccurring Urinary Tract Infection (3 or more in the 12months prior to  enrol lment)  
5. Current use of a marketed device for treatment of their OAB or incontinence (including but not limited to  Interstim®)  
6. Have had Botox treatment for their OAB in the previous 8  months  
7. Current use of TENS in pelvic region, back or  legs  
8. Had PTNS treatment within 6 months prior to  enrol lment  
9. Use of investigational drug/device therapy within past 12  weeks  
10. Current participat ion in anothe r clinical study  
11. Had within 6 months of enrol lment a significant untreated substance 
abuse disorder or polysubstance abuse disorder stemming  from  
dependency producing medications, alcohol, and/or illicit drugs  
12. Pregnant or planning to become pregnant within  the next 12  weeks  
13. Has scar tissue, metal, or other implant in the target ankle that would 
interfere with stimulation  
14. Has a neurological disorder that causes abnormal sensations in  the 
lower leg (loss of sensation or allodynia)  
15. Has a neurological disorder that affects the bladder or a diagnosis  of 
interstitial cystitis, radiation cystitis, or  fistulas.  
16. Has a skin condition in the area of the ankle stimulation location that 
would preclude them from using surface stimulation  
17. Has been dia gnosed with incontinence due to neurogenic bladder  
18. Have failed a third line treatment for their OAB because of lack of effectiveness in the last 2 years (PTNS, Botox, or  SNS)  
19. Urge incontinence due to stress predominant mixed urinary incontinence (greater t hat 60% of the  time)  
20. Have polyuria (>2500 cc urine output per  day)  
21. Has urinary retention or incomplete bladder  emptying  
22. Has symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia (weak stream, straining, 
hesitancy, or  intermittency)  
 
Page [ADDRESS_957443] signed the Informed Consent Form and meet all 
applicable eligibility criteria  will be randomized  1:[ADDRESS_957444] 12 weeks of 
stimulation , subjects will return to the clinic for final assessments,  then will 
either enroll in the long -term follow up phase , if eligible,  or exit from the 
study. 
Statistical 
Methods Analyses will be performed within both the intent -to-treat (ITT) population 
of all enrolled  patients and among the subset of patients who complete the 
study. Patients may be missing endpoint data at one or more, or possibly all, 
post -screening time points,  at which endpoint data will be provided by 
[CONTACT_704649].  Enrollment will continue 
until 80 patients complete the study. Expecting 15% dropout, the anticipated total enrollment  will be approximately 94  patients . 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Page 11 of 38 
 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
   
3. Introduction  
Overactive bladder is a stressful and disruptive chronic disorder that affects more than 
16% of the adult population [1], an estimated [ADDRESS_957445] the United 
States alone. The symptoms of OAB cause millions of individuals to suffer with a decrease in their quali ty of life and put them at increased risk of falls, bone fractures due 
to falls and higher rates of anxiety and depression  
OAB is characterized by [CONTACT_704650]; urgency, frequency, nocturia, and urge incontinence[2]. Urgency is the complaint of a sudden, irresistible desire to pass urine 
which often is difficult to resist. Frequency is the number of voids per day. In OAB, there 
are usually 8 or more voiding epi[INVESTIGATOR_704635]. Nocturia is the number of 
voids per night. In OAB, the complaint of sleep interruption due to the need to void is 
1+ times, per night. Urge incontinence is the involuntary leakage of urine, associated 
with sudden compelling desire to void. In order to be diagnosed, these symptoms or a 
combination of them, must be present wit hout a pathologic or metabolic component 
causing them[3].  
According to the American Urolog ical Association, the first line of treatment is 
behavioral therapy. These therapi[INVESTIGATOR_704636], timed voiding, and 
fluid monitoring. This approach may be effective for some, but many patients are not 
compliant,  and they do not see consistent relief of symptoms [2]. The next line of 
treatment is medications. Medication can be effective in around 70% of patients but they can produce significant side effects and are cost prohibitive[4] . Further, more than 
70% of patients quit drug therapy within 6 months making longer term compliance an 
issue [5]. Third line therapi[INVESTIGATOR_31430] B otulinum toxin (BT) , PTNS, and SNS. B T can also 
be effective in up to 70% of cases; however, 39.8% of all who discontinued therapy, did 
so because of the side effects, including the risk or urinary retention [2]. The full effect 
of BT  treatment is temporary and requires additional procedures every 4 to 9 months. 
PTNS is found to be around 55 -70% effective, minimally invasive, and has very little side 
effects , bu t is temporary and requires frequent visit to the clinic (once a  week) which 
may  be difficult for patients who work full time or those who must  travel a long distance 
to reach a provider  [6] [7]. SNS is typi[INVESTIGATOR_704637]  
85% , but it is also the most invasive[8]. SNS requires a surgical implant which may cause 
a series of adverse events. Further, the currently available neuromodulation options are 
open -loop and do not provide objective confirmation that the target nerve is  being 
reached.  
In summary, while  there are  many  treatment options available to manage  symptoms 
associated with OAB, each carry with it considerable  drawbacks for patients. Patients 
drop out of the treatment pathway for OAB in great numbers. Further, of th e [ADDRESS_957446] 
profile. There is a need for a surgery -free and drug -free easy -to-use wearable system 
that allows pa tients to treat their chronic OAB symptoms when and where it is 
convenient for them and one that offers  an objective  confirmation  that  the 
neuromodulation  target has  been  reached  and one that automatically adjusts based 
on the patient’s anatomy and movement during treatment sessions.
This study will evaluate the clinical efficacy, subject compliance, side -effects,  and 
subject satisfaction of a surgery -free wearable and personalized bladder modulation 
system that provides personalized treatment through objective confirmation of nerve 
recruitment and can used in the home by [CONTACT_704651].  
 
4. Objectives  
• To compare the effectiveness of [ADDRESS_957447] Article . 
• To evaluate the overall effectiveness  
• To evaluate any side effects of the Test Article . 
• To evaluate the tolerability, usab ility,  and satisfaction of the Test Article . 
• To evaluate the compliance by [CONTACT_704652] . 
5. Study Design  
This is a prospective, multicenter study comparing the effectiveness of [ADDRESS_957448] Article  either once (1) or three (3) times a week 
for thirty (30) minutes each time  over a [ADDRESS_957449] a  remote  visit (via  phone /video conferencing ) after one (1) week ± 2 
days, four (4) weeks ±  4 days, eight (8) weeks ±  4 days , and twelve (12) weeks ±  [ADDRESS_957450] Article  
components , they will be asked to either return  to the clinic or undergo troubleshooting 
Page 13 of 38 
 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
  instructions over the phone. At the end of the twelve (12) week s ± [ADDRESS_957451], in deep brain 
structures, and over nerves in the periphery. Stimulation has also been used 
to treat disorders that are not pain related such as Parkinson’s disease, 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_002], and depression. Recently, SNS a nd PTNS have been used to 
modulate bladder function and treat subjects with OAB and provided some 
relief of OAB symptoms. However, currently commercial options for bladder modulation are invasive and have significant drawbacks that have limited 
their appea l to patients. SNS requires a major surgery, is costly and results 
in a permanent foreign body implant and, frequently, additional surgeries to 
replace batteries or address other issues PTNS requires a skin puncture and 
requires the Subject to travel to a physician’s office weekly for therapy. Of 
the estimated [ADDRESS_957452] Article  can be used in the home  and offers personalized treatment 
through objective confirmation of nerve activation. It is noninvasive , 
eliminating the risk of surgery, and minimizes the inconvenience of frequent 
visits to the physician’s office. This study will evaluate the tolerability, 
usability and satisfaction of the Test Article  on subjects with OAB. Further, 
the study will also evaluate the use of evoked EMG signals to help control the Test Article  and customize the stimulation experience for each subject.  
Page [ADDRESS_957453] Selection  
 
Selection 
Criteria   Inclusion Criteria : To be eligible for study entry, subjects must satisfy all of the 
following inclusion criteria:  
1. Male or female and [ADDRESS_957454] their OAB symptoms, is on a stable dose (no new, discontinued, or change in dose) of all prescribed 
medication for at least [ADDRESS_957455] weekly  
16. Are capable of using the tablet -based controlling app  
Page 15 of 38 
 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
   
  Exclusion Criteria : Subjects will be excluded from the study if 1 or  more of the 
following exclusion criteria are applicable:  
1. Have  evidence of an active  disruptive  psychological  or psychiatric               
disorder or other known condition significant enough to impact       
perception of pain, compliance of intervention and/or ability to evaluate 
treatment outcomes, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_15863].  
2. Allergic, or have shown hypersensitivity, to any materia ls of the system 
which come into contact [CONTACT_704648] . 
3. Have a pacemaker or implanted  defibrillator . 
4. Have a documented current or reoccurring Urinary Tract Infection                           (3 or more in the 12  months prior to enrollment ). 
5. Current use of a marketed device for treatment of their OAB or 
incontinence (including but not limited to  Interstim®) . 
6. Have had botulinum toxin treatment for their OAB in the previous 8  months . 
7. Current use of TENS in pelvic region, back or  legs . 
8. Had PTNS treatment within 6 months prior to  enrollment . 
9. Use of investigational drug/device therapy within past 12  weeks . 
10. Current participation in another clinical  study . 
11. Had within 6 months of enrollment  a significant untreated substance                    
abuse di sorder or polysubstance abuse disorder stemming  from                  
dependency -producing medications, alcohol, and/or illicit drugs . 
12. Pregnant or planning to become pregnant within the next 12  weeks . 
13. Has scar tissue, metal, or other implant in the target ankle that would        
interfere with stimulation . 
14. Has a neurological disorder that causes abnormal sensations in the lower  
 leg (loss of sensation or allodynia) . 
15. Has a neurological disorder that affects the bladder or a diagnosis of  
interstitial cystitis, radiation cystitis, or fistula s. 
16. Has a skin condition in the area of the ankle stimulation location that  would preclude them from using surface stimulation . 
17. Has  been diagnosed with incontinence due to neurogenic bladder . 
18. Have failed a third line treatment for their OAB because of lack of  effectiveness in the last 2 years (PTNS, botulinum toxin , or SNS) . 
19. Urge incontinence due to stress -predominant mixed urinary i ncontinence 
(greater that 60% of the time)  
20. Have polyuria (>2500 cc urine output per day)  
21. Has urinary retention or incomplete bladder emptying  
22. Has symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH ) - weak stream,  
straining, hesitancy or intermittency .
 
Page [ADDRESS_957456] complying with the inclusion/exclusion criteria who is willing to 
participate in the study, and signs the informed consent, will be enrolled . At 
baseline subjects will be randomized to use the system for 30 minutes either one (1) time per week  or three (3) times per week for a total of 12 weeks.  All 
subjects will independently complete stimulation treatment sessions; no blinding will occur  
7. Methods and Procedure s 
7.1. Informed  Consent  
Written Informed Consent will be obtained from each subject prior to any 
study procedures being performed . All potential  subjects  will be properly  
informed  as to the purpose of the study and the potential risks and benefits 
known or that can be reasonably predicted or expected. The Investigator will 
retain the original c opy of the Informed Consent Form signed by [CONTACT_423];  
a duplicate will be provided to the subject.  Only  the consent  form approved  
by [CONTACT_704653].  
 
7.2. Visit  Schedule  
 Study Visit  Tele -visit  
Screening 1  Visit 0   
Screening 2/ Baseline  Visit 1   
Week 1  Visit 2  optional  
Week 2   X (Weekly Phone Call)  
Week 3   X (Weekly Phone Call)  
Week 4  Visit 3  optional  
Week 5   X (Weekly Phone Call)  
Week 6   X (Weekly Phone Call)  
Week 7   X (Weekly Phone Call)  
Week 8  Visit 4  optional  
Week 9   X (Weekly Phone Call)  
Week 10   X (Weekly Phone Call)  
Week 11   X (Weekly Phone Call)  
Week 12  Visit 5   
Page 17 of 38 
 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
   
7.3. Pre-Screening  
Potential study candidates will be initially pre -screened by [CONTACT_704654].  
 
7.4. Visit 0 - Screening 1 (Informed Consent and Diary Distribution)  
This visit involves  the review and signing of  the Informed Consent, 
eligibility criteria review, and distribution of a [ADDRESS_957457] that sign the informed consent will be given the      
3-day Bladder Diary.  
 
7.5. Visit 1 -  Screening 2 (EMG  evaluation)  
This procedure will evaluate if EMG signals can be recorded during 
stimulation of the tibial nerve with the wearable bladder modulation 
system . 
Step  Action  
1. Screening evaluations will be collected including (using a 3 -day 
Bladder  Diary):  
1. Number of daytime voids  
2. Number of urge events  
3. Number of nighttime voids  
4. Number of urge incontinence events  
Note  Only subjects that meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria with regard 
to the Bladder Diary  will proceed to EMG testing.  
2. Only delegated, qualified, site personnel will instruct the subject on how to place the Test Article  on the foot and ankle area.  
3. Once the Test Article  is placed, site personnel will use the Test 
Article  to stimulate the tibial nerve, evaluate EMG signals and 
instruct the subject how to use the Test Article.  
4. The subject will be asked to rate various  sensations 
experienced during  the stimulation therapy.  
5. Subject will be enrolled  in the study and given a subject ID.  
Note  Only subjects that have a detectable EMG and find the stimulation sensation tolerable will be eligible for enrollment . 
Page [ADDRESS_957458]  begins  stimulation  therapy.  These  procedures  can also 
be done during the Screening 2 / Baseline visit.  
Step  Action  
1. The inclusion and exclusion criteria will be confirmed as being met  
2. Demographic information will be collected.  
3. OAB questionnaires will be completed including:  
1. OAB -q 
2. IIQ-7 (only for those with incontinence)  
3. I-QoL  
4. and  OHQ  
4. Subjects will be randomized  1:[ADDRESS_957459] will use the controller to 
start the stimulator to activate the tibial nerve (trial session should not exceed 15 minutes) . 
4. The subject will be asked questions regarding the feeling of Test Article  during use and the ease of use of the Test Article . 
5. Subjects will be given a new 3 -day Bladder Diary  to complete in the 
days leading up to the next scheduled study visit . 
Page 19 of 38 
 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
   
7.8. Visit 2 -  Week  1 ± 2 days  
This  visit will be scheduled after 1 week of therapy for evaluations. This 
visit may be performed remotely  via ePRO . 
 
Step  Action  
1. Subjects w ill be queried for AE/SAE or concomitant medication  
changes.  
2. The [ADDRESS_957460] Article . 
6. Subjects will be given a  new  3-day  Bladder Diary  to complete in the 
days leading up to the next scheduled study visit . 
 
7.9. Visit 3 -  Week  4 ± 4 days  
This  visit will be scheduled after 4 weeks of therapy for evaluations. This 
visit may be performed remotely via ePRO.  
 
Step  Action  
1. Subjects will be queried for AE/SAE or concomitant medication  
changes.  
2. The 3 -day Bladder Diary  dispensed at Visit 2  will be collected and 
reviewed.  
3.  Applicable visit forms and questionnaires will be completed :  
1. OAB -q 
2. IIQ-[ADDRESS_957461] Article . 
5. Subjects will be given a  new  3-day  Bladder Diary  to complete in the 
days leading up to the next scheduled study visit . 
Page 20 of 38 
 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
   
7.10. Visit 4 -  Week  8 ± 4 days  
This  visit will be scheduled after 8 weeks of therapy for evaluations. This 
visit may be performed remotely via ePRO.  
 
 
Step  Action  
1. Subjects will be queried for AE/SAE or concomitant medication  
changes.  
2. The 3 -day Bladder Diary  dispensed at Visit 3 will be collected and 
reviewed.  
3. Applicable visit forms and questionnaires will be completed  
4. Subjects will be given a  new  3-day  Bladder Diary  to complete in the 
days leading up to the next scheduled study visit . 
 
7.11. Visit 5 –  Week  12 ± 4 days  
This  visit will be scheduled after 12 weeks of stimulation for final 
evaluations.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 Step  Action  
1. Subjects will be queried for AE/SAE or changes to concomitant 
medications . 
2. The [ADDRESS_957462] Article . 
5. Subjects will either exit from the study or be given the option to 
enroll in the long -term follow -up study, if eligible.  
  
 
7.12. Visit  Schedule for Lead- in Phase  
 
  Visit 0  Visit 1  Visit 2  Week 2  
Week 3  Visit 3 Week 5  
Week 6  
Week 7  Visit 4 Week 9  
Week 10  
Week 11  Visit 5  
Informed Consent  X              
3-day Bladder  Diary (a,b)  X X X   
X    
X    
X 
EMG Detection Trial   
X (c)              
Inclusion/Exclusion Check   
X             
Medical History   
X        
      
Test Article  Assessment 
Form   
X             
Device Training   
X             
OAB -q  
X    
X        
X 
IIQ-[ADDRESS_957463]  Selection  
 
Selection 
Criteria  Inclusion Criteria : To be eligible for entry into the long -term 
follow -up portion of the study , subjects must satisfy all the 
following inclusion criteria:  
1. Successful complet ion of  the  lead -in portion of the  FREEOAB 
study  
2. A rating of  5 or greater on the PGIC questionnaire at Visit 5  
3. A minimum compliance of 90% with diary and 
questionnaire completion  
4. A minimum  compliance  of 80% with stimulation sessions 
during the lead -in portion of the FREEOAB study. 
 
 Exclusion Criteria : Subjects will be excluded from participation  
if the  following  exclusion criteria are met:  
1. Any  change in health status that might affect the subject’s 
ability to comply with the visit schedule,  assessments, 
and/or stimulation session completion.   
8.2. Informed Consent  
Written Informed Consent will be obtained from each subject before recruitment into  
the long -term follow -up portion of the FREEOAB trial . All potential  subjects  will be 
properly  informed  as to the purpose  and the potential risks and benefits known or that 
can be reasonably predicted  or expected.  The  Investigator  will retain  the original  copy  of 
the Informed Consent  Form  signed  by [CONTACT_423];  a duplicate  will be provided  to the 
subject . Only  the consent  form  approved  by [CONTACT_704655].  
8.3. Visit Schedule  
 Study Visit  
(in-clinic)  Remote/ Tele -visit  
 
Enrollment  Visit 6   
Month 6   Visit 7  
Month 9   Visit 8  
Month 12  Visit 9  Optional  
Month 18   Visit 10  
Month 24  Visit 11   
8.4. Visit 6 - Enroll ment  
This procedure will occur at the completion of Visit 5 /Week 12  of the lead -in portion of 
the FREEOAB study . Eligible subjects will sign a new Informed Consent Form . (Visit 5 
and 6 may occur on the same day)  
   
 
Page [ADDRESS_957464] to enroll in the long -term follow 
up study will sign a new informe d consent form . 
2.  Subjects will be given detailed instructions to begin an 
augmented treatment schedule, based on original 
treatment group assignment in the lead -in portion of the 
study.  
• Subjects will be instructed  to slowly taper down their 
treatment frequency stepwise  from three treatment 
sessions per week, to two per week, to one per week, and finally one session every other week.  
• Subjects that were assigned to  one treatment 
session per week  in the lead -in portion  will move 
directly to twice  month ly treatment sessions.   
 
3.  Subjects will be given a  new  3-day Bladder Diary  to complete within 3 
days leading up to their next scheduled visit.  
 
8.5. Visit 7 - (Month 6 ±  14 days  of stimulation)  
Visit 7  will occur  after 6 months of treatment  (including lead -in portion of  
the FREEOAB study) . This visit may be conducted remotely, via ePRO.  
 
1. Subjects will be queried for AE/SAE or concomitant medication  
changes.  
2. The 3 -day Bladder Diary  dispensed at Visit 6  will be collected an d 
reviewed . 
3. Applicable visit forms and questionnaires will be completed  
4. Subjects will be given a  new  3-day Bladder Diary  to complete within 3 
days leading up to their next scheduled visit.  
8.6. Visit 8 – (Month  9 ± 14 days of stimulation)  
Visit 8 will occur  after 9 months of treatment (including lead -in portion of  
the FREEOAB study) . This visit may be conducted remotely, via ePRO.  
1.  Subjects will be queried for AE/SAE or concomitant medication  
changes.  
2.  The 3 -day Bladder Diary  dispensed at Visit 7  will be collected and 
reviewed  
3.  Applicable visit forms and questionnaires will be completed  Step  Action  
Step  Action  
Page 24 of 38 
 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
  4.  Subjects will be given a  new  3-day Bladder Diary  to complete within 3   
days leading up to their next scheduled visit.  
8.7. Visit 9 – (Month 12 ±  14 days of stimulation)  
Visit 9 will occur  after 12 months of treatment (including lead -in portion of  
the FREEOAB study) .This visit may be conducted  remotely via ePRO.  
 
Step   Action   
1.  Subjects will be queried for AE/SAE or concomitant medication  
changes.  
2.  The 3 -day Bladder Diary  dispensed at Visit 8  will be collected and 
reviewed . 
3.  Applicable visit forms and questionnaires will be completed . 
4.  Subjects will be given a  new  3-day Bladder Diary  to complete within 3 
days leading up to their next scheduled visit.  
8.8. Visit 10 – (Month 18 ±  14 days of stimulation)  
Visit 10 will occur  after 18 months of stimulation  (including lead -in portion of  
the FREEOAB study) . This visit may be conducted remotely via ePRO . 
 
Step  Action  
1.  Subjects will be queried for AE/SAE or concomitant medication  
changes.  
2.  The 3 -day Bladder Diary  dispensed at Visit 9  will be collected and 
reviewed . 
3.  Applicable visit forms and questionnaires will be completed  
 4. Subjects will be given a  new  3-day Bladder Diary  to complete within 3 
days leading up to their next scheduled visit.  
8.9. Visit 11 – (Month 24  ± 14 days of stimulation)  – End of Study  
Visit 11 will occur  after 24 months of stimulation.  
 
Step  Action  
1.  Subjects will be queried for AE/SAE or concomitant medication  
changes.  
2.  The 3 -day Bladder Diary  dispensed at Visit 8 will be collected and 
reviewed  
3.    Applicable visit forms and questionnaires will be completed  
4.  Subjects will return their study equipment and supplies to the site staff 
and exit the from the study.  
Page 25 of 38 
 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
  8.10.   Unscheduled Visit s 
Unscheduled visits  are perm itted to occur as needed , for the purposes of resolving 
issues, AE/SAE follow up, and may be performed remotely or in -clinic, depending on 
the reason for the visit.  
 
 
8.11.  Visit Schedule  for Long -Term Follow -Up Phase  
 Visit 6  Visit 7  Visit 8  Visit 9  Visit 10  Visit 11  
Study Phase  enrollment  Month 6  Month 9  Month 12  Month 18  Month 24  
Informed Consent  X      
3-day Bladder  Diary  
(a,b)  X X X X X X 
Inclusion/Exclusion 
Check  X      
OAB -q    X  X 
IIQ-[ADDRESS_957465] on activities, relationships, 
and feelings.  
9.5. I-QOL  
The incontinence quality of life questionnaire is used to assess the quality of life in subjects with urinary incontinence due to neurogenic detrusor overactivity [5].  
9.6. OAB -q 
This questionnaire asks abo ut how much you have been bothered by [CONTACT_704656] [ADDRESS_957466] global impression of change evaluates all aspects of Subjects ’ health and 
assesses if there has been an improvement or decline in clinical status.  
9.8. OHQ 
This questionnaire assesses the level of happi[INVESTIGATOR_704638] a series of statements based on their level of agreement.  
 
10. Test Article  
The Test Article  consists of a garment, a stimulator, gel pads, a controller, and charging system.  
10.1.  Garment , Stimulator , Charger,   and Gel Pads  
The Garment is worn on the foot and ankle area to provide a comfortable and 
convenient method of holding the electrodes in the desired location and a place to hold the stimulator. The stimulator unit can be easily removed to allow recharging. Replaceable gel pads are located inside the G arment to improve skin contact.  Gel Pads 
can be replaced. The stimulator will have and on/off button and LED’s to indicate Bluetooth connection status and battery level.
 
10.2.  Material  
Article  Material  
Garment  Neoprene  
Stimulator and Charger  3D Printed Plastic (ABS -Like)  
Gel Pads  Hydrogel  
10.3. Stimulation Specifications  
Parameters  Technical Description  
Pulse Type  Charged balanced biphasic  
Output  Current -controlled  
Number of stimulation electrodes  2 (one cathode, one anode)  
Figure 1   Wearable tibial nerve stimulation garment with built -in stimulating and sensing 
electrodes, fits left & right ankles  
Page 27 of 38 
 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
  Number of recording electrodes  3 ( two differential inputs, one reference input)  
Maximum current amplitude  [ADDRESS_957467] -case current density per 
phase  7.8 mA/ cm [ADDRESS_957468] -case charge density per 
phase  3.1 uC/cm [ADDRESS_957469]’s usage of the system while  completing  their treatment 
sessions at  home. This will also allow troubleshooting to take place without a visit to the 
office.  
 

Page [ADDRESS_957470] Article  is not approved for sale in any country.  
 
12. Safety and adverse events  
12.1. Definitions  
Adverse  Event s 
(AE)  Any untoward medical occurrence, unintended disease or injury, or 
untoward clinical signs (including abnormal laboratory findings) in 
subjects, users,  or other persons, whether or not related to the 
investigational medical device.  
Serious Adverse 
Event s (SAE)   A current adverse event that worsened or the occurrence of a new 
adverse event  that : 
a) led to death  
b) led to serious deterioration in the health of the subject, that either 
resulted in:  
1) a life -threatening illness or injury, or  
2) a permanent impairment of a body structure or a body 
function, or  
3) in -patient or prolonged hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or  
4) medical or surgical intervention to prevent life -threatening 
illness or injury or permanent impairment to a body structure or 
a body function  
  c) led to fetal distress, fetal death or a congenital abnormality or birth  
defect  
Unanticipated  
Adverse Device 
Effect (UADE)  Adverse device effect which by [CONTACT_5942], incidence, severity or  
outcome has not been identified in the current version of the risk 
analysis report.  
Unanticipated 
Serious Adverse 
Device Effect 
([LOCATION_003]DE)  Serious adverse device effect which by [CONTACT_5942], incidence, severity 
or outcome has not been identified in the current version of the risk analysis report.  
12.2. AE Recording  
All AEs or UADEs volunteered by [CONTACT_704657] . In accordance with the medical device incident 
reporting and investigation scheme (IRIS) (in the US follow 21 CFR 812.150(a)(l)), an Investigator shall submit to the Sponsor and IRB a report of any UADE occurring during the investigation as soon as possi ble, but no later than [ADDRESS_957471] ([LOCATION_003]DEs) will be reported to the regulatory authorities as required. This report must be confirmed by 
[CONTACT_704658] . 
 
 
Page [ADDRESS_957472] with the study device, through to participant study exit.  Investigational sites will be asked to report the  final medical diagnosis as an AE, rather 
than reporting all signs and symptoms as separate events.  
It is the responsibility of the investigator to decide when an adverse event has occurred. Adverse event information will be collected throughout the study.  Adverse events will be 
recorded on the appropriate CRF by [CONTACT_648456]. Event, date of onset, severity, duration and relationship to the procedure or device will be recorded.  
In case of a serious adverse event (whether or not rela ted to the investigational device), 
or an unanticipated adverse device effect, the investigator should complete the applicable SAE CRF pages within [ADDRESS_957473] be reported to and reviewed by  [CONTACT_16049] . 
NOTE: As applicable, reports must only identify participants using the study’s unique 
identifier to protect confidentiality.  
Non -serious AEs should be reported at the next routine contact.  
12.4.  Anticipated  Adverse Events and Complications 
The  anticipated  AEs  associated  with using the Test Article  include:  
1. Pain at the stimulation site . 
2. Allergic reaction .  
3. Changes in skin color (reddening) under the electrode.  
12.5. AE Classification  
The Investigator will classify each AE according to the Adverse Event Form. If the AE  is 
serious  or the Investigator  feels  that  the device  contributed  in any way  to the AE, the 
Investigator must report the event to the  Sponsor.  
13. Data Analysis, Evaluation and Statistical Plan  
13.1. Ana lysis Populations  
Analyses will be performed within both the intent -to-treat (ITT) population of all 
enrolled  patients and among the subset of patients who complete the study. Patients 
may be missing endpoint data at one or more, or possibly all, post -scre ening time 
points, at which endpoint data will be provided by [CONTACT_704659]. E nrollment  will continue until 80 subjects  complete the study.  Expecting 
15% dropout, the anticipated total enrollment  will be approximately [ADDRESS_957474] to frequency of OAB 
symptoms, including 3 -day daily averages of daytime  voids, urge events, nighttime 
voids, and urge incontinent events.  The maximum percent improvement across the four symptoms will als o be calculated at each time point as a composite endpoint. 
Percent improvement in daily average total voids relative to an upper normal limit of 8, will also be calculated, and will be bounded below at 0% for patients not achieving improvement and bounded  above at 100% for patients achieving or surpassing the 
upper normal limit of 8. Longitudinal analyses will be performed using repeated measures models to assess and describe trends over time with respect to these endpoints.  At individual time points, the  one -sample T -test will be performed at 
significance level α=0.05 within each treatment group and for the pooled study groups to assess the mean percent improvements, with 95% confidence intervals for mean percent improvements also calculated. The percent change endpoints are not likely to have approximately normal distributions, but the sample size is considered sufficient such that mean values will be approximately normally distributed, justifying the use of the T -tests.  If there is concern with the dist ributions, then the Wilcoxon signed rank 
test will be used as an alternative to the one -sample T -test.  
Sample size is evaluated by [CONTACT_704660] 95% confidence interval for mean percent improvement percent improvement in daily average total voids relative to an upper normal limit of 8.  Log ratios of daily average event frequencies at post -
screening time points relative to the daily average event frequencies at baseline, 
which are mathematically related to the percent changes from baseline, are mor e 
likely than percent  changes to have approximately normal distributions.   If such log 
ratios are normally distributed so that in both treatment groups the median percent improvement (toward zero) in daily average total voids is 15% and so that 25% of pati ents will achieve a 50% improvement, then with a total evaluable sample size of 80 
patients completing the study, there is an estimated 95.6% power to conclude that the mean percent improvement in daily average total voids relative to an upper normal limit  of 8 is 25% or larger using the 95% confidence interval.   Within each 
treatment group of size n=40, there is an estimated 90.8% power to conclude that the mean percent improvement in daily average total voids relative to an upper normal limit of 8 is 20% or larger using the 95% confidence interval.  
Two -sample T -tests performed at a significance level α=0.[ADDRESS_957475]  
achieving 50% improvement in frequency, and a responder  for the composite 
collection of OAB symptoms is defined as a subject  achieving 50% improvement in 
frequency for at least one symptom frequency.  The treatmen t groups will be 
Page [ADDRESS_957476] to response frequencies using chi -square of Fisher’s exact 
tests, and exact 95% binomial confidence intervals will be calculated.  
13.3. Analyses of Tolerability, Usability, and Satisfaction  
Subject  responses to questions  regarding tolerability, usability, and satisfaction, will be 
tabulated.  
13.4.  Analyses of Safety  
All adverse events will be collected  as they occur and tabulated.  
 
 
14. Withdrawal of Subjects from Study  
Subjects may be discontinued from the study for non- treatment- related reasons only when no other 
option is possible. Reasons for discontinuation include, but are not necessarily limited to:  
1. Voluntary withdrawal from the study by [CONTACT_423].  
2. Subject is unwilling or unable to cooperate with study requirements.  
3. Subject has an adverse event such that they can no longer continue with stimulation.  
The reason for discontinuation will be recorded on the appropriate subject Withdrawal form. 
Discontinued subjects may not be replaced in the study.  
Prior to  discont inuing  a subject, every  effort should be made to  contact [CONTACT_704661], or to obtain as much follow -up data as possible.  
15. Modification of Protocol  
Any amendments  to this protocol mu st be prepared by [CONTACT_704662], the Investigator, and the central or local authority (IRB/IEC) before implementation.  
16. Discontinuation of Study  
Avation Medical reserves the right to discontinue any study for administrati ve reasons at any time, such 
as but not limited to, a decision to discontinue further clinical investigations with the Test Article , 
improper conduct of the Study by [CONTACT_737], inability to obtain the number of subjects required by 
[CONTACT_760], etc. Reimbursements for reasonable expenses will be made if such action is necessary . 
17. Identified Risks  
The Avation Medical Risk Management Procedure was used during the development of the protocol. 
This procedure complies with ISO [ZIP_CODE]:2012 and ensures hazards are identified for which risks are 
assessed, designed out, mitigated,  or labeled . Where residual risks remain high, risk/benefit analysis has 
been conducted.  
All identified  risks have been designed out, mitigated or  disclosed with labeling . 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 38 
 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
   
17.1. Justification  for study given risk/benefit outcomes  
PTNS  has been used to treat patients with OAB . It requires that a needle electrode be 
inserted through the patient’s skin to provide stimulation to the tibial nerve near the 
inner ankle. PTNS therapy is performed in a doctor’s office one time a week for a 30 -
minute session for 12 weeks in a doctor’s office. Successful patients are then required to continuing therapy at least once a month to maintain success. There have been recent studies that have indicated that stimulating more often may be beneficial.  PTNS 
protocols rely on a toe twitch to confirm the correct placement of the needle at the 
beginning of the session. Once the therapy session begins stimulation is typi[INVESTIGATOR_704639]. Thus, in most cases there is no means of objectively  
confirm ing nerve recruitment  during the therapy session. In those patients w here 
stimulation cannot be increased to the level of a toe twitch , there is no objective 
confirmation of tibial nerve stim ulation.  
The current study involves testing a surgery -free and non -invasive wearable bladder 
modulation system in the home by s ubjects with OAB. In addition, the System, 
through sensors incorporated into the modulation garment, provide objective 
confirmat ion of tibial nerve activation at the beginning and through the modulation 
therapy which provides personalized treatment for each patient. The Test Article  
provides several benefits over PTNS. First, it  is wearable eliminat ing any risks 
associated with a n eedle puncture. Second, it  allows the patient to perform their 
therapy in their home , eliminat ing the need for weekly and monthly travel to a 
physician’s office. Third, it will provide objective confirmation that the active tibial 
nerve  stimulation is automatically adjusting  the personalized stimulation  level for 
each s ubject. The study will involve stimulating  for [ADDRESS_957477] Article . 
17.2. Justification  of study design  
Electrical stimulation of peripheral nerves has been used to manage chronic pain, 
Parkinson’s disease, epi[INVESTIGATOR_002], and other neurological disorders. These treatments include placing electrodes over the spi[INVESTIGATOR_1831], in deep brain structures, and over 
nerves in the periphery, etc. Recently, PTNS  has been used to treat subject with OAB . 
PTNS is thought to modify the signals from the bladder to achieve it effect, it usually 
takes 5 -7 weeks for symptoms to change. However, patients respond at different 
rates. In a review of about 100 patients who responded to PTNS, onset of symptom relief began anywhere between 2 -12 week s after starting treatment. For about 20% of 
these patients, some symptoms didn't improve until after 8 weeks [1] . However, PTNS 
therapy is performed only in a doctor’s office during weekly visits and requires that a needle- electrode is blindly inserted through the patient ’s skin near their inner ankle. A 
non -invasive transcutaneous system that can be used at home will make treatment 
more accessible and convenient for patients, will help to improve treatment compliance and s ubject satisfaction and may contribute to better o utcomes.  
Once s ubjects meet all eligibility and  screening criteria, they will be enrolled  in the 
study. Subjects will be randomized to therapy once a week or three times a week for 
[ADDRESS_957478] 
EMG screening to confirm eligibility for enrollment  and to set up the System for home 
use, and end of study assessments. To further minimize COVID19 exposure, th is 
protocol enables sites to combine Screening Visit 2 and Visit 1/Baseline  in a single 
office visi t.  
18. Administrative Requirements and Quality Assurance  
18.1.  Institutional  Review Board (IRB) / Ethics Committee (EC)  
Before study enrollment  can begin, the Investigator must provide the Sponsor with a 
copy of the approval notice for the protocol and informed con sent forms, signed by 
[CONTACT_704663].  
18.2.  Informed  Consent  
Written Informed Consent must be obtained from all subjects or their legally 
authorized representative before recruitment into the study.  All potential subjects 
must be properly informed as  to the purpose of the study and the potential risks and 
benefits known or that can be reasonably predicted or expected.  
Page [ADDRESS_957479].  Only the consent form 
approved by [CONTACT_1201]/EC must be used.  
18.3.  Clinical  Supplies  
All System components will be labeled as investigational and bear the following statement:  
“For Investigation al Use Only”  
18.4.  Data Management  
All study data will be recorded on the eCRF EDC system or  by [CONTACT_704664] .  When applicable, deidentified copi[INVESTIGATOR_704640].  Where possible all paper CRF  and EDC  data should originate from a 
verifiable medical record  in source documentation for each subject . 
Any corrections to paper CRFs should be made by [CONTACT_704665] a single line and writing the new value next to the original entry with the 
designated study staff initialing and dating the new entry.  Only the designated study 
staff may amend or otherwise alter any data entered onto the  paper  CRF  or site source 
documents . Once a change has been m ade on the paper CRF and the CRF has been 
submitted to the data department, no change may be made on the original CRF.  All 
corrections must be made with a Data Clarification Form (DCF)  for submission to 
Avation data management . Significant changes to eCRF EDC data entries are to be 
captured on a DCF and will require PI [INVESTIGATOR_704641].  
If the reason for the correction is not obvious then, when appropriate, a brief explanation of the reason fo r the correction should be made. Correction fluids should 
never be used on any document.  Before forwarding copi[INVESTIGATOR_704642], accuracy,  and legibility.  The Investigator/site must always retain a copy 
of all completed CRFs in his/her ISF .  
Study centers will record all study information in an appropriate source document. 
The data will then be entered directly into an electronic data capture (EDC) syst em by 
[CONTACT_120081] a secure internet connection. Data entered into the eCRF must be verifiable against source documents at the study center. Any changes to the 
data entered in  the EDC system will be recorded in the audit trail.  
The S ponsor will be responsible for activities associated with the data management of 
this study.  
 
 
 
Page [ADDRESS_957480] Storage and Retention  
Federal laws and GCP requires that a copy of all study records (e.g., Informed Consent 
documents, source documents, study records, etc.) which support CRFs of this study, 
must be retained in the ISF  of the responsible Investigator for a minimum of two year s 
in accordance with local regulations following notification by [CONTACT_704666] (not merely the Investigators portion) are completed, terminated, or 
discontinued, or that the Food and Drug Administration or the non- U.S regulatory 
authority has approved the submission.   
If the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_1496], relocates, or for other reasons withdraws from the responsibility of keepi[INVESTIGATOR_8090], custody must be transferred to a person who will accept responsibility. Avation Medical or its local sponsor must be notified in writing of the name [CONTACT_1640].  
18.8.  Clinical Monitors  
The name, title, address, phone, and fax number of the Study Monitor should be provided to 
the Investigator and Sponsor and kept in the respective Investigator and Regulatory Binders.  
 
 
 
Page 36 of 38 
 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
  19. Publications  
Investigator agrees, and will ensure that its Agents likewise agree, that neither shall, without Sponsor’s 
prior written consent, independently publish, publicly disclose, present,  or disc uss any results of, or 
information pertaining to, Investigator’s activities conducted under this protocol until such multi- center 
publication is released or twelve months after completion of the Study, whichever is the sooner.  
After the events recited in t he above paragraph of this protocol, the Investigator and/or its Agents shall 
then be free to publish or publicly present the results of the Study Subjects enrolled  solely at Facilities, 
provided that the manuscript or abstract proposed to be published or presented shall be submitted to Sponsor at least ninety (90) days prior to submission for publication or presentation. Sponsor retains 
the right to direct removal of any Confidential Information provided by [CONTACT_704667] a scientifically appropriate description of the methods and 
results of the Study, to protect its rights to any patentable inventions set forth therein and to ensure the 
accuracy of the information contained in the publication or presenta tion. The Investigator agrees, and 
will ensure that its Agents likewise agree, to delete any Confidential Information provided by [CONTACT_704668].  
Sponsor supports the authorship criteria esta blished by [CONTACT_65646] (ICMJE). According to these guidelines, authorship credit is based only on substantial contributions to: (i) conception and design, or acquisition of data, or analysis and interpretation of data; 
(ii) drafting of the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content; and (iii) approving of 
the final version to be published. Neither Investigator nor its Agents qualify to be an author if its contribution consists solely of ar ranging funding, collecting data or supervising the research group. The 
Sponsor reserves the right to assign a co -author to any publication or public presentation.  
 
20. References  
 [1] I. Milsom, P. Abrams, L. Cardozo, R. G. Roberts, J. Thüroff, and A. J. Wein, “How 
widespread are the symptoms of an overactive bladder and how are they managed? A population -based prevalence study,” BJU Int. , vol. 87, no. 9, pp. 760– 766, 2001.  
[2] P. Abra ms, C. J. Kelleher, L. A. Kerr, and R. G. Rogers, “Overactive bladder significantly 
affects quality of life,” Am J Manag Care, vol. 6, no. [ADDRESS_957481], pp. S580– S590, 2000.  
[3] C. R. Chapple et al. , “Total urgency and frequency score as a measure of urgency a nd 
frequency in overactive bladder and storage lower urinary tract symptoms: TUFS as measure of storage symptoms in LUTS and OAB,” BJU Int. , vol. 113, no. 5, pp. 696– 703, 
May 2014. 
[4] S. Herschorn et al. , “A Phase III, Randomized, Double -blind, Parallel- group, Placebo -
controlled, Multicentre Study to Assess the Efficacy and Safety of the β3 Adrenoceptor Agonist, Mirabegron, in Subjects With Symptoms of Overactive Bladder,” Urology , vol. 82, 
no. 2, pp. 313 –320, Aug. 2013.  
[5] M. B. Chancellor, K. Migliaccio -Walle, T. J. Bramley, S. L. Chaudhari, C. Corbell, and D. 
Globe, “Long -Term Patterns of Use and Treatment Failure With Anticholinergic Agents for 
Overactive Bladder,” Clin. Ther. , vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 1744 –1751, Nov. 2013.  
[6] K. M. Peters et al. , “Random ized Trial of Percutaneous Tibial Nerve Stimulation Versus 
Sham Efficacy in the Treatment of Overactive Bladder Syndrome: Results From the SUmiT Trial,” J. Urol. , vol. 183, no. 4, pp. 1438 –1443, Apr. 2010.  
Page 37 of 38 
 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
  [7] Peters K.M. et al. , “Randomized Trial of Percu taneous Tibial Nerve Stimulation Versus 
Extended -Release Tolterodine: Results From the Overactive Bladder Innovative Therapy 
Trial,” J. Urol. , vol. 182, no. 3, pp. 1055 –1061, 2009.  
[8] K. Noblett et al. , “Results of a prospective, multicenter study evaluat ing quality of life, 
safety, and efficacy of sacral neuromodulation at twelve months in subjects with 
symptoms of overactive bladder: 12 Month Outcomes of Sacral Neuromodulation for OAB,” Neurourol. Urodyn. , vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 246– 251, Feb. 2016.  
 
21. Protocol Amendment Summary of Changes  
 
 
  
 
  
Summary of Changes for  
Protocol  Version 1 Dated: 06 JUL 2020 to Version 2 Dated: 07 DEC  2020  
SECTION  DESCRIPTION OF CHANGE  RATIONALE 
GLOBAL 
THROUGHO UT 
DOCUMENT  Formatting changes and other minor 
edits, including changes to references for 
consistency/correction, throughout the 
proto col, without change to meaning or 
substance.  Improve document consistency, 
accuracy, readability, and 
adherence to necessary style.  
TITLE PAGE  Version / Date change.  To reflect the current version  of 
the protocol  
TABLE OF  
CONTENTS  Modified to include addition of Section 8  
Long -Term Follow -Up. To Provide necessary information 
relating to the long -term follow -up 
phase of the AMHOAB2001 trial.  
SECTION 2 – 
Protocol Summary  Structure, Method of Assignment, and 
Study Design  section s updated to include 
information related to the long -term 
follow -up phase  of the AMHOAB2001 
study.  To provide information regarding 
the long -term follo w-up phase of 
the AMHOAB2001 study.  
Section 5 – Study 
Design  Updated to include information related to 
the long -term follow -up phase of the 
AMHOAB2001 study.  To provide information regarding 
the long -term follow -up phase of 
the AMHOAB2001 study  
Section 7 – 
Methods & 
Procedures  Updated to include information related to 
the long -term follow -up phase of the 
AMHOAB2001 study.  To provide information regarding 
the long -term follow -up phase of 
the AMHOAB2001 study  
Section 8 – Long -
Term Follow -Up 
Phase  Section added to provide information 
related to the long -term follow -up phase 
of the AMHOAB2001 study.  To provide information regarding 
the long -term follow -up phase of 
the AMHOAB2001 study  
Section 10 – Test 
Article  Updated pi[INVESTIGATOR_704643] e Stimulator and 
controller app  To reflect latest design of Test 
Article  
Section 21 – 
Protocol 
Amendment 
Summary of 
Changes  Section added to Protocol  To provide information regarding 
changes between Protocol Version 
1.0 and Protocol Version 2.0.  
Page 38 of 38 
 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
  
  
21. Appendix A - Case Report  Forms  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
[This Page is left intentionally blank]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Page 1 of 2  Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
  
 3-Day Bladder Diary  Visit  # 
 
Subject ID:    Subject  Initials:     
 
 
1. Choose 3 days (entire 24 hours) to complete this record - they do not have to be in a row. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_704644].  
2. Begin  recording when  you  wake  up in the morning  and continue  for a full [ADDRESS_957482]  each  time  you  notice  a leak  - please indicate  how much  using  a scale  from 1-3 
(1=drops/damp, 2=wet/soaked, 3=bladder  emptied/voided). Record  if you  felt an "urge"  with  the 
leak  (yes or  no).  
 
 
 
Time of Day  Fluid Intake  
(oz)  Leak Amount  
(1-3) Activity with 
Leak  Urge with Leak  
(yes or no)  Comments  
7:15 am       
7:45 am  2 oz      
9:00 am   2  Yes   
10:[ADDRESS_957483] reviewed the recorded information for this visit and verified that it is complete and accurate.  
SIGNATURE   
3-Day Bladder Diary  Visit #   
Subject  ID:      Subject Initials:  
 
 
Number of Pads for full 24 hours:  
 
 
 
 
 Time of Day  Fluid Intake  
(oz)  Leak Amount  
(1-3) Activity with  
Leak  Urge with Leak  
(yes or no)   
 Comments  
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
Page 1  of 3 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
  
  
OAB -q (HQL) Form - Visit    
 
 
Subject  ID:   Subject  Initials:     
 
This questionnaire asks about how much you have been bothered by [CONTACT_704669] [ADDRESS_957484] 4 weeks, how 
bothered were you by…   
(1)  
(2)  
(3)  
(4)  
(5)  
(6) 
1. Frequent urination during 
day -time hours   
Not at all  
A little bit  Somewhat   
Quite a bit   
A great deal  A very 
great deal  
2. An uncomfortable urge to 
urinate   
Not at all  
A little bit  Somewhat   
Quite a bit   
A great deal  A very 
great deal  
3. A sudden urge to urinate 
with little or no warning   
Not at all  
A little bit  Somewhat   
Quite a bit   
A great deal  A very 
great deal  
4. Accidental loss of small 
amounts of urine   
Not at all  
A little bit  Somewhat   
Quite a bit   
A great deal  A very 
great deal  
 
5. Nighttime urination   
Not at all  
A little bit  Somewhat   
Quite a bit   
A great deal  A very 
great deal  
6. Waking up at night 
because you had to urinate   
Not at all  
A little bit  Somewhat   
Quite a bit   
A great deal  A very 
great deal  
7. An uncontrollable urge to 
urinate   
Not at all  
A little bit  Somewhat   
Quite a bit   
A great deal  A very 
great deal  
8. Urine loss associated with a 
strong desire to urinate   
Not at all  
A little bit  Somewhat   
Quite a bit   
A great deal  A very 
great deal  
This questionnaire asks about how much you have been bothered by [CONTACT_704669] [ADDRESS_957485] your bladder 
symptoms…   
(1)  
(2)  
(3)  
(4)  
(5)  
(6) 
9. Made you carefully plan your 
commute?  None of 
the time  A little of 
the time  Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the time  Most of 
the time  All of 
the time  
10. Caused you to feel drowsy 
or sleepy during the day?  None of 
the time  A little of 
the time  Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the time  Most of 
the time  All of 
the time  
11. Caused you to plan 'escape 
routes’ to restrooms in public 
places?  None of 
the time  A little of 
the time  Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the time  Most of 
the time  All of 
the time  
Page 2  of 3 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
  
  
OAB -q (HQL) Form - Visit    
 
Subject  ID:   Subject  Initials:     
 
 
12.Caused you distress?  None of 
the time  A little of 
the time  Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time  Most of 
the time  All of 
the time  
 
13.Frustrated you?  None of 
the time  A little of 
the time  Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time  Most of 
the time  All of 
the time  
14. Made you feel like there is 
something wrong with you?  None of 
the time  A little of 
the time  Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time  Most of 
the time  All of 
the time  
15. Interfered with your ability 
to get a good night’s rest?  None of 
the time  A little of 
the time  Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time  Most of 
the time  All of 
the time  
16. Caused you to decrease 
your physical activities 
(exercising, sports, etc.) ?  None of 
the time  A little of 
the time  Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time  Most of 
the time  All of 
the time  
17. Prevented you from feeling 
rested upon walking in the 
morning?  None of 
the time  A little of 
the time  Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time  Most of 
the time  All of 
the time  
18.Frustrated your family or 
friends?  None of 
the time  A little of 
the time  Some of 
the time  A good 
bit of the 
time  Most of 
the time  All of 
the time  
 
19. Caused you anxiety or worry?  None of 
the time  A little of 
the time  Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time  Most of 
the time  All of 
the time  
20. Caused you to stay home 
more often than you 
would prefer?  None of 
the time  A little of 
the time  Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time  Most of 
the time  All of 
the time  
21.Caused you to adjust your 
travel plans so that you are 
always near a restroom?  None of 
the time  A little of 
the time  Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time  Most of 
the time  All of 
the time  
[ADDRESS_957486] from restrooms (i.e., 
walks, running, hiking)?  None of 
the time  A little of 
the time  Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time  Most of 
the time  All of 
the time  
23. Made you frustrated or 
annoyed about the amount 
of time you spend in the 
restroom?  None of 
the time   
A little of 
the time   
Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time   
Most of 
the time   
All of 
the time  
 
24. Awakened you during sleep?   
None of 
the time   
A little of 
the time   
Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time   
Most of 
the time   
All of 
the time  
25. Made you worry about odor 
or hygiene?  None of 
the time  A little of 
the time  Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time  Most of 
the time  All of 
the time  
Page 3  of 3 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
  
  
OAB -q (HQL) Form - Visit    
 
Subject  ID:   Subject  Initials:     
 
26. Made you uncomfortable 
while traveling with others 
because of needing to stop for 
a restroom?   
None of 
the time   
A little of 
the time   
Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time   
Most of 
the time   
All of the 
time  
27. Affected your relationships 
with family and friends?   
None of 
the time   
A little of 
the time   
Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time   
Most of 
the time   
All of the 
time  
28. Caused you to decrease 
participating in social 
gatherings, such as parties or 
visits with family or friends?   
None of 
the time   
A little of 
the time   
Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time   
Most of 
the time   
All of the 
time  
 
29. Caused you embarrassment?  None of 
the time  A little of 
the time  Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time  Most of 
the time  All of the 
time  
30. Interfered with getting the 
amount of sleep you 
needed?  None of 
the time  A little of 
the time  Some of the time  A good bit 
of the 
time  Most of 
the time  All of the 
time  
31.Caused you to have 
problems with your 
partner or spouse?   
None of 
the time   
A little of 
the time   
Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time   
Most of 
the time   
All of the 
time  
32.Caused you to plan activities 
more carefully?  None of 
the time  A little of 
the time  Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time  Most of 
the time  All of the 
time  
33.Caused you to locate the 
closes restroom as soon as 
you arrive at a place you 
have never been?   
None of 
the time   
A little of 
the time   
Some of 
the time  A good bit 
of the 
time   
Most of 
the time   
All of the 
time  
2001 Pharmacia & Upjohn, a subsidiary of Pharmacia Corporation. Contact K. Coyne for 
permission to use  
 
 
D D M M M Y Y Y Y 
Date  
 Authorized Signature  
I have reviewed the recorded information for this visit and verified that it is complete and accurate.  
SIGNATURE  
[CONTACT_3490] [ADDRESS_957487]  ID:   Subject  Initials:     
 
Some people find that accidental urine loss may affect their activities, relationships, and feelings. The 
questions below refer to areas in your life that may have been influenced or changed by [CONTACT_704670]. For each question, circle the response that best describes how much your activities, relationships, and feelings are being affected by [CONTACT_704671].  
 
 
Has urine leakage affected your:  Not at 
all  
Slightly   
Moderately   
Greatly   
Subject Score  
1. Ability to do household chores 
(cooking, housecleaning, laundry)?   
0  
1  
2  
3  
 
 
2. Physical recreation such as walking, 
swimming, or other exercise?   
0  
1  
2  
3  
 
 
3. Entertainment activities (movies, 
concerts, etc.)?   
0  
1  
2  
3  
 
 
4. Ability to travel by [CONTACT_322324] 30 minutes from home?   
0  
1  
2  
3  
 
 
5. Participation in social activities 
outside your home?   
0  
1  
2  
3  
 
 
6. Emotional health (nervousness, 
depression, etc.)?   
0  
1  
2  
3  
 
 
7. Feeling  frustrated?  0 1 2 3  
 
 
TOTAL       
 
 
Reference. Uebersax, J.S., Wyman, J. F., Shumaker, S. A., McClish, D. K., Fantl, J. A., & the Continence Program for Women 
Research Group. (1995). Short forms to assess life quality and symptom distress for urinary incontinence in women: The 
incontinence impact questionnaire and the urogenital distress inventory. Neurourology and Urodynamics, 14, [ADDRESS_957488] reviewed the recorded information for this visit and verified that it is complete and accurate.  
SIGNATURE  
[CONTACT_3490] 1 of 1 Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
  
  
PGIC – Visit #   
 
Subject ID:    Subject  Initials:     
 
 
Chief  Complaint:     
Since beginning treatment how would you describe the change (if any) in ACTIVITY LIMITATIONS 
SYMPTOMS, EMOTIONS and OVERALL QUALITY OF LIFE, related to your condition? (tick ONE  box)  
1. No change (or condition has got worse)   
 
2. Almost the same, hardly any change at all   
 
3. A little better, but no noticeable change   
 
4. Somewhat better but the change has not made any real difference   
 
5. Moderately better, and a slight but noticeable change   
 
6. Better, and a definite improvement that has made a real and worthwhile difference   
 
7. A great  deal better  and  a considerable  improvement  that  has made  all the  difference   
 
In a similar way, please circle the number below, that matches your degree of change since beginning 
care at this clinic:  
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
 
 
 
Much  No Much  
Better  Change  Worse  
Reference: Hurst H, Bolton J. Assessing the clinical significance of change scores recorded on subjective outcome 
measures. J Manipulative Physiol Ther 2004;27:[ADDRESS_957489] reviewed the recorded information for this visit and verified that it is complete and accurate.  
SIGNATURE  
[CONTACT_3490] 1 of 2  Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
  
  
I-QoL – Visit #   
 
Subject ID:    Subject  Initials:     
 
ALB Domain  
1. I worry about not being able to get to 
the toilet on time  Extremely  Quite a bit  Moderately  A little  Not at all  
2. I worry about coughing/sneezing 
because of my incontinence  Extremely  Quite a bit  Moderately  A little  Not at all  
3. I have to be careful standing up from 
sitting  Extremely  Quite a bit  Moderately  A little  Not at all  
4. I worry about where toilets are in new 
places  Extremely  Quite a bit  Moderately  A little  Not at all  
5. It’s important to me to make frequent 
trips to the toilet  Extremely  Quite a bit  Moderately  A little  Not at all  
6. It’s important to plan every detail in 
advance because of my incontinence  Extremely  Quite a bit  Moderately  A little  Not at all  
7. I have difficulty getting a good night’s 
sleep because of my incontinence  Extremely  Quite a bit  Moderately  A little  Not at all  
8. I have to watch how much I drink 
because of my incontinence  Extremely  Quite a bit  Moderately  A little  Not at all  
PSI Domain  
9. I feel depressed because of my 
incontinence  Extremely  Quite a bit  Moderately  A little  Not at all  
10. I don’t feel free to leave home for long  
periods of time because of my 
incontinence   
Extremely   
Quite a bit   
Moderately   
A little   
Not at all  
11. I feel frustrated because my  
incontinence prevents me doing what I 
want   
Extremely   
Quite a bit   
Moderately   
A little   
Not at all  
12. My incontinence is always on my mind  Extremely  Quite a bit  Moderately  A little  Not at all  
13. My incontinence makes me feel 
unhealthy  Extremely  Quite a bit  Moderately  A little  Not at all  
14. My incontinence makes me 
feel helpless  Extremely  Quite a bit  Moderately  A little  Not at all  
15. I get less enjoyment out of life because 
of my incontinence  Extremely  Quite a bit  Moderately  A little  Not at all  
16. My incontinence limits my choice 
of clothing  Extremely  Quite a bit  Moderately  A little  Not at all  
17. I worry about having sex because of 
my incontinence  Extremely  Quite a bit  Moderately  A little  Not at all  
Page [ADDRESS_957490] reviewed the recorded information for this visit and verified that it is complete and accurate.  
SIGNATURE   
I-QoL – Visit #   
 
Subject ID:    Subject  Initials:     
 
SE Domain  
18. I worry about others smelling urine 
on me  Extremely  Quite a bit Moderately  A little  Not at all  
19. I worry about my incontinence 
getting worse as I get older  Extremely  Quite a bit  Moderately  A little  Not at all  
20. I worry about being embarrassed or 
humiliated by [CONTACT_704672] a bit  Moderately  A little  Not at all  
21. I worry about wetting myself  Extremely  Quite a bit  Moderately  A little  Not at all  
22. I feel I have no control over my bladder  Extremely  Quite a bit  Moderately  A little  Not at all  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 D  D   M  M M Y Y Y Y 
Page 1  of 2  Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
  
  
OHQ – Visit #   
 
Subject ID:     Subject  Initials:     
 
 
Instructions  
Below are a number of statements about happi[INVESTIGATOR_008]. Please indicate how much you agree or disagree with 
each by [CONTACT_45342] a number in the blank after each statement, according to the following scale:  
 
1 = strongly disagree  2 = moderately disagree  3 = slightly disagree  
4 = slightly agree  5 = moderately agree  6 = strongly agree  
 
Response #  
 
1. I don’t feel particularly pleased with the way I am.   
2. I am intensely interested in other people.   
3. I feel that life is very rewarding.   
4. I have very warm feelings towards almost everyone.   
5. I rarely wake up feeling rested.   
6. I am not particularly optimistic about the future.   
7. I find most things amusing.   
8. I am always committed and involved.   
9. Life is good.   
10. I do not think that the world is a good place.   
11. I laugh a lot.   
12. I am well satisfied about everything in my life.   
13. I don’t think I look attractive.   
14. There is a gap between what I would like to do and what I have done.   
15. I am very happy.   
16. I find beauty in some things.   
17. I always have a cheerful effect on others.   
18. I can fit in (find time for) everything I want to do.   
19. I feel that I am not especially in control of my life   
20. I feel able to take anything on.   
21. I feel mentally alert.   
22. I often experience joy and elation.   
Page 2  of 2  Version 2.0 dated February 15, 2021  
  
  
OHQ – Visit #   
 
Subject ID:    Subject  Initials:     
 
23. I don’t find it easy to make decisions.   
24. I don’t have a particular sense of meaning and purpose in my life.   
25. I feel I have a great deal of energy.   
26. I usually have a good influence on events.   
27. I don’t have fun with other people.   
28. I don’t feel particularly healthy.   
29. I don’t have particularly happy memories of my past.   
 
 
D D M M M Y Y Y Y 
Date  
 Authorized Signature  
I have reviewed the recorded information for this visit and verified that it is complete and accurate.  
SIGNATURE  
[CONTACT_3490] [ADDRESS_957491] ID:     
Subject  Initials:     
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Paresthesia Map  
 
Turn the stimulator to the maximum tolerable level. Mark on the figure below where the Subject feels stimulation.  
 
 
 
R L 
 
 
R L  
Version 2.[ADDRESS_957492] ID:       Subject Initials:    _______  
 
Ask the patient to rate each of the following words from 0 to 4 how well each 
describes the feeling of paresthesia. (0 does not at all describe the feeling ---  4 very 
much describes the feeling)  
 
 Warm  [ADDRESS_957493] ID:       Subject Initials:                   
 
General Information  
1. How likely would you be willing to use  
a system like this for treating your 
OAB?   
Not 
likely   
A little 
likely   
Moderately 
likely   
Very 
likely   
Extremely 
likely  
Please comment on the willingness to use this System to treat OAB:  
2. How easy was it to use the overall 
System?   
Not easy   
A little 
easy   
Moderately 
easy   
Very easy   
Extremely 
easy  
Please comment on the ease of use of the System:  
3. How satisfied were you with the 
Avation System app?   
Not 
satisfied   
A little 
satisfied   
Moderately 
satisfied   
Very 
satisfied   
Extremely 
satisfied  
What in particular did you like about the 
App?   
What, if anything, can be improved 
about the App?   
4. How satisfied were you with the 
Garment?   
Not 
satisfied   
A little 
satisfied   
Moderately 
satisfied   
Very 
satisfied   
Extremely 
satisfied  
What in particular did you like about 
the Garment?   
What, if anything, can be improved 
about the Garment?   
5. How satisfied were you with the system 
overall?   
Not 
satisfied  A little 
satisfied  Moderately 
satisfied  Very 
satisfied  Extremely 
satisfied  
What in particular did you like about the 
system overall?  
What, if anything, can be improved 
about the overall system?   
 
 
 
Version 2.[ADDRESS_957494] ID:       Subject Initials:                              
 
 
General Information  
6. How easy was it to fit this 
stimulation therapy into 
your routine?   
 
Not easy   
 
A little easy   
Moderately  
easy   
 
Very easy   
 
Extremely easy  
Please comment on ease of fitting 
this modulation therapy into your 
routine.   
7. What type of activities were you   
doing when you used this system?  [ ] Reading  
 [ ] Watching TV  
 [ ] On the Computer  
 [ ] Eating  
 [ ] Other:     
8. What positions were you in   
while using the system?  [ ] Sitting  
 [ ] Standing  
 [ ] Lying  
 [ ] Other:     
9. What positions were you in 
most often while using the 
system?  
[ ] Sitting  
[ ] Standing  
 [ ] Lying  
 [ ] Other:     
10. What did you like about the 
stimulation sessions?   
11. What did you dislike about the 
stimulation sessions?   
12. How easy was it to change the 
Gel Pads?   
Not easy   
A little easy   
Moderately 
easy   
Very easy   
Extremely 
easy  
13. Did you use the subject 
manual?  [ ] Yes  
[ ] No  
If yes, why did you use the subject  
manual? Was the information clear 
and easy to locate?   
 
 
 