Project Title: Promoting Cancer Symptom Management in Older Adults  
Grant Number: 1R15NR015851-01  
NT #: NA  
Date of ori ginal submission: 12/11/2019  
Date of update with cover sheet: 08/09/2021  
1 
 A. SPECIFIC AIMS 
This research addresses the critical need to improve symptom self-management of c hemotherapy -induced 
nausea and vomiting (CINV) among older (≥ 65) adults by [CONTACT_12780][INVESTIGATOR_796211] -based Serious 
Game (SG) designed to build CINV self -management skills. Older adults undergoing cancer treatment are at 
high risk for progressive severe effects resulting from nausea and vomiting1-4 such as  fluid and electrolyte 
imbalances, dehydration, muscle weakness, ge neralized fatigue, weight loss, dizziness, altered mental status, 
low blood pressure, changes in cardiac function, falls, and non- adherence with treatment plans.  CINV is among 
the top five  reasons why  patients call the ir doctor w hile under treatment for ca ncer5, 6 and has shown to lead to 
increased use of resources (e.g., u nplann ed emergency department (ED) and /or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_614] ).7  Severe 
CINV -related symptoms occur in up to 80 % of older adults under going chemotherapy  treatment,[ADDRESS_1098355] costs.8, 9 Additionally, q uality of life  (QOL)  and daily functioning are greatly reduced 
with CINV.[ADDRESS_1098356] for treating CINV; 11, 12 however, anti -emetics  are often under -prescribed in the 
elderly3 and, to our knowledge, there is no evidence regarding older adults’ use of anti -emetics or non -
pharmacologic self -management strategies at home  or within structured CINV intervention programs. Because 
of the increased risk for treatment- related toxicity, there is a significant need for e ffective educational strategies 
that assist older adults in making self -management decisions and taking action a gainst  CINV.   
   The Common Sense Model of illness provides a framework explaining how older adults  with cancer make 
decisions regarding symptom self -management. Actions taken are related to  a person’s beliefs (cognitive 
representation) about the identity, cause, time line,  consequences, and ability of the symptom to be controlled 
or cured.13, 14 Older people are able  to identify a symptom  and attribute it to cancer ;15, 16 however, barriers to 
taking action to self -manage symptoms include beliefs about symptom consequences17 and the symptom ’s 
ability to be controlled or cured . Our intervention addresses these barriers to self -managing symptoms  by 
[CONTACT_796237] a simulated gaming experience , where a n avatar experiences  positive or 
negative outcomes , based on the player’s symptom self -manag ement decisions.  Our preliminary data suggests 
that such an intervention is needed , feasible, and acceptable to older adults in order to mitigate the challenges 
of self -managing symptoms of cancer treatment .  This project is planned in two phases: Phase I will consist of 
the design and development of an interactive avatar -based Serious Game  that will engage and prepare older 
adults to make CINV self -care  decisions.  Phase II will be a two-arm, randomized clinical trial comparing the 
newly developed simulat ion system, electronic Symptom Self-Management Training - CINV (eSSET -CINV) 
with attention control.  Once shown to be effective, this novel educational strategy can be widely disse minated 
for use at the bedside  and be adapted to educate older adults on self -management strategies for o ther cancer -
related symptoms with negative outcomes .  
Research AIMS are:  
Phase I: Game prototype and production 
1. Identify real-life scenarios involving CINV incidence, self-management, and consequences using a 
peer Community Advisory Board  of older adults who have undergone cancer treatment, their family 
members, and oncology nurses to design and develop a serious game for CINV self -care decision 
making . 
2. Identify design aspects and elements of eSSET -CINV game play, audio, and visual avatar 
development that have the greatest appeal for older adults with cancer.  
Phase II: Game prototype testing  
1. Estimate  effect size of the eSSET -CINV  in changing patient outcomes: cognitive r epresentation,  self-
management behaviors , CINV severity , QOL, and resource use . 
2. Examine differences in  cognitive representation,  self-management behaviors , CINV severity , QOL, 
and resource use between, and within, the intervention and attention control groups.  
3. Obtain preliminary data regarding the feasibility and acceptability of the game in older adults 
experiencing CINV . 
This study builds on the investigators’  prior work in older adults ’ cancer symptom experience and gaming.15, 16, 
18-[ADDRESS_1098357]  on the self -management choices 
related to CINV . Participants will use knowledge gained during game play to manage their own care resulting 
observable changes in outcomes: cognitive representation,  self-management behaviors , CINV severity , QOL, 
and resource use . 
 
2 
 RESEARCH STRATEGY 
B. SIGNIFICANCE  
Adults  ages 65 and older represent 13.3% (41.4 million people) of our population.22 By 2040, older adults will 
represent 21% of the population .22  However, older adults account for the majority of cancer diagnoses.23  With 
an increas ing older population, the number of older adults with cancer will also increase , taxi ng limited 
healthcare resources. Th ese factors make  managing cancer in older adults a  healthcare  priority .24, 25 
Complications from cancer treatment are more common in older adults with cancer compared to younger 
adults .26  Aging and associated limitations in organ systems that prolong plasma levels of chemotherapy ( e.g., 
renal, gastrointestinal, and liver dysfunction1, 27, 28) and increase risk of treatment -related toxicity and poor 
outcomes in older adults include  co-morbidity, poly -pharmacy, functional and physical limitations, nutrition, 
emotion al status, and social support (caregiver).1, [ADDRESS_1098358]  CINV that are rooted  in their beliefs 
about th at symptom .   
   The significance of the proposed intervention lies in its ability to allow older adults to visualize the 
consequences of self -management decisions  and reframe cognitive representation.  It can result in improved 
control of CINV.   This intervention educates  older adults to more effectively self -manage symptoms at home , 
optimiz ing quality of life. eSSET -CINV  is poised to reduce healthcare costs by [CONTACT_796238] 
(unplanned ED or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_103978] ) for CINV due to poor  symptom  management . 
  Conceptual Framework  for Intervention Development and Testing  
Phase I : Game prototype and production.  Phase I  will consist of the design, development , and 
production of the serious game : eSSET -CINV .  Game design will be guided by [CONTACT_796239] a user -centered approach  that involves the older cancer patient  at all stages of development to ensure ease 
of use and value to the  player  (patient) .29, [ADDRESS_1098359] widely used theory 
for game design31 and can provide behavior change as a result from enhancing skills and confidence in using 
the new behavior while receiving feedback about these new skills. By [CONTACT_796240] -management strategies related to CINV early in the treatment trajec tory, the risk for negative 
sequela and unnecessary costs associated with unplanned hospi[INVESTIGATOR_796212].   
   Our proposed eSSET -CINV intervention will use  an electronic format ( study -provided tablet or laptop 
computer) to  deliver a game that promote s cognitive reframing of CINV and effective self- management .  Five 
older adults  who have undergone cancer treatment with emetogenic chemotherapy , three family caregiver s, 
and two oncology nurses who have experience managing CINV will be involved as co -designers  (Community 
Advisory Board  [CAB] ) as the game is developed and refined.   The CAB will be convened at the start of the 
study and will assist the principal investigator ( PI) in developi[INVESTIGATOR_796213] -life CINV scenario s to be used in 
eSSET:CINV. Focus groups will allow the CAB to discuss their experiences with CINV.  These experiences will provide the foundation for CINV scenarios for the game.  Subsequent focus groups will validate scenarios, provide feedback to game de signers,  and allow for game testing  
Phase II : Game prototype testing . Phase II  is guided by  a representational approach to educational 
interventions and grounded in the Common Sense Model of Illness (CSM) which assert s that illness- related 
beliefs frame ho w older adults make decisions about self-management of illness and treatment- related 
symptoms.35  Action is related to  a person’s b eliefs (cognitive representation) about the identity, cause, 
time line, consequences, and ability of the symptom to be controlled or cured.13, [ADDRESS_1098360] representations can lead to 
consequences such as delays i n seeking care and/or non- adherence to prescri bed or recommended 
treatments.13, 35, 36 Beliefs about consequences are im portant predictors of self -management.36 Older adults’ 
beliefs regarding their ability to cure or control a symptom  also determine the likelihood of self - management .[ADDRESS_1098361] cancer survivors38 and the elderly with symptoms related to myocardial infarcti on.39  Many 
older people interpret symptoms as part of aging, leading them to delay seeking treatment.35  Adults of all ages  
may normalize symptoms and subsequently minim ize the significance of their symptoms on their health, 
leading to delays in treatment.40  Further, cancer patients wo rry more over symptoms that indicate worsening 
disease, compared to symptoms that they interpret as a sign that chemotherapy is working to kill the cancer.41  
Other reasons for delayed treatment in the elderly include being uncertain about the symptom ’s severity or 
seriousness and beli eving  that treatment or management is not possible.39 Interventions that specifically 
address people’s illness or symptom representations may be able to alter their response to illness.36 
   A representational approach : 1) assesses a person’s illness or symptom representation  (beliefs), 2)  seeks to 
restructure existing representations, and 3)  elicit s a conceptual change  in which learning can occur.42, [ADDRESS_1098362] old misperceptions, and new goals and 
strategies are set.43   The representational approach has been successful in improving outcomes related to 
cancer pain,43 end-of-life communication,44 end stage renal disease, and symptom distress.45  It is also being 
tested online to help women with recurrent ovarian cancer  manage symptoms.43    
   As shown i n the overall study model ( Figure  1), older adults begin treatment for cancer with a preconceived 
cognitive representation about  chemotherapy treatment -related symptoms.  T he eSSET -CINV intervention is 
designed to restructure  the older adult’s  known erroneous  representations and introduce new information 
regarding the efficacy of using self- management strategies for CINV.  We propose that “a pi[INVESTIGATOR_796214] a 
thousand words” and images are more powerful than the written word .  In the proposed approach, visualizing 
CINV consequences  (positive and negative)  experienced by [CONTACT_796241] a result of symptom 
management decisions , coupled with discussion with a nurse, will help the older adult reframe his or her 
cognitive representation, set new goals, prompt use of self -manage ment strategies for CINV , and improve 
outcomes .  We hypothesize that through the eSSET -CINV  intervention, older adults undergoing treatment with 
emetogenic chemotherapy who reframe their CINV cognitive representation will engage in more effective 
symptom self -management behaviors , resulti ng in decreased CINV severity, increased QOL, and decreased 
resource use.  
Figure 1: Overall Study Model : Representational Framework  
 
Background  
Approximately 63% of all cancers are diagnosed in people age [ADDRESS_1098363] one co -morbid condition ( e.g. arthritis, heart disease, diabetes).47 Older p eople with a history of  
cancer report more comorbid conditions compared to people without cancer (7 versus 5, respectively) ; however 
symptoms related to comorbid  conditions are not unique to people with cancer.48  While c ancer treatment 
often results in a myriad of treatment -related symptoms, symptoms may be more related to comorbid illnesses 
instead of cancer  and its treatment.48 In addition, symptoms from comorbid conditions may be present at 
diagnosis , making the onset of some cancer treatment -related symptoms difficult to discern ( e.g., fatigue, 
bowel disturbances, sleep disturbances, pain).   
  Nausea is a frequent , readily identifiable  side effect of cancer treatment.   Up to 64% of adults being treated 
for cancer  report delayed nausea , and 33% report acute nausea .[ADDRESS_1098364]  (see Figure 2) ,11, 12, [ADDRESS_1098365] examined the effectiveness of any CINV self -
management strategy in older adults. Only one intervention study for CINV was found that included the elderly 
as a specific group(n=23); this study demonstrated that palonosetron -a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist, plus 
dexamethasone is safe and effective at reducing moderate acute and delayed CINV in this population.2  This 
study will address these gaps by [CONTACT_796242] a n interactive intervention for CINV (eSSET -CINV) 

4 
 in older cancer patients to reinforce the use of self -management strategies based on clinical guidelines and 
recommendations .  
Self -management of CINV in older adults i s unknown  
Printed patient education material for CINV based on the treatment and 
prevention guidelines  are routinely provided to new patients and their family 
members so they can self -manage CINV at home. No studies  were found that 
examined older adults’  use of CINV self -management strategies based on these 
guidelines.  Studies have reported that adults (age 18  and older) in China 
experienced an average of 14 treatment -related symptoms and used 16 to 21 
self-management strategies per week.50  Another study from China reported 
that cancer patients used an average of 8.56 strategies for managing CINV and 
reported low to moderate relief. Strategies used by [CONTACT_796243] 
(e.g., small frequen t meals) and environmental (e.g.,  avoid smells) 
modification, psychological strategies ( e.g., relaxation), acupuncture/pressure, 
and taking anti -emetics.   
   Patients who experienced more severe or prolonged CINV engaged in more types self-management behaviors.  
However, timing (preventive versus active management ) of the self -management behavior s was unknown. 
Patients treated in an outpatient setting reported using fewer self -management behaviors than those treated in 
inpatient setting s.  Regarding  CINV relief, those with delayed CINV or greater symptom distress reported less 
relief51 indicating the more severe the CINV, the less likely it is to be relieve d. Because there are no studies that 
specifically focus  on the older cancer patient with either acute or prolonged CINV, one goal of the proposed 
intervention is to help older adults identify and manage CINV in the early  stages  to reduce negative 
consequences . 
   In related symptom and self -management literature, studies show that other cancer treatment- related 
symptoms (fatigue, chemotherapy -induced peripheral neuropathy) are generall y accepted or perceived as 
inevitable . Most adults modify their activities to reduce the impact of symptoms rather than actively engag e in 
self-management behaviors.52-[ADDRESS_1098366] (i.e. , effect size) of those strategies in 
managing or reducing CINV.  
Symptoms  and  QOL in older adults  with cancer are related  
The literature related to CINV  and QOL in older adults is extremely limited  and unclear .  One study reported 
significant declines in QOL and functioning in adults (mean age 56 years) with both acute and delayed CINV over [ADDRESS_1098367] teaching strategies for educating older adults apply to written material ( e.g., using large 
print, lower reading levels)62, 64, 65 these  strategies can be applied to nove l methods of education , such as 
Common Recommended 
CINV Interventions
Pharmacologic : Antiemetic therapy as 
prescribed by [CONTACT_796244] -Pharmacologic : 
Nutritio n : Eat- dry food , small meals , bland 
and easy to digest foods . Sit up after eating . 
Avoid cooking odors , spi[INVESTIGATOR_796215] .  
Hydration : 8 to 12 cups of liquid per day .  
Drink even if not thirsty .  Include liquids like 
soup , ice pops , flavored ices , gelatin .  Limit 
caffeine products
Complementary: Relaxation , yoga , 
behavioral therapy (distraction , 
meditation ), guided imagery , controlled 
breathing , environmental changes , 
acupuncture /acupressure
5 
 technology -based programs.  Effective educational strategies for older adults focus on  “must know” concepts62 
such as self -care activities.  In addition, practicing new skills is essential62, [ADDRESS_1098368] to introduce  and reinforce  new information and learning .  The use of story telling 
by [CONTACT_796245]’s own experiences as a learning tool , or introducing new stories is also an effective 
means of promot ing learning  in elders .[ADDRESS_1098369] more effective strategies.  The proposed 
intervention will improve learning by [CONTACT_2359] a “story” about a character experiencing CINV that older 
adults can relate to and then transfer knowledg e gained  from the intervention  into their own lives .  Images of 
positive and negative consequences (termed “after -imaging ”60) related to CINV symptom management may 
be retained by [CONTACT_796246] t o manage their own symptoms.   
Serious Game education in older adults ha s potential to improve learning  
Serious gaming has been used mostly in children and adolescents  with diabetes68-70 and depression ,71 adults 
with chronic pain ,72 and for various topi[INVESTIGATOR_796216]’s health ,73 
surgical skills ,74 disaster preparedness75 and surrogate decision making .20 New applications in older adults 
include interventions involving “exergaming” for balance in resident s of assisted living facilities.  Exergaming 
has shown to be safe and potentially effective at encouraging physical activity using the Wii Fit game system.72, 
76-[ADDRESS_1098370] addresses NIH  research priorities by [CONTACT_796247]-management through health behavio rs and improved health 
outcomes in an understudied population.  This approach departs from traditional methods of education 
(passive receipt of information)  because  our game uses simulation and gaming technology to engage older 
adults in active learning (game playing) instead of passive learning (traditional printed patient education material) to improve CINV self -management at home.  Our methodology eschews a  “one size fits all” approach 
common to standard adult patient education and is expected to dynamically challenge older adults ’ core 
representations about controlling symptoms.  The intervention  targets known barriers to symptom self -
management (cognitive representation related to symptom consequence, and cure/control) in older adults 
and seeks to change these representations and promote self -management behaviors.  This game  allows older 
adults  to learn by [CONTACT_796248] s and using new knowledge to practic e making self -
management decisions in a safe environment before  they attempt to manage CINV at home .  In contrast to 
interventions that are developed by [CONTACT_796249], our 
method of game development involves a Community Advisory Board (CAB) that included older adults  with 
cancer who have undergone treatment with emetogenic chemotherapy , family members and oncology nurses 
who hav e had experience with treatment -related side effects such as CINV. The CAB is crucial to developi[INVESTIGATOR_796217], relatable, practical and salient for their peers.   
Finally, this study seeks to address the numerous gaps in the literature regarding older adults, CINV, 
cognitive representation, and self -management behaviors.  If the eSSET -CINV intervention is shown to be  
effective in this population, the intervention can  be easily adapted to educate older adults about self -managing 
other treatment- related symptoms (e.g., fatigue, sleep disturbances) .   
C. APPROACH : 
Team :  
[CONTACT_796271]  (VL, PI) is an Oncology Certified Nurse with over [ADDRESS_1098371] (R01) and the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_796218] . [CONTACT_796272] 
6 
 has a long -standing history with the UF Health Cancer Center - Orlando  at Orlando Health and has excellent 
experience in recruiting and retaining older adults in research . Her  qualitative  and descriptive  quantita tive 
research focusing on  older cancer survivors and adults with cancer, symptom experience , and cognitive 
representation provide foundation  for this study.  She is a new investigator to NIH;  however, she has extensive 
research administration experience to lead this team.  In addition, Co-I Clochesy and consultant Given  will also 
provide support to the PI . 
[CONTACT_4932] M. Clochesy  (JC, Co-I) is an expert in developi[INVESTIGATOR_796219] t populations with over [ADDRESS_1098372] improved outcomes by 
[CONTACT_796250] -based avatars to promote se lf-efficacy in self- management of 
healthcare providers from medically and socially disenfranchised groups  (eSMART -HD) and  reducing 
depressive symptoms in young adults (eSMART -MH). A current study focuses on avatar- based decision 
support for surrogate decision makers (eSMARTT). Clochesy has also served as a mentor to several rese archers 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_796220]. Loerzel and Clo chesy are well known to each other through 
alumni events with Case Western Reserve University and through conference meetings and reside in the same 
region, permitting them to work closely in the execution of this project . 
[CONTACT_796273]  (BG, Consultant) is an expert in older people with cancer , cancer symptom management, 
and cancer intervention research with over 30 years of intervention research for symptom management and 
funding from the National Institutes of Health.  Her current intervention research is using  technology 
(eCancer - A technological approach to symptom management from home to practice; Text messaging to 
improve adherence to oral chemotherapy agents ) to help patients receiving chemotherapy self -manage the 
severity of their symptoms at home so they can continue to adhere to medications.   Given has served as a 
mentor to numerous researchers in oncology for a  variety of topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102].  Given and Loerzel are known to each other 
through common research interests and the development of this project.  
[CONTACT_796274]  (XY)  will work as Biostatistician for statistical design, analysis and interpretations of results.  [CONTACT_796275] has 20 years of experience in design and analysis of more than 70 clinical trials (Phase I through Phase IV) 
in various therapeutic areas.  He has been PI [INVESTIGATOR_796221] -PI [INVESTIGATOR_796222].   Loerzel and Yan have worked closely together 
during the development of this proposal.  
[CONTACT_796276]  (PG)  is an Advanced Oncology C linical  Nurs e Specialist  at the UF Health Cancer Center - 
Orlando , has  over 28 years of clinical oncology experience and is a doctoral student at the UCF College of 
Nursing.  Geddie has expertise in the symptom experience of older adults undergoing treatment for cancer.  
She has extensive experience recruiting and retaining older adults for research. She will be the study’s research 
nurse and have primary responsibility for recruitment, enrollment , data collection  and intervention delivery.  
Loerzel and Geddie are well known to each other through the Central [LOCATION_012] ONS Chapte r, previous working 
relationship , and partnership on several pi[INVESTIGATOR_796223].  
Our team will be supported by [CONTACT_796251]  (ES, Co -I) of E2i Creative Studios (E2i) , a media lab within 
the University  of Central [LOCATION_012]’s Institute for Simulation and Training (IST).  E2i has created several avatar -
based training systems in partnership with nursing (DRAMA- RAMA83) and has  collaborated with Loerzel in 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_796224].  
Nursing students  will be an integral part of the  team and will be active  research assistants (RAs) throughout  
this study. All students will receive training in research  and will be required to undergo CITI training as 
required by [CONTACT_796252].  All students will be educated on  cancer chemotherapy side 
effects and self -management behaviors prior to working with research subjects.  In phase I, student s will be 
trained to participate in focus groups (e.g., note taking), analyze focus group data ( e.g., review transcripts, 
code , and develop themes), and pre-test the eSETT:CINV game.  In phase II, students  will be trained in the 
following: 1) data base setup, data entry , and cleaning; 2) conduct follow -up phone calls and data collection; 
and 3) develop a questionnaire to elicit feedback about the games appeal and usability .  Pre -nursing students, 
undergraduate Honors in the Major  students,  and graduate stud ents have a strong record of research within 
our college with many students conducting their own research or working on faculty projects.  Students  
engaged in this project will be exposed to cutting -edge technology and patient education  and have  
opportunit ies to publish and present their work related to this project at university, local , and regional research 
conferences.   This project will provide a research foundation that they can use for their own research careers.  
 
 
7 
 Preliminary Studies : 
Symptom experience and c ognitive misperceptions :  [CONTACT_796272]  (PI) initially investigat ed QOL  and the 
symptom experience of older breast cancer survivors and found  that older breast cancer survivors experienced 
high QOL while experiencing treatment -related  symptoms.18, 38, 84 These women accepted symptoms as “part of 
life,”  a belief that prompted their decision to not manage current symptoms.[ADDRESS_1098373] cancer survivors “pushed” cancer into the 
background using a process involving: expecting illness with aging, keepi[INVESTIGATOR_796225], and sensing 
a partnersh ip in the fight against breast cancer. Again, women minimized their experience with breast cancer , 
choosing to focus on the positive aspects of their recovery, not lingering treatment- related symptoms.  While 
symptoms were present, older women rarely volun teered their experience with symptoms.[ADDRESS_1098374] cancer survivors (N=9) within a year of completing treatment reported  an average of 6 (range 3 -9) 
cancer treatment -related symptoms. The most common long -term symptoms were sleep disturbances, pain 
and fatigue.  Contrary to prior studies17, this study  identified cognitive misperceptions in symptom cause, 
consequence, and ability to contr ol/cure the symptom.85   In another pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] , older  adults  (n=43)  under 
treatment for cancer reported an average of 7 (range 2 -13) symptoms. Twenty -five percent reported CINV  as 
one of the most bothersome symptoms with a mean symptom severity rating of 6.8 on a 0 to 10 scale. This 
study again  identified cognitive  misperceptions in symptom consequence and ability to control/cure 
symptoms.86  In addition, there was  poor self - management of CINV with only 33.3% of older adults actively 
managing it with medication .  Medication was rated  moderate ly effective at managing CINV.87  In summary, 
these studies indicate that older adults with  cancer experience multiple treatment -related symptoms 
throughout the cancer treatment trajectory . Older adults do little to manage symptoms (including CINV) due 
to cognitive misperceptions related to symptom consequences and ability to be controlled/cured . 
Current standard education is overwhelming, technology accepted by [CONTACT_21140] : Currently, [CONTACT_796277], [CONTACT_796278], and [CONTACT_688584] collaborate on a study using qualitative focus groups to evaluate current 
education strategies for older adults and explore new approaches  for educating older adults with cancer .  
Preliminary d ata suggest that older adults consider standard symptom patient education : 1) overwhelm ing; 2) 
difficult to prioritize; and 3) challenging t0  apply to their own care.   Older adults  value engaging others in 
conversation (peers and MD) and learning from other patients experiences . This  current study  and prior 
studies  indicate  that most older adults use technology , including playing electronic games ( e.g., Words with 
Friends, Solitaire, Candy Crush)  on a daily basis and are receptive  to new technology based educational 
interventions  above and beyond typi[INVESTIGATOR_796226] .[ADDRESS_1098375]. Clochesy  (eSMART -HD20; eSMART -MH19) and  [CONTACT_688584] (DRAMA -RAMA83) will lead the 
team in developi[INVESTIGATOR_796227].  The 
CINV game scenario s will be developed in partnership with the CAB.  Educational and CINV self -management 
content for the scenario s will be created by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Loerzel and [CONTACT_796278]  using common recommended CINV 
interventions (Figure 2) .11, 12  
   In summary, t hese multiple preliminary studies  and experiences  informed  our decision to focus on  
developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a technology -based  intervention to help older adults restructure existing cognitive 
representations and promote a conceptual change in which learning can occur. This intervention will 
introduce new information about CIN Vs ability to be man aged (cured/controlled) at home by [CONTACT_796253] (positive and negative) of using CINV self -care strategies.    
Research Design and Methods  
Design: This project incorporates qualitative and quantitative research designs.  Phase I consists of three  
focus groups with the CAB who have personal and professional experience with CINV and can identify realistic 
scenarios and educational content to build  the game.  Phase II  is a two -arm randomized trial to e stablish  effect 
size of the intervention.   Nursing students, as research assistants (RAs) , will be involved in both phases of this 
study.  
8 
 Phas e I: Game design and production:  The goal of phase I in this proposed research is to design and 
develop a serious game that offers older adults practical skills to reframe cognitive representation of CINV, 
reduce  CINV severity, enhance CINV self -management behaviors, reduce healthcare resource use, and improve 
overall QOL . This game will put the user in the center of the action and focus on a specific outcome.[ADDRESS_1098376]  motivation to self -manage CINV.33  Phase I will be guided by a fo rmative evaluation (FE) process88 
using a Community Advisory Board (CAB) and principles  of serious game design  (Figure 3).31, 32, 68, [ADDRESS_1098377]’s status, talk about changes, observe and capture feedback 
during play testing of the emerging le arning scenario, and receive 
objective feedback from the CAB as to the project’s progress. M embers of 
the CAB will participate in 3 focus groups.  Focus Group  1: Participants 
will be asked to describe their personal and professional experiences 
(incidence, self-management, perceived and actual consequences) with 
CINV in order to begin bui lding realistic game scenarios.  In addition, 
standard  CINV interventions11 such as taking antiemetic’s, eating small 
frequent meals , and staying hydrated ( Figure 2) will be used to guide the 
emerging scenario s and self -management choices made by [CONTACT_796254]. F ocus Group  2: Participants 
will validate themes from the first focus group  and provide  feedback on 
game scenario context related to CINV, character development, reality of the setting, scripts, self -management 
choices and subsequent outcomes.   Focus Group 3: Participants will  pre-test the game and provide  feedback on 
game consistency, usefulness, likelihood  of changing symptom representation related to CINVs ability to be 
cured/controlled, engagement, entertainment factor, and potential “dose” of the intervention .   
   All focus groups will be digitally audiotaped,  transcribe d verbatim , and uploaded into Hyper RESEARCH™  
software for content analysis . Under the guidance of the PI,  student RAs will take notes during the focus groups 
and be involved in data analysis and game pre -testing.  The focus groups will be held at the E2i lab in the UCF 
Institute for Simulation and Training.  
Phase I outcomes : The primary outcome of this phase is the development of an  interactive dialogue system  
that allow s older adults to progress through a serious game  through  interacting with characters inside the 
game. The main form of participant interaction is making dialogue decisions at specific times in a serious 
game. When a virtual character is asked a question, the participants can pi[INVESTIGATOR_796228]. This function behaves much like the popular “choose your own adventure” books where readers 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_796229] a story progresses. Interactive dialogue systems allow for the p articipant to follow 
an intended story, while still making decisions of how the story unfolds. Another benefit of this approach  is that 
the participant can engage in the serious game multiple times and explore varying story arcs. The main design 
priority i s planning for all possible paths in the experience  (scenarios) . For this project , we propose to have an 
“either/or” approach to the types of decisions participants can make in the game, thus witnessing the effect of 
their choice.   For example, the avatar will show early signs of CINV  (e.g., mild queasiness, not wanting to eat or 
drink).  The decisions a player  could make  include: 1) no management (wait it out) , 2) self-manage with 
prescribed  medication, or 3) self-manage with distraction techniques .  Once the player makes a choice, the 
avatar will show the consequences of their decision ( e.g., progressive nausea leading to vomiting, controlled 
nausea and being able to do normal activities , or persistent mild nausea ). The player will be led  through 
progressive scenarios based on their decisions and asked to make self -management choices at different time 
points until the avatars CINV is either controlled or a serious effect such as dehydration and/or fall at home leads to an unplanned ED or h ospi[INVESTIGATOR_063].  
Recruitment of CAB :  Sampling will be purposive. The CAB will consist of [ADDRESS_1098378] extent possible, 
all CAB members will be present at each focus group.  CAB members  will provide input for scenarios  
(incidence, self-management, perceived and actual consequences)  based on their experiences  with CINV . Older 
adults will be recruited from a pool of approximately 1 09 participants from the PIs prior research studies who  
agreed to be contact[CONTACT_361222].   
   Names will be randomly drawn from this pool; an invitation to participate will be mailed in bat ches of 10 
• Knowledge sets stage for behavioral 
change
• Practicing skills leads to self -mastery
• Modeling is an effective way to learn new skills
• Tailored games facilitate character identification
• Game must be entertaining
9 
 until target numbers are reached.  Nurses will be recruited from  the UF Health Cancer Center -Orlando 
chemotherapy treatment center. Retention will be enhanced by [CONTACT_14659] a $50 stipend/gift card to the CAB 
members  for each focus group they parti cipate in.  Informed consent and participant characteristics ( e.g., age, 
gender, race, educational level, CINV experience) information will be collected from all CAB members.  
Phase II  - Game prototype testing   
Phase II will use  a prospective 2-group  randomized , longitudinal  design  to evaluate  effect size of the 
intervention, examine group differences  and evaluate game appeal.   Patients who meet the inclusion criteria  
will be randomly assigned into the intervention group or control group at a 1:1 ratio. All participants will be 
followed for four chemotherapy cycles (approximately 4 months ).   
Setting : The outpatient treatment center at the UF Health Cancer Center -Orlando  will be the primary site for 
enrollment  due to its  long -standing relationship  with these researchers.  In 2013, UF Health Cancer Center -
Orlando  saw approximately 4,694 patients . Of these  2,573  patients were age 65 or older , and 565 of these 
patients received outpatient chemotherapy. These numbers indicat e an ample sampling  pool  of older adults .    
Sample  size : The target sample is older adults r eceiving  emetogen ic chemotherapy for the first time . Sixty -six 
participants will be enrolled if they meet the following inclusion criteria : age 65 and older,  newly diagnosed 
with any cancer, treatment with any chemotherap eutic agent with a moderate to severe emetic potential  (on a 
3- or 4- week cycle) , proficient in E nglish, and have a telephone.  Exclusion criteria  include : previous 
diagnosis and treatment for cancer, advanced or end stage disease with a palliative intent, visually or hearing 
impaired .  Dementia or cognitive impairment is not a concern with the population since they have already been 
cognitively screen ed in order to consent to treatment at this cancer center. There will be no exclusion based on 
gender or racial/ethnic status.  Retention of all participants will be enhanced by [CONTACT_796255] 1) 
weekly telephone f ollow -up phone calls by [CONTACT_21118]; 2) a $50 incentive/gift card  at the end of the study period ; 
and 3) attention c ontrol group offered eSS ET-CINV at the end of the study.  We will oversample by 20%  in 
order to account for attrition.  
Phase II Procedures:  
Recruitment and randomization:  Successful recruitment and retention strategies previously established 
by [CONTACT_796256] .7, 15, 16, 18, 90 Convenience sampling , followed by [CONTACT_796257]. All new patients will be screened for eligibility by [CONTACT_202172]  (RN -PG) using  the Sunrise XA -
electronic medical record  
system used by [CONTACT_796258].  Eligible patients 
will be approached by [CONTACT_796259].  This timing is 
not expected to add to or create patient anxiety .  
Patients usually wait [ADDRESS_1098379] of treatment.  Written informed 
consent  will be obtained in a private area of the clinic  open to the RN .  A signed copy of the consent will be 
given to the patient. Once informed consent is obtained, baseline measures will be completed , and participants 
will be randomized (Intervention Group [IG] and Attention C ontrol Group [ ACG])  to either group by [CONTACT_796260] a group assignment .  
   Participants in each group will receive standard care : 1) on admission  to the cancer center ( receipt  of 
standard written  educat ional materials that patients are instructed to bring to each appointment), 2 ) at a 
treatment planning visit  (receipt of specific handouts regarding treatment and potential side effects,  and 3) at 
time of treatment  (verbal  review of chemotherapy and symptom handouts by [CONTACT_796261]) . See 
Table [ADDRESS_1098380] education and eSSET -CINV intervention.  
 Table 1: Intervention schema  
 Pre-treatment  First Treatment Visit  Post -
treatment  
Standard 
written 
patient 
education at 
admission 
to cancer 
center  Standard 
written 
patient 
education at 
treatment 
planning 
visit 
ENROLL/  
RANDOMIZE  
 eSSET -CINV 
Intervention:  
1) Game  
2) Decision 
discussion 
with 
research 
nurse  Standard 
review of 
written 
patient 
education 
on side 
effects  Follow -up 
phone call  
All 
subjects  x x IG x x x 
ACG   x x 
Note: IG= Intervention Group, ACG=Attention Control Group  
10 
 Study Variables  
Independent variable: Intervention versus Attention Control group  
1) Intervention Group  
 The intervention  will consist of two parts: 1) the  eSSET -CINV  game and 2) decision discussion with research 
nurse  (RN) . The game will be administered by [CONTACT_101035]. Participants will play the game  at the outpatient 
treatment center prior to their first chemotherapy treatment using  either a study -provided laptop or  smart 
table t using headphones to ensure privacy and limit distraction.  Please see Table [ADDRESS_1098381] changes  or discuss possible outcomes based on different  
choices. For example, if the player chose not to treat the avatar’s mild nausea and vomiting  occurred , the R N 
would discuss more effective self -management choices  as outlined in Figure 3.  
   The player s will be allowed to play the game as many times as 
they choose  during that chemotherapy visit in order to practice 
making decisions and visualizing consequences and outcomes . 
Once the p articipant  is discharged home , a student RA , blinded 
to the treatment g roup, will call participants weekly to see how 
they are doing and remind them to record self -management 
data. To reduce bias, a scripte d interview form will be used. 
Student RAs will instruct the participant to follow cancer center 
procedures and call thei r oncologist  if they are having problems 
or have questions.  
Intervention fidelity.   eSSET -CINV will be presented and 
delivered by [CONTACT_796262] . The RN will base the 
discussion on common self -management options (Figure 3).  
Minor  interruptions ( < 10 minutes)  to game play will be 
recorded and participan ts will resume game play where they 
left off.  Technology malfunctions ( e.g,. system crash or froz en screen) will be recorded and participants will be 
asked to start eSSET -CINV over.  For players with caregivers, caregiver involvement ( e.g., helpi[INVESTIGATOR_007], prompting) 
in the game will be recorded for subgroup analysis.   
2) Attention Control Group  
Participants in  the control group will receive:  1) standard care ; 2) follow -up phone call s from the student RAs 
to remind them to  record self -management data; and 3) the opportunity to play eSSET:CINV a t the end of the 
study period. During the follow -up phone calls, t he student RAs will instruct the participant to  follow cancer 
center procedures and call thei r oncologist  if they are ha ving problems or have questions.  Contamination 
between groups  is not expected since participants are likely scheduled for chemot herapy  at different times and 
receiving treatment in different areas of the treatment center.   
Co-variates  
Participant characteristics : Demographic and experientia l characteristics that may influence CINV and 
ability to self -manage this symptom  will be measured at T1 (baseline ). Demographics  include: age, gender, 
comorbidity information , education level, and income level . Experiential  characteristics include:  cancer 
diagnosis and stage , chemo therapy  regimen with antiemetic s, discharge antiemetic prescriptions, use of the 
Internet to research symptom management information, and caregiver presence (yes/no)  and involvement  at 
home. All cancer information will be collected from the pat ient’s electronic medical record by [CONTACT_101035]. Delays in 
chemotherapy treatment and rationale for delay will also be recorded  at each time point  by [CONTACT_101035] . 
Dependent Variables  
An overview of study variables, measures and data collec tion time line are presented in T able 3. Data will be 
collected for 4 treatment cycles (3 or 4 months depending on cycle length).  Questionnaires will use a 
paper/pencil format with enlarged font and be entered into Excel™ software.  
1) Symptom severity :  The Symptom Re presentation Questionnaire (SRQ)91 , a 24 -item self -report 
measure will be used to identify presence and severity of common treatment -related  symptoms (0 -10 Likert 
scale) , including nausea and vomiting (N/V) . This measure asks respondents to think about their 
symptoms over the past week.  Table 2: eSSET -CINV Intervention process  
1 Game introduction and orientati on 
2 Choose avatar  
3 Avatar discharged home after treatment  
4 Avatar begins to experience nausea  
5 Player makes self -management decisions  
6 Avatar responds based on player decisions  
7 Avatar experience continues with periodic 
nausea as player continues to make self -
management decisions  
8 Game ends when avatar achieves goal of mild 
or no nausea or has an unplanned ED or 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_063]  
9 Discussion of decision choices with Research 
Nurse  
11 
 2) Cognitive representation:  The Symptom Representation Questionnaire (SRQ)91 has an additional 15 
questions  to assess cognitive representation (identity, cause, time line, consequences , and cure/control) or 
beliefs about  specific symptoms (0 -4 agreement  scale). This measure includes subscales for symptom cause 
(2 questions), timeline (3 questions), cure/control (3 questions) , and consequence (6 questions).  Only the 
cognitive representation of nausea will be evaluated.  This tool is reliable with alpha co -efficients  from 0.63 
to 0.88 for the subscales .91 The cognitive representation questions will be modified at baseline  to assess 
partici pant s’ beliefs about potential CINV consequences and their  ability to be controlled/cured.  
Subsequent data collection time points will focus on current cognitive representations.  
3) Self -management 
behaviors :  An 
investigator- developed 
Symptom Management 
Checklist  [SMC] will 
measure CINV : 1) self -
management behaviors  
and 2) prevention 
behaviors .  Participants 
will complete this daily at 
home between 
chemotherapy cycles . 
When experiencing CINV, 
the participant will use 
the SMC to record : 1) 
CINV severity  (0-10 
Likert scale) prior to self -
management,  2)  the type  
of self -management strategies used  and, 3) the strategies  perceived helpful ness  in reduci ng nausea ( 0-10 
Likert scale).  Preventative self -management activities for CINV will also be recorded . All self -management 
strategies are coded ( e.g,. “MED”= taking antiemetic, “DIS” - using distraction) , and the participant s will fill 
in the strategy code they are using on the form.  To lessen the risk of the SMC  becoming an intervention for 
the Control Group, all participants will be asked to record sel f-management behaviors of other common 
treatment -related symptoms (i.e. fatigue, mouth/throat sores). The SMC  will be collected by  [CONTACT_796263]  2, 3 and 4.    
4) Health -related Quality of L ife- The EORTC -[ADDRESS_1098382] measured QOL in older adults over time .59, 93. This 
well-known scale include s 5 functional scales, 3 symptom scales, and 6 single items  using a 4 -point Likert 
scale (“not at all” to “very much”), and 2  global health/QOL items using a 7 -point Likert scale (“very poor” 
to “excellent”) .   Higher scores on the functiona l and health/QOL scale indicate  better functioning, while 
higher scores on the symptom -related scales and items indicate hig her symptoms.  Reliabilities (C ronbach’s 
alphas) range from 0.52 (role functioning scale) to 0.89 (QOL).92 
5) Resource Use: Any unplanned Emergency Department or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_796230] a dichotomous (Y/N) variable  at ea ch follow -up ph one contact [CONTACT_796264] .  
Follow -up questions about the reason for the admission, length of time for admission and treatment will 
also be asked.  The r eport will be verified by [CONTACT_796265].   
Additional Outcomes:  
Game appeal : Under the guidance of the PI, student  RAs will develop and pre -test a short survey  to evaluate 
game appeal  at the first follow -up phone call.   Using  a 4-point  agreement scale, participants will be asked the 
extent to which the agree or disagree  with statements regarding ease of game play, game likability, clarity  of 
self-management choices, usefulness in educating about CINV consequences and ability to be control led/cured , 
and realism  (setting and scenario).   Additional comments about the game will be recorded.  
Willingness to recommend  the game will be assessed using one item : Would you recommend this game to 
other older adults about to start ch emotherapy treatmen t (yes/no)?  This will be collected at Cycle 4 (T4).  
  Table 3: Summary of dependent variables, measures and data collection time 
points  
 Data Collection Time points  
Dependent 
Variable/Outcome
s Measure  T1 
Baseline  T2 
Cycle 2  T3 
Cycle 3  T4 
Cycle 4  
Symptom severity  SRQ - patient 
report  x x x x 
Cognitive 
representation  SRQ -patient 
report  x x x x 
Self -management 
behaviors*  SMC - patient 
report   x x x 
Resource Use  Patient report   x x x 
QOL  EORTC -patient 
report  x x x x 
*Note: self -management behaviors will be recorded daily by [CONTACT_4317], but collected by [CONTACT_796266]  
12 
 DATA ANALYSIS  
Phase I: Game prototype and production 
AIM 1 : Identify real -life scenarios involving CINV incidence, self- management, and consequences using a peer 
Community Advisory Board of older adults who have undergone cancer treatment, their family members , and 
oncology nurses to design and develop a serious game for CINV self -care decision making.  
AIM 2 : Identify design aspects and elements of eSSET -CINV game play, audio, and visual avatar dev elopment 
that have the greatest appeal for older adults with cancer.  
     Data from focus groups will be digitally audio -recorded and transcribed.   Methods consistent with classic 
content analysis will be used to analyze data from the focus groups and will begin immediately after each focus 
group.94  The focus group recordings will be reviewed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_796231] c ontent analysis will be 
conducted to thematically categorize responses. Data wil l be de -identified in analysis -no names will be used.  
In order to eliminate bias, the analysis will remain grounded in the data.  Themes will be created and coded 
using language similar to what the participants use. These codes will then be grouped by [CONTACT_796267].94 The notes taken by [CONTACT_796268] a “trail of evidence” to increase the trustworthiness of the data and 
confirm final findin gs.  Data are not intended to be generalized  but will answer specific study AIMS.   
Phase II: Game prototype testing    
Preliminary data analysis:   Descriptive statistics will be provided to characterize the study participants for 
all demographic and experiential variables at baseline and at each treatment cycle time point .  Summary tables 
will be provided to present  participant characteristics (e.g., gender, age group, race) , major study variables, 
game appeal, and willingness to recommend game to others.  Internal consistency of study measures wi ll be 
checked and evaluated to ensure data quality . Effort will be taken as much as possible to avoid missing data. If 
there are significant missing data that may impact analysis results,  the multiple imputation method may be 
used for the analysis of prima ry endpoint. All statistical analyses will be performed using Statistical Application  
Packages (SAS®), version 9. 4.  
Principle data analysis: The primary endpoints for the study are N/V severity score and the number of self -
management behaviors. The second ary endpoints are ED/hospi[INVESTIGATOR_796232]. S ummary statistics for 
the primary and secondary endpoints will be provided. The t -test will be used if the normality of the endpoint 
can be confirmed. Otherwise, the Wilcoxon Rank -Sum test will be used to assess the difference between the two 
groups at each treatment cycle time point.  
AIM 1:  Estimate effect size of the eSSET -CINV  in changing patient outcomes: cognitive 
representation,  self-management behaviors,  CINV severity, QOL, and resource use. The effect 
size of N/V severity score will be estimated using the Cohen’s d , which is defined as the difference between two 
means divi ded by a standard deviation for the data.   
AIM 2: Examine differences in cognitive representation,  self-management behaviors,  CINV 
severity, QOL, and resource use,  between, and within, the intervention and attention control 
groups.   For the primary endpoints, the data will be collected over 4 treatment cycles , and the method of 
analysis of longitudinal data will be used to compare the difference between intervention  and control groups 
over time.  The generalized estimating equation (GEE) approach may be used to enhance the robustness of the 
estimation of model parameters when the ideal working correlation structure is difficult to pre -specify. In the 
longitudinal mode l treatment cycle time, interaction of time and treatment, or both, whenever feasible, may be 
added into the model to assess the time effect on treatment difference.   
    The one- way repeated measures ANOVA will be used to assess the difference between th e two groups. The 
mixed effect model may be used as exploratory analysis to account for unobservable variations from each 
individual patient. In addition, comparisons between two groups at each treatment cycle time point will be 
performed for all primary a nd secondary endpoints. For this particular comparison, the univariate normality of 
each endpoint will be assessed graphically at each treatment cycle time point. An appropriate time window will 
be determined to define the treatment cycles for the study.  
AIM 3: Obtain preliminary data regarding the feasibility and acceptability of the game in older 
adults experiencing CINV . Feasibility - Computer science and digital media undergraduate students will 
work under the direction of [CONTACT_688584] and [CONTACT_796272] to identify patterns in game play data ( e.g., self-
management decisions, scenario patterns of progression) , time to ga me completion, and number of times the 
game was played  (intervention dose) . The RN will track any instance of game play interrupti ons or 
13 
 malfunction. This data will be summarized with descriptive statistics. Game Appeal:  Responses to the game 
appeal and willingness to recommend questions will be scored  and summed using descriptive statistics.   
Additional comments about the game will be recorded and analyzed for themes.    
Sample size and statistical power:  
Based on the assumption of a nausea severity mean score of 6.20, range from [ADDRESS_1098383] deviation of 
2.44, and a clinically meaningful difference in mean nausea severity score of one between the intervention and 
control groups, with 90 % power , the r equired sample size is [ADDRESS_1098384] stage. However, the power statistical analysis will be assessed when data become av ailable from the planned study.  
Potential challenges  and strategies  for addressing :  
Although prior research participants have agreed to be contact[CONTACT_796269], it is possible, that 
we will not be able to recruit enough CAB members for phase I.  In that unlikely event, we would recruit 
additional CAB  members  from the UF He alth Cancer Center who recently completed treatment. Challenges 
related to creating a credible educational game  (e.g., does not appeal to older people, un relatable 
characters/avatars) will be minimized through the partnership of the CAB  who will lend credi bility to the 
scenarios for CINV.  Prototypes will be created first so credibility issues can be addressed and corrected in 
phase I focus groups.  In addition, [CONTACT_796279] sy (Co -I) and our partners at E 2i have a successful history of game 
development for ma ny different populations and settings. Challenges inherent to having team members at a 
distance will be addressed through  face-to-face meetings at critical time -points related to each phase of the 
project.  Team meetings will be scheduled for every [ADDRESS_1098385] the 
option to S kype  into those meetings.  
Student engagement in clinical research : The PI, [CONTACT_796272] has involved undergraduate and graduate 
students in prior  clinical research  and has the necessary experience an d expertise to guide them through this 
innovative project . Students will be involved in all phases of this project . Their participation in this project will 
expose them to cutting -edge technology and opportunities to build multidisciplinar y connections.  
Study Start -up and Training :  During the first 3 months of the study, ES will hire the technical team for 
game development, and VL will hire UCF CON nursing students as RAs .  At the start of each study phase, VL 
will provide appropriate staff training and education for the RAs on the following topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]: Collaborative IR B 
Training Initiative (CITI), human subject protection, CINV, CINV self- management behaviors, conducting 
focus groups, coding and analyzing qualitative data, collecting data during follow- up phone calls .  Regular team 
meetings will be held with investigato rs, consultants,  and study staff to ensure study protocols are maintained  
(Table 4).    
 
 
 
 
 Table 4: Project Time line 
Activity  Year  [ADDRESS_1098386] startup  x            
Team meeting prior to game development  x            
RA training  (both phases)   x   x        
Phase I  - CAB recruitment   x           
Phase I  - Focus groups, game development, and initial testing    x x         
Phase II  - Participant recruitment and enrolment, data collection, intervention delivery     x x x x x x    
Phase II  - Database set up     x         
Phase II  - Data entry and cleaning     x x x x x x    
Phase II  - Data analysis        x x x x   
Dissemination and final grant report s         x x x x 
14 
 REFERENCES - USE SEPARATE DOCUMENT  
1. Jakobsen JN, Herrstedt J. Prevention of chemotherapy -induced nausea and vomiting in elderly cancer 
patients. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol . Sep 2009;71(3):[ADDRESS_1098387] failed to respond to a previous antiemetic treatment: 
comparison between elderly and non- elderly patient response. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol . Apr 
2009;70(1):83 -91. 
3. Gridelli C. Same old story>  Do we need to modify our supportive care treatment of elderly cancer 
patients? Foc us on anti -emetics. Drugs and Aging . 2004;21(13):825 -832.  
4. Naeim A, Aapro M, Subbarao R, Balducci L. Supportive Care Considerations for Older Adults With 
Cancer. Journal Of Clinical Oncology: Official Journal Of The American Society Of Clinical 
Oncology . 2014.  
5. Reid J, Porter S. Utility, caller, and patient profile of a novel chemotherapy telephone helpline service within a regional cancer centre in northern ireland. Cancer Nursing . 2011;34(3):E27 -32. 
6. Flannery M, McAndrews L, Stein KF. Telephone call s by [CONTACT_796270]. Oncol Nurs Forum. 
Sep 2013;40(5):464 -471. 
7. Geddie P. Family caregiver knowledge, patient related factors and unplanned hospi[INVESTIGATOR_796233].  
; In preparation.  
8. Shih Y- CT, Xu Y, Etting LS. Costs of uncontrolled chemotherapy induced nausea and vomiting among 
working -age cancer patients receiving highly or moderately emetogenic chemptherapy. Cancer  
2007;110(3):[ADDRESS_1098388]. The economic burde n of toxicities 
associated with cancer treatment: review of the literature and analysis of nausea and vomiting, diarrhoea, oral mucositis and fatigue. Pharmacoeconomics . Sep 2013;31(9):753 -766.  
10. Cohen L, de Moor CA, Eisenberg P, Ming EE, Hu H. Chemother apy-induced nausea and vomiting: 
incidence and impact on patient quality of life at community oncology settings. Support Care 
Cancer. May 2007;15(5):497 -503.  
11. National Cancer Institute. Managing chemotherapy side effects: Nausea and Vomiting. Available at: 
http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]/copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]/physicaleffects#Nausea+and+Vomiting
, 2014.  
12. Tipton JM, McDaniel RW, Barbour L, et al. Putting evidence into practice: evidence -based 
interventions to prevent, manage, and treat chemotherapy -induced nausea and vomiting. Clin J Oncol 
Nurs . Feb 2007;11(1):69 -78. 
13. Leventhal H, Brissette I, Leventhal EA. The common -sense model of self -regulation of health and 
illness. In: Cameron LD, Leventhal H, eds. The self -regulation of health and illness behavior. [LOCATION_001]: 
Routledge; 2003:42- 63. 
14. Prohaska TR, Keller ML, Leventhal EA, Leventhal H. Impact of symptoms and aging attribution on 
emotions and copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. Health Psychology . 1987;6(6):495- 514. 
15. Loerzel VW, Aroian K. "A bump in the road": older women's views on surviving breast cancer. J 
Psychosoc Oncol . 2013;31(1):[ADDRESS_1098389] cancer. Cancer 
Nursing . 2012 35(2).  
17. Royer HR, Phelan CH, Heidrich SM. Older breast cancer survivors' symptom beliefs. Oncol Nurs 
Forum. Jul 2009;36(4):[ADDRESS_1098390] year of survivorship. Oncology Nursing Forum. 2008;35(6):924 -932.  
19. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_796234], Hickman RL, Clochesy J, Buchner M. Avatar -based depress ion self -management technology: 
promising approach to improve depressive symptoms among young adults... Self -Management 
Resource Training for Mental Health (eSMART -MH). Applied Nursing Research . 2013;26(1):[ADDRESS_1098391] of serious games for health on 
chronic disease self -management: prel iminary efficacy among community dwelling adults with 
hypertension. Journal of Health and Human Service Administration. In press.  
22. Genetic testing for breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility: evaluating direct- to-consumer marketing --
Atlanta, Denver, Ra leigh -Durham, and Seattle, 2003. MMWR. Morbidity And Mortality Weekly 
Report . 2004;53(27):603 -606.  
23. American Cancer Society. Estimated New Cancer Cases by [CONTACT_533128] (Years), 2014. Available at: http://www.cancer.org/research/cancerfactsstatistics/cancerfactsfigures2014/index
, 2014.  
24. Balducci L, Colloca G, Cesari M, Gambassi G. Assessment and treatment of elderly patients with cancer. 
Surg Oncol . Sep 201 0;19(3):117 -123. 
25. Given B, Given CW. Cancer treatment in older adults: implications for psychosocial research. J Am 
Geriatr Soc. Nov 2009;[ADDRESS_1098392] 2:S283 -285. 
26. Balducci L, Stanta G. Cancer in the frail patient. A coming epi[INVESTIGATOR_901]. Hematology Oncology Clinics 
of North America . Feb 2000;14(1):235 -250, xi.  
27. Sehl M, Sawhney R, Naeim A. Physiologic aspects of aging: impact on cancer management and decision making, part II. Cancer J . Nov-Dec 2005;11(6):461 -473.  
28. Sawhney R, Sehl M, Naeim A. Physiologic aspects of aging: impact on cancer management and decision 
making, part I. Cancer Journal (Sudbury, Mass.) . 2005;11(6):449 -460.  
29. Dabbs AD, Myers BA, MCCurry KR, et al. User- centered design and interactive health technologies for 
patients. CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing . 2009;27(3):175- 183. 
30. Henderson VA, Barr KL, An LC, et al. Community -based participatory research and user- centered 
design in a diabetes medication information and decision tool. Prog Community Health 
Partnersh . Summer 2013;7(2):171 -184.  
31. Baranowski T, Buday R, Thompson DI, Baranowski  J. Playing for real: video games and stories for 
health -related behavior change. Am J Prev Med . Jan 2008;34(1):74 -82. 
32. Thompson D. Designing serious video games for health behavior change: current status and future 
directions. J Diabetes Sci Technol . Jul 2012;6(4):807 -811. 
33. McCallum S. Gamification and serious games for personalized health. Studies In Health 
Technology And Informatics . 2012;177:85 -96. 
34. Bandura A. Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective. Asian Journal of Social Psychology . 
1999;2(1):21 -41. 
35. Leventhal EA, Prohaska TR. Age, symptom interpretation, and health behavior. Journal of the 
American G eriatric Society . 1986;34:186 -191. 
36. Cameron LD, Moss -Morris R. Illness -Related Cognition and Behaviour In: Kaptein A, Weinman J, eds. 
Health psychology: An introduction. Oxford, [LOCATION_006].: Blackwell Publishers; 2004:[ADDRESS_1098393] G, O'Carroll R, Kearney N. Perceived control and involvement in self care in patients 
with colorectal cancer. J Clin Nurs . Aug 2009;18(16):[ADDRESS_1098394] cancer. Cancer 
Nurs . Mar -Apr 2012 ;35(2):83 -88. 
39. Ryan CJ, Zerwic JJ. Perceptions of symptoms of myocardial infarction related to health care seeking 
behaviors in the elderly. Journal of Cardiovascular Nursing . 2003;18(3):184 -196.  
40. Kessler D, Lloyd K, Lewis G, Gray DP. Cross sectional  study of symptom attributiuon and recognition of 
depression and anxiety in primary care. BMJ . 1999;318:[ADDRESS_1098395], Levbenthal H, Love RR, Ringler KE. Psychological aspects of cancer chemotherapy. 
International Review of Applied Psychology . 1984;33:[ADDRESS_1098396] S. A representational approach to patient education. Journal of Nursing 
Scholarship . 2001;33(3):[ADDRESS_1098397] SE, Song M, Heidrich SM, Gunnarsdottir S, Phillips CM. An update on the 
representational approa ch to patient education. Journal of Nursing Scholarship . 2007;39(3):[ADDRESS_1098398] SE, Happ MB, et al. Randomized controlled trial of SPI[INVESTIGATOR_61192]: An effective approach to 
preparing African -American dialysis patients and families for end of life. R eserach in Nursing & 
Health . 2009;32:260 -273.  
16 
 45. Heidrich SM, Brown RL, Egan JJ, et al. An individualized representational intervention to improve 
symptom management (IRIS) in older breast cancer survivors: three pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602]. Oncol Nurs 
Forum. May 2009; 36(3):E133 -143. 
46. Institute NC. SEER stat fact sheet: All cancer sites. Available at: 
http://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/all.html . 
47. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. A profi le of older Americans: 2012. Available at: 
http://www.aoa.gov/AoARoot/%28S%282ch3qw55k1qylo45dbihar2u%29%29/Aging_Statistics/Profil
e/index. aspx , 2014.  
48. Bender CM, Engberg SJ, Donovan HS, et al. Symptom clusters in adults with chronic health problems 
and cancer as a comorbidity. Oncol Nurs Forum. Jan 2008;35(1):E1 -E11. 
49. Basch E, Prestrud AA, Hesketh PJ, Kris MG, Somerfield MR, Lyman GH. Antiemetic Use in Oncology: 
Updated Guideline Recommendations from ASCO. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book . 2012;32:532 -
540.  
50. Chou F -y, Dodd M, Abrams D, Padilla G. Symptoms, self -care, and q uality of life of Chinese American 
patients with cancer. Oncology Nursing Forum. 2007;34(6):1162 -1167.  
51. Lou Y, Yates P, McCarthy A, Wang HM. Self -management of chemotherapy -related nausea and 
vomiting: a cross- sectional survey of Chinese cancer patients. Cancer Nurs . Mar -Apr 2014;37(2):126 -
138. 
52. Closs SJ, Staples V, Reid I, Bennett MI, Briggs M. Managing the symptoms of neuropathic pain: an 
exploration of patients' experiences. J Pain Symptom Manage . Oct 2007;34(4):422- 433.  
53. Fitch MI, Mings D, Lee A. Exploring patient experiences and self -initiated strategies for living with 
cancer -related fatigue. Can Oncol Nurs J . Summer 2008;18(3):[ADDRESS_1098399] 
2012;20(10):2433 -2439.  
55. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_109691] E, Rieder E, Muller -Frohlich C, Kesselring A. Fatigue in patients undergoing chemotherapy, 
their self -care and the role of health professionals: a qualitative study. Eur J Oncol Nurs . Apr 
2012;16(2):165- 171. 
56. Goodwin JA. Older adults' function al performance loss and adaptation during chemotherapy. 
Geriatric Nursing ([LOCATION_001], N.Y.) . 2007;28(6):370 -376.  
57. Cheng KKF, Yeung RMW. Symptom distress in older adults during cancer therapy: Impact on performance status and quality of life. Journal of G eriatric Oncology . 1// 2013;4(1):71- 77. 
58. Miaskowski C, Cooper BA, Paul SM, et al. Subgroups of patients with cancer with different symptom experiences and quality -of-life outcomes: a cluster analysis. Oncology Nursing Forum. 
2006;33(5):E79 -E89.  
59. Park  S, Kim IR, Baek KK, et al. Prospective analysis of quality of life in elderly patients treated with 
adjuvant chemotherapy for non- small -cell lung cancer. Annals Of Oncology: Official Journal Of 
The European Society For Medical Oncology / ESMO. 2013;24(6): 1630 -1639.  
60. Rigdon AS. Development of patient education for older adults receicing chemotherapy. Clinical 
Journal of Oncology Nursing . 2010;14(4 ):433 -441.  
61. Merriam SB, Caffarella RS, Baumgartner LM. Learning in adulthood: A comprehensive guide . 
3rd ed. San Francisco, CA: Jossey -Bass; 2007.  
62. Zurakowski T, Taylor M, Bradway C. Effective teaching strategies for the older adult with urologic 
concerns. Urol Nurs . Oct 2006;26(5):355 -360.  
63. Knowles M. Applying modern principles of adult learning . San F rancisco, CA: Jossey -Bass, Inc.; 
1984.  
64. Billek- Sawhney B, Reicherter EA. Literacy and the older adult: Educational considerations for Health 
Professionals. Topi[INVESTIGATOR_74132] . 2005;21(4):275 -281.  
65. Speros CI. More than words: promoting  health literacy in older adults. Online Journal of Issues in 
Nursing . 2009;14(3):6 -6. 
66. Fenter PC. Unxderstanding the role of practice in learning for geriatric individuals. Topi[INVESTIGATOR_796235] . 2002;17(4):11- 32. 
67. Sorrell JM. Storytelling as an educaitonal strategy for older adults with chronic illnesses. Jorunal of 
Psychosocial Nursing . 2008;46(7):19 -22. 
17 
 68. Thompson D, Baranowski T, Buday R, et al. Serious Video Games for Health: How Behavioral Science 
Guided the Development of a Serious Video Game. Simul Gaming . Aug 1 2010;41(4):[ADDRESS_1098400] ive health games: Theory and 
research findings. Journal of Ambulatory Care Management . 2001;24(1):26 -38. 
70. Aoki N, Ohta S, Masuda H, et al. Edutainment tools for initial education of type -1 diabetes mellitus: 
initial diabetes education with fun. Studies In Health Technology And Informatics . 2004;107(Pt 
2):855 -859. 
71. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_796234], Hickman RL, Jr., Clochesy J, Buchner M. Avatar -based depression self -management 
technology: promising approach to improve depressive symptoms among young adults. Appl Nurs 
Res . Feb 2013;26(1):45 -48. 
72. Jansen- Kosterink SM, Huis In 't Veld RMHA, Schönauer C, Kaufmann H, Hermens HJ, Vollenbroek -
Hutten MMR. A Serious Exergame for Patients Suffering from Chronic Musculoskeletal Back and Neck 
Pain: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]. Games For Health Journa l. 2013;2(5):299 -307.  
73. de Wit -Zuurendonk LD, Oei SG. Serious gaming in women's health care. BJOG: An International 
Journal Of Obstetrics And Gynaecology . 2011;[ADDRESS_1098401] 3:17 -21. 
74. Graafland M, Schraagen JM, Schijven MP. Systematic review of serious ga mes for medical education 
and surgical skills training. The British Journal Of Surgery . 2012;99(10):1322- 1330.  
75. Breslin P, McGowan C, Pecheux B, Sudol R. Serious gaming. Advanced computer simulation games help to transform healthcare and disaster prepar edness. Health Management Technology . 
2007;28(10):14.  
76. Malliot P, Perrot A, Hartley A. Effects of interactive physcial -activity video -game training on physical 
and cognitive function in older adults. Psychology & Aging . 2012;27(3):[ADDRESS_1098402] S, Borghese NA, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_83132] M, Mainetti R, van de Langenberg R, de Bruin ED. Usability and 
Effects of an Exergame- Based Balance Training Program. Games For Health Journal . 
2014;3(2):106 -114. 
78. Chao Y -Y, Scherer YK, Wu Y -W, Lucke KT, Montgomery CA. The feasibil ity of an intervention 
combining self -efficacy theory and Wii Fit exergames in assisted living residents: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. 
Geriatric Nursing . 2013;34(5):377 -382.  
79. Finkelstein J, Bedra M. Avatar- based Interactive Diabetes Education in Older Adults.  
80. King AC, Hekler EB, Grieco LA, et al. Harnessing Different Motivational Frames via Mobile Phones to 
Promote Daily Physical Activity and Reduce Sedentary Behavior in Aging Adults.  
81. Green -Hamann S, Eichhorn KC, Sherblom JC. An Exploration of Why People Parti cipate in Second Life 
Social Support Groups.  
82. Loerzel VW, Geddie P, Smith E. Perceptions of cancer education: Older adults with cancer. In preparation.  
83. Norris AE, Hughes C, Hecht M, Peragallo N, Nickerson D. Randomized trial of a peer resistance skill -
building game for Hispanic early adolescent girls. Nurs Res. Jan- Feb 2013;62(1):[ADDRESS_1098403] cancer survi vors. Paper presented at: 10th Annual 
Conference on Cancer Nursing, 2009; Orlando, FL.  
85. Loerzel VW. An exploration of symptom representation: Older breast cancer survivors. In preparation.  
86. Loerzel VW, Geddie P. Cognitive representation of treatment- related symptoms in older adults with 
cancer. In preparation.  
87. Loerzel VW. Self -management strategies for treatment- related symptoms in older adults with cancer. In 
preparation.  
88. Stetler CB, Legro MW, Wallace CM, et al. The role of formative evaluati on in implementaion research 
and the QUERI experience. Journal of General Internal Medicine . 2006;21:S1 -8. 
89. Lewis M. Analysis of the roles of "serious games" in helpi[INVESTIGATOR_796236] -related knowledge and skills 
and in changing behavior. Journal of Diabe tes Science and Technology . 2007;1(6):918 -920.  
90. Geddie P. Nursing assessment of family caregiver knowledge and action tool (NAFKAT): Development 
and psychometric testing. in preparation.  
91. Donovan HS, Ward SE, Sherwood P, Serlin RC. Evaluation of the symptom representation 
questionnaire (SRQ) for assessing cancer- related symptoms. Journal of Pain & Symptom 
Management . 2008;35(3):242 -257.  
18 
 92. Aaronson NK, Ahmedzai S, Bergman B, et al. The European Organization for Research and Treatment 
of Cancer QLQ- C30: A quality -of-life instrument for use in international clinical trials in oncology. 
Journal of the National Cancer Institute . Mar 3 1993;85(5) :365 -376.  
93. Scarpa M, Di Cristofaro L, Cortinovis M, et al. Minimally invasive surgery for colorectal cancer: quality 
of life and satisfaction with care in elderly patients. Surgical Endoscopy . 2013;27(8):2911 -2920.  
94. Schilling J. On the pragmatics of qualitative assessment. European Journal of Psychological 
Assessment . 2006;22(1):28 -37. 
 