 
Randomized Controlled Study of the 
Effectiveness of Stepped -Care Sleep Therapy 
In General Practice  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
September 01, [ADDRESS_391491] aims to fill in the science -to-service gap between  proven efficacy of 
cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBTi)  and future large scale implementation. 
We have developed and propose  to test a primary -care-friendly stepped -care CBTi model 
(STEPPED  CARE) that offers an easy to use Decision Checklist for matching  delivery of 
CBTi to individual patient characteristics so that  patients will begin treatment with the 
appropriate delivery mode  (online or therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] -lead) and will be allowed to transition 
from  online to therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] -lead delivery if they do not su fficiently benefit  form  the online 
only treatment.  
b. Objectives  
The investigators hope to learn the relative merit of the STEPPED  CARE approach and 
an ONLINE ONLY approach with respect to reduction  of insomnia severity and use of 
hypnotic medication, as well as  future implementation potential. Results will yield a 
simple and  effective way for primary care providers to prescribe CBTi to middle  aged 
and older adults.  
c. Rationale for Research in Humans  
The purpose of this study is to determine efficacy and effectiveness  of a non -
pharmacological interventions for humans with insomnia.  
2. STUDY PROCEDURES  
a. Procedures  
Screening participants will begin participation with a phone screen  (attached) or an online 
self-administered screening checklist. Those  who are not excluded will have an informed 
consent visit (in person  or via Zoom); if they agree, they will sign a consent form (either  
on paper or electronically via RedCap). They will then undergo  screening, using 
September 01, 2020   Page 2 of 7 structured clinical interviews for sleep  disorders and for mental disorder (both are 
attached), and  questionnaires (attached). Eligible participants will be randomized.  
 
Those randomized to ONLINE ONLY will receive a code to a  commercially  available 
online CBTi called Sleepio and will have access to the  program for 12 months.  
 
Those assigned to STEPPED CARE will in Step 1  (8 weeks) receive CBTi either as a 
self-help intervention, using the  Sleepio program, or with a therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]. This decision will 
be based on  a DECISION CHECKLIST that considers patients' clinical presentation  
based on data they provide. During the second step, those  assigned to STEPPED CARE, 
who in step [ADDRESS_391492] -led treatment. Regardless of the specific path for all  those 
assigned to STEPPED CARE the duration of treatment will be 12  months.  
 
Randomly selected participants (25% of the sample) will additionally  undergo interviews 
at baseline and at the end of study and queries  about their experience with insomnia ans 
its treatment. (The  interview script be uploaded once finalized and before participant  
enrollment.)  
 
Participants will undergo periodic assessments during this  12 months (at baseline, and 
months 2, 4, 6, 9, & 12). These  assessments will include study questionnaires and the use 
of an  Actiwatch ™ for two weeks.  
b. Procedure Risks  
The research protocol involves minimal risk. It offers effective and effective low risk 
intervention to all participants  
c. Use of Deception in the Study  
No deception is involved . 
d. Use of Audio and Video Recordings  
To enhance accessibility, patients receiving therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] -lead CBTi will  be able to choose to 
receive therapy session remotely via a secure  videoconferencing, rather than in person.  
e. Alternative Procedures or Courses of Treatment  
Alternative to online and in -person CBTi is the use of hypnotic  medications. However, 
this alternative is not superior to study  interventions. In fact, the American Geriatric 
Society states “Don’t  use benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_318051] –hypnotics in older adults as  
first choice for insomnia, agitation, or delirium “. That said, we  note that no standard care 
will be withheld at any time from  participants once enrolled, regardless of treatment 
assignment. That  is, study interventions will be added to usual care  and patients  will be 
free to seek care in the community.  
September 01, 2020   Page 3 of 7 f. Will it be possible to continue the more (most) appropriate therapy for the 
participant(s) after the conclusion of the study?  
Patients are free to continue any therapy for insomnia on their own  after they completed 
all study procedures; these will not be provided  by [CONTACT_1758].  
g. Study Endpoint (s) 
There is no plan for interim analysis.  
3. BACKGROUND   
a. Past Experimental and/or Clinical Findings  
The prevalence of insomnia and use of prescription sleep medications  increase around 
age 50, approximately one in three older adults (50  and older) reporting persistent 
difficulty maintaining sleep and one  in five reporting difficulties initiating sleep. This is 
also a  time of increased use of sleep medications. According to a 2013 report  from the 
National Center for Health Statistics the prevalence of use  of sleep medication increases 
three fold starting in middle age. In  addition to multiple negative consequences of 
insomnia in the  general  population, among older individuals the consequences of 
insomnia  include exacerbation of age related cognitive decline (such as  slower  reaction 
time and memory impairment), visual impairment, and greater  risk for imbalance and 
falls. The negative impacts of hypnotic use  are also greater among older than younger 
adults. Although the  safety  of sedative hypnotic medications has improved over time, 
significant  concerns about tolerance, dependence, daytime sedation, and ri sk for  
imbalance, falls, and motor vehicle crashes persist and remain a  concern for primary care 
physicians, particularly when treating  older  adults. As a result, there is effort to reduce 
prescribing of  sedative hypnotics, particularly to older adults. The American  Geriatric 
Society Beer Criteria for potentially inappropriate  medication use in older adults 
recommends avoiding use of  benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_318052] - 
benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_318053] 90 days (chronic use). It is  therefore particularly 
important to reduce the use of hypnotic  medications among older adults and to provide 
effective alternative  treatments.  
 
CBTi is an effective skill -based psychotherapy for insomnia. The  American College of 
Physicians (ACP) issued new practice guidelines  stating that “Cognitive behavior therapy 
should be the initial  treatment option in persons with chronic insomnia.” CBTi improves  
sleep among middle aged and older adults without comorbidities,  among  patients with 
psychiatric and medical comorbidities, and among  patients with hypnotic dependence. 
Importantly, CBTi has more  durable  benefits than hypnotic medications among midlif e 
and older adults.  CBTi can reduce the use of sleep medication for two reasons: (a) it  can 
be offered as an alternative to hypnotics as an initial  treatment  option; and (b) it can 
facilitate reduction or discontinuation of  sleep medications for those already taking them.  
Reduction/discontinuation of hypnotic use during CBTi can be  indirect  (i.e., some 
patients spontaneously reduce their use as they acquire  new skills) or direct (i.e., therapi[INVESTIGATOR_318054]), particularly when  the CBTi protocol includes a spec ific module to address 
medication  taper/discontinuation.  
 
September 01, 2020   Page 4 of 7 There is a major gap between the current state of the science and  actual clinical practice: 
Limited access to CBTi is a major barrier  to its wide -scale use as a first line treatment 
insomnia and ergo to  the implementation of the ACP guidelines. Current models of  
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] -led delivery are a major limiting factor in treatment  access, largely due to the 
low number of trained providers relative  to those needing treatment (largely due to the 
low number of trained  providers relative to those needing treatment). Pi[INVESTIGATOR_318055] -led delivery methods,  such as abbreviated 
CBTi and delivery using telehealth among older  adults; it is unlikely that, even if the 
results from these pi[INVESTIGATOR_318056] -scale trials, they alone can  meet  
the demand for insomnia treatment in primary care.  Another approach to increasing 
access to CBTi is to thoughtfully  utilize consumer directed CBTi products, such as online 
programs.  Such products offer patients a convenient way to receive treatment  that 
addresses s everal barriers to therapi[INVESTIGATOR_318057] -CBTi, including  geographic, mobility, 
scheduling constraints, reduced waiting time  for therapy, reduced stigma and 
embarrassment in seeking help,  flexibility in accessing self -paced treatment, and efficient 
use of  resource within the healthcare system. However, online CBTi  programs  have 
limitations. They are less effective than in -person treatment,  with effect size for reduction 
in insomnia severity being half of  the effect size following in -person therapy (Cohen d = 
1.2 vs 2.3). In  addition, online CBTi programs have high dropout rates (low  engagement) 
that may contribute to lower efficacy. Current online  CBTi programs are not the best 
choice when the goal is to reduce  frequent use of hypnotic medications because they do 
not include  modules to support the often difficult process of discontinuing  these  
medications. (Although, through improving sleep, online CBTi can  lead to hypnotic 
discontinuation among some users, effect sizes are  smaller than therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] -led CBTi.) 
Online CBT i programs also do not  include modules to address circadian rhythm factors, 
such as those  present among individuals with unusual sleep schedules. Individuals  who, 
based on past research on CBTi are at increased risk for  droppi[INVESTIGATOR_318058] -led 
CBTi are likely at even greater risk  for droppi[INVESTIGATOR_318059], since 
they lack  flexibility in tailoring the intervention to support adherence.  
 
STEPPED -CARE CBTi has strong potential for overcoming the  shortcomings of an 
online only approach, while maintaining the  scalability advantages offered by [CONTACT_318061].  
b. Findings from Past Animal Experiments  
Not applicable . 
4. NVESTIGATIONAL DEVICES   
Investigational  Device 1  
Name:  [CONTACT_318063]:  Sleepio  is an online consumer program.  There is no device involved. 
However,  participants can get a free app to have  access to some aspects of 
the program on  their personal device if they so choose.  
September 01, 2020   Page 5 of 7 5. PARTICIPANT POPULATION  
a. Planned Enrollment  
This is a single site study. We hope to randomize 240 middle aged and older adult 
patients with insomnia disorder  
b. Age, Gender, and Ethnic Background  
Age: 50 and older  
Gender: all  
ethnicity: all  
c. Vulnerable Population s 
Recruitment will NOT target potentially vulnerable populations; but they will not be 
excluded . 
d. Stanford Populations  
Recruitment will NOT target laboratory personnel, employees, and/or students; but they 
will not be excluded  
e. Healthy Volunteers  
Healthy volunteers will not be included . 
f. Recruitment Details  
Patients will be recruited from primary care clinics that are part of the Stanford Health 
care system. Patients will be identified as potentially eligible through a search of 
electronic health records. The search will be based on age, insomnia diagnosis or  use of 
sedative hypnotics, and the absence of a diagnosis of dementia or the need for an 
interpreter; all of which can easily be extracted from the electronic medical records. 
Those identified will be invited to participate, using a Myhealth message (scri pts for SHC 
clinics and for SHA are attached). The SHC MyHealth message will be sent on behalf of 
individual primary care clinic providers/directors and the protocol director who have 
given their explicit permission for us to do so.  
 
The MyHealth message for SHA will be sent on behalf of [CONTACT_318064], Chief Medical 
Officer, University Healthcare Alliance, and the Protocol director, who has given us 
permission to do so.  
 
Patients without an active MyHealth account will be sent a letter via mail. This letter will 
have the identical content as the attached MyHealth scripts on a departmental letter head.  
 
The attached script includes a link to a contact [CONTACT_318062], and a study 
website  
 
Those who respond to the invitation will be phone screened.  
 
September 01, [ADDRESS_391493]  
health care system.  
g. Eligibility Criteria  
i. Inclusion Criteria  
• Age>=50  
• Meets criteria for insomnia disorder  
• Residing in [LOCATION_004]  
• Has primary care provider in [LOCATION_004]  
ii. Exclusion Criteria  
• Cannot be consented in English without an interpreter  
• Does not have a reliable telephone service  
• Lack physical or mental capacity to participate in treatment. Examples 
include, but are not limited to, thought disorder and Cognitive impairment 
(mini mental status exam score < 25).  
• Presence of alcohol use disorder or drug use disorder, excluding sedative 
hypnotic or anxiolytic (taken for sleep), with current withdrawal symptoms 
or if severe (per DSM -5); 
• Use of substances that cause sleep disturbances (e.g., stimulants, prednisone)  
• Family member that resides in same household as another study participant  
• Inability to use and cannot get help from a trusted other for using the internet 
daily.  
• The study physician determines their participation is not medically advised 
for any reason.  
• Does not currently receive CBTi  
h. Screening Procedures  
Participants will begin screen with a telephone screen or a self -administered online 
screening checklist (both uploaded). Those not excluded will undergo two structured 
clinical interviews conducted by [CONTACT_59856]: 1) the Duke Structured 
Interview for Sleep Disorders (DSISD) for ascertaining insomnia and documenting other 
sleep disorder diagnoses; 2) the widely used Structured Clinical Interview for DSM 
Disorders (SCID), MINI version to assess severe unstable comorbid psychiatric 
conditions t hat might better explain the insomnia symptoms; 3) the Folstein Mini -Mental 
Status Exam (MMSE). These questionnaires and interviews are attached. 4) For 
consented participants, who the study physician identified as medically complex (e.g., 
taking more than  10 prescription medications), we will request medical clearance from 
their PCP; (for those receiving care outside we will use the attached letter.)  
i. Participation in Multiple Protocols  
Participants will be asked if they are currently participating in another study. When a 
potential participant reports participating in another study where there is a potential for 
September 01, [ADDRESS_391494] resolve the situation. (An example of such a situation is when a patient participates 
in a study that requires them to receive another treatment for insomnia.)  
j. Planned Duration  of the Study  
We expect the study will last 5 years, with a 4 year active recruitment period. A 
participant will be in the study for approximately 14 months after being randomized.  
6. RISKS 
Treatment -related risks:  
1) Transient increase in daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008]/tiredness might be experienced as a result of an initial 
restriction of time in bed during the implementation of stimulus control and sleep restriction 
protocols, which are part of CBTi. Some patients experience increase in anxiety in response to the 
recommendation to decrease time in bed. Initial increase in daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_318060] a s ide effect of the more conservative time in bed restriction 
protocol we will be using in this study. There are no available estimates regarding the frequency 
of increased anxiety in response to the recommendation to restrict time in bed.  
2) Gradual taper of hypnotic medications might involve mild transient worsening of sleep, 
anxiety about sleep, and/or daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008].  
 
Risks associated with other procedures involved in the study as part of the data collection and 
measurement involve minimal risk. These include (a) the potential for loss of privacy and 
confidentiality; (b) legal limits to the confidentiality of informatio n obtained if risk of harm to 
self or others, including children, is disclosed (in our experience, this has been very rare); (c) 
experiencing distress from being asked to focus on sensitive issues such as depression (In our 
years of conducting research wit h hundreds of patient we found this to be rare); (d) some 
participants may consider the study measures time -consuming, inconvenient, or otherwise 
disruptive of their usual routines; and (e) some patients might not like wearing a wrist band or 
experience mi nor skin irritation when wearing the actigraph on their wrist.  
7. BENEFITS  
All participants will receive cognitive behavioral therapy for  insomnia free of charge.  
 
The STEPPED CARE option we propose to test has the potential to  improve sleep, reduce use of 
hypnotic medications, promote safety,  and offer convenient access to treatment for midlife and 
older  adults, while using resources efficiently.  
8. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
All participant information  and specimens are  handle d in compliance with the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)  and privacy policies of Stanford University, Stanford 
Health Ca re, and Stanford Children’s Health.  