Protocol Summary  Form
7459
Small, Scott
Page 1 of 27
Protocol Title:
Glutamate Reducing Interventions in Schizophrenia
Protocol Number:
[ADDRESS_833413] Approval:
06/15/2017
Expi[INVESTIGATOR_5952]:
06/04/2021Version Date:
08/24/2020
Clinic:
Center of  Prevention  and Evaluation 
(COPE)
Contact [INVESTIGATOR_678]:
[INVESTIGATOR_625596]: [EMAIL_11959]
Telephone: 2123051269Co-Investigator(s):
Jeffrey Lieberman, MD
Ragy Girgis, MD
Research Chief:
Lawrence Kegeles,  MD
Cover Sheet
Choose ONE  option from  the following that is applicable to  your study
If you are creating  a new protocol, select "I am submitting a new protocol." As 5 Year Renewals are no 
longer required,  this option  remains  for historical  purposes.
I am proposing an  amendment only to an  existing protocol
Division & Personnel
Division
What Area Group does the PI [INVESTIGATOR_40348]?What Division/Department does the  PI [INVESTIGATOR_100534]?
Translational Imaging
Within the division/department, what Center  or group are you affiliated with, if  any? 
COPE
Unaffiliated Personnel
List investigators, if any,  who will be participating in this protocol but  are not affiliated with  New  York 
State Psychiatric  Institute or Columbia University. Provide: Full  Name, Degrees and Affiliation.
Protocol Summary  Form
7459
Small, Scott
Page 2 of 27
na
Amendment
Describe the change(s) being made  
We are submitting this amendment to  revise this protocol to  include that  research  staff  will monitor each 
dose of POMA taken by [CONTACT_625607]. We  are doing this  because an initial analysis 
of PK data indicated substantial nonadherence with POMA. We made this change  to the PSF (Study 
Procedures, in  bold, towards the end)  and the CF (page 4, bolded). We  are also changing  the time of  the PK 
blood draws from pre dose on days 7 and  14 to  2-3 hours  after the  dose on day  7 and right before the MRI 
on day 14 (Study Procedures, in bold, towards the end). We  are making this change
because the half life of POMA is only a few  hours and we think that  peak rather  than trough  levels will be 
more informative. We have included  clean  and bolded  versions  of the patient  CF.
Provide the rationale for the change(s)  
Please see  above.
Comment on the  extent to  which the proposed  change(s)  alter  or affect risks/benefits  to subjects 
Please see  above
Comment on if the  proposed change(s)  require a  modification to the Consent Form (CF)
Please see  above.  Yes, a change was made.
Procedures
To create the protocol summary form,  first indicate if this research will include  any of the following  
procedures
   Neuropsychological Evaluation
   Collection of Biological  Specimens
   Medication Trial
   Use of Placebo or Sham Treatment
   MRI
   Use of Investigational Drug or Device
   Internet-based Data Collection  or Transmission
Population
Indicate which  of the following populations  will be included  in this  research
   Adults  who may have impaired  decision-making ability
   Medically and Psychiatrically  Healthy  Subjects
   Adults
Protocol Summary  Form
7459
Small, Scott
Page 3 of 27
Research Support/Funding
Will an existing internal account be used to support the project?NoIs the project  externally funded  or is external funding planned?
YesSelect the number of external  sources of funding that  will be applicable to  this study
Funding Source #1
Is the PI  [INVESTIGATOR_40349]/contract the same  as the PI [INVESTIGATOR_40350]? 
YesSelect one of the followingThe grant/contract is currently fundedSource of FundingFederalInstitute/AgencyNIMHGrant NameGlutamate reducing interventions in schizophreniaGrant NumberR61 MH112800-01Select one of the followingSingle SiteBusiness OfficeCUDoes the grant/contract involve a  subcontract? 
YesSubcontracted?ToName [CONTACT_14189](s)RFMH, [CONTACT_500190] is the PI [INVESTIGATOR_625597]/will be conducted at any  of the  following
   NYSPI
[INVESTIGATOR_60492]/locations
No
Lay Summary of Proposed  Research 
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_833414], then medications  that decrease glutamate may be 
able to prevent the  development of schizophrenia. One medication that  decreased brain  glutamate  is a 
medication called pomaglumetad (POMA). POMA has  been  tried  several  times  in schizophrenia but  without 
much success.  We think that this may be  because  these people  already had schizophrenia. In addition, the 
people who did these studies used doses of POMA that were  too low and  did not  actually  decrease 
glutamate. Third, the people who did these studies did not use  a brain imaging method of measuring 
whether or  not POMA  affected glutamate levels in the brain.
 
 To address these limitations of prior studies, we  will administer  several  doses  of POMA (low and high  
doses) over [ADDRESS_833415], then high  glutamate should be considered a 
molecular target for  drug  discovery and agents  that reduce extracellular  glutamate  should be an effective  
intervention. Pomaglumetad methionil (which  we will call  ‘POMA’) is one  such agent, because as an 
agonist of  presynaptic metabotropic glutamate 2/[ADDRESS_833416],  as these  
trials did not use a  reliable brain biomarker of glutamate elevations there was no readout  of ‘target 
engagement’, and thus  it remains possible that these  trials were false negatives. Second, and more 
importantly, schizophrenia is now thought to start in a prodromal  phase before the onset  of psychosis, and  
there is evidence to suggest that the prodromal stage might  represent a  unique  time-window  for therapeutic 
interventions, and  so it possible  that the drug was given at the wrong stage of the disease.
 
Pathophysiological support for  these conclusions comes from  our studies (Schobel et al, Neuron,  2013)
in which we applied fMRI indicators  of metabolism and volumetric MRI  to patients in  prodromal stages  of 
the disease who then progressed  to the psychotic stage, and  to a mouse  model of the disease. Collectively, 
these studies  suggested that glutamate is  a driver  of hippocampal dysfunction, that fMRI  measures  are 
sensitive to glutamate elevations,  and that glutamate-reducing drugs  can ameliorate hippocampal 
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_833417] recently proposed  a mechanistic model of
disease progression (Small, Neuron, 2014), which  predicts that  because of its  distinct pathophysiological 
features the prodromal stage  of disease  is a unique  time-window that is  most  amenable to  glutamate-
reducing interventions. This mechanistic model  motivates  this protocol in  which we hypothesize that: 1) 
MRI based measures of hippocampal metabolism and glutamate can be  used  as in vivo biomarkers  of target 
engagement when using  a glutamate-reducing intervention. 2) Glutamate-reducing  interventions will be 
most effective when administered to prodromal patients, and only  when they  are shown to engage their 
target. The R61 phase of this proposal  is designed  to test the first hypothesis, and the R33 phase  is designed 
to the second.  The current  IRB describes the R61 phase.
 
We will also perform  a study to examine  the stability of our MRI measures over up to 4 months in a 
healthy control population.  
Specific Aims and Hypotheses
Specific Aims and  Hypotheses
To perform  a double-blind,  randomized,  phase Ib, multiple dose trial of 14 days of treatment with  POMA 
(40mg bid, 80mg bid, 120mg bid, 160mg bid) in clinical high risk patients to  determine  which dose, if  any,  
reduces hippocampal glutamate and metabolism using  MRI techniques. The GO  NO-GO decision  will be 
whether or  not any dose tested  in the R61 phase of the trial decreases left CA1 CBV.
 
To examine  the stability of our MRI  measures  over up  to [ADDRESS_833418] Population
Sample #[ADDRESS_833419]  population
18-30
Protocol Summary  Form
7459
Small, Scott
Page 6 of 27
Sample #[ADDRESS_833420]  population
18-30
Gender, Racial and  Ethnic Breakdown
33% Caucasian, 33% African American, 10% Asian, 24% Mixed; 33% Hispanic; 70% male, 30% femaleDescription of subject populationAs above
Recruitment Procedures
Describe settings where recruitment  will occur
Patients will be  told about  the study by [CONTACT_625608]  (IRB #6654R). If they  are interested, they 
will then be referred  to study investigators designated to  obtain  informed consent, who  will describe the 
study in  greater  detail and then obtain  informed consent. Specifically, patients  interested  in participation will 
be screened by [CONTACT_625609]. They will be told about the procedures  and risks, 
that the study involves randomization and the details  will be  explained. They will also be told that  
participation is voluntary,  and of the extra study details beyond that  of the COPE  protocol  itself and 
affiliated observational studies, including exposure  to POMA and  gadolinium contrast. If interested and  
eligible, patients will  have an  evaluation  of their  capacity to  consent and  invited  to provide written informed 
consent.
 
Healthy control subjects will be recruited through  #6654R  as well as from other Area Psychosis 
research studies that include healthy control subjects who have expressed interest in additional research.
How and by [CONTACT_60504]/or recruited? 
See above. All patients will be initially recruited through  6654R.
How will the study be  advertised/publicized? 
As above. Patients are initially recruited through 6654R.Do you have ads/recruitment material requiring  review at this time? 
NoDoes this study involve a  clinical trial?
YesPlease provide the NCT Registration Number
Protocol Summary  Form
7459
Small, Scott
Page 7 of 27
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Concurrent Research Studies
Will subjects in this  study participate in or be recruited from other studies? 
YesDescribe concurrent research  involvement
Subjects may  also be  active in IRB #6654R, 7132R, 7342 (PI [INVESTIGATOR_625598])  as they are  longitudinal 
studies. However,  no study  procedures  for the  other studies will take place  while active in  the current study.  
Rather, the other studies are studies which involve an active period, followed  by [CONTACT_625610] (6654R is the screening/umbrella  protocol for all 
COPE studies). Therefore,  subjects will not actually be  "active" in  more than one study while part of the 
current study, and  therefore subjects will finish this study before moving on to any  other studies.  Patients 
will be told about the  study  by [CONTACT_625611] (IRB #6654R). If interested, the study will be  
explained in greater detail by a study physician. Healthy control subjects may also be recruited through 6654R or other Area Psychosis research studies though will only be active in one protocol at a time.
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
Name [CONTACT_40443]/sub sampleClinical High  Risk
Create or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and  methods  to ascertain them
Criterion Method of  Ascertainment
1. COPE Patient between the ages  of 18-30 
(Identified as at  clinical  high  risk for  psychosis 
as defined  as a) attenuated psychotic symptoms; 
or b) brief intermittent  psychotic symptoms  c) 
schizotypal disorder or family history of  
psychotic disorder withrecent decline in functioning (30  GAF  points))Structured Interview for  Prodromal Syndromes/ 
Scale of  Prodromal Symptoms (SIPS/SOPS)
2. Capacity to provide informed consent  Clinical assessment by [CONTACT_625612]
3. Currently using a  reliable form of birth 
control (females  and males)Physician interview
 
 
 
Create or insert table to describe the exclusion criteria and methods to  ascertain them
 
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_833421] agents Physician evaluation
3. Lifetime diagnosis  of renal  failure/disease Physician eval and laboratories
4. Acute neurological, neuroendocrine, or medical disorder including renal insufficiency (CrCl <60mL/min/1.73m2
Physician exam, electrolytes, CBC
5. Lifetime diagnosis  of hypertension or diabetes  
or seizure disorderPhysician evaluation
6. IQ  < 70 WTAR < 6
7. Acute risk for suicide and/or  violence Physician evaluation, suicidal or violent act  in 
last [ADDRESS_833422]
9. Current abuse of substances  (alcohol, cocaine, 
stimulants, cannabis,  opi[INVESTIGATOR_858], sedative 
hypnotics)SCID, utox
10. Current use or anticipated need  for any 
antipsychotics or mood stabilizers (all  
antipsychotics, also Depakote, lithium, lamotrigine, pregabalin or any med  with a 
mechanism of action like  gabapentin) 
probenecid. Patients  may  take selective  
serotonin reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors as  long as they have been on a 
stable dose for at least  4 weeks before starting 
study drug.Physician Eval
11. More than one previous gadolinium scan Physician Eval
 
 
 
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria #[ADDRESS_833423] group/sub sampleControls
Protocol Summary  Form
7459
Small, Scott
Page 9 of 27
Create or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and  methods  to ascertain them 
 
 Criterion   Method of  Ascertainment
 1. Healthy control between the ages  of 18-30  Scid
 2. Capacity to provide informed consent Clinical assessment by [CONTACT_84048]
 3. Currently using a  reliable form of birth 
control (females) physician interview
 
 
 
 
Create or insert table to describe the exclusion criteria and methods to  ascertain them 
 
 
 Criterion Method of  
Ascertainment
 1. Metal  implants  in body or  a history of metal 
working metal screener
 2. Any neurological  disorder  medical history
 3. IQ  < 70 WTAR < 6 (only if  
IQ < 70 is suspected)
 4. Pregnant, lactating  urine pregnancy test
 5. Current use of substances (cocaine, stimulants, cannabis, opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438], sedative hypnotics)
 utox, SCID
 6. Any history of use  of a psychiatric  medication  History
 7. Any history of a  DSM Axis I disorder with the  
exception of specific  phobias and adjustment 
disorders SCID
 
 
 
 
 
Waiver of Consent/Authorization
Protocol Summary  Form
7459
Small, Scott
Page 10 of 27
Indicate if you are requesting any of the following consent waiversWaiver of consent for  use of records that include protected health information (a HIPAA waiver of 
Authorization) NoWaiver or alteration of consentNoWaiver of documentation of consent YesWaiver of parental consent No
Consent Procedures
Is eligibility screening  for this study conducted under a different IRB protocol?
YesIndicate NYSPI [CONTACT_1744] # 6654RDescribe Study Consent ProceduresPatients will be  told about  the study by [CONTACT_625608]  (IRB #6654R). If they  are interested, they 
will then be referred  to study investigators designated to  obtain  informed consent, who  will describe the 
study in  greater  detail and then obtain  informed consent. Specifically, patients  interested  in participation will 
be screened by [CONTACT_625609]. They will be told about the procedures  and risks, 
that the study involves randomization, and the details  will be  explained. They will also be told that
participation is voluntary,  and of the extra study details beyond that  of the COPE  protocol  itself and 
affiliated observational studies, including exposure  to POMA and  gadolinium contrast. If
interested and eligible, patients will have an  evaluation of their capacity to consent and invited to
provide written  informed consent. We will explicitly ask all  subjects  if they are  planning  on having a 
gadolinium MRI scan within  the 2 weeks before the  study, during  the study, or within 2 weeks  after the 
study (we will place this in the consent  form).
 
 Control subjects will be  similar told about the study and consented  if they are interested. Controls  will not  
require an independent  assessment of capacity.
 
Remote/virtual Procedures: remote procedures will be similar  to in person  procedures except that we 
will use  redcap to obtain  signed  consent (using the e signature [CONTACT_625626])  on the consent  forms  and 
hipaa forms. This may occur by [CONTACT_625613]. If  a subject  is unable to use  redcap  for some 
reason, we will use a verbal consent procedure.  When a verbal consent  procedure is done by [CONTACT_648], 
CFs and HIPAA forms will be sent to participants, preferably in advance in possible, for their review and records (but not signed). We have requested a Waiver  of Documentation  of Consent in the 
Waiver section of the PSF. In these cases, a note-to-file will be added to the participant’s chart on the date of the verbal  consent procedure documenting the  consent discussion and the participant’s verbal 
consent, signed by  [CONTACT_347680].
 
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_833424], such as access to a 
private space in which to take calls, or  accessibility —access at home to adequate  devices, cell signal, 
or wifi.We are also  confirming that the consent discussion includes the of risks of possible loss  of 
confidentiality with remote procedures, as well as the risk of attending the MRI or any other procedure in-person  during the pandemic, and  how these  risks can be mitigated.
 
Indicate which of  the following are employed  as a part of screening or main  study consent  procedures
   Consent Form
   Information Sheet
Waiver of Documentation of Consent
Would the consent form signature [CONTACT_60510]’s identity and the research data?NoIs breach of confidentiality the main study risk?NoIs consent for  this research procedure ordinarily not required outside of the research context? Explain
For our remote/virtual consent procedures, we  will use  redcap.  If a subject is  unable  to use redcap for 
some reason, we  will use a verbal consent procedure. When a verbal consent  procedure is done by  
[CONTACT_648], CFs and HIPAA forms will be sent to  participants,  preferably in advance in possible, for their 
review and records (but not signed). We have requested a Waiver  of Documentation  of Consent  in the 
Waiver section of the PSF. In these cases, a note-to-file will be added to the participant’s chart on the date of the verbal  consent procedure documenting the  consent discussion and the participant’s verbal 
consent, signed by  [CONTACT_347680]. We are requesting the waiver of documentation  of consent because, 
in this case,  we do not want subjects to send  us PHI when it  may  not be sent in a private  manner.
Persons designated to discuss and document  consent
Select the names of persons designated  to obtain consent/assent
Girgis, Ragy, MDLieberman, Jeffrey, MDSmall, ScottType in  the name(s)  not found in the  above  list
Independent Assessment of Capacity
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_833425] indicated  that your study  involves  subjects who  MAY  LACK capacity to  consent.
Does this study require an  independent assessment of capacity?
YesMethods/procedures for  capacity assessment
Capacity will be assessed by a psychiatrist  or psychologist licensed in NY state  and who  is not associated 
with this  study (patients only) .
Study Procedures
Describe the procedures required for this studya. COPE patients  (IRB #6654R) Patients will be  told about  the study  by [CONTACT_625608]  (IRB
#6654R). If interested, the  study will be explained in greater detail by a  study physician. Patients  will
provide written  informed consent and capacity determined by a  licensed,  CITI  trained  MD or PhD
psychologist at NYSPI.b. Baseline measures (pre-randomization):i. Serum laboratory tests (beta  HCG if  female, electrolytes, serum  BUN/creatinine, CPK, urinalysis, liver 
function tests,  CBC with differential,  thyroid  function  tests);  If eGFR <40 mL/min/1.73m2 or serum  
pregnancy test positive , then patients will discontinue the study (exclusion criterion for exposure to  
gadolinium.ii.a urine toxicology screen
iii. general  physical exam, including measures of weight, blood pressure, temperature pulse, respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516], 
EKG.
iv. 5cc of  blood  for DNA analysis
c. Structural Interview of Prodromal Syndromes (SIPS)  to evaluate current prodromal symptoms at time of 
study entryd. SCID to evaluate current psychiatric diagnoses including present of substance abusee. MATRICS, Hollingshead, GFS  scales,  GAF, CGI, SAFTEE,  AIMS , CSSRS, Simpson  Angus Scale
f. MRI with gadolinium contrast  and MRS  (one  hour). All  scans will be examined at the image console for 
gross structural abnormalities such as  the presence  of mass effects, hydrocephalus, and vascular
malformations by [CONTACT_625614].  Since the images obtained in this  study are exclusively 
T-[ADDRESS_833426]-scan acquisition, by [CONTACT_625615]. Appropriate follow-up with the patient’s primary care physician or appropriate sub-specialist and care setting will be  immediately arranged  for further diagnostic testing/treatment recommendations by [CONTACT_625616] [INVESTIGATOR_625599].
Concomitant Medications:  During the trial, no new  concomitant psychotropic medications will be permitted 
of the following classes of medication: antipsychotic  or mood-stabilizing  medication. Antidepressant and 
antianxiety medication, if needed for clinical management, will be  allowed, including lorazepam up to 1 mg 
daily (hypnotic, or for anxiety) if needed on a PRN basis. If a patient  does  require lorazepam,  they  will not  
take it for [ADDRESS_833427] adversely with POMA will not  be changed during the 
study.
Treatment Design: Enrollment, randomization, blinding, and  assessments for safety
 
Patients will be  randomized in a double blind manner to  40mg bid, 80mg  bid, 120mg bid, or 160mg bid of 
POMA. They will be  randomized in a 1:1:1:[ADDRESS_833428] take an equal number  of pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353] (e.g., someone taking 160mg  bid will take 4 tablets of 40mg 
POMA bid, and someone taking 40mg  bid will take  1 tab of 40mg  POMA bid  and 3 identical looking tablets 
of placebo bid). To minimize  risk of nausea,  we will taper medications up so that on day 1 subjects will take 
40mg bid, on day 2 80mg bid (if at  this dose or higher), on day 3 120mg  bid (if at this dose or higher), and 
on day [ADDRESS_833429] MRI scan.
 
Follow Up
 
We will perform a  safety check in call  30 days after study participation. We may repeat the safety  
labs/EKG/physical as necessary after Day  [ADDRESS_833430]. Eligible subjects  will receive up to 4x1 hour MRI/MRS scans over a  4 month period. MRI  scans will be 
done as described  above, without gadolinium. Standby [CONTACT_625617].
 
Remote Procedures:  Some of the visits may be conducted remotely using  the telephone or HIPAA-
compliant video teleconferencing. In  particular,  all procedures that can be done remotely including 
consent, capacity and clinical/behavioral assessments will be done  remotely except for the blood draw 
and physical exam which will have to occur separate from  MRI since these screening procedures are 
required before we  begin the study (technically not required  for MRI but we prefer to know if 
someone will be eligible  for the study  before we have people do MRI; we will submit individual 
exception requests  if we want to perform an MRI without having received the  results of labs and 
physical exam).
 
I attest to follow the  COVID-19 Safety Guidelines for Columbia Psychiatry and NYSPI [INVESTIGATOR_40372]-Entry 
outlined in the NYSPI [INVESTIGATOR_40373]’s June 1st memo, which include  but are not limited to: 
• Infection Control/PPE –  Guidelines 
• Research participants will only  come on-site if absolutely necessary for study procedures.  
• No volunteers/externs  on-site during  Stage 1. 
• Clinical research  teams will screen their participants for COVID symptoms  (night before and day of 
onsite visit, documenting this  in the chart), and  escort them in and out of  the building.  
• COVID/COVID-like symptoms in participants will be reported  to the IRB via  PRISM as an SAE. 
You can upload charts or diagrams if any
Criteria for Early Discontinuation  
Criteria for  Early Discontinuation
Subjects will be  discontinued from this study for any of the following reasons: a)  relapse, defined as an 
increase of  > 2 points on the CGI-S at any time  point; b) the use of > 3 doses  of p.r.n. clinically determined 
Protocol Summary  Form
7459
Small, Scott
Page 15 of 27
benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_625600] a week;  c) deemed to  be clinically  necessary in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_625601],  physical examination, mental status examination, or any other 
clinical information; d)  pregnancy; e) seizure activity. All  attempts  will be made to obtain end-of-study  
CBV scans and  ratings  for early  discontinuations.  The blind will be broken  at the  end of the study. 
Randomization/blind information will not be given to  subjects.
 
 
Patients will be  discontinued if they convert to psychosis. If this happens, standard treatment/referral  
procedures (as  per #6654R) will be implemented.  Namely, if they do not  already have a clinician, they will 
be treated in COPE  until an appropriate referral can be made.
Blood and other Biological Samples
Please create or insert  a table describing  the proposed collection  of blood or other biological specimens
We will obtain  up to 120 cc of blood at  screening (safety labs  and blood for DNA), day  7 (safety  labs and 
POMA PK sample), and day 14 (safety labs and  POMA PK sample) for a  total  of 50 cc over the course of 
the study (~3 tablespoons).
Assessment Instruments
Create a table or give a brief  description  of the  instruments  that will be used for assessment
The Structured Clinical Interview for  DSM-IV (SCID)  (First e al., 2001) 45 min is a structured  diagnostic  
interview done at baseline  to evaluate  potential exclusion  criteria for the trial.
 
The Structured Interview for Prodromal  Symptoms/ Scale of Prodromal Symptoms (SIPS/SOPS)  30 min
(Miller et al.,1999) will be done at  baseline,  and on days  7 and 14. It includes  the GAF.
 
The Global Functioning Scale: Role (GFS: Role; Niendam, Beraden, Johnson &  Cannon,  2006), and The 
Global Functioning Scale: Social (GFS:  Social;  Auther, Smith &  Cornblatt, 2006)  5 min.
 
Clinical Global Impression scale  (CGI)-3  minutes measures overall  clinical  functioning.
Columbia Suicide  Severity Rating Scale  (CSSRS)-[ADDRESS_833431] of Adult Reading (WTAR)-5 minutes is a measure of intelligence.
Simpson Angus Scale (SAS) [ADDRESS_833432]  instruments are used
Protocol Summary  Form
7459
Small, Scott
Page 16 of 27
Off label and investigational use of drugs/devices
Choose from the following that will be applicable to your study 
   Drug
Select the number of drugs used in this study1
Drug #1
Name [CONTACT_625627]#134867Who holds the  IND/IND  sponsor?
IND is held by  [CONTACT_976]/CU Investigator
Lieberman, Jeffrey, MD
Research Related Delay to Treatment
Will research procedures result in a delay to treatment?NoTreatment to be  provided at the  end of the study
If subjects clinically require active treatment  for new onset mood  syndrome (major  depressive  or bipolar, 
anxiety symptoms, or  psychosis during the  study  period or screening phase) patients will be immediately  
offered such treatment. Subjects will be ineligible  for study participation if they meet any exclusion  criteria 
as a result  of such clinical  developments. Since POMA  is an experimental medication, it will not  be 
available to subjects  at the end of  the trial.
 
Patients in this study  will continue their  usual treatment with their usual psychiatrist and clinician  without 
interruption or changes.  There is  currently no standard best  clinical practice (psychotherapeutic or  
psychopharmacologic) for  prodromal  stages of psychotic disease. Available antipsychotic therapi[INVESTIGATOR_625602], but are associated with a  significant  side-effect burden, including EPS, weight gain, and 
hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035], amongst other side effects.  The evidence for efficacy  of cognitive-behavioral interventions 
for prevention of transition to psychosis is also mixed to  date.
 
All COPE subjects receive up to [ADDRESS_833433] treatment (medication management and therapy), 
though they would have to cover  the cost of their medications.
Protocol Summary  Form
7459
Small, Scott
Page 17 of 27
Clinical Treatment Alternatives
Clinical treatment alternatives
If subjects clinically require active treatment  for new onset mood  syndrome (major  depressive  or bipolar, 
anxiety symptoms, or  psychosis during the  study  period or screening phase) patients will be immediately  
offered such treatment. Subjects will be ineligible  for study participation if they meet any exclusion  criteria 
as a result  of such clinical  developments. Since POMA  is an experimental medication, it will not  be 
available to subjects  at the end of  the trial.
 
Patients in this study  will continue their  usual treatment with their usual psychiatrist and clinician  without 
interruption or changes.  There is  currently no standard best  clinical practice (psychotherapeutic or  
psychopharmacologic) for  prodromal  stages of psychotic disease. Available antipsychotic therapi[INVESTIGATOR_625602], but are associated with a  significant  side-effect burden, including EPS, weight gain, and 
hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035], amongst other side effects.  The evidence for efficacy  of cognitive-behavioral interventions 
for prevention of transition to psychosis is also mixed to  date.
Risks/Discomforts/Inconveniences 
Risks that  could be  encountered during the study period
1) Risks and Discomforts Associated  with LY2140023 (Pomaglumetd,  “POMA”) Administration 
Approximately 582 healthy  subjects  and 2877 subjects/patients  with schizophrenia  have been 
exposed to POMA in prior studies.   Across groups, nausea, vomiting, increased heart  rate, and 
eosinophilia as assessed by [CONTACT_625618] (≥1% and <10%) in 
patients treated with POMA.
Healthy controls: [ADDRESS_833434] common AEs (≥10%)  in clinical pharmacology studies 
conducted in healthy subjects were:  nausea,  headache, vomiting, and dizziness. The following 
SAEs have been reported  in healthy subjects: infected sebaceous cyst (1), deep vein thrombosis 
(1), pulmonary embolism (2), and syncope due to vasovagal event (1). With the exception of 
syncope due to vasovagal event,  none of these  SAEs were reported by [CONTACT_625619].
Most pertinent to the proposed dose in this study, multiple doses of POMA, administered 
up to [ADDRESS_833435] population, including  5 healthy 
controls receiving  160 mg BID (greater  or equal  320 mg per day) for [ADDRESS_833436] the 200 mg dose level  was ongoing
There were generally no clinically  significant values, changes, or trends  in clinical 
laboratory data or vital signs.  An increased  esoinophil count was observed  after 15 days of dosing  
with 40 mg POMA. However, similar eosinophil changes  were not seen at higher dose levels, so 
there is no apparent  dose dependency  of the change. In addition, there  were  no concomitant  
cutaneous reactions associated with the eosinophil  changes, so the clinical significance remains 
unclear. There  were  no clinically  significant  changes in ECGs which is consistent with findings, 
suggesting that doses  of POMA up to 160 mg BID are not associated with QTc prolongation. This 
study incorporated EEG measurements to explore  potential  prodromal signs  of convulsions at 
higher than previously  administered  doses of POMA. The results of the EEG  measurements  in 
this study showed  that there  was no abnormal EEG activity  associated with POMA, administered 
up to 160 mg BID. 
Patient populations:   Table 6.4 from the IB (attached) provides  a summary of TEAEs for patients 
who were assigned  to take either placebo or POMA  in completed studies.   In the placebo-
controlled studies, 727 patients  were assigned to placebo, and 1555  were  assigned  to POMA . 
There was not a significant difference in adverse events when  comparing patients taking placebo  
with patients taking POMA  , 403 (55.4%) and 901 (57.9%), respectively. The common adverse 
events reported in ≥2% of patients  treated with POMA  were: schizophrenia (underlying disease-
related events), eosinophilia, anxiety,  acute extrapyramidal  symptoms, vomiting, abdominal pain, 
insomnia, headache,  nausea, anxiety, blood  CPK increased, agitation, constipation,  abdominal 
pain, and dyspepsia. Nausea  was significantly  higher in the POMA pooled group compared with 
the placebo group  (6.8%  vs. 4.1%,  p=.005), as were vomiting  (4.1% vs. 2.5%, p=.032)  and 
eosinophilia (4.8%  vs. 1.0%, p=.003).  
The most common TEAEs reported  in ≥2% of patients assigned to POMA in 1 or more of 
the completed long-term safety studies were:  schizophrenia-related  events, nausea, insomnia, 
headache, vomiting, nasopharyngitis,  blood  CPK increased, anxiety,  decreased appetite, diarrhea,  
dizziness, tremor, fatigue,  weight decreased, nasopharyngitis, upper respi[INVESTIGATOR_1092], 
agitation, dyspepsia,  bronchitis, back  pain, cough,  depression, restlessness,  abdominal  
discomfort, blood pressure increased,  constipation, rash, tooth ache, arthralgia, back pain, 
somnolence, akathisia, dry mouth,  irritability,  pruritus, and upper abdominal pain. 
In the placebo-controlled studies there  was a statistically higher incidence of abnormally 
high eosinophils at any time in the pooled POMA  group compared with placebo (POMA  5.5%;  
Protocol Summary  Form
7459
Small, Scott
Page 19 of 27
placebo 0.9%; p<.001). There  was also a statistically significant mean increase in eosinophils 
during administration of POMA  administration  when  compared to baseline or placebo.  
The significance of the eosinophila is unknown but there have been no clear clinical 
correlates to the eosinophil  elevations.  There  have  been  no other consistent or clinically significant  
changes in laboratory values in the placebo-controlled  studies.
In other studies, people  who took compounds similar to POMA have  experienced rash, skin 
itching, or skin peeling.  Because of these experiences, rash,  itching  of the skin or skin peeling  will 
be closely monitored. Subjects will be asked at every visit about these  skin conditions.
Most pertinent to the present project, [ADDRESS_833437] exposure  to POMA. There was no apparent  trend in the severity 
of TEAEs  with increasing dose. The MTD for was not reached in this multiple ascending dose 
study. There were no clinically meaningful  changes in ECG parameters  and no positive correlation 
between plasma concentrations of POMA and changes from baseline in QTc across all the doses. 
A dose of 400 mg, which was approximately 5 times the anticipated clinical dose, did not prolong 
QTcF to a clinically significant degree.
Deaths: There were  18 deaths  reported in completed studies (out of over 3000  human 
exposures). In these  18 death  cases, 12 patients were  assigned to take POMA, 3 patients were 
assigned to take placebo, 1 patient  was assigned to take olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_050], and 2 patients  did not take 
any study  drug. Also, of these 18 death cases, 7 were  completed  suicides with 5 of those  patients 
assigned to take POMA. Of the 12 patients  assigned  to take POMA, 5 of those deaths occurred 
after the study drug had been held or discontinued. Also, of the 12 patients assigned to take 
POMA, 9 of those  deaths were considered to be not related to the study drug treatment by [CONTACT_1275], while all 12 deaths  were considered to be not related  to the study drug treatment by 
[CONTACT_456]. A listing of death  cases for completed studies is presented in Table 6.1 in the IB 
(attached).
SAE: Overall, there were 361 case  reports of SAEs (excluding the 18 deaths in patients) in POMA 
clinical trials. In the placebo-controlled studies, 727 patients  were  assigned to placebo, and 1555  
were assigned to POMA. There  was not a significant difference in SAEs when comparing patients 
taking placebo with patients assigned  to POMA, 25 (3.4%) and 43 (2.8%), respectively. The only 
SAE reported  ≥1% patients was schizophrenia-related, with no statistically significant differences 
observed when comparing patients taking placebo with patients  taking POMA. 
Overdose: The effect of a single dose of activated charcoal on the PK of POMA  and LY404039 
was examined in healthy subjects. Activated  charcoal reduced the area under the curve  from time 
zero to infinity (AUC0-∞) and Cmax of both POMA  and LY404039 by [CONTACT_3450]  25% and 
35%, respectively, when administered  1 hour after a single 80-mg  dose of POMA . However, the 
median time to maximum concentration  (tmax) of neither analyte was affected by [CONTACT_625620]. 
Protocol Summary  Form
7459
Small, Scott
Page 20 of 27
Signs and Symptoms: There is limited information on signs or symptoms of POMA overdose  or on 
treatment of overdose in humans. In clinical  trials,  1 case of ingesting approximately 1800 mg of 
POMA in combination with lorazepam  was reported. The patient did not experience  any significant 
medical consequences of the overdose and spontaneously recovered without medical 
intervention. 
Management of Overdose: No specific antidote  is known. Symptomatic  treatment and monitoring 
of vital organ function according to clinical  presentation is recommended.
Risk of Serotonin Syndrome
 
POMA increases levels of serotonergic  metabolites in  humans  (Lowe et al., 2012) and therefore there is a  
theoretical increased risk of serotonin syndrome  when POMA  is administered  with  a serotonergic  
medication, such as an antidepressant. There is insufficient experience in humans  to know  whether this risk  
of more than theoretical. However, in order to protect against  this risk, we will review serotonin syndrome 
as part of  the standard consent process with all patients, include  a full paragraph  in risks  section  of the 
consent form discussing  this theoretical risk, and review side  effects  at every visit, as previously described. 
In addition,  we are  already excluding  individuals with any severe  medical  condition or history  of seizure  
disorder, and have implemented a robust schedule for adverse  event monitoring, including safety labs and 
medical/physical examination.
 
Seizure Risk
 
In all  of the studies  performed with POMA in human subjects,  events of seizure were reported in 6 patients 
treated with POMA at 5, 20, and 80 mg BID. Additionally, seizures were reported in 1 patient  randomized  
to risperidone  and 1 patient  during a  placebo-lead in period. Seizures were reported in an  additional  3 
patients prior to them being randomized to study medication. There  was 1 additional report  of convulsion 
that was determined  not to be seizures.
Specific Vulnerabilities  
There are no known specific vulnerabilities  for a CHR (clinical  high  risk) population. However, we will 
obtain an independent assessment of  capacity  for all  subjects,  and will also perform the SIPS and CGI and 
GAF weekly while  in the study to follow clinical  status.
 
Risks and Discomforts Associated with Compound LY404039  in Humans
A breakdown product of POMA, called LY404039, has been given to [ADDRESS_833438] taken  LY404039 were 
headache, feeling dizzy upon  standing  up, stomach pain,  nausea (feeling sick to the stomach), 
sore throat,  tiredness, or feeling  sleepy. 
Risks and Discomforts Associated with LY2140023 (Pomaglumetad, “POMA”)  in Animals
POMA has been studied in animals. Rats treated with POMA showed  uncoordinated  movement, 
problems with walking, reduced  body weight, uncontrollable and rapid  shaking (convulsions or 
Protocol Summary  Form
7459
Small, Scott
Page 21 of 27
possible seizures),  or death. In 1 out of 40 rats treated with very high doses of POMA for 6 
months, areas of brain injury  were  observed. Mice treated  with POMA also showed  uncontrollable 
and rapid shaking  (convulsions or possible  seizures). Vomiting, soft or watery stools,  and/or  a 
severe rash were seen  in monkeys  given  high doses of POMA for up to [ADDRESS_833439]’s blood will be lower than the levels of drug in 
monkeys at which the above bad effects  were noted. Effects of convulsion observed  in rats and 
mice were observed  at blood drug levels that are similar to or lower than the levels expected in 
this study.
Summary
 
Doses of  POMA as high or higher  than the highest dose in this study (160 mg twice  a day) have been taken 
by 24 healthy people without psychiatric illness for 10 days in a  previous study without significant  side 
effects. 44 patients  with schizophrenia completed a multiple dose escalation study over a  dose range  of 160 
to 480 mg BID for 7 days. Therefore, this dose and higher has been given before, but not  for this  length  of 
time ([ADDRESS_833440]  been given).
 
 
2) Interviews  and ratings  (general): Study participants may feel anxious  during medical history  interviews  or 
during administration of specific rating  scales.
 
3) Brain imaging  scans (general): It may be uncomfortable to lie motionless  in the MRI scanner and it may 
cause some subjects to feel anxious.
 
4) Intravenous catheter: Intra-venous lines can  cause pain, bleeding, or occlusion/clotting.
 
5) MRI Imaging:  The Magnetic Resonance  (MR) scanner  uses  strong magnetic fields and radio waves to 
take measurements in the brain. MRI involves lying on a table that slides into a large magnet shaped like  a 
cylinder. Before  beginning the procedure,  we will determine  that patients do not have a pacemaker or any  
unsafe metallic implants  such  as an aneurysm clip  or heart valve  and certain tattoos, and  they  will be  asked 
to remove  any metal or magnetized objects (such  as keys, chains, jewelry, retainers, medication  patches, 
hairpi[INVESTIGATOR_307111]).  In addition, they will complete a brief interview at the time  of study inclusion  to 
determine if they  have Asthma or a  history of renal failure that  may exclude  their  ability to receive an  
injection of Gadolinium (see below  section).  These questions  will be repeated on the day of the scan.
 
For the scanning procedure, they will be  asked to lie flat on the back  in the MRI  scanner  for approximately 
[ADDRESS_833441] reported  sensations  during MRI scans, such 
as "tingling"  or "twitching" (or, very  rarely, a painful  sensation), which are caused  by [CONTACT_625621]. With any MRI scan, on occasion, some  people 
experience nervousness or  discomfort  due to the scanner's small space and the need to  lie still.  Except for 
Protocol Summary  Form
7459
Small, Scott
Page 22 of 27
pacemakers, some types of metallic implants, and medication patches, we are  not aware of any other 
potentially dangerous interactions or hazards associated with  the MRI scan. The MRI scanner also produces 
a loud noise.
6) Gadolinium compounds  do have side effects, we use Dotarem. One side  effect of gadolinium is nausea 
and vomiting, observed in less than 2 people  out of  every 100 injected. (1.8% estimate). Dry mouth (less 
than 2%), dizziness (0.7%  up to 3.6%),  and headache (2.2% up to 5.8%)  are infrequent, yet possible side-
effects. An additional side effect is hives, observed  in less than [ADDRESS_833442]  agents are at increased risk for more serious side rare  side effects (less than 
1/10,000 injections  estimate), such as severe  allergic reaction that may result in sudden
difficulty breathing, and  therefore will not be injected with Gadolinium.   Some patients with  acute renal 
failure or end-stage renal  disease  have developed a serious medical condition known  as nephrogenic 
systemic fibrosis (NSF) after the use  of gadolinium for MRI.  The primary concern regarding risks to renal 
function from gadolinium-based contrast  agents (GBCAs) is specific to  this population of patients  who have 
end-stage renal disease (ESRD)  on hemodialysis,  or acute, florid, clinical renal failure, and then are  exposed 
to gadolinium. This population of patients  is by [CONTACT_625622]. Renal  dysfunction as a result of gadolinium  in a population without 
history of end-stage  renal disease or acute  renal failure has  not been described in  the medical literature.  In a 
retrospective study conducted at two large medical centers, 74,[ADDRESS_833443] dose of gadolinium (0.1mmol/kg, the  same dose used in  our research studies) who  
had no screening for renal function,  with a rate of zero/74,124 cases of renal complications (e.g.,  
nephrogenic systemic  fibrosis  (NSF)  or other renal dysfunction) post injection (Prince, Zhang  et al. 2008). 
All [ADDRESS_833444] been identified in  persons  with normal renal  function or 
with moderate  renal dysfunction.
 
Regarding this specific risk, the FDA recommends:1. Become familiar  with the patient populations at risk for NSF.
2. Avoid using gadolinium in patients with known risks  for developi[INVESTIGATOR_248526].
3. Prior to administering gadolinium, evaluate patients for renal dysfunction by [CONTACT_625623], either by [CONTACT_19201] a medical history or conducting laboratory tests  that measure renal function.
4. When administering gadolinium, do not exceed  the recommended dose in  product labeling and  allow a 
sufficient period of time  for elimination of the agent from the body prior  to any  further  gadolinium
administration. The American  College  of Radiology recommends, as of July 2007, pre-screening patients 
prior to the administration of Gadolinium-Based MR  Contrast Agents (GBMCA)  their  glomerular filtration
rate (GFR) for the following patient groups:
1. Renal  disease (including solitary kidney,  renal  transplant, renal tumor)
2. Age >603. History of  Hypertension
4. History of  Diabetes
5. History of  severe hepatic disease/liver transplant/pending liver transplant. For patients  in this  category  
only, it is  recommended  that the patient's  GFR assessment be nearly contemporaneous with  the MR  
examination for which the  GBMCA is to be administered. Concurrently,  researchers investigating clinical 
Protocol Summary  Form
7459
Small, Scott
Page 23 of 27
risk factors as well as the  role of gadolinium formulation in  development of NSF (Peak and Sheller  2007; 
Kanal, Broome et al. 2008) note  that the Gadolinium-based contrast agents may possess  differential risk of 
NSF depending upon their chemical structure.  Gadolinium agents are classified  on the basis of chelate 
biochemical structures (macrocyclic vs linear) and chelate charge (ionic vs nonionic) (Perazella 2007). Macrocyclic molecules  bind gadolinium  more tightly than do linear chelates,  possess high thermodynamic  
conditional stability, and  have lower  dissociation rates. Ionic cyclic chelates are
thought to be the  least likely to release free  gadolinium,  whereas  nonionic  linear  chelates are the most  likely 
to release free gadolinium in the body. Risk of NSF  is considered to  be the highest with  Omniscan and 
OptiMARK, which carry  no molecular  charge, are arranged in a linear structure with excess chelate, and 
seem more likely to release  free gadolinium into the body. Since gadodiamide  (Omniscan) has been most  
commonly associated with NSF(Thomsen 2006) and gadopentetate dimeglumine (magnevist) second-most associated ; the Neurological Institute’s  imaging center has changed contrast agents from  Omniscan  to 
Dotarem, a macrocyclic ionic agent.
 
The dosing  guidelines for the brand  of gadolinium to be used in  this study are as follows:  CNS (Central 
Nervous System)  Adults: The  recommended  dose of Dotarem  0.1mmol/kg  (0.2 mL/kg)  administered  as a 
rapid bolus intravenous  injection. According to the Multihance package insert and  the recent literature, 
repeated dosing of mutihance up to a  total dose of .3mmol/kg (in three  doses of 0.1mmol/kg) can be 
immediate given within a short time-span  with no adverse  effects.  The elimination half-life of the compound 
is 1-2 hours. Prior to readministration,  the FDA  recommends  'sufficient time for drug elimination'. Our  
study design of a  single baseline dose at 0.1mmol/kg followed by [CONTACT_625624] [ADDRESS_833445] been shown to  be safe with repeated dosing in prior studies.
 
COVID Risks There is  a risk  of exposure to COVID  when deciding  to go out in public and  travel for 
research.
 
Describe procedures  for minimizing risks
1) POMA:  In order to minimize risk, we will exclude any individual  with  any history of seizure disorder, or  
any severe medical  condition.  We will obtain frequent laboratory analyses, including liver
tests, and cbc, adverse event queries, and EKGs and  temperature during  this study. Patients  will be 
terminated from the study  if they develop  side effects that are, in  the opi[INVESTIGATOR_17439], preclusive  of 
continuing in this protocol  or in particular if they meet worsening criteria based  on the  CGI or need for  prn 
medications.
 
2) Interviews  and ratings  (general) Participants  will be allowed to take  breaks as necessary and are not 
required to answer any questions that may  be uncomfortable.
 
3) Brain imaging  scans (general): Our staff will be available to  provide  support, reduce anxiety, optimize the 
comfort of  the subject and  remove  the subject  from the MRI magnet bore if requested.
 
4) Intravenous catheter: Placement risks are minimized by [CONTACT_625625].
Protocol Summary  Form
7459
Small, Scott
Page 24 of 27
 
5) MRI Imaging:  Before beginning the procedure, we will determine that  patients  do not have a pacemaker  
or any unsafe metallic  implants such as an aneurysm clip  or heart  valve and certain tattoos, and they will be 
asked to remove any  metal or magnetized  objects  (such  as keys, chains, jewelry, retainers,  medication 
patches, hairpi[INVESTIGATOR_307111]). In addition,  they will  complete  a brief  interview at the time of study 
inclusion to determine  if they have  Asthma or  a history of renal failure  that may exclude  their  ability to  
receive an injection of Gadolinium (see below section). These  questions  will be repeated on the day of the 
scan. The MRI scanner also produces  a loud noise; earplugs will be  provided  to reduce this  discomfort.  If a 
patient experience any  discomfort and wish to stop the scan,  he/she can  tell the MRI technologist who will 
stop the scan immediately. In our experience, no one  has had sensations from  the MRI  that did not  stop 
when the scanning stopped.
 
6) Gadolinium -A trained physician will inject  the gadolinium and remain with the patient  for the entire 
duration and for 15minutes after the scanning  session is complete. Prior to scan,  all participants being 
considered for participation in this study  will continue to have  a complete  medical history prior  to MRI to 
screen for renal failure/history of renal disease, diabetes, or  hypertension,  as well as  screening labs.  Patients 
with a diagnosis of  acute renal failure are  invariably  severely medically  ill and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_057],  and are not 
eligible for study participation. In the current protocol, we administer Dotarem according  to the patient's 
weight at a dose of 0.1mmol/kg. Based upon the amount administered,  we do not exceed the recommended  
dosage. In addition,  an Epi [INVESTIGATOR_625603].  
 
COVID Risks:  We will instruct subjects to wear  a mask in public and while  traveling, practice  hand 
hygiene, and stay at least [ADDRESS_833446] or bus they  
would normally take is crowded, they can reschedule, or we may be able  to arrange alternative 
transportation (if  it is the  case  that alternative transportation, such as Uber or Lyft, can be offered). 
We have also minimized  in-office visits to lessen this risk. We will keep our subjects informed about  
current public health recommendations, such  as federal and local  government guidelines and 
directives. 
Methods to Protect Confidentiality
Describe methods  to protect confidentiality
All records of the participating subjects  will be kept in a  locked room  with access provided only to staff  
members. All data collected will be  kept confidential and used for professional purposes only.  Publications 
using these data  will be done with only deidentified data. As this study is an intervention study utilizing an 
IND there  is a possibility  that the FDA will inspect our records.
 
When done remotely, we will use redcap to  obtain consent on the cfs and hipaa forms. When  sending 
electronic messages to subjects, we will only use encrypted email  (NYSPI [CONTACT_164173]) and  when 
Protocol Summary  Form
7459
Small, Scott
Page 25 of 27
sending attachments with PHI only  use the NYSPI [INVESTIGATOR_625604] 
(https://attach.nyspi.org/) or encrypted nyspi [INVESTIGATOR_625605].When COPE  staff work from home, we all use the nyspi  [INVESTIGATOR_625606]. When  conducting remote 
visits, we will use telephone or hipaa compliant video conferencing.
 
Will the  study be  conducted under  a certificate of confidentiality?
Yes, we have already received a Certificate  of Confidentiality
Direct Benefits to Subjects  
Direct Benefits to Subjects
There are no direct benefits for participating  patients.
Compensation and/or  Reimbursement  
Will compensation or reimbursement  for expenses  be offered to subjects?
YesPlease describe  and indicate total amount and schedule of  payment(s).  
Include justification for compensation amounts and indicate  if there are bonus  payments.
Subjects will receive  $50 per visit, not including MRI, up to 5 total  visits (up to 3 for  screening, day  7, day 
14). In addition, patients will receive  $[ADDRESS_833447] 
(up to 2). Subjects  will also  receive reimbursement for local  transportation.  Payments will be made in  cash 
or check. The total estimated compensation  for this study is approximately $550.
 
For the test retest study, healthy subjects will receive $50 for their screening visit, not including  MRI, 
and $[ADDRESS_833448] (up to 4). Subjects will also  
receive reimbursement for local  transportation. Payments  will be made  in cash  or check. The total 
estimated compensation for this study  is approximately $450. 
References
References
First, M.B., Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Gibbon M, and Williams JBW.  Structured  Clinical  Interview for DSM-IV Axis I  
Disorders, Clinician Version (SCID-CV). (American Psychiatric Press, Inc., Washington D.C., 1996). 
Protocol Summary  Form
7459
Small, Scott
Page 26 of 27
Guy, W. Clinical Global Impressions. in ECDEU Assessment Manual for Psychopharmacology:Revised, ADM 76-338  (ed. Guy, W.) 217-222 (Department of Health, Education, and  Welfare,
Washington, DC, 1976).
 
Hollingshead, A.B.  Four-Factor Index of Social Status,  (Yale University, Department of Sociology, New
Haven, CT., 1975).
 
Levine, J. & Schooler, N.R. SAFTEE: a technique for the systematic assessment  of side effects in
clinical trials. Psychopharmacol Bull  22, 343-381  (1986).
 
Lowe S, Dean R, Ackermann B, Jackson K, Natanegara  F, Anderson S,  Eckstein J, Yuen E,  Ayan-
Oshodi M, Ho M, McKinzie D, Perry K, Svensson K.  Effects of a novel mGlu ₂/₃ receptor agonist 
prodrug, LY2140023  monohydrate,  on central monoamine  turnover  as determined in human and rat 
cerebrospi[INVESTIGATOR_872]. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2012 Feb;219(4):959-70.
 
Marder, S.R.  & Fenton,  W. Measurement  and Treatment Research to Improve Cognition  in
Schizophrenia: NIMH MATRICS initiative to support  the development of agents for  improving cognition
in schizophrenia. Schizophr Res 72, 5-9 (2004).
 
Miller, T.J., et al.  Prospective diagnosis of the  prodrome for schizophrenia:  Preliminary evidence of
interrater reliability and  predictive validity using operational criteria  and a structured  interview.  Am J
Psychiat 159, 863-865 (2002).
 
Niendam, T.A., Bearden, C.E., Johnson, J.K. & Cannon, T.D. Global  Functioning:  Role  Scale,
(University of [LOCATION_004], Los Angeles, Los Angeles,  CA, 2006).
 
Auther, A.M., Smith, C.W. & Cornblatt, B.A. Global Functioning: Social Scale, (Zucker Hillside Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], Glen Oaks, NY, 2006).
 
Oquendo, M.A. & Mann,  J. Risk Factors for suicidal  behaviour: utility  and limitations  of research
instruments. in Standardized Evaluation  in Clinical Practice. (ed. First, M.B.) 103-130 (2003).
 
Revheim, N. &  Medalia, A. The independent living scales as a  measure  of functional  outcome  for
schizophrenia. Psychiatr  Serv 55, 1052-1054 (2004).
 
Schobel SA, Chaudhury  NH,  Khan  UA, Paniagua  B, Styner MA, Asllani I, Inbar BP, Corcoran  CM, 
Lieberman JA, Moore  H, Small  SA. Imaging  patients with  psychosis and a mouse  model establishes a  
spreading pattern of  hippocampal dysfunction and  implicates glutamate  as a driver. Neuron.  2013 Apr  
10;78(1):81-93.
 
Simpson, G.M. & Angus, J.W.S. A rating  scale  for extrapyramidal side  effects. Acta  Psych Scand
212(suppl.), 11-19 (1970).
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_833449] 1;84(1):32-9.
 
Uploads
Upload the entire grant application(s)Upload copy(ies) of unbolded Consent Form(s)Consent Form(081320)Bolded.pdfConsent Form(081320)unBolded.pdfUpload copy(ies) of bolded Consent Form(s)Upload copy(ies) of unbolded Information  Sheet(s)
Upload copy(ies) of bolded Information  Sheet(s)
Upload evidence of FDA  IND approval(s)
Upload a copy of Certificate of ConfidentialityUpload copy(ies) of the  HIPAA form
Upload any additional documents that  may be related to  this study