1 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014  Protocol and Background  
Title  PAP to PAP: CPAP vs ASV for Insomnia (Title Abbreviation = P2P)  
Date  November 7, 2014  
P.I. Barry Krakow, MD  
 Sleep & Human Health Institute (SHHI)  
 Maimonides Sleep Arts & Sciences, Ltd ( MSAS ) 
 [ADDRESS_348589]. NE, Suite 380  
 Albuquerque, NM [ZIP_CODE]  
 (505) [ADDRESS_348590] [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 Synopsis  
 Insomnia is the most common sleep disorder affecting millions of adults and is linked to daytime 
impairment.  Insomnia is typi[INVESTIGATOR_285528] a symptom, secon dary to a primary disorder, and often 
goes untreated for years.  Medication ( over the counter  or prescription) and sleep hygiene are typi[INVESTIGATOR_285529].  Newer guidelines view 
insomnia as a  co-morbid disorder needing independent treatment.  Recent research has discovered high 
rates of sleep -disordered breathing (SDB) among insomnia patients; this co -morbid pair ing is referred to 
as “complex insomnia.”   Several studies have revealed that trea tment of SDB decreases insomnia.  
 This study will determine which  of two different types of positive airway pressure (PAP therapy) 
mode s are more effective in reducing sleep breathing events in chronic insomnia patients  and in 
decreasing insomnia severity.   Patients presenting to the clinic with a primary complaint of insomnia will 
be potential participants for this study.  Following diagnostic polysomnography (PSG) testing, insomnia 
patients diagnosed with SDB and meeting inclusion criteria will be randomi zed to a PAP treatment arm, 
CPAP or ASV. No experimental devices will be used in this study, both CPAP and ASV are FDA approved 
for treatment of SDB  and are in wide use in the [LOCATION_003] . Participants will complete a series of three titration 
studies with their a ssigned PAP mode and attend a minimum of five clinical follow -up appointments over 
a [ADDRESS_348591] -treatment 
objective improvements on sleep studies will also be compared  including sleep breathing indices, sleep 
consolidation indices, and objective data download information.  
 This study will be funded by [CONTACT_285565], San Diego, CA .  Research will be conducted by 
[CONTACT_11339] -profit Sleep & Human Health Institute (SHHI)  at Maimonides Sleep Arts & Sciences (MSAS) and 
SHHI in Albuquerque, NM .  This project will take 1 -2 years to complete.   
2 
Version: 1, 11/11 /[ADDRESS_348592]  
 
AASM – American Ac ademy of Sleep Medicine  
ABPAP – Auto -Bilevel Positive Airway Pressure  
ADE – Adverse Device Effect  
AEC – Adverse Effects Checklist  
AHI – Apnea Hypopnea Index  
APAP -  Automatic Positive Airway Pressure  
ASV – Adaptive Servo -Ventilation  
BMI – Body Mass Index  
BT – Bed Time  
CAI – Central Apnea Index  
CBT-I – Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia  
CHF – Congestive Heart Failure  
COPD – Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease  
CPAP – Continuous Positive Airway Pressure  
CRF – Case -Report Form  
DME – Durable Medical Equ ipment  
EIQ – Exit Interview Questionnaire  
EPI – Expi[INVESTIGATOR_285530] – Epworth Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_285531] – Food and Drug Administration  
FOSQ -10 – Functional Outcomes of Sleep Questionniare  
FSS – Fatigue Severity Scale  
HSCL – Hopkins Symptom Check list 
III – Insomnia Impairment Index  
ISI – Insomnia Severity Index  
ITT – Intent to Treat  
MRD – Mandibular Repositioning Device  
MSAS – Maimonides Sleep Arts & Sciences, Ltd.  
NAR – Nonallergic Rhinitis  
NDS – Nasal Dilator Strips  
OOB – Out of Bed  
OSA – Obstru ctive Sleep Apnea  
OTC – Over -The-Counter  
PAP – Positive Airway Pressure  
PAP-T – Positive Airway Pressure Therapy  
PGA – Patient Global Assessment of Sleep Questionnaire  
PHI – Private Health Information  
PLMD – Periodic Limb Movement Disorder  
PSG - Polysomnog ram 
PUDS – PAP Units of Distress Survey  
3 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014  QLESQ – Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire  
RCT – Randomized Controlled Trial  
RDI – Respi[INVESTIGATOR_285532] – Restless Leg Syndrome  
SDB – Sleep -Disordered Breathing  
SE – Sleep Efficienc y 
SHHI – Sleep & Human Health Institute  
SOL – Sleep Onset Latency  
SUDS – Subjective Units of Distress Scale  
TIB – Time in Bed  
TST – Total Sleep Time  
UARS – Upper Airway Resistance Syndrome  
VAS-F – Visual Analog Scale - Fatigue  
VAS-S – Visual Analog Scale - Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_285533] – Wake After Sleep Onset  
 
 
  
4 
Version: 1, 11/11 /[ADDRESS_348593] common sleep disorder in the general population affecting millions, and 
difficulty staying asleep (sleep maintenance insomnia) is the most common presentation. (1-5) Chronic 
insomn ia is linked to daytime impairment,(6) disability,(7) motor vehicle crashes,(8) workplace 
absenteeism(9) and errors,(8) and excess medical service utilization.(7)  It also aggravates or increases 
risk for alcoholism,(10) depression,(11)  diabetes,(12) obes ity,(13) and stroke.(14)  The economic burden 
of insomnia has been calculated in the tens of billions of dollars.(15;16)  
Though insomnia is encountered routinely in primary care,(6;17;18) it often goes undiagnosed or 
untreated for years.(19;20) Disregard for insomnia complaints may be a function of physician training or 
knowledge;(21 -23) conversely, patients may avoid discussing insomnia with their doctors or may not 
envision useful treatments for this sleep disorder.(24;25)  The apparent lack of attention  to insomnia 
care may occur as a result of a vast medical literature that defines insomnia as a symptom, secondary to 
a primary disorder (e.g. cancer or depression).  When the primary condition is treated, insomnia 
presumably resolves.(26)   
Treatment offe red for insomnia usually consists of three approaches: basic sleep hygiene 
education,(27) over -the-counter (OTC) sleep aids, or sedative/hypnotics and other sedating medications 
by [CONTACT_50246].(5;6;18;28) For mild insomnia cases, sleep hygiene may prove c ost effective and often 
yield s satisfying results with minimal external coaching.  Though no definitive epi[INVESTIGATOR_285534], (19)  CDC and NHANES studies report sedative prescriptions are on the rise. (29;30)   
Notwithstanding, protracted use of prescription sedating medications (both indicated and off -label use) 
is a controversial subject. (31)  Unquestionably, prescription sedatives help some insomni a patients in 
the primary care setting, (32;33)  including some who use these medications nightly for several 
months (34) or potentially longer. (35;36)  Clinical trials often report minimal complications (35;37)  among 
a large proportion of sedative users, incl uding long -term users, although it is not always as clear whether 
these patients are achieving optimal outcomes. (33)  Counter to these observations, some reviews report 
sedatives are of limited (38) or no efficacy (39) for most chronic insomnia patients.  Co nventional wisdom 
suggests sedatives may be used frequently for short periods and then discontinued for myriad reasons.  
Last, emerging research has raised questions about increased risks for mortality, (40;41)  suicidality (42) 
and other side -effects (43) associated with sedatives.   Still, prescription sedatives for chronic insomnia 
represent only one form of treatment —a symptomatic therapy that may not lead to remission or cure 
when drug use ceases —thus, if this form of therapy fails to resolve epi[INVESTIGATOR_285535], it is 
unclear how primary care physicians proceed with these patients.(21;44)    
Newer perspectives and guidelines from the fields of sleep medicine(45) and psychiatry(42) view 
insomnia as a co -morbid disorder rather than a symptom, which then  warrants independent clinical 
assessment and treatment.  This point is key to the specialty of sleep medicine, whose main imperative 
seeks to determine whether or not the chronic insomnia patient is receiving an efficacious treatment,(5) 
which often leads  to an assessment of whether pharmacotherapy is yielding optimal results.  When 
pharmacotherapy is failing, it requires a more thorough sleep medical evaluation and usually a broader 
5 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014  array of therapeutic options.(5;21)  In particular, pharmacotherapy failu re raises suspi[INVESTIGATOR_285536],(5) a direct indication for polysomnography 
(PSG) per American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) guidelines.(5;46)  Of potential clinical import, 
recent research focusing  on PSG diagnostics revealed surprisingly high rates of the physiological disorder 
sleep -disordered breathing  among insomnia patients(47 -52)—referred to as “complex insomnia.”(53)  
Two studie s revealed very high rates of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) or u pper airway resistance 
syndrome (UARS)(54;55) in hypnotic -dependent insomniacs seeking treatment at a sleep medical center 
specifically for the chief complaint of persistent insomnia symptoms despi[INVESTIGATOR_285537].  
The manifestation and recognit ion of complex insomnia should be relatively straightforward, 
especially in light of newer research.  In a recent study(56) we found that of 1,035 patients with an 
insomnia disorder (insomnia severity index score >7 and daytime impairment attributed to ins omnia) 
who  sought insomnia treatment at a sleep medical center, 42% ranked a sleep breathing disorder as one 
of their main reasons for seeking treatment, 13% reported a concern about sleep breathing problems, 
and another 26% reported awareness of sleep bre athing symptoms.  Only 19% of the total sample 
lacked awareness or concerns about a possible sleep breathing disorder.  Although we found a high 
prevalence of sleep breathing awareness, it was only through multiple layers of questioning that these 
symptoms  were uncovered, which suggests polysomnography may be underutilized in insomnia patients 
with sleep breathing complaints due to inadequate screening and thus fewer referrals to sleep centers.  
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_285538], we presume most doctor -patient relationships 
currently steer clear of the discussion of sleep breathing symptoms, perhaps because so many 
insomniacs are more despera te about  not sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007].  In our own clinic, we often hear people remark, 
“Sure I snore, but that’s not why I  came to your sleep center; I want to fix my insomnia. “  Moreover, 
this combination of sleep disorders —Insomnia and SDB —creates clinical confusion,  because each one 
causes sleep fragmentation effects, and both disorders present with overlappi[INVESTIGATOR_285539] -
restorative sleep, awakenings at night, and difficulty returning to sleep.(57;58)  The complex insomnia 
co-morbidity may further complicate physicians’ efforts to assess pharmacotherapy efficacy due to their 
lack of familiarity with the intrica cies and assessments of either or both sleep disorders.  In theory, 
confusion arises when primary care physicians face the challenge of prescribing different drugs or 
revising dosages to treat residual insomnia symptoms(21) instead of considering potential  co-morbid 
SDB and referral to a sleep center.(28)  Identifying pharmacotherapy failure may also be obscured if 
drug efficacy estimates are based on limited knowledge(27) or influenced by [CONTACT_285566].(59)  
Making matters worse, no formal standards are  published to define pharmacotherapy failure for 
insomnia drugs.(5)    
When pharmacotherapy failure is suspected in primary care settings, many factors may dissuade 
physicians from referring insomnia patients to sleep medical centers for sleep specialist c onsultations or 
to sleep medical laboratories for overnight testing. However, when primary care physicians suspect 
sleep apnea in an insomnia patient, they may use screening tools designed to capture typi[INVESTIGATOR_285540](60) but not validated to as sess SDB risk among insomnia patients.(61)  As a result, false 
negative screens may further confound care.  
6 
Version: 1, 11/11 /[ADDRESS_348594] majority of insomnia patients:  “Doctor, I wake up at night and can’t go back 
to sleep.”  Prescribing a drug seems rational and logical, yet few physicians take the time to build a 
differential diagnosis to explain these nocturnal awakenings.  Moreover, the vast majority of insomnia 
research implicates two primary and not mutually exclusive pathophysiological pathways:  (1) innate 
hyperarousal; and (2) learned behavior.  Both theor ies more or less assign the physiological aspects of 
insomnia to the somatized tension that may cause or be a result of learned behaviors or innate 
hyperarousal activity.  Neither of these theories implicates sleep -disordered breathing as a major 
component  to this process, despi[INVESTIGATOR_285541] -disordered breathing creates hyperarousal 
activity all night long and has been reported to trigger awakenings in patients that lead to middle of the 
night insomnia.  
Our center explored this problem by [CONTACT_285567] a study on “What causes chronic insomnia patients 
to wake up at night?” (62)  No one had ever looked at this issue in a prospective work, because most 
studies focus on the post -awakening problem of returning to sleep, which is usually attributed to 
hyper arousal. (7)  
Hyperarousal theory posits insomnia patients suffer from a state of increased alertness or arousal 
during waking or sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_285542]. (63;64)  As above, h yperarousal is innate or genetically predisposed 
(physiologically driven; e.g. increased so matic tension (65)) or learned through behavioral influences that 
promote excess alertness or arousal (psychologically driven; e.g. losing sleep over losing sleep (66)), both 
of which over -stimulate the mind with racing thoughts and ruminations that inhibit sleep.  Hyperarousal 
creates vulnerability to nocturnal awakenings among individuals predisposed toward excess mental 
stimulation or conditioning influences, which then extends a brief awakening (e.g. 5 minutes) into a 
longer awakening (i.e. a period of in somnia).   This theory explains the difficulty in returning to sleep 
(duration of an awakening), but no research explains how hyperarousal actually causes 
awakenings. (63;64)   
Few researchers study or comment on subjective or objective causes of these awake nings.  
Ohayon’s work is the most authoritative. (4)   Among 8,937 adults surveyed from the general [LOCATION_003] 
population , 35.5% reported frequent nocturnal awakenings.  When queried on “motives for awakening,” 
75.5% reported needing to use the bathroom often or s ometimes.  Waking spontaneously, thirst or 
noise averaged 30 to 40%; children, bed -partner, or pain averaged 10 to 20%; and, hunger and breathing 
difficulties were about 5%. (4)  While this research was detailed, no findings were objectively confirmed 
with polysomnography (PSG). However, it is intriguing that Ohayon found nocturia to be the most 
common factor in the sample in light of extensive research linking nocturia to sleep apnea via the 
pathophysiological mechanism of excessive release of atrial natriu retic peptide from the right atrium of 
the heart, which in turn overstimulates kidney production of urine through the night. (67) 
In our prospective study, (62) we selected 20 chronic insomnia patients without previous sleep 
evaluations or testing who denie d having symptoms of sleep disordered breathing.  All patients 
completed an intake set of questionnaires as well as a qualitative interview to assess subjective reasons 
7 
Version: 1, 11/11 /[ADDRESS_348595] common subjective reasons for nocturnal awakenings were unkno wn reason 
(50%), nightmares (45%), nocturia (35%), bedroom distractions (20%), and pain (15%).  No patients 
identified sleep breathing problems as a cause.  All patients underwent PSG to assess awakenings and 
their causes.  Of 531 awakenings observed, 90% were preceded by a sleep breathing event (apnea, 
hypopnea, or respi[INVESTIGATOR_21266] -related arousal).  Thus, in a sample of chronic insomnia patients with 
minimal or no risks for a sleep breathing disorder , based on convention al criteria 85% of the subjects 
suffered from co -morbid insomnia and sleep -disordered breathing. Although these findings in 
combination with the aforementioned findings of frequent sleep breathing complaints among insomnia 
patients presenting to a sleep center strongly suggest a critical role for sleep apnea among insomnia 
patients, there remains certain skepticism about the construct of complex insomnia  as it relates to 
treatment . 
In our work and that of Guilleminault and colleagues, (68-74) emerging research suggests complex 
insomnia repr esents a much more common condition than previously anticipated in contrast to the 
wealth of research that focuses on the psychophysiological basis of chronic insomnia.  Some treatment 
research, while involving only small samples, points to the potential f or sleep breathing to play a larger 
role in the etiology of chronic insomnia in a sizeable proportion of patients.  Most of these studies have 
been anecdotal or cases series with a few randomized controlled studies.(68 -74) Despi[INVESTIGATOR_285543] t hese designs, particularly a lack of clarity in some protocols as to selection bias and 
diagnostic criteria for insomnia disorders, all the studies showed improvements in insomnia symptoms 
subsequent to treatment for sleep -disordered breathing regardless o f the therapy mode (positive airway 
pressure therapy, oral appliance therapy, nasal/oral airway surgery, bariatric surgery, and nasal dilator 
strips).  
Two of the more  rigorous studies  included our randomized controlled trial assessing the impact of 
nasal d ilator strips (NDS) and SDB education on insomnia severity and SDB symptoms in chronic sleep 
maintenance insomniacs.(69) We found  patients using NDS and receiving SDB education had 
significantly improved insomnia, sleep quality, and life satisfaction comp ared to a control group.  The 
other study, a randomized crossover prospective study by [CONTACT_285568]. comparing CBT -I and 
surgical treatment for OSA in 30 complex insomnia patients,(74) showed surgical intervention was more 
successful in improving in somnia than CBT -I alone.  Although patients receiving initial treatment with 
CBT-I also showed increased TST, once these patients completed the surgical arm of the study their TST 
was further increased and SOL was significantly decreased.  
Missing from this  body of work is a rigorously designed randomized controlled trial (RCT) of positive 
airway pressure therapy (PAP -T) for the treatment of chronic insomnia. Such a treatment approach must 
naturally be conducted if we are to learn how insomnia may or may not  be influenced by [CONTACT_285569].  In our own clinical and research experience, we have found that patients with 
insomnia and comorbid sleep -disordered breathing (“complex insomnia”) often demonstrate greater 
difficulty in tolerating fixed CPAP dev ices due to the specific problem of expi[INVESTIGATOR_285544].  
Thus, we have progressed toward the use of advanced PAP technology such as auto -bilevel (ABPAP) or 
adaptive servo -ventilation (ASV) devices in the treatment of these patients, the latter  device manifesting 
8 
Version: 1, 11/11 /[ADDRESS_348596] study, (75) we looked at [ADDRESS_348597] PAP.  Germane to the current protocol, insomnia severity 
markedly decreased on the Insomnia Severity Index (ISI)  (16.8 vs 9.7, p = .001, d = 1.40) .  In a more  
recent study, (76) we looked at  follow -up data from 281 patients with moderate to severe insomnia 
(ISI>15) and diagnosed comorbid OSA or UARS who were using either ASV or ABPAP. We f ound that 
regular use (>20hrs per week) of ASV was associated with sizeable decreases in insomnia severity 
measured on the ISI (19.0 vs 11.9, p = .001, d = 1.50) .     
Finally, another and equally large barrier to any successful RCT with PAP -T for chronic i nsomnia 
patients involves the use of a PAP -T placebo device.  By [CONTACT_285570] a useful insomnia treatment should be demonstrated over a minimum of [ADDRESS_348598] protocol would involve the use of fixed CPAP as the control in comparison to the 
experimental group with advanced PAP technology, which from our experience would be an ASV device.   
We hypothesize the following:  
(1) The use of ASV PAP therapy would prove superior to standard fixed CPAP in decreasing insomnia 
severity on a validated insomnia research scale, increasing sleep efficiency by [CONTACT_6270] -report and 
objectively on PSG, and improving additional subjective and objective markers of sleep quality.  
 
Patient Selection  
 
 All adult, chronic insomnia patients presenting at Maimonides Sleep Arts & Sciences, Ltd ( MSAS ) 
are potential candidates for this study.  This sleep center serves the greater Albuquerque, NM area.  The 
population consists of treatment seeking patients for a variety of sleep d isorders.  The estimated 
number of potential participants during any given month is 5 to 10 ; the recruitment and patient 
participation should be completed over a 12 to 18 month period .   
  
 
 
9 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014  Purpose  & Clinical Impact  
 
The purposes of this study are to: (1)  determine the clinical relevance  of different forms of  
positive airway pressure ( PAP) therapy in treatment of sleep breathing events in chronic insomnia 
patients with co -morbid sleep -disordered breathing; (2) measure the impact of such treatment on 
insomn ia severity; and (3) demonstrate a potential role for this new therapeutic pathway for chronic 
insomnia patients.  
 
Protocol  
Abstract : 
  
 As presented in the in -depth Background material, emerging research strongly indicates the 
need for an RCT to evaluate the role of PAP therapy in the treatment of chronic insomnia.  This study, 
succinctly summarized in the following two flow charts (A. Patient Encounters; B.  Patient Timetable)  
proposes this project to test standard CPAP therapy versus a more advanced form of CPAP therapy 
known as adaptive servo -ventilation (ASV).  During a 14 -16 week period, two groups of approximately 
25 patients each will use either CPAP or ASV, and their specific sleep outcomes and related variables will 
be tracked daily or every two wee ks to provide data for a final comparative analysis  between the two 
groups.  The summary of endpoint objectives (page 10) following the two flow charts describes the 
primary and secondary outcomes for this study.   
 
 Flowchart A: Patient Encounters in Prot ocol Steps.  This chart describes the entry of the patient 
into the study after confirmation of the diagnosis of SDB.   
 
 Flowchart B: Patient Timetable and Protocol Steps.  This chart describes estimated time 
commitment for each participant once the diagn osis of SDB is confirmed.   
10 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014  Flow charts and timetables :  
Flow chart A: Patient Encounters in Protocol Steps   
 
 
  Diagnostic PSG  
PSG Results, 
Informed Consent, 
Physical Exam  
PSG Titration #1 and  
Set-up (wk 0)  
Data Download 
Follow -up #1 (wk 2)  
Data Download 
Follow -up #2 (wk 4)  
PSG Titration #2 and 
Follow -up (wk 6)  
Data Download 
Follow -up #3 (wk 8)  
Data Download 
Follow -up #4 (wk 10)  
PSG Titration #3 and 
Follow -up (wk 12)  
Data Download Follow -
up #5 and Exit 
Interview (wk 14 -16) 
11 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014  Flow chart B: Patient Timetable and Protocol Steps  
 
 
 
   # of visits  Time / visit  Total  
Results /Discussion  1 30min  0.5hr  
Informed Consent  1 90min  1.5hr  
Titration  3 12hr  36hr  
Set-up 
Follow -up 1 
5 90min  
1hr 1.5hr  
5hr 
Exit Interview  1 1hr 1hr 
Total  11  45.5hrs  Diagnostic PSG  
PSG Results Discussion, 
Informed Consent, 
Physical Exam  
(30min  + 90min)  
PSG Titration #1 and  
Set-up (wk 0)  
(12hrs + 90min)  
Data Download Follow -
up #1 (wk 2)  
(45min)  
Data Download Follow -
up #2 (wk 4)  
(45min)  
PSG Titration #2 and 
Follow -up (wk 6)  
(12hrs)  
Data Download Fol low-
up #3 (wk 8)  
(45min)  
Data Download Follow -
up #4 (wk 10)  
(45min)  
PSG Titration #3 and  
Follow -up (wk 12)  
(12hrs)  
Data Download Follow -up 
#5 and Exit Interview (wk 
14-16) 
(45min + 45min)  Supplemental Interactions  
Participants may receive additional follow -
up as needed to address any barriers that 
are affecting PAP use.  Supplemental 
interactions include: Phone consultations, 
additional  clinic follow -ups, and PAP -NAP  
studies (a d aytime abbreviated cardio -
respi[INVESTIGATOR_285545]).  These 
interactions may take place at any time 
during the protocol for patients reporting 
extreme difficulties in adapting to therapy.  Patient Time Commitment Estimation  
12 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014  Summary of Endpoint Objectives:   
 Primary Endpoint objectives:  
• Change in insomnia sev erity from baseline to 4 months as measured by [CONTACT_141634] (ISI)  
• Sleep Diary sleep quality rating (8 point Likert scale)  
• Global Morning Rating of Nightly Sleep (0 -100% scale)  
• Change in prospective sleep log data for insomnia parameter s (SOL, WASO, SE)  
 Secondary Endpoint Objectives:  
• Objective improvements on sleep studies  
o Sleep breathing indices (AHI, RDI)  
o Sleep consolidation indices (SE %, REM%, REM min)  
o Objective Data Download (% compliance; % use , AHI, flattening % ) 
• Subjective Va lidated Psychometric Instruments  
o Sleep related impairment (ESS, VAS -F, VAS -S, III, FSS , SDB -6) 
o Quality of Life/Impairment (FOSQ -10, QLESQ , HSCL ) 
 Other Tracking Variables  
 PAP Therapy Tracking Tools  
o PUDS, AEC, NOSE -8 
 Change Tracking Tool  
o PGA (Insomnia, Slee p Quality, Fatigue, Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008], Energy level)  
o Exit Interview  
 
Subject Recruitment and Eligibility:  
 All adult insomnia patients presenting at MSAS are potential candidates for this study.  Potential 
participants are pre-screen ed to identify likely candidat es.  Medications need to be clarified and a 
discussion regarding possible upcoming medication changes/adjustments is necessary.  The patients ’ 
travel plans for the next 3 -6 months need to be discussed: length of trip, time zone changes, and dates 
of trip.  Does  the patient have computer access and will they be able and willing to complete daily 5min 
online tasks?  Evaluate the patient’s transportation situation and ability to return to the facility for 
follow up visits.  Certain medical conditions or lifest yle habits may exclude patients from the protocol, 
including but not limited to: asthma, COPD, RLS, PLMD, smoking, epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]. Query mental or medical 
health problems and any upcoming procedures that may interfere with research protocol including 
surgery or elaborate testing that may affect sleep and decide if it is possible to work around these dates. 
Besides talk therapy, determine whether there are any plans for shock therapy or other brain 
stimulation that may affect sleep physiology.  Have they recently started or do they plan to start 
insomnia treatment within the next few months (aside from coming to our sleep center for insomnia 
help)?  
 Participants who are currently treating their insomnia are eligible for the protocol as long as 
they maintain (or dec rease/cease) the same treatment program throughout participation.  Example: a 
patient taking sleep aids may continue to take sleep aids or decrease their dose but may not increase 
the dose or add another treatment, such as cognitive therapy, during involve ment with this protocol.  
 
13 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014  Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria:    
Inclusion criteria:  
1.  ≥ 18 years old  
2. Primary complaint of insomnia when presenting at clinic  
3. Diagnosis of moderate to severe insomnia through the Insomnia Severity Index (ISI)  with a score ≥ 
15 
4. Meet diagnostic criteria of Insomnia Disorder  (per American Academy of Sleep Medicin e) 
5. Diagnosis of SDB, either OSA as determined by [CONTACT_285571] ≥ 5 events/hour or UARS with a RDI ≥ 15 
events/hour and AHI < 5 events/hour  
6. Naïve to treatment for sleep -disordered breathing (SDB), including CPAP, APAP, ASV; mandibular 
repositioning devices (MRDs),  and any other nasal or oral therapy with a primary indication of 
treating SDB  
7. Able to fully understand study information in English and sign informed consent  
Exclusion criteria:  
1. Primary complaint of sleep -disordered breathing  or issues with apneas during  sleep  
2. Severe respi[INVESTIGATOR_285546] (RLS), idiopathic 
hypersomnia, or narcolepsy  
3. BMI > 30 kg/m2 
4. Epworth Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_7110] (ESS) score ≥ 10 
5. Frequent nappi[INVESTIGATOR_172510], such as a few times a week or more  
6. Anticipated changes to start or stop sedative or psychotropic medications during the course of the 
trial.  
7. Medical history of congestive  heart  failure (CHF) or other potentially unstable car diac disease as 
well as chronic lung diseases or other debilitating medical conditions that manifest as more 
prominent in the patient’s health compared to their sleep complaints.  
8. Daily use of opi[INVESTIGATOR_158263]  
9. Known contraindications to PAP therapy as lis ted in the indication for use  
10. Requires a CPAP (fixed) pressure > 20 cm H 2O 
11. Inability to comply with study procedures  
 
Informed Consent:   
 Patients will first be introduced to this research following completion of their New Patient 
Intake (a set of online q uestionnaires completed by [CONTACT_285572]).  
They will be pre -screened for eligibility prior to their diagnostic PSG.  Following MD review and 
interpretation of the diagnostic PSG, qualifying research candidates will be  scheduled to meet with a 
research coordinator to discuss their results in detail (SDB, hypoxia, sleep fragmentation, sleep 
architecture, etc.).  The research protocol will be introduced by [CONTACT_285573].  By [CONTACT_285574], we can illustrate how nighttime awakenings due 
to SDB are fragmenting sleep and discuss how this study will test whether or  not treating these 
breathing events with different types of PAP may change their insomnia.   
Study protocol is thoroughly discussed with patient and they are educated on insomnia as it 
relates to SDB.  Patients will be informed that we are comparing two d evices to find out which is more 
14 
Version: 1, 11/11 /[ADDRESS_348599]. Krakow any remaining questions.  Candidates who  do not qua lify for the study 
following diagnostic PSG will continue to receive care in the sleep center  as appropriate.  
 
Study Procedure Summary  (4 Phases)  
 
Phase 1: Pre -Screening Steps and Enrollment in the Study  
These  steps  may take place over the course of severa l days to complete all pre -screening and enrollment 
encounters.  
First Encounter (by [CONTACT_648])  
1. Patient seeks treatment at sleep center for chronic inso mnia and completes Web Intake (f ull 
medical history and sleep history).  
2. Physician reviews medical history, i ncluding concomitant medications, demographic 
information, and collects weight and height to assess BMI.  
3. [CONTACT_285590] informs research coordinator of potential eligibility.  
4. Research coordinator contacts patient to complete pre -screening survey.  
a. Patient infor med whether they have potential eligibility based on pre-screen.  
b. Patient informed of [CONTACT_285590]’s recommendation for proceeding according to 
standard of care , regardless of research interests.  
Second Encounter ( in person, at sleep lab)  
1. Patients expressing interest in the protocol will be scheduled for and will complete the 
Diagnostic PSG.  
a. [CONTACT_285590] completes interpretation and recommendations per standard of care 
following a diagnostic study.  
b. If OSA or UARS positive (and confirmed by [CONTACT_285575]), patient is scheduled 
for full explanation of research project and signing of informed consent form . 
c. If OSA or UARS negative , patient  will be informed  and will proceed with standard 
clinical care . 
Third Encounter (in person, at sleep lab)  
1. PSG results discuss ion with research coordinator  
2. Confirm ation  that the patient meets I/E criteria  
3. Patient review s and sign s informed consent form  
4. [CONTACT_285590] conducts airway exam and answers patient questions.  
5. Subject r andomize d to treatment arm  
6. Complet ion of  special  baseline  questionnaires  
a. One week Sleep Diary (see below) with Global Mor ning Rating of Nightly Sleep  
b. Insomnia Impairment Index  
15 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014  c. Fatigue Severity Scale  
d. Intake Supplement  
7. Schedule Titration #1  
Phase 2: Treatment  
 
Titration  Procedure  
1. Mask fit and mask evaluation.  
2. Sleep technologist titrates  the participant following AASM guidelines with his or her  
assigned mode to: eliminate all forms of abnormal  SDB, consolidate sleep, and achieve REM 
sleep  
3. MD will review study and determine starting pressures for each participant.  
4. Study scored by a n independent  sleep technologist . 
1. Equipment Set -up Procedure  at MSAS VPAP Adapt set to patient’s assigned mode (CPAP or 
ASV) and prescribed pressure settings.  
2. Participants given their device, tubing, and mask at the clinic within [ADDRESS_348600] symptoms (soreness on pressure points, red mark s, aerophagia, etc.) 
discussed at this time to expedite care if an issue arises.  
Once the patient is set -up, he or she receive s instructions for  follow -up steps and procedures.  
Scheduling of all Follow -up appointments and titration studies will take place  at this time.  
Phase  3: Follow -up 
Sleep Diary  
Once patients are set -up with their PAP device, they are expected to complete the online Sleep 
Diary each morning.  It should take no longer than 5min to complete this brief survey.  The sleep 
diary measures:  
1. Subjective sleep indices :  
a. Bed Time (BT)  
b. Sleep Onset Latency (SOL)  
c. Wake After S leep Onset (WASO)  
d. Total Sleep Time (TST)  
e. Time in B ed (TIB)  
f. Time O ut of Bed (OOB)  
2. Subjective sleep quality:  
a. Sleep Quality rating: a n 8-item Likert scale for sleep quality ratin gs in the morning  
b. Global Morning Rating of Nightly Sleep : patients rate their sleep on a 0 -100% scale.  
3. PAP Adaptation:  
a. PAP Units of Distress Scale (PUDS): a scale from  0-10 measuring current subjective 
distress as it relates to PAP therapy.  
16 
Version: 1, 11/11 /[ADDRESS_348601]. Krakow for relevant Q&A with 
patient.  The following will be completed at each follow -up appointment:  
1. Outcomes:  Subject complete s the following questionnaires:  
a. Validated research instrument for tracking insomnia: ISI  
b. Sleep  related impairment: ESS, VAS -F, VAS -S, III, FSS , SDB -6 
c. Quality of Life/Impairment: FOSQ -10, QLESQ , HSCL  
d. PAP Therapy Tracking Tools: AEC, NOSE -8 
e. Change Tracking Tool: PGA (Insomnia, Sleep Quality, Fatigue, Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008], Energy 
level)  
2. Data, d ownload  from the VPAP Adapt.  
a. Usage  
b. AHI, flattening %  
3. Review device usage.  Address concerns or questions including:  
a. Progress and experiences with PAP  
b. Benefits or lack thereof   
4. Review sleep diary.  
5. Determine if the subject has had any adverse events or adverse device effec ts. 
a. Troubleshoot as needed  
Summary:  Following initial titration, the following steps will reoccur for the remainder of the 
protocol (refer to initial flow chart to see repetition of steps):  
o Patients return on weeks 2 and 4 for Follow -up visits  
o On week 6 t hey repeat titration process and complete Follow -up visit surveys and 
downloads  
o Return o n weeks 8 and 10 for follow -up appointments  
o Return o n week 12 for a final titration      
Phase 4: Exit Interview  
The Exit Interview  occurs  2-4 weeks after the final tit ration.  The following will be completed during 
this visit:  
1. Complete Follow -up Visits steps (Outcomes, Objective Data Download, review device usage 
and sleep diary, determine if ther e have been any adverse events)  
2. Comple te Exit Interview  
3. Discuss next cours e of treatment such as:  
a. Transfer to clinical care at our sleep center or another sleep center of their choosing  
17 
Version: 1, 11/11 /[ADDRESS_348602]  
e. Formal transfer of PAP device into patient ownership  
f. Reimbursement of travel funds  
Supplemental Follow -up Care  
Pressure intolerance, mask problems, leak, and other adaptation issues will be addressed to maximize  
PAP use in all participants.  Follow -up visits, PAP Naps, and phone calls will be available to help subjects 
acclimate to PAP and troubleshoot barriers. Clinical judgment will be used to determine the type of follow -
up the subjects will need over the cour se of the trial. Subjects will be followed until the PAP concern or 
issue resolves. The type of follow -up (titration or PAP Nap or phone call or clinic visit), the PAP area of 
concern, how the concern was addressed will be recorded in study documents and c ase report forms 
(CRFs).       
1.  PAP-NAP   
a. Daytime abbreviated cardio respi[INVESTIGATOR_285547]  
i. Used for patients having difficulty adapting to any aspect of PAP  
b. Individualized attention allows for gradual introduction to PAP with increased 
attentio n from a sleep technologist  
c. Can also be used to address mask and intolerance issues.  
d. Can occur at any time during the treatment, based solely on patient problems with 
compliance, and it often is an intervention that specifically can reduce drop -outs.   
e. The number of PAP-NAPs per each patient will be limited to one.  In special 
circumstances , a patient may need an extended PAP-NAP conducted at night.  
2. Phone Consult  
a. Participants have access to research  assistants (and sleep technologists) to discuss or 
troubl eshoot any issue that may come up du ring the course of the protocol, and as 
described on the Informed Consent Form, sleep technologists or  [CONTACT_285590] can be 
contact[CONTACT_285576] .     
3. Clinic Follow -up 
a. Follow -up to address a ny issues that need hands on attention (like mask issues) will 
be available to participants as needed.  
 
Special Considerations  
Due to the nature of this study and its short duration, it is necessary to expedite care of any issues that 
may be barriers to rapid acclimation of PAP. Without  reasonably rapid acclimation , results  will be 
skew ed toward less than optimal outcomes  for either treatment arm , therefore the items  below  will be 
addressed both prophylactically and as they arise.  
1. Mask Issues  
a. Common mask is sues discussed with the patient  during Set -up as well as trouble 
shooting for each problem .   
18 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014  i. Mouth breathing or mouth leak  
 chinstrap will be demonstrated  
ii. Mask leak  
 Proper mask fit  
 Tightening the mask  
 Chinstrap  
 Mask liners (mask liners will also be recomme nded for soreness, mask 
creases, and pressure spots)  
2. Aerophagia (air swallowing)  
a. PAP therapy complication that can be very uncomfortable or even painful . 
b. We would like all participants to be aware of aerophagia and bring this symptom to our 
attention imme diately.   
c. Leg jerks, mask issues, reflux, NAR, and pressure intolerance can all cause aerophagia 
and will require clinical attention.  
3. Leg Jerks (sub -cohort potential)  
a. Patients who did not report restless leg or periodic limb movement symptoms on their 
intake, but had significant leg movements during their diagnostic PSG (not respi[INVESTIGATOR_285548]) will be excluded from the study  if the leg jerks persist on the titration.    
b. Patients who do not report leg movement symptoms on their intake and do not exhibit 
leg movements on their diagnostic PSG but do exhibit leg jerks on any titration study, 
will require careful re -evaluation of clinical care by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Krakow to determine if leg jerks 
are a separate co -morbid medical issue requiring withdrawal from the study.  
 
Research Rationale for Procedures  
Titration #1 (Initial)  
 Participants return to MSAS sleep lab for a full night titration study during which only 
their assigned mode will be used .  They will be fit with several masks and, with the help of a 
sleep technologi st, will identify the best mask  to start the PSG with and use during the study.   
The sleep technologist will titrate PAP pressure settings for each participant following AASM 
guidelines to eliminate all abnormal SDB wave forms, consolidate sleep, and achie ve REM sleep 
with the assigned mode.   All titrations will begin with low pressures, as recommended by  [CONTACT_285577], to help improve adaptation.   Pressure settings will be determined to eliminate  all SDB 
events (including RERAs).  We anticipate that within th e CPAP group the following trend will 
occur: aggressive treatment of RERAs will require increased pressure settings; these pressures 
will lead to expi[INVESTIGATOR_285544] ( EPI) or intolerance; and, “down” titration will be 
necessary for patient comf ort.  The highest pressures tolerated by [CONTACT_285578].  We would prefer to use 
pressures that treat all SDB events (including RERAs), but this may be an unrealistic goal for t he 
CPAP group during the titration or the early adaptation period.  Although we don’t anticipate as 
much of an issue of EPI [INVESTIGATOR_285549], we will follow the AASM procedure 
of “down” titration if it is needed. To avoid EPI [INVESTIGATOR_285550], it may be 
19 
Version: 1, 11/11 /[ADDRESS_348603] an individual’s ability to immediately adapt to 
PAP therapy.  With this lack of immediate adaptation, certain pressure settings may prove 
intolerab le. By [CONTACT_285579], patients will be informed that learning to use PAP may 
be like learning to drive a car.  In the beginning slower speeds (lower pressures) are more 
comfortable, and some training or experience may be needed before merging on to the highway 
to experience faster speeds (higher pressures). Returning to driving school (titrations in sleep 
lab) twice more during this protocol will enhance experience and expedite the capacity to adjust 
to higher pressures.  
The studies will be scored  by [CONTACT_285580].  
Scoring technologist will be blinded to PAP mode.  If discrepancy arises between independent  
scorer and MS AS technologist, the MD will review for final determination.  
 MD will review the study and prescribe PAP settings for each participant within 2 days of 
titration. It would be preferable to start all participants with their optimal pressure setting found 
during the titration, but as noted above lower pressures may be needed initially (preferably for 
no more than [ADDRESS_348604] follow -up appointment) to help patients adapt to 
PAP therapy.   
 
Set-up 
 At MSAS, the research coordinator will set V PAP Adapt to assigned mode and prescribed 
pressure settings.  Patient will be introduced to device/humidifier and educated on use and 
proper maintenance. A prescription will be sent to a DME company for additional PAP mask and 
supplies.  Interim equipment from MSAS will be used for initial set up.  Common PAP and mask 
issues will be discussed with the participant as well as how we will be able to help them address 
these issues if needed, including the role of mask liners (e.g. REMzzz or padacheek) among tho se 
complaining of skin or other facial irritation, redness, or soreness  
 Common barriers that arise soon after set -up most likely involve mouth breathing, mask 
leak, and air swallowing (aerophagia).  Patients will be informed prophylactically about these 
issues so they can address them as they arise  during the titration or shortly thereafter.  It is not 
uncommon for these factors to arise over time and will be dealt with through aggressive follow -
up (see Special Considerations below).  
 Participants will be instructed on how to fill out the daily online sleep diary.  All Follow -
ups and titrations will be  scheduled at this time.  Research coordinator will document PAP 
setting, PAP pressure, mask type, and other relevant information from this encounter.  
 
 
20 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014  Follow-up Appointments  
 The goal is to achieve the maximum number of participants using the device.  To 
reiterate, all participants are required to attend a total of seven follow -up appointments (2 full 
night studies  after initial titration , 4 data download a nd progress appointments, and final data 
download and progress appointment with an exit interview).  Additional follow -up appointment 
frequency will vary based on individual needs.  All follow -up will be documented by [CONTACT_285581].  
 
Online Follow -up 
Sleep Diary  
 A sleep diary will be available online for patients to fill out daily.  The sleep diary 
tracks subjective: bed time (BT), sleep onset latency (SOL), wake after sleep onset 
(WASO), total sleep time (TST), time in bed (TIB), out of bed time (O OB).  They will also 
complete an 8 -item Likert scale for sleep quality ratings in the morning  as well as the 
Global Morning Rating of Nightly Sleep  where patients rate their sleep on a 0 -100% 
scale . The last question will be a rating on our PUDS scale to a ssess distress or lack 
thereof in using PAP therapy. Patients will be prompted to indicate if something has 
changed, such as medications, when they fill out this daily diary.   
 
Clinic Follow -up 
 All participants are required to attend 5 clinic follow -up v isits with a clinical research 
coordinator (refer to flowchart).  The first is [ADDRESS_348605] is 10 -14 days after titration #2 (see below), fourth is [ADDRESS_348606] follow -up, and final follow -up is 14 -28 days after titration #3.   These clinic 
follow -up visits will consist of: data download, outcomes, and qualitative measure of the 
participants progress.  
 Data Download  
Objective data will be downloaded from the device.  
Outco mes and Scales  
ISI, III, ESS, FSS, QLESQ, FOSQ -10, VAS -F, VAS -S, HSCL, SDB -[ADDRESS_348607], NOSE -8, 
Qualitative Measure  
This includes a discussion with patient regarding their progress and experiences 
with PAP .  Are they receiving any benefits?  Do they feel differently? We will also 
address anything noted on Outcomes and Scales that suggests a problem or barrier has 
arisen or remains unresolved.  
 
Titration #2 (Repeat)  
 All participants will be required to unde rgo a full night retitration [ADDRESS_348608] during the adaptation process 
21 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014  require fine tuning of pressure settings of usually 1 -2cmH 2O.  The two retitration studies (at 
6wks and 12wks) are key components to ensuring participants are using the most o ptimal 
pressure settings as they progress through the adaptation process.  Data will be downloaded 
from each device at these studies  and patients will complete all Follow -up outcomes and scales .   
 
Titration #3 (Final)   
 The final titration study will not  only serve as an opportunity to reevaluate pressure 
needs but also to measure sleep indices: sleep onset latency, wake after sleep onset, sleep as 
proportion of TIB, sleep efficiency, sleep architecture, AHI, RDI, CAI, etc.  This comparison will 
serve as the main pre and post objective comparison of data, because we anticipate the 
patient’s adaptation to the device to be approaching an optimal point, and therefore, the 
objective metrics would most likely show the most well consolidated sleep compared to 
baseline. However, in some cases, pressure tweaks may still be needed, which then permits 
opportunity for another minor adjustment of the device.  The patient then will be permitted to 
use these new settings for the next two to four weeks before the exit int erview.  This two  to 
four  week period then is quite important for that proportion of patients where pressure settings 
were still not optimal  until undergoing the third titration . For some, if the minor pressure 
tweaks approach optimal, we will see noticeab le therapeutic gains in that final few  weeks of use 
on the new settings.  
 
Supplemental Follow -up/Care  
 PAP Nap  
 The PAP -Nap is our daytime abbreviated cardio respi[INVESTIGATOR_285547].  
Participants who are having difficulty adapting to any aspect of PAP may benefit from this 
procedure to help trouble shoot barriers.  The individualized attention allows patients to be 
introduced to PAP in a gradual fashion with increased attention from a sleep technologist.  PAP 
Naps can also be used to address mask  and intolerance issues. This PAP Nap can occur at any 
time during the treatment, based solely on patient problems with compliance, and it often is an 
intervention that specifically can reduce drop -outs.  The number of PAP Naps per each patient 
will be lim ited to one.  In special circumstances , a patient may need an extended PAP Nap 
conducted at night.  
 Phone Consult  
 Participants will have access to research assistants (and sleep technologists) during the 
day to discuss or troubleshoot any issue that may c ome up during the course of the protocol , 
and as described on the Informed Consent Form, [CONTACT_285590] can be contact[CONTACT_285582] .  By [CONTACT_285583], we hope to help patients adapt 
to PAP and use PAP nightly.  
Clinic Follow -up 
 Extra daytime follow -up to address any issues that need hands on attention (like mask 
issues) will be available to participants as needed.  
 
 
22 
Version: 1, 11/11 /[ADDRESS_348609] less than optimal outcomes, therefore the above items 
will be addressed both prophylactically and as they arise.  
Aerophagia  
 Aerophagia, or air swallowing, is a complication with PAP therapy that can be very 
uncomfortable or even painful.  We would like all participants to be aware of aerophagia and 
bring this symptom to our attention immediately.  Leg jerks, mask issues, reflux, NAR, and 
pressure intolerance can all cause aerophagia and will require clinical attention.  
Leg Je rks (sub cohort potential)  
Patients who did not report restless leg or periodic limb movement symptoms on their 
intake, but had significant leg movements during their PSG (not respi[INVESTIGATOR_285551]) may  be 
excluded from the study  if they continue to show leg  jerks on their titration study .  Patients who 
do not report leg movement symptoms on their intake and do not exhibit leg movements on 
their diagnostic PSG but do exhibit leg jerks on any titration study, will require careful re -
evaluation of clinical care  by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Krakow to determine if leg jerks are a medical issue requiring 
withdrawal from the study.   
 
Final Datasets  
 Following the final titration, participants will return between weeks 14 and 16 to meet 
with a research coordinator to obtain a final data d ownload and complete final outcomes 
questionnaires.  This meeting also includes: follow -up care program, exit interview, scheduling 
into the clinical venue, opportunity to try other mode of PAP therapy, clarifications regarding 
the free equipment , and reim bursement for travel .  
 
Follow up care program  
 Patients will be instructed to continue follow up as needed for treatment of their SDB 
and Insomnia.  They will be transitioned into the patient popu lation standard of care at MSAS  or 
to another sleep center of their choosing.  Patients may choose for referral for an alternative 
SDB treatment option.  
 
Exit interview  
 Patients will undergo an Exit Interview and will be queried on five general topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]: 1) 
general study overview; 2) PAP effectiveness; 3) PAP and sleep medication; 4) long -term 
treatment of sleep -disordered breathing; and 5) PAP devices and masks.  Questions the 
23 
Version: 1, 11/11 /[ADDRESS_348610] accurate pressures or to qualify for ASV 
therapy as it relates to their insurance coverage.  We will strongly recommend this course of 
treatment to relevant patients.  Then at th e 6 month mark we will compi[INVESTIGATOR_285552] a case series report, if such data offers 
scientific value .  Otherwise, our main focus by [CONTACT_285584] -up is t o maintain continuity 
of care to  insure a proper  transition from the research venue to the clinical care model.  
 
Equipment  
 There will be a di scussion of free VPAP Adapt and H5i units  and official transfer of PAP 
device into participant ownership .  Masks and supplies need to be supplied  through a DME 
company  and any clarification of insurance can be addressed at this time .   
 
Travel Reimbursement  
 Participants will be reimbursed $ 80.[ADDRESS_348611] udy.  
 
Questionnaires:  
 
Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) : The seven -item questionnaire asks the individual to rate the level of 
insomnia and perceptions of sleep problems in the last two weeks. Answers must be provided using a 
scale from 0 -4, with 0 reflectin g no problem or being very satisfied to 4 indicating a very severe or very 
dissatisfied experience. Scores are divided into four tiers: 0 -7 equates to no clinically significant 
insomnia, 8 -14 equates to subthreshold insomnia, 15 -21 indicates moderate sever ity insomnia, and 22 -
28 reflects severe insomnia.  
Epworth Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_7110] (ESS) : The ESS is a simple, self -administered questionnaire which provides a 
measurement of an individual’s general level of daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008]. The responder is asked on a scale of  
24 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014  0–3 to score the likelihood of falling asleep in eight various situations.  A higher score indicates a higher 
level of sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008].  
Functional Outcomes of Sleep (FOSQ -10): The FOSQ -[ADDRESS_348612] daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_285553]. Global scores range from 5 to 20; scores less than 15 indicative of severe impairment.  
Visual Analog Scale for Fatigue (VAS -F): A single question on an 11 point Lik ert scale evaluating daytime 
fatigue.  Higher scores are indicative of more fatigue.  
Visual Analog Scale for Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008] (VAS -S): A single question on an 11 point Likert scale evaluating 
daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008] .  Higher scores are indicative of more fatigue.  
Insomnia Impairment Index (III) : The III is an 11 item survey based on research diagnostic criteria for 
insomnia disorder, which measures forms of daytime impairment in relation to nighttime sleep 
difficulties. It uses a 5 –point Likert scale and is scored wi th an inter -item average (0 to 4), with higher 
scores denoting more impairment.  
Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS) : FSS is a 9 question survey on a 7 point Likert scale evaluating daytime 
fatigue.  Higher scores are indicative of more fatigue.  
Sleep Disorder Bre athing (SDB -6): A 6 item survey assessing frequency (on a 4 point scale) and intensity 
(on a 4 point scale) of end organ symptoms of SDB including cognitive impairment, morning headache, 
dry mouth, and nocturia.  
Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire (QLESQ) -Summary Sheet : QLESQ is a [ADDRESS_348613] (HSCL):  This well -known and widely used 25 -item inventory measures 
symptoms of anxiety and depression.  Part I of the HSCL has 10 items for anxiety symptoms and Part II of 
the HSCL has 15 items for depression symptoms.  All questions are measured on a four point s cale 
ranging from “Not at all” to “Extremely”.  
Patient Global Assessment of Sleep (PGA) : The PGSA consists of 5 question subjectively assessing 
daytime and nighttime insomnia symptom improvement (or worsening) on a percent scale  in 
comparison to the intak e assessment.  
PAP Units of Distress Survey (PUDS) : The PUDS is a scale of 0 -10 measuring current subjective distress 
as it relates to PAP therapy.  This survey is based on the Subjective Units of Distress Scale (SUDS) 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_285554] a clinical desensiti zation -based therapy setting to evaluate treatment progress.  
Adverse Effects Checklist (AEC) : This checklist consists of common side effects or adverse experiences 
common to new PAP users. Symptoms are categorized into three groups: mask problems, pressure  
problems, or other problems.  The checklist will facilitate discussion with the patient at follow -up. 
25 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014  NOSE -8: This 8 question survey queries patients on congestion, stuffiness, or runny nose symptoms as 
they relate to sleep and PAP use on a 5 point Likert scale.  This questionnaire also measures subjective 
treatment efficacy of these symptoms.  
Intake Supplement : This questionnaire is a baseline assessment of the patient’s understanding of the 
treatment rationale and the ir views on  PAP and sleep medication , so that we can compare any changes 
in views at the exit interview.  
 
Exit Interview Questionnaire (EIQ) : This questionnaire is an assessment of the patient’s perception of 
the study including: general overview, treatment rationale, effectiveness of PAP ther apy, PAP and sleep 
medication, long -term treatment of SDB, and PAP devices and masks.  
Sleep Diary : A sleep diary will be available online for patients to fill out daily.  The sleep diary tracks 
subjective: bed time (BT), sleep onset latency (SOL), wake af ter sleep onset (WASO), total sleep time 
(TST), time in bed (TIB), and out of bed time (OOB).  They will also complete an 8 -item Likert scale for 
sleep quality ratings in the morning and rate their sleep on a 0 -100% scale. The last question will be a 
ratin g on our PUDS scale to assess distress or lack thereof in using PAP therapy. Patients will be 
prompted to indicate if something has changed, such as medications, when they fill out this daily diary.  
Sleep Diary Sleep Quality Rating (8 point Likert scale) : This is a single question on an 8 -point 
Likert Scale (0= extremely good sleep to 7=extremely poor sleep) assessing subjective sleep 
quality.  
Global Morning Rating of Nightly Sleep : This is an experimental variable using a global rating 
system to help us t rack nightly changes in the sleep experience. In this daily subjective rating 
scale, 0 -100%, 0% reflects an awful night of sleep and 100% reflects a great night of sleep.  
PAP Units of Distress Survey (PUDS) : The PUDS is a scale of 0 -10 measuring current s ubjective 
distress as it relates to PAP therapy.  This survey is based on the Subjective Units of Distress 
Scale (SUDS) typi[INVESTIGATOR_285554] a clinical desensitization -based therapy setting to evaluate 
treatment progress.  
Polysomnography:  
Polysomnography will  be completed at three different time points  during the protocol : a diagnostic PSG 
study is completed during screening (not part of protocol) and three titration PSG studies are completed 
during the protocol (including a final study completed after four mo nths of treatment with either CPAP or 
ASV).  
PSGs will be conducted by [CONTACT_285585]. Titration protocols will 
be followed based on the subject’s treatment arm. Scoring criteria will be applied using version 2.[ADDRESS_348614] who will be blinded to the treatment mode so as to preserve data integrity.  
PSG parameters to be collected include : 
26 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014   Total sleep time (minutes)  
 Total recording time (minutes)  
 Sleep efficiency (total sleep time/total recording time)  
 Sleep stages (% and minutes of total sleep time): Stage 1, Stage 2, Stage 3, REM  
 Awakenings index (arousals/hour)  
 Arousal index (arousals/h our)  
 Wake after sleep onset (minutes)  
 REM consolidation index (total REM time in min/total # of discrete REM periods)  
 Apnea -hypopnea index (events/hour)  
 Obstructive apnea index (events/hour)  
 Central apnea index (events/hour)  
 Oxygen desaturation index (even ts/hour)  
 Respi[INVESTIGATOR_285555] (RERA)  
 Respi[INVESTIGATOR_285556] (RDI)  
 
Power Analysis, Sample Size Data Analysis  
Power Analysis and Sample Size : 
 Based on our descript ion in the background (see page 6), our work with ASV anticipates an 
effect size of at least 1.[ADDRESS_348615] between ASV and CPAP use would be ~0.[ADDRESS_348616] 
size.  Using a resource specific to clinical research(77)in order to calculate power and sample size 
estimates, we used a beta of .90 for two tailed significance testing at .05 which arrived at 26 patients  per 
group, or a total sample of 52.  Therefore, using the less stringent  criteria of beta .80, we believe our 
sample size allotments of 25 per group or 50 total should prove more than  sufficient for this protocol.  
Data Analysis:  
Primary analysis  is a rep eated measures ANOVA to test for a group by [CONTACT_285586] (Cohen’s d or He dges g). The initial analysis will  be with a single ISI score.  Both 
study completers and intent -to-treat (ITT) analyses will be conducted, albeit thi s is an efficacy study 
ther efore the ITT is not necessarily germane to the focus of the work.  
Several other variables will be analyzed in similar fashion (breathing event indices, sleep 
consolidation indices, sleep diary metrics, addition secondary variab le measurements).  As indicated by 
[CONTACT_447] -hoc factor analyses, we may also conduct more advanced multi -variate analyses.  
 
Risks/Benefits:   
 
Risks:  
The study is considered to be of low risk to subjects in that PAP Therapy  will be used as 
indicated according to the instructions for use, and study devices will be dispensed by [CONTACT_14321], 
who will also oversee the subjects throughout the course of their study participation. Safety events 
27 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014  reported by [CONTACT_285587] s taff will be carefully reviewed and 
treated as required  by [CONTACT_285588].  
Adverse Events and Adverse Device Effects  
An Adverse Event (AE)/Adverse Device Effect (ADE) is any untoward occurrence in a subject or 
clinical investigation where the  subject has been administered an investigational product and 
which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with this product. An AE/ADE can 
therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), 
symptom, or di sease temporally associated with the use of an investigational product or clinical 
investigation procedure, whether or not related. At each evaluation, the investigator will 
determine whether any adverse events (AEs) or adverse device effects (ADEs) have o ccurred. 
For the purpose of this protocol, an adverse event and adverse device effect is any undesirable 
clinical occurrence in a subject that can be attributed to the device or procedure required by [CONTACT_47375].  
Certain adverse effects are anticipated w ith the use of PAP therapy. Expected adverse effects 
are usually mild in intensity and resolve within 24 hours after discontinuing the use of the 
device. The following adverse effects may occur:  
 Drying of the nose, mouth or throat  
 Nosebleed  
 Ear or sinus di scomfort  
 Eye irritation  
 Skin rashes  
Anticipated adverse effects that are mild in intensity and resolve within 24 hours do not need to 
be recorded in the case report forms (CRFs).  
 
Benefits:  
All participants will receive extensive free clinical care in this  protocol.  At the completion of this 
study, when participants  have completed all the steps in the protocol, they will receive free of charge 
the same PAP device they used during the study .  
 
Data Collection and Storage:  
 All data will be stored at SHHI.  Patients will enter data directly into our database, thereby 
[CONTACT_285589].  
 Current SHHI computers are operated through the SHHI facility, which have appropriate firewall 
protection to prevent unauthorized access from anyone outside SHHI.  Access to the database will be 
limited to appropriate SHHI staff and clinical caregivers. All HIPAA regulations will be followed to protect 
private health information (PHI).  
 
28 
Version: 1, 11/11 /[ADDRESS_348617]  
 (1)  Ancoli -Israel S, Roth T. Characteristics of insomnia in th e [LOCATION_002]: results of the 1991 
National Sleep Foundation Survey. Sleep  1999; [ADDRESS_348618] 2:S347 -S353.  
 (2)  Ohayon MM, Zulley J. Correlates of global sleep dissatisfaction in the German population. 
Sleep  2001; 24(7):780 -787.  
 (3)  Ohayon MM. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_176078] y of insomnia: what we know and what we still need to learn. Sleep 
Med Rev  2002; 6(2):97 -111.  
 (4)  Ohayon MM. Nocturnal awakenings and comorbid disorders in the American general 
population. J Psychiatr Res  2008; 43(1):48 -54. 
 (5)  Schutte -Rodin S, Broch L , Buysse D, Dorsey C, Sateia M. Clinical guideline for the evaluation 
and management of chronic insomnia in adults. J Clin Sleep Med  2008; 4(5):487 -504.  
 (6)  Buysse DJ. Insomnia. JAMA  2013; 309(7):706 -716.  
 (7)  Simon GE, VonKorff M. Prevalence, burden, a nd treatment of insomnia in primary care. Am J 
Psychiatry  1997; 154(10):1417 -1423.  
 (8)  Leger D, Massuel MA, Metlaine A. Professional correlates of insomnia. Sleep  2006; 29(2):171 -
178.  
 (9)  Daley M, Morin CM, LeBlanc M, Gregoire JP, Savard J, Baillargeon  L. Insomnia and its 
relationship to health -care utilization, work absenteeism, productivity and accidents. Sleep 
Med  2009; 10(4):427 -438.  
 (10)  Crum RM, Storr CL, Chan YF, Ford DE. Sleep disturbance and risk for alcohol -related problems. 
Am J Psychiatry  2004; 161(7):1197 -1203.  
 (11)  Taylor DJ, Lichstein KL, Durrence HH, Reidel BW, Bush AJ. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_116702], 
depression, and anxiety. Sleep  2005; 28(11):1457 -1464.  
 (12)  Cappuccio FP, D'Elia L, Strazzullo P, Miller MA. Quantity and quality of sleep and incidence of 
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Diabetes Care  2010; 33(2):414 -420.  
29 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014   (13)  Gangwisch JE, Malaspi[INVESTIGATOR_28947] D, Boden -Albala B, Heymsfield SB. Inadequate sleep as a risk factor 
for obesity: analyses of the NHANES. Sleep  2005; 28(10):1289 -1296.  
 (14)  Elwood P, Hack M, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_11721] J, Hughes J, Gallacher J. Sleep disturbance, stroke, and heart 
disease events: evidence from the Caerphilly cohort. J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_47779]  2006; 
60(1):69 -73. 
 (15)  Stoller MK. Economic effects of insomnia. Clin Ther  1994; 16(5):873 -897.  
 (16)  Walsh JK, Engelhardt CL. The direct economic costs of insomnia in the [LOCATION_002] for 1995. 
Sleep  1999; [ADDRESS_348619] 2:S386 -S393.  
 (17)  American Academy of Sleep Medicine. International Classification of Sleep  Disorders: 
Diagnostic & Coding Manual. 2nd ed. Westchester, IL: American Academy of Sleep Medicine, 
2005.  
 (18)  Wilson JF. In the clinic. Insomnia. Ann Intern Med  2008; 148(1):ITC13.  
 (19)  Benca RM. Diagnosis and treatment of chronic insomnia: a review.  Psychiatr Serv  2005; 
56(3):332 -343.  
 (20)  Hamblin JE. Insomnia: an ignored health problem. Prim Care  2007; 34(3):659 -74, viii.  
 (21)  Lande RG, Gragnani C. Nonpharmacologic approaches to the management of insomnia. J Am 
Osteopath Assoc  2010; 110(12):695 -701.  
 (22)  Papp KK, Penrod CE, Strohl KP. Knowledge and attitudes of primary care physicians toward 
sleep and sleep disorders. Sleep Breath  2002; 6(3):103 -109.  
 (23)  Rosen RC, Rosekind M, Rosevear C, Cole WE, Dement WC. Physician education in sleep and 
sleep disorders: a national survey of U.S. medical schools. Sleep  1993; 16(3):249 -254.  
 (24)  Ford DE, Kamerow DB. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_285557]. An 
opportunity for prevention? JAMA  1989; 262(11):1479 -1484.  
 (25)  Shoch at T, Umphress J, Israel AG, Ancoli -Israel S. Insomnia in primary care patients. Sleep  
1999; [ADDRESS_348620] 2:S359 -S365.  
30 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014   (26)  McCrae CS, Lichstein KL. Secondary insomnia: diagnostic challenges and intervention 
opportunities. Sleep Med Rev  2001; 5(1):47 -61. 
 (27)  Sivertsen B, Nordhus IH, Bjorvatn B, Pallesen S. Sleep problems in general practice: a national 
survey of assessment and treatment routines of general practitioners in Norway. J Sleep Res  
2010; 19(1 Pt 1):36 -41. 
 (28)  Hilty D, Young JS, Bourgeois JA, Klein S, Hardin KA. Algorithms for the assessment and 
management of insomnia in primary care. Patient Prefer Adherence  2009; 3:9 -20. 
 (29)  Bertisch SM, Herzig SJ, Winkelman JW, Buettner C. National use of prescription medications 
for insomnia: NHANES 1999 -2010. Sleep  2014; 37(2):343 -349.  
 (30)  Chong Y, Fryer CD, Gu Q. Prescription sleep aid use among adults: [LOCATION_002], 2005 -2010. 
NCHS Data Brief  2013;(127):1 -8. 
 (31)  Brandt NJ, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_285558]. Treatment of insomnia in older adults: re -evaluating the be nefits and 
risks of sedative hypnotic agents. J Gerontol Nurs  2013; 39(4):48 -54. 
 (32)  Hajak G, Geisler P. Experience with zolpi[INVESTIGATOR_6730] 'as needed' in primary care settings. CNS Drugs  
2004; [ADDRESS_348621] 1:35 -40. 
 (33)  Omvik S, Pallesen S, Bjorvatn B, Sivertsen B , Havik OE, Nordhus IH. Patient characteristics and 
predictors of sleep medication use. Int Clin Psychopharmacol  2010; 25(2):91 -100.  
 (34)  Randall S, Roehrs TA, Roth T. Efficacy of eight months of nightly zolpi[INVESTIGATOR_6730]: a prospective 
placebo -controlled study. Sleep  2012; 35(11):1551 -1557.  
 (35)  Krystal AD, Walsh JK, Laska E, Caron J, Amato DA, Wessel TC et al. Sustained efficacy of 
eszopi[INVESTIGATOR_285559] 6 months of nightly treatment: results of a randomized, double -blind, 
placebo -controlled study in adults with chr onic insomnia. Sleep  2003; 26(7):793 -799.  
 (36)  Krystal AD, Erman M, Zammit GK, Soubrane C, Roth T. Long -term efficacy and safety of 
zolpi[INVESTIGATOR_123200] -release 12.5 mg, administered 3 to 7 nights per week for 24 weeks, in 
patients with chronic primary inso mnia: a 6 -month, randomized, double -blind, placebo -
controlled, parallel -group, multicenter study. Sleep  2008; 31(1):79 -90. 
 (37)  Ancoli -Israel S, Richardson GS, Mangano RM, Jenkins L, Hall P, Jones WS. Long -term use of 
sedative hypnotics in older patients  with insomnia. Sleep Med  2005; 6(2):107 -113.  
31 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014   (38)  Mattila T, Stoyanova V, Elferink A, Gispen -de Wied C, de Boer A, Wohlfarth T. Insomnia 
medication: do published studies reflect the complete pi[INVESTIGATOR_285560]? Eur 
Neuropsychopharmacol  2011;  21(7):500 -507.  
 (39)  Kripke DF. Chronic hypnotic use: deadly risks, doubtful benefit. REVIEW ARTICLE. Sleep Med 
Rev 2000; 4(1):5 -20. 
 (40)  Chen HC, Su TP, Chou P. A nine -year follow -up study of sleep patterns and mortality in 
community -dwelling older ad ults in Taiwan. Sleep  2013; 36(8):1187 -1198.  
 (41)  Kripke DF, Klauber MR, Wingard DL, Fell RL, Assmus JD, Garfinkel L. Mortality hazard 
associated with prescription hypnotics. Biol Psychiatry  1998; 43(9):687 -693.  
 (42)  Brower KJ, McCammon RJ, Wojnar M, I lgen MA, Wojnar J, Valenstein M. Prescription sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_285561], insomnia, and suicidality in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. J Clin Psychiatry  
2011; 72(4):515 -521.  
 (43)  Zammit G. Comparative tolerability of newer agents for insomnia. Drug Saf  2009; 32(9):735 -
748.  
 (44)  Davy Z, Middlemass J, Siriwardena AN. Patients' and clinicians' experiences and perceptions of 
the primary care management of insomnia: qualitative study. Health Expect  2013.  
 (45)  Lichstein KL. Secondary insomnia: a myth dismi ssed. Sleep Med Rev  2006; 10(1):3 -5. 
 (46)  Littner M, Hirshkowitz M, Kramer M, Kapen S, Anderson WM, Bailey D et al. Practice 
parameters for using polysomnography to evaluate insomnia: an update. Sleep  2003; 
26(6):754 -760.  
 (47)  Beneto A, Gomez -Siurana E , Rubio -Sanchez P. Comorbidity between sleep apnea and 
insomnia. Sleep Med Rev  2009; 13(4):287 -293.  
 (48)  Fung CH, Martin JL, Dzierzewski JM, Jouldjian S, Josephson K, Park M et al. Prevalence and 
symptoms of occult sleep disordered breathing among older veterans with insomnia. J Clin 
Sleep Med  2013; 9(11):1173 -1178.  
 (49)  Krakow B, Ulibarri VA, Romero EA, McIver ND. A two -year prospective study on the frequency 
and co -occurrence of insomnia and sleep -disordered breathing symptoms in a primary care 
popula tion. Sleep Med  2013; 14(9):814 -823.  
32 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014   (50)  Lichstein KL, Riedel BW, Lester KW, Aguillard RN. Occult sleep apnea in a recruited sample of 
older adults with insomnia. J Consult Clin Psychol  1999; 67(3):405 -410.  
 (51)  Luyster FS, Buysse DJ, Strollo PJ, Jr. Comorbid insomnia and obstructive sleep apnea: 
challenges for clinical practice and research. J Clin Sleep Med  2010; 6(2):196 -204.  
 (52)  Wickwire EM, Collop NA. Insomnia and sleep -related breathing disorders. Chest  2010; 
137(6):1449 -1463.  
 (53)  Krakow B,  Melendrez D, Pedersen B, Johnston L, Hollifield M, Germain A et al. Complex 
insomnia: insomnia and sleep -disordered breathing in a consecutive series of crime victims 
with nightmares and PTSD. Biol Psychiatry  2001; 49(11):948 -953.  
 (54)  Krakow B, Ulibarr i VA, Romero EA. Patients with treatment -resistant insomnia taking nightly 
prescription medications for sleep: a retrospective assessment of diagnostic and treatment 
variables. Prim Care Companion J Clin Psychiatry  2010; 12(4).  
 (55)  Krakow B, Ulibarri VA , Romero E. Persistent insomnia in chronic hypnotic users presenting to a 
sleep medical center: a retrospective chart review of 137 consecutive patients. J Nerv Ment 
Dis 2010; 198(10):734 -741.  
 (56)  Krakow B, Ulibarri VA. Prevalence of sleep breathing com plaints reported by [CONTACT_3148] -
seeking chronic insomnia disorder patients on presentation to a sleep medical center: a 
preliminary report. Sleep Breath  2013; 17(1):317 -322.  
 (57)  Sateia MJ, Doghramji K, Hauri PJ, Morin CM. Evaluation of chronic insomnia. A n American 
Academy of Sleep Medicine review. Sleep  2000; 23(2):243 -308.  
 (58)  Stone KC, Taylor DJ, McCrae CS, Kalsekar A, Lichstein KL. Nonrestorative sleep. Sleep Med Rev  
2008; 12(4):275 -288.  
 (59)  Kripke DF. Who should sponsor sleep disorders pharmaceu tical trials? J Clin Sleep Med  2007; 
3(7):671 -673.  
 (60)  Netzer NC, Stoohs RA, Netzer CM, Clark K, Strohl KP. Using the Berlin Questionnaire to identify 
patients at risk for the sleep apnea syndrome. Ann Intern Med  1999; 131(7):485 -491.  
 (61)  Chung KF. I nsomnia subtypes and their relationships to daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_285562]. Respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516]  2005; 72(5):460 -465.  
33 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014   (62)  Krakow B, Romero E, Ulibarri VA, Kikta S. Prospective assessment of nocturnal awakenings in a 
case series of tr eatment -seeking chronic insomnia patients: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_285563]. Sleep  2012; 35(12):1685 -1692.  
 (63)  Bonnet MH, Arand DL. Hyperarousal and insomnia: state of the science. Sleep Med Rev  2010; 
14(1):9 -15. 
 (64)  Riemann D, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_285564] K, Feige B, Voderholzer U, Berger M, Perlis M et al. The 
hyperarousal model of insomnia: a review of the concept and its evidence. Sleep Med Rev  
2010; 14(1):19 -31. 
 (65)  Hauri P, Fisher J. Persistent psychophysiologic (learned) insomnia. Sleep  1986; 9(1):38 -53. 
 (66)  Smith MT, Perlis ML, Park A, Smith MS, Pennington J, Giles DE et al. Comparative meta -
analysis of pharmacotherapy and behavior therapy for persistent insomnia. Am J Psychiatry  
2002; 159(1):5 -11. 
 (67)  Romero E, Krakow B, Haynes P, Ul ibarri V. Nocturia and snoring: predictive symptoms for 
obstructive sleep apnea. Sleep Breath  2010; 14(4):337 -343.  
 (68)  Bjornsdottir E, Janson C, Sigurdsson JF, Gehrman P, Perlis M, Juliusson S et al. Symptoms of 
insomnia among patients with obstructive sleep apnea before and after two years of positive 
airway pressure treatment. Sleep  2013; 36(12):1901 -1909.  
 (69)  Krakow B, Melendrez D, Sisley B, Warner TD, Krakow J, Leahigh L et al. Nasal dilator strip 
therapy for chronic sleep -maintenance insomnia and  symptoms of sleep -disordered 
breathing: a randomized controlled trial. Sleep Breath  2006; 10(1):16 -28. 
 (70)  Krakow B, Melendrez D, Lee SA, Warner TD, Clark JO, Sklar D. Refractory insomnia and sleep -
disordered breathing: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Sleep Breath  2004 ; 8(1):15 -29. 
 (71)  Krakow B, Lowry C, Germain A, Gaddy L, Hollifield M, Koss M et al. A retrospective study on 
improvements in nightmares and post -traumatic stress disorder following treatment for co -
morbid sleep -disordered breathing. J Psychosom Res  2000; 49(5):291 -298.  
 (72)  Guilleminault C, Stoohs R, Shiomi T, Kushida C, Schnittger I. Upper airway resistance 
syndrome, nocturnal blood pressure monitoring, and borderline hypertension. Chest  1996; 
109(4):901 -908.  
34 
Version: 1, 11/11 /2014   (73)  Guilleminault C, Palombini L, Poya res D, Chowdhuri S. Chronic insomnia, premenopausal 
women and sleep disordered breathing: part 2. Comparison of nondrug treatment trials in 
normal breathing and UARS post menopausal women complaining of chronic insomnia. J 
Psychosom Res  2002; 53(1):617 -623. 
 (74)  Guilleminault C, Davis K, Huynh NT. Prospective randomized study of patients with insomnia 
and mild sleep disordered breathing. Sleep  2008; 31(11):1527 -1533.  
 (75)  Krakow B, Ulibarri VA, Romero EA, Thomas RJ, McIver ND. Adaptive servo -ventilation  therapy 
in a case series of patients with co -morbid insomnia and sleep apnea. Journal of Sleep 
Disorders: Treatment and Care  2013; 2(1).  
 (76)  Ornelas J, McIver ND, Krakow B, Ulibarri V. Change in self -reported insomnia severity 
following advanced forms of PAP therapy (Adaptive Servo -Ventilation and Auto -Bilevel) in 
patients with CompSA and OSA. Sleep 35[Abstract]. 2014.  
 (77)  Hulley SB, Cummings SR. Sample size required per group when using the t test to compare 
means of continuous variables. Designing  Clinical Research. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 
1988: 215.  
  
 