 
 
Pre-Specified S tudy P rotocol and Statistical Analysis P lan 
 
Original Project Title: Comparing the Effectiveness of Fatigue  Management Programs for 
People with MS  
Version date  of document : November  01, 2019  
Clinical Trial R egistration : clinicaltrials.gov  #[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Funding : This work was supported through a Patient -Centered Outcomes Research  
Institute (PCORI) Project Program Award (MS -1610- [ZIP_CODE]). All statements in this report, 
including its findings and conclusions, are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the views of the Patient -Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI), its Board of 
Governors or Methodology Committee. 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Method and Analysis   
Study Design 
We are conducting a randomized clinical trial to directly compare three delivery formats  
of the Managing Fatigue intervention . We are using  a pragmatic design  approach in which [ADDRESS_616180] appr opriate to the delivery  format. Our goal is to recruit a 
diverse research sample to examine the effectiveness of each  delivery format on different 
subgroups of participants (i.e., disease, demographic, and psychosocial characteristics) . 
Outcomes are being measured  at baseline, two months, three months, and six months. To help 
facilitate recruitment, the study is being branded as REFRESH ( REducing F atigue and R estoring 
Energy to S upport H ealth ).  
 
Sample Size and I nferiority M argin  
A sample size of 582 participants is needed to achieve a power of 0.90 for testing the 
hypothesis and conducting the moderation analyses. Based on previous studies and to err  on the 
side of being conservative, w e assumed  an attrition rate  of 35%, a standardized mean difference 
of 0.3, a correlation of 0.45 (rho), and a two -sided alpha level of 0.05.1 An interaction -to-overall 
effects ratio  estimated the extra number of participants needed to examine interactions between 
delivery forma ts and participants’ baseline characteristics.2 The prespecified inferiority margin is 
ten points , which is  based on triangulating anchor- based and distribution-based methods to 
calculate the minimally  important difference  (MID)  on the Fatigue Impact Scale ( FIS), and is 
consistent with a standardized mean difference of 0.3.3-5 
Recruitment and Eligibility  
The primary recruitment method is community outreach  in th e Midwestern  and 
Northeastern  [LOCATION_002] , involving  four approaches: (1) advertising with non- profit 
organizations (e.g., visiting support groups and going to events), ( 2) using social media (e.g., 
Facebook), (3) asking neurologists and rehabilitation professionals to provide flyers to their 
patients , and (4) engaging community stakeholders (e.g., snowballing re cruitment ). Inclusion 
criteria are a self -reported  diagnosis of MS, at least 18 years of age, moderate to severe fatigue 
(i.e., Fatigue Severity scale score ≥  4),6 and ability to speak and read English  (i.e., confirmed via 
phone conversation and self- report) . Exclusion criteria are the inability to understand the consent 
form (e.g., assessed with five questions about the study) or the inability to participate in the intervention (e.g., unwilling or unable to travel outside the home).  
Several steps are being taken to ensure that those who meet the  study criteria have the 
opportunity to participate in the intervention: e.g., providing transportation to in- person visits 
and providing participants with a Chromebook to access the internet intervention  if needed. 
Universal Design Principles for research  are also  being implemented.
7 For example, recruiting 
participants through various media (i.e., print, audio, and in-person), providing multiple options to express interest in the study and complete questionnaires (e.g., paper and pencil, internet, and phone), and implementing strategies to include people with low vision (e.g., making reading material available in large -print and audio formats and enabling text- to-speech functionality).  
Because of the pragmatic design approach, we are monitoring but not excluding participants for recei ving other treatments for fatigue or participating in other rehabilitation services before or 
during the study. Particip ants are permitted to withdraw  from the study at any time for any 
reason. Reasons for withdrawal and inability to participate in the intervention are being 
documented and will be examined in sensitivity analyses.  
 
Randomization and A llocation Concealment 
Each participant will be randomized to receive one of the three interventions. Participants 
are randomized only after availability is confirmed for each delivery format, baseline data collection is complete , and there are enough participants within a specific geographic region (18 
to 30 participants) to conduct the group sessions. Permuted block randomization is  being 
implemented . A statistician , who is not involved with data collection or participant interactions, 
developed  a random number table  using a 1:1:1 allocation ratio in blocks of six. The statistician 
directly imported  the table  into the Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap)
[ADDRESS_616181] manager. Participants are permitted to switch group 
assignment only when we are unable to provide services (e.g., an OT becomes sick and is no longer able to deliver services or a participant is unable to  use a computer ). 
 
Masking  
 As in most behavioral and rehabilitation  interventions, direct interaction between participants 
and OT s is required, making complete masking impossible. To mitigate bias, each OT  is 
delivering only one intervention format, i.e., teleconference,  internet, or one -to-one. Data 
collectors  are being masked to group assignment to minimize any biases in baseline or follow-up 
data collection . We are also measuring  the expectations of benefits for each delivery format and 
conducting sensitivity analyses on measures of treatment fidelity.  The study is being described to 
participants as a comparison of three courses that could all be equally beneficial for reducing the 
impact of fatigue.  
 
Intervention Procedures 
Teleconference, internet, and in-person delivery of the Managing Fatigue intervention  
are being compared because of the ir contrasting advantages and disadvantages, the useful 
information provided to stakeholders, and prior evidence that this intervention  is effective in 
reducing fatigue  impact compared to wait -list controls .9-13 The reference group is the one- to-one, 
in-person format bec ause it is consistent with clinical practice and the input we received from 
stakeholders  about the need to show remote delivery formats are as effective as in -person 
formats . The comparison groups are the internet and teleconference formats because of the 
potential advantages of  delivering the intervention  remotely . Regardless of delivery format,  the 
following  six topi[INVESTIGATOR_479779] : (1) Importance of Rest and Sleep, 
(2) Communication and Body Mechanics, ( 3) Activity Stations, ( 4) Priorities and Stand ards, ( 5) 
Balancing Your Schedule, and (6) Course Review and Future Plans. Participants receive information on taking rest breaks, re -evaluating priorities, communicating needs, and re-
organizing spaces. Practice activities involve experiment ing with strategies for “banking” energy 
and “spending” limited energy to meet personal, meaningful goals. Participants  are supported to 
test and tailor fatigue self -management strategies as appropriate to  their own situation s. 
Strategies to manage sleep difficulties and cognitive fatigue , not included in the original 
intervention, are incorporated into all three  delivery formats for this study based on their 
prevalence and severity  among people with MS.
14 15 
Teleconference. This six -week, group- based intervention  involves weekly 80- minute 
teleconference sessions (i.e., phone- only). Group size s are kept small (five  to ten  participants) to 
maximize participants’ opportunities for interaction. P articipants receive a program manual 
divided into six sections, one  for each week , that includes worksheets and practice activities  for 
participants to apply what they learn. Participants have the option of receiving the manual via 
email or mail. On the designated date and time, participants and the OT  dial a toll- free 
conference call line. If a participant misses a session, research staff will call  them to provide an 
abbreviated summary of the session.  
Internet. Similar to t he teleconference intervention, the internet intervention  lasts for six 
weeks and is group- based ; however, unlike the teleconference  intervention , participation is 
asynchronous, with participants able to log on whenever convenient for them. As per the 
teleconference program, five to ten  participants  start the intervention  at the same time and 
interact during the  intervention , also facilitated by [CONTACT_479789] . Participants are given a username [INVESTIGATOR_1238] 
a password to view the intervention content via a secure website. Each  week, a new session is 
activated. Each session includes content delivered via text and short videos, completion of 
interactive activities  and information sharing. OTs facilitate the  group discussion boards by 
[CONTACT_479790], asking questions and prompting discussion, and providing encouragement. Website content can be downloaded by [CONTACT_479791][INVESTIGATOR_014]. To ensure that all participants are able to access and navigate the site, a welcome week session is delivered  
prior to the first session. However, no intervention content is delivered during this session. 
One-to-one
, in-person. Unlike the teleconference and internet interventions, the number 
and length of sessions for the one- to-one, in-person intervention vary over the six- week  period. 
The OT delivers all six  topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102], but the pace is tailored to participants’ needs and preferences. 
Thus, although the topi[INVESTIGATOR_479780], OTs can spend more time on those topi[INVESTIGATOR_479781].  The participants and OT are  instructed to meet at least 
three times , with at least seven  days between session s. Similar to the teleconference, participants 
receive a program manual divided into six  sections. Sessions are held at a central location or at 
participants’ home s on a day and time convenient for both the  OTs and the participants.  
 
Ensuring the F idelity of the Interventions 
Bellg et al.’s16 recommendation to monitor all aspects of treatment fidelity  are being 
followed. Our goal is to strike a balance between delivering each format consistently , 
capi[INVESTIGATOR_479782], and providing OTs with flexibility to deliver the intervention  in a way that meets the participants’ needs. This balance is needed to 
maintain internal validity while  helpi[INVESTIGATOR_479783].  
 Theory fidelity : The Managing Fatigue intervention  is congruent with Social Cognitive 
Theory17 and supports increasing self -efficacy to promote  engagement in fatigue self-
management behaviors. Self-efficacy18 and fatigue self -management behaviors19 are being 
measured and  will be  tested for mediation. All three  intervention s are expected to increase self -
efficacy and encourage engagement in self-management behaviors. Each delivery format 
includes strategies to address emotional states, promote social persuasion, practice and master skills, and provide opportunities for peer modeling. However, each delivery format implements 
these str ategies in  a different way . For example, each format uses a different approach for  
eliciting social persuasion and peer modeling: t he internet format uses discussion boards and 
written  testimonials from people with MS ; the one -to-one format involves in -person interactions 
with a clinician  and the review of written testimonials from people with MS ; and the 
teleconference format  involves group interactions  among peers and clinicians. It is unknown 
whether these  different ways of  eliciting  social  persuasion  and peer modeling influences changes 
in self-efficacy and behavior. Thus, t he proposed mediation analysis might have broader 
implications for understanding the “active ingredients” of interventions  and whether the ir 
delivery format influence s self -efficacy,  behavior al change, and the impact of fatigue .   
Training of OTs: Multiple OTs in each state are being hired to deliver the intervention over 
the duration of the study. C onsistent with a pragmatic research design, licensed O Ts, regardless 
of experience level, are being hired. However, all OTs receive training to deliver the intervention  
consistently  and as intended . Training is  composed of four online sessions about 1) study 
procedures (part one), 2) MS and fatigue, 3) study procedures (part two), 3) theoretical 
underpi[INVESTIGATOR_479784] , and 4) the specific format assigned to deliver . Proficiency 
is documented using quizzes. OTs also  receive ongoing training during the study for the specific 
format they are delivering.  Digital recordings of teleconference and in -person sessions and data 
on therapi[INVESTIGATOR_479785], along with a review of notes (see below), are used to provide the 
OTs with continuous training and specific feedback .  
Implementation fidelity: I n addition to the training, each OT is provided with an intervention  
manual (or internet site) to facilitate the consistent delivery of the intervention  as intended. OTs 
are asked to use checklists during the session s (teleconference s and one- to-ones) and to write 
notes (i.e., clinical impressions)  each week. The notes are standardized using a Subjective, 
Objective, Assessment, and Plan ( S.O.A.P. ) format and include instructions to document the 
amount of time spent on each topic, a summary of the interactions, and participants’ questions and concerns. Digital recordings of teleconferences and in- person sessions and data on OTs’ 
internet activity are being used to examine whether the course is being delivered consistently and 
as intended . 
Receipt and enactment fidelity:  The extent to which participants participate in the 
intervention s and the extent to which participants enact recommendations are being documented. 
This includes documenting attendance , participants’ level of involvement using the S.O.A.P. 
format, and the number of internet log-ins and webpages visited. Enactment is being examined  
with a  validated questionnaire on fatigue self-management behaviors.[ADDRESS_616182] a phone interview from research staff masked to intervention 
assignment and/or a paper and pencil version mailed to their homes if they are unable to 
complete the surveys i n REDCap. The primary outcome is the FIS20; the secondary outcome is  
the Multiple Sclerosis Impact Scale ;21 and the tertiary outcome is  the Community Participation 
Indicators.22 These questionnaires are valid and reliable for  people with MS .20-23 The primary 
outcome ha s been  shown to be responsive in previous comparable trials of the Managing Fatigue  
intervention.9-13 24 Primary and secondary questionnaires account for a wide range of daily 
activities and social situations impacted by  [CONTACT_479792] - and distribution-
based analyses can be used to establish  meaningful changes.20-22 25- 27 Potential mediators, 
moderators, and other covariates and possible confounders , as well as time points of 
admi nistration , are listed in Table 1. Plans to reduce missing outcome data and avoid attrition 
include providing monetary incentives ($20 for completion of questionnaires at each time point), 
using multiple  methods to engage participants (e.g., newsletters, email, text messages, and phone 
calls), and addressing questions and concerns promptly.  
<<<Insert Table 1 >>> 
Data M anagement and Analysis 
Participants expressing interest in the study will first be screened over the phone by 
[CONTACT_66185] a script in REDCap. Participants meeting study criteria will then be scheduled for an in-person baseline visit. Participants have the option of unde rgoing the 
informed consent over the phone or during the in-person baseline visit. At the baseline visit, trained research staff who are masked to group assignment will administer the MS Functional Composite. Baseline visits are typi[INVESTIGATOR_479786] c onference rooms in hotels or libraries in 
the communities where participants live. Once enough participants in a specific geographic region complete the baseline visit and indicate their availability, they are asked to complete 
baseline questionnaires via REDCap, phone, or mail. Research staff masked to group assignment 
are available to address questions and enter in data received by [CONTACT_87068]. Once the questionnaires are completed, participants are then randomized by [CONTACT_74143].  
REDCap
[ADDRESS_616183] data, help ensure consistent research procedures, and score 
questionnaires in real  time. At each time point, questionnaires on anxiety, depression, 
exacerbations, falls, and injuries are be ing used to monitor for adverse events. REDCap 
automatically notifies research staff when a possible adverse event has occurred based on participants’ responses to questionnaires (e.g., increases in symptoms of d epression or anxiety or 
worsen of symptoms indicative of an exacerbation). OTs are also provided with instructions to 
notify the research office immediately if they suspect an adverse event. The participant’s 
physician is informed when additional services are needed  for the treatment of an adverse event. 
Because it is unlikely that these adverse events will be related to the study protocol, an independent Data and Safety Monitoring Board is not being utilized. If a serious adverse event is related to the protocol, the I nstitutional R eview Board and study sponsor will be notified 
immediately . Quality control checks (e.g., data generation and attrition rate) will occur 
throughout the study (i.e., every few months) by [CONTACT_479793]. Concerns about adverse events or quality control checks will be discussed in the monthly team meetings and conveyed to other stakeholder  groups convened 
during the study, including people with MS.  
 Data will be downloaded from REDCap into a  statistical software program. L inear 
mixed effects model will serve as the primary analysi s tool for  examining the differential effects 
of the intervention  delivery format on outcomes . The model s will include the group assignment 
variable, time, and  interaction of time and group, as well as the subject -specific random intercept 
and slope for accounting  for individual heterogeneity. Using the fitted model, the trajectory of 
outcomes will be  plotted over the study period. Direct estimates of the treatment effect at specific 
times will be  derived by [CONTACT_479794] ×  Time interaction. 
Noninferiority will be  established with a  95%  confidence interval  (CI) using the  prespecified 
margin of inferiority  at each  time point , which is set at ten  points on the total composite score of  
the FIS. T he prespecified inferiority margin for the Multi ple Sclerosis Impact Scale is set at  eight  
points for the physical f unction subscale and six  points for the psychological function subscale . 
These margins are based on anchored- based methods calculated from previous studies.
25 26  
The p urpose of the moderator analysis will be  to examine the consistency of the 
intervention ’s effect across the following subgroups : (1) disa bility status  (i.e., people with 
moderate to severe disabilities vs. people with mild impairments , (2) race  (i.e., Hispanic and 
non-whites vs. non- Hispanic whites, (3) environment  (i.e., people living in rural areas vs. urban 
areas) , and ( 4) psychosocial characteristics (i.e., peopl e experiencing societ al barriers, 
depress ion, low health literacy,  low social support, and/or low patient activation vs. people 
without these characteristics ). This analysis  will involve  adding an additi onal interaction term of 
group ×  time ×  characteristic and the two -way interaction term of time × characteristic and group 
× characteristic using the mixed effects model that will be used to detect the main treatment 
effects on fatigue impact.  
 The purpose of the mediator analysis will be  to examine whether changes in self -efficacy 
and fatigue self -management behaviors influence the relationship  between the intervention s and 
outcome s. Significant changes across time in self -efficacy and fatigue self -management 
behaviors will be evaluated using the proposed mixed effects analysis . Following Hayes et al .,28 
the mediation analysis will involve  a series of regression analyses to quantify mediation effects 
using bias -corrected bootstrapped 95% CI. 
We will conduct  analyses using both intention- to-treat and per -protocol principles. When 
using intent ion-to-treat principles,  the treatment of missing values  will depend on the type of 
missingness . In the case of missing at random, the  proposed mixed effects models should be 
sufficient . In the case of missing not at random or non- ignorable, a  Bayesian method to jointly 
model response data and missing data will be  applied . When using per -protocol principles, 
participants who provide complete data and attend four or more intervention  sessions will be  
included in the analysis .   
A series of sensitivity analyses are planned to explore how various assumptions and 
potential confounders might  influence the results. Four  pre-specified sensitivity analyses are 
planned: (1) significant difference s in time -varying factors between groups  after randomization  
(e.g., exacerbations, changes in medications, or changes in health and wellness services ), (2) 
assumptions of missing data, (3 ) differences in pre specified  margins, and (4) treatment fidelity 
measures (e.g., attendance, quizzes, and experience of OT).  We plan to examine these factors  by 
[CONTACT_479795]- adjuste d models. Significant differences in time -varying factors 
between groups  after randomization  will be  entered into the model as covariates during 
hypothesis testing. We will  examine whether any differences exist in results based on how 
missing data are treated  (e.g., missing at random versus missing not at random ). We will also use 
prespecified margin s of 4.8 (i.e., standard error of measurement), 15.5 (the mean of 12 anchored-
based MID s), and 20 (upper  limit of the triangulated anchored and distribution- based MID s). 
Last, we will assess whether measures of treatment fidelity, such as OT experience and 
participants ’ understanding of material, influence outcomes a s well as whether differences exist  
in the per -protocol analysis when participants  who provide complete data and attend  all six  
intervention sessions (compared to four and five  of the six sessions)  are only included in the 
analysis . 
 
Public and Patient I nvolvement  
Stakeholder groups compris ing individuals with MS, policy advocates, insurance 
representatives,  clinicians , and researchers on the project  are informing  all asp ects of the study. 
This includes  drafting and reviewing recruitment and intervention  material, branding of the 
study, selecting which delivery formats to  examine, assessing  and finding both the ease and 
length of completing the online questionnaires  as acceptable, examining policies and procedure 
for participant interactions, reviewing the informed consent process , and providing firsthand 
testimonies about the impact of fatigue and ways to reduce it . Eliciting o pi[INVESTIGATOR_479787], 
including in -person focus groups, emails,  online surveys, teleconference calls,  and one -to-one, 
in-person me etings. Multiple approaches are also  being used to accommodate various work 
schedules and  obtain diverse stakeholder  input (e.g., diversity in race/ethnicity, functional status, 
and constituents represented). Stakeholder groups will continue to meet  at least once a month  
throughout the study to guide the recruitment of a diverse sample, present and disseminate 
results, and create an infrastructure to support  the delivery of the Managing Fatigue intervention  
after the study ’s completion . The stakeholder groups are chaired by [CONTACT_479796] (e.g., selection of interventions and outcomes).   
 
Ethics and Dissemination  
The protocol is approved by [CONTACT_941] I nstitutional R eview B oard (IRB , STUDY20180027) at 
Case Western Reserve University, University of Minnesota, University of Illinois at Chicago, Queen’s University, and Dalhousie University. The study is being carried out according to the principles in the Declaration of Helsinki.
[ADDRESS_616184] on social media and publish in magazine s with a relevant 
readership , and meet with advocacy groups , like the National Multiple Sclerosis Society . 
Participants will also  receive a newsletter at th e end of the study to inform them about the study 
results.  
 
    
 
 
        
References:  
1. Hedeker D, Gibbons R, Waternaux C. Sample size estimation for longitudinal designs with 
attrition: Comparing time -related contrasts between two groups. J Educ Behav Stat  
1999;24(1):70- 93. 
2. Wang S -J, Hung HJ. A regulatory perspective on essential considerations in design and 
analysis of subgroups when correctly classified. J Biopharm Stat  2014;24(1):19 -41. 
3. Moss -Morris R, Norton S. Aerobic exercise, cognitive behavioural therapy and energy 
conservation management for multiple sclerosis (MS) fatigue: Are three trials better than 
one? Mult Scler  2017;23(11):1436 -40. 
4. Nordin Å, Taft C, Lundgren- Nilsson Å, et al. Minimal important differences for fatigue 
patient reported outcome measures— a systematic review. BMC Med Res Methodol  
2016;16(1):62. 
5. Rendas -Baum R, Yang M, Cattelin F, et al. A novel approach to estimate the minimally 
important difference for the Fatigue Impact Scale in multiple sclerosis patients. Qual Life Res 2010;19(9):1349 -58. 
6. Krupp LB, LaRocca NG, Muir -Nash J, et al. The Fatigue Severity Scale. Application to 
patients with multiple sclerosis and systemic lupus erythematosus. Archives of Neurology 1989;46(10):1121- 3. 
7. Williams A, Moore SM. Universal design of research: Inclusion of persons with disabilities in 
mainstream biomedical studies. Sci Transl Med  2011;3(82):82cm12- 82cm12. 
8. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, et al. Research electronic data capture (REDCap) --a 
metadata -driven methodology and workflow process for providing translational research 
informatics support. J Biomed Inform  2009;42(2):377- 81. 
9. Finlayson M, Preissner K, Cho C, et al. Randomized trial of a teleconference -delivered fatigue 
management program for people with multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler  2011;17(9):1130 -40. 
10. Mathiowetz VG, Finlayson ML, Matuska KM, et al. Randomized controlled trial of an 
energy conservation course for persons with multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler  
2005;11(5):592- 601. 
11. Mathiowetz VG, Matuska KM, Finlayson ML, et al. One -year follow -up to a randomized 
controlled trial of an energy conservation course for persons with multiple sclerosis. Int J 
Rehabil Res  2007;30(4):305- 13. 
12. Ghahari S, Packer T. Effectiveness of online and face -to-face fatigue self -management 
programmes for adults with neurological conditions. Disabil Rehabil  2012;34(7):564- 73. 
13. Van Heest K, Mogush A, Mathiowetz V. Effects of one -to-one fatigue management course 
for persons with chronic conditions and fatigue. Am J Occup Ther 
2017;71(4):7304205040p1- 40p9. 
14. Strober LB. Fatigue in multiple sclerosis: A look at the role of poor sleep. Frontiers in 
neurology  2015;6:21.  
15. Golan D, Doniger GM, Wissemann K, et al. The impact of subjective cognitive fatigue and 
depression on cognitive function in patients with multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler  
2018;24(2):196- 204. 
16. Bellg AJ, Borrelli B, Resnick B, et al. Enhancing treatment fidelity in health behavior change 
studies: Best practices and recommendations from the NIH Behavior Change 
Consortium. Health Psychol  2004;23(5):443 -51. 
17. Bandura A. Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social Cognitive Theory. 
Englewood Cliffs (NJ): Prentice -Hall 1986. 
18. Liepold A, Mathiowetz V. Reliability and validity of the Self -Efficacy for Performing 
Energy Conservation Strategies Assessment for persons with multiple sclerosis. Occup Ther Int  2005;12(4):234- 49. 
19. Mallik PS, Finlayson M, Mathiowetz V, et al. Psychometric evaluation of the Energy 
Conservation Strategies Survey. Clin Rehabil  2005;19(5):538- 43. 
20. Fisk JD, Ritvo PG, Ross L, et al. Measuring the functional impact of fatigue: Initial 
validation of the fatigue impact scale. Clin Infect Dis  1994;18(Supplement 1):S79- S83. 
21. Hobart J, Lampi[INVESTIGATOR_007] D, Fitzpatrick R, et al. The Multiple Sclerosis Impact Scale (MSIS -29): A 
new patient -based outcome measure. Brain  2001;124(Pt 5):962- 73. 
22. Heinemann AW, Magasi S, Bode RK, et al. Measuring enfranchisement: Importance of and 
control over participation by [CONTACT_245236]. Arch Phys Med Rehabil  
2013;94(11):2157- 65. 
23. Plow MA, Finlayson M, Gunzler D, et al. Correlates of participation in meaningful activities 
among people with multiple sclerosis. J Rehabil Med 2015  
24. Plow M, Finlayson M, Liu J, et al. Randomized controlled trial of a telephone -delivered 
physical activity and fatigue self -management interventions in adults with multiple 
sclerosis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil  2019;100(11):2006- 14. 
25. Costelloe L, O’Rourke K, Kearney H, et al. The patient knows best: Significant change in the 
physical component of the Multiple Sclerosis Impact Scale (MSIS -29 physical). Journal 
of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry  2007;78(8):[ADDRESS_616185]: Do patients 
and proxies agree? BMC Neurol  2009;9(1):12.  
27. Heinemann AW, Lai JS, Magasi S, et al. Measuring participation enfranchisement. Arch 
Phys Med Rehabil  2011;92(4):564 -71. 
28. Hayes AF. Introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process analysis: A 
regression -based approach: Guilford Publications 2017. 
29. World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki: Ethical principles for medical research 
involving human subjects. JAMA 2013;310(20):2191- 4. 
30. Guidelines on authorship-- International Committee of Medical Journal Editors. Med J Aust  
1985;143(11):520- 1. 
31. Fischer JS, Rudick RA, Cutter GR, et al. The Multiple Sclerosis Functional Composite 
Measure (MSFC): an integrated approach to MS clinical outcome assessment. National 
MS Society Clinical Outcomes Assessment Task Force. Mult Scler  1999;5(4):244 -50. 
32. Rawson KA, Gunstad J, Hughes J, et al. The METER: a brief, self -administered measure of 
health literacy. J Gen Intern Med  2010;25(1):67- 71. 
33. Cella D, Lai JS, Nowinski CJ, et al. Neuro- QOL: Brief measures of health -related quality of 
life for clinical research in neurology. Neurology  2012;78(23):1860- 7. 
34. Kroenke K, Strine TW, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], et al. The PHQ -[ADDRESS_616186]  2009;114(1):[ADDRESS_616187] J, et al. Validation of the patient activation measure in a 
multiple sclerosis clinic sample and implications for care. Disabil Rehabil  
2010;32(19):1558- 67. 
36. Whiteneck GG, Harrison- Felix CL, Mellick DC, et al. Quantifying environmental factors: A 
measure of physical, attitudinal, service, productivity, and policy barriers. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil  2004;85(8):1324- 35. 
37. Horton M, Rudick RA, Hara -Cleaver C, et al. Validation of a self- report comorbidity 
questionnaire for multiple sclerosis. Neuroepi[INVESTIGATOR_623]  2010;35(2):83- 90. 
38. Ritvo P, Fischer JS, Miller DM, et al. Multiple Sclerosis Quality of Life Inventory: A user's 
manual. [LOCATION_001]: National Multiple Sclerosis Society 1997:1 -65. 
39. Lorig K. Outcome measures for health education and other health care interventions. 
Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications 1996. 
40. Godin G. The Godin- Shephard Leisure -Time Physical Activity questionnaire. The Health & 
Fitness Journal of Canada 2011;4(1):18- 22. 
41. Ross AP, Halper J, Harris CJ. Assessing Relapses and Response to Relapse Treatment in 
Patients with Multiple Sclerosis: A Nursing Perspective. Int J MS Care  2012;14(3):148-
59. 
42. Ritter PL, Stewart AL, Kaymaz H, et al. Self- reports of health care utilization compared to 
provider records. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]  2001;54(2):136- 41. 
43. McMillan L, Moore KA. The development and validation of the impact of multiple sclerosis 
scale and the symptoms of multiple sclerosis scale. Arch Phys Med Rehabil  
2006;87(6):832- 41. 
44. Benedict RH, Munschauer F, Linn R, et al. Screening for multiple sclerosis cognitive 
impairment using a self- administered 15 -item questionnaire. Mult Scler  2003;9(1):95-
101. 
 
     
Trial status  
Protocol V3.04 (09/20/2019):  This RCT was first registered  online at ClinicalTrials.GOV in 
June, 2018. The first participant was re cruited and randomized in March, 2019. Recruitment is 
expected to continue until March, 2021 with 6- month follow -up to be completed in October, 
2021. Data analysis is expected to be completed in December, 2021.  
 Contributors   
MAP, TP, KP, VM, SG, FB, and MF designed the study and helped draft the original grant proposal . MAP and TP  provided trial leadership.  MAP, TP, VM, SG, MF and SA provided 
methodological expertise. SA also provided statistical and data management expertise. TP, KP, VM, SG, MF, and FB provided clinical expertise. MAP, KP, and VM provided training and supervision to the OTs. VM oversaw delivery of 1- to-1, in- person intervention format. TP and 
SG oversaw delivery of internet intervention format. KP and MF oversaw delivery of 
teleconference intervention format. All authors  reviewed and approved the final version of this 
manuscript.  
 Acknowledgements  
The authors would like to t hank the participants for their time. We also  would like to thank Clara 
Adegbite, Nataliya Bukhanova , Julie Hewitt, Kaitlin Sibbald, Toni Van  Denend, and Yue Wu  for 
assistance with  intervention refinement and/or development as well as  ongoing recruitment, 
enrollment,  data collection , and/or intervention delivery . 
  
Conflict of Interest  
[CONTACT_479797] has financial relationships with pharmaceutical and devices companies outside the 
submitted work. The other authors declare that they have no potential or actual conflict of interest pertaining to this research study.  
  Funding  
This work was supported through a Patient -Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) 
Project Program Award (MS -1610- [ZIP_CODE]). All statements in this report, including its findings 
and conclusions, are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Patient -Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI), its Board of Governors or Methodology 
Committee.  
 
          
Key:  t1 = 2 months ; t2 = 3 months ; t3 = [ADDRESS_616188]-allocation  
TIMEPOINT**  -t1 0  t1 t2 t3 
ENROLMENT:   
Eligibility screen  X      
Informed consent   X      
In-person assessment  X      
Return baseline questionnaire packet  X      
Allocation   X     
MANAGING FATIGUE INTERVENTION :  
One-to-one, i n-person        
Internet        
Teleconference        
PRIMARY OUTCOME:   
Fatigue Impact Scale20 X   X X X 
SECONDARY OUTCOMES:   
Multiple Sclerosis Impact Scale21 X   X X X 
Community Participation Indicators22 27 X   X X X 
MODERATORS        
Multiple Sclerosis Functional Composite31 X      
Medical Term Recognition Test32  X      
Neuro QOL – Anxiety33  X   X X X 
Neuro QOL – Sleep33 X   X X X 
Patient Health Questionnaire –834  X   X X X 
Patient Activation Measure35 X     X 
Craig Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_479788]36 X      
Demographics (i.e., urban/rural and race)   X      
Self-report Comorbidity Questionnaire37 X      
Modified Social Support Survey38 X     X 
MEDIATORS   
Energy Conservation Strategies S urvey19 X   X X X 
Self-Efficacy for Performing Energy Con servation 
Strategies Assessment18 X   X X X 
Chronic Disease Self -management Scale39 X   X X X 
COVARIATES & POSSIBLE CONFOUNDERS        
Sociodemographic (e.g., age, gender, income, 
education, living arrangements, and employment)  X      
Godin Leisure -Time Exercise Questionnaire40 X   X X X 
Adverse events (e.g., exacerbations41 and injuries)   X   X X X 
Health and wellness service s42 (e.g., occupational 
therapy, counseling, and prescribed medications)   X     X 
Expectation of benefits/Past Experience /Quizzes  X   X   
Satisfaction survey (open - and close -ended questions)     X   
Symptoms of MS Scale43 X   X X X 
Neuropsychological Screening Questionnaire44 X      