 
 
 
 
A Feasibility Study of Behavioral Activation in the 
Rehabilitation of Veterans with Post -TBI Depression  
 
 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_747033], PhD, RN, FAAN  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
Human Participant Information and Protocol Summary Excerpted from IRB 
approved Form  101, V. 6.0, Jan. 18, 2023 , Approved  by [CONTACT_599616] 
3/6/2023   
Section 5: Human Participant Information  
NOTE:   A participant is considered “enrolled” at the time the consent is signed  so this number should 
include an allowance for screen failures prior to randomization.   
 
1. How many participant records  will be reviewed PRIOR  to enrollment/consent occurring?  
We may review  up to 300 records  and send  up to 300 letters  in order  to obtain  a sample  of 40 
subjects.  
 
2. How many participants will be screened PRIOR  to enrollment/consent occurring?  
We may conduct  Phone  Screens  on up to 300 potential  subjects  (however  it is most  likely  that 
we will screen  about  70). 
 
3. How many participants will be enrolled (total number to include randomized and screen 
failures AFTER  consent is obtained)?  
60 
3.1. Will all research activity be the same at all sites?  Yes      No      N/A  
3.2. If no,  please describe the activity that is different or limited (For example; 2 sites will 
analyze data only, or, 1 site will consent and enroll all participants etc.):        
 
4. Are there any further screening procedures after enrollment?  Yes      No  
4.1. If yes,  describe:  Screening  for the inclusion  criteria  on the CES-D and PHQ  item 9 and 
exclusion  criteria  for the person  with TBI (presence  of psychosis,  presence  of asphasia,  PHQ -
9 affirmative  response  on item 9 indicating  suicide  ideation,  or indication  of dementia   based 
on difficulty responding to interview questions will occur after consenting.   
 
5. Are non -Veterans being enrolled?   NOTE :  This does not include non -Veterans enrolled at 
non-VA sites.     Yes      No  
5.1. If yes , provide justification.        
      NOTE:  
➢ Every non -Veteran should sign VA form 10 -0483 , Acknowledgement of the Notice 
of Privacy Practices (ANOP)  
➢ Once the ANOP is signed , the research study staff must send the non -Veteran's 
name [CONTACT_75287] e -mail.  The signed ANOP 
must be kept in the research study binder.  
➢ If an oral informed consent is used , the NOP should be sent to the non -Veteran 
via postal mail.  In addition, the research study staff must write a Note -to-File that the 
NOP was sent to the non -Veteran.  
                
6. Does this project target a specific race, gender or ethnic group as participants ?  
     Yes      No      
6.1. If yes,  indicate which group and why this group is being targeted .   
               
 
7. What is the age range of participants?  (Check all that apply.)  
Neonates (See note below)   
Children Under 18 (See note 
below)    
Young Adults (18 -21)  
Adults (22 -65) Age 21 allowed   
Seniors (Over 65)   
       NOTE:    If neonates or children is checked, certification by [CONTACT_3283]. Only minimal risk research may be performed with children.  Only non -invasive monitoring 
and/or prospective observational and retrospective record review studies that are minimal risk can 
be conducted in VA involving neonates.  
 
8. Does the project involve the potential enrollment of any of the following populations or 
categories of participants?   That is, are you targeting a specific group.   NOTE:   These 
populations must be checked “Yes” if they are not being excluded from the research.  
 Yes            No            N/A 
a.  Employees     
b.  Students  at the VA or Penn     
c   Individuals with impaired decision -making capacity      
d.  Pregnant women (See below)     
e.  Economically and/or educationally disadvantaged persons     
f.   Prisoners  (See Below)     
g.  Illiterate, limited, or no English language proficiency     
h.  Terminally ill patients     
i.   Children (See B elow)     
 
 
  
  
16: Protocol Summary  
 
1. Introduction  
1.1. Provide scientific background and rationale for study.   
Since 2000, 379,[ADDRESS_1022105] been diagnosed with TBI, representing up to 22% 
of combat casualties.[ADDRESS_1022106] remote TBIs only recently 
diagnosed, the result of increased awareness of TBI in the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) and 
the general medical community.[ADDRESS_1022107] common psychiatric sequela of TBI,3,4,5  
with prevalence estimates up to 53% for major depressive disorder (MDD).6,[ADDRESS_1022108] -TBI depression may interfere with rehabilitation effectiveness8 and treatment 
adherence;9 impede reintegration into family and community;10,[ADDRESS_1022109] used for TBI depression are medication24,25 and cognitive behavioral therapy 
(CBT).26,27,[ADDRESS_1022110] individuals perceive and think about 
their situation; thus, therapy targets maladaptive thinking to improve mood and functioning. Yet, many 
of TBI’s hallmark deficits - especially in memory, organization, planning, and initiation - may interfere 
with the cognitive work that CBT requires. Second, CBT depends on the availability of mental health 
professionals with specialized training in CBT, and these providers are not always present in 
rehabili tation settings .  
      
1.2. Include summary of gaps in current knowledge, relevant data, and how the study 
will add to existing knowledge .   
Gaps in Current Knowledge.  The absence of optimal evidence -based treatments for post -TBI 
depression justifies clinical research on promising treatment approaches that can be folded into TBI 
rehabilitation services, increasing its accessibility and potential for uptake . The p roposed  study  will 
test the feasibility of behavioral activation (BA),30,31 a well -established and empi[INVESTIGATOR_747034] .32 Rigorously tested in clinical trials since the 1970s,33 BA’s 
efficacy has been demonstrated in trials to reduce or prevent depression  in several clinical 
populations (cancer,34 macular degeneration,35 diabetes,36 PTSD ,37,38) and to improv e functioning  in 
depressed older African Americans39 and African Americans with mild cognitive impairment.[ADDRESS_1022111] been effective in improving health 
behaviors.42 Because TBI may impair the capability to plan,43 interventions that enhance it are 
especially relevant for rehabilitation. BA protocol components therefore emphasize goal setting 
(especially for activities that promote social connectedness), creation of a plan (broken down into 
steps), strategies for implementation of the steps, identification of potential barriers, tactics to 
overcome them, activity monitoring and scheduling, and emotional regulation strategies. BA has 
rarely been used or studied for treatment of depression in a TBI population.44,[ADDRESS_1022112] with military veterans with TBI  revealed a high 
prevalence of depressive symptoms , with 89% of veterans  scoring at or above the cutoff for clinically 
significant depressive symptoms.46 Several of our studies based on that R21 highlight the key role of 
depression in important outcomes.47,48,49,50  
(1) Community reintegration . Our first study of predictors of CR in veterans with TBI tested 
sociodemographic characteristics, family factors, physical factors,  pain, PTSD, time post -TBI, and 
depressive symptoms. Multiple regression revealed  depressive symptoms to be the sole independent 
predictor of CR.49  
(2) Depression as mediator of other effects on CR . This study [ADDRESS_1022113] effects of both PTSD and physical functioning on CR. Such  findings argue for targeting 
depression as a means of improving CR , enhancing rehabilitation effectiveness , and promoting other 
important outcomes.  
(3) Employment . Our study of employment status in veterans with TBI50 examined potential predictors 
of employment  and found it  associated with pain, depressive symptoms, and poor physical functioning . 
Physical functioning mediated the effect of pain, and depressive symptoms mediated the effect of 
physical functioning.  
(4) Mediation of treatment effects on depressive symptoms by [CONTACT_747052] . A home -based, 
family -inclusive intervention, the Veterans ’ In-home Program (VIP), was designed to target the home 
environment to align its social and physical demands with the veteran’s TBI -related strengths and 
deficits. In a 2-group RCT, VIP was compared to usual care on several [ADDRESS_1022114] to nonsignificance. This suggests that the VIP intervention’s impact on depressive 
symptoms was attributable to increased activity engagement.  
     In summary, prior research indicates that (1) depression is prevalent among veterans with TBI; (2) it 
interferes with CR and employment outcomes; (3) BA is an effective therapy for depression in other 
clinical populations; and (4 ) BA is effective with populations having cognitive impairments . These 
findings justify moving forward with a pi[INVESTIGATOR_747035]’s feasibility with veterans with TBI in a 
rehabilitation setting.  
How the proposed research would add to existing knowledge .  The proposed research will develop 
the BA protocol and measures and provide preliminary data for a larger -scale efficacy trial of BA. This 
line of research has the potential to add a powerful clinical tool for treating depression in VA 
rehabilitation setti ngs and, thereby, improve access to an important form of care for veterans with post -
TBI depression. Furthermore, the research has the potential to enhance community reintegration of 
veterans with  TBI, the ultimate goal of rehabilitation and a critical priority for the VA health system.  
 
1.3. Include rationale for including or excluding certain populations – in particular 
vulnerable populations.  
     We are not including  vulnerable  populations  as defined  by [CONTACT_4289].  
 
2. Objectives  
2.1. Describe the study’s purpose, specific aims, or objectives .  
The proposed pi[INVESTIGATOR_747036]-TBI depression in the VA rehabilitation setting . The specific aims are:  
• Aim 1: Assess feasibility in six domains.52,53  
o a) Acceptability: Acceptability to patients and staff, assessed using qualitative 
and quantitative  measures.  
o b) Process: Recruitment; refusal and retention rates; study 
completion; eligibility criteria; and number of sessions attended.  
o c) Practicality: The resources of the rehabilitation setting that support the 
BA intervention and the constraints that may interfere. These will determine 
the probability that BA can be  implemented.  
o d) Treatment safety: Number of adverse events, those related and unrelated 
to the  study.  
o e) Participant comprehension of interview questions and intervention  activities.  
o f) Research burden: Length of interviews, participant fatigue, need for breaks, 
and emotional  distress.  
 
• Aim 2: Provide preliminary evidence of response, assessed using a pi[INVESTIGATOR_48424] (RCT). Evidence of response is also considered a 
feasibility focus. The pi[INVESTIGATOR_747037] a control group using a 
2-group design (see figure below).  
• Aim 3: Expand and refine the BA protocol and manual. The investigators, 
rehabilitation clinic staff, and two veterans with TBI will constitute a panel charged 
with adapting the preliminary manual for TBI for use in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_747038] a monthly basis. They will evaluate the BA stra tegies and 
assess the interviews for burden and cultural sensitivity. This will lead to a refined 
BA protocol and manual, to be evaluated in a larger study of BA’s efficacy in the 
future.  
 
Exploratory Aim: We will examine engagement in activity as a possible mechanism 
that underlies BA effects on depression.  
 
2.2. State the hypotheses to be tested.  
This is not applicable  in this feasibility  study.  
 
3. Resources and Personnel  
3.1. Include where and by [CONTACT_427346].  
     The research  will be conducted  by [CONTACT_747053] 3.2 at the CMCVAMC.  
 
3.2. Provide a brief description of each individual’s role in the study.  Be sure to 
indicate who will have access to protected health information and who will be 
involved in recruiting subjects; obtaining informed consent; administering 
survey/interview proced ures; and performing data analysis.  
Helene Moriarty, PhD, RN, FAAN, Principal Investigator  
[INVESTIGATOR_747039], involved in recruiting, consenting, administering survey/interview 
procedures at baseline, performing data analysis, p roviding input into the 
development of the intervention, participating in the development of 
presentations and papers arising from the work.  
Laraine Winter, PhD, Co -investigator and Project Manager,  
Access to PHI, involved in recruiting, consenting, administering survey/interview 
procedures, and performing data analysis, p roviding input into the development 
of the intervention, participating in the development of presentations and papers 
arising from the work.  
Keith Robinson, MD, Co -investigator   
Chief of the Rehabilitation Medical Service at CMCVAMC  
Access to PHI, involved in recruiting, administering survey/interview procedures, 
assessing the severity of TBI for all veteran study participants, providing input 
into the development of the intervention, and participating in the development of 
presentations and papers arising from the work.  
Tracey Vause -Earland, PhD, OTR/L, Co -investigator  
Access to PHI. She will provide training and oversight on behavioral activation for 
the OT interventionists and will be responsible for day -to-day oversight of 
delivery of the intervention arm. She will also monitor and ensure intervention 
fidelity through observation of  some study sessions and review of audiotaped 
sessions. In addition, she will provide input into conceptual and methodological 
issues.  throughout the conduct of the study, participate in regular team meetings, 
and will participate in dissemi nation of the findings.  
Two Occupational Therapy Interventionists (TBD)  
 Access to PHI, responsible for delivering the BA intervention.  
 
3.3. If applicable provide information on any services that will be performed by 
[CONTACT_747054].  
  Robin Casten, PhD  
No access to PHI. As a consultant on the study, [CONTACT_724840] will share her 
expertise in behavioral activation throughout the study and oversee the training, 
with co -investigator [CONTACT_747074] -Earland, for occupational therapi[INVESTIGATOR_747040]. [CONTACT_724840] has worked closely with the team to develop the 
attached preliminary intervention manual (Appendi x 1) for behavioral activation 
for persons with traumatic brain injury, and she will continue to provide input into 
the refinement of this manual. She will also collaborate with the study team to 
assess treatment fidelity throughout the study, will provide consultation around 
methodological issues, and will participate in data interpretation and papers.  
   Two Consultants (TBD), to serve as Interviewers  
Access to PHI, involved in recruiting, consenting, administering survey/interview 
procedures.  
 
3.4. If applicable provide information on any Memoranda of Understandings (MOUs) or 
Data Use Agreements (DUAs) that are being entered into including with whom and 
for what reason.  
This study  does  not use an MOU  or DUA.  
 
4. Study Procedures  
4.1. Study Design  
4.1.1.  Describe experimental design of the study.  Include sequential and/or 
parallel phases of the study, including durations, and explain which 
interventions are standard of care.   
This feasi bility study assesses feasibility in six domains and provides preliminary 
evidence of treatment response, through a pi[INVESTIGATOR_2269] (RCT) 
The pi[INVESTIGATOR_747041] (BA plus as Treatment as usual) 
with the control group (Treatment as usual). We will enroll 40 subjects (20 in each 
group), conduct a baseline interview, randomize into the two groups, and then 
conduct a follow -up interview 3 months later. Subsequently, a qualitative phone 
interview to assess the experience of the intervention along with 
satisfaction/acceptability will be conducted with those in the intervention group. 
The BA intervention will be delivered in [ADDRESS_1022115] -TBI depression.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Procedure. At the baseline interview, the interviewer will review the study, 
answer veterans’ questions, obtain Informed Consent, screen for depression 
using the CES -D scale and item [ADDRESS_1022116] the baseline 
interview battery. If the participant does not meet inclusion criteria based on 
the CES -D, and PHQ -9 at this time, they will not be included in the study as a 
randomized participant. We will thank them for their time,  and they will receive 
compensation for the visit. They will also be offered referrals for services as 
appropriate.  
Response cards presenting each question’s response format will be employed 
to reduce response burden and facilitate interview progress. In previous 
studies, response cards were found helpful and acceptabl.47,[ADDRESS_1022117] been conducted with veterans with TBI and 
depression in previous research and were not found excessively 
burdensome.47,48 The interview will be conducted in the setting preferred by [CONTACT_2416], a rehabilitation clinic office or his/her home. In our experience, most 
who complete the Baseline interview will be willing to continue to participate. 
Veterans who do not wish t o continue with the study after the baseline 
interview will not be randomized or count towards our accrual goals.  
Within 48 hours of the baseline interview, eligible veterans will be randomized 
using the method of random permuted blocks (to control for possible changes 
over time in subject mix) and concealed allocation. Those randomized to BA 
will be contact[CONTACT_11252] [ADDRESS_1022118] 
session.  
 
Those randomized to BA will receive the 6 -session BA intervention (as well as 
treatment as usual [TAU]). Control participants will receive TAU only (which 
may include current medical and mental health treatments.) Three months 
after Baseline, a blinded int erviewer will conduct the follow -up interview in 
person or on the phone with all veterans. Subjects will be sent reminder letters 
two weeks prior to this [ADDRESS_1022119] a CES -D score of 16 or 
greater at both screening and baseline. Such a score indicates the presence of 
clinically significant depressive symptoms. Those who answer affirmatively (1, 2, 
or 3) at the baseli ne interview to item [ADDRESS_1022120] 
mild depression, there is a minimal risk that the interviews may contribute to 
emotional discomfort in the discussion of personal matters. In our previous study 
of veterans with  TBI in their homes (the large majority of whom scored above the 
cutoff for clinical depression on the CES -D Short Form), using many of the same 
interview instruments as proposed, we encountered no upset or excessive fatigue 
with any participants nor did a ny adverse events occur as a result of study 
participation.  
  
The study poses minimal risk to study participants, based on experience with our 
earlier in -home intervention study with veterans with TBI, the literature on 
rehabilitation interventions with persons with TBI, and literature on BA. The risk of 
burden or fa tigue from the interview or intervention is also low.  
 
Risks to privacy or subject discomfort about disclosing or considering sensitive 
information   
Study procedures are thoroughly explained during the consent process.  
Participants are assured that they can withdraw at any time or refuse to 
participate or respond to interviews or specific interview questions.  When 
interviewing respondents, interview procedures will be employed to avoid 
overtaxing or burdening respondents and to enhance communication.   
 
To minimize the potential risk of breach of confidentiality, the following safeguards 
will be in place:  
 
• Study data from all sources (survey, interviews, and electronic record) are de -
identified and only code numbers used. The master list linking code numbers 
with participant names and contact [CONTACT_747055] -identified data o n a secure server.   
• Study databases do not contain any identifiable data. All VA regulations for 
data security and encryption will be followed as required.   
• If an interventionist or interviewer makes any visits to homes, they will 
transport identifiable data (e.g., name [CONTACT_3816]) in a locked briefcase. 
Interventionists and interviewers receive initial and ongoing training to follow 
the mechanisms in place to ensure confidentiality of data.   
• All study data are stored in a secure server.   
• Study results will be represented only by [CONTACT_747056].   
• All questionnaires and transcriptions of interviews are kept in a locked file 
cabinet (separate from the master list with participant names and assigned 
numbers. A master list of study participants that includes the assigned ID #, 
the first and last names,  and any project -necessary groupi[INVESTIGATOR_747042] 
a secure server and stored in locked filing cabinets.  Screening forms and 
data collection cover sheets that include identifying info rmation are necessary.  
All such information is considered confidential and stored in a locked file 
cabinet separate from study data.   
• All consent forms are kept in a locked file cabinet (separate from the master 
list with participant names and assigned numbers).   
• Data collection takes place in a private place in the rehabilitation setting or by 
[CONTACT_747057] a private place.     
Telephone conversations with or about study participants require common sense 
discretion.  Attempts to schedule data collection with study participants or telephone 
conversations discussing issues related to the participants are conducted in a 
manner that assures confidentiality.  When talking on the telephone, office doors 
are kept closed, voices are kept low, and last names are not used beyond what is 
necessary. Computer files used for the purpose of tracking study participants are 
set up with password pr otection. Access to these files is restricted to defined key 
personnel approved by [CONTACT_32084].  
Interviewer Training, conducted by [CONTACT_604026]. Moriarty and Winter, will emphasize 
consent as an ongoing process and dialogue and will provide the interviewer with 
detailed study information to ensure that the interviewer understands the protocol 
and can answ er questions about the study.  All research staff will undergo initial 
training by [CONTACT_6283]. Moriarty and Winter to review confidentiality procedures consistent 
with the protocol and IRB regulations; they will monitor adherence to the 
confidentiality safeguards  on a weekly basis.   
   Risks of fatigue or research burden  
During the baseline and follow up interviews, the interviewer is alert for signs of 
fatigue or upset with the data collection procedures. The data collection can be 
stopped and continued at another time if the participant becomes fatigued. The 
interviewer will offer breaks at least two times during the interview. If the participant 
appears upset, the interviewer will stop the data collection process and offer 
support as needed. Data collection can be continued at another time if the 
participant desires.  
Response cards presenting each question’s response format will be employed to 
reduce response burden and facilitate interview progress. Used in our previous 
studies, response cards were found helpful and acceptable to participants. The 
estimated time of th e baseline interview is approximately 1.[ADDRESS_1022121] been conducted with individuals 
with TBI and depression in our previous research and were not found excessively 
burdensome. The interview will be conducted in the rehabilitation clinic office or 
home setting if preferred by [CONTACT_2299]. Follow -up interviews will be conducted 
in-person or by [CONTACT_648].   
Potential Benefits of Research to Subjects and Others :  
The proposed study may provide benefits to study participants. Participants may 
acquire skills to help reduce their depressive symptoms and increase their 
participation in activities and the community. Participation may lead to more 
veterans with TBI being  assessed and identified as having mild or moderate 
depressive symptoms. It is also possible that participants may have no direct 
benefit.  
 
The present application of BA to TBI -related depression is designed to augment 
current clinical care for TBI. It does not take the place of other treatments for 
depression that persons with TBI may be receiving.  Study participants are not 
asked to stop ot her treatments they are receiving for TBI or mental health 
problems.  Results from the study will allow us to assess the feasibility of BA for 
veterans with post -TBI depression and will provide preliminary data to support a 
future larger efficacy trial. Th is feasibility study and future research may generate 
new knowledge around the development and evaluation of interventions that 
reduce depression and improve community reintegration for veterans with TBI.  
 
Risk vs. Benefits  
Knowledge gained through this feasibility study and future larger studies has the 
potential to advance the care of persons with depression post TBI and to extend 
our knowledge on the feasibility and efficacy of interventions for this population.  
Given tha t TBI is a major public health problem for military and civilian populations 
and in light of the high prevalence of depression post -TBI, the potential benefits 
for this population and society outweigh the potential risks  
 
4.1.3.  Provide description of the study population (delineate all categories of 
subjects – patients, providers, family members, employees, etc.). Include 
anticipated enrollment numbers.  
A total of at least forty male and female Veterans at a VA outpatient 
Rehabilitation Medicine Service will be recruited to participate. We will 
oversample women to assure approximately 10% in each arm.  
 
4.1.4.  As applicable, provide information on any added protections for vulnerable 
populations.  
N/A 
 
4.1.5.  If applicable include information on data and specimen banking.  
N/A 
 
5. Recruitment Methods  
5.1. State how many subjects will be needed.  
At least,  forty male  and female  veterans  at a VA outpatient  Rehabilitation  Medicine  
service  will be recruited  to participate.   
 
5.2. Describe when, where, how and by [CONTACT_495230].  
Names of veterans meeting inclusion criteria for age, diagnosis of TBI, and severity of 
TBI will be given by [CONTACT_747058], and then we will mail these Veterans l a letter 
of invitation that introduces the study and invites them to call the study pho ne number to 
express interest in the study. The letter also informs them that a member of the research 
team will be calling them to discuss the study. When a veteran expresses interest in 
continuing the discussion about the study, the team members will pro vide more 
information, answer questions, and determine eligibility. Once an individual is deemed 
likely eligible, the research interviewer will schedule the baseline interview.  
A study flyer with a study phone number will be posted at the CMCVAMC, and Veterans 
may contact [CONTACT_747059].  
 
5.3. Describe materials that will be used to recruit subjects, e.g., advertisements.  
Include materials as an appendix or separate attachment  
Informational  flyer (Appendix  4); Letter  of Invitation  (Appendix  5); Telephone  script  used  
after letter  (Appendix  2) 
 
5.4. Describe any payments to subjects, including the amount, timing (at the end of the 
study or pro -rated for partial study participation), method (e.g., cash, check, gift 
card), and whether subjects will experience a delay in receiving the payment.  
There  will be incremental  payment  for interviews:  $40 for completion  of the Baseline  (BL) 
interview  and $50 for the follow -up interview  at 3 months.   
 
6. Informed Consent Procedures  
6.1. Indicate if informed consent will be obtained and/or if you are requesting a waiver 
of informed consent or waiver of documentation of informed consent.  If the 
research involves multiple phases, specify for which phases of the research the 
waiver(s) is bei ng requested and/or the informed consent will be sought.  
We will obtain  informed  consent  at the Baseline  (BL) visit. We will obtain  a Waiver  of 
HIPAA  for prescreening  (letters,  post-letter  phone  call.) 
 
6.2. Describe who will be obtaining informed consent, if applicable, and any 
circumstances that may need to be addressed (e.g. subjects with impaired 
decision  making ability and the use of a legally authorized representative, etc.)  
The interviewers  will obtain  informed  consent  at the BL visit. This will take place  at the 
CMC VAMC  or at the subject’s  home,  whichever  the subject  prefers.  Subjects  with 
impaired  decision  making  ability  or requiring  a legally  authorized  representative  will not 
be included.  
 
6.3. If applicable, indicate how local site study personnel will be trained regarding 
human subjects ' protections requirements and how to obtain and document 
informed consent.  
To ensure subject safety and the validity and integrity of the data, Drs. Moriarty and 
Winter will be responsible for training the Research Interviewer(s) in enrollment and the 
ongoing consent process.   
 
Interviewers  will receive a set of readings on TBI and background on the study. They will 
undergo a one -day training on depression, TBI, the interview batteries, human subjects 
protections, and safety plans. They will conduct four practice sessions with staff and role 
play as participants in four practice interviews.  
 
[CONTACT_747075] or Winter will observe several early interviews for each interviewer to assure 
integrity in the consent process and data collection process and adherence to 
confidentiality safeguards. They will provide additional training and review on a regular 
basis.    
 
7. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
7.1. Describe the criteria that determine who will be included in or excluded from the 
study.  
Inclusion Criteria . Veterans must be >[ADDRESS_1022122] a CES -D score > 16 at both the Telephone Screen 
and Baseline.56,57 Inclusion of those with mild TBI (mTBI), representing up to 50% of 
post-TBI depression, will provide a representative sample7,12. This also addresses the 
need for interventions that can prevent escalation from minor to major depression.48,[ADDRESS_1022123] acknowledge current TBI -related symptoms on the Telephone 
Screen (Appendix 2) and speak English. Inclusion of those with other physical 
symptoms (e.g., pain) or who meet criteria for PTSD will insure a more representative 
TBI sample.  
 
Exclusion criteria  are a diagnosis of severe TBI; psychosis; aphasia; history of bipolar 
disorder, history of severe physical aggressiveness, judged by [CONTACT_6098]; or 
currently receiving CBT for depression. Veterans with severe TBI were judged 
unlikely to be able to fully engage in BA. Dementia will be an exclusion. Since no 
cutoff on standard de mentia -screens is established for TBI populations, probable 
dementia will be determined on a case -by-case basis using  physician diagnosis  and 
difficulty unde rstanding interview questions. A review of CPRS will confirm TBI 
diagnosis and severity.  
 
8. Study Evaluations  
8.1. Describe all evaluations to be conducted (including screening; 
tests/questionnaires that will be administered; any procedures that subjects will be 
required to complete) and data collection methods.  Include materials as an 
appendix or separate attachment.  
The table describes the constructs, the instruments that operationalize them, number of 
items, and when administered. Appendix 6 presents the baseline and 3 month follow -up 
interview batteries.  
Table 2. Study constructs, measures, number of items, and when administered . 
CONSTRUCTS  MEASURES  
  
OSU TBI 
Short form  Ohio State University TBI Identification Method -Short form55 to confirm TBI diagnosis (OSU TBI -ID-
SF) Baseline interview  
Depressive 
Symptoms  The Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_6328] (CES -D) is a well -established 20 -item 
screening instrument that shows good psychometric properties in TBI populations . 56,57,58  Baseline 
& Follow -up interviews.  
PHQ, 
question 9  The Suicide Ideation (Patient Health Questionnaire [PHQ -9], item #9)59 Baseline & Follow -up 
interview s.  
Positive & 
negative 
affect  The [ADDRESS_1022124] Schedule60 (PANAS) is used to capture a wide range of 
emotions, allowing a broader examination of possible intervention effects beyond depressed affect. 
Baseline & Follow -up interviews.     
Community 
Reintegration  The 17 -item Participation Assessment with Recombined Tools -Objective (PART -O-17) 61, 62 is an 
objective measure of social functioning, developed from 3 existing CR measures to examine long -term 
outcomes and to evaluate intervention efficacy.78, 79 Baseline & Follow -up interviews.  
Quality of 
Life in TBI  The QoL -TBI 63, 64, 65, 66 is a 37 -item patient -centered measure that captures the individual’s perception 
of his/her health -related quality -of-life (HRQoL) in cognition, self -care, daily life and autonomy, social 
relationships, emotions, and physical problems. Baseline & Follow -up interviews.  
Demographics 
& military  
characteristics  These characteristics are age, sex, years of education, race, Hispanic ethnicity, marital status, 
employment status, financial difficulty, combat exposure, and war cohort. Baseline interview.  
Relevant 
health data  Years since most recent TBI, severity of TBI, co -morbidities, source of injury (e.g., blast exposure, 
vehicular, fall), number of TBIs, and history of prior TBIs and of depression. Baseline interview 
and CPRS review.  
Post - 
Traumatic 
Stress 
Disorder  The [ADDRESS_1022125] month that correspond to the DSM -V. Each item is rated on a 5 -point Likert 
scale, from 1 (not at all bothered) to 5 (extremely bothered). A score between 31 -33 indicates 
probable PTSD .86 Baseline interview.  
Patient self - 
ratings of 
functioning  Self-rated competency in daily activities is measured using the Patient Competency Rating Scale 
(PCRS),69,70 a 30-item standardized measure of patient competency designed for TBI populations. 
The stem question is, “How much of a problem have you had (in the past month) in …?” The 
response format is a five -point Likert scale from 1 (cannot do) to 5 (can do with e ase). Higher scores 
indicate better functioning. Baseline and Follow -up interviews.  
Healthcare 
services 
utilization  Veterans with TBI may use outpatient and inpatient care, mental health services, social services, and 
military service -connected and/or disability services. This Checklist will assess frequency of use of [ADDRESS_1022126] month and since t he baseline. Baseline and Follow -up interviews.  
Behavioral 
Activation  The 23 -item Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale (BADS)71 measures engagement in  social  
and occupational  activities  hypothesized  to underlie  depression  and targeted  for change  by [INVESTIGATOR_49840], using 
7-point Likert responses from 0 (not at all) to 6 (completely). Baseline and Follow -up interviews.  
Pain and self -
rated health  Pain (frequency and intensity) and self -perceived health are especially  germane to TBI and depression. 
These measures are  taken from the SF36,[ADDRESS_1022127] of the 
COVID -19 pandemic73 Baseline and Follow -up interviews  
Dose and 
Intensity   The Delivery Assessment form (Appendix 7) is completed by [CONTACT_747060] - interventionist after each session, 
documenting start and stop times, treatment setting, TBI -related problems worked on, BA components 
used, and amount of time for each. These data will be used to characterize the intervention content.  
Each OT -intervention session.    
OT-rated 
Acceptability   This 18 -item Acceptability and Enactment Scale is part of the Delivery Assessment Form (Appendix 7) 
based on measures extensively used by [CONTACT_473].39 Final OT session .   
Acceptability 
and experience 
of BA to 
participants   Measures of acceptability and perceived benefits from BA are collected in a final phone interview,  
immediately after the 3 -month follow -up interview, with BA participants Appendix 9). Acceptability by 
[CONTACT_1962] – final phone interview.   
Acceptability to 
clinic staff  Questions elicit clinic staff’s thoughts about the feasibility and acceptability of a BA -based  intervention in 
the rehabilitation clinic setting. Acceptability  by [CONTACT_3655] – after  completion of data collection.  
 
 
9. Data Analysis  
9.1. Provide sample size determination  and analysis (include anticipated rate of screen 
failures, study discontinuations, lost to follow -up etc.).  
This is a feasibility  study  using  40 subjects.  It will assess  recruitment,  refusal,  and 
retention  rates  and other  indicators  of feasibility  as described  earlier.  
 
9.2. Describe how, where  and by [CONTACT_747061].  
Data will be analyzed at the CMCVAMC by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_7706] -Is. 
Aim 1 will assess the feasibility of BA in the VA rehabilitation setting,  following  criteria 
suggested by [CONTACT_747062].52  and Thabane et al.53:: 
Acceptability to veterans and staff, assessed using qualitative and quantitative  
measures.  Qualitative : This analysis will be conducted for open -ended interview 
questions concerning the experience of receiving BA (for veterans) and the process 
of its implementation in the rehabilitation setting (for clinic staff). After verification of 
transcript accuracy for interviews, ATLAS.ti will be used to facilitate data 
organization, coding, and retrieval. Qualitative content analysis74 will inductively 
generate codes and categories. Line by [CONTACT_747063] (level I coding) that are then grouped into larger 
categories (level II, coding for themes). Strategies to support scientific r igor will be 
followed: for credibility (member checking findings with a subsample of participants); 
dependability (audit trial); transferability (thick description); and confirmability (audit 
trial).75 
Quantitative : (1) On the Acceptance/Receipt Scale completed by [CONTACT_139230] 
(final Delivery Assessment form), at least 75% should score > 3.0 (Appendix 7); (2) 
On the Satisfaction Scale, administered to BA participants during the final interview 
(Appendix 9), > 75% should score > 3.0. (3) Willingness to participate in future 
related studies should be > 75%. Criteria are based on our past study.47 
(a)  Process: (1) For recruitment, >50%, percent of veterans will be eligible to 
participate, and >30% will be willing to participate. (2) For retention, >75% of 
veterans in BA will attend > 4 sessions, and >75% will complete the study. (3) Less 
than 15% deviation from protocol on the Treatment Fidelity Checklist will o c c u r. 
(b)  Practicality:  Resources  of the rehabilitation  setting  that support  the BA intervention  
and constraints  that may interfere will assess the probability that BA can be 
implemented. Resources and constraints will be assessed by [CONTACT_364337], the 
project manager, and clinic staff through discussions on issues including 
scheduling, coordination with other appointm ents, staff time, and space providing  
privacy.  
(c) Treatment safety: Number of adverse events (study -related and unrelated) will be  
monitored.  
(d) Eligibility criteria: The team will assess whether these criteria were too broad or  
restrictive.  
(e) Participant comprehension: Interviewer and interventionist will note areas 
of participant difficulty understanding interview questions and intervention 
activities. Missing data  will also reflect difficulty.  
(f)  Research burden: Length of time to complete interviews will be recorded using 
start and stop time data on the interview. The interviewer will record participant 
fatigue, wish to take breaks, and/or emotional  distress.  
 
Aim 2 will assess change in participant response by [CONTACT_747064] 1 (BA + TAU) 
and Group 2 (TAU) on outcomes at T2 (3 -month follow -up). We will first conduct 
descriptive analyses separately for the BA and control groups to characterize the 
sample and assess the success of randomization in balancing the two groups. We will 
inspect trends, directions of change in the two groups, and associations between 
baseline characteristics (T1) and CES -D scores at follow -up (T2). The same trends 
and changes will be inspected for the secondary outcomes of CR and QOL. Analyses 
will be conducted using SPSS version  25. 
Aim [ADDRESS_1022128] 3 months, an expert panel comprising the investigators, interventionists, 
interviewer, clinic staff, and two veterans with TBI will review and modify the existing 
protoc ol and manual to adapt them for hallmark deficits of TBI. The panel will meet 
monthly to monitor the study, assessing need for additional compensatory strategies 
and removal or alteration of strategies that depend on: abstract thinking; patients’  
understanding of TBI -related depression; awareness of emotion and its regulation; 
and interpersonal issues. Interview measures will be assessed for participant 
comprehension, sensitivity, and burden. This pi[INVESTIGATOR_747043] a refined BA 
protocol and man ual for post -TBI depression whose efficacy will be evaluated in a 
larger RCT.  
An Exploratory Aim will examine engagement in activity as the mechanism underlying 
effects of BA. Although mediation analysis is beyond the scope of this feasibility study, 
we will explore characteristics of activity engagement using the BADS and its 
associations with the BA  intervention and with depression.  
 
 
10. Withdrawal of Subjects  
10.1.  Describe any anticipated circumstances under which subjects will be withdrawn 
from the research without their consent.  
Subjects  may be withdrawn  from the study  by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_747044],  such  as if the subject  expresses  suicidal  
ideation,  or increased  depression  that would  increase  risk of suicide.  The study  PI [INVESTIGATOR_747045] a safety  visit (in person  or over 
the phone)  and referrals  for other  services . Subjects  will not be withdrawn  for changes  in 
antidepressants  or other  medications  affecting  mood  or behavior,  or for changes  in 
psychotherapy  after consenting.  Investigators  will document  the change(s).   
 
10.2.  Describe the consequences of a subject's decision to withdraw from the research 
and the procedures for orderly termination of participation by [CONTACT_423] (e.g., the 
subject contact[CONTACT_427332] -of-study visit).  
The subject  may withdraw  at any time.  Subjects  will be offered  a safety  visit and referrals  
for other  services  to provide  more  support  after an early  withdrawal  (by [CONTACT_747065]).  
 
11. Reporting  
11.1.  Include procedures for reporting unanticipated problems, serious adverse events, 
and protocol deviations.  
Adverse  events,  protocol  deviations,  and unanticipated  problems  will be collected  at each  
study  visit or intervention  following  the signing  of the informed  consent,  or when  the study  
team  becomes  aware  of them.  They  will be reported  to the IRB at the time of continuing  
review,  or sooner,  per IRB requirements,  as necessitated  by [CONTACT_747066]  (e.g. SAE,  
serious  unanticipated  problem,  protocol  deviation  impacting  subject  safety).  
   Data and Safety Monitoring Plan   
Drs. Moriarty and Winter will be responsible for ensuring that the trial is conducted 
according to the protocol and will also be responsible for implementing the data safety 
and monitoring plan as described below. A data and safety monitoring plan is 
estab lished to ensure the safety of all study participants and to ensure the validity and 
integrity of the data.   
 
To maintain the validity and integrity of the data, Drs. Moriarty and Winter will be 
responsible for training the Research Interviewer(s) in enrollment, the ongoing consent 
process, and data collection procedures and also be responsible for training the OT  
interventionists in their treatment -documentation procedures. Interviewer training will 
include a review of the eligibility criteria, study procedures, safety plans, completion and 
scoring of each of the study instruments, and safeguards to maintain confi dentiality. [CONTACT_747076] or Winter will observe the several early  interviews for each interviewer to assure 
integrity in the consent process and data collection process and adherence to 
confidentiality safeguards. They will provide additional training and review as on a 
regular basis.  They will also conduct a weekly inspection of IRB documents, study 
records, data security, and confidentiality safeguards to ensure that the study is adhering 
to the study protocol and research regulations.  These items will b e part of the weekly 
discussions among the research interviewer, [CONTACT_747075], and [CONTACT_747077] that will 
address fidelity to the data collection protocol.  
 
The training for the OT interventionists will include a review of the study protocol, 
confidentiality safeguards, and the safety plan for study participants who may need 
additional medical or mental health services. The interventionists will meet with the Drs. 
Moriarty, Winter and Vause -Earland twice monthly for debriefings. The co -investigator, 
[CONTACT_747074] -Earland, will also observe at least five randomly selected intervention visits in 
Months 1 -2 to monitor fidelity to the study protocol and confidentiality  safeguards.     
 
Treatment Fidelity Monitoring  
We will monitor delivery of the intervention using a plan for providing oversight of 
treatment implementation based on the NIH Behavioral Change Consortium’s 
recommendations for assessing and maintaining treatment fidelity.76,77 The plan involves 
standardizing delivery and checking for protocol adherence utilizing three general 
strategies: following a treatment manual, checking adherence to the protocol, and 
maintaining provider skills. Specific steps to achieve treatment fidelit y goals include the 
following:  
 
(a) The Behavioral Activation condition is manualized to insure standardization of 
delivery.  
(b) Twenty -five percent of the intervention sessions will be audiotaped by [CONTACT_747067] (provided that the participant agrees to the tapi[INVESTIGATOR_007]), and the taped 
sessions will be reviewed by [CONTACT_6283]. Moriarty and Winter and evaluated according to a 
priori criter ia provided in a Treatment Fidelity Checklist (see Appendix 10).  
(c) Non-specific treatment effects (e.g., interventionist characteristics) will also be 
measured using the Treatment Fidelity Checklist by [CONTACT_747068].  
(d) To maintain interventionist skills and minimize drift, twice -monthly case conferences 
will be held. These will be attended by [CONTACT_747069].  
 
Adverse Event (AE) Reporting  
Interventionists will be trained in procedures to manage distress, suicidal ideation, severe 
depression, and other responses as described earlier and noted in the table below.  
Given that both data collection and interventions may occur in people’s homes ( if 
preferred by [CONTACT_87755]), there is the potential for a member of our research 
team to encounter a potential emergency situation that is not related to study participation 
(e.g., environmental risk, medical emergency).  We refer to such events  as alerts and 
have well developed procedures for their management.  All alerts will be reported to the 
VA IRB as required.  We will follow the reporting requirements of the VA IRB. Thus, per 
the requirement of the VA IRB, all adverse events that are descr ibed in the informed 
consent will be reported to the IRB at continuing review and unexpected adverse events 
that are considered unrelated to the study will be reported at continuing review.  An 
unexpected adverse event that is related to the study will be reported to the VA IRB 
within 72 hours (business days) of the investigator’s becoming aware of it.  Serious 
adverse events will be reported to the VA IRB within 72 hours regardless of whether it is 
related to the study or whether it is an onsite or offsite  event.  The event will be 
considered a serious adverse event, whether or not it is related to the study if any of the 
following six criteria are met:  1) hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], 2) life -threatening reactions (e.g., heart 
attack), 3) persistent or significant dis ability/incapacity or permanent hardship or 
disability, 4) events that jeopardize the subject and require medical or surgical 
intervention to prevent one of the outcomes previously listed, 5) congenital anomaly/birth 
defect in the offspring of the research  participant, and 6) death. Any  deviations from the 
approved protocol will be reported to the IRB. A summary of all adverse events and/or 
unanticipated problems will be included with the continuing review/progress report for the 
IRB.   
 
Overview of Alerts, Adverse Events, and their Monitoring  
The table below describes the specific events we consider as an Alert or Adverse Event 
and the procedures we plan to follow.  
 
Table:  Other Specific Alerts/Adverse Events and Actions Taken    
 
Emergency Alert/Adverse Event  
 Event  Action Taken  
Medical emergency:  
 -Chest pains  
- Excessive bleeding  
- Fall and cannot get up  
- Difficulty breathing  If a research staff person encounters this situation while speaking on 
the phone, the person is put on hold and the staff person calls [ADDRESS_1022129] the individual for 
a follow -up within two days.   
 
Research staff member completes alert form and reports adverse 
event to IRB as required.       
Threats to hurt self or 
others; severe depression ; 
suicidality  Described later  in text (Safety plans).  
Evidence of abuse  Evidence of physical abuse is as follows:  
• Participant states to research staff that abuse occurs  
• Research staff observes physical evidence (black eye, 
black and blue marks on arms/legs)  
 
If the interviewer or OTs suspects child abuse, they will report this 
immediately to [CONTACT_747075] or Winter, who will discuss this with the 
Polytrauma Social Worker Case Manager. If there is reasonable 
cause to suspect child abuse, this will be reported to  the Child Abuse 
Hotline with Child Protective Services (215 -683-6100). If the 
interviewer or OTs suspect spouse or partner abuse, they will report 
this immediately to [CONTACT_747075] or Winter, who will review the 
situation with the Polytrauma Social Worker Case Manager. 
Information and contact [CONTACT_747070] (such 
as Philadelphia Domestic Violence Hotline and Women Against 
Abuse) will be shared with the family member who is being abused.  
If the interviewer or OTs suspect elder abuse, this will be reported to 
the appropriate agency.  
 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_747046].    
Note – The mandated reporting of child and elder abuse is stated in 
the consent form.  
Extreme Home Hazards  
(if observed during  
home visit).   
-Exposed electrical wires  
-External door missing or 
cannot be locked  
-Ceiling, floors caved in  
-No temperature control (no 
air or heat – must be 
extreme)  
-Major infestation  Research staff member notifies PI [INVESTIGATOR_874] 24 hours.  If alert is identified 
prior to baseline/randomization, the individual is not enrolled in study 
until the home hazard is addressed.  If enrolled in the study, the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_747047]/he r to a home repair program.  
 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_747048].  
 
Alerts and adverse events are reviewed at weekly meetings to assure that each has been 
managed appropriately and follow -up and resolution obtained. We expect adverse events to be 
infrequent. In the rare case in which multiple adverse events occur, the study team will meet to 
review the severity and cause and determine next study steps with the guidance of the IRB  
 
 Safety Plan  
Given the population of interest (persons with TBI and depression), the team has developed a 
detailed safety plan for participants. The Rehabilitation Medicine Service and medical center 
employs mental health providers who can provide support to the study team for clinically 
emergent situations or circumstances that arise in the conduct of the research. A licensed 
clinician is always available at the medical center during business hours to facilitate assessment 
and support for emergent clinical situations. A licensed clinician is also available through the 
Behavioral Health Emergency Service during business hours and outside business hours.  
If the interviewer or interventionists observe that a study participant is a threat to self or others or 
has severe depression, a safety plan is in place to manage this situation. If a research staff 
person encounters a situation in the rehabilitation clinic  in which the person is severely depressed 
and threatens to hurt self or others immediately, or has answered affirmatively to item 9 on the 
PHQ, the research staff member stays with the individual and calls on the emergency behavioral 
health services at the medical center. Patient can be escorted to the BH urgent walk -in clinic on 
the 7th  floor for immediate assessment. Patients can also be escorted to the emergency room 
where there is psychiatric staffing 24/[ADDRESS_1022130] his provider 
and/or the contact [CONTACT_747071]/she chooses. The research staff also informs the 
person that a member of the research team will be contact[CONTACT_139724]/her shortly to follow -up. 
Imme diately at the conclusion of the interview, Drs. Moriarty and Winter are notified of the 
situation. They contact [CONTACT_747072]. 
The team has compi[INVESTIGATOR_42602] a list of community resources (VA and non -VA) th at will be shared with 
subjects for appropriate mental health resources, crisis lines, financial resources, and other 
resources as needed.   
In the event that the interviewer or OT is meeting with the veteran in the home and assesses the 
veteran to be at high risk for suicide, or the veteran has answered affirmatively to the PHQ item [ADDRESS_1022131] on call for problems that need 
immediate attention; the veteran would call the main hospi[INVESTIGATOR_747049] [ADDRESS_1022132] emergency room or the 
VA Medical Center’s emergency room.  When a veteran calls the 1 -800-273-TALK crisis hotline 
number, he reaches the national hotline, indicates if he/she is a veteran by [CONTACT_7326] 1, and then 
the hotline contacts the VA Medical Center Suicide Prevention Team, which contacts the 
veteran’s provider or arranges for a provider if the veteran does not have one. If veterans are 
experiencing homicidal thinking, they can call 911 or go to VA’s emergency room or the nearest 
emergency room. The interviewer or OT will encourage the veteran to seek the appropriate 
services, but if the OT o r interviewer judges that the veteran needs emergency services for a life -
threatening medical or psychiatric emergency and is unable to contact [CONTACT_747073], the OT or 
interviewer will call [ADDRESS_1022133] veterans w ith 
suicide risk to appropriate resources/referrals. They will also provide training , along with [CONTACT_747078],  on the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale.78 The Columbia Scale will be 
administered to participants who answer affirmatively (1, 2, or 3) to item 9 on the PHQ -9, 
indicating the presence and duration of suicidal ideation. The Columbia Scale is an assessment 
tool that evaluates suicidal ideation and behavior; it has been used with military and civilian 
populations.  Outcomes on this scale that can be used for safety monitoring include scores on 
suicidal behavior lethality, suicidal ideation, and suicidal ideation intensity. It is evidence -based in 
that much research has validated its relevance and the effectiveness of its questions in assessing 
suicide risk. Triage gu idelines are available for the tool that indicate risk and need for further 
evaluation and management (e.g., triggers for immediate referral to mental health services and 
patient safety precautions). Data from the PHQ item 9 and Columbia Scale will be shar ed when 
the person is referred for mental health services.  
The consent form will state that the research team may refer the participant to appropriate 
medical and mental health resources within the VA medical center. The consent will also note that 
in the event that a participant indicates an intention to harm sel f or others, we will be obligated to 
notify the appropriate medical and mental health professionals immediately.  
   
 
12. Privacy and Confidentia lity 
12.1.  Describe whether the study will use or disclose subjects’ Protected Health 
Information (PHI).  
The study  uses  subjects’  PHI but does  not disclose  it. 
 
12.2.  Describe the steps that will be taken to secure the data (e.g., training, authorization 
of access, password protection, encryption, physical controls, Certificates of 
Confidentiality, and separation of identifiers and data)  
To minimize the potential risk of breach of confidentiality, the following safeguards will be 
in place:  
 
• Study data from all sources (survey, interviews, and electronic record) are de -
identified and only code numbers used.  The master list linking code numbers 
with participant names and contact [CONTACT_747055] -identified data on a secure server.   
• Study databases do not contain any identifiable data. All VA regulations for 
data security and encryption will be followed as required.   
• If an interventionist or interviewer makes any visits to homes, they will 
transport identifiable data (e.g., name [CONTACT_3816]) in a locked briefcase. 
Interventionists and interviewers receive initial and ongoing training to follow 
the mechanisms in place t o ensure confidentiality of data.   
• All study data are stored in a secure server.   
• Study results will be represented only by [CONTACT_747056].   
• All questionnaires and transcriptions of interviews are kept in a locked file 
cabinet (separate from the master list with participant names and assigned 
numbers. A master list of study participants that includes the assigned ID #, 
the first and last names,  and any project -necessary groupi[INVESTIGATOR_747042] 
a secure server and stored in locked filing cabinets. Screening forms and data 
collection cover sheets that include identifying infor mation are necessary. All 
such information is considered confidential and stored in a locked file cabinet 
separate from study data.   
• All consent forms are kept in a locked file cabinet (separate from the master 
list with participant names and assigned numbers).   
• Data collection takes place in a private place in the rehabilitation setting or by 
[CONTACT_747057] a private place.     
 
 
13. Communication Plan  for Multi -Site Studies or Studies being done at Non -CMCVAMC 
Locations    
  N/A; skip to question [ADDRESS_1022134] of the study.  
      
 
13.4.  Include plan for ensuring the study is conducted according to the IRB -approved 
protocol.  
      
 
13.5.  Include plan for notifying all local facility directors and LSIs when a multi -site 
study reaches the point that it no longer requires engagement of the local facility 
(e.g., all subsequent follow -up of subjects will be performed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_495694]).  
      
  
 
14. References (bibliography of cited literature )  Please see list of cited references at the very end 
of document.  Our reference system does not allow us to place the references under item 14.  
 
 
 
1 Defense and Veterans Brain  Injury Center . DOD worldwide numbers for TBI. [Cited  May 7, 2018] 
Available from  http//: www.dvbic.dcoe/dod -worldwide -numbers -tbi. 
2 Defense and Veterans Brain  Injury Center . Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) Awareness. [Cited May 7,  
2018]   Available from http//: www .[EMAIL_14283] .  
[ADDRESS_1022135] SB, Kumar RG, Wagner, AK. A narrative literature review of depression following traumatic  
brain injury: prevalence, impact, and management challenges. Psychol Res Behav Manag. 2017; 10: 
175-86. 
4 Osborn AJ , Mathias JL , Fairweather -Schmidt AK , Anstey KJ . Traumatic brain injury and  depression  in   
a community -based sample: a cohort study across the adult life span . J Head Trauma Rehabil.  2017 
May 17.  doi: 10.1097/HTR.0000000000000311. [Epub ahead of print]  
5 Bombardier CH, Fann JR, Temkin NR, Esselman PC, Barber J, Dikmen SS. Rates of major 
depressive  disorder and clinical outcomes following traumatic brain injury. JAMA. 2010;313(19): 
1938 -1945.  
 
 
6 Greer N, Ackland P, Sayer N, Spoont M, Taylor B, Macdonald R, et al. Relationship of deployment -
related mild traumatic brain injury to posttraumatic stress disorder, depressive disorders, substance 
use disorders,  suicidal ideation, and anxiety disorder: a  systematic review. Retrieved January 12, 
[ADDRESS_1022136].research.va.gov/publications/esp/tni -mentalhealth.cfm .  
7 Singh R , Mason S , Lecky F , Dawson J . Prevalence of depression after TBI in a prospective  
  cohort: the SHEFBIT study. Brain Inj.  2018;32(1):84 -90. 
8 Cnossen MC, Scholten AC, Hester F. Lingsma HF, Synnot A, Haagsma J, Steyerberg EW, Polinder 
S. Predictors of major depression and posttraumatic stress disorder following traumatic brain injury: a  
  systematic review and meta -analysis. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 2017; 29:206 –224.  
9 DiMatteo MR, Lepper HS, Croghan TW. Depression is a risk factor for noncompliance with medical  
   treatment: meta -analysis of the effects of anxiety and depression in patient adherence. Arch Intern  
   Med. 2000; 160:2101 -7. 
10 Daggett VS, Bakas T, Buelow J, Habermann B, Murray LL. Needs and concerns of male combat  
   veterans with mild traumatic brain injury. J Rehabil Res Develop. 2013; 50 (3): 327 -40.   
11 McCabe P, Lippert C, Weiser M, Hilditch M, Hartridge C, Villamere J, for the Erabi Group. 
Community reintegration following acquired brain injury.  Brain Inj. 2007; 21: 231 -57. 
12 Hart T , Hoffman JM , Pretz C , Kennedy R , Clark AN , Brenner LA . A longitudinal study of major and  
    minor depression following traumatic brain injury.  Arch Phys Med Rehabil.  2012 Aug;93(8):[ADDRESS_1022137] SH, Adams LM, Bogner JA, Arenth PM, O’Neil -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_747050], Dreer LE, Hart T, Bergquist TF,  
    Bombardier CH, Dijkers MP, Wagner AK. Trajectories of life satisfaction after TBI: influence of life  
    roles, age, cognitive disability, and depressive symptoms. Rehabil Psychol. 2015; 60(4): 353 –64. 
14 Madsen T, Erlangsen A, Orlovska S, Mofaddy R, Nordentoft M, Benros ME. Association between  
   traumatic brain injury and risk of suicide . J Amer Med Assoc. 2018 : 320(6): 580 –588. 
15 Simpson G, Tate R. Suicidality in people surviving a traumatic brain injury: prevalence, risk factors,  
    and implications for clinical management. Brain Inj. 2007; 21:1335 –1351.  
16 Brenner LA, Ignacio RV, Blow FC. Suicide and traumatic brain injury among individuals seeking  
    Veterans Health Administration services. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 2011; 26:257 –264. 
17 Wilson L, Stewart W, Dams -O’Connor K, Diaz -Arrastia R, Horton L, Menon DK, Polinder S. The  
    chronic and evolving neurological consequences of traumatic brain injury. Lancet Neurol. 2017;  
    16:813 -25.  
18 Jorge RE, Arciniegas DB. Mood disorders after TBI.  Psychiatr Clin N Amer. 2014;37: 13 -29.   
19 Koponen S, Taiminen, T, Portin R, et al. Axis I and Ii psychiatric disorders after traumatic brain injury:   
a 30-years follow -up study. Am J Psychiatry, 2002; 159(8): [ADDRESS_1022138] TF , Bombardier CH , et al. Prevalence of suicidal  
   Behaviour following traumatic brain injury: longitudinal follow -up data from the NIDRR Traumatic 
Brain  Injury Model Systems.  Brain Inj.  2016;30(11):1311 -8. 
21 Albrecht JS, Kiptanui Z, Tsang Y, Khokhar B, Smith GS, et al. Patterns of depression treatment in  
   Medicare beneficiaries with depression after traumatic brain injury. J Neurotrauma.2015:1223 -9. 
22 Gertler P, Tate RL, Cameron ID. Non -pharmacological interventions for depression in adults and  
    Children with traumatic brain injury. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2015, Issue 12. Art.  
    No.: CD009871.DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD009871.pub2.  
23 Jorge RE, Arciniegas DB. Mood disorders after TBI.  Psychiatr Clin N Am. 2014; 37: [ADDRESS_1022139] -acute traumatic   
brain  injury. Brain Res. 2016; 1649:164 -79. 
25 Yue JK, Burke JF, Upadhyayula PS, Windler EA, Deng H, et al. Selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors for treating neurocognitive and neuropsychiatric disorders following traumatic brain injury: 
an evaluation of current evidence. Brain Sci. 2017;7: doi10.3390/brainsci7080093  
26 Beck AT, Rush AJ. Shaw BF, Emery G. 1979. Cognitive therapy of depression. [LOCATION_001]: Guildford.  
 
 
27 Ashman T, Cantor JB, Tsaosides T, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_067] L, Gordon W. Comparison of cognitive behavioral  
therapy and supportive psychotherapy for the treatment of depression following traumatic brain 
injury:  a randomized controlled trial. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 29: [ADDRESS_1022140] JL .  
   Cognitive behavior therapy to treat sleep disturbance and fatigue after traumatic brain Injury: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_747051].  Arch Phys Med Rehabil.  2017 Apr 8. pii: S0003 -9993(17)[ADDRESS_1022141] mental health care among OEF/OIF veterans at VA outpatient mental health  
   clinics. Mil Med.  2014;179(3):273 -8. 
30 Cuipers P, van Straten A, Warmerdam L. Behavioral activation treatments of depression: a meta - 
    analysis.Clin Psychol Rev. 2007; 27:318 -26. 
31 Ekers D, Webster L, Van Straten A, Cuijpers P, Richards D, Gilbody S. Behavioural activation for 
depression:  an update of meta -analysis of effectiveness and sub group analysis. PLOS One. 2014; 
6.  
32 Kantor JW, Manos RC, Bowe WM, Baruch DE, Busch AM, Rusch LC. What is behavior activation:   
   a review of the empi[INVESTIGATOR_20661]. Clin Psychol Rev. 2010; 2 -10: 608 -20.  
33 Lewinsohn P. A behavioral approach to depression. In R. J. Friedman, & M. M. Katz (Eds.). 
Psychology of depression: contemporary theory and research (pp. 157−185). 1974. Oxford, 
England: John Wiley & Sons.  
[ADDRESS_1022142], Bell JL, Armento MEA, Hunt MK, Lejuez CW. Behavior therapy for depressed cancer   
    patients in primary care. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training. 2005; 42:236 -43.  
35 Rovner BW, Casten RJ, Hegel MT, Massot RW, Leiby [INVESTIGATOR_66562], et al. Low vision depression prevention 
trial in age -related macular degeneration:  a randomized clinical trial. Ophthal. 2014;12(11): [ADDRESS_1022143] of behavioral intervention on  
   dilated fundus examination rates in older Africa American individuals with diabetes mellitus:  a  
   randomized clinical trial. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2015;133(9):1005 -12. 
37Jakupcak M, Wagner A, Paulson A, Varra A, McFall M. Behavioral activation as a primary care -based  
treatment for PTSD and depression among returning veterans. J Traumatic Stress. 2010; 23: 491 -5. 
38 Turner AP, Jakupcak M. Behavioral activation for treatment of PTSD and depression in an Iraqi  
    combat  veteran with multiple combat injuries. Behav Cog Psychother. 2010; 38:[ADDRESS_1022144], Szanton SL, Huang J, Roth DL. Factors mediating the effects of a depression  intervention 
on functional disability in older African Americans. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2014; 62(12): 2280 –7. 
40 Rovner BW, Casten RJ, Hegel MT, Leiby B. Preventing cognitive decline in black individuals with 
mild  cognitive impairment: a randomized clinical trial. J Am Med Assoc  Neurol .  
doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.2513 Published online September 10,2018.   
41 Miller GA, Pribram K, Galanter. Plans and the structure of behavior. 1960.  
42 Winter L, Goldy AS. Effects of prebehavioral cognitive work on adolescents' acceptance of condoms.   
   Health Psychol.  1993;12:313 -323. 
43 Stuss DT, Levine B. Adult clinical neuropsychology: lesions from studies of the frontal lobes. Ann 
Rev Psycho. 2002; 53:[ADDRESS_1022145] year after traumatic 
brain  injury.  J Head Trauma Rehabil.  2009 Jul -Aug;24(4):230 -8. 
45 Hart T, Vaccaro, Collier G, Chervoneva I, Fann JR. Promoting mental health in traumatic brain injury  
    Using  single session behavioral activation and SMS messaging: a randomized controlled trial.  
    Neuropsychol Rehabil. Doi.org/10.1080/09602011.2019.1592761.  
46 Moriarty H, Winter L, True G, Robinson K, Short TH. Depressive symptomatology mediates  
 
 
   associations with community reintegration in veterans with TBI. Mili Psychol . 2016 ; 28(6): 376 -89. 
47 Winter L, Moriarty H, Robinson KE, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_101660], et al. Eff icacy  and acceptability  of a home -based,  
   family -inclusive intervention for veterans with TBI: A randomized controlled trial. Brain Inj.  2016; 16:1- 
5. 
48 Moriarty H, Winter L, Robinson KE, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_101660], Vause -Earland T, et al. A randomized controlled trial 
to evaluate the veterans’ in -home program (VIP) for military veterans with traumatic brain injury and 
their families: report on impact for family members.  Phys Med Rehabil. 2015;8 (6) : 495-509.   
49 Moriarty H, Winter L, Robinson K, True G, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_193260] C, Vause -Earland T, Iacovone DB, Holbert L,  
   Newhart B, Fishman D, Short TH. Exploration of individual and family factors related to community  
reintegration i n veterans with traumatic brain injury .  J Am Psychiatr Nurs Assoc. 2015;21(3):  195-
211. 
50 Winter L, Moriarty H, Robinson K. Employment status among U.S. military veterans with traumatic  
   brain injury: mediation analysis and the goal of tertiary prevention. Front Neurol. 2019;  
   doi:10.3389/rneur2019. . 
51 Winter L, Moriarty H, Robinson K. Depressive symptoms among veterans with TBI:  effects of an in - 
   home,  family -inclusive Intervention and their mediation by [CONTACT_747052]. . Int J Ther Rehabil.  
   2020. https://doi. org/10.[ZIP_CODE]/2019.005  
52 Bowen DJ, Kreuter M, Spring B, Cofta -Woerpel, Linnan L, et al. How we design feasibility studies.  
   Am J Prev Med. 2009; 36(5): 452 -7.  
53 Thabane L, Ma J, Chu R, Cheng J, Ismaila A, Rios LP, Robson R, Thabane M, Giangregorio L,  
   Goldsmith CH. A tutorial on pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602]: the what, why and how. BMC Med Res Methodology. 2010;  
   10:1  
54 U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs/Department of Defense. (2016). VA/DoD Clinical Practice  
Guideline: Management of concussion/mild traumatic brain injury . [Cited September 1, 2016] 
Available  from http://www.healthquality.va.gov/guidelines/Rehab/mtbi.  
55 Corrigan JD, Bogner J. Initial reliability and validity of the  TBI Ohio State University TBI Identication  
    Method.  J Head Trauma Rehabilitation. 2007; 22(6): 318 -29.  
56 Radloff LW. The CES -D Scale: a self -report depression scale for research in the general population.  
   App Psychol Meas.1977; 1(3), 385 -40.  
57 Kennedy E, M W Reid MW, L H Lu LH,D B Cooper (2019) Validity of the CES -D for depression  
    screening in military service members with a history of mild traumatic brain injury, Brain Injury, 33:7,  
    932-940, DOI: 10.1080/02699052.2019.1610191.  
58 Osborn AJ, Mathias JL, Fairweather -Schmidt AK. Depression following adult, non -penetrating  
    traumatic brain injury: A meta -analysis examining methodological variables and sample  
    characteristics. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 2014: 47 (2014) 1 –15.  
59 Kroenke K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Williams JBW. The PHQ -9: Validity of a brief severity measure. J Gen  
     Intern Med. 2001; 16: 606 -13. 
60 Watson D, Clark LA,  Tellegen A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of  
    Positive and Negative Affect: The PANAS Scales. J Personality Social Psychol. 1988;54:1063 -70. 
61 Bogner JA, Whiteneck G, Corrigan JD, Lai JS, Dijkers MP, et al. Comparison of scoring methods for  
   the Participation Assessment with Recombined Tools –Objective. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2011;  
   92:552 -63.  
62 Whiteneck G, Dijkers M, Heinemann AW, Bogner J, Bushnik T, et al. Development of the 
Participation Assessment with Recombined Tools -Objective for use with individuals with traumatic 
brain injury. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2011; 92:542 -51.  
63 Steger MF, Kashdan TB. Depression and everyday social activity, belonging, and well -being. J  
   Couns Psychol 2009;56: 289 -300.  
64 QOL Von Steinbuchel N, Wilson L, Gibbons H, Hawthorne G, Hofer S, Schmidt S, et al. Quality of life  
 
 
    after Brain Injury (QOLIBRI): scale validity and correlates of quality of life. J Neurotrauma. 2010(a);  
    27:[ZIP_CODE].  
65 Von Steinbuchel N, Wilson L, Gibbons H, Hawthorne G, Hofer S, Schmidt S, et al. Quality of life after  
   Brain Injury (QOLIBRI): Scale development and metric properties. J Neurotrauma.2010(a); 27:1167 -
85.  
66 Lange RT, Brickell RA, Bailie JM, Tulsky DS, French LM. Clinical utility and psychometric properties 
of the Traumatic Brain Injury Quality of Life Scale (TBI -QOL) in US military service members. J Head  
   Trauma Rehabil. 2016;31(1): [ADDRESS_1022146] (PCL). The PTSD  
    Checklist (PCL): Reliability, validity, and diagnostic utility. Paper presented at the 9 th Annual  
    Conference of the International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies, San Antonio, Tx. November  
   1993.   
68 Weathers FW, Litz BT, Keane TM, Palmieri PA, Marx BP, Schnurr PP. (2013). The PTSD  
    Checklist for DSM -5 (PCL -5). Scale available from the National Center for PTSD at ptsd.va.gov  
69 Prigatano GP, Fordyce DJ, Zeiner HK et al. Neuropsychological rehabilitation after brain injury.    
Baltimore (MD): Johns Hopkins University Press; 1986.   
70 Sveen U, Roe C, Sandvik L, Bautz -Holter E. Self -rated competency in activities predicts  
   functioning and participation one year after traumatic brain injury. Clin Rehabil. 2008; 22:4555.  
71 Kantor JW, Mulick PS, Busch AM, et al., The Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale (BADS):  
    psychometric properties and factor structure. J Psychopath Behav Assess. 2007; 29:191 -202.  
72 Ware JE, Sherbourne C. The MOS 36 -item health survey. I. Conceptual framework and item 
selection.  Med Care. 1992; 30(6): [ADDRESS_1022147] Questionnaire. COVID -19 OBSSR Research Tools. Retrieved from  
    https://www.nlm.nih.gov/dr2/COVID -19_BSSR_Research_Tools.pdf  
74 Hsieh HF, Shannon SE. Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qual Health Res .2005;  
   15(9):1277 -1288. doi:10.1177/1049732305276687  
75 Guba EG. Criteria for assessing the trustworthiness of naturalistic inquiry. ECTJ. 1981; 29 (2): [ADDRESS_1022148] D, 
Czajkowski S, for the Treatment Fidelity Workgroup of the NIH Behavior Change Consort, et al. 
Enhancing treatment fidelity in health behavior change studies: best practices and recommendations 
for the NIH Behavior Change Consortium. Health Psychol, 2004;23, [ADDRESS_1022149] D, Belig AJ, Czajkowski S, Breger R., De[LOCATION_009]sco C, Levesque C, Sharp DL, 
Ogedegbe G, Resnick B, Orwig D. A new tool to assess treatment fidelity and evaluation of treatment 
fidelity across 10 years of health behavior research . J Counsel Clin Psychol. 2000;73: 852 -60.  
78 Yershova KV, Oquendo MA, Currier GW, Melvin GA, Sa Shen LG…Brent DA. The Columbia –
Suicide  Severity Rating Scale: Initial validity and internal consistency findings from three multisite 
studies with  adolescents and adults.  Am J Psychiatry . 2011 December; 168(12): 1266 –1277.  
   doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2011.10111704  