  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Title:  Computerized Tool for Preventing Prenatal Drinking  
 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
 
Date of Document:  May 1, 2015  
 
Approved:  June 15, 2015  
 
 
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
 
 
 
  Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
Preliminary analysis  will a) examine distributions of study variables, transform or categorize non -normally 
distributed variables, and handle outliers as recommended (Andrews et al., 1972 ); b) conduct attrition analyses 
to assess potential bias due to participant loss at follow -up (Gerstein et al., 1994 ); c) assess effects of study 
non-participation using information from WIC ’s database; and d) implement multiple imputation methods for 
missing data (Rubin, 1987 , Schafer and Olsen, 1998 ). If needed , propensity score methods will be employed to 
re-match study groups,  Propensity scores incorporate large numbers o f covariates to yield quintile -based 
matching of experimental and control groups on scores . The scores are  defined as the predicted probability of 
study group assignment obtained from logistic regressions that use baseline demographics and key outcome 
variables (Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1985 ). Such matching reduces “noise” in group  comparisons, of particular 
value given the development nature of our proposed trial and small sample sizes.  The propensity score 
method does not focus on effect estimation, limited here by [CONTACT_203749] y examine any issues with randomization and attrition to help plan for a Phase II trial of e -SBI. 
Given random assignment and the relatively homogeneous nature of the clinic population with respect to age, 
income and education, we do not anticipate having unmatched study groups.  
 
We w ill evaluat e e-SBI eff ects by [CONTACT_203750] 3-month (T2) and , separately, the  6-month follow -up (T3) .  Mean differences will be estimated  
separately for the experimental and control group, combined using weights based on sample size, and 
compared across study condition. Categorical variables will be analyzed using the longitudinal Generalized 
Estimating Equations (GEE) approach  (Liang and Zeger, 1986 , Zeger and Liang, 1986 ) with indicator variables 
included for each follow -up and an exchangeable error correlation structure. .  
Post hoc analyses will focus on changes in drink size and drink size corrected quantities o f consumption 
and between and within group differences in drinking at T2 and T3.   
 
Power considerations . We consider the worst case scenario with n=65  per group expected at 3 -month 
follow up (T3).   Tests of equality of means or rates of outcomes across matched groups would have a power of 
.[ADDRESS_242873] size differences in 2 -sided tests with α=.05 (Cohen, 1988 ), corresponding to a 
group difference in proportions of at least 15% (e.g., any 5 plus - 5% in the experimental vs.  20% in the control 
group).   Power for tests for 6 -month outcomes ( n=60  per group), would be .78.  
 