1                              Palliative Care for the Elderly Outpatient, May 12, 2020 
 RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
 
Investigators:  
 
Diana J. Wilkie, PhD, RN – Principal Investigator, UF College of Nursing  
Yingwei Yao, PhD – Co- Investigator, UF College of Nursing  
Sheri Kitte lson, MD – Site Director, UF College of Medicine  
Linda Emanuel, MD – MPI, Northwestern University  
Joshua Hauser, MD – Site Director, Northwestern University  
George Fitchett, PhD, DMin  – MPI, Rush University  
Sean O’Mahony, MD – Site Director, Rush University  
Tammie Quest, MD – Site Director, Emory University  
Michael Rabow, MD - Site Director, UCSF  
Marvin Delgado, MD - Site Director, MD Anderson  
George Handzo, MDiv – Co-Investigator, Health Care Chaplaincy of [LOCATION_001]  
 
Background and Purpose:  
 
Our long- term goal is to improve spi[INVESTIGATOR_153404]. We will 
use a spi[INVESTIGATOR_153405], Dignity Therapy (DT), to help these patients maintain pride, find 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_153406], enhance continuity of self, and ultimately make meaning of their life 
threatening illness. However, to date, DT has not been viewed as a spi[INVESTIGATOR_153407]. Our thesis is that DT will systematize spi[INVESTIGATOR_153408] (spi[INVESTIGATOR_153409]). The 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_153410].1 Spi[INVESTIGATOR_153411] 86% of 
patients with advanced cancer.2  Unfortunately, little research guides interventions for spi[INVESTIGATOR_153412].  We will address this gap by [CONTACT_153441] a rigorous, multi -site, randomized 
controlled trial (RCT).3  
 
Previous studies of DT demonstrated clear feasibility and inconsistent efficacy of DT with 
virtually no evidence of its mechanism of action. Specifically, the 12 studies of DT (8  
uncontrolled feasibility; 4 mostly small sample efficacy RCTs) show DT to be an important 
intervention when delivered by [CONTACT_153442], but effects on patients’ distressing physical or emotional symptoms of life -threatening illness have been inconsistent. 
Taking a spi[INVESTIGATOR_153413],
[ADDRESS_177016] on patients ’ 
sense of meaning and purpose,
[ADDRESS_177017]. Two disciplines 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_153414] —nurses 
and chaplains. A nurse- led or chaplain -led DT study of patients receiving outpatient palliative 
care is needed to determine the efficacy of DT on key spi[INVESTIGATOR_37312] -related patient outcomes (dignity 
impact, existential tasks, cancer prognosis awareness) and explore possible moderators (physical symptoms and spi[INVESTIGATOR_153415]) of DT’s effects on patient outcomes.  
 
2                              Palliative Care for the Elderly Outpatient, May 12, 2020 
 We propose a pre/posttest, RCT with a 4- step (12 months per step), stepped- wedge design3 to 
compare effects of usual outpatient palliative care (usual care) and usual care along wit h either 
nurse- led or chaplain- led DT on patient outcomes (dignity impact, existential tasks [preparation 
for death, life completion], cancer prognosis awareness [peaceful awareness, treatment 
preferences]). We will assign [ADDRESS_177018] measures (patient outcomes, covariates [physical symptoms, spi[INVESTIGATOR_153415]], and 
satisfaction with palliative spi[INVESTIGATOR_153416]), receive usual palliative care, and complete 
posttest measures (patient outcomes, covariates, satisfaction). During the experimental steps  
as part of routine palliative care service delivery, [ADDRESS_177019] measures. Using mixed level 
analysis with site, provider (nurse, chaplain) and time (step) includ ed in the model, we will 
compare the usual care and each of the DT groups for effects on dignity impact, existential 
tasks, and cancer prognosis awareness and explore the moderating effects of physical 
symptoms and spi[INVESTIGATOR_153415]. We will also determin e the effect of usual care and DT on the 
patient’s satisfaction with palliative spi[INVESTIGATOR_153417]’s unmet 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_153418].  
 
Specific Aims:  
      
In a diverse sample of 560 elderly cancer patients, the specific aims are to: 
  
Aim 1. Compare usual care and usual care with nurse- led or chaplain- led DT groups for effects 
on:   
 a) patient outcomes (dignity impact, existential tasks [preparation for death, life 
completion], cancer prognosis [peaceful awareness, treatment preferences]). We hypothesize that, controlling for pretest scores, each of the DT groups will have higher scor es on the dignity 
impact (1° outcome) and existential tasks (2° outcome) measures than the usual care group. 
Also patients in each of the DT groups will report better peaceful awareness and treatment 
preferences more consistent with their cancer prognosis (2° outcomes) than the usual care 
group; and  
 b) processes of delivering palliative spi[INVESTIGATOR_153416] (satisfaction and unmet 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_153418]; 2° outcomes). We hypothesize that each of the DT groups will show increased 
patient satisfaction with spir itual care services and fewer unmet spi[INVESTIGATOR_153419].  
 
Aim 2. Explore the influence of physical symptoms and spi[INVESTIGATOR_153420]- led or chaplain- led DT. We 
hypothesize that physical symptoms and spi[INVESTIGATOR_153421]. This rigorous trial of DT will constitute a landmark step in gero- oncology palliative care 
and spi[INVESTIGATOR_153422].  
 
  
3                              Palliative Care for the Elderly Outpatient, May 12, 2020 
 Study design:  
 
We propose a 6- site, pre/posttest, randomized, controlled 4- step, stepped -wedge design to 
compare the  effects of usual outpatient 
palliative care and usual outpatient 
palliative care along with nurse- led or 
chaplain- led DT on patient outcomes 
and palliative care processes. We will assign the [ADDRESS_177020] -step period (1 0 months), and 
randomly assign 2 sites per step to 
begin and continue DT during each of the next 3 steps ( 10 months each). 
Figure 1 shows the stepped- wedge 
study design with projected numbers of completed patients needed per site, step period, and group (usual care, DT led by [CONTACT_5640] a 
nurse or a chaplain). [CONTACT_153452], a highly qualified statistician will conduct the randomization of site 
to steps 2 -4. Each step will be 1 0 months long, with DT training during a 1- week period between 
steps. For each site/step, a quota of 50% of the participants will report low or high distress on 
the Personal Dignity Inventory to assure we recruit a sample with a range of problems 
threatening their dignity. Each patient will participate for 4- [ADDRESS_177021] 23 -24 patients to participate at each site (93 -94 total patients per site).  
 
Subject identification, recruitment and consent:  
 
We will recruit the study sample from the population served by [CONTACT_153443][INVESTIGATOR_153423]. The sites  represent the South Eastern  (Emory University, UF Health 
Gainesville) , North Midwest  (Northwestern University, Rush University) , South Midwest  (MD. 
Anderson) , and Western (University of [LOCATION_004] at San Francisco) areas of the U.S. The 
participants will be elders who are diagnosed with cancer and are receiving outpatient palliative care services at the participating sites.  At UF Health, we will recruit the sample from the existing 
outpatient oncology palliative care services and those under development within the UF Cancer Center.  
 
The consent process will be completed in person and in a private area at the outpatient palliative care services of the [ADDRESS_177022] to go over the details of the study and informed 
consent. The consent process may also be conducted by [CONTACT_153444] a preaddressed, stamped envelope.  
   Figure 1 . Stepped -wedge design     N per step per site         Total N  
Site 6  23 23 23 24 93 
Site 5  23 23 23 24 93 
Site 4  24 23 23 24 94 
Site 3  24 23 23 24 94 
Site 2  24 23 23 23 93 
Site 1  24 23 23 23 93 
Step  1 2 3 4  
Patient s/ 
Step Period  142 138 138 142 560 
Usual Care          280 
Nurse -Led DT          140 
Chaplain -Led DT          140 
Step Period Duration (mo) 10 10 10 10 40 
 
4                              Palliative Care for the Elderly Outpatient, May 12, 2020 
 Procedure s:  
 
The study will be conducted in the outpatient clinic in spaces available for research or virtually 
via a HIPAA -compliant video- conferencing platform . The investigators will attend patient care 
planning meetings and introduce the study to the palliative care team members. Any member of 
the palliative care team will refer patients to the RA on the day the patient is seen in the 
palliative care clinic  or via a HIPAA -compliant video -
conferencing platform . 
 
Figure 2 shows the general flow of patients through the 
outpatient palliative care clinics  and study procedures for 
this study of nurse- led or chaplain- led DT over 4- 6 weeks. 
Prior to participant recruitment, the research assistants 
(RA) will be trained in all study procedures. Prior to 
steppi[INVESTIGATOR_153424], the nurse and 
chaplains at the sites scheduled to begin the DT will be 
trained in the DT.                                                                                                                                                                                                      
 
Study Procedures:  
 
I. The RA will recruit the referred and potentially eligible patients for this study, provide and obtain informed consent, determine final eligibility, and 
schedule time before the next clinic visit or at a 
time conven ient to the patient for the patient to 
complete the pretest tools  via an audio- recorded 
interview documented on REDCap forms and stored on REDCap for quality control purposes .  
 
II. Then the RA will inform the nurse/chaplain that the patient is available for care (usual 
care or DT, depending on the study step and site). The nurse/chaplain will provide the 
designated care on the same day as the pretest data collection, as s pecifi ed in the 
following section:  
   
a. Usual care. Palliative care nurses usually see patients each clinic visit to assess vital 
signs, function, symptoms, and to provide patient and family education. They document findings and interventions in the electronic health record (EHR). Whereas 
usual care for palliative care chaplaincy in the outpatient setting varies by [CONTACT_3725], 
chaplaincy care for usual care patients in this study will follow the usual practice for 
inpatient palliative care chaplaincy, which is to visit all new referrals to the clinic and 
assess their spi[INVESTIGATOR_153425]. This assessment is then memorialized in a 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_153426].  
 
b. Dignity Therapy . The DT intervention is detailed in Chochinov’s  manualized guide; 
he serves as our co- investigator  and will conduct trainings for the team. The basic 
questions of the DT interview appear in Table 2. The nurse- led or chaplain- led DT 
intervention involves three sessions, each of which follows a set process (Fig 2). The 
standardize approach to the delivery  of the intervention facilitates a personal process 
of reflection and recognition that allows the patient to make meaning of their 
experience.  
  

5                              Palliative Care for the Elderly Outpatient, May 12, 2020 
  
Table 1. Examples of the Dignity Therapy Question Protocol  
1. Tell me about your life history; particularly th e parts that you either remember most or think 
are the most important? When did you feel most alive?  
2. Are there specific things that you would want your family to know about you, and are there 
particular things you would want them to remember?  
3. What are the most important roles you have played in life (family roles, vocational roles, 
community service roles, etc.)? Why were they so important to you, and what do you think 
you accomplished in those roles?  
4. What are your most important accomplishments , and what do you feel most proud of?  
5. What are your hopes and dreams for your loved ones?  
6. What have you learned about life that you would want to pass along to others?  
7. What advice or words of guidance would you wish to pass along to your [son,  daughter, 
husband, wife, parents, other(s)]?  
8. Are there particular things that you feel still need to be said to your loved ones, or things 
that you would want to take the time to say once again?  
9. Are there words or perhaps even instructions you would like to offer your family, in order to 
provide help to prepare them for the future?  
10. In creating this permanent record, are their other things that you would like included?  
 
When the nurse/chap lain session(s) are completed, the nurse/chaplain will inform the 
RA that he/she has completed all nurse/chaplain session(s). The interview will be 
conducted either in person in the clinic or  at a time and place convenient to the patient 
(e.g., home, community setting) , or via a HIPAA- compliant video -conferencing platform.  
 
III. Either in -person if the patient has a clinic visit , by [CONTACT_153445] a HIPAA -
compliant video- conferencing platform , the RA will schedule the follow -up appointment  
at a time a nd place convenient to the patient (e.g., clinic, home, community setting) , and 
complete the audio- recorded posttest measures within 5- [ADDRESS_177023] measures, the RA will provide $50 (cash or card) to the patient for time and 
travel expenses to complete study measures.  
 
Sample size:   
 
We will recruit 1500 adults with cancer diagnoses who are receiving care from the outpatient 
palliative care services of the six hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600]. From this sample, 560 patients will complete the 
study and provide data for analysis, 280 for the DT groups (140 per each of the two DT groups) 
and the [ADDRESS_177024] to recruit  94 total patients , 23-24 
per year  with complete data. We will consent  approximately 1,500 (250  total patients per site) 
for screening over the 4.5 years devoted to data collection and 120 to participate to achieve a 
completed sample of 94 patients per site.   
 Anticipated risks:  
 
The risks of this study are primarily those regarding potential for fatigue from completing the 
questionnaires and the intervention, the emotionally evocative nature of the material shared 
during the course of the intervention, and loss of privacy. The likelihood of these risks is low, as has been observed and documented in the many prev ious studies of DT cited in the 
Background section.  
   
6                              Palliative Care for the Elderly Outpatient, May 12, 2020 
 Anticipated benefits:  
 
There may be no benefit to individual participants in any arm since this study is needed to 
understand how DT can be implemented in a real -world setting and still retain its beneficial 
impacts. A common perception regarding DT is that it has been sufficiently studied that it should 
simply be accepted. However, there is minimal knowledge on how DT fares in the real world 
setting. As our recent systematic review has revealed, results of many feasibility studies are 
very promising, but only one small efficacy study showed significant effects on study outcomes 
whereas the other three completed efficacy s tudies, one with more than [ADDRESS_177025] shown that DT is greatly appreciated by 
[CONTACT_4317], families and healthcare providers. So there seems reason to believe that DT’s 
impact on promoting healthy life transitions will result in a patient bene fit for those from either of 
the nurse - or the chaplain- led DT arms.  
 
The study has tremendous potential to inform future studies on DT and advancing DT to clinical 
palliative care practice involving elderly patients with cancer. There tends to be a bias regarding 
psychosocial interventions, which includes the idea that these interventions ought to be 
resource neutral i.e., without any cost whatsoever. However, the availability of resources should 
be driven by [CONTACT_153446] a given setting. This 
study will provide needed data on how to apply DT in specific services –  by [CONTACT_153447].  
 
The study also has tremendous potential to help the scientific community understand ways for 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_153427]. Very few spi[INVESTIGATOR_153428], 
protocolized, and studied. DT is one of them. Until we understand how much of DT’s impac t is 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_37312], we do not know how to use DT as a tool to study spi[INVESTIGATOR_153429].  
 
The knowledge also has potential to add to the understanding of mechanisms that may influence the effect of DT for elderly patients with cancer and receiving palliative care. In 
particular, in our study, we will be including patients from the palliative care service regardless 
of prognosis and so we will have exploratory data on the use of DT for people who have every 
reason to expect to survive for prolonged periods, inc luding promoting the will to survive cancer 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_153430].  
 Inclusion criteria:  
 
Criteria for study participation require that the patient:  
(1) has a cancer diagnosis (receiving cancer therapy or cancer control care, r esponsive to NOT -
CA-14-016) 
(2) is receiving outpatient palliative care  
(3) is age 55 years or older (responsive to PAR -13-354) 
(4) is able to speak and read English  
(5) is physically able to complete the study (Palliative Performance Scale [PPS]>50,6-11 
suggesting a mean in life expectancy of 53 days at the time of enrollment),11 each patient is 
expected to participate in the study for 28- 42 days maximum (4 -6 weeks).  
 
  
7                              Palliative Care for the Elderly Outpatient, May 12, 2020 
 Exclusion criteria:  
 
Patients will be excluded  if they:  
(1) are legally blind  
(2) are cognitively unable to complete study measures (Mini Mental Status Exam [MMSE]  does 
not correctly spell the word world backwards )  
(3) have history of psychosis (medical record review)  
(4) have Patient Dignity Inventory and Spi[INVESTIGATOR_153431] s that indicate their distress level s 
fall outside the remaining quota for a given step (quota is 50% of sample/site/step with low 
distress ≤ 2 problems rated >2 & 50% with high distress ≥ 3 problems rated >2  on each scale)  
(5) are participating in another psychosocial intervention study that is focused on concepts 
similar to the proposed study.  
 
Data collection and management:  
 
This study is an intervention study  with data collected before and after the intervention.  We will 
obtain data from patients  completing  self-report  questionnaires  (dignity  impact,  existenti al tasks, 
cancer  prognosis  awar eness,  physical  symptoms,  spi[INVESTIGATOR_153432],  death anxiety , satisfaction  
with spi[INVESTIGATOR_60408], demographics)  on a tablet device  connected to the study’s REDCap  site. We 
also will obtain data via patient  interview  (performance,  mental  status, DT interview)  and medical 
record  review.  The DT interview  will be recorded,  depos ited on a secure  server  for transcription  
by a qualif ied transcrip tionist  and editing  by a trained,  professional  editor. Following upload to 
REDCap, the video -conferenc e recording will be deleted from the device.  
Chaplains  will document their usual care in the health record.  
To ensure confidentiality, each subject  and provider (nurse or chaplain interventionist ) will be  
assigned a code number. All data are coded with the code number s and linked to the patient’s 
name. The patient’s name [CONTACT_153451]. Demographi c information, chart review information, and other self -report outcomes 
are entered into data forms in REDCap, an Internet -based data management system. The 
REDCap system has strong password protection and is located on a reliable and secure 
research server at UF. Access to the server is password restricted and only the pertinent 
research staff can access the data via an application designed for data download. Only the data 
manager and statistician will have authority for direct access to the database server files. 
Participants or study staff will enter data through the REDCap system designed specifically for 
this study on a tablet computer with strong password protection. The team members in the 
Center for Palliative Care Research and Education at the UF ar e skilled in developi[INVESTIGATOR_153433] -friendly, secure, and reliable programs for data collection and tracking. The staff 
members in the nursing information systems office are well -trained and responsible for 
maintaining the network security and adher ing to UF policy regarding security for research data 
and protected health information. The UF Health Sciences  research servers have firewall 
protection and access through the firewall is restricted and closely monitored. Data on the 
server will be backed up each night; backups are stored nightly in water - and fireproof cabinets. 
The tablets used for data collection will be locked in a secure cabinet when not in use. The 
project statistician  will monitor the safety of the data continuously.  
 
Completing the self-report measures and the DT intervention are low risk. Continuous, close 
monitoring by [CONTACT_153448] (MPIs) will be an adequate and appropriate 
format for monitoring, with prompt reporting of adverse effects to the IRB and NIH Pr ogram 
Officer. As a low -risk study, data monitoring by [CONTACT_153449] 
8                              Palliative Care for the Elderly Outpatient, May 12, 2020 
 data safety and monitoring for a clinical trial. The co- investigators, site directors, and other team 
members are well positioned clinically to identify any  adverse event and report it to the MPI 
[INVESTIGATOR_153434], who will report it to other MPIs, the IRBs and NIH program officer.  
 
The MPIs (Wilkie, Emanuel, Fitchett) will evaluate the progress of the study, including periodic 
assessments of data quality and timeliness , participant recruitment, accrual and retention, 
participant risk versus benefit, and other factors that could affect study outcomes. The MPIs 
also monitor for scientific or therapeutic developments that may have an impact on the safety of 
the participant s or the ethics of the study. The MPIs make recommendations to the IRB and the 
site directors concerning continuation or conclusion of the trial.  
Data analysis:  
 
Data management and preliminary data analysis procedures will be supervised by [CONTACT_79086] [INVESTIGATOR_153435]. Yao, the Co- I and statistician, using statistical software R. Data will be 
stored in a REDCap database and will be exported to R. In the case of missing data, multiple imputations will be used to generate multiple complete datasets on whic h statistical inference 
will be performed. Missing at random assumption will be assessed and if necessary sensitivity 
analysis will be performed using pattern mixture methods. We will consider a p value less than 
.05 as statistically significant.   
 Descri ptive statistics (ranges, frequencies, means, and standard deviations) and graphic 
summary (box plots, histograms, bivariate scatter plots, etc.) will be first generated for both 
patient covariates and outcome measures. We will check patient characteristic s to see if there is 
notable imbalance between the three arms, as well as whether there is significant variations 
between sites or over time. Descriptive statistics of patient outcomes and process data will 
reveal patients’ spi[INVESTIGATOR_153436], identify potent ial areas for improvement in nurse and chaplain 
service, and provide information on nurses’ and chaplains’ workload both in usual care and 
when dignity therapy is added and on family -related variables (e.g., legacy document 
disposition, etc.).  
 
 Aim 1. Li near mixed effects models will be used to compare the effects of usual palliative 
care with usual palliative care with nurse- led and chaplain- led DT groups on (a) patient 
outcomes and (b) processes of delivering palliative spi[INVESTIGATOR_153416]. Random e ffects 
terms will be used to model the variations between sites. A main challenge of data analysis of a 
stepped -wedge design is the modeling of potential time trends. We plan to treat time as a 
continuous variable and utilize smoothing splines to model pot ential time trends. Smoothing 
splines is a nonparametric method that allows flexibility to model different time trends without overfitting by [CONTACT_153450] a smoothness constraint. Likelihood ratio tests will be used to determine 
the statistical significance o f the intervention effect on various outcome measures. We 
hypothesize that, controlling for pretest scores, patients in both nurse- led and chaplain- led DT 
groups will have higher dignity impact scores, higher preparation for death and life completion 
score s, better peaceful awareness, and treatment preferences more consistent with their cancer 
prognosis than the usual care groups. We also expect the patients in the DT groups to be more 
satisfied with the palliative care and have fewer unmet spi[INVESTIGATOR_153437]. We do not expect significant difference between nurse- led and chaplain- led DT 
interventions. Note that, this does not necessarily mean that the two interventions are equally 
effective. We do not seek to test the equivalence of t he two intervention arms. At this point, it is 
premature to speculate on their relative efficacy. We expect most patients in this study to have 
metastatic cancer. If a sizable portion of our sample has non- metastatic cancer, we will explore 
if they respond  to DT differently than those with metastatic disease.  
[ADDRESS_177026] likely to benefit from the DT intervention. Likelihood ratio tests will be used to determine 
the significance of the interaction. We hypothesize that patients’ levels of spi[INVESTIGATOR_153438].  
 
Safety monitoring:  
 
The study is low risk. However, the research team will monitor the safety of subjects during 
study procedures . In the event of injury related to this research, treatment will be available 
through the UF Health or the health system associated with the data collection site . However, 
the patient or third par ty payer, if any, will be responsible for payment of this treatment. Patient 
subjects will remain under the care of their usual provider, who will be available to give them 
usual care if needed.  Any unanticipated problems related to the study procedure wil l be 
immediately reported to the IRB  and NCI Program Officer . 
 References  
 
1. Steinhauser KE, Christakis NA, Clipp EC, McNeilly M, McIntyre L, Tulsky JA. Factors 
considered important at the end of life by [CONTACT_1962], family, physicians, and other care 
providers. JAMA. 2000;284(19):2476- 2482.  
2. Winkelman WD, Lauderdale K, Balboni MJ, et al. The relationship of spi[INVESTIGATOR_153439]: preliminary findings. Journal of 
Palliative Medicine. 2011;14(9):1022- 1028.  
3. Brown CA, Lilford RJ. The stepped wedge trial design: a systematic review. BMC 
Medical Research Methodology. 2006;6:54.  
4. Vergo MT, Nimeir iH, Mulcahy M, Benson AB, Emanuel L. A Feasibility Study of Dignity Therapy in Patients with Stage IV Colorectal Cancer Actively Receiving Second Line 
Chemotherapy. J Comm Support Oncol  2014, 12 (12):446- 453. 
5. Chochinov HM, Kristjanson LJ, Breitbart W, et al. Effect of dignity therapy on distress 
and end- of-life experience in terminally ill patients: a randomised controlled trial. The 
Lancet Oncology. 2011;12(8):753- 762. 
6. Anderson F, Downing G M, Hill J, Casorso L, Lerch N. Palliative performance scale 
(PPS): a new tool. Journal of Palliative Care. 1996;12(1):5- 11. 
7. Virik K, Glare P. Validation of the palliative performance scale for inpatients admitted to 
a palliative care unit in Sydney, Aus tralia. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management. 
2002;23(6):455- 457. 
8. Olajide O, Hanson L, Usher BM, Qaqish BF, Schwartz R, Bernard S. Validation of the palliative performance scale in the acute tertiary care hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885]. Journal of 
Palliative Medicine. 2007;10(1):111- 117. 
9. Morita T, Tsunoda J, Inoue S, Chihara S. Validity of the palliative performance scale from a survival perspective. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management. 1999;18(1):2- 3. 
10. Head B, Ritchie CS, Smoot TM. Prognostication in hospi [INVESTIGATOR_3677]: can the palliative 
performance scale help? Journal of Palliative Medicine. 2005;8(3):492- 502.  
11. Weng LC, Huang HL, Wilkie DJ, et al. Predicting survival with the Palliative Performance 
Scale in a minority -serving hospi[INVESTIGATOR_153440]. J Pain Symptom 
Manage. 2009;37(4):642- 648. 