 
Protocol Version 07/12 /2017 Page 1 of 14  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Repurposing Dexmedetom idine as an Orally Administered Sleep Therapeutic  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
7/12/2017  
 
Protocol Version 07/12 /2017 Page 2 of 14 Repurposing Dexmedetom idine as an Orally Administered Sleep Therapeutic  
Principal Investigator : [INVESTIGATOR_258257] -Akeju, M.D. , M.M.Sc.  
I. Background and Significance          
Challenges in Drug Discovery  
Basic science discoveries of the molecular basis of disease have the potential to provide immeasurable 
opportunities to translate discoveries into targeted therapeutics (Collins 2011) . However , translation of these 
basic science discoveries to targeted therapeutics is often met with failure (Collins 2011) . A paradigm shifting 
approach (complementing current approaches) to reposition drug discovery efforts from an era of ‘me -too’ or 
‘slightly me -better’ drugs to one of highly innovative medicines is necessary (Paul, Mytelka et al. 2010) . 
Presently, we know the molecular basis of approximately 4,[ADDRESS_313794] (Collins 2012) . This mismatch is present because the trad itional approach to drug discovery involves 
de novo identification and validation of new molecular entities, which is a time -consuming and costly process 
(Paul, Mytelka et al. 2010) . Despi[INVESTIGATOR_258258], the number of new 
drugs introduced in to clinical practice has not increased significantly. For example, while the total research and 
development expenditure for drug discovery worldwide increased 10 times from 1975 ($4 billion) to 2009 ($40 
billion), the number of new molecular entities appro ved has remained stagnant (Paul, Mytelka et al. 2010) . 
Drug discovery failure rates can be as high as 95% and the average time from target selection to approval is 
approximately 13 -14 years (Paul, Mytelka et al. 2010) . When failures are accounted for, the cost of bringing a 
new drug to the market is app roximately $2 billion (Paul, Mytelka et al. 2010) . Therefore, strategies to reduce 
the average time for drug approval, decrease costs, and improve success rates are urgently needed. Drug 
rescue and repurposing can be one of those strategies, as it offers the key advantage of harn essing previous 
research and development efforts (Paul, Mytelka et al. 2010, Collins 2011) . Approved drugs and many 
abandoned compounds have already been tested in humans, and detailed information is available on th eir 
pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, formulation, dosing, and potential toxicity (Paul, Mytelka et al. 2010, 
Collins 2011) . Since drug repurposing is built upon previous research and development efforts, new cand idate 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_258259] a very timely fashion, speeding their review by [CONTACT_258280] (Paul, Mytelka et al. 2010, Collins 2011) . 
Neurophysiological Principled Approach to Drug Discovery and Repurposing  
Neural  oscillations form well -orchestrated structure for communication or miscommunication within and across 
neural circuits at multiple time scales (Buzsaki and Freeman 2015) . It has been postulated that in the next 
decade, studies of neural oscillations are expecte d to spearhead insights on brain function and provide a much 
needed alternative approach to the development of novel therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] (Buzsaki and Freeman 2015) . Today, 
studies of neural oscillations are a significant component of systems neuroscience research. In humans, 
valuable insights into neural oscillations and neural circuit mechanisms of a ltered arousal come from our 
clinical and research experiences in anesthesiology. In our systems neuroscience studies of anesthesia, we 
have found that neural oscillations observed during altered states of arousal possess structured phen otypes 
that are app ropriate for obtaining mechanistic insigh ts into mechanisms such as sleep  (Ching, Cimenser et al. 
2010, Purdon, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_258260]. 2013, Vijayan, Ching et al. 2013, Akeju, Pavone et al. 2014) . In my research 
laboratory, we are studying the functional characteristics and neuroanatomical basis of these oscillations, and 
relating them to normal and pathological brain functioning. We expect that the techniques and  insights 
emanating from this neural oscillation focused approa ch will serve important areas in basic and clinical 
neuroscience  especially sleep medicine . 
Mechanisms of Natural Sleep  
Sleep is a basic human function that occupi[INVESTIGATOR_258261] -third of our lives, yet science is not entirely 
clear on its purpose (Brown, Basheer et al. 2012) . Although the purpose of sleep is not entirely clear, great 
progress has been made in understanding the neural oscillations and circuitry that control sleep (Brown, 
Basheer et al. 2012) . During natural sleep, humans switch at approximately 90 -minute intervals between two 
states: rapid eye movement sleep (REM) and non -REM sleep.  This oscillatory dynamic is postulated to be 
fundamental for achieving the  restorative benefits of natural sleep. Non -REM sleep is initiated when the 
preoptic area (POA) activates and thereby, blocks the arousal inputs of these centers to the thalamus and the 
cortex (Saper, Fuller et al. 2010) . With the initiation of this inhibition, the EEG shows intermittent sigma/spi[INVESTIGATOR_258262] (9 –16 Hz oscillations) followed shortly thereafter, by [CONTACT_148597] -wave (< 1 Hz) and delta (1 -4 Hz) oscillations 
 
Protocol Version 07/12 /2017 Page 3 of 14 (Saper, Fuller et al. 2010) . Non -REM II sleep is defined by [CONTACT_258281][INVESTIGATOR_258263] K -
complexes (Saper, Fuller et al. 2010) . Spi[INVESTIGATOR_258264] (Saper, Fuller et al. 2010) . Non -REM stage III 
sleep is characterized by a predominance of slow -delta EEG oscillations (Saper, Fuller  et al. 2010) . The slow -
delta oscillations likely result from cortical hyperpolarization due to decreased excitation from the arousal 
centers and the thalamus. The transition from non -REM sleep to REM sleep is initiated when the cholinergic 
centers in the  pedunculopontine tegmentum (PPT) and the laterodorsal tegmentum (LDT) activate. Activity of 
the monoaminergic dorsal raphé and locus coeruleus (LC) during non -REM sleep inhibits the PPT and LDT 
suppressing REM sleep (Saper, Fuller et al. 2010) . The dorsal raphé and LC cease firing at REM onset. 
Activation of the PPT and the LDT, which project to the thalamus, basal fo rebrain and to the cortex, results in 
the switch of the EEG from  slow-wave -delta oscillations to the awake -like EEG patterns characteristic of REM 
sleep. Non -REM sleep represents periods of cortical quiescence that likely allow the brain to restore its ene rgy 
levels and has been strongly linked to improved memory function (Stickgold 2005) . REM sleep may play a 
critical role in memory consolidation (Stickgold 2005) .  
Insomnia: A Clinical Problem With Healthcare Implications  
Much of what is known about the benefits  of sleep in humans has been obtained from studies of patients with 
insomnia. Insomnia is defined as a repeated difficulty with sleep initiation, duration, consolidation, or quality 
that occurs despi[INVESTIGATOR_258265] 
(American Psychiatric Association. 2013) . Insomnia  is the most common sleep disorder, with a reported 
prevalence of 10 to 15%, depending on the diagnostic criteria used (Winkelman 2015) . Roughly 50% of 
patients  with insomnia have a psyc hiatric disorder, most commonly a mood disorder (e.g., major depressive 
disorder) or an anxiety disorder (e.g., generalized anxiety disorder or post -traumatic stress disorder) 
(Winkelman 2015) . Although roughly 80% of those with major depressive disorde r have insomnia (insomnia 
doubles the risk factor for developi[INVESTIGATOR_9103]), in approximately half of those cases, insomnia predated the 
onset of the mood disorder (Winkelman 2015) . This suggests that insomnia is an independent risk factor for 
major de pressive disorder. Insomnia is also an independent risk factor for acute myocardial infarction and 
coronary heart disease, heart failure, hypertension, diabetes, and death (Winkelman 2015) . Unfortunately, at 
present, the medicines currently used to trea t insomnia are associated with side effects such as daytime 
sedation, delirium, ataxia, anterograde memory disturbance, and complex sleep -related behaviors (Wafford 
and Ebert 2008, Winkelman 2015) . More so, sleep di sturbances may also lead to delirium and other cognitive 
deficits such as psychosis (Maldonado 2013) . Thus, an effective treatment for insomnia will have immense 
public health benefits.  
Current Sleep Therapeutics Do  Not Approximate Natural Sleep  
In the [LOCATION_002], insomnia therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014], ranging from prescription to over -the-counter medications, are a 
multi -billion dollar market with numerous pharmacological targets for the treatment of insomnia. The principal 
sleep medications (i.e. benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], eszopi[INVESTIGATOR_11123], and zolpi[INVESTIGATOR_6730]) are among the most widely sold 
pharmaceuticals (Wafford and Ebert 2008) . These drugs target inhibitory gamma amino -butyric acid A 
(GABA A) receptors throu ghout the brain. The drug formulations are designed for immediate release or timed 
release based on whether the insomnia is due to difficulty falling asleep or difficulty staying asleep respectively. 
They cause changes in the normal sleep architecture, inc luding increased non -REM II sleep and increased 
REM latency. Importantly, these medications do not approximate natural sleep or selectively activate the brain 
circuits in a precisely timed manner to drive the [ADDRESS_313795], produce only 
sedation. Sedation with these sleep medications is associated with beta (13 -25 Hz) oscillations (van Lier, 
Drinkenburg et al. 2004) , an oscillatory dynamic that is distinct from non -REM and REM sleep, and is 
responsible for the amnesic effects of GABAergic drugs (Feshchenko, Veselis et al. 1997) . Thus it is not 
surprising that principal sleep medications possess adverse side effects such as memory and cognitive 
impairment (Wafford and Ebert 2008, Winkelman 2015) .  
Other agents : Ramelteon  selectively targets hypothalamic melatonin  receptors involved in the sleep –wake  
cycle. Studies suggest it significantly shortens sleep onset and increases sleep time without evide nce of 
rebound insomnia, but it is associated with somnolence, fatigue, and dizziness (Wafford and Ebert 2008) . 
Melatonin is also used as an insomnia therapy but there is minimal data supporting its efficacy (Wafford and 
Ebert 2008) . Other medications such as antidepressants are often used off -label when treating insomnia . 
Nonprescription sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_258266], though much of the existing data does not support t heir 
 
Protocol Version 07/12 /[ADDRESS_313796] s quickly develop tolerance to sedative effects or rebound insomnia upon 
discontinuation (Wafford and Ebert 2008) . The hypocretin/orexin system involved in narcolepsy was recent ly 
identified as a possible target (Wafford and Ebert 2008) , and led to the development of the newest sleep 
therapeutic suvorexant. However, this drug has also been associated with adverse side effects such as 
memor y and cognitive impairment, and suicidal thoughts (Jacobson, Callander et al. 2014) . Thus, there is a 
great clinical need to develop more efficacious agents that closely approximates natural sleep with better side 
effect profiles. Given the high prevalence of insomnia and known diseases that are precipi[INVESTIGATOR_258267]/or 
aggravated by [CONTACT_258282], cardiovascular disease, diabetes , and cognitive 
impairments, a novel and effective medication for sle ep will have immediate and immense public health 
benefit.  
Evidence For Repurposing Dexmedetomi dine as a Sleep Therapeutic  
Dexmedetomidine is an alpha -[ADDRESS_313797]. 
Patients who are sedated wit h dexmedetomidine are arousable and responsive in a manner that is very similar 
to that seen in people who are sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (Cortinez, Hsu et al. 2004, Akeju, Pavone et al. 2014) . 
Dexmedetomidine is thought to alter aro usal primarily through its actions on pre -synaptic alpha -2A adrenergic 
receptors on neurons projecting from the LC (Correa -Sales, Rabin et al. 1992, Chiu, Chen et al. 1995) . 
Dexmedetomidine binding hyperpolarizes LC  neurons, decreasing norepi[INVESTIGATOR_258268] (Jorm and Stamford 
1993, Nacif -Coelho, Correa -Sales et al. 1994, Nelson, Lu et al. 2003) . Hyperpolarization of LC  neurons results 
in loss of inhibitory inputs to the pre -optic area of the hypothalamus and excitatory inputs to the cortex, basal 
forebrain and the central thalamus. The pre -optic area sends GABAergic and galanergic inhibitory projections 
to the major arousals centers in the midbrain, pons and hypothalamus (Saper, Fuller et al. 2010) . Hence, loss 
of inputs from the LC is thought to result in sleep -like state (Carter, Yi zhar et al. 2010) , due to activation of 
inhibitory pathways from the pre -optic area to the arousal centers along with loss of excitatory inputs to the 
cortex, basal forebrain and the central thalamus. Not surprisingly, as in non -REM II sleep, spi[INVESTIGATOR_258269] (Akeju, 
Pavone et al. 2014) . It is important to note the behavioral and neurophysiologic similarities between 
dexmedetomidine -induced altered arousal and sleep occurs because activation of inhibitory inputs from the 
pre-optic area is an essential component of how non -REM sleep is initiated (Sherin, Elmquist et al. 1998, 
Morair ty, Rainnie et al. 2004, Saper, Fuller et al. 2010) .  
 
We recently conducted a clinical  trial ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) that utilized  a combination of high -density EEG and 
Fludeoxyglucose Positron Emission Tomography/Magnetic Resonance (PET/MR) imaging to study the b rain 
states induced by [CONTACT_258283]. Results  from this clinical trial of dexmedetomidine  suggest s that this drug 
may be used to induce and maintain a brain state that closely approximates non -REM II sleep state 
characterized by [CONTACT_258284][INVESTIGATOR_36874], and slow -delta oscillations (Akeju, Pavone et al. 2014) . Similar to non -REM 
sleep, we also found that dexmedetomidine decreased cerebral blood flow and cerebral metabolism, but 
maintained cortico -cortical functional connecti vity patterns (Akeju, Loggia et al. 2014) . These results lend to a 
very specific rhythms based  hypothesis of the mecha nisms necessary to engage sleep. Can  successful sleep 
state switching be accomplished  in humans b y inducing a non -REM II state and then allowing indigenous sleep 
mechanism to engage normal sleep cycling.  Until now, it has been unclear whether any pharmacological agent 
can induce a state that closely approximates natural sleep or sleep state switching.  The possibility that 
dexmedetomidine could be used as a sleep therapy has not been r eadily apparent because it is currently 
market ed as an intravenous drug . Furthermore, a systems neuroscience approach to studying the 
dexmedetomidine -induced brain state h ad previously not been accomplished. A key strength of this proposal is 
that it is based upon co mpelling results obtained from our  recently conducted Phase I/II proof -of-concept 
clinical study ( [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] ) where we established the safety, efficacy, dosing  paradigm, and dose for 
successfully using dexmedetomidine to induce sleep, which is characterized by [CONTACT_105] -REM I -III and REM sleep 
states. Therefor e, we hypothesize that oral dexmedetomidine will shorten sleep latency by [CONTACT_48937]  a non -
REM II state that wil l allow indigenous sleep mechanisms to engage successful sleep state switching into non -
REM III and REM sleep states,  conferring the restorative benefits of sleep . 
 
Currently dexmedetomidine is not available in an oral or sub -lingual preparation. However, the intravenous 
form of dexmedetomidine has a buccal bioavailability of approximately 86% and an oral bioavailability of 
approximately 16% (Anttila, Penttila et al. 2003) . In our clinical practice of anesthesiology, the oral solution of 
dexmedetomidine, which is the intravenous formul ation administered at up to 5 times the typi[INVESTIGATOR_258270] 07/12 /2017 Page 5 of 14 bolus dose of 1mcg/kg has been used off -label and shown to be effective as a sedative (Ray and Tobias 2008, 
Mountain, Smithson et al. 2011) . Thus, we expec t that the oral reformulations of dexmedetomidine will be 
bioavailable and efficacious. Importantly, the oral administration of dexmedetomidine solution at up to 5 times 
of the recommended bolus dose does not appear to result in either of the two commonly reported side effects 
of hypotension and bradycardia that are associated with intravenous administration of dexmedetomidine (Ray 
and Tobias 2008, Mountain, Smithson et al. 2011) . Therefore, we expect oral dexmedetom idine to be 
efficacious and safe for administration in humans .  
In summary, existing sleep medications are non -specific sedatives  with significant cognitive side effects . 
However, our systems neuroscience based studies and proof -of-concept studies strongly  suggest that 
dexmedetomidine is biochemically and neurophysiologically well suited to engage the natural m echanisms that 
drive sleep. Thus, this study will  demonstrate a putative new class of sleep therapeutics  to treat insomnia. If 
this research is succe ssful, we will see a resolution to the problem of morbidity caused by [CONTACT_258285].  
 
II. Specific Aims:  
The broad objective of this investigation is to assess the safety and efficacy of oral therapy with 
dexmedeto midine for the induction and maintenance of restful sleep.  
Specific Aim 1:  Investigate the safety profile of dexmedetomidine in a phase I dose finding  study.  
Hypothesis 1.1. Oral dexmedetomidine will maintain cardiovascular stability  
Hypothesis 1.2. Oral dexmedetomidine will result in electroencephalographic evidence of spi[INVESTIGATOR_258271]/delta oscillation.  
Specific Aim 2 : Investigate the efficacy of dexmedetomidine for inducing sleep in a Phase II randomized 
double -blind placebo -controlled study.                                                                        
Hypothesis 2.1. Oral  dexmedetomidine will reduce sleep latency  
Hypothesis [ADDRESS_313798] s capabl e of giving their own consent will be considered for this study.  
Phase 1: We will select  15 male and female healthy controls for this study between the ages of 18 and 50. 
Phase 2: We will select [ADDRESS_313799].  All volunteer s will be fit and healthy, meeting the American Society of Anesthesiologists 
(ASA) phy sical status classificat ion P1 (normal healthy  subjects ) and P2 (stable chronic condition) and of 
normal body habitus . Prior to the study enrollment, each volunteer  will sign informed consent. A complete 
medical history will be taken in addition to perform ing a complete physical examination in order to rule out 
active and chronic medical problems.  
Medical History  
Chronic health conditions that will exclude volunteer s from the study include but are not limited to:  
Cardiovascular:   Poorly controlled h yperte nsion, myocardial infarction, coronary artery disease, peripheral 
vascular disease, arrhythmia, congestive heart failure, valvular disease,  cardiac 
electrophysiological abnormalities ascertained from the screening ECG (i.e. but not limited 
to second and th ird degree heart block in the absence of a pace maker, supraventricular 
tachycardia, ventricular tachycardia, atrial fibrillation, atrial fl utter, junctional heart rhythms ) 
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_696]:   Bronchitis, chronic obstructive pulmonary diseas e, smoking, shortness  of breath , history of 
obstructive sleep apnea  
Hepatic:   Hepatitis, jaundice , Child -Pugh Class C liver disease, generalized anasarca, ascites, 
encephalopathy and caput medusa  
Neurologic:   Seizure, stroke, positive neurologic findings on neurologic examinat ion, multiple sclerosis, 
Meniere’s disease, Parkinson’s disease  
 
Protocol Version 07/12 /2017 Page 6 of 14 Gastrointestinal:   Esophage al reflux, hiatal hernia, ulcer , oral ulcers, or other oral pathology  
 
Endocr ine:  Diabetes, thyroid disease  
Hematologic:   Blood dys crasias, anemia, coagulopathies  
Musculoskeletal:   Prior surgery or trauma to head neck or face, arthritis, personal or family hi story of 
malignant hyperthermia  
Psychiatric:   History or treatment for an active psychiatric problem, including, but not limited to: 
attention deficit hyperactiv ity disorder, depression, bipo lar disorder, and schizophrenia  
Reproductive:  Pregnancy, breast -feeding  
Medications:   Regular use of prescription and non -prescription medications expected to affect central 
nervous system function or sleep  
Allergies:   Dexmede tomidine , glycopyrrolate , phenylephrine, ephedrine, labetolol   
 
Physical Examination  
The volunteer  will be given a standard pre -anesthetic physical examination. Abnormal findings on physical 
examination will provide reason for exclusion from the study. Abn ormal finding(s) will be reported to the 
affected volunteer  and recommendation(s) for medical follow -up will be given as needed.  
Screening Tests  
A complete blood count, blood glucose level, liver function test (LFT), blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and 
creatini ne (Cr) level will be obtained at the initial screening visit. For inclusion into the study protocol, each 
volunteer  will be required to have a platelet count, blood glucose, BUN , Cr and LFT's levels be within 1.[ADDRESS_313800] 
at the initial examination and each active study day. Positive toxici ty screening and/or positive results on the 
pregnancy test will prompt exclusion from the study. A 12-lead electrocardiogram will be performed on all study 
volunteer s at the initial screening visit to identify any pre -existing cardiac issues.  
Primary Incl usion Criteria for “Healthy” control volunteers  
• Age between 18 -50  
• Native English speaking  
• ASA physical status classification P1 and P2 (stable chronic condition)  
• Normal body habitus.  
Primary Exclusion Criteria  for “Healthy” control volunteer s 
• Abnormal sle ep habits                                                                                                                                                       
o Sleepi [INVESTIGATOR_258272] 5 hours each night   
o Going to sleep before 9:00 PM or after 2:00 AM on a regul ar basis  
o Waking up before 5:00 AM or after 10:00 AM on a regular basis.  
• Takes medication that alters sleep, cognitive function, or both.                                                                          
• Has a history of a known neurological or psy chiatric problem.                                                                   
• Younger than 18 or older than 50 years of age.                                                                                                        
• Known or suspected sle ep disorder(s).  
Remuneration  
For successful completion of Phase I of this protocol volunteer  remuneration will be $ 500. If the study volunteer  
is unable to complete the entire protocol, the proration will be as follows:  
 
 
Protocol Version 07/12 /2017 Page 7 of 14 • Study volunteer s who complete the m edical evaluation (screening visit) but do not begin the active  
portion of the stu dy will receive no remuneration.  
• If the study must be stopped due to concerns for the study volunteer ’s medical safety, volunteer s will 
receive $ 500. 
 
For successful completi on of Phase II of this protocol volunteer  remuneration will be $7 50. If the study 
volunteer  is unable to complete the entire protocol, the proration will be as follows:  
• Study volunteer s who complete the medical evaluation (screening visit) but do not begin  the active 
portion of the study will receive no remuneration.  
• Study volunteer s who complete only one sleep study night will receive $100.  
• Study volunteer s who complete two sleep study nights will receive $300.  
• Study volunteer  who complete all sleep visi ts will receive $ 750.  
• If the study must be stopped due to concerns for the study volunteer ’s medical safety, volunteer s will 
receive remuneration commensurate with their time given to the study as listed above.  
• Participants will also be paid a bonus of $[ADDRESS_313801] task on the three 
overnight visits.  
IV. Study Procedures  
An Investigational New Drug (IND) application has been submitted to the Federal Drug Administration (FDA) 
and study initiation will be contingent upon IRB an d FDA approval. Also, we will meet with Emily Ouellette, QI 
Program Assistant Director, FDA and Regulatory Support  to make certain that this protocol is in compliance 
with all FDA regulations.  
All study visits will take place at the Whi te [ADDRESS_313802] to ventilation, 
temperature control, plumbing and electrical facilities, as well as storage for sterile supplies and linens. There 
is pi[INVESTIGATOR_258273], wall suction and waste anesthetic gas removal. The hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s backup generator 
supports electrical the outlets  in clinical research center . There is a fully equipped  anesthesia machine 
(ventilator) with an automated record keeper and standard anes thesia monitors. A fully equipped code cart is 
also available, and an emergency call system is connected to the Post Anesthesia Recovery Unit. Personnel 
from the Operating Room pharmacy check the code cart and medications at intervals , and the anesthesia 
equipment is checked and maintained by [CONTACT_941] b ioengineering  department . In summary , the level of 
physiological monitoring and clinical care that can be delivered in this facility is comparable to an Intensive 
Care Unit at MGH and far exceeds what is available  in the White 13  Clinical Research Cente r. We deem this 
high level of care essential  for our dose finding Phase I study.  
 
The initial starting doses selected for this Phase I clinical trial are based on clinical and research experience 
with intravenous dex medetomidine, our synthesis of the literature on the pharmacodynamics/pharmacokinetics 
of oral dexmedetomidine, and clinical experience docume nted in the literature of the intravenous form of 
dexmedetomidine when it is  administered orally. The starting dos es are in accordance F ood and Drug 
Administration’s  guidelines for Estimating the Maximum Safe Starting Dose in Initial Clinical Trials for 
Therapeutics in Adult Healthy Volunteers which states that toxicity should be avoided at the initial clinical dose.  
However, doses should be chosen that allow reasonably rapid attainment of the Phase I trial objectives ( e.g. 
Assessment  of the therapeutics  tolerability, pharmacodynamic or pharmacokinetic profile).    
Phase 1a – Oral,  will follow an open -label , and dose e scalation  design. The first 5 subjects  enrolled in this 
phase  will receive 300 mcg (dose A) of dexmedetomidine in an unblinded fashion, and will be closely 
monitored for hemodynamic stability .  Assuming that dose A  does not cause any adverse hemodynamic 
events, the next [ADDRESS_313803] s enrolled in the study will receive 500 mcg (dose B ). Assuming that dose B does not 
cause any adverse hemodynamic events, the next [ADDRESS_313804] s enrolled in the study will receive 700 mcg (dose 
C).  
 
 
 
Protocol Version 07/12 /2017 Page 8 of 14  
Study Design Schematic Phase I   
 
Phase 1: Dose Escalation Study  
Visit 1 (Initial Scre ening)  
Prior to the beginning of the study, the study volunteer  will sign informed consent. Next, the volunteer  will 
undergo an initial pre -anesthetic exam and toxicology screening to assess exclusionary criteria. A pregnancy 
test will be administered to f emale volunteer s. An electrocardiogram will be performed on all study volunteer s 
at the initial screening visit to identify any pre -existing cardiac issues. A complete blood count, blood glucose 
level, LFT, BUN , and Cr level will be obtained. Volunteer s will also complete a questionnaire concerning 
his/her sleep habits. This questionnaire is in clinical use by [CONTACT_164245][INVESTIGATOR_258274].  
Visit 2 (Active Study Day)  
The study volunteer  will arrive at the study site and a toxicology sc reen will be administered to exclude the use 
of prohibited substances, and female volunteer s will again be required to undergo a pregnancy test. 
Phys iological measures will include up to 256 channels of EEG, a 5 lead ele ctrocardiogram, pulse oximetry , 
heart rate, end -tidal CO 2, and audio/video data. All of the leads and sensors used are removed easily. 
Furthermore , blood samples will be obtained for pharmacoki netic/pharmacodynamic modeling  of 
dexmedetomidine  at T = 0 (baseline) and at T = [ADDRESS_313805] stable vital signs, i.e., within 20% of pre -study values, be able to respond appropriately to 
normal commands, be pain free, be free from any nausea and vomiting. Volunteer s will be advised not to drive 
or operate heavy equipment for 24 hours.   
The primary endpoint for the Phase I studies will be hemodynamic stability  defined as (1) hypotension: systolic 
blood pressure (SBP)  < 60 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure (DBP)  < 40 mmHg or decrease of SBP by  ≥ 50 % 
from the baseline  which is sustained over two consecutive minutes , (2) hypertension: SBP  > 180 mmHg, 
DBP > 100 mmHg, or increase of SBP by ≥  50 % from the baseline  which is sustained over two minutes  and, 
(3) bradycar dia: heart rate (HR)  < 40 bpm or decrease by ≥  50 % from the baseline  sustained over two 
consecutive minutes . Intravenous ephedrine, phenylephrine, glycopyrrolate and/or fluid bolu s (500 ml of 0.9% 
normal saline ) may be administered  for the treatment of hy potension. Intravenous labetolol  may be 
administered for the treatment of hypertension. The anesthesiologist based on his/her clinical judgment will 
administer all medications . Standard department guidelines will guide the administration of all ancillary 
medications.  Secondary endpoints include the occurrence of dexmedetomidine -spi[INVESTIGATOR_86853], slow, and delta 
oscillations on the electroencephalogram. If no adverse events occur during the Phase I trial, we will then 
request the DSMB to review our results before pro ceeding with the Phase II trial.  
 Visit 1  Visit 2  
Consent, Physical Examination, Blood Work  etc 
Location: White 13 Clinical Research Center  Dexmedetomidine ( dose s A, B, and C) 
Location: White 5 Carl Rosow Center for Clinical 
Research.  
 
Protocol Version 07/12 /2017 Page 9 of 14  
Study Design Schematic Phase 2 : Crossover Study  
 
Next, in a Phase II randomized double -blind placebo -controlled crossover  study, [ADDRESS_313806] concluded from our review of 
the literature and our proof -of-concept study that the aforementioned dos es should be efficacious while 
maintaining cardiovascular stability. A requirement for this safe dose will be the maintenance of systolic blood 
pressure and the heart rate within 25% of baseline values without the administration of vasoactive medication. 
The MGH Research Pharmacy will consult the randomization assignment and will prepare the appropriate 
treatment for the volunteer . The primary endpoints for the Phase II study are polysomnography measures of 
sleep latency and efficiency.  Secondary endpoints include subjective  and objective measures of sleep, 
memory consolidation and learning.  
Phase II  
Visit 1 (Initial Screening)  
Prior to the beginning of the study, the study volunteer  will sign informed consent. Next, the volunteer  will 
undergo an initial pre -anesthetic exam and toxicology screening to assess exclusionary criteria. A pregnancy 
test will be administered to female volunteer s. An electrocardiogram will be performed on all study volunteer s 
at the initial screening visit to identify any pre -existin g cardiac issues. A complete blood count, blood glucose 
level, LFT, BUN , and Cr level will be obtained. Volunteer s will also complete a questionnaire concerning 
his/her sleep habits. This questionnaire is in clinical use by [CONTACT_258286].  
Visit 2 (Acclimation Night)  
In this crossover study , the study volunteer will arrive at the study site  and a  toxicology screen will be 
administered to exclude the use of pr ohibited substances, and female  volunteers will again be requir ed to 
undergo a pregnancy test. Physiological measures will include; up to 256 channels of EEG, 2 EOG  channels, 2 
chin EMG  channels, a 5 lead ECG , saturated oxygen levels, heart rate, end -tidal CO 2, and audio/video data. 
All of the leads and sensors used a re removed easily. The EEG cap will be placed on the volunteer to enable 
acclimation to the device. ECG, EOG and  EMG channels will be attached so that the volunteer can acclimate 
to the sensation of contact [CONTACT_258287]. The purpose of the first study n ight is for the volunteer to become 
acclimated to the study site and recording equipment, as well as to obtain a baseline reading of their brain 
activity during sleep.  The volunteer will then  be instructed to try to sleep for 8 -hours. If he/she wakes up be fore 
the designated time, he/she will be instructed to stay in bed and try to go back to sleep. A registered nurse will 
monitor the volunteer all night. An on -call physician is available, at all times, in the event of an unforeseen 
problem. Prior to leavin g the study site, each volunteer will complete a brief post -sleep questionnaire. Upon 
conclusion of testing , a member of the study staff will rem ove the physiological monitors and the volunteer  will 
be permitt ed to resume his/her day as normal. The volunte er must have stable vital signs, i.e., within 20% of 
pre-study values  and be able to respond ap propriately to normal commands prior to discharge home.  
Volunteer s will be advised not to drive or operate heavy equipment for 24 hours.  
Visit 3  and 4 (Active St udy Night)  
Due to the crossover nature of this Ph ase II study , the volunteer will return to the study site  on two separate 
nights  to complete study procedures . A toxicology screen will be administered to exclude the use of prohibited Visit 1  Visit 2  Visit 3  Visit 4  
Consent, Physical 
Examination, Blood Work 
etc 
Location: White 12  
Clinical Research Center  Acclimation Night  
 
 
Location: White 12  
Clinical Re search Center  Dexmedetomidine or 
Placebo  
 
Location: White 12  
Clinical Research Center  Dexmedetomidine or 
Placebo  
 
Location : White 12  
Clinical Research Center  
 
Protocol Version 07/12 /[ADDRESS_313807]  
for 1 hour after the administration of the medication to ensure normal physiology is maintained.  A registered 
nurse will monitor the volunteer all night. An on-call physician is available, at all times, in the event of an 
unforeseen problem.  The volunteer will then be instructed to try to sleep for 8 -hours. If he/she wakes up before 
the designated time, he/she will be instructed to stay in bed and try to go ba ck to sleep. Reflecting standard of 
post procedure monitoring, the study anesthesiologist will monitor the subject  for one hour after the 
administration of the medication to ensure normal physiology. Prior to leaving the study site, each volunteer will 
complete a brief post -sleep questionnaire. Upon conclusion of testing, a member of the study staff will remove 
the physiological monitors and the volunteer will be permitted to resume his/her day as normal. The volunteer 
must have stable vital signs, i.e., wi thin 20% of pre -study values and be able to respond appropriately to 
normal commands prior to discharge home. Volunteer s will be advised not to drive or operate heavy equipment 
for 24 hours.  
Cognitive Testing  
Motor Sequence Task:  Participants will be train ed on a motor sequence task  (MST) , a well -established probe 
of sleep -dependent memory consolidation,  on a laptop prior to the onset of sleep and then tested [ADDRESS_313808] involves pressing four keys with the fingers of the left hand, repeating a f ive digit sequence ( e.g., 4-1-
3-2-4) "as quickly and accurately as possible" for 30  seconds . During both the training  (night time)  and test 
sessions  (morning) , participants will perform  twelve 30-second  tappi[INVESTIGATOR_258275] i s followed by a 30  
second break. During tappi[INVESTIGATOR_258276], the computer screen will be  green with the numeric sequence displayed at 
the top, and dots appearing from left to right beneath the sequence with each keystroke. During the  breaks, the 
display will be  red, and instead of sh owing the sequence, numbers (displayed as words) counted down the 
seconds until the next trial. Three s econds before the display turns green, the words will be replaced by 
[CONTACT_258288] . We will measure the number of correct sequen ces per [ADDRESS_313809] three training trials. Participants will be paid a bonus of $0.[ADDRESS_313810] sequence.  
Psychomotor Vigilance Task (PVT): is a highly sensitive assay of vigilant attention used commonly in the study 
of sleep disruption after each night of sleep. 
 
While seated at a  laptop computer, the subject will be asked to attend to an area enclosed by a small green 
rectangle against a black screen. After a variable delay (chosen randomly to last between 2 to 10 seconds) a 
digital millisecond counter will begin inside the rectan gle.  
The subject will be asked to stop the timer as quickly as they can by [CONTACT_258289]. At this time, the 
subject can view his/her reaction time, which serves as feedback for that trial.  
 
Instruction is given to avoid premature button presses during the variable inter -stimulus interval. If such a false 
start occurs, the subject will be asked to wait for the timer to begin before pressing the space bar and a new 
trial will commence. Trials of this nature repeat throughout a [ADDRESS_313811]:  
 
Welcome. In this task, a rectangle will appear in the center of the screen. After a delay of variable 
duration, a counter will begin inside this rectangle. Your job is to press the SPACEBAR as r api[INVESTIGATOR_258277]. Hitting the spacebar will stop the timer; you will then have a chance to 
view your speed. Aim for low numbers, but be sure not to press the spacebar before the timer starts! 
The task will continue for [ADDRESS_313812] finished.       
 
 
Protocol Version 07/12 /2017 Page 11 of 14 From this task we will analyze outcome measures such as the median reaction time, the variability of these 
reaction times, the occurrence of "lapses," (response times over 500 ms) errors of commission ("false -starts"), 
and a measure of performance degradation through time. The subject will perform this test before and after 
sleep on each study day.  
 
V. Biostatistical analysis  
Using an endpoint of sleep latency  to guide sample size calculation s. Our null hypothesis is the average within 
volunteer  difference in sleep latency for oral dexmedetomidine compared with placebo  is zero. Alternative 
hypothesis is the average within volunteer  difference in total sleep time for dexmedetomidine compared wi th 
zolpi[INVESTIGATOR_258278] [ADDRESS_313813] a clinically relevant improvement in 
sleep latency  if we successfully enroll only 5  volunteers for the each of the dexmedetomidine groups . 
VI. Risk and Discomfort  
Dexmedetomidine : The risks involved in the administration of dexmedetomi dine include nausea, xerostomia, 
atrial fibrillation, and transient hypertension during drug loading. The significant risks involved are directly 
related to a drug induced reduction in sympathetic activity, resulting in hypotension and bradycardia. Rare ca se 
reports of sinus arrest in instances of rapid drug administration and in subject s with a high resting vagal tone 
have also been described. Drug discontinuation, dose reduction, or the use of vasoactive substances causes a 
return of these hemodynamic par ameters to baseline. As such, study volunteer hemodynamic parameters will 
be continuously monitored to ensure that appropriate medical intervention will be instituted for any clinically 
significant hypotensive or bradycardic epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841].   
Polysomnography ris ks: Electrodes placed on the scalp may cause temporary redness.  
Intravenous line risks : Pain at the needle insertion site, infection, and bleeding.  
Arterial Line risks:  The most concerning risk is a <0.01% of permanent ischemic injury with placement of an 
arterial catheter in the radial artery. The risk factors that have been identified in the medical literature include 
high severity of illness (American Society of Anesthesiologists IV and greater), low cardiac output, use of 
vasopressor therapy, prolonged duration of catheter placement (greater than 4 days), large catheter size, 
multiple punctures for catheter insertion, predisposing comorbidities (i.e. peripheral vascular disease), 
diabetes. The study volunteers we will enroll are healthy ASA I/II and by d efinition are without any of these 
comorbid conditions.  Our research group has successfully executed three research protocols (2005P001549, 
1999P010748, and 2011P002333) that incorporate the use of arterial lines to monitor  subject s being studied 
under ge neral anesthetics. Under the aegis of these protocols, arterial lines have been placed without any 
ischemia related tissue injury. Other risks include pain at the needle insertion site, infection, bleeding,  AND  
arterial thrombosis (blood clots).  
VII. Poten tial Benefits  
There are no direct benefits to the individual volunteer s involved in this study. The potential benefits of this 
study to society are a clearer understanding of the potential benefit of dexmedetomidine as a therapy for 
insomnia compared with the established therapy zolpi[INVESTIGATOR_6730]. We hope to also gain insight into the extent of 
which dexmedetomidine affects the sleep architecture of healthy volunteers . If successful, this study may lead 
to the identification of a new class of medications for sleep t herapy.  
VIII. Monitoring and Quality Assurance  
All EEG , blood pressure, heart rate, electrocardiography, and capnography  data will be visualized in real time 
for safe monitoring.  These data will also be  stored for later off -line analysis. Unanticipated pr oblems involving 
risks to volunteers or others , including adverse events will be reported to the PHRC in accordance with PHRC 
unanticipated problems including adverse events reporting guidelines.  
Data and S afety Monitoring Board (DSMB)  
A Data and Safety Mo nitoring Board (DSMB) has been created as an independent body charged with ensuring 
that the safety of study volunteers is protected and that the scientific goals of the study are being met. To 
 
Protocol Version 07/12 /2017 Page 12 of 14 support those purposes, the DSMB will perform expedited monito ring of all serious adverse events, perform 
ongoing monitoring of drop -outs and non -serious adverse events, determine whether study procedures should 
be changed or the study should be halted for reasons related to the safety of study volunteers , and perfor m 
periodic review of the completeness and validity of data to be used for analysis of safety and efficacy. The 
DSMB will also ensure volunteer privacy and r esearch data confidentiality.   
Serious Adverse Events  
Expedited review will occur for all events me eting the FDA definition of SAEs – i.e., any fatal event, 
immediately life -threatening event, permanently or substantially disabling event, event requiring or prolonging 
inpatient  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. This also includes any event that a study investigator or t he DSMB judges to impose a 
significant hazard, contraindicatio n, side effect, or precaution. For purposes of this study, all SAEs are required 
to be reported to the DSMB, regardless of any judgment of their relatedness to the study drug. All relevant 
information will be reported to the DSMB for each SAE including information about the event and its outcome, 
dosing history of all study drugs, concomitant medications, the volunteer’s medical history and current 
conditions, and all relevant laboratory data.  N otification by e -mail of all related study forms shall be made to 
the DSMB within [ADDRESS_313814] on a yearly basis during the course of the study, the DSMB will receive a report on data quality and 
completeness . The Charter and Membership has been submitted to the IRB.  
 
 
 
 
Protocol Version 07/12 /2017 Page 13 of 14 IX. References  
Akeju, O., M. L. Loggia, C. Catana, K. J. Pavone, R. Vazquez, J. Rhee, V. Contreras Ramirez, D. B. Chonde, 
D. Izquierdo -Garcia, G. Arabasz, S. Hsu, K. Habeeb, J. M. Hooker, V. Napadow, E. N. Brown and P. L. Purdon 
(2014). "Disruption of tha lamic functional connectivity is a neural correlate of dexmedetomidine -induced 
unconsciousness." Elife 3: e04499.  
Akeju, O., K. J. Pavone, M. B. Westover, R. Vazquez, M. J. Prerau, P. G. Harrell, K. E. Hartnack, J. Rhee, A. 
L. Sampson, K. Habeeb, L. Gao, E . T. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_835], J. L. Walsh, E. N. Brown and P. L. Purdon (2014). "A 
comparison of propofol - and dexmedetomidine -induced electroencephalogram dynamics using spectral and 
coherence analysis." Anesthesiology  121(5): 978 -989. 
American Psychiatric Association. (2 013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders : DSM -5. 
Washington, D.C., American Psychiatric Association.  
Anttila, M., J. Penttila, A. Helminen, L. Vuorilehto and H. Scheinin (2003). "Bioavailability of dexmedetomidine 
after extravascular do ses in healthy subjects." Br J Clin Pharmacol  56(6): 691 -693. 
Brown, R. E., R. Basheer, J. T. McKenna, R. E. Strecker and R. W. McCarley (2012). "Control of sleep and 
wakefulness." Physiol Rev  92(3): 1087 -1187.  
Buzsaki, G. and W. Freeman (2015). "Editorial  overview: brain rhythms and dynamic coordination." Curr Opin 
Neurobiol  31: v-ix. 
Carter, M. E., O. Yizhar, S. Chikahisa, H. Nguyen, A. Adamantidis, S. Nishino, K. Deisseroth and L. de Lecea 
(2010). "Tuning arousal with optogenetic modulation of locus coer uleus neurons." Nat Neurosci  13(12): 1526 -
1533.  
Ching, S., A. Cimenser, P. L. Purdon, E. N. Brown and N. J. Kopell (2010). "Thalamocortical model for a 
propofol -induced alpha -rhythm associated with loss of consciousness." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  107(52): 
[ZIP_CODE] -[ZIP_CODE].  
Chiu, T. H., M. J. Chen, Y. R. Yang, J. J. Yang and F. I. Tang (1995). "Action of dexmedetomidine on rat locus 
coeruleus neurones: intracellular recording in vitro." Eur J Pharmacol  285(3): 261 -268. 
Collins, F. S. (2011). "Mining for therapeut ic gold." Nat Rev Drug Discov  10(6): 397.  
Collins, F. S. (2012). We need better drugs — now.  
Correa -Sales, C., B. C. Rabin and M. Maze (1992). "A hypnotic response to dexmedetomidine, an alpha [ADDRESS_313815], is mediated in the locus coeruleus in rats." Anesthe siology  76(6): 948 -952. 
Cortinez, L. I., Y. W. Hsu, S. T. Sum -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_007], C. Young, J. C. Keifer, D. Macleod, K. M. Robertson, D. R. Wright, 
E. W. Moretti and J. Somma (2004). "Dexmedetomidine pharmacodynamics: Part II: Crossover comparison of 
the analgesic effe ct of dexmedetomidine and remifentanil in healthy volunteers." Anesthesiology  101(5): 1077 -
1083.  
Feshchenko, V. A., R. A. Veselis and R. A. Reinsel (1997). "Comparison of the EEG effects of midazolam, 
thiopental, and propofol: the role of underlying oscill atory systems." Neuropsychobiology  35(4): 211 -220. 
Jacobson, L. H., G. E. Callander and D. Hoyer (2014). "Suvorexant for the treatment of insomnia." Expert Rev 
Clin Pharmacol  7(6): [ADDRESS_313816] (1993). "Actions of the hypnotic an aesthetic, dexmedetomidine, on 
noradrenaline release and cell firing in rat locus coeruleus slices." Br J Anaesth  71(3): 447 -449. 
 
Protocol Version 07/12 /2017 Page 14 of 14 Maldonado, J. R. (2013). "Neuropathogenesis of delirium: review of current etiologic theories and common 
pathways." Am J Geria tr Psychiatry  21(12): 1190 -1222.  
Morairty, S., D. Rainnie, R. McCarley and R. Greene (2004). "Disinhibition of ventrolateral preoptic area sleep -
active neurons by [CONTACT_68412]: a new mechanism for sleep promotion." Neuroscience  123(2): 451 -457. 
Mountain, B. W ., L. Smithson, M. Cramolini, T. H. Wyatt and M. Newman (2011). "Dexmedetomidine as a 
pediatric anesthetic premedication to reduce anxiety and to deter emergence delirium." AANA J  79(3): 219 -
224. 
Nacif -Coelho, C., C. Correa -Sales, L. L. Chang and M. Maze ( 1994). "Perturbation of ion channel conductance 
alters the hypnotic response to the alpha [ADDRESS_313817] dexmedetomidine in the locus coeruleus of the 
rat." Anesthesiology  81(6): 1527 -1534.  
Nelson, L. E., J. Lu, T. Guo, C. B. Saper, N. P. Franks and M. Maze (2003). "The alpha2 -adrenoceptor agonist 
dexmedetomidine converges on an endogenous sleep -promoting pathway to exert its sedative effects." 
Anesthesiology  98(2): 428 -436. 
Paul, S. M., D. S. Mytelka, C. T. Dunwiddie, C. C. Persinger, B. H. Munos, S.  R. Lindborg and A. L. Schacht 
(2010). "How to improve R&D productivity: the pharmaceutical industry's grand challenge." Nat Rev Drug 
Discov  9(3): 203 -214. 
Purdon, P. L., E. T. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_835], E. A. Mukamel, M. J. Prerau, J. L. Walsh, K. F. Wong, A. F. Salazar -Gom ez, P. G. 
Harrell, A. L. Sampson, A. Cimenser, S. Ching, N. J. Kopell, C. Tavares -Stoeckel, K. Habeeb, R. Merhar and 
E. N. Brown (2013). "Electroencephalogram signatures of loss and recovery of consciousness from propofol." 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  110(12): E1142 -1151.  
Ray, T. and J. D. Tobias (2008). "Dexmedetomidine for sedation during electroencephalographic analysis in 
children with autism, pervasive developmental disorders, and seizure disorders." J Clin Anesth  20(5): 364 -368. 
Saper, C. B., P. M. Fulle r, N. P. Pedersen, J. Lu and T. E. Scammell (2010). "Sleep state switching." Neuron  
68(6): [ADDRESS_313818], F. Torrealba and C. B. Saper (1998). "Innervation of histaminergic 
tuberomammillary neurons by [CONTACT_258290] n eurons in the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus of the 
rat." J Neurosci  18(12): 4705 -4721.  
Stickgold, R. (2005). "Sleep -dependent memory consolidation." Nature  437(7063): 1272 -1278.  
van Lier, H., W. H. Drinkenburg, Y. J. van Eeten and A. M. Coenen (2004). "Ef fects of diazepam and zolpi[INVESTIGATOR_258279] -specific in rats." Neuropharmacology  47(2): 163 -174. 
Vijayan, S., S. Ching, P. L. Purdon, E. N. Brown and N. J. Kopell (2013) . "Thalamocortical mechanisms for the 
anteriorization of alpha rhythms during propofol -induced unconsciousness." J Neurosci  33(27): [ADDRESS_313819], K. A. and B. Ebert (2008). "Emerging anti -insomnia drugs: tackling sleeplessness and the quality of 
wake time." Nat Rev Drug Discov  7(6): 530 -540. 
Winkelman, J. W. (2015). "CLINICAL PRACTICE. Insomnia Disorder." N Engl J Med  373(15): 1437 -1444.  
 