IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0059 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/05/2019    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Small Volume Bolus Of Papaverine versus Heparin To Maintain Patency Of 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters In Pediatric Patients Undergoing Surgical Procedures: 
Randomized, Controlled Trial, Double -Blind,Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 08/05/2019  
  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0059 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/05/2019   Title: Small Volume Bolus Of Papaverine versus Heparin To Maintain Patency Of 
Peripheral Arterial Catheters In Pediatric Patients Undergoing Surgical Procedures: 
Randomized, Controlled Trial, Double -Blind,Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116].  
 
Principal Investigator:  
[INVESTIGATOR_818349] K. Gautam, MD -Consent Patient, Study Design, Data Collection and Data Analysis  
 
Co Investigators  
Olga Pawalek, MD -Consent Patient, Data Collection 
Evelyn Griffin, MD -Consent Patient, Data Collection 
Richard Hubbard, MD -Consent Patient, Data Collect ion 
Anil M DeSilva, MD -Consent Patient, Data Collection  
Ranu Jain, MD -Study Design, Consent Patient, Data Collection  
Maria Matuszczak, MD -Study Design, Consent Patient, Data Collection 
Jessica Rochkind, MD -Consent Patient, Data Collection  
Kayla Edmonds, CA A-Consent Patient, Data Collection  
 
 
Hypothesis:  
Periodic small volume boluses of diluted papaverine in peripheral arterial catheters of pediatric 
patients will prevent arterial spasm and help maintain patency of arterial catheters during 
general anesthesi a. 
 
Background:  
What is the problem? -- Overdampi[INVESTIGATOR_818350].  
a) Pediatric patients undergoing complex surgical repairs or those with complex 
comorbidities often require continuous arterial pressure monitoring to help maintain 
hemodynamics and obtain blood samples to ensure optimal therapy. However, the 
accuracy of t his system is subject to wide variability due to patient characteristics 
(caliber of the vessels), site of cannulation (radial versus posterior tibial), the type of 
catheter (size and material), and the catheter -tubing -transducer -flush system. We notice 
that maintaining the patency of peripheral arterial catheters in this age group is a difficult 
issue many pediatric anesthesiologists face, especially during lengthy surgical 
procedures or when temperature instability is present (cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_6476]). 
Unfractionated Heparin, normal saline and papaverine have been shown to prolong 
patency of peripheral arterial catheters in neonates and children{Heulitt:1993un, 
Griffin:2005bo} when used in a continuous pump -based infusion in the intensive care 
setting. Whil e the continuous infusion ensures patency of peripheral arterial catheters in 
an intensive care setting, this method is not convenient for use during surgery. 
Intraoperatively, the peripheral arterial catheter -tubing -transducer is usually connected to 
a pressurized bag of normal saline or heparinized saline (2 units/mL) allowing for 
continuous leaching up to 3  mL/hour.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0059 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/05/2019    
What do we do at our institution currently?  
Intraoperatively, peripheral arterial catheters are placed and secured by [CONTACT_818358], and a pressurized heparin (2 units/mL) bag (500mL) is connected 
to the transducer to m aintain patency. Towards the end of surgery, the pediatric 
anesthesia care team transitions the fast flush system to a continuous pump -based 
papaverine/heparin infusion system before transporting the patients to the intensive care 
unit. However, as rescue,  the anesthesia care team frequently uses papaverine bolus 
(0.3 mg) in patients undergoing cardiac surgery to treat arterial spasm whenever arterial 
catheter spasm is suspected.  
 
What is the advantage of adding papaverine bolus to arterial line catheter care during general 
anesthesia?  
Papaverine is an alkaloid obtained from opi[INVESTIGATOR_818351] a characteristic effect of relaxation of 
all smooth muscle, especially when spasmodically contract ed. Papaverine acts directly 
on the muscle itself, unrelated to innervation, and the relaxation is prominent if spasm 
exists. The current standard of care is to administer papaverine after surgery to help 
relax the blood vessel and keep the catheter open f or reliable blood pressure monitoring 
and sampling. There is evidence that papaverine infusion helps to relax arterial blood 
vessels in pediatric patients.  
We do use this drug intraoperatively as a rescue with anecdotal evidence of relief of 
spasm. However, we do not know if administering papaverine bolus during surgery will 
help prevent or treat vasospasm. This study may help the study doctors learn things t hat 
may help other patients in the future.  
With current practice and care of catheters in ICU, arterial catheters remain patent 
during standard infusions of papaverine. Adopting this strategy, we hypothesize that 
small volume boluses of papaverine/heparin (1mL of 0.12 mg/mL papaverine, heparin 
2units/mL premixed syringe made by [CONTACT_1714]) during general anesthesia can 
maintain and prolong patency of these arterial catheters. This volume was chosen to 
mimic a one hour’s dose of papaverine that the patient  would have received as a 
continuous infusion in the ICU setting. See methods for more dosing details.  
 
Study Method:  
Prospective study - Parental consent will be obtained. The surgical list will be evaluated to 
review all patients age 0 -17 years who would require elective placements of arterial catheters 
based on patients clinical complexity (ex. congenital heart disease) or based on the type of 
surgery (ex. open heart surgery)  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
1. Patients with a history of significant liver  dysfunction.  
2. Patients undergoing liver  transplants.  
3. Patients with Grade 2 or more of intraventricular  hemorrhage.  
4. All preterm patients with a gestational age less than 37 weeks at the time of  surgery.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0059 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/05/[ADDRESS_1133281] will be  followed to allocate the patient to the 
treatment group or control group.  
 
Double Blinding - The patients, patient’s family, principal investigator, and the anesthesiology 
care team will be blinded to the allocation list.  
 
Syringe Blinding - A member of the anesthesiology care team not involved in direct patient care 
will be given the randomizer list.  
This team member will be given 2 syringes.  
1. a) The 50mL premixed syringe of papaverine as dispensed from pharmacy ( NaCl 
0.9% i nj 48.8 mL + papaverine 6mg+ heparin 100  units)  
2. b) 10 mL of 2 units/mL of heparin from the pressurized fast flush bag from the 
operating  room.  
 
Based on the list, one of the below will be aspi[INVESTIGATOR_818352] a Research  syringe  
3. 1) 2 mL from the premixed -papaverine  syringe will be aspi[INVESTIGATOR_818352] a sterile aseptic 
fashion in a 3 mL BD syringe and labelled as RESEARCH SYRINGE, with patient 
identifiers, date and time of constitution, expi[INVESTIGATOR_818353].  
4. 2) 2 mL of heparinized solution from the 2 units/mL heparin s yringe will be aspi[INVESTIGATOR_818354] a 3 mL BD syringe and labelled as RESEARCH SYRINGE, with patient identifiers, 
date and time of constitution, expi[INVESTIGATOR_818353].  
 
 
Time of administration:  (see Figure 1: Flowchart)  
The arterial catheters of all patients will be connected to the pressurized heparin flush system. 
All patients will receive 1 mL volume bolus from the “research syringe” as soon as the arterial 
catheter is placed and secured. Subsequent bolus from the “res earch syringe” will occur one 
hour after initial bolus.  
 
1) An intention to treat with 0.3 mg of papaverine (0.1mL from the papaverine vial) will be 
considered by [CONTACT_818359], if the arterial catheter spasm/patency or 
waveform does not improv e 10 minutes after the second “research syringe” bolus (1 
hour after initial  placement).  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0059 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/05/2019   @ t=0 mins: Administer 1 mL from “research syringe”  
@t=55 mins: Data Collection  Peripheral arterial line is secured and transduced  
Data Collection @t=5 mins  
@t60mins: Administer 1 mL 
from “research syringe”  Do not administer anything; continue 
to monitor  
@t=65 mins: Data Collection  
@t=75 mins:Data Collection  @t70 mins: Administer “intention to treat” with 0.3 
mg (0.1mL) of papaverine  Do not administer anything; continue 
to monitor  Figure 1. Flowchar t 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If Yes If No 
 
If Yes If No 
 
If Yes If No 
 
 
Data Collected:  
(Routine standard operating procedure data)  
1. Patient  Demographics  
a. gestational  age 
b. age at  operation  
c. weight at  birth 
d. weight at  operation  
e. primary  diagnosis  
f. other diagnosis (syndrome, ductal  dependency)  
2. Operative  Variable  
a. type of  surgery  
b. duration of  surgery  
3. Arterial  Catheters  
a. time of  placement  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0059 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/05/2019   b. site of  catheterization  
c. number of  attempts  
d. localization  technique  
e. catheter placement  technique  
f. Size and material type of the arterial  catheter  
g. tubing length from the catheter to  transducer  
h. Filtering set on arterial monitoring at a frequency higher than the natural 
frequency. For example, if patients heart rate is 70bpm, then a Filter frequency of 
(70*10)/60=11 Hz and above will be set. For a heart rate of 140bpm, a Filter of 
20Hz will be  set. 
4.  Indicators  of arterial  waveform  patency  performed  from baseline  and then every  1 hour 
intraoperatively  
a. color changes at catheter site (presence or absence of local axon reflex with fluid 
flushes after placement) when the arterial line is  accessible  
b. presence/ absence of a dicrotic notch ( a distinct dicrotic notch implies system 
has good resolution at higher frequencies and is not  overdamped)  
c. ability to draw lab  sample  
i. Negative aspi[INVESTIGATOR_818355] 
a 3 mL B D syringe  
ii. Negative aspi[INVESTIGATOR_818356] (cavitation during negative aspi[INVESTIGATOR_1516], takes 
more than 30 seconds to draw 1 mL) using a [ADDRESS_1133282] flush system will be used. Pressure bag will be set to 
300 mmHg and the resultant wa veform will be recorded on  paper  
e. Presence of Oscillations - Yes/no, how many above baseline (there should be  at 
least one bounce. If the system does not oscillate, then there is too much 
dampi[INVESTIGATOR_007]). There should be no more than two  oscillations.  
i. Amplitude of  D1 
ii. Amplitude of D12 (The amplitude of each oscillation is no greater than  ⅓ 
of previous oscillation)  
iii. Arterial Blood pressure reading compared with NIBP measurement at 
times of  measurement.  
iv. Postoperatively, we will measure the duration of catheter patency ( # 
hours/days) and the reason for discontinuation up to two days after the 
procedure.  
5. Measurement of hemodynamics (HR, BP, ETCO2) before Papaverine/Heparin or 
Heparin bolus and at 1 min, 5min and 10 mins after  bolus.  
 
Primary Outcome:  
1. Indicators of intra operative arterial waveform patency as mentioned above in Data 
Collection section 4a to 4d  
 
Data Handling and Record Keepi[INVESTIGATOR_818357] a 
binder which will be locked in the office of the principal investigator. A linking log will be  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0059 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/05/[ADDRESS_1133283] protected. 
(https://www.uth.edu/uthshare/ ) 
 
Quality Control and Assurance  
There are no plans to have ongoing third party monitoring. Data will be reviewed and audited 
internally to ensure that data is consistent, accurate and complete.  
 
Sample Size:  
Since this is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], we will collect data on 50 patients in each group. B ased on the 
Cohen’s d for an anticipated effect size of 0.5 (we will use anyone of the indicators of patency 
as mentioned above), desired power level of 0.[ADDRESS_1133284] with 
the family member while obtaining the surgical and or the anesthesia consent.  
 
Study Risks:  
Papaverine acts on all smooth muscle cells and relieves vascular spasm. It is metabolized by 
[CONTACT_4852]. There are no perceivable risks from exposure to papaverine bolus as it is standard of 
care to subject all patients in ICU to continuous infusion of papaver ine after OR to maintain 
patency of arterial catheter and has been well studied in neonates and pediatric patients  
{Griffin:2005bo, Boris:1998wp, Heulitt:1993un}. Side effects of papaverine can include nausea, 
headache, flushing, bleeding, or allergic reac tion. These side effects are rare.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring:  
This study will not have a formal data and safety monitoring board. All subjects will be monitored 
by [CONTACT_818360], though none are anticipated. All unanticipated 
problems (adverse events, protocol deviations) will be reported t o the IRB as required in a 
timely  fashion.  
 
Ethics:  
We are seeking IRB approval for this study from CPHS.  
 
Discussion of risks and possible benefits of participating in this study will be provided to the 
subjects and their families. Consent forms describin g in detail the study procedures, and risks 
are given to the subject and written documentation of informed consent is required prior to 
starting the study.  
Consent forms will be IRB -approved and the subject will be asked to read and review the 
document. Up on reviewing the document, the investigator will explain the research study to the 
subject and answer any questions that may arise. The subject will sign the informed consent 
document prior to any procedures being done specifically for the study. The subje cts should 
have the opportunity to discuss the study or think about it prior to agreeing to participate. The 
subjects may withdraw consent at any time throughout the course of the study. A copy of the 
informed consent document will be given to the subjects  for their records. The rights and 
welfare of the subjects will be protected by [CONTACT_818361]: HSC -MS-19-0059 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/05/2019   not be adversely affected if they decline to participate in this study.  
 
Publication Plan:  
We plan to publis h the results of the study in a peer reviewed scientific journal. Study results will 
not be returned to the research subjects. However, information regarding the study will be 
available on www.clinicaltrial s.gov . 
 
 
References:  
 
 
1  Heulitt MJ, Farrington EA, O'Shea TM, Stoltzman SM, Srubar NB, Levin DL. Double - 
blind, randomized, controlled trial of papaverine -containing infusions to prevent failure of 
arterial catheters in pediatric patients. Crit Care Med. 1993  Jun;21(6):825 –9. 
 
2  Griffin MP, Siadaty MS. Papaverine prolongs patency of peripheral arterial catheters in 
neonates. J Pediatr. 2005  Jan;146(1):62 –5. 
 
3  Boris JR, Harned RK, Logan LA, Wiggins JW. The use of papaverine in arterial sheaths 
to prevent loss of femoral artery p ulse in pediatric cardiac catheterization. Pediatr Cardiol. 
1998  Sep;19(5):390 –7. 