1 Protocol & Statistical Analysis P lan 
Official Title: Influence of E xercise on Neurocognitiv e Function in Breast C ancer 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Document Date: 6/14/2023
2 
 Title of study: 
Exercise Program in Cancer and Cognition (EPI[INVESTIGATOR_6875])  
 
 
Brief description: 
This is a single -site randomized control trial to test whether a moderate- intensity aerobic exercise 
intervention can prevent cognitive decline in postmenopausal women with breast cancer. Women who 
meet the eligibility criteria will be randomly assigned to either receive the intervention or usual care. Data 
will be collected prior to initiating endocrine therapy for breast cancer (TP1) and approximately 7 months 
later (TP2)and include fitness testing and a battery of neuropsychic  tests, blood biomarkers, and other 
behavioral measures; a subset of women will undergo MR imaging. For women who agree to addit ional 
follow -up, data will also be collected approximately12 months post TP1 (TP3).  
 
Specific aims:  
We will examine whether a well -controlled and monitored site- based exercise intervention improves 
cognitive function in postmenopausal women with early stage breast cancer.1. Compared to usual care, examine whether the 6- month exercise intervention improves cognitive function in postmenopausal 
women with early stage breast cancer.  Hypothesis 1. Exercise will improve cognitive function in women 
receiving AI therapy in a domain specific fashion such that attention, executive and memory functions will be influenced more than other domains.  
 
2. Compared to usual care, examine the direct effects of exercise on neuroimaging metrics of brain health 
including regional gray matter volume, white matter architecture and functional dynamics of the brain and the pro- inflammatory biomarkers (IL- 6, TNF-α), and explore the direct effects of exercise on symptoms 
(fatigue, sleep problems, depression, anxiety).  Hypothesis 2. Exercise will improve neuroimaging metrics 
of brain health and pro- inflammatory biomarkers.  
 3. Compared to usual care, explore whether the effects of exercise on cognitive function are mediated by 
a) neuroimaging metrics of cognitive function, b) IL- 6 and TNF-α levels, c) symptoms (fatigue, sleep 
problems, depression, anxiety), d)  and moderated by E2 levels over the first six months of AI therapy . 
 
Inclusion criteria:  
1. Postmenopausal women, defined by [CONTACT_171338] a menstrual period for an entire year or confirmed by 
[CONTACT_5936]  2. 18- [ADDRESS_807277] -
mastectomy at the start of participation .  
  Exclusion criteria:  
1. Prior treatment with cancer chemotherapy, central nervous system radiation, of intrathecal therapy  2. 
Prior cancer involving the central nervous system 3. Clinical evidence of metastatic disease 4. Any of the 
following breast cancer surgery complications unless approved by [CONTACT_2299]’s health care provider: 
persistent seroma requiring aspi[INVESTIGATOR_1516], wound dehiscence, infection, prolonged drain output, 
lymphedema5. Reconstructive surgery unless approved by [CONTACT_2299]'s health care provider6. Any significant medical condition that would preclude them from exercising (e.g., uncontrolled diabetes, 
congestive heart failure, angina, uncontrolled arrhythmia or other symptoms that indicate increased risk 
for an acute cardiovascular or  
 
 
Research activities:  
Participants: We plan to recruit up to [ADDRESS_807278] cancer: up to 
127 will undergo an exercise intervention in this 6- month study described below and up to 127 will be 
enrolled in an usual care arm. A subsample of women who are randomized will participate in the 
neuroimaging component of the study(n=150; 75/group).  
3 
  
Locations: Recruitment  will take place at St. Clair Budway Surgical Associates and Magee- Women’s 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_809], Comprehensive Breast Care Center at UPMC Passavant -Cranberry, UPMC South 
Hills, UPMC McKeesport and Magee Woman care Center in Monroeville. Data collection will take place in participants’ homes, at the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_608732]. The exercise intervention will take place at Sennott Square, Baierl 
Family YMCA, Sampson Family YMCA, and JCC South Hills Branch or Healthy Lifestyle Institute offices in Oak Hill; alternatively, a participant may exercise in her home or other location of her choosing. MRI 
Imaging will take place at Carnegie Mellon University SIBR.  
 
Informed Consent: Written informed consent will be obtained from the participant prior to any study -
specific activities either in person or remotely.  
 Assessments:  Participants will complete a series of assessments at two timepoints; Time 1(baseline) will 
occur up to [ADDRESS_807279] -completion of primary treatment and before randomization and initiation of the 
exercise intervention/usual care. Time 2 will occur approxi mately within 1 month of completion of the 
intervention (or [ADDRESS_807280] -Time 1). Data collection at each timepoint will be composed of behavioral 
assessments, blood samples, neuroimaging and objective measures of physical activity and fitness. We will also objectively evaluate physical activity at 3 time points during participation (approximately every 5 weeks).For participants who agree to additional follow -up via the addendum consent form, Time [ADDRESS_807281] (3 months) between Time 2 and Time 3 as well as at Time 3. Participants will also be asked to maintain their edema cap and REDCap diaries during this time. Participants may be asked to complete assessments in 
two separate sessions at both TP1 and TP2.During one visit (which includes fitness testing), blood 
samples (approximately 30ccor 6 teaspoons) will be collec ted for biobanking for future evaluation of the 
relationships of biomarkers (including genetic biomarkers) with cognitive function, exercise, brain health 
and symptoms. Blood samples will be transported immediately, under conditions appropriate for 
preserv ation of the blood, and stored before the end of the day of testing. Samples will be maintained in a 
-80°C freezer in the Victoria building under the control of the principal investigators of this research 
project and will be maintained indefinitely. In the event that we need to send samples to a different facility 
outside of the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_608733], no identifying information will accompany 
the sample. Participants will be asked questions prior to the blood draw to determine any factors which 
may affect the findings. If a recent illness is noted, or certain other factors as noted on the form, are 
found, the participant may not be eligible for a blood draw at this visit. In this event, we will attempt to 
collect the blood at a nother time, either during a subsequent visit or other agreed upon time. Fitness will 
be objectively measured at Time [ADDRESS_807282] takes 15- 30minutes to complete. Subjects will be 
given exercise testing instructions regarding proper clothing and footwear and will be told to abstain from 
caffeine or nicotine 2hours prior to the physical activity/fitness assessment. When participants report to the laboratory (Sennott Square) for the fitness assessment they will first be acquainted with the equipment, allowed to ask any questions, and get comfortable with walking on a treadmill. Before the test 
begins, the participant will get familiar with wearing the mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_608734] f itness. This helps to reduce anxiety associated with 
exercise and fitness testing. Cardiovascular fitness testing consists of progressively increasing exercise 
intensity while the subjects exhaled air is collected via a mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_608735] a gas exchange 
chamber via a breathing tube. A comfort fitted head gear supports the mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_13959]. This reduces the effort of the participant to keep the mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_608736]. Alternatively, the 
participant may wear a facemask. The gas chamber that is being used is the Parvo Medics True one 
[ADDRESS_807283] is a modified Balke protocol in which the speed remains constant and 
grade is increased 1% each minute. This protocol has been used extensively in the literature for fitness 
training for both normal, at -risk, and impaired populations. Verifying maximal vo2 is difficult in at -risk 
4 
 populations and therefore submaximal vo2 is often the desired method. This method has people walk at a 
slow - moderate pace with increasing grade increments up to the goal heart rate of 85% of the age- based 
maximum (220- age) or a rating of perceived exerti on equal to or greater than [ADDRESS_807284], the mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_608737] a four minute active cool -down in which they will walk at a slower rate with 
zero incline grade. After these four minutes the participant will be helped off of the treadmill and undergo 
a passive cool -down session in which they are seated in a chair. The participant's heart rate and blood 
pressure will be continuously monitored through the cool -down period and the participant will not be 
allowed to leave until the vital signs return to normal patterns. Blood pressure will also be monitored both before and after the fitness test to ensure that changes in blood pressure resulting from exercise are all 
normal. If the participants vital signs remain elevated after a cool down and rest period, the study 
physician will be called and will provide instructions for further monitoring of the participant. Situations like this are very rare and occur in less than 1/10,[ADDRESS_807285]. Erickson’s laboratory by [CONTACT_608745] >15 years of coaching and 
exercise testing who is AED and Recertified and has certificat ions in exercise physiology from the 
American College of Sports Medicine. Prior to engaging in exercise, participants may be fitted with one or 
two physical activity monitoring devices (Body Media Sense Wear mini armband or Autographing). The 
Body Media Se nse wear Armband is worn around the upper left arm. Hectograph Link is a wristband 
worn on the non- dominant arm. Both devices will record physiological data (e.g., heat flux, sweat rate, 
etc.) over the duration of their exercise test; this information is used in an algorithm to determine intensity 
and amount of physical activity. The participants will be provided with detailed instructions regarding 
wearing of the device(s) as well as the option to remove the device(s) if it becomes problematic. 
Participant s may also be asked to wear the physical activity monitoring device(s) for a week before or 
after the exercise testing session. This way we can get a more comprehensive idea of both activity and 
fitness levels. In addition, all participants, regardless of group assignment, will be asked to wear the 
device(s) 3 additional times through their participation in this study(approximately every 5 weeks) and 
again at the follow -up assessment (TP2) for total of 5 times over the course of participation in the study. 
Participants who wear the Actigraphy Link will be given a log at the time they receive their device. This log is used to report any time/reason the device is removed as well as information about their sleep. The self-report information contained in the log will be compared to and used in interpreting the device data. 
Alternatively, in the event that a participant cannot come to Sennott Square for this testing for any reason (e.g., preference, weather, pandemic -related restrictions.), a brief heart -rate moni toring session may take 
place virtually either by [CONTACT_608746]. During this guided session, the participant will be asked to wear study -provided heart rate monitor for approximately 5 minutes and asked to report 
readings to study staff. Partic ipants will also be asked to report their weight; home scale may provided for 
participants to use (with instructions to return via pre- paid mailer when complete). Data from the session 
can provide information to estimate results from a VO2 test. Participants may also be asked to complete 
questionnaires regarding exercise knowledge and self -efficacy during the physical activity and fitness 
assessment, time permitting. Alternatively, these may be included in the behavioral assessment. The 
behavioral assessment includes a battery of standard clinical neuropsychological tests that assess verbal 
ability, visuospatial ability, attention/processing speed, memory, and executive function, will be 
administered. These tests have standard administration protocols and wi ll be administered by [CONTACT_608747]. This is expected to take approximately [ADDRESS_807286] of their abilities. They will also be offered breaks as needed between tests 
to help reduce fatigue and frustration. Data collected will be transported by [CONTACT_608748]'s home to the office of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_41862] 
5 
 Department of Nursing for locked storage. Alternatively, neuropsychological tests may be administered 
virtually via teleconferencing or phone as needed. Other measures may be administered via Redcap or 
by [CONTACT_608749]- person. 
Participants' location data (e.g., zip code or census tract) may be used to gather information from publicly 
availably datasets to provide information about community/neighborhood characteristics/social 
determin ants of health (such as deprivation, safety, degree of segregation).  
 
Physical Activity Diary: All participants will be asked to provide information related to their physical 
activity throughout the study. Participants will be offered the option of a paper diary(uploaded in section 
2.8) or to complete a weekly electronic mail survey administered v ia REDCAP.  
 eDEM Cap:  All participants will be provided with the electronic Drug Exposure Monitor (Edema) to 
measure adherence to hormonal therapy. The Eden consists of a bottle cap fitted with a microprocessor 
that records the date and time the cap is removed from a medication vial. It also records the duration of 
time that the cap is off the vial. Eachmonitor has sufficient memory to record and store the dates and 
times of 2000doses. The Eden will be collected at the time of the follow -up assessment. Neuroimaging** 
No new MRI  participants will be consented after February 2020 ** A subgroup(N=150) will have the 
following neuroimaging protocol at times [ADDRESS_807287] approximately 1 hour. Seventy -
five women from each group will be randomly sampled to participate in neuroimaging based on age and 
baseline executive function. On the day of a participant's scan, she will be asked to arrive 30minutes 
before the start of her scan in order to provide time to review and sign a separate CMU consent form, and 
to undergo fi nal safety screening by a SIBR MRI technologist. For the sake of brevity, MRI sequence 
parameters have been omitted but can be found in our prior publications.68,75,78,132,133 Brain 
Morphology: High- resolution anatomical MPRAGE (1mm3 voxels, 256 slices) im ages will be used for 
morphologic and volumetric analyses. The Free Surfer pi[INVESTIGATOR_608738], cortical surface area, and thickness. Intracranial volume (ICV) will be used as a covariate in analysis of brain morphology. Regional values that can be exported into statistical packages (e.g., SAS) will be calculated. Errors and omissions will be corrected 
according to standard guidelines. Hippocampal subfields: We will use a focal (.4 x .5x 2mm) T2- weighted 
sequence for hippocampal subfield segmentation146. Since the dentate gyrus and CA1 subfields are more frequently affected by[CONTACT_14759]147,148 and the head of the hippocampus may be affected more than 
thetail,68 this will allow us t o segment hippocampal subfields to determine regional specificity of the 
intervention. White matter imaging will be performed using diffusion- weighted sequence (50 directions; 
2.5mm isotropic voxels). Images will be corrected for head motion and eddy current artifacts. For each 
voxel the first three principle eigenvectors of water diffusion will be calculated using FSL, which will be 
used to calculate fractional anisotropy (FA), axial and radial diffusivity components. These maps will be transformed into st andard space using non- linear normalization. We will also conduct fiber tractography, 
which identifies tracts between regions and will use computational methods to dissociate crossing white matter fibers withinvoxels.149 Finally, white matter lesions (see next section) will be removed from the calculation of white matter integrity. White matter hyperintensities (WMH): We will use a T2 FLAIR sequence and an automated segmentation method, which uses an algorithm for automated selection of 
WMH lesions. The seg mented WMH are then localized to white matter tracts using the Johns Hopkins 
White Matter Atlas. Resting state analyses: We will employ standard BOLD sequences used by [CONTACT_976]: 
[INVESTIGATOR_608739]. Prior to generating brain networks (see150), a ll images will be 
motion corrected and registered. To control noise,[ADDRESS_807288] for physiological confounds.  The time series from each node will be compared to every other node using 
regression analysis, generating a correlation matrix. A threshold is applied to the matrix to retain only the 
strong connections and is maintained to represent connection strength.153 Once an adjacency matrix is 
generated, network attributes can be calculated for each node. The data will allow for the identification of 
changes in network topology that are associated with the intervention. Cerebral Blood Flow(CBF) will be 
measured wit h multi -phase pseudo Continuous Arterial Spin Labeling(pals) with background suppression 
and will be analyzed using BASIL. Task -evoked activation: We selected the n- back working memory 
paradigm because our preliminary data demonstrates that walking interve ntions improve performance on 
this task.[ADDRESS_807289] network of brain regions including the PFC, ACC, hippocampus, and basal ganglia.155 Participants determine whether a lowercase letter 
6 
 matches the letter on the previous trial (1- back) or the letter two trials previously (2 -back). We will employ 
FSL software with standard preprocessing steps including motion correction, temporal filtering, and 
spatial smoothing and a sample- specific templ ate for registration.75,156,157 We will also use 
Psychophysiological Interaction (PPI) analyses to examine changes in functional connectivity between 
regions during task performance.  
  Randomization : After completing the baseline assessments, subjects may be randomized into one of 
two groups: (1) Aerobic Exercise Intervention or (2) Usual Care. Subjects will be randomly assigned via a 
computer using a minimization algorithm with equal allocation to on e of two treatment groups: 1) exercise 
intervention, or 2) usual care. Use of a minimization algorithm will insure treatment balance on two three factors:1) age at study entry (<60, >60 to <70, >70 years) (since age is associated with reduced fitness, 
cognition, and brain measures), and 2) baseline levels of cognitive function, particularly executive function (based on the composite mean Z -score, < -0.5, > - 0.5 to < +0.5, > +0.5), and 3) the time since primary 
cancer treatment (<= 6months, >6 months to 12 mo nths). Minimization is a form of adaptive treatment 
allocation in which the probability of assignment to the treatment groups does not remain constant, but is determined by [CONTACT_608750]/or composition of groups. In this study, the treatment assi gnment 
probability will be adjusted in response to the marginal distributions of categories of age at entry and baseline executive function such that the marginal distributions of these categories will be approximately equal between treatment groups. Treat ment group assignment will be generated and stored in a secured 
database. Aerobic  
 
Exercise Intervention Group: An exercise physiologist with a Master’s degree in Exercise Science with 
experience in the proper execution and delivery of the exercise intervention in normal and at risk 
population while maintaining a safe environment will be the staff member responsibl e for the training of 
other staff to deliver the exercise intervention at each site. This individual will also be responsible for 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_608740]. Exercise staff w ill have completed a degree in Exercise Science or related field (e.g., kinesiology) 
and / or have a fitness certification from a reputable organization. All staff will have a minimum of 2 years experience in exercise supervision and prescription. The exer cise intervention will be aerobic in nature 
and performed at a moderate intensity as monitored by [CONTACT_608751](RPE); both will be monitored on- site by a trained member of the research team. Trained study 
staff will be present at each exercise session at all intervention sites. Occasionally, participants may have 
heart rate abnormalities which can make it difficult to obtain accurate readings via a heart rate monitor. In 
these situations, exercise staff will employ ad ditional strategies to monitor exercise intensity as described 
below:1. Rating of perceived exertion (RPE) – this scale is used for all study participants. Itis a scale that 
runs 6 (no intensity) to 20 (maximal intensity). It is asked of participants and t racked every 15 minutes 
during exercise.2. Rating scale of breathlessness –  this scale will only be used for the rare case of 
compromised heart rate response. This scale runs 0.5 (very, very slight breathlessness) to 10 (very, very 
severe out of breath). I f a participant rates [ADDRESS_807290] –  this 
will be used by [CONTACT_608752]. For those with heart rate issues, the exercise trainer 
will proceed through the entire session with ahigh level of at tention focused on this procedure. While the 
trainer is in conversation with the participant, the trainer will be attentive to the level of gaspi[INVESTIGATOR_608741]. If the participant is struggling to hold or continue a conversation due to the 
level of work, the intensity will be decreased. Walking on a motorized treadmill will be the encouraged 
mode of exercise; however participants may use other equipment such as upright bikes, recumbent bikes, ellipticals and indoor walking tr ack, etc. Participants will begin by [CONTACT_167765] 10- 15 minutes for 3 
days/week during the first two weeks of the program and gradually increase the duration for the following 
4weeks until they reach 40 –50 minutes per session/3 days per week. This level is t hen maintained for the 
remainder of the 6 months. This falls within the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) guidelines 
for cancer patients and survivors.106These guidelines (2010) recommend a weekly volume of [ADDRESS_807291]’s baseline cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_608742]. All exercise sessions start and end with a vital sign check and 5- [ADDRESS_807292] weekly. Participants will 
receive guidance and coaching related to their exercise sessions -  either in real -time or other time as to 
be accommodating as possible to the research participants. Heart rate during exercise sessions w ill be 
monitored via study -provided monitors and will be reported to trainers by [CONTACT_2299]. Participants may 
be provided with online resources/videos for exercise (such as Be Fit Pi[INVESTIGATOR_32887]) or may be encouraged to use 
an exercise resources available to them (such as owned exercise equipment, gym memberships, indoor 
or outdoor walking, etc.)  
 
Usual Care Group: will not withhold physical activity or limit physical activity in the usual care group but 
instead will let them engage in activity in the same manner as if they were not part of an active intervention.  
 
 
Statistical Plan  
 
Randomization:  Subjects will be randomly assigned via a computer using a minimization algorithm with 
equal allocation to one of two treatment groups: 1) exercise intervention, or 2)usual care. Use of a 
minimization algorithm will insure treatment balance on two factors: 1) age at study entry (<60, >60 to 
<70, >70 years) (since age is associated with reduced fitness, cognition, and brain measures), and 2) baseline levels of cognitive function, particularly executive function (based on the composite mean Z -
score, < - 0.5, > - 0.5 to < +0.5, > +0.5). Minimization is a form of adaptive treatment allocation in w hich the 
probability of assignment to the treatment groups does not remain constant but is determined by [CONTACT_608753]/or composition of groups. In this study, the treatment assignment probability will be 
adjusted in response to the marginal dist ributions of categories of age at entry and baseline executive 
function such that the marginal distributions of these categories will be approximately  equal between 
treatment groups. Treatment group assignment will be generated and stored in a secured database.  
 Data analysis : Preliminary  Analyses. Exploratory analyses will be performed for data description and 
screening for anomalies (e.g., outliers, nonnormality). This will be done to: 1)describe univariate and bivariate distributions; 2) identify group imbalances and associations  between dependent variables and 
suspected covariates/ confounders;3) evaluate missing data; and 4) check for violation of statistical assumptions. If assumptions  are violated, data transformations or more statistically robust procedures  will 
be considered. Covariates/ confounders will be included in models secondarily  and their effects on 
primary predictors/factors will be evaluated. The randomness  of missing data will be investigated using 
available information on subject  characteristics to help discern patterns in missing data, identify possible 
missing  data mechanisms and inform strategies to handle missing data. If the data are ignorable missing, 
the estimation procedures to be used will produce unbiased estimates  while allowing us to retain 
observations with missing values on the outcome variables. If needed, multiple imputation would be used 
to impute missing values  on covariates. If the data are not ignorable missing, we may use selection or 
pattern  mixture modeling to investigate the sensitivity of results.  
 Analysis  Plan for Aim 1. An "intent -to-treat" (ITT) approach will be used for data analysis . All subjects will 
be included in the groups to which they were assigned, regardless  of adherence to protocol, treatment 
received, withdrawal or protocol deviation. Although this approach is recommended for efficacy analyses 
in Retaste sensitivity of the results assuming ITT will be explored using information collected  regarding 
participant’s adherence to the exercise intervention (e.g., protocol , amount of treatment  received) ) as 
well as the amount of activity engaged in  by [CONTACT_608754]. The primary endpoint, changes in 
cognitive function, will be derived from normed(for age, education) composites of neuropsychological test 
scores (expressed as mean Z-scores).1 (Table 2) The composite scores for the targeted cognitive 
function domains  are empi[INVESTIGATOR_608743]. Given the variation in scaling, test 
scores are converted to Z -scores related to an established cohort of age-  and education- matched healthy 
women, and then averaged into composites, where  negative scores indicate poorer cognitive function. 
Linear mixed- effects modeling with linear contrasts will be used to examine the effect of treatment 
assignment  on cognitive function over time. When fitting models, time will be repeated  within -subjects 
[ADDRESS_807293] our hypothesis that executive, memory, and attention domains will be more affected than 
other domains. We will consider baseline cognitive function values both  as an assessment point and as a 
possible covariate in analyses. Fixed and/ or time- dependent covariates may be included to adjust for 
group imbalances or variables  related to the dependent variables. Standard fit indices will also be used to 
identify  the most appropriate covariance structure. F -tests will test the main and interaction  effects 
included in the model. Individual regression parameters will be computed and reported with standard 
errors to yield confidence intervals. For each model , residual analysis will be conducted to identify 
sources of model misspecification, outliers and influential observations. Sensitivity anal yses will be 
performed to discern the impact of influential cases on results. To test specific hypotheses , linear 
contrasts will be specified and estimated in the repeated measures  model to compare changes from 
follow -up to baseline values between groups . Wald t -statistics will be used to test each contrast. Marginal 
modeling with generalized estimating equations will also be used as it tends to be more robust to 
misspecification of the covariance structure and violations in normality assumptions. Results  from each 
modeling approach will be compared via sensitivity analyses.  
 
Analysis  Plan for Aim 2. We will use the same analytical approach described for Aim1 to fit models for 
intermediate outcomes (neuroimaging metrics of brain heath, inflammatory  markers, and symptoms) and 
to test Aim 2 hypotheses regarding the effects  of exercise on primary intermediate outcomes 
(neuroimaging metrics and inflammatory  markers of IL- 6 and CRP). The only difference will be that initial 
neuroimaging analyses will be conducted on a voxel -wise basis using FSL, SPM, treasurer , depending on 
the imagi ng modality and analysis (e.g., volumetric). In addition to voxel -wise analyses we may apply 
regions -of-interest (ROI) analyses since  our primary hypotheses focus on prefrontal and hippocampal 
regions. Thesaurus  can be generated using anatomical templates from normalized MNI space or from  
functionally -derived estimates of activation or connectivity. We will use standard cluster -based corrections 
for multiple comparisons of fMRI results, threshold- free cluster enhancement, and an FDR of p<.01 for 
volumetric and white matter analyses.  
 
Analysis  Plan for Aim 3. We will explore neuroimaging metrics of brain health, biomarkers , and symptoms 
as variables that may mediate the effects of the exercise intervention on cognitive function and E2 as a 
possible moderator. Initially, we will fit simple  mediational models (predictor, single mediator, single 
outcome) applying the change score method and estimate whether effects of exercise (predictor) on 
changes  in cognitive function outcomes are mediated through changes in the suspected mediators. 
Goodness -of-fit will be assessed through standard summary indices  (e.g., RMSEA, CFI) and residual 
analyses. Total, indirect and direct effects will  be estimated and reported with confidence intervals. 
Additionally, we will explore mediation applying the half -longitudinal approach proposed by [CONTACT_608755]_ENREF_148 as well as an autoregressive mediational approach. Depending on the results 
from simple mediational modeling, we may also combine mediators  into a multiple or serial mediator 
models to develop a mo re comprehensive pi[INVESTIGATOR_608744]. As stated previously, voxel -based 
mediation  of neuroimaging results will be conducted using BRAVO by [CONTACT_608756]. To explore E2 as a moderator of exercise effects on  cognitive function, the models 
developed in Aim [ADDRESS_807294] as well as interactions of E2 with 
the other fixed effects. Exploratory  analysis. We will explore whether physical activity diary data are 
related to  objective physical activity data. If validated, we will explore the physical activity patterns  over 6 
months and its relationship to change in outcomes.  
 