 
 
 
Official Study Title:  
Acute Exercise Effects on Word Learning in Aging and Stroke -induced Aphasia  
NCT# 03370471  
Document Date: 05/16/19  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Version Date:  05/16/[ADDRESS_25805] Learning in Aging , Mild Cognitive Impairment  
and Stroke -induced Aphasia  
Principal Investigator:   [INVESTIGATOR_26411] , PhD  
 
2. Abstract  
Objective:  Difficulty retrieving words, one of the most common language complaints in 
healthy older adults and those with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) stroke -induced 
language disorde rs (i.e., aphasia), can have a negative impact on communicative 
function. Consistent with studies in young adults, our pi[INVESTIGATOR_26412] , 
demonstrates that acute exercise may improve word learning; however, more research 
is needed to opti mize learning paradigms for healthy older adults and those with MCI 
and aphasia and to investigate the factors that contribute to exercise -induced 
improve ments in learning in these populations. The objectives of this research are to: 1) 
identify an optimal  novel word learning paradigm; 2) determine the acute effects of 
exercise (compared to stretching) on word learning; 3) investigate the influence of 
timin g of exercise (exercise before vs. after learning); 4) investigate the influence of high 
vs. low worki ng memory ability on exercise -enhance word learning; and 5) investigate 
the neurophysiological correlates of exercise -enhanced word learning.  
Research Pla n: Word learning performance will be compared in up to four conditions 
(before exercise, after exercis e, before stretching, after stretching). Performance of 
individuals with high vs. low working memory will be compared and peripheral levels of 
brain -deriv ed neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and dopamine will be measured to investigate 
correlates of immediate and  one-week retention of learned words.  
Methods:  We will compare  word learning in up to four conditions using a within -subjects 
crossover design . Individual s aged  65-89 years  (healthy older adults  and MCI ) and 35 -
89 years (individuals with aphasia) who meet the eligibility criteria will be offered 
enrollment. In the exercise conditions, participants will engage in 30 minutes of 
moderate -intensity cycling (with a warm -up/cool -down) before or after word learning. In 
the stretching conditions, participants will engage in upper - and lower -limb stretching for 
[ADDRESS_25806] learning task, participants will be 
asked to learn no vel words (“flark”) for a familiar object (“cup”) and will engage in tests 
of recall and recognition. Each condition will last two weeks. In week 1, training /testing 
will take place on Monday, Wednesday and Friday of week [ADDRESS_25807] on Friday to measure one -week retention. To 
measure serum levels o f BDNF and dopamine, blood samples will be taken at baseline 
(every 15 minutes for one hour) and in the two training conditions when 
exercise/stretching o ccurs before word learning (immediately before exercise/stretching, 
immediate ly after exercise/stretch ing, immediately after word learning, and [ADDRESS_25808] learning).   
Clinical Relevance:  The aging population of the US is expected to more than d ouble by 
2060, and a similar trajectory is expected within our aging veteran population. 
  Version Date:  05/16/19  
 
3 Additionally,  stroke affects 795,000 individuals per year, and up to 30% are left with 
chronic disability including language impairment. MCI can also have an impact ac ross 
all cognitive domains, including language and memory (Arnaiz & Almkvist, 2003). The 
declines in co mmunicative function that are present in healthy older adults and those 
with aphasia often result in reduced independence and psychosocial well -being, and  
they may contribute to poorer health outcomes. Investigating an exercise -based 
approach to improving word retrieval is clinically relevant and has the potential to have a 
significant impact on the functioning and well -being of thousands of aging veterans.  
 
3. Introduction and Background   
The onset of cognitive decline can begin before 30 years of age (Sal thouse, 2004), but 
the potential for improving brain function remains throughout the lifespan. To combat 
the effects of aging on cognition, exercise -based  programs aimed at taking advantage 
of reactive neuroplasticity (immediate, short term changes) to pro mote adaptational 
neuroplasticity (long term changes) have become increasingly popular. Engaging in 
physical exercise promotes neuroplasticity through inc reased cerebral blood flow, 
increased neurogenesis, and neurochemical release (Greenwood & Parasuraman , 
2010). Meta -analyses have shown that acute exercise has small to moderate effects on 
working memory (McMorris et al., 2012; Roig et al., 2013) and large  effects on long -
term memory (Roig et al., 2013; Lambourne & Tomporowski, 2010).  
Difficulty retrievin g the right word at the right time is one of the most common 
complaints in healthy older adults and those with MCI and stroke -induced language 
impairment (i.e., aphasia). The consequences of word retrieval deficits include reduced 
independence and psycholo gical well -being (Llewellyn et al., 2008) as well as poor 
health outcomes. Novel word learning paradigms have been used to investigate a 
variety of behavi oral and neuromodulatory approaches to word retrieval deficits in these 
populations. We are using a no vel word learning paradigm to investigate the acute (or 
immediate) effects of exercise on word recall with a long -term goal of developi[INVESTIGATOR_26413]. In a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], we demonstrated 
that engaging in moderate -intensity exercise can improve long -term recognition  of novel 
words (e.g., flark) for familiar objects (e.g., ball) in healthy older adults (Rodriguez et al, 
in prep ); however, evidence regarding acute exercise effects on novel word recall  and 
the potential me chanisms that support these effects is required.  
Moreover, despi[INVESTIGATOR_26414], learning and working memory in the 
aging population, no  studies  have investigated the influence of baseline working 
memory ability on exercise -enhanced word learning. Additionally, other factors, such the 
influence of timing of exercise in relation to learning have also not been investigated in 
older adults. A s not all cognitive functions are likely to be enhanced by [CONTACT_14759] 
(Lambourne & Tomporowsk, 2010; Roi g et al., 2013), and individual differences in 
baseline cognitive function have been shown to influence outcomes in younger adults 
(Sibley & Beilock, 2007 ; Schmidt -Kassow et al. 2013), this line of inquiry is an important 
step in develop ing effective exerc ise-based interventions.   
  Version Date:  05/16/[ADDRESS_25809] learning, and the results  of two studies in younger adults yielded 
contrasting results . Winter and colleagues (2007) found that  increased levels of serum 
brain -derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and dopamine were related to short - and long -
term learning success (respectively) in y oung male athletes who engaged in high 
intensity prior to learning; however, Schmidt -Kassow et al (201 3) failed to find a link 
between serum BDNF and learning in healthy young females who engaged in light to 
moderate exercise during learning. Although a re cent review by [CONTACT_26422] 
(2013) suggests that moderate -intensity exercise is most effectiv e in promoting 
increased BDNF levels in the elderly, no studies have investigated the relationship 
between BDNF and word learning in aging populations.  
Our research aims to address these gaps in the literature in order to inform the 
development of targete d, exercise -based interventions for word retrieval impairments in 
healthy older adults and those with stroke -induced aphasia . 
3. Objectives/ Hypothesis/Res earch Ques tions  
1) To identify an optimal novel word learning paradigm for investigation of acute 
exercis e effects on word recall  
2) To determine the effect of moderate -intensity aerobic exercise (compared to a 
stretching control) on word learning  
3) To investigate  factors known to modulate acute exercise effects such as:  
a. Timing of exercise (exercise before vs. aft er learning)  
b. Individual differences (high vs. low working memory ability)  
4) To investigate the neurophysiological correlates of exercise -enhanced word 
learning 
Research Question 1: Does acute, moderate -intensity exercise (compared to gentle 
stretching) enha nce nov el word learning in healthy older adult and neurologic 
populations?  Based on our pi[INVESTIGATOR_20732], we hypothesize that with an optimal paradigm 
both reca ll and recognition will be significantly better in the moderate -intensity exercise 
condition (compared  to gentle stretching).  
Research Question 2: Modulating Factors  
a. Does t iming  of exercise in relation to word learning moderate the effect of 
acute exerci se on novel word learning in healthy older adult s and 
individuals with MCI or aphasia ?   
b. Do individual  differences  in baseline working memory moderate the effect 
of acute exercise on novel word learning in healthy older adult s and 
individuals with MCI or a phasia ? 
Based on our pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299], the findings that acute exercise benefits low performers at 
baseline (Schmidt -Kassow et al., 2013 ; Sibley and Beilock; 2007), and the findings that 
acute exercise improves processing efficiency (McMorris et al., 2012), we h ypothesize 
  Version Date:  05/16/19  
 
5 that exercise (compared to gentle stretching) before learning will significantly enhance 
immediate and long -term retention of words in the low working memory group 
(compared to the high working memory group). Furthermore, based on findings that 
exercise improves long -term retention (Rodriguez et al., in prep; Roig et al., 2013), we 
hypothesize t hat exercise (compared to gentle stretching) after learning will significantly 
enhance long -term retention of words (compared to immediate retention) with  no 
significant difference in the change between the high and low working memory groups.  
Research Ques tion 3: Does exercise -enhanced novel word learning correlate with 
increases in peripheral levels of BDNF or dopamine in healthy older adult and 
individual s with MCI or aphasia ?  Based on previous exercise and word learning 
research, we hypothesize that sig nificantly better short -term retention (immediately after 
learning) will correlate with increased BDNF levels and that significantly better long-term 
retention (at one -week follow -up) will correlate with increased levels of dopamine.   
4. Description of Rel evance to VA  
 It is anticipated that by 2060 the aging population in the [LOCATION_002] will more than 
double to 92 million ([LOCATION_002] Census Bureau, 2 012). A similar trajectory is 
expected within our aging veteran population over the next decade . Aging  can 
significantly impact cognitive functions including language, learning and memory (Burke 
& Mackay, 1997). Difficulty retrieving words is one of the mo st common complaints in 
healthy older adults and individuals with MCI and stroke -induced aphasia . 
Cons equences of w ord retrieval deficits include  reduced independence and 
psychosocial well -being (Llewellyn et al., 2008), as well as poor health outcomes. Sa fe, 
cost-effective, accessible approaches for enhancing word retrieval in older adult 
populations are needed. Exercise is one approach that has y ielded positive effects on 
the ability to remember new words, but more  research is required so that exercise -
based interventions for word retrieval can be optimized. That is the focus of this line of 
research. Due  to the pervasiveness of word retrieval difficulty in aging populations, and 
the negative consequences associate with it, this research  has the potential to 
significantly impact  veterans in our rapi[INVESTIGATOR_26415].  
6. Overview of Design/Methods  
The study will enroll up to  [ADDRESS_25810] learning paradigms and/or the additive effect of moderate -intensity exercise vs. 
stretching on novel word learning.  
Study procedures  
Assessment:  
The subject’s cognitive and physical function will be assessed at the start of the study.  
Some asses sments may be audio -recorded for scoring and reliability assessment.  
 
  Version Date:  05/16/19  
 
6 Cognitive Assessment:  
a) Readin g Span (RS PAN) and Operation Span (OSPAN): assesses working memory 
capacity . These two tests  will allow us to categorize subjects into high vs low working  
memory, which will allow us investigate how acute exercise effects vary as a function of  
individual d ifferences in baseline working memory ability (Objective 3b).  
b) Digit Span: assesses the central executive component of working memory  
c) Verbal fluency  (semantic and letter): assesses the verbal component of executive 
function  
d) Color -word Interference  Test: assesses the inhibition component of executive 
function  
e) Hopkins Verbal Learning Test : assesses verbal learning and memory (immediate 
recall, del ayed recall, delayed recognition)   
f) Brief Visuospatial Memory Test - Revised: assesses  visuospatial m emory (immediate 
recall, delayed recall, delayed recognition)  
g) Digit Symbol  Substitution:  sensitive to the effect of brain damage, dementia, age and 
depression  on task completion  
h) American National Adult Reading Te st- Revised: estimates  intelligence  in based on 
reading of words with irregular grapheme -to-phoneme conversion.  
i) Edinburgh Handedness In ventory: assesses handedness  
j) Task practice: Subje cts will be administered a practice word learning task at baseline 
to familiarize them with the novel word learning paradigm.  
k) Discourse production: Subjects will be asked to answer two open -ended questions in 
order to get a measure of their connected s peech.  
The following measures will be administered to participants with aphasia : 
a) Comprehensive Aphasia  Test- assesses general language ability  
b) Philadelphia  Naming Test - assesses confrontation naming ability  
c) Pyramids and Palm Trees -  assesses semantic proc essing ability  
Physical Assessment:  
 Submaximal Treadmill Exercise Test (participants not on beta bloc kers):  The YMCA 
test, which estimates maximal volume oxygen uptake (VO2max) using an 
“extrapolation” method , will be administered. This test will provide an indication of 
aerobic capacity and will be used to set subjects’ individual target training zone fo r 
exercise  training . Heart rate monitors will be used to ensure subjects are maintaining 
their target heart rate and to prevent hear rate increases above levels that are 
considered safe.  
Maximal Treadmill Exercise Test (participants on beta blockers). Part icipants will 
undergo maximal treadmill exercise until exhaustion using the modified Balke protocol 
  Version Date:  05/16/19  
 
7 to determine peak oxygen uptake (VO2 max). The protoco l consists of a series of [ADDRESS_25811] and every 
30 seconds during exercise using a breathing apparatus with metabolic cart 
(Sensormedics).  The VO2 max is defined as the highest VO2 rate observed during 
maximal exercise.  A registered nurse (RN) will be present for the entire test and 
manually monitor blood pressure at baseline and during each stage of exer cise, as well 
as monitor continuous EKG recordings.  This same protocol is being by [CONTACT_15957] -I Nocera in 
other exercise -based studies that involving older adults.  
Word learning  paradigm : 
A Dell laptop computer running EPrime 2.[ADDRESS_25812] recall (Objective 1).  
Exercise /Stretching :  
a) Exercise: Subjects will engage in supervised moderate -intensity cycling for 3 0 
minutes  with a warm -up and cool -down . They will be asked to reach and maintain their 
individual physiological training target (i.e., heart rate at which  50-75% of maximal 
oxygen uptake would be achieved as predicted by [CONTACT_26423] -maximal test administered 
durin g the baseline assessment).  
b) Stretching : Participants will participate in an upper - and lower -extremity stretching 
program for 30 minutes. The stretchin g program will provide the opportunity for 30 
minutes of interaction without increasing heart rate.  
Exercise and/or stretching will be paired with a novel word learning paradigm to 
determine the effect of moderate -intensity aerobic exercise (compared to a  stretching 
control) on word recall  (Objective 2). The exercise/stretching will be administered before  
and/or after word learning to better understand how acute exercise effects vary as 
function of timing (Objective 3a).  
Subjects will be asked to avoid an y exercise that is not part of the study on training days 
and to avoid exercise before testing on the testing only days. No other restrictions will 
be placed on subjects regarding their exercise routines.  
  Version Date:  05/16/19  
 
8 Mood and arousal measures:  
Bond and Lader’s Mood Ra ting Scale will be administered to assess the effect of 
moderate -intensity exercise and gentle stretch ing on mood and arousal. Ratings will be 
obtained prior to the second word recall and recognition test in each session. As heart 
rate is physiological mar ker of arousal, we will also take heart rate measurements after 
subjects complete of the rating scale.  These data will be used in secondary analyses to 
investigate the relationship between mood and arousal and performance on the recall 
and recognition test s.  
Post-session and post -study  questionnaires :  
Post-session q uestionnaires will be used to explore h ow subjects feel  physically and 
psychologically after a session.  A rating scale to measure current level of motivation to 
learn novel words, current stre ss level, perceived difficulty of learning the words, and 
quality of the previous night’s sleep  will a lso be administered at each session . The post -
study  questionnaire will be used to explore the subject’s perception of difficulty of the 
experimental condi tions and any expectations regarding ease of learning . 
Daily Diary : 
To monitor exercise and sleep duri ng the experimental conditions, subjects will be 
asked to keep a daily diary of any exercise outside of the training sessions (type, 
intensity, duration) as well as the amount of sleep.  
Blood draws:   
To explore the neurophysiological correlates of exercis e-enhanced word learning 
(Objective 4), f asting whole blood will be collected  from some subjects  during a baseline 
blood draw and during subsequent traini ng conditions . Samples will be collected by a 
certified phlebotomist, via venipuncture or peripheral v enous line into pre -cooled plasma 
EDTA tubes and serum separator tubes (~40 ml per visit). The time line for collection of 
blood samples is as follows:  
Baseline : every 15 minutes  for one hour  to demonstrate reliability.  
Experimental : Immediately prior to  exercise  and stretching , immediately post exercise 
and stretching, immediately post word learning , and [ADDRESS_25813] bags. Plasma volume 
will be measured as described by [CONTACT_26424]  (1974) . Lactate will be measured by [CONTACT_26425] ([COMPANY_002] Molecular Biochemicals, Mannheim, [LOCATION_013]).  
 
 
 
  Version Date:  05/16/19  
 
9 7. Patient Evaluation and Data Collection Timeli ne 
Study Visit  Activity  # of 
hours  
Pre Training  
Assessment I   Consenting  
 Screening Tests  
 Study Tests   2 
Assessment II  + 
Blood draw           
(if applic able)   Study Tests   
 Blood sample taken every 15 minutes for 1 hour   
2 
Assessment III   Study Tests   2 
Training Conditions (in random order)  
Exercise + Word 
Learning  
+ 
Blood draw**           
(if applicable)  M W                          F **Before exercise , 
after exercise, 
after word 
learning, [ADDRESS_25814]/train/test  test/train/tes t test/train/test  
  test 
One week break  
Stretching + Word 
Learning  
+ 
Blood draw**           
(if applicable)  M W                          F **Before 
stretching, after 
stretching, after 
word learning, [ADDRESS_25815]/train/te st test/train/test  test/train/test  
  test 
One week break  
 
8. Participant Selection   
The study will enroll up to 100 healthy older adults and up  to 50 older adults with MCI 
and stroke -induced aphasia . 
Recruitment  
Individuals will be recruited fr om the Atlanta VA Rehab R&D Subject Registry 
(IRB00000159 ) based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The Subject Registry 
study staff will query the data base  of all patients meeting the inclusion and exclusion 
criteria who have consented to be contac ted for research purposes and will print out 
their contact [CONTACT_3031]. The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_26416].  
 
Additionally, participants may be recruited from  VA’s Information and Com puting 
Infrastructure (VINCI)  to enhance recruitment goals within the VISN. Potential Veteran 
subjects will be mailed an IRB approved recruitment letter, as well as an opt in/opt out 
response form to be returned using a postage paid envelope .  This will al low for 
potential subjects to indicate whether they would like to be contact[CONTACT_26426] e future 
related to the study. If no response is received within two w eeks, we will follow up with a 
phone call to gauge subject interest.  
 
  Version Date:  05/16/19  
 
10 Finally, VA healthcare providers , Emory Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, Emory 
Rehabilitation Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], StrokeNet, other investigators, word of mouth and via 
advertisements.  
 
Individ uals who indicate interest in participating will undergo a  phone screen comprised 
of questions about c ognitive and physical function. Those who “pass ” the phone screen 
will be provided a copy of the informed consent and will be scheduled for an orientation  
session . The PI/Co -PI [INVESTIGATOR_26417] r and describe the consent 
in a quiet r oom. Prior to providing written consent, potential subjects will be given the 
chance to ask questions and the PI/Co -PI [INVESTIGATOR_26418] t o ensure the 
potential subject understands what the study entails . 
Inclusion criteria:  
• age 65 -89 years  (healthy older adults  and individuals with mild cognitive impairment ) 
and 35-89 years (individuals with aphasia)  
• English  as first and primary language  
• “low physical activity” on the International Physical Activity Questionnaire  
• physician’s written medica l approval for participation in moderate -intensity exercise  
Exclusion criteria:  
• any comorbid condition with exercise contraindications  
• current use of horm one replacement therapy or dopaminergic drugs  
• use of anti -depressant or anti -psychotic drugs for less  than 3 months  
• current use of illicit drugs  
• consumption of >[ADDRESS_25816] alcoholic drinks/week  
• consumption of > 1pack of cigarettes/day  
• uncorrected hearin g or vision impairments that could i nterfere with study procedures  
• < 26 on the Montreal Cognitive Asse ssment  (healthy older adults only)   
• low mood or depression as indicated by > [ADDRESS_25817] 
breaks, as necessary. In our experience, frustration o r anxiety that cannot be managed by [CONTACT_26427].  Additionally, w e will decrease testing bu rden for participants, when possible. 
  Version Date:  05/16/[ADDRESS_25818] Krishnamurthy’s study entitled “ Beyond lesion -language mappi[INVESTIGATOR_26419]: A novel 
imaging -based predict ion model ” (IRB#104270) and [CONTACT_26429]’s study entitled “ Transcranial 
Direct Current Stimulation (t DCS) as an Adjuvant to Phonomotor Treatment for Aphasia ” 
(IRB# 102536 ) also investigate stroke and aphasia. While the question for this study is different,  
the framework is in place to use assessment data collected in [CONTACT_26430]’s and [CONTACT_26431]’s  study to reduce the number of assessments in this study. Specifically, we may 
obtain a participant ’s data on the Western Aphasia Battery -Revised (WAB -R), Comprehensive 
Aphasia Test (CAT), Hopkins Verbal Learning Test -Revised (HVLT -R), Brief Visuospatial 
Memory Test -Revised (BVMT -R), Beck Depression Inventory -II, and  [LOCATION_011] Naming Test 
(BNT).  
Several precautions will be made to reduce the risk of exercise -related injuries:  
• Warm -up and cooling down components are included to minimize injuries;  
• At each exerci se session, subject s will be questioned about the presence of 
musculoskeletal symptoms;  
• Study staff  will be instructed to be alert for the emergence of sy mptoms of angina 
and shortness of breath ;  
• Subjects  will be instructed to discontinue exercise if ther e is significant pain, 
weakness, or joint swelling after exercise ;  
• We will ensure that that the site has immediate access to a phone and that 
provision o f interventions and evaluations are undertaken in the immediate 
vicinity of a phone. Study staff will be encouraged to carry cell phones  during 
testing and training ; 
• All testing and training activities will occur inside an air -conditioned facility 
because environmental extremes are poorly tolerated;  
• Subjects will be provide d fluids and the opportunity to rest, if necessary.  
 
9. Adverse event reporting  
In the case of a reportable event, the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_26420] 
“Reportable Protocol Ev ent Form for VA sites ” along with supporting documentation and 
to the VA Science Information Office.  The SIO will then route the report to the Emory 
IRB. The Emory IRB will be notified within five days of any adverse event occurring.  
10. Data Security Pla n 
Information about subjects, including all research records created, will be held strictly 
confidenti al. Study files will be  kept in a locked filing cabinet in the private office of the 
Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_26421]  (Room 12C -118). A study 
number rather the subject’s name [CONTACT_26428]. The 
data collected with special software on the study laptops during the word learning tasks 
will be de -identified (subject number, visit number). The data will be  exported to Excel 
spreadsheets and transferred from the password -protected laptop to password -
protect ed files on the secure VA network using a VA -issued USB drive . Audio -
  Version Date:  05/16/[ADDRESS_25819] number, visit number and draw number . Samples may be temporarily 
stored at Emory University in the locked office of Mike Iuvone  (TEC B5601)  while 
undergoi ng analyses. We will not use subjects’ names or other identifying information 
when the study is presen ted or when the results are published. All research records 
and/or identifiers will be destroyed in accordance with the VA record retention schedule.  
11. References  
Arnáiz, E. &Almkvist, O.(2003).Neuropsychological features of mild cognitive 
impairment and  preclinical Alzheimer's disease. Acta Neurologica Scandinavika 
Supplementum, 179, 34-41. 
Burke, D. M., & Mackay, D. G. (1997). Memory, language, and agein g. Philosophical  
Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B -Biological Sciences, 352 (1363), 
1845 - 1856.  
Coelho, F., Gobbi, S., Andreatto, C., Corazza, D., Pedroso, R., & Santos -Galduroz, R 
(2013). Physical exercise modulates peripheral levels of  brain -derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF): A systematic review of experimental studies in the elderly.  Archives 
of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 56 , 10-15. 
Greenwood, P. M., & Parasuraman, R. (2010). Neuro nal and cognitive plasticity: A  
neurocognitive framew ork for ameliorating cognitive aging. Frontiers in Aging 
Neuroscience, 2 , Article 150.  
Lambourne, K. & Tomporowski, P. (2010). The effects of exercise -induced arousal on 
cognitive task performance: A meta -regression analysis. Brain Research , 1341 , 12-
24. 
Llewellyn, D. J., Lang, I. A., Langa, K. M., & Huppert, F. A. (2008). Cognitive function 
and psycholog ical well -being: Findings from a population -based cohort.  Age and 
Ageing,  37(6), 685 -689. 
McMorris, T. & Hale, B.J. (2012). Differential effects of differ ing intensities of acute 
exercise on speed and accuracy of cognition: A meta -analytical investigation.  Brain 
and Cognition,  80, 338-351. 
Roig, M., Norbrandt, S., Geertsen, S.S., & Nielsen, J.B. (2013). The effects of 
cardiovascular exercise on human memory : A review with meta -analysis. 
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews , 37, 1645 –1666.  
Salthouse, T.A. (2004). What and when of cognitive aging. Current Directions in 
Psychological Science , 13(4), 140 -144. 
Schmidt -Kassow, M., Kulka, A., Gunterc, T.C., Rothe rmich, & K., Kotz, S.A. (2010) 
Exercising during learning improves vocabulary acquisition: Behavioral and ERP 
evidence. Neuroscience Letters, 482,  40-44. 
Schmidt -Kassow, M., Deusser, M., Thiel, C., Otterbein, S., Montag, C., Reuter, M., et al. 
(2013). Phys ical exercise during encoding improves vocabulary learning in young 
female adults: A neuroendocrinolog ical study. PLoS ONE , 8(5): e64172.  
  Version Date:  05/16/19  
 
13 Sibley, B.A. & Beilock, S.L. (2007). Exercise and working memory: An individual 
differences investigation. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 29,  783-791. 
[LOCATION_002] Census Bureau  (2012) . US Census Bureau project ions show a slower 
growing, older, more diverse nation a half ce ntury from now [online].  
Winter, B., Breitenstein, C., Mooren, F. C., Voelker, K., Fobker , M., Lechtermann, A., & 
Knecht, S. (2007). High impact running improves learning. Neurobiology of Lea rning 
and Memory, 87 (4), 597 -609. 
 