 
 
 
 
 
Methocarbamol and Orphenadrine for  
Acute, Non -traumatic, Non -radicular Low Back Pain:  
A Randomized, Placebo Controlled, [ADDRESS_400817]#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol ID: 2015 -5903 
Version Date: 01/27/[ADDRESS_400818]. Version 012716   
 2  
Specific Aims  
 
Low back pain (LBP) causes 2.4% of visits to US emergency departments (ED) resulting in  2.7 million 
visits annually . (1) In general, o utcomes for these patients are  unfavorable . One week after ED 
discharge, 70% of patients report  persistent back -pain related functional impairment  and 69% report  
analgesic use within the previous 24 hours. (2) Three months after the emergency  visit, 48% of ED 
LBP patients report  functional impairment, 42% report  moderate or severe pain, and 46% report 
persistent  analgesic use.  (2) 
 
It is not clear which medications should be prescribed for acute LBP . Non-steroidal ant i-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAID) are more efficacious than placebo with regard to LBP relief, global improvement, and 
requirement of analgesic medication  (3) but are insufficient  treatment  for as many as ½ of ED patients, 
who continue to suffer despi[INVESTIGATOR_324610]. Treatment of LBP with multiple concurrent 
medications is common in the ED --emergency physicians often prescribe skeletal muscle relaxants or 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_324611]. (4) However, w ork recently completed has revealed that 
combining cyclobenzaprine , a ske letal muscle relaxant,  or oxycodone/acetaminophen  with an NSAID  
does not improve outcomes. (5) It remains uncertain if adding other skeletal muscle relaxants to 
NSAIDs improves LBP outcomes.  
 
Two specific skeletal muscle relaxants, o rphenadrine and methocarbamol , are each used in more than 
250,000 U.S. ED visits for LBP annually , although scant evidence exists to determine the 
appropriateness  of this approach. (6) Orphenadrine is centrally acting with prominent anti -cholinergic 
and anti -histaminic properties. Mechanism of action is not understood. Efficacy in low back pain may 
be related to  non-specific analgesic properties. Mechanism of action of methocarbamol has also not 
been established. Its efficacy is though t to be related to CNS effects rather than direct effects on 
skeletal muscles.  
 
Given the poor pain and functional outcomes that p ersist beyond an ED visit for acute  LBP, we 
propose a clinical trial to determine  whether combining either orphenadrine or methocarbamol with an 
NSAID  is more effective than NSAID monotherapy for the treatment of acute, non-traumatic, non -
radicular low back pain. Specifically, we will evaluate the following two hypothese s: 
 
1) A daily regimen of  naproxen + orphenadrine  will provide greater relief of LBP than naproxen + 
placebo  one week  after an ED visit, as measured by [CONTACT_941] R oland Morris Disability Questionnaire  
2) A daily regimen of naproxen + methocarbamol will provide greater relief of LBP than 
naproxen + placebo one week after an ED visit, as measured by [CONTACT_324616]. An RCT. Version [ADDRESS_400819] selection:  
Our goal is to include in this study a broad representation of patients with musculoskeletal  back pain 
who are likely to respond to the investigational medications and who would not be considered 
candidates for spi[INVESTIGATOR_6844]. We hope for a widely generalizable 
study and therefore will not require diagnoses to be  contingent on advanced imaging studies. Though 
we could ensure a more homogeneous study population by [CONTACT_324617], we do not believe this is 
clinically useful and it will not facilitate dissemination and utilization of the study results. The 
presenc e or absence of palpable spasm of the paraspi[INVESTIGATOR_324612]. (7) 
 
Inclusion criteria:  
-Present to ED primary for management of LBP, defined as pain originating between the lower border 
of the scapulae and the upper gluteal folds. Flank pain, that  is pain originating from tissues lateral to 
the paraspi[INVESTIGATOR_6845], will not be included.  
- Absence of non -musculoskeletal etiology of low back, such as urinary tract infection, ovarian cysts , 
or influenza like illness. The primary clinical diagnosis, at the conclusion of the ED visit, must be a 
diagnosis consistent with non -traumatic, non -radicular, musculoskeletal LBP.  
-Patient is to be discharged home. Patients admitted to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_324613].  
- Age 18 -69 Enrollment will be l imited to adults younger than 70 years because of the increased risk of 
adverse medication effects in the elderly.  
-Non-radicular pain: pain cannot radiate below the gluteal folds in a radicular pattern. Patients with 
non-radicular pain extending below the gluteal folds will not be ex cluded  
-Pain duration <2 weeks (336 hours) . Patients with more than two weeks of pain are at increased risk 
of poor pain and functional outcomes. (2) 
-Prior to the acute attack of LBP, back pain cannot have occurred once per month or more frequently. 
Patients with more frequent back pain are at increased risk of poor pain and functional outcomes. (2)  
-Non-traumatic LBP: no substantial and direct trauma to the back within the previous month  
-Functionally impairing  back pain: A baseline score of > 5 on the Roland -Morris Disability 
Questionnaire (Appendix)  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
-Not a vailable for follow -up 
-Pregnant or breast -feeding  
-Chronic pain syndrome defined as use of any analgesic medication on a daily or near -daily basis  
-Allergic to or intolerant of investi gational m edications  
-Contra -indications to non -steroidal anti-inflamma tory drugs : 1) history of hypersensitivity to NSAIDs 
or aspi[INVESTIGATOR_324614], 
nasal polyps, rhinitis, or urticarial 2) active or history of peptic ulcer disease, chronic dyspepsia , or 
active or history of gastrointestinal bleed 3) Severe heart failure (NYHA 2 or worse) 4) hypertension 
(JNC7 stage 2 or worse) 5) Chronic kidney disease 3 or worse 6) Current use of anti -coagulants, 
bleeding with tooth brushing, easy bruisability 7) He patitis 8) Alcoholism  
 
Naproxen plus orphenadrine or methocarbamol for LBP. An RCT. Version 012716   
 4 -Contra -indications to orphenadrine : 1) Glaucoma, Prostatic hypertrophy, Myasthenia gravis, P yloric 
or duodenal obstruction  
-Contra -indications to methocarbamol: 1) Myasthenia gravis, Chronic kidney disease 3 or worse  
 
 
Study  arms:  
A. The orphe nadrine  arm: Naproxen 500mg, orally twice per day  + orphenadrine 100 mg, orally 
twice per day  
B. The methocarba mol arm: Naproxen 500mg tablets, orally twice per day + methocarbamol 
750mg, orally as 1  or 2 tabs, thrice per day  
C. The contro l arm: Naproxen  500mg tablets taken twice per day  + placebo. P lacebo dose will be 
either [ADDRESS_400820] 
7 days . Optimal dosing of methocarbamol has not been established. We believe the dosing regimen we 
chose is sufficient to determine efficacy while not exposing patients to unnecessary risk. (8-10) 
 
Outcome measures  
1. Roland Morris LBP Disability Questionnaire  (RMDQ) --Reproduced in the Appendix . This 24 -item 
LBP functional scale is recommended for use in LBP research. (11) Its yes/ no format is amenable to 
telephone follow -up. We have used it successfully to obtain post -ED follow -up in five previous L BP 
studies involving more than 1500  patients.  
2. Ordinal pain scale (“severe”, “moderate”, “mild”, or “none”).  Study participants will be asked to 
describe their worst back pain in the previous 24 hours.  
3. Medication requirements: “Did you require any medication to treat your low back pain in the 
previous 24 hours?”  
4. Low back pain frequency: “Over the last 24 h ours, how often were you in pain?  Not at all, Rarely, 
Sometimes, Usually, Always”.  Low back pain symptomatology is quite variable. Some patients may 
experience no pain unless they move a certain way. Others may experience a constant low level of 
pain. Th is question will help determine the burdensomeness of the LBP in the patient’s daily life.  
5. Satisfaction, as measured by [CONTACT_6857]: The next time you go to the ER with low 
back pain, do you want to get the same combination of medications?  
 
Baseline measures  
1. Roland Morris LBP disability questionnaire  
2. Patient Health Questionna ire depression module, the PHQ [ADDRESS_400821] poor 
outcomes in an emergency room population. (12) (Reproduced in the Appendix)  
4. Perceived risk of not rec overing. Pain outcomes may be influenced by [CONTACT_18164]. After providing 
an educational intervention, we will ask study participants to estimate how long they believe they will 
continue to suffer from pain.  
 
Naproxen plus orphenadrine or methocarbamol for LBP. An RCT. Version 012716   
 5 5. StarT Back LBP questionnaire  
 
Primary outcome  
 
The change in Roland Morris scale between the baseline ED visit and the one week follow -up (Roland -
Morris baseline  - Roland -Morris 1week ). The baseline questions will refer to the time period immediately 
prior to ED presentation (Before you came to the ER today, were you able to…..)..  
 
Secondary outcomes  
   The following outcomes will be assessed one week after ED discharge  
1. Day post ED  discharge able to return to all usual activities  
2. Satisfaction with treatment  
3. Number of visits to any healthcare provider.  
4. Worst LBP over the previous 24 hours, using a four point ordinal scale: severe, moderate, mild, or 
none and a 0 – 10 verbal integer scale  
5. Use of any analgesic or LBP medication within the previous 24 hours.  
6. Frequency of low back pain using the five point Likert scale: Not at all, Rarely, Sometimes, Usually, 
Always  
7.Absolute RMDQ score  
 
The following outcomes will be asse ssed three months after ED discharge  
1. Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire  
2. Worst LBP over the previous week, using a four point ordinal scale: severe, moderate, mild, or none 
and a 0 – 10 verbal integer scale  
3.  Frequency of low back pain over the previous week using the five point Likert scale: Not at all, 
Rarely, Sometimes, Usually, Always  
4. Number of days with LBP since ED discharge  
5. Use of any analgesic or LBP medication within the previous [ADDRESS_400822] will perf orm randomization in blocks of 6  based on a sequence generated at 
http://randomization.com . Every block of six will contain two orphenadrine assignments, two 
methocarbamol assignment s, one placebo assignment dosed as 1 capsule twice daily (to mirror 
orphenadrine dosing) , and one placebo assignment dosed as 1-2 capsules thrice daily (to mirror 
methocarbamol d osing) . Therefore, though patients will not know whether they have been assigned to 
active medication or placebo, they may deduce to which medication t hey were not assigned. This does 
not threaten the internal validity of the study because patients will no t know whether or not they 
received active medication.  
 
 
Naproxen plus orphenadrine or methocarbamol for LBP. An RCT. Version [ADDRESS_400823] in a secure location inaccessible to ED personnel. Patients will be presented 
with two vials of medication. The vial containing the naproxen will be labeled in a typi[INVESTIGATOR_324615]. The 
second vial, containing  orphenadrine, methocarbamol,  or placebo  will be labeled as investigational 
medication. Patients will be instructed to the investigational medication  only as needed for moderate or 
severe LBP. 
 
Details of protocol  
 
Prior to discharge from the ED and after the patient’s pain has been c ontrolled, the attending 
emergency physician will refer appropriate patients to study personnel for screening.  Eligible patients 
would have already received different and various medications in the ED for their pain 
(potentially  including naproxen) prior t o being approached for study participation. This decision is up 
to the attending physician and is not related to partic ipation in the study.  Patients will be screened and 
consented. Research associates will ascertain baseline socio -demographic information, low back pain 
history, and baseline variables discussed above. A urine pregnancy test will be performed. Research 
personnel will provide each patient with a 15 -minute educational intervention. This will be based on 
NIAMS’s Handout on Health: Back Pain information webpage (available at 
http://www.niams.nih.gov/Health_Info/Back_Pain/default.asp ) Research personnel will review each 
section of the information she et with the patient and elicit questions. Patients will be discharged with 
two medical vials , one containing naproxen and one containing placebo, orphenadrine, or 
methocarbamol . Patients will be cautioned not to take off protocol LBP medications without fi rst 
consulting with a healthcare provider.  Patients will be cautioned not to drink alcohol or use other 
centrally -acting substances while using study medications.  Patients will be cautioned not to drive after 
taking the study medications. Follow -up phone c alls will be conducted one week and three months 
after ED discharge. Follow -up will be attempted daily until successful. For patients difficult to contact, 
express courier or home visit will be used to obtain follow -up information.  
Analysis. An intention -to-treat analysis will be performed. The primary outcome will be a comparison 
of the change in RMDQ  between baseline and one week . Results will be reported as means with 
95%CI. A t-test for independent samples will be used to determine statistica lly significant differences 
between placebo and each of the active medications . Secondary outcomes will be reported as rates with 
95%CI. A per protocol efficacy analysis will be conducted among those patients who use the 
investigational medication at least  once. 
 
Sample size calculation  
We based assumptions on a recently completed RCT of LBP treatm ent. The mean improvement in 
RMDQ among those wh o receive naproxen alone was  10.2. The standard deviation was  8.9. A widely 
accepted minimum clinically important impr ovement of [ADDRESS_400824]-to-follow -up (typi[INVESTIGATOR_6847] -to-follow -up rate is 5%)  and 
to ensure sufficient power for the per protocol analysis (in our previous ED -based LBP studies, up to 
1/[ADDRESS_400825] not used the medication more than once), we intend to enroll [ADDRESS_400826]. XXX  and include XXX . 
The committee will meet every month with the PI [CONTACT_1639] 1) monitor adverse events and develop strategies 
to minimize these; and, 2) monitor recruitment and enrollment. There will not be an interim analysis.  
 
Naproxen plus orphenadrine or methocarbamol for LBP. An RCT. Version 012716   
 7  
Registration. The study will be registered at http://www.clinicaltrials.gov . 
 
Consent. Study personnel will obtain i nformed consent once the patient ’s pain has been controlled and 
the patient is ready for discharge from the ED.  
 
Risks/Benefits  
Non-steroidals ar e used in 50% of more than 2.5 million annual US ED visits for LBP. Skeletal muscle 
relaxants are used in 43 % of these visits. Regardless of results, this study will have a national impact. 
Study subjects will benefit by [CONTACT_26777] a medication that is like ly to improve their acute LBP. In 
addition to breach of confidentiality, which is unlikely, and inconvenience to the subject, which will 
undoubtedly occur, it is likely that subjects will experience adverse medication effects. For the most 
part, these are nuisance events. Skeletal muscle relaxants  such as orphenadrine and methocarbamol  are 
generally well tolerated but can cause substantial drowsiness and when combined with alcohol or other 
centrally acting substances may be lethal. Non -steroidals can cause life-threating gastro -intestinal 
bleeding, but this is unlikely in patients screened for gastro -intestinal illness who will take the 
medication for one week only.  
 
Data Storage & Confidentiality  
Data will be stored and maintained in REDCap. Data analysis w ill occur on password -protected 
computers. Consent documents will be maintained in locked research cabinets. Only study personnel 
will have access to the data and consent documents.  
 
 
  
 
Naproxen plus orphenadrine or methocarbamol for LBP. An RCT. Version 012716   
 8  
References  
1. Friedman BW, Chilstrom M, Bijur PE, Gallagher EJ . Diagnostic testing and treatment of low 
back pain in [LOCATION_002] emergency departments: a national perspective. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050] (Phila 
Pa 1976);35(24):E1406 -11. 
2. Friedman BW, O'Mahony S, Mulvey L, Davitt M, Choi H, Xia S, et al.  One -week and 3-month 
outcomes after an emergency department visit for undifferentiated musculoskeletal low 
back pain. Annals of emergency medicine. 2012;59(2):128 -33 e3.  
3. Roelofs PD, Deyo RA, Koes BW, Scholten RJ, van Tulder MW . Nonsteroidal anti -
inflammatory drugs f or low back pain: an updated Cochrane review. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. 
2008;33(16):1766 -74. 
4. Friedman BW, Chilstrom M, Bijur PE, Gallagher EJ . Diagnostic testing and treatment of low 
back pain in [LOCATION_002] emergency departments: a national perspective. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. 
2010;35( 24):E1406 -11. 
5. Friedman BW, Dym AA, Davitt M, Holden L, Solorzano C, Esses D, et al.  Naproxen With 
Cyclobenzaprine, Oxycodone/Acetaminophen, or Placebo for Treating Acute Low Back 
Pain: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA. 2015;314(15):1572 -80. 
6. Chou R, Peterson K . Drug Class Review: Skeletal Muscle Relaxants: Final Report. Portland 
(OR); 2005.  
7. Simons DG, Mense S . Understanding and measurement of muscle tone as related to 
clinical muscle pain. Pain. 1998;75(1):[ADDRESS_400827]. 1984;38(3):107 -9. 
9. Sica DA, Comstock TJ, Davis J, Manning L, Powell R, Melikian A, et al.  Pharmacokinetics 
and protein binding of methocarbamol in renal insufficiency and normal s. Eur J Clin 
Pharmacol. 1990;39(2):193 -4. 
10. Tisdale SA, Jr., Ervin DK . A controlled study of methocarbamol (Robaxin) in acute painful 
musculoskeletal conditions. Curr Ther Res Clin Exp. 1975;17(6):525 -30. 
11. Deyo RA, Battie M, Beurskens AJ, Bombardier C, Croft P, Koes B, et al.  Outcome measures 
for low back pain research. A proposal for standardized use. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. 1998;23(18):2003 -13. 
12. Dionne CE, Le Sage N, Franche RL, Dorval M, Bombardier C, Deyo RA . Five questions 
predicted long -term, severe, back -related functional limitations: evidence from three 
large prospective studies. Journal of clinical epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. 2011;64(1):[ADDRESS_400828] of the time because of my back pain:  
Over the last 24 hours, I changed position frequently to try to get my back comfortable:  
Over the last 24 hours, I walked more slow ly than usual because of my back:  
Over the last [ADDRESS_400829] not been doing any jobs that I usually do around the house 
because of my back pain:  
Over the last 24 hours, I used a handrail to get upstairs because of my back pain:  
Over the last [ADDRESS_400830] more often because of my back pain:  
Over the last [ADDRESS_400831] tried to get other people to do things for me because of my  
back pain:  
Over the last 24 hours, I got dressed more slowly than usual because of my back pain:  
Over the last 24 hours, I only stood up for short periods of time because of my back pain:  
Over the last 24 hours, I tried not to bend or kneel down because o f my back pain:     
Over the last 24 hours, I found it difficult to get out of a chair because of my back pain:     
Over the last [ADDRESS_400832] all of the time:     
Over the last 24 hours, I found it difficult to turn over in bed bec ause of my back pain:     
Over the last 24 hours, my appetite was not very good because of my back pain:     
Over the last [ADDRESS_400833] had trouble putting on my socks ( or stockings) because of 
the pain in my back or leg:  
Over the last 24 hours,  I co uld only walk short distances because of my back pain:  
Over the last 24 hours, I slept less well because of my back:     
Over the last 24 hours, I got dressed with the help of someone else because of my back 
pain:    
Over the last [ADDRESS_400834] of the day because of my back:    
Over the last 24 hours, I avoided heavy jobs around the house because of my back pain:     
Over the last [ADDRESS_400835] of the time because of my back pain:     
 No0     Yes1 
No0     Yes1 
No0     Yes1 
No0     Yes1 
 
No0     Yes1 
No0     Yes1 
No0     Yes1 
 
No0     Yes1 
 
No0     Yes1 
No0     Yes1 
No0     Yes1 
No0     Yes1 
No0     Yes1 
No0     Yes1 
No0     Yes1 
No0     Yes1 
 
No0     Yes1 
No0     Yes1 
No0     Yes1 
 
No0     Yes1 
No0     Yes1 
No0     Yes1 
 
No0     Yes1 
No0     Yes1 
 
 
  
 
Naproxen plus orphenadrine or methocarbamol for LBP. An RCT. Version [ADDRESS_400836] month, how often were you distressed by:  
 
   1. Feeling everything is an effort  
 
Not at all 0    A little bit1    Moderately2    Quite a bit3   Extremely4   Don’t know  
 
   2.  Trouble getting your breath  
 
Not at all 0    A little bit1    Moderately2    Quite a bit3   Extremely4   Don’t know  
 
   3. Hot or cold spells  
 
Not at all 0    A little bit1    Moderately2    Quite a bit3   Extremely4   Don’t know  
 
   4. Numbness or tingling in parts of your body  
 
Not at all 0    A little bit1    Moderately2    Quite a bit3   Extremely4   Don’t know  
 
   5. Pain in your heart or chest  
 
Not at all 0    A little bit1    Moderately2    Quite a bit3   Extremely4   Don’t know  
 