PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD  
Page 1 of 19   Revis ed: 15 -Jun-2017 
  Version 4.0  1) Protocol Title  
A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD 
2) Author of Protocol  
 
[CONTACT_622166],  MD  
 
3) IRB Review History 
This is a modification to an approved protocol.  
4) Objectives  
Aim 1 :  To evaluate the benefit of sertraline for treatment of social deficits and 
language delays in young children with ASD (2 through 5 years old , 
inclusive ) in a double -blind, placebo -controlled trial.  
Hypothesis 1.1 :  We hypothesize that sertraline will stimulate both language and 
socialization and improve behavior in young children with ASD compared 
to those who are not treated with sertraline.  
 
Aim 2:  Explore biomarkers associated with response to early treatment with 
sertraline in children with ASD.  
Hypothesis 2.1 :  Levels of BDNF at baseline and change in BDNF levels will correlate to the 
clinical response to sertraline in young children with ASD.  
Hypothesis 2.2 :  Polymorphisms in the b rain-derived neurotrophic f actor  (BDNF), within the 
serotonin transporter gene (SLC6A4) and serotonin -synthesizing 
tryptophan hydroxylase 2 (TPH2) gene will correlate with the clinical 
response to sertraline.  
Hypothesis 2.3 :  Sertraline treatment may have an immunomodulatory effect through a 
decrease in the pro -inflammatory (such as cytokine IL -1) and an increase in 
the anti -inflammatory cytokines (i.e. IL -4 and TGF1).  
 
5) Background  
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a behaviorally defined disorder with many causes 
including currently estimated over 1,000 gene mutations that can lead to deficits in synaptic plasticity, neuronal migration, transcription and translation changes in addition to many other 
processes that are important for synapse development, CNS connectivity and developmental 
change. Neuroimmune mechanisms may also be active in ASD and influenced by [CONTACT_622141]. Currently the CDC has reported that 1 in 68 children at age 8 years in the general population has ASD (CDC 2014 MMWR). Known specific genetic causes of ASD that are 
PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD  
Page 2 of 19   Revis ed: 15 -Jun-2017 
  Version 4.0  over 2 to 3% include fragile X syndrome (FXS) and tuberous sclerosis (TS), although many more 
single gene mutations, duplications or  deletions can cause 1% or less of ASD.  
We have chosen sertraline treatment in young children with ASD because our previous open 
label and our current controlled trial of sertraline in FXS+ASD have demonstrated significant benefit. There is evidence that young children with ASD demonstrate early deficits of serotonin 
synthesis compared to typi[INVESTIGATOR_897] -developi[INVESTIGATOR_68243] . There is also emerging evidence regarding 
the stimulation of brain -derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) by [CONTACT_622142] ( ID ). Preliminary open -label data in ASD 
have shown b enefit of an SSRI in preschool children with ASD. Although a multicenter controlled 
trial of citalopram in children with ASD ages 5 -17yo did not show benefit, there has never been a 
controlled trial of sertraline in children <5yo with ASD. In our experienc e in preschool children 
with ASD this is the optimal time to stimulate connectivity in the brain to improve social 
interaction and language , and this is the time that serotonin is deficient in the brain. This 
double -blind, placebo -controlled trial will assess behavioral and language benefits in ASD as well 
as whether variations in genes that affect the level of serotonin at the synapse can predict 
treatment response. This work will provide much -needed rigorous evidence of a scientifically 
validated treatment in young children with ASD and will provide biomarker evidence of who 
may respond.  
There is a great need to develop treatment programs early on in ASD because this is the 
time to rectify the synaptic abnormalities that are taking  place with a developmental window 
which will impact the rest of their life. The benefit of early treatment with behavioral 
interventions has been dramatically demonstrated in young children with ASD most recently 
with the Early Start Denver Model (ESDM) w ith positive effects on behavior, cognition , and even 
EEG patterns. We believe the use of a low dose SSRI in early childhood in addition to the 
community behavioral and therapy programs will have a significant effect on behavior, 
language , and development in young children with ASD. Such early intervention is imperative to 
study at this time when the prevalence is ever higher at 1 in 68 children who are 8 -years -old in 
the general population (CDC 2014 MMWR).  
Autism is a behaviorally -defined disorder (DSM -V) that arises through one or more of a large 
number of genetic and/or environmental factors . Mutations in numerous recognized genes are 
known to be highly associated with autism, operating through mechanisms that alter/disrupt 
critical functions, including synaptic plasticity, the balance of inhibitory and excitatory pathways, 
regulation of mTOR pathways, mitochondrial function, immune function, and neuronal migration. Similar mechanisms of dysfunction are known to occur in genetic subgroups of 
autism such as fragile X syndrome (FXS) where the lack of the Fragile X Mental Retardation 1 
Protein (FMRP) leads to dramatic up -regulation of protein production in the CNS , up-regulation 
of the metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5) pathw ay, and down -regulation of the 
GABAA pathways. This imbalance between the glutamate and GABA systems can also be seen in 
idiopathic autism and in the context of other mutations associated with autism . This coupling 
between FXS and autism suggests that treatments effective in FXS provide a rational basis for 
PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD  
Page 3 of 19   Revis ed: [ADDRESS_827982] seen a dramatic response of young 
children with FXS+ASD (2 to 6 years) to sertraline and in the interim analysis of the first [ADDRESS_827983] treatment response; thus, providing a 
foundation for individualized treatment based on the biomarker profile.  
Anxiety is a pervasive  problem in ASD and FXS that may contribute to or exacerbate a 
number of the other symptoms, including deficits in reciprocal social interaction (e.g., gaze 
avoidance), stereotypi[INVESTIGATOR_622131] (e.g., hand -flappi[INVESTIGATOR_007]) and communication 
abnormalit ies (e.g. repetitive and perseverative speech) that characterize ASD. Higher ratings of 
anxiety were associated with more severe autism symptoms as independently rated by [CONTACT_622143] (ADOS) in our study of  children with FXS. 
Our extensive clinical experience and these findings indicate that effective anxiety treatment 
may reduce autism symptoms and improve social reciprocity in patients with ASD with or 
without FXS.  
We and others have been treating anxiety,  repetitive, and compulsive behaviors in children 
with ASD with SSRIs, typi[INVESTIGATOR_622132] , for many years. The utilization of SSRIs to 
treat ASD increased from 6.1% in 1993 to 21.4% in 2002 , and in a review by [CONTACT_622144] -Lam et 
al., fluoxet ine, paroxetine , and sertraline accounted for 61% of SSRI prescriptions in children 
with autism.  
There have been no controlled trials of sertraline in children with ASD  except for our study 
in FXS and ASD , which was also funded by [CONTACT_273953].  P revious studies o f sertraline use in ASD  
without FXS  include an open label in 42 adults with ASD that  demonstrated improved aggression 
and repetitive behavior , and an open -label study  in 9 adults with ID and ASD by [CONTACT_622145]. , 
which demonstrated improvement. Previous studies of SSRIs in children include a controlled 
trial of fluoxetine in 39 children 5 to 16 years (mean age 8.2 years) with 8 weeks in each arm and 
a 4 week washout in between. They saw improvement in obsessive co mpulsive behavior but not 
in language; however , it would be unlikely to see improvement in language in such a short 
treatment period. Overall, there is a 60% -70% response rate to fluoxetine in an open -label trial 
for ASD and ID and a 53% response rate to fluvoxamine in a placebo -controlled trial for ASD. A 
recent multicenter study of citalopram in children with ASD who were 5 to 17years  old 
demonstrated no significant benefit for citalopram use (n=73) compared to placebo (n=76). This 
study has dampened the enthusiasm for SSRI treatments in children with ASD. However, this 
study did not include children under [ADDRESS_827984] low serotonin during this time , which 
sertraline can impro ve. Sertraline can also stimulate neurogenesis , which may further enhance 
development.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD  
Page 4 of 19   Revis ed: 15 -Jun-2017 
  Version 4.0  Our preliminary data in a subgroup of ASD, specifically young children with FXS + ASD, has 
demonstrated a significant benefit of low -dose sertraline in a retrospective s tudy.  In our  
controlled study of sertraline in FXS , the interim  analysis of the data after the first [ADDRESS_827985] proposed 
the current study of a double -blind, placebo -controlled trial of sertraline in young children with 
idiopathic ASD.  In 2016, the complete results of this study were published (Hess et al.), which 
showed  that despi[INVESTIGATOR_622133]’s primary outcomes (MSEL expressive language age equivalent and CGI -I), analyses 
of secondary measures showed significant improvements, particularly in motor and visual 
perceptual abilities and social participation. Furthermore, post hoc analysis found significant 
improvement in early expressive language development as measured by [CONTACT_622146] + ASD on sertraline. Overall, sertraline w as well tolerated, with no difference 
in side effects between sertraline and placebo groups, and no serious adverse events occurred.  
Sertraline is approved by [CONTACT_622147] [ADDRESS_827986] given the FDA yearly updates 
of our study. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_622134] X syndrome, and this IND 
now includes ASD as a secondary indicated population (IND Number 113747 -0001).  
Sertraline has been shown to help increase the levels of serotonin in hippocampal neurons 
and this correlated with increased levels of the brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). BDNF is the most abundant neurotrophin in the brain playing an important role during brain 
development and in synaptic plasticity . It has been implicated in cognitive function as well as in 
the pathogenesis of various psychiatric disorders. A synergistic relationship has been proposed 
for serotonin (5 -HT) and BDNF since BDNF promotes the survival and differentiation of [ADDRESS_827987] has a role in mood disorders , such as depression , and makes the BDNF gene 
and genes related to serotonin levels attractive candidates for the study of diseased br ain 
function and behaviors.  
Besides neurogenesis, BDNF also regulates long term potentiation (LTP) , and it is involved in 
synaptic plasticity. It primarily interacts with the protein tropomyosin -related kinase B (TrkB).  
Alterations in the expression of BD NF and TrkB are also associated with defects in learning and 
memory. Corroborating this role of BDNF, it has been shown that BDNF improves neurogenesis 
in animal models of Down syndrome. In the knock -out (KO) mouse model of FXS, dysregulation 
in BDNF/TrkB signaling affects differentiation of neural progenitor cells (NPC) and brain 
development.  
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_622135], BDNF is found in tissues other than the brain, including peripheral blood 
as this neurotrophic factor functions in the central and peripheral nervous systems ; thus , BDNF 
expression can be easily measured in plasma samples . In fact, a study showed that blo od BDNF 
PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD  
Page 5 of 19   Revis ed: [ADDRESS_827988] brain -tissue BDNF levels. Therefore , for Aim 2 , we will measure BDNF 
expression in blood to see if this correlates with treatment response to sertraline.  
We will also investigate the response to sertraline in association with  the different 
polymorphic variants, particularly in the serotonin transporter (SLC6A4), serotonin -synthesizing 
tryptophan hydroxylase 2 gene (TPH2) , and BDNF genes, in our study patients. These genes have 
different polymorphic allelic variants  that have b een implicated in neurological conditions. Two 
BDNF variants have been associated with diagnosis and response to treatment in patients with 
neuropsychiatric disorders. Specifically, the BDNF Val66Met polymorphism has been associated 
with attenuated stress response in individuals suffering from depression as reviewed in a meta-
analysis that examined [ADDRESS_827989] more difficulty copi[INVESTIGATOR_622136] a 
homozygous val/val genotype. This same polymorphism has also been implicated in efficacy of 
response to fluoxetine in an Asian population group. Thus, the variable response rate to SSRI 
treatment in ASD could be associated with secondary gene effe cts that ultimately can regulate 
serotonin levels in the brain.  
Thus, the question we will investigate in Aim [ADDRESS_827990] 
response and individually tailor and personalize a specific treatment. Studies of the gene for the 
serotonin transporter ( SLC6A4 ), and in particular the 44 base pair insertion/deletion 
polymorphism within a repetitive unit in the promoter region (5 -HTTLPR) , have indicated that 
the long (L, insertion) form of 5 -HTTLPR is functionally more active than the short (S, deletion) 
form. While t he long allele (L) of the 5 -HTT gene- linked polymorphic region (5 -HTTLPR) has been 
correlated with shyness in grade school children, the short allele (S) has been shown to 
moderate the influence of stre ssful life events on depressio n. In addition, m ultiple studies 
document that individuals with social anxiety disorder or depressive disorders, who are homozygous for the high -transcribing long (L/L ) genotype (which is most effective in clearing the 
synapse of serotonin), have consistently shown the best response to treatment with an SSRI. Several studies, although not always consistent, have examined the influences of the 5 -HTTLPR 
polymorphism and d emonstrated that individuals with the short allele (S) compared to those 
that are homozygous for the long allele (L/L) show increased vulnerability to develop anxiety -
related traits and depression. Also there is evidence that environmental insults such as 
significant stress exposure in those with the S allele are at more risk to develop depression . 
Thus, with Aim 2 we sought to demonstrate that patients with ASD homozygous for the L 
allele in the 5 -HTTLPR will show a greater improvement in language and social reciprocity than 
those with the other genotype. This hypothesis is supported by [CONTACT_622148] -transcribing long (L/L) genotype (which is most eff ective in clearing the synapse of 
serotonin), consistently have the best treatment response to SSRIs. Establishing a link between 
PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD  
Page 6 of 19   Revis ed: [ADDRESS_827991] that the BDNF (Val/Met) may act as a modifier of disease severity and that those homozygous (Met/M et) and heterozygous (Val/Met) 
may have less response than those with the (Val/Val) genotype.  
We will also assess the contribution of the serotonin -synthesizing tryptophan hydroxylase 2 
(TPH2) gene, which is involved in serotonin biosynthesis in the brain , and has been associated 
with a number of psychiatric disorders , including ADHD, autism, and major depression. The 
rs1178997 SNP in the promoter of TPH2 results in disruption of a transcription factor binding 
site and has been reported to decrease promoter activity by 22% , so we will also assess this 
allelic variant.  
Mucosal serotonin (5 -HT) has been shown to modulate the immune response potentially 
influencing intestinal inflammation.  In addition, serotonergic receptors have been characterized 
in lympho cytes, monocytes, macrophages , and dendritic cells suggesting a role for [ADDRESS_827992] to make disease worse (pro -
inflammatory) ; whereas , others serve to reduce inflammation and promote healing ( anti-
inflammatory). Interleukin (IL) -1 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) are pro -inflammatory 
cytokines. Pro -inflammatory cytokines and serotonergic homeostasis have both been implicated 
in the pathophysiology of major psychiatric disorders. It has been demo nstrated that 
inflammatory cytokines can activate p38 mitogen -activated protein kinase (MAPK), which 
induces a catalytic activation of the serotonin transporter.  
The role of inflammation in ASD prompts us to investigate the cytokine response to 
sertraline treatment. We will document whether the abnormal cytokine profiles in ASD change 
with sertraline treatment and whether these changes correlate with treatment response.  
In the treatment of autism , Chugani  has emphasized the importance of developmental 
windows for pharmacological intervention aimed at setting brain developmental programs back on course. In her PET studies using a 
11C methyl -L-tryptophan as a tracer to estimate serotonin 
synthesis, she has d emonstrated that humans undergo a period of high brain serotonin 
synthesis capacity during early childhood, in the first five years and that this developmental 
process is disrupted in children with autism. Children with autism show a gradual increase in 
serotonin synthesis capacity that is significantly lower on average than typi[INVESTIGATOR_622137] 6 years and then it becomes gradually higher by 7 years of age. Since 
serotonin is known to be an important factor involved in postnatal synap togenesis, one 
approach to the treatment of autism would be the use of an SSRI in children less than the age of 
PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD  
Page 7 of 19   Revis ed: [ADDRESS_827993] Chugani, but her evaluation of the data is not yet complete.  
6) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Inclus ion Criteria  
1. Documentation of ASD with DSM -V criteria as well as a standardized autism assessment 
such as the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) or the Autism Diagnostic 
Interview –Revised (ADI -R).  
2. Subject between the ages of [ADDRESS_827994] SSRI treatment.  
2. Other serious co -morbid medical disorders affecting brain function and behavior, 
including uncontrolled seizures.  
 
7) Number of Subjects  
We will recruit a total of 72 patients with ASD over three years, in hopes of having 20 
subjects complete the trial each year (for a total of 60 subjects completing the trial).  Due to a 
delayed activation  and several periods of low recruitment due to study staff  turnover in the past 
few years, we will enter a no -cost extension year to reach enrollment targets by [CONTACT_61763] 2018 . 
 
8) Recruitment Methods  
Subjects will be recruited through the MIND Institute Subject Tracking System (STS) and 
referral from UCDHS clinicians. I f needed, approved study flyers will be posted in the regional 
center, UCDHS clinics, social networking sites, community providers’ offices, and given to an 
autism support groups. Additionally , the investigator plans to do educational pre sentations on 
use of sertraline  in neurodevelopmental disorders, which may lead to recruitment into this 
study.   
PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD  
Page 8 of 19   Revis ed: [ADDRESS_827995]. Consent to 
participate and HIPAA Authorization to access additional information in the medical records will 
be obtained prior to enrollment into the study. The protected health information will not be 
reused or disclosed to outside persons or entities.  
The review of subjects' medical records is for limited information and only to determine 
eligibility. The data are derived from clinically indicated procedures and there is minimal risk to the subjects' status, employment, or insurability. Only research personnel will access medical records via EMR, and all personnel are required to use the “Quick Disclosure” function in EMR to document review. Without an initial review of the medical record for screening purposes, it 
would not be possible to identify potential subjects and confirm their applicability for study 
participatio n. Once eligibility in confirmed, subjects will be approached to obtain their 
authorization to access and use their health information for the research.  
9) Compensation to the Subjects  
There will not be any compensation available to subjects for completing any or all of the 
study procedures.  
 
10) Study Timelines  
Screening and enrollment began  upon IRB approval of this protocol and associated 
documents. Enrollment has  continue d for approximately two and a half years  and will be 
extended for an additional year in order to reach the full target  and to have the final participant 
finish before the end of 2018 . 
Each participant will be involved in this trial for a period of six months. This will include 
three visits to the UC Davis MIND Institute – a combined screening and baseline visit, a 3 month 
interim visit ( +2 week ), and a 6 month end -of-treatment visit ( +2 week). Additionally, there will 
be weekly phone cal ls for the first month of treatment, and subsequent monthly phone calls if 
no visit is scheduled during that month.   
Participants will be active in this trial until about December of [ADDRESS_827996] complet ed the trial period.  
Final data analysis of data collected during the trial period of each participant will be 
analyzed after the final participant has completed the trial, which is expected to be about 
December 2018.  
11) Study Endpoints  
Our primary study endp oints will be change s, from baseline to 6 months, in both the 
expressive language raw scores  and  the combined age equivalent scores as measured by [CONTACT_622149] . All other measures listed below in Section 12 are secondary study endpoints. \ 
PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD  
Page 9 of 19   Revis ed: 15 -Jun-2017 
  Version 4.0  12) Procedures Involved  
The schedule of assessments is listed below:  
 
Demographics : 
At Screening, b asic demographic information will be collected on all study subjects, 
including but not limited to date of birth, race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, education of 
parents, parental occupation, and parental salary range.  
Medical Examination:   
This will be carried out by [INVESTIGATOR_124].  Hagerman or her associate and will include growth 
percentiles , vitals , a detailed medical history, physical,  neurological examination , and review of 
medical records , as applicable . In addition a detailed family history may be obtained , if medically Assessments  Screening/ 
Baseline Visit  Three 
month visit  
(+2 week)  Six Month  
Final Visit  
(+2 week)  
Informed Consent  X   
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  X   
Medical History  X   
Physical Exam  X X X 
Adverse Events  X X X 
Concomitant Medications  X X X 
Vital Signs  X X X 
Blood Draw  X Xa X 
Mullen Scales of Early Learning (MSEL)  X  X 
Preschool Language Scale, 5th ed. (PLS -5) X  X 
Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) or  
Autism Observation Scale for Infants (AOSI)  X   
Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale, 2nd ed. (VABS -II) X  X 
Clinical Global Impression Scale (CGI)  X X X 
Visual Analogue Scale (VAS)  X X X 
Sensory Processing Measure, Preschool ed. (SPM -P) 
or  
Sensory Processing Measure (SPM)  X  
X 
Preschool Anxiety Scale, Revised ed. (PAS -R) X  X 
DSM V Checklist  X   
Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS)  X  X 
Eye Trackingb X  X 
Aberrant Behavior Checklist (ABC)c X X X 
Suicidality Checklistc X X X 
Dispense Study Drug  X X  
PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD  
Page 10 of 19   Revis ed: 15 -Jun-2017 
  Version 4.0  necessary . A medical history and exam will be conducted at the Screening/baseline visit. A 
medical exam and a review of recent history will take place at each subsequent visit.  
Mullen Scales of Early Learning (MSEL; Mullen, 19 95):  
The MSEL was standardized in children from birth to 68 months of age. It includes five 
subscales: gross motor, fine motor, visual reception, expressive language, and receptive 
language. The subscales yield alpha coefficients between .[ADDRESS_827997] values range 
from .76 to .96 across ages and scales, and inter- rater reliability from .91 to .96. NVMA and 
NVIQ will be computed (with latter being twice the T score).  The MSEL will be a baseline and 6 -
month outcome measure.  
Preschool Language Scale -Fifth Edition:  
The PLS -5 assesses auditory comprehension and expressive communication for children 
birth to 7 years 11 months. The measure examines the child’s attention, play, gestures, social 
communication, semantics, language structure, integrative language skills and emergent literacy skills. The PLS -5 has expanded coverage of early play behaviors, concepts, Theory of Mind, as 
well as emergent literacy skills. The PLS -5 also has a means by [CONTACT_622150] a child’s skills. PLS -5 was standardized with a sample of 1400 children, 
including children with disabilities, selected to be representative of the U. S. population in terms of ethnicity, gender, geographic region, and parent education level based on U.S. Census  figures 
(March 2008 update). Of the sample, 45% consisted of minorities, the largest percentage to date.  The PLS -5 will be a baseline and 6 -month outcome measure.  
Clinical Global Impression Scale (CGI):  
This scale is a standard assessment for medication studies because it allows the clinician to 
utilize the history from the par ents or caretaker and incorporate it into a clinical rating for the 
clinical follow -up of the patient through the treatment trial. (Guy, 1976; Psychopharmacology, 
1985).   
The CGI -S is a 7 -point scale that requires the clinician to rate the severity of the patient’s 
illness at the time of assessment, relative to the clinician’s past experience with subjects who have the same diagnosis. The CGI -S will be captured at Screening. The 7 -point scale is as follows:  
 
Normal   
[ADDRESS_827998] has 
improved or worsened relative to a baseline status. The CGI -I will be captured at the 3 -month 
visit and the 6 -month visit. The response options include the followin g: 
 
Very Much Improved  1 
Much Improved  2  
Minimally Improved  3  
No Change  4  
PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD  
Page 11 of 19   Revis ed: 15 -Jun-2017 
  Version 4.0  Minimally Worse  5  
Much Worse  6  
Very Much Worse  7  
Visual Analogue Scale (VAS):  
Parents will mark on a visual line measuring 10 cm with one side marked “worst behavior” 
and the other side marked “best behavior”. They will assess 3 key behaviors that are targeted  
for this trial (e.g., aggression, hyperarousal with stimuli, anxiety, hyperactivity). For each 
behavior they will mark their impression of the behavior at each visit , demonstrating how they 
have changed from the baseline. The horizontal marks are measured in cm distance so that we can see improvements or worsening of behavio r over this time period.  The VAS will be a 
baseline, 3 -month, and 6 -month outcome measure.  
Autism Diagnostic Observation Scale (ADOS) or Autism Observation Scale for Infants (AOSI):  
The ADOS (Lord, et al., 2000) and AOSI are semi -structured standardized i nterviews 
administered directly for the purposes of diagnosing autism. The ADOS uses developmentally appropriate social and object -based interactions in a 30 -45 minute interview to elicit symptoms 
of autism in four areas: social interaction, communication,  play, and repetitive, restrictive 
behaviors. The ADOS consists of different modules, each directed at a particular level of 
language ability and is thus appropriate to use across subjects of varying ages and functioning 
levels . A previously completed ADOS  or AOSI performed 6 months prior to the 
Screening/Baseline visit can be used to determine study eligibility. In this instance, the ADOS or AOSI will not need to be done at the Screening/Baseline visit.  This assessment will not be 
repeated at the 3 -month o r 6-month visits because its purpose is solely for eligibility 
determination and characterization of the study population at baseline.  
Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale -Second Edition  (VABS -II):   
The VABS -II (Sparrow, Cicchetti, & Balla, 2005) is an update  of the VABS developed by [CONTACT_622151]., 1998 that was designed to assess handicapped and non -handicapped persons in their 
personal and social functioning and is appropriate for individuals of all ages. The VABS -II is a 
survey that is administered to a parent or caregiver using a semi- structured interview format 
and is organized around four Behavior Domains: Communication, Daily Living Skills, Socialization, and Motor Skills. Each subtest is scored with a standard score X=100 ± 15.  The VABS was successfull y utilized to establish level of adaptive functioning for individuals with FXS 
(Berry -Kravis et al., 2006; Zingerevich et al., 2009).  Internal consistency for each domain was 
measured utilizing the split -half method and coefficients ranging from .[ADDRESS_827999] reliability was calculated to be .81 to .86 and inter -rater reliability was 
.62 to .78. The VABS will be a baseline and 6 -month outcome measure.  
Sensory Processing Measure (SPM):  
The SPM is designed to measure sensory proce ssing difficulties in multiple environments (at 
home, at school, and in the community) for children aged [ADDRESS_828000] scores for two higher level integrative functions (praxis and social 
participation) and five sensor sensory systems (visual, auditory, tactile, proprioceptive, and 
vestibular functioning. Within each system, the SPM offers descriptive clinical information on 
processing vulnerabilities, including under - and over - responsiveness, sensory -seeking behavior, 
and perceptual problems.  The SPM will be a baseline and 6 -month outcome measure.  
Sensory Processing Measure -Preschool (SPM -P):  
PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD  
Page 12 of 19   Revis ed: 15 -Jun-2017 
  Version 4.0  The SPM -P is designed to integrate seamlessly with the SPM (as described above) but is 
targeted for a younger population (ages 2 to 5 years old).  For most patients we will use the SPM -
P; for those over 5  years old the SPM or the SPM -P will be used  as appropriate based on the 
participant’s cognitive age and ability . As with the SPM, the SPM -P will be a baseline and 6 -
month  outcome measure.  
Preschool Anxiety Scale – Revised (PAS -R): 
The PAS -R is a revision of an earlier measure (Preschool Anxiety Rating Scale, Spence et al., 
2001). It is designed to assess symptoms of anxiety and fears in young children (aged 6 and 
below) as  reported by [CONTACT_107605]. The measure provides 4 subscales tappi[INVESTIGATOR_622138], social anxiety, separation anxiety, and specific fears. The total scale and 4 subscales 
showed strong internal consistency (alphas = .72 -.92), 12 -month stability (rs = .60 -.75) and 
maternal/paternal agreement (rs = .60 -.75). Scores on the scale also showed expected 
correlations with a measure of emotional distress, diagnosed anxiety disorders, and behavioral 
indicators of anxiety.  The PAS -R will be a baseline and 6 -mon th outcome measure.  
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders -V: 
Per the DSM -V (APA 20 13), Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is characterized by [CONTACT_622152]: reciprocal social interaction skills, communication skills, and the presence of stereotyped behavior, interests, and activities. The qualitative impairments that define thes e conditions are distinctly deviant relative to the 
individual’s developmental level or mental age . The DSM -V will not be repeated at the 3 -month 
or 6-month visits because its purpose is solely for eligibility determination and characterization 
of the stud y population at baseline.  
Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS) : 
The SRS distinguishes autism spectrum conditions from other child psychiatric conditions by 
[CONTACT_622153]. This 65 -item rating scale 
measures t he severity of autism spectrum symptoms as they occur in natural social settings. 
Completed by a parent or teacher in 15 to 20 minutes, the SRS provides a clear pi[INVESTIGATOR_510] a child’s social impairments, assessing social awareness, social information process ing, capacity 
for reciprocal social communication, social anxiety/avoidance, and autistic preoccupations and traits.  The SRS will be a baseline and 6 -month outcome measure.  
Eye Tracking : 
In a series of eye tracking tasks participants will be shown stimuli,  either objects or 
emotional faces and their visual reaction times as measured by [CONTACT_622154]. The tasks aim to index visuospatial attention via passive viewing methods that will not overly tax the participants, and 
may be sensitive to subtle changes over time that will not be evident in more gross behavioral 
measures.  The eye tracking protocol also includes  collection of  demographic information  and 
completion of the Carey Tem perament Scales (CTS). The CTS is a collection of parent -report 
questionnaires, each covering a specific age range between 1 month and 12 years, that examines nine categories of behavioral and temperamental style as defined in the [LOCATION_001] Longitudinal Stu dy (NYLS).  Eye tracking will be a baseline and [ADDRESS_828001] -Community  (ABC -C): 
PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD  
Page 13 of 19   Revis ed: 15 -Jun-2017 
  Version 4.0  The ABC is a parental survey consisting of 58 questions designed to measure the severity of 
autism -associated behaviors, including irritability, lethargy, stereotypy, hyperactivity and 
inappropriate speech. The irritability subscale includes self- injurious and aggressive behavior. 
The total score range within the ABC is 0 –174, with higher scores indicating more severely 
affected behav ior. The ABC has been previously approved by [CONTACT_622155] (MIPR, IRB # 200513093).  The ABC will be captured at baseline, 3 
months, and 6 months.  
Clinical Assessment of Suicidal Ideation and Behavior : 
This assessment is a series of “yes ” or “no” questions. The clinician will ask if the subject 
understands the concept of suicidal ideation. If the answer is “No” , the remaining questions 
about the subject ’s behavior will be asked to the caregiver. If the answer  is “Yes” , the remaining 
questions will be directed to the subject.  This assessment will be used in combination with the 
ABC irritability subscale to assist the clinician in assessing any possible suicidal ideation or 
behavior.  Although we have never seen this side effect in children under 6 years old, this has been added to follow the FDA draft Guidance for Suicidal Ideation and Behavior (attached for 
reference) . This assessment will be administered at screening, 1 month, 3 months, and 6 
months.   
Additio nal Information Regarding Above Assessments:  
Measures administered may be audio or video recorded for future reference or coding. All 
recording will be stored in compliance with all applicable guidelines.  
The MSEL, CGI, ADOS, VABS -II, SPM, SPM -P, and VAS a ssessments listed above are part of 
the MIND Institute’s Protocol Repository (MIPR) and have been approved under the human 
subjects protocol #232909. The PLS -5 has been included as part of this protocol’s initial 
submission for approval. The remaining asse ssments are computer -based and are described in 
full above.  
Laboratory Blood Tests  
Laboratory assessments will be collected at the Screening/Baseline visit and the 6 -month 
visit. If blood is unable to be completed at the Screening/Baseline visit, then sample collection will be attempted at the 3 -month visit. Both safety blood samples and  biomarker blood samples 
will be collected. Safety laboratory assessments include complete metabolic panel and complete blood count. Biomarker assessments  will evaluate  DNA, RNA, FMR1 mutation status , BDNF, 
SLC6A44, TPH2, 5- HTTLPR, and cytokine response . Approximately 30 mL (6 tsp) of blood will be 
collected per blood draw.  
13) Data and Specimen Banking  
Each sample will be coded by a unique numerical identifier. There will be a total of two 
blood draws throughout the study. Each blood draw will have a total vo lume of up to 30ml. 
Safety labs will be processed through the UC Davis Pathology Laboratory. Biomarker samples 
will be delivered to [CONTACT_622167]’s lab at the UC Davis MIND Institute’s Wet Lab for processing 
and storage.  Samples will be kept until the end of  the study  and subsequent analysis , at which 
point they will be destroyed. Alternatively, on the study consent form, participants may indicate 
permission to allow for samples to be kept for a period of 15 years after the end of the study.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD  
Page 14 of 19   Revis ed: 15 -Jun-2017 
  Version 4.0  14) Data Management  and Confidentiality 
The clinical study data will be entered into and stored in REDCap, which is managed by [CONTACT_622156]. 
Vanderbilt University, with collaboration from a conso rtium of institutional partners, has 
developed a software toolset and workflow methodology for electronic collection and management of research and clinical trial data. REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) data collection projects rely on a thorough s tudy -specific data dictionary defined in an iterative self-
documenting process by [CONTACT_622157]. Iterative development and testing processes result in a well-
planned data c ollection strategy for individual studies. The REDCap system provides secure, 
web -based applications that are flexible enough to be used for a variety of types of research, 
provide an intuitive interface for users to enter data and have real time validatio n rules (with 
automated data type and range checks) at the time of entry. These systems offer easy data manipulation with audit trails for reporting, monitoring , and querying patient records  as well as 
and automated export mechanism to common statistical p ackages (SPSS, SAS, Stata, R/S- Plus). 
REDCap servers are housed in a local data center at UC Davis Health System and all web -based 
information transmission is encrypted. REDCap was developed specifically around HIPAA -
Security guidelines. For example, upon login, an approved username [CONTACT_474440]. 
REDCap has been disseminated for use locally at other institutions and currently supports 240+ 
academic/non -profit consortium partners on six continents and over 26,000 research end -users 
(www.project -redcap.org ). 
All research personnel on this IRB protocol will have some type of access to this database. 
The data management and biostatistics team ( Patrick Adams  and [CONTACT_622168]) will have full 
access since  they will create the data dictionary and address data requests. Research 
coordinators, technicians, and assistants will enter the data into the database. All research 
personnel will have current  GCP training for investigators and staff involved in researc h 
involving human subjects.  
Analysis will be based on the intention -to-treat principle. The analysis of treatment efficacy 
will be based on the analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with outcomes (receptive and expression 
language at 6 -month follow -up with corre sponding baseline measure as a covariate ). The 
chosen endpoint at 6 -month, based on preliminary data, provides a reasonable treatment time 
period to assess changes in the response. The proposed method adjusts for potential baseline differences between trea tment arms despi[INVESTIGATOR_39470], if any. The sample size/power for 
the ANCOVA is based on sample size needed for a t -test by a variance inflation factor [ADDRESS_828002] and power for the ANCOVA will be higher depending on this 
factor. We estimate clinically relevant effects sizes from our preliminary d ata at follow -up visit 
for (sertraline /placebo) as follows: receptive language score mean 18.1/23.8, SD=7.0; expressive language score mean 13.6/20.7, SD 8.4. For these effect sizes of the [ADDRESS_828003] 80% (or have between 0.2 -0.5) at level 
alpha=0.016 with the proposed total sample size n = 60.  
For CGI, we will use the standard t -test for 6 -month follow -up assessment. For n = [ADDRESS_828004] a one point CGI change (from 4 = no change to 3 = minimally improved) and 
conservatively assuming a SD = 1, the power is 91% at alpha level of 0.016. We  will use similar 
regression and ANCOVA/ANOVA methods to analyze other  secondary variables.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD  
Page 15 of 19   Revis ed: 15 -Jun-2017 
  Version 4.0  15) Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of S ubjects  
A DSMB will be established that will include two  physicians who are independent of the 
study but who have significant expertise in carrying out psychopharmacological interventions in 
children with ASD. In addition, an independent statistician will be a mem ber of the DSMB. The 
DSMB will examine unblinded adverse event(s) and clinical data annually  to recommend 
whether the trial can be safely continued. The investigators and staff will remain blind ed 
throughout the trial.  
16) Withdrawal of Subjects  
The study team  reserves the right to withdraw subjects from the study for reasons including, 
but not limited to, adverse events and non -compliance. The caregivers of a subject may also 
withdraw their son or daughter from the study.  
If a subject is withdrawn from the stu dy early, caregivers will be asked to return to the MIND 
Institute for a termination visit which will include a visit with a study physician who can assess 
for adverse events and general safety of the subject.  
17) Risks to Subjects  
Risks associated with partic ipation in this study pertain to the study medication, the possible 
ineffectiveness of treatment, and the blood tests. A potential risk is the chance of infection or 
bleeding at the site where the venous blood draw is completed. This site will be carefully  
cleaned and a band aid will be applied.  Other potential risks are the side effects of sertraline, 
which include hyperarousal, hyperactivity or activation especially if the dose is too high.  
 In adolescents , SSRIs have induced suicidal ideation in rare cir cumstances , but we have 
never seen this side effect in children under [ADDRESS_828005] to aid clinicians in this risk asses sment. Clinicians will perform the assessments at each visit, and at the one -month 
phone call (scheduling a follow -up, face to face interaction if needed).  The study physician will 
discontinue the medication if there is any concern about suicidal ideation  or behavior.  
Weekly phone calls during the first month will be made by [CONTACT_622158].  Subsequent phone calls will be monthly  except for months [ADDRESS_828006] . The study physician will perfo rm a phone call after one month of 
treatment to assess for adverse events as  well as perform the Clinical Assessment of Suicidality  
and ABC –  Irritability Subscale.  [CONTACT_622169]’s contact [CONTACT_622159]’ parents for emergencies related to the study.  
All the data obtained from this study will be kept confidential. Only research personnel on 
the IRB -approved protocol will have access to the data. Electronic data will be password 
protected and physical data will be store d in a locked file room. However, just like with other 
personal information kept by [CONTACT_284895], your banks, and others, even these safeguards cannot guarantee absolute protection of the data.  If private information gets into the wrong hand s, it can cause harm.  Although rare, there are reported cases of breaches that 
have resulted in discrimination in insurance or employment.   
PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD  
Page 16 of 19   Revis ed: 15 -Jun-2017 
  Version 4.0  18) Vulnerable Populations  
This study intends to enroll developmentally disabled children with ASD who will be too 
young to consent to participate to this study. As such, reliable and competent caregiver(s) , such 
as (a) parent(s) or other legal guardian , must give consent to participate in this study. The 
caregivers of the participant will be informed of all known risks and potential benefits associated 
with the study.  
Because this study involves young children ages 2 through  5 years old  (inclusive)  with 
developmental disorders , all study staff will pay special attention to the potential for the 
extreme sensitivities, multiple stressors, and other possible risks associated with the vulnerable 
population  under  study. We have done research with developmentally disabled and cognitively 
impaired individuals of all ages for many years. Consent for individuals with cognitive disability is 
always signed by [CONTACT_308489], and no study -specific procedures will be done for any 
subject prior to consent.  
 
19) Multi -Site Research  
This is a single -site research study.  
 
20) Community -Based Participatory Research  
Not applicable.  
 
21) Sharing of Results with Subjects  
Participants may request a research report with scores from some of the cognitive testing 
completed at the baseline and final visits . Participants will not be unblinded at any point during 
their enrollment.  This is to prevent uncon scious biases that may present as the trial progresses 
and to ensure quality data.  Subjects will be unblinded once all study procedures and all 
statistical analyses for all subjects ha ve been completed.  
 
22) Setting  
The UC Davis MIND Institute:  
Participants will be evaluated at the MIND Institute Research Clinic. The MIND Institute is a 
multi -purpose research facility focusing on patients with autism spectrum disorders and other 
neurodevelopmental disorders. The basic (wet labs) and clinical buildings, total approximately 100,000 ft
2, were completed in 2002 and are co -localized on the UC Davis Medical Center 
campus in Sacramento. The MIND Institute is well equipped with multiple patient exam rooms available for screening IQ measures as well as que stionnaires, surveys, and physical exams. This 
will be the main study site, as recruitment, screening, and patient visits will occur at the MIND 
Institute. The MIND MICRO committee has approved space usage for this study.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD  
Page 17 of 19   Revis ed: 15 -Jun-2017 
  Version 4.0  23) Resources Available  
For a full list of research personnel associated with this study, please refer to the associated 
personnel list.  All study personnel will be familiar with the protocol and research procedures.  
Computers: All key personnel have up -to-date personal computers with high -speed internet 
and printer connections.  
Offices: The MIND Institute has office space available for all associated research personnel. 
All office space includes up -to-date computers, high -speed internet access, printers and 
telephones with private voice mail . 
 
24) Prior Approvals 
The Year [ADDRESS_828007]-2014. Initial approval 
was granted on 25 -Nov-2014. Year 2 renewal was submitted o n 26 -Aug- 2015 and approved 14 -
Sep- 2015. Year 3 renewal was submitted on 29 -Jul-2016 and approved on 9 -Aug- 2016.  Year 4 
renewal submission is due by 23 -Jun-2017.  
 
25) Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
Research charts will be kept on the su bjects and subject information will be coded to 
protect confidentiality. All charts will be kept in a locked cabinet of a locked file room. The 
identifiers used to identify subjects will be kept in locked offices and/or locked cabinets, and the 
electronic database containing personal information will be kept on a secure computer network 
accessible only to PI’s research team. If information from the study is published or presented at 
scientific meetings, subject names and other information that could identif y subjects will not be 
used.  
The subjects’ health information, along with the identifiers, will be kept with the 
investigator as mentioned, until the conclusion of the study, or when immediate access is no longer required. Thereafter, the information may b e transferred to a records and information 
management company for long- term storage, or to a UCDMC long -term storage facility. 
Archiving, storage, and destruction of all study materials will comply with the MIND Institute’s 
Archiving SOP# [ADDRESS_828008] will be kept private; however, we cannot guarantee total privacy. The subject’s personal and medical information may be given out if 
required by [CONTACT_2371]  (for example, reporting sensitive information (such as child abuse) to state or 
local authorities if necessary ). 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD  
Page 18 of 19   Revis ed: 15 -Jun-2017 
  Version 4.0  26) Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
It is important that subjects promptly tell the person in charge of the research if they believe 
that they have been injured because of taking part in this study. If subjects are injured as a 
result of being in this study, the University of [LOCATION_004] will provide necessary medical treatment. Depending on the circumstances, the costs of the treatment may be covered by [CONTACT_622160]’s insurance company just like 
other medical costs. The University and the study sponsor do not normally provide any other 
form of compensation for injury.   
27) Economic Burden to Subjects  
There is no charge for the subject to participate in this study. Neither the subject nor his or 
her insurance carrier will be charged for taking part in the research. All costs associated with the study will be paid by [CONTACT_456]/department.  
There may be indirect costs associated with participation including travel and time taken off 
work to meet appointments.  Possible expenses to the subject’s family include time spent at the 
clinic as well as expenses for traveling. All eligible research subjects, who w ould not otherwise 
be able to participate due to the cost of traveling to the MIND Institute (e.g., flights, gas, lodging), will be offered up to $400 travel reimbursement per visit for actual costs incurred.  
Costs of travel may include, but are not limite d to, economy airfare, car mileage, lodging, 
bridge tolls, parking garage fees, taxis, rental cars , and/ or gas reimbursement for rental cars. 
Reimbursement will be based off of paid receipts submitted by [CONTACT_622161]. Travel reimbursement is based off of employee reimbursement 
guidelines enforced by [CONTACT_622162]. Reimbursement checks will be mailed 6 -10 weeks from submission of paid receipts 
following the completed study visit.  
28) Consent Process 
If requested, t he study consent form will be provided to potential subjects prior to visiting 
the MIND Institute.  
Consenting will take place at the UC Davis MIND Institute by [CONTACT_622163] [INVESTIGATOR_622139] .  Procedure s for obtaining consent will be followed as 
outline d in HRP -090. Consenting and all study measures and assessments will be done in 
English, as some of the measures used through this study are only available in English . 
All participants will be under the age of 18 ; thus, we  will require the consent of a parent, 
guardian, or other legally responsible adult with documentation of authority to sign on 
behalf of the participant in order to be enrolled in this study.  All subjects, parents, or 
LARs (as applicable) will sign a HIPAA authorization for research.  
Consent to enroll in this study will preferentially be obtained from both 
parents /guardians of the participant ; however, only one parent will be required to 
consent to participate in this study.  The investigator feels that given the potential 
benefit and low -risk safety profile of the investigational product, it is sufficient to obtain 
permission from one parent.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:   A Controlled Trial of Sertraline in Young Children with ASD  
Page 19 of 19   Revis ed: 15 -Jun-2017 
  Version 4.0  29) Process to Document Consent in Writing.  
 
The consent will conform to HRP -090 “Informed Consent Process for Research” and HRP -
091 “Written Documentation of Consent”.  
 
30) Drugs or Devices  
We will treat children with ASD ages 24 to 72 months in a randomized, double -blind, 
placebo -controlled trial of sertraline  (brand name [CONTACT_622165])  for 6 m onths. Randomization to 
sertraline or placebo will be carried out by [CONTACT_622164] , and 
dosing will be determined based on patient age  at enrollment . The study drug will be 
administered in liquid form  (20 mg per cc).  
For patients aged 2 to 3 years  (inclusive) at enrollment , sertraline liquid or placebo liquid in 
a dose of 2.5 mg per day  (0.125 ml)  will be used. For those age d 4 years through 5 years  
(inclusive) at enrollment , the starting dose will be 5.0 mg  perday (0.25 ml ). The liquid can be 
mixed with water , ginger ale, lemon or lime soda, lemonade, or orange juice, as per the package 
insert . The UCDMC  Investigational Drug Services Pharmacy will store and dispense the study 
drug.  
As previously described,  starting dose is assigned based on age at enrollment . After 
enrollment, dose modifications may be made at the discretion of the study physician ; for 
example, if a subject aged 4 -5 years (inclusive ) at time of enrollment is experiencing an adverse 
event wh ile at the [ADDRESS_828009]’s dose to 2.[ADDRESS_828010]  aged 2 -3 years 
(inclusive) at time of enrollment turn s 4 years of age during her  study participation , she will 
nevertheless continue at the original dose of 2.5 mg per day . 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_622140] X syndrome, and this IND now  
include s ASD as a secondary indicated population (IND Number 113747 -0001).  
        