 
  
 
   
 
Study Title: Optimization of Hip -exoskeleton Weight Attributes  
 
NCT number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Document date: 12/2/2021 
  
Participants  
Twenty -one healthy participants (12 males, 9 females, age 26.8 ±5.57 years, body height 172.8 ± 
7.58 cm, body weight 65.9 ± 8.53 kg) were recruited for this study. Exclusion criteria included 
relevant  musculoskeletal injuries , abnormal gait  deviations, and weight bearing restrictions. Prior 
to the experiment, participants had their footedness evaluated to ensure that they were right footed. The University of [LOCATION_007]  Institutional Review Board  approved the experimental protocol 
and subjects were provided informed written consent . 
Experimental setup and protocol  
Participants were tasked with traversing a treadmill while bearing scuba weights secured with a diving belt (Scuba Choice, Los Angeles CA). Weights of 4 kg, 6 kg, and 8 kg were suspended on the pelvis in three configurations: weight evenly distributed between both anterior  iliac 
crests  (Bilateral, BI), weight on the 4th lumbar vertebrae (Lumbar, L), and weight on the non-
dominant left anterior iliac crest (Unilateral, UNI).  Fig. 1 illustrates these placements.  
We collected Motion capture marker data with a 13 -camera motion capture system and 36 active 
markers attached to the lower body and torso segment (Phase Space, San Leandro, CA). Ground reaction forces (GRF) were measured through force plates in an instrumented split -belt treadmill 
(Bertec, Columbus, OH).  Surface electromyography  data (EMG) (Bortec, Calgary, AL) were 
collected from the rectus femoris (RF), medial hamstring (MH), tibialis anterior (TA), and lateral  gastrocnemius  (GAS) of each leg.  
 
Fig. 1. Weight placements during an experiment. Also shown are the motion capture LEDs, 
EMG electrodes, and split belt treadmill.  
 
Participants walked for 1m30s at a speed of 1.1 m/s for every combination of weight (4, 6 and 8 
kg), placement ( BI, UNI, L), and no weight (NW) in pseudo- randomized order. The participants 
were exposed to each condition two times, for [ADDRESS_320464] 30 s to account for familiarization to the condition. For  outlier detection , we 
removed an individual stride if the waveform exceeded 2 inter -quartile -ranges from the median 
waveform for more than 40% of the gait cycle. The mean waveform from the last [ADDRESS_320465], and then performed inverse kinematics  and dynamics for  joint  angles and moments, 
respectively.  
Outcome measures  
We contextualized the joint motion for the  hips  and knees  as Range- of-Motion (ROM), the 
difference between the maximum and minimum joint angles within a given period. We analyzed the effect of weight on the hip and knee  sagittal plane  motion during initial stance phase. We 
quantif ied pelvic tilt and obliquity as the average position within a gait phase. 
 EMG signals were normalized via the m ean-dynamic method centering the EMG signal around 
1. For data analysis, the EMG signal was integrated along each gait phase to calculate the integrated EMG (iEMG) values. We analyzed the RF muscle  activation during initial stance and 
the GAS muscle  activation during late stance.  
 
Statistical analysis  
R 4.1.1 (2021 The R Foundation for Statistical Computing) was used for statistical analysis. O ne 
subject was removed from the dataset due to technical errors with recording the data.  
We used a linear mixed regression model ( lme4  [IP_ADDRESS]  and  lmerTest  3.1.3)  with two fixed 
effects (weight and placement) along with a no weight condition and one random effect (subject) 
and α<0.05. A Tukey Honestly Significant Difference post -hoc test was performed to determine 
pairwise differences between weights, placements, and their interactive effects.  
 
 