   
 
   
 A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_32394]: 
A Randomized Clinical Trial  
 
National Clinical Trial (NCT) Identified Number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Principal Investigators: Irogue Igbinosa, Deirdre Lyell  
Research Coordinator s: ,  
Funded by: [CONTACT_32411] 10 2022  
 
                              

   
 
   
 Prevention of Anemia in Pregnancy at Time of Birth Admission: A Randomized Clinical 
Trial  
Objective : Our goal is to provide evidence on the most effective treatment of persistent iron 
deficiency anemia ( IDA) late in pregnancy among all women. Our aims are to evaluate the 1) 
mean change in hemoglobin in IV iron group vs oral iron over 4 weeks, and 2) the mean change in hemoglobin in the IV vs oral iron group pre- delivery  
Organization : Stanford University Maternal -Fetal Medicine Division  
Clinical Center : Stanford/LPCH OB clinic  
Design  Type:  Open Label Randomized clinical trial  
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Pregnant patients [ADDRESS_31508]/LPCH OB 
clinic  
a. Hemoglobin < 11 g/dL, serum ferritin < 30 ug/dL and or transferrin saturation  
(TSAT)  < 20% 
b. Between 24 -34 weeks’ pregnancy  
c.  (study will offer iron studies to determine eligibility for patients eligible by 
[CONTACT_32412]/health care provider per standard of care)  
2. Singleton pregnancy 
3. Viable Pregnancy  
4. Hemodynamically stable  
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Patients unable to give informed consent 
2. Known allergy/hypersensitivity to IV iron  
3. Inflammatory Bowel Disease  or history of gastric by[CONTACT_4897]  
4. Dialysis -dependent Chronic Kidney Disease  
5. Known Hemoglobinopathies such as sickle cell disease, beta - thalassemia, alpha 
thalassemia (not including trait)  
6. Folate/Vitamin B12 deficiency  
7. Known malignancy 
8. History of mul tiple medication allergies (> 2 allergies) 
9. Hemoglobin above 12 or less than 7 g/dL 
10. Patients with complex past medical histories  which  may include history of multiple 
medication allergies, connective tissue disorder, etc.  
11. Medication allergy to Tylenol 
12. Placenta previa  
Interventions:  
1. Active group: IV iron (ferumoxtyol)  
2. Standard group: Oral Ferrous sulfate  
Medications:  
Ferrous sulfate 325mg tablets every other day or 650mg (two 325mg tablets) po every other day 
per protocol Ferumoxytol intravenous iron – 510mg x1 dose or 510mg x2 doses per protocol 
   
 
   
 Tylenol 650mg tablets (or 325mg tables x 2) 
Analysis: Intent to Treat  
Outcome Measures:  
Primary composite:  
o Correction of anemia by [CONTACT_32413]  
 Change in hemoglobin 
o Rates of blood transfusion post partum  
Primary safety outcome:  
o Rates of adverse events  
o Compliance with  medication  
o Severe neonatal composite morbidity  
o Severe maternal morbidity  
Timetable:  
Recruitment: 0 -9 months 
Data Collection: 0 -12 months  
Complete follow up: 0 -16 months  
Final data/primary analysis: 12 -16 months  
 Sample size : 80  
             
 
            
   
 
   
  
    1.  INTRODUCTION 
This manual gives detailed instructions on procedures for the Prevention of Anemia in Pregnancy (PAP) Trial. It is meant to serve as a reference guide for study staff, including investigators, coordinators, study nurses, and data managers.  
 
1.[ADDRESS_31509] Maternal Fetal Medicine Division, Labor and Delivery, and the Clinical Trans lational and Research Unit site.  
 1.1.1 Steering Committee (SC)  
 A Maternal -Fetal Medicine Clinical Revie w Unit (CRU) and Data Safety Monitoring Board 
(DSMB) that brings together the multi- disciplinary will oversee implementation including: 
finalizing the clinical protocol, training and certification, monitoring recruitment, data coordination and quality control, DSMB recommendations and IRB- related issues. T he SC  will 
also make final decisions about data analysis and interpretation, secondary analyses, presentation at scientific meetings and publications .  
 1.1.2 Responsibilities  
 
The responsibilities of these individuals are described briefly here:  
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_6254]-PIs are responsible for ensuring the proper conduct of the study clinic site including recruitment as specified in the protocol  and accurate collection of the data . 
Other specific duties include:  
 
a.  Obtaining and maintaining IRB approval and training for study personnel b.  Obtaining sufficient study areas for study personnel to interview patients and perform study procedures, including storage of study medication and other study supplies.  c.  Participate in study - related meetings or conference calls  
d.  Familiarity and training for REDCap based data entry system by [CONTACT_32414].  e.  Screen potential participants for eligibility and consent them. It is important to ensure  
the patient’s primary obstetric provider agrees to follow the study treatment protocol during pregnancy.  f.  Randomize per protocol to intervention arms – both arms to receive medication  
g.  Follow participants during the antepartum, delivery and 6 (4-12) weeks postpartum periods: with labs as indicated in the protocol and with pre- and post-intervention surveys to monitor patient symptoms and adverse effects  
   
 
   
 h.  Facilitate  collection of labs at 24 -28 weeks gestation (preferred window, but may 
collect up to 34 complete weeks) , labs at [ADDRESS_31510] as required by [CONTACT_760]. Research staff at CTRU, will undergo training to ascertain response to severe adverse outcomes, specifically identification of hypersensitivity reactions to intravenous iron. j.  Investigators will participate in blinded review of outcomes in order to confirm the primary and other key outcomes.  k. Maternal outcomes will be ascertained through 6 weeks including a postpartum visit in this window. If unscheduled visits occurred at another facility, obtain medical records release (if one has not already been obtained) to order hospi[INVESTIGATOR_32395].  l.  All newborn outcomes will also be ascertained through 6 (4 -12) weeks through 
medical records chart review . If unscheduled visits occurred at another facility, obtain 
medical records release (if one has not already been obtained) to order hospi[INVESTIGATOR_32395].  m.  Data collection forms for maternal outcomes, newborn outcomes, NICU outcomes, and postpartum clinic/hospi[INVESTIGATOR_32396]. These forms will be used to enter the clinical data into the study data base.  
 The Study Coordinator will be responsible for the day- to-day operations of the study at the 
clinical center, including recruitment and data collection processes. This responsibility includes the following:  
a.  Establishing a method of training and monitoring to ensure primary obstetric providers 
are following the study treatment protocol during the pregnancy.  
b.  Establishing a method to ensure that all potential participants receive medications and 
appropriate follow up  
c. Establishing a method that for screening women with IDA who are potentially eligible for the study e.g. dedicated clinic days or sessions.  d.  Assures that study drug is available at all times by [CONTACT_32415]. The current workflow is that Stanford’s pharmacy will dispense medications with Stanford’s CTRU. e. Meeting with Stanford Investigational Drug Pharmacist pharmacy and/or site CTRU if 
necessary, to understand center specific drug request procedures.  f. Arranging for the ordering and storage of study supplies.  g.  Collecting maternal and neonatal information necessary to complete all study forms.  h.  Will abstract information related to primary and other key outcomes , and assure that 
the PI [INVESTIGATOR_32397] (if required by [CONTACT_14189]) is notified of any primary outcome events and adverse events.  i. Training additional staff as needed in data collection, forms completion and data entry.  j. Coordinating data entry, including controlling access to the REDCap and study unit as applicable, and assuring that required back-up security and confidential ity procedures are 
maintained.  
k. Organizing and maintaining records, including the protocol, data forms, reports and correspondence 
   
 
   
  
1.2 Procedures for Participant Confidentiality  
  The REDCAP database will contain PHI linked to the patient’s clinical data. The MFM Research team  members are the only one who will be able to access this database. A 
study/screening number will be used to identify each participant. Site will maintain a log of participant names and medical record numbers.  
 1.3 Training and Site Initiation  
 
A training session for study coordinators will be held before recruitment starts. The purpose of the training workshop is to review the study design, objectives, procedures, data collection forms and a demonstration of the REDCap data base. The coordinators, in turn, are responsible for training any additional staff assigned to this study. Clinical site initiation to enroll and randomize participants is dependent upon completion of a series of preliminary tasks. These include completion of appropri ate regul atory approvals (IRBs) .  
 Site staff training, certification, and receipt of all study supplies including medications will need to be completed as well as the development of a site recruitment plan. Fulfillment of the following are requirements before start of study:  
 1. Review of the final version of the study protocol, data forms and manual, and study medications.  2. IRB approval and consent forms on file at Stanford. Due to COVID, also consider e-consent process.  
3. Completion of training and data entry of forms.  4. Training with Stanford’s CTRU  
 1.4 IRB approval  
 Approval by [CONTACT_32416]. Once a study has been approved, any additional information about the study that relates to participant safety (i.e., protocol changes, significant adverse events, changes in the consent form) also needs to be submitted to the IRB.   1.5 Interim IRB Review/Approval  
 After initial approval, an IRB must be notified any time about:  
• Recruitment Brochures and Advertisements  
• Form Letters or Study information sent to participants  
• Protocol Amendments  
• Protocol Deviations  
• Serious Adverse Events (SAEs)  
• Unanticipated problems  
• Consent Form Revisions  
 
   
 
   
  
1.5.[ADDRESS_31511] of each clinic’s participation in the IDA study. It should be kept current and available for review by [CONTACT_32417]. The binder should include current copi[INVESTIGATOR_1309]: 
• Protocol and revisions  
• All protocol amendments  
• IRB submissions and approvals, IRB renewals and any submitted protocol deviations and 
log, IRB correspondence (adverse events reports)  
• Copi[INVESTIGATOR_32398](s)  
• Research participant advertisements, (e.g. patient brochures, pamphlets) patient education 
materials, newsletters, etc.  
• Current correspondences relating to human subjects research (may keep separate 
correspondence file)  
• Enrolled patient log with pertinent identifier information (randomization number if 
needed)  
• List of study drug formulary and package inserts  
 Other items that may also be include d are : recruitment plans, a set of study forms, CVs or 
biosketches for study staff, staff responsibility logs, essential elements of informed consent checklist, protocol deviation logs or other requirements from Stanford institution  
  2.  STUDY INFORMATION 
 
 2.[ADDRESS_31512] common cause of anemia in pregnancy in the [LOCATION_002] (Mei). 
Our study will add key evidence to improve the management of antepartum IDA in late 
pregnancy, when women are at particularly high risk for poor outcomes. Our study will also 
assess previously unstudied outcomes, notably blood transfusion. 
Rationale for change in intravenous iron  
The initial proposal aimed to conduct a prospective open label randomized clinical trial 
comparing standard of care  (SOC)  oral ferrous sulfate to IV FCM for the treatment of anemia in 
pregnancy. FCM was the IV iron formulation of choice based on a FER -ASAP clinical trial and 
meta -analysis supporting safety of iv irons in pregnancy 
1–4. It also has required less time per 
infusion (30min) and max course of [ADDRESS_31513]. Chertow, a co- author in “Randomized Clinical trial of IV 
iron induced hypophosphatemia”, graciously provided further assistance and helped to contextualize previous research experience with CKD patients
5. As a precaution, this study 
proposal has been significantly modified to exclude the use of FCM.  
2.2 Background  
Anemia in pregnancy is a risk factor for increased rates of maternal and perinatal morbidity 6. 
Antepartum anemia has been linked to higher rates of blood transfusion, preterm delivery, low 
Apgar scores, NICU admissions, and delay in neuro- cognitive motor development6,7. Iron 
deficiency represents over 70% of the anemias diagnosed in pregnancy. Other causes of anemia can include malnutrition, folate or vitamin B -[ADDRESS_31514] rates of antepartum anemia, 
approximately two- to-threefold compared to other racial/ethnic groups 11. 
Physiologically, iron utilization increases from approximately 2 mg/day in the non -pregnant 
state to 5 -6 mg/day in pregnancy 12. Furthermore, blood volume expansion by [CONTACT_3450] 50% 
and the increase of plasma cell volume by 35% contribute to heightened consumption of iron stores with advancing gestation of pregnancy
13. Current guidelines support supplementation with 27 mg 
of elemental iron in pregnancy, an equivalency commonly found in over the counter prenatal vitamins 
9,14. Oral ferric salts (such as ferrous sulfate) are recommended for IDA in fractionated 
dosing of 100-200 mg of elemental iron/day15. Additional prescriptions for iron are influenced by 
[CONTACT_32418] 24 -28 weeks of pregnancy7. Oral 
preparations, although cheaper, are associated with adverse gastrointestinal side effects, noncompliance, and limited interval increase in hemoglobin at the time of delivery compared to intravenous preparations 
16. A meta -analysis concluded greater than 70% of pregnant women 
experienced an adverse side effect, largely GI, with oral iron treatment and discontinuation of oral medication in approximately half of patients prescribed 
17. 
Consequently, some women will require parenteral administration of iron. Newer preparations 
of
 intravenous iron solutions have been well -tolerated with low anaphylaxis type reactions and 
fewer adverse side effects than older formulations 3,4. Intravenous iron sucrose in pregnancy has 
been shown to be efficacious in addressing anemia in late pregnancy 3,18, yet drawbacks include 
dosing (max 200mg/dose), frequency (avg 4- 5 infusions) and duration (1- 2hrs each). The 
contemporary class of IV irons available in the U.S. include ferric carboxymaltose (FCM), ferumoxytol and low molecular weight dextran (LMWD). LMWD has the advantage of being administered in a single dose; yet requires a test dose is recommended prior to infusion and concerns regarding rates of anaphylaxis limited widespread use
19. An investigation demonstrated 
that most of the severe adverse events were associated with its predecessor high molecular weight 
iron19. Ferumoxytol is a “superparamagnetic iron oxide” that creates an iron -carbohydrate complex 
with elemental iron that allows for more rapid infusion20. Ferumoxytol is FDA approved for adults 
with IDA20. Animal studies of ferumoxytol have not shown teratogenic effects at human doses; 
however, teratogenicity was seen in animal studies at levels six times that of human dosing20,21. 
   
 
   
 As a precaution, IV irons are not recommended in the first trimester to decrease the possibility of 
harm during organogenesis. The FDA updated labelling for pregnancy and lactation considerations 
list consideration for IV iron use in second/third trimester of pregnancy and “it is not known if ferumoxytol changes breast milk concentrations.” A clinical trial with ferumoxytol in pregnancy is near completion with standard dosing (510mgx2 or single dose infusion)(clinical trials.gov) for all patients
22. By [CONTACT_2163], our proposed trial recommends hemoglobin based dosing 
extrapolated from the Ganzoni formula23. Ferumoxytol safety data for anaphylaxis is less than < 
1%19,24.  
Our study will add key evidence to support the management of antepartum IDA in late 
pregnancy, when women are at particularly high risk for poor outcomes. In collaboration with the 
CMQCC (Medical Director [CONTACT_32448], Co -I on this proposal), our study will also assess 
feasibility for a large scale, multicenter quality intervention for [LOCATION_004] hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600].  
  2.3 Risk/Benefit Assessment  
 2.3.1 Known Potential Benefits   
Potential benefits of treatment with iron during pregnancy including repletion of iron stores and 
decreased incidence of SMM. This potential benefit may be increased in diverse racial/ethnic 
populations that experience higher rates of iron deficiency anemi a. A 2013 meta- analysis 
suggested daily oral iron use could increase birth weight of infant, concerns in a follow-up study were raised about risk associated with over supplementation.  
Over supplementation is less likely to be a risk in this cohort as we correcting only iron 
deficiency anemia and not iron deficiency, it’s precursor.  
Iron crosses the placenta and is also thought to be beneficial for breastfed infants. A recent 
review did not reveal studies that suggest adverse effect of iron in breast milk.  
 
2.3.2 Assessment of potential risks  
 Oral Iron Risks 
 Pregnancies in experimental animals: Large -dose dietary iron supplements were not teratogenic 
when tested in mice and rats. However, pregnant rabbits fed maternally toxic dose levels of an iron supplement had offspring with an increased incidence of defects of the central nervous system and skeleton. Retrospective studies have raised concern of teratogenic effect of oral iron in the first trimester, however, the findings were not replicated in larger studies. Observational studies have not found an increase in congenital defects with oral iron use.  Oral ferrous sulfate adverse effects include darkening of stools < 80%), abdominal pain (~70%), heartburn, nausea (68%), flatulence (38%), and diarrhea (23%).  
 Note: Intentional severe iron intoxication is potentially fatal and has been associated with adverse fetal and maternal outcomes such as preterm birth, miscarriage. T here have been reports 
of patient overdose of oral iron with use of desferoxamine if severe.  
   
 
   
  
Patients  in this study will receive oral  medication at interval lengths.  
 Intravenous Ferumoxytol  Risks  
 IV iron is indicated in pregnant women who cannot tolerate oral iron, those with persistent anemia despi[INVESTIGATOR_32399] 
7. Ferumoxytol, is 
part of a newer class of IV irons that can be administered more quickly and have less adverse reactions due to a tighter binding of elemental iron by [CONTACT_32419] 
25,26. As of 2018, 
Ferumoxytol is FDA approved for adults with IDA. Animal studies of ferumoxytol have not shown teratogenic effects at  human doses; teratogenicity was seen in animal studies at levels 4x that of human dosing
20. IV iron transfusions are not administered in the first trimester due to concerns of 
this time period being the most critical for organogenesis. There are ongoing clinical trials with ferumoxytol in pregnancy near completion with standard dosing for all patients. Comparison studies of FCM to ferumoxytol have shown that ferumoxytol has a lower anaphylaxis rate and <1% hypophosphatemia
27.  
 
Information adapted from package insert  
 
Black Box warning on label: “Serious hypersensitivity reactions, (some fatal), including 
anaphylaxis may occur, presenting with cardiac/cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_13374], clinically significant hypotension, syncope, or unresponsiveness even in patients who previously tolerated ferumoxytol. Infuse over ≥[ADDRESS_31515] equipment for resusc itation and trained 
personnel experienced in handling emergencies immediately available during use. Monitor patients for signs/symptoms of hypersensitivity reactions, including blood pressure and pulse 
during and ≥30 minutes (until clinically stable) following administration. Other hypersensitivity 
reactions have also occurred (pruritus, rash, urticaria, wheezing). Patients with multiple drug allergies may have greater risk of anaphylaxis; elderly patients with multiple or serious comorbidities who develop hypersensitivity and/or hypotension after ferumoxytol may be at greater risk for serious adverse events.”   Fatal and serious hypersensitivity reactions including anaphylaxis have occurred in patients receiving ferumoxytol in less than 1%. Initial symptoms may include hypotension, syncope. Unresponsiveness, cardiac/cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_13374].  
Hypersensitivity reactions have occurred in patients in whom a previous ferumoxytol dose was 
tolerated. Other adverse reactions potentially associated with hypersensitivity have occurred 
(pruritus, rash, urticarial rea ction and wheezing). Patients with a history of multiple drug 
allergies may have a greater risk of anaphylaxis with parenteral iron products.  
Excessive therapy with parenteral iron can lead to excess storage of iron with the possibility of 
iatrogenic hemosiderosis.  
Administration of ferumoxytol may transiently affect the diagnostic ability of magnetic 
resonance imaging. Alteration of MR imaging studies may persist for up to [ADDRESS_31516] common serious AEs reported in ferumoxytol- treated 
   
 
   
 patients were syncope, gastroenteritis, seizure, pneumonia, hemorrhagic anemia, and acute 
kidney injury.  
A separate protocol is referenced below for the management of hypersensitivity reactions.  
IV ferumoxytol in pregnancy  
Ferumoxytol is a “superparamagnetic iron oxide” that creates an iron -carbohydrate complex with 
elemental iron that allows for more rapid infusion20. Ferumoxytol is FDA approved for adults 
with IDA20.  
• Animal Studies  
Animal studies of ferumoxytol have not shown teratogenic effects at human doses; however, 
teratogenicity was seen in animal studies at levels six times that of human dosing20,21. As a 
precaution, IV irons are not recommended in the first trimester to decrease the possibility of 
harm during organogenesis.  
• FDA label for pregnancy  
The FDA updated labelling for pregnancy and lactation considerations list consideration for 
IV iron use in second/third trimester of pregnancy and “it is not known if ferumoxytol 
changes breast milk concentrations.”  
• Studies in Pregnancy 
A clinical trial with ferumoxytol in pregnancy is near completion with standard dosing 
(510mgx2 or single dose infusion)(clinical trials.gov) for all patients22 
 
S
afety measures for this study include the following:  
- Obtain VITALS prior to transfusion (see table below) for reference range in 
pregnancy 
- Monitor patients for signs and symptoms of hypersensitivity during and after IV iron administration for at least 30 minutes and until clinically stable following completion of the infusion. IV iron will only to be administered in sites where personnel and therapi[INVESTIGATOR_32400].  
- Pregnant women in this study may receive up to a maximum dose of 1020mg 
ferumoxytol only; this is the max dose per course as outlined by [CONTACT_32420]. Each dose will be given as [ADDRESS_31517] infusion. 
- Monitor patients for signs and symptoms of hypertension following each ferumoxytol administration.  
  
   
 
   
  
Source: Williams Obstetrics and Gynecology, 25th Edition  
 
Vital sign s which suggest hemodynamic instability  
- HR > 1 20  
- Systolic Blood Pressure > 1 60 or Diastolic Blood Pressure > 11 0  
• (pts with controlled hypertension can be enrolled in the study) 
- RR > 24 or less than < 10  
 
*See Separate Section for management of adverse  reactions  
 
Oral Acetaminophen Risks  
 
Acetaminophen is generally considered to be safe to use during pregnancy and has been categorized as Class B for all trimesters. Acetaminophen is known to cross the placenta during pregnancy, and acetaminophen administered during labor has been found in the umbilical cord blood at delivery (Levy 1975) . There is no known association with teratogenicity, however few 
clinical studies have assessed safety  (Collins 1981). More recent studies with poor power have 
suggested a link between prenatal acetaminophen use and asthma, lower intelligence quotient, 

   
 
   
 shorter male anogenital distance (predicting poor male reproductive potential), attention -
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, poorer attention and executive function, and behavioral problems 
in childhood (Toda 2017) . The Society of Maternal Fetal Medicine deems these studies as 
inconclusive as the methodologies were subject to recall bias and no data on dosing or frequency of use was incorporated into the analyses (Society of Maternal Fetal Medicine 2017) . Thus, the 
current recommendation is to use acetaminophen for at the lowest dose for the minimal duration possible. We will be administering a single 650mg dose of acetaminophen in the course of this study, which is considered to be safe in pregnancy.       Adverse effects of oral acetaminophen include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, loss of 
appetite, itching, rash, headache, dark urine, clay-colored stools, or jaundice. Serious allergic reactions to acetaminophen can include rash, itching/swelling (including of the face/tongue/throat), severe dizziness, or difficulty breathing.  
 2.3.3 Risk Benefit/Ratio  
 Iron deficiency anemia at admission for birth hospi[INVESTIGATOR_32401], preterm birth, low birth weight, incidence of C -section and more. 
Assessment of outcomes in this study will determine how treatment can improve maternal and 
neonatal outcomes. 
 
3. OBJECTIVES  
 
3.[ADDRESS_31518] the hypotheses 
that 1) intravenous (IV) iron therapy will increase hemoglobin more with IV iron than oral iron over a 4 week period, approximately 0.8 g/dL in the IV group and 0.5g/dL in the oral arm
16,28 
and 2) IV iron will improve anemia at the time of birth admission, 1.5 g/dL for IV iron and 1 g/dL for oral iron supplementation, the standard of care
28,29 
 3.2 Secondary Outcome   Evaluate the  
- rate of patients who discontinued treatment,  
- the rate of adverse events associated with treatment,  
- the need for blood transfusion postpartum 
- symptoms of patients before, during, and at the completion of therapy 
 
 
   
 
   
 4.  STUDY DESIGN  
 
4.1 Overall Design  
This will be an open- label randomized clinical trial at an academic tertiary care center comparing 
oral ferrous sulfate to intravenous (IV) ferumoxytol in pregnant women with IDA in the second or third trimester.   
 4.[ADDRESS_31519] difficulty with completing oral 
treatment due to gastrointestinal side effects. Immediate release ora l iron products are preferred 
for treatment of iron deficiency anemia; enteric coated and slow/sustained release preparations 
are not desired due to poor absorption (Hershko 2014; Liu 2012).  F
urther, there is increasingly more and more evidence optimal oral iron absorption occurs with 
single dosing every other day (Stoffel, et al 2020). There is also evidence to demonstrate intermittent dosing is also associated with less adverse side effects (RR 0.41, 95% CI 0.21 to 
0.82; 6 studies, 1166 participants; moderate‐quality evidence) (Cochrane 2019).  
The dosing for intravenous iron was initially based on the Ganzoni formula. However, it was 
noted to be cumbersome as it was not practical to dose outside of the confines of elemental iron 
in the viable. Thus in clinical practice patients have received the standard dosing 510 mg x  2 and 
recently there was an  investigation by [CONTACT_32421] 1020 mg in a single infusion (MA).  
 
In regards to a pregnancy specific population, it is of particular interest if receipt of intravenous 
doing can be stratified by [CONTACT_32422]. There is retrospective data that suggests that 
intravenous iron dosing with respect to pre -pregnancy body mass index may also be an area of 
future concern.  
  
4.3 E
nd of Study Definition  
 The study will be complete once enrollment has been completed. The goal is 80 patients with 40 
in each arm.  
 
4.4 Sample Size  
 We estimated minimum sample size required for 90% power, one -sided α=0.025, and estimated 
effect sizes for the outcomes of change in proportion of women (Hg <11g/dL) by [CONTACT_32423][INVESTIGATOR_32402]
16,30. Based on these parameters and 
allowing for 20% drop-out rate, the study requires [ADDRESS_31520], PhD (Co-I). We plan to recruit 80 patients to account for 
potential loss to follow up. 
 4.5 Timeline  
 
Aim 1 Milestones  Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 
Extramural funding application preparation and submission. Letter of intent submitted 
to PCORI February 4th; full applications due May 5th.  X       
Patient screening and enrollment. Patients identified via CBC testing during the 
second trimester  X    
Randomization. Patients randomized to IV iron cohort or Oral iron cohort  X    
Intervention. IV iron cohort receives intravenous iron. Oral iron cohort prescribed 
ferrous sulfate tablets.   
X X  
Data Analysis and Manuscript Preparation and Submission.    
X X 
 
 
5.  STUDY POPULATION 
 5.1. Screening and Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria   
General Screening guidelines   
I. We will recruit Stanford Children’s Health prenatal patients via screening by [CONTACT_32424], which are routinely performed to screen for anemia performed at 24- 28 weeks’ gestation  or may be performed for any other 
clinical indication , and with plans for delivery at LPCH. P atient s can be included in 
the study up until 34 weeks.  a. P
atients will be eligible for the study if they meet the following criteria for IDA: 
hemoglobin 7- 10.9 g/dL and serum ferritin <30 μg/L) (WHO).  
b. P atients on prenatal supplements with iron and/or taking oral iron in the early part 
of pregnancy but meeting other inclusion criteria will also be included in the study cohort.  
 
II. Patients will be screened by [CONTACT_14716]  
a. Patien ts will need to complete  iron studies  to appropriately determine eligibility  
b. Data obtained from the screening process includes a review of CBC screening at performed in the second trimester.    
c. Review will also include  pregnancy dating information using the initial 
ultrasound, and other medical history information taken at the first prenatal visits. Other baseline information, including such items as contact [CONTACT_3031], vitals , 
demographic and pregnancy history information, concomitant medications, and lifestyle information will be reviewed to assess suitability for study participation.  
   
 
   
 d. Gestational age must be validated prior to enrollment using the latest ACOG 
criteria that compares LMP derived gestational age with ultrasound parameters. The ACOG criteria for gestational age determination are listed in section  is as 
follows:  
 
 Gestational age assessment  by [CONTACT_32425] 
(between 14 0/7 weeks and 21 6/7 weeks of gestation , inclusive) is based on a composite 
of fetal biometric measurements and has an accuracy of ± 7–[ADDRESS_31521] clinical estimate according to ACOG criteria (see below) and have hemoglobin from 7 -10.9 g/dL 
and serum ferritin < 30 ug.  
 In agreement with ACOG, we recommend that all pregnant women be screened for anemia at the initiation of prenatal care and second/third trimester with a CBC. As this study is focused on intervention in the >24 weeks gestation, we will not be proposing a tr eatment regimen with IDA 
identified prior to this time.   Ferritin is also an acute phase reactant and can be elevated in chronic illnesses. Therefore, the study would also include of women with a hemoglobin 7-10.9 g.dL and transferrin saturation < 20%.   5.3 Exclusion Criteria  
 
If the basic screening criteria are met (patient has IDA by [CONTACT_32426]), the next 
step is to review the exclusion criteria. Those without exclusions should be approached for study 
participation.   Assess the following exclusions:  
1. History of hypersensitivity to intravenous iron. Out of an abundance of caution, pregnant women with this history will be excluded due to concern for increased risk of anaphylaxis  
2. Known hemoglobinopathies. This was added as an exclusion criteria to remove the potential confounder that women with hemoglobinopathies such as sickle cell disease, thalassemia, may have a different physiologic response to intravenous iron.  
3. History of Inflammatory Bowel Disease  or history of gastric by[CONTACT_4897] . Intravenous 
iron is the first line for treatment of iron deficiency anemia in individuals with inflammatory bowel disease due to concerns for impaired absorption of oral iron.  
4. History of Dialysis -Dependent Chronic Kidney D isease (CKD) . This category was added 
as patients with dialysis -dependent chronic kidney disease, because while the initial 
studies treated CKD patients with Ferumoxytol, these patients would require a complex dose adjustment due to decreased clearance.  
5.  Multifetal pregnancy (twins reduced to singleton or with vanishing twin syndrome prior to 14 weeks qualify)  
6. Gestational age < 2 4 weeks (needs ultrasound confirmation)  
   
 
   
 7. High -risk co -morbidities for which treatment may be indicated: if patient with multiple 
medical problems important to discuss with primary obstetrician prior to enrollment.  
8. Pt with history of with two or more  medication allergies: patient with history of medical 
allergies can slightly increase the risk of hypersensitivity reactions.   
9. Severe asthma or eczema 
10. Pt with the following will need additional review of medical  history prior to inclusion:  
a. Receiving treatment with beta blockers  
b. Systemic inflammatory disease (rheumatoid arthritis, lupus) or connective tissue 
disorder 
c. Severe anxiety   
11. Medication allergy to Tylenol 
12. Placenta previa  
 
Women who meet inclusion criteria and do not have exclusion criteria may be approached for the informed consent process.    
5.4 Screening/Re- screening  
 Patients may be included in the study up to 34 weeks 6/7 days . If the above inclusion criteria are 
met and exclusion criteria are absent, patients should be approached for study participation (if not already done) and randomization. All women who have a diagnosis of IDA should have the screening form initiated. The screening number will be generated electronically with REDCap is 
accessed and participant information is entered.  
 5.[ADDRESS_31522] recent ACOG criteria with ultrasound required prior to randomization. If no ultrasound examination has been performed previously, one will be performed before the patient is randomized. Only pregnant women with gestational age > 24 
0/[ADDRESS_31523] at each participating center. Any woman who is potentially eligible will be told about the study and asked if she is willing to participate. The point in the screening process at which a signed informed consent is required will be prior randomization. The study personnel conducting the informed consent process should emphasize the following study criteria during the informed consent process:   
• Patients  eligible based on hemoglobin will be offered iron studies if it’s  not already 
collected as part of routine prenatal care.  
   
 
   
 • Randomization to a t reatment arm with iron to increase hemoglobin, with 50% chance to 
be assigned to either arm:  
o One group will receive oral iron  
o One group will receive intravenous iron   
• Participants to sign medical release  
• American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology recommends oral iron as standard of 
care and IV iron only for a select few medical indications  
• Labs will be drawn [ADDRESS_31524]- initiation (Oral iron)/ post treatment  (IV iron) and 
to evaluate anemia  
o Update: We will no longer perform  study draw at 6 weeks postpartum, however, 
we will document labs performed  as part of routine study care postpartum.  
• Follow up to occur at clinic appointments or phone/email to evaluate symptoms 
associated with either treatment  
 
Due to elevated rate of anemia in the Hispanic/Latinx/Latin a population we will also have 
consents available in Spanish, or translators will be available for the consent process. A short 
form consent may also be used depending on the participant’s preferred language.  All women who are considered for participation in the study (consent, decline or ineligible) should have a data entry form and entered into the electronic data system even if not randomized. 
Women who do not meet IDA criteria at 24-28 weeks screening visit, may be re-screened until such time that they meet exclusion criteria or they reach 34weeks’  gestation. 
 5.7 Requesting Medical Release Forms  
 In order to obtain medical records from participants, each participant should sign a “Release of Medical Information” form. A signed Release of Medical Information form should be obtained at the time of, and preferably before, randomization. Clinical Site staff will be able to answer any questions about the procedure at the very beginning of their participation in the study. Also, reluctance to supply medical records may serve as a potential “red flag” that a potential participant may be an adherence or ret ention risk.  
 If a participant refuses to sign a Medical Release Form, probe for reasons for the refusal. Explain the importance of the records for the study and why they are needed. Some participants may be willing to sign a release that is specific to information needed for a particular outcome. If the participant continues to refuse, note the refusal in the participant’s chart and continue to follow them according to the protocol if they consent to contacts and/or visits.  
 5.8 Background and Rationale for Hemoglobin,  Serum Ferritin  and Transferrin Saturation  
Cutoffs  
In women without comorbidities , a serum ferritin <30 ng/mL  can confirm the diagnosis of iron 
deficiency; levels ≥30 ng/mL rule out the possibility of IDA. Borderline levels of serum ferritin 
may be in the range of 30 to 40 ng/mL with chronic illnesses such as diabetes because ferritin is 
an acute phase reactant.  
   
 
   
 We will also test for iron studies including ferritin, serum iron, total iron binding capacity 
(TIBC), and calculation of transferrin saturation (TSAT) if not already collected by [CONTACT_32427]. 
TSAT below [ADDRESS_31525], or the woman should 
simply be advised to avoid iron -containing foods or supplements to mitigate otherwise falsely 
elevated TSAT values.  
5.9 Frequency of Labs  
 The timing of follow up labs is determined by [CONTACT_32428] a participant should s
ee an increase in hemoglobin. The hypothesis is that 1) intravenous (IV) iron therapy will 
increase hemoglobin more with IV iron than oral iron over a 4 week period, approximately 0.8 g/dL in the IV group and 0.5g/dL in the oral arm
16,28 and 2) IV iron will improve anemia at the 
time of birth admission, 1.5 g/dL for IV iron and 1 g/dL for oral iron supplementation, the 
standard of care28,29The estimates are informed from a  2018 study which reflected a 1.5 g/dL 
increase in hemoglobin by [CONTACT_32429].28 
 
The follow up and reassessment is further informed by [CONTACT_32430]’s et al approach to 
treatment of IDA in pregnancy.    6. RAN
DOMIZATION AND BASELINE VISIT PROCEDURES  
 In participants with IDA prior to 24 weeks’ gestation, they can still be included in the study if 
they meet the inclusion criteria at 24 weeks gestation / enrollment time frame. If IDA is a new 
diagnosis at the time of 24 -28 weeks gestation, patients meeting the inclusion criteria be 
included.  
 In both groups, prenatal data will be obtained at the randomization visit. The randomization visit should occur with timing of lab results availability and prenatal visit if applicable.  
 Randomization may occur upon confirmation that all exclusion/inclusion criteria are satisfied and after verification of participant consent and HIPAA authorization. Of particular importance, careful consideration will be given the patient’s prior history a nd medications to determine final 
eligibility and the appropriate study algorithm to follow (see below). Study staff will also verify participant contact [CONTACT_32431] o btain a Release of Information . 
 The MFM Research team will review the following before randomization:   
• Complete review of all exclusion and inclusion criteria  
• Informed consent obtained  
• Iron studies and baseline labs to confirm eligibility  
• Pre-intervention survey to assess symptoms  
 
   
 
   
 After randomization:  
 
• Provide medication and instructions based on the treatment arm randomized to  
• Provide the group algorithm to both patient and provider. 
 
Once the participant is randomized, the treatment algorithms will be conspi[INVESTIGATOR_32403]’s medical record (whether electronic or paper medical record is utilized) such that providers will be aware of treatment plan at all times.  
 In both groups, serial CBC follow up and survey for symptoms will be assessed.  Baseline data 
consisting gestational age of pregnancy , body mass index, pre -pregnancy weight  and other 
prenatal data including baseline BP at the randomization visit will be included .  
Patients will be assigned to treatment groups by a concealed randomization allocation sequence 
using REDCap .  
 The categories of patients randomized:   Patients consenting to the study will be randomized 1:1 to two treatment groups   Group 1: Patients randomized to the IV iron group will receive treatment as follows:  
- Women with Hgb 9-10.9 g/dL will receive one dose of 510 mg IV 
ferumoxytol  
- Women with Hg 7-8.9 d/dL will receive two doses of ferumoxytol 510 mg 3-8 days apart for a maximum of dose of 1020 mg (see Figure 2 ). 
- Patients will receive 650mg of Tylenol prior to initiation of the infusion  
- The ferumoxytol is administered as an infusion for approximately 15-[ADDRESS_31526]’s Clinical and Translational Research Unit (CTRU) outpatient clinics with vitals collected before infusion and monitoring for 30minutes after infusion. Alternatively, patients who are admitted to the antepartum unit may receive the infusion inpatient.  
For the IV iron group, follow up labs will be performed at 4 and 8 weeks after completion of infusion /s;  
 Group 2: The standard of care oral iron group will be prescribed 1 -2 ferrous sulfate 325 mg 
tablets to be taken by [CONTACT_32432]. Dosage will be as follows for 
standardization: 
- one ferrous sulfate tablet every other day if Hg 9 -10.9 g/dL, and  
- two tablets once every other day if Hg 7-8.9 g/dL.  
- Oral medications will be dispensed by [CONTACT_32433]  (final confirmation pending contracts)  
- Follow up labs will be drawn for both groups. For the oral iron group, it will be drawn [ADDRESS_31527]-intervention surveys at 1 week, 4 weeks, and 8-12 weeks after initiating therapy to monitor symptoms and adverse events.   
   
 
   
 6.1 Informed Consent  
 No study activities will be conducted until an IRB approval is obtained. Potential participants 
who may be eligible will be approached by [CONTACT_16133]. The research staff will only 
introduce the study with the patients after a member of the clinical care team acquires permission 
from the potential participant that they can be approached for a study. If interested, the research 
staff will discuss the study and  obtain an informed consent from the participant. 
 Sufficient time will be given to participants to read the consent form, and to ask questions to 
ensure understanding. 
 
An IRB-approved study brochure may be given to potential participants to provide more information about the study and the procedures involved.  6.2 Randomization visit: Study Groups   There will be [ADDRESS_31528] care, based on randomization.  Group 1 (active treatment):  
 The starting dose and escalation of therapy in the active treatment arm are as follows:   Ferumoxytol: The patient will receive infusions at the Stanford’s CTRU or in the Antepartum Unit 
 Ferumoxytol will be administered to participants with iron deficiency anemia with inclusion criteria as outlined above. Each single use vial contains 510 mg elemental iron / 15 mL.   Prior to infusion of ferumoxytol, patients will receive 650mg of Tylenol.   Participants with Hemoglobin between 9 -
 10.9 g/dL will receive one dose of ferumoxytol 
(510mg). Participants with Hemoglobin between 7-8.9 g/dL will receive two doses (total 1020mg) of ferumoxytol with 3- 8 days interval between doses per manufacturer instru ctions. 
The IV iron is administered as an infusion for approximately 15 – [ADDRESS_31529]’s Clinical and Translational Research Unit (CTRU) outpatient clinics under the administration under trained Advanced Practit ioner Provider/Research Clinic 
Nurse coordinator or in the inpatient Antepartum Unit. When administered via infusion, 
administer diluted as a slow IV infusion over at least 15 minutes. Patient should be in a reclined 
or semi -reclined position during the infusion; monitor for signs of hypersensitivity (including 
blood pressure and pulse) for at least [ADDRESS_31530] clinical guidelines, 
which  may include administering Benadryl, Zofran, steroids, albuterol nebulizer, and in the cases 
of serious hypersensitivity, intramuscular epi[INVESTIGATOR_238].    
   
 
   
 Note:  Serious hypersensitivity reactions have been observed with rapid IV injection (<1 minute) 
(Macdougall 2014; Vadhan- Raj 2014). Wait ≥30 minutes between administration of ferumoxytol 
and other agents that may cause serious hypersensitivity reactions and/or hypotension (e.g., 
chemotherapy, monoclonal antibodies). 
 
Group 2 (standard of care):  
Ferrous sulfate: the patient will receive a bottle dispensed with 100 pi[INVESTIGATOR_32404] a time.  
 O
ral ferrous sulfate will be administered to participants identified with iron deficiency anemia as 
described above. One tablet every other day  in patients with hemoglobin 9-10.9 g/dL and two 
tablets every other day will be provided for patients with hemoglobin levels between 7- 8.9 g/dL.   
Tablet: 325 mg [elemental iron 65 mg].   
6.3. Starting dose of Medications   
Historically, suggested dosing of oral ferrous sulfate has been increased in frequency up to 2-[ADDRESS_31531] difficulty with completing oral treatment due to gastrointestinal side effects. 
Immediate release oral iron products are preferred for treatment of iron deficiency anemia; 
enteric coated and slow/sustained release preparations are not desired due to poor absorption 
(Hershko 2014; Liu 2012). Moreover, hepcidin has been found to be elevated immediately after 
taking oral iron, transiently decreasing absorption (Moretti 2015).  A recent open -label, 
randomized controlled trials showed higher amounts of iron absorption with dosing every other 
day compared two daily dosing, with subsequent studies showing similar findings (Stoffel et. al., 
2017). Thus, oral iron with be dosed every other day in this study.   
The dosing for intravenous iron was initially based on the Ganzoni formula. However, it was 
noted to be cumbersome as it was not practical to dose outside of the confines of elemental iron 
in the viable. Thus, in clinical practice patients have received the standard dosing 510mgx2 and 
recently there was an  investigation by [CONTACT_32421] 1020mg in a single infusion (MA).                
   
 
   
  
                       Algorithm A: Randomization  
 
routine CBC 24-
28 weeks
Hg<11, serum ferritin < 30 and or transferrin 
saturation < 20%
Randomization to 
Oral/IV iron armSee text for full Exclusion 
criteria 
Hg < 7
excluded from trial, 
referral to 
hematologyHg 7 -8.9
Oral: two ferrous 
sulfate 325mg tablets 
by [CONTACT_32434]: Ferumoxytol 
510mg x 2Hg 9 -10.9
Oral: one ferrous 
sulfate 325mg dailyIV: Ferumoxytol 
510mgx1
   
 
   
 7.  POST RANDOMIZATIO N VISITS AND MANAGEMENT OF IDA  
 
7.[ADDRESS_31532] Randomization Visits and management of IDA for both groups at 4 weeks  Group 1: (IV iron) Follow up visits Important for patient to maintain prenatal care, beyond 28 weeks gestation: frequency of visits determined by [CONTACT_32435], this is often every [ADDRESS_31533]/LPCH OB clinic  
• if less than starting hemoglobin, then refer to hematologist  
 Group 2: (oral iron)  
- [ADDRESS_31534]- initiation labs to be timed with prenatal care where possible  
- Pi[INVESTIGATOR_32405] 
• If compliance a concern, assess reasons why  
  
In both groups, patient will complete a survey monitoring symptoms and adverse effects. 
 
7.[ADDRESS_31535]  Randomization Visits and management of IDA for both groups at 8 weeks 
 Group 1: (IV iron) Follow up visits Important for patient to maintain prenatal care, beyond 28 weeks gestation: frequency this is often every 1- [ADDRESS_31536]/LPCH OB clinic  
 Group 2: (oral iron)  
- [ADDRESS_31537]- initiation labs to be timed with prenatal care where possible  
- Pi[INVESTIGATOR_32405] 
• If compliance a concern, assess reasons why  
 In both groups, patient will complete a survey monitoring symptoms and adverse effects between 8-12 weeks after initiation of therapy.          
   
 
   
 Algorithm B: Eval for labs post 4 weeks treatment  
 
 
 
  * Oral arm: if patients state they are intolerant to oral iron at any time during the study – refer to OB to discuss alternative treatment options  
                  
 
CBC, iron studies [ADDRESS_31538] treatmentOral Iron Arm*Hg rise > 0.5 : continue oral iron
Hg rise < 0.5 g/dL 
repeat iron indicesIf Hg< 7g/dl: Primary OB refer to 
Heme
Hg 9 -11: continue
Hg 7 -9: consider increasing dose 
of oral iron or Heme referral
IV Iron Arm Hg rise > 0.5: no additional 
medication
Hg rise < 0.5 g/dL, repeat iron 
indicesHg 9 -11: no additional action
Hg 7 -9: if iron studies less than 
enrollment levels, consider 
heme referral
Hg < 7: Primary OB refer 
toHeme
   
 
   
  
  Algorithm C: Evaluation of Labs [ADDRESS_31539] treatment  
    
 
      
*Oral arm: if patients state they are intolerant to oral iron at any time during the study – refer to OB to discuss alternative treatment options  
     [ADDRESS_31540] treatment
Oral Iron ARM*
•Hg rise > 1g/dL : continue oral iron
•Hg rise < 1 g/dL; repeat iron 
studies
•Hg 9 -11: continue oral iron
•Hg 7 -9: increase oral iron tablets  
or POB referral to Heme
•Hg < 7: POB referral to HemeIV Iron ARM 
•Hg rise > 1 g/dL: no additional 
action
•Hg rise < 1 g/dL: repeat iron 
studies •Hg 7 -11: no additional action
•Hg < 7: POB referral to Heme
   
 
   
  
 7.3 Management of patient’s intolerance to study intervention  
 Oral iron:  
 For adverse effects, particularly GI, consideration may be given for IV iron as this is standard of care. Per ACOG, intravenous iron is an approved indication for patient’s  intolerant of oral iron.  
 Intravenous iron: 
 For adverse effects such as hypotension (maternal BP˂90/60) and persistent dizziness, headaches, lightheadedness or fatigue and no other potential cause other than the medication, will be assessed for adverse reactions and any signs of anaphylaxis. Methylprednisolone, solumedrol, or dexamethasone, albuterol nebulizers, and intramuscular epi[INVESTIGATOR_32406].  PLEASE REFER TO THE DETAILED ALGORTIHM APPROACH FOR MANAGEMENT OF ADVERSE REACTIONS: this is a figure from Rampton, et a “Hypersensitivity reactions to intravenous iron: guidance for risk minimization and management.”   For patients that are stable for transfer, the plan will be for obstetric monitoring and further evaluation at the LPCH OB triage on the third floor. The  location is across the street from the 
CTRU and Stanford/LPCH clinic. The patients will still be followed by [CONTACT_32436].  In the cases of an unstable patient, 911 will be called and patient will be transferred 
immediately to the emergency room.   To increase effective management of possible hypersensitivity reactions in the IV group: the following have been included.  
- Reference range of normal vitals in pregnancy 
- Algorithm for management of hypersensitivity reactions  
   
   
 
   
  
I. Management of mild Hypersensitivity reactions  
II. Mild of Moderate Hypersensitivity reactions  
III. Severe/life threatening Hypersensitivity reactions  
 
 Note: Methyl prednisone prior to IV infusion may considered on case by [CONTACT_32437].  
      

   
 
   
  
7.4 Study Procedures by [CONTACT_32438]. Outcomes will be ascertained until 
delivery and maternal/infant discharge and up to 6 (4-12) weeks postpartum depending on the outcome.    7.5 Management of Unscheduled Visits  
 To facilitate appropriate management of study participants during unscheduled visits, we will : Visit Description  Screening/ 
Enrollment Treatment  [ADDRESS_31541]-initiation/ Post-
completion  [ADDRESS_31542]-initiation/ 
Post- 
completion  Delivery  1 day 
Postpartum 6 weeks 
postpartum  IV 
Ferumoxytol Oral  
Ferrous 
sulfate  
Visit Window  24-34 weeks 
GA 24-34 weeks  24-34 
weeks GA 
up to 
delivery     1 day after 
delivery  
Screening of pregnant women with 
eligible hemoglobin and ferritin levels  X        
Review eligibility criteria  X        
Informed consent  X        
Iron studies with or without baseline  
complete metabolic panel (depending on 
history of liver or kidney disease)  X        
Randomization  X        
Assign study number  X        
Demographics  X        
Medical and obstetric history review  X        
Initiate Oral iron study medications    X      
Schedule a visit at the CTRU for IV Iron 
infusion or coordinate with Antepartum 
Unit  X       
IV iron infusion appointment, 1st session   X       
Second IV iron infusion, as needed based 
on initial hemoglobin levels   X       
Monitoring during the IV Iron  infusion 
and post -infusion period   X       
Blood draw to check CBC at 4 weeks after 
initiation of oral iron/ post- completion of 
IV infusions     X     
Blood draw to check CBC 8 weeks after 
initiation  of oral iron/ post -completion 
of IV infusions      X    
Blood draw to check CBC during the time 
of admission  for delivery  (SOC)       X   
Blood draw to check hemoglobin, 
hematocrit level post-delivery  (SOC )       X (per OB)  
SAE/ AE monitoring, reporting, recording   X X X X X X X 
Pregnancy/ prenatal data collection       X   
Delivery data collection       X X  
Neonatal data collection       X X  
   
 
   
 • Prominently display participant status in the patient’s EHR for all providers to see  
• Include information regarding the management plan that corresponds to the study group  
• Provide the patient with brochure that outlines the study group and management 
algorithm  
• Include contact [CONTACT_32439].  
  7.[ADDRESS_31543] Randomi zation Participant Management  
  Clinical management  
• A summary of the research management algorithm for patients in each of the two study 
groups will be strategically posted at clinic locations and will be placed in each 
participant’s medical record; the patient should have an informational copy of their lab s 
and management algorithm and advised to bring to scheduled and unscheduled visits.  
• OB Welch  Clinical labs staff will be available to draw labs at 4 and 8 weeks after 
initiation of therapy : if a patient has Clinical labs that are indicated for any other reason 
by [CONTACT_32435] , the study labs can be paired with the clinical draw. 
• IV iron group will receive a dditional follow up for adverse symptoms [ADDRESS_31544] 
infusion and 4 and 8 weeks after initiation of treatment  
• Oral iron group will receive survey of symptoms 1, 4, and 8 weeks after initiation  of 
treatment  
• Routine pregnancy care at each center will be given to patients by [CONTACT_32440].  
• Ultrasound for anatomy or fluid/growth and antenatal testing will be per clinical center’s 
routine.  
 7.7 Parti cipant follow up  
 A clinic visit (preferred method) or follow up call will occur at 6  (4-12 weeks) weeks after 
delivery in accordance with routine postpartum care.  Several data forms will be used during this follow -up process using forms for maternal outcomes, newborn outcomes, NICU outcomes, and 
6 weeks follow up forms. These forms, HIPA A compliant, will be entered into the REDCap 
database.  
 At randomization, 24- 28 weeks (up to 30 complete weeks if necessary) [ADDRESS_31545]- 
initiation (Oral iron)/ post- treatment (IV iron) labs will be collected as described above.  We will 
also perform chart abstraction to determine hemoglobin levels at the time of admission for delivery and 1 day postpartum (these labs are drawn routinely at LPCH).   
 In addition to routine prenatal and postpartum clinic visits, participants will be followed up to ascertain maternal and infant status related to re/admissions and ER or unscheduled visits. The records of any ER visits or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_32407] . 
    
   
 
   
  
 7.[ADDRESS_31546]’s  investigational pharmacy will dispense IV iron infusion to  CTRU. CTRU will 
dispense/administer study infusion(s) to research participant  and will provide oral acetaminophen 
prior to the initiation of IV iron infusion .   
 Participants receive medication supplies from the outpatient pharmacy . Oral iron tablets will be 
distributed 100 tablets at a time. Medication dispensing may occur in the intervening periods between visits in case of emergency, loss, or schedule changes. A tracking mechanism is maintained for all dispensing actions.  
 The participant will report by [CONTACT_32441]. The only reasons that a patient may return the bottle include expi[INVESTIGATOR_32408]. If the participant doesn’t have enough left to supply her until her next visit, she will be dispe nsed a new bottle and told to complete the current 
supply and then start the new bottle  7.9 Biospecimens  
 7.9.1 Maternal Blood Samples will be collected at the following time points (see table below):  
• Randomization (at  24-28 weeks age gestational age-optimal) may collect up to 32 weeks  
• [ADDRESS_31547] –initiation for oral group or post- completion for intravenous group.  
• [ADDRESS_31548] –initiation for oral group or post- completion for intravenous 
group. 
• Delivery *  
• Postpartum day 1* 
 * collected with routine delivery at LPCH . Routine CBC at birth admission and postpartum day 1 
with LPCH. This will be in the patient’s electronic health record.  
 8. DELIVERY (including pregnancy loss after randomization) AND POST- DELIVERY  
 Outcome Data Collection and Chart Review Delivery Outcomes will be ascertained - on an ongoing basis until discharge.  Study personnel will abstract the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_32409]: 
- Labor and Delivery Data 
- Neonatal Outcome Data  
- Placental Pathology (review only if sent by [CONTACT_32442])  
- NICU admission form (if indicated)  
- Adverse Event  
- Study Intervention Discontinuation and Participation discontinuation/withdrawal  
  
   
 
   
 9.  PROCEDURES FOR INACTIVE/ LOST/ REFUSED PARTICIPANTS AND MISSED 
VISITS   
 
9.[ADDRESS_31549] of the study.  The goals to avoid drop-out and accomplish drop-out recovery include the following:  1. to ensure that participants are not pushed to the point that they refuse to participate further 2. to continue to engage participants through some form of contact (e.g., phone, e- mail) and 
allow an opportunity to determine participants’ concerns and problem-solve for solutions to concerns and barriers to participation,  
3. to foster some form of continued participation (e.g., even an agreement to allow future contact)  
 The general approach to drop-out recovery will involve contact [CONTACT_32443]:  1. identify barriers to participation  
2. problem- solve for solutions to overcome identified barriers  
3. apply motivational enhancement methods  In situations where a participant’s behavior suggests that she does not  wish to participate, the 
participant can be removed from the study.  
 
9.2 Definition of Participant Status.  
  For purposes of the study, we define the following terms related to trial participation status:  
 
 • Active status – active if iron medication therapy is managed according to the study algorithm. 
There may be instances where a provider is managing the participant’s medications in 
accordance with the study protocol (i.e. many may commonly prescribe oral i ron for anemia 
without iron studies), but the participant is obtaining medications from a (non -study) pharmacy 
of his/her choosing; in such situations, the participant is considered to be active as well.  
 
• Inactive status –inactive or non-compliant if her iron medication is no longer being managed 
according to the study protocol with CTRU and she has not withdrawn consent for regular 
measurement (follow -up) visits or event monitoring is still being performe d.  
 
• Lost status –lost- to-follow -up if she has missed several appointments and cannot be contact[CONTACT_32444] (e.g., home phone, cell phone, mail, email, fax, etc.), clinic staff does not 
know the participant’s whereabouts, and alternative contacts either do not know where the participant is or cannot be contact[CONTACT_32445].   
   
 
   
 · Withdrawn/Refused status –participant is considered to be withdrawn if he/she has withdrawn 
consent to participate in the study and refuses further contact [CONTACT_32446]. 
  10. ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING  
 
Serious adverse events that meet any of the following criteria: 
• fatal or life -threatening  
• result in significant or persistent disability,  
• require or prolong hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], 
• result in a congenital anomaly/birth defect, or • are important medical events that investigators judge to represent significant hazards or harm to research participants.  
 Specifically, any AE that meets any of these criteria (maternal death, ICU admission stroke, myocardial infarction, cardiomyopathy, fetal death or neonatal death) will be documented and reported as a SAE.  
In addition, any unexpected event/ unanticipated problems which the investigator identifies will 
be reported.  
10.[ADDRESS_31550] (DSMB) will be established, with responsibility to monitor all aspects of the study and monitor data and oversee participant safety. DSM B participants include the 
senior faculty, staff, and representatives from the Stanford  Maternal Fetal Medicine Division,  
Internal Medicine, Hematology and Nephrology. The DSMB will meet once a year to monitor safety, to advise on study progress and performance, protocol modification, or whether there should be early termination. 
The outcome of reviews will be relayed to the IRB and protocol director.  
10.2 Reporting of Adverse Events  
In addition, the following maternal events are examples of adverse events to be reported: 
Maternal or perinatal allergic reaction:  
• Angioedema, anaphylaxis or generalized skin rash  
• Transfer to Chronic Care facility (neonatal)  
   
 
   
 • Maternal arrhythmia (especially QT prolongation) or congestive cardiac failure 
(EF<45%)  
• Neonatal arrhythmia (especially QT prolongation)  
• Any adverse event leading to discontinuation of study medication or suspected to be due to the medication  
• Maternal pulmonary thromboembolism  
• Maternal admission to ICU  
• Neonatal IVH Grade III or IV  
• Prolonged maternal or term neonatal hospi[INVESTIGATOR_057]  
 
11.  QUALITY CONTROL  
Quality control and assurance are the responsibility of every member of the IDA trial.  
 
All clinic personnel are responsible for understanding the protocol procedures.  
 
Research Staff responsibilities: 
 
• Maintaining the integrity of the protocol  and regulatory document binder. 
• Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a data entry system that incorporates real -time data quality assurance 
features, such as range and logic checks   
• Monitoring site initiation requirements.  
• Monitoring the screening and randomization processes to ensure randomization of 
eligible participants and appropriate randomization allocation of participants.  
• Generating timely web -based reports describing clinic and study performance, including 
but not limited to: a) recruitment b) visit adherence and visit completeness c) study intervention ) data entry e) data completeness f) outcomes documentation  
• Monitoring documentation of 100% of potential outcomes  
  12.  STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
  12.1 Statistical Considerations  
 
Efficacy Endpoint(s): The primary outcome for this study is to assess the delta in hemoglobin pre 
and post intervention in both treatment groups. Our hypothesis is that the rate of increase of intravenous iron will be approximately 1.5g/dL higher in the IV iron cohort versus the oral iron 
cohort 
Secondary Efficacy Endpoint(s): The secondary outcomes for this study include the following:  
- correction of anemia at the time of birth hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059],  
- rates of blood transfusion,  
   
 
   
 - neonatal outcomes such as APGARs and NICU admissions  
- maternal/neonatal infection  
- mode of delivery (NTSV)  
- infant birth weight  
 
12.2 Sample  size determination  
 
We estimated minimum sample size required for 90% power, one -sided α=0.025, and estimated 
effect sizes for the outcomes of change in proportion of women (Hg <11g/dL) by [CONTACT_32447][INVESTIGATOR_32402]26,47. Based on these parameters and 
allowing for 20% drop-out rate, the study requires [ADDRESS_31551], PhD (Co- I). We plan to recruit  up to [ADDRESS_31552] analyses stratified by [CONTACT_545]/ethnicity and to study rare secondary clinical outcomes, as well as possibly compare formulations of intravenous iron, none of which has been done previously.   12.[ADDRESS_31553] an intent- to-treat analysis to compare the primary and secondary outcomes 
between the treatment arms. The primary outcome is the mean change in hemoglobin in oral vs IV iron over 4 weeks as well mean change in hemoglobin pre delivery. The primary outcome will be assessed using t -tests. Baseline characteristics between the groups will be compared using 
t-tests and chi -square tests. If there is an imbalance between the treatment arms, we will use 
multivariable regression modeling. Differe nces will be considered statistically significant at 
P<0.05.   13. POTENTIAL CONTINGENCY PLANS   
 
Patient compliance will be assessed in this trial by [CONTACT_21173][INVESTIGATOR_32410] a 
log of the study infusions in the IV arm . If enrollment is low, we will engage additional obstetric 
providers whose patients deliver at LPCH such as San Mateo clinic. The IRB revision with the updated formulation ferumoxytol is approved. The goal remains to identify the optimal intravenous iron preparation that combines lowest risk optimal amount of elemental iron with least burden on the patient (fewest visits, short infusion times) with  optimal amount of elemental iron.   
  References  
1.  Shim J -Y, Kim MY, Kim YJ, et al. Efficacy and safety of ferric carboxymaltose versus 
ferrous sulfate for iron deficiency anemia during pregnancy: subgroup analysis of Korean women. doi:10.1186/s12884-018-1817-y 
2.  Breymann C, Milman N, Pharma V, et al. Patient Blood Management and Life Cycle 
   
 
   
 Management Open Access Ferric carboxymaltose vs. oral iron in the treatment of 
pregnant women with iron deficiency anemia: an international, open- label, randomized 
controlled trial (FER -ASAP). J Perinat Med . 2017;45(4):443-453. doi:10.1515/jpm-2016-
0050 
3.  Govindappagari S, Burwick RM. Treatment of Iron Deficiency Anemia in Pregnancy with 
Intravenous versus Oral Iron: Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis. Am J Perinatol . 
2019;36(4):366-376. doi:10.1055/s-0038-1668555 
4.  Lewkowitz AK, Gupta A, Simon L, et al. Intravenous compared with oral iron for the 
treatment of iron -deficiency anemia in pregnancy: a systematic review and meta -analysis. 
J Perinatol . 2019;39(4):519-532. doi:10.1038/s41372-019-0320-2 
5.  Wolf M, Chertow GM, Macdougall IC, Kaper R, Krop J, Strauss W. C L I N I C A L M E 
D I C I N E Randomized trial of intravenous iron -induced hypophosphatemia. 2018. 
doi:10.1172/jci.insight.124486 
6.  Beckert RH, Baer RJ, Anderson JG, Jelliffe- Pawlowski LL, Rogers EE. Maternal anemia 
and pregnancy outcomes: a population-based study. J Perinatol . 2019;39(7):911-919. 
doi:10.1038/s41372-019-0375-[ADDRESS_31554] S, Daru J, Prasannan N, Robinson S, Stanworth S, Girling J. [LOCATION_006] guidelines on the 
management of iron deficiency in pregnancy. Br J Haematol . October 2019:bjh.[ZIP_CODE]. 
doi:10.1111/bjh.[ZIP_CODE] 
8.  Lops VR, Hunter LP, Dixon LR. Anemia in pregnancy. Am Fam Physician . 
1995;51(5):1189-1197. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7709894. Accessed February 1, 2020. 
9.  ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 95: Anemia in Pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol . 2008;112(1):201-
207. doi:10.1097/AOG.0b013e3181809c0d 
10.  Mei Z, Cogswell ME, Looker AC, et al. Assessment of iron status in US pregnant women 
from the national health and nutrition examination survey (NHANES), 1999-2006. Am J 
Clin Nutr . 2011;93(6):1312-1320. doi:10.3945/ajcn.110.[ADDRESS_31555] SA, Main EK, Scott KA, Profit J, Carmichael SL. Racial and ethnic disparities in severe maternal morbidity prevalence and trends. Ann Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] . 2019. 
doi:10.1016/j.annepi[INVESTIGATOR_6730].2019.02.007 
12.  Bothwell TH. Iron requirements in pregnancy and strategies to meet them. In: American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. Vol 72. ; 2000. doi:10.1093/ajcn/72.1.257s 
13.  Talbot L, Maclennan K. Physiology of Pregnancy . 
14.  Recommendations to prevent and control iron deficiency in the [LOCATION_002]. Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention. MMWR Recomm Rep . 1998;47(RR- 3):1-29. 
15.  Cantor AG, Bougatsos C, Dana T, Blazina I, McDonagh M. Routine iron supplementation 
and screening for iron deficiency anemia in pregnancy: A systematic review for the U.S. preventive services task force. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162(8):566-576. doi:10.7326/M14-[ADDRESS_31556] Rev . October 2011. 
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD003094.pub3 
17.  Tolkien Z, Stecher L, Mander AP, Pereira DIA, Powell JJ. Ferrous Sulfate 
Supplementation Causes Significant Gastrointestinal Side -Effects in Adults: A Systematic 
Review and Meta-Analysis. Strnad P, ed. PLoS One . 2015;10(2):e0117383. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0117383 
   
 
   
 18.  Kriplani A, Mahey R, Dash BB, Kulshrestha V, Agarwal N, Bhatla N. Intravenous iron 
sucrose therapy for treatment of anaemia in pregnancy. J Obstet Gynaecol (Lahore) . 
2011;31(July):34. doi:10.1016/S0020-7292(12)[ZIP_CODE]-8 
19.  Chertow GM, Mason PD, Vaage-Nilsen O, Ahlmén J. Update on adverse drug events 
associated with parenteral iron. Nephrol Dial Transplant . 2006;21(2):378-382. 
doi:10.1093/ndt/gfi253 
20.  Pharmaceuticals A. FERAHEME - ferumoxytol injection HIGHLIGHT S OF 
PRESCRIBING INFORMAT ION FULL PRESCRIBING INFORMATION : 
CONTENTS * WARNING : RISK FOR SERIOUS HYPERSENSITIVITY / ANAPHYLAXIS REACTIONS [ADDRESS_31557].  
21.  U.S. FDA 2008. 
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfdadocs/nda/2009/022180s000PharmR.pdf. 
22.  U.S. National Library of Medicine. 23.  Grzeskowiak LE, Qassim A, Jeffries B, Grivell RM. Approaches for optimising intravenous iron dosing in pregnancy: a retrospective cohort study. Intern Med J . 
2017;47(7):747-753. doi:10.1111/imj.[ZIP_CODE] 
24.  Wang C, Graham DJ, Kane RC, et al. Comparative risk of anaphylactic reactions associated with intravenous iron products. JAMA - J Am Med Assoc. 2015;314(19):2062-
2068. doi:10.1001/jama.2015.[ZIP_CODE] 
25.  Breymann C, Auerbach M. Iron deficiency in gynecology and obstetrics: Clinical 
implications and management. Hematology . 2017;2017(1):152-159. 
doi:10.1182/asheducation-2017.1.152 
26.  Auerbach M, Adamson JW. How we diagnose and treat iron deficiency anemia. Am J 
Hematol . 2016;91(1):31-38. doi:10.1002/ajh.[ZIP_CODE] 
27.  Wolf M, Chertow GM, Macdougall IC, Kaper R, Krop J, Strauss W. C L I N I C A L M E 
D I C I N E Randomized trial of intravenous iron -induced hypophosphatemia. 2018. 
doi:10.1172/jci.insight.124486 
28.  Khalafallah A, Dennis A, Bates J, et al. A prospective randomized, controlled trial of 
intravenous versus oral iron for moderate iron deficiency anaemia of pregnancy. J Intern Med. 2010. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2796.2010.[ZIP_CODE].x 
29.  Peña -Rosas JP, De- Regil LM, Dowswell T, Viteri FE. Daily oral iron supplementation 
during pregnancy. In: Peña-Rosas JP, ed. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews . 
Chichester, [LOCATION_006]: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd; 2012. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD004736.pub4 
30.  Qassim A, Gergis RG, Jeffries B, Grivell RM, Grzeskowiak LE. Use of intravenous iron 
polymaltose in the management of iron deficiency in pregnancy: A retrospective cohort study. Aust New Zeal J Obstet Gynaecol . 2018. doi:10.1111/ajo.[ZIP_CODE]  
31. Mo
retti D, Goede JS, Zeder C, Jiskra M, Chatzinakou V, Tjalsma H, Melse-Boonstra A, 
Brittenham G, Swinkels DW, Zimmermann MB. Oral iron supplements increase hepcidin and decreas e iron absorption from daily or twice -daily doses in iron-depleted young 
women. Blood . 2015. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015- 05-642223 
32. S toffel, Siebenthal, Moretti, Zimmerman. Oral iron supplementation in iron -deficient 
women: how much and how often? Molecular Aspects of Medicine. 75 (2020)  