 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Impact of Individualized Estrogen Therapy on Cardiovascular Disease Risk Parameters in 
Young Women after Bilateral Oophorectomy: A Randomized Controlled Trial  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
January 29, 2021  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Specific aims : Women undergoing bilateral oophorectomy before the natural age of menopause (~51 years) 
have a higher risk of early mortality in comparison to their age -matched counterparts with intact ovarian 
function. [1-4] The increase in mortality is primarily related to an increased risk of cardiovascular disease 
(CVD). [5] The risk can be mitigated, in part, with the use of estrogen -based hormone therapy (ET) given at least 
until the natural age of menopause, unless there is a contraindication to its use. [1, 5-7] While most professional 
societies support the use of ET in this group of women, there are no consensus guidelines regarding the optimal 
estrogen dose required to minimize risk for early mortality, multiple morbidities and accelerated aging , or 
recommendation s regarding how to individualize treatment (tailored to estradiol level) in these young women .[6] 
The long -term goal  of this work  is to improve and individualize the hormonal treatment of women with bilateral 
oophorectomy, in order to reduce mortality, CVD risk and other morbidities associated with premature estrogen 
deprivation . To achieve this goal, we will test the over-arching hypothesis  that an individualized approach to 
dosing estrogen treatment in young women (<46 years of age) after bilateral oophorectomy would improve 
parameters of CVD risk . Current clinical practice is to treat with a dose of estrogen about [ADDRESS_1078501] of hormone therapy on measures of cardiovascular function in young wome n after bilateral 
oophorectomy.  We will recruit women younger than 46 years of age who undergo bilateral oophorectomy, and 
are candidates  for hormone therapy after the procedure. We will study whether titrating the dose of estradiol to 
achieve the average premenopausal estradiol level ( 80-120 pg/ml)  is superior to “standard dosing ” for improving 
CVD risk parameters . We will focus on measures  of cardiovascular function  which show rapid  changes to 
hormonal variation , and are predictors of  CVD  progression : arterial stiffness, and cardiovascular response to 
sympathoexcitatory stressors . Our over -arching hypothesis will be tested by [CONTACT_348354]:  
Aim 1 : Compare the cardiovascular function in young women (<46 years) following bilateral oophorectomy who 
are treated with either the standard dose of estradiol(100 mcg or lower transdermal patch or equivalent oral 
dose) or titrated estradiol dosing to achieve average premenopausal estradiol level ( 80-120 pg/ml).    
Hypothesis : Women receiving the titrated dosing of estradiol will have better cardiovascular function  than women 
receiving the standard dose of estradiol.   
Aim 2 : Characterize the relationship between the serum estradiol level and cardiovascular function  in young 
women (<46 years) on estradiol replacement after bilateral oophorectomy.  
Hypothesis : There will be a dose response relationship between the serum estradiol level and cardiovascular 
function .  
Aim 3 : Compare the body composition  in young women following bilateral oophorectomy who are treated with 
either the standard dose of estradiol (100 mcg or lower transdermal patch or equivalent oral dose) or titrated 
estradiol dosing to achieve average premenopausal estradiol level (80 -120 pg/ml).  
Hypothesis : Women receiving the titrated dosing of estradiol will have  a body composition closer to their 
premenopausal state  as compared to women receiving the standard dose of estradiol .   
Background  and Significance : Bilateral oophorectomy performed before the natural age of menopause is an 
important cause of premature estrogen deprivation, and may not be avoidable in women undergoing surgery for 
gynecologic cancer or ovarian cancer risk reduction in high risk individuals, such as BRCA mutation carriers. [6] 
In the absence of estrogen replacement therapy, these women  are at increased risk for several adverse health 
outcomes including CVD, cognitive dysfunction, mood disorders, osteoporosis , acc elerated aging  and early 
death. The risk for many of these conditions is higher with younger age at oophorectomy. [6] Many professional 
societies, therefore, support the use of estrogen therapy for these women, not only for management of 
menopausal symptoms, but also to mitigate the adverse long -term health consequ ences of bilateral 
oophorectomy .[8, 9] The current clinical practice is to use estrogen -based hormone therapy at least until the 
natural age of menopause  unless there is a contraindicati on to its use .[1] However, in the absence of evidence 
regarding the impact of the specific estrogen therapy regimens on  health outcomes in these women ,[10] 
3 
 treatment is usually tailored to symptom control. The general  practice is  to use a dose of  estrogen higher than 
that used for vasomotor symptom treatment in women after natural menopause in order to approxim ate 
the physiologic estradiol level s in premenopausal women. [11] A transdermal estradiol patch delivering 100 mcg 
per day  or lower , or its equivalent oral dose  (2 mg per day) , is commonly re commended for these young 
women .[12] However, this choice is not based on rigorous scientific evidence. While this approach serves to 
alleviate v asomotor symptoms in most cases , it is currently unknown if this dose is an effective strategy to prevent 
long-term adverse health consequences of early estrogen deprivation, and if a n individualized treatment 
approach may result in better long -term health outcomes. Additionally, estradiol absorption and metabolism can 
be highly variable, accounting for differences in estradiol levels among women on identical estradiol dosing. The 
current clinical practice  is to titrate the estradiol dos e to symptom control, and not to achieve the average 
premenopausal estradiol level of 80-120 pg/ml. It is reasonable to speculate  that ET in young women 
with premature estrogen deprivation should be individualized  and titrated  to estradiol level in order to 
optimize their long -term  health outcomes.  
This novel study  has been designed to test hypotheses relevant to the health of a group of understudied young 
women  at risk for increased mortality and numerous adverse long -term health outcomes. We ar e proposing to 
study the trends  CVD risk markers between young women with bilateral oophorectomy who are treated with 
standard -dose estradiol therapy versus those whose estradiol dose is titrated to achi eve the average 
premenopausal estradiol level  (80-120 pg/ml) . The CVD risk parameters that will be studied in the current 
protocol include arterial stiffness  and cardiovascular response to sympathoexcitatory stressors . 
 
Previous studies have also reported that menopause accelerates epi[INVESTIGATOR_784169] . There is  preliminary 
data to suggest  significant change in steroid metabolome after menopause. Further,  abnormal steroid 
metabolome in menopausal women is associated with decline in executive function, processing speed, and 
working memory. Our overall hypothesis is that ad renal aging is accelerated after bilateral ooophorectomy, as 
characterized by [CONTACT_88086] 24h urine steroid metabolome.  We are therefore proposing to st udy the trends in [ADDRESS_1078502] of individualized estradiol dosing on 
the same.  
 
 
 
4 
   
Methods : The overall study pr otocol is summarized in Figure [ADDRESS_1078503] Information:  
 
Subject population :  Patients scheduled for  bilateral oophorectomy or completion oophorectomy (in cases with 
a prior history of unilateral oophorectomy) in Mayo Clinic Gynecology Department  will be considered for 
participation in the study . We plan to screen about [ADDRESS_1078504] of patients scheduled for Gynecology consultation for oophorectomy. We will screen these potential 
participants on the phone using a screening questionnaire prior to their visit in Gynecology. Those patients who 
meet study criteria will be invited to participate.  
 
Inclusion Criteria :     
1. Premenopausal w omen undergoing (or completion of) bilateral oophorectomy and starting menopausal 
hormone therapy at Mayo Clinic, [COMPANY_002]ster ; or premenopausal women not undergoing the procedure for 
the time control group  
2. Currently between the ages of 21 - 45 years  
3. Able to participate fully in all aspects of the study  
4. Able to understand and sign the informed consent.  
 
Exclusion Criteria :   

5 
 1. Contra indication to hormone therapy  
2. Chemotherapy  or radiation  therapy  in the preceding 3 months  (only applicable to those participating in 
the cardiovascular testing)  
3. Current ly using tobacco, or past use in preceding  12 months  (only applicable to those participating in the 
cardiovascular testing)  
4. Current use of medication that alters autonomic or vascular function (e.g. α -blockers, β -blockers, etc.)  
(only applicable to those participating in the cardiovascular testing)   
5. For Time Controls:  Are currently pregnant or lactating, or are of child -bearing potential or are likely to 
become pregnant during the study and unwilling to use contraception;  Acceptable forms include:  
a. Barrier methods (such as a condom or diaphragm) used with a spermicide (a foam, cream, or 
gel that kills sperm)  
b. Copper IUD  
c. Hysterectomy  
d. Tubal ligation  
e. Abstinence (no sex)  
6. Any condition or factor judged by [CONTACT_784174] : This will be a randomized open -label trial. Participants  will be randomized 1:[ADDRESS_1078505] 100 mcg or lower transdermal estradiol patch as clinically indicated (or an equivalent oral dose; n=up 
to 25). The other group will be on transdermal (or oral) estradiol therapy titrated to achieve a serum estradiol 
level of 80 -120 pg/ml (n=up to 25).  Participants  with an intact uterus will also be prescribed a progest ogen  for 
endometrial protection. A third group of h ealthy age -matched premenopausal women, not on any hormonal 
contraception will be recruited via an advertisement, and will be studied as time controls (n=up to10).  
 
The women deemed eligible based on the phone screen will be scheduled for a baseline medical assessment 
by [CONTACT_784175]’s Sexual Health Clinic (MWSH).  This is a normal part of 
clinical care for these women prior to oophorectomy.  This visit will occur after they have been evaluated in the 
Department of Gynecology, and a decision to proceed with bilateral  (or completion)  oophorectomy has been 
made. Relevant past history including history of pregnancy induced hypertension and g estational diabetes will 
be obtained.    If the patient is eligible and interested in study participation, they will meet with a study team 
member who will review the informed consent and answer all of the patients’ questions.  
 
 After they agree to participate and sign the consent form, they will complete questionnaires to assess the 
following  (these questionnaires will also be assessed at 6 and 12 month visits) : 
a. Menopausal symptoms severity: Menopause Rating Scale (MRS) . This self -reported  
questionnaire consists of 11 items covering psychological, somatic, and urogenital subscales. It 
can be easily administered and scored, and completed in less than 5 minutes . 
b. Exercise/physical activity: International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ).  This is a Godin 
physical activity questionnaire, and a detailed [ADDRESS_1078506].  
c. Sleep: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_539472] (PSQI). This is a self -reported assessment of sleep 
quality and disturbances over a 1 -month period. It consists of 19 items covering sleep quality, 
latency, duration, efficiency, disturbances, medications, and daytime dysfunction. It can be easily 
administered and  scored in less than 10 minutes . 
d. Mood: Patient Health Questionnaire -9. The PHQ -9 is a 9 -question screen  to assess the presence 
and severity of depression. The results of the PHQ -9 may be used to make a depression diagnosis 
according to DSM -IV criteria . It can be completed in less than 3 minutes.  
e. Anxiety:  Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7 (GAD -7). The GAD -7 is a self -reported questionnaire to 
assess the presence and severity of anxiety.  It has 7 items and the final assessment regarding 
the presence and severity of anxiety is based on the sum of the score on all 7 items.  
f. Sexual function ( Female Sexual Function Index,  FSFI and Female Sexual Distress Scale -
Revised,  FSDS -R): The FSFI, a validated 19 -item questionnaire with scores ranging from 2.0 -
36.0, is designed to assess female sexual function with a lower score indicating greater sexual 
dysfunction. The FSFI is divided into six domains: desire, arousal, lubrication, orgasm , 
[ADDRESS_1078507] reliability. Scores range from 0 -52. A score 
greater than or equal to 11 indicates clinically significant sexual distress.  
g. Quality of life: Utian Quality of Life Scale (UQOL). This is a self -reported assessment of perceived 
well-being distinct from menopausal symptoms . It consists of [ADDRESS_1078508] 24h urine sample. A mail -in kit will be sent to the participant, and clear 
instructions for collection will be provided.    Participants on any kind of exogenous glucocorticoid therapy will be 
excluded from this part of the study. Urine samples will be aliquoted and stored as a part of the IRB # 13-005838 
biobank.  Urine steroid profiling will be perf ormed in batches in the ICL lab . 
 
The participants will then be asked to report to the clinical research and trials unit (CRTU) for the baseline study 
visit. When they  report to the CRTU for the baseline visit, they will be in the fasting state (8 hours) to complete 
the tests listed below.  Participants will also refrain from vigorous exercise, caffeine, and alcohol for 24 hours 
prior to the study days.  
 
Baseline S tudy Day Protoco l:  
1. Urine Pregnancy Test:  Urine Pregnancy tests will be performed on subjects determined to be of child -
bearing potential.  Nurses in the CRTU will assess the need for this, and confirm through a pregnancy test 
their status before beginning physiological testing.  
2. Blood sampling : Baseline blood samples will be collected for estradiol, estrone, testosterone  (total and 
free), glucose, insulin, lipid panel , norepi[INVESTIGATOR_293183] , a bone alkaline phosphatase  and HbA 1c. We will also 
plan to store [ADDRESS_1078509] will be omitted for the limited participation subjects.  
3. Dual energy x -ray absorptiometry (DXA) : Body composition will be measured prior to the study visit in the 
CTSA body composition core using DXA.  All subjects will have whole -body and regional fat and fat -free 
mass measured by [CONTACT_784176] -body DXA scans with Lunar software.   (Baseline DXA scan 
for the limited participation subjects can be done within a month after oophorectomy.)  
4. Cardiovascular monitoring : Electrocardiogram (ECG) and continuous blood pressure will be monitored 
and recorded throughout the protocol.  We will use a Nexfin to record continuous blood pressure.  The 
pneumatic cuff will be placed around the middle finger of the non -dominant hand fo r continuous, non -invasive 
monitoring of blood pressure.  The Nexfin has previously been reported to accurately record changes in 
mean arterial pressure (MAP) during both exercise and apnea, and has been used extensively in Dr. J oyner’s 
experiments.  The Nexfin cuff will be positioned at heart level and kept at the same level throughout the 
duration of the study  visit.  Cardiovascular activity will be recorded using a 3 -lead electrocardiogram 
(Cardiocap) placed  in the Lead II configuration.  
5. Arterial Tonometry : Arterial tonometry estimates central blood pressure which is an important determinant 
of flow through the carotid and cerebral vessels. Additionally, indices of arterial stiffness can be calculated 
from non -invasive applanation tonometry.  Participants  will be studied in the supi[INVESTIGATOR_784170] 15 minutes of relaxation. Tonometry transit distances from the supra -sternal notch to the 
femoral, carotid, and radial recording sites will be measured with a tape measure. High -fidelity pressure 
waveforms will be recorded non -invasively using a pencil -type Millar Micro -tip pressure transducer from the 
radial, femoral and carotid arteries in that order in rapid succession. An aortic pressure waveform is derived 
from the radial pulse  using the application of a generalized transfer function (SphygmoCor).  Arterial 
applanation tonometry will then be performed on the radial, femoral, and carotid arteries in rapid succession 
over a [ADDRESS_1078510] -Exercise Ischemia:  Maximal Voluntary Contraction (MVC, kg) of 
the non -dominant arm will be determined as the average of the two highest measurements from [ADDRESS_1078511] of squeezing a transducer forcefully enough to consiste ntly 
maintain a moderate workload (30% MVC; a combination of central command, mechanoreflex,  and 
metaboreflex stimulation) [17, 18 ].  Visual feedback of force production is provided to the subject. Fol lowing 
[ADDRESS_1078512], s ubjects will complete 2 minutes of static handgrip exercise at 30% MVC, followed 
by [ADDRESS_1078513] exercise ischemia (PEI).  PEI will begin at the 2 -minute mark of exercise prior to the 
end of contraction and consists of rapid inflation of an occlusion cuff on the exercising arm proximal to the 
antecubital fossa to suprasystolic pressure (~220 mmHg); the cuff will remain inflated for 2 minutes.  PEI 
traps local metabolites and preserves activation of metabosensitive afferent ner ve endings, thus isolating the 
metaboreflex from central command and the mechanoreflex [19,20,21,22,23] . Participants will be asked to 
rate their perceived exertion (RPE) at the end of the exercise (Bo rg scale; range 6 to 20).  
7. Cold Pressor Test:   The subject’s hand will be immersed up to the wrist in ice water (0 -4 degrees C) for [ADDRESS_1078514] 
Raynaud ’s phenomenon this test will not be completed.    
 
  
 
In addition to the groups above , in order to keep an optimum recruitment, we will  recruit the women who refuse 
the cardiovascular testing, for blood -work, questionnaires and DXA scan only.  
 
Surgery and dismissal : Participants will be randomized 1:1 to one of the 2 groups  upon dismissal from the 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_784171]: standard dose estradiol , (including dosing dicta ted by [CONTACT_784177] ) or titrated dose estradiol therapy . Women with an intact uterus will also be prescribed a progest ogen  for 
endometrial protection. The preferred progest ogen  will be oral micronized progesterone, given as oral dose [ADDRESS_1078515] their estradiol 
levels checked once every 3 -4 weeks  (clinical visits overseen by [CONTACT_784178]’s Sexual Health Clinic ) and the estradiol dose accordingly titrated until they reach the desired goal of an 
estradiol level of 80 -120 pg/ml. if women in the standard dose group report  residual symptoms despi[INVESTIGATOR_2391], 
we will offer titration to a higher dose of ET. Women intolerant of the estradiol patch will be treated with oral 
estradiol at an equivalent dose. Women with intolerance/side -effects/abnormal uterine bleeding with 
progesterone will be offered an alternative progest ogen  for uterine protection.  Clinical care of the subjects will 
be overseen by [CONTACT_784179]’s Sexual Health Clinic.   
 
The study is designed to have active study participants on varying hormone replacement after oophorectomy as 
dictated by [CONTACT_784180].  
 
Post -operative Study V isit at 6 Months : The same protocol will be followed as the baseline study day protocol 
above except we will not check glucose, lipi[INVESTIGATOR_784172], and DXA scan will not be performed, as it will 
take longer than [ADDRESS_1078516] -operative Study V isit at 12 Months : Subjects will report to the clinical research and trials unit (CRTU), 
and t he same protocol w ill be followed as that of the baseline study day v isit.  All blood samples will be drawn  in 
Cold 
Pressor 
TestIsometric 
Handgrip 
Exercise/Post -
Exercise 
IschemiaInstrumentation Arterial 
TonometryDXA,
Blood samples,
Questionnaires
0 60 90                150 
Time (minutes)Figure 2.  Approximate Timeline for Study Day Visits
[ADDRESS_1078517] as done for the baseline visit . A 24 -hour urine  sample will be collected again in a mail -in kit as 
described above. Participants on any kind of exogenous glucocorticoid therapy will be excluded from this part of 
the study. Urine samples will be aliquoted and stored as a part of the IRB # 13 -005838 biobank. Urine steroid 
profiling will be perf ormed in batches in the ICL lab.  
 
 
 
Time controls will complete baseline, 6 month, and 12 m onth study visits.   
 
Participant Retention :  All participants will be remunerated up to $ 300.  Participants will be remunerated $100 
for each of the following visits:  baseline, six months and twelve months.    If a participant refuse the 
cardiovascular testing, and chooses the option to complete the  blood -work, questionnaires and DXA scan only, 
they will be remunerated $50 for each of the following visits:  baseline, six months and twelve months.  Amounts 
will be prorated according to the visits the participant completes.  In addition, participants will be provided with 
Mayo parking vouchers for the time they are onsite for study visits.  For CRTU visits, participants will be given 
six-hour vouchers , and for other visits participants would be given 2 hour parking vouc hers.  After the long visits 
in the CRTU, which requires fasting for 8 hours, participants will be provided a meal.  
 
Statistics (prepared in collaboration with Mariza de Andrade, Ph.D.) : For the proposed investigation, women 
21-45 years of age undergoing bilateral oophorectomy will be randomized to one of two groups, based on the 
regimen of estradiol replacement therapy (standard versus titrated). In addition to estradiol, patients who do  not 
undergo hysterectomy will receive a progestogen as clinically indicated. A randomization schedule will be 
generated by [CONTACT_784181]. Covariates not balanced through randomization, such as additional hormone 
use in patients with hysterectomy, will be accounted for in analysis.   For all aims, the primary analyses will be 
performed using intention to treat with estradiol dosing regimen  as the treatment group variable  and secondary 
analyses will be performed using the serum estradiol concentration (E2)  as a continuous explanatory variable .  
 
Statistical Analysis :  
Aims 1 and 3 : We will first perform cluster analysis among the variables to identify set of variables that are highly 
correlated, and regression analysis to identify the dependency between the outcome variable and its covariate. 
We will also perform a multivariable regr ession analysis taking into account all the covariates and applying 
penalized methods such as least absolute shrinkage selection operator (lasso) [17] for covariate  selection .  
Aim 2: We will plot the data to identify the patterns between the outcome variable and the covariates. We will 
then fit a mixed -effects model with two fixed effects parameters, the intercept and the slope of the linear trend 
for the population, and two random effects for each participant , i.e., the deviations in intercept and slope of that 
participant ’s time trend from the population values.   
Power calculation : The analysis of the 12 month outcomes will be considered the primary analysis, with 
analyses of the earlier time point used to supplement the primary findings. In all cases, distributional assumptions 
will be assessed with transformations o r non -parametric met hods used as appropriate. When the  direction of a 
difference is hypothesized a priori (e.g. women receiving the lower dose of estradiol will have poorer endothelial 
vasodilator function) a on e-tailed test will be used; if the  direction is not stated a two-tailed test will be used.   
Sample -size/statistical power considerations : In general, a sample -size of N=25 per group will provide 
statistical power (one -tailed, alpha=0.05) of 82% to detect a difference between groups of 0.[ADDRESS_1078518] 
deviation units. Therefore, although preliminary data are not available for each aim and the s tatistical power will 
differ for the multiple facets of each aim, we believe that a sample -size of N=[ADDRESS_1078519] igative Sequence and Timeline :  
Year  Aims  Number of Studies (Total = 150) 
1 1 and 2  ~50 (~15-18 participants  and 3 visits  each ) 
2 1 and 2  ~50 (~15-18 participants  and 3 visits  each ) 
3 1 and 2  ~50 (~15-18 participants and 3 visits  each ) 
 
9 
 Summary and Significance : This novel clinical study  proposes an individualized approach  to hormonal 
management of women with premature estrogen deprivation . We hypothesize that an individualized approach, 
tailored to a target estradiol level is more likely to effectively mitigate CVD risk  in the young women under study. 
The results from the current study have the potential to significantly impact the current clinical practice  related to 
the care of young women undergoing bilateral oophorectomy. Furthermore, there is potential for extrapolating 
these principles to the care of women experiencing premature menopause due to non -surgical causes (primary 
ovarian insufficiency ).  
 
Limitations : Women with an intact uterus after oophorectomy will be on a progestogen in addition to ET for 
endometrial protection. It is conceivable that the progestogen may impact some of the parameters under study.  
We are hypothesizing that each woman will serve as her own control  and the baseline measurements will be 
compared to the measurements obtained on estrogen therapy.  
 
Future plans : The current study will provide pi[INVESTIGATOR_784173]. Our next step would be to obtain 
extramural funding in order to pursue a larger -scale study to evaluate the  effect of individualized estradiol therapy 
on other long -term health consequences in young women with bilateral oophorectomy, in cluding blood pressure 
control, changes in metabolic profile (including glycemic control and li pid profile), cognitive function, mood, 
quality of life and sexual function. We also intend to expand our study population to include women with 
premature estrogen deprivation due to non -surgical causes, i.e., those wit h primary ovarian insufficiency, or 
ovarian failure due to chemotherapy or radiation.  It is conceivable individualized hormone therapy, targeted to 
estradiol levels, will become the standard of care in women with premature estrogen deprivation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
  
REFERENCES  
 
1. Faubion, S.S., et al., Long -term health consequences of premature or early menopause and 
considerations for management.  Climacteric, 2015. 18(4): p. 483 -91. 
2. Rocca, W.A., et al., Survival patterns after oophorectomy in premenopausal women: a population -based 
cohort study.  Lancet Oncol, 2006. 7(10): p. 821 -8. 
3. Shuster, L.T., et al., Prophylactic oophorectomy in premenopausal women and long -term health.  
Menopause Int, 2008. 14(3): p. 111 -6. 
4. Shuster, L.T., et al., Premature menopause or early menopause: long -term health consequences.  
Maturitas, 2010. 65(2): p. 161 -6. 
5. Gierach, G.L., et al., Long -term overall and disease -specific mortality associated with benign gynecologic 
surgery performed at different ages.  Menopause, 2014. 21(6): p. 592 -601. 
6. Rocca, W.A., et al., Accelerated Accumulation of Multimorbidity After Bilateral Oophorectomy: A 
Population -Based Cohort Study.  Mayo Clin Proc, 2016. 91(11): p. 1577 -1589.  
7. Rocca, W.A., et al., Bilateral Oophorectomy and Accelerated Aging: Cause or Effect?  J Gerontol A Biol 
Sci Med Sci, 2017.  
8. de Villiers, T.J., et al., Global Consensus Statement on menopausal hormone therapy.  Maturitas, 2013. 
74(4): p. 391 -2. 
9. Panay, N., et al., The 2013 British Menopause Society & Women's Health Concern recommendations on 
hormone replacement therapy.  Menopause Int, 2013. 19(2): p. 59 -68. 
10. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_117592], J., et al., Management of premature menopause.  Menopause Int, 2007. 13(1): p. 44 -5. 
11. Welt, C.K., Primary ovarian insufficiency: a more accurate term for premature ovarian failure.  Clin 
Endocrinol (Oxf), 2008. 68(4): p. 499 -509. 
12. Nelson, L.M., Clinical practice. Primary ovarian insufficiency.  N Engl J Med, 2009. 360(6): p. [ADDRESS_1078520], M., et al., Estradiol therapy combined with progesterone and endothelium -dependent 
vasodilation in postmenopausal women.  Circulation, 1998. 98(12): p. [ADDRESS_1078521] of 17 beta -estradiol on endothelium -dependent 
responses in the rabbit.  J Pharmacol Exp Ther, 1988. 244(1): p. 19 -22. 
15. Lieberman, E.H., et al., Estrogen improves endothelium -dependent, flow -mediated vasodilation in 
postmenopausal women.  Ann Intern Med, 1994. 121(12): p. 936 -41. 
16. Gilligan, D.M., et al., Acute vascular effects of estrogen in postmenopausal women.  Circulation, 1994. 
90(2): p. [ADDRESS_1078522] 
Physiol , 1988. 64(5): p. 2197 -203. 
18. Rowell, L.B., Reflex control of the circulation during exercise.  Int J Sports Med, 1992. 13: S25 -S27. 
19. Stebbins, C.L . and J.C. Longhurst, Bradykinin -induced chemoreflexes from skeletal muscle: implications 
for the exercise reflex.  J Appl Physiol , 1985. 59(1): p. 56-63. 
20. Seals, D.R . and R.R. Enoka, Sympathetic activation is associated with increases in EMG during fatiguing 
exercise.  J Appl Physiol , 1989. 66(1): p. 88-95. 
21. Saito,  M., T. Mano, S. Iwase, Sympathetic nerve activity related to local fatigue sensation during static 
contraction.  J Appl Physiol, 1989. 67(3):980 -4. 
22. Mark,  T.D., et al., Low-energy -electron attachment to oxygen clusters produced by [CONTACT_784182].  
Phys Rev Lett, 1985. 55(23): p. 2559 -2562.  
23. Alam, M. and F.H. Smirk, Observations in man upon a blood pressure raising reflex arising from the 
voluntary muscles.  J Physiol, 1937. 89(4): p. 372-83. 
24. Friedman, J., T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani, Regularization Paths for Generalized Linear Models via 
Coordinate Descent.  J Stat Softw, 2010. 33(1): p. 1 -22. 
 