 1  
 
 
 
 
  
Blood Volume Analysis - Guided Heart Failure Management  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Document D ate: February  24, 2020  
  
 2 1. Protocol Title  
Blood Volume Analysis - Guided Heart Failure Management  
 
2. Background  
Heart failure (HF) is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the US. Simply put, the 
numbers are alarming. HF affects more than 6 million adults in the [LOCATION_002] (US) alone.[ADDRESS_737558] common cause of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_561284]. The key hallmark of acute heart failure (HF) is vascular congestion. 
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_561285], our understanding of congestion remains 
limited. The current HF pathophysiologic model suggests that congestion is the result of volume 
retention, and therefore therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] (such as diuretics and ultrafiltration) have generally targeted a 
suspected volume overload. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_6831], the therapeutic benefits of fluid removal strategies on 
short and long term outcomes have been modest or absent. More recently the concept of fluid 
gain as cause of cardiac decompensation has been challenged. Our recent work proposed a 
new concept of cardiac congestion and decompensation, which may play a critical role in the 
pathophysiology of congestion i n a significant portion of patients. This disruptive concept 
suggests that cardiovascular congestion is the result of blood redistribution from the abdominal 
(splanchnic) compartment to the heart and lungs. To allow a personalized treatment of patients 
with HF  it is imperative to understand whether a patient has fluid overload and if so to w hat 
extent. To date the assessments of congestion is often limited to surrogates of intravascular 
pressure and volume, which often provide an incomplete and, in some instances,  a false 
impression of a patient’s congestion status. Volume overload, based on clinical examination 
parameters (presence of jugular venous distension, peripheral edema and orthopnea, an S3 and positive hepato- jugular reflex)
1, 2 increases in body weight,3, 4 natriuretic peptides5, 
estimates of plasma volume6 and even invasive hemodynamic measurements7, 8 lack sufficient 
sensitivity and specificity to accurately assess a patient’s intravascular volume status. Yet, the 
use of b lood volume analysis (BVA) via  I131- labeled human serum albumin indicator -dilution 
technique , the gold- standard test to determine the intra -vascular volume,  could overcome many 
of the limitations of conventionally used surrogate markers .  
While it is well recognized that the extent of 
fluid volume congestion is closely associated 
with clinical outcomes,9-[ADDRESS_737559] 
Figure 1: Heterogeneity in blood volume 
parameters. From Miller W, et al. JACC HF 2014  
 
 3 demonstrated marked heterogeneity in volume status in patients with acute and chronic HF11, 13, 
15 and uncovered unrecognized subclinical hypervolemia in asymptomatic and symptomatic HF 
patients ( Figure 1 ).15, [ADDRESS_737560] recent retrospective evidence now suggests that BVA - guided HF 
management could improve clinical outcomes such as HF rehospi[INVESTIGATOR_561286].16 Consistent with our paradigm shifting hypothesis and 
preliminary data, inappropriate redistribution of intra -vascular volume might be an additional 
important driver of cardiac decompensation and can explain an increase in central filling pressures in the absence of weight gain or total body volume increase 
11, 17, 18. Supportive 
evidence is provided by [CONTACT_561295] I131 -labeled human serum albumin 
indicator -dilution technique. Using this technology studies found that chronic HF patients with 
persistent symptoms are in 35% of cases hypovolemic or euvolemic11 and the same was even 
true for patients admitted for decompensated HF (34%).19, 20  
 
In an attempt to gather preliminary experience with the Daxor BVA technology, we enrolled 
and performed BVA measurements in 14 patients with acute and chronic HF within a 3 months 
window as part of a Duke approved IRB protocol (Pro00100536, Adrian Hernandez ).  
 
3. Purpose of the Study   
Our objective is to develop personalized treatment approaches to the treatment of acute HF. 
The central hypothesis  is that BVA will allow improved congestion phenotypi[INVESTIGATOR_561287]. Knowledge of 
specific congestion phenotypes will be the basis for targeted treatment algorithms.  The specific 
objectives are:  
Perform a pragmatic randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] (N= 50) with blood volume analysis (BVA) – guided 
treatment strategy vs standard of care in patients admitted for acute decompensated HF  
A: Study effects of unblinded BVA results on provider treatment choices and clinical endpoints  
B: Develop a new BVA -guided treatment algorithm based on the observed experience with BVA 
at Duke    
 
4. Design & Procedures 
Perform a pragmatic randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] (N=50) with BV A- guided treatment strategy vs 
standard of care in patients admitted for acute decompensated HF.  
The main intent for this pi[INVESTIGATOR_561288], treatment 
recommendations and sample size for a future planned pi[INVESTIGATOR_16076].  
Design: Pragmatic p ilot study of patients admitted with acute HF. Upon enrollment  patients will 
be randomized to either the unblinded arm  (BVA- guided treatment ), or blinded arm  (Standard 
of care  treatment ), where BVA results will not be provided to patient s or provider team. The 
study is planned to start in the Spring , 2020 and be open for enrollment for 1 year. ( Figure 2 ) 
 4  
Population:  Patients presenting to Duke Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4791] a history of HF  and worsening symptoms 
of HF will be enrolled in the study. Exclusion criteria are: Ongoing pregnan cy, age  <[ADDRESS_737561] heart transplant ation  or ongoing mechanical circulatory support, and end stage renal 
disease.  
 
Treatment protocol : A pre -determined assortment of demographic and medical information will 
be gathered for all patients upon admission, 24h, 48h , 72h and upon completion of repeat BVA 
and upon discharge.  See flow chart below ( Table 1).  
 
Table 1: Patient assessment s during the study. SOC indicates standard of care and CS 
indicates  clinical study related procedures.  
 
Required Assessment  Baseline  Day [ADDRESS_737562] 
discharge  
Consent/Randomization X 
(CS)       
Medications  X 
(SOC)  X 
(SOC)  X 
(SOC)  X 
(SOC)  X 
(SOC)  X  
(SOC)  X  
(CS) 
Vitals  
(BP, HR, RR, SpO2, 
weight)  X 
(SOC) X (SOC) X (SOC) X (SOC) X (SOC) X  
(SOC)  
Orthostatic vitals  X 
(CS)    X 
(CS) X 
(CS)  
Urine output  X 
(SOC) X 
(SOC) X 
(SOC) X 
(SOC) 
 X 
(SOC) X (SOC)  
Labs: BMP, NT-
proBNP, urine sodium, 
CA-125 X (SOC/CS) X 
(SOC/C
S)  X  
(SOC/CS) X (CS)    
BVA X 
(CS)    X 
(CS)   
Dyspnea Questionnaire  X 
(CS) X 
(CS) X 
(CS) X 
(CS) X 
(CS) X 
(CS) X 
(CS) 
Impedance and lung 
fluid content 
measurement  X (CS)    X (CS) X (CS)  
Echocardiogram  X 
(SOC/CS)     X 
(SOC/CS)    
Pulse Wave Analysis  X 
(CS)    X 
(CS)   
Physician questionnaire  X 
(CS)    X 
(CS)   

 5 Phone Call        X 
(CS) 
 
Following enrollment, subjects will undergo the following tests/measurements. Some 
procedures occur as part of standard of care testing (SOC) while some testing will be performed 
as part of the clinical study (CS) . All of the following tests have been approved in the present 
combination in Pro00100536, PI: [INVESTIGATOR_88471] . 
 
-  IV line  will be placed (SOC)  
- If the subject is female and childbearing potential and has not had a pregnancy test  
since the arrival to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], a blood pregnancy test will be done (SOC). If positive 
the subject will be excluded from the study.  
-  Blood work:  Basic metabolic panel (BMP) (SOC), N- terminal pro -brain natriuretic 
peptide ( NT-proBNP) (CS), urine sodi um (CS), CA -125 (CS). This will require an extra 
lab draw. Expected blood loss is <20ml.  
-  Blood volume analysis The described BVA technique is an FDA approved technology 
for the purpose of volume measurement. It is currently used in clinical practice on patients with syncope, heart failure and sepsis to determine the exact intravascular volume and their components such as plasma volume and red blood cell volume.  
 
BVA will be completed within 24h of admission and  again within 24h before anticipated 
discharge. Each blood volume analysis will take about 60 minutes to complete. The 
agent will be delivered to the radiopharmacy and prepared by [CONTACT_414265]. The agent will be then transported and stored at the DMP/ Radiology. On the study day the 
agent will be taken from the DMP to the patient’s room for the injection. An intravenous 
line connected to a [ADDRESS_737563] a small amount of diagnostic radioactive material into the patient’s  circulatory 
system. A second IV line will be placed to collect small samples of blood at timed 
intervals 15 min after injection of drug, then every 6 minute s for an additional 3 samples 
( 18, 24, and 30 minutes) . Blood collection timeframes do not have to be exact but time 
of blood draw will be documented. Approximately 15 ml of blood will be drawn total. The 
collected blood samples will be processed in the DMP in the device provided by [CONTACT_105741].  
 
On the report, values will be expressed as percentage (%) deviation from ideal volumes and the predicted normal BV was determined from patient’s height, weight and  deviation 
from ideal body weight. The output on the BVA results will be shared with the clinical 
teams within an hour of processing as outlined in Figure 2. BVA results will be provided 
only to patients and providers in the unblinded/BVA - guided arm. In t he BVA - guided arm 
the medical team will also be provided with data to inform the medical management of 
their patients based on observed BVA results (admission and prior to discharge).  
 The current  data supports that ideal patient -specific euvolemic targe t should be 8- 10% 
above euvolemia. All r ecommendations will not be binding.  
 Further, i f there is a red- cell deficit of >20% the team in encouraged to consider 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_561289]. Treatment is up to the physician discretion.  
 
Similarly, the test might reveal red blood cell overload (polycythemia) which ideally is 
addressed by [CONTACT_561296].   
 
 6 - Vital Sign s: Recorded vital signs including weight, blood pressure, heart rate, 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], SpO2  
- Dyspnea questionnaire  using a 7 -point Likert scale and Visual Analog Scale (CS)  
- Orthostatic heart rate and blood pressure (5 minutes supi[INVESTIGATOR_050], 1+5 minutes sitting and 1+5 
minutes standing) on the day before procedure if the subject is  an inpatient and again 
within 1 hour before procedure (CS) . Also we will document whether subjects have 
symptoms bending over for 10 seconds (bendopnea).   
-  Non-invasive Testing 
• Fluid Lung Content measurement of chest fluid content using the ReDSTM unit 
(Sensible Medical,  Tenafly, NJ). The ReDS unit is a vest that emits  radiofrequency 
waves to measures fluid content. The device is FDA approved. The measurement 
requires 10 minutes.   
• Impedance  for lung water volume measure using the Cardioset which uses el ectrical 
impedance technique to determine intra-thoracic blood volume.  
• Arterial stiffness assessment  (Pulse Wave Analysis) : We will use the 
SphygmocorTM (AtCor Medical, It asca , IL) to measure arterial stiffness . It is 
measured through a brachial cuff.  This measurement requires 5 minutes.  
- Bedside ultrasound  will be performed of the heart and abdomen. We will assess: left 
ventricular function, inferior vena cava dimensions and collapsibility . 
 A phone call at 30 days will evaluate the vital status of the patient, potential changes in 
medications after discharge, and assess the patient ’s symptoms via the standardized 
questionnaires.  
 Physicians will be interviewed with a questionnaire at the time point of the BVA testing. The 
questionnaire will explore whether the unblinded BVA results changed the perception of the 
patients’ congestion status and if they will result in a change in mana gement.  
 
Randomization process: Randomization will be performed by [CONTACT_561297].  
 
Potential complications:  
- The radiation effective dose from a single administration of I -[ADDRESS_737564] x -ray exams.  It is equivalent to about  2 months of 
natural background exposure.  
 
5.  Selection of Subjects For this study we seek to enroll heart failure patients admitted for acute decompensated heart 
failure to the cardiology service at the Duke Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. All patients irrespective of gender, race, 
and ethnicity will be considered for the study.  
 
Exclusion cr iteria are:  
- Ongoing pregnancy  
- age <18 years  
- Recent acute MI or hemodynamic instability:  Acute MI (STEMI or Type I NSTEMI) within [ADDRESS_737565] Recruitment & Compensation  
 
Potential subjects will be identified via two potential pathways.  
 
Inpatients will be identified within 24 h of the admission via screening of the admission logs 
and inpatient census. Consent process will occur in the subjects’ hospi[INVESTIGATOR_561290] 7700/7100/7300/7200/3100/3300/[ADDRESS_737566].  
 
Patients considered for this study will be identified within 24 h of admission. Prior to 
approaching the pati ent we will discuss the patient and his/her eligibility with the primary 
cardiology team. Study team will be introduced by [CONTACT_96204]. Ample time will be 
given to the patient to review the consent and have all questions answered. After the patient 
has consented to the study we will begin study related activities. The primary enrollment 
target is up to =50.  
 
Subjects will be informed that their participation is strictly voluntary. They will be assured 
that the decision to decline participation will have no impact on their care or the perceptions 
of their providers.  
 
The subject will be compensated $100 for participation in this clinical study.  
 
7.  Consent Process  
 
Candidate subjects will be informed of the risks and benefits of participation in the study. They will be informed of the study process and demands. They will be given a copy of the informed consent document to review and afforded adequate time to do so.  
 Informed consent will be obtained prior to the study. Consent will be obtained by [CONTACT_229390] (PI), Duke Heart Center study coordinators who are trained on the 
study and who have been trained on the informed consent process, and other  key personnel 
as designated by [CONTACT_978]. Consent will be obtained in the subjects’ rooms. A subject is 
considered enrolled in this clinical study at the time at which the subject and investigator or 
authorized designee have personally signed and dated the I nformed Consent Form.  
 8.  Subject’s Capacity to Give Legally Effective Consent  
 
Subjects must to be able to understand the English language and understand the study 
process, including all potential risk and benefits. Any subject for whom the study personnel 
or treatment team has cause for concern regarding the subject’s ability to understand the 
study process or follow the consent process, will be excluded from the study.  
 
9.  Study Interventions  
-  Lab draws  
-  Vital signs  
- Orthostatic vital signs  
- Non-invasive imaging with ultrasound  
-     Non-invasive hemodynamic monitoring (heart rate variability, Sphygmocor ReDS,  
 8 Cardioset)  
-     Blood volume analysis  
 
 
10. Risk/Benefit Assessment  
  
This study is associated with only small risks and has the potential to provide significant 
insight into the physiology of the patient’s congestion. Risks are limited to the intravenous 
line placement, and radiation exposure.  
 Anticipated benefits to the subject include detailed information on congestion status and 
extent of fluid overload, otherwise not captured with standard clinical care diagnostic 
methods. This newly obtained data will be provided back to the patient and provider which 
then can result in a change in clinical care. However the study or protocol does not have an 
influence on the clinical care the patient will receive as a result of the newly obtained 
information.  
 
11. Costs to the Subject  
 
Study -specific activities and assessments will be conducted at no additional cost to the 
subject. Subjects will still be responsible for standard of care procedures related to hospi[INVESTIGATOR_19934].  
 
12. Data Analysis & Statistical Considerations  
 
Descriptive statistics of continuous outcomes will include sample size, mean, median, standard deviation, mi nimum and maximum. For categorical outcomes, the number and 
percentage of subjects in each category will be presented. Statistical comparisons will be 
made using t -tests for continuous outcomes and chi square or Fisher’s exact test 
(depending on overall ev ent rates) for categorical outcomes.  
 
13. Data & Safety Monitoring  
 
Significant adverse events associated with the study procedures are not expected. 30 day 
follow -up is planned. Should complications be encountered, they will be reported to the IRB 
within 10 working days or per IRB policy. The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_561291].   
 
No protected health information associated with the study procedures will be sent outside of 
Duke. PHI  (subject ID, height, weight, and gender) will be used internally for measuring the 
blood volume.  Additionally, we will capture the birth year of the patient to perform the pulse 
wave analysis.  
 
 14. Privacy, Data Storage & Confidentiality –   
 
Data will be obtained by [CONTACT_371194]. An enrollment log will also be 
maintained in an Excel Spreadsheet on the Heart Center’s  secured  S:drive . The subject ID 
will also be stored on the folder to track subject enrollment and collection of data. Data will be recorded in Excel.  Only deidentified data will be available for statistical analysis. All 
subject identifiers will be removed for database s torage, statistical analysis and data 
reporting. This data will be stored on a study specific folder on the Duke server behind the 
 [ADDRESS_737567] ID code will be destroyed after data analysis is completed. 
Protected health information will not  be used for any other purposes than those described in 
this protocol without obtaining further IRB approval.  This information will be used for research purposes only and subjects will never be contact[CONTACT_561298] . A designated statistician from the DCRI will provide support with 
statistical analysis.  
 
The adequacy of the Research Data Security Plan (RDSP) will be evaluated and approved 
by [CONTACT_561299].  
 
Any publications or presentations that result from this research will not identify any subjects 
individually, and will present data in aggregate form only.  
  
Gathered data will be stored for at least 6 years.   
 References  
1. Stevenson LW and Perloff JK. The limited reliability of physical signs for estimating 
hemodynamics in chronic heart failure. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association. 
1989;261:884 -8. 
2. Chakko S, Woska D, Martinez H, de Marchena E, Futterman L, Kessler KM and 
Myerberg RJ. Clinical, radiographic, and hemodynamic correlations in chronic congestive heart 
failure: conflicting results may lead to inappropriate care. The American journal of medicine. 
1991;90:353 -9. 
3. Chaudhry SI, Wang Y, Concato J,  Gill TM and Krumholz HM. Patterns of weight change 
preceding hospi[INVESTIGATOR_19934]. Circulation . 2007;116:1549- 54. 
4. Lewin J, Ledwidge M, O'Loughlin C, McNally C and McDonald K. Clinical deterioration in 
established heart failure: what is the  value of BNP and weight gain in aiding diagnosis? 
European journal of heart failure. 2005;7:953- 7. 
5. James KB, Troughton RW, Feldschuh J, Soltis D, Thomas D and Fouad -Tarazi F. Blood 
volume and brain natriuretic peptide in congestive heart failure: a pil ot study. American heart 
journal . 2005;150:984.  
6. Fudim M and Miller WL. Calculated Estimates of Plasma Volume in Patients With 
Chronic Heart Failure- Comparison With Measured Volumes. J Card Fail . 2018;24:[ADDRESS_737568] and Shoemaker WC. Reliability of clinical monitoring to assess 
blood volume in critically ill patients. Crit Care Med . 1984;12:[ADDRESS_737569] the status of circulating blood volume in patients after extended transthoracic 
esophagectomy? J Anesth. 2005;19:21- 5. 
9. Yoshihisa A, Abe S, Sato Y, Watanabe S, Yokokawa T, Miura S, Misaka T, Sato T, 
Suzuki S, Oikawa M, Kobayashi A, Yamaki T, Kunii H, Saitoh SI and Takeishi Y. Plasma 
volume s tatus predicts prognosis in patients with acute heart failure syndromes. Eur Heart J 
Acute Cardiovasc Care . 2018;7:330 -338. 
10. Hudson SR, Chan D and Ng LL. Change in plasma volume and prognosis in acute 
decompensated heart failure: an observational cohort  study. J R Soc Med. 2016;109:337- 46. 
11. Androne AS, Hryniewicz K, Hudaihed A, Mancini D, Lamanca J and Katz SD. Relation of 
unrecognized hypervolemia in chronic heart failure to clinical status, hemodynamics, and patient 
outcomes. The American journal of  cardiology . 2004;93:1254 -9. 
12. Mullens W, Abrahams Z, Francis GS, Sokos G, Taylor DO, Starling RC, Young JB and 
Tang WHW. Importance of venous congestion for worsening of renal function in advanced 
decompensated heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;53: 589-596. 
 10 13. Miller WL and Mullan BP. Understanding the heterogeneity in volume overload and fluid 
distribution in decompensated heart failure is key to optimal volume management: role for blood 
volume quantitation. JACC Heart Fail . 2014;2:298 -305. 
14. Mentz RJ, Kjeldsen K, Rossi GP, Voors AA, Cleland JG, Anker SD, Gheorghiade M, 
Fiuzat M, Rossignol P, Zannad F, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_32887] B, O'Connor C and Felker GM. Decongestion in acute 
heart failure. European journal of heart failure. 2014;16:471 -82. 
15. Miller WL, Albers DP,  Gansen DN and Mullan BP. Intravascular Volume Profiles in 
Patients With Class I and II Systolic Heart Failure: Heterogeneity and Volume Overload Are 
Common Even in Mild Heart Failure. J Card Fail . 2018;24:417 -424. 
16. Strobeck JE, Feldschuh J and Miller WL. Heart Failure Outcomes With Volume- Guided 
Management. JACC Heart Fail. 2018;6:940 -948. 
17. Miller WL. Fluid Volume Overload and Congestion in Heart Failure: Time to Reconsider 
Pathophysiology and How Volume Is Assess ed. Circ Heart Fail. 2016;9:e002922.  
18. Fudim M, Hernandez AF and Felker GM. Role of Volume Redistribution in the 
Congestion of Heart Failure. Journal of the American Heart Association. 2017;6.  
19. Nijst P, Verbrugge FH, Bertrand PB, Martens P, Dupont M, Drieskens O, Penders J, 
Tang WH and Mullens W. Plasma Volume Is Normal but Heterogeneously Distributed, and True 
Anemia Is Highly Prevalent in Patients With Stable Heart Failure. Journal of cardiac failure. 
2017;23:[ADDRESS_737570] of  Blood Volume Quantification on Decongestion Strategy, 
Readmission Rates (RR), and Mortality in Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_114664] (HHF). American 
College of Cardiology, Oral poster session. 2016.  
21. Senni M, Paulus WJ, Gavazzi A, Fraser AG, Diez J, Solomon SD, Smiseth OA, Guazzi 
M, Lam CS, Maggioni AP, Tschope C, Metra M, Hummel SL, Edelmann F, Ambrosio G, Stewart Coats AJ, Filippatos GS, Gheorghiade M, Anker SD, Levy D, Pfeffer MA, Stough WG and 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_146497]. New strategies for heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: the importance of 
targeted therapi[INVESTIGATOR_561292]. Eur Heart J . 2014;35:2797 -815. 
22. Shah SJ, Katz DH, Selvaraj S, Burke MA, Yancy CW, Gheorghiade M, Bonow RO, 
Huang CC and Deo RC. Phenomappi[INVESTIGATOR_561293]. Circulation . 2015;131:269- 79. 
23. Tromp J, Westenbrink BD, Ouwerkerk W,  van Veldhuisen DJ, Samani NJ, Ponikowski P, 
Metra M, Anker SD, Cleland JG, Dickstein K, Filippatos G, van der Harst P, Lang CC, Ng LL, 
Zannad F, Zwinderman AH, Hillege HL, van der Meer P and Voors AA. Identifying 
Pathophysiological Mechanisms in Heart Fai lure With Reduced Versus Preserved Ejection 
Fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;72:1081- 1090.  
24. John Lu ZQ. The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and 
Prediction. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Soci ety). 
2010;173:693 -694. 
25. Shah SJ, Katz DH, Selvaraj S, Burke MA, Yancy CW, Gheorghiade M, Bonow RO, 
Huang C -C and Deo RC. Phenomappi[INVESTIGATOR_561294]. Circulation . 2015;131:269- 279. 
 