Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607679] - Support Group Toolkit for Breast Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/2022  Page 1 of 28  
Title:  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607679] —Support Group Toolkit for Breast Cancer Survivors    
 
Principal Investigator:   [INVESTIGATOR_36009] J. Lyons (UTMB)  
 
Collaborators:    
Eloisa Martinez  (UTMB)  
    Rachel Deer  (UTMB)  
    H. Colleen Silva  (UTMB)  
    V. Suzanne Klimberg  (UTMB)  
    Julie Park  (UTMB)  
    Sandra Hatch (MD Anderson  Cancer Center /UTMB Contract ) 
    Rohit Venkatesan  (MD Anderson  Cancer Center /UTMB Contract ) 
    Maria C. Swartz (Co -PI, MD Anderson Cancer Center)  
 
Funding Sponsor:  President’s Cabinet Award at The University of [LOCATION_007]  Medical   
Branch  (Cohort 1 to 3) and The Claude D. Pepper Older Americans 
Independence Center (OAIC) Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] (grant number P30AG024832) 
and Sealy Center on Aging (Cohort 4)  
 
Clinicaltrials.gov ID:  NCT0425 9905  (Please note that this identifier refers specifically to 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607679] 2.0, cohort 4 of the larger protocol)   
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607679] - Support Group Toolkit for Breast Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/2022  Page 2 of 28  
Table of Contents:  
 
Study Schema  
1.0  Rationale and Specific Aims  
2.0  Background and Significance  
3.0  Preliminary Studies  
4.0  Research Design and Methods  
5.0  Potential Risk to Participants or Others  
6.0  Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
7.[ADDRESS_805268] Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/[ADDRESS_805269] cancer (BC) survivors 
remains an unresolved problem in BC survivorship care.1 BC survivors, from diagnosis until the 
end of life, go through many transitions. One major transition is the significant decline of 
physical activity  immediately after diagnosis. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_607680] —speeding 
recovery time and reduced cancer r ecurrence risk —less than 30% of survivors met PA 
recommendations.[ADDRESS_805270] a 12-week  physical activity intervention, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607679] , which  
will investigate the feasibility of implementing active video game -based physical activity 
intervention  among BC survivors within the support group setting.  In cohort 1 -3 participants (N  
= 60) will be randomized to participate in the support group using the active video game -based 
physical activity intervention or to participate in the existing UTM B breast cancer support group  
with pedometers . In the fourth cohort, participants (N= 20) will be recruited and randomly 
assigned to intervention or control cond ition.   
 
Our specific aims are:  
 
Aim 1:  Evaluate the feasibility and acceptability of active video game -based physical 
activity intervention among BC survivors within the support group setting.  Measures of 
feasibility will include weekly attendance records, number of completed home -based 
worksheets, and number  of participants com pleting the program activities,  technological 
issues, and adverse events.  
 
Aim 2:  Compare the support group using the active video game -based physical activity 
intervention to a control condition (cohort 1 -3: existing UTMB breast cancer support 
group  with pedometer ; cohort 4 : Telephone -based weekly support group  with UTMB 
support group ). Primary outcomes will be  changes in physical activity. Secondary outcomes 
will be changes in physical function, dietary pattern , and quality of life.  
 
Aim 3: Develop  tools for implement ation of the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607681] n the 
clinic and community settings.  A trainer’s manual for the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607682].  
   
The feasibility and acceptability f indings from the intervention along with stakeholder input 
will guide the refinement of the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607683]. This project 
will lay the ground work  for accelerating disseminating a state -of-the art evidence -based 
program into the community and address a pressing need among BC survivors.   
 
2. Background and Significance  
 
The impact of physical activity on survival and health related quality of life i s immense for 
BC survivors, especially with the growing survivor population. According to the [ADDRESS_805271] Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/2022  Page 4 of 28 counties.3 Higher cancer incidence leads to more cancer surviv ors living in Galveston. These 
increasing evidence shows that physical activity is a powerful tool that can reduce the severity 
of these side effects without adverse  consequences .4,5 Activity reduces the risk for declines in 
physical function.6 Function, especially of the lower body, is critical to survivors ’ perceptions of 
their quality of life.6,7 Intervening to prevent or reduce functional deficits would produce lasting 
benefits on BC survivors’ quality of life.6 
 
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_607684] a ctivity among BC survivors, fewer than 30% of 
survivors meet the minimum physical activity recommendation of [ADDRESS_805272], survivors were found to be similarly inactive or even more 
inactive than the general population or other populations with chronic conditions.1 Furthermore, 
research has shown that BC survivors experience a significant decline of physical activity (2 
hours/week less) after diagnosis compared to their pre -diagnosis activity levels.[ADDRESS_805273] -treatment.9 Common iss ues affecting physical 
activity level among BC survivors include:  lack of a belief in their ability to be physically active 
(known as self -efficacy10), competing demands, lack of motivat ion, and fatigue.11,[ADDRESS_805274] , physical activity programs designed for the 
research setting often are costly because they require a team of highly skilled staff.1 Second , 
a recen t review found that as many as 62% of the 122 physical activity programs were 
implemented under one setting —individual or group -based.[ADDRESS_805275] 
indicated a need for program to be offered with a mix of individual and group -based settings.12 
Thus, in addition to address ing survivors’ barriers, physical activity programs would ideally be 
evidence -based, include social activities, and be low -cost.   
 
Recent technology advances have produced methods that allow for low -cost, flexible 
physical activity programming.[ADDRESS_805276] and can be used in a variety of 
settings. Fitness trackers expand upon pedometers’ limited feedback by [CONTACT_607718] -setting 
assistance, extensive feedback on progress, and encouraging social comparison and 
interactio n.18 Active video games perform similar functions, but also provide opp ortunities for 
strength training (i.e. balance games) and can increase motivation to maintain activity over 
time.[ADDRESS_805277] Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/[ADDRESS_805278] Health and Imaging Center that has become a premier 
BC care center for resident s in Galveston County area and its affiliated support group is well 
known in the community. By [CONTACT_38350] a partnership between researchers and stakeholders —
clinicians, staff, and survivors —we will be able to disseminate effective physical activity 
intervent ions or programs  that will serve the BC survivor community and increase the center’s 
community outreach capacity. Third , clinic staff report a need for a structured curriculum that 
uses physical activity to help BC survivors cope with their treatment. Thus , the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607685].  By [CONTACT_607719], we will be able to reach more BC survivors during and 
after active cancer treatment to prevent significant physical function declines and positively 
impact BC survivors’ quality of life.   
 
3. Preliminary Studies  
 
Our lab has conducted  focus groups with [ADDRESS_805279] Cancer (ALABC) program. The ALABC program focused on adding 
physical activity into daily living through a group -based program. ALABC used behavior 
change strategies and skill -building to gradually inc rease physical activity. ALABC was tested 
previously in a randomized controlled trial, which found improved physical functioning —less 
pain and less daily activity limitation —after the intervention.  Furthermore, the ALABC program 
was chosen because it was d esigned to meet the unique needs of BC survivors by [CONTACT_607720] -specific support and resources. However, the ALABC requires a highly skilled 
team to implement the program and has a focus on group -based intervention. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607686], and will include active video gaming technology and written 
“toolkit” materials that allow modestly ted support group leaders to implement the program.   It 
will incorporate both a group -based and individual -based component, to satisfy the n eeds of 
the survivors.[ADDRESS_805280] Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/[ADDRESS_805281] cancer support group.  Participants (N= 60) will be randomized to participate in 
the support group that uses the active video game -based physical activity intervention 
(intervention group) or in the existing UTMB bre ast cancer support group  with pedometers 
(control group) for 12 weeks .  The home -based self-paced portion of the intervention will 
mainly be de livered through the participant manual.  In the fourth cohort, BC su rvivors (N= 20, 
aged 55 to 79  due to the aging grant  restrictions ) will be recruited and randomly assigned to 
intervention or control condition  for a 12 -week period . The intervention group will participate in 
weekly active video game web -based group sessions. The control group will re ceive weekly 
conference calls plus wearable tracker  to track their physical activity  for 12  weeks.  
 
4.1 Theoretical Framework.   The theoretica l framework used for the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607687]  (see Fig. 1)  are based on the constructs from the Social Cognitive Theory  (SCT)10 
and Self -Determination Theory   (SDT) .[ADDRESS_805282] 
found that increasing autonomous motivation  
under SDT  is important to promote physical 
activity over time.27  The autonomous motivation 
include the identified regulation  (i.e. value  
physical activity and accepted that the behavior 
is his/her own behaviors ), integrated regulation 
(i.e. being physically active is consistent with 
his/her own sense of self), and intrinsic  
motivation (i.e. motivation to be physically active 
because of interest and enjoyment).[ADDRESS_805283] created the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607688]’ autonomous motivation to engage in physical activity thr ough targeting 
the self -efficacy (task and barrier) , self -regulation, autonomy, competence, and relatedness 
constructs.    
 
The behavioral change method  we will use to target the theoretical constructs central to the 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607689] 1.  
 
Table 1. Theoretical construc ts, behavioral change methods , and intervention components.  
Theoretical 
construct29 Behavioral change 
method29 Intervention components  
  Active video game support 
group  Existing /phone -based  
support group  
Task Self-
efficacy  Modeling  The avatar in the active video 
game and other participants in the 
group   
 Set graded tasks  Active video game (increase 
difficulty until target behavior is 
performed)   

Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607679] - Support Group Toolkit for Breast Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/2022  Page 7 of 28  Reinforcement  Unlocking games   
 Public commitment  Group session   
Barrier Self-
efficacy  Reattribution training  
(Reinterpret previous 
failures)  Group session     
 Cue altering  Group session   
Self-regulation  Goal -setting  Weekly log, home -based 
worksheets, group session   
 Prompting self -monitoring  Wii fit meter , weekly log  (Cohorts 1 
to 3) 
Wearable fitness tracker (Cohort 
4) Pedometer  (Cohort 1 to 
3) 
Wearable fitness 
tracker (Cohort 4)  
 Barrier identification  Group session   
 Action planning  Weekly log , home -based 
worksheet, and group session   
Motivation     
Autonomy 
support  Provide information and 
provide choice  Non-directive group discussion , 
Group game play , ACS personal 
health manager kit  ACS personal health 
manager kit (general 
information)  
Competence 
support  Feedback on performance  Badges, unlocking the game, 
weekly progress chart  based on 
the Wii fit meter, other participants 
in the group, and from the 
facilitator  Pedometer  
Relatedness  Social support  Group play, group session, and 
identification with other survivors  Identification with other 
survivors  
 Social support —Emotional 
support  Group sessions on survivorship 
issues  Group sessions on 
survivorship issues  
 
 Social support —Appraisal 
support  See the “friends” progress in the 
group   
 
4.2 Participant Recruitment .  Participants will be recruited from Galveston county and 
surrounding counties, the University of [LOCATION_007], Medical Branch (UTMB) clinics , UTMB -
associated cancer care facilities,  MD Anderson clinics  and from cancer or volunteer registries. 
Recruitment of MD Anderson patients will occur in person at MD Anderson and joint MD 
Anderson/UTMB clinics as well as by [CONTACT_648] & email (following the same procedures used to 
identify UTMB patients to approach . Due to the possible difficulty of recruitment,  we have 
collaborated with oncologist s.  The oncologist s will be referring their patients.  The team will 
not approach patients until they provided the permission for the team to approach.  For the 
other oncologists  not on our protocol,  a flyer will be pro vided to them for referral.  Participants 
will contact [CONTACT_607721]. MD Anderson personnel (Maria C. 
Swartz) will be involved in recruitment activities for the fourth cohort (Note: UTMB and MD 
Anderson have entered into an  agreement such that the clinical site is a collaborative single 
site operation by [CONTACT_607722].)  
 
A recruitment letter will be mailed to contact [CONTACT_607723] .  We will also collaborate with local cancer support groups.   Newspaper 
advertisement and flyers will also be used as additional recruitment tools.   We will recruit 
participants in three cohorts.  First and second cohort will consist of [ADDRESS_805284] of 20 people (age [ADDRESS_805285] Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/2022  Page 8 of 28 restrictions) , 10 in the intervention group and 10 in the control group. In order to randomize a 
total of 20 participants, we will need to recruit an additional 80 individuals  to account for 
potential drop-outs between screening and randomization.  A total of 160 individuals will be 
recruited for Cohort 1 -4 in order to randomize a total of 80 participants. Screening script, 
recruitment letter, flyer, presentation blur b are presented  in Appendix A . 
 
4.3 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria.  Research staff will follow the screening script to determine 
eligibility when potential participants express interest in the study.   Potential participant s must 
meet all of  the inclusion criteria in order to be eligible to participate in the study.    
Primary inclusion criteria will include  for Cohort 1 -3:   
• Provide informed consent  
• Diagnosed with primary female breast cancer  
• English -speaking between the ages of 18  years or older   
• Able to read and write in English  
• Obtained approval  from oncologists for the participant to be involved in the 
physical activity based support group  
• Able to travel to the UTMB sites (Victory Lakes or Galveston)  
• Able to move arms and legs as well as ambulate  
• Able to see TV screen from a distance of 2 to 4 feet   
 
Primary inclusion criteria for Cohort 4 due to grant restriction s will include:  
• Ability to provide informed consent  
• Diagnose d with  primary  female breast cancer  
• 55 years to 79  
• Able to speak, read,  and write in English  
• Able to travel to UTMB locations  and/or MD Anderson Victory Lakes   
• Able to move arms and legs as well as ambulate  
• Has a smartphone, tablet or computer and daily access to a reliable internet  
 
Inclusion criteria for Cohort 4 due to pandemic (e.g., COVID -19) restrictions will include:  
• Ability to provide informed consent  via telephone or through internet  
• Diagnose d with primary female breast cancer  
• 55 years to 79  
• Able to speak, read,  and write in English  
• Able to move arms and legs as well as ambulate  
• Has a smartphone, tablet or computer and daily access to a reliable internet  
 
Potential participant meeting any of the exclusion criteria at screening will be excluded from 
study participation  
Ineligibility criteria will include:  
• Being pregnant  
• Dementia  
• Currently engage in ≥[ADDRESS_805286] Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/2022  Page 9 of 28 • Are involved in another physical activity intervention  
 
Ineligibility criteria for Cohort 4 will include all criteria listed above . However, cohort 4 has  
an addition of  no access to an internet -connected smart device  (smartphone, tablet, or 
computer)  being an ineligibility criterion.     
 
4.3 Randomization Proc edures.  Participant  in cohorts 1 to 3  will be randomly assigned to 
be in the active video game -based physical activity intervention group (intervention group) or 
the existing UTMB Breast Cancer  support group  with pedometer (control group).  Participant in 
cohort 4 will be randomly assigned to be in the weekly active video game web -based group 
sessions  with wearable tracker  (intervention group) or receive weekly conference calls plus 
wearable tracker (control g roup). We will ra ndomize participants by [CONTACT_607724] 1 to 4.  The sequentially number will be the 
Study ID #1 to # [ADDRESS_805287] staff who is not involved in the assessment will use 
the rando m number generator ( https://www.randomizer.org/ ) to assign each study ID number 
to either intervention group or control group.  The project staff who is not involved in the 
asses sment will write the g roup assignments will be written on pi[INVESTIGATOR_215001], placed under a 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_607690], wrapped in aluminum foil, and then sealed one per opaque envelope.  
The same procedure will be used for co hort 4.   
 
4.4 Intervention Group Procedure .  The primary purpose of this study is to investigate the 
feasibility and acceptability of active video game -based physical activity intervention among 
BC survivors within t he support group setting (in person for cohorts 1 -3 and over the web for 
cohort 4) with home -base d components.  Cohort [ADDRESS_805288] the addition of yellow and red 
theraputty  and grip exercise to the 12 -week intervention components.   The 1 2-week 
intervention com ponents are presented in Table 2 . Cohort 4 will not receive a Wii Fit Fitness 
tracker and we will mainly use Xbox 360 video game s but may use the Wii video game s. 
 
Table 2 .  Summary of the 1 2-week Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607691] -Behavioral 
skill building component  
(group and home -based 
topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102])  Activity demonstration and 
practice component  Cancer survivorship 
discussion component  
1 Program orientation —
distribution of the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607692]:  Benefits of physical 
activity  Distribute the Wii Fit fitness 
tracker  
Wii Street U:  Walking for 2 
minutes , (cohort 4 only: 
yellow  theraputty, grip 
exercise)  Review of the Personal Health 
Manager Kit and first steps for 
the newl y diagnosed  
2 Topic:  Discovering values 
and setting long -term and 
short -term activity goals  Wii Street U:  Walking for 5 
minutes , (cohort 4: grip 
exercise  Communicating and making 
decisions and talking to your 
doctor  
3 Topic:  Time management 
and planning your activity  Xbox 360:  Tai -Chi, (cohort 4 
grip exercise)  Lymphedema  
4 Topic:  Uncovering 
barriers  Xbox 360:  Yoga , (cohort 4 
grip exercise)  Finding information and 
solving problems  
5 Topic:  Getting confident  Wii Street U:  Walking , (cohort 
4 grip exercise)   Symptom diary  
6 Topic:  Finding and getting 
support  Xbox 360:  Tai -chi, (cohort 4 
grip exercise)  Eating well during cancer 
treatment  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607679] - Support Group Toolkit for Breast Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/[ADDRESS_805289] o f three components:  1) a cognitive -behavioral skill 
building  component to promote the increase and maintenance of physical activity behavior, 2) 
an activity demonstration and practice component to provide guided practice and to increase 
mastery of activit y skills, and 3) a cancer survivorship discussion component to provide 
support and resources  for BC survivors.  Participant manual is available for review in 
Appendix B . 
 
Based on participant  feedback we received from the first and second cohort s, we are 
changing the  length of  group sessions to 60 minutes  and add ing an additional healthy eating 
discussion topic .  We will also provide c ancer survivorship discussion summary sheet per 
participants’ suggestions .  Updated participant manual is available in Appendix B1.  MD 
Anderson personnel ( e.g., Maria C. Swartz) will be involved in cohort 4 intervention delivery 
activities.  7 Topic:  Problem solving 
skills : (cohort 4  distribute 
red theraputty ) Wii Fit U:  Yoga , (cohort 4 red 
theraputty, grip exercise)  Fatigues/Nausea and Vomiting  
8 Topic:  Relapse prevention  Wii Fit U:  Walking , (cohort 4 
grip exercise)  Cancer pain  
9 Topic:  Meaningful 
rewards  Xbox 360:  Zumba , (cohort 4 
grip exercise ) Negotiating and standing up 
for your rights  
10 Topic:  Thinking about 
problems in different ways  Wii Fit U:  Yoga , (cohort 4 grip 
exercise )   Copi[INVESTIGATOR_607693]  
11 Topic:  Review of long-
term goals  Xbox 360:  Zumba , (cohort 4 
grip exercise ) Cancer and relationship  
12 Topic:  Finding places you 
can be physically active in 
your community  Wii Fit U:  Dance , (cohort 4 
grip exercise ) Managing your health records  
13 Certificate of achievement 
ceremony  Celebration dance  Healthy snacks pot luck  
Table 2.   Summary of the 1 2-week Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607691] -Behavioral 
skill building component  
(group and home -based 
topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102])  Activity demonstration and 
practice component  Cancer survivorship 
discussion component  
1 Program orientation —
distribution of the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607692]:  Benefits of physical 
activity  Distribute the Wii Fit fitness 
tracker  
Wii Street U:  Walking for 2 
minutes , (cohort 4 only: 
yellow theraputty, grip 
exercise)  Review of the Personal Health 
Manager Kit and first steps for 
the newly diagnosed  
2 Topic:  Discovering values 
and setting long -term and 
short -term activity goals  Wii Street U:  Walking for 5 
minutes , (cohort 4: grip 
exercise)  Communicating and making 
decisions and talking to your 
doctor  
3 Topic:  Time management 
and planning your activi ty Xbox 360:  Tai -Chi, (cohort 4: 
grip exercise)  Lymphedema  
4 Topic:  Uncovering 
barriers  Xbox 360:  Yoga , (cohort 4: 
grip exercise)  Finding information and 
solving problems  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607679] - Support Group Toolkit for Breast Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/2022  Page 11 of 28  
 
 
Within the cognitive -behavioral skill building component , the adapted Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607694] -regulation skills. The behavior change strategies include: getting feedback 
regarding physical activity, self -monitoring, goal -setting, actio n planning, gaining knowledge 
regarding benefits of physical activity, and evaluation of value toward activity. We specifically 
chose these behavior change strategies because recent meta -analysis, which provided a 
comprehensive review of published physical  activity programs, have shown effectiveness of 
these strategies in increasing physical activity.30 The behavioral change strategies will address 
activity barriers such as: lack of self -efficacy related to physical activity, lack of time due to 
competing demands, and lack of motivation due to general reasons o r fatigue.  
 
Active video games that involve motion -controlled movement will be used for the activity 
demonstration and practice component  of the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607695]. First, 
they are a cost -effective way to deliver a physical activity  program in the community setting 
without the need to hire an exercise trainer.31 
Second, research has shown active games 
are a unique and effective platform for 
increasing physical activity and motivation.16 
By [CONTACT_8345], active video games will produce 
enjoyment, increase self -efficacy, and 
increase motivation to increase physical 
activity through delivering evidence -based 
behavior strateg ies such as modeling, 
guided practice, providing instantaneous 
feedback, providing various activity options, and increases opportunity for survivors to relate to 
one another through social play.16,17 Furthermore, by [CONTACT_607725] 1 -3 (Figure 2) , participants will be able to track individual and group’s daily steps. They 
will also be recording their activities on a daily, weekly, and monthly basis.  Having the ability 
to see the weekly accomplishments will further enhance motivation for activity through social 
comparison and relatedness.16     
 5 Topic:  Getting confident  Wii Street U:  Walking , (cohort 
4: grip exercise)  Symptom diary  and Eating well 
during cancer treatment  
6 Topic:  Finding and getting 
support  Xbox 360:  Tai -chi, (cohort 4: 
grip exercise)  Healthy recipes and general 
eating plan  
7 Topic:  Problem solving 
skills  (cohort 4 distribute 
red theraputty)  Wii Fit U:  Yoga , (cohort 4:  
red theraputty,  grip exercise)  Fatigues/Nausea and Vomiting  
8 Topic:  Relapse prevention  Wii Fit U:  Walking , (cohort 4: 
grip exercise)  Cancer pain  
9 Topic:  Meaningful 
rewards  Xbox 360:  Zumba , (cohort 4: 
grip exercise)  Negotiating and standing up 
for your rights  
10 Topic:  Thinking about 
problems in different ways  Wii Fit U:  Yoga , (cohort 4: 
grip exercise)   Copi[INVESTIGATOR_607693]  
11 Topic:  Review of long-
term goals  Xbox 360:  Zumba , (cohort 4: 
grip exercise)  Cancer and relationship  
12 Topic:  Finding places you 
can be physically active in 
your community  Wii Fit U:  Dance , (cohort 4: 
grip exercise)  Managing your health records  
[ADDRESS_805290] Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/2022  Page 12 of 28 For the cancer survivorship discussion component , resources from the National  Coalition 
for Cancer Survivorship’s cancer survival toolbox and American Cancer Society’s personal 
health manager kit will be used to elicit survivorship discussions.  It is the standard practice of 
the UTMB Breast Health Clinic to provide the American Ca ncer Society’s personal health 
manager kit to all new cancer patients.  Please see the list of contents in the personal health 
manager kit in Appendix C .  This component is designed to provide resources and support for 
the BC survivors.   
 
We will partner with stakeholders to iteratively develop and refine the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607696]. 
We plan to have half of participants receive all components of the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607697], 
so we can obtain and use the acceptability and feasibility informat ion to refine the program 
before the other half of BC survivors go through the program. Furthermore, we will be able to 
compare the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607698].  
 
The fourth cohort will be a web-based AVGs group activity intervention  over the 13 -week 
study period . An initial in person  meeting or video conference via a telemedicine platform (due 
to pandemic restrictions)  will be conducted to set up weekly step goal. Participants will be 
given a wearable tracker ( i.e. Fitbit ) with charger and wrist band , a wearable tracker account 
with a pseudonym to use during the study period , a phone stand, and a wall charger . All of the 
pseudonym accounts will be linked to a private group on the Fitbit dashboard. The weekly 
struc tured group session will be conducted through a HIPPA compliant telemedicine platform 
that allows simultaneous video chat. Each session will last approximately 60 minutes  
(Appendix B2a -c. Instructions on how to use the Fitbit and how to connect to the tele medicine 
platform) . The same curriculum will be used as in past cohort, refer to Table 2. Weekly 
worksheets will be provided to encourage activities outside of the group. Each of the weekly 
sessions will consist of three components:  1) a cognitive -behavioral skill building component 
to promote the increase and maintenance of physical activity behavior, 2) an activity 
demonstration and practice component to provide guided practice and to increase mastery of 
activity skills, and 3) a cancer survivorship discussion component to provide support and 
resources for BC survivors.   
By [CONTACT_607726] t, participants will be able to track individual and group daily steps on the 
Fitbit dashboard. Having the ability to see the weekly accomplishments will further enhance 
motivation for activity through social comparison and relatedness.[ADDRESS_805291] 
Cancer Support Group are presented in Appendix D .  
The support group follows the  Navigating Life’s road 
Map After Breast Canc er curriculum from the 
Reconstruction of a Survivor (http://www.reconstructasurvivor.org/index.html) organization.  
Control group participant will also be provided a pedometer (Digi Walker or Omron Tri Axis HJ -

Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607679] - Support Group Toolkit for Breast Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/2022  Page 13 of 28 321) to be worn for 1 2-weeks (Figure 3).  Participants will have a choice to use either a Digi 
Walker or Omron Tri Axis pedometer.  Participants in the control group will also receive the 
American Cancer Society’s personal health manager kit as it is standard of practice at the  
UTMB Breast Health and Imaging Center.   They will also be recording their activities on a 
daily, weekly, and monthly basis.      
 
For the fourth cohort, weekly conference calls to check on participants’ well -being and to 
provide survivorship  information w ill be scheduled over the 13 -week study period  (Appendix 
B2d) .  Control group participants in the cohort [ADDRESS_805292] cancer/cancer support groups will also be 
given to the participants  that is available on the UTMB website . MD Anderson personnel ( e.g., 
Maria C. Swartz) will be involved in cohort 4 control group activities.  
 
4.6 Measurement proced ure.  The intervention includes three assessments.  Survivors will 
be provided a summary of their individual assessment results at each evaluation session  
(Appendix E ).  A summary of the assessment schedule is presented in Table 3 .  
Questionnaires for the self -reported measures  are presented in Appendix F .  Questionnaires 
for the self -reported measures will be administered either through Assessment CenterSM 
(https://www.assessmentcente r.net/ ), through paper copi[INVESTIGATOR_014] , or through telephone interviews 
conducted by a study staff due to pandemic restrictions . Participants will have a choice to 
complete the web -based format or the paper format.   
 
We will also obtain permission from the participants at the time of recruitment to send 
reminders.  Furthermore, prior to the  6-week and  12-week visit, a  personalized email will  
provide instructions on how to access the website in a written form.   The instructions will 
include a hyperlink to the Assessment CenterSM website along with a uni que personal access 
ID number.  Appendix G  include s an example email to access Assessment Center .   
 
Feasibility will be evaluated through weekly attendance records, number o f participants 
who completed at least 80% of the  program activities including home -based worksheets, 
technological issues, and adverse events.   Observatio nal forms and project staff logs will also 
be used to determine the ease of using the toolkit and facilitators’ ability to deliver the program 
as planned.  Participant acceptability and satisfaction will be  collected at week 7  and week 12 .  
Participant sat isfaction will be determined based on a questionnaire with 5 -point scale 
responses.  Participant will be asked to report their satisfaction with the support time and 
length, intervention materials and staff, activity demonstrations, and discussion topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102].  
 
For the fourth cohort, feasibility at the implementation level include feedback on ease of 
use of the telemedicine platform, curriculum usability, ability to deliver the weekly curriculum as 
planned, and feedback on the curriculum. Feasibility measures at  the participant level will 
include weekly attendance records, completion of weekly worksheets, weekly adherence to the 
intervention, number and type of technology issues,  number and type/difficulty of games 
played,  and adverse events. MD Anderson personne l (e.g., Maria C. Swartz) will be involved in 
the cohort [ADDRESS_805293] Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/2022  Page 14 of 28 Table 3 a. Summary of measures and evaluation schedule  (pre-pandemic restrictions)  
Measures  Week [ADDRESS_805294]   X X(hand grip 
strength only)  X 
  Height, Weight, and Waist Circumference  X X X X 
Actigraph wGT3X GT monitors (Physical 
activity) —cohorts 1 and 2  X  X X 
Actigraph GT9X monitors (Physical 
activity) —cohort s 3 and 4  X  X X 
Participant self -report measures  
  Demographics  X   X 
  Program satisfaction    X X 
  CHAMPS to measure physical activity 
(cohorts 1 , 2 and 4 ) X   X 
 BRFSS physical activity questions (cohort 3)  X   X 
  Functional Assessment of Cancer  
  Therapy (Quality of life)  X  X X 
  PROMIS -Cancer Physical Function  X   X 
  PROMIS -Cancer Fatigue  X   X 
  Dietary screener /recall  X   X 
Psychosocial variables related to exercise  
  Exercise motivation  X  X X 
  Psychological Feelings  X  X X 
  Self-regulation  X  X X 
  Social support  X  X X 
  Task and Barrier Self-efficacy   X  X X 
  Posttraumatic Growth Inventory -SF (cohort 
3) X  X X 
 
Table 3 b. Summary of measures and evaluation schedule  (during and post pandemic restrictions)  
Measures  Week [ADDRESS_805295] to measure  
physical function  (virtual)   X X X 
  Height, Weight, and Waist Circumference  X X X X 
Actigraph wGT3X GT monitors (Physical 
activity) —cohorts 1 and 2  X  X X 
Actigraph GT9X monitors (Physical activity) —
cohorts 3 and 4  X  X X 
Participant self -report measures  
  Demographics  X   X 
  Program satisfaction    X X 
  CHAMPS to measure physical activity (cohorts 
1, 2 and 4)  X   X 
 BRFSS physical activity questions (cohort 3)  X   X 
  Functional Assessment of Cancer  
  Therapy (Quality of life)  X  X X 
  PROMIS -Cancer Physical Function  X   X 
  PROMIS -Cancer Fatigue  X   X 
  Dietary screener/recall  X   X 
Hand Scale   X X X 
FRAIL index   X  X 
Insomnia Severity Index  X  X X 
Psychosocial variables related to exercise  
  Exercise motivation  X  X X 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607679] - Support Group Toolkit for Breast Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/2022  Page 15 of 28   Psychological Feelings  X  X X 
  Self-regulation  X  X X 
  Social support  X  X X 
  Task and Barrier Self -efficacy  X  X X 
  Posttraumatic Growth Inventory -SF (cohort 3)  X  X X 
 
 
Participants will also be asked to report their intention to continue using the program material, 
appropriateness of the program in meeting their needs, and actual use of the Wii Fit 
pedometer  or Digi -walker / Omron Tri Axis  pedometer . Feasibility information, participant 
satisfaction will be used to refine the intervention and also help us refine the tools we have 
developed for implementation of the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607699].  
 
The changes in physical activity level among breast cancer survivors who were randomized 
into th e Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607700] 14 .  Physical activity changes such as 
meeting the recommended 150 minutes per week or 7,000 -10,000  steps/day will be  measured 
by [CONTACT_607727]3X BT monitors . Wear time will be seven days at each assessment point. 
Because continuous measurement is not feasible, a week -long sample will be taken at 
baseline, week 7 (+/- one week)  and week 14 (+/- one week) . Physical activity e stimates will 
only be considered as  valid if the monitor is worn ≥ 10 hours per day on ≥ 4 days.  Also 
through the community healthy activities model program for seniors (CHAM PS) self-reported 
questionnaire at baseline and at week 1 4 will be admi nistered for participants in cohorts 1 , 2, 
and 4 .  The changes in dietary pattern  will be evaluated using  the Dietary Screener  
Questionnaire used in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2009 -10.  The 
screener captures frequency of fruits, vegetables, dairy/calcium, added sugar, 
wholegrains/fiber, red meat, and processed meat consumption within the past 30 days.32 
Health related quality of life outcomes will be measured by [CONTACT_607728] (PROMIS) 
adapted testing.[ADDRESS_805296]  and fourth  cohort we will measure physical activity changes (e.g., 150 minutes per 
week of activity or 7,000 -10,000 steps/day) by [CONTACT_607729]9X  to accommodate the 
increase d number of participants in cohort three  and four . Based on participant feedback from 
cohorts [ADDRESS_805297] cohort 
to reduce participant burden. Instead, we are adding eight questions  from the 2015 Behavioral 
Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) questionnaire  to the main demog raphic 
questionnaire.   
 
Physical function and physical changes will be objectively measured. The Short Physical 
Performance Battery (SPPB) will be used to objectively measure physical function  for cohorts 
1 and 2 . The battery consists of six components:  repeated chair sit and stands, balance test, 
semi -tandem stand, tandem stand, side -by-side stand, and eight feet walk  (Appendix H ).[ADDRESS_805298] Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/[ADDRESS_805299] we found in cohorts 1 and 2, we are going  to 
use the Senior Fitness Test36 along with two subsections of the SPPB protocol —balance with 
time increase to [ADDRESS_805300] of six different comp onents:  1) chair stand test (evaluate lower body strength), 2) 
arm curl test (evaluate upper body strength), 3) chair sit and reach test (evaluate lower body 
flexibility), 4) back scratch test (evaluate upper body flexibility), 5) [ADDRESS_805301] 
(evaluate agility), and 6) [ADDRESS_805302] (evaluate aerobic endurance) .  We are 
also adding the Figure -of-[ADDRESS_805303] to evaluate walking skills in daily life  (Appendix H1) .[ADDRESS_805304] chosen to make the following changes to maintain the integrity of the  
physical function  data being collected  due to the pandemic restrictions  (Table 4) . 
Table 4. Summary of changes due to pandemic restrictions  
Type of assessment  Pre-pandemic  During  and post  pandemic  
SPPB  In-person  Via Video conference   
Grip strength  In-person  The Cochin Hand Scale38 (self-
report , but collected through 
intervi ew) 
SFT In-person  Collect [ADDRESS_805305] our 
protocol safely.  
 
Fatigue, Resistance, Ambulation, 
Illness, Loss of Weight (FRAI L) 
index39 (self-report, but collected 
through interview)  
Figure -of-8 Walk tes t  In-person  Will not be conducted  
 
Due to equipment limitations during the pandemic, we will not be able to use a hand 
dynamometer to assess the hand grip strength objectively. We chose t he Cochin Hand Scale  
instead to capture self-report daily hand func tion. This measure will be administered by a 
research coordinator/interviewer . The scale consists of 18 items  with a 6-point Likert response 
that ranged from 0  (Yes, without difficulty)  to 5 (Impossible to do) . The Cochin scale had an 
inter-rater reliability of 0.96.[ADDRESS_805306] to only the  Timed Up and Go (TUG) and  2-minute step test. Participants will be mailed an 
enrollment packet that consist s of a tape measure and colored tape to  measure out the 
walking course for SPPB , TUG , and the [ADDRESS_805307]. We added the FRAIL  index 
measure to capture an additional physical function measure. FRAIL  is a self -report functional 
measure that will be administered by a research coordinator/in terviewer . The FRAIL index 
consisted of questions in 5 components —fatigue, resistance, ambulation, illness, and loss of 
weight.  Frail scale scores can range from 0 (best) to 5 (worst). A score of [ADDRESS_805308] Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/2022  Page 17 of 28 intervention on sleep. The Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) is a 7 -item validated self -report scale 
that assess es subjective symptoms of insomnia. Items are scored on a 0 -4 scale to yield a 
score of 0 -28. Higher scor es indicate greater insomnia severity. A cutoff score of ≥ [ADDRESS_805309] clinical levels of insomnia. It is also sensitive to change over time.40 A change 
score of -8.4 points is associated with moderate improvement.40   
 
Other self -reported measures include demographics such as age , gender, race/ethnicity, 
education, type of cancer diagnosis, and the type of treatment the participant is receiving.  
Exercise motivation will be evaluated by [CONTACT_607730] -2 to assess participants’ motivation towards physical activity (intrinsic, identified, 
introjected, or extrinsic).   The questionnaire had an alpha ranged between 0.73 -0.86.41 
Psychological feelings about exercise will be evaluated by [CONTACT_607731]’ perceived competence, perceived 
autonomy, and perceived relat edness.  The q uestionnaire had an alpha >0.90.42  The self -
regulation will be evaluated by [CONTACT_607732]. scale that assess participants’ exercise 
goals and exercise plans.   The questionnaire had an alpha raged from 0.87 to 0.89.43  Self-
efficacy wi ll be evaluated by [CONTACT_607733]. scale. That assess participants’ self -
efficacy to over barriers and their task related self -efficacy.  The questionnaire had an alpha 
ranged from 0 .89 to 0.96.44  We added a 10 -question Posttraumatic Growth Inventory -Short 
Form (PTGI -SF) to capture positive psychosocial changes that developed after facing 
challenging life circumstances (i.e., cancer diagnosis an d treatment) .45  The questionnaire had 
an alpha of 0.93 among cancer patients.  Furthermore, we added The Physical Activity Group 
Environmen t Questionnaire (PAGEQ) for cohort 4. PAGEQ is a 21 -item questionnaire on a 9 -
point Likert scale that ranged from “strongly agree” to strongly disagree.” The questionnaire 
has an alpha ranged from 0.65 to 0.94. PAGEQ was added because it can influence 
attendance, timeliness, improve attitude towards PA, and stronger PA self -efficacy. 
Participants will no t receive any monetary incentive (cohort 1 -3). Rather, a water bottle and a 
tote bag will be provided to both intervention and control group participants as a thank 
you/token of appreciation for participating in the study.    
 
4.7 Unscheduled visits/communication.  We will download the activity monitor 
information during Assessment 1. If monitor activity was worn  less than [ADDRESS_805310] a question or concern regarding their participation such as following up on 
questionnaire responses or adverse events. Additional calls/texts/emails may occur to 
schedule accelerometer drop off prior to week [ADDRESS_805311] you to mail/drop off 
or set up a meeting to provide the study material. We will be available by [CONTACT_607734]. We will allow up to one in -person meeting for technical s upport. We will 
reply to texts/emails/phone calls during business hours for technical problems or to schedule 
calls/assessments. After hours texts or calls will only occur if pre -arranged for the purposes of 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607679] - Support Group Toolkit for Breast Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/2022  Page 18 of 28 pi[INVESTIGATOR_607701].  
  
4.8 Participant compensation  (cohort 4) . Participants will be compensated for the parking fee 
via parking validation. Due to funding restrictions, cohorts 1 -3 were not provided monetary 
compensation for participation. However, cohort 4 participants will be pro vided gift cards 
totaling $15 ($5.00 at baseline, $5.00 at midpoint , and $5.00 at the  final visit). A water bottle 
and a tote bag will be provided to both intervention and control group participants as a thank 
you/token of appreciation for participating in the study.   
 
 
5.0 Potential  Risk to Participants  
• Confidentiality  could be breached, as is a risk in all human subjects  research.  
Sensitive personal health information or other sensitive information could be 
divulged inappropriately to outside sources.  
• Physical functioning testing.   Short Physical  Performance Battery and hand grip 
strength testing may involve minimal risk .  Risks include muscle soreness, fatigue, 
and potential muscle strain.      
• Injury, pain or fatigue.   Participants may experience joint discomfort, muscle 
soreness, or other minor injuries due to increased physical activity.  Cohort 4 the 
addition of possib le skin irritation or other minor injuries due to increased physical 
activity and the use of theraputty.  
• Activity monitors  such as the Actigraph, Wii Fit meter, and Digit -Walker pedometer , 
cohort 4 the use of Fitbit or Mi Xiaomi Band 3 are associated with minimal risk.  
Some participants might feel slight discomfort or skin irritation from the monitors’ 
contact [CONTACT_8124].   
• Embarrassment.   Participants may feel embarrassed to share the ir activity 
information with other participants.  
We believe all identified risks are minimal given the proposed procedures for protecting against 
risk. 
5.[ADDRESS_805312] training completion are on file at UTMB.  Participants that are eligible based on initial 
screening will be invited to attend an initial session.  They will be given a gr oup orientation to 
the study, including information on all aspects of the study from the principal investigator (PI) .  
They will be able to ask questions at any time.  Following this explanation, potential 
participa nts will be given informed consent inform ation and forms to sign.  After completing this 
information, they will proceed to the baseline assessment.   
•  Confidentiality  All data collected will remain confidential.   
o Paper copi[INVESTIGATOR_607702] a 
locked file cabinet in the PI’s locked office.  ID numbers will be used on these 
forms to match them to individual participants.  The database matching ID 
numbers to identifying information will be individually password -protected and 
kept separately on the UTMB secured server.    
o As for the web -based questionnaire administered through Assessment 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607679] - Support Group Toolkit for Breast Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/[ADDRESS_805313] to prevent the interception of data 
transmission by [CONTACT_607735] (i.e. Secured 
Socket Layer) and digital certificates; signatures may also b e used to encrypt 
data, validate data integrity, and authenticate the parties in a transaction.  The 
protected health information (PHI) will be stored separately from other survey 
data.  In addition, the PHI will only be collected and transferred only when  
necessary.  Any data that needs to be transferred will be encrypted prior to 
transfer.  All of the participants will be identified by a generic ID generated by 
[CONTACT_607736].  Furthermore, the Northwestern University 
Research Data Center has an established infrastructure for confidential data 
management that includes having secured facilities that are being monitored 
24x7, has sophisticated use of firewall technologies, has intrusion detection 
software, has anti -virus scans, has dedicated databas e and application 
servers, has automatic failover design, has real -time monitoring and related 
technological capabilities.  It also is fitted with redundancy for HVAC, power, 
and fire detection/suppression systems ( Appendix I ).    
o The web -based questionnai re will not ask for participant’s name. The research 
staff will provide each participant a unique study identification number.  All 
necessary firewall and password protections will be implemented to store 
electronic files.  The internet will be used to tra nsfer the completed survey from 
the Assessment CenterSM with study ID to UTMB secured network.  The data 
will also be stored and formatted using SPSS for Windows (version 20) on the 
secured UTMB  network that requires unique username [CONTACT_2383].  
o Activity monitors will be encrypted to prevent unauthorized viewing of the 
application data.  Participants in the intervention group will be “friends” with 
one another.  Participants will use pseudonyms on the Wii U and Xbox 360 
systems , and wearable trackers  to provide additional layer of security.  All 
information collected by [CONTACT_607737] , wearable trackers,  or the Digit -
Walker will be generic and related to physical activity —no other health 
information will be collected on these devices.  
o Telemedicine platfo rm and the conference call system s are HIPPA compliant 
(Appendix J).  
• Physical functioning testing.   Short Physical Performance Battery  (cohorts 1 and 2)  
and Senior Fitness Test (cohort 3  and 4 ) and hand grip strength testing will occur at 
the UTMB sites with trained nursing staff nearby [CONTACT_607738] a 
research coordinator trained in conducting physical assessments.  The location of 
the tests and supervision by [CONTACT_607739], in the unlikely but  
possible case of injury, treatment will be immediately available.   
• Injury, pain or fatigue.   Walking and low impact activity that will be performed via Wii 
U and Xbox [ADDRESS_805314] Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/[ADDRESS_805315] will oversee and provide instructions to participants.   
During the weekly session, study staff will inquire about the participants’ walking 
plans and how participants feel during  exercise.  Immediate steps will be taken if 
there is any indication of potential adverse events.  (see data safety and monitoring 
plan).     
• Activity monitors .  We will warn participants of the risk of potential skin irritation due 
to wearing the measurem ent equipment  and using theraputty .  We will also provide 
participants with several alternative procedures that could be used to minimize 
discomfort, such as inserting a soft cloth between the monitor and the skin  and 
alternative exercises for grippi[INVESTIGATOR_007] .   
• Embarrassment.   We will provide training and discussion during the orientation on 
the importance of confidentiality and privacy.  All participants will use pseudonyms 
when logged into the Wii U system to ensure th at their activity information cannot 
be connected to their true identity.  
5.[ADDRESS_805316] cancer support groups.  
6.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
A study participant will be discontinued from participation in the study if any of the following 
occur:  
• Serious adverse event (SAE)   
• Medical condition or situation occurs that prohibits the participant to participate in 
intervention activities and would not be in the best interest of the subject in the 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_17439]/treating medical staf f 
• Participant withdraws consent to continue in the research for any reason  
 
6.[ADDRESS_805317] Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/2022  Page 21 of 28 with pedometer.  We will measure feasibility and acceptability -related process measures and 
outcome measures.  MD Anderson personnel (Maria C. Swartz) will lea d the cohorts 1 -4 data 
analyses and ma nuscript development. Data provi ded to MD Anderson personnel for data 
analyses will be de -identified.  
 
Aim 1:  Evaluate the feasibility and acceptability of active video game -based physical 
activity intervention among  BC survivors within the support group setting.   Feasib ility 
findings will be based on descript ive analyses.  We will compare our summary results to other 
studies.  Examples of feasibility findings include:  number of completed home -based 
worksheets, number of participant at tendance on a weekly basis, number of participants who 
completed the program and the progra m activities, and weekly step goal achieved.  Adherence 
is considered a s a feasibility outcome.  Weekly adherence is defined as the participant wearing 
Wii Fit meter for ≥ [ADDRESS_805318] 10 group sessions.  
  
Aim 2:  Compare the support group using the active video game -based physical activity 
intervention (intervention group) to the existi ng UTMB breast cancer support group with 
pedometer  (control group  for cohorts 1 -3) or the telephone -based support group  with 
the UTMB support group  (control group for cohort 4) .  We will use analysis of covariance 
(ANCOVA) to test the pos t-intervention differences at 12 -weeks (physical activity) between the 
two groups, controlling for baseline  and other covariates that are significantly different at 
baseline .  Intent to treat analysis will be used to handle missing data.   ANCOVA will also be 
used to evaluate the secondary outcomes (physical function and quality of life).   We will 
explore the changes  in psychosocial variables using linear mixed models to investigate 
differences between groups and over here time points.  Since this is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_607703], we hypothesized that 
the intervention group will show an improvement in physical activity, physical function, and 
quality of life compared to the control group.   We also hypothesize that the intervention group 
will show an improvement in self -reported scores on self -efficacy, self -regulation, intrinsic 
motivation  
 
Aim 3: Develop tools for implementation of the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607704].  Development of a trainer’s manual for the intervention will 
mainly be based on descriptive  analyses using the facilitator’s weekly group log.  The 
facilitators will indicate whether or not they were able to cover the entire session  as planned  
and facilitator will also be asked to provide feedback regarding the facilitator’s guide and their 
feedback regarding the group activities.   
 
7.[ADDRESS_805319] sizes and inform the power and sample size estimates for larger tria ls. In the 
fourth cohort, a sample size of 20 is deemed appropriate to determine the Cohen’s d effect 
sizes the intervention has on activity level (average number of steps/day), physical function, 
and self -reported quality of life.  
 
8.[ADDRESS_805320] Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/[ADDRESS_805321] the research staff if 
problems arise and defective monitor s will be replaced.    
 
8.2 Limitations.   The Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607705] a more extensive facilitator 
training than the current support group format.  Therefore, time for facilitator training may be an 
issue for future implementations.  However, if the study proves feasible, then sub sequent study 
will be conducted to evaluate how to efficiently deliver facilitator training.  In addition, this study 
is also limited to the greater Galveston, TX community.  Even though our pi[INVESTIGATOR_607706], we will use ou r results to inform the design of a larger and 
generalizable study.  
 
9.0 Ethics and Protection of Human Subjects  
Potential participants will be provided with an in -depth informed consent information prior to 
baseline assessments, being randomized, and beginning of study participation.  The  principal 
investigator ( PI) or research staff will outline pertinent information and go over the consent 
form with each individual.   All study personnel will be trained in the conduct of human research  
and only individuals authorized by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_607707] a need to know basis.    
Extensive discussion of risks and possible benefits of participation will be provided to the 
potential participant.  Consent forms describing in details the stu dy proc edures and risks will 
be IRB -approved and the potential participant will be asked to read and review the document.  
Upon reviewing the document, the investigator or staff will explain the research study to the 
potential participant and answer any qu estions that may arise.  Potential participant will then 
sign the informed consent document prior to any study procedures.  The potential participants 
will also have the opportunity to think about it prior to agreeing to participate.   
Participants may wit hdraw consent at any time throughout the course of the trial.  A copy of 
the informed consent document will be given to the participant for their records.  The rights and 
welfare of the participants will be protected by [CONTACT_607740].     
We anticipate this study to present minimal risk depending on the age of the participant.  
Risks include breaches of confidentiality and acute musculosk eletal injuries (muscle soreness, 
sprains,  skin irritation,  sunburn).  We have sought to minimize the risk by [CONTACT_607741].  If participants follow the activity 
recommended by [CONTACT_607742], but serious 
injuries may arise as a result of vigorous physical activity.  In this event, the necessary actions 
defined by [CONTACT_607743].     
The design of this randomized controlled trial to include the control group is to assist the 
research team compare the different interventions.  Participants in the control group still 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607679] - Support Group Toolkit for Breast Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/[ADDRESS_805322] of 
the study for each participant including:  eligibility, enrollment, data collection, evaluation of 
study outcomes, problems with informed consent, and participant safety and well -being.   [CONTACT_607751] will be the point of contact [CONTACT_607744] -related personnel who come into contact [CONTACT_607745].  An Occupational Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_607708], home exercise worksheets, and will be responsible for modification of 
activity .  All study personnel will be responsible for monitoring for any potential adverse events 
or negative reactions.  The coordinator will be the point of contact [CONTACT_607746], make necessary inquiries with participants, and document 
all potential adverse events.   
The plan for monitoring will include:  
1. Regular  review of screening call logs by [CONTACT_976]  
2. Regular  review of group session logs by [CONTACT_976]  
3. Regular  review of collected data p erformed by [CONTACT_976] [INVESTIGATOR_607709]  
4. Annual review by [CONTACT_976]   [INVESTIGATOR_607710] s creening call logs  on a regular  basis  will ensure that any values indicating 
ineligibility and/or unsafe practices are flagged.  Flagged participants may be excused from the 
study or instructed on safer practices as needed.  Group session logs completed by [CONTACT_607747].  Any indication of an adverse event 
or unsafe practices will also be flagged.  In the case of adverse events, stand protocol for 
reported adverse events will be used.  Study data will be reviewed by  [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_607711].  Again, the team will identify any values indicating unsafe practices or potential adverse 
events that may not have been reported by [CONTACT_4317].  Finally, the UTMB IRB will review 
study progress yearly.   
 
As this is a low -risk study, we do not antic ipate any serious adverse events or safety 
concerns.  Thus, we will not perform full statistical analysis during these periodic reviews.  
Though we anticipate possible differences in health outcomes, for the study to be rigorous, we 
must continue to measur e all planned variables at each planned time point.  The reviews will 
focus on indicators of safety for participants, such as large decreases in quality of life or 
strength, or large weight gains.  We will create a list of a priori criteria for quantifying  clinically 
significant change based on adverse events information published by [CONTACT_6812].  (For example, 
a weight gain of 5 -10% would be considered a mild adverse event.)   
 
We will not convene an external Da ta Safety and Monitoring Board.  
 
Anticipated non -serious adverse events include musculoskeletal pain or mild injuries, other 
non-serious injuries (e.g., bruises),  skin irritation,  minor discomfort, cardiac events, fatigue, 
weight gain, and possible loss of confidentiality. If an anticipat ed adverse event occurs, the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_607712]. The attribution and impact of each event on the 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607679] - Support Group Toolkit for Breast Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/[ADDRESS_805323]’s risk/benefit ratio will then be determined.  
 
All unanticipated, serious, fatal, and/or life -threatening adverse events will be immediately 
reported to the UTMB IRB  within 24 hours of occurrence.  The IRB and PI [INVESTIGATOR_607713]/or protocol based on the 
event. If a determination is made that participa nts are exposed to unacceptably high risk in 
comparison to benefit, the study will be suspended until proper modifications are made for 
participant safety. Aggregate reports of adverse events will be prepared in consultation with 
the regulatory key resourc e of the Institute for Translational Sciences at UTMB and forwarded 
to the IRB for review.  
 
9.[ADDRESS_805324] -protected server.  The data collected by [CONTACT_607748].  Data saved by 
[CONTACT_607749].  
 
9.2 Plan for adverse event reporting.  The PI  [INVESTIGATOR_607714]. We do not anticipate seve re adverse events, though mild 
and moderate events are possible. The scale to be used is the UTMB Clinical Research 
Center Adverse Event Grading Scale  (Table 5) . Examples of each level of adverse event on 
the scale are provided below.  
• Mild events include discomfort without disruption of daily activities. No therapy or only 
symptomatic therapy is required. This level is equivalent to NCI Common Terminology 
Criteria for Adverse Events version 4.03 Grade 1 adverse events (mild; asymptomatic or  
mild symptoms; intervention not indicated).  
• Moderate  events include discomfort sufficient to modify daily normal activity. Specific 
therapy is required. Laboratory test alterations indicate injury without long -term risk. 
This level is equivalent to NCI Gr ade 2 (moderate; minimal, local or noninvasive 
intervention indicated; limiting age -appropriate activities of daily living).  
• Severe  events include incapacity, inability to work, inability to perform normal daily 
activity, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_91536], prolonge d emergency treatment required, life -
threatening events, laboratory tests indicating a serious health threat or permanent 
injury, and death. This level is equivalent to NCI Grades 3 (severe/medically significant 
but not immediately life -threatening), 4 (li fe-threatening, urgent intervention indicated), 
and 5 (death).  
 
Table 5. Reporting of adverse events to IRB  
NCI Adverse Event Grade  Expected  Unexpected  
Grade 1  Reporting not required  Report within 10 days  
Grade 2  Reporting not required  Report within 10 days  
Grade 3 (UTMB level 3)  Report by [CONTACT_1382] 24 hours  Report by [CONTACT_1382] 24 hours  
Grade 4 (UTMB level 3)  Report by [CONTACT_1382] 24 hours  Report by [CONTACT_1382] 24 hours  
Grade 5 (UTMB level 3)  Report by [CONTACT_1382] [ADDRESS_805325] Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/2022  Page 25 of 28  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_607715]. All unanticipated, serious, fatal, and/or life -
threatening adverse events will be reported to the UTMB IRB within 24 hours of o ccurrence or 
recognition. Aggregate reports of adverse events will be prepared on an annual basis and 
forwarded to the IRB at annual review.  
 
Attribution will be assessed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_2394] a scale used by [CONTACT_303033]: 1) not related, 2) 
possibly related, 3) probably related, 4) definitely related to the study interventions.  
 
9.3 Protection of human research participants – computer -based trainin g. All research 
personnel have completed the UTMB  required training course in protection of human research 
participants.  
 
10.0 References  
1. Phillips SM, Alfano CM, Perna FM, Glasgow RE. Accelerating Translation of Physical 
Activity and C ancer Survivorship Research into Practice: Recommendations for a More 
Integrated and Collaborative Approach. Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_9991] & Prevention. 
2014;23(5):[ADDRESS_805326] CM, Courneya KS, Stein K. Cancer Survivors’ Adherence to Lifestyle 
Behavior Recommendations and Associations With Health -Related Quality of Life: 
Results From the American Cancer Society's SCS -II. Journal of Clinical Oncology. 
2008;26(13):[ADDRESS_805327] Cancer in Texa s:  A Closer 
Look (Incidence and Mortality Data by [CONTACT_607750]).  Cancer 
Prevention and Research Institute of [LOCATION_007];2010.  
4. Speck R, Courneya K, Mâsse L, Duval S, Schmitz K. An update of controlled physical 
activity trials in cancer s urvivors: a systematic review and meta -analysis. J Cancer 
Surviv. 2010;4(2):87 -100. 
5. World Cancer Research Fund International/American Institute for Cancer Research. 
Continuous Update Project Report:  Diet, Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Breast Cancer  
Survivors. Continuous Update Project Report  2014; 
http://www.wcrf.org/sites/default/files/Breast -Cancer -Survivors -2014 -Report.pdf . 
Accessed Feb 10, 2016.  
6. Mishra SI, Scherer RW, Snyder C, Geigle P, Gotay C. The Effectiveness of Exercise 
Interventions for Improving Health -Related Quality of Life From Diagnosis Through 
Active Cancer Treatment. Paper presented at: Oncology nursing forum2015.  
7. Ho RTH, Lo PHY, Luk MY. A Good Time to Dance? A Mixed -Methods Approach of the 
Effects of Dance Movement Therapy for Breast Cancer Patients During and After 
Radiotherapy. Cancer Nursing. 9000;Publish Ahead of Print.  
8. Irwin ML, Crumle y D, McTiernan A, et al. Physical activity levels before and after a 
diagnosis of breast carcinoma. Cancer. 2003;97(7):[ADDRESS_805328] 
Cancer Survivors. Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_607716] & Prevention. 2013;22(6):1153 -
1161.  
10. Bandura A. Social cognitive theory of self -regulation. Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes. 1991;50(2):[ADDRESS_805329] Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/[ADDRESS_805330] cancer patients 
during treatment: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. European Journal of Cancer Care. 2007;16(1):[ADDRESS_805331] Cancer Survivors' Views and Preferences f or 
Physical Activity. Qualitative Health Research. 2009;19(7):[ADDRESS_805332] cancer survivors. Patient Education and 
Counseling. 2006;64(1 –3):[ADDRESS_805333] Cancer Survivors. Journal of Clinic al Oncology. 
2007;25(17):2352 -2359.  
15. Michie S, Abraham C, Whittington C, McAteer J, Gupta S. Effective techniques in 
healthy eating and physical activity interventions: a meta -regression. Health 
Psychology. 2009;28(6):690.  
16. Tate DF, Lyons EJ, Valle C G. High -Tech Tools for Exercise Motivation: Use and Role of 
Technologies Such as the Internet, Mobile Applications, Social Media, and Video 
Games. Diabetes Spectrum. 2015;28(1):45 -54. 
17. Lyons EJ, Hatkevich C. Prevalence of Behavior Changing Strategies in  Fitness Video 
Games: Theory -Based Content Analysis. Journal of Medical Internet Research. 
2013;15(5):e81.  
18. Lyons EJ, Lewis ZH, Mayrsohn BG, Rowland JL. Behavior Change Techniques 
Implemented in Electronic Lifestyle Activity Monitors: A Systematic Conte nt Analysis. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research. 2014;16(8):e192.  
19. Rosenberg D, Depp CA, Vahia IV, et al. Exergames for Subsyndromal Depression in 
Older Adults: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_613] a Novel Intervention. The American Journal of Geriatric 
Psychiatry. 2010;18(3):221 -226. 
20. Thompson WG, Kuhle CL, Koepp GA, McCrady -Spi[INVESTIGATOR_212371], Levine JA. “Go4Life” 
exercise counseling, accelerometer feedback, and activity levels in older people. 
Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics. 2014;58(3):314 -319. 
21. Adams MM, Davis PG, Gill DL. A Hybrid Online Intervention for Reducing Sedentary 
Behavior  in Obese Women. Frontiers in Public Health. 2013;1:45.  
22. Bird ML, Clark B, Millar J, Whetton S, Smith S. Exposure to "Exergames" Increases 
Older Adults' Perception of the Usefulness of Technology for Improving Health and 
Physical Activity: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116] . JMIR Serious Games. 2015;3(2):e8.  
23. Laufer Y, Dar G, Kodesh E. Does a wii -based exercise program enhance balance 
control of independently functioning older adults? A systematic review. Clinical 
interventions in aging. 2014;9:1803.  
24. Maillot P, Perrot  A, Hartley A. Effects of interactive physical -activity video -game training 
on physical and cognitive function in older adults. Psychol Aging. 2012;27(3):589 -600. 
25. Ryan RM, Deci EL. Self -determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation,  
social development, and well -being. Am Psychol. 2000;55(1):68 -78. 
26. Fortier MS, Williams GC, Sweet SN, Patrick H. Self -Determination theory: Process 
models for health behavior change. Emerging theories in health promotion practice and 
research: Strategi es for improving public health. 2009;2:157 -183. 
27. Teixeira PJ, Carraca EV, Markland D, Silva MN, Ryan RM. Exercise, physical activity, 
and self -determination theory: a systematic review. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 
2012;9:78.  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_607679] - Support Group Toolkit for Breast Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/[ADDRESS_805334] R, Campbel l R, Brown J, Gainforth H. ABC of behaviour change 
theories. 2014.  
29. Kok G, Gottlieb NH, Peters GY, et al. A taxonomy of behaviour change methods: an 
Intervention Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_120229]. Health Psychol Rev. 2015:[ADDRESS_805335] S, Powell J. Behavior change 
techniques used to promote walking and cycling: A systematic review. Health 
psychology. 2013;32(8):829.  
31. Strand KA, Francis SL, Margrett JA, Franke WD, Peterson MJ. Community -based 
exergaming program increases phy sical activity and perceived wellness in older adults. 
Journal of aging and physical activity. 2014;22(3):364 -371. 
32. National Cancer Institute. Dietary Screener Questionnaire (DSQ) in the NHANES 2009 -
10. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_137632]  2015; 
http://epi.grants.cancer.gov/nhanes/dietscreen/questionnaires.html . Accessed February 
[ADDRESS_805336] KJ, Eton DT, Garcia SF, Cella D. Mini mally important differences were estimated 
for six Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System -Cancer scales in 
advanced -stage cancer patients. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 2011;64(5):507 -516. 
34. Puthoff ML. Outcome measures in cardiopulmonary physical therapy: short physical 
performance battery. Cardiopulm Phys Ther J. 2008;19(1):17 -22. 
35. Sasaki H, Kasagi F, Yamada M, Fujita S. Grip strength predicts cause -specific mortality 
in middle -aged and elderly persons. Am J Med. 2007;120(4):[ADDRESS_805337]. Journal of Physiotherapy. 
2015;61(3):163.  
37. Hess RJ, Brach JS, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_195047], VanSwearingen JM. Walking skill can be assessed in 
older adults: validity of the Figure -of-[ADDRESS_805338]. Phys Ther. 2010;90(1):89 -99. 
38. Poiraudeau S, Chevalier X, Conrozier T, et al. Reliability, validity, and sensitivity to 
change of the Cochin hand functional disability scale in hand osteoarthritis. 
Osteoarthritis and Cartilage. 2001;9(6):570 -577. 
39. Morley JE, Malmstrom TK, Miller D K. A simple frailty questionnaire (FRAIL) predicts 
outcomes in middle aged African Americans. J Nutr Health Aging. 2012;16(7):601 -608. 
40. Morin CM, Belleville G, Bélanger L, Ivers H. The Insomnia Severity Index: Psychometric 
Indicators to Detect Insomnia Cases and Evaluate Treatment Response. Sleep. 
2011;34(5):601 -608. 
41. Markland D, Tobin V. A modification to the Behavioural Regulation in Exercise 
Questionnaire to include an assessment of amotivation. Journal of Sport & Exercise 
Psychology. 2004;26(2):19 1-196. 
42. Wilson PM, Rogers WT, Rodgers WM, Wild TC. The Psychological Need Satisfaction in 
Exercise Scale. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology. 2006;28(3):231 -251. 
43. Rovniak LS, Anderson ES, Winett RA, Stephens RS. Social cognitive determinants of 
physical activity in young adults: a prospective structural equation analysis. Ann Behav 
Med. 2002;24(2):[ADDRESS_805339] cancer patients durin g treatment. Supportive Care in 
Cancer. 2006;14(1):84 -90. 
45. Cann A, Calhoun LG, Tedeschi RG, et al. A short form of the Posttraumatic Growth 
Inventory. Anxiety, Stress, & Copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. 2010;23(2):127 -137. 
46. Bravata DM, Smith -Spangler C, Sundaram V, et al. Using pedometers to increase 
physical activity and improve health: A systematic review. JAMA. 2007;298(19):[ADDRESS_805340] Cancer Survivors  
Version 1 4 12/19/2022  Page 28 of 28 47. Lewis ZH, Lyons EJ, Jarvis JM, Baillargeon J. Using an electronic activity monitor 
system as an intervention modality: A systematic review. BMC Public Health. 
2015;15(1):[ADDRESS_805341] of Appendices  
Appendix A.  Screening script, recruitment letter, r ecruitment flyer, and presentation blurb  
Appendix B.  Participant Manual  
Appendix C.  American Cancer Society’s Personal Health Manager Kit Content  
Appendix D.  UTMB Breast Cancer Support Group Topi[INVESTIGATOR_607717] E.  Assessment Summary Sheet  
Appendix F.  Ques tionnaires  
Appendix G.  Email Template for the Assessment Center   
Appendix H.  SPPB Protocol  
  H1. Senior Fitness Test Manual  
Appendix I.    Assessment Center Security Information  
Appendix J.  HIPPA Compliance information  