Research Aimed at Improving Both Mood and Weight 
(RAINBOW) in Primary Care: A Type [ADDRESS_417344] 
effectiveness and implementation potential of an integrated, te chnology-enhanced, collaborative 
care model for treating comorbid obesity and depression in prim ary care. Obese and depressed 
adults (n=404) will be randomized to usual care enhanced with t he provision of a pedometer and 
information about the health system’s services for mood or weig ht management (control) or with 
theIntegrated Coaching fo r Better Mood and Weight (I-CARE) program (intervention). The 12-
month I-CARE program synergistically integrates two proven beha vioral interventions: problem-
Corresponding author: Jun Ma, MD, PhD, Palo Alto Medical Founda tion Research Institute, 795 El Camino Real, Ames Building, 
Palo Alto, CA, Telephone: ([PHONE_7007], Fax: ([PHONE_7008], [EMAIL_6539]. 
Trial registration: ClinicalTrials.gov  #[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Authors’ Contribution
JM conceived the study, obtained funding, has the overall respo nsibility for its design and conduct, and drafted the manuscrip t. VY, 
JGF, MAL, MKK, and MBS participated in the design of the study.  LX contributed to planning the statistical analyses. NL 
contributed to drafting the manuscript. All authors participate d in critical revisions for important intellectual content.
Competing Interests
The authors declare that they have no financial, research, orga nizational, or other interests to disclose that are relevant to  the execution 
of this research or this publication.
These materials were adapted with permission from [CONTACT_337791] on, Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_337732] ( http://
www.teamcarehealth.org ).
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Contemp Clin Trials . 2015 July ; 43: 260–278. doi:10.1016/j.cct.2015.06.010.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
solving therapy with as-needed intensification of pharmacothera py for depression (PEARLS) and 
standardized behavioral treatment for obesity (Group Lifestyle Balance™). It utilizes traditional 
(e.g., office visits and phone consults) and emerging care deli very modalities (e.g., patient web 
portal and mobile applications). Follow-up assessments will occ ur at 6, 12, 18, and [ADDRESS_417345] at 12 
months, which will be sustained at 24 months. We will also asse ss I-CARE’s cost-effectiveness 
and use mixed methods to examine its potential for reach, adopt ion, implementation, and 
maintenance. This study offers the potential to change how obes e and depressed adults are treated
—through a new model of accessible and integrative lifestyle me dicine and mental health 
expertise—in primary care.
Keywords
Depression; obesity; randomized controlled trial; problem solvi ng therapy; standard behavioral 
treatment; lifestyle change
1. Introduction
Effective interventions targeting comorbid obesity and depressi on are critical given the 
increasing prevalence and worsened outcomes for patients with b oth conditions.1 Obesity 
affects 36% of women and men in the [LOCATION_002] (US)2 and is an independent risk factor 
for major chronic diseases such as type 2 diabetes mellitus and  cardiovascular disease.3,4
Similarly, depression is associated with increased risks of the se chronic diseases5 and is a 
leading cause of disability worldwide.6,7 Lifetime risk of major depressive disorder (MDD) 
is 20% in US women and 13% in men, and the 12-month prevalence is 8.6% and 4.9%, 
respectively.8,9 Moreover, over their lifetime, 4% of the US general adult popu lation meets 
the criteria for a chronic depressive disorder.10 Mounting epi[INVESTIGATOR_10296]1,11 has 
shown a bidirectional relationship between obesity and depressi on, especially in women. 
Prospective studies also reveal that the obesity-depression rel ationship is temporally 
reciprocal, i.e., baseline obesity predicting later depression and vice versa.12–14 Not only are 
obesity and depression associated with the same health complica tions (e.g., type 2 diabetes 
mellitus and cardiovascular disease), but their coexistence exe rts synergistic adverse effects 
on treatment adherence and response for both conditions.15–17
Thus, adults who are both obese and depressed are a growing pop ulation of great public 
health concern and should be a prime target for clinical interv entions to prevent type 2 
diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular disease. Some studies sugg ested the potential benefits 
of behavioral interventions in obese and depressed adults.18–[ADDRESS_417346] people seek and receive care.
The RAINBOW ( Research Aimed at Improvi ngBoth Mood and Weight) trial was designed 
to evaluate the clinical and cost effectiveness and implementat ion potential of an integrated, Ma et al. Page 2
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
technology-enhanced, collaborative care model for treating obes e and depressed adults in 
primary care. This paper describes the study design and methodo logy.
2. Methods
2.1. Study Design
RAINBOW is a 2-arm randomized controlled trial in which patient s ≥18 years of age with 
comorbid depression and obesity will be randomized to receive u sual care alone or 
combined with an integrated treatment for the two coexisting di sorders, the “Integrated 
coaching for better mood and weight (I-CARE)” intervention. All  study procedures and 
materials have been approved by [CONTACT_337748] (PAMF). The study uses an effectiveness-and-prelimin ary-implementation 
(Type 1 hybrid) design, aimed at testing intervention effective ness while gathering 
information on its potential for implementation in real-world s ettings.22 Framed within the 
Reach, Effectiveness, Adoption, Implementation, and Maintenance  (RE-AIM) model, the 
specific aims focus on outcome and process evaluations.
Aim 1. Determine the clinical and cost effectiveness of I-CARE vs. usual care
—Hypothesis 1. Compared with controls, I-CARE participants will achieve greater mean 
reductions in body mass index (BMI) and Depression Symptom Chec klist-20 (SCL-20) 
score at 12 months, which are the study’s co-primary endpoints.
Hypothesis 2. Mean BMI and SCL-20 scores will remain significan tly lower (improved) at 
24 months (i.e., [ADDRESS_417347]-treatment) in I-CARE participan ts compared to controls.
Hypothesis 3. The I-CARE intervention will be cost-effective wi thin [ADDRESS_417348] 
medical and nonmedical costs (estimated from health system and societal perspectives) to 
incremental benefits (measured by [CONTACT_102767]-adjusted life years g ained).
Aim 2. Examine I-CARE’s potential for reach, adoption, implemen tation, and 
maintenance— A mixed methods approach utilizing detailed process data will b e used to 
examine RE-AIM attributes other than effectiveness: reach (e.g. , patient participation rate 
and reasons for refusal), adoption (e.g., characteristics of pa rticipating clinics and 
providers), implementation (e.g., fidelity of a multi-faceted s trategy to support intervention 
delivery within the trial: standard coach training, co-located psychiatric-medical supervision, 
structured audit and feedback, and external and internal expert  facilitation), and maintenance 
(e.g., expected setting-level sustainability based on post-tria l surveys and interviews with 
stakeholders).
2.2. Eligibility Criteria
Participants will be recruited from multiple medical centers of  PAMF, which is a large 
community-based multispecialty group practice in Northern Calif ornia. Patients ≥18 years of 
age who are obese and depressed will be eligible to participate  (Table 1). Those with 
significant medical (e.g., type 2 diabetes mellitus or cardiova scular disease) or psychiatric 
comorbidities (e.g., psychotic or bipolar disorders) or special  lifestyle circumstances (e.g., Ma et al. Page 3
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
pregnancy or planned relocation) will be excluded. Women and me n of any racial or ethnic 
background who speak English, meet the inclusion criteria, and have no exclusion criteria 
will be enrolled.
2.3. Recruitment and Screening
The target sample size of 404 eligible and consenting participa nts will be enrolled over a 2-
year period. Recruitment and screening will proceed in 5 steps (Table 1). First, PAMF 
patient electronic health records (EHRs) will be pre-screened t o identify potential 
participants meeting basic eligibility criteria (e.g., age, BMI , time with PAMF, and absence 
of exclusionary medical or psychiatric comorbidities). Second, primary care providers 
(PCPs) will review lists of potentially eligible patients, excl ude those they deem 
inappropriate for the study because of medical reasons, and aut horize study contact [CONTACT_337749]. Third, patients will be mailed or emailed study invitatio ns that contain a web link for 
the study screening form that patients can complete on their ow n or with research staff over 
the phone. Research staff will begin calling patients [ADDRESS_417349] complete the baseline  assessment consisting of a 
self-administered online questionnaire and an in-person examina tion visit. Finally, a study 
physician will review patients’ EHRs to confirm final eligibili ty before randomization. 
Based on the demographics of obese and depressed patients seen in primary care at PAMF, 
the gender and minority racial/ethnic composition of the target  enrollment population is 
estimated to be 64% female, 10% non-Hispanic black, 18% Hispani c/Latino, and 44% 
Asian.
2.4. Randomization and Blinding
A staff person not involved in outcome assessments or data anal ysis will perform 
randomization using a web-based system23 that we developed and have used successfully in 
several trials.24,25 Participants will be randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to the u sual care 
control group or the I-CARE intervention group. The web-based r andomization program 
uses Pocock’s minimization, a covariate-adaptive method,26,27 to achieve better than chance 
marginal balance between study arms across multiple baseline ch aracteristics: clinic, gender, 
age, race/ethnicity, education, BMI, SCL-20 score, therapeutic class of antidepressant 
medication taken, and number of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. The system’s c omputational algorithm 
automatically adjusts the randomization probability based on th e characteristics of all the 
previously randomized participants, thus minimizing the total c ovariate imbalance between 
arms after each new patient is randomized. Efron’s biased-coin method28 is applied to 
protect allocation concealment with the use of non-extreme rand omization probabilities 
(2/3:1/3). Specifically, for each patient about to be randomize d, the system automatically 
calculates an imbalance score for each of the above-mentioned b aseline covariates, and then 
a total imbalance score, S, by [CONTACT_337750]. I f S = 0, the randomization 
probability for receiving the intervention for that patient wil l be set to ½, and if S < 0 (S > 
0), the randomization probability will be set to 2/3 (1/3).
By [CONTACT_8345], treatment assignments are identifiable to participan ts and the lifestyle coach, but 
the investigators, data and safety monitoring board members, ou tcome assessors, and data Ma et al. Page 4
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC [ADDRESS_417350] a higher likelihood of an established relationship wi th their PCP. During informed 
consent, patients will be clearly instructed that they should c ontinue to receive any medical 
care (e.g., depression and weight control care) as usual. For p atient safety and 
generalizability, no standard care will be withheld at any time  from participants once 
enrolled, regardless of treatment assignment. They will be advi sed to consult with their PCP 
about their conditions. PCPs will be free to prescribe medicati ons or refer patients for mental 
health and/or obesity consultation, and patients will be free t o seek care in the community. 
All participants will receive information on PAMF health and we llness classes and programs 
relating to mood and weight, as well as a Fitbit ZIP™ wireless activity tracker.
To retain the integrity of usual care, PCPs will not be told wh ich of their patients are 
enrolled in the study and in which treatment group if enrolled.  They will only identify which 
of their patients are in the I-CARE intervention if and when th ey are contact[CONTACT_337751]. We anticip ate the number of I-CARE 
participants per PCP to be small considering we will be recruit ing at multiple large PAMF 
primary care clinics.
Based on our prior primary care-based trials, we anticipate low  rates of changes in 
concomitant therapy for depression or obesity in usual care wit hin the 12-month intervention 
period. In the TEAMcare study,29 the number of antidepressant medication initiations and/or 
adjustments in the TEAMcare intervention (3.37; 95% CI, 2.92–3. 89) was 6.2 times (P <.
001) that of usual care (0.53; 0.34–0.82) over 12 months. In th e 15-month E-LITE trial,24 no 
one had drug or surgical treatment for obesity; 15 of the 81 (1 9%) usual care controls used a 
nonstudy weight-loss program (13 in a commercial program and 2 in a routine class at the 
clinic), compared to 5 of the 79 (6%) coach-led and 3 of the 81  (4%) self-directed 
participants (all used a commercial program) ( P = 0.003).
As we have done in those trials, from the EHR we will determine  PCP orders and referrals 
throughout the trial period for intervention and control partic ipants. We will also survey 
participants about any programs or products that they may have used on their own to treat 
depression or obesity during the trial. We will conduct seconda ry analyses using data on out-
of-study treatments to elucidate their potential confounding ef fects on the primary intention-
to-treat findings.
2.6. Intervention
Participants in the control group will receive no intervention from the study. Participants in 
the I-CARE group will complete a 12-month integrated interventi on for comorbid obesity 
and depression.
2.6.1. Integrated collaborative care— The I-CARE intervention integrates the essential 
components of the Diabetes Prevention Program-based Group Lifes tyle Balance™ (GLB) Ma et al. Page 5
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
program for weight loss and cardiometabolic risk reduction24,30,31 with the PEARLS 
program32,33 for collaborative stepped depression care, which uses Problem Solving 
Therapy (PST) combined with behavioral activation as first-line , intensified with stepwise 
increases in doses and number of antidepressant medications as needed. Both programs are 
nationally recognized and provide standard coach training and s upport.34,[ADDRESS_417351] shown 
the effectiveness of both programs separately  in our previous trials.24,31–33,36–38 In this 
study, we innovatively integrate them for the treatment of adul ts with comorbid obesity and 
depression in primary care.
2.6.2. Synergistic conceptual models for behavior change— The GLB program is 
based on Social Cognitive Theory,39 which emphasizes a triadic, reciprocally deterministic 
relationship between the individual, environment, and behavior.  Social Cognitive Theory 
recognizes that behavior change is a dynamic process that moves  at variable speed through 
stages of readiness to change. Positive outcome expectancies th rough realistic goal setting 
and guided action planning are associated with initiation of be havior change, and self-
efficacy developed for specific behaviors (e.g., self-weighing,  dietary change and physical 
activity) predict establishment and maintenance of behavior cha nge. Social Cognitive 
Theory suggests that self-efficacy is enhanced through social s upport and gradual mastery of 
self-regulation skills (e.g., self-monitoring, action planning,  and problem solving).[ADDRESS_417352] for depression has important overlap with the GLB as fo llows: both (1) are based 
on cognitive and behavioral models of behavioral change; (2) in volve goal setting and action 
planning; (3) require monitoring of specific targets from week to week; (4) assign home 
activities to be done between sessions; (5) incorporate problem  solving and relapse 
prevention; (6) are interactive treatment methods that actively  engage participants; and (7) 
recognize the value of engaging with support from a lifestyle c oach to accomplish these 
goals. Because both interventions share common cognitive and be havioral principles, it is 
expected that patients can focus on applying familiar skills to  behavior change for both 
improved depression and weight loss simultaneously. Thus, parti cipants are likely to 
transition between the PST and GLB programs smoothly. The seque ntial, overlappi[INVESTIGATOR_337733], thereby [CONTACT_337752] g improved outcomes for 
both disorders.
2.6.3. Intervention format, structure and content— The 12-month I-CARE 
intervention has an intensive phase and a maintenance phase.
[IP_ADDRESS]. Format: Delivered by a trained lifestyle coach, I-CARE begins with a 6- month 
intensive phase including 9 one-on-one clinic visits of 60 minu tes each, and 11 home-
viewed 20–[ADDRESS_417353] 
once a month for 15–30 minutes during the 6-month maintenance p hase (Table 2). The I-
CARE trained lifestyle coach will conduct the visits and phone calls, and additionally can 
communicate with patients via the secure EHR patient portal thr oughout the intervention. 
Throughout the intervention, participants will be asked to wear  a study-provided Fitbit 
pedometer, log their weight on Fitbit website or mobile applica tion (“app”), and log minutes Ma et al. Page 6
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
of physical activity and dietary intake using MyFitnessPal webs ite or app. Each participant 
will set up an online user account for Fitbit and one for MyFit nessPal, and share them with 
the lifestyle coach as a “friend.” Fitbit pedometers interface with the personal computer or 
Fitbit app on a mobile device to automatically and wirelessly u pload a participant’s daily 
steps into the person’s Fitbit account. Participants will manua lly enter their weights, minutes 
of physical activity, and foods consumed into their accounts on  a computer or through the 
mobile apps. Once friended the lifestyle coach will be able to view participant’s self-tracked 
data, monitor their progress, and use it to facilitate individu alized coaching.
[IP_ADDRESS]. Structure, content, and curriculum: The PEARLS intervention for depression 
begins with PST at the first one-on-one visit and the GLB progr am is introduced in the fifth 
visit during week 6 (Table 2). PST teaches participants problem -solving skills using a 
structured 7-step method and workbook-style paper materials. Wi thin the first 3–[ADDRESS_417354] participants on, and help tr oubleshoot issues with, the use of 
secure email via the EHR-integrated patient portal, MyFitnessPa l, and Fitbit, all of which 
are accessible online or via Android- and iPhone-compatible app s.
During the fifth I-CARE visit (week 6), participants will recei ve the in-home GLB core 
program materials, including self-directed videos and a workboo k. The lifestyle coach will 
review the content from 11 out of the 12 core GLB video session s (excluding the problem 
solving session due to overlap with PST) during visits [ADDRESS_417355]-core GLB print materials (which are included in the  workbook) will be 
discussed during each phone encounter.
Throughout the 12-month intervention, the coach will practice p roblem solving skills with 
participants and provide between-session support via EHR-embedd ed secure email. The 
coach will provide lifestyle counseling following the GLB progr am on weight management, 
healthy eating, and physical activity after GLB is introduced. The coach and participant will 
develop a maintenance plan once targeted depression and weight loss goals (or a personal 
maximum achievable level of improvement) are reached for at lea st [ADDRESS_417356]-effectivene ss.
2.6.4. Psychiatric and medical supervision of lifestyle coach a nd medication 
management support for PCPs— Rather than a separate care manager providing care 
for each illness in primary care systems, which may be prohibit ively expensive, a lifestyle 
coach who is cross-trained using the standardized GLB34 and PEARLS35 training protocols 
will provide integrated coaching for comorbid obesity and depre ssion, under the supervision 
of a study psychiatrist and a study physician who are identifie d from among local PAMF 
providers. After each one-on-one visit, the coach will document  patient progress on key 
intervention tracking parameters (e.g., date and content; most current Patient Health 
Questionnaire-9 [PHQ-9] score; pedometer steps; self-reported w eight and minutes of Ma et al. Page 7
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
physical activity) in the EHR—viewable by [CONTACT_337753]’s care team to 
facilitate care coordination. Working together as a study care team, the coach will meet for [ADDRESS_417357], study physician, a nd intervention manager. 
They use an online tracking database to view each participant’s  progress for ongoing case 
management. The form will include a flag for cases not meeting pre-defined progress 
milestones for depression (e.g., compared to visit 1, PHQ-9 sco re <25% decrease by [CONTACT_5875] 4; 
another <25% decrease by [CONTACT_5875] 8; or PHQ-9 score >5 or <50% decr ease by [CONTACT_5875] 12), 
weight loss (e.g., <3% decrease by [CONTACT_5875] 12; <5% decrease by [CONTACT_337754] k 20), and for physical 
activity (e.g., <150 minutes/week of moderate-intensity physica l activity or <8000 steps per 
day by [CONTACT_5875] 12). Each week the coach and supervisors will discu ss new and flagged cases 
(5–10 minutes of discussion per case). The study psychiatrist a nd physician will provide 
psychiatric and medical advice to the coach during case review meetings, but they will not 
directly interact with intervention participants. Consistent wi th stepped care strategies, for 
patients with unremitting depression symptoms the supervising p sychiatrist will recommend 
antidepressant medication changes, according to the study medic ation protocol (Appendix 
A), taking into account potential medical or substance abuse et iologies. The psychiatrist 
communicates her recommendations via secure EHR staff messaging  to PCPs who, as 
treating physicians, will be responsible for prescribing the re commended antidepressant 
medications. PCPs may consult the study psychiatrist if they ha ve questions about any 
recommended medication changes. The coach will monitor conditio n status, coordinate 
communication between the supervising psychiatrist and the pati ent’s PCP regarding 
medication changes, and help problem solve barriers to medicati on adherence during 
scheduled visits.
2.7. Participant Safety
Participants will be carefully screened using a multistep enrol lment process, and individuals 
for whom the intervention is deemed medically inappropriate or unsafe will be excluded. 
The study physician will review medical charts of all the parti cipants after baseline 
assessments and before randomization. During screening women wh o are pregnant, 
lactating, or planning to become pregnant during the study peri od will be excluded. If a 
participant becomes pregnant during the study, she will be excl uded from further 
participation in all study activities, and her PCP will be noti fied. Participants who are 
diagnosed with any other exclusionary condition (e.g., coronary  heart disease, stroke, 
diabetes, and cancer) following randomization may continue in t he trial with approval of the 
study physician. Established alert levels (e.g., for high blood  pressure) and alert conditions 
(e.g., suicidality, angina, and peripheral vascular disease) wi ll help ensure that participants 
are referred for further evaluation and therapy when clinically  indicated. The PHQ-9 and the 
SCL-20 will be used to assess suicidal risk. Study staff will f ollow the self-harm protection 
protocol (Appendix B) if a participant responds “2” (“more than  half the days”) or “3” 
(“nearly every day”) to item 9 of the PHQ-9 or responds “3” (‘q uite a bit”) or “4” 
(“extremely”) to item [ADDRESS_417358] interview and reporting Ma et al. Page 8
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC [ADDRESS_417359] medical or psychologic al event experienced by a 
patient during or as a result of his/her participation in the s tudy that represents a new 
symptom or an exacerbation of an existing condition, whether or  not considered study 
related based on appropriate medical judgment. Documentation in  EHR will be used to 
verify patient self-reports. Adverse events discovered outside these planned evaluations 
(e.g., during intervention encounters) will be duly noted and f ollowed up with, as needed, to 
assure participant safety. We will report adverse events accord ing to the data and safety 
monitoring plan (Appendix C).
2.8. Retention
As we have done in our previous trials,24,25,30,40 we will implement a series of strategies to 
minimize loss to follow-up: (1) careful staff selection and sta ndardized training in trial-
specific protocols, rapport building, motivational interviewing , and problem solving as 
appropriate to their study roles; (2) legally adequate, effecti ve informed consent; (3) 
education of participants about the importance of follow-up ass essments regardless of 
treatment adherence; (4) prudent participant incentives (e.g., pedometer, cash incentives of 
$20) and flexible scheduling (outside of work hours, multiple l ocations); (5) promotion of 
study “brand” identity with a logo and a website; (6) ongoing m onitoring of recruitment and 
retention; (7) up-to-date participant contact [CONTACT_32431] t wo emergency contacts; (8) 
diligent efforts to re-engage inactive participants; and (9) al ternative means of obtaining 
measurements.
2.9. Study measures and data collection schedule (Table 3)
2.9.1. Primary outcomes— The co-primary outcomes are changes in BMI and SCL-[ADDRESS_417360] protocols.41 The SCL-20 is a valid, reliable measure of depression severity .42,43 It 
has been used in numerous depression treatment trials in primar y care and community 
settings,32,33,37,38 making it particularly useful for cross-study comparisons and data 
synthesis in meta-analyses.
2.9.2. Secondary outcomes— BMI and SCL-20 score at 24 months will be secondary 
outcomes. Additional secondary outcome measures will include de pression treatment 
response (>50% decline in SCL-20 score from baseline) and remis sion (SCL-20 score <0.5), 
waist circumference and resting blood pressure according to sta ndardized protocols,41 and 
the following measures at 12 and 24 months:
Obesity-specific problems: The Obesity-Related Problem Scale specifically measures the 
impact of obesity on psychosocial functioning. The 8-item scale  has high internal reliability 
and sound test–retest reliability, correlates strongly with a w ide range of theoretically related 
constructs, and is responsive to weight loss intervention.44
Anxiety: Anxiety will be measured with the Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale (GAD-7) 
and the Panic Disorder module of the Mini-International Neurops ychiatric Interview Ma et al. Page 9
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
(MINI). GAD-[ADDRESS_417361] ional impairment.45 The 
MINI has high validity and reliability scores;46 and in the present study we will specifically 
use module E to screen for panic disorder.
Disability: The Sheehan Disability Scale is a validated questionnaire that measures 
functional disability and is sensitive to treatment effects in clinical trials.47 Patients rate the 
extent to which they symptoms impair work/school, social, and f amily life on a visual 
analog scale from 0 to 10 and answer the number of days when th eir symptoms cause them 
to miss work/school and be unproductive at work/school.
Quality of life: Quality of life will be measured with the Short Form-8 Health S urvey 
(SF-8) and Euro-QoL 5D. The SF-8 is an 8-item version of the SF -36 that measures overall 
health-related quality of life.48 Euro-QoL 5D (EQ-5D-5L) include 5 domains (mobility, self-
care, usual activities, pain and discomfort, and depression and  anxiety) scored on 5 levels 
(no, slight, moderate, severe, or extreme problems) and current  health rated on a visual 
analogue scale from 0 to 100. It has been shown to be a valid a nd reliable tool to measure 
utility based quality of life.49 Values from the EQ-5D-5L instrument will be used to 
calculate quality-adjusted life years that are used to inform i ncremental benefits of the I-
CARE intervention relative to control.
Costs: These include direct medical costs and direct nonmedical costs.  Direct medical costs 
will include the costs of identifying eligible patients, provid ing the intervention, addressing 
side effects, and health care utilization. Direct nonmedical co sts will include intervention-
related “out-of-pocket” costs (e.g., value of participant time spent on intervention activities). 
We will obtain authorization from patients for extraction of EH R data on health care 
utilization (e.g., office visits, in-patient stays, procedures,  medications, laboratory tests). We 
will also interview participants about their medication use (wi th the aid of containers of 
regularly-taken medication brought by [CONTACT_337755] s), general wellness service 
use, and out of network health care utilization. Also, we will survey the coach and patients 
using adapted resource utilization and cost capture instruments  based on the Diabetes 
Prevention Program and Diabetes Prevention Program translation trials.50,[ADDRESS_417362] modifiers and mediators— To complement the primary and 
secondary findings, we will explore for whom and under what con dition (effect modifiers) 
and how (mediators) treatment effects occur. Data will be colle cted on measures of potential 
moderators (e.g., gender, age, race/ethnicity, education, postt raumatic stress disorder) and 
mediators (e.g. dietary intake, physical activity, problem solv ing, and sleep quality) 
responses to the intervention. Posttraumatic stress disorder (P TSD) will be measured with 
the 17-item PTSD checklist – Civilian Version that has high rel iability and validity.52
Participants’ dietary intake will be assessed by [CONTACT_27873]-pass 24-hour diet recalls,[ADDRESS_417363] 
7-day Physical Activity Recall, which is a reliable measure tha t is sensitive to change in 
physical activity.54 Participants’ problem solving skills will be assessed using th e reliable 
and valid Social Problem-Solving Inventory-Revised: Short Form that contains 25 items in Ma et al. Page 10
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
the following five scales: positive problem orientation, ration al problem solving, negative 
problem orientation, impulsive/careless style, and avoidance st yle.55 Sleep quality will be 
measured with the 8-item PROMIS sleep disturbance and sleep imp airment scales short 
forms.56
2.9.4. Process measures— As in an effectiveness-and-preliminary-implementation 
(Type 1 hybrid) design, we will use mixed methods to collect pr ocess measures that will 
provide a nuanced understanding of why the intervention is (or is not) more effective than 
usual care, whether high intervention fidelity is achieved, wha t barriers and enablers there 
are, how these may translate into real-world implementation, an d what modifications can be 
made to maximize implementation success.22 We will frame the process evaluation around 
the RE-AIM framework (Table 4). In addition to focusing on effe ctiveness, RE-AIM 
examines the reach, adoption, implementation, and maintenance o f the program, and any 
barriers or enablers in each of these domains.57,[ADDRESS_417364] survey and interview 
different stakeholders, including participants, recruitment sta ff, study care team, internal 
experts (study physician advisors), PCPs, and medical and admin istrative leaders at 
participating clinics, at multiple time points throughout the t rial period.
In addition to qualitative evaluation through surveys and inter views, we will also collect 
data on the screening process, e.g., the proportion and represe ntativeness of the patients who 
are eligible at initial and subsequent screenings, reasons for exclusion, and demographics of 
patients who screen ineligible or decline participation. We als o will assess the proportion 
and representativeness of physicians willing to approve screeni ng of their potentially eligible 
patients, patient retention rates, and the representatives of p atients who complete follow-up 
assessments and reasons for dropout.
Intervention exposure and adherence measures will include atten dance at one-on-one visits, 
reasons for missed visits, frequency of self-monitoring records  and secure emails, self-
reported completion of in-home videos, and number of completed counselling phone calls. 
Self-monitoring data obtained during intervention program will be used for adherence 
monitoring and for the coach to use in tailoring feedback for i ndividual participants.
2.10. Statistical Analysis
2.10.1. Analytic plan— Repeated-measures mixed-effects linear (for continuous 
outcomes) or logistic models (for categorical outcomes) using i ntention-to-treat tests of 
group by [CONTACT_337756]-group differen ces in primary ( Aim 1, 
Hypotheses 1 and 2 ) and secondary outcomes. The fixed effects of each model will include 
the baseline value of the outcome of interest, randomization ba lancing factors, group, time 
point, and group-by-time interaction indicators. The models wil l account for the non-
independence of repeated measures using a covariance structure within participants to be 
determined by [CONTACT_337757]. Maximum likelihood estimation in mixed modeling will be used for 
missing data. We will document the extent and pattern of missin g data and the reasons, and 
will conduct sensitivity analyses of the impact of missing data  (e.g., with multiple 
imputation,59–61 on stability of the primary results). Models will be adjusted for nonlinearity Ma et al. Page 11
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
and/or unequal variances based on residuals from a model using residual plots. Polynomial 
terms may be included if indicated. Appropriate transformation of the outcome variable 
(e.g., logarithmic) will be considered as a remedy for unequal variances. Also, the model 
could be altered to a heterogeneous variance model if participa nts in different intervention 
arms are found to have different variances. We will verify that  mixed model-based results 
are not sensitive to violations of model assumptions with permu tation and bootstrap 
resampling tests.62,63
Mediation analyses will explore changes in potential putative m ediators (e.g. problem 
solving, antidepressant medication change, physical activity, d ietary intake, sleep quality) 
and their effects on treatment response. Using MacKinnon’s prod uct of coefficients test 
(řŚ)64 we will examine longitudinal and contemporaneous mediation sep arately. 
Longitudinal mediation refers to changes in mediators from base line to 6 months followed 
by [CONTACT_337758]/or SCL-20. Contemporaneous mediation refer s to changes in 
mediators and change in BMI and/or SCL-[ADDRESS_417365] mediated will be calculated for each significant mediato r as řŚ/(řŚ+ś), where ś is 
the direct intervention effect on outcome.
Moderation analyses will explore differences in intervention ef fect by [CONTACT_337759] 
(e.g., according to gender, age, race/ethnicity, and education) . These analyses will follow the 
same general analytic approach as described above for primary a nd secondary outcomes, 
with the inclusion of appropriate moderator main effects and mo derator-by-group interaction 
terms.
Cost-effectiveness analyses ( Aim 1, Hypothesis 3 ) will extend and combine existing models 
for obesity and depression that we and others have developed.65–70 We will compare 
incremental costs, estimated from the perspectives of health sy stems (direct medical costs 
only) and society (direct medical and non-medical costs), to in cremental benefits, expressed 
as quality-adjusted life years gained. We will also consider th e number needed to treat as an 
important and clinically-relevant outcome and estimate the inte rvention cost per number 
needed to treat. The use of quality-adjusted life years allows for comparisons of both 
changes in morbidity and health status as well as mortality eff ects based on change in the 
risk of death and, among survivors, reduction in quality of lif e due to nonfatal events, given 
the probabilities of disease progression in the target populati on.68,71 We will convert 
Cohen’s d effect sizes to estimates of the number needed to treat to hav e one more patient 
with better outcomes in the intervention arm vs. usual care.72 We will exclude from all 
analyses research-related costs, such as costs of recruitment, screening, and outcome 
surveillance that are beyond those recommended for routine clin ical practice. Intervention 
start-up costs, fixed costs of sustaining the intervention, and  marginal costs of adding 
additional participants to the intervention will be differentia ted because they are relevant for Ma et al. Page 12
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
different decisions: whether to implement the intervention in t he first place and whether to 
sustain or expand it over time. We will use simulation models, similar to those in Diabetes 
Prevention Program and Sequenced Treatment Alternatives to Reli eve Depression,68,73,[ADDRESS_417366]  guidelines.75–[ADDRESS_417367] tests,  e.g., Student’s t-tests and ů2
tests for continuous and categorical variables, respectively ( Aim 2 ). We will use NVivo to 
analyze all qualitative data.78 Two independent and trained researchers will code all 
qualitative data separately by [CONTACT_337760] (e.g., partici pants, recruitment staff, study 
care team, internal experts, PCPs, and medical and administrati ve leaders) using principles 
of content analysis.79 Codes will be developed based on the RE-AIM domains assessed. 
Quantitative process data and qualitative data will be combined  to draw conclusions about 
reach, adoption, implementation, and maintenance of the interve ntion.80
2.10.2. Sample size and data interpretation— The trial with 202 participants per arm 
has 90% power to detect a standardized mean difference of 0.35 (Cohen’s d) in the primary 
endpoints of BMI and SCL-20 scores at 12 months between the int ervention and usual care 
group at ř=5% (2-sided), assuming at least 85% retention at [ADDRESS_417368] with simplified assumptions to estimate power, 
whereas actual power likely will be greater due to increased ef ficiency associated with 
repeated-measures mixed models with baseline and covariate adju stments.83 Because 
treatment success will be judged on both (not either) primary o utcomes, multiplicity 
adjustment is unnecessary.84 No multiplicity adjustment will be made for secondary 
analyses, which are intended to complement the primary findings  and to inform future 
research. They will be interpreted within that context, conside ring the totality of evidence 
available.84,85
We chose a d of 0.35 as the minimum important between-group difference base d on our 
prior studies and other available literature. Previously, we ob served a standardized mean 
difference of 0.46 between usual care and the GLB weight loss i ntervention being tested in 
the current trial. This corresponded to a mean of 5.0% vs. 2.6%  weight loss over 15 
months.24 Weight loss of ≥5% is widely regarded clinically significant,86 while a weight 
change of <3% defines weight maintenance.[ADDRESS_417369]  sizes of 0.61–0.[ADDRESS_417370] sizes in the PEARLS trials 
ranged from 0.35–0.74.32,[ADDRESS_417371] size of 0.50.89Ma et al. Page 13
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
2.11. Quality Control
2.11.1. Data management— Study data will be entered into computerized databases 
including the following: (1) Microsoft Access for recruitment a nd intervention tracking data; 
(2) REDCap90 hosted at the PAMF Research Institute for self- and interviewe r-administered 
questionnaire data and physical measurements; and (3) the Nutri tion Data System for 
Research (NDS-R) (Minneapolis, MN) licensed for data collection  and nutrient analysis 
based on multiple-pass 24-hour diet recalls.91,92 These databases employ automatic, real-
time range, logic, and missing value checks, as applicable. Als o, the outcome assessors are 
trained on data collection protocols (e.g., multiple-pass 24-ho ur diet recall using NDS-R and 
7-day physical activity recall), and their performance is conti nuously monitored. All datasets 
will be cleaned, verified and archived, and then read into SAS (version 9.2; SAS Institute 
Inc, Cary, NC) datasets, which also will be archived. One offic ial copy of all study data and 
a master data dictionary will be maintained and updated regular ly. All analytic and tracking 
databases will be stored in a password-protected, encrypted net work drive with continuous 
backups. For the protection of participant confidentiality, uni que anonymous study IDs will 
be used for data storing, tracking and reporting. Protected hea lth information will be stored 
separately from all other study data, and will be used and disc losed in accordance with the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act regulations . Regular reports will be 
produced on (1) patient accrual and follow-up completion/retent ion in relation to goals and 
timeline; (2) the randomization process and group comparability  on the balancing variables; 
(3) key baseline characteristics of the sample, by (blinded) gr oup, related to the primary and 
secondary outcome variables and proposed effect modifiers and m ediators; (4) intervention 
exposure and adherence; and (5) protocol violations. Any observ ed delays in these processes 
or data irregularities will be followed up and resolved in a ti mely manner.
2.11.2. Intervention fidelity— Following recommendations for behavioral intervention 
studies,[ADDRESS_417372] 10% will be reviewe d and rated for protocol 
adherence using a structured rating scale. The lifestyle coach will follow a structured 
framework for composing secure emails, which will be sampled fo r periodic review as part 
of routine quality control efforts. The coach will complete a c hecklist of critical intervention 
behaviors and materials delivered during one-on-one sessions, a nd document the frequency, 
duration, and purpose of phone and email communications. These records will be subject to 
periodic reviews using standardized evaluation forms. If a coac h scores below an a priori 
performance standard, she will receive more frequent audit and feedback and “booster” 
training if necessary.
To monitor and support participants’ receipt of and adherence t o the intervention, the coach 
will review and give feedback on homework and self-monitoring r ecords and document 
participants’ mastery of protocol-specific, achievement-based o bjectives. The coach will 
routinely inquire about barriers to treatment receipt and adher ence, recommend problem-
solving strategies, and provide ongoing support using motivatio nal interviewing 
techniques.94Ma et al. Page 14
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
3. Discussion
Research on integrated therapy in comorbid obesity and depressi on is lacking. One 
randomized controlled trial by [CONTACT_337761]. tested the efficacy of an intensive 
intervention with 203 obese and depressed women in a primary ca re setting that combined 
behavioral weight-loss and cognitive-behavioral depression trea tments into 26 group visits 
over 1 year, compared with behavioral weight-loss treatment alo ne for the same number of 
sessions.20 There were no significant differences between groups at 12 mon ths for weight or 
depression symptoms measured by [CONTACT_337762]-20.20 Pagoto et al. completed an efficacy trial in 
161 obese women with major depressive disorder who were treated  sequentially with 
behavioral activation therapy for depression followed by [CONTACT_337763]-loss treatment, 
or received behavioral weight-loss treatment only. Both study a rms involved 26 weekly 
individual and group sessions during a 6-month intensive phase,  and 6 group and 10 phone 
sessions during 18 months of maintenance.95 At 12 months (primary endpoint), the two 
groups did not differ in weight loss, but sequential treatment led to greater improvement in 
Beck Depression Inventory-II scores.[ADDRESS_417373] greater weight regardless of random  assignment. Simon’s and 
Pagoto’s efficacy trials tested high-intensity behavioral inter ventions (≥26 in-person visits in 
1 year), included women only, and neither used team-based multi condition collaborative 
care involving as-needed stepped treatment intensification with  antidepressant 
medications.38,96,97 The findings of these trials reinforce a critical need for alt ernative 
comorbidity treatment models that can be integrated within prim ary care and better engage 
obese and depressed patients, thereby [CONTACT_337764] a nd generalizability.
The current study uniquely adapts and integrates the GLB video program for weight loss 
with the PEARLS program for collaborative stepped depression ca re. The intervention 
incorporates conventional clinic- and home-based modes of care delivery (e.g., office visits 
plus phone consults and in-home video), and leverages low-cost,  wide-reach health 
information technologies (e.g., web, secure email, and mobile a pps). Using an effectiveness-
and-preliminary-implementation (Type 1 hybrid) design,[ADDRESS_417374] candidates i n health professions that are 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_337734] (e.g., health educators a nd registered dietitians). Coach 
training for the study can be readily scaled in future dissemin ation and implementation of 
the intervention if warranted by [CONTACT_337765]. Both  GLB and PEARLS programs 
are nationally recognized and provide standard coach training a nd support.
This study leverages two proven behavioral interventions in way s that are practical and 
likely to have a synergistic therapeutic effect on two prevalen t and commonly coexisting Ma et al. Page 15
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC [ADDRESS_417375] Number R01HL119453 from the National Heart, Lung and Blood 
Institute and internal funding from the Palo Alto Medical Found ation Research Institute. JGF is supported in part by 
[CONTACT_4289]/NIA K01AG037593-01A1. VY is supported in part by [CONTACT_81812] K23D K097308. The content is solely the 
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represen t the official views of the National Heart, Lung and 
Blood Institute or the National Institutes of Health. No sponso r or funding source has a role in the design or conduct 
of the study; collection, management, analysis or interpretatio n of the data; or preparation, review or approval of the 
manuscript.
The authors dedicate this work to the deceased Wayne Katon, MD,  who contributed significantly to the conception 
and design of the RAINBOW study. The authors extend special tha nks to RAINBOW participants and their 
families who make this study possible. The authors also thank t he study physician advisors (Meg Durbin, MD, Ed 
Yu, MD, and Bahar Aghighi, MD), the study Data and Safety Monit oring Board members (William Haskell, PhD, 
Mickey Trockel, MD, Sandra Tsai, MD, and Manisha Desai, PhD), a nd the study team members who have made 
substantial contributions to the conduct of the study (Veronica  Luna, BS, Andrea Blonstein, MBA, RD, Elizabeth 
Jameiro, MD, Nancy Wittels, MS, Elizabeth Ward, MD, and Lenard Lesser, MD, MSHS).
Investigators at Palo Alto Medical Foundation Research Institut e, the University of Washington, and the University 
of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_337735] I-CARE interve ntion, which integrates adaptations of the 
Program to Encourage Active, Rewarding Lives for Seniors and th e Group Lifestyle Balance™ Program. The 
University of Washington and the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_337736].
Appendix A. Study Medication Protocol
I-CARE Treatment of Depression with Medications
A. Initiating Antidepressants
When starting patients on antidepressants, they need to underst and that side effects can 
occur before the medication’s therapeutic effects help them to feel better. It is helpful to 
draw the figure below for patients, illustrating that side effe cts peak in the first 1–2 weeks 
and then subside, whereas therapeutic effects often peak at 3–4  weeks. This figure can 
prevent patients from getting discouraged prematurely and disco ntinuing medications.Ma et al. Page 16
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
B. Antidepressant Side Effects
Short-Term Side Effects— These occur within the first several weeks and include 
jitteriness, insomnia, headache, and nausea, and other side eff ects that may be idiosyncratic 
to the individual patient. These symptoms are usually lessened by [CONTACT_337766] 
a low dose and increasing the dose weekly. Short-term side effe cts usually disappear within 
2–3 weeks.
Long-Term Side Effects
ߖߖ Diarrhea  is particularly common with sertraline (Zoloft), but can occur  with 
other SSRIs or with bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_2394] (Wellbutrin). Changing to a low d osage of 
paroxetine (Paxil) at 5–[ADDRESS_417376] by 5–10 mg e very 7–10 days 
to a dosage of 20–50 mg may help because paroxetine (Paxil) has  slight 
anticholinergic effects.
ߖ Sexual dysfunction  can occur in up to one third of patients receiving selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), such as fluoxetine. It i s important to ask 
about sexual function, since many patients with diabetes alread y have 
problematic sexual functioning. The most common sexual side eff ect is delayed 
orgasm or inability to experience orgasm. Patients can be switc hed or cross-Ma et al. Page 17
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC [ADDRESS_417377] on an SSRI. The 
addition of bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_60098] 100 mg twice a day or buspi[INVESTIGATOR_5331] 15 mg twice a day to 
an SSRI regimen also often alleviates sexual dysfunction.
ߖߖ Sleep problems  continue to occur in approximately 25–33% of patients despi[INVESTIGATOR_337737]. For people bothered by [CONTACT_100854], traz odone could be 
prescribed, starting at 25 mg at bedtime and increasing the dos e by 25 mg 
increments every 5 days until insomnia is successfully treated.
ߖ Weight gain , a significant problem for many people with type 2 diabetes, i s 
worsened for 5–10% of SSRI-treated patients. Paroxetine is the SSRI that has 
the most weight gain associated with it. Because bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_337738], these antidepressants are good  first choices for 
overweight people.
C. Choice of Antidepressant
For patients already taking an anti-depressant at a sub-therape utic dose , the first 
treatment action step is to titrate up the antidepressant dosag e. All titrations should be done 
slowly, on a weekly basis, until PHQ-9 score goals are achieved : either < [ADDRESS_417378]-line antidepressant choices due to lack of weight gain wi th these medications. Initiation 
and titration are shown in the schematic below.Ma et al. Page 18
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC [ADDRESS_417379] when carry ing out antidepressant 
augmentation strategies.
D. Strategies for Overcoming Common Issues with Taking Antidepr essants
A variety of strategies may help patients take antidepressants,  including:
ߖߖ Provide rationale for use.Ma et al. Page 19
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC [ADDRESS_417380] family/spousal support.
ߖ Elicit resistance and relationship to prior experience with med ication.
ߖ Identify relevant illness aspects (phobic, paranoid).
ߖ Increase contact [CONTACT_337767]-ins.
ߖ Give specific instructions (take regardless of symptom change, don’t stop on 
own).
ߖ Use symptom scale PHQ-9 to chart progress.
Depression Goal: PHQ-9 < [ADDRESS_417381] 50% decrease from baseli ne in PHQ-9
•TCM to encourage patient to fill out PHQ-9 weekly until reaches  a “steady state”, 
then prn.
•TCM to discuss behavioral activation methods, medication adhere nce strategies, 
rationale for initial and long-term maintenance therapy with an tidepressants (e.g., 
don’t decrease dose or stop without checking with TCM or PCP; t ake regardless of 
symptoms), and side effects (most disappear at 2 weeks).
•TCM to contact [CONTACT_337768]: acute suicidal symptoms, 
psychotic symptoms, manic symptoms, severe lack of appetite wit h insufficient 
oral intake or weight loss, suspected alcohol or drug misuse, o r severe medication 
side effects.
•Create My Better Health Plan  initially and update at each visit.
ANTIDEPRESSANT MEDICATION
_____ Fluoxetine  10 mg/day × 1 week; then 20mg/day × 1 week. If PHQ-9 hasn’t 
decreased by 50% or more, increase to 30mg/day. At week 4, if P HQ-9 hasn’t 
decreased by 50% or more, increase to 40mg/day. Can increase fl uoxetine up to a 
maximum of 60 mg/day as needed/tolerated.
_____ If two or more negative SSRI trials  or for those patients with preexisting 
diabetes-related sexual dysfunction, start Bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_60098] 100mg/d ay for 1 week; then 
100mg 2×/day for a week; then 200mg in am & 100mg in pm. If PHQ -9 at 4 weeks 
isn’t decreased by 50%, increase dose to 200mg BID.
_____ If patient doesn’t fit above criteria, or has significant  medical or psychiatric 
symptoms, antidepressant medications to be suggested by [CONTACT_337769] m consulting 
psychiatrist or PCP.Ma et al. Page 20
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
Antidepressant Medications
Drug Starting dose Usual Dose Indications Side EffectsStarting antidepressants:  improvement often seen in first two weeks. If not seen by [ADDRESS_417382] weekly when starting antidep ressants. 3/3 of people with depression will improve 
with antidepressants.
Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_337739]:  Recurrence of depression is common. 64% of patients with depre ssion had a recurrence 10 
years after stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_337740]. If patients do deci de to stop their antidepressants, encourage them to talk with 
their PCP prior to stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_337741] a two week period.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
Citalopram (Celexa) 10 20–40 Max FDA daily 
recommendeddose for patients >60 yrs old is 20 mgJitteriness, restlessness, 
agitation, GI distress, nausea, diarrhea, insomnia usually improve in 2 weeks.Weight gain for some patients. Fluoxetine (Prozac) 10 20–[ADDRESS_417383] line (weight 
gain less likely)
Fluvoxamine (Luvox) 50 50–300Paroxetine (Paxil) 20 20–[ADDRESS_417384] for sexual 
dysfunction,weight gain, sedation; mild anticholinergiceffects (helps diarrhea)Same as above.
Paroxetine CR (Paxil CR) 25 25–75 Same as above.
Sertraline (Zoloft) 50 50–200 Same as above.
Dopamine-norepi[INVESTIGATOR_337742] (Wellbutrin SR)
**When dose > 100 mg give 
bid.100 300–400 Weight gain rare. 
May improve sexualfunctioning.Useful for lethargic patients.Contraindicated in 
patients with seizure history or eating disorders .
Serotonin-norepi[INVESTIGATOR_5608] (SNRIs)
Venlafaxine XR (Effexor XR)
—
**When dose > 75 mg, give 
bid.37.5, 75 & 100 75–300 Effective for diabetic 
neuropathy,fibromyalgia, chronic pain.
Duloxetine (Cymbalta)— 30 60–120 Effective for diabetic 
neuropathy,fibromyalgia, chronic pain.
Serotonin modulators
Trazodone (Desyrel) 25–50 50–300 Useful for 
insomniaassociated with depression/anxiety.Doses > 50 mg can cause 
orthostatic hypotension or (rarely) priapi[INVESTIGATOR_8801].
Tricyclics and tetracyclics
Amitriptyline (Elavil) 25–50 100–300 Anticholinergic side 
effects and weight gain.Elders particularly susceptible to memory change, confusion, hallucinations, sedation Amoxapi[INVESTIGATOR_050] (Asendin) 50 100–400
Clomipramine (Anafranil) 25 100–250Maprotiline (Ludiomil) 50 100–225Ma et al. Page 21
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
Antidepressant Medications
Drug Starting dose Usual Dose Indications Side Effects
Doxepin (Adapin, Sinequan)and orthostatic 
hypotension.
Contraindicated in 
patients with recent MI, cardiac conduction problems25–50 100–300
Imipramine (Tofranil) 25–50 100–300Desipramine (Norpramin) 50 100–300Nortriptyline (Pamelor) 25 50–200Protriptyline (Vivactil) 10 15–60
Noradrenergic and specific serotonergic antidepressant
Mirtazapi[INVESTIGATOR_050] (Remeron) 15 15–45 Causes weight gain in 
50% of patients. Helpful for anxious patients with insomnia and no appetite.
Appendix B. RAINBOW Self-harm Protection Protocol
Rationale
1.The Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) has a question regar ding self-harm 
risk. If a participant reports frequently contemplating suicida l ideation (“more than 
half the days” or “nearly every day” over the last 2 weeks), a clinical response is 
indicated. The Symptom Checklist (SCL-20) questionnaire also ha s a question 
regarding self-harm risk. If a participant reports frequently c ontemplating suicidal 
ideation (“quite a bit” or “extremely” over the past 2 weeks), a clinical response is 
indicated.
2.This protocol includes two self-harm protection procedures: one  for participants 
self-screening online and the other for research staff conducti ng the telephone (e.g., 
during phone screening or intervention phone consult) or in-per son (e.g., during a 
baseline or follow-up assessment or intervention visit) intervi ews.
3.The research staff conducting the telephone or in-person interv iews are non-
clinicians.
4.Current suicidal ideation is the only interview finding that cl early requires further 
clinical assessment and possible intervention.
5.This protocol refers to self-harm risk responded to an online s elf-screening (PHQ-9 
only), telephone or in-person interview (PHQ-9 or SCL-20) as fo llows:
- Responding “2” (“more than half the days”) or “3” (“nearly ever y day”) 
to the PHQ-9 question – “Over the last [ADDRESS_417385]?”
- Responding “3” (‘quite a bit”) or “4” (“extremely”) to the (SCL -20) 
question – “Overall in the past 2 weeks how much were you distr essed by 
[CONTACT_337770]?”Ma et al. Page 22
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
6.Either question can be endorsed at several different time point s. The PHQ-9 is 
administered during online self-screening or phone screening by  a research 
associate, and during every in-person or phone intervention ses sions. The SCL-20 
is completed at the clinic during baseline and follow-up assess ments (6, 12, 18, and 
24 months).
Procedures
A. For participants self-screening online
1.During the online self-screening, if a participant responds “2”  (“more than half the 
days”) or “3” (“nearly every day”) to the PHQ-9 question “Over the last [ADDRESS_417386]?” the participant will  be shown the 
following instructions:
“Please note: we do not monitor this screener in real time; if this is an emergency 
call 911.
For more immediate attention, because you have been bothered by  [CONTACT_337771] [ADDRESS_417387], or go to the emergency room.
You may also call the National Suicide Hotline at 800-SUICIDE/8 00-784-2433 
or the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 800-273-TALK/[ADDRESS_417388] you within 1–2 days. In the meantime, do 
not delay seeking medical attention.”
2.The research staff will generate daily reports (except for week ends and holidays) 
on any positive suicidality responses from the newly completed PHQ-9s since the 
last report. The research staff will follow the following proce dural steps based on 
the participant’s answers to screening questions and should not  attempt to perform 
any independent assessment of self-harm risk.
3.If positive suicidality responses are identified, the research staff will contact [CONTACT_337772] a high priority staff message in EPIC. T he study psychiatrist 
is licensed and has clinical privileges at PAMF. The study psyc hiatrist will notify 
the research staff of receipt of message within 24 hours; other wise staff will call to 
confirm receipt. The assessment request and study psychiatrist’ s follow-up attempts 
and actions will be documented in the study Safety Monitoring D atabase.
4.If the study psychiatrist is not available, the research staff will send a high priority 
staff message in EPIC to the participant’s PCP or covering phys ician (using the dot 
phrase *) requesting that he/she contact [CONTACT_337773]. The PCP or cov ering physician 
may in addition schedule a follow up appointment with the patie nt as deemed 
appropriate.Ma et al. Page 23
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC [ADDRESS_417389] the participant as soon as possible 
(within 1–2 days) to conduct a PHONE assessment of current suic idal ideation for 
level of lethality and need for further referral. This assessme nt will be based on 
characteristics of suicidal patients (low-, moderate-, or high- risk) and clinical 
strategies for managing suicidal patients at these different th resholds. These 
strategies could include prompt emergency intervention by a lic ensed mental health 
professional when the immediate suicide risk is high and the pa rticipant has refused 
other interventions.
6.If there is an IMMINENT/HIGH risk of harm, including but not li mited to: an 
active plan to harm oneself or another person, grave disability  impacting the 
participant’s ability to care for him/herself or severely impai ring participant’s 
judgment and/or without reasonable supportive resources, then t he study 
psychiatrist will ask for participant’s location and advise the  participant that she is 
obligated to take immediate action to get help for the particip ant. The study 
psychiatrist will call 911, giving participant’s name, date of birth, location, medical 
conditions and current risk factors and notify any immediate fa mily member or 
emergency contact [CONTACT_337774].
The study psychiatrist will check study database to see whether  patient is an I-
CARE participant.
A.For enrolled I-CARE participants, the study psychiatrist will c ontact the 
study health coach via phone or confidential email, who will co ntact the 
participant weekly thereafter (unless currently hospi[INVESTIGATOR_057]) t o complete the 
PHQ-9 (until patient’s PHQ-9 score <5, or score decreases by 50 %), assess 
progress, and coordinate patient’s follow up care with the stud y psychiatrist. 
The study psychiatrist will also send a staff message to inform  patient’s PCP 
of this action (dot phrase **).
B.For patients excluded from enrollment, or enrolled control part icipants, the 
study psychiatrist will send a high priority staff message in E pic (dot 
phrase**) to inform participant’s PCP or covering physician of the action of 
calling 911 and give potential resources for follow up followin g 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. The PCP may in addition choose to call or sche dule a follow 
up appointment with the patient as deemed appropriate.
7.If there is MODERATE RISK of harm, with the participant having significant 
symptoms, but able to tend to basic needs, expressing willingne ss to get help, 
possibly having suicidal thoughts but denying an active suicida l plan:
A.For enrolled I-CARE participants, the study psychiatrist will c ontact the 
study health coach, via phone or confidential email, who will c ontact the 
participant weekly thereafter by [CONTACT_337775]-9 (u ntil 
patient’s PHQ-9 score <5, or score decreases by 50%), assess pr ogress, and 
assist participant with follow-up. The study psychiatrist will send a staff 
message to inform patient’s PCP of this action. The study psych iatrist will Ma et al. Page 24
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
be available as needed to consult with the health coach and the  participant’s 
PCP.
B.For patients excluded from enrollment, or enrolled control part icipants, The 
study psychiatrist will send a high priority staff message in E pic (using the 
dot phrase ***) to inform participant’s PCP or covering physici an of follow 
up plan.
8.If there is LOW RISK of harm, with participant denying suicidal  or homicidal 
thoughts, able to carry out basic activities of daily living, w ith reasonable social 
supports and agreeable to getting help:
A.For enrolled I-CARE participants, the study psychiatrist will s taff message 
the study health coach who will contact [CONTACT_337776]-9 (until patient’s PHQ-9 score <5, or score de creases by 
50%), assess progress, and coordinate the patient’s follow up c are with the 
study psychiatrist. The study psychiatrist will send a staff me ssage to inform 
patient’s PCP of this action.
B.For patients excluded from enrollment, or enrolled control part icipants, the 
study psychiatrist will send a staff message in Epic (using the  dot phrase 
****) to inform participant’s PCP of follow up plan.
9.The study psychiatrist in scenarios 6–8 above will complete a s tudy Self-Harm 
Risk Clinician Assessment Form that is part of the study Safety  Monitoring 
Database.
B. PROCEDURES for telephone or in-person interviews with resear ch staff
During telephone or in-person interviews with research staff, i f a participant’s response 
suggests suicidal ideation on PHQ-9 or SCL-20 per definition in  Rationale #5, the 
interviewer will ask “Do you have a plan for how you would comm it suicide?”
1.If yes, the interviewer stop the interview, get the participant ’s location (if phone 
interview), let the participant know that you are concerned for  his/her safety and 
therefore need to call for help, and call 911 immediately. You do NOT need 
participant’s consent to call [ADDRESS_417390] 
him/her within 24–[ADDRESS_417391] phone 
numbers if interviewing participant by [CONTACT_648]. The interviewer w ill then offer to 
continue with the interview. Before moving on, it may be helpfu l to acknowledge 
to the patient that we will continue to monitor suicidal though ts throughout the 
study, as they are a fairly common symptom of depression, and p art of the 
depressive illness itself. Also helpful to instill hope: “We wi ll work together to get 
you feeling better.”Ma et al. Page 25
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC [ADDRESS_417392] is unavailable— *This message is to 
inform you that your patient recently endorsed suicidal thought s on the PHQ-9 and/or 
SCL-[ADDRESS_417393] your patient 
and initiate an Urgent Mental Health referral in Epic if deemed  appropriate.
In addition, you may choose to schedule a follow up appointment  with the patient at your 
discretion.
-For enrolled I-CARE participants: Our health coach will contac t your patient within one 
week and weekly thereafter to complete PHQ-[ADDRESS_417394] dot phrases to alert PCPs via Epic
For HIGH RISK PATIENTS: **This message is to inform you that your patient was 
recently assessed by [CONTACT_337777]-9 and/or SCL-20. As a result, 911 has alrea dy been contact[CONTACT_337778]/or medical admission to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. Appropriate family me mber/emergency contact 
[CONTACT_337779].
-For enrolled I-CARE participants, our health coach will contac t your patient within one 
week and weekly thereafter to complete PHQ-[ADDRESS_417395] as needed.
For MODERATE RISK PATIENTS: ***This message is to inform you that your patient 
recently endorsed having suicidal thoughts over the past two we eks on the PHQ-9 and/or 
SCL-[ADDRESS_417396] your patient and initiate an Urgent or R outine Mental Health referral 
in Epic as deemed appropriate.
In addition, you may choose to schedule a follow up appointment  with the patient at your 
discretion.
-For enrolled I-CARE participants: Our health coach will contac t your patient within one 
week and weekly thereafter to complete PHQ-[ADDRESS_417397] as needed.
For LOW RISK PATIENTS: ****This message is to inform you that your patient recently 
endorsed having significant depressive and/or anxiety symptoms over the past two weeks on 
the PHQ-9 and/or SCL-20.Ma et al. Page 26
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC [ADDRESS_417398] PA (650-85 3-4726) or Fremont 
([PHONE_7009]) Behavioral Health intake referral line to schedu le a routine appointment 
with a mental health provider. If participant is out of network , we recommend that you 
advise he/she to contact [CONTACT_337780]-net work mental health provider. If 
neither of the above options are available, the patient should be advised to schedule an 
appointment with their PCP or covering physician within the nex t 1–2 weeks to discuss 
treatment options.
Appendix C. RAINBOW Data and Safety Monitoring Plan
The following procedures will be followed to ensure the safety of study participants and the 
validity and integrity of data in compliance with NIH requireme nts.Ma et al. Page 27
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC [ADDRESS_417399] (DSMB)
We will empanel a DSMB prior to enrollment of the first study p articipant. A DSMB in the 
context of this investigator-initiated randomized controlled tr ial exists for the purpose of 
providing the investigators, the cognizant IRB(s) and the spons or with objective, scientific 
monitoring of the conduct of the study from the standpoint of e nsuring (1) the protection and 
safety of human subjects and (2) the validity and integrity of the trial. The DSMB will be an 
independent, advisory body to the investigators and funding age ncy. To fulfill its functions, 
the DSMB will review the original protocol and any subsequent a mendments, perform 
expedited monitoring of serious adverse events (SAEs) that are unexpected and at least 
possibly related to the study, perform ongoing monitoring of dr op-outs and non-SAEs, 
determine whether study procedures should be changed or the stu dy should be halted 
because of serious safety concerns and/or major problems with t he study conduct, and 
perform periodic review of the completeness and validity of dat a to be used for analysis of 
effectiveness and safety. The DSMB will also monitor implementa tion of procedures to 
ensure research participant privacy and data confidentiality.
As in any clinical trial, it is not possible to anticipate all possible adverse events (AEs). We 
will conduct extensive training with our staff in ascertaining,  monitoring, and documenting 
AEs—serious or not. The study investigators have extensive expe rience in clinical trial 
organization and management, including data and safety monitori ng for single site and 
multi-site trials. We have established procedures for rendering  first aid and life threatening 
emergencies. Study physicians will oversee these procedures.
Membership of the DSMB
The DSMB will consist of 3–5 outside members (not part of the i nvestigative team) with 
expertise in a variety of disciplines including mental health, biobehavioral medicine, 
preventive medicine, nutrition, physical activity, biostatistic s, clinical trial designs, and 
bioethics of research conduct. In the event of an award, we wil l work with NIH-designated 
Project Official to appoint an appropriate DSMB. The expertise of the members will include 
the disciplines and skills needed to initially review the proto col and then to monitor trial 
progress, data quality, and participant safety. The voting memb ers must have no personal 
stake in the scientific outcomes of the study. They will not be  included as authors of 
publications from the study, but will be acknowledged for their  contribution. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_337743] (Ma) will be responsible for overseeing the preparation of AEs and 
SAEs and all statistical reports to the DSMB.
Functional Organization of the DSMB
One individual will serve as Chairperson of the DSMB and will c ommunicate by e-mail and 
telephone conference with the other members on an as-needed bas is. Communication 
pertaining to expedited review of unexpected and possibly study -related SAEs will occur 
within a week of receiving the report of such events from Dr. M a. Reporting and 
communication about routine trial monitoring will occur during DSMB meetings throughout 
the study.Ma et al. Page 28
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
DSMB Meetings and Recommendations
The DSMB will convene every 4–6 months, in person or by [CONTACT_337781], with the 
investigators to review summaries of patient accrual, data coll ection, the timeliness of data 
transfer to analysis files, group balance and data concerning t he execution of the 
randomization process, analysis plans and results, and the numb ers and characteristics of 
any SAEs, and the numbers and rates of non-SAEs. At the end of each meeting, DSMB 
members will make a recommendation regarding the continuation o f the trial and the time 
interval and format of the next meeting. In addition, there wil l be an evaluative statement 
regarding SAEs, protocol exceptions, and other matters of data quality, integrity of the trial, 
and timeliness. The DSMB’s findings and recommendations will be  documented in the 
meeting minutes and transmitted to the investigators and sponso r for their information and 
action. A draft of the meeting minutes will be made available t o the DSMB Chair for 
approval prior to distribution of a final version to other DSMB  members, the funding 
agency, and the investigators.
Monitoring of Safety Data by [CONTACT_337782]. This will maintain pro per blinding of the 
investigators, outcome assessors, and the DSMB. However, if the re are extraordinary 
concerns regarding patient safety, the DSMB may request unblind ed data, e.g., on 
unexpected SAEs or unanticipated problems, in order to determin e the nature and extent of 
toxicity of the intervention under study or the integrity of th e trial conduct. When this 
occurs, the unblinded results will not be released to the investigators unless warranted for 
safety protection of the research participants.
No formal interim analyses are proposed of study outcomes by [CONTACT_337783]. Follow-up data will be reported for all particip ants, irrespective of random 
assignment, during the course of the study. For purposes of stu dy monitoring, including 
review of planned primary outcome analyses, the DSMB may wish t o review results with 
permuted group assignments to test the analysis programs.
SAEs
For ongoing monitoring of this study, all SAEs will be reported to the DSMB during its 
regularly scheduled meetings, regardless of any judgment of the ir expectedness or 
relatedness to the study. Expedited reviews will occur for all unexpected and possibly study-
related events meeting the NIH definition of SAEs, i.e., any fa tal event, immediately life-
threatening event, permanently or substantially disabling event , event requiring or 
prolonging inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or any congenital anomaly . [CONTACT_65576] will concurrently 
notify the DSMB and the IRB by [CONTACT_49907] 72 business hours o f the detection of an SAE 
requiring expedited review and will submit all relevant informa tion about the event and a 
proposed corrective and preventive action plan (CAPA). The rele vant information may 
include, but is not limited to, that about the event and its ou tcome, dosing history of a Ma et al. Page 29
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC [ADDRESS_417400] medication/treatment, concomitant medications, the subj ect’s medical history and 
current conditions, and all relevant laboratory data. Within on e week of receiving the 
notification, the DSMB will render their determination of the e vent and recommendations 
about the CAPA in a letter signed by [CONTACT_337784]. Ma and the 
IRB.
Non-SAEs
At periodic intervals, the DSMB will be provided with summaries  of the numbers and rates 
of all AEs by [CONTACT_47123]. “Blinded treatment group ” means an arbitrary 
labeling (e.g., 1 and 2) that does not reveal the true identity  of the groups. These reports will 
include types of events, affected body system(s), severity, exp ectedness, study relatedness, 
and treatment phase. Data on individual non-SAEs is not expecte d to be needed for this 
review. At the discretion of the DSMB, however, the Chair may r equest unblinded and/or 
individual-level results to determine the nature and extent of adverse consequences.
Other Safety-Related Reports
It is considered necessary for the purpose of monitoring the sa fety of the study that the 
DSMB review not only AEs and SAEs, but other data that may refl ect differences in safety 
between treatment groups. For example, these may include treatm ent retention rates and 
reasons for drop-outs. In addition, mean (SD) changes in SCL-[ADDRESS_417401]. Ma will submit a detailed report on data quality and 
completeness. At a minimum, this will include the following: (1 ) patient accrual and follow-
up completion/retention in relation to goals and timeline; (2) the randomization process and 
group comparability on the balancing variables; (3) key baselin e characteristics of the Ma et al. Page 30
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC [ADDRESS_417402] modifiers and mediators; (4) indices of interve ntion adherence; and (5) 
protocol violations.
Annual Report to the sponsor
As part of each annual progress report to the NIH, [CONTACT_65576] will include a summary of 
findings regarding safety and quality based on data received to  that point in the study and 
any new DSMB recommendations about patient safety, protocol adh erence, and data quality.
Protection against Depression-related Risks
Protection against risks of worsening depression and self-harm
Some of the questions about depression, thoughts of death and o ther psychiatric symptoms 
and conditions as a part of the screening may be distressing to  some patients. However, in 
general the questions will not be particularly intrusive or dis tressing, and stress will likely be 
transient. In addition, participants are free to choose not to any questions. It is widely 
accepted that asking questions about thoughts of death or suici de does not lead to increased 
risk of suicide. Nevertheless, in the event that a patient is i dentified as being suicidal in the 
screening or follow-up phase of the study (not because of being  asked questions), we have a 
self-harm protection protocol (below) in place that will alert the study supervising 
psychiatrist to assess the patient’s suicidal thoughts by [CONTACT_162520], followed by [CONTACT_337785]’s primary care provider and appropriate clinical ac tion if necessary.
Protection against risk of worsening anxiety
The Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-Item (GAD-7) Scale is a scre ening tool that has been 
developed to screen for 4 anxiety disorders: Post Traumatic Str ess Disorder, Panic Disorder, 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder, and Social Phobia. A score of ≥[ADDRESS_417403] before starting or increasing the  dosage of a patient’s planned 
antidepressant. SSRIs are effective treatments for both panic d isorder and depression, but 
patients with comorbid panic should be started on lower dosages  initially.
Protection against adverse reactions to antidepressant medicati ons (ADMs)
Consistent with the stepped depression care strategies, the stu dy supervising psychiatrist will 
contact [CONTACT_337786] (e.g., PHQ-9 score 
remains >50% of baseline by [CONTACT_5875] [ADDRESS_417404]) to recommend initia ting or adjusting ADMs. 
Health coaches will support and educate intervention participan ts regarding ADM Ma et al. Page 31
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC [ADDRESS_417405] and 
action by [CONTACT_145482].
References
1. Faith MS, Butryn M, Wadden TA, Fabricatore A, Nguyen AM, Hey msfield SB. Evidence for 
prospective associations among depression and obesity in popula tion-based studies. Obes Rev. 
May; 2011 12(5):e438–453. [PubMed: 21414128] 
2. Flegal KM, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Ogden CL. Prevalence of obesi ty and trends in the distribution of 
body mass index among US adults, 1999–2010. JAMA. Feb 1; 2012 3 07(5):491–497. [PubMed: 
22253363]
3. Nguyen NT, Nguyen XM, Lane J, Wang P. Relationship between o besity and diabetes in a US adult 
population: findings from the National Health and Nutrition Exa mination Survey, 1999–2006. Obes 
Surg. Mar; 2011 21(3):351–355. [PubMed: 21128002] 
4. Jokinen E. Obesity and cardiovascular disease. Minerva pedia trica. Mar; 2015 67(1):25–32. 
[PubMed: 25387321] 
5. Chapman, DP.; Perry, GS.; Strine, TW. The vital link between  chronic disease and depressive 
disorders. Prev Chronic Dis 2005. 2005. http://www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2005/jan/pdf/04_0066.pdf .
Accessed June 16, 2008
6. World Health Organization. The World Health Report 2002: Red ucing Risks, Promoting Healthy 
Life. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2002. 
7. Murray, JL.; Lopez, AD., editors. Summary: the global burden  of disease. [LOCATION_011], MA: Harvard 
School of Public Health; 1996. 
8. Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Researc h. National Comorbidity Survey 
Replication (NCS-R) Lifetime and Twelve-month Prevalence estima tes. 2007. http://
www.hcp.med.harvard.edu/ncs/index.php . Accessed June 16, 2008
9. Gonzalez HM, Tarraf W, Whitfield KE, Vega WA. The epi[INVESTIGATOR_337744]. J Psychiatr Res. Nov; 2010 44(1 5):1043–1051. [PubMed: 20537350] 
10. Blanco C, Okuda M, Markowitz JC, Liu SM, Grant BF, Hasin DS . The epi[INVESTIGATOR_62984]: results from the National Epi[INVESTIGATOR_62985]. J Clin Psychiatry. De c; 2010 71(12):1645–1656. 
[PubMed: 21190638] 
11. Preiss K, Brennan L, Clarke D. A systematic review of varia bles associated with the relationship 
between obesity and depression. Obes Rev. Nov; 2013 14(11):906– 918. [PubMed: 23809142] 
12. Bjerkeset O, Romundstad P, Evans J, Gunnell D. Association of adult body mass index and height 
with anxiety, depression, and suicide in the general population : the HUNT study. Am J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 
Jan 15; 2008 167(2):193–202. [PubMed: 17981889] 
13. Herva A, Laitinen J, Miettunen J, et al. Obesity and depres sion: results from the longitudinal 
Northern Finland 1966 Birth Cohort Study. Int J Obes (Lond). Ma r; 2006 30(3):520–527. 
[PubMed: 16302014] 
14. Blaine B. Does depression cause obesity?: A meta-analysis o f longitudinal studies of depression 
and weight control. J Health Psychol. Nov; 2008 13(8):1190–1197 . [PubMed: 18987092] 
15. Ladwig KH, Marten-Mittag B, Lowel H, Doring A, Wichmann HE.  Synergistic effects of 
depressed mood and obesity on long-term cardiovascular risks in  1510 obese men and women: 
results from the MONICA-KORA Augsburg Cohort Study 1984–1998. I nt J Obes (Lond). Sep; 
2006 30(9):1408–1414. [PubMed: 16552409] 
16. Werrij MQ, Mulkens S, Hospers HJ, Jansen A. Overweight and obesity: the significance of a 
depressed mood. Patient Educ Couns. Jul; 2006 62(1):126–131. [P ubMed: 16095867] 
17. Katon WJ. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_337745]. 
Dialogues in clinical neuroscience. 2011; 13(1):7–23. [PubMed: 21485743] 
18. Faulconbridge LF, Wadden TA, Rubin RR, et al. One-year chan ges in symptoms of depression and 
weight in overweight/obese individuals with type 2 diabetes in the Look AHEAD study. Obesity 
(Silver Spring). Apr; 2012 20(4):783–793. [PubMed: 22016099] Ma et al. Page 32
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC [ADDRESS_417406] of intensive  lifestyle intervention on depression 
and health-related quality of life in type 2 diabetes: the Look  AHEAD Trial. Diabetes Care. Jun; 
2014 37(6):1544–1553. [PubMed: 24855155] 
20. Linde JA, Simon GE, Ludman EJ, et al. A randomized controll ed trial of behavioral weight loss 
treatment versus combined weight loss/depression treatment amon g women with comorbid obesity 
and depression. Ann Behav Med. Feb; 2011 41(1):119–130. [PubMed : 20878292] 
21. Pagoto S, Schneider KL, Whited MC, et al. Randomized contro lled trial of behavioral treatment for 
comorbid obesity and depression in women: the Be Active Trial. Int J Obes (Lond). Mar 5.2013 
22. Curran GM, Bauer M, Mittman B, Pyne JM, Stetler C. Effectiv eness-implementation hybrid 
designs: combining elements of clinical effectiveness and imple mentation research to enhance 
public health impact. Med Care. Mar; 2012 50(3):217–226. [PubMe d: 22310560] 
23. Xiao L, Huang Q, Yank V, Ma J. An easily accessed web-based  minimization random allocation 
system for clinical trials. JMIR. 2013; 15(7):e139. [PubMed: 23 872035] 
24. Ma J, Yank V, Xiao L, et al. Translating the Diabetes Preve ntion Program lifestyle intervention for 
weight loss into primary care: a randomized trial. JAMA Intern Med. Jan 28; 2013 173(2):113–
121. [PubMed: 23229846] 
25. Ma J, Strub P, Lavori PW, et al. DASH for asthma: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] s tudy of the DASH diet in not-well-
controlled adult asthma. Contemp Clin Trials. Jul; 2013 35(2):5 5–67. [PubMed: 23648395] 
26. Pocock, SJ. Clinical Trials, A Practical Approach. Chichest er: John Wiley and Sons; 1991. p. 
84-86.
27. Pocock SJ, Simon R. Sequential treatment assignment with ba lancing for prognostic factors in the 
controlled clinical trial. Biometrics. Mar; 1975 31(1):103–115.  [PubMed: 1100130] 
28. Efron B. Forcing sequential experiment to be balanced. Biom etrika. 1971; 58:403–417.
29. Lin EH, Von Korff M, Ciechanowski P, et al. Treatment adjus tment and medication adherence for 
complex patients with diabetes, heart disease, and depression: a randomized controlled trial. Ann 
Fam Med. Jan-Feb;2012 10(1):6–14. [PubMed: 22230825] 
30. Ma J, King AC, Wilson SR, Xiao L, Stafford RS. Evaluation o f lifestyle interventions to treat 
elevated cardiometabolic risk in primary care (E-LITE): a rando mized controlled trial. BMC Fam 
Pract. 2009; 10:71. [PubMed: 19909549] 
31. Kramer MK, Kriska AM, Venditti EM, et al. Translating the D iabetes Prevention Program: a 
comprehensive model for prevention training and program deliver y. Am J Prev Med. Dec; 2009 
37(6):505–511. [PubMed: 19944916] 
32. Ciechanowski P, Wagner E, Schmaling K, et al. Community-int egrated home-based depression 
treatment in older adults: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.  Apr 7; 2004 291(13):1569–1577. 
[PubMed: 15069044] 
33. Ciechanowski P, Chaytor N, Miller J, et al. PEARLS depressi on treatment for individuals with 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]: a randomized controlled trial. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] & behavior: E &B. Nov; 2010 19(3):225–231.
34. University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_337746] . GLB Lifestyle Coach Training. 2015. 
http://www.diabetesprevention.pi[INVESTIGATOR_32887].edu/index.php/training/glb-l ifestyle-coach-training/ . Accessed 
March 13, 2015
35. University of Washington. PEARLS Program. http://www.pearlsprogram.org/Training.aspx .
Accessed June 28, 2012
36. Kramer MK, Kriska AM, Venditti EM, et al. A novel approach to diabetes prevention: evaluation 
of the Group Lifestyle Balance program delivered via DVD. Diabe tes Res Clin Pract. Dec; 2010 
90(3):e60–63. [PubMed: 20863586] 
37. Chaytor N, Ciechanowski P, Miller JW, et al. Long-term outc omes from the PEARLS randomized 
trial for the treatment of depression in patients with epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] . Epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] & behavior: E&B. Mar; 
2011 20(3):545–549.
38. Katon WJ, Lin EH, Von Korff M, et al. Collaborative care fo r patients with depression and chronic 
illnesses. N Engl J Med. Dec 30; 2010 363(27):2611–2620. [PubMe d: 21190455] 
39. Bandura, A. Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Soc ial Cognitive Theory. Englewood 
Cliffs, N.J: Prentice Hall; 1986. Ma et al. Page 33
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
40. Ma J, Strub P, Camargo CA Jr, et al. The Breathe Easier thr ough Weight Loss Lifestyle (BE 
WELL) Intervention: a randomized controlled trial. BMC Pulm Med . 2010; 10:16. [PubMed: 
20334686]
41. Measures from the PhenX Toolkit version February 4 2011, Ve r 4.2. PhenX (consensus measures 
of Phenotypes and eXposures) is supported by [CONTACT_337787]. U0 1 
HG004597 www.phenxtoolkit.org Accessed January 15, 2015
42. Goldberg DP, Rickels K, Downing R, Hesbacher P. A compariso n of two psychiatric screening 
tests. Br J Psychiatry. Jul.1976 129:61–67. [PubMed: 938806] 
43. Glass RM, Allan AT, Uhlenhuth EH, Kimball CP, Borinstein DI . Psychiatric screening in a 
medical clinic. An evaluation of a self-report inventory. Arch Gen Psychiatry. Oct; 1978 35(10):
1189–1195. [PubMed: 697537] 
44. Karlsson J, Taft C, Sjostrom L, Torgerson JS, Sullivan M. P sychosocial functioning in the obese 
before and after weight reduction: construct validity and respo nsiveness of the Obesity-related 
Problems scale. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. May; 2003 27(5): 617–630. [PubMed: 12704406] 
45. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Kroenke K, Williams JB, Lowe B. A brief measure  for assessing generalized anxiety 
disorder: the GAD-7. Arch Intern Med. May 22; 2006 166(10):1092 –1097. [PubMed: 16717171] 
46. Sheehan DV, Lecrubier Y, Sheehan KH, et al. The Mini-Intern ational Neuropsychiatric Interview 
(M.I.N.I.): the development and validation of a structured diag nostic psychiatric interview for 
DSM-IV and ICD-10. J Clin Psychiatry. 1998; 59(Suppl 20):22–33.  quiz 34–57. [PubMed: 
9881538]
47. Sheehan KH, Sheehan DV. Assessing treatment effects in clin ical trials with the discan metric of 
the Sheehan Disability Scale. International clinical psychophar macology. Mar; 2008 23(2):70–83. 
[PubMed: 18301121] 
48. Ware, JE.; Kosinski, M.; Dewey, JE.; Gandek, B. How to Scor e and Interpret Single-Item Health 
Status Measures: A Manual for Users of the SF-[ADDRESS_417407] RI: QualityMetric 
Incorporated; 2001. 
49. Badia X, Schiaffino A, Alonso J, Herdman M. Using the EuroQ oI 5-D in the Catalan general 
population: feasibility and construct validity. Qual Life Res. May; 1998 7(4):311–322. [PubMed: 
9610215]
50. Schafer, GL.; Songer, TJ.; Kramer, MK.; Miller, RG.; Vander wood, KK.; Kriska, A. Do Food 
Costs Increase for Participants in a Diabetes Prevention Progra m?; Paper presented at: American 
Diabetes Association 73rd Scientific Sessions2013; Chicago, IL.  
51. Hernan WH, Brandle M, Zhang P, et al. Costs associated with  the primary prevention of type 2 
diabetes mellitus in the Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP). Dia betes Care. Jan; 2003 26(1):36–
47. [PubMed: 12502656] 
52. Weathers, FW.; Litz, BT.; Herman, DS.; Huska, JA.; Keane, T M. The PTSD checklist: Reliability, 
validity, and diagnostic utility; Paper presented at the Annual  Meeting of the International Society 
for Traumatic Stress Studies; 1993; San Antonio, TX. 
53. Moshfegh AJ, Goldman J, Lacomb R, Perloff B, Cleveland L. R esearch results using the new 
USDA Automated Multiple-Pass Method. FASEB J. 2001; 15(4):A278.  (abstr). 
54. Blair SN, Haskell WL, Ho P, et al. Assessment of habitual p hysical activity by a seven-day recall 
in a community survey and controlled experiments. Am J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_33408] l. Nov; 1985 122(5):794–804. 
[PubMed: 3876763] 
55. D’Zurilla TJ, Chang EC, Nottingham EJt, Faccini L. Social p roblem-solving deficits and 
hopelessness, depression, and suicidal risk in college students  and psychiatric inpatients. J Clin 
Psychol. Dec; 1998 54(8):1091–1107. [PubMed: 9840781] 
56. Yu L, Buysse DJ, Germain A, et al. Development of short for ms from the PROMIS sleep 
disturbance and Sleep-Related Impairment item banks. Behavioral  sleep medicine. Dec 28; 2011 
10(1):6–24. [PubMed: 22250775] 
57. Glasgow RE, Vogt TM, Boles SM. Evaluating the public health  impact of health promotion 
interventions: the RE-AIM framework. Am J Public Health. Sep; 1 999 89(9):1322–1327. 
[PubMed: 10474547] 
58. Kessler RS, Purcell EP, Glasgow RE, Klesges LM, Benkeser RM , Peek CJ. What does it mean to 
“employ” the RE-AIM model? Eval Health [CONTACT_337792]; 2013 36(1):44 –66. [PubMed: 22615498] Ma et al. Page 34
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
59. Robin, DB. Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys. [LOCATION_001]: John Wiley & Sons, Inc; 
1987.
60. Lavori PW, Dawson R, Shera D. A multiple imputation strateg y for clinical trials with truncation 
of patient data. Stat Med. Sep 15; 1995 14(17):1913–1925. [PubM ed: 8532984] 
61. Schafer, JL. Analysis of Incomplete Multivariate Data. [LOCATION_001]: Chapman and Hall; 1997. 
62. Tang L, Duan N, Klap R, Asarnow JR, Belin TR. Applying perm utation tests with adjustment for 
covariates and attrition weights to randomized trials of health -services interventions. Stat Med. Jan 
15; 2009 28(1):65–74. [PubMed: 18937226] 
63. DiCiccio TJ, Efron B. Bootstrap confidence intervals. Stati stic Sci. 1996; 11(3):189–228.
64. MacKinnon DP, Fritz MS, Williams J, Lockwood CM. Distributi on of the product confidence 
limits for the indirect effect: program PRODCLIN. Behav Res Met hods. Aug; 2007 39(3):384–
389. [PubMed: 17958149] 
65. Goldhaber-Fiebert JD, Rubinfeld RE, Bhattacharya J, Robinso n TN, Wise PH. The utility of 
childhood and adolescent obesity assessment in relation to adul t health. Med Decis Making. 2012 
Epub ahead of print. 
66. Hall KD, Jordan PN. Modeling weight-loss maintenance to hel p prevent body weight regain. Am J 
Clin Nutr. Dec; 2008 88(6):1495–1503. [PubMed: 19064508] 
67. Hall KD. Predicting metabolic adaptation, body weight chang e, and energy intake in humans. 
American journal of physiology. Endocrinology and metabolism. M ar; 2010 298(3):E449–466. 
[PubMed: 19934407] 
68. Herman WH, Hoerger TJ, Brandle M, et al. The cost-effective ness of lifestyle modification or 
metformin in preventing type 2 diabetes in adults with impaired  glucose tolerance. Ann Intern 
Med. Mar 1; 2005 142(5):323–332. [PubMed: 15738451] 
69. Haji Ali Afzali H, Karnon J, Gray J. A critical review of m odel-based economic studies of 
depression: modelling techniques, model structure and data sour ces. Pharmacoeconomics. Jun 1; 
2012 30(6):461–482. [PubMed: 22462694] 
70. Wein LM, Yang Y, Goldhaber-Fiebert JD. Assessing screening policies for childhood obesity. 
Obesity (Silver Spring). Jul; 2012 20(7):1437–1443. [PubMed: 22 240724] 
71. Gold, MR.; Siegel, JE.; Russell, LB.; Weinstein, MC., edito rs. Cost-Effectiveness in Health and 
Medicine. [LOCATION_001]: Oxford University Press; 1996. 
72. Kraemer HC, Kupfer DJ. Size of treatment effects and their importance to clinical research and 
practice. Biol Psychiatry. Jun 1; 2006 59(11):990–996. [PubMed:  16368078] 
73. The STAR*D Investigative Team. Sequenced Treatment Alternat ives to Relieve Depression 
(STAR*D) Protocol and Analytic Plan. 2002. http://www.madinamerica.com/
MADINAMERICA.COM/STARD%20Documents_files/STAR-D%20Protocol%20wi th
%20Analytic%20Plan.pdf . Accessed April 19, [ADDRESS_417408]-effectiveness of lifestyle intervention o r metformin for the primary prevention of 
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. Sep; 2003 26(9):2518–2523. [Pub Med: 12941712] 
75. Laupacis A, Feeny D, Detsky AS, Tugwell PX. How attractive does a new technology have to be 
to warrant adoption and utilization? Tentative guidelines for u sing clinical and economic 
evaluations. CMAJ. Feb 15; 1992 146(4):473–481. [PubMed: 130603 4] 
76. Guidelines for the economic evaluation of health technologi es. 3rd. Ottawa, Canada: Canadian 
Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health; 2006. 
77. Weinstein MC, Siegel JE, Gold MR, Kamlet MS, Russell LB. Re commendations of the Panel on 
Cost-effectiveness in Health and Medicine. JAMA. Oct 16; 1996 2 76(15):1253–1258. [PubMed: 
8849754]
78. QSR NVivo [computer program]. Victoria, Australia: QSR Inte rnational; 
79. Elo S, Kyngas H. The qualitative content analysis process. Journal of advanced nursing. Apr; 2008 
62(1):107–115. [PubMed: 18352969] 
80. Patton, MQ. Qualitative research and evaluation methods. Sa n Francisco: Sage Publications; 2002. 
81. Ma J, Yank V, Xiao L, et al. Translating the Diabetes Preve ntion Program lifestyle intervention for 
weight loss into primary care: A randomized trial. Arch Intern Med. 2012 accepted for publication. Ma et al. Page 35
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
82. Ma J, Berra K, Haskell WL, et al. Case management to reduce  risk of cardiovascular disease in a 
county health care system. Arch Intern Med. Nov 23; 2009 169(21 ):1988–1995. [PubMed: 
19933961]
83. Kraemer HC. To increase power in randomized clinical trials  without increasing sample size. 
Psychopharmacol Bull. 1991; 27(3):217–224. [PubMed: 1775591] 
84. ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline. Statistical principles  for clinical trials. International 
Conference on Harmonisation E9 Expert Working Group. Stat Med. Aug 15; 1999 18(15):1905–
1942. [PubMed: 10532877] 
85. Bender R, Lange S. Adjusting for multiple testing–when and how? J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. Apr; 2001 
54(4):343–349. [PubMed: 11297884] 
86. Thomas, PR. Weighing the Options: Criteria for Evaluating W eight-Management Programs. 
Washington, DC: Committee to Develop Criteria for Evaluating th e Outcomes of Approaches to 
Prevent and Treat Obesity, Institute of Medicine; 1995. 
87. Stevens J, Truesdale KP, McClain JE, Cai J. The definition of weight maintenance. Int J Obes 
(Lond). Mar; 2006 30(3):391–399. [PubMed: 16302013] 
88. Blaine BE, Rodman J, Newman JM. Weight loss treatment and p sychological well-being: a review 
and meta-analysis. J Health Psychol. Jan; 2007 12(1):66–82. [Pu bMed: 17158841] 
89. National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Depression: Man agement of Depression in Primary and 
Secondary Care. London, England: National Health Service; 2004.  
90. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research electronic data capture 
(REDCap)–a metadata-driven methodology and workflow process for  providing translational 
research informatics support. J Biomed Inform. Apr; 2009 42(2): 377–381. [PubMed: 18929686] 
91. Conway JM, Ingwersen LA, Vinyard BT, Moshfegh AJ. Effective ness of the US Department of 
Agriculture 5-step multiple-pass method in assessing food intak e in obese and nonobese women. 
Am J Clin Nutr. May; 2003 77(5):1171–1178. [PubMed: 12716668] 
92. Conway JM, Ingwersen LA, Moshfegh AJ. Accuracy of dietary r ecall using the USDA five-step 
multiple-pass method in men: an observational validation study.  J Am Diet Assoc. Apr; 2004 
104(4):595–603. [PubMed: 15054345] 
93. Bellg AJ, Borrelli B, Resnick B, et al. Enhancing treatment  fidelity in health behavior change 
studies: best practices and recommendations from the NIH Behavi or Change Consortium. Health 
Psychol. Sep; 2004 23(5):443–451. [PubMed: 15367063] 
94. Miller, WR.; Rollnick, S. Motivational Interviewing: Prepar ing People for Change. 2nd. New 
York: Guilford Press; 2002. 
95. Schneider KL, Bodenlos JS, Ma Y, et al. Design and methods for a randomized clinical trial 
treating comorbid obesity and major depressive disorder. BMC Ps ychiatry. 2008; 8:77. [PubMed: 
18793398]
96. Katon WJ, Von Korff M, Lin EH, et al. The Pathways Study: a  randomized trial of collaborative 
care in patients with diabetes and depression. Arch Gen Psychia try. Oct; 2004 61(10):1042–1049. 
[PubMed: 15466678] 
97. Unutzer J, Katon W, Callahan CM, et al. Collaborative care management of late-life depression in 
the primary care setting: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. Dec 11; 2002 288(22):2836–2845. 
[PubMed: 12472325] 
98. Katon W, Pedersen HS, Ribe AR, et al. Effect of Depression and Diabetes Mellitus on the Risk for 
Dementia: A National Population-Based Cohort Study. JAMA psychi atry. Apr 15.2015 Ma et al. Page 36
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus cript
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus criptMa et al. Page 37
Table 1
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Pre-
screening(Electronichealth record data)PCP Clearance Screening
(Patientreports by [CONTACT_49522])Baseline
Visit(In-personinterview,physicalexam and, if clinicallyindicated,studyphysicianclearance)
Inclusion Criteria:  (patients will be included if meeting all of the 
following)
Ethnicity: All ethnic groups √Gender: Both men and women √Age: ≥18 years √
Body mass index ≥30.0 kg/m
2 (non-Asians) or ≥27.0 kg/m2 (Asians) √√
Clinically significant depression PHQ-9 ≥10 √
PAMF patient for ≥[ADDRESS_417409] once  in the 
preceding 24 months√
Able and willing to enroll and provide written, informed consen t, i.e., 
to: meet the time and data collection requirements of the study ; be 
randomized to one of two intervention arms; participate in foll ow-up 
for 24 months; and allow extraction of relevant information fro m their 
medical records.√
Exclusion Criteria:  (patients will be excluded if meeting any of the 
following)
Active suicidal ideation per PHQ-9 interview that includes acti ve plan 
and/or intent (item #9 ≥2)√√
Any Axis I disorder other than Minor or Major Depressive Disord er 
and/or Dysthymia, with the exception of any comorbid Anxiety 
Disorder√√
Active Bulimia Nervosa within the past 3 months (however Binge 
Eating Disorder without purging is not an exclusionary condition)√√
Active alcohol or substance use disorder (including prescriptio n drugs) √ √ √
Ongoing psychiatric care with a provider outside of PAMF √Had bariatric surgery within the past 12 months or plan to unde rgo 
bariatric surgery during the study period√√ √
Pre-existing diabetes (other than during pregnancy) √ √ √ √
Pre-existing cardiovascular disease: e.g., coronary heart disea se 
(myocardial infarction, angina pectoris, percutaneous coronary intervention, and coronary artery by[CONTACT_10956]), cerebrovascular disease (stroke, transient ischemic attack), pe ripheral 
vascular disease, heart failure, or aortic aneurysm.√√ √ √
Diagnosis of cancer (other than non-melanoma skin cancer) that is/was 
active or treated with radiation or chemotherapy within the pas t year√√ √
Severe medical comorbidities that require aggressive treatment,  e.g., 
stage 4 or greater renal disease, liver failure√√ √
Diagnosis of a terminal illness and/or residence in a long-term  care 
facility√√
Cognitive impairment based on the Callahan 6-item screener √
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus criptMa et al. Page 38
Pre-
screening(Electronichealth record data)PCP Clearance Screening
(Patientreports by [CONTACT_49522])Baseline
Visit(In-personinterview,physicalexam and, if clinicallyindicated,studyphysicianclearance)
Inability to speak, read or understand English √ √ √ √
Having no reliable telephone service, or no regular Internet ac cess via 
a computer and/or mobile device (e.g., smartphone)*√
Plan to move out of the area or transfer care outside PAMF duri ng the 
study period√
Currently pregnant, lactating, or planning to become pregnant d uring 
the study period√√ √ √
Already enrolled, or planning to enroll, in a research study th at would 
limit full participation in the study or confound the observati on and 
interpretation of the study’s findings√
Family/household member of another participant or of a staff me mber √ √
Investigator discretion for clinical safety or protocol adheren ce reasons √
*We do not employ a behavioral run-in for technology use (typi[INVESTIGATOR_19529] l in efficacy trials) as an inclusion criterion because of the importance of 
balancing scientific rigor and generalizability in this type [ADDRESS_417410]. It is an integral part of the intervention c urriculum that the coach 
instructs on, and helps troubleshoot issues with, technologies (e.g., MyFitnessPal and Fitbit websites and mobile applications ) used in the 
intervention, as would be expected if the intervention were del ivered in routine practice.
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus criptMa et al. Page 39
Table 2
Intervention Outlinea,b
WeekVisitc Minutes Content
11 6 0 •Introduction to I-CARE Mood and I-CARE Lifestyled sequenced integration (5 min)
•Technology: Fitbit, MyFitnessPal – using, linking, friend reque sts to coach; My Health Online.e
Encouragement to wear Fitbit and check uploads (10 min)
• Physical activity safety guidelines handout (GLB Session 4, pag es 3,4)
• Evaluation of bathroom scale ownership
• I-CARE Mood Session 1 (45 min)
22 6 0 • I-CARE Mood Session 2 (60 min)
• Provision of bathroom scale to participants requiring one
33 6 0 • I-CARE Mood Session 3 (60 min)
44 6 0 • I-CARE Mood Session 4 (50 min)
• Technology: MyFitnessPal – explanation of logging physical acti vity minutes and weight; 
introduction to logging diet; importance of self-monitoring (10  min)
65 6 0 • I-CARE Mood Session 5 (45 min)
• I-CARE Lifestyle introduction and self-study guidelines (5 min)
• Technology: MyFitnessPal – review of logging physical activity and weight; explanation of logging 
diet; importance of self-monitoring (10 min)
86 6 0 • I-CARE Lifestyle Progress Check (5 min)
• I-CARE Mood Session 6 (30 min)
• Technology: MyFitnessPal, Fitbit, My Health Online check in (5 min)
• Goals confirmation: weight, physical activity, steps (5 min)
• Optional tools to reduce calorie intake: meal plans, packaged m eals (5 min)
• I-CARE Lifestyle Session (GLB Sessions #1,2) (10 min)
12 7 60 • I-CARE Lifestyle Progress Check (10 min)
• I-CARE Mood Session 7 (35 min)
• I-CARE Lifestyle Session (GLB Sessions #3,4,5,6) (15 min)
16 8 60 • I-CARE Lifestyle Progress Check (10 min)
• I-CARE Mood Session 8 (35 min)
• I-CARE Lifestyle Session (GLB Sessions #8,9,10) (15 min)
20 9 60 • I-CARE Lifestyle Progress Check (10 min)
• I-CARE Mood Session 9 (35 min)
• I-CARE Lifestyle Session (GLB Sessions #11,12) (10 min)
• Overview of weeks 21–52 (5 min)
21–52 Phone 15–30 • I-CARE Lifestyle Progress Check (5–10 min)
• I-CARE Mood Session (5–10 min)
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus criptMa et al. Page 40
WeekVisitc Minutes Content
• I-CARE Lifestyle Session (5–10 min)
• Discussion of maintenance plan when program goals met
aIn-between session support as needed via EHR secure email, betw een weeks 1–52.
bCo-located psychiatric and medical supervision during weekly in tervention management team meeting, between weeks 1–52.
cThe 9 one-on-one I-CARE sessions will occur primarily in the cl inic, but video conferences (as the second option) or phone ses sions (as the last 
option and for visits 1–5, phone session is only an option upon  PI [INVESTIGATOR_337747]) throughout the intensive  phase will be an 
option for participants with considerable constraints.
dI-CARE Mood is the PEARLS program; I-CARE Lifestyle is the GLB program.
eParticipants receive Fitbit, MyFitnessPal, and My Health Online  instructions via mail or e-mail prior to first session.
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC [ADDRESS_417411] of measures and data collection schedule.
Study Measures Instrument Collection Method Month
Screenin g061 21 82 4
Eligibility Screening
Depression severity Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9 and Dy sthymia questions) Self-report x
Suicidal ideation PHQ-9 (item #9 ≥2) Self-report xBulimia nervosa PHQ eating disorder module Self-report xAlcohol/substance abuse CAGE Adapted to Include Drugs (CAGE-AID) Self-report x
Cognitive Impairment 6-item Screener Interview x
Primary/Secondary Outcomes
BMI (height) Height Biophysical x
BMI (weight) Weight Biophysical x x x x xDepression severity treatment response, and 
remissionDepression symptom Checklist-20 (SCL-20) Self-report x x x x x
Cardiovascular risk factors Blood pressure, waist circumference B iophysical x x x x x
Obesity-specific health related questions Obesity-related Proble m Scale Self-report x x x x x
Anxiety Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale (GAD-7); Panic Disord er module of the 
Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI)Self-report x x x x x
Disability Sheehan Disability Scale Self-report x x x x x
Generic health related quality of life SF-[ADDRESS_417412] nonmedical 
costsHealth care utilization: from electronic health record (EHR); i ntervention cost: 
coach time, survey lifestyle coach for Intervention process acc ounting, 
intervention-related patient “out-of-pocket” costs.EHR; process documentation; 
self-reportx x xxx
Absenteeism-Presenteeism questionnaire Self-report x x x x x
Participant Expense Survey Self-report x x x x xMedication use, general wellness services, and out of network h ealth care 
utilization questionnaireInterview x x x x x
Potential effect modifiers
Sociodemographics Age, gender, education, race/ethnicity Self-rep ort x
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) 17-item PTSD checklist – Ci vilian Version (PCL-C) Self-report x
Potential effect mediators
Dietary intake 24-hr diet recalls Interview x x x x x
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus criptMa et al. Page 42Study Measures Instrument Collection Method Month
Screenin g061 21 82 4
Physical activity 7-day Physical Activity Recall Interview x x x x x
Problem solving Social Problem-Solving Inventory-Revised: Short Form Self-report x x x x x
Sleep habits and quality PROMIS Sleep Disturbance and Sleep Impa irment Scales Self-report x x x x x
Safety
Activity Rose Angina and Peripheral Vascular Disease Questionnai res Self-report x x x x x
Severe high or low blood pressure Blood pressure Biophysical x x x x xAdverse Events (AE) AE form Interview x x x x xSelf-harm risk SCL-20 suicidality item Self-report x x x x x
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manus criptMa et al. Page 43
Table 4
Summary of Quantitative and Qualitative Measures for the Proces s Evaluation
RE-AIM Domains Example Questions, Data Sources, and Methods
Quantitative Qualitative
Reach Using patient survey and recruitment 
tracking data we will assess the percentage and characteristics of participants compared to non-participants, e.g., by [CONTACT_337788].We will ask study staff at the beginning, mid-point, and 
end of the 2-year recruitment period: What were the barriers to and enablers of recruiting participants? Was there variability in these factors related to demographics or other characteristics? How were the barriers addressed? Were the solutions successful? What could be changed to maximize reach?
Adoption Using administrative data we will describe 
the characteristics of participating clinics, and the percentage and characteristics of PCPs approached that participated (e.g., PCPs referring patients for screening or making recommended antidepressant medication changes).Via interviews with internal experts, PCPs, and medical 
and administrative leaders we will ask: What were the barriers to and enablers of clinic and PCP participation? Why did the barriers exist? What recommendations do they have for addressing barriers and maximizing adoption?
Implementation (staff perspective) Using intervention tracking d ata we will 
assess time and resources required for coach training, intervention delivery, coach supervision, and fidelity assurance.Via interviews with study care team, internal experts, 
PCPs, and medical and administrative leaders we will ask: What were the barriers to and enablers of delivering the intervention, and were they different across participating clinics? How might these factors translate or not to real-world implementation? Were certain components more challenging to deliver than others? What modifications could be made to maximize real-world implementation?
Implementation (patient perspective) Using intervention tracking  data we will 
assess participants’ receipt of and adherence to the intervention, e.g., by [CONTACT_337789]-person sessions, phone calls and DVD sessions completed, reasons for missed sessions, secure email and self-monitoring frequency, and consistency of adherence across participant subgroups.Via interviews with a 10% random sample of 
intervention participants we will ask: How relevant and acceptable were the knowledge and skills gained? How often did they practice the intervention strategies? What were the perceived benefits? What problems did they encounter? How satisfied were they with program format, materials, and coach performance?
Maintenance Using follow-up data through 24 months 
we will assess attrition rates and adverse events by [CONTACT_337790]; the durability of intervention effects on depression, obesity, and health-related quality of life; and simulation model-based projections of cost-effectiveness within trial and long term.Via interviews with study care team, internal experts, 
PCPs, and medical and administrative leaders we will ask: How could the intervention be integrated into regular care and sustained after  the study ended? What resources, 
policies, and care process redesigns would be needed to 
maximize sustainability?
Contemp Clin Trials . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 01.