  
   
Study Title: Efficacy of a Dissonance Based Eating Disorder Program NCT Number: 03796091 ID: 1516-105-GRE Date of IRB Approval: May 8, 2018 (revised protocol approved) Document Type: Study Protocol (revised protocol) PI: [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Melinda Ann Green Institution: Cornell College 		
  
   
		Cornell	College	IRB-Approved	Protocol		Project	Number	(if	previously	assigned):	#1516-105-GRE	Project	Title:	Efficacy	of	a	Dissonance	Based	Eating	Disorder	Program		Principal	Investigator:	[INVESTIGATOR_124].	Melinda	Green,	Department	of	Psychology,	106E	Law	Hall,	Cornell	College,	[ADDRESS_925557]	SW,	Mt.	Vernon,	IA	[ZIP_CODE],	[EMAIL_13095],	[PHONE_14219]		Research	Assistants:	Gabby	[CONTACT_683550],	Kamryn	Hogan,	Elisabeth	Sage,	Yumeng	Tao,	John	Bogucki,	Julian	Smith,	Emma	Hartman,	Lexi	Ferenzi,	Undergraduate	Research	Assistants;	Anne	[COMPANY_002],	Cara	Weinkes,	Mallory	Bolenbaugh,	Marcie	King,	Graduate	Research	Assistants	Medical	Monitor:								[CONTACT_683573]	and	Monitoring	Board	Members:	[CONTACT_683574],	[CONTACT_683575],	Yunkyong	Garrison		Study	Protocol:			Participants:	All	participants	will	be	treated	in	accordance	with	federal	guidelines	(Title	45,	Code	of	Regulations	Part	46)	for	the	treatment	of	human	participants.	The	sample	will	include	female	participants	ages	15-34	(postmenarcheal	and	premenopausal)	who	are	not	pregnant.	Participant	selection	was	limited	to	this	group	to	control	for	the	effects	of	estrogen	on	cardiac	function	and	in	accordance	with	meta-analytic	findings	which	suggest	that	a)	dissonance-based	programs	are	most	effective	when	offered	solely	to	females	and	that	b)	program	effect	sizes	are	greatest	for	females	over	the	age	of	15	(Stice	&	Shaw,	2004).		Our	preliminary	data	indicate	age	did	not	significantly	predict	program	efficacy	at	postintervention	or	2-month	follow-up	in	regression	models;	preliminary	results	suggest	the	program	is	effective	when	delivered	to	a	group	of	women	ages	14-34.	Results	provide	support	for	conducting	the	proposed	full	scale	trial	with	women	of	this	age	group	(though	the	lower	limit	of	this	age	range	was	adjusted	up	from	14	to	15	years,	per	the	recommendation	offered	by	[CONTACT_683551]	&	Shaw,	2004).	Consistent	with	the	methodology	of	the	preliminary	trial,	participants	will	not	be	excluded	from	the	sample	if	they	are	seeking	other	eating	disorder	treatment	or	prevention	services;	this	will	be	treated	as	a	covariate	in	a	secondary	analysis	to	control	for	the	effect	of	external	treatment	or	external	prevention	services	on	trial	outcomes.	Also	consistent	with	the	methodology	of	the	preliminary	trial,	diagnostic	level	(clinical,	subclinical)	will	be	initially	screened	online	via	the	Questionnaire	for	Eating	Disorder	Diagnoses	(Q-EDD;	Mintz,	O'Halloran,	Mulholland,	&	Schneider,	1997)	with	scoring	criteria	adapted	for	the	Diagnostic	and	Statistical	Manual	of	Mental	Disorders	5th	
  
   
edition	(DSM-5;	American	Psychiatric	Association,	2013).	Diagnostic	status	will	be	confirmed	during	the	baseline	assessment	session	via	the	Eating	Disorder	Examination	Edition	16.0D	(Fairburn,	Cooper,	O’Connor,	2008).	Clinical	status	will	be	assigned	for	participants	meeting	DSM-5	diagnostic	criteria	for	bulimia	nervosa,	anorexia	nervosa,	bulimia	nervosa,	binge	eating	disorder,	or	other	specified	feeding	or	eating	disorder.	Subclinical	status	will	be	assigned	via	recommendations	offered	by	[CONTACT_683552]	(1997)	for	designating	symptomatic	(i.e.,	subclinical)	eating	disorder	status	(see	Green	et	al.,	2017;	Green	et	al.,	in	press	for	a	description	in	the	preliminary	trial).	Symptom	status	will	be	monitored	by	[CONTACT_355987]	[INVESTIGATOR_683523]-Q	at	each	assessment	interval;	participants	with	deteriorating	symptoms	will	be	given	information	regarding	treatment	resources.	For	minor	participants,	this	information	will	be	provided	both	to	the	minor	participants	and	their	parents	or	legal	guardians.			Participants	will	be	recruited	via	letters	sent	to	inpatient	and	outpatient	behavioral	and	medical	treatment	facilities	in	Eastern	Iowa,	via	letters	mailed	to	sororities	at	nearby	[CONTACT_6070],	via	flyers	posted	at	local	businesses	and	fitness	centers	in	Eastern	Iowa,	via	an	advertisement	posted	on	the	social	networking	sites	Instagram	and	Facebook,	via	advertisements	posted	in	local	newspapers,	via	advertisements	posted	on	websites	for	the	Academy	for	Eating	Disorders	and	the	National	Eating	Disorders	Association,	via	fliers	posted	in	area	high	schools,	colleges,	and	universities,	via	announcements	made	on	a	local	radio	station,	and	via	advertisements	on	radio	and	public	transit,	and	via	the	e-mail	listserv	of	a	nearby	[CONTACT_683553].	Intentional	efforts	will	be	made	to	increase	the	representation	of	ethnic	minority	women	in	the	sample.		Procedure:		Postings	and	mailings	will	advertise	a	study	examining	eating	disorder	treatment	and	prevention	practices.	All	participants	will	be	screened	to	ensure	they	meet	inclusion	criteria	for	the	trial.	Participants	interested	in	completing	a	screening	will	contact	[CONTACT_355987]	[INVESTIGATOR_683524]	e-mail	to	indicate	interest.	The	Principal	Investigator	[INVESTIGATOR_683525]	e-mail	interested	participants	the	informed	consent	statements	for	the	screening	and	the	full-scale	trial	and	will	provide	a	URL	for	the	online	screening	survey	(administered	via	Qualtrics).	The	online	survey	will	again	display	the	informed	consent	statement	for	the	screening.	Participants	will	be	asked	to	electronically	indicate	their	consent	to	participation	before	completing	the	screening.	In	the	case	of	minors,	parents	will	indicate	their	online	consent	and	minors	their	online	assent.		Once	consent	is	secured,	participants	will	complete	an	online	demographic	questionnaire	which	includes	an	assessment	of	participants’	medical	history,	pregnancy	status,	and	current	medication	status.	Participants	will	also	complete	an	online	version	of	the	Questionnaire	for	Eating	Disorder	Diagnoses	(Q-EDD;	Mintz,	O'Halloran,	Mulholland,	&	Schneider,	1997).	This	screening	will	take	approximately	[ADDRESS_925558]	them	if	they	meet	the	inclusion	criteria	for	the	full-scale	trial.		Screening	participants	will	be	
  
   
entered	into	a	drawing	to	win	one	of	two	$25	gift	certificates	to	Amazon.com.	Diagnostic	status	(clinical,	subclinical,	asymptomatic)	will	be	determined	according	to	the	Q-EDD	scoring	criteria	outlined	by	[CONTACT_683552]	(1997)	with	clinical	criteria	adapted	for	DSM-5	(American	Psychiatric	Association,	2013);	clinical	diagnostic	status	will	be	conformed	via	the	EDE	16.0D	(Cooper	et	al.,	2008)	administered	at	baseline.			All	participants	meeting	the	inclusion	criteria	for	the	full	scale	trial	will	be	contact[CONTACT_683554]	e-mail	by	[CONTACT_355987]	[INVESTIGATOR_683526].	In	this	e-mail,	each	participant	will	be	given	an	electronic	version	of	the	informed	consent	statement	for	the	full	scale	study	and	will	be	asked	to	indicate	e-mail	consent.	For	minors,	assent	and	parental	consent	will	be	required.	If	participants	consent,	the	Principal	Investigator	[INVESTIGATOR_683527]	a	research	appointment	and	will	verify	the	participant’s	home	address.	A	copy	of	the	full	scale	study	informed	consent	statement,	a	map	to	the	laboratory	location,	and	pre-appointment	instructions	will	be	mailed	to	the	participant’s	home	approximately	one	week	before	the	scheduled	research	appointment.	Finally,	an	e-mail	reminder	will	be	sent	by	[CONTACT_683555].			Participants	will	be	randomly	assigned	to	the	expanded	dissonance-based	condition,	the	traditional	Body	Project	condition,	or	to	an	educational	brochure	control	condition.	The	experimenter	will	be	blind	to	their	condition.	Participants	in	all	conditions	will	complete	on-line	assessments	of	body	dissatisfaction,	self-esteem,	self-objectification,	thin-ideal	internalization,	maladaptive	social	comparison,	trait	anxiety,	and	eating	disorder	symptoms	at	baseline,	postintervention,	and	2-month	follow-up	(see	the	list	of	specific	measures	below).	Participants	will	come	to	the	laboratory	at	each	assessment	period	to	have	their	height,	weight,	and	cardiovascular	function	assessed.					Participants	will	be	instructed	to	avoid	food,	coffee,	and	nicotine	for	3	hours	prior	to	each	laboratory	appointment	(see	Low,	2003).	Participants	will	be	instructed	to	abstain	from	vigorous	physical	exercise	for	[ADDRESS_925559]	the	Laboratory	Coordinator	to	reschedule	the	appointment.		Upon	entry	into	the	laboratory,	an	experimenter	will	greet	the	participants	and	will	read	the	informed	consent	statement	aloud.	The	participant	will	be	given	an	opportunity	to	ask	questions.	If	the	participant	provides	consent,	the	laboratory	protocol	will	begin.	Minors	will	provide	assent	and	parental	or	legal	guardian	consent.		Participants	will	be	placed	in	a	supi[INVESTIGATOR_683528]	a	10-minute	equilibration	period;	a	blood	pressure	cuff	with	a	heart	rate	monitor	will	be	secured	to	the	left	arm.	Blood	pressure	and	heart	rate	indices	will	be	checked	at	two	5-minute	intervals	to	assess	cardiac	equilibration.	Participants	will	be	prepared	for	electrocardiography	(ECG)	during	this	equilibration	period.	[ADDRESS_925560]	configuration;	ECG	lead	wires	will	be	attached	and	a	sample	(~5-second)	ECG	recording	will	be	obtained	to	check	signal	quality.	Immediately	after	the	10-minute	equilibration	period,	participants	will	be	instructed	to	remain	silent	in	a	resting	supi[INVESTIGATOR_683529]	a	5-minute	and	30-second	ECG	recording	is	conducted.	Next	participants’	height	and	weight	will	be	assessed	in	the	laboratory.	At	the	conclusion	of	each	assessment	session,	participants	will	be	compensated	via	a	$[ADDRESS_925561]	program	as	specified	by	[CONTACT_683556]	(2001).		Participants	in	the	enhanced	and	traditional	conditions	will	meet	in	four	60-minute	group	sessions,	once	per	week,	for	one	month.	Homework	will	be	assigned	between	group	sessions	and	during	the	2-month	follow-up	assessment	period.	Group	sessions	will	be	facilitated	by	[CONTACT_355987],	the	Laboratory	Coordinator,	or	one	advanced	graduate	student	in	a	Clinical	Psychology	program	at	a	large	Midwestern	university	and	a	Cornell	College	undergraduate	student.			Session	content	in	the	expanded	condition	will	be	identical	to	the	traditional	Body	Project	prevention	program	with	the	following	exceptions:	1)	the	concept,	origins,	and	consequences	of	cultural	objectification	will	be	introduced	and	discussed	alongside	the	thin-ideal	during	the	first	session;	2)	a	thought	record	exercise	designed	to	monitor	and	reframe	appearance-based	maladaptive	upward	social	comparison	will	be	added	to	session	one	homework;	3)	behavioral	exercises	designed	to	decrease	the	frequency	of	trait	self-objectification	and	maladaptive	social	comparison	will	be	added	to	session	three;	4)	a	behavioral	exercise	designed	to	increase	understanding	of	the	consequences	of	the	cultural	objectification	of	women	and	trait	self-objectification	will	be	added	to	session	four;	and	5)	homework	designed	to	decrease	the	frequency	of	maladaptive	social	comparison	will	be	added	to	the	final	homework	exercise.		Across	both	dissonance	conditions,	participants	will	be	compensated	$40	in	Amazon	gift	cards	for	each	program	session,	$10	in	Amazon	gift	cards	for	each	set	of	homework	activities	between	sessions,	and	$40	for	the	final	homework	conducted	over	the	2-month	follow-up	period.	Participants	in	the	educational	brochure	control	condition	will	receive	a	2-page	handout	from	the	National	Eating	Disorder	Association	which	describes	negative	and	positive	body	image,	delineates	the	relationship	between	negative	body	image	and	disordered	eating,	and	offers	strategies	for	improving	body	image.	This	educational	brochure	control	condition	was	used	by	[CONTACT_683556]	(2014)	in	the	evaluation	of	the	efficacy	of	a	dissonance-based	prevention	program.		Measures:	Questionnaire	for	Eating	Disorder	Diagnoses	(Q-EDD).	The	Questionnaire	for	Eating	Disorder	Diagnoses	(Q-EDD:	Mintz	et	al.,	1997)	was	used	to	determine	diagnostic	status.	The	Q-EDD	is	a	self-report	questionnaire	used	to	assess	level	of	eating	disorder	symptomatology.		The	Q-EDD	operationalizes	diagnostic	criteria	for	eating	disorder	diagnoses	according	to	the	Diagnostic	and	Statistical	Manual	of	Mental	Disorders,	4th	
  
   
edition,	Text	Revision	(DSM-IV-TR;	American	Psychiatric	Association,	2000).	Q-EDD	scoring	criteria	will	be	adapted	in	the	proposed	trial	to	fit	criteria	specified	by	[CONTACT_683557],	5th	Edition	(DSM-5;	American	Psychiatric	Association,	2013).	The	Q-EDD	has	good	convergent	validity	when	compared	to	the	Revised	Bulimia	Test	(BULIT-R;	Thelen,	Farmer,	Wonderlich,	&	Smith,	1991)	and	the	Eating	Attitudes	Test	(EAT;	Garner	&	Garfinkel,	1979)	in	undergraduate	and	community	samples.			Rosenberg	Self-Esteem	Scale	(RSE).	The	Rosenberg	Self-Esteem	Scale	(RSE:	Rosenberg,	1965)	is	a	widely	used	measure	designed	to	assess	global	feelings	of	self-worth	and	self-esteem.	Originally	designed	as	a	Guttman	scale,	the	RSE	is	now	conceptualized	and	scored	as	a	Likert	scale.	The	RSE	includes	10	items	(e.g.	“I	feel	that	I’m	a	person	of	worth)	rated	on	a	four-point	scale	(1	=	strongly	disagree,	4	=	strongly	agree).	Higher	scores	indicate	higher	levels	of	self-esteem.	The	RSE	has	high	test-retest	reliability,	typi[INVESTIGATOR_683530]	.82	to	.88	depending	upon	the	sample	(Blascovich	&	Tomaka,	1993).	Coefficient	alphas	range	from	.73	to	.85	(Corning,	Krumm	&	Smitham,	2006;	Hawkins,	Richards,	Granley	&	Stein,	2004).		Eating	Disorder	Examination	(EDE-Q	16.0D)	&	Eating	Disorder	Examination	Questionnaire	(EDE-Q).	The	Eating	Disorder	Examination-Questionnaire	16.0D	is	the	gold	standard	semi-structured	diagnostic	interview	for	evaluating	eating	disorder	symptoms,	adapted	from	the	original	Eating	Disorder	Examination	(EDE:	Cooper,	Cooper,	&	Fairburn,	1989).	The	EDE	will	be	used	to	confirm	diagnostic	level	for	participants	with	clinical	symptoms.		The	EDE-Q	shows	high	convergent	validity	with	EDE	subscales	(Mond,	Hay,	Rogers,	Owen,	&	Beumont,	2004);	it	will	be	used	to	evaluate	level	of	eating	disorder	symptoms	at	each	assessment.				Body	Shape	Questionnaire	(BSQ).	The	Body	Shape	Questionnaire	(BSQ:	Cooper,	Taylor,	Cooper,	&	Fairburn,	1986)	is	a	34-item	measure	designed	to	assess	body	dissatisfaction.	Items	are	measured	on	a	6-point	Likert	scale	designed	to	measure	the	frequency	of	negative	body-related	thoughts	(1=	never,	6	=	always).	Higher	scores	indicate	higher	frequency	of	negative	body-related	thoughts	and	higher	levels	of	body	dissatisfaction.	The	BSQ	shows	strong	test-retest	reliability	and	good	convergent	validity	when	compared	with	other	measures	of	body	dissatisfaction	in	clinical	and	nonclinical	college	and	community	samples	(Rosen,	Jones,	Ramirez,	&	Waxman,	1996).		Social	Comparison	Rating	Scale	(SCRS).	The	Social	Comparison	Rating	Scale	(SCRS:	Allan	&	Gilbert,	1995)	is	an	11-item	scale	designed	to	assess	perception	of	social	rank.		The	scale	consists	of	a	series	of	bipolar	adjectives	(e.g.,	inferior/superior)	separated	by	[CONTACT_683558]	[ADDRESS_925562]	reliability	of	the	11-item	scale	is	high	(Cronbach’s	α	=	.88).		Self-Objectification	Questionnaire	(SOQ).	The	Self-Objectification	Questionnaire	(SOQ:	Fredrickson	et	al.,	1998)	was	used	to	assess	trait	self-objectification.	The	SOQ	is	a	
  
   
10-item	self-report	inventory	designed	to	assess	the	relative	importance	of	body	competence	versus	body	appearance	in	physical	self-concept	(Fredrickson	et	al.,	1998).	Participants	are	asked	to	rank	5	appearance-based	attributes	(e.g.,	physical	attractiveness)	and	5	competence-based	attributes	(e.g.,	physical	coordination)	in	order	of	their	impact	on	physical	self-concept.		Attributes	are	ranked	from	0	to	9	with	higher	scores	representing	higher	importance.	An	overall	trait	self-objectification	score	is	computed	by	[CONTACT_683559].	Resulting	scores	range	from	-25	to	25.	Higher	scores	denote	higher	levels	of	trait	self-objectification.		According	to	Noll	&	Fredrickson	(1998),	the	Self-Objectification	Questionnaire	displays	acceptable	convergent	validity	when	compared	to	the	Body	Image	Assessment	(Williamson,	Davis,	Bennett,	Goreczny,	&	Gleaves,	1985)	and	the	Appearance	Anxiety	Questionnaire	(Dion,	Dion,	&	Keelan,	1990)	in	a	college	student	sample.	The	measure	also	demonstrates	acceptable	internal	consistency	(α	=	.80)	in	a	college	student	sample	(Hebl,	King,	&	Lin,	2004).			Ideal	Body	Stereotype	Scale	–	Revised.	The	Ideal	Body	Stereotype	Scale	-	Revised	(IBSS-R:	Stice,	2001)	was	used	to	assess	the	extent	to	which	participants	internalized	the	cultural	feminine	thin-ideal.	The	IBSS-R	is	a	self-report	inventory	which	asks	participants	to	report	their	level	of	agreement	with	6	statements	which	indicate	what	attractive	women	look	like	on	a	5-point	scale	ranging	from	strongly	disagree	(1)	to	strongly	agree	(5).	Responses	are	averaged	to	compute	a	total	score.	Higher	scores	indicate	higher	levels	of	thin-ideal	internalization.	The	scale	demonstrates	acceptable	internal	consistency	(α	=	.83-.89)	and	discriminant,	convergent,	and	predictive	validity	in	college	student	samples	(see	Stice,	2001).			State	Trait	Anxiety	Inventory	–	Form	Y.	The	State	Trait	Anxiety	Inventory-	Form	Y	(STAI:	Spi[INVESTIGATOR_2996],	Gorsuch,	&	Lushene,	1970)	is	a	20-item	self-report	measure	designed	to	assess	level	of	trait	anxiety.	Each	item	consists	of	a	statement	which	assesses	feelings	of	anxiety	or	relaxation	on	a	4-point	scale	ranging	from	1	(not	at	all)	to	4	(very	much	so).	Scores	range	from	20	to	80.	Higher	scores	indicate	higher	levels	of	anxiety.	The	STAI	demonstrates	high	internal	consistency	in	college	student	samples,	as	well	as	strong	reliability	and	validity	indices	(see	Spi[INVESTIGATOR_2996],	1983).			Body	Mass	Index:	Body	mass	index	(BMI)	will	be	calculated	based	on	height	and	weight	data	[weight	(kg)/height	(m2)]	(see	Garrow	&	Webster,	1985).			Cardiac	Indices:	The	ECG	signal	will	be	acquired	via	PowerLab	16/35	psychophysiological	data	acquisition	system	with	a	sampling	rate	of	1000	Hz.	Hardware	setup	will	include	an	ECG100C	amplifier	with	a	35Hz	LPN	filter	and	a	.5Hz	HP	filter.	HRV	data	and	ECG	data	will	be	analyzed	via	PowerLab	LabChart	8	software.				Data	and	Human	Protections:		Human	Participant	Training:		All	members	of	the	research	team	will	review	the	Cornell	College	IRB	handbook	available	at	https://www.cornellcollege.edu/irb/files/Handbook%202018.pdf.		Please	note	the	NIH	
  
   
human	subjects	training	was	no	longer	available	as	of	September	26th,	2018	but	all	members	of	the	current	team	completed	this	training	prior	to	its	removal.			All	members	of	the	team	signed	Cornell	College	confidentiality	assurance	forms	available	at	https://www.cornellcollege.edu/irb/files/WebConfAssur2018.pdf.	All	records	will	be	kept	confidential	and	participants’	records	will	not	be	made	publicly	available.	Participants	in	all	conditions	will	be	assigned	an	experimental	number	which	will	appear	on	all	study	materials.		There	will	be	a	separate	master	file	which	links	experimental	numbers	to	participant	names.		Only	research	team	members	will	have	access	to	this	data	file.		All	data	will	be	kept	in	a	locked	laboratory	location.	On-line	data	will	be	downloaded	to	a	password-protected	electronic	file.	Data	from	the	present	study	will	be	analyzed	by	[CONTACT_97757].	The	resulting	dataset	will	be	analyzed	and	summarized	in	a	publication	intended	to	appear	in	a	scientific	journal.	This	dataset	will	be	archived	in	a	password	protected	file	for	future	analysis	and	publications	by	[CONTACT_355987].		The	dataset	without	participants’	names	or	identifiers	will	be	available	on	ClinicalTrials.gov	and	will	be	submitted	to	journals	alongside	published	articles	for	interested	readers	to	access	on	journal	websites.		It	may	also	be	requested	for	re-analysis	by	[CONTACT_683560].		Again,	the	data	will	contain	no	identifying	information.			Protection	of	sensitive	data	collected	online.		An	online	data	acquisition	platform	(Qualtrics)	will	be	used	for	the	collection	of	all	screening	and	assessment	data.		Qualtrics	uses	TLS	encryption	for	all	transmitted	data	and	participants	will	be	sent	password	protected	survey	links	(a	function	available	in	Qualtrics).		The	Qualtrics	security	statement	is	available	at		https://www.qualtrics.com/security-statement/.	Only	laboratory	members	have	access	to	the	Qualtrics	login	information	for	the	laboratory.	Qualtrics	data	is	downloaded	to	the	Cornell	College	server	to	a	password	protected	shared	drive	that	only	laboratory	members	have	access	to.		The	Cornell	College	also	has	a	high-end	firewall	systems	and	the	IT	staff	regularly	assesses	and	ameliorates	vulnerabilities	to	the	secure	server.		Cornell	College	retains	a	certified	secure	3rd	party	storage	and	disaster	recovery	site	roughly	25	miles	from	our	campus,	to	store	our	retained	data	and	nightly/weekly	backups.	All	student	data	and	financial	records/data	are	encrypted	and	transferred	through	secure,	encrypted	connections.	All	administrative	system	user	and	administrator	logins	and	passwords	are	stored	in	a	centralized,	encrypted	password	vault.		At	the	start	of	a	relationship	with	the	College	and	annually	thereafter,	every	College	employee,	student,	and	contracted	worker	is	required	to	read	a	statement	of	responsibility	for	the	security	and	confidentiality	of	data	and	data	networks	and	agree	to	the	following	conditions:	Keep	personal	passwords	private.	Assume	responsibility	and	be	held	accountable	for	all	data	modifications	made	using	his/her	ID	and	password.		Not	allow	unauthorized	use	of	any	information	in	files	or	databases.		Not	provide	or	permit	access	to	College	data	infrastructure	or	networks	by	[CONTACT_683561].		Not	seek	personal	benefit	or	permit	others	to	benefit	personally	through	the	use	of	any	confidential	information	which	has	come	to	him/her	through	his/her	work	assignment.		
  
   
Not	exhibit	or	divulge	the	contents	of	any	record	or	report	to	any	person	except	in	the	conduct	of	his/her	regular	work	assignment.		Not	aid,	abet,	or	act	in	conspi[INVESTIGATOR_683531].				Assessment	of	Medical	Risks	and	Appropriateness	for	Outpatient	Treatment:	Medical	risk	will	be	assessed	at	baseline,	post,	and	follow-up.	The	medical	monitor	will	be	responsible	for	monitoring	eating	disorder	risk	status,	cardiac	risk,	and	BMI	at	each	assessment	session	and	will	work	with	the	Laboratory	Coordinator	and	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_683532].	In	the	case	of	minor	participants,	this	information	will	also	be	communicated	to	parents	directly.	This	will	be	done	both	via	a	written	letter	and	a	phone	call	from	the	study	staff.			All	ECG	strips	which	deviate	from	typi[INVESTIGATOR_683533].	Participants	with	atypi[INVESTIGATOR_683534]	a	copy	of	their	ECG	strip	and	will	be	referred	to	their	primary	care	physician	to	determine	if	additional	testing	or	intervention	is	needed.		Participants	in	the	high	medical	risk	category	will	also	be	given	a	list	of	local	mental	health	providers	specializing	in	eating	disorder	treatment	and	will	be	referred	to	a	mental	health	care	specialist	for	additional	eating	disorder	assessment	and	treatment	planning.		If	the	trial	does	not	interfere	with	other	treatment	services	recommended	by	[CONTACT_683562],	then	the	participant	will	remain	eligible	for	the	trial.	Assessment	of	Medical	Risks	at	Baseline:	With	regard	to	the	assessment	of	medical	risk	at	baseline,	research	indicates	eating	disorder	patients	with	body	mass	indices	(BMI)	<	[ADDRESS_925563]	notably	disorder-related	cardiac	risks	(see	Fairburn,	2008;	Swenne	&	Larsson,	1999).		Patients	with	low	BMIs	(regardless	of	electrolyte	status)	are	significantly	more	likely	to	show	QTc	interval	prolongation	and	dispersion,	indicators	of	increased	risk	for	sudden	cardiac	arrhythmia	and	death	(Swenne	&	Larsson,	1999).		Participants	meeting	this	low	weight	criterion	(BMI	<	18)	or	with	QTc	interval	duration	of	>500msec	(Swenne	&	Larsson,	1999)	will	be	considered	to	have	an	initial	high	risk	symptom	presentation	and	will	be	referred	to	their	primary	care	physician	for	a	medical	assessment	prior	to	beginning	the	trial.			According	to	American	Psychiatric	Association	level	of	care	guidelines	for	patients	with	eating	disorders	(Yager	et	al.,	2006),	patients	are	considered	at	to	be	at	a	medically	high	risk	(and	in	potential	need	of	inpatient	care)	if	they	demonstrate	a	HR	<	40	bpm	or	BP	<	90/60.		Participants	meeting	one	or	both	of	these	criteria	will	be	similarly	referred	to	a	primary	care	physician	for	a	medical	assessment	prior	to	beginning	the	trial.			According	to	American	Psychiatric	Association	guidelines	(Yager	et	al.,	2006),	patients	are	also	at	high	medical	risk	(and	in	potential	need	of	inpatient	care)	if	they	are	unable	to	control	multiple	daily	epi[INVESTIGATOR_683535],	persistent,	and	
  
   
disabling.	In	line	with	these	recommendations,	patients	demonstrating	multiple	daily	epi[INVESTIGATOR_683536]-induced	vomiting,	daily	laxative	abuse,	daily	diuretic,	or	>	[ADDRESS_925564]	28	days	as	assessed	by	[CONTACT_941]	Q-EDD	(Mintz	et	al.,	1997)	will	be	considered	to	be	at	medically	high	risk	and	will	be	referred	to	their	primary	care	physician	for	a	medical	assessment	prior	to	beginning	the	trial.				Assessment	of	Medical	Risks	Throughout	the	Trial:	Eating	disorder	symptom	severity,	BMI,	and	cardiac	risk	indices	will	be	assessed	at	baseline,	postintervention	(4-6	weeks	after	the	baseline	assessment),	and	2-month	follow-up.		Tracking	eating	disorder	symptom	status,	BMI,	and	cardiac	function	at	the	3	assessment	periods	will	allow	for	the	careful	monitoring	of	symptom	deterioration	over	the	duration	of	the	trial.			Eating	disorder	symptom	severity	will	be	assessed	by	[CONTACT_683563]	–	Questionnaire	(Fairburn	et	al.,	2014)	and	via	the	Questionnaire	for	Eating	Disorder	Diagnoses	(Mintz	et	al.,	1997),	both	reliable	and	valid	indicators	of	eating	disorder	pathology.		The	same	medical	risk	criteria	outlined	in	the	“Assessment	of	Medical	Risks	at	Baseline”	section	above	will	be	applied	throughout	the	trial.		Increased	frequency	of	binge	and	purge	behaviors	as	indicated	on	the	Q-EDD	(Mintz	et	al.,	1997)	and	the	EDE-Q	(Fairburn	et	al.,	2014)	will	be	evaluated	in	conjunction	with	BMI	and	cardiac	risk	indices	(QTc	interval	length	>	[ADDRESS_925565]	amplitude	<	.5	mV)	by	[CONTACT_683564].	 Participants	demonstrating	deterioration	on	these	indices	across	assessment	periods	will	be	referred	by	[CONTACT_683565].		Group	Intervention:	Confidentiality	Risks.		Participants	will	be	notified	in	the	informed	consent	document	that	the	trial	incorporates	a	group	intervention,	that	there	is	a	chance	they	may	know	others	enrolled	in	the	group,	and	that	group	interventions	pose	inherent	risks	for	confidentiality	since	others	in	the	group	will	know	their	identities.		Participants	will	be	asked	to	check	a	series	of	boxes	on	the	informed	consent	documents	which	indicate	they	acknowledge	these	unique	risks.		In	an	attempt	to	reduce	the	risk	that	confidential	information	discussed	during	the	group	intervention	will	be	shared	outside	of	the	group,	each	participant	will	be	asked	to	sign	a	confidentiality	agreement	in	which	they	promise	to	keep	the	identity	of	other	groups	members	private	and	not	to	discuss	group	content	outside	of	the	group	context.		We	believe	this	approach	will	inform	participants	of	the	unique	confidentiality	concerns	associated	with	group	interventions	and	will	discourage	sharing	of	confidential	group	data	outside	of	the	group	context.				Qualifications	and	Supervision	of	Group	Facilitators:	Graduate	facilitators	will	be	second	to	fourth	year	doctoral	students	from	nearby	[CONTACT_683566].		Graduate	facilitators	will	have	taken	at	least	one	course	in	counseling	theories	and	techniques	and	had	at	least	[ADDRESS_925566]	completed	one	counseling	and	psychotherapy	course	and	to	be	an	ongoing	member	of	the	student-faculty	research	team	with	previous	team-based	training	in	dissonance-based	eating	disorder	interventions.			All	facilitators	will	undergo	facilitator	training	during	which	they	learn	to	administer	the	intervention	programs.		During	the	training,	facilitators	will	practice	all	components	of	the	intervention	protocol	and	will	review	safety	guidelines	and	procedures	for	adverse	group	events	(including	if	a	participant	experiences	an	adverse	health	event	during	a	group	intervention	session	or	if	a	group	member	expresses	ideas	of	self-harm	during	a	group	intervention	session).			During	group	intervention	sessions,	the	Laboratory	Coordinator	will	be	present	in	the	building	and	the	Principal	Investigator	[INVESTIGATOR_683537].		If	a	group	member	expresses	ideas	of	self-harm,	facilitators	will	inform	the	participant	they	would	like	to	explore	the	issue	more	fully	following	the	conclusion	of	the	group	session.		The	facilitators	will	notify	the	Laboratory	Coordinator	who	will	promptly	call	the	PI.		The	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_683538]	a	thorough	suicide	assessment	and	to	determine	the	appropriate	level	of	care.		The	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_683539].		If	it	is	clear	the	participant	is	at	imminent	risk	for	self-harm,	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_683540]	a	local	hospi[INVESTIGATOR_683541]	a	psychiatric	assessment.		If	the	participant	is	at	imminent	risk	for	self-harm	but	refuses	voluntary	transport,	campus	safety	and	local	law	enforcement	will	be	contact[CONTACT_683567]-harm	explained.		If	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_683542]-call	for	a	given	session,	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_683543]-call	in	her	absence.			All	intervention	sessions	will	be	rated	for	fidelity	and	compliance	in	order	to	provide	supervision	on	the	protocol.		Formal	rating	forms	will	be	completed	by	[CONTACT_683568].					Data	Safety	and	Monitoring:	Despi[INVESTIGATOR_683544],	we	will	be	instituting	a	fully	independent	DSMB	to	maximally	ensure	patient	safety.	The	DSMB	will	operate	in	compliance	with	NIH	Policy	for	Data	and	Safety	Monitoring	(1998)	as	specified	at	https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/not98-084.html.	We	will	be	recruiting	DSMB	members	who	meet	the	NIH	guidelines,	and	will	include	least	one	eating	disorders	expert	and	one	biostatistician.	One	DSMB	member	will	be	a	physician	who	will	also	serve	as	the	study’s	medical	monitor	(see	“Assessment	of	Medical	Risks”	section	below	for	additional	details	about	this	role).			Serious	Adverse	Events	(SAE)	will	be	identified,	monitored,	and	reported	throughout	the	study	in	accordance	with	the	NIH	Reportable	Events	Policy	(April	16,	2015)	as	specified	at	https://www.nimh.nih.gov/funding/clinical-research/nimh-reportable-events-policy.shtml.				
  
   
	Active	or	Passive	Deception:	This	protocol	involves	no	active	or	passive	deception.		Inherent	Risks:	The foreseeable risks inherent in this study slightly exceed those encountered in everyday life. Examining weight-related thoughts, emotions, and behaviors may cause discomfort and may precipi[INVESTIGATOR_047] a negative psychological reaction in some individuals. Should a participant experience a negative psychological reaction to the study, they will be asked to contact [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_683545]. Participants will also be given contact [CONTACT_683569].  If a participant experiences an unexpected negative psychological reaction to the study that does not remit, a list of mental health service agencies in the area are listed out in the Informed Consent document. If atypi[INVESTIGATOR_683546] a participants’ ECG results, the Primary Investigator ([CONTACT_683576]) will send the relevant data to the medical monitor who will then make a recommendation on whether or not participants should receive an atypi[INVESTIGATOR_683547].  	Benefits	and	Compensation:	The present study may be a direct therapeutic benefit to the participant if they are in the traditional or the expanded Body Project intervention conditions. Previous findings indicate participants in a similar intervention programs experienced lower symptoms of disordered eating and associated risk factors.  However, there may be variability with regard to outcomes and all participants may not experience this reduction. Data from this trial will help to increase scientific knowledge regarding the effectiveness of eating disorder treatment and prevention programs.  As compensation for the participants’ time and transportation expenses participants will receive Amazon gift cards. Each participant will receive $120 in exchange for their participation in the 3 evaluation sessions (3 sessions x $40 per session = $120).  If the participant is assigned to either the traditional Body Project or the expanded Body Project interventions, they will receive an extra $40 for each intervention attended (4 sessions x $40 = $160). Participants in these conditions will also receive an extra $30 ($10 each sessions) for completing homework for sessions 2-4) and and $40 for the final homework assigned over the 2-month follow-up period ($[ADDRESS_925567] intervention conditions: $120 assessments, $160 intervention program, $70 homework).  Participants in the educational brochure condition will not receive compensation for reading the educational brochure but will receive $120 in compensation for attending the 3 assessment sessions. 	Inclusion	of	Special	Populations:	Adolescent	women	between	the	ages	of	15	and	17	will	be	admitted	into	the	study	since	eating	disorders	commonly	onset	during	the	adolescent	period.	Based	on	our	recruitment	strategy	(a	portion	of	which	occurs	in	area	high	schools	and	clinics	which	serve	adolescents),	and	statistics	from	our	previous	samples	which	used	the	same	recruitment	strategy,	we	anticipate	approximately	10-20%	of	our	sample	will	be	comprised	of	women	in	the	15-[ADDRESS_925568]	that	eating	disorder	symptoms	commonly	onset	
  
   
during	this	age	and	earlier	treatment	and	prevention	interventions	are	critical	to	positive	outcomes.		By	[CONTACT_683570],	we	would	be	limiting	prevention	and	treatment	research	essential	for	this	group.			That	said,	we	are	very	mindful	that	the	inclusion	of	adolescents	in	this	research	requires	extra	protections	for	this	population.		As	delineated	in	our	human	participants	section,	minor	assent	and	parental/legal	guardian	consent	is	required	for	inclusion	in	this	trial.		In	addition,	any	assessments	outcomes	which	indicate	symptom	deterioration	or	atypi[INVESTIGATOR_683548]/legal	guardians.		Any	necessary	treatment	referrals	will	also	be	communicated	to	both	parties	by	[CONTACT_97758]	[INVESTIGATOR_683526].		In	addition,	any	adverse	reactions	to	the	trial	(assessed	at	all	assessment	intervals)	reported	by	[CONTACT_683571]	[INVESTIGATOR_683549]/legal	guardian	to	discuss	the	adverse	reaction	and	to	provide	appropriate	treatment	referrals	and	follow-up	resources.			In	recognition	of	the	important	of	protecting	children	in	research,	our	IRB	follows	the	relevant	federal	guidelines	(see	below).	With	regard	to	the	proposed	trial,	written	parental	consent	is	required	for	all	participants	under	age	[ADDRESS_925569]	complete	access	to	their	child’s	assessment	results	if	they	are	requested.	The	minor	child	is	made	aware	of	this	parental	right	as	well	as	part	of	the	informed	consent	statement.		§46.408	Requirements	for	permission	by	[CONTACT_683572].		(a) In	addition	to	the	determinations	required	under	other	applicable	sections	of	this	subpart,	the	IRB	shall	determine	that	adequate	provisions	are	made	for	soliciting	the	assent	of	the	children,	when	in	the	judgment	of	the	IRB	the	children	are	capable	of	providing	assent.	In	determining	whether	children	are	capable	of	assenting,	the	IRB	shall	take	into	account	the	ages,	maturity,	and	psychological	state	of	the	children	involved.	This	judgment	may	be	made	for	all	children	to	be	involved	in	research	under	a	particular	protocol,	or	for	each	child,	as	the	IRB	deems	appropriate.	If	the	IRB	determines	that	the	capability	of	some	or	all	of	the	children	is	so	limited	that	they	cannot	reasonably	be	consulted	or	that	the	intervention	or	procedure	involved	in	the	research	holds	out	a	prospect	of	direct	benefit	that	is	important	to	the	health	or	well-being	of	the	children	and	is	available	only	in	the	context	of	the	research,	the	assent	of	the	children	is	not	a	necessary	condition	for	proceeding	with	the	research.	Even	where	the	IRB	determines	that	the	subjects	are	capable	of	assenting,	the	IRB	may	still	waive	the	assent	requirement	under	circumstances	in	which	consent	may	be	waived	in	accord	with	§46.116	of	Subpart	A.		(b)	In	addition	to	the	determinations	required	under	other	applicable	sections	of	this	subpart,	the	IRB	shall	determine,	in	accordance	with	and	to	the	extent	that	consent	is	required	by	§46.116	of	Subpart	A,	that	adequate	provisions	are	made	for	soliciting	the	
  
   
permission	of	each	child's	parents	or	guardian.	Where	parental	permission	is	to	be	obtained,	the	IRB	may	find	that	the	permission	of	one	parent	is	sufficient	for	research	to	be	conducted	under	§46.404	or	§46.405.	Where	research	is	covered	by	§§46.[ADDRESS_925570]	give	their	permission	unless	one	parent	is	deceased,	unknown,	incompetent,	or	not	reasonably	available,	or	when	only	one	parent	has	legal	responsibility	for	the	care	and	custody	of	the	child.		(c)	In	addition	to	the	provisions	for	waiver	contained	in	§46.[ADDRESS_925571]	the	subjects	(for	example,	neglected	or	abused	children),	it	may	waive	the	consent	requirements	in	Subpart	A	of	this	part	and	paragraph	(b)	of	this	section,	provided	an	appropriate	mechanism	for	protecting	the	children	who	will	participate	as	subjects	in	the	research	is	substituted,	and	provided	further	that	the	waiver	is	not	inconsistent	with	federal,	state,	or	local	law.	The	choice	of	an	appropriate	mechanism	would	depend	upon	the	nature	and	purpose	of	the	activities	described	in	the	protocol,	the	risk	and	anticipated	benefit	to	the	research	subjects,	and	their	age,	maturity,	status,	and	condition.										
  
   
	INSTITUTIONAL	REVIEW	BOARD	APPROVAL	LETTER			May	8,	2018		IRB—Determination	for	Proposal	#	1516-105-GRE		Dear	[CONTACT_683577],	this	letter	is	in	response	to	your	request	for	changes	to	the	IRB	approved	project	(#1516-105-GRE)	Efficacy	Trial	of	a	Dissonance	Based	Eating	Disorder	Program	at	Cornell	College.		The	IRB	has	reviewed	the	modifications	to	your	previously	approved	study	and	approved	the	renewal	with	the	stated	modifications.		You	may	begin	your	data	collection	using	the	methods	approved	in	this	proposal	for	one	year	from	this	date	(May	8,	2018).		In	addition,	please	have	any	students	working	on	the	project	fill	out	the	Confidentiality	Assurance	before	they	begin	collecting	data	and	send	an	electronic	version	to	the	IRB	chair	for	his	file	on	the	project.		If	you	wish	to	collect	additional	data	after	this	date,	and	there	is	no	change	to	the	project	as	described	in	the	original	proposal	you	may	receive	expedited	review.		If	there	are	changes	please,	consult	with	the	chair	of	the	IRB	before	submitting	a	new	proposal	for	an	initial	determination	of	the	review	category	that	is	most	appropriate.		If	the	change	is	deemed	substantial,	a	separate	proposal	must	be	submitted	for	review.		Please	remember	that	you	are	obligated	to	promptly	report	any	unanticipated	problems	or	adverse	effects	of	the	research	to	the	Institutional	Review	Board.	The	IRB	must	be	notified	if	adverse	events	occur	and	what	actions	the	investigator	has	taken	to	respond.			Changes	in	the	procedures	of	collecting	data	from	human	subjects	must	be	re-reviewed	and	approved	by	[CONTACT_124328].			The	IRB	requires	you	to	keep	all	documentation,	particularly	Informed	Consent	Forms,	for	three	years	following	the	termination	of	the	project.		Please	contact	[EMAIL_13096]	if	you	have	questions.	