Protocol Version # 5  
Protocol Date: March 18, 2024 1 STUDY PROTOCOL 
STUDY TITLE  
Youth Mindful Awareness Program (YMAP)  
R61 PHASE
: Targeting negative affect through mindfulness training in youth at risk for internalizing 
problems  
STUDY IRB NUMBER  
Vanderbilt IRB #202263   "SIRB: Youth Mindful  Awareness  Program" 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS  
Judy Garber, PhD., Vanderbilt University, Department of Psychology and Human Development  
Steven Hollon, Ph.D., Vanderbilt University, Department of Psychology   
Richard Zinbarg, Ph.D., Northwestern University, Department of Psychology  
Emma Adam, Ph.D., Northwestern University, Human Development & Social Policy  
Denise Chavira, Ph.D., University of [LOCATION_004] Los Angeles, Department of Psychology  
Michelle Craske, Ph.D., University of [LOCATION_004] Los Angeles, Department of Psychology  
SPONSOR NAME, ADDRESS  
National Institutes of Health (NIH)  
NIH Grant/Sponsor # 119270  
VERSION DATE  
March 18, 2024 
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED] R61; Identfier for the R33 is pending  
Protocol Version # 5  
Protocol Date: March 18, 2024                                                                                                                                       2  TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1.0 Background 3 
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims 3 
3.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  3 
4.0 Enrollment/Randomization 3 
4.1 Enrollment 3 
4.2 Randomization 3 
5.0 Study Procedures 4 
5.1 Recruitment Methods 4 
5.2 Consent/Assent Procedures Error! Bookmark not defined. 
5.3 Procedures 5 
5.4 Compensation 8 
5.5 Research Locations and Materials 8 
5.6 Multi-Site Coordination 8 
6.0  Report of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to Participants or Others  9 
7.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation 10 
8.0 Statistical Considerations 10 
9.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues                            [ADDRESS_1033794] Retention                11   
APPENDIX A:  Study Procedures and Frequency of Activities 12 
APPENDIX B: Intervention Study Procedures Flowchart  113 
 
 
 
  
Protocol Version # 5  
Protocol Date: March 18, 2024                                                                                                                                       3  1.0 Background   
Mood problems in youth are serious public health concerns for which more targeted interventions are needed. 
Rates of anxiety and depression in youth are substantial, causing a major unmet need for effective interventions. 
Although some progress has been made in preventing these mood problems in adolescents, further research is 
needed that targets theoretically and empi[INVESTIGATOR_755168]. An important risk factor found to increase the likelihood of anxiety and depression is negative affectivity  - a propensity to experience and express 
more frequent, intense, and enduring negative emotional states.  
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims 
The Intervention Study builds upon findings from our prior longitudinal study in which we found that elevated 
levels of negative affectivity during adolescence prospectively predicted internalizing problems (Zinbarg et al., 2016), and this relation was mediated by [CONTACT_755172] (NA) measured with ecological momentary assessment (EMA) (Adam et al., 2023). The Intervention Study  aims to test whether an online, coached 
mindfulness intervention as compared to an assessment-only control condition reduces negative affect as measured with EMA, in 450 adolescents (ages 12-17) who vary in their levels of NA. EMA will measure average 
daily mood, collected four times a day across seve n days at pre- and post-intervention. In the R33, participants  
will be randomly assigned (like flippi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a coin)
 to one of  three conditions – (a)  mindfulness, (b) support active 
comparator  or (c) no intervention. We will compare youth randomized to the three conditions  regarding NA, 
internalizing symptoms and disorders, and functioning at baseline, post-intervention, and 6-month follow -up. 
After the last assessment, all participants will be offered information about the other programs they did not receive.  
This will let us examine the effects  of the programs,  while  still giving all youth  access to them.   
3.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 Individuals interested in participating in the Intervention Study will be interviewed about psychiatric disorders. 
No race or ethnic group or gender will be excluded.  
1. Inclusion criteria for the Intervention Study are:  
a. Participants are ages [ADDRESS_1033795] access to a smartphone, tablet, or other mobile device on which they can access the intervention materials  and complete EMA reports. Youth without a device will be provided with one for 
their time in the study.  
2. Exclusion criteria for participation in the Intervention Study are:  a. current diagnosis of DSM -[ADDRESS_1033796] disorder, or developmental delay .  
e. reading level below 4th grade as reported by [CONTACT_755173] 
f. teen does not speak English at a level that would allow them to participate in the intervention and 
assessments  
4.0 Enrollment/Randomization  4.1 Enrollment 
Intervention Study Enrollment  (N=450; 150 per site):  Parents of interested teens will contact [CONTACT_755174], text, email , or an online REDCap link. Study team members  answer parents’ and teens’  
questions and will send a link to the e-consent form to the parent. Teens for whom parent consent is obtained, then will be sent a separate REDCap link to their e-assent and study questionnaires; they  also will 
be interviewed about their psychiatric symptoms. Youth who meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria, will 
be asked to complete the EMA procedure. After the EMA, youth will be randomized to one of the three  
conditions.   
 4.[ADDRESS_1033797] coordinator to one of 
three conditions  – (a)  mindfulness, (b) Active Support, and (c) No intervention. Randomization will be balanced 
on sex, age, and race/ethnicity using a modification of Efron's biased coin toss procedure (Begg & Iglewicz, 1980; Efron, 1971). The purpose of the stratification is to yield a similar proportion within the intervention and control conditions. For example, if 70% of participants are female in the intervention condition, then we will 
aim for 70% female in the other conditions . Participants will know their assignment at the point they are 
randomized. The independent interviewers  will not know to which condition participants are assigned. 
 
Protocol Version # 5  
Protocol Date: March 18, [ADDRESS_1033798] the study team, we will answer their questions and will provide them  with a 
confidential, unique link to the REDCap consent and assent . All study recruitment will be online and only open 
to those living in [LOCATION_004], Tennessee, and Illinois, US.  
1. A study -specific website URL: Youth-Mindful -Awareness -Program.org  will be included in all recruitment 
materials that target parents of youth ages  12-17. The website and recruitment materials provide information 
for interested parents about how to contact [CONTACT_755175] , or they can complete an online REDCap contact [CONTACT_982].  
2. Study flyers will be distributed to community organizations via. Email  or dropped off in person. If community 
organizations have capacity, we will ask if they also can post the study flyers on their websites, social media, 
or email listservs. Interested people will contact [CONTACT_755176] , phone number, or online form .  
a. Example: Northwestern University will contact [CONTACT_755177], Hyde Park Neighborhood Club, Evanston Public Libraries, 
McGaw YMCA, Evanston Families, Evanston Youth Outreach.  
b. Example: Vanderbilt University will send out flyers and announcements through the Vanderbilt University listserv/Research Match, pediatrician offices, YMCAs, and public libraries.  
3. Study -specific social media will be created (Instagram, Facebook, Twitter) where study flyers will be posted. 
These social media posts will be re-posted and sent to community organizations who will repost on their social media or share within their own email lists. Parents of teens who are interested in the study will contact [CONTACT_3476] . If we are not able to meet our recruitment goal , we will pursue social media paid advertising (e.g., 
Instagram & Facebook) restricting by [CONTACT_654] (12-17) and location (i.e., state).  
a. Example short-posts: Please visit Youth-Mindful -Awareness -Project.org to learn more.” (b) Intervention 
Study  – “Do you have a child between the ages of 12-17? Your child may be eligible to participate in a 
study about decreasing stress and improving well -being. Please visit Youth-Mindful -Awareness -
Project.org to learn more.”   
b. Facebook Groups: Evanston Mamas FB, District65 Parents and Guardians, Raising Children in Evanston.  
4. Flyers/Ads will be posted on Craigslist and similar free gig apps and websites 
5. The study team will check with listserv adstrators to determine if they can crowdsource via listservs. 
6. At the UCLA site, participants will be recruited in collaboration with a high school in El Centro, CA where parents will be sent a letter and study flyers through the school. Interested parents will contact [CONTACT_755176] , 
phone number, or online form. Permission has been granted for recruitment at this high school. UCLA also 
will recruit through a Registry  
7. At Vanderbilt University, mass email distribution will be used. In addition, a listing will be placed on the 
Kennedy Center Study Finder and ResearchMatch websites. ResearchMatch.org also will be utilized as a 
recruitment tool for this protocol. ResearchMatch.org is a national electronic, web-based recruitment tool that 
was created through the Clinical & Translational Science Awards Consortium in 2009 and is maintained at Vanderbilt University as an IRB -approved data repository (Research Match - IRB 090207) . 
8. All sites will use a recruitment company call  BuildClinical that recruits broadly  
5.2 Consent/Assent Procedures 
We will obtain separate parent consent, adolescent (ages 13-17)  and child assent (age 12)  using an e-consent on 
REDCap. A study team member will be available to explain the Intervention Study to parents and youth and will 
answer all their questions prior to beginning the study. Parents or teens who prefer to receive a hard copy of the consent form will be mailed the form with a stamped, addressed envelope in which to return the signed form. A 
separate assent form will be given to 12-year -old participants; the 13- to 17-year -olds will be asked to sign an 
assent form.   
Parents and children whose primary language is not English: We are not planning to enroll children whose 
primary language is not English. It is likely, however, that for some parents/guardians, Spanish will be their primary 
language. The e-consent procedure will give parents the option to use the English or Spanish version of the 
consent form. Members of the research team who are fluent in Spanish will be available to answer questions from  
Spanish speaking parents.  
Protocol Version # 5  
Protocol Date: March 18, 2024                                                                                                                                       5  Study Consent: For parents/guardians and youth interested in the Intervention Study , online e-consents through 
a link to REDCap will be obtained from a parent/guardian and from the teen prior to beginning the interview with 
the teen. A copy of the consent form will be emailed to parents along with a link to a REDCap consent form. After 
reading the consent form, parents will type their name [CONTACT_3670], and submit the form electronically. Teens for whom parents have consented will be given an e-assent form  to review with a project staff person. The authorized 
research staff obtaining consent will sign and date the form after the participant has submitted it online and prior to the participant starting the interview.  Parents  will be offered a Spanish or English version of the consent form 
either as an e-consent or as a hard copy mailed to them. This will accom modate all families who may have different 
types of technology/internet access. Participants who assented for study participation as minors (<18 years of age) but who turn 18 during the course of the study will be asked to provide consent for continued study participation when they turn 18 years old."  
 5.3 Procedures 
  5.3.A. Overview & Timeline: The following procedures outlined for the Intervention Study will take place over 
the course of approximately 12 weeks. The Intervention Study Procedures & Frequency Table (Appendix A) 
describes the activities to be conducted. The Intervention Study Overview Flowchart  (Appendix B ) shows the 
procedures in chronological order for each condition.  
5.3.A.1. Assessments 
Baseline Interviews and Questionnaires: Youth will participate in an interview (about 1 hour) to assess 
inclusion/exclusion criteria. Interviews will be conducted remotely (e.g., Zoom; telephone) and will be audio recorded for the purpose of evaluating inter -rater reliability. Interviewers will be research staff and psychology 
graduate students trained and supervised by [CONTACT_755178] ([CONTACT_755190], Vanderbilt; [CONTACT_755191], Northwestern; [CONTACT_755192], UCLA). The Schedule of Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School -aged 
Children (KSADS), an established diagnostic interview, will be used to assess DSM disorders in participants. 
Youth also will be interviewed about their service utilization outside the study using the CASA  (Child and 
Adolescent Services Assessment). After the interview, participants who meet inclusion and exclusion criteria will be invited to continue to the next part of the study. Participants not eligible for the study will be thanked for their 
participation  and compensated for completed activities . All participants will be provided with an information sheet 
that contains referrals to health care service providers in the area.  
Questionnaires: Table [ADDRESS_1033799] Follow-up 
Youth Self -report Measures       
Demographics        
Negative Affect (NA -15)          
Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ13)       
Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ14)            
Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD7)            
Mood & Feelings            
Stressful Life Events (SLE)       
Distress Tolerance Scale (DTS)           
Short Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire (S -FFMQ)           
Everyday Discrimination (EvDisc)          
Sleep Scales          
Loneliness Scale (LS)          
Rumination Scale for Children (Rum -C)         
Strengths & Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ)          
Screen for Child Anxiety Related Disorders (SCARED)          
Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS -X)         
Self-acceptance questionnaire (SAQ)          
Life Events Checklist (LEQ)          
Conflict Behavior Questionnaire (CBQ)          
Gratitude Scale          
Barriers to Care          
Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ)        
Working Alliance Inventory (WAI)          
Parent Report       
Strengths & Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ)         
SCARED -P (completed by [CONTACT_755179])         
Protocol Version # 5  
Protocol Date: March 18, 2024                                                                                                                                       6  PHQ14 -Parent about Child         
Conflict Behavior Questionnaire (CBQ)         
PHQ1 3 & GAD7 about self         
Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS -X)        
EMA – Ecological Momentary Assessment:  Mood Log          
Interviews       
Schedule of Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for 
School -aged Children (KSADS)          
Child and Adolescent Services Assessment (CASA)          
Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA):  The EMA involves participants completing an EMA survey on 
Qualtrics for 7 consecutive days. If they miss five or more EMA responses, they will be given the opportunity to 
make up missed responses  by [CONTACT_1583] a day . Participants will receive a text message four times a day for seven 
days. The number of questions vary by [CONTACT_755180] : morning and night surveys are a little longer than the two 
during the day. These take [ADDRESS_1033800]-intervention (week 10). 
  5.3.B.2. Procedures -- All Participants 
1. Interested parents will contact [CONTACT_755181], text, phone, or a link on REDCap. Study staff will 
respond to the inquiry and provide information about the study.  
2. First, each participant will be sent a unique link to REDCap to complete questionnaires about mood , 
symptoms, and functioning. Participants who are unable to access the measures online will be mailed paper 
versions  and return the completed measures in a stamped, addressed envelope provided to them .  
3. Next, participants will complete the EMA (4 times per day over 7 days).  
4. Participants will be randomized to one of the three conditions : mindfulness , supportive active control, or no 
intervention control.  
5. All participants will complete the PHQ 14, GAD7, and affect measure weekly throughout the study. 
6. Four weeks after the week 5 assessments (week 10), participants will complete several midpoint surveys.  
7. After completing the endpoint EMA, participants will be interviewed again about their symptoms and functioning (via Zoom) and will complete the questionnaires on REDCap. A unique link will be sent to each 
participant. Participants who are unable to access the measures online will be mailed paper versions, which 
they can return in a stamped, addressed envelope.  
8. Interviews will be audio recorded so that we can conduct quality checks  of the interviewers  and test inter -rater 
reliability. Participants who prefer not to be audio recorded may continue to participate without recording.  
a. Interviews will be conducted by [CONTACT_755182] ([CONTACT_755190], Vanderbilt; [CONTACT_755191], Northwestern; [CONTACT_755192], UCLA). Established structured diagnostic interviews will be used to assess DSM disorders using the Schedule of Affective 
Disorders and Schizophrenia for School -aged Children (KSADS; Kaufman et al., 1997)  
b. In addition, teens  will be interviewed about their  service utilization outside the study using the CASA (Child 
and Adolescent Services Assessment; Farmer, Angold, Burns, & Costello, 1994).  
 5.3.B.3. Additional Intervention Condition Procedures 
1. Participants will be instructed in downloading the intervention ( i.e., mindfulness ; active support) program  
materials  and Zoom on their smartphone or tablet. If they do not have access to technology, a device to 
access the app will be provided to them for the time they are in the study.  
2. Participants will meet with their coach for 30-40 minutes for 9 weeks over Zoom. 
3. The intervention program s guide participants through exercises. Coaches will introduce the new exercises 
each week. Coaching sessions will be audio/ video recorded to ensure intervention quality and fidelity to the  
study  protocol. Participants who prefer not to be recorded may continue to participate without recording.  
4. [Weeks 6-9] After completion of mid -point surveys, participants will resume weekly meetings with coaches 
and will continue to complete tasks using the program  to which they were assigned.  
5. After the final coaching session, participants will complete the post-intervention EMA, interview, and 
questionnaires.  
  
 5.3.B.4. Financial Compensation.  
Participants in the Intervention Study  will be compensated up to $300 based on completion of evaluations.  
Protocol Version # 5  
Protocol Date: March 18, 2024                                                                                                                                       7    Payments for time spent taking part in this study: Participants  in the will be compensated up to $300 
based on completion  of the evaluations  as described below.  
1. Interview  and Online Measures.  Participants  will be compensated $30 for completing  the interview  and 
other online  measures  before the program.  Participants  will receive another  $25 for completing  the 
interview and online  measures  at the end of the program  (about 10-[ADDRESS_1033801] 
assessment). 
2. Mood Log. The Mood  Log (on Qualtrics)  involves  4 brief assessments  per day over 7 days. The  Mood  
Logs are adstered  2 times  in the study:  before  and post (about 10 weeks  later).  For each set of Mood 
Logs,  participants  will be paid up to $5 0. At each   Mood  Log adstration, participants  complete 4 surveys 
a day for 7 days (total of 28). 
The payments  for each  Mood Log period are as follows:  
• 1-5 Entries  = $5 
• 6-10 Entries  = $10 
• 11-15 Entries)  = $20 
• 16-20   Entries  = $30 
• 21-24 Entries  = $40 
• 25-28 Entries  = $50 
Participants  will be paid an additional  $[ADDRESS_1033802] the opportunity  to complete 4 additional  entries  on an 
additional day of that week. Across the whole study, participants  can be compensated up to $120 for 
completing  the  Mood Logs . 
Weekly A ssessments. Partici pants will complete a brief a ssessment (10 mi nutes) w eekly about mood and 
anxiety  for which they will be compensated $[ADDRESS_1033803] 4 weekly  surveys  (up to $20) will be added  
to the payment for the midpoint evaluation . Payment for completing the last four weekly  surveys  will be 
added  to payment  after the post- evaluation (up to another  $20 for 4 survey  week s). Six months  after the 
post interview,  youth again will complete the online surveys and an interview. 
Compensation across the wh ole study. Payments  for the YMAP  Intervention Study  will be in the form of 
electronic  gift cards.  Participants  will be sent an e-gift card up to four points  over the course  of the study  
and can be compensated up to $300 for completion of all evaluations.  
(1)  After the First Eva luation (Baseline): up to $90 
a. Initial  Survey:   $10  
b. Interview  and Online  Measures:  $30 
c.  Mood Log: up to $50 
(2) After midpoint evaluation: up to $30 
a. $10 for questionnaires  
b. Up to $20 for completion  of the 4 prior weekly  assessments  
(3) After post-evaluation: up to $130  
a. Interview  and Online  Measures:  $40 
b.  Mood Log: up to $70  
c. Up to $20 for completion  of the 4 prior weekly  assessments  
(4)  Follow -up online  measures  six months  after post interview:  $50 
Parents will receive $10 for completing online measures  at baseline and $[ADDRESS_1033804] evaluation for a total of $30. 
5.4 Research Locations and Materials 
These r es
earch studies are being conducted at Vanderbilt University (Nashville, TN), University of [LOCATION_004] Los 
Angeles (Los Angeles, CA), and Northwestern University (Evanston, IL). All research activities will take place 
Protocol Version # 5  
Protocol Date: March 18, 2024                                                                                                                                       8  online using the following platforms: REDCap, Qualtrics, Zoom, and Microsoft TEAMS. Participants will use their 
personal smartphone or tablet to access the intervention materials. Participants who do not have access to a 
phone or tablet will be provided a phone during their time in the study.  
 5.[ADDRESS_1033805] the same study protocol and will be responsible for recruitment, consent, and data 
collection at their site. The Northwestern University site will oversee data analysis of de -identified data (ID 
numbers will be used for participants).  
To facilitate coordination of activities among collaborating sites, the research team (PIs, Research Coordinators, 
RAs) meet on Zoom weekly to communicate about adherence to the protocol and to troubleshoot any issues 
that arise. In addition, there will be a weekly Zoom meeting among the site Project Coordinators to ensure that 
the protocols are being followed. Similar procedures for using Zoom, scheduling appointments, and saving files will be implemented across sites.  
6.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to Participants or Others  
 6.1. Data and safety monitoring plan general description: The PIs at each site will monitor the accuracy 
(reliability and validity) of all data collected. All measures have been selected based in part on their established levels of reliability and validity. All data will be checked for errors prior to any analysi s. In addition, the weekly 
measures will be monitored by [CONTACT_755183]. If reported by a participant, the Critical Incident Protocol  will be implemented . 
Assessment data will be obtained through REDCap online electronic forms and on standard paper -and-pencil 
forms as needed; all interviews will be digitally audio/video recorded, and responses will be recorded on REDCap  
forms. Data will be reviewed by [CONTACT_755184]. All data collected on paper will be double entered, checked for accuracy, and all entry errors will be corrected. All data will be stored in a secure, shared Box folder with locked 
sharing permissions using the SAFER add-on. Participants will be identified by [CONTACT_309212]; names 
and other possible identifiers will not be included in the electronic database. Identification numbers do not reveal the identity of participants (e.g., no birth dates, initials, social security numbers). An archival record of all data collected that has passed through the above-noted checks will be maintained on a secured server. Each site will 
be responsible for data security and confidentiality. At each stage of data collection and maintenance, all 
identifying information is shared from data archives; any hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_755169], and participant files are password protected. Data transferred from 
one site to the other will be de-identified, will not contain PHI, and will be transferred electronically using secured file transfer protocols.  
 6.2. Data Safety Monitoring Board: A Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) will monitor the clinical trial at 
the three sites and serve as a reporting body to the NIH as well as to the respective IRBs. The primary role of the 
DSMB is to monitor the safety of participants in both the intervention and the control conditions, receive reports of 
all adverse events in a timely and consistent fashion, and check the validity and integrity of the data. The DSMB is composed of three members, none directly involved in the project or employed by [CONTACT_28144]. The DSMB consists of experts knowledgeable in several areas relevant to this study including interventions for internalizing symptoms in children and adolescents (Anne Marie Albano, Ph.D.), implementation and evaluation 
of mindfulness interventions (Philippe Goldin, Ph.D.) and biostatistics (David Rosenfield, Ph.D.). The DSMB will 
first approve the protocol and subsequently conduct annual reviews to determine whether participant safety has 
been adequately safeguarded and enrollment goals have been met. The DSMB will be kept apprised of any 
serious adverse events when they occur and will serve as the final arbiters of whether individual participants should be removed from the protocol. Although the coaches, in consultation with the clinically responsible PIs, are empowered to take whatever immediate action is necessary to safeguard the welfare of individual participants, 
the DSMB also will be called upon to render judgments if any serious clinical  problems (e.g., serious suicidal 
intent) occur. 
Data monitoring and participant safety: The DSMB will meet first to approve the protocol and subsequently 
conduct annual reviews to determine whether participant safety has been adequately safeguarded and enrollment 
goals have been met. The DSMB will be informed of any protocol -related serious adverse events; when they 
occur. The DSMB will serve as the final arbiters of whether individual participants should be removed from the 
Protocol Version # 5  
Protocol Date: March 18, [ADDRESS_1033806] the welfare of individual participants, the DSMB also will be called 
upon to render judgments when any serious clinical problems (e.g., serious suicidal intent) occur. Psychiatric or 
other life crises that are high risk and imminent will be acted upon immediately with staff linking participants to appropriate crisis services. These are reviewed immediately with the clinically responsible PI. Lower risk and less imminent crises are reviewed within 48 hours by [CONTACT_152314]. Interim analyses will be conducted at each annual review for safety only, not effectiveness. Assuming there are no safety issues, we will prepare the data for analysis. Early termination typi[INVESTIGATOR_755170] a prevention study unless  iatrogenic effects of the 
intervention are observed. 
 6.3. Critical Incident Protocol & Reporting of Adverse Events: Please see Critical Incident Protocol. In 
the Intervention Study,  we will collect interview and questionnaire data that could indicate potential harm to 
participants (e.g., participants expressing intent to harm self or others, or data indicating child, spousal, elder or 
other forms of abuse or neglect). The Critical Incident Protocol  will be triggered if a participant reveals information 
indicating possible or actual harm to themselves or others. Information collected by [CONTACT_309213] a day of data collection. All adverse events or unanticipated problems involving 
risk to participants or others will be reported to the appropriate agency as required including the IRB, specific state agencies and stakeholders (IL, TN, CA), the Data Safety and Monitoring Board, and the National Institute of Mental Health. The clinically responsible PIs at each site (Garber at Vanderbilt; Zinbarg at Northwestern; 
Chavira and Craske at UCLA) will monitor and report any adverse events. The PIs also will supervise all study staff, interviewers, and coaches to ensure that all required protocol procedures are followed. 
  6.4. Potential Risks to Participants 
The studies  have  mal risk to participants. The studies consist of interviews and surveys to research individual and 
group characteristics .  
   6.4.A. A risk that can occur from being in the Intervention S tudy is discomfort or embarrassment from the 
participant answering personal questions on surveys and interviews.  Answers from participants are confidential 
and w ill be seen only by  [CONTACT_3647]. The interventions are manualized and all coaches will be trained and 
supervised by [CONTACT_755178]; graduate students will be trained and will provide supervision of coaches as 
well.  
Another possible risk is the breach of confidentiality. Data files used for analysis will not contain any identifiable 
information. If there is a breach of confidentiality, participants will be informed. There is also a low probability that 
participants will have a loss of privacy (name & email) if the online program is compromised.  
The risks are mal for participants assigned to the mood monitoring condition. These youth will be monitored for 
symptoms as often as those in the intervention condition. Moreover, given that this is a prevention trial, no participant currently meets diagnostic criteria for a mood or anxiety disorder  with serious clinical impairment. Thus, 
treatment is not being withheld. All participants are free to seek other non -study professional services and will be 
encouraged to engage in standard care mental health services as needed. All participants will be offered the opportunity to receive the other program materials after their follow -up assessment is completed.  
7.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation 
Participants can withdraw from the study by [CONTACT_755185]. The address to which a letter can be sent is listed in the consent form . 
Participants who want to stop the mindfulness program can still participate in the assessments and will be 
compensated. Participants who choose to withdraw will be compensated for all study tasks that they have 
completed up until that point. Study data collected up to the point of withdrawal will be maintained.  
8.0 Statistical Considerations 
The figure below depi[INVESTIGATOR_755171] (SEM) analysis of the data from this study (through Post) 
and the R33 study that will follow it (through Follow -up, f-u). We will conduct an inferential test of the critical a
2 
path – representing the effect of intervention on our primary target variable, momentary negative affect (mNA) - 
from our SEM analysis. We conducted a power analysis using G*Power and with a post-treatment sample size of [ADDRESS_1033807] size for the a
2  path (i.e., a .[ADDRESS_1033808]), alpha 
= .[ADDRESS_1033809] power of .81. Our initial sample size for the R61 was 126 (42 per site, 21 
per condition per site) so that even with close to 20% attrition, we will still end up with [ADDRESS_1033810]-treatment. 
Protocol Version # 5  
Protocol Date: March 18, 2024                                                                                                                                       10   
9.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues 
This study is supported by [CONTACT_755186] a certificate of confidentiality through 
NIH.  
Data Storage: Non-audio/video digital files, including survey data, will be stored in a password-protected, 
secured Box folder, labeled by [CONTACT_755187]. Data Storage will not be permitted 
on personal computers. The Box folder is password-protected. All files will be labeled by [CONTACT_568], session number, 
and participant code and will not include any identifying information (e.g., name, initials, birth date). The Box Folder with SAFER will be accessed by [CONTACT_755188]. The SAFER folder will have two adstrators that 
will be able to manage the levels of access study personnel have to sensitive data. The de-identified survey data 
will be stored indefinitely.  
Audio/Video Recording: Assessment interviews will be audio recorded for evaluating inter -rater reliability and 
coached intervention sessions will be audio and video recorded to ensure that the intervention is delivered with fidelity and for supervision. Audio and video recordings will be labeled using date, session number, and participant 
code. The file naming system will not include any personal identifiers (e.g., participant name, age, address). The 
audio and video recordings will be stored on a secure Box folder with SAFER add -on that is only accessible by 
[CONTACT_44518]. Audio and video recordings will be stored up to 7 years after the study is published; no one outside of the study team will have access to the recordings. Recordings will be shared outside the research team only if the participant gives express consent on a separate consent form. 
10.[ADDRESS_1033811] Retention 
Deidentified participant data from surveys will be stored indefinitely in a secure Box folder with the SAFER add -
on. and will only be shared outwardly with express consent from study participants. All study data will be 
maintained indefinitely by [CONTACT_755189] s (Judy Garber at Vanderbilt University, 
Richard Zinbarg at Northwestern University, respectively). De-identified data will be shared according to the requirements of the National Institute of Mental Health.  
 
  

Protocol Version # 5  
Protocol Date: March 18, 2024                                                                                                                                       11   
APPENDIX A:  Study Procedures and Frequency of Activities  
Procedures (Participant Activities)  Frequency  
Questionnaires to assess negative affect, symptoms, 
and functioning. Surveys will be conducted on 
REDCap.  Four times (pre -, mid -, post -intervention , and follow -
up). Survey Length: Approximately 5 0 minutes  
Interview to assess psychiatric diagnoses: Interviews 
will be conducted on Zoom or phone.  Three times  (pre- and post -intervention , and follow -up). 
 Interview Length: About 60 minutes  
EMA - Ecological Momentary Assessment:  
EMA surveys will be conducted via an individualized 
link on Qualtrics  EMA occurs t wo times (pre - and post -intervention).  
Survey length: Each EMA response takes about 5-10 
minutes (4 per day for 7 days)  
Weekly Assessment: Measures of mood related 
symptoms will be adstered once a week. Weekly 
measures will be completed via. REDCap.  Completed weekly .  
Survey Length: 10 minutes  
Participants in the Mindfulness condition will 
complete online activities on their own between 
coaching sessions for 5 minutes a day in week 1, 10 
minutes a day in weeks 2-5 , and 15 minutes a day in 
weeks 6-9 . Participants in the Awareness condition 
will complete writing activities four days a week for 
10 to 15 minutes each time.  Participants will be asked to access the online activities 
over the 9 weeks of the program.  
 
 
Coached Sessions  - Participants will work with a 
coach on program activities. Coaches will train 
participants in the YMAP mindfulness or awareness 
activities that they complete weekly.  There will be 9 coaching sessions (once per week) 
during the Intervention Study.  
 
Coaching Session Length: 30-40 minutes.  
 
 
     
Protocol Version #5  
Protocol Date: March 18, 2024                                                                                                                                       12  $33(1',;%3URFHGXUHV)ORZFKDUW




 %DVHOLQH$VVHVVPHQW
,QWHUYLHZ	4XHVWLRQQDLUHV
PPre-EMA
5$1'20,=$7,21
Mindfulness Awareness Mood Monitoring
0LGSRLQW$VVHVVPHQW
4XHVWLRQQDLUHV
3RVW$VVHVVPHQW
,QWHUYLHZ	4XHVWLRQQDLUHV
Post EMA
)ROORZXS$VVHVVPHQW
,QWHUYLHZ	4XHVWLRQQDLUHV
5
$1'20,=$7,21
5
5
M
i
n
d
f
u
l
n
e
s
s
 A
w
a
r
e
n
e
s
s
 M
o
o
d
M
o
n
i
t
o
r
i
n
g
