Official title:  Lidocaine Infusion as a Treatment for Cocaine Relapse and Craving  
 
 NCT number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Document dat e: May 21, 2015  
10/8/[ADDRESS_554174] 
 
Protocol Template (for Investigator Initiated Studies) 
 
 
1. Title 
Lidocaine Infusion as a Treatment for Cocaine Relapse and Craving 
 2. Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_7706]-Investigator 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_437347], M.D. 
Co-Investigators: Edson Brown M.D., Ph.D.; [LOCATION_009]sca  Filbey, Ph.D.; Enas Kandil, M.D.; Alina Suris, 
Ph.D.  3. Sponsor of the Study 
NIH-NIDA 
 
4. Investigational New Drug (IND)/Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) 
IND [ADDRESS_554175] not been fruitful. Thus, the need for novel targets and approaches for cocaine 
addiction is imperative.  Primary Aim 1: Assess the effects of lidocaine in reducing cue-induced cocaine craving. 
Hypothesis P1: Cue-induced craving assessed one week after infusion will be less in patients administered lidocaine+cue-induced relative to those given saline+cue-induced craving or 
lidocaine alone. 
Hypothesis P1b: Physiologic responses to cue-induced craving assessed one week after 
infusion will be significantly less in patients administered lidocaine relative to those administered saline. 
Primary Aim 2: Assess the effects of lidocaine on cocaine use [as measured by [CONTACT_437354] 
(UDS)] and craving for four weeks following lidocaine or saline administration. 
Hypothesis P2a: Cocaine use will be significantly less in the patients administered lidocaine [+cue-induced craving] compared to those adm inistered saline+cue-induced craving or 
lidocaine alone. 
 
Hypothesis P2b: Craving will be significantly le ss in the patients administered lidocaine+cue-
induced craving compared to those administered saline+cue-induced craving or lidocaine alone. 
 
If our hypotheses are proven correct, these findings will (1) demonstrate the feasibility of interfering with reconsolidation memories in substance-dependent patients, (2) support a role for lidocaine in the treatment of cocaine addiction, and (3) guide the development of a larger 
study to assess treatment outcome with lidocaine. 
  
6. Background and Results of Previous Related Research  
10/8/2014 
Page 2 of 7 A novel treatment approach is to disrupt the neural processes involved in cue-related memories 
(memory links between the external stimuli associated with drug use and the subjective drug effect). These engrained memories, when reactivated by [CONTACT_74657], elicit craving and a return to drug use. Each 
cue re-exposure, however, requires the re-remembering (or reconsolidation) of the drug cue. Key 
molecular processes required for memory reconsolidation are NMDA receptor activation, the induction of nitric oxide (NO) synthesis and increased extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) activity. In rodent models, blocking these processes changes the cue-related memory; the cue loses its potency to induce a return to drug self-administration. Li docaine is an FDA approved medication that inhibits 
activation of NMDA receptors and suppresses production of NO and ERK. Lidocaine, like cocaine, is 
a local anesthetic with potent effects as a sodium-channel blocker. Unlike cocaine, lidocaine is 
essentially devoid of activity at monoamine re- uptake transporters and has no rewarding or addictive 
properties. As lidocaine suppresses the molecular processes required for drug cue reconsolidation and has relatively specific effects upon the striatal regions necessary for drug cue reconsolidation, lidocaine may offer a novel approach for interfering with memory reconsolidation. Two other Na
+ 
channel blockers have also decrease craving and/or substance use in substance-dependent subjects. We propose that the systemic administration of lidocaine following the induction of cue-induced craving, relative to saline plus cue-induced cravi ng or lidocaine without cue-induced craving, will block 
the reconsolidation of cue memories. This will lead to a reduction in cue-induced craving upon repeated testing as well as subsequent cocaine use and basal craving. If our hypotheses are proven 
correct, these findings will 1) support a role for lidocaine in cocaine addiction treatment, 2) demonstrate the feasibility and efficacy of attenuating cue-induced memories, and 3) guide the development of a larger study with lidocaine.   
7. Concise Summary of Project: 
In this proof-of-concept approach for the treatment of cocaine addition (modeled on a paradigm developed by [CONTACT_437355]-related trauma memories), the 
effect of lidocaine infusion following cue-induced craving will be assessed in treatment-seeking, cocaine-addicted outpatients. Immediately following t he induction of cue-induced craving, lidocaine or 
saline will be administered in a double-blind, randomized design. A third arm will also assess lidocaine in the absence of cue-induced craving. One week following the infusion, cue-induced craving will be 
assessed. Cocaine use and craving (non cue-induced) will be monitored for four weeks. 
 
8. Study Procedures: 
[ADDRESS_554176] a physical exam and drug and pregnancy tests. The following day, scripts will be read to participants and lidocaine (n=22) or saline (n=22) will be administered immediately following craving reactivation. Since lidocaine may be effective in the 
absence of craving induction, a third group of subjects (n=22) will be given lidocaine but not a craving 
script. One week later (Study Day 3), craving intensity and physiologic activation following cue-induced craving will be assessed. Costs incurred from these visits will be covered by [CONTACT_5051]’s funding for this study. Follow-up sessions post-infusion will include [ADDRESS_554177] immediately following discharge from 
their treatment program.
 
Due to sex differences in craving (106), randomization will be stratified by [CONTACT_4321].  9. Sub-Study Procedures: 
NA 
10/8/2014 
Page 3 of 7  
10. Criteria for Inclusion of Subjects: 
Inclusion criteria:   All participants must be 25-[ADDRESS_554178] Bound, Inc (a local public-sector treatment facility). If attending a residential treatment facility, participants will be studied just prior to discharge. Patients must meet DSM-IV criteria for cocaine dependence (by [CONTACT_437356]-IV Lifetime) and must identify cocaine as their primary present and lifetime drug of abuse. Participants must live close enough to 
the sites and have reliable transportation such that they can attend all assessments, study sessions, 
and follow-up and treatment sessions.   
11. Criteria for Exclusion of Subjects: 
Patients with active DSM-IV other Substance Dependence (except nicotine) within the previous three months, Affective Disorder, Schizophrenic Disorders, or significant cognitive impairment (WTAR<70). 
Due to the complicating presentation of substance-induced mood or psychotic disorders, these disorders will only be cause for exclusion if symptoms persist upon cocaine abstinence. Patients concomitantly using tricyclic anti-depressants, benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], cimetidine, mood stabilizers, opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438], lithium, sympathomimetics, anticonvulsants that  act on sodium and L-type channels similar to 
lidocaine, sedative/hypnotics, -blockers, or dopamine agonists will be excluded from the study. 
Participants on stable doses of SSRIs and SNRIs for at least two weeks will not be excluded. Medical conditions that might limit cooperation (e.g. dementia) or put the patient at medical risk (i.e. significant hematologic, hepatic, renal, or cardiovascular pathology – particularly arrhythmias) will be excluded. Patients with congenital or idiopathic methemoglobi nemia or patients taking medications associated 
with increased risk of methemoglobinemia (including sulfonamides, acetaminophen, acetanilid, aniline dyes, benzocaine, chloroquine, dapsone, naphthalene, nitrates and nitrites, nitrofurantoin, nitroglycerin, nitroprusside, pamaquine, paraaminosalicylic acid, phenacetin, phenobarbital, phenytoin, primaquine, quinine) will be excluded. Patients with past or present neurologic disorders (i.e. severe head trauma, transient ischemic attacks, stroke, tumor, etc.) will be excluded. Active 
suicidal ideation, pregnant or nursing women, and prisoners will be excluded from the study. 
 
12. Sources of Research Material: 
Initial screening will consist of questionnaires, routine blood chemistry and cell blood count, EKG, 
pregnancy test and urine tests for illicit drug use. Questionnaires will include lifetime use of substances (drugs and alcohol), personal psychiatric history, psychiatric history of family members, 
demographic and medical information, and development of  craving script. Subjective measures of 
craving, mood, and anxiety and physiological measures will be obtained during infusion and reactivation sessions. Measures of craving, mood and urine tests for illicit drug use will be obtained upon follow-up. All measures will be used for research purposes only.  13. Recruitment Methods and Consenting Process: 
Subjects will be recruited from the VA substance dependence program, flyers, Internet and 
newspaper ads, and links to our Website. Participants will be evaluated after they contact [CONTACT_437357]. General information about the study and brief screening will be provided over the phone. Interested participants will be scheduled for further evaluation and 
obtaining informed consent. Assessment will then in clude a history and medical evaluation, routine 
laboratory tests, EKG, urine drug screen (UDS), Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR) (107) and 
urine pregnancy test. Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID) (108) will be used for diagnosis. 
Subjects meeting inclusion/exclusion criteria will be further assessed with demographic/clinical 
variables (including menstrual phase), Time Line Follow Back (109) to determine lifetime and previous 90 days cocaine use (number of days used, amount used in $), the Inventory of Drug Use 
Consequences (InDUC) (110) and the SF-36 Health Survey assessing quality of life (111). 
 
14. Potential Risks: 
10/8/2014 
Page 4 of 7 The insertion of an intravenous catheter may cause a slight pain when inserted.  A bruise may form 
temporarily at the spot where the catheter is inserted.  There is a slight chance of inflammation of the vein and/or clot formation, but this is rare. 
Lidocaine is FDA approved as a local anesthetic (applied intradermally) and for cardiac arrhythmias 
and status epi[INVESTIGATOR_7397] (11).  Lidocaine may commonly (1-10%) cause central nervous system symptoms such as numbness and tingling, dizziness, drowsiness, anxiety and nervousness. Rare side effects (0.01 to 0.09%) include dizziness, a metalic taste, lightheadedness, nervousness, apprehension, euphoria, confusion, ringing in the ear, blurred vision, nausea and vomiting, sensations of heat, cold or numbness, twitching, tremors, and convulsions.  Rarely, irregular heart beats and/or 
slowed heart rate may progress to respi[INVESTIGATOR_437348]. At the injection site, you 
may experience a burning sensation, pain, skin irritation, or swelling. Rarely (0.01 to 0.09%), an allergic reaction can be experienced, including hives, difficulty breathing, swelling of face, lips, tongue, or throat. 
A report from Stanford University Pain Management Center reports on the use of lidocaine infusion 
for chronic pain. No serious adverse events were  reported in over 3000 lidocaine infusions (121). 
Other reviews also note the safety of lidocaine infusion at doses similar to that being used in the present study (12). A recent Cochrane review of 395 patients receiving lidocaine during surgery notes 
that lidocaine did not result in toxicity or clinically significant adverse events (49).  
In a previous study assessing the rCBF effects of procaine infusion in cocaine-addicted subjects, 
participants were followed (including urine drug screen) for three months after the study, at one week, one month, and three months post-infusion (37).  This follow-up was conducted to assure that there were no long-term, untoward and unexpected adverse effects to procaine infusion. Seven of 12 patients (58%) had not relapsed at three months. One patient was abstinent at two weeks and then moved out of town. Four patients relapsed by [CONTACT_437358]. These relapse rates are comparable to those observed in clinical drug trials.  
Subjects will be assessed for pregnancy and cocaine use prior to lidocaine infusion. If participants 
report cocaine use within previous [ADDRESS_554179] Safety and Data Monitoring: 
All subjects will be carefully assessed prior to participation in the studies, including psychiatric 
and medical history (as appropriate), laboratory tests, and examination by a board-certified physician ([CONTACT_437368]).  Subjects with medical or psychiatri c problems that would increase risk for participation 
will be excluded from the study.   
 Craving will likely be increased during script development, lidocaine/saline infusion session, and 
craving reactivation. During craving induction, part icipants will be monitored at all times. A neutral 
imagery session will follow all craving imagery followed by a 20-min muscle relaxation session. Persistent craving that occurs following the craving reactivation session will be referred to the treating therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] (the first CBT session follows craving reactivation). Any participant who demonstrates need for additional intervention due to serious psychiatric/medical symptoms will be referred to emergency 
psychiatric services located in the VA Medical Center (if eligible for care) or other public sector 
(Homeward Bound, Inc.) or private (Presby[CONTACT_51616]) treatment programs. Participants demonstrating severe psychiatric/medical symptomo logy will be walked or transported by [CONTACT_437359], as determined by [CONTACT_978]. 
Participants will be provided a car service to and from Study Session 2. If the participant is 
outpatient they will be pi[INVESTIGATOR_437349]. If the participant is attending a residential facility they will be transported back to the treatment program.  
10/8/2014 
Page 5 of 7 All lidocaine/saline infusions will be supervised by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Enas Kandil, an anesthesiologist and co-
investigator. Either [CONTACT_437368] or an ACLS certified nurse will be in attendance during throughout the infusion. Heart rate, including EKG rhythm strip, will be monitored continuously throughout the 
infusion and blood pressure will be obtained every 15 minutes, and more frequently if indicated. If the 
participants’ hemodynamics (heart rate and blood pr essure) change by [CONTACT_726] 20% (typi[INVESTIGATOR_897] a 
consequence of cardiac arrhythmias) the infusion will be stopped. The more serious toxic effects of lidocaine (e.g. unconsciousness, confusion, convulsions, respi[INVESTIGATOR_13374]) are preceded by [CONTACT_437360], lightheadedness, visual disturbances and muscle twitching; infusions will be terminated if the subject reports of any of these latter signs or symptoms and they persist for more 
than two minutes. The infusion may also be stopped at any time per physician discretion. A checklist 
of signs and symptoms will be obtained every [ADDRESS_554180] two hours (approximately one half-life of lidocaine) following the cessation of lidocaine (or saline) infusion. [CONTACT_437368] must approve discharge for all participants on the infusion study day. There is a crash cart in the CRU and a 24-hour code team in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. 
Lidocaine labels carry warnings and precautions for use in patients with various cardiac 
conditions, notably conduction abnormalities (e.g., heart block, QT prolongation). Cardiac conditions will be identified by [CONTACT_90660], medical history and physica l exam. Participants with any medical history of 
cardiac disease (e.g. myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, cardiac arrhythmia) or an abnormal ECG (including any arrhythmia, heart block, QT prolongation) will be excluded. Lidocaine 
labels carry warnings and precautions regarding the dangers its use in patients with significant renal 
disease, due to the risk of accumulating active metabolites. Renal impairment will be identified through medical history and physical exam as well as laboratory measures of creatinine and BUN, 
electrolyte panel, and urinalysis. Participants with abnormal levels of creatinine or BUN will be excluded. Participants with any evidence of renal in sufficiency identified by [CONTACT_437361].  
Since lidocaine can increase cocaine lethality (122), participants with a positive UDS for cocaine 
(or amphetamine) or who report stimulant use wi thin the previous [ADDRESS_554181] may be rescheduled for another session (at the PIs 
discretion). If the rescheduled infusion cannot be performed (due to stimulant use or pregnancy), the 
subject will be terminated from the study and referred for care. In addition, subjects will be observed for at least two hours (approximately one half-life of lidocaine) following the cessation of lidocaine (or saline) infusion. Participants will be advised of the potential for increased cocaine toxicity for [ADDRESS_554182] research staff in the advent of problems. 
An IND for the use of lidocaine (administered over one hour in outpatient cocaine-addicted patients 
during a neuroimaging paradigm) has recently been approved by [CONTACT_437362] a similar paradigm, 
including the two-hour wait prior to discharge (IND 115555).  
Investigators, other research staff, therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437], and other clinical care staff will be blind to the status 
of the subjects in the study. If necessary, t he blind can be broken by [CONTACT_437363]. Breaking the blind would be unlikely, however, as any adverse event experienced during 
the infusion will be treated acutely with the assumption that the participant is receiving active drug. 
As lidocaine is not FDA approved for the treatment  of cocaine addiction or to attenuate memory 
reconsolidation, an IND will be obtained from the FDA for its use in this proposal. In addition, the DSMB will obtain interim unblinded primary outcome measures following the assessment of 15 participants (n=5/group) and 30 participants (n=10/group) (see Section IV.E.4).  
At the final follow-up session, all outpatient participants will receive a referral list of local 
substance use intervention centers, both public se ctor and private. If a participant’s substance use 
worsens during the study and more intensive treatment is required, the participant will be referred for more intensive treatment and terminated from the study.   All adverse events that occur at any time point will be reported (SAEs within 48 hours) to the 
UTSW and VA IRB (the HRRC) and to the Project Officer. 
 
10/8/2014 
Page 6 of 7 The proposed study is placebo-controlled and conducted in a group of patients with cocaine 
dependence. Given the potentially vulnerable nature of the participants, in addition to monitoring and review by [CONTACT_437364] (VANTHCS) IRB, we have 
implemented an additional data and safety monitoring plan that includes the formation of a Data and 
Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB).  Informed Consent Process  
1) All investigators and research assistants and other staff (including administrative staff) will receive 
training in the protection of human research subjects in the form of a UT Southwestern and/or 
VANTHCS required on-line tutorial.  
2) All persons obtaining informed consent will, in addition to the training above, attend a UT 
Southwestern-sponsored day-long symposium on the informed consent process, ethical conduct 
of research, and patient safety.  
3) A psychiatrist (PI [INVESTIGATOR_1660] a co-I) will, in all cases, be involved in the informed consent process providing 
additional information about the study, including risks, benefits and alternatives, and to answer questions.  
4) All investigators and staff involved with patient care will remain updated on issues related to 
patient rights and safety through educational programs and updates provided by [CONTACT_437365]. 
 Data Handling/Confidentiality 
1) Training outlined above addresses issues of confidentiality in research. 2) All subjects are immediately assigned a 3-letter unique ID upon entry into the study.  All Personal 
Health Information (PHI) that is linked to the unique ID is entered into a spreadsheet in the VANTHCS server.  This spreadsheet can only be a ccessed by [CONTACT_978]’s administrative assistant. 
No PHI is linked with the unique ID in electronic form or hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_437350]. 
3) Hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_437351] a locked file cabinet separate from research files using the 
unique ID. 
4) All patient records for the research study will be maintained on the UT Southwestern or VANTHCS 
Health Care campus in locked file cabinets or computers with password-protected access.  
5) To ensure accuracy, data will be checked and reviewed by [CONTACT_437366].  
 Adverse Events 
1) Exclusion criteria include active suicidal ideation, pregnant or nursing women, or prisoners to 
minimize the risk to vulnerable populations or adverse events.  
2) All adverse events will be discussed with and eval uated by a physician or psychologist investigator 
as soon as the event is reported by [CONTACT_2299]. 
3) All adverse events will be reported to the IRB and DSMB. Serious adverse events (e.g., death of a 
participant) will be reported within 48 hours to the IRB, DSMB and NIDA program official. As part 
of this reporting process the PI [INVESTIGATOR_376965], its relationship to the 
study, and whether changes in the protocol are warranted.  
5) The PI, co-investigators involved with clinical care, and the research assistant will be available 24 
hours each day to patients and other investigators should an emergency arise.  
6) At the completion of the study participants will be given referrals for further treatment of cocaine 
dependence.  
8) The PI [INVESTIGATOR_437352].  Data and Safety Monitoring Board 
In addition to the safeguards listed above, we will form a Data and Safety Monitoring Board that 
will periodically review the project. This board will consist of [CONTACT_437369][CONTACT_437367] M.D.(chair), [CONTACT_437370], and one additional board member to be determined.  
10/8/[ADDRESS_554183] been enrolled and at the end of the study. The study's research assistant will present safety data to the board for review, including changes in cocaine use/craving and dropouts prior to cue-memory reactivation and during follow-up. The PI ([CONTACT_437371]) will also attend the meeting. In addition, materials provided to the IRB, including serious adverse events leading to death, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or ER visits will be forwarded to board members. The board will review preliminary data on adverse events and outcomes. As lidocaine has not previously been assessed for use in the treatment of cocaine addiction or to attenuate memory reconsolidation, the study statistician ([CONTACT_10784]) will conduct a blinded analyses of the primary outcome measures after [ADDRESS_554184] will unblind the groups for the DSMB (see Letter from DSMB Chair, [CONTACT_180101][CONTACT_437367]). If a pattern begins to emerge and the Board feels that protocol modifications are needed, based on a preponderance of adverse events occurring in a particular treatment  group or lidocaine is increasing cocaine craving 
and/or cocaine use (the opposite of what is hypothesized), it will have the authority to recommend modifications of safety procedures and recomme nd temporarily or permanently discontinuation of 
enrollment. However, the final decision on these matters will rest with the local IRBs and NIDA.  
 
16. Procedures to Maintain Confidentiality: 
Subject confidentiality will be maintained at all times. Results of the urine drug screens and all 
other research tests will be strictly confidential. The in vestigative team will retain all of the information 
obtained in this research.  None of the data will be presented in any publications in such a way to 
identify a particular subject.  All data and copi[INVESTIGATOR_437353]. A Certificate of Confidentiality will be obtained for the study.   17. Potential Benefits: 
Direct Benefit to Participants: The assessment, including a history and physical, routine labs, and 
diagnostic interview may be some direct benefit to participants. All subjects will receive CBT, which is a beneficial treatment for cocaine dependence.  Frequent follow-up visits with study staff have also 
been shown to have a positive effect on treatment outcome. If lidocaine is effective in disrupting 
cocaine-cue memories, the group given lidocaine will directly benefit from this intervention. 
Direct Benefit to Others: This study may provide the basis for both a new pharmacological treatment 
(lidocaine) and new approach (disruption of memory reconsolidation) cocaine dependence.   18. Biostatistics: (omit this section for peer-reviewed research such as cooperative group, or NIH- 
sponsored studies, and for industry-sponsored research which has been submitted to FDA) 
Study is funded by [CONTACT_133312]. 