Official Title:  Computerized Cognitive Training  
 in Breast Cancer Survivors  
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
Document Name:  [CONTACT_197585]:  January  27, 2020 
 
  
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/[ADDRESS_234608] Cancer Survivors  
 
Protocol Number:  
IUSCC -0625  
 
Principal Investigator:  
[INVESTIGATOR_197554], PhD, RN, FAAN  
Professor & Associate Dean  
Indiana University, School of Nursing  
[ADDRESS_234609], Indianapolis, IN [ZIP_CODE]  
 
Co- Investigators:  
Robert Considine, PhD  
Bryan Schneider, MD  
Fredrick Unver zagt, PhD  
 
Study Statistician:  
Patrick Monahan , PhD 
 
Support Provided By:  
[CONTACT_197568] : 
         1/27/20 20 
  

IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/[ADDRESS_234610]  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  4 
1. SPECIFIC AIMS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  5 
2. SIGNIFICANCE  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  6 
3. INNOVATION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  7 
4. APPROACH  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 8 
5. STUDY DESIGN ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  9 
6. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  9 
7. PATIENT REGISTRATION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  9 
8. STUDY PROCEDURES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  10 
9. MEASURES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 14 
10. DATA ANALYSIS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  15 
11. DATA INTEGRITY AND SECURITY  ................................ ................................ .......................  16 
12. STUDY TIMELINE  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  17 
13. RISKS TO SUBJECTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  17 
14. POTENTIAL BENEFITS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  18 
15. PATIENT CONSENT AND PEER JUDGMENT  ................................ ................................ ....... 18 
16. DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  ................................ ................................ ...........  19 
17. ADVERSE EVENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  20 
18. AE AND SAE REPORTING ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  21 
REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  22 
 
 
  
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/[ADDRESS_234611]  
 
For millions of cancer survivors, cognitive impairment is a prevalent, severe, and persistent 
problem that is associated with other symptoms (depressive symptoms, anxiety and fatigue), 
poorer work ability, and poorer quality of life. Available evidence, in cluding work by [CONTACT_197569], suggests that cognitive training may be a viable treatment option. However, to date, 
these studies are limited as none have been conducted in the home and therefore fail to 
address the transferability of these empi[INVESTIGATOR_197555].  
 
The purpose of this translational research is to conduct a home based single -blind, randomized 
controlled trial to test the feasibility, satisfaction, and preliminary efficacy of cognitive training 
compared to attention control in breast cancer survivors ( BCS) as well as to explore potential 
biomarker s of intervention effects.  
 
Specific aims are to: (1) examine the feasibility (facilitators and barriers) and satisfaction of the 
computer -based cognitive training program; (2) test the preliminary efficacy of cognitive training 
on improving cognitive performance (memory, processing speed, attention, working memory, 
executive function)  over time compared to attention control; (3) evaluate cognitive training 
effects on associated outcomes compared to attention control; and (4) explore the effect of 
computerized cognitive training on serum brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) over time 
compared to attention control.  B DNF is widely distributed in the brain, plays a crucial role in 
neuroplasticity and has been observed to correlate with cognitive function in cancer patients. A 
total of 68 eligible BCS will be randomized to computerized cognitive training or attention 
control. A blinded and trained tester will perform data collection and neuropsychological testing 
at two time points: baseline prior to intervention (T1) and immediately after the 10 -week 
cognitive training -program  (within 90 days)  (T2). Feasibility and satisfaction will be assessed 
through objective indicators (study adherence, completion rate) and self -report (facilitators, 
barriers, and perceived satisfaction) and cognitive performance will be assessed through 
objective n europsychological tests of memory, processing speed, attention, working memory, 
executive function  assessed over the phone. In addition, we will measure the effects of cognitive 
training on self -report measures of perceived cognitive function, associated symptoms 
(depressive symptoms, anxiety and fatigue), perceived work ability, and quality of life. D ata will 
be analyzed using descriptive statistics and a general linear mixed model (GLMM).  Simple main 
effects analyses will be used to follow up statisticall y significant interactions.  
 
This research innovatively builds on our previous research by:  1) translating findings from the 
laboratory to the home setting and importantly seeks to identify facilitators and  barriers of 
intervention use; 2) addresses limitations of previous trials (uses an attention control rather than 
a no-contact [CONTACT_197570] -list control),  (3) examines cognitive training effects on real -life outcomes 
such as associated symptoms, perceived work ability and quality of life; and (4) will be the first 
study in cancer survivors to explore levels of BDNF as a potentially sensitive outcome measure 
of intervention effects over time compared to attention control. Findings from this study will 
provide nec essary information about the feasibility, satisfaction and preliminary efficacy of the 
home -based  cognitive training on memory performance and processing speed as well as its 
effects on associated outcomes in BCS. Positive results will lead to a larger, full -scale study to 
determine efficacy and build evidence -based treatment for clinicians to use in treating BCS with 
cognitive impairment.  
 
 
 
 
 
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/[ADDRESS_234612] 
study in cancer to explore levels of brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), which we now 
know is associated with neural plasticity , as a potentially sensitive outcome measure of 
intervention effects over time compared to attention control.  
  
 Cancer - and cancer -treatment -related cognitive impairment is a national research priority. 1 Up 
to 75% of the 2.[ADDRESS_234613] cancer survivors (BCS) living in the [LOCATION_002] 2-[ADDRESS_234614] also been documented on neuropsychological exam 6-13 and functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI). 14-18 Cognitive impairment is a prevalent, severe, and persistent 
problem that is associated with other symptoms (depressive symptoms, anxiety symptoms, 
fatigue), poorer work ability 19-[ADDRESS_234615] that 
cognitive training interventions to promote neuroplasticity are likely to be beneficial; however, 
these studies are limited as most have been conducted in the home and therefore, fail to 
address the tr ansferability of these cognitive training programs to general practice . Therefore, 
the purpose of this translational research  is to conduct a home based single -blind, 
randomized controlled trial to test the feasibility, satisfaction, and preliminary efficacy of 
cognitive training delivered in the home setting compared to attention control in breast cancer 
survivors (BCS). In add ition, this will be the first study in cancer to explore levels of brain 
derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF).  
 
 Specific aims are to: (1) examine the feasibility (facilitators and barriers to use) and satisfaction 
of the computerized cognitive training program; (2) test the preliminary efficacy of cognitive 
training on improving objective cognitive performance over time compared to attention control; 
(3) evaluate cognitive training effects on associated outcomes over time compared to attention 
control and (4) explore the effect of computerized cognitive training on serum brain derived 
neurotrophic factor (BDNF)  over time compared to attention control.  A total of 68  eligible BCS 
will be randomized to cognitive training or attention control. A blinded and trained tester will 
perform data collection and neuropsychological testing at two time points: baseline prior to 
intervention (T1)  and immediately after the 10 -week cognitive training program  (within  90 days)  
(T2). Feasibility and satisfaction will be assessed through objective indicators (study adherence, 
completion rate) and self -report and memory and spee d of processing will be assessed through 
objective neuropsychological tests. In addition, we will measure the effects of cognitive training 
on self -report measures of perceived cognitive function, associated symptoms (depressive 
symptoms, anxiety and fatig ue), perceived work ability, and quality of life .  
 
 Innovatively, the proposed study builds on our pi[INVESTIGATOR_197556]:  (1) uses home based training; (2) uses an attention control rather 
than a no -contact [CONTACT_197570] -list control; (3) uses optimal intervention dose based on evidence, (4) 
explores cognitive training effects on real -life outcomes such as perceived cognitive impairment 
(using new PROMIS measures), associate symptoms, perceived work ability, and quality of life. 
This will also be the first study in the context of cancer to  examine BDNF as a biomarker of 
intervention effects.  
 
 
 
1.1 Specific Aims and Hypotheses are:  
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/2020   Page 6   
Aim 1:  To evaluate the feasibility (including facilitators and barriers to use) and satisfaction of  
computer ized cognitive training delivered in the home among BCS.  
  
Hypothesis 1:  BCS assigned to the cognitive training arm will perceive the intervention as more 
acceptable and useful than BCS assigned to the attention control condition.  
  
Aim 2:  To test the preliminary efficacy of the cognitive training intervention for improving 
perceived cognitive function over time compared to attention control.  
  
Hypothesis 2.1:  The intervention group will have greater improvement in subjectively  measured 
cognitive function (Perceived cognitive impairment and Perceived cognitive capabilities) over 
time compared to attention control.  
 
Secondary and exploratory aims  
Aim 3: To evaluate computerized cognitive training effects on secondary outcomes over time 
compared to attention control.   
 
Hypothesis 3:  The intervention group will demonstrate greater improvement in work ability , 
health perceptions, and quality of life  over time compared to attention control.  
  
Aim 4: To test the preliminary efficacy of the cognitive training intervention for improving 
objective cognitive performance over time compared to attention control.  
  
Hypothesis: 4: The intervention group will have greater improvement in objectively measured 
cognitive function o ver time compared to attention control.  
           
  
Aim 5 (exploratory):  Explore the effect of computerized cognitive training on serum BDNF 
levels over time compared to attention control.   
   
2. SIGNIFICANCE  
  
 Research on cognitive impairment in cancer is a national priority:  The President’s Cancer 
Panel,[ADDRESS_234616] cancer survivors (BCS) is vitally important:  This research focuses on 
BCS, the largest group of female cancer survivors. Breast cancer is the second most common 
cancer among women, with one out of eight women, or appro ximately 12.4% of American 
women being diagnosed with breast cancer at some time in their life.[ADDRESS_234617] cancer in the U.S. alone48 with five -year relative 
survival rates at 98% for local stage tumors.  Because BCS constitute the largest group in the 
cancer survivor community, management of symptoms experienced by [CONTACT_197571], such as 
cognitive impairment is vitally important.1 Cognitive impairment is a prevalent, severe, and 
persistent problem for BCS : Up to 75%4,[ADDRESS_234618] meta -analysis with 30 studies showed moderate to large decrements in memory ( d 
= -0.61 to -0.91) and speed of processing ( d = -0.70) in adult cancer survivors compared to 
controls.10 Similarly, a recent meta -analysis of 27 studies of BCS (over 1,562 subjects) found 
small to mo derate decrements not only in memory and processing speed; but, also in attention, 
working memory and executive function in both cross -sectional and longitudinal studies.[ADDRESS_234619] identified cognitive dysfunction after surgery and prior to 
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/2020   Page 7 chemotherapy and during the acute phase of treatment (e.g. during chemotherapy),[ADDRESS_234620] disruptive and  bothersome after treatment (≥[ADDRESS_234621]-treatment), when other cancer treatment -related symptoms have subsided, and they face 
returning to work.53-[ADDRESS_234622] -
treatment49,57 -5960 and that BCS perceive cognitive impairment as disruptive and  bothersome.54,61  
Cognitive impairment is associated with other symptoms (depressive symptoms, anxiety 
and fatigue), poor perceived work ability, and poorer quality of life:  Perceived cognitive 
impairment consistently correlates with higher levels of depressive symptoms, anxiety, and 
fatigue.54,[ADDRESS_234623] that computerized cognitive training interventions are likely to be beneficial; however, 
these studies are limited as they fail to address feasibility issues for implementing a home 
based intervention  
 
3. INNOVATION  
 
This will be one of the first studies to deliver a computerized cognitive training program 
to cancer survivors in the home. Delivery of the home based computerized cognitive training 
has several advantages, including: (1) mitigates transportation needs and thereby, improves 
participation/access to those who would otherwise been unable to (e.g. rural BCS); (2) alleviates 
scheduling difficulties; (3) reduces expenses especially when compared to nurse -led, 
supervised programs;72 and (4) ultimately, allows BCS a role in self -management of this 
symptom. [ADDRESS_234624] trial to leverage an existing and readily available 
computerized cognitive training program in cancer survivors . Brain HQ (formerly InSight), 
utilized in our university -based, RWJF -pi[INVESTIGATOR_197557] a representative 
population of BCS in their home. Using the readily available Brain HQ program wo uld leverage 
the significant investment made to originally develop these resources and may expand its 
usefulness in translating to the large population of BCS. Fully testing this program has many 
important advantages for clinical practice and public health including:  (1) the program 
addresses deficits in memory, speed of processing, and executive function which have been 
linked to diminished life quality and poor perceived work ability, both of which have functional 
and economic impact for BCSs and their fa milies; (2) the program is readily available and, if 
determined efficacious, its uptake could be immediate and cost -effective; (3) the program 
adjusts for individual performance and thus would support BCS with varying deficit levels; and 
(4) the program is  practical and relatively easy to use and therefore would allow BCS a role in 
self-management of this symptom. [ADDRESS_234625] control comparison group, a study approach that fails to fully 
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/[ADDRESS_234626] the active component to modify 
cognitive function, will enhance the study by (1) providing a more suitable alternative and, 
consequently, enhance recruitment and retention of participants; (2) improve the internal validity 
of the study; and (3) ensure that the “true effects of the intervention can be discerned.”[ADDRESS_234627] a crucial link between cognitive impairment and work -related 
outcomes in cancer survivors.77-79 To understand this link better, our team completed a 
comprehensive review of the literature and found a total of 20 empi[INVESTIGATOR_2292] (9 qualitative, 10 
quantitative and 1 mixed -methods) that demonstrated the deleterious effects of perceived 
cognitive imp airment on work -related outcomes including perceived work ability.19-28,30,31,61,[ADDRESS_234628] study in cancer to examine BDNF as a potentially sensitive outcome 
measure that will increase our ability to measure intervention efficacy.  Brain derived 
neurotrophic factor  (BDNF) is a neurotropin that is widely distributed in the brain and plays a 
crucial role in neurodevelopment, neuronal function, and neuroplasticity.86-[ADDRESS_234629] noted that spatial memory is impaired when BDNF signaling is decreased;89,[ADDRESS_234630] responses on cognitive tests; suggesting 
that serum BDNF levels may be a sensitive measure of cognitive function.[ADDRESS_234631] been no studies examining serum BDNF levels as an outcome measure of  computerized  
cognitive training efficacy in cancer. Identifying a sensitive biomarker of neuroplasticity will aid 
future efficacy and effectiveness trials and ultimately, help guide the development of evidence -
based treatment guidelines.  
 
4. APPROACH  
 
PRELIMINARY STUDIES:  The proposed study will leverage the expertise of an 
interdisciplinary team of experts in cancer, neuro -psychological assessment, statistics 
and cognitive training in BCS ). Our team has been internally (ACS) and externally funded 
(RWJF and Walther Cancer Institute) and have conducted multiple studies which have (1) 
documented clinically significant memory impairment in 52 BCS compared to age and education 
matched healthy cont rol women;59 (2) examined the impact of perceived cognitive im pairment in 
134 BCS and found that those with more cognitive concerns had poorer QOL, including more 
depressive symptoms, lower well -being, poorer physical functioning, and greater fatigue;33 (3) 
interviewed [ADDRESS_234632] their self -esteem, social relationships, and work 
ability;[ADDRESS_234633] recently (4) we completed the Advanced Cognitive Training in Breast 
Cancer Survivors (PI: [INVESTIGATOR_197558]).  With funding from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, we  
conducted a randomized controlled trial comparing two cognitive training interventions  (memory 
and computerized cognitive training)  to a wait -list control group in 82 female BCS at the IUSON. 
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/2020   Page 9 Computerized c ognitive training (InSight) compared to wait -list control, resulted in immediate 
and durable improvements in neuropsychological measures of (1) memory at post -intervention 
and 2 -month follow -up (effect sizes=0.75 and 0.82; respectively; p<.01) and (2) proc essing 
speed at post -intervention and 2 -month follow -up (effect sizes=0.55 and 0.67, p<0.05). InSight 
training also had the advantage of demonstrating improved perceived cognitive functioning, 
associated symptoms (less depressive symptoms, an xiety and fatigue), and quality of life.[ADDRESS_234634] been 
standardized across the BrainHQ training and attention control groups with each group 
completing  up to  40 hours over 10 week period  (total  of up to  40 hours),  with the dose based on 
previous research.[ADDRESS_234635] -intervention 
(within 90 days ).  
 
6. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA  
 
6.1 Inclusion criteria  
 
1. Female gender  
2. ≥ [ADDRESS_234636] cancer.  
5. Self-reported cognitive impairment  
6. Subjects seeking treatment though not currently being treated or with prior treatment 
history for cognitive impairment.  
7. ≥ [ADDRESS_234637] -treatment including surgery, radiation, and/or chemotherapy  
8. Ability to understand, speak, read, and write English  
 
6.2 Exclusion criteria  
 
1. Comorbidities that would sufficiently impair performance or inhibit cognitive training 
such as: history of stroke, encephalitis, traumatic brain injury, brain surgery, 
dementia, or Alzheimers disease.  
2. Cranial radiation or intrathecal therapy.  
3. Current active major depression or substance abuse or history of bipolar disorder 
psychosis, schizophrenia, or learning disability.  
4. History of current or other cancer except for basal cell skin cancer.  
 
 No potential participant will be excluded due to not having a computer. The study will provide a 
computer tablet with data capability to ensure access to participate. This need is not estimated 
to be high as the most recent Census data identified that 84% of U.S. households own a 
computer and 73% have a computer with a broadband connection to the internet.  
  
7. PATIENT REGISTRATION  
 
 All patients will be registered with the Indiana University  School of Nursing . Regulatory files will 
be maintained by [CONTACT_197572] . Applicable regulatory documents must be completed and on file prior to 
registration of any patients. Potential patients will be identified in the Oncology outpatient clinics 
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/[ADDRESS_234638] will be forwarded to the School of Nursing  designee for registration in the 
OnCore® database.  
 
 Study data will be collected and stored in OnCore®, developed by [CONTACT_164939], Inc. 
(www.forteresearch.com ). OnCore® Enterprise Research is a comprehensive, web -based, 
Clinical Trial Management System (CTMS) which utilizes an Oracle database.   It has been 
licensed by [CONTACT_164940] (IU) to support the operations and data capture of clinical 
research trials.  
 
 The system has been installed and configured within a HIPAA -aligned, Information Technology 
(IT), operations center supported by [CONTACT_164941]’s IT organization, University Information Technology 
Services (UITS).  
  
 OnCore® provides users secure access with unique IDs/passwords and restricts access by 
[CONTACT_164942], from any location , to record, manage, and report on data associated with the 
operation and conduct of clinical trials.  
 
 The system is comprised of three specific applications —Clinical Research Management (CRM), 
Biospecimen Management (BSM), and Unified Registries Management (URM).  Indiana 
University leverages OnCore® to support clinical research operations specifically as it relates to 
the following functions/processes:   electronic Scientific Review Committee (SRC), regulatory 
management, protocol and subject life cycle management, coverage analysis, study financials 
management, subject registration and visit management, su bject safety monitoring, protocol 
deviation monitoring, study auditing and monitoring, electronic data management, correlative 
study sample management, specimen banking and management, registries management, effort 
tracking, and reporting . 
 
 
 
8. STUDY PROCEDURES  
  
8.[ADDRESS_234639]. Similar to our pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], 
we will recruit in -person consecutive BCS who are being seen for care at the Indiana University 
Health Systems clinics including the IU clinics on campus (IUSCC ) (including Eskenazi Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] ) 
and the associated Northside clinic in Carmel, IN.  
  
 We will also recruit through mailings. Similar to our pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], we will use: (1) the IU Cancer Center 
tumor registry’s 4,111 potentially eligible BCS, who fit our revised eligibility criteria and the (2) 
the Indiana Clinical and Translational Sciences Institu te patient registry which has over 1,[ADDRESS_234640]. Schneider (co -I) or designee will get permission from patients to 
allow project staff to enter the patient’s room during a clinic visit to introduce the study .  
  
 Introduce study and screen for eligibility/interest  
 For in clinic recruitment, the project recruiter then sequentially approaches each woman at the 
end of her clinic visit with the physician and describes the purpose and nature of the study.  
 
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/[ADDRESS_234641] our office in response to a mailing, study staff will discuss the study 
requirements and screen for eligibility (phone or in person. Those determined to be ineligible 
due to depressive symptoms will be r eferred to their attending physician for follow -up.  
 
 Distribute study information: Following screening, study staff will send or hand out a study 
packet. Packets will contain a cover letter with contact [CONTACT_3031]; a study brochure; copi[INVESTIGATOR_197559] -mandated authorization to allow use of protected 
healt h information; and a stamped, addressed envelope for returning the signed consent and 
authorization forms.  
  
 Obtain informed consent:  Women who are eligible and interested will be consented in person 
in the clinic. Those women who do not return a signed consent will receive a phone call one 
week following their screening date to verify interest in participating and provide additional 
information if needed. Interested women will be instructed on the consent process. Informed 
cons ent will follow the requirements of the university’s institutional review board  
 
 Eligibility/Baseline Assessment:  After the signed written consent an d HIPAA authorization 
forms are r eceived, research staff will telephone the participant and arrange a mutually 
convenient appointment . Assessments will be completed in a private room at the university.  
First, eligibility will be confirmed  via self -report by [CONTACT_2299] .  
 
 If ineligible , the subject will be thanked for her time and interest in participating.  
 
 If eligibility is confirmed , the appointment will continue,  and the other baseline assessment 
measures will be administered. Once the neuropsychological assessment and questionnaires 
are completed, the tester will review them and obtain data from the participant on any missing 
items  
 
Randomization:  Building on our pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602], BCS will be randomly assigned to one of two 
groups: BrainHQ  cognitive training or attention control. Assignments will be in a random order 
generated by a computer using blocks of 8, to ensure filling of treatment groups. Randomization 
will occur as close to the start of the training sessions as possible to minimiz e study drop -out. 
 
Neuropsychological testing, completion of questionnaires and collection of a blood sample for 
BDNF will be collected at t wo time points during the study. Baseline (T1) data will be collected 
prior to the initiation of the intervention or attention control computerized training. Follow up 
assessments and BDNF blood sample will be collected post -intervention within 90 days of 
completing the intervention or attention control computerized training  (T2)  
 
Serum for BDNF analysis and all biomarkers that are part of this study will be prepared by 
[CONTACT_197573] (blood sample code) stored in 
the Analyte Laboratory within the Translation Core of the Center for Diabetes and Metabolic 
Disease under management of [CONTACT_4342] (Co -I). The BDNF serum levels will be batch 
analyzed following collection of all samples following the manufacturers’ ELISA protocol. The 
ELISA assay has standards ranging from 7.8 to 500 pg/ml BDNF (this is the possible range for 
all samples).  
 
The study will also examine biomarkers that can affect  brain functioning including neurotropic 
factor, proinflammatory cytokines, cortisol, and dehydroepi[INVESTIGATOR_2119] (neuro steroid) DHEA . 
 
8.[ADDRESS_234642] will be 
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/2020   Page 12 completed, which will be 10 weeks after baseline ( [ADDRESS_234643] -intervention assessment).  The first visit will last about [ADDRESS_234644] about 50 minutes.  
  
 At baseline, participants will provide demographic, clinical and treatment information, 
questionnaire data, blood sample, and complete a neuropsychological assessment 
administered by a trained and blinded tester .  All other assessments will proceed in the same 
manner; however, demographic and treatment information will not be re -assessed. The medical 
record of BCS’s will be examined for purposes of verifying disease and treatment information, 
including types and d ates of treatments received (surgery, radia tion, chemotherapy, tamoxifen 
and/or aromatase inhibitors). Data will be linked to participants through the use of a unique 
study -specific identifying number. Only persons on the research team will have access to the 
data. The neuropsychological tester wil l remain blinded to the randomization of the participants. 
All data are collected for research purposes only . 
 
 Cognitive Training:  As tested in our pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], the Brain HQ program is designed to enhance 
specific areas of cognitive functioning that will be tested in this study. The goals of the Brain HQ 
program are to improve visual processing speed, learning and memory and attention. The 
exercises include time -order judgment, discrimination, spatial -match, forward -span, instruction -
following, and narrative -memory tasks.[ADDRESS_234645] to user performance to maintain an 85% correct 
rate. The program wi ll include  [ADDRESS_234646] support from the original developer and Posit Science . For the purposes of this 
trial, any participants who do not complete the total  of up to  40 hours will not be counted as 
deviations.  
 
BrainHQ  uses five tasks in the form of computer games designed to improve memory, 
processing speed, attention, working memory and executive function  including:  
1. Sweep Seeker : The person is asked to clear the rows of blocks presented on the screen, 
either by [CONTACT_197574]. The goal is 
to refine and increase the response of primary visual cortex neurons and to enable th e 
person to increase speed and accuracy of visual processing (executive function) and visual 
memory.  
2. Bird Safari :  The user is first presented with a target bird. Subsequently, a group of birds is 
presented in the peripheral vision and then disappears when the trial begins. The user 
selects the section of the screen where the target bird appeared. The presentation spee d 
adapts with user performance (i.e. better performance = faster presentation). The goal is to 
improve speed and accuracy of object identification in peripheral vision and improve visual 
precision important for improving memory.   
3. Jewel Diver :  The person is first presented objects (jewels) on the screen. The objects are 
then covered with occluders (bubbles) and then identical distracters are presented. The 
objects move around in screen and when the movement stops, the user chooses the 
occlude rs that cover the jewels. The number of jewels adapts to performance (more jewels = 
better performance). The goal is to improve divided visual attention, sustained visual 
attention, visual working memory, and visual precision.  
4.  Master Gardener : The person is presented a series of target stimuli and distracters which 
are presented at one time and then disappear. The locations of the stimuli are marked by 
[CONTACT_197575], and the user choses the icons where the target stimuli were once located. The goal is  
to increase speed and accuracy as well as the ability to extract information accurately.  
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/[ADDRESS_234647] Tour :  The person is presented with a target vehicle briefly in both the center of the 
screen and in one of eight locations in the periphery. Two vehicles are then presented briefly 
in the center of the screen, one of which is the target vehicle. The user must  identify the 
location of the target vehicle in the periphery as well as identify which was the target vehicle 
that appeared in the center. The goal of this activity is to improve divided attention and ability 
to extract information and discard irrelevant information from peripheral vision.  
 
 Attention Control:  Control participants will be asked to complete activities on the computer. 
The program offers a choice of activities that will consist of crossword puzzles and word 
jumbles.  Attention Control: Computer -based General Cognitive Stimulation Intervention 
(Computerized Crossword Puzzles): The program offers a pre -determined set of computerized 
crossword puzzles  (www.bestcrosswords.com ; http://zone.msn.com/en/crossword ; Accessed 
09-15-2015 ). The site has over 100,[ADDRESS_234648] puzzles do not provide for progressive 
challenges of increasing speed, visual field size, number of distractors or degree of diffi culty of 
targeted stimulus differentiation. Training: Participants will be instructed to perform this active 
attention control intervention 4 hours per week over 10 weeks for a total of  up to  40 hours, the 
same as BrainHQ . 
 
  The rationale for this attention control program is (1) it has been routinely and successfully used 
in other NIH-funded cognitive training trials, (2) it has not shown cognitive benefit in previous 
research studies,44,98 and  (3) previous experience by [CONTACT_197576].43,[ADDRESS_234649]  Intervention : A 
follow  up assessment  will 
be conducted  immediately  
post intervention  (T2). 
Based  on our pi[INVESTIGATOR_799],  
the post-intervention  
assessment  and BDNF  
blood  draw  will be 
completed  within  90 days  
of completing  the 
intervention  (T2) training  or 
attention  control  sessions.   
 
Procedures  for 
Monitoring  Treatment  Fidelity:   As in our pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268],  procedures  for monitoring  treatment  fidelity  will Table 1 Comparison of BrainHQ to Attention Control  
Element  Computerized Cognitive 
Training using BrainHQ  Attention Control  
Computer -Based  
General Cognitive  
 
Visual stimuli  Intensive & repetitive with 
increasing visual stimuli  None  
Complexity 
of stimuli  Progressively increased 
speed & processing of 
stimuli with increasing 
distractions  No Progressive 
Challenge  
Cognitive 
demand  Tailored; Training 
adjusted by [CONTACT_197577] 
85% of individual’s 
threshold  Not tailored; not 
adjusted or tailored for 
individual threshold  
Visual 
attention & 
memory  Directed attention with 
each exercise, precision  No directed attention 
from computerized 
intervention  
Novelty  Individualized feedback 
and rewards built in to 
respond to the 
participant, game 
features to improve 
satisfaction  Feedback and rewards 
not provided, may incur 
some satisfaction on 
their own  
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/[ADDRESS_234650]  been  standardized  in dose  
(length  and content)  and delivery  method  (in-home).  Intervention  dose  will be carefully  monitored  
using  the computer  software  built within  BrainHQ  and Rescue  Time  software  for the active  
attention  control  (total  time on task).  These  variables  will be examined  and used  in the analysis.  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_197560].  The project  manager  will ensure  the participants  understand  and are 
utilizing  the program.  Treatment  dose  and content  will be carefully  monitored  through  the InSight  
program  . 
 
 Qualitative assessment : individual interviews will be conducted over the phone with members 
of the intervention group to understand the perceived facilitators and barriers to use of the 
intervention. All interviews will be conducted after the intervention, voice recorded digitally and 
labeled with a patient identification number.   
 
 Accrual & Retention : Several steps will be taken to ensure high rates of accrual, retention, and 
representation of minority BCS. These include (1) using culturally appropriate printed study 
information;100-102 (2) contact[CONTACT_197578], which has been shown 
to be preferred over unsolicited telephone calls 101 and to be more effective in recruiting minority 
subjects;103  and (3) providing participant incentives of $ 20.00 for every assessment completed 
($40.00 for both) to off set subject burden.  
 
 
9. MEASURES  
 
 Table 1 displays the quantitative data  collection plan and details of measures. The 
neuropsychological battery has been shown to be reliable and valid. 104Based on our pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], 
estimated completion time  for the initial baseline assessment will be 1 hour with each follow -up 
session lasting approximately  50 minutes. Qualitative assessment : individual interviews will be 
conducted over the phone with members of the intervention group to understand the perceived 
facilitators and barriers to use of the intervention. All interviews will be conducted after the 
intervention, recorded digitally an d labeled with a patient identification number. This will be done 
only one time and will last up to 30 minutes.  
 
Table 2. Schedule of Quantitative Measures  
 
  No. Items/  
(Potential 
range)    
Variable  Instrument ( Measure )  T1 T2 Instrument 
Range  Reliability  S
c
o
r
e 
 Screening   
Perceived 
Cognitive 
Function  Numeric rating scale 
(0 to 10)  X  0-10 n/a ↓ 
       
Depression  PHQ -9107,108 X   0.84 ↓ 
 Aim 1: Satisfaction and Acceptability    
Satisfaction  Client Satisfaction 
Questionnaire   X 8-32 0.90-0.94†  
 ↑ 
 
Acceptability  Acceptability Scale   X  NA ↑ 
 Aim 2 Subjective 
Cognitive Measures     
Perceived 
Cognitive 
Function  ƗPROMIS – Applied 
Cognition - Abilities  X 
 
 
 X 
 
 
 33 (33 -165) 
 
 
 0.97†  
 ↑ 
 
↓ 
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/2020   Page 15 ƗPROMIS -  Applied 
Cognition Gen. 
Concerns 16,120 X X 34 (34 -170) 
 
 Aim [ADDRESS_234651] 109   
Rivermead Behavioral 
Memory Test110 X 
 
X X 
 
X 15 words, 5 trials  
(0-75) 
N/A  
Speed of 
Processing  Symbol Digit  X X 7-500ms  0.78*  
 
0.60*  ↑ 
↑ 
     0.71-0.88 ↓ 
Working 
Memory  Wechsler Adult 
Intelligence Scale IV 
– Digit Span116 X X    
Executive 
Function - 
Language  Controlled Word 
Association117 X X #words/1min  0.96 ↑ 
 Aim 3 Other 
Outcomes     >.70 ↑ 
       
Work Ability  Work Ability Index 
(WAI) 123-125 X X 7 (7-49) 0.98†  
 
0.97†  
 
0.99†  ↓ 
 
↓ 
 
↓ 
Quality of Life  Quality of Life -Cancer 
Survivors (QOL -
CS)126 X X 41 (0 -10 on 4 
sub-scales)  0.66*  ↑ 
 Exploratory Aim [ADDRESS_234652] 
on BDNF     0.93†  ↑ 
Serum BDNF 
levels  Serum BDNF –ELISA  X X Assa
ys 
range
: 7.8-
500 
pg/ml 
 Intervention Fidelity 
Assessment  & other 
symptoms     Within assay 
%CV at 
334pg/ml =4.7%  
Within assay 
%CV 825pm/ml 
= 3.4%  ↑ 
Dose  Time Spent each session – Computer    N/A 
Depressive 
Symptoms  
 
Anxiety  
 
Fatigue  PROMIS -Depression 
Short Form 121 
122 
PROMIS -Anxiety 
Short Form 122 
PROMIS -Fatigue 
Short Form121 X 
 
X 
 
X X 
 
X 
 
X 8 (0-40) 
 
8 (0-40) 
 
8 (0-40) 
   
 
 
10. DATA  ANALYSIS  
 
 Descriptive statistics and assessment of internal consistency reliability will be computed for all 
variables. Aim 1 Feasibility and Satisfaction:   Descriptive statistics and frequencies will be 
used to summarize the Client Satisfaction Questionnaire and Acceptability Scale. The two 
groups will be compared on the mean of each item using the t test or Wilxocon rank sum test if 
the parametric assumptions are violated. Qualitative Analysis : A conventional content analysis 
approach, which aims to summarize the i nformational contents of the data, will be used.126,127 
Common themes across all the participants’ data will be identified and organized into clusters 
and categories. Aims 2-4: A linear mixed -effects models128 to analyze repeated -measures 
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/[ADDRESS_234653] for training group (BrainHQ, attention control), the 
Time effect, and the interaction term of Time -by-Training Group. The primary test of interest will 
the Group effect, which compares the t wo randomized groups on the outcome. The second 
most important test will be the interaction test to determine whether change over time differs for 
the two groups. We will also assess the Time effect, which tests whether scores generally 
changed in one dire ction for both groups combined. In addition, to ensure equivalence across 
groups potential covariates will be adjusted for in the models on which the various intervention 
and control groups significantly differ after random assignment at a liberal p -value of <.10.  Effect 
sizes between the two groups will be computed as differences between adjusted means divided 
by [CONTACT_197579]. The significance level will be <.[ADDRESS_234654], while controlling for potential 
known confounding effects including, age, education, smoking status, body mass index, 
medications, physical activity (per D[LOCATION_006]E Activit y Status Index129) that may influence BDNF 
interpretation130 prior to hypothesis testing; although the RCT design will likely balance these 
factors.  
 
 Power analysis:  We are adequately powered for estimating effect sizes or preliminary efficacy 
(Aim 2). Sample size is based on Aim [ADDRESS_234655] size is 
0.20.96 Using the Nquery software, a sample size of 30 in each group will provide 86% power 
for a two -sided t test to detect a large eff ect size of 0.[ADDRESS_234656] sizes.  
 
Methods for Handling Missing Data and Dropouts: The GLMM approach to analysis allows 
use of all available data, including from participants who have incomplete (i.e., partially missing) 
data. We will compare those who dropped out to those who completed the study on various 
demographic and treatment factors and on intervention group membership. To the extent that 
differences exist, we will describe this bias and its potential effects on the results of our analysis. 
Additionally, we will attempt to determine missing data patterns, and, if cell sizes permit, will 
incorporate this information into the analyses by [INVESTIGATOR_1312] -running the GLMM with incorporation of the 
missing pattern as a nominal covariate.  
 
Additionally, the influence of treatment dose (i.e.: sessions completed) will be evaluated to 
determine if it should be included as a covariate in the GLMM. Participants will be randomized 
only after completing baseline assessment. There are only two possible missing data patterns: 
baseline and immediate post only.  
 
 
11. DATA INTEGRITY AND SECURITY  
 
All documentation will be stored on a limited -access university server or in locking file cabinets 
in a limited -access, locked project office. All electronic databases housing subject data will be 
password -protected with access limited to study personnel o nly. Identifying information is 
separated from all data provided by [CONTACT_197580] a unique identification code 
assigned by [CONTACT_197581].  
 
Analysis of objective neuropsychological data will be monitored for quality assurance. Personnel 
who conduct the neuropsychological assessments (tester) will complete a standardized 
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/[ADDRESS_234657]. Unverzagt (Co -I).  
 
All data entry will be done by [CONTACT_21724]. Databases will be constructed to include forms 
for data entry that mirror questionnaires and have restricted field ranges and values to prevent 
errors. In addition, quality of data entry will be monitored b y the Project Manager, who will 
randomly select patient files to be double -entered and will periodically generate reports for the 
entire dataset to identify outliers, missing data, or other problems. All data will be imported into 
SAS data sets for analysi s. Analyses will include only summaries of data; personal identifiers 
will be omitted  
 
12. STUDY TIMELINE  
 
Study Timeline  May June  July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar  Apr 
Study start up (hiring, 
training, finalize all 
study protocols)  X            
Enrollment and 
baseline data collection   X X X X X X X X    
Randomization, 
delivery of 
intervention/control   X X X X X X X X X   
Follow -up data 
collection, data entry 
and management   X X X X X X X X X X  
Analyze preliminary, 
baseline and follow -up   X X X X X X X X X X 
Dissemination: 
literature review, theory 
review, intervention 
description, baseline 
and final study findings    X X X X X X X X X X 
 
13. RISKS TO SUBJECTS  
 
 Potential risks associated with study participation are minimal. Subjects may experience: (a) 
bruising, bleeding, soreness or rarely, fainting of infection as a result of venipuncture for 
collection of the blood samples (b) psychosocial risks and (c) breach of confidentia lity. Risks in 
the psychosocial realm would involve any anxiety or distress that may result from participation in 
the scheduled study assessments  and/or phone interview . Based on our prior work with similar 
assessment protocols, we anticipate that any nega tive psychological reactions will be 
uncommon and generally very mild. There is always some risk that a woman’s responses during 
the study will become known to others outside the research project staff. No unusually sensitive 
information is being collected  in our study; for example, we are not collecting information on 
sexual behavior or criminal behaviors, or substance abuse.  
  
 Steps will be taken to minimize any potential risks associated with study participation.  
  
 To minimize bruising, bleeding, soreness or rarely fainting or infection as a result of 
venipuncture . Our experienced research staff is trained and certified in phlebotomy. They will 
apply universal precautions when drawing blood to reduce the risk of infection and will take 
steps to minimize discomfort to subjects including application of pressure on the site following 
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/[ADDRESS_234658] connecting the study identification number with each participant's name [CONTACT_7637] 
a password -protected database on a limited -access university server. Furthermore, all study 
data records,  or digital recordings will be maintained in locked file cabinets and/or password -
protected databases on limited -access univ ersity servers. Access to study data records will be 
furnished only to individuals who are members of the project research team. All personnel who 
are involved in the design or conduct of this research will have successfully completed human 
subjects traini ng.  
 
 For women who exhibit extreme scores on the PHQ -9 brief depression screen we will adhere to 
the following  PHQ -9 Referral Algorithm:  Score ≥ 15, negative response to self -harm item: 
Refer to physician for follow -up; Score ≥ 15 positive response to self -harm item: Keep patient on 
the telephone, assess emergent needs of patient. If immediate risk is low, refer to suicide hot 
line and inform patient you will be notifying her oncologist for follow -up. If immediate risk is high, 
call 911, refer to suicide hot line, and inform patient you will be notifying her oncologist for 
follow -up. 
 
14. POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
  
 Subjects may benefit from participating in cognitive training with improvement in memory 
performance and/or speed of processing. This research will provide information about the 
efficacy of the BrainHQ cognitive training intervention in BCS. This research could also provide 
a non -pharmacological alternative to address cognitive impairment in a generally younger 
population of cancer survivors who currently have limited or no other treatment options.  Risks 
of participation are minimal.   
 
 Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained:  
 Knowledge will be gained on the efficacy of a commercially available cognitive training 
intervention that may help improve cognitive impairment in cancer survivors. This study will 
provide the necessary evidence regarding the use of cognitive training in breast cancer 
survivors. Such improvement is essential to helpi[INVESTIGATOR_197561]. Risks in this 
study are minim al. Findings will provide empi[INVESTIGATOR_197562]. 
Importantly, either positive or negative findings will provide guidance for clinicians’ 
recomm endations and consumers’ treatment selections relative to the use of this type of 
advanced cognitive training This research study will provide efficacy data about the cognitive 
training intervention and will offer a non -pharmacological alternative to impro ving cognitive 
performance in breast cancer survivors, who have limited or no other treatment options. In 
addition, if efficacious this cognitive training program could be tested in a broader population of 
cancer survivors incurring similar cognitive defic its 
 
15. PATIENT CONSENT AND PEER JUDGMENT  
 
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/[ADDRESS_234659] (IRB) prior to any patient being registered on this study.   
 
 Changes to the protocol, as well as a change of principal investigator, must also be approved by 
[CONTACT_164950].  Records of the Institutional Review Board review and approval of all documents 
pertaining to this study must be kept on file by [CONTACT_093] (h oused in the Clinical Trials  
Office) and are subject to inspection at any time during the study.  Periodic status reports must 
be submitted to the Institutional Review Board at least yearly, as well as notification of 
completion of the study and a final re port within 90 days  of study completion or termination.   
The study will be  conducted in compliance with ICH guidelines and with all applicable federal 
(including 21 CFR parts 56 & 50), state or local laws.  
 
16. DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  
 
This study will be conducted in accordance with the IU Simon Cancer Center Institutional  
DSMP for Low Risk Trials.  
 
Investigators will conduct continuous review of data and subject safety. Quarterly review  
meetings for low risk trials are required and will include the principal investigator, clinical  
research specialist and/or research nurse (other members per principal investigator’s  
discretion). Quarterly meeting summaries should include review of data, the number of  
subjects, significant toxicities as described in the protocol, and responses observed. Study  
teams should maintain meeting minutes and attendance for submission to the DSMC upon  
request.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Committee  
The IUSCC Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC) is responsible for oversight of  
subject safety, regulatory compliance, and data integrity for this trial.  The DSMC will review this  
study annually to review overall trial progress, toxicity, compliance, data integrity, and accrual  
per the Institutional DSMP.  
 
Furthermore, the DSMC conducts an administrative review of serious adverse events (SAEs),  
deviations, reportable events, and any other outstanding business.  Major issues may require  
further DSMC review or action.  
 
At any time during the conduct of the trial, if it is the opi[INVESTIGATOR_85263] (or  
benefits) to the subject warrant early closure of the study, the DSMC Chair and Compliance  
Officer must be notified within [ADDRESS_234660] to auditing and/or monitoring per the Institutional  
DSMP. Reports will be reviewed by [CONTACT_197582].  
 
Data Management/ Oncore Reporting Requirements  
The DSMC reviews data and study progress directly from Oncore; therefore, timely data entry  
and status updates are vital.  Study data must be entered within Oncore promptly, no later than  
one week from study visit occurrence.  Subject status in Oncore will be updated in real time, as  
this may affect overall trial enrollment status.  Global SAEs and deviations will be reviewed on a  
monthly basis by [CONTACT_85279].  
 
Study Accrual Oversight  
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/2020   Page 20 Accrual data will be entered into the IU Simon Cancer Center OnCore system. The Protocol  
Progress Committee (PPC) reviews study accrual twice per year, while the PPC coordinator  
reviews  accrual quarterly.  
 
Oncore Safety Reporting  
In addition to protocol - and regulatory -required safety reporting, all serious adverse events  
(SAEs) will be captured in the Oncore system within 1 business day of notification.  Initial SAE  
reporting will include as much detail as available, with follow -up to provide complete information.  
Attributions will be assessed to study drugs, procedures, study disease, and other alternate  
etiology.  
 
Protocol Deviation Reporting  
Protocol deviations will be entered into OnCore within 5 days of discovery and reviewed by [CONTACT_197583] a monthly basis. Findings will be reported to the full DSMC at the time of study  
review.  For serious or repetitive protocol deviations, additional action may be required by [CONTACT_197584].  
 
17. ADVERSE EVENTS  
  
 Adverse Event (AE):  
 An adverse event is defined as untoward medical occurrence associated with the use of an 
intervention in humans, whether or not considered intervention related. An adverse event can 
be ANY unfavorable and unintended sign (e.g. an abnormal laboratory findi ng), symptom, or 
disease temporarily associated with the use of an intervention, whether or not considered 
related to the intervention (attribution of ‘unrelated’, ‘unlikely’, ‘possible’, ‘probable’, or ‘definite’).  
Adverse events will be graded according  to the NCI Common Toxicity Criteria, Version 4.0.  
 
 For this study, an  Adverse Event will be defined as any reaction or undesirable event that 
occurs while a subject is on the research protocol whether or not it is considered relate to the 
study intervention (cognitive training). Such events could include illness, signs, sym ptoms, or 
abnormal laboratory tests that have appeared or worsened during the course of the trial 
regardless if any causal relationship to the study can be made.  
 
 Serious Adverse Event (SAE):  
 A serious adverse event is any untoward medical occurrence resulting in one or more of the 
following:   
• Results in death or ANY death occurring within 30 days of a biopsy procedure (even if it 
is not felt to be related).  
• Is life -threatening (defined as an event in which the patient was at risk of death at the 
time of the event; it does not refer to an event which hypothetically might have caused 
death if it were more severe)  
• Requires inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] ≥ 24 hours or prolongation of existing hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]  
▪ NOTE: Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_85265]:  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_197563]  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_197564] 24 hours  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5187] a pre -existing condition 
unrelated to biopsy procedure.  
• Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
• Is a congenital anomaly or birth defect  
• Is an important medical event (defined as a medical event(s) that may not be 
immediately life -threatening or result in death or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_313], based upon 
appropriate medical and scientific judgment, may jeopardize the patient or may require 
intervent ion (e.g., medical, surgical) to prevent one of the other serious outcomes listed 
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/2020   Page 21 in the definition above).  Examples of such events include, but are not limited to, 
intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home for allergic bronchospasm; blood 
dyscrasias or convulsions not resulting in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]; or the development of drug 
dependency or drug abuse.  
 
 Attribution:  An assessment of the relationship between the AE and the medical intervention. 
CTCAE does not define an AE as necessarily “caused by a therapeutic intervention” . After 
naming and grading the event, the clinical investigator must assign an attribution to the AE 
using the following attribution categories:  
 
 
Relationship  Attribution  Description  
Unrelated to investigational intervention  Unrelated  The AE is clearly NOT related  
Unlikely  The AE is doubtfully related  
Related to investigational intervention  Possible  The AE may be related  
Probable  The AE is likely related  
Definite  The AE is clearly related  
 
18. SAE R EPORTING  
  
18.1 SAE Reporting to the IRB:  
 Unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others will be reported within 5 days  of 
becoming aware of the event  to the IRB if they:  
 
• unexpected;  
• related or possibly related to participation in the research; and  
• suggests that the research places subjects or others at a greater risk of harm than was 
previously known or recognized.    
 
 If the serious adverse event does not meet all three (3) criteria listed above, the event does not 
have to be promptly reported to the Indiana University IRB.   However, it should be reported at 
the time of continuing review  
 
18.2 SAE Reporting to the IUSCC Data Safety Monitoring Committee :  
 Regardless of study sponsorship, the study team must enter all initial and follow -up SAE, 
expedited, and noncompliance reports into OnCore® for review by [CONTACT_85281]/or 
coordinator. Expedited reports may include IRB Prompt Report Forms and additional SAE forms 
as required by [CONTACT_456]. When follow -up information is received, a follow -up report should 
also be created in OnCore®. This DSMC reporting requirement is in addition  to any other  
regulatory bodies to be notified (i.e., IRB, FDA, pharmaceuti cal company, etc.). The DSMC chair 
and/or coordinator will review all SAE, expedited, and noncompliance reports monthly.   
 
 
  
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/2020   Page 22 REFERENCES  
 
1. Reuben SL. Living Beyond Cancer: Finding a New Balance. President's Cancer Panel, 
2003 -2004, Annual Report : U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National 
Institute of Health, National Cancer Institute; 2004.  
2. American Cancer Society. Cancer Facts and Figures 2012. Atlanta 2012.  
3. Reis LAG, Melbert D, Krapcho M, et al. SEER Cancer Statistics Review [ADDRESS_234661] cancer. Psycho -Oncology. 1995;4(1):61 -66. 
5. Tannock IF, Ahles TA, Ganz PA, van Dam FS. Cognitive Impairment Associated With 
Chemotherapy for Cancer: Report of a Workshop. J Clin Oncol. 2004;22(11):[ADDRESS_234662] cancer. Clin Neuropsychol. 2006;20(1):[ADDRESS_234663] 
cancer: A meta -analysis of the current literature. Brain Cogn. 2005;59(1):60 -70. 
8. Jansen CE, Miaskowski C, Dodd M, Dowling G, Kramer J. A metaanalysis of studies of 
the effects of cancer chemotherapy on various domains of cognitive function. Cancer. 
2005;104(10):2222 -2233.  
9. Anderson -Hanley C, Sherman M, Riggs R, Agocha V, Compas B. Neuropsychological 
effects of treatments for adults with cancer: A meta -analysis and review of the literature. 
Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society : JINS. 2003;9(7):967 -982. 
10. Anderson -Hanley C, Sherman ML, Riggs R, Agocha VB, Compas BE. 
Neuropsychological effects of treatments for adults with cancer: a meta -analysis and 
review of the literature. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society : JINS. 
2003;9(7):[ADDRESS_234664] cancer. Front 
Oncol. 2015;5:59.  
12. Lindner OC, Phillips B, McCabe MG, et al. A meta -analysis of cognitive impairment 
following adult cancer chemotherapy. Neuropsychology. 2014;28(5):[ADDRESS_234665] cancer 
survivors compared to healthy age - and education -matched women. Clin Neuropsychol. 
2009;23(4):661 -674. 
14. McDonald BC, Saykin AJ, Ahles TA. Brain imagining investigation of chemotherapy -
induced neurocognitive changes. In: Meyers CA, Perry JR, eds. Cognition and Cancer . 
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge University; 2008:19 -32. 
15. Saykin AJ, Wishart HA. fMRI of Memory in Aging and Dementia. In: Faro SH, Mohamed 
FB, Haughton V, eds. Functional MRI : Springer [LOCATION_001]; 2006:[ADDRESS_234666] cancer. Journal of Clinical and Experimental 
Neuropsychology. 2009.  
17. Ferguson RJ, McDonald BC, Saykin AJ, Ahles TA. Brain structure and function 
Differences in monozygotic twins: Possible effects of breast cancer chemotherapy. J Clin 
Oncol. 2007;25(25):3866 -3870.  
18. Holohan K, Von Ah D, McDonald BC, Saykin A. Neuroimaging, cancer and cognition: 
State of the knowledge brief. Seminars in Oncology Nursing. 2013;29(4):[ADDRESS_234667] cancer survivors. European Journal of Oncology Nursing. 
2013;17(2):236 -241. 
20. Spelten ER, Verbeek JH, Uitterhoeve AL, et al. Cancer, fatigue and the return of patients 
to work -a prospective cohort study. Eur J Cancer. 2003;39(11):1562 -1567.  
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/[ADDRESS_234668] returned to work after curative treatment. 
Support Care Cancer. 2006;14:1020 -1029.  
22. Bradley CJ, Neumark D, Luo Z, Schenk M. Employment and cancer: findings from a 
longitudinal study of breast and prostate cancer survivors. Cancer Invest. 2007;25(1):47 -
54. 
23. Feuerstein M, Hansen JA, Calvio LC, Johnson L, Ronquillo JG. Work productivity in 
brain tumor survivors. J Occup Environ Med. 2007;49(7):803 -811. 
24. Pryce J. Cancer survivorship and work: Symptoms, supervisor response, co -worker 
disclosure and work adjustment. Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation. 2007;17:83 -92. 
25. Taskila T, Martikainen R, Hietanen P, Lindbohm ML. Comparative study of work ability 
between cancer survivors and their referents. Eur J Cancer. 2007;43(5):914 -920. 
26. de Boer A, Verbeek JH, Spelten E, et al. Work ability and return -to-work in cancer 
patients. Br J Cancer. 2008;98:[ADDRESS_234669] cancer survivors at work. J 
Occup Environ Med. 2008;50(7):[ADDRESS_234670] cancer survivors. JOEM. 2010;52(2):[ADDRESS_234671] adjuvant versus high -dose chemotherapy. Patient Educ 
Couns. 2007;66(1):[ADDRESS_234672] cancer patients undergoing adjuvant 
chemotherapy: A needs analysis. Cancer Nursing. 2011;34(5):385 -392. 
31. Munir F, Burrows J, Yarker J, Kalawsky K, Bains M. Women's perceptions of 
chemotherapy -induced cognitive side affects on work ability: a focus group. Journal of 
Clinical Nursing. 2010;19(9 -10):1362 -1370.  
32. Munir F, Yarker J, McDermott H. Employment and the common cancers: correlates of 
work ability during or following cancer treatment. Occup Med (Lond). 2009;59(6):[ADDRESS_234673] cancer survivors. Oncology Nursing Forum. 
2009;36(3):326 -336. 
34. Ferguson RJ, Ahles TA, Saykin AJ, et al. Cognitve -behavioral management of 
chemotherapy -related cognitive change. Psycho -Oncology. 2007;16(8):772 -777. 
35. Von Ah D, Storey S, Jansen C, Allen D. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_197565]. Seminars in Oncology Nursing. 
2013;29(4):[ADDRESS_234674] cancer 
survivors: A randomized controlled trial. Breast Cancer Research and Treatment. 
2012;135(3):799 -809. 
37. Hassler MR, Elandt K, Preusser M, et al. Neurocognitive training in patients with high -
grade glioma: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. J Neurooncol. 2010;97(1):109 -115. 
38. Ferguson RJ, McDonald BC, Rocque MA, et al. Development of CBT for chemotherapy -
related cognitive change: results of a waitlist control trial. Psychooncology. 
2012;21(2):176 -186. 
39. McDougall GJ. Memory improvement program for elderly cancer survivors. Geriatric 
Nursing. 2001;22(4):185 -190. 
40. McDougall GJ, Becker H, Acee TW, Vaughan PW, Delville CL. Symptom management 
of affective and cognitive disturbance with a group of cancer survivors. Arch Psychiatr 
Nurs. 2011;25(1):24 -35. 
41. Gehring K, Sitskoorn MM, Gundy CM, et al. Cognitive rehabilitation in patients with 
gliomas: a randomized, controlled trial. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(22):3712 -3722.  
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/2020   Page 24 42. Schuurs A, Green HJ. A feasibility study of group cognitive rehabilitation for cancer 
survivors: Enhancing cognitive function and quality of life. Psycho -Oncology. 2012.  
43. Ball K, Berch DB, Helmers KF, et al. Effects of cognitive training interventions with older 
adults: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2002;288(18):2271 -2281.  
44. Wolinsky FD, Vander Weg MW, Howren MB, Jones MP, Dotson MM. A randomized 
controlled trial of cognitive training using a visual speed of processing intervention in 
middle aged and older adults. PloS one. 2013;8(5):e61624.  
45. National Cancer Policy Board Committee on Cancer Survivorship Improving Care and 
Quality of Life. From Cancer Patient to Cancer Survivor: Lost in Transition.  Washington, 
D.C.: The National Academies Press; 2005.  
46. National Institute of Nursing Research. NINR: Bring science to life -Strategic Plan. 2011.  
47. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975 -2009. 
2012; http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2008 , based on Novemeber [ADDRESS_234675] cancer. Br J Cancer. 
2006;94(6):[ADDRESS_234676] cancer: High -dose versus standard -
dose chemotherapy. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1998;90(3):[ADDRESS_234677] cancer treatment and cognitive 
functioning: Current status and future challenges in assessment. Breast Cancer Res 
Treat. 2005;92(3):199 -206. 
52. Vardy J, Wefel JS, Ahles TA, Tannock IF, Schagen SB. Cancer and cancer -therapy 
related cognitive dysfunction: an international perspective from the Venice cognitive 
workshop. Annals of Oncology. 2008;19:[ADDRESS_234678] cancer. Cancer. 
2010;116(14):[ADDRESS_234679] cancer across 3 phases of the disease. Cancer Nurs. 2005;28(3):219 -225. 
55. Boykoff N, Moieni M, Subramanian SK. Confronting chemobrain: An indepth look at 
survivors' reports of impact on work, social networks, and health care response. Journal 
of Cancer Survivorship. 2009;3(4):[ADDRESS_234680] cancer survivors. European journal of oncology nursing : the official 
journal of European Oncology Nursing Society. 2013;17(2):[ADDRESS_234681] cancer and lymphoma. J Clin 
Oncol. 2002;20(2):[ADDRESS_234682] carcinoma: Results of a 
prospective, randomized, longitudinal trial. Cancer. 2004;100(11):[ADDRESS_234683]. 2009;23(4):[ADDRESS_234684] cancer more than 20 years after 
adjuvant chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol. 2012.  
61. Boykoff N, Moieni M, Subramanian SK. Confronting chemobrain: an in -depth look at 
survivors' reports of impact on work, social networks, and health care response. J 
Cancer Surviv. 2009;3(4):223 -232. 
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/2020   Page 25 62. Valentine AD, Meyers CA. Cognitive and mood disturbance as causes and symptoms of 
fatigue in cancer patients. Cancer. 2001;92([ADDRESS_234685]):[ADDRESS_234686] cancer. Psychooncology. 2006;15(5):[ADDRESS_234687] cancer: a prospective study. Psycho -
Oncology. 2008;17(2):[ADDRESS_234688] cancer surgery. Res Nurs Health. 
1992;15(3):199 -207. 
66. Cimprich B. Development of an intervention to restore attention in cancer patients. 
Cancer Nurs. 1993;16(2):[ADDRESS_234689] cancer survivors. 38th Annual Meeting of the International 
Neuropsychological Society 2/3/2010 -2/6/2010, 2010; Acapulco, Mexico.  
68. Cull A, Hay C, Love SB, Mackie M, Smets E, Stewart M. What do cancer patients mean 
when they complain of concentration and memory problems? Br J Cancer. 
1996;74(10):[ADDRESS_234690] cancer survivors. NeuroRehabilitation. 2006;21(1):[ADDRESS_234691] cancer survivors: Impact on self, relationships, work ability, and life satsifaction. 
Eur J Cancer Under review.  
71. Hede K. Chemobrain Is Real but May Need New Name. J Natl Cancer Inst. 
2008;100(3):162 -169. 
72. Stuifbergen A, Becker H, Morgan S, Morrison J, Perez F. Home based computer -
assisted cognitive training. Int J MS Care. 2011;13(4):189 -198. 
73. Glasgow RE, Davis CL, Funnell MM, Beck A. Implementing practical interventios to 
support chronic illness self -management. Joint Commission Journal on Quality and 
Safety. 2003;29(11):563 -574. 
74. Center for Drug Evaluation and Treatment. E10 choice of control group and relaed 
issues in clinical trials. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
Food and Drug Administration; 2001.  
75. Lindquist R, Wyman JF, Talley KMC, Findorff MJ, Gross CR. Design of control -group 
conditions in clinical trials of behavioral interventions. Journal of Nursing Scholarship. 
2007;39(3):214 -221. 
76. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_84620] B. Guide to clinical trials.  [LOCATION_001]: Raven; 1991.  
77. Feuerstein M. Work and Cancer Survivors. In: Feuerstein M, ed. Work and Cancer 
Survivors . [LOCATION_001]: Springer Science; 2009.  
78. Feuerstein M, Todd BL, Moskowitz MC, et al. Work in cancer survivors: a model for 
practice and research. J Cancer Surviv. 2010;4(4):[ADDRESS_234692] of cancer on work 
outcomes. Cancer. 2004;101(8):1703 -1711.  
80. Kennedy F, Haslam C, Munir F, Pryce J. Returning to work following cancer: a 
qualitative exploratory study into the experience of returning to work following cancer. 
Eur J Cancer Care (Engl). 2007;16(1):17 -25. 
81. Main DS. A qualitative study of work and work return in cancer survivors. . 2005;14:992 -
1004.  
82. Amir Z, Neary D, Luker K. Cancer survivors' views of work [ADDRESS_234693] diagnosis: a [LOCATION_006] 
perspective. Eur J Oncol Nurs. 2008;12(3):190 -197. 
83. Fitch MI, Armstrong J, Tsang S. Patients' experiences with cognitive changes after 
chemotherapy. Canadian Oncology Nursing Journal. 2008;18(4):180 -192. 
84. Myers JS. Chemotherapy -related cognitive impairment: the breast cancer experience. 
Oncol Nurs Forum. 2012;39(1):E31 -40. 
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/2020   Page 26 85. Nieuwenhuijsen K, de Boer A, Spelten E, Sprangers MA, Verbeek JH. The role of 
neuropsychological functioning in cancer survivors' return to work one year after 
diagnosis. Psychooncology. 2009;18(6):589 -597. 
86. Mattson MP, Maudsley S, Martin B. BDNF and 5 -HT: a dynamic duo in age -related 
neuronal plasticity and neurodegenerative disorders. Trends in neurosciences. 
2004;27(10):589 -594. 
87. Huang ZJ, Kirkwood A, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_197566] T, et al. BDNF regulates the maturation of inhibition 
and the critical period of plasticity in mouse visual cortex. Cell. 1999;98(6):739 -755. 
88. Gorski JA, Zeiler SR, Tamowski S, Jones KR. Brain -derived neurotrophic factor is 
required for the maintenance of cortical dendrites. The Journal of neuroscience : the 
official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2003;23(17):[ADDRESS_234694] in rats. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for 
Neuroscience. 2000;20(18):7116 -7121.  
90. Linnarsson S, Bjorklund A, Ernfors P. Learning deficit in BDNF mutant mice. The 
European journal of neuroscience. 1997;9(12):2581 -2587.  
91. Young D, Lawlor PA, Leone P, Dragunow M, During MJ. Environmental enrichment 
inhibits spontaneous apoptosis, prevents seizures and is neuroprotective. Nature 
medicine. 1999;5(4):448 -453. 
92. Vinogradov S, Fisher M, Holland C, Shelly W, Wolkowitz O, Mellon SH. Is serum brain -
derived neurotrophic factor a biomarker for cognitive enhancement in schizophrenia? 
Biological psychiatry. 2009;66(6):549 -553. 
93. Pressler SJ, Titler M, Koelling TM, et al. Nurse -Enhanced Computerized Cognitive 
Training Increases Serum Brain -Derived Neurotropic Factor Levels and Improves 
Working Memory in Heart Failure. Journal of cardiac failure. 2015;21(8):[ADDRESS_234695] -chemotherapy cognitive impairment in patients 
with B -cell non -Hodgkin lymphoma: a first comprehensive approach to determine 
cognitive impairments after treatment with rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, 
vincristine and prednisone or rituximab and bendamustine. Leuk Lymphoma. 
2015;56(2):347 -352. 
95. Greimel E, Thiel I, Peintinger F, Cegnar I, Pongratz E. Prospective Assessment of 
Quality of Life of Female Cancer Patients. Gynecologic Oncology. 2002;85(1):140 -147. 
96. Cohen J. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences.  2 ed. New Jersey: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.; 1988.  
97. Mahncke HW, Conner BB, Appelman J, et al. Memory enhancement in healthy older 
adults using a brain plasticity -based training program: A randomized, controlled study. 
PNAS. 2006;103(33):[ADDRESS_234696] of speed of processing training on cognitive 
and everyday functions. Journals of Gerontology: SERIES B. 2007;62B(Special Issue 
I):19-31. 
99. Borrelli B, Sepi[INVESTIGATOR_115415] D, Ernst D, et al. A new tool to assess treatment fidelity and 
evaluation of treatment fidelity across 10 years of health behavior research. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 2005;73(5):[ADDRESS_234697] recruitment 
challenges: Strategies for successful collaboration with novice research agencies. 
Applied Nursing Research. 2003;16(1):[ADDRESS_234698] recruitment 
for familial cancer research. Ann Epi[INVESTIGATOR_197567]. 2001;11:[ADDRESS_234699] H, Fairbank J. Does it matter if 
clinicians recruiting for a trial don't understand what the trial is really about? Qualitative 
study of surgeons' experiences of participation in a pragmatic multi -centre RCT. Trials. 
2007;8(1):4.  
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/2020   Page 27 103. Marquez MA, Muhs JM, Tosomeen A, Riggs BL, Melton LJr. Costs and strategies in 
minority recruitment for osteoporosis research. J Bone Miner Res. 2003;18(1):3 -8. 
104. Unverzagt F, Monahan P, Moser L, et al. The Indiana University Telephone -Based 
Assessment of Neuropsychological Status: A new method for large scale 
neuropsychological assessment. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society 
: JINS. 2007;13(5):799.  
105. Nasreddine ZS, Phillips NA, Bedirian V, et al. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, 
MoCA: a brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. Journal of the American 
Geriatrics Society. 2005;53(4):695 -699. 
106. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Kroenke K, Williams JB. Validation and utility of self -report version of 
PRIME -MD: The PHQ primary care study. Primary care evaluation of mental disorders. 
Patient Health Questionnaire. Journal of American Medical Association. 
1999;282(18):1737 -1744.  
107. Kroenke K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Williams JB. The PHQ -9: validity of a brief depression severity 
measure. J Gen Intern Med. 2001;16(9):606 -613. 
108. Rey A. L'examen psychologique dans les cas d'encephalopathie traumatique. Archives 
de Psychologie. 1941;28:[ADDRESS_234700], Mich: Thames Valley Test Co and National Rehabilitation 
Services; 1985.  
110. Owsley C, Ball K, McGwin G, Jr., et al. Visual Processing Impairment and Risk of Motor 
Vehicle Crash Among Older Adults. JAMA. 1998;279(14):1083 -1088.  
111. Owsley C, Sloane M, McGwin G, Jr., Ball K. Timed instrumental activities of daily living 
tasks: relationship to cognitive function and everyday performance assessments in older 
adults. Gerontology. 2002;48(4):[ADDRESS_234701] Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 
1993;34(11):[ADDRESS_234702]. 1996;10(1):[ADDRESS_234703] of Attention in patients 
with Huntington's disease and amnesia. The Clinical neuropsychologist. 1996;10(1):90 -
95. 
115. Wechsler D. WAIS -III administration and scoring manual.  San Antonio: The 
Psychological Corporation; 1997.  
116. Benton AL, Hamsher KD. Multilingual aphasia examination.  Iowa City: AJA Associates; 
1989.  
117. Spreen O, Stauss E. A compendium of neuropsychological tests:  Administration, norms, 
and commentary.  [LOCATION_001]: Oxford University Press; 1998.  
118. Stroop JR. Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology. 1935;18:643 -662. 
119. Lai JS, Butt Z, Wagner L, et al. Evaluating the dimensionality of perceived cognitive 
function. Journal of pain and symptom management. 2009;37(6):982 -995. 
120. System P -rOMI. PROMIS: Dynamic tools to measure health outcomes from the patient 
perspective. 2013. Accessed May 10, 2013.  
121. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_5544], Choi SW, Reise SP, et al. Item banks for measuring emotional distress from 
the patient -reported outcomes measurement information system (PROMIS): depression, 
anxiety, and anger. Assessment. 2011;18(3):263 -283. 
122. Tuomi K, Ilmarinen J, Katajarinne L, Tulkki A. Work Ability Index.  2nd revised ed. 
Helsinki, Finland: Finnish Institue of Occupational Health; 1998.  
123. Radkiewich P, Widerszal -Bazyl M. Psychometric Properties of work ability index in the 
light of comparative survey study. . Int Cong Ser. 2005.  
124. de Zwart BC, Frings -Dresen MH, van Duivenbooden JC. Test -retest reliability of the 
Work Ability Index questionnaire. Occup Med (Lond). 2002;52(4):177 -181. 
IUSCC -0625  
Protocol Version Date:  1/27/2020   Page 28 125. Ferrell BR, Dow KH, Leigh S, Ly J, Gulasekaram P. Quality of life in long -term cancer 
survivors. Oncol Nurs Forum. 1995;22(6):915 -922. 
126. Hsieh H, Shannon S. Three approaches to qualitative content analysis.  . Qual Health 
Res. 2005;15(9):1277 -1288.  
127. Sandelowski M. What happened to qualitative description? Reserach in Nursing and 
Health. 2000;23(3):334 -340. 
128. Verbeke G, Molenberghs G. Linear mixed models for longitudinal data.  [LOCATION_001]: 
Springer; 2000.  
129. Hlatky MA, Boineau RE, Higginbotham MB, et al. A brief self -administered questionnaire 
to determine functional capacity (the Duke Activity Status Index). The American journal 
of cardiology. 1989;64(10):651 -654. 
130. Fukushima A, Kinugawa S, Homma T, et al. Decreased serum brain -derived 
neurotrophic factor levels are correlated with exercise intolerance in patients with heart 
failure. International journal of cardiology. 2013;168(5):e142 -144. 
 