Symptom Screening Linked to Care Pathways for Pediatric Patients with Cancer: a 
Cluster Randomized Trial  
This supplement contains the following items:  
1.Final Protocol (version date: 21Nov2023) with document history and summary  of 
amendments table p. 2
2.Original Protocol (vers ion date: 26Feb2020) p. 19
3.Original and Final Statistical Analysis Plan (vers ion date: 21Nov2023 ) (no amendments  
made) p. 32  
 
Page 1 of 17 
  
 
 
Protocol Title: Symptom Screening Linked to Care Pathways for Children with Cancer: a 
Cluster Randomized Trial  
 Date: November 21, 2023 
 
Sponsor /Coordinating Center :  
The Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_31331]  
[ADDRESS_205634]  
Toronto, Ont ario 
M5G 1X8  
 Principal Investigators:  
 Lillian Sung, MD PhD  
The Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_31331]  
[ADDRESS_205635]  
Toronto, Ont ario 
M5G 1X8  
[PHONE_507] x [ADDRESS_205636]  
Toronto, Ont ario  
M5G 1X8  
[PHONE_507] x [ADDRESS_205637], MC7810 San Antonio, [LOCATION_007]  
[ZIP_CODE] [PHONE_3794]  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
Page [ADDRESS_205638] been made and now, more than 82% of children with cancer will be cured.[ADDRESS_205639] children suffer and experience severe and distressing treatment -related 
symptoms such as pain, fatigue and nausea.2 In our cross -sectional study of 302 inpatients 8- 18 
years of age, when asked about yesterday  or today , 99% of children experienced at least one 
bothersome symptom and 60% experienced at least one severely  bothersome symptom, 
including severe pain in 22% and severe fatigue in 33%.3 Symptoms are important; w e 
previously demonstrated a strong  correlation between increasing symptom burden and worse 
quality of life (QoL) in children receiving cancer treatments.[ADDRESS_205640] of synonyms that met criteria for documentation of 
symptoms. For example,  “tired”, “feel weak ”, “low energy ”, and “sluggish” were all considered 
adequate documentation for fatigue. We also created a list of possible interventions for each 
symptom.  For most of the symptoms measured (12/15) , severely bothersome symptoms were 
documented in the health record less than 60% of the time. The most infrequently documented 
severely bothersome symptoms were problems with thinking or remembering things (0%), 
changes in how your body or face look (4.8%), changes in taste (7.7%) and tingly or numb 
hands or feet (11.1%). Only two severely bothersome symptoms were documented at least 80% 
of the time, namely hurt or pain ( 92.6% ) and throwing up or feeling like you might throw up 
(92.6%).  
 Provision  of an intervention to address  severely bothersome symptoms  occurred less than 
60% of the time for [ADDRESS_205641] infrequently treated severely bothersome 
symptoms were thinking or remembering things (0%), changes in how your body or face look 
(0%), tingly or numb hands or feet (0%), changes in taste ( 0%), diarrhea (0%) and feeling tired 
(1.6%). Intervention provision was most common for hurt or pain (96.3%), headache (89.5%), 
throwing up or feeling like you might throw up (88.9%) and  constipation (84.2%). However, even 
when interventions were provided,  they were often not prescribed specifically for that symptom  
(for example, acetaminophen for fever rather than pain) . 
 Within the adult oncology setting, screening and assessment of symptoms through patient 
self-report has been identified as an important priority.5-8 In adult cancer patients , routine 
collection of patient -reported outcomes (PROs) improves patient -clinician communication9, 
reduces distress10 and improves QoL.11,[ADDRESS_205642] of care, median 
overall survival was 31.2 months (95% confidence interval ( CI) 24.5 to 39.6) in the symptom 
screening group vs. 26.0 months (95% CI 22.1 to 30.9) in the standard of care group ( P=0.03).  
Consequently, routine assessment  of PROs is now considered essential to high quality care.11 It 
is also known that delivery of care consistent with clinical practice guidelines ( CPGs ) can 
improve patient outcomes.  For example, timely administration of CPG -consistent antibiotics to 
adult patients with fever and neutropenia resulted in significantly lower mortality compared to 
patients who did not receive CPG -consistent antibiotics.[ADDRESS_205643] to these accomplishments  in adults, efforts in children are limited.17 To help 
address this gap, w e developed SSPedi (Symptom Screening in Pediatrics Tool ; Appendix 
1)18,19 and SPARK (Supportive care Prioritization, Assessment and Recommendations for Kids ; 
Appendix 2). SSPedi is a self -reported 15-item symptom screening tool for children receiving 
cancer treatments. SSPedi consists of the following 15 items: disappointed or sad, scared or 
worried, cranky or angry, problems thinking, body or face changes, tiredness, mouth sores, 
 
Page 3 of 17 
 headache, other pain, tingling or numbness, throwing up, hunger changes, taste changes, 
constipation and diarrhea.  We developed SSPedi because our previous work concluded that 
then- available pediatric cancer symptom assessment tools were not appropriate for clinical use 
due to length or content.20 Items were generated using a nominal group technique among 
pediatric cancer clinicians and a patient advocate .20 Next, b ased upon input from 50 children 
receiving cancer treatments and 20 parents of pediatric oncology patients, we refined the paper and electronic versions of SSPedi and confirmed content validity, understandability and ease of 
use.
20-22 The electronic version of SSPedi has an audio feature that allows specific questions or 
the entire instrument to be read aloud. A help feature provides synonyms for each symptom; these were derived from children themselves during cognitive interview s. 
 Next, we conducted a multi -center study in the US and Canada to evaluate the 
psychometric properties of SSPedi. SSPedi was shown to be reliable ( internal consistency and 
test re -test and inter -rater reliability), valid (construct validity) and responsive to change in 502 
English -speaking children 8- 18 years of age receiving cancer  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] .
3 More specifically, the 
intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) were 0.88 (95% CI 0.82 to 0.92) for test re- test reliability, 
and 0.76 (95% CI 0 .71 to 0.80) for inter -rater reliability  between children and parents . Mean 
difference in SSPedi scores between groups hypothesized to be more and less symptomatic was 7.8  (95% CI 6.4  to 9.2; P<0.001) .
[ADDRESS_205644] validity was demonstrated as all hypothesized 
relationships among measures were observed.  SSPedi was responsive to change; t hose who 
reported they were much better or worse on a  global symptom change scale had significantly 
changed from their baseline score (mean absolute difference 5.6, 95% CI 3.8 to 7.5; P<0.001).  
This instrument has been translated into Spanish ; the translated version is satisfactory to use in 
the US and Canada based on understandability and cultural relevance . 
 Building upon SSPedi, SPARK  is a web -based applicat ion that consists of two components: 
(1) a symptom screening component centered on SSPedi; and (2) a supportive care CPG 
component. While SSPedi asks children  about symptoms, SPARK facilitates access to SSPedi, 
encourages symptom screening, generates reports and allows children to track their symptoms. In addition, when used by [CONTACT_152905] , SPARK links the symptoms identified using 
SSPedi with CPGs to manage them. CPGs contained within SPARK are those endorsed by [CONTACT_176167]’s Oncology Group ( COG ) and thereby [CONTACT_176168] .
23 
  
AIMS  
 Aims 1 and 2
: Among children with newly diagnosed cancer, to determine if symptom screening 
and feedback to healthcare providers at least three times weekly  and locally -adapted symptom 
management care pathways , when compared to usual care : 
Aim 1 . Improves overall self -reported symptom scores (total SSPedi score), fatigue 
(PROMIS –Fatigue) and cancer -specific QoL (PedsQL 3.0 Acute Cancer Module) over 8 
weeks  
Hypothesis: Symptom screening and care pathways will improve symptoms, fatigue and QoL 
Aim 2
. Improves symptom documentation, increases provision of interventions for 
symptoms, and reduces emergency department visits and unplanned clinic visits and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_149701] 8 weeks  
Hypotheses: Symptom screening and care pathways will increase symptom documentation and provision of interventions for symptoms, and will reduce healthcare 
utilization.  
Aim 3
: As an exploratory aim, we will evaluate key elements of the intervention related to the 
external validity and generalizability of the intervention effects using the RE -AIM framework.  
 
Page 4 of 17 
  
METHODS  
 Overall Strategy  
 This is a cluster randomized trial  including 20 pediatric oncology sites . The coordinating 
center is The Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_75521], Canada. Sites will be randomized to either systematic symptom screening via SPARK with provision of symptom reports to healthcare 
providers  containing links to care pathways for symptom management (intervention)  or usual 
care (control).   
 Research Methods  
Eligibility: We will include children with cancer who: (1) are 8- 18 years of age at enrollment  
(SSPedi is validated in this age range) ; (2) are English  or Spanish- speaking (all PROs are  
validated in these languages  in this age range) ; (3) have any newly diagnosed cancer; (4) have 
a plan for any chemotherapy, radiotherapy or surgery ; (5) have a plan to be followed by [CONTACT_176169] ≥ 50% of the 8 -week study period and expected to be 
available on site or virtually for the week 8 assessment  and ( 6) enroll within 28 days  after 
diagnosis or treatment initiation, whichever occurs later . Exclusion criteria will be cognitive 
disability (attending lower than second  grade or equivalent ) or visual impairment (cannot see 
SPARK even with corrective lens) .   
  
Procedures: In this cluster randomized trial, we will randomize sites to either intervention or 
control groups . At both intervention and control sites, w e will enroll participants within [ADDRESS_205645] been answered, informed consent and assent will 
be obtained from participant s and guardians  as appropriate . For those who decline to contribute 
PROs, they will be given the option to only participate in a retrospective chart review to evaluate 
symptom documentation, intervention provision and healthcare utilization. Careful tracking of all 
newly diagnosed patients by [CONTACT_176170], and where possible, reasons for declining participation.   
 For all enrolled participants  who will be contributing PROs ( excluding those only involved in 
the retrospective chart review) , a personal SPARK account will be created to allow SSPedi to be 
completed  and symptom results to be recorded. At the [ADDRESS_205646] s. If sites already routinely perform 
systematic symptom screening or use care pathways  for symptom management , these may be 
continued but their use will be recorded .  
 At both intervention and control sit es, demographic information including age, sex, race, 
ethnicity, diagnosis, cancer stage, family socioeconomic information and treatment plan will be 
collected at enrollment . The following PROs will be obtained by [CONTACT_176171], week 4 and week 8 for all participants : SSPedi, PROMIS Fatigue and the PedsQL 3.0 
Acute Cancer Module (Aim 1). We will contact [CONTACT_176172] [ADDRESS_205647] information to 
complete the questionnaires by [CONTACT_6968], text or over the phone.  Data from health records (Aim 2 ) 
will be abstracted for all enrolled participants. Relapse and cancer treatment received 
information will be collected at the end of the study . 
   
 
Procedures at Intervention and Control Sites : 
 Procedures at Intervention Sites : Participants  enrolled at intervention sites will be prompted 
to complete symptom screening three times  weekly via SPARK with corresponding feedback 
and links to symptom management care pathways sent to their healthcare providers .  
 
a) Symptom Screening using SPARK
: Symptom screening using SPARK can be performed  at 
any time and as often as desired,  but screening will be prompted three times  weekly for eight  
weeks. In our pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602], the mean time for SSPedi completion using the identical SPARK 
platform was 1.0 (SD=1.5) minutes  and in over 1,[ADDRESS_205648] completed SSPedi, no 
child has ever stated that SSPedi completion was distressing. The ideal frequency of symptom 
screening is not known; the need to identify change in symptoms as soon as possible must be 
balanced against the burden of frequent screening to children and healthcare providers. In order 
to identify the ideal frequency of symptom screening reminders , we surveyed site investigators 
at participating sites. The most commonly suggested frequency was three times  weekly  (n=15, 
range 2 -5 times weekly) . However, it is important to stress that three times  weekly is the 
frequency in which we will remind participants to complete SSPedi; participants can complete 
SSPedi as often as they wish including daily or more often .  
 Participants will be set up to use their own smart phone,  tablet  or computer  to perform 
symptom screening. If participant s do not have a device, one will be loaned to them  for the 
study duration.  Text message reminders will be sent from SPARK using a HIPPA -compliant 
third party vendor to route the text messages. Email  reminder s will be sent from  SPARK using 
the institutional email domain or other institutionally -approved approaches where required .  
 b) Symptom Reports to Healthcare Providers
: Each day the participant completes symptom 
screening (whether prompted or unprompted)  and has at least one severely bothersome 
symptom , the primary healthcare team will receive an email summarizing the symptom report  
and highlighting symptoms that are “ a lot” or “extremely” bothersome.  Emails  will include links to 
the site-specific care pathways for symptom management.  Patient name [CONTACT_176201]. Thus, patient 
name [CONTACT_176202][INVESTIGATOR_176145] . These  approaches  have  been approved 
by [CONTACT_152306][INVESTIGATOR_31331]’s  Privacy Office and IRB , and all IRBs of institutions that have 
participated in other  SPARK studies . In terms of email  communication, each hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s policies  
will be followed. At some hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600], emails sent internally within the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_176146]. In this case, SPARK emails will be generated from that hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s email domain if 
possible. Some hospi[INVESTIGATOR_176147]; these will be used where required. 
Other approaches will  be instituted where required.  
 Qualitative feedback from providers receiving these reports in our pi[INVESTIGATOR_176148].  When specifically asked, receiving these reports was  not considered burdensome . In 
fact, providers found reports helpful to communicate symptom experience and to initiate or 
escalate symptom management interventions . 
 
c) Creation of Local Care Pathways for Symptom Management : Care pathway  templates for 
symptom management have been drafted for each of the [ADDRESS_205649] , templates are  also 
based on “good practice statements”24. In brief, “good practice statements” are guidance 
statements regarding the provision of care where to provide care in any other way would be 
considered unethical or absurd.  Guideline experts have explicitly acknowledged their  necessity 
and have published guidance for how and when to use such statements.24 Upon study 
activation, we will work with each of the 10 intervention sites to develop site -specific, adapted 
care pathways that consider relevant work flows, institutional culture and available resources 
(laboratory tests, medications and personnel) ; this process will require three months to 
complete . The finalized local care pathways will contain explicit direction for how to prevent and 
manage symptoms at each site . The process for creating local care pathways will be based 
upon a procedure we developed for CPG adaptation, will require local inter -professional input 
and will be finalized at  an in -person or video- conference meeting at the site.[ADDRESS_205650] changed  to gain insight into the 
adaptation process  over the course of the study and to  evaluate how the process might inform 
future implementation of care pathways . Adaptations will be summarized and will be made 
available to all intervention sites during the study, and will be widely available to all sites 
following study completion as part of knowledge translation, and as a component of the RE -AIM 
implementation evaluation.  
 
d) Training
: From a patient participant  perspective, training on how to use SPARK and how to 
interpret SPARK symptom reports will be provided at enrollment. From a healthcare provider 
perspective, t raining on how to interpret SPARK symptom reports, CPGs and care pathways will 
be provided to each site during the in- person or video- conference meeting to adapt symptom 
management care pathways  and via a webinar at study activation  and regularly throughout the 
study to educate new staff and to re- enforce knowledge for  existing staff . Different aspects of  
training also will be highlighted during the site calls  every two week s. Stories of successful 
implementation at a particular site will be shared so that all sites can benefit.  Technical 
assistance and support will be available to providers throughout the study  from The Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_176149].   
 
Procedures at Control Sites:  At control sites, usual  care will be provided,  which may or may 
not include symptom screening, access to CPGs  or care pathways. Participants will complete 
SSPedi to obtain the primary outcome at weeks 0, 4 and 8 but the scores will not be revealed to providers and will not be linked to care pathways . 
 Describing  Site Characteristics  (both Intervention and Control Sites)
: In order to describe 
supportive care practices  that could impact on intervention effectiveness and to gain insight into  
future implementation ( adoption) , the site PI s will complete a short questionnaire at study 
activation (baseline prior to randomization) and annually while participants  are being enrolled. 
Questions will include demographic characteristics of patients and providers ( only at baseline), 
psychosocial resources available for pediatric cancer patients and current approaches to 
systematic symptom screening, symptom management CPG availability and care pathway  
existence for SSPedi  symptoms . CPG availability will be defined as either the posting of CPGs 
themselves or links to CPGs on an institutional web site or drive that is available to all oncology 
providers (not an individual clinician’s computer only). Care pathway use will be defined as a 
written set of instructions for the management of a symptom that is available to all oncology providers at that site.  Site characteristics were also mea sured using
 the inner setting measures 
 
Page 7 of 17 
 from the Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research (CFIR).26,27  
 
Site Monitoring,  Quality Control  and Intervention Site Auditing : Quality control will be maintained 
with calls every two weeks among participating site PIs and clinical research personnel . 
Separate calls will be held with intervention and control sites  to reduce the risk of contamination. 
On those calls, we will summarize enrollment s at each site and review the proportion of eligible 
patients enrolled. We will also review identified issues with respect to missing data and data 
quality identified during routine data checks.   
 For intervention sites, fidelity to the symptom screening approach will also be monitored.  
Each intervention site will be audited at least once ( 4-6 months after site activation)  to assess 
adherence to the process of symptom screening, namely documentation of participant training in the health records, completion of SSPedi at least three times weekly, and delivery of symptom reports to providers. Accessibility of local care pathways will also be examined. These 
will be evaluated as part of the implementation dimension of RE -AIM.
28 Audits may be 
conducted in person or remotely.  
 Proposed Practical Arrangements for Allocating Sites : The allocation sequence will be 
computer generated. Sites will be randomized 1:1 and will be stratified by [CONTACT_176173]  ≥ or < median: (1) anticipated number of cancer patients 8- 18 years of age who 
speak English or Spanish per year, and (2) percentage of patients with private insurance vs. 
other payment types . Block size is not disclosed in this protocol . Assignment will be 
communicated by [CONTACT_176174] [INVESTIGATOR_176150].   
  
Proposed Methods for Protecting against Sources of Bias : Given the cluster randomized 
nature of the study, a potential source of bias is that allocation will be known, which could lead to selection bias during participant  enrollment. To address this potential, efforts will be made to 
both identify all potentially eligible participants and maximize enrollment. We will describe those not approached and those who decline to participate in the intervention and control sites. We 
will describe these groups by [CONTACT_4321], age, race, ethnicity, cancer type and institution.  
 Primary , Secondary and Exploratory Outcome Measures:  Endpoints for Aim 1 are PROs; all 
PROs are self -report. The primary endpoint is the total SSPedi symptom score,  which is the 
sum of each of the 15 SSPedi item’s Likert score s, resulting in a total score that ranges from 0 
(no bothersome symptoms) to 60 (worst bothersome symptoms). The recall period is yesterday 
or today. The total SSPedi score is reliable, valid and responsive to change in children with 
cancer [ADDRESS_205651] 7 days. It is reliable and valid in children 
8-18 years of age with cancer.29 QoL will be measured using the PedsQL 3.0 Acute Cancer 
Module.30 The 7 day recall version will be used. This measure is a multidimensional instrument 
that is reliable and valid in children with cancer.30 It assesses pain and hurt, nausea, procedural 
anxiety, treatment anxiety, worry, cognitive problems, perceived physical appearance and communication. All PROs are validated for use in English and Spanish for children 8- 18 years of 
age. 
 For both groups , all questionnaires  including SSPedi will be administered at baseline, week 
4 (±1 week) and week 8 (±1 week) at  an in- person visit during a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_176151]  
(preferred), or will be obtained remotely . The approach will be identical for intervention and 
control sites .   
 Endpoints for Aim [ADDRESS_205652] and are:  documentation of 
symptoms, provision of interventions for symptoms and emergency department visits and unplanned clinic visits and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]. Guardians will also be asked about healthcare visits to ensure encounters outside the primary institution are captured. Documentation of symptoms 
and intervention provision for symptom control will be abstracted from the patients’ health 
records using the procedures our team previously  developed.
[ADDRESS_205653] will be 
noted. B oth documentation of symptoms and interventions for these symptoms will be described 
for each specific symptom  at each time point . These outcomes will be obtained on each day that 
a week 4 or 8 SSPedi assessment was obtained (as measured in conjunction with the other PROs) with a one day window before and after these assessments. For example, if the 
participant completed SSPedi on a Tuesday, we would accept documentation of that symptom (or provision of an intervention for that symptom) if it were recorded in the health records on Monday, Tuesday or Wednesday. A comprehensive and field- tested list of synonyms for 
symptoms and interventions is available for each of the [ADDRESS_205654] private, publ ic or no insurance. Healthcare provider  characteristics will 
include number of physician and nurse practitioner full -time equivalents and median years in 
practice.  Adoption will be assessed through the number of SSPedi per participant completed at 
intervention institutions; this analysis will use duration of time on protocol therapy as an offset. Further, we will dichotomize each participant as a high or low SSPedi c ompleter, with a high 
completer being defined as one who completed [ADDRESS_205655], access route (email link 
or QR code) and device (iPad, iPhone, Mac, Windows or unknown). Implementation outcomes 
will capture the percentages of intervention patients who came off protocol therapy early and the 
number of all parti cipants who came off study early, both overall and stratified by [CONTACT_176175].  
 Off Protocol and Off Study Criteria  
Off protocol criteria only apply to intervention sites. When off protocol criteria are met, the 
reminders  to complete symptom screening via SPARK will be discontinued but the collection of 
PROs will continue until off study criteria are met.  
 Off protocol criteria:  
a) Refusal to continue with study intervention 
b) Physician determines it is in the patient’s best interest  
c) Death 
d) Completion of planned study intervention  
e) Other, describe  
 Off study criteria:  
a) Withdrawal of consent for further data submission 
b) Physician determines it is in the patient’s best interest  
c) Death 
d) Completion of planned study observations  (Up to [ADDRESS_205656] health records 
 
Page 9 of 17 
 outcomes accurately)  
e) Other, describe 
 
ANALYTIC PLAN  
 
Power Calculations   
The primary endpoint is the total self -reported SSPedi score at eight weeks. We used 
data from our SSPedi validation study for power calculation.3 In that study, w e recruited 302 
children across nine sites who were hospi[INVESTIGATOR_176152]. Children completed SSPedi on days 1 and 4 and a 5 -point global symptom change 
scale on day 4. The average absolute change in total SSPedi scores for those who reported 
they were a little better or a little worse (1 -point change) was 2.7 while the average absolute 
change in total SSPedi scores for those who reported they were much better or much wor se (2-
point change) was 5.6. Thus, the minimum plausible clinically  important difference is likely 
approximately 3.0 but may be higher.  The intracluster correlation coefficient ( ICC), a measure of 
the degree of clustering, was 0.021 (95% CI 0 to 0.123). In power calculations for the proposed 
study, we used ICC=0.021 but show sensitivity analyses to ICCs at the extremes of the 95% CI  
(which are unlikely) . Among the [ADDRESS_205657] deviation of 8.8 (derived from the SSPedi validation 
study3). Power for each combination in the table was calculated through simulation of 4000 
trials; each one was analyzed with a linear mixed effects model clustering by [CONTACT_176176] a significant P value was taken as the estimate of power. If the re is a baseline 
characteristic, such as age, that explains 20% of the variance in 8 -week scores, including that 
variable in analyses increases power to the value shown in the far right column. Table 1  shows 
that assuming a minimal clinically important difference of 3.0 and with inclusion of age as a 
covariate in the analysis, there is 85% power with ICC=0.021. Assuming that 10% of patients 
have missing final scores, we will inflate the sample size to 4 44. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Baseline Characteristics:  Summary statistics on baseline characteristics will be calculated 
within each study arm and presented in a table –  means and standard deviations (SDs) for 
variables treated as continuous, counts and percentages for categorical variables, along with 
total numbers with missing data.   
  Table 1: Power Assuming 400 Patients, Alpha=0.[ADDRESS_205658] Deviation=8.8  
ICC Difference  Power  
Without baseline predictor  With age as baseline predictor  
0.000  2.5 71.0 81.4 
 3.0 86.7 94.2 
 3.5 95.9 98.9 
0.021  2.5 59.5 70.1 
 3.0 75.7 85.2 
 3.5 86.5 94.2 
0.123  2.5 26.6 32.6 
 3.0 38.2 45.3 
 3.5 47.7 57.0 
 
Page 10 of 17 
 Outcomes: Similar tables will be created for all study outcomes.  Individual SSPedi symptom 
scores will be summarized by [CONTACT_176177] [ADDRESS_205659] 
bothersome categories.  
 
Comparative Analyses:  The primary analysis will use the patient -level [ADDRESS_205660] for cluster, fixed 
effects for treatment assignment, child age and diagnosis group (leukemia/lymphoma, solid 
tumor and central nervous system tumor), and two binary fixed effects at the cluster level for 
stratification variables (above or below the average anticipated yearly number of English or 
Spanish- speaking cancer patients 8 -18 years of a ge, and above or below the average 
anticipated percentage of patients with private insurance vs. other payment types). Child age 
and diagnosis group will be included as they are known to be associated with total SSPedi 
scores; this will reduce residual var iance in scores. We do not plan to adjust the model for 
baseline SSPedi score because some of the care pathway interventions (that are prophylactic) 
will affect symptoms prior to enrollment and the baseline score may already reflect some benefit 
of the cluster’s treatment assignment. The treatment effect will be the covariate- adjusted mean 
difference between study groups in 8- week SSPedi, presented with a 95% CI and a two- sided 
p-value for a test of no treatment effect. If we find the residuals from the mix ed model fitted to 
the [ADDRESS_205661] sensitivity 
analyses, one using normalizing transformations of the outcome and another using an ordinal 
regression model. To account for potential differ ential enrollment of surgery only patients (who 
might not be cared for by [CONTACT_176178]) between intervention vs. control sites, we will also conduct a sensitivity analysis restricted to patients that received systemic chemotherapy.  
 
 Secondary outcomes will be analyzed as follows:  
1. Self-reported individual symptoms at weeks 4 and 8 on the SSPedi instrument : For 
each of the 15 ordinal outcomes representing symptoms (scored 0 -4), a mixed effects 
proportional odds model will be fitted using treatment assignment and stratification factors 
as fixed effects covariates and with a random effect for site.  As some i ndividual symptoms 
may be uncommon, to avoid specifying models that may be overfitted for those symptoms, 
these models will use only this minimal set of three covariates. The estima ted odds ratio for 
the intervention (representing the odds of having a higher vs. lower score in the intervention group) will be estimated and presented along with a 95% CI.  
2. PROMIS Fatigue Scale: This scale will be treated as a continuous variable and analyzed 
using a linear mixed effects model in the same way as the primary SSPedi outcome.   
3. PedsQL 3.0 Acute Cancer Module domain scores:  Each of these [ADDRESS_205662] 
as the primary SSPedi outcome.   
4. Documentation of symptoms on weeks 4 and 8 (± 1 day): Analyses will involve three analyses for each symptom class. Each analysis will fit a mixed effects logistic regression 
model to estimate the odds ratio for documentation (on weeks 4 and 8) comparing 
intervention groups, adjusting for stratification factors. It is possible that there will be too few 
documentation events to reliably fit this mixed model to all 15 symptoms. If this model 
cannot be fitted to some symptoms (likely because the random effects variance cannot be 
estimated), we will fit a fixed effects logistic regression model to just those symptoms. Three 
cohorts will be defined:  
a. Each participant will be classed as having the symptom documented or not. All 
participants are included in the analytic sample for each symptom.  
b. The analytic sample will be limited to those participants who self -report the symptom 
on weeks 4 and 8 (symptom score > 0).  
 
Page [ADDRESS_205663] 
bothersome self -report of the symptom on the weeks 4 and 8 SSPedi (symptom 
score ≥ 3).  
5. Interventions for symptoms: Analyses will follow a similar flow to the analyses of 
documentation of symptoms. For each of the 15 symptoms, each participant will be 
classified as having an intervention at weeks 4 and 8 (±1 days).  Also collected is whether interventions were adminis tered specifically for the specific symptoms. For example, 
acetaminophen may be administered for fever or pain. As interventions are expected to be 
more uncommon than symptoms, all treatment effects will be estimated by [CONTACT_176179] (i.e., ignoring clustering), p -values will be 
computed from the Fisher exact test, and 95% CI for differences in proportions will use the 
Newcombe method. Three cohorts will be defined:  
a. Each participant will be classed as having an intervention for the symptom or not. All 
participants are included in the analytic sample for each intervention- symptom pair.  
b. The analytic sample will be limited to those participants who self -report the symptom 
on the weeks 4 and 8 SSPedi (symptom score > 0).  
c. The analytic sample will be limited to those participants who have the most 
bothersome self -report of the symptom on the weeks 4 and 8 SSPedi (symptom 
score ≥ 3).  
6. Unplanned encounters:  For each of the secondary endpoints of unplanned health services 
utilization (emergency, clinic visits, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], and the total across categories), the 
number of events per child will be counted over the 8- week period and compared between 
randomiz ed groups using a mixed- effects Poisson or negative binomial regression analysis 
(with zero -inflation if necessary), with a random effect for site and fixed effects for the two 
stratification factors. If a child has less than 8 weeks of follow- up, the model will include an 
offset equal to the logarithm of each child’s follow -up time.  
 
 Exploratory outcomes  will be analyzed as follows:  
1. Reach: w e will describe the baseline demographic characteristics (sex, age or age group 
and diagnosis group) of  eligible patients who participate and who do not participate  using 
means and standard deviations for continuous variables and counts and percentages for categorical variables. We will also summarize CFIR inner setting attributes as counts and 
percentages.  
2. Effectiveness: In addition to the analyses of primary and secondary outcomes detailed 
above, we will also carry out analyses that dichotomize each of the 15 SSPedi symptoms as 
being severely bothersome (3 or 4) or not.  Percentages for each symptom will be tabulated 
and compared between intervention groups using mixed effects binary logistic regression. 
We will also assess between- site variation in the odds of having a severely bothersome 
symptom (after adjusting for intervention and stratification factors)  by [CONTACT_176180] (MOR). This is an alternative measure of clustering (or between -cluster variability); it is the estimated median 
of the ratio of the odds of a bothersome sym ptom for a participant at one site to the odds of 
a bothersome symptom for an otherwise identical participant at another site. The MOR is 
always defined with the higher odds in the numerator. One appealing aspect of the MOR is 
that it is on the same scale as the odds ratio for treatment, aiding interpretation of both the 
OR for intervention and the MOR for variation in the outcome.  
3. Adoption: We will characterize adoption at intervention sites by [CONTACT_176181]:  
a. characteristics of sites and their providers  
b. number of SSPedis completed per enrolled participant  
c. proportion of participants that are high or low SSPedi completers  
d. number of times the institutional care pathways were clicked.  
 
Page [ADDRESS_205664] for site. Participant characteristics will 
include sex, age/age group, race, ethnicity, preferred language, and c ancer diagnosis group. 
Guardian characteristics will include marital status, guardian employment and highest 
education, and high annual household income. Site characteristics will be those included 
above. The dependence of the odds of being a high responde r on these same 
characteristics will be assessed using mixed effects logistic regression adjusting for 
stratification factors.   
 The number of recorded clicks is available on aggregate for each site, so we will 
summarize this as a set of 10 rates, clicks per enrolled participant, and assess whether 
there is site -to-site variability by [CONTACT_6486] a random effects Poisson or negative bi nomial model 
with clicks as the outcome and the logarithm of the number of patients as an offset.  A summary rate will be estimated from this model and the median rate ratio (analogous to the 
MOR above) will be calculated.  
4. Implementation will calculate the percentage of patients who enrolled but came off protocol 
therapy early (intervention only) or off study early (all participants), overall and stratified by 
[CONTACT_176182].  C ounts and percentages will be shown , with no inferential 
statistics.  
 
Missing Data: The PedsQL will be scored according to its scoring guide, which includes rules 
for scoring in the presence of missing elements on each domain modules.  No other 
deterministic rule -based method will be used to deal with missing data.   
 If more than 10% of participants are missing the primary outcome or secondary patient -
reported outcomes, the analysis will use multiple imputation based on previous SSPedi 
assessments (weeks 0 and 4), group and site. In addition, we will conduct sensitivit y analysis 
assuming that missing scores are from children with high total SSPedi scores and from children 
with low total SSPedi scores (randomly drawn from the highest and lowest quartile). A set of [ADDRESS_205665] above, and the key covariates that appear in our adjusted models (age, diagnosis group and stratification factors). The models will 
be fitted in each imput ed dataset and the pooled estimate of the treatment effect and its 
standard error will be computed using Rubin’s rules.  
 Analyses of documentation and interventions will not use any imputation. There can be 
no missing data for these outcomes: if a symptom is not documented in the health record and 
there is no record of an intervention being used, then this constitutes a ‘no ’ for the outcome. 
While it is possible that the SSPedi symptom score needed for the identification of the analytic 
datasets in analyses (4b, 4c, 5b, and 5c) is missing for some participants, the more exploratory 
nature of these analyses led us to the deci sion to use only observed data for these outcomes.  
 
FEASIBILITY AND POTENTIAL BENEFITS /RISKS  
 
Feasibility and Recruitment Rate  
 Among the [ADDRESS_205666] agreed to participate, th ere are expected to be 60 patients/ 
 
Page 13 of 17 
 month who are newly diagnosed with cancer 8- 18 years of age and who speak English or 
Spanish. Assuming that 60% meet eligibility criteria (for example, some patients will not receive 
treatment for cancer such as those with low grade brain tumors  and some centers provide 
consultation only services for newly diagnosed patients ), and 75% agree to participate 
(conservative estimate based upon other SPARK studies), we anticipate enrollment of 27 
patients/month. Thus, to reach the target sample size of 444 patients, enrollment is anticipated 
to be  complete within 2 to 2.5 years  (this allows for periods of slow enrollment such as holidays 
or when research personnel have limited availability) . In terms of timelines, start -up activities will 
require [ADDRESS_205667] to 
effort required. Abstraction of symptom documentation and intervention provision will be done 
over a short time frame (3 days for each of  two time points (weeks 4 and 8)); pi[INVESTIGATOR_176153]. The PROs at weeks 4 and 8 
will require <[ADDRESS_205668] better symptom control and QoL by 
[CONTACT_4907]. Even for those who decline participation in the study, establishment of 
care pathways for symptom management may improve symptom control for all patients at that 
site. For participants at control sites, participants may gain increased self -awareness of 
symptoms by [CONTACT_176183] 0, 4 and 8.  
 Risks include the potential for  inadvertent disclosure of personal health information although 
risks should be low given the precautions instituted. Although there is a risk of distress with 
symptom assessment, such an occurrence has not been observed in SSPedi studies to date.  
Study participation also entails time commitment and some inconvenience to schedule the 
weeks 4 and 8 PRO  assessments .  
   
   
 
 
Page 14 of 17 
 REFERENCES  
 
 1. Canadian Cancer Society's Steering Committee on Cancer Statistics: Canadian Cancer 
Statistics. Toronto, ON, Canadian Cancer Society, 2011  
 2. Baggott C, Dodd M, Kennedy C, et al: Changes in children's reports of symptom 
occurrence and severity during a course of myelosuppressive chemotherapy. J Pediatr Oncol Nurs 
27:307- 15, 2010  
 3. Dupuis LL, Johnston DL, Baggott C, et al: Validation of the Symptom Screening in 
Pediatrics Tool in Children Receiving Cancer Treatments. J Natl Cancer Inst, 2017  
 4. Hyslop S, Davis H, Duong N, et al: Symptom Documentation and Intervention Provision 
for Symptom Control in Children Receiving Cancer Treatments. Submitted 2018  
 5. Carelle N, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_13038] E, Bellanger A, et al: Changing patient perceptions of the side effects of 
cancer chemotherapy. Cancer 95:155 -63, 2002  
 6. Coates A, Abraham S, Kaye SB, et al: On the receiving end --patient perception of the 
side-effects of cancer chemotherapy. Eur J Cancer 19:203 -8, 1983 
 7. de Boer -Dennert M, de Wit R, Schmitz PI, et al: Patient perceptions of the side- effects of 
chemotherapy: the influence of 5HT3 antagonists. Br J Cancer 76:1055 -61, 1997  
 8. Griffin AM, Butow PN, Coates AS, et al: On the receiving end. V: Patient perceptions of 
the side effects of cancer chemotherapy in 1993. Ann Oncol 7:[ADDRESS_205669] AF, et al: Patient -reported outcome use in oncology: a 
systematic review of the impact on patient- clinician communication. Support Care Cancer 26:41 -60, 
2018  
 10. Berry DL, Hong F, Halpenny B, et al: Electronic self- report assessment for cancer and 
self- care support: results of a multicenter randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 32:199 -205, 2014 
 11. Mooney K, Berry DL, Whisenant M, et al: Improving Cancer Care Through the Patient 
Experience: How to Use Patient- Reported Outcomes in Clinical Practice. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book 
37:695- 704, 2017  
 12. Basch E, Deal AM, Kris MG, et al: Symptom Monitoring With Patient -Reported Outcomes 
During Routine Cancer Treatment: A Randomized Controlled Trial. J Clin Oncol 34:557 -65, 2016  
 13. Basch E, Deal AM, Dueck AC, et al: Overall Survival Results of a Trial Assessing Patient -
Reported Outcomes for Symptom Monitoring During Routine Cancer Treatment. JAMA, 2017  
 14. Wright JD, Neugut AI, Ananth CV, et al: Deviations from guideline -based therapy for 
febrile neutropenia in cancer patients and their effect on outcomes. JAMA Intern Med 173:559 -68, 2013  
 15. FitzGerald JM, Boulet LP, McIvor RA, et al: Asthma control in Canada remains 
suboptimal: the Reality of Asthma Control (TRAC) study. Can Respir J 13:253 -9, 2006 
 16. Grimshaw J, Eccles M, Thomas R, et al: Toward evidence -based quality improvement. 
Evidence (and its limitations) of the effectiveness of guideline dissemination and implementation strategies [ADDRESS_205670] 2:S14 -20, 2006 
 17. Wolfe J, Orellana L, Cook EF, et al: Improving the care of children with advanced cancer 
by [CONTACT_176184] -reported feedback intervention: results from the PediQUEST randomized 
controlled trial. J Clin Oncol 32:1119 -26, 2014 
 18. O'Sullivan C, Dupuis LL, Gibson P, et al: Refinement of the symptom screening in 
pediatrics tool (SSPedi). Br J Cancer 111:1262 -8, 2014  
 19. O'Sullivan C, Dupuis LL, Gibson P, et al: Evaluation of the electronic self- report Symptom 
Screening in Pediatrics Tool (SSPedi). BMJ Support Palliat Care, 2016  
 20. Tomlinson D, Dupuis LL, Gibson P, et al: Initial development of the Symptom Screening 
in Pediatrics Tool (SSPedi). Support Care Cancer 22:71 -5, 2014 
 
Page 15 of 17 
  21. Soman D: The Last Mile: Creating Social and Economic Value from Behavioural Insights, 
University of Toronto Press, 2015  
 22. O'Sullivan C, Dupuis LL, Gibson P, et al: Refinement of the symptom screening in 
pediatrics tool (SSPedi). British Journal of Cancer 111:1262 -8, 2014  
 23. National Guideline Clearinghouse: Inclusion Criteria. 
http://www.guideline.gov/about/inclusion -criteria.aspx , 2014 
 24. Guyatt GH, Schunemann HJ, Djulbegovic B, et al: Guideline panels should not GRADE 
good practice statements. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] 68:597 -600, 2015  
 25. Koo A, Li C, Liu LL, et al: Successful adaptation of fever and neutropenia clinical practice 
guideline in China. . Applied Cancer Research, In Press, 2018  
 26. Damschroder LJ, Aron DC, Keith RE, et al: Fostering implementation of health services 
research findings into practice: a consolidated framework for advancing implementation science. Implement Sci 4:50, 2009  
 27. Fernandez ME, Walker TJ, Weiner BJ, et al: Developi[INVESTIGATOR_176154]. Implement Sci 13:52, 2018 
 28. Glasgow RE, Harden SM, Gaglio B, et al: RE -AIM Planning and Evaluation Framework: 
Adapting to New Science and Practice With a 20 -Year Review. Front Public Health 7:64, 2019  
 29. Hinds PS, Nuss SL, Ruccione KS, et al: PROMIS pediatric measures in pediatric oncology: 
valid and clinically feasible indicators of patient -reported outcomes. Pediatr Blood Cancer 60:402 -8, 
2013  
 30. Varni JW, Burwinkle TM, Katz ER, et al: The PedsQL in pediatric cancer: reliability and 
validity of the Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory Generic Core Scales, Multidimensional Fatigue Scale, 
and Cancer Module. Cancer 94:2090 -2106, 2002 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Page 16 of 17 
 Appendix 1: Symptom Screening in Pediatrics Tool (SSPedi)  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  

 
Page 17 of 17 
 Appendix 2: SPARK Landing Page  
 
 

Symptom Screening Linked to Care Pathways for Children with Cancer: a Cluster Randomized Trial  
Study Protocol  
 
Version Date: February 26, [ADDRESS_205671] 
been made and now, more than 82% of children with cancer will be cured.[ADDRESS_205672] children suffer and 
experience severe and distressing treatm ent-related symptoms such as pain, fatigue and nausea.2 In our 
cross- sectional study of 302 inpatients 8- 18 years of age, when asked about yesterday  or today , 99% of 
children experienced at least one bothersome symptom and 60% experienced at least one severely  
bothersome symptom, including severe pain in 22% and severe fatigue in 33%.3 Symptoms are important; w e 
previously demonstrated a strong  correlation between increasing symptom burden and worse quality of life 
(QoL) in children receiving cancer treatments.[ADDRESS_205673] of synonyms that met 
criteria for documentation of symptoms. For example,  “tired”, “feel weak ”, “low energy ”, and “sluggish” were all 
considered adequate documentation for fatigue. We also created a lis t of possible interventions for each 
symptom.  For most of the symptoms measured (12/15) , severely bothersome symptoms were documented in 
the health  record less than 60% of the time. The most infrequently documented severely bothersome 
symptoms were problems with thinking or remembering things (0%), changes in how your body or face look 
(4.8%), changes in taste (7.7%) and tingly or numb hands or feet (11.1%). Only two severely bothersome 
symptoms were documented at least 80% of the time, namely hurt or pain ( 92.6% ) and throwing up or feeling 
like you might throw up (92.6%).  
 Provision  of an intervention to address  severely bothersome symptoms  occurred less than 60% of the time 
for [ADDRESS_205674] infrequently treated severely bothersome symptoms were thinking or 
remembering things (0%), changes in how your body or face look (0%), tingly or numb hands or feet (0%), 
changes in taste (0%), diar rhea (0%) and feeling tired (1.6%). Intervention provision was most common for hurt 
or pain (96.3%), headache (89.5%), throwing up or feeling like you might throw up (88.9%) and constipation 
(84.2%). However, e ven when interventions were provided,  they wer e often not prescribed specifically for that 
symptom  (for example, acetaminophen for fever rather than pain) . 
 Within the adult oncology setting, screening and assessment of symptoms through patient self -report has 
been identified as an important priority.5-8 In adult cancer patients , routine collection of patient -reported 
outcomes (PROs) improves patient -clinician communication9, reduces distress10 and improves QoL.11,[ADDRESS_205675] of care, median overall survival was 31.2 months (95% confidence interval ( CI) 24.5 to 39.6) in the 
symptom screening group vs. 26.0 months (95% CI 22.1 to 30.9) in the standard of care group ( P=0.03).  
Consequently, routine assessment  of PROs is now considered essential to high quality care.[ADDRESS_205676] to these accomplishments  in adults, efforts in children are limited.17 To help address this gap, 
we developed SSPedi (Symptom Screening in Pediatrics Tool ; Appendix 1 )18,19 and SPARK (Supportive care 
Prioritization, Assessment and Recommendations for Kids ; Appendix 2 ). SSPedi is a self -reported 15-item 
symptom screening tool for children receiving cancer treatments. SSPedi consists of the following 15 items: 
disappointed or sad, scared or worried, cranky or angry, problems thinking, body or face changes, tiredness, 
mouth sores, headache, other pain,  tingling or numbness, throwing up, hunger changes, taste changes, 
constipation and diarrhea.  We developed SSPedi because our previous work concluded that then- available 
pediatric cancer symptom assessment tools were not appropriate for clinical use due to length or content.20 
Items were generated using a nominal group technique among pediatric cancer clinicians and a patient 
advocate.20 Next, b ased upon input from 50 children receiving cancer treatments and 20 parents of pediatric 
oncology patients, we refined the paper and electronic versions of SSPedi and confirmed content validity, 
understandability and ease of use.20-22 The electronic version of SSPedi has an audio feature that  allows 
specific questions or the entire instrument to be read aloud. A help feature provides synonyms for each 
symptom; these were derived from children themselves during cognitive interview s. 
Symptom Screening Linked to Care Pathways for Children with Cancer: a Cluster Randomized Trial  
Study Protocol  
 
Version Date: February 26, 2020  
Page 2 of 12 
  Next, we conducted a multi -center study in the US and Canada to evaluate the psychometric properties of 
SSPedi. SSPedi was shown to be reliable ( internal consistency and test re -test and inter -rater reliability), valid 
(construct validity) and responsive to change in 502 English -speaking children 8 -18 years of age receiving 
cancer  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] .3 More specifically, the i ntraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) were 0.88 (95% CI 0.82  to 
0.92) for test re -test reliability, and 0.76 (95% CI 0. 71 to 0.80) for inter -rater reliability  between childr en and 
parents . Mean difference in SSPedi scores between groups hypothesized to be more and less symptomatic 
was 7.8  (95% CI 6.4  to 9.2; P<0.001) .[ADDRESS_205677] validity was demonstrated as all hypothesized relationships 
among measures were observed.  SSPedi was responsive to change ; those who reported they were much 
better or worse on a  global symptom c hange scale had significantly changed from their baseline score (mean 
absolute difference 5.6, 95% CI 3.8 to 7.5; P<0.001).  This instrument has been translated into Spanish; the 
translated version is satisfactory to use in the US and Canada based on understandability and  cultural 
relevance.  
 Building upon SSPedi, SPARK  is a web -based applicat ion that consists of two components: (1) a 
symptom screening component centered on SSPedi; and (2) a supportive care CPG component. While SSPedi 
asks children  about symptoms, SPARK facilitates access to SSPedi, encourages symptom screening, 
generates reports and allows children to track their symptoms. In addition, when used by [CONTACT_152905] , 
SPARK links the symptoms identified  using SSPedi with CPGs to manage them. CPGs contained within 
SPARK are those endorsed by [CONTACT_2005]’s Oncology Group ( COG ) and thereby [CONTACT_176185] .23 
  
AIMS  
 
Aims 1 and 2 : Among children with newly diagnosed cancer, determine if symptom feedback to healthcare 
providers given at least three times weekly using SPARK and locally -adapted symptom management care 
pathways based on CPGs, when compared with usual care:  
Aim 1 . Improv es overall self -reported symptom scores (total SSPedi score), fatigue (PROMIS –Fatigue) and 
cancer -specific QoL (PedsQL 3.0 Acute Cancer Module) over 8 weeks  
Hypothesis: Symptom screening and care pathways will improve symptoms, fatigue and QoL  
Aim 2 . Improves symptom documentation, increases provision of interventions for symptoms, and reduces 
emergency department visits and unplanned clinic visits and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_149701] 8 weeks  
Hypotheses: Symptom screening and care pathways will increase symptom documentation and 
provision of interventions for symptoms, and will reduce healthcare utilization.  
Aim 3: As an exploratory aim, we will evaluate key elements of the intervention related to the external validity 
and generalizability of the intervention effects using the RE -AIM framework.  
 
METHODS  
 
Overall Strategy  
 This is a cluster randomized trial  including 20 pediatric oncology sites , each with a history of excellent 
accrual to supportive care trials , with geographic variation and representativeness among ethnic minority 
groups . Sites will be randomized to either systematic symptom screening via SPARK with provision of 
symptom reports to healthcare providers  containing links to care pathways for symptom management 
(intervention)  vs. usual care (control).   
 
Research Methods  
Eligibility: We will include children with cancer who: (1) are 8- 18 years of age at enrollment  (SSPedi is 
validated in this age range) ; (2) are English or Spanish- speaking (all PROs are  validated in these languages  in 
this age range) ; (3) have any newly diagnosed cancer; (4) have a plan for any chemotherapy, radiotherapy or 
surgery ; and (5) enroll within 28 days  after treatment initiation. Exclusion criteria will be cognitive disability 
(attending minimum second grade  or equivalent ) or visual impairment (cannot see SPARK even with corrective 
lens) .   
 
Procedures: In this cluster randomized trial, we will randomize participating sites to either intervention or 
Symptom Screening Linked to Care Pathways for Children with Cancer: a Cluster Randomized Trial  
Study Protocol  
 
Version Date: February 26, [ADDRESS_205678] and outpatient clinics . Informed consent and 
assent will be obtained from each participant /guardian as appropriate . Careful tracking of all newly diagnosed 
patients by [CONTACT_176186], and where possible, reasons for declining participation.   
 At the [ADDRESS_205679] information to complete the questionnaires by [CONTACT_6968], text or over the 
phone.  
 Demographic information including age, sex, race, ethnicity, diagnosis, cancer stage, family 
socioeconomic information and treatment plan will be collected at enrollment . For all participants, the following 
PROs will be obtained  by [CONTACT_176187], week 4 and week 8: SSPedi, PROMIS Fatigue and 
the PedsQL 3.0 Acute Cancer Module (Aim 1). Data from health records (Aim 2 ) will be abstracted for all 
enrolled participants.   
 
Procedures at Intervention and Control Sites : 
 
Procedures at Intervention Sites : Participants  enrolled at intervention sites will be prompted to complete 
symptom screening three times  weekly via SPARK with corresponding feedback and links to symptom 
management care pathways sent to their healthcare providers .  
 
a) Symptom Screening using SPARK  and Timing Justifications : Symptom screening using SPARK can be 
performed  at any time and as often as desired,  but screening will be prompted three times  weekly for eight  
weeks. In our pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602], the mean time for SSPedi completion using the identical SPARK platform was 1.0 
(SD=1.5) minutes  and in over 1,[ADDRESS_205680] completed SSPedi, no child has ever stated that 
SSPedi completion was distressing. The ideal frequency of symptom screening is not known; the need to  
identify change in symptoms as soon as possible must be balanced against the burden of frequent screening 
to children and healthcare providers. In a trial of adult oncology patients demonstrating  that routine symptom 
screening improved QoL, weekly email r eminders were sent .[ADDRESS_205681] commonly 
suggested frequency was three times  weekly (n=15, range 2 -5 times weekly) . However, it is important to stress 
that three times  weekly is the frequency in which we will remind participants to complete SSPedi; participants 
can complete SSPedi as often as they wish including daily or more often .  
 Participants will be set up to use their own smart phone,  tablet  or computer  to perfor m symptom 
screening. If participant s do not have a device, one will be loaned to them  for the study duration.   
 
b) Symptom Reports to Healthcare Providers : Each day the participant completes symptom screening 
(whether prompted or unprompted) , the primary healthcare team will receive an email summarizing the 
symptom report  and highlighting of symptoms that are “ a lot” or “extremely” bothersome . Emails  will include 
links to the site-specific care pathways for symptom management.  Patient name [CONTACT_176201]. Thus, patient name [CONTACT_176203] s ite including SickKids can access 
it. These  approaches  have been approved by [CONTACT_176188] , and all IRBs outside of 
SickKids that have participated in other  SPARK studies . In terms of email  communication, each hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s 
policies  will be followed. For example, at all institutions currently participating in other  SPARK studies , emails 
sent within that hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s system are  considered secure and that approach is being used to transmit symptom 
reports  with these emails being generated from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s email domain. Some hospi[INVESTIGATOR_176155]: a Cluster Randomized Trial  
Study Protocol  
 
Version Date: February 26, 2020  
Page 4 of 12 
 encrypted emails; these will be used where required.  
 Qualitative feedback from p roviders receiving these reports in our pi[INVESTIGATOR_176156].  When 
specifically asked, receiving these reports was  not considered burdensome. In fact , providers found reports 
helpful to communicate  symptom experience and to initiate or escalate  symptom management interventions . 
 
c) Creation of Local Care Pathways for Symptom Management : Care pathway  templates for symptom 
management have been drafted for each of the [ADDRESS_205682] , templates are also 
based on “good practice statements”35. In brief, “good practice statements” are guidance statements regarding 
the provision of care where to provide care in any other way would be considered unethical or absurd.  
Guideline experts have  explicitly acknowledged the ir necessity and have published guidance for how and when 
to use such statements.35 Upon study activation, we will work with each of the 10 intervention sites to develop 
site-specific, adapted care pathways that consider relevant work flows, institutional culture and available 
resources (laboratory tests, medications and personnel) ; this process will require three months to complete. 
The finalized local care pathways will contain explicit direction for how to prevent and manage symptoms at 
each site. The process for creating local care pathways will be based upon a procedure we developed for CPG 
adaptation , will require local inter -professional input and will be finalized at  an in- person meeting at the site .[ADDRESS_205683] changed  to gain insight into the adaptation process  over the course of the 
study and to evaluate how the process might inform future implementation of care pathways . Adaptations will 
be summarized and will be made available to all intervention sites during the study, and will be widely available 
to all sites following study completion as par t of knowledge translation, and as a component of the RE -AIM 
implementation evaluation.  
 
d) Training : From a patient participant  perspective, training on how to use SPARK and how to interpret SPARK 
symptom reports will be provided at enrollment. From a healthcare provider perspective, t raining on how to 
interpret SPARK symptom reports, CPGs and care pathways will be provided to eac h site during the in- person 
meeting to adapt symptom management care pathways  and via a webinar at study activation and regularly 
throughout the study to educate new staff and to re -enforce knowledge for  existing staff . Different aspects of  
training also will be highlighted during the site calls  every two week s. Stories of successful implementation at a 
particular site will be shared so that all sites can benefit.  Technical assistance and support will be available to 
providers throughout the  study  from SickKids where SPARK is located .  
 
Procedures at Control Sites:  At control sites, usual  care will be provided,  which may or may not include 
symptom screening, access to CPGs  or care pathways. Participants will complete SSPedi to obtain the primary 
outcome at weeks 0, 4 and 8 but the scores will not be revealed to providers and will not be linked to care 
pathways . 
 
Describing  Site Characteristics  (both Intervention and Control Sites) : In order to describe supportive care 
practices  that could impact on intervention effectiveness and to gain insight into  future implementation 
(adoption) , the site PI s will complete a short questionnaire at study activation (baseline prior to randomization) 
and annually while participants  are being enrolled. Questions will include demographic characteristics of 
patients and providers ( only at baseline), psychosocial resources available for pediatric cancer patients and 
current approaches to systematic symptom screening, symptom management CPG availability and care 
pathway  existence for SSPedi  symptoms . CPG availability will be defined as either the posting of CPGs 
themselves or links to CPGs on an institutional web site or drive that is available to all oncology providers (not 
an individual clinician’s computer only). Care pathway use will be defined as a written set of instructions for the 
management of a symptom that is available to all oncology providers at that site. At interv ention sites,  
Symptom Screening Linked to Care Pathways for Children with Cancer: a Cluster Randomized Trial  
Study Protocol  
 
Version Date: February 26, 2020  
Page 5 of 12 
 questions will pertain to patients not enrolled.  
 
Site Monitoring,  Quality Control  and Intervention Site Auditing : Quality control will be maintained with calls 
every two weeks among participating site PIs and clinical research associates . Separate calls will be held with 
intervention and control sites  to reduce the risk of contamination. On those calls, we will summarize 
enrollment s at each site and review the proportion of eligible patients enrolled. We will also review identified 
issues with respect to missing data and data quality identified during routine data checks.   
 For intervention sites, fidelity to the symptom screening approach will also be monitored.  Each intervention 
site will be audited at least once ( 4-6 months after site activation)  to assess adherence to the process of 
symptom screening, namely documentation of participant training in the health records, completion of SSPedi 
at least three times weekly, and delivery of symptom reports to providers. Accessibility of local  care pathway s 
will also be examined. These will be evaluated as part of the implementation dimension of RE -AIM.36  
 
Proposed Practical Arrangements for Allocating Sites : The allocation sequence will be computer 
generated. Sites will be randomized 1:1 and will be stratified by [CONTACT_176173] ≥ or < median: (1) 
anticipated number of cancer patients 8- 18 years of age who speak English or Spanish per year, and (2) 
percentage of patients with private insurance vs. other payment types . Block size is not disclosed in this 
protocol . Randomization will be performed using an internet -based randomization service. A ssignment will be 
communicated by [CONTACT_176174] [INVESTIGATOR_176157].   
  
Proposed Methods for Protecting against Sources of Bias : Given the cluster randomized nature of the 
study, a potential source of bias is that allocation will be known, which could lead to selection bias during 
participant  enrollment. To address this potential, efforts will be made to both identify all potentiall y eligible 
participants and maximize enrollment. We will describe those not approached and those who decline to 
participate in the intervention and control sites. We will describe these groups by [CONTACT_4321], age, race, ethnicity, 
cancer type and institution.  
 
Primary , Secondary and Exploratory Outcome Measures:  Endpoints for Aim 1 are PROs; all PROs are 
self-report. The primary endpoint is the total SSPedi symptom score,  which is the sum of each of the 15 
SSPedi item’s Likert scores, resulting in a total score that ranges from 0 (no bothersome symptoms) to 60 
(worst bothersome symptoms). The recall period is yesterday or today. The total SSPedi score is reliable, valid 
and responsive to change in children with cancer 8- [ADDRESS_205684] 7 days. It i s reliable and valid in 
children 8- 18 years of age with cancer.37 QoL will be measured using the PedsQL 3.0 Acute Cancer Module.38 
The 7 day recall version will be used. This measure is a multidimensional instrument that is reliable and valid in 
children with cancer.38 It assesses pain and hurt, nausea, procedural anxiety, treatment anxiety, worry, 
cognitive problems, perceived physical appearance and communication. All PROs are validated for use in 
English  and Spanish for children 8- 18 years of age.  
 For both groups , all questionnaires  including SSPedi will be administered at baseline, week 4 (±1 week) 
and week 8 (±1 week) at  an in- person visit during a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_176158]  (preferred) , or will be obtained 
remote ly. The approach will be identical for intervention and control sites .   
 Endpoints for Aim [ADDRESS_205685] and are:  documentation of symptoms, 
provision of interventions for symptoms and emergency department visits and unplanned clinic visits and 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]. Guardians will also be asked about healthcare visits to ensure encounters outside the primary 
institution are captured. Documentation of symptoms and intervention provision for symptom control will be 
abstracted from the patients’ health records using the procedures our team previously  developed.[ADDRESS_205686] will be 
noted. B oth documentation of symptoms and interventions for these symptoms will be described for each 
specific symptom  at each time point . These outcomes will be obtained on each day that a week 4 or 8 SSPedi 
assessment wa s obtained (as measured in conjunction with the other PROs) with a one day window before 
and after these assessments. For example, if the participant completed SSPedi on a Tuesday, we would 
accept documentation of that symptom (or provision of an intervent ion for that symptom) if it were recorded in 
the health records on Monday, Tuesday or Wednesday. A comprehensive and field- tested list of synonyms for 
symptoms and interventions is available for each of the 15 symptoms in SSPedi.4 We found study data could 
be abstracted with minimal training and effort. De -identified source documentation will be sent to the 
Symptom Screening Linked to Care Pathways for Children with Cancer: a Cluster Randomized Trial  
Study Protocol  
 
Version Date: February 26, [ADDRESS_205687] of dissemination is estimating the reach and 
representativeness of participants. Therefore, we propose to describe the baseline sociodemographic 
characteristics of eligible patients who participate and who do not participate (where possible) . Effectiveness 
will be evaluated through primary and secondary outcomes. In addition, we will describe  the percentage of 
patient s without any severely bothersome symptoms within intervention and control sites . We will estimate 
adoption of the intervention by [CONTACT_176189]. 
We will describe adherence with symptom sc reening and care pathways at intervention sites . Adoption can 
also be assessed through metrics that the SPARK website itself tracks such as the number of clicks within the 
symptom screening and CPG components  and specific sections clicked . Implementation w ill focus on care 
pathway adaptations and number of patients who use SPARK as intended .  
 
Statistical Analyses,  Power Calculations  and Data Management  
 The primary endpoint is the total self -reported SSPedi score at eight  weeks. We used data from our 
SSPedi validation study for power calculation.3 In that study, w e recruited 302 children across nine sites who 
were hospi[INVESTIGATOR_176159]. Children completed SSPedi on 
days 1 and 4 and a 5 -point global symptom change scale on day 4. The average absolute change in total 
SSPedi scores for those who report ed they were a little better  or a little worse  (1-point change) was 2.7 while 
the average absolute change in total SSPedi scores for those who reported they were much better or much 
worse (2-point change) was  5.6. Thus, the minimum plausible clinically important difference is likely 
approximately 3.0 but may be higher.  The intracluster correlation coefficient ( ICC), a measure of the degree of 
clustering, was 0.021 (95% CI 0 to 0.123). In power calculations for  the proposed study, we used ICC=0.021 
but show sensitivity analyses to ICCs at the extremes of the 95% CI  (which are unlikely) . Among the [ADDRESS_205688] deviation of 8.8 (derived from the SSPedi validation 
study3). Power for each combination in the table was calculated through simulation of 4000 trials; each one 
was analyzed with a linear mixed effects model clustering by [CONTACT_176176] a significant P value 
was taken as the estimate of power. If there is a baseline characterist ic, such as age, that explains 20% of the 
variance in 8 -week scores, including that variable in analyses increases power to the value shown in the far 
right column. Table 1  shows that assuming a minimal clinically important difference of 3.0 and with inclusion of 
age as a covariate in the analysis, there is 85% power  with ICC=0.021 . Assuming that 10% of patients have 
missing final scores, we will inflate the sample size to 444.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The primary analysis will use the patient -level [ADDRESS_205689] for child age, and fixed effects at the cluster 
level for stratification variables and treatment assignment. Child age will be included as it is kn own to be 
associated with higher total SSPedi scores39; this will reduce residual variance in scores. We do not plan to 
adjust the model for baseline SSPedi score because some of the care pathway interventions (that are Table 1: Power Assuming 400 Patients, Alpha=0.[ADDRESS_205690] Deviation=8.8  
ICC Difference  Power  
Without baseline predictor  With age as baseline predictor  
0.000  2.5 71.0 81.4 
 3.0 86.7 94.2 
 3.5 95.9 98.9 
0.021  2.5 59.5 70.1 
 3.0 75.7 85.2 
 3.5 86.5 94.2 
0.123  2.5 26.6 32.6 
 3.0 38.2 45.3 
 3.5 47.7 57.0 
Symptom Screening Linked to Care Pathways for Children with Cancer: a Cluster Randomized Trial  
Study Protocol  
 
Version Date: February 26, 2020  
Page 7 of 12 
 prophylactic) will affect symptoms prior to enrollment and this baseline score may already reflect some benefit 
of the cluster’s treatment assignment.  All attempts to avoid missing data will be made and, given the short 
duration of this study, we anticipate a low dropout rate by [CONTACT_5875] 8 . However, if more than 10% of participants 
are missi ng the primary outcome, the primary analysis will use multiple imputation based on previous SS Pedi 
assessments (weeks 0 and 4), group and site . In addition, we will conduct sensitivity analysis assuming that 
missing scores are from children with high total  SSPedi scores and from children with low total SSPedi scores 
(randomly drawn from the highest and lowest quartile).  
The secondary endpoints of self -reported fatigue and QoL will be compared between randomized groups 
using the methods for the primary anal ysis (with inclusion of child age in the model) . Presence of documented 
severely bothersome symptoms (SSPedi score of 3 or 4) and any intervention for severely bothersome 
symptoms at weeks 4 and 8 will be compared between groups for each symptom using mixed -effects logistic 
regression analysis that takes cluster effects into account. For the secondary endpoint of unplanned health 
services utilization (emergency and clinic visits and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]), the number of visits or unplanned 
admissions per child w ill be counted over the 8 -week period and compared between randomized groups using 
a mixed- effects Poisson or negative binomial regression analysis (with zero- inflation if necessary), accounting 
for site.  
 Child sex, race, ethnicity, diagnosis (leukemia/l ymphoma, solid tumor vs brain tumor), cancer stage, 
socioeconomic status and guardian education will be described. I f a covariate is found, blinded to group 
treatment assignment, to be associated with the 8 -week total SSPedi scores , it will be included in each of the 
regression analyses described above for primary and secondary outcomes. In addition, psychosocial 
resources and characteristics of the usual care provided by [CONTACT_25733] (e.g. routine systematic symptom 
screening, availability of CPGs and care pathways for symptom management) will be described and accounted 
for in exploratory regression and stratified analysis. For sex in particular, w e also will determine if the impact of 
the intervention is moderated by [CONTACT_176190].  
 For the exploratory aim, we propose to describe  key elements related to the external validity and 
generalizability of the intervention effects  using the RE -AIM framework . These analyses  will be descriptive.  
 In terms of data management , SPARK data are stored on the SickKids server each time SSPedi is 
completed. This process was used in SSPedi and other SPARK multi -institutional trials ; processes met 
institutional privacy and IRB requirem ents to maintain personal health information. Data outside of SSPedi 
scores  including demographics, non-SSPedi  outcomes and covariates will be maintained in a REDCap 
database.  The databa se will have data validation checks to maximize data quality at data entry. Data will be 
downloaded and evaluated quarterly to identify missing data and perform additional data validation checks.   
 
Feasibility and Recruitment Rate  
 Among the [ADDRESS_205691] agreed to participate, th ere are expected to be 60 patients/ month who are 
newly diagnosed with cancer 8 -18 years of age and who speak English or Spanish. Assuming that 6 0% meet 
eligibility criteria (for example, some patients will not receive treatment for cancer such as those with low grade 
brain tumors  and some centers provide consultation only services for newly diagnosed patients ), and 75% 
agree to participate (conservative estimate based upon other SPARK studies), we anticipate enrollment of 27 
patients/month. Thus, to reach the target sample size of 444 patients, enrollment is anticipated to be complete 
within 2 to 2.5 years  (this allows for periods of slow enrollment such as holidays or when research personnel 
have limited availability) . In terms of timelines, start-up activities will require [ADDRESS_205692] to effort required. Abstraction 
of symptom documentation and interven tion provision will be done over  a short time frame (3 days for each of  
two time points (weeks 4 and 8)); pi[INVESTIGATOR_176160]. The PROs at 
weeks 4 and 8 will require <5- 10 minutes to complete and can be completed electronically.  
 
Knowledge Translation and Exchange  
 The targets of our KTE efforts are patients, families, healthcare providers and decision makers including 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_176161].  
Integrated KTE : To increase awareness and to engage with a variety of stakeholders, we will create an 
Advisory Panel. The Panel will include two childhood cancer survivors, one parent of a child with cancer, 
Symptom Screening Linked to Care Pathways for Children with Cancer: a Cluster Randomized Trial  
Study Protocol  
 
Version Date: February 26, [ADDRESS_205693] 
annually to discuss progress and identify opportunities for KTE.  
End of Grant KTE : We will publish the results of this study in peer -reviewed journals (minimum of [ADDRESS_205694] journals) and support attendance at national and international conferences. We plan to distribute plain 
language summaries throughout the COG, the C17 Research Network (represents the 17 centers in Canada) 
and the Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario (represents the 5 centers in Ontari o). We also plan to hold regular 
webinars and podcasts. The SickKids Industry, Partnerships and Commercialization office will help promote 
SPARK as a no cost web -portal for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_29399]. In order to further enhance KTE, we will create an end- of-
grant repor t that summarizes the processes refined to achieve symptom screening and feedback, and to adapt 
local care pathways for symptom management. This report will include the steps taken, challenges 
encountered and solutions to those challenges. This report will  help other institutions to implement the 
approach expeditiously.  
 
  
   
 
  
Symptom Screening Linked to Care Pathways for Children with Cancer: a Cluster Randomized Trial  
Study Protocol  
 
Version Date: February 26, 2020  
Page 9 of 12 
 REFERENCES  
 
 1. Canadian Cancer Society's Steering Committee on Cancer Statistics: Canadian Cancer 
Statistics. Toronto, ON, Canadian Cancer Society, 2011  
 2. Baggott C, Dodd M, Kennedy C, et al: Changes in children's reports of symptom occurrence 
and severity during a course of myelosuppressive chemotherapy. J Pediatr Oncol Nurs 27:307 -15, 2010  
 3. Dupuis LL, Johnston DL, Baggott C, et al: Validation of the Sym ptom Screening in Pediatrics 
Tool in Children Receiving Cancer Treatments. J Natl Cancer Inst, 2017  
 4. Hyslop S, Davis H, Duong N, et al: Symptom Documentation and Intervention Provision for 
Symptom Control in Children Receiving Cancer Treatments. Submitt ed 2018 
 5. Carelle N, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_13038] E, Bellanger A, et al: Changing patient perceptions of the side effects of cancer 
chemotherapy. Cancer 95:155- 63, 2002  
 6. Coates A, Abraham S, Kaye SB, et al: On the receiving end--patient perception of the side -
effects of cancer chemotherapy. Eur J Cancer 19:203- 8, 1983  
 7. de Boer -Dennert M, de Wit R, Schmitz PI, et al: Patient perceptions of the side- effects of 
chemotherapy: the influence of 5HT3 antagonists. Br J Cancer 76:1055- 61, 1997  
 8. Griffin AM, Bu tow PN, Coates AS, et al: On the receiving end. V: Patient perceptions of the side 
effects of cancer chemotherapy in 1993. Ann Oncol 7:189- 95, [ADDRESS_205695] AF, et al: Patient -reported outcome use in oncology: a 
systematic review of t he impact on patient -clinician communication. Support Care Cancer 26:41- 60, 2018  
 10. Berry DL, Hong F, Halpenny B, et al: Electronic self -report assessment for cancer and self -care 
support: results of a multicenter randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 32:199- 205, 2014  
 11. Mooney K, Berry DL, Whisenant M, et al: Improving Cancer Care Through the Patient 
Experience: How to Use Patient -Reported Outcomes in Clinical Practice. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book 
37:695- 704, 2017  
 12. Basch E, Deal AM, Kris MG, et al: Sympto m Monitoring With Patient -Reported Outcomes 
During Routine Cancer Treatment: A Randomized Controlled Trial. J Clin Oncol 34:557- 65, 2016  
 13. Basch E, Deal AM, Dueck AC, et al: Overall Survival Results of a Trial Assessing Patient -
Reported Outcomes for Sym ptom Monitoring During Routine Cancer Treatment. JAMA, 2017  
 14. Wright JD, Neugut AI, Ananth CV, et al: Deviations from guideline- based therapy for febrile 
neutropenia in cancer patients and their effect on outcomes. JAMA Intern Med 173:559- 68, 2013  
 15. FitzGerald JM, Boulet LP, McIvor RA, et al: Asthma control in Canada remains suboptimal: the 
Reality of Asthma Control (TRAC) study. Can Respir J 13:253- 9, 2006  
 16. Grimshaw J, Eccles M, Thomas R, et al: Toward evidence- based quality improvement. 
Evidence (and its limitations) of the effectiveness of guideline dissemination and implementation strategies 
1966- 1998. J Gen Intern Med [ADDRESS_205696] 2:S14 -20, 2006 
 17. Wolfe J, Orellana L, Cook EF, et al: Improving the care of children with advanced cancer by 
[CONTACT_176184] -reported feedback intervention: results from the PediQUEST randomized controlled 
trial. J Clin Oncol 32:1119- 26, 2014  
 18. O'Sullivan C, Dupuis LL, Gibson P, et al: Refinement of the symptom screening in pediatrics tool 
(SSPedi). Br J  Cancer 111:1262- 8, 2014  
 19. O'Sullivan C, Dupuis LL, Gibson P, et al: Evaluation of the electronic self -report Symptom 
Screening in Pediatrics Tool (SSPedi). BMJ Support Palliat Care, 2016  
 20. Tomlinson D, Dupuis LL, Gibson P, et al: Initial development  of the Symptom Screening in 
Pediatrics Tool (SSPedi). Support Care Cancer 22:71- 5, 2014  
 21. Soman D: The Last Mile: Creating Social and Economic Value from Behavioural Insights, 
University of Toronto Press, 2015  
 22. O'Sullivan C, Dupuis LL, Gibson P, e t al: Refinement of the symptom screening in pediatrics tool 
(SSPedi). British Journal of Cancer 111:1262 -8, 2014 
 23. National Guideline Clearinghouse: Inclusion Criteria. http://www.g uideline.gov/about/inclusion-
criteria.aspx , 2014  
 24. Forman J, Heisler M, Damschroder LJ, et al: Development and application of the RE -AIM 
QuEST mixed methods framework for program evaluation. Prev Med Rep 6:322 -328, 2017  
 25. Graham ID, Logan J, Harrison MB, et al: Lost in knowledge translation: time for a map? J Contin 
Educ Health Prof 26:13 -24, 2006  
Symptom Screening Linked to Care Pathways for Children with Cancer: a Cluster Randomized Trial  
Study Protocol  
 
Version Date: February 26, 2020  
Page 10 of 12 
  26. Koo A, Li C, Liu LL, et al: Successful adaptation of fever and neutropenia clinical practice 
guideline in China. . Applied Cancer Research, In Press, 2018  
 27. Altman M, Huang TTK, Breland JY: Design Thinking in Health Care. Prev Chronic Dis 15:E117, 
2018 
 28. Thaler RH, Sunstein CR: Nudge improving decisions about health, wealth, and happi[INVESTIGATOR_008]. New 
Haven, Yale University Press,, 2008, pp 1 online resour ce (x, 293 p.)  
 29. Patel MS, Volpp KG, Asch DA: Nudge Units to Improve the Delivery of Health Care. N Engl J 
Med 378:214- 216, 2018  
 30. Vettese E, Cook S, Soman D, et al: Longitudinal evaluation of Supportive care Prioritization, 
Assessment and Recommendations for Kids (SPARK), a symptom screening and management application. 
BMC Cancer 19:458, 2019 
 31. Allanson ER, Tuncalp O, Vogel JP, et al: Implementation of effective practices in health 
facilities: a systematic review of cluster randomised trials. BMJ Glob Health 2:e000266, 2017  
 32. Shoup JA, Gaglio B, Varda D, et al: Network analysis of RE -AIM framework: chronology of the 
field and the connectivity of its contributors. Translational Behavioral Medicine 5:216- 32, 2015  
 33. Glasgow RE, Chambers D: Devel opi[INVESTIGATOR_176162], sustainable, implementation systems using 
rigorous, rapid and relevant science. Cts -Clinical and Translational Science 5:48 -55, 2012  
 34. Vanhoff D, Hesser T, Kelly KP, et al: Facilitating accrual to cancer control and supportive care 
trials: the clinical research associate perspective. BMC Med Res Methodol 13:154, 2013  
 35. Guyatt GH, Schunemann HJ, Djulbegovic B, et al: Guideline panels should not GRADE good 
practice statements. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] 68:597- 600, 2015  
 36. Glasgow RE, Harden SM, Gaglio B, et al: RE -AIM Planning and Evaluation Framework: 
Adapting to New Science and Practice With a 20 -Year Review. Front Public Health 7:64, 2019  
 37. Hinds PS, Nuss SL, Ruccione KS, et al: PROMIS pediatric measures in pediatric oncology: valid 
and clinically feasible indicators of patient -reported outcomes. Pediatr Blood Cancer 60:402 -8, 2013 
 38. Varni JW, Burwinkle TM, Katz ER, et al: The PedsQL in pediatric cancer: reliability and validity 
of the Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory Generic Cor e Scales, Multidimensional Fatigue Scale, and Cancer 
Module. Cancer 94:2090 -2106, 2002  
 39. Johnston DL, Hyslop S, Tomlinson D, et al: Describing symptoms using the Symptom Screening 
in Pediatrics Tool in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_176163]. Cancer 
Med 7:1750- 1755, 2018  
 40. Wild D, Grove A, Martin M, et al: Principles of Good Practice for the Translation and Cultural 
Adaptation Process for Patient -Reported Outcomes (PRO) Measures: report of the ISPOR Task For ce for 
Translation and Cultural Adaptation. Value Health 8:94 -104, 2005  
 41. Cook S, Vettese E, Soman D, et al: Initial Development of Supportive Care Assessment, 
Prioritization and Recommendations for Kids (SPARK), a symptom screening and management appli cation. 
Submitted 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Symptom Screening Linked to Care Pathways for Children with Cancer: a Cluster Randomized Trial  
Study Protocol  
 
Version Date: February 26, 2020  
Page 11 of 12 
 Appendix 1: Symptom Screening in Pediatrics Tool (SSPedi)  
 
  

Symptom Screening Linked to Care Pathways for Children with Cancer: a Cluster Randomized Trial  
Study Protocol  
 
Version Date: February 26, 2020  
Page 12 of 12 
 Appendix 2: SPARK Landing Page  
 
 
 
 
 

PROTOCOL AMENDMENT SUMMARY OF CHANGES TABLE  
Document History  of Initial Approvals, Amendments and Statistical Plan  
Version Date  Timeline  Date  
N/A Data sent to biostiatistician  15Dec2023  
21Nov2023  Statistical Analysis Plan Uploaded to 
ClinicalTrials.gov  13Dec2023  
21Nov2023  Amendment #2 -4 – statistical edits  Nov 23, 2023  
July 19, 2023  
April 18, 2023  
21Dec2021  Amendment #1 – modified eligibility criteria and 
ability to contact  [CONTACT_11711] 2, [ADDRESS_205697]  April 15, 2020  
 
Amendment #2-4 (version date 21Nov2023)  
Protocol Section  Major Modifications  Reason for Amendment  
Statistical 
Analysis, Power 
Calculations and 
Data 
Management  Modifications to match the final statistical 
analytical plan uploaded to 
clinicaltrials.gov  To match the final statistical 
analytical plan uploaded to clinicaltrials.gov  
 
Amendment  #1 (version date  21Dec2021)  
Protocol Section  Major Modifications  Reason for Amendment  
Eligibility Criteria  Added : 
(5) have a  plan to be followed by [CONTACT_176169] 
≥ 50% of the 8 -week study period and 
expected to be available on site or 
virtually for the week 8 assessment  and 
(6) enroll within [ADDRESS_205698] 
identified technical issues preventing receipt of 
reminders to complete 
SSPedi. This allows us to 
identify and address those 
issues if needed.  
 
Version Date: November 21 , 2023 
 
1 
 Statistical Analytic Plan for Symptom Screening Linked to Care Pathways  
for Children with Cancer: A Cluster Randomized Trial  
 
Study Title: Symptom Screening Linked to Care Pathways for Children with Cancer: A Cluster 
Randomized Trial  
 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
 Document Date: November 2 1, 2023  
 
Objectives  ___________________________________________________________________ 2  
Sample Size Justification  _______________________________________________________ 2  
Analytic datasets  _____________________________________________________________ 2  
Study Outcomes  ______________________________________________________________ 3  
Descriptive Statistics  __________________________________________________________ 5  
Comparative Analyses  _________________________________________________________ 5  
Primary outcome  __________________________________________________________________ 5  
Secondary outcomes  _______________________________________________________________ 5  
Missing data  _________________________________________________________________ 7  
Software  ____________________________________________________________________ 9  
 
  
Version Date: November 21 , 2023 
 
2 
 Objectives  
Aims 1 and 2: Among children with newly diagnosed cancer, to determine if symptom screening 
and feedback to healthcare providers at least three times weekly and locally -adapted symptom 
management care pathways, when compared to usual care:  
Aim 1. Improves overall self -reported symptom scores (total SSPedi score), fatigue 
(PROMIS –Fatigue) and cancer- specific quality of life ( QoL) (PedsQL 3.0 Acute Cancer 
Module) over 8 weeks.  
Hypothesis: Symptom screening and care pathways will improve symptoms, fatigue and 
QoL 
Aim 2 . Improves symptom documentation, increases provision of interventions for 
symptoms, and reduces emergency department visits and unplanned clinic visits and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_149701] 8 weeks.  
Hypotheses: Symptom screening and care pathways will increase symptom documentation and provision of interventions for symptoms, and will reduce healthcare utilization.  
Aim 3 : As an exploratory aim, we will evaluate key elements of the intervention related to the 
external validity and generalizability of the intervention effects using the RE -AIM framework.  
 
Sample Size Justification  
 The primary endpoint is the total self -reported SSPedi score at eight weeks. We used 
data from our SSPedi validation study for power calculation. In that study, we recruited 302 children across nine sites who were hospi[INVESTIGATOR_176164] l or in clinic three 
days later. Children completed SSPedi on days 1 and 4 and a 5 -point global symptom change 
scale on day 4. The average absolute change in total SSPedi scores for those who reported they were a little better or a little worse on this glo bal change scale (a 1-point change) was 2.7 while 
the average absolute change in total SSPedi scores for those who reported they were much better or much worse ( a 2-point change) was 5.6. Thus, the minimum plausible clinically 
important difference is likely approximately 3.0 but may be higher. The intracluster correlation coefficient (ICC), a measure of the degree of clustering, was 0.021 (95% confidence interval ( CI) 
0 to 0.123). In power calculations for the proposed study, we used ICC=0.021 but show sensitivity analyses to ICCs at the extremes of the 95% CI (which are unlikely). Among the [ADDRESS_205699] deviation of 8.8 (derived fr om the SSPedi validation study). Power for each 
combination in the table was calculated through simulation of 4000 trials . Each one was 
analyzed with a linear mixed effects model clustering by [CONTACT_176176] a significant P value was taken as the estimate of power. If there is a baseline characteristic, such as age, that explains 20% of the variance in 8 -week scor es, including that variable in analyses 
increases power to the value shown in the far right column. Table 1 shows that assuming a minimal clinically important difference of 3.0 and with inclusion of age as a covariate in the analysis, there is 85% power with ICC=0.021. Assuming that 10% of patients have missing final 
Version Date: November 21 , 2023 
 
3 
 scores, we inflate d the sample size to 444.  
  
Analytic  Datasets  
 All analys es will follow  the intention -to-treat principle . See below (Missing Data) for details 
on how those with missing data will be included in the analysis.  
 
Study Outcomes  
Questionnaires including the primary outcome and secondary patient- reported outcomes are 
obtained at weeks 4 and 8  from enrollment . 
1. Primary outcome: The primary outcome  is the total SSPedi symptom score, which is the 
sum of each of the 15 SSPedi item’s Likert scores, resulting in a total score that ranges 
from 0 (no bothersome symptoms) to 60 (worst bothersome symptoms).  The 
designated week 4 or 8 SSPedi score will be taken on  the day the other patient -reported 
outcomes were obtained or were planned to be obtained. This assures that the SSPedi score was collected as an outcome rather than as an intervention.  
2. Secondary outcomes:  
a. Individual SS Pedi symptom scores, which consist of each of the [ADDRESS_205700] seven days.  A 
higher T -score represents more fatigue, or worse health.  
c. PedsQL 3.0 Acute Cancer Module (scored according to https://www.pedsql.org/PedsQL -Scoring.pdf
), which produces 8 domain scores 
on a 0 -100 scale.  The domains are (1) pain and hurt; (2)  nausea ; (3) procedural 
anxiety ; (4) treatment anxiety ; (5) worry ; (6) cognitive problems ; (7) perceived 
physical appearance ; and (8) communication. The recall period is the last seven 
days.  Higher scores indicate better QoL.  Table 1: Power With  400 Patients, Alpha=0.[ADDRESS_205701] Deviation=8.8  
ICC Difference  Power  (%) 
Without baseline predictor  With age as baseline predictor  
0.000  2.5 71.0  81.4  
3.0 86.7  94.2  
3.5 95.9  98.9  
0.021  2.5 59.5  70.1  
3.0 75.7  85.2  
3.5 86.5  94.2  
0.123  2.5 26.6  32.6  
3.0 38.2  45.3  
3.5 47.7  57.0  
Version Date: November 21 , 2023 
 
4 
 d. Documentation of symptoms (mapped onto the 15 SSPedi symptoms) in the 
participant’s heath record ; these are  a set of 15 binary outcomes (assessed at 
weeks 4  and 8 ). For each, t he window is a 3-day period extending from one day 
before to one day after the week 4 and 8 SSPedi time point.  
e. SSPedi symptom -specific intervention performed ; these are a set of 15 binary 
outcomes ( assessed at weeks 4 and 8).  For each, the window is a 3 -day period 
extending from one day before to one day after the week 4 and 8 SSPedi time 
point.  
f. Healthcare encounters including emergency department visits, unplanned clinic visits and unplanned hospi[INVESTIGATOR_176165] 8 -week period.  The number of 
encounters in e ach category  and the total across categories will each be a 
separate secondary outcome . 
3. Exploratory outcomes: These are RE-AIM characteristics to measure reach, 
effectiveness, adoption and implementation.  
a. For reach, w e propose to  describe the baseline demographic characteristics of  
eligible patients who participate and who do not participate . We will also 
describe site attributes using  the inner setting measures from the Consolidated 
Framework for Implementation Research (CFIR)  as measured at baseline .(18, 19)   
This conceptual framework includes factors that may impact on intervention implementation. These attributes include culture, culture stress, culture effort, 
implementation climate, learning climate, leadership engagement and available resources.  
b. Effectiveness will be evaluated through primary and secondary outcomes  as 
described in list items [ADDRESS_205702] private, public or no insurance. Healthcare professional characteristics will include number of physician and nurse practitioner full -time equivalents and 
median years in practice.   
c. Adoption will be assessed through the number of SSPedis per participant  
completed at intervention institutions ; this analysis will use duration of time on 
protocol therapy as an offset. Further, we will dichotomize each participant as a 
high or low SSPedi completer, with a high completer being defined as one who 
completed [ADDRESS_205703], access route (email link or QR code) and device (iPad, iPhone, Mac, Windows or unknown).  
d.  Implementation outcomes will capture  the percentage s of intervention patients 
who came off protocol therapy  early and the number of all participants  who 
Version Date: November 21 , 2023 
 
5 
 came off study early, both overall and stratified by [CONTACT_176182].  
 
Descriptive Statistics  
Baseline characteristics:  Summary statistics on baseline characteristics will be calculated within 
each study arm and presented in a table – means and standard deviations ( SDs) for variables 
treated as continuous, counts and percentages for categorical variables , along with total 
numbers with missing data.   
Outcomes : Similar tables will be created for all study outcomes.  Individual SSP edi symptom 
scores will be summarized by [CONTACT_176177] [ADDRESS_205704] s for treatment 
assignment , child age  and diagnosis group (leukemia/lymphoma, solid tumor and central 
nervous system tumor) , and two binary fixed effects at the cluster level for stratification 
variables (above or below the average anticipated yearly number of English or Spanish- speaking 
cancer patients 8 -18 years of age, and above or below the average anticipated percentage of 
patients with private insurance vs. other payment types) . Child age  and diagnosis group  will be 
included as they are  known to be associated with total SSPedi scores; th is will reduce residual 
variance in scores. We do not plan to adjust the model for baseline SSPedi score because some of the care pathway interventions (that are prophylactic) will affect symptoms prior to enrollment and th e baseline score may already reflect some benefit of the cluster’s treatment 
assignment. The treatment effect will be the covariate -adjusted mean difference between 
study groups in 8 -week SS Pedi, presented with a 95% CI and a two -sided p- value for a test of no 
treatment effect. If we find the residuals from the mixed model fitted to the [ADDRESS_205705] sensitivity analyses, one using normalizing transformations of the outcome and another using an ordinal regression 
model.   
 T o account for potential differential enrollment of surgery only patients (who might not be 
cared for by [CONTACT_176178]) between intervention vs. control sites, we will also conduct a sensitivity analysis restricted to patients that received systemic chemotherapy.  
  
 
Secondary Outcomes  
1. Self-reported individual symptom s at weeks 4 and 8  on the SSPedi instrument : For 
each of the 15 ordinal outcomes representing symptoms (scored 0 -4), a mixed effects 
proportional odds model will be fitted using treatment assignment  and stratification 
factors as fixed effects covariates  and with a random effect for site .  As some individual 
symptoms may be uncommon, to avoid specifying models that may be overfitted for those symptoms, these models will use only this minimal set of three  covariates. The 
estimated odds ratio for the intervention ( representing  the odds of having a higher vs. 
lower score in the intervention group) will be estimated and presented along with a 95% 
Version Date: November 21 , 2023 
 
6 
 CI. T wo figures will be generated to present these results graphically : (a) to display the 
raw outcome data, a set of 15 pairs of stacked barplots will be created; within each pair, 
the stacked barplot will show the percentages  of participants with scores of 0 -4 in the 
control and intervention groups ; (b) a forest -plot type figure will be created showing the 
estimated odds ratios with 95% C Is for each of the 15 symptoms.  
2. PROMIS Fatigue Scale : This scale will be treated as a continuous variable and analyzed 
using a linear mixed effects model in the same way as the primary SSPedi outcome.   
3. PedsQL 3.0 Acute Cancer Module domain scores :  Each of these [ADDRESS_205706] -plot type figure will be created showing the 
estimated treatment effects with 95% C Is for each of the 8 domains.  
4. Documentation of symptoms on weeks 4 and 8 (± 1 day ): Analyses will involve three 
analyses for each symptom class. Each analysis will fit a mixed effects logistic regression 
model to estimate the odds ratio for documentation (on weeks 4 and 8 ) comparing 
intervention groups, adjusting for  stratification factors . It is possible that there will be 
too few documentation events to reliably fit this mixed model to all 15 symptom s. If this 
model cannot be fitted to some symptoms (likely because the random effects variance 
cannot be estimated), we will fit a fixed effects logistic regression model to just those symptoms.  Three cohorts will be defined:  
a. Each participant will be classed as having the symptom documented or not . All 
participants are included in the analytic sample  for each symptom.  
b. The analytic sample will be limited to those participants who self- report the 
symptom on weeks 4 and 8  (symptom score > 0).  
c. The analytic sample will be limited to those participants who have the most bothersome self -report of the symptom on the weeks 4 and 8  SSPedi (symptom 
score ≥ 3 ). 
5. Intervention s for symptoms : Analyses will follow a similar flow to the analyses of 
documentation of symptoms. For each of the 15 symptoms, each participant will be classified as having an intervention at weeks 4 and 8  (±1 days).  Also collected is 
whether interventions were administered specifically for the specific symptoms. For example, acetaminophen may be administered for fever or pain. As interventions are expected to be more uncommon than symptoms, all treatment effects will be estimated by [CONTACT_176191] s in the proportions with interventions  (i.e., ignoring clustering), p -
values will be computed from the Fisher exact test , and 95% CI for differences in 
proportions will use the Newcombe  method.  Three cohorts will be defined:  
a. Each participant will be classed as having an intervention for the symptom or 
not. All participants are included in the analy tic sample for each intervention -
symptom pair.  
b. The analytic sample will be limited to those participants who self- report the 
symptom on the weeks 4 and 8  SSPedi (symptom score > 0).  
c. The analytic sample will be limited to those participants who have the most 
bothersome self -report of the symptom on the weeks 4 and 8  SSPedi (symptom 
score ≥ 3 ). 
Version Date: November 21 , 2023 
 
7 
 6. Unplanned encounters:  For each of the secondary endpoints of unplanned health 
services utilization (emergency , clinic visits , hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602] , and the total across 
categories ), the number of events per child will be counted over the 8 -week period and 
compared between randomized groups using a mixed -effects Poisson or negative 
binomial regression analysis (with zero -inflation if necessary), with a random effect for 
site and fixed effects for the two stratification factors . If a child has less than 8 weeks of 
follow -up, the model will include an offset equal to the logarithm of each child’s follow -
up time.  
 
Exploratory Outcomes  
1. Reach : we will describe the baseline demographic characteristics (sex, age or age group 
and diagnosis group) of  eligible patients who participate and who do not participate  
using means and standard deviations for continuous variables and counts and 
percentages for categorical variables. The difference between participants and non-participants will be summarized two ways: numerically by [CONTACT_176192] -by-side barplots for categorical variables and by [CONTACT_10167] -
by [CONTACT_176193] . We will also summarize  CFIR inner 
setting attributes as counts and percentages.  
2. Effectiveness : In addition to the analyses of primary and secondary outcomes  detailed 
above, we will also carry out analyses that dichotomize each of the 15 SS Pedi symptoms 
as being severely bothersome (3 or 4) or not.  Percentages  for each symptom will be 
tabulated and compared between intervention groups using mixed effects binary 
logistic regression . We will also assess between -site variation in the odds of having a 
severely bothersome symptom (after adjusting for intervention and stratification factors) by [CONTACT_176194]  (MOR). This is an alternative measure of clustering (or between -
cluster variability); it is the estimated median of the ratio of the  odds of a bothersome 
symptom for a participant at one site to the odds of a bothersome symptom for an otherwise identical participant at another site. The MOR is always defined with the higher odds in the numerator. One appealing aspect of the MOR is that it is on the same 
scale as the odds ratio for treatment, aiding interpretation of both the OR for intervention and the MOR for variation in the outcome.  
3. Adoption: We will characterize adoption at intervention sites by [CONTACT_176195]:  
a. characteristics of sites  and their providers  
b. number of SSPedis completed  per enrolled participant  
c. proportion of participants that are high or low SSPedi completers  
d. number of times the institutional care pathways were clicked.  
 Site and provider attributes will be described by [CONTACT_176196].  Site characteristics will include pediatric vs. mixed adult and pediatric, number 
of pediatric cancer patients diagnosed annually, and percentage of patients anticipated to have private, public or no insurance. Healthcare professional characteristics will 
Version Date: November [ADDRESS_205707] for site.  
Participant characteristics will include sex, age/age group, race, ethnicity , preferred 
language , and cancer diagnosis group. Guardian characteristics will include marital 
status, guardian employment and highest education, and high annual household 
income. Site characteristics will be those included above. The dependence of the odds 
of being a high respond ers on these same c haracteristics will be assessed using mixed 
effects logistic regression adjusting for stratification factors.    
 The number of recorded clicks is available on aggregate for each site, so we will 
summarize this as a set of 10 rates, clicks per enrolled participant, and assess whether 
there is site -to-site variability by [CONTACT_6486] a random effects Poisson or negative binomial 
model with clicks as the outcome and the logarithm of the number of patients as an offset.  A summary rate will b e estimated from this model and the median rate ratio 
(analogous to the MOR above) will be calculated.  
4. Implementation will calculate  the percentage of patients who enrolled but came off 
protocol therapy early (intervention only) or off study early (all participants) , overall and 
stratified by [CONTACT_176182].  Counts and percentages will be shown , with 
no inferential statistics.  
 
Missing Data 
Rule-based methods : The PedsQL will be scored according to its scoring guide, which includes 
rules for scoring in the presence of missing elements on each domain modules.  No other deterministic rule -based method will be used to deal with missing data.   
 Multiple imputation: I f more than 10% of participants are missing the primary  outcome  or 
secondary patient- reported outcomes , the analysis will use multiple imputation based on 
previous SSPedi assessments (weeks 0 and 4), group and site. In addition, we will conduct sensitivity analysis assuming that missing scores are from children with high total SSPedi scores and from childr en with low total SSPedi scores (randomly drawn from the highest and lowest 
quartile). A set of [ADDRESS_205708] ed models ( age, diagnosis group  and 
stratification factors ). The models will be fitted in each imputed dataset and the pooled 
estimate of the treatment effect and its standard error wi ll be computed using Rubin’s rules.   
 Analyses of documentation and interventions will not use any imputation. There can be no 
missing data for these outcomes: if a symptom is not documented in the health record and there is no record of an intervention being used, then this constitutes  a ‘no’ for the outcome. 
While it is possible that the SS Pedi symptom score needed for the identification of the analytic 
datasets in analyses  (4b, 4c, 5b , and 5c) is missing for some participants, the more exploratory 
nature of these analyses led us to the deci sion to use only observed data for these outcomes.   
Version Date: November 21 , 2023 
 
9 
  
Software  
All analyses will use R 4.3.0 with these specific packages : 
- base  R for general programming and fitting linear and logistic regression  models.  
- the tidyverse and lubri date packages for data “wrangling” . 
- the rms package for the proportional odds model . 
- the mice package for multiple imputation . 
- the ggplot2 pa ckage for graphs.  
- the tableone package for summary descriptive tables.  
- glmer for linear and logistic mixed effects regression models  
- ordinal for proportional odds mixed effects regression models  
 
Planned Tables  
Planned tables are below.  
 
  
Version Date: November 21 , 2023 
 
10 
 Table 1: Participant Demographic Characteristics  
Characteristic s All Patients  
 Symptom 
Screening  
 Usual Care  
 
    
Male     
Median Age in Years ( range )    
Age Group in Years    
8-10    
11-14    
15-18    
Race     
American Indian or Alaska Native     
Asian     
Black or African American     
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific 
Islander     
White     
Unknown     
Ethnicity     
Hispanic or Latino     
Not Hispanic or Latino     
Unknown     
Diagnosis     
Leukemia     
Lymphoma     
Solid tumor     
Brain tumor     
Other     
Metastatic Disease     
Median Days from Diagnosis (range)     
Planned or Received Treatment     
Chemotherapy     
Radiotherapy     
Surgery     
Median Days from Treatment Start 
(range)     
Inpatient  at Enrollment     
First language English or Spanish     
Preferred Language for Patient 
Reported Outcomes     
English     
Spanish     
Not applicable (chart review only)     
Family Composition - Married     
Guardian Employment  Full or Part Time     
Guardian Education College or Higher     
Annual Household Income  ≥ $60,000     
 
Version Date: November 21 , 2023 
 
11 
  
 
Table 2: SSPedi  Outcomes by [CONTACT_176197] [ADDRESS_205709]  
Estimate;  
 95% CI; p -value  
 Symptom 
Screening   Usual 
Care   Symptom 
Screening   Usual 
Care   Symptom 
Screening   Usual 
Care   Unadjusted  Adjusted  
Primary Outcome        Mean Difference  
SSPedi Score 
(mean, SD)          
       Odds Ratio  
Secondary 
Outcomes          
Severely 
Bothersome, n (%)*          
Feeling 
disappointed or 
sad         
Feeling scared 
or worried          
Feeling cranky 
or angry          
Problems with 
thinking or 
remembering 
things          
Changes in how 
your body or 
face look          
Feeling tired          
Mouth sores          
Headache          
Hurt or pain 
(other than 
headache)          
Tingly or numb 
hands or feet          
Throwing up or 
feeling like you 
may throw up          
Feeling more or 
less hungry than 
you usually do          
Changes in 
taste          
Constipation 
(hard to poop)          
Diarrhea 
(watery, runny 
poop)          
Version Date: November 3 , 2023  
 
 12 Table 3: Non-SSPedi Patient -reported Outcomes by [CONTACT_176198] [ADDRESS_205710]  
Estimate;  
 95% CI; p -value  
 Symptom 
Screening 
(n=175) Usual 
Care 
(n=169)   Symptom 
Screening 
(n=168) Usual 
Care 
(n=164) Unadjusted  
 Adjusted  
 
PROMIS Fatigue  
(Mean, SD )       Mean Difference  
         
Total PedsQL 3.0 
Acute Cancer 
Module Score 
(Mean, SD )       Mean Difference  
Pain and hurt          
Nausea          
Procedural 
anxiety          
Treatment 
anxiety          
Worry          
Cognitive 
problems          
Perceived 
physical 
appearance          
Communication          
Version Date: November 3 , 2023  
 
 13 Table 4: Symptom Documentation and Intervention by [CONTACT_176199]   P value  
    
Symptom Documentation (%)     
Feeling disappointed or sad     
Feeling scared or worried     
Feeling cranky or angry     
Problems with thinking or 
remembering things     
Changes in how your body or 
face look     
Feeling tired     
Mouth sores     
Headache     
Hurt or pain (other than 
headache)     
Tingly or numb hands or feet     
Throwing up or feeling like you 
may throw up     
Feeling more or less hungry 
than you usually do     
Changes in taste     
Constipation (hard to poop)     
Diarrhea (watery, runny poop)     
    
Any Symptom Intervention (%)     
Feeling disappointed or sad     
Feeling scared or worried     
Feeling cranky or angry     
Problems with thinking or 
remembering things     
Changes in how your body or 
face look     
Feeling tired     
Mouth sores     
Headache     
Hurt or pain (other than 
headache)     
Tingly or numb hands or feet     
Throwing up or feeling like you 
may throw up     
Feeling more or less hungry 
than you usually do     
Changes in taste     
Constipation (hard to poop)     
Diarrhea (watery, runny poop)     
    
Symptom Intervention Clearly    
Version Date: November 3 , 2023  
 
 14 for Symptom (%)  
Feeling disappointed or sad     
Feeling scared or worried     
Feeling cranky or angry     
Problems with thinking or 
remembering things     
Changes in how your body or 
face look     
Feeling tired     
Mouth sores     
Headache     
Hurt or pain (other than 
headache)     
Tingly or numb hands or feet     
Throwing up or feeling like you 
may throw up     
Feeling more or less hungry 
than you usually do     
Changes in taste     
Constipation (hard to poop)     
Diarrhea (watery, runny poop)     
 
  
Version Date: November 3 , 2023  
 
 15 Table 5: Number of Unplanned Healthcare Encounters by [CONTACT_176200]  
 
  (n=xx)  (n=xx)  
All unplanned encounters     
    Rate per 100 patient -weeks     
Number of encounters (n, %)     
0    
1    
2    
3    
4    
5    
6 or more     
Emergency department visits     
     Rate per 100 patient -weeks     
Number of encounters (n, %)     
0    
1    
2    
3    
4    
5    
6 or more     
Unplanned clinic visits     
    Rate per 100 patient -weeks     
Number of encounters (n, %)     
0    
1    
2    
3    
4    
5    
6 or more     
Unplanned hospi[INVESTIGATOR_176166] 100 patient -weeks     
Number of encounters (n, %)     
0    
1    
2    
3    
4    
5    
6 or more     
 
  