 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Name: [CONTACT_706067]: [REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chronotherapy in Inflammatory Bowel Disease  
 
Principal Investigators:  
 
Garth Swanson, MD, MS  
Co-Investigators:  
Thayer Hamoudah  
Maham Lodhi  
Catherine Maloney  
Affiliations: (1) Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Digestive Diseases, Rush 
University Medical Center, (2) Department of Internal Medicine, Rush University Medical 
Center, (3) College of Health Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, (4) Rush Medical 
College  
Sponsors: None  
Protocol version number: 1 
Date: 6/18/2018  
 
Objective: The objective of this study is to determine whether the timing of drug administration 
to treat inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) has an effect on patient outcomes.  
Primary objective: Determine whether there is a difference in outcomes seen when patients are  
assigned to take their prescribed immunomodulator (IM) - either Azathioprine or 6 -
Mercaptopurine - at either a morning delivery time or evening delivery time.  
 
Hypothesis:  We hypothesize that administration time of immunomodulators (IMs) during the 
day can affect the clinical outcomes in IBD patients.  
 
Specific Aims:  
·  Determine whether morning vs. evening dosing of patients’ prescribed IMs (either 
Azathioprine or 6 -Mercaptopurine) could affect the subclinical markers of inflammation related 
to disease . 
·  Determine whether morning vs. evening dosing of patients’ prescribed IMs (either 
Azathioprine or 6 -Mercaptopurine) could affect endoscopic outcomes.  
·  Determine whether morning vs. evening dosing of IMs affect their biochemical side effects, as 
is rou tinely monitored as part of the patients’ clinical care.  
·  Determine if outcomes correlate with patients’ chronotype, as determined by [CONTACT_706056] (the Owl and Lark Questionnaire and the Munich Chronotype Questionnaire).  
 
Background  
 
1. Inflammatory Bowel Disease:  
 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) affects between 1 -1.3 million people in the United 
States (Center for Disease Control and Prevention , 2014 ). IBD includes ulcerative c olitis and 
Crohn’s disease, both of which are characterized by [CONTACT_706057] (Ardizzone & Porro, 2005, p. 2255). The 
pathogenesis of these diseases is still unclear, but current theories emphasize intestinal 
microbiota, and disrupt ions in the host immune response due to interactions between genetics 
and environmental stimuli  (Gomez -Gomez et. al, 2015, p. 1283). Normally, the intestinal mucosa 
is in a state of ‘controlled’ inflammation involving a balance between pro -inflammatory and  anti-
inflammatory cytokines (Ardizzone & Porro, 2005, p. 2254). However, in IBD, there is 
dysregulation of the immune system and chronic inflammation.  
        The goals of IBD treatment include remission (absence of symptoms) and the prevention 
of flare -ups by [CONTACT_706058] (Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation of 
America , 2016 ). IMs such as a zathioprine modify the immune system to decrease the 
inflammatory response in the intestine. IMs are usually used to maintain remission in pat ients 
with moderate disease who are steroid dependent or those who do not  respond to 
aminosalicycylates or antibiotics, frequently need steroids, or have reported side effects with 
corticosteroid treatment (Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation of America). IMs in IBD include 
azathioprine and 6 -mercaptopurine, two related molecules.   
Data supports that IMs are effective for promoting remission in IBD. A meta -analysis of 
placebo -controlled studies of patients with Crohn’s disease found that 57% of patients responded 
to azathioprine for treatment of active disease and remission maintenance indications, and 67% 
of patients responded similarly to 6 -mercaptopurine (Belaiche et. al, 2001, p. 71). However, 
there are significant clinical side effects of IM therapy , and aroun d 30-50% of patients 
discontinue IM use due to their side effects or because of a lack of efficacy of the medication 
(Bradford & Shih, 2011). Allergic reactions to the medications include rash, joint pain , fever, 
and pancreatitis  (Grevenitis et. al, 2015, p. 1163). More serious complications include 
myelosuppresion and hepatotoxicity. A close biochemical monitoring of these medications 
(white blood count and liver function tests) is needed for dose adjustment or cessation of the 
medications .  
 
2. Potential Role of Chronotherapy in IBD  
 
An intrinsic circadian rhythm, set by [CONTACT_706059] (SCN), regulates the 
temporal aspect of cellular and physiological function, and ensures that our behavior and 
physiological processes are timed in  such a way that is optimal for interaction with the 
environment (Buttgerfeit et. al, 2015, p. 1). The SCN acts as the master clock that coordinates 
peripheral clocks (internal synchronization) and is also synchronized by [CONTACT_706060], 
specifically,  light-dark cycles. This leads to time -dependent responses such as the release of 
certain hormones, including melatonin, which regulates pro -inflammatory cytokine expression 
and leukocyte functions, as well as oscillation in activities of enzymes that are involved in 
generation of active or toxic forms of medications ( p. 2).  Chronotherapy is defined as  the 
“timing of medical interventions according to biological rhythm determinants as a means to 
optimize treatment outcomes and minimize or avoid adverse eff ects” (Haus et. al, 2012, p. 8). 
While circadian based medicine is novel and not yet included in mainstream medical practice, 
chronotherapy has already shown to be beneficial for treating Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA), 
another chronic inflammatory disease. In RA, there is temporal variation in cytokine secretion, 
regulated by [CONTACT_281885], and research has shown that administering drugs at a specific 
time of day has led to a reduction in symptoms felt by [CONTACT_102] (Buttgerfeit et. al, 2015, p. 4). 
As explained by [CONTACT_706061]. al, morning stiffness, joint pain, and functional disability in RA is due 
to differences in the concentration of anti -inflammatory hormone cortisol compared to the 
concentrations of the pro -inflammatory cytokines that circulate at diff erent times during a 24 
hour period (2012, p. 6). Thus, prednisone, a common treatment for RA, if prescribed based on 
the circadian rhythm levels of IL -6, can control symptoms more effectively ( p. 9). Similar to RA 
and other autoimmune diseases, IBD is cha racterized by a pro -inflammatory cytokine 
upregulation with treatments targeting this autoimmune response. Indeed, there is a significant 
overlap between IBD and RA treatments. Therefore it is possible that time of medication use in 
IBD may potentially imp act the disease outcome. In this regard, we chose to focus on timing  of 
IM delivery because 1) the drug metabolism of IMs is well -characterized (as is explained in 
detail below) 2) the effective and detrimental metabolites are well known ; 3) the levels of these 
metabolites are clinically monitored in patients on IM therapy ; and 4) unlike steroids, where their 
use should be limited, patients are maintained on IMs for extended time periods.  
 
3. Metabolism of Azathioprine/[ADDRESS_959449] converted to 6 -mercaptopurine in the liver. In red blood cells, 
hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) converts 6 -mercaptopurine to 6 -
thionionsine -5’monophosphate, which is then converted to either 6 -thiogunaine nucleotides (6 -
TG) or 6 -methyl -mercaptopruine ribonucleotides (6 -MMP). 6 -TG is the metabolite that is 
associated with immunosuppression, and thus may help decrease disease activity and lead to  or 
maintain  remission in IBD (Belaiche et. al, 2001, p. 72). It has a long half -life in red blood cells 
and other tissues. Thus, prolonged treatment is needed for it to accumulate to steady -state levels 
(p. 72). 6 -TG is also cytotoxic and associated with suppression of bone marrow at levels greater 
than 400 pmol/8x 108 RBC (MacDermott,  2016). However, levels between 230 and 400 
pmol/ 8x108 RBC seem to be optimal for treating IBD and achieving remission. The other end 
metabolite of azathioprine/6 -mercaptopurine, 6 -MMP, i s associated with hepatotoxicity at levels 
greater than 5700  pmol/8x 108 RBC  (MacDermott,  2016). If thiopurine methyltransferase 
(TPMT) is deficient, bone m arrow toxicity can occur due to elevated levels of 6 -TG nucleotides.  
Thus, it is important to monitor  the metabolism of azathioprine and 6 -mercaptopurine through 
the levels of 6 -TG and 6 -MMP.   
 
Methods  
 
Research design: The study will be a prospective study in a cross over design, with each patient 
acting as a control for him/herself. Subjects will be pa tients contact[CONTACT_50587] a Rush University 
Medical Center database that are currently prescribed azathioprine and/or 6 -mercaptopurine. 
They will be asked to take their medication at a determined time each day (morning or evening), 
complete questionnaires, and come in to get labs drawn. Data obtained will be analyzed 
according to statistical methods listed below in order to determine significance of association.  
 
Power and Sample Size: There have been no prior studies testing the role of chronotherapy and 
IBD, therefore no knowledge exists on the anticipated effect. We aim for a prospective study to 
offer enrollment to all subjects who meet the study qualifications. For a mean difference  of 5% 
and standard deviation of 20, we calculated that we will need to enroll 128 subjects to provide a 
power of 80% for a significance level of a=0.05.  
 
Inclusion Criteria: Patients with IBD who have taken, or are currently taking, azathioprine or 6 -
mercaptopurine.  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  1) Subjects who cannot give informed consent, 2) vulnerable populations 
including subjects < 18 years old, pregnant women, prisoners, non English -speaking and 
cognitively impaired individuals, 3) breastfeeding subjects, 4 ) patients treated with dual 
corticosteroid and immunomodulator therapy 5) patients who have had a history of 
complications related to immunomodulator therapy  
 
Subject Consenting and Recruitment: Potential subjects will be identified through a Rush 
University Medical Center Database, and contact[CONTACT_28136]. Subjects will also be recruited 
during their scheduled clinic appointments with Rush University Gastroenterologists. A 
newsletter will als o be posted on rush.edu/clinical -trials for patients to identify whether they 
would be interested in the study. A study staff member will explain the study to them. If the 
subject meets study qualifications and they are interested, they can choose to have the consent 
form physically mailed or emailed to them (if they were recruited by [CONTACT_756]). If they were 
recruited during a scheduled clinic appointment, they can sign the consent form or take it home 
and return it by [CONTACT_2319]. The PI, co -investigators, and o ther key study personnel will obtain the 
consent from the subjects using an IRB -approved consent form for participation in the study. 
They will also answer any questions that the subjects may have regarding the study. Subject 
participation is voluntary. Co nsent will be obtained by [CONTACT_706062] a paper 
copy or an online copy of the approved consent form in a private setting. Subjects are allowed to 
take the consent form home to review it on their own time.  
 
Early Withdrawal: Subjects can withdraw from the study at anytime upon their request.  
 
Description of Procedures: After signing the informed consent form, subjects will be asked to 
answer the Inflammatory Bowel Disease Questionnaire (IBDQ), the Munich Chronotype 
Questionnaire (MCTQ), t he Owl and Lark Questionnaire, the Harvey Bradshaw questionnaire , 
the RU SATED questionnaire, and a demographics survey . All six of these questionnaires are 
included with this IRB. Next, patients will be assigned a time (morning or evening) to self-
administer their prescribed medication  for [ADDRESS_959450] for complete blood count 
(CBC), comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), C -reactive protein (CRP), methylmercaptopurine 
(6-MMP), and thioguanine nucleotides (6 -TG). Plasma and serum isolated from the blood 
sample will be temporari ly stored  to measure inflammatory cytokines  after every 20 subjects 
complete the study . 
Within a 6 -10 week window, as part of their clinical care, subjects will come in to assess their 
clinical status while undergoing biochemical monitoring every 2 -4 weeks . Data from their 
endoscopic examination, if done, will also be collected.  
After 10  weeks, the subjects will be asked to complete the IBDQ and Harvey Bradshaw 
questionnaire. In addition, a blood sample will be obtained to measure the same metabolite level s 
and other biochemical indications of disease as stated above. Again, plasma and serum will be 
isolated from the blood sample and stored.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Design Flow:  
 
 
 
 
Data Collection: Collected data will be logged in a secure database. The subject's name [CONTACT_706068]. The consent form is physically different from the actual questionnaire forms 
and therefore cannot be linke d with reasonable ease to the subjects' responses to the 
questionnaires. No personal identifiers will be included in the spreadsheet. Each participant will 
be assigned a code for data collection. Only the key personnel listed in the IRB review 
application will be able to enter data into and access the database. All access into the database 
will be electronically monitored, complete with time and date of access, to ensure security and 
fidelity of the database material. The database will be stored electronica lly on a secure server in 
the PI's office in the Rush Professional Office Building Suite [ADDRESS_959451] 
protected. The database will be saved and maintained for approximately 5 years.  
 
Data collected on subjects will include:  
1. age and gender  
2. presc ribed medication (Azathioprine or 6 -mercaptopurine)  
3. subset of IBD (Crohn’s or Ulcerative Colitis)  
4. Data collected from questionnaires  
5. laboratory values that correlate with clinical disease activity  
6. endoscopic findings  
7. imaging  
 
The surveys are scored as  followed:  
1. Short IBD Questionnaire (SIBDQ): higher values represent better quality of life  

2. Munich Chronotype Questionnaire (MCTQ): MSFSC < 2.17: extreme early type; 2.17 < 
MSFSC < 7.25: normal type; MSFSC > 7.25: extreme late type  
3. Owl and Lark: ex treme morning type: 70 -86; moderately morning type: 59 -69; neutral type: 
42-58; moderately evening type: 31 -41; extreme evening type: 16 -30 
4. Harvey Bradshaw Questionnaire: >16 severe disease, 8 -16 moderate disease, 5 -7 mild disease, 
<5 remission  
5. RU SATED Questionnaire: higher values represent better sleep health  
 
Study and Data Analysis:  
 
All power estimates were computed using R package pwr, and we assume a Type I error rate of 
0.[ADDRESS_959452] found that circadian enzymes can alter metabolites about 12% 
by [CONTACT_706063]. With [ADDRESS_959453] size of 0.1 this will give 
us a 98% p ower to detect a difference in serum metabolites with a paired Wilcox Signed Rank 
test at alpha=0.05 level, and 84% power if gender is used as an independent variable.  These 
conservative estimates provide a good estimate of the power to detect differences i n metabolites 
chronotherapy in IBD patients. We anticipate we will have nonparametric data and will use the 
Wilcoxon match -pair test for analysis for inflammatory cytokines. This will be a nonrandomized 
trial that will not control for order effects, but ot her factors that are recorded such as cigarette 
smoking will be used as a covariate in multivariate analysis with analysis of variance (ANOVA) 
and linear regression as indicated. For Aim 2, a validated chronotype questionnaire (Munich 
Chronotype Questionna ire) will be compared optimal 6 -mercaptopurine.  Corrected midpoint of 
sleep will then be compared to 6 -MP metabolites to see if chronotype impacts metabolite 
profiles.  Data will be presented as median ± range for variables that can be considered 
nonparam etric.  All analyses will use R (v.3.2.5) and SPSS (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL).  
 
 Our study is based on the potential circadian oscillation of the enzymes responsible for 
metabolizing IMs (as above), as well as that of the pro - and anti -inflammatory cytokines  also 
described above. The oscillatory nature of these enzymes and cytokines may differ amongst 
individuals based on their circadian makeup, which we hope to assess via the chronotype surveys 
(Owl and Lark, MCTQ, RU SATED). We will assess the potential ben efit of taking IMs in the 
morning vs evening by [CONTACT_706064], laboratory data, endoscopic 
findings/imaging (if subjects undergo a colonoscopy or imaging as part of their standard care 
while a part of this study), and quality of li fe surveys (Harvey Bradshaw, IBDQ). The study is a 
prospective cross -over study in which each patient is assigned to the morning or evening group 
based on when they currently take their medication. Therefore, each subject serves as his/her 
own control.  
 
Study Outcomes: The goal of this study is to determine whether time of delivery of medication 
affects the efficacy or side effects of this medication. The study outcomes include 1) IBD clinical 
status as either a) remission defined per no need for step -up therapy (steroid, initiation of anti 
TNF, change of TNF, or surgery), or b) complications (fistula or abscess)  
2) changes in the IBDQ and H arvey Bradshaw questionnaires.  
 
Expected Outcomes: The expected outcome of this study is that there will be a difference seen 
in disease outcomes for IBD between the different groups based on what time they are taking 
their medication. Based on the known e nzymatic pathways of IM metabolism and their potential 
circadian rhythm, we expect to see variation in the efficacy as well as toxicity of IMs when 
administered at different times of the day. Understanding these variations and determining the 
predicting fa ctors (e.g., chronotypes) can lead to circadian -based administration of IMs to 
increase the efficacy of the drug while minimizing its side effects. We expect to see differences 
in the IBD quality of life questionnaire and the Harvey Bradshaw questionnaire from before the 
intervention to after the intervention, as well as differences in clinical disease activity as 
determined by [CONTACT_706065], endoscopic findings, and imaging, between the two groups.  
 
Safety and Adverse Events: We do not predict any adverse events from modifying the timing 
of the medication delivery since there is no specific time of day currently prescribed to patients 
by [CONTACT_706066]. Additionally, we are not changing the dose or 
frequency of delivery of the medication. However, we will do continuous safety monitoring of 
our patients.  
 
Data Management and Acquisition: Each study participant is assigned a code, and his/her data 
will be entered anonymously into a chart.  We will then link the que stionnaire and endoscopic 
results to this data via participant codes. Permission controls and passwords will assure that only 
authorized personnel will have the ability to enter data into the study database.  
 
Confidentiality: Information about study subjec ts will be kept confidential and managed 
according to the requirements of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 
(HIPAA). In the event that a subject revokes authorization to collect or use PHI, the investigator, 
by [CONTACT_5151], ret ains the ability to use all information collected prior to the revocation of subject 
authorization.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References:  
Ardizzone, S., & Porro, G. B. (2005). Biologic therapy for inflammatory bowel disease. Drugs ,     
 65(16), 2253 -2286.  
Belaiche, J., Desager, J. P., Horsmans, Y., & Louis, E. (2001). Therapeutic drug monitoring of  
     azathioprine and 6 -mercaptopurine metabolites in crohn disease. Scandinavian Journal of  
     Gastroenterology , 36(1), [ADDRESS_959454], K., & Shih, D. Q.  (2011). Optimizing 6 -mercaptopurine and azathioprine therapy in  
the management of inflammatory bowel disease. World Journal of Gastroenterology , 
17(37), 4166 -4173.  
 
Grevenitis, P., Thomas, A., & Lodhia, N. (2015). Medical therapy for inflammatory bowel   
 disease.  Surgical Clinics of North America , 95(6), 1159 -1182.       
 
Gomez -Gomez, G. J., Masedo, A., Yela, C., del Pi[INVESTIGATOR_706054] -Montiel, M., & Casis, B. (2015).  
Current stage in inflammatory bowel disease: What is next? World Journal of  
Gastroenterology , 21(40), [ZIP_CODE] -[ZIP_CODE].  
 
Haus, E., Sackett -Lundeen, L., & Smolensky, M. H. (n.d.). Rheumatoid arthritis: Circadian  
rhythms in  disease activity, signs and symptoms, and rational for chronotherapy with 
corticosteroids and  other medications. Bulletin of the Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_706055] e, 70, 3-10. 
 
Immunomodulators. (2009, January 16). Retrieved from Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of  
America . website: 
http://www.ccfa.org/resources/immunomod ulators.html?referrer=https://www.google.co
m/ 
 
Inflammatory bowel disease. (2014, September 4). Re trieved February 25, 2016, from  
Centers for  Disease Control and Prevention website: http://www.cdc.gov/ibd/index.htm  
 
MacDermott, R. P. (2016). 6 -mercaptopurine (6 -MP) metabolite monitoring and TPMT testing  
in the  treatment of inflammatory bowel disease with 6 -MP or azathioprine. Retrieved 
March 6, 2016, from UpToDate website: http://www.uptodate.com/contents/6 -
mercaptopurine -6-mp-metabolite -monitoring -and-tpmt-testing -in-the-treatment -of-
inflammatory -bowel -disease -with-6-mp-or-azathioprine  
 
Perri, D., Cole, D. E. C., Friedman, O., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_621230], E., Mintz, S., & Adhikari, N. K. J. (2007).  
     Azathioprine and diffuse alveolar ha emorrhage: The pharmacogenetics of thiopurine  
     methyltransferase. European Respi[INVESTIGATOR_21107] , 30(5), 1014 -1017.  
 
  