PROTOCOL TITLE: Running cutaneous  suture spacing during linear wound closures 
and the effect on wound cosmesis: a randomized evaluator blinded split wound 
comparative effectiveness trial   
Version Date: 10/30/2017  Page 1 of 15 Revis ed: November 27, 2013  1) Protocol Title  
Running cutaneous suture spacing during linear wound closures and the effect on 
wound cosmesis: a randomized evaluator blinded split wound comparative 
effectiveness trial    
2) Author of Protocol  
 
X  UC Davis Researcher  
 Researcher from other institution  
 Private Sponsor  
 Cooperative Group  
 Other: _________________  
 
3) IRB Review History  
N/A 
4) Objectives  
The purpose of this study is to determine whether the spacing between 
cutaneous  running  sutures  during repair of linear cutaneous surgery 
wounds  on the trunk  or extremities  affects scar cosmesis .  We will use  a 
split wound model, where half of the wound is repaired with sutures 
spaced two milli meters apart  and the other half is repaired with sutures 
spaced five mill imeter s apart . Three -months post -surgery, the scar  will be 
measured via the patient observer scar assessment scale, a validated scar 
instrument.   The scar width , and adverse events  will also be recorded . 
5) Background  
Sutures are the standard of care in repai ring cutaneous wounds. The 
majority of surgical reconstruction s following a  Mohs micrographic 
surgery  and standard surgical excisions  require two layers of sutures: a 
deep (subcutaneous) layer and a top (cutaneous) layer . The deep layer 
dissolves naturally  whereas the top layer m ay necessitate removal if non -
absorbable sutures are used.   
 
This study aims to investigate whether the spacing of the 
running cutaneous sutures affects  surgical wound cosmesis on the trunk 
and extremities . In other words, we would like to determine which of the 
following yields a more cosmetically appealing scar: many closely 
approximated sutures or fewer, more widely spaced sutures.   We wish to 
compare the effects of two versus five millimeter  spacing between sutures.  
It is p ossible that fewer, more widely spaced sutures may leave more open 
space in the wound, leaving more tension to pull on those few sutures, 
possibly encouraging the wound to dehisce and make it harder to 
approximate the wound edges yielding a less cosmetical ly appealing scar 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Running cutaneous  suture spacing during linear wound closures 
and the effect on wound cosmesis: a randomized evaluator blinded split wound 
comparative effectiveness trial   
Version Date: 10/30/2017  Page 2 of 15 Revis ed: November 27, [ADDRESS_1096176] of cutaneous  suture 
spacing on wound cosmesis.   
 
6) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Describe how you r individuals will be screen ed for eligibility.  
All patients schedul ed for cutaneous surgical procedures with one of the 
study investigators at the UC Davis Dermatology Clinic  will be screened 
for eligibility.  
Describe the criteria that define who will be included or excluded in your 
final study sample.  
Inclusion Criteria:  
• 18 years of age  or older  
• Able to give informed consent themselves  
• Patient scheduled for cutaneous surgical procedure on the trunk  
and extremities  with predicted primary closure  
• Willing to return for follow up visit.  
Exclusion Criteria:  
• Mentally handicapped  
• Unable to understand written and oral English  
• Incarceration  
• Under 18 years of age  
• Pregnant Women  
• Wounds with predicted closure length less than 3 cm  
Indicate specifically whether you will include or exclude each of the 
following special populations:  (You may not include members of the above 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Running cutaneous  suture spacing during linear wound closures 
and the effect on wound cosmesis: a randomized evaluator blinded split wound 
comparative effectiveness trial   
Version Date: 10/30/2017  Page 3 of 15 Revis ed: November 27, 2013  populations as subjects in your research unless you indicate this in your 
inclusion criteria.)  
• Adults unable to consent  
• Individuals who are not yet adults (infants, children, teenagers)  
• Pregnan t women  
• Prisoners  
None of these special populations will be included  
7) Number of Subjects  
a) Study - Wide:  
This is a single center study; see below.  
b) Local:  
Indicate the total number of subjects to be enrolled  locally.  
We will enroll 50 patients locally in this s ingle center study.  
 
8) Recruitment Methods  
a) Study -Wide:  
NA 
Describe when, where, and how potential subjects will be recruited.  
Patients will be recruited from the investigators surgical practice at the 
time of the procedure at the University of [LOCATION_004], Dermatology Clinic  
Describe the methods that will be used to identify potential subjects.  
The surgical schedule will be examined to identify potenti al study 
subjects. Faculty will be reminded about the study through a flier posted in 
the doctors charting lounges (Attached).  
Describe materials that will be used to recruit subjects. (Attach  copi[INVESTIGATOR_145526]. For advertisements, attach  the final 
copy of printed advertisements. When advertisements are taped for 
broadcast, attach  the final audio/video tape. You may submit the wording 
of the advertisement prior to tapi[INVESTIGATOR_47222] -tapi[INVESTIGATOR_359482], provided the IRB revi ews the final audio/video 
tape.)  
b) HIPAA:  
If the research procedures include accessing personal health information 
(PHI) to identify prospective subjects without HIPAA Authorization please 
describe:  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Running cutaneous  suture spacing during linear wound closures 
and the effect on wound cosmesis: a randomized evaluator blinded split wound 
comparative effectiveness trial   
Version Date: 10/30/2017  Page 4 of 15 Revis ed: November 27, 2013  • Why getting  HIPAA Authorization is not practicable.  
• Why the research can’t be conducted without access to this PHI.  
• Your plan to protect the PHI from improper use and disclosure, 
including the plan to destroy the PHI at the earliest opportunity.  
• Assurance that the  protected health information will not be 
inappropriately reused or disclosed to any other person or entity.  
• Description of the protected health information which will be 
accessed  
The patients name, age, gender, medical record number, operative and 
follow up images and phone number will be recorded in the Redcap 
data system  to allow study personnel to contact [CONTACT_794629]. Information will be deleted from the redcap 
system after 3 years. HIPPA authorization will be obtained fro m each 
patient.  
 
9) Compensation to the Subjects  
 
If the subjects will be compensated for their participation within the study 
describe the amount and type of compensation that will be paid to subjects. 
Clarify how compensation will be pro -rated if the subjects does not 
complete all study visits.  
No compensation provided  to study subjects . 
 
10) Study Timelines  
Describe:  
• The duration of an individual subject’s participation in the study.  
3 months  
• The duration anticipated to enroll all study subjects.  
3 months  
• The estimated date for the investigators to complete this study 
(complete primary analyses)  
12 months  
11) Study Endpoints  
Describe the primary and secondary study endpoints.  
The primary endpoint will be the score of two blinded reviewers using the 
patie nt observer scar assessment score  at a three -month assessment visit.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Running cutaneous  suture spacing during linear wound closures 
and the effect on wound cosmesis: a randomized evaluator blinded split wound 
comparative effectiveness trial   
Version Date: 10/30/2017  Page 5 of 15 Revis ed: November 27, [ADDRESS_1096177] ever been 
observed in our department, minor infections occur at rates of < 3% and 
bleeding and dehiscence at much lower rates still. All adverse events will 
be recor ded, and monitored. Serious adverse events will be reported, 
though none are expected.  
12) Procedures Involved  
a) Describe and explain the study design.  
This is a single center, randomized, evaluator blind, split wound study.  
 
Provide a description of all resear ch procedures being performed and 
when they are performed, including procedures being performed to 
monitor subject s for safety or minimize risks.  
 
After screening and informed consent , demographic da ta will be collected 
including date of birth, race, gende r and medical record number.  This will 
be collected in the redcap database .  
The patient ’s wound will be labeled A  if it is on the left or superior side of 
the investigator and B if it is on the right  or inferior  side. A predetermined, 
concealed randomization number will be obtained from the RedCap 
randomization module, which will specify how side A is to be treated. 
Side B will be treated the opposite way as A. Side A will always be closed 
first. T he side assigned to be closed with sutures spaced two milli meters 
apart  will be treated  in a simple ,running  cutaneous suture  pattern.  Sutures 
spaced five milli meter s apart  will be used to treat the opposite side in a 
simple , running  cutaneous suture  pattern . Prior to  placement  of the 
cutaneous sutures , both sides of the wound will be sutured together with a 
subcutaneous (bottom)  layer of stitches, as is the standard of care . A 
digital image of the wound before and after the top stitches are placed  will 
be obtained ; these  may be  used in scientific talks and/or for publication 
purposes. Treatment assignment , wound length , demographic data , and 
digital images  will be recorded within the redcap database.  
Follow -up ass essment will be scheduled for three months following the 
procedure, w ith a one -month window before or after that time if the 
patient cannot return at precisely three  months.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Running cutaneous  suture spacing during linear wound closures 
and the effect on wound cosmesis: a randomized evaluator blinded split wound 
comparative effectiveness trial   
Version Date: 10/30/2017  Page 6 of 15 Revis ed: November 27, [ADDRESS_1096178] their scores 
independent ly using the physician observer scar assessment score 
instrument  (POSAS) . The width of the scar on both sides will also be 
measured and recorded  1 cm from midline on both sides of the scar . If one 
half of the scar has more associated erythema, that will be  recorded. The 
patient part of the instrument will be independently recorded. This data 
will be recorded in the redcap database. Digital images will then be 
obtained again, which may be used for s cientific meeting presentation 
and/or publication purposes.  
 
Describe:  
• Procedures performed  to lessen the probability or magnitude of risks.  
All adverse events will be monitored and recorded. Safety precautions will 
be the same as for all patients undergoing cutaneous procedures. Patients 
will be given instructions  to call in the event of any complications such as 
bleeding, infection, pain or any concerns. An on call resident will be 
available by [CONTACT_794630], every  day of the week. Instructions for 
contact[CONTACT_794631].  
• All drugs and devices used in the research and the purpose of their 
use, and their regulatory approval status.  
The type of suture device used on the deep portion of the wound will be at 
the discretion of the investigator.  The type used will be ei ther vicryl, 
monocryl, or  PDS as these are all standard of care . 
• The source records that will be used to collect data about subjects. 
(Attach all surveys, scri pts, and data collection forms.)  
We will colle ct all data, demographic and scientific, in the re dcap data 
collection system. The patient will be queried for demographic data 
verbally or the patient chart will be examined within the EMR to obtain 
the date of birth, race, gender, date of surgery, date of follow -up, name, 
medical record number, and surgery location. All other data will be 
recorded from assessments during study evaluation.   
• What data will be collected including long -term follow -up. 
POSAS scores, width of the scar 1 cm from midline on each side , digital 
images, occurrence of any compli cations including: spi[INVESTIGATOR_794624], 
dehiscence, infection, necrosis, bleeding,  and hematoma.  
• Describe how much blood is being drawn and how often  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Running cutaneous  suture spacing during linear wound closures 
and the effect on wound cosmesis: a randomized evaluator blinded split wound 
comparative effectiveness trial   
Version Date: 10/30/2017  Page 7 of 15 Revis ed: November 27, 2013  NA 
b) Humanitarian Use Device (HUD)  
For HUD uses provide a description of the device, a summary of how you 
propo se to use the device, including a description of any screening 
procedures, the HUD procedure, and any patient follow -up visits, tests or 
procedures.  
NA 
13) Data and Specimen Banking  
If data or specimens will be banked for future use, describe where the 
specime ns will be stored, how long they will be stored, how the specimens 
will be accessed, and who will have access to the specimens.  
NA 
List the data to be stored or associated with each specimen.  
NA 
Describe the procedures to release data or specimens, including: the 
process to request a release, approvals required for release, who can 
obtain data or specimens, and the data to be provided with specimens.  
NA 
14) Data Management  and Confidentiality  
Describe the data analysis plan, including any stat istical procedures.  
Paired t -test will be performed for POSAS scores  and scar width . For 
analysis of complications Fisher’s exact test will be used.  
Provide a power analysis.  
Using g*power statistical software , we calculated we woul d need to enroll 
50 patients using a split scar model with a mean POSAS score of 12 a 
minimal meaningful clinical  difference of 3 points on the 60 point POSAS 
scale with the following assumptions: alpha 0.05, beta 0.10, standard 
deviation  6 (based upon wound eversion study results from trial completed 
by [CONTACT_794632]),  dropout rate 15%.  
Describe the steps that will be taken secure the data (e.g., training, 
authorization of access, password protection, encryption, physical 
controls, certifica tes of confidentiality, and separation of identifiers and 
data) during storage, use, and transmission.  
Redcap database will be used to record all data. It is maintained by [CONTACT_352045], Davis  and encrypted. Passwords for access will 
not be shared.  For analysis, data will only be downloaded without personal 
identifiers.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Running cutaneous  suture spacing during linear wound closures 
and the effect on wound cosmesis: a randomized evaluator blinded split wound 
comparative effectiveness trial   
Version Date: 10/30/2017  Page 8 of 15 Revis ed: November 27, [ADDRESS_1096179] warning text that will 
appear if users attemp t to close them without recording the required data.  
a.) Study -Wide:  
Describe how data and specimens will be handled study -wide:  
NA. Study is single center only.  
• What information  will be included in that data or associated with the 
specimens?  
• Where and how dat a or specimens will be stored?  
• How long the data or specimens will be stored?  
• Who will have access to the data or specimens?  
• Who is responsible for receipt or transmission of the data or 
specimens?  
• How data and specimens will be transported?  
b.) Local  
Describe the local procedures for maintenance of confidentiality.  
• Where and how data or specimens will be stored locally?   
Consent forms will be stored in a locked cabinet. All other study 
related information will be recorded in the redcap data system.  
• How long the data or specimens will be stored locally?  
3 years.  
• Who will have access to the data or specimens locally?  
Only those listed in the study protocol. A statistician will view de -
identified data after collection for analysis purposes.  
• Who is responsib le for receipt or transmission of the data or 
specimens locally?  
The principal  investigator; Daniel Eisen  
• How data and specimens will be transported locally?  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Running cutaneous  suture spacing during linear wound closures 
and the effect on wound cosmesis: a randomized evaluator blinded split wound 
comparative effectiveness trial   
Version Date: 10/30/2017  Page 9 of 15 Revis ed: November 27, 2013  Data will only be downloaded onto encrypted computers directly from the 
redcap database and only when necessary for study administration or data 
analysis.  
 
15) Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
This is required when research  involves more than Minimal Risk  to 
subjects.  
The plan might include establishing a data monitorin g committee and a 
plan for reporting data monitoring committee findings to the IRB and the 
sponsor.  
Describe:  
• The plan to periodically evaluate the data collected regarding both 
harms and benefits to determine whether subjects remain safe.  
Risks from this study are minimal. All adverse events will  be monitored 
and recorded. S tudy personne l will immediately share all adverse events 
with the principal  investigator.  
• What data are reviewed, including safety data, untoward events, and 
efficacy data.  
Only safety  data will be reviewed. Efficacy data will be determined after 
study follow up is completed since this study concerns non -life threatening 
outcomes.  
• How the safety information will be collected (e.g., with case report 
forms, at study visits, by [CONTACT_756] c alls with participants).  
Safety information will be collected within the redcap database.  
• The frequency of data collection, including when safety data collection 
starts.  
Safety data collection begins immediately following the procedure. 
Patients will be instructed to call immediately with any complications 
from their procedures. Patients will also be queried at follow up  (3 
months)  regarding complications in case they fail to call and are treated by 
[CONTACT_267284].  
• Who will review the data.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Running cutaneous  suture spacing during linear wound closures 
and the effect on wound cosmesis: a randomized evaluator blinded split wound 
comparative effectiveness trial   
Version Date: 10/30/2017  Page 10 of 15 Revis ed: November 27, 2013  The prin cipal  investigator and study personnel will review the data.  
• The frequency or periodicity of review of cumulative data.  
The study investigator will review safety data weekly after enrollment.  
• The statistical tests for analyzing the safety data to determine  whether 
harm is occurring.  
Both interventions in this study are relatively low risk and have been used 
in surgery for decades. Serious adverse events are not expected. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_794625], 
bleeding, or dehiscence. If the adverse event is localizable to a single site 
it will be recorded as such and the results analyzed after study completion.  
• Any conditions that trigger an immediate suspension of the research.  
Any serious complication, such as  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_794626], until study personnel 
meet and determine it is safe to continue enrolling patients.  
16) Withdrawal of Subjects  
Describe anticipated circumstances under which subjects will be 
withdrawn from the research without their consent.  
None  
Describe any procedures for orderly termination.  
For subjects that do not want to continue to participate in the study, then 
they may do so by [CONTACT_794633]. There 
is no risk to early study termination.  
Describe procedures that will be followed when subjects withdraw from 
the research, including partial withdrawal from procedures with 
continued data collection.  
If patients change their mind about participation prior to or during their 
procedure the surgeon will use his or her judgment with regarding the 
spacing of the cutaneous sutures to close the deep  layer of skin . No data 
collection will occur in the future.  
17) Risks to Subjects  
List the reasonabl y foreseeable risks, discomforts, hazards, or 
inconveniences to the subjects related the subjects’ participation in the 
research. Include as may be useful for the IRB’s consideration, describe 
the probability, magnitude, duration, and reversibility of the risks. 
Consider physical, psychological, social, legal, and economic risks.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Running cutaneous  suture spacing during linear wound closures 
and the effect on wound cosmesis: a randomized evaluator blinded split wound 
comparative effectiveness trial   
Version Date: 10/30/2017  Page 11 of 15 Revis ed: November 27, 2013  The primary risk of participating is that one side of the wound may look 
different than the other. The  author has thus far conducted 5  split scar 
studies and none of the participan ts from these trials has requested 
revision of the scar based upon differences in appearance of the two 
halves. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_897] , differences are not extreme in individuals. Other risks 
are the same for every cutaneous surgical procedure regardless of study 
enrol lment: infection, bleeding, dehiscence, 100% chance of scar. Risks of 
bleeding and infection are less than 3% in our facility and typi[INVESTIGATOR_794627].  
If applicable, indicate which procedures may have risks to the subjects 
that are currently unforese eable.  
The study intervention is commonly performed. Though unforeseeable 
risks are always possible, they are not probable here.  
If applicable, indicate which procedures may have risks to an embryo or 
fetus should the subject be or become pregnant.  
NA 
If applicable, describe risks to others who are not subjects.  
NA 
18) Potential Benefits to Subjects  
Describe the potential benefits that individual subjects may experience 
from taking part in the research. Include as may be useful for the IRB’s 
consideration, the probability, magnitude, and duration of the potential 
benefits.  
Indicate if there is no direct benefit. Do not include benefits to society or 
others.  
No direct benefit to individual subjects.  
19) Vulnerable Populations  
If the research  involves individuals who are vulnerable to coercion or 
undue influence, describe additional safeguards included to protect their 
rights and welfare.  
NA 
20) Multi -Site Research  
NA 
21) Community -Based Participatory Research  
NA 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Running cutaneous  suture spacing during linear wound closures 
and the effect on wound cosmesis: a randomized evaluator blinded split wound 
comparative effectiveness trial   
Version Date: 10/30/2017  Page 12 of 15 Revis ed: November 27, 2013  22) Sharing of Results with Subjects  
Resul ts of the study participants own outcome measurements will be 
shared with patient verbally if they request.  
23) Setting  
Patients will be recruited from the University of [LOCATION_004], , Dermatology 
Clinic cutaneous surgery practice, [ADDRESS_1096180] , Sacramento , CA 
[ZIP_CODE].  
Research procedures will be performed at t he University of [LOCATION_004], 
Davis  Department of Dermatology cutaneous surgery practice. [ADDRESS_1096181], Sacramento, CA [ZIP_CODE].  
24) Resources Available  
Principle Investigator - Board Certified Dermatologist  with fellowship 
training in cutaneous surgery. Will recruit, enroll, evaluate study subjects 
and oversee study.  
 
Co-Investigator - Procedural Dermatology Fellow: w ill recruit, enroll, and 
evaluate study subjects.  
 
Board certified dermatologists with fellowship training in cutaneous 
surgery: will recruit, enroll, and evaluate study subjects.  
 
Board certified dermatologist s: will recruit, enroll, and evaluate study 
subjects.  
Dermatology residents: will recruit, enroll, and evaluate study subjects.  
 
Study  coordinator : will correspond with IRB, perform audits of consent 
forms, and handle  administrative requirements of study  
 
Junior Specialist:  will correspond with IRB and handle administrative 
requirements  of study  
 
Patient Record Abstractor: perform research study maintenance in Epic 
and scanning consent forms to Epic.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Running cutaneous  suture spacing during linear wound closures 
and the effect on wound cosmesis: a randomized evaluator blinded split wound 
comparative effectiveness trial   
Version Date: 10/30/2017  Page 13 of 15 Revis ed: November 27, 2013  Approximately 30 patients under go cutaneous surgeries every week in our 
center. We should easily be able to recruit our required number wi thin 3 
months.  
 
The principle investigator and procedural dermatology fellow will recruit 
and treat patients continuously five days a week.  
 
Outpatient, dermatologic surgery facility with 6 procedure rooms, and 
more than a dozen nursing staff.  
 
No psychol ogical support is likely necessary for those undergoing the 
procedure. Medical help is available in the event of a complication from 
7:[ADDRESS_1096182] a lab practicing 
the procedure on a simulated patient mannequin designed for teaching 
cutaneous surgical procedures.  
25) Prior Approvals  
NA 
26) Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
Only study personnel and nurses normally present during cutaneous 
procedures and follow -ups will be present. Personal information will be 
obtained just once at study recruitment. It will not be required at follow 
up. 
Examination of the wound will not differ significa ntly in practice from 
standard medical care, during which a faculty member and resident and 
nurse typi[INVESTIGATOR_794628]. In this situation, the number 
of interactions will be the same or less, since only two study investigators 
will be  required. Medical students will not participate in study patient 
follow-up evaluation.  
Indicate how the research team is permitted to access any sources of 
information about the subjects.  
Access to study information will be permitted only for data entry a nd for 
study monitoring. Study staff will be requested to only access this 
information for these purposes only.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Running cutaneous  suture spacing during linear wound closures 
and the effect on wound cosmesis: a randomized evaluator blinded split wound 
comparative effectiveness trial   
Version Date: 10/30/2017  Page 14 of 15 Revis ed: November 27, 2013  27) Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
If the research involves more than Minimal Risk  to subjects, describe the 
available compensation in the  event of research related injury.  
No compensation will be provided.  
Economic Burden to Subjects  
No additional cost to participate in the study will be incurred.  Standard of 
care and other routine costs will be billed to the patient or the patient’s  
insur ance carrier, Medicare, or Medi -cal, where appropriate. Only the 
costs of research and experimental procedures will be paid by [CONTACT_103]/department  
28) Consent Process  
We will obtain written informed consent from all subjects . Study 
personnel will be obtaini ng consent in person at the Dermatology clinic at 
[ADDRESS_1096183] , Sacramento, CA [ZIP_CODE].  Patients will be given as much 
time as they like to consider enrolling.  
We will review the consent form binder once a month to ascertain 
signatures on the consent  and HIPA A forms.  The study coordinator, Lam 
Nguyen will review the binder independently at routine intervals.  
Our experience from past studies indicates it takes less than [ADDRESS_1096184] majority of our cutaneous surgical population is English 
speaking.  
 
Waiver or Alteration of the Consent Process (consent will not be 
obtained, required information will not be disclosed, or the research 
involves deception)  
NA 
Subjects  who are not yet adults (infants, children, teenagers)  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Running cutaneous  suture spacing during linear wound closures 
and the effect on wound cosmesis: a randomized evaluator blinded split wound 
comparative effectiveness trial   
Version Date: 10/30/2017  Page 15 of 15 Revis ed: November 27, 2013  NA 
Cognitively Impaired Adults  
NA 
Adults Unable to Consent  
NA 
Adults Unable to Consent  
NA 
For HUD uses provide a description of how the patient will be informed of 
the potential risks and benefits of t he HUD and any procedures associated 
with its use.  
29) Process to Document Consent in Writing  
We will follow “SOP: Written Documentation of Consent (HRP -091)” 
 
30) Drugs or Devices  
NA  
 
 
References   
After completing a literature search, it has been determined that there are no publications, 
recommendations, or studies invetigating the relationship between running 
cutaneous  suture spacing and wound cosmesis.  
 
 