Page 1 of 13 [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Comparing  Time to Readiness for Discharge After Colonoscopy: Propofol and 
Dexmedetomidine vs Propofol Only Sedation  
 
PROTOCOL Version 2/21/2018  
 
Principal investigators: Dennis Dimaculangan MD  
 
Other investigators:  
Leonard Edokpolo  MD 
Jeremy C. Weedon PhD  
Joanna Serafin, PhD  
James Kim, M.Eng.  
Isabelle Kao, B.A.  
Alexander Lo, B.S.  
Maryam Siddiqui, B.S.  
Frederick Jacques, B.S.  
 
Page 2 of 13 1.  INTRODUCTION : 
Colonoscopy is an important diagnostic screening procedure for colon cancer that is 
often associated with discomfo rt therefore requiring moderate to deep sedation of 
patients. Monitored Anesthesia Care (MAC) sedation is the technique that is widely 
provided and is considered the standard of practice in the U nited States for  patients 
undergoing colonoscopy  [1]. An idea l sedative agent for ambulatory colonoscopy should 
have certain properties that include: a rapid onset and offset of action, provide 
cardiopulmonary stability, have minimal adverse effects, and allow for smooth recovery, 
and early discharge  [4, 5].  
  Titra ted bolus dosing or continuous infusion, of propofol alone, is the commonly 
used technique for Monitored Anesthesia Care (MAC)  in ambulatory col onoscopy. Propofol 
is chosen  because of its rapid onset and short duration of action,  a property which is ideal 
for fast recovery and early discharge in the ambulatory setting. Depending on a patient’s 
comorbidities, age and functional status, there is a wide range of variability in the 
hemodynamic and respi[INVESTIGATOR_166638]. Car eful p ropofol 
titration is therefore  required to avoid hypotension and hypoventilation. Hypotension and 
apnea can occur if large doses of propof ol are required to complete the procedure  [1, 6, 7].  
 Balanced anesthesia, using a combination of medications with dif ferent 
mechanisms of action can be used as a technique to minimize the total amount of each 
agent given and their side effects while achieving the desired level of sedation. 
Dexmedetomidine is one agent that has been used alone or in combination with propo fol 
for sedation during colonoscopy.  
 Dexmedetomidine is an alpha -[ADDRESS_193337] with analgesic and 
sedative effects  [8]. Other desirable effects for this agent include: decrease requirements 
for other anesthetics and  analgesics, minimal res pi[INVESTIGATOR_2341] , neuroprotecti on, and 
decrease in emergence agitation  [9-11]. On the other hand, dexmedetomidine has been 
reported to be associated with prolonged post -operative recovery time due to bradycardia, 
low mean arterial pressure, and cardiova scular depression  [12-14].  
 While several  studies have examined the use of dexmedetomidine in colonoscopy , 
there is limited evidence on its efficacy when combined  with propofol for use in 
ambulatory c olonoscopy . One study that demonstrated the safe use of  dexmedetomidine 
alone for colonoscopy also concluded that its sole use in this setting is limited b y its side 
effects such as, hemodynamic instability, prolonged recovery, and a “complicated 
administration”  [15]. In another study, dexmedetomidine was shown  to provide better 
hemodynamic stability, higher Ramsay sedation scale score, and higher satisfaction scores 
in comparison to midazolam  [16]. A  randomized study that compared four different drugs: 
dexmedetomidine, sufentanil, meperidine and midazolam used in combination with 
propofol for sedation in colonoscopy showed that patients who received dexmedetomidine 
and propofol had a higher degree of sedation and shorter time to recover protective 
reflexes and motor function  [4]. 
Page 3 of 13  Only o ne study in the literatur e has directly compared a dexmedetomidine -propofol 
regimen with propofol alone  for sedation during  colo noscopy. In this Chinese study, 
investigators found that oxygen saturation level, and the amount of propofol consumed in 
patients who received dexmedetom idine -propofol are decreased in comparison with those 
who recei ved propofol only  [17]. The study investigators determined that there was no 
difference in recovery time between a combination of dexmedetomidine -propofol 
compared to propofol -only. However, re covery time in the  study was defined as time from 
the last dose of medication to the time when the patient became alert and oriented to their 
name,  age and to time. This definition of recovery does not necessarily mean that the 
patient is ready for dischar ge to home, which will be more relevant to the clinical 
implications of the findings in the ambulatory surgical setting. In the [LOCATION_002], phase [ADDRESS_193338] Anesthesia Dis charge Scoring System 
(MPADSS), shown in Table 1  (18, 19) . Compared to the Aldrete score (Table 2), the 
MPADSS system does not only provide criteria for discharge from the post anesthetic care 
unit (PACU), but also pr ovides criteria for “street fitness,” such as severity of pain, ability to 
stand and ambulate, and tolerance of oral fluids so that patients can be discharged to home 
(20,21).  
 We did not find any study in the literature that has definitively assessed whe ther 
dexmedetomidine -propofol prolongs readiness for discharge in the ambulatory setting 
when compared to a propofol -only regimen  for sedation . 
 Some practitioners at the SUNY Downstate Medical  Center have started combining 
dexmedetomidine with propofol fo r sedation of patients undergoing colonoscopi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. Due to 
the importance of rapid recovery and patient turnover in an  ambulatory surgery setting , 
we plan to conduct a prospective randomized double -blind study on patients scheduled to 
undergo colonoscopy to c ompare the combination regimen of dexmedetomidine -propofol 
to a propofol -only regimen and determine whether there are any differences in recovery 
time and readiness for discharge as defined by [CONTACT_166640] (MPADSS)  scale.  
  
2. OBJECTIVES  
 We will prospectively compare  a group of  patients randomized to receive p ropofol 
and dexmedetomidine to another  group of patients randomized to receive propofol alone. 
We hypothesize that there will be no significant difference in t he time to readiness for 
discharge between the two groups using the MPADSS discharge scale.  
 
3. STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS  
This is a  prospective  study to  compare in a randomized  double blind  trial the following 
outcome measures:  
Page 4 of 13 Primary outcome:  
1. Readines s for discharge time:  
From the time of last administration of sedative medication to the time for the 
patient to attain Modified Post Anesthesia Discharge Scoring System (MPADSS)  
score of [ADDRESS_193339] every patient is discharged within an hour, 
the measure is very granular; we propose therefore to dichotomize it as discharge 
within 30min, yes or no.  
 
Secondary outcomes:  
1. Total propofol consumption  per group  (mg/kg)/duration of procedure in minutes  
2. Side effects:   
a. lowest intraoperative % drop in MAP from baseline  
b. sustained bradycardic epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865] (HR<[ADDRESS_193340] 5 minutes ) 
intraoperatively , to be reported as a yes/no event  
c. number of apneic epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841] , intraoperatively , requiring positive pressure 
ventilation.  To be reported per group  
 
A. Type of study  
This is a non -inferiority prospective randomized  double blind  study.  
 
B. Patient selection  
i. Requested Sample Size : Up to 150 people will be screened until th e study 
achieves 100 cases (excluding screen failures and withdrawals) - 50 patients to 
receive intravenous Dexmedetomidine 0.3 ug/kg followed by [CONTACT_39955] ; 50 
patients to receive propofol -only plus placebo.  
ii. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria :  
Inclusion crit eria:  
 All patients scheduled to undergo colonoscopy at SUNY Downstate 
Medical  Center . 
Exclusion Criteria  
 < 18 years old  
 > 75 years old  
  Cognitively Impaired patients  (Cognitively impaired patients are 
excluded from the study because our primary outcome inv olves a very 
strict discharge criteria that requires the patient to respond to and 
perform tasks on our pre -existing discharge scale checklist. These may be 
impossible to assess or will be difficult to standardize for patients whom 
are Cognitively Impaired .) 
 Pregnancy  
 Patients who use a w heelchair or ambulates with crutches  (Patients using 
a wheelchair are excluded from the study because our primary outcome 
involves a very strict discharge criteria that requires the patient to 
respond to and perform tasks o n our pre -existing discharge scale 
Page [ADDRESS_193341]. These may be impossible to assess or will be difficult to 
standardize for patients whom who use a  wheel -chair ). 
 Limited exercise tolerance (as this could represent active coronary 
disease)  
 Total body weight gre ater than 150  kg (due to maximal dose of drug 
available in randomized syringes containing study drug)  
 Propofol , soy or glycerol  allergy  
 Significant renal impairment  
 Significant hepatic impairment  
 Inability to read or write in English  
iii. Method for Screening F or Eligibility : 
 Screening for Cognitively Impaired patients  
o pre-existing clinical diagnosis  of cognitive impairment in medical 
history  
 Screening for pregnancy  
o Based on urine or serum HCG pregnancy test done as part of 
routine preoperative evaluation prior to administration of 
anesthesia.  
 Screening for renal impairment  
o Based on glomerular filtration rate <60 using routine preoperative 
basic metabolic panel.  
 Screening for other issues  
o As documented in health records or reported by [CONTACT_166641]. Inclusion of Vu lnerable Populations:  Minors will not be included. Pregnant 
women will not be included. Cognitively Impaired  individuals will not be 
included. To mitigate undue influence of patients recruited by [CONTACT_30155], a 
member of the research team who is not dir ectly involved in the anesthetic 
management of the patient will be responsible for recruiting and consenting the 
patients for this research study. Minorities and women will be included, but are 
not specifically being targeted for inclusion.  Since a signif icant percentage of our 
patient population are minorities, it is important to include this group in our 
research study. Minorities will receive the same recruitment and randomization 
process as non -minorities. We will emphasize their right to withdraw from  the 
study at any point and encourage them to ask questions about any issues of 
concern.  
v. Recruitment Procedures : Study staff will recruit participants through direct 
subject contact.  This would occur after the patient has been evaluated and 
consented for a nesthesia by a different anesthesia clinical team member that is 
not involved in the study. Recruitment will be done in the preoperative area 
separate by a study staff who is not directly involved in the clinical management 
of the patient.  
vi. Discontinuation  of Study Subject/Withdrawal : The study may be discontinued at 
any time.  The participant can opt out at any time. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_166639]: participant meets one or more of the exclusion 
Page 6 of 13 criteria listed above or it is determ ined that participation in the study will be 
harmful to the participant . 
 
C. Procedures and Data collection  
Randomization procedure:  
Patients will be randomized , 50 patients in each group by [CONTACT_166642] e the patient’s group assignment  
(random assignment similar to a flip of a coin) . One group will  receive intravenous 
Dexmedetomidine 0.3  ug/kg followed  by [CONTACT_39955], and the other group will receive  
propofol -only plus placebo .  The level of sedation in each  subject will be monitored 
by [CONTACT_2363] a Bispectral Index (BIS) monitor. The anesthesiologist will not be allowed 
to view the BIS monitor until after the first dose of propofol is administered. This is 
to ensure that the anesthesiologist is not provided with  information that may allude 
to which arm the patient was randomized to. Additional doses of propofol will be 
given at the discretion of the anesthesiologist based on level of sedation  to maintain 
a BIS level of approximately 60.  
The anesthesiologist will be blinded to the study group of each subject and will 
receive a premixed syringe containing either dexmedetomidine or placebo but 
labelled as dexmedotimidine 4 mcg/ml. Randomization will be performed by a  
research pharmacist  who will determine the patient ’s group assignment  based on 
an electronically generated randomization table . This investigator will then give the 
respective pre -labeled syringe to the anesthesiologist and record the patient’s 
assignment in a password protected electronic data collection  sheet.  It will not be 
necessary to un -blind the care providers if an adverse event occurs because the 
management of likely adverse events are independent of the treatment arm and are 
based on clinical signs and findings in the evaluation of the patient.  
Data to be gathered from all participants will include: age, gender, body mass index 
(BMI ); American Society of Anesthesiologists ( ASA ) classification; duration of 
procedure;  procedure start and end times,  time  of the initial dose of sedatives given 
as well  as the time of the last dose of medication administration. The total dose of 
propofol administered will also be recorded.  
Recovery will be assessed using the Modified Post Anesthesia Discharge Scoring 
System (MPADSS). This criteria is chosen because it ha s been proven as an efficient 
system that guarantees safe discharge. [18, 19]. This should be reliable and valid for 
use in this study because the purpose is to determine the point where patients have 
sufficiently recovered from sedation to be safely disch arged from the ambulatory 
post anesthesia care unit. Data will be recorded immediately at the end of the 
procedure and every [ADDRESS_193342] the immediate postoperative Aldrete score (Table 2)  in 
the operating room . The Aldrete score can be used to follow the awakening process 
of patients after an anesthetic experience as well as to determine eligibility for 
discharge from the PACU  to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_111494] . This method is accepted by [CONTACT_166643] [20].  We plan to report and compare 
the immediate post -operative Aldrete score as average score in each study group 
upon immediate assessment postoperatively.  
Vital signs will be recorded preoperatively, immediately at the end of the procedure 
and also at [ADDRESS_193343] vital signs, to treat pain or nausea will also be recorded . The individual 
recording the data will also be blinded to the group assignments t o avoid bias . 
 
4. STUDY SITE:  
SUNY Downstate  Medical Center, Brooklyn, NY  
 
5. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
This study is characterized as a [ADDRESS_193344]:  
The evaluation of time to discharge will in volve the assessment of patients every 
10minutes. Since almost every patient is discharged within an hour, the measure is 
very granular; we propose therefore to dichotomize it as discharge within 30min, 
yes or no.  
 
B. Sample size considerations:  
We project  from past experience that in the single -drug arm, probability of patient 
discharge within 30min will be 0.90. We project that the same probability will apply 
to the two -drug arm; but we assert that if this number were as low as 0.70, the extra 
inconvenien ce to all concerned would be minimal; in other words, this differential 
represents a threshold of clinical significance, and we aim to demonstrate with 
reasonable certainty that the actual differential is smaller. Assuming equal numbers 
of subjects in each  study arm, the power of the Pearson chi -square test to detect a 
differential as small as this is 90% for N=[ADDRESS_193345] is not always accurate for low 
prevalences, so we aim instead f or N=50 per arm, which should yield an expected 
frequency of 5 or more in each cell of the 2x2 table that constitutes the principal 
analysis.  Outcomes will be evaluated with the fisher’s exact test and the Mann -
Whitney U test for non -parametric variables a s detailed below.  
 
Page [ADDRESS_193346] that we can consent about 4 patients per week into the study, which 
suggests that the enrollment window will be about 6 months.  
 
C. Data analysis plan:  
Subjects’ biometric, demographic and medical history characteristics as li sted above 
will be recorded and summarized in a [ADDRESS_193347] table, i.e., broken down by [CONTACT_166644], showing quartiles and min -max values for scored quantities, 
numerators and denominators with %s for classified quantities.  
 
There are [ADDRESS_193348]:  
1. discharge within 30min;  
a. Specifically looking at whether there is a statistically significant 
difference in the number of patients discharged within 30 minutes in 
both treatment groups.  
2. mg propofol administered per kg bodyweight  per minute of procedu re; 
3. change in mean arterial pressure from pre -procedure baseline to lowest value 
observed during procedure.  
a. Difference in hemodynamic variables in blood pressure will serve as 
evidence of whether patients in the experimental group tolerated the 
study drug combination better than patients in the control group.  
 
Presentation of outcome summary data will be conducted as described above. 
Fisher’s exact test will be used to evaluate the first outcome; a supplementary 
Mann -Whitney test of between -arm difference i n distribution of actual discharge 
times will be conducted. Mann -Whitney tests will be used for the other two 
outcomes. Given that this is a randomized study with decent sample sizes, we do not 
propose to construct regression models that attempt to control  for differences 
between study arms. And given the nature of the intervention under evaluation, 
“intent to treat” considerations are essentially irrelevant.  
 
6. RISKS  
There is an occasional risk of a bradycardia following administration of dexmedetomidine.  
This is usually self -limited and resolves within a few hours  particularly given the very small 
dose of dexmedetomidine needed for this study.  If the heart rate is significantly slow, a 
small dose of glycopyrolate can be administered with expected immediat e effect. Risk of 
glycopyrolate include tachycardia and dry mouth, however we do not expect these side 
effects because very small doses of glycopyrolate are required to correct the bradycardia.  
 
There is also an occasional risk of hypotension following ad ministration of 
dexmedetomidine. If the blood pressure is significantly low, a small dose of ephedrine can 
be administered with expected immediate improvement in blood pressure.  Risk s of 
ephedrine include tachycardia but this is usually self -limited and d oes not require 
treatment particularly given the small dose of ephedrine required to correct the 
hypotension from dexmedetomidine.  
 
Page [ADDRESS_193349] ASA monitors required for routine 
colonoscopy and while in the recovery room.  
 
There is also a potential for feelings of coercion or undue influence because of the 
recruitment of participants from the study team's own patient population.  To mitigate this 
undue influence, recruitment and informed consent will be performed by a member of the 
research team that is not directly involved in the clinical care of the patient.  
 
In addition, there is the potential for a breach of confidentiality give n the collection of 
protected health information in this study.  The medical record number will be the only 
information on the data sheet linking the protected health information to the patient. 
Additionally, information will be stored in a password protect ed document.  
 
We do not expect any other additional risks to the subject beyond that which is expected 
for a routine outpatient colonoscopy procedure. The proposed study does not deviate from 
standard of care and patients in each study group will be receiv ing the same quality of 
anesthesia that they would otherwise receive whether or not they are enrolled in our 
study. Currently, anesthesiologists at SUNY Downstate Medical Center have the choice to 
use a combination of the drugs dexmedetomidine  and propofol  as a metho d of sedation or 
use the  drug propofol alone .  This investigation simply allows us to collect and analyze data 
on the current practices to improve the standard of care.  
 
The investigators believe that the benefits of the knowledge gained from t his study 
outweigh the risks of performing it. Results of this study could encourage more 
anesthesiologists to employ this technique of balanced anesthesia that minimizes the side -
effects of each drug administered with a predictable expectation of how pati ents will 
recover from the treatment.  
 
7. BENEFITS  
Although no direct benefits will apply to the subjects  being studied, the results of this 
investigation could encourage more anesthesiologists to employ this technique of balanced 
anesthesia that minimizes  the side -effects of each drug administered with a predictable 
expectation of how patients will recover from the treatment.  
 
8. INFORMED CONSENT  
Informed consent will be obtained from each subject by a member of the research team in 
the pre -operative area after the anesthesiology  consent and evaluation has been completed 
by a separate clinical team member that is not involved in the study . Patient’s PHI will be 
protected in compliance with IRB  and HIPA  regulations.  
 
 
9. CONFIDENTIALITY  
Information about stu dy subjects will be kept confidential and managed according to the 
requirements of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). 
Patient data will be entered into a password protected electronic spreadsheet. Only the 
Page [ADDRESS_193350]. Electronic records will be stored for 
five years after study conclusion on the agreed upon investigator’s laptop computer, after 
which time they will be deleted. These records will be encrypted  and password protect ed.  
 
 
10. ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING  
If there is a breach in confidentiality , adverse e vent,  or violation of IRB  or HIPAA 
regulations, the IRB will be notified in a timely manner as required by [CONTACT_166645].   
 
11. FOLLOW -UP AND RECORD RETENTION  
Electronic records will be stored for five years after  stud y conclusion on the agreed upon 
investigator’s lap top or desktop  computer  that is stored in the investigators office at the 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] . These records will be enc rypted , password protect ed and a vailable only to the 
investigators invited to participate in  the study and who have fulfilled all requirements 
outlined by [CONTACT_166646] . Five years  after the study is closed with the IRB , all 
documents will be deleted.  
 
12. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST  
All investigators have no conflict of interests in regards t o the proposed study.  
Page 11 of 13 Table 1  
Modified Postanesthestic Discharge Scoring System  
(Score  ≥ 9 for discharge)  
VITAL SIGNS  
 Within 20% of preop value  2 
 20 – 40% of preop value  1 
 40% of preop value  0 
AMBULATION  
 Steady gait/no dizziness  2 
 With assistance  1 
 None/dizziness  0 
NAUSEA/VOMITING  
 Minimal  2 
 Moderate  1 
 Severe  0 
PAIN  
 Minimal  2 
 Moderate  1 
 Severe  0 
SURGICAL BLEEDING  
 Minimal  2 
 Moderate  1 
 Severe  0 
 
Table 2  
Modified Aldrete Score System  
Activity: Able to move (voluntarily or on command)  
 Four extremities  2 
 Two extremities  1 
 No extremities  0 
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516]  
 Able to breathe deep ly or cough freely  2 
 Dyspnea, shallow, or limited breathing  1 
 Apnea  0 
Circulation  
 BP+/ - 20 mm Hg of preop level  2 
 BP +/ - 20 – 50 mm Hg of preop level  1 
 BP +/ - 50 mm Hg of preop level  0 
Consciousness  
 Fully awake  2 
 Arousable  on calling  1 
 Unrespons ive 0 
Oxygen saturation  
 SpO2 >92%  2 
 Needs supplement O2 to maintain SpO2>90%  1 
 SpO2 <90% with oxygen  [ADDRESS_193351] Endosc Clin N Am, 2002.  12(2): p. [ADDRESS_193352] Endosc, 2002.  56(5): p. [ADDRESS_193353] Endosc, 2003.  58(3): p. 317 -22. 
4. Akarsu Ayazoglu, T., et al.,  Comparison of propofol -based sedation regimens administered 
during colonoscopy.  Rev Med Chil, 2013.  141 (4): p. 477 -85. 
5. Tuncali, B., et al.,  Addition of low -dose ketamine to midazolam -fentanyl -propofol -based 
sedati on for colonoscopy: a randomized, double -blind, controlled trial.  J Clin Anesth, 
2015.  27(4): p. [ADDRESS_193354] Endosc Clin N Am, 2004.  14(2): p. [ADDRESS_193355] Endosc Clin N Am, 2004.  14(2): p. 247 -68. 
8. Aantaa, R. and M. Scheinin,  Alpha 2 -adrenergic agents in anaesthesia.  Acta Anaesthesiol 
Scand , 1993.  37(5): p. 433 -48. 
9. Kamibayashi, T. and M. Maze,  Clinical uses of alpha2 -adrenergic agonists.  Anesthesiology, 
2000.  93(5): p. [ADDRESS_193356] of clonidine and dexmedetomidine premedication on 
perioperative oxygen consu mption and haemodynamic state.  Br J Anaesth, 
1997.  78(4): p. 400 -6. 
11. Wijeysundera, D.N., J.S. Naik, and W.S. Beattie,  Alpha -2 adrenergic agonists to prevent 
perioperative cardiovascular complications: a meta -analysis.  Am J Med, 2003.  114 (9): 
p. 742 -52. 
12. Scheinin, H., et al.,  Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of intramuscular 
dexmedetomidine.  Clin Pharmacol Ther, 1992.  52(5): p. [ADDRESS_193357] surgery.  Br J An aesth, 2006.  96(6): p. 722 -6. 
Page 13 of 13 14. Arain, S.R. and T.J. Ebert,  The efficacy, side effects, and recovery characteristics of 
dexmedetomidine versus propofol when used for intraoperative sedation.  Anesth 
Analg, 2002.  95(2): p. 461 -6, table of contents.  
15. Jal owiecki, P., et al.,  Sole use of dexmedetomidine has limited utility for conscious sedation 
during outpatient colonoscopy.  Anesthesiology, 2005.  103 (2): p. 269 -73. 
16. Dere, K., et al.,  A comparison of dexmedetomidine versus midazolam for sedation, pain 
and hemodynamic control, during colonoscopy under conscious sedation.  Eur J 
Anaesthesiol, 2010.  27(7): p. 648 -52. 
17. Ji, J., et al.,  [Application of dexmedetomidine combined with propofol in patients 
undergoing painless colonoscopy for colonic polyps resect ion under Narcotrend 
monitoring].  Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao, 2015.  35(2): p. 264 -7. 
18. Palumbo P, Tellan G, Peroti B et al. Modified PADSS (Post Aneasthetic Discharge Scoring 
System) for monitoring outpatients discharge. Ann Ital Chir. 2013. 84(6): [ADDRESS_193358] -anaesthetic discharge scoring criteria: A 
systematic review.  JBI Libr Syst Rev. 2011;9(4): [ADDRESS_193359] -anesthesia recovery score revisited. J Clin Anesth. 1995;7(1):89 -91. 
21. A ldrete JA, Kroulik D. A postanesthetic recovery score. Anesth Analg. 1970;49:924 -34. 
 
 