Re-engineering Precision Therapeutics Through N-of-1 Trials: Feasibility Study of 
Personalized Trials of Light Therapy for Fatigue
Research Protocol Document
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_248360] W. Davidson, PhD, MASc
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Document Date: 09/09 /2021 
Version Date:  09/9/2021 P age 1 of 32 
RES
EARCH PROTOCOL 
Protocol Title:  Re-engineering Precision Therapeutics Through N -of-1 Trials: 
Feasibility Study of Personalized Trials of Light Therapy for 
Fatigue  
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_248360] W. Davidson, PhD , MASc  
Primary Contact [CONTACT_5627]:  Stefani D’Angelo  
Primary Contact [CONTACT_7626]:  [PHONE_5207]
Primary Contact E -mail:  [EMAIL_4821]  
Date Revised:  09/9/2021  
IRB Number:  20-0835
Guidelines for Preparing a Research Protocol  
In
structions:  
•Y
ou do not need to complete this document if you are submitting an Application for
Exemption or Application for a Chart Review .
•Do not use this template if:
oYour study involves an FDA regulated product.  In this case, use the Clinical
Trial Protocol Template.
oYour study has a protocol from a sponsor or cooperative group.  In this case, use
the Protocol Plus .
oYour study is a registry or repository for data and/or samples,  In this case, useProtocol Template – Registry Studies.  .
•If a section of this protocol is not applicable, please indicate such.
•Do not delete any of the text contained within this document.
•Please make sure to keep an electronic copy of this document.  You will need to use it, ifyou make modifications in the future.
•Start by [CONTACT_69061], according to these rules:
oProtocol Title:  Include the full protocol title as listed on the application.
oInvestigator:  include the principal investigator’s name [CONTACT_248411]:  Indicate the date at which the protocol was last revised
oIRB Number:  Indicate the assigned IRB number, when known.  At initialsubmission, this row will be left blank.
•Once the table information in entered, proceed to page [ADDRESS_301952] of the
form.
C
ontinue to next page to begin entering information about this study 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/2021   Page 2 of 32  
 
1.  PREVIOUS STUDY HISTORY 
 
Has this study ever been reviewed and rejected/disapproved by [CONTACT_69062]? 
 
 No   Yes −   if yes, plea se explain:  
  
2. BRIEF SUMMARY OF RESEARCH  
• The summary should be written in language intelligible to a moderately educated, non- scientific layperson .  
• It should contain a clear statement of the rationale and hypothesis of your study, a concise description of the methodology, with an emphasis on what will happen to the subjects, and a discussion of the results.  
• This section should be ½ page 
 
 
The purpose  of this  pi[INVESTIGATOR_248361] N -of-[ADDRESS_301953] and assess 
participant symptoms in response to a wellness strategy (in this case, light therapy 
for symptoms of fatigue). This pi[INVESTIGATOR_248362] N -of-[ADDRESS_301954] widespread use in future research and clinical practice  to address high public health burdens with a high 
heterogeneity of response.  
 This study will assess feasibility using a Personalized Trial model to evaluate an 
individual p articipant’s experience using  bright or dim light therapy on symptoms 
of fatigue. Participants (N=60) will be sent a Fitbit device and receive a commercially -available light therapy device (bright blue light) and a dim  light 
therapy device (dim blue light). Participants will be asked several questions a day via text message about their symptoms of fatigue, as well as their pain, 
concentration, confidence, mood, and stress levels to demonstrate relevant secondary impacts of fatigue. Participants will also have access to several videos explaining the protocol. After 14 weeks, participants will receive a summary of their observed data . Creating this type of report will help to assess the feasibility of 
using a N-of- 1 trial design  through user- acceptability of fatigue and wellness -
related data visualizations and the ability to choose preferred intervention (if any) based on the data. Participants will be asked to complete a satisfaction survey (electronic or phone if they are  non-responders) and participate in a phone 
interview to inform acceptability of protocol requirements, study materials, and personalized reports.  
 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/2021   Page 3 of 32 We believe Personalized Trials are feasible to scale to a large randomized 
controlled trial, and eventually clinical practice specifically to address frequent 
chronic complaints with the custom N -of-1 pathways we are developi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. Data 
collected to support our hypothesis includes device adherence, survey adherence, 
adherence to video views, website and social medi a engagement metrics, and 
participant satisfaction based on qualitative interviews and surveys. Results from this pi[INVESTIGATOR_248363] N -of-1 methodology in the 
research and clinical space.  
 
 
3. INTRODUCTION/BACKGROUND MATERIAL/PRELIMINARY STUDIES AND SIGNIFICANCE  
• Describe and provide the results of previous work by [CONTACT_69063], including 
animal studies, laboratory studies, pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602] , pre-clinical and/or clinical studies 
involving the compound or device to be studied.  
• Include information as to why you are conducting the study and how the study differs from what has been previously researched, including what the knowledge gaps are. 
• Describe the importance of the knowledge expected to result  
 
This project represents a pi[INVESTIGATOR_248364] -funded grant 
“Re-engineering precision therapeutics through N-of- 1 trials” (Northwell IRB 19 -
0572- MRB) which is funded to test use cases appropriate for N -of-[ADDRESS_301955] available 
evidence (e.g., results from parallel group, phase III randomized clinical trials; 
RCTs) for recommending therapi[INVESTIGATOR_24305] a patient. Yet, conventional, between-group 
RCTs only provide estimates of the effect of therapi[INVESTIGATOR_248365] 
‘average’ patient in those trials. Individual patients, however, often respond 
differently than the hypothetical average patient in the phase III RCTs, and thus, 
heterogeneity of therapy response plagues clinical decisions made for an individual 
patient  every day.   
 
The most scientifically rigorous  — and potentially transformative — method for 
determining optimal therapy for a patient is a single -patient (N -of-1) trial. N -of-1 
trials are multiple crossover trials, usually randomized, and often masked, 
conducted within a single patient, with data collected objectively, continuously, 
and in the real-world, for a sufficient time period to determine whether the therapy, 
compared to a placebo or other active therapy, is optimal for a particular patient. 
They also yield information on off- target actions, such as side -effects or unintended 
consequences, so that a more complex pi[INVESTIGATOR_248366]. Clinicians and 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/[ADDRESS_301956] described Personalized Trials as the pi[INVESTIGATOR_248367]-based design 
pyramid.(1)  Clinicians can use these techniques to monitor and make treatment 
decisions in chronically ill patients, (2) of whom 25% experience adverse treatment 
effects. (3) Personalized Trials are specifically designed to help  patients and their 
clinicians make healthcare decisions that are informed by [CONTACT_5019] -integrity, evidence -
based information uniquely relevant to the outcomes and values important to 
them.(4)  In a series of demonstration trials, Personalized Trials led to valuable 
changes in treatment, cessation of treatment, or confirmation of the original 
treatment.(5-8)  For example, of 71 N-of-1 trials for patients with any chronic pain, 
46 patients (65%) decided to change their pain medication due to trial results.(9) 
However, Personalized Trials are conducted infrequently in clinical practice. (10-
12) In post- mortem assessments as to why Personalized Trials had yet to 
become commonly employed, proponents concluded that they were insufficiently appealing to patients or cl inicians to justify the cost and effort needed to design and 
implement them.(1 0, 11) Specifically, Personalized Trial design specifications had 
mostly been driven by [CONTACT_248390], (13, 14) with little input from 
patients.   
 Rationale for Selecting B lue Light  as an N-of-1 Trial for Fatigue   
Participant report of fatigue meets all of  our criteria for selection as a use case as 
outlined in our umbrella grant: it has high public health burden, high heterogeneity of observed outcomes , and is high priority for a Personalized Trial approach as 
determined by [CONTACT_248391].  This instance will 
adapt our N-of-1 trial platform to comparing a complementary and alternative 
medicine (CAM) therapy for fatigue symptoms (bright light therapy) to (dim light 
therapy). This alpha -test will enable us to expand our N-of-[ADDRESS_301957]- to-consumer level.  
 
Rational for Selecting Blue Light  
Blue light has been chosen for this study because it has been shown in multiple 
research studies to be either equal or more efficacious than bright white light in 
light therapy treatments for a variety of therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014], including fatigue  (15-19). It has 
also been shown in a number of studies that the blue wavelength of light is a key 
component to the shift of fatigue measures in patient reported outcomes (15-18). 
Additionally, the use of blue light therapy rather than white light therapy allows for 
a lower strength bright light, reducing the eye glare in tr eatments  (17) . This allows 
for a more comfortable , low -risk light therapy experience  and resulting observed 
outcomes to support the trial methodology.   
 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/2021   Page 5 of 32 Rationale for Selecting Usual Care  over  Dim Light as the Control Condition   
Patients don’t frequently ask is treatment A better than Treatment B, but rather 
should I use Treatment A? That is, is Treatment A better than what I’m using for fatigue management now? This was indicated to us by [CONTACT_248392]; when asked what the most acceptable control condition was, over 80% of patients preferred Usual Care as the control  for their Personalized 
Trial.  We are including a dim blue light therapy device given our prior experience 
conducting pi[INVESTIGATOR_248368]. In those studies, participants often chose the “sham” device as the one to which they were most responsive.  In addition, we include a usual care condition to control for and observe the influence 
of any expectancy effect on the self-reported da ta. Usual care data collection will 
enable us to test the effect of bright light therapy compared to usual care, and to 
obtain estimates of the cost -effectiveness of the N -of-1 approach. For this reason, 
we will use usual care as our control condition for light therapy  Personalized 
Trials.    
 
Without development of innovative platforms for conducting Personalized Trials, with within -participant  randomization to eligible wellness management options, 
including when clinically appropriate, usual care, patients and clinicians cannot obtain the objective data they need to empi[INVESTIGATOR_248369]. Scientists may be able to use Personalized or N-of- 1 trials in the future to 
better understand the uniqueness of light therapy responders versus non-responders. Off-target responses (such as increased  stress or decreased physical  activity) could 
also be detected in this methodology, as the unique responsiveness of one pa tient to 
several time periods of therapy exposure will be available.  Should this pi[INVESTIGATOR_248370],  scalable implementation and satisfaction 
with this methodology amongst participants, it will be a critical step in broadening 
the application and utilization of this methodology.  
 
 
4. OBJECTIVE(S)/SPECIFIC AIMS AND HYPOTHESES  
• A concise statement of the goal(s) of the current study.  
• The rationale for and specific objectives of the study.  
• The goals and the hypothesis to be tested should be stated. 
 
We believe the delivery of N -of-[ADDRESS_301958] the feasibility of pooling real -world N-of-1 results across patients to efficiently 
estimate the overall effectiveness of light therapy  and thus t he N -of-1 trial design .  
To determine whether this “precision therapeu tics” paradigm -shifting approach 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/2021   Page 6 of 32 creates added value for the learning healthcare system , and to confirm engineering 
these innovations into one platform and system to empi[INVESTIGATOR_248371], we will pool N-of- 1 results across all 
projects using the N1Thrive platform.   
 Thus, t he goals of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_58780]:  
1. Conduct a pi[INVESTIGATOR_21087] (N=60) of a Personalized Trial that is delivered r emotely to 
participants in the [LOCATION_002] . 
2. Collect data regarding Minimum V iable Product (MVP)  specifications for a 
future technology platform to deliver Personalized Trials.  
3. Incorporate web -based research advertising and recruitment in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  
4. Elicit participant attitudes and opi[INVESTIGATOR_248372].  
  
5.  RESOURCES AVAILABLE TO CONDUCT THE HUMAN RESEARCH  
• Explain the feasibility of meeting recruitment goals of this project and demonstrate a 
potential for recruiting the required number of suitable subjects within the agreed 
recruitment period  
o How many potential subjects do you have access to? 
• Describe your process to ensure that all persons assisting with the trial are 
adequately informed about the protocol and their trial related duties and functions  
 
Fatigue  remains one of the most highly -cited patient complaints to their primary 
care provider(20) , yet there are relatively few treatment options available. We have 
conducted focus groups as part of prior grants to determine what chronic symptoms or conditions are most acceptable for a Personalized Trial, and fatigue was selected  
by [CONTACT_248393](19). With such a broad group experiencing symptoms of fatigue, we have planned for a broad base of recruitment efforts to potentially recruit a diverse representation of this population.  
 Northwell employs over 70,[ADDRESS_301959] Manager, in order to stay informed about the study 
protocol, staff duties and functions, and to answer any questions that come up 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/[ADDRESS_301960] outside these established weekly meetings.  
 
 
6.  RECRUITMENT METHODS  
• Describe the source of potential subjects  
• Describe the methods that will be used to identify potential subjects  
• Describe any materials that will be used to recruit subjects.  A copy of any 
advertisements (flyers, radio scripts, etc.) should be submitted along with the 
protocol.  
• If monetary compensation is to be offered, this should be indicated in the protocol 
 
Since the proposed study will take place virtually, potential participants can reside 
anywhere within the [LOCATION_002].  
 Potential participants will be recruited via the following avenues: - Paid social media advertisements targeted to individuals who meet study eligibility demographics and identify as having chronic fatigue . 
-E-mail advertisement through employee and student communication channels, both including and outside of Northwell Hea lth and Hofstra University.  
-E-mail advertisements through existing email lists from those who have previously 
expressed an interest in  participation in  a Personalized Trial with the Center for 
Personalized Health . 
-Flyers , shared at urgent care/walk -in and physician clinics, within and outside of 
the Northwell Health network . 
-Short promotional videos shared online or in clinic waiting rooms. -Recruitment  posts within online wellness groups, such as those that discuss 
recurring fatigue . 
 
Potential participants will self -identify as having a minimum threshold of fatigue 
over the last [ADDRESS_301961]  valued at $100 for 
completing all study requi rements . 
 
 
7.  ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA  
• Describe the characteristics of the subject population, including their anticipated number, age, ranges, sex, ethnic background, and health status. Identify the criteria for inclusion or exclusion of any subpopulation.  
• Explain the rationale for the involv ement of special classes of subjects, such as 
fetuses, pregnant women, children, prisoners or other institutionalized individuals, or others who are likely to be vulnerable.   You cannot include these populations in your 
research, unless you indicate such in the protocol  
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/2021   Page 8 of 32 • Similarly, detail exclusionary criteria: age limits, special populations (minors, 
pregnant women, decisionally impaired), use of concomitant medications, subjects with other diseases, severity of illness, etc.  
 
Up to 60 participants will be  randomized to receive this pi[INVESTIGATOR_182239] . We 
estimate about 7 0% will identify as  female and 30% will identify as  male. We aim 
to recruit a diverse pool of participants with varied ethnic and racial backgrounds.  
 
Inclusion criteria:  
-Age 18 - 59 years old of age  
-Fluent in English  
-Self reported fatigue results score  > 12 on a modified  PROMIS Fatigue Short 
Form 8a scale  
-Able to participate in blue light therapy  
-Owns a nd can regularly access a smartphone capable of receiving text messages  
-Owns  and can regularly access an e- mail account  
-Lives in the [LOCATION_002]  
 
Exclusion criteria : 
- <18 years old or >60 years old  - Pregnant women -Previous diagnosis of a serious mental health condition or psychiatric disorder , 
such as bipolar disorder -Previous diagnosis of eye disease, such as cataracts, glaucoma, macular 
degeneration, Stargardt or family history of Stargardt, retinitis or retinopathy, or other retinal disorders  
-Previous diagnosis of diabetes - Previous eye surgery 
-Sensitivity to light or use of medication causing sensitivity to light 
-Epi[INVESTIGATOR_34868] a history of seizures  
- Participation in shift work (evening/night shifts, early morning shifts, rotating shifts, etc.)  
-Lives outside of the [LOCATION_002]  
 
 
8.  NUMBER OF SUBJECTS  
• Indicate the total number of subjects to be accrued locally.  If applicable, distinguish 
between the number of subjects who are expected to be pre- screened, enrolled 
(consent obtained), randomized and complete the research procedures. 
• If your study includes different cohorts, include the total number of subjects in each 
cohort. 
• If this is multisite study, include total number of subjects across all sites.   
 
We expect to pre -screen up to 750 potential participants in this study. Up to 150 
potential participants will be invited to enroll. Up to 60 participants will be 
randomized to complete research procedures.  
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/2021   Page 9 of 32  
Of those participants who receive randomized treatment schedules, 30 participants 
will be randomized to receive the protocol in the following order of two- week 
treatment periods: Bright Blue Light Therapy, Dim Blue Light Therapy, Usual Care, Usual Care, Dim Blue Light Therapy, Bright Blue Light Therapy (ABCCBA). The remaining 30 participants will be randomized in the following order of two -week treatment periods: Usual Care, Dim Blue Light Therapy, Bright 
Blue Light Therapy, Bright Blue Light Therapy, Dim Blue Light Therapy, Usual 
Care (CBAABC).  
  
9. STUDY TIMELINES  
• Describe the duration of an individuals participation in the study 
• Describe the duration anticipated to enroll all study subjects 
• The estimated date of study completion  
The study will take place over the course of [ADDRESS_301962] two weeks will be 
a baseline period, where no light therapy is assigned, but data are collected, including self- report of fatigue and accelerometer-derived sleep and activity data. 
After successful completion of the baseline period, participants will be randomized to six 2- week treatment blocks of bright blue light therapy, dim blue light therapy, 
and usual care. In usual care  treatment periods, participants will be instructed to not 
use any light therapy device and will be asked to continue answering survey questions and wearing their Fitbit device. At the end of the 14 weeks, a report containing the individual’s analyzed data will be sent to each participant, along with a satisfaction survey. This report will be sent within 3 months of study completion. After the satisfaction survey is completed, study coordinators will 
reach out to each participant to interview them about their experience in Personalized Trials.  A $[ADDRESS_301963] (Clin iCard) will be mailed to each participant 
as compensation for their time after the successful completion of [ADDRESS_301964] been randomized after baseline to receive a personalized trial of light therapy for self -reported fatigue . We estimate that the 
final participant will be randomized by [CONTACT_933] 30, 2021, and data collection 
will cease by [CONTACT_466] 31, 2021.  
 
 
10.  ENDPOINTS  
• Describe the primary and secondary study endpoints  
• Describe any primary or secondary safety endpoints  
 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/[ADDRESS_301965] 3 months.  
 
 
11.  RESEARCH PROCEDURES  
• Include a detailed description of all procedures to be performed on the research subject and the schedule for each procedure.  
• Include any screening procedures for eligibility and/or baseline diagnost ic tests  
• Include procedures being performed to monitor subjects for safety or minimize risks  
• Include information about drug washout periods 
• If drugs or biologics are being administered provide information on dosing and route of administration 
• Clearly indicate which procedures are only being conducted for research purposes.  
• If any specimens will be used for this research, explain whether they are being collected specifically for research purposes.   
• Describe any source records that will be used to colle ct data about subjects 
• Indicate the data to be collected, including long term follow-up  
Potential participa nts who self -identify as experiencing chronic symptoms of 
fatigue will be directed to an information screen with details about the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. 
Those who are interested in participating in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_248373] a HIPAA Authorization form before completing screening survey  process that 
includes validated PROMIS measures of f atigue , as well as questions pertaining to 
inclusion and exclusion criteria. Consenting coordinators will review this data and determine whether or not a potential participant is eligible to participate. Those who are eligible will receive a link to a short video about key details from the 
consent form, as well as an electronic copy of the consent form. Potential participant s will also be asked to set up a 30- minute phone call with a research 
coordinator, where the research coordinator will describe the stu dy and consent 
process and offer an opportunity for the potential participant to ask any questions. After the phone call, the potential participant will be sent a link to view and electronically sign the consent form via the N1Thrive by 4Peacocks platform,  
which meets [ADDRESS_301966] during onboarding to the study. They will be mailed an initial study 
kit including a Fitbit Charge 3 device  and a printed copy of their electronically -
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/[ADDRESS_301967] over the course of 2 weeks. Potential 
participants will not use light therapy  during the  baseline period. At three 
random ized times each day  during waking hours , (identified by [CONTACT_248394]) , baseline participants will receive a text 
message asking  them  to rate their  fatigue , pain, concentration, confidence, mood, 
and stress levels at that exact moment. Each evening, baseline participants  will 
receive a survey asking a few questions about their  fatigue that day. At the end of 
the week o n Sunday evenings, baseline participants will receive a slightly longer 
survey as king them  to reflect on their symptoms of fatigue  that week.  
 During the baseline period, potential participants will be asked to wear their Fitbit  
all day and night, even while they are sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. Baseline participants will be 
instructed to sync their Fitb it device by [CONTACT_248395] .  
 Ten days into the baseline period, a c onsenting coordinator will review individual 
adherence to Fitbit wear and to survey responses. Adherence to Fitbit wear will be defined as r ecorded activity of greater than [ADDRESS_301968] 80% adherence of Fitbit wear and survey submission during the first [ADDRESS_301969] 80% adherence will be randomized to 
one of two treatment sequences in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Participants who are randomized to receive treatment sequences will receive email confirmation including their 
protocol timeline.  Participants will also receive a second mailed kit including a 
bright blue light commercial AYO light therapy device, and a dim blue light research AYO light therapy device . Enrollment will continue until up to [ADDRESS_301970] been randomized into one of two treatment sequences.  
 Each treatment sequence is made up of 6 2 -week periods dedicated to either bright 
blue light therapy, dim blue light therapy, or usual care.  During both bright  blue 
light and dim blue light therapy weeks, participants will receive a text message within an hour of their self- reported wake time instructing them to use their 
designated light therapy device for 30 minutes. During usual care treatment 
periods, partic ipants will not receive any text notifications to complete light 
therapy, and will instead be asked to refrain from using either AYO device .  
 
During all treatment weeks (12 weeks total) , participants  will be asked to continue 
wearing their Fitbit device each day and night. They will continue to receive 3 randomized text messages each day with questions about their fatigue , pain , 
concentration, confidence, mood,  and stress at that current moment, as well as an 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/[ADDRESS_301971] on their fatigue and any side -effects they may 
be experiencing from their light therapy treatment (if applicable). Participants will 
receive slightly longer surveys on Sunday evenings, asking them to reflect on their symptoms of fatigue  that week. A study phone numbe r and email address will be 
available as part of each survey to contact [CONTACT_248396] a participant is concerned about any side effects they are experiencing. Participants will also be instructed to stop their light therapy sessions if they are concern ed about their side 
effects .  
 Participants may receive additional text messages to those outlined above with 
important reminders about their protocol (e.g. transition to a new treatment period), or to remind participants  to sync their  data. We will send a  maximum of 6  text 
messages per day during the study, including these reminders and the survey questions outlined above.    In the event of an unanticipated circumstance that temporarily prevents a participant from completing study activities (illness, injury, death in the family, etc.), the participant will have the option of pausing their study to resume once their circumstance has been positively resolved.  
 Participants will complete remote data monitoring after they have gone through one 
baseline period  (two weeks), two bright blue light therapy peri ods (two weeks 
each), two dim blue light therapy  periods (two weeks each), and two usual care 
periods (two weeks each), or 14 weeks total . Alternatively, a participant may 
choose to withdraw from the study, or be withdrawn from the study by [CONTACT_5051]. Upon completion of data monitoring, participants  will be given instructions 
on how to un- link their  Fitbit from the study account . Daily text messages and 
survey prompts  will be cancelled for participants who are withdrawn from the 
study.  
  We will compi[INVESTIGATOR_248374] -reported data from questionnaires, treatment adherence, 
side effects, pain, fatigue, concentration, confidence, mood, and stress assessment s, 
as well as information from the Fitbit regarding activity (steps, flights climbed and 
intensity), sleep (duration, estimated sleep stages) for each individual participant. Treatment adherence will be tracked via an AYO research web portal and will be included in the compi[INVESTIGATOR_248375]. No identifying information will be provided to AYO 
or included on the treatment adherence report provided by [CONTACT_248397]. We will analyze this data and create a summary report of the participant’s data and symptoms over the study period, relation to the bright blue light therapy, dim blue light therapy, and usual care treatment periods.  
 
The participant will be sent this report in an encrypted email and secure web link  
by [CONTACT_29452]. Participants will also be sent links to several online videos explaining the terms and data visualizations available in their summary report. 
These videos will be general to the template report and will not contain any 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/[ADDRESS_301972] (Clin icard) valued at $[ADDRESS_301973] Personalized Trials, as well as 
for suggestions for improvement for future Personalized Trials . Study participation 
will end after successful completion of this participant phone interview.  
 
 
12.  STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
• Describe how your data will be used to test the hypotheses.  
• State clearly what variables will be tested and what statistical tests will be used.  
• Include sample size calculations.  
• If this is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], state which variables will be examined for hypothesis 
generation in later studies.  
 
The sample size of [ADDRESS_301974] 3 months. We aim to demonstrate a trial completion rate greater than 50% in randomized participants.  With n = 60, using a one- sample 
binomial test at 2.5% significance one -sided, t his will give us about 90% power if 
the true completion rate is 70%. Data will be reported transparently so that individual level heterogeneity can be assessed (21). 
 Participants will be randomized into one of two different treatment orders , 
ABCCBA or CBAABC, where A=bright light, B=dim light, and C=usual care. Two treatment orders were chosen to test out the feasibility of carrying out a virtual, N -of-[ADDRESS_301975] participant 
acceptability with back -to-back usual care treatment (i.e. no treatment) extending 
through [ADDRESS_301976] participant acceptability with starting a Personalized Trial with a usual care treatment after a baseline run -in (i.e. no treatment for the first 4 weeks). 
Treatment order was not included as a factor in the statistical analysis because acceptability and feasibility study. 
 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/[ADDRESS_301977] of 60 participants will be split into two groups of 30 using a random shuffle function that takes that seed as in input. The order in which an individual becomes eligible for one of these 60 randomizat ions will determine the placement given (i.e. the first 
person eligible will be randomized to the treatment order given to participant 1, and continue sequentially). Eligibility is obtained by a participant maintaining at least 80% adherence of survey response, Fitbit wear ≥ 12 hours a day, and 80% sleep data available through the baseline run -in period. The data analyst will alert the 
research coordinator of the assigned randomization once a participant becomes eligible during the baseline run-in period.  
 
The primary outcome measure will be a mean usability score, obtained using the 
System Usability Scale (SUS), a validated 10 -item questionnaire originally 
developed by [CONTACT_248398] 1986 that asks users to score each item on a Likert 
scale from Strongly D isagree ( rating of 1) to Strongly Agree (rating of 5). The SUS 
will be presented to the participant as addressing the ease of use, complexity, 
consistency of the Personalized Trials system as a whole, from recruitment to 
receipt of the report. Individual r esults are calculated to arrive at a composite 
measure out of 100. Participant SUS scores will be averaged together. Higher 
scored values correlate to a more usable system, and therefore a better outcome.  
 
Other outcome measures assessing feasibility of the Personalized Trials framework 
include:  
• Mean participant satisfaction with Personalized Trials components 
supplemental to the SUS, 
• Qualitative satisfaction data collected during the participant phone 
interview,  
• Mean participant survey adherence rate, defined as completion of each 
assigned survey  
• Mean participant Fitbit adherence rate, defined as recorded heart rate data 
for ≥ 12 hours each day,  
• Mean participant Fitbit sleep rate, defined as recorded sleep and wake 
cycles  
• Mean participant bright AYO adherence rate, defined as completion of each 
assigned 30- minute session  
• Mean participant dim AYO adherence rate, defined as completion of each 
assig ned 30- minute session  
• Google Ad metrics 
• Social media activity, including but not limited to: 
o Social media conversion rate, defined as total impressions compared 
to total click -through  
o Cost per social media conversion  
• Website activity, including but not li mited to:  
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/2021   Page 15 of 32 o Total number of website visits per traffic source  
o Website bounce rates  
o Mean user total time on website  
 
In order to share a summary report of observed trends back to the participant to 
assess acceptability and satisfaction with the participant report, additional outcomes 
will be analyzed on an N-of-1 level including: 
• Mean Within -Subject Difference in Self -Reported Daily Fatigue  During 3 
Treatment Periods from Mean Baseline using the PROMIS Item Bank  v1.0 
– Fatigue 7b Daily  Short Form 
• Mean Within -Subject Difference in Self -Reported Weekly  Fatigue During 3 
Treatment Periods from Mean Baseline, using the PROMIS Item Bank  v1.0 
– Fatigue 8a Short Form 
• Mean Within -Subject Difference in Ecological Momentary Assessment 
Three -Times -Daily of Pain During 3 Treatment Periods from Mean 
Baseline, using the Numeric Pain Rating Scale adapted from McCaffery, 
Beebe et al. 1989 
• Mean Within -Subject Difference in Ecological Momentary Assessment 
Three -Times -Daily of Fatigue During 3 Treatment Periods from Mean 
Baseline, using the Numeric Pain Rating Scale adapted from McCaffery, Beebe et al. 1989 
• Mean Within -Subject Difference in Ecological Momentary Assessment 
Three -Times -Daily of Concentration During 3 Treatment Periods from 
Mean Baseline, using the Numeric Pain Rating Scale adapted from McCaffery, Beebe et al. 1989 
• Mean Within -Subject Difference in Ecological Momentary Assessment 
Three -Times -Daily of Confidence During 3 Treatment Periods from Mean 
Baseline, using the Numeric Pain Rating Scale ad apted from McCaffery, 
Beebe et al. 1989 
• Mean Within -Subject Difference in Ecological Momentary Assessment 
Three -Times -Daily of Mood During 3 Treatment Periods from Mean 
Baseline, using the Numeric Pain Rating Scale adapted from McCaffery, Beebe et al. 1989 
• Mean Within -Subject Difference in Ecological Momentary Assessment 
Three -Times -Daily of Stress During 3 Treatment Periods from Mean 
Baseline, using the Numeric Pain Rating Scale adapted from McCaffery, Beebe et al. 1989 
• Mean Within -Subject Difference in Self- Reported Side Effects  from 
Baseline, using the average number of days side effects were reported during treatment periods. 
• Mean Within -Subject Difference in Device- Recorded Daily Steps from 
Mean Baseline, using participant Fitbit data  
• Mean Within -Subject Difference in Device-Recorded Nightly Sleep from 
Mean Baseline, using participant Fitbit data  
o The effects of treatment on sleep quality will be assessed using 
generalized estimating equations (GEE) with an unstructured 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/2021   Page 16 of 32 variance -covariance ma trix for measures on the same day. This 
model accounts for possible autocorrelation and linear trends 
between self -reported sleep quality ratings over time.  
 
  
13. SPECIMEN BANKING  
• If specimens will be banked for future research, describe where the specimens will be stored, how long they will be stored, how they will be accessed and who will have access to the specimens  
• List the information that will be stored with each specimen, including how specimens are labeled/coded 
• Describe the procedures to release the specimens, including:  the process to request release, approvals required for release, who can obtain the specimens, and the information to be provided with the specimens.  
N/A 
 
 
14.  DATA MANAGEMENT AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
• Describe the data and specimens to be sent out or received.  As applicable, describe:  
o What information will be included in that data or associated with the specimens?  
o Where and how data and specimens will be stored?  
o How long the data will be stored? 
o Who will have access to the data? 
o Who is responsible for receipt or transmission of data and specimens?  
• Describe the steps that will be taken to secure the data during storage, use and 
transmission. 
 
Fitbit  
This pi[INVESTIGATOR_248376]- NFC, Fitbit Charge 3 devices to remotely monitor 
participant activity and sleep. All enrolled participants will be provided with a study account that has been created by [CONTACT_248399]. The email address of the study account contains a unique identifier (e.g. northwellf25). Data collected will include daily steps, floors climbed, activity intensity, sleep duration, and estimated minutes in sleep stages. A file linking the Fitbit identifier to the study participant will be housed in a Northwell-approved drive to store PHI, and be accessible only by [CONTACT_248400]. Coded data from Fitbit will remain stored in a Northwell -approved drive indef initely  with the file linking the Fitbit identifier 
to the study participant stored separately.   Data collected for this study may also be 
maintained in its native state on a Northwell-approved drive to store PHI indefinitely.  Data collected under this re search may be used for future research in 
coded format without additional consent as per the consent form participants sign 
and with appropriate IRB approval as required.  
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/2021   Page 17 of 32  
 
Fitabase  
This pi[INVESTIGATOR_248377]. Fitabase 
is a secure, online portal . The Fitbit study account provided to the participants will 
be linked to an identi fication number in the Fitabase  system  (e.g. FLT01). No 
information that could be used to identify a participant will be stored on Fit abase. 
Only the research team will have access to data that will be able to connect a 
research participant to their Fitabase ID. Data collected will include last sync date, battery charge status, daily steps, floors climbed, activity intensity, sleep duration, and estimated minutes in sleep stages. Fitabase will stop tracking participant data at 
the trial end date selected by [CONTACT_23164]. As an added measure, participants will be instructed to remove  the Fitbit study account from their device 
if they plan on keepi[INVESTIGATOR_248378].  
Treatment Delivery  
This pi[INVESTIGATOR_248379] -available bright-blue light therapy  glasses 
called AYO, as well as a dim blue light therapy device developed by [CONTACT_248401]. The research team will have access to a dashboard that will track light therapy  device used (bright/full or dim ), duration, and date and time  
based on a generic application user ID (e.g. Northwell_001). No information that could be used to identi fy a participant will be stored on the AYO research web 
portal, nor on the AYO device itself . Only the research team will have access to 
data that will be able to connect a research participant to their  generic AYO user 
ID.  
 
Eligibility, Consent, and Survey  Data 
A goal of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_248380] (MVP) 
specifications for the development of a technology platform to support the delivery of Personalized Trials.  To achieve this goal, we are partnering with a company 
(N1Thrive by 4Peacocks ) that was formed specifically for the development of 
technology to support N-of-[ADDRESS_301978] with 
analyzing the individual reports and to pool N-of- 1 results across all projects using 
the N1Thrive platform. Coded reports will be  given back to the study team, who 
will identify the document before sending individualized reports to the participant 
via encrypted email.  Pooled N-of- 1 results will be used to assess gaps in 
phenotypic understanding to empi[INVESTIGATOR_248381].  
 
Interview Data  
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/2021   Page 18 of 32 Qualitative data collected from  phone  interviews with researc h participants will be 
collected and stored via REDCap, a Northwell -approved system for collecting and 
storing research data , including PHI. 
 
The study team takes data confidentiality very seriously. The participant will be made aware of all data collected  and the companies/technology employed to collect 
the data via the consent process.  All coded data will be maintained by [CONTACT_248402] a Northwell -approved drive to store PHI or stored in its native state in a 
SQL database. All members of the research team with access to identifiable and coded data will be trained and included on the IRB submission for approval. Regular meetings will take place with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_248382].  
 This research is funded by [CONTACT_18121], thus a Certificate of Confidentiality has been issued for this research. Certificates of Confidentiality (CoCs) protect the privacy of 
research subjects by [CONTACT_248403], sensitive research information to anyone not connected to the research except when the subject consents or in a few other specific situations.   
  
 
 
15.  DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN 
 
A specific data and safety monitoring plan is only required for greater than minimal risk research.  For guidance on creating this plan, please see the  Guidance Document
 on the 
HRPP website . 
 Part I – this part should be completed for all studies that require a DSMP.   Part II – This part should be completed when your study needs a Data and Safety Monitoring Board or Committee (DSMB/C ) as part of your Data and 
Safety Monitoring Plan.   
 
Part I:  Elements of the Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
•  Indicate who will perform the data and safety monitoring for this study.   
• Justify your choice of monitor, in terms of assessed risk to the research subject’ s 
health and well being.  In studies where the monitor is independent of the study staff, 
indicate the individual’ s credentials, relationship to the PI, and rationale for sel ection  
• List the specific items that will be monitored for safety (e.g. adverse events, protocol 
compliance, etc)  
• Indicate the frequency at which accumulated safety and data information (items listed 
in # above) will be reviewed by [CONTACT_2037] (s) or the DSMB/C.   
• Where applicable, describe rules which will guide interruption or alteration of the study design.   
• Where applicable, indicate dose selection procedures that will be used to minimize 
toxicity.  
• Should a temporary or permanent suspension of your study occur, in addition to the 
IRB, indicate to whom will you report the occurrence.   
 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/2021   Page 19 of 32  
 
 
Part II:  Data and Safety Monitoring Board or Committee 
 
 
•  When appropriate, attach a description of the DSMB.   
• Provide the number of members and area of professional expertise.   
• Provide confirmation that the members of the board are all independent of the study. 
 
Attached please find the Charter do cument for the Personalized Tria ls Pi[INVESTIGATOR_248383]. Personnel, roles, and areas of expertise are listed. All voting members of 
the DSMB are independent of the study . 
 
 
16. WITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS  
• Describe anticipated circumstances under which subjects will be withdrawn from the 
research without their consent  
• Describe procedures for orderly termination  
• Describe procedures that will be followed when subjects withdraw from the research, 
including partial with drawal from procedures with continued data collection.   
 
Circumstances under which participants  will be withdrawn from the research 
without their consent include failure to maintain protocol adherence, repeated 
failure to complete light therapy treatments , and self- reported adverse side effects 
to bright blue light or dim blue light therapy. A potential participant will not be randomized to receive the treatment protocol until he /she has demonstrated at least 
80% adherence to continuous Fitbit monitoring (activity recorded > 12 hours/day, and recorded sleep activity ) and response to survey questionnaires during the 
baseline period.  
 Potential participants will be notified of the possibility of being removed from the study before treatment randomization due  to adherence issues in the informed 
consent. Participants who fail to maintain minimum adherence during baseline will be notified by [CONTACT_248404] [ADDRESS_301979] their continued study eligibility . 
Once a protocol deviation has been repeated ly recorded, the Principal Investigator 
[INVESTIGATOR_248384]’s continued eligibility in the study, with consultation of the DSMB if needed. If it is determined that the participant will be withdrawn from the study,  the participant will be notified by [CONTACT_248405]. The participant will stop receiving notifications and survey prompts, 
and will be sent instructions to un- link their Fitbit device. The participant will be 
able to keep their Fitbit and one of the AYO light therapy devices .  
 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/[ADDRESS_301980] office , or to email  personalized [EMAIL_4822] , an e-mail account 
monitored by [CONTACT_1744] -approved members of the research team . Participants will be 
contact[CONTACT_426] a member of the research team confirming their study withdrawal, and 
to answer any questions they may have. The participant wi ll stop receiving 
notification and survey prompts, and will be sent instructions to un- link their Fitbit 
device. Data collection will stop the business day the letter or email is received. All 
data up until the receipt date of the letter will be included in the research study.   
 
Partial withdrawal, defined as study participation and data collection without the use of one of the light therapy device s will be allowed  if a parti cipant experiences 
an adverse events to one of the treatment options (bright blue light or dim blue light therapy ). In instances where participants contact  [CONTACT_248406] -reported treatment side -effects, participants will be permitted to 
continue their involvement in the study, should they be inter ested . Participant data 
will continue to be collected and monitored, while removing the self -reported 
adverse treatment option from their randomized protocol (i.e. skip the treatment 
days and continue with usual care). This will allow the participant to st ill evaluate 
their individual response to the self -reported non- aggravating treatment option. In 
the event that both treatment options create s elf-reported adverse events for the 
participant, they will be withdrawn from the study.   
  
17. RISKS TO SUBJECTS  
• Describe any potential risks and discomforts to the subject (physical, psychological, 
social, legal, or other) and assess their likelihood and seriousness and whether side effects are reversible. Where appropriate, describe alternative treatments and procedures that might be advantageous to the subjects.  
• Include risks to others , like sexual partners (if appropriate)  
• Discuss why the risks to subjects are reasonable in relation to the anticipated benefits and in relation to the importance of the knowledge that may re asonably be expected 
to results  
• Describe the procedures for protecting against or minimizing any potential risks, including risks to confidentiality, and assess their likely effectiveness.   
 
This study poses low risk of physical harm to subjects. Bright  blue light therapy is 
a mainstream treatment for fatigue symptoms. Several transient side -effects have 
been observed when monitoring patients including jumpi[INVESTIGATOR_008]/jitteriness, headache, and nausea, and mania has been infrequently observed in patients with bipolar disorder. These side- effects typi[INVESTIGATOR_248385]. 
Monitoring for adverse side- effects will be performed during the N -of-1 trial. 
Subjects will be encouraged to adhere to the light therapy protocol, but will also be told that they can discontinue treatment at any time.    
 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/[ADDRESS_301981]  4 Light -emitting diodes (LEDs)  with a dominant 
wavelength of approximately 470nm ± 2nm and typi[INVESTIGATOR_248386] (1 00% 
intensity) of approximately 250 µW/cm².   Although there are  minimal direct safety 
standards for blue light within the [LOCATION_002], the photochemical blue light 
hazard can be evaluated  based on several global standards.   AYO glasses are 
compliant with  the following:  Directive 2014/30/EU (EMC) EN [ZIP_CODE]-1:2006 + 
A2:2011 EN [ZIP_CODE]-2:2015, Directive 2011/65/EU (RoHS), IEC [ZIP_CODE]:2008, IEC [ZIP_CODE]-3-1:2013, IEC [ZIP_CODE]-4:2013, IEC [ZIP_CODE]-5:2013, Radio -Equipment 
Directive 2014/53/EU, EN [ZIP_CODE]:2010, EN 300328:2015, EN 301489-1:2011, EN 301489-17:2012,  RoHS Directive 2011/65/EU of the European Parliament, the Council from 08/06/[ADDRESS_301982] and 
conformity assessment IEC [ZIP_CODE] “Photobiological safety of lamps and lamp systems.”   
 
The international standard and conformity assessment (IEC  [ZIP_CODE]) provides 
guidance for evaluating the photobiological safety of lamps and lamp systems, 
including lu minaires, and specifies the exposure limits, reference measurement 
technique and classification scheme for the evaluation and control of 
photobiological hazards from all electrically powered incoherent broadband sources of optical radiation, including LEDs  in the wavelength range from 200 nm 
through 3000 nm.  IEC [ZIP_CODE] classifies light sources into Risk Groups 0, 1, 2 and 3 (from 0 = no risk through to 3 =  high risk) and provides for cautions and warnings 
for consumers  as needed.  These risk groups are deter mined  by [CONTACT_248407] a specified distance,  spectral  weighting of measurements 
and maximum allowed exposure time based on the hazard type.  Radiance measurements are used to assess retinal exposure to radiation.   Irradiance 
measurements are used to assess skin and the outer eye (lens and cornea) exposure to radiation.   Retinal Thermal weighting is used to assess risk from localized 
heating of tissue and Blue Light weighting is used to assess photochemical risk to tissue.    The four- tier classification structure  in IEC [ZIP_CODE], ranging from RG0 
or “Exempt” to  “Risk Group (RG) 3.”
 
   
RG classification of the source or luminaire is as follows: 1. A luminaire employing a light source classified RG0 or RG1 requires no warning or caution. 2. If a luminaire uses a light source from a higher risk group (RG2 or RG3), product information must  indicate  the mentioned RG class and include suitable warnings or 
cautions. In this manner, the end use product is suitably  labelled if a potential ri sk 
exists.     AYO  blue light glasses are in the  “exempt” group (RG0) for photo -
biological risk.  The device does  not cause  photoretinits  or retinal burn.   In 
addition,  AYO uses narrow band blue light  at approximately 470nm, is UV 
and IR free, and  the light prism disperses the light making  the light source 
very  diffused  and not concentrated.  As such,  unlike laser or highly focused or 
intense sources of light, the AYO light is gentle to the eyes and does not reach the levels that can cause harm.    In addition, the design of the glasses is such that 
the LED  band  sits above the eye  and is not  directed  into the eye. The participant 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/[ADDRESS_301983].   
  
In order to ensure participants  adhere to the defined time for use/exposure and thus 
to ensure safety,  we will have access to a dashboard that enables us to  track the 
participants’ use of the light therapy device (both  bright/full or dim), duration, and 
date and ti me.    
  
AYO light properties are within referent values of one of the most researched, 
direct- to-consumer, blue light products:  the Philips goLiteBLU.  Numerous 
trials  using the Phillips device with human subjects have demonstrated minimal 
adverse effects and confirm its  irradiance is much lower than what is currently 
recommended for light treatment.  (21, 22) In comparison, the optical power 
projected on the eye is 300 μWatt/cm2 for the Phillips device vs 250 μWatt/cm2 for the AYO device.  In addition, the  Philips device operates at  at 70% of the limits 
stated in the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP)  guidelines on limits of exposure to incoherent visible radiation, whereas 
the AYO device operates at 10.5% of the “Blue Li ght Hazard” limit, far from the 
considered critical or dangerous levels identified as a “Thermal Hazard.”  
 
  
Lastly, the Philips device emits a wavelength of  blue light at 460 nm in comparison 
to AYO’s wavelength of 470nm.  Although the Philips device range falls within  wavelengths considered “harmless,” Tosini et. al
 confirmed “exposure to 
blue light in the 470–490 nm range may be less damaging to the eye compared to blue light in the 400–460 nm range... [D]evelopment of LEDs with a peak 
emission of around 470–490 nm may represent an important advancement in the safety of LEDs for  ocular health. Thus, LEDs with an emission peak of 
around 470–[ADDRESS_301984] an emission peak 
below 450 nm.” (23)    This wavelength range is important to note given studies have shown that peak effectiveness for a photic maculopathy (photochemical injury 
of the retina) occurs at  approximately 435 – 440 nm. (24)  See below for functional 
categories of the blue light spectrum comparing harmful vs healthy  blue 
light ranges.(25)   
 
There is also the potential risk of loss of privacy of information pertaining to 
research material collected by [CONTACT_1758]. Yet, we will take precau tions, described 
below, to minimize these risks.  
  
Treatment  Adverse Events  
As per the manufacturer’s recommendations, individuals below [ADDRESS_301985] sensitivity to light, epi[INVESTIGATOR_002], or a history of sei zures  will 
screen out for study participation. We will emphasize to subjects in the intervention arm that they can stop light therapy or withdraw from the N -of-1 trial completely at 
any point, particularly if they experience any concerning side -effects. Ad ditionally, 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/[ADDRESS_301986]-protected, encrypted Northwell -
approved database. No paper documents with personal identifiers will be kept. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_248387]. All data will be obtained specifically for research purposes.  
 
Personal or identifiable information is not stored on any of the devices used in this study. No information about the participants or the participants’ health history will be shared with AYO or Fitbit, except for the information the participants directly share themselves should they choose to use the device for personal use at  the 
conclusion of the study. There is no additional risk with using AYO or Fitbit as part 
of this research study  as compared to using the device as a consumer . 
 
 
  18. RESEARCH RELATED HARM/INJURY  
• Describe the availability of medical or psychological resources that subjects might need as a result of anticipated problems that may be known to be associated with the research.  
• If the research is greater than minimal risk, explain any medical treatments that are 
available if research -related i njury occurs, who will provide it, what will be provided, 
and who will pay for it.   
 
Shoul d a participant experience  an adverse event, they will be advised to contact 
[CONTACT_29383]. The DSMB and IRB will be notified according to timelines es tablished in their Charter/Policy and Procedure manual. Should a 
participant report emotional distress in responding to survey questions, the research coordinators will refer to our Principal Investigator ( a licensed clinical 
psychologist) , who will recomm end follow -up. 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/2021   Page 24 of 32  
 
19. POTENTIAL BENEFIT TO SUBJECTS  
 
• Explain what benefits might be derived from participation in the study, noting in particular the benefit over standard treatment (e.g. a once-a-day administration instead of four times a day, an oral formulation over an IV administration).  
• Also state if t here are no known benefits to subjects, but detail the value of knowledge 
to be gained  
Although not a primary endpoint, p articipants randomized to the intervention may 
receive an indirect benefit, i.e. they may gain a better understanding of how bright blue light therapy personally affects them or could possibly see a positive effect on their fatigue symptoms . This may result in their being more satisfied with their 
fatigue treatment regimen and in achieving reduced fatigue symptoms. Through pooling N- of-[ADDRESS_301987] PRIVACY INTERESTS OF SUBJECTS  
 
• Describe the methods used to identify potential research subjects, obtain consent and gather information about subjects to ensure that their privacy is not invaded.  
• In addition consider privacy protections that may be needed due to communications with subjects (such as phone messages or mail) .   
 
Names and email addresses from potential study participants will not be collected 
until participants have read through web information explaining the research study and protocol and indicated their interest in the study.  This information will be 
stored in a Northwell-approved database store PHI,  and it will only be accessible to 
research staff listed on the approved IRB protocol. Names or other identifying information will not be shared with those outside the research tea m. Phone 
numbers and email will only be used for study- related communications, and 
employees or students  will only be contact[CONTACT_248408] a future Personalized Trial.  
 
  
21.  COSTS TO SUBJECTS  
 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/2021   Page 25 of 32 • Describe any foreseeable costs that subjects may incur through participation in the 
research  
• Indicate whether research procedures will be billed to insurance or paid for by [CONTACT_84386].   
 
This research study is funded by  [CONTACT_248409] (NIH). All study 
related devices and platforms will be provided to participants  at no cost. Participant 
insurance will not be billed. 
 
This study uses text messaging to deliver notifications, reminders, and study questionnaires. Standard message and data rates from the participant’s  wireless 
carrier may apply to the study participant. Study participants will not be compensated for any costs related to data usage or sending or re ceiving text 
messages by [CONTACT_248410].  
   
22. PAYMENT TO SUBJECTS  
 
• Describe the amount of payment to subjects, in what form payment will be received and the timing of the payments.    
Study participants  will receive a Clinicard v alued at $100 after successful 
completion of this study . As a thank you, they will  also be able to keep their Fi tbit 
Charge 3 (a value of $120), and one AYO light therapy glasses device (a value of 
$299 ).   
 
 
23.  CONSENT PROCESS  
 
If obtaining consent for this study, describe:  
• Who will be obtaining consent  
• Where consent will be obtained 
• Any waiting period available between informing the prospective participant and 
obtaining consent  
• Steps that will be taken to assure the participants’ understanding 
• Any tools that will be utilized during the consent process 
•   Information about how the consent will be documented in writing.  If using a  standard consent form, indicate such.   
• Procedures for maintaining informed consent.   
 
Consent and written authorization will be obtained electronically  via the 21 
CFR 11 -approved N1Thrive by 4Peacocks platform, with a copy of the 
electronically signed form mailed to the participants  along with their study 
instructions and devices. Before being sent a copy of the consent form, 
potential participants will be sent through a series of web pages that summarize 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/[ADDRESS_301988], accessible only to 
members of the research team listed on the IR B protocol. A copy of the consent 
form and signed signature [CONTACT_248412].   
 
 
In the state of NY, any participants under the age of 18 are considered children.  If your study involves children, additional information should be provided to describe: 
• How parental permission will be obtained 
• From how many parents will parental permission be obtained 
• Whether permission will be obtained from individuals other than parents, and if so, who will be allowed to provide permission.  The process used to determine these individual’s authority to consent for the child should be provided 
• Whether or not assent will be obtained from the child 
• How will assent be documented 
• Whether child subjects may be expected to attain legal age to consent to the procedures for research prior to the completion of their participation in the research.  If so, describe the process that will be used to obtain their legal consent to continue participation in the study.  Indicate what will occur if consent is not obtained from the now-adult subjects.    
N/A 
 
 
If the study involves cognitively impaired adults, additional information should be provided to describe:  
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/2021   Page 27 of 32 • The process to determine whether an individual is capable of consent 
• Indicate who will make this assessment  
• The plan should indicate that documentation of the determination  and 
assessment will be placed in the medical record, when applicable, in addition to the research record.  
• If permissio n of a legally authorized representative will be obtained, 
o  list the individuals from who permission will be obtained in order of priority  
o Describe the process for assent of subjects; indicate whether assent will be required of all, some or none of the subjects.  If some, which subjects will be required to assent and which will not. 
o If assent will not be obtained from some or all subjects, provide an explanation as to why not 
o Describe whether assent will be documented and the process to document assent  
o Indicate if the subject could regain capacity and at what point you would obtain their consent for continued participation in the study  
 
N/A 
 
 
If the study will enroll non -English speaking subjects: 
• Indicate what language(s) other than English are understood by [CONTACT_40228] 
• Indicate whether or not consent forms will be translated into a language other than English 
• Describe the process to ensure that the oral and written information provided 
to those subjects will be in that language 
• If non-English speaking subjects will be excluded, provide a justification for 
doing so  
This is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_58742] N -of-[ADDRESS_301989] data that supports the feasibility of such a trial design, we anticipate the methodology would be scaled to larger clinical trials designed to assess safety and/or efficacy.  Non -Engli sh speaking individuals would then be 
included as participants in those separate studies per the princip les of justice 
and autonomy.  Exclusion of non-English speaking participants in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_248388], participant comprehensibility or research design applicability to the diverse populations 
that may be solicited for participation in future clinical trials run under a n 
N-of-1 design.    
 
 
24.  WAIVER OR ALTERATION OF THE CONSENT PROCESS         N/A          
 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/2021   Page 28 of 32 Complete this section if you are seeking an alteration or complete waiver of the consent   
process.  
• Describe the possible risks of harm to the subjects involved in this study and explain why the study involves no more than minimal risk to the subject:   
• Explain why the waiver/ alteration will not adversely affect the rights and welfare 
of subjects 
• Explain why it is impracticable to conduct this research if informed consent is 
required   
• Explain why it is not possible to conduct this research without using the information or biospecimens in an identifiable form 
• If appropriate, explain how the subject s will be provided with additional pertinent 
information after participation.   If not appropriate to do so, explain why.  
 
 
 
Complete this section if you are obtaining informed consent but you are requesting a waiver of the documentation of consent (i.e., verbal consent will be obtained ). To 
proceed with a waiver based on these criteria, each subject must be asked whether they wish to have documentation linking them to this study.  Only complete subsection 1 OR 
subsection 2.  
 
  SUBSECTION 1   
• Explain how the only record linking the subject to the research would be the consent document. 
• Explain how the principal risk of this study would be the potential harm resulting from a breach in the confidentiality 
• Indicate whether or not subjects will be provided with a written statement 
regarding the research.  
 
 
 
SUBSECTION 2  
•  Describe the possible risks of harm to the subjects involved in this study and 
explain why the study involves no more than minimal risk.   
• Confirm that the research only involves procedure for which consent is not 
normally required outside the research con text.  
• Indicate whether or not subjects will be provided with a written statement 
regarding the research.  
 
 
 . 
 
25. WAIVER OF HIPAA AUTHORIZATION      N/A       
 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/2021   Page 29 of 32 Complete this section if you seek to obtain a full waiver of HIPAA authorization to use 
and/or disclose protected health information.  
• Describe the risks to privacy involved in this study and explain why the study involves no more than minimal risk to privacy:   
• Describe your plan to protect identifiers from improper use or disclosure and to 
destroy them at the earliest time.  
•  Indicate why it is  not possible to seek subjects’ authorization for use or 
disclosure of PHI.  
• Indicate why it is  not possible to conduct this research without use or disclosure 
of the PHI.   
• Indicate if PHI will be disclosed outside NSLIJ Health System, and if so, to whom.   Note:  PHI disclosed outside NSLIJ Health System, without HIPAA authorization 
needs to be tracked. Please see guidance at www.nslij.com/irb
 for information 
about tracking disclosures. 
 
 
 
Complete this section if you seek to obtain a partial waiver of the patient’s authorization for screening/recruitment purposes (i.e., the researcher does not have access to patient records as s/he is not part of the covered entity)  
Note: Information collected through a partial waiver for recruitment cannot be shared 
or disclosed to any other person or entity.  
• Describe how data wi ll be collected and used:  
• Indicate why you need the PHI (e.g.PHI is required to determine eligibility, 
identifiers are necessary to contact [CONTACT_69073], other) 
• Indicate why  the research cannot practicably be conducted without the partial 
waiver (e.g. no access to medical records or contact [CONTACT_84993], no treating clinician to assist in recruitment of the study population, other) 
 
 
 
26.  VULNERABLE POPULATIONS:  
 
Indicate whether you will include any of these vulnerable populations. If indicated, 
submit the appropriate appendix to the IRB for review:  
  Children or viable neonate  
  Cognitively impaired  
  Pregnant Women, Fetuses or neonates of uncertain viability or nonviable  
  Prisoners  
  NSLIJ Employees, residents, fellows, etc  
  poor/uninsured  
  Students  
  Minorities  
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/[ADDRESS_301990] no bearing on an individual’s posit ion at Northwell Health.   
 
Similarly, all students of Hofstra School of Medicine will be eligible to participate in the study. Online documentation in the consent process will explain that their participation is voluntary, and that their participation will not impact the educational enrollment or standing Hofstra University , nor have any bearing on current or future 
health services received from Northwell Health . Professors or supervisory staff will not 
enroll individuals who report to or work or study unde r them. Student -participation or 
non-participation will have no bearing on an individual’s position at Hofstra University or Northwell Health.   
 
 
 
27.  MULTI -SITE HUMAN RESEARCH (COORDINATING CENTER)  
 
If this is a multi -site study where you are the lead investigator, describe the management 
of information (e.g. results, new information, unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others, or protocol modifications) among sites to protect subjects. 
N/A 
 
  
28.  REFERENCES/BIBIOGRAPHY  
 
Provide a reasonable list of references directly related to the study. Any diagrams for new medical devices or brief reprints from journals might also prove useful.  
 
1. Guyatt, G.,Haynes, B., Jaeschke, R.,Cook, D., Greenhalgh,T., 
Mead,M., Green, L.,Naylor, C.,Wilson,M., McAlister, F., & 
Richardson, W. (2002). Introduction: The philosophy of evidence -
based medicine. In G. Guyatt, & D. Rennie (Eds.), Users’ Guides to 
the Medical Literature : A Manual for Eevidence- base d Clinical 
Practice (pp. 3 –11). Chicago, IL:  American Medical Association.  
2. Ridenour TA, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_248389], Maldonado- Molina MM, Hassmiller -Lich K . 
Toward idiographic research in prevention science: Demonstration of 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/2021   Page 31 of 32 three techniques for rigorous small sample researc h. Prevention Science. 
2013;14:267-78.  
3. Gandhi TK . Adverse drug events in ambulatory care. New England 
Journal of Medicine. 2003;348(16):1556-64.   
4. Duan N, Kravitz RL, Schmid CH . Single- patient (n -of-1) trials: a 
pragmatic clinical decision methodology for patient- centered 
comparative effectiveness research. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 2013;66([ADDRESS_301991]):S21-8. 
5. Guyatt G, Jaeschke R, McGinn T . N-of-1 Randomized Controlled 
Trials: Study Design. In: Guyatt G, Rennie D, Meade MO, Cook DJ, 
eds. Users' Guides to the Medical Literature. 2nd ed. [LOCATION_001]; 
London: McGraw Hill Medical 2008:179-92.  
6. Guyatt G, Keller J, Jaeschke R, Rosenbloom D, Adachi J, Newhouse M . 
The n -of-1 randomized controlled trial: clinical usefulness, our three -
year experience. Annals of Int ernal Medicine. 1990;112:293 - 9.  
7. Larson EB . N-of- 1 trials: a new future? J Gen Intern Med. 
2010;25(9):891-2.  
8. Joy TR, Monjed A, Zou GY, Hegele RA, McDonald CG, Mahon JL . N-
of-1 (Single -Patient) Trials for Statin -Related Myalgia. Annals of 
Internal Medicine. 2014;160(5):301-10.  
9. Nikles CJ, Yelland M, Glasziou PP, Del Mar C . Do individualized 
medication effectiveness tests (n -of-1 trials) change clinical decisions 
about which drugs to use for osteoarthritis and chronic pain? Am J Ther. 
2005;12(1):92-7. 
10. Kravitz RL, Duan N, Niedzinski EJ, Hay MC, Subramanian SK, 
Weisner TS . What ever happened to N -of-1 trials? Insiders' perspectives 
and a look to the future. Milbank Q. 2008;86(4):533-55.  
11. Guyatt G . N of 1 randomized trials: a commentary. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 
2016;76:4- 5.  
12. Gabler NB, Duan N, Vohra S, Kravitz RL . N-of- 1 trials in the medical 
literature: a systematic review. Medical Care. 2011;49(8):761 -8.  
13. Recommended principles and practices for the provision of humanistic 
psychosocial services: Alternative to mandated practice and treatment 
guidelines. Humanistic Psychologist. 2004;32(1):3-75.  
14. Gabler NB, Duan N, Vohra S, Kravitz RL . N-of- 1 trials in the medical 
literature: a systematic review. Med Care. 2011;49(8):761-8.  
15. Hanifin  J, Lockley S, Cecil K, et al. Randomized trial of polychromatic 
blue-enriched light for circadian phase shifting, melatonin suppression, 
and alerting responses. Physiology & Behavior. 2019;198:57-66. 
doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2018.10.004. 
16. Sasseville A, Martin  JS, Houle J, Hébert M. Investigating the 
contribution of short wavelengths in the alerting effect of bright light. 
Physiology & Behavior.  2015;151:81-87. 
doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2015.06.028. 
17. Meesters Y, Duijzer WB, Hommes V. The effects of low -intensity 
narrow-band blue -light treatment compared to bright white -light 
   
 
Version Date:  09/9/2021   Page 32 of 32 treatment in seasonal affective disorder . Journal of Affective Disorders.  
2018;232:48-51. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2018.01.024. 
18. Smolders KC, Kort YAD. Bright light and mental fatigue: Effects on 
alertness, vitality, performance and physiological arousal. Journal of 
Environmental Psychology. 2014;39:77-91. 
doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2013.12.010. 
19. Kronish IM, Alcantara C, Duer -Hefele J, St Onge T, Davidson KW, 
Carter EJ, et al.  Patients and primary care providers identify 
opportunities for personalized (N-of- 1) trials in the mobile health era. J 
Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 2017.  
20. Finley CR, Chan DS, Garrison S, et al. What are the most common 
conditions in primary care? Systematic review. Can Fam Physician. 
2018;64(11):832-840. 
21. Raman G, Balk EM, Lai L, Shi J, Chan J, Lutz JS, et al. Evaluation of 
person- level heterogeneity of treatment effects in published multipers on 
N-of- 1 studies: systematic review and reanalysis. BMJ Open. 
2018;8(5):e017641. 
22. Anderson, J. L., Glod, C. A., Dai, J., Cao, Y., Lockley, S. W. (2009).  
Lux vs. wavelength in light treatment of Seasonal Affective Disorder 
(pp. 203-212).  Acta Psychiatrica Scandinaviea, Volume 120, Issue 3.     
23.  Revell, Victoria L., Molina, Thomas A., Eastman, Charmane I. (2012). 
Human phase response curve to intermittent blue light using a 
commercially available device (pp. 4859- 4868). The Journal of 
Physiology, Volume 590 , Issue 19.    
24. Tosini, Gianluca, Ferguson, Ian,  and Tsubota, Kazuao. (2016).  Effects 
of blue light on the circadian system and eye physiology.  Molecular 
Vision, 22: 61–72.  
25. Miller, Sharon A., et. Al (2020). Light- Emitting Diodes (LEDS): 
Implications for Safety. Health Physics: May 2020 - Volume 118 - Issue 
5 - p 549-561  
26. Heiting, Gary. (2019). Chapter 2: Blue Light and Displays, How to Save 
Your Eyes in the Digital Age - The Handbook for Eye Care and 
Electronics:  https://eyesafe.com/handbook/chapter -2/   
 
 
 
 
 