 
 
1 
 Study Protocol and  
Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP)  
DEVELOPMENT AND PRELIMINARY TESTING OF A NON -REGULATED DIGITAL  
SERVICE THAT  SUPPORTS COGNITIVE BEHAVIORAL THERAPY FOR DEPRESSIVE 
SYMPTOMS UNDER  CLINICAL SUPERVISION  
Principal Investigator :   [INVESTIGATOR_405271], PhD  
Chief of Psychology  
[LOCATION_005] General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]  & Harvard Medical School  
[LOCATION_011], MA, [LOCATION_002] of America  
 
 
Ethical approval:    Mass General Brigham Institutional Review Boards   
(protocol # 2020P001958 , approved on 04/08/2021) 
 
 
ClinicalTrials.gov identifier :   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
Funding:     This study was funded by [CONTACT_405295] (formerly Telefonica   
Alpha). Investigators from MGH developed  the Mindset  app 
in collaboration with technologists and  designers from Koa 
Health via a user -centered, iterative design approach.  The 
investigators from MGH were responsible for the  study 
design and for the execution of the study; authors from Koa  
Health supported th e technical activities related to the 
development  and deployment of the app, and provided 
funding for the  project. Koa Health had no role in the 
recruitment of participants  and had no access to data during 
the trial.  
 
 
Document Date:    November 14, 2023  (shortened version)  
     Last IRB -approved update: 09/19/23  
 
 
Author     Susanne Hoeppner , PhD , MApStat  
Assistant Professor of Psychology  
[LOCATION_005] General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] & Harvard Medical School  
[LOCATION_011], MA, [LOCATION_002] of America  
 
 
Version     Draft 1.[ADDRESS_510949]. Specifically, we seek to 
evaluate how digital CBT plus virtual treatment initially performs when deployed in a clinical 
setting to support treatment. This treatment will include the mobile CBT for depression app in 
combination with eight  virtual visits delivered by [CONTACT_68826] -level psychologists or psychology 
interns with their master’s degree over  a period of [ADDRESS_510950] will be assigned once 
eligibility is determined and will offer 8 virtual treatment sessions in total in addition to 
unlimited access to the app. All virtual sessions will be no longer than 16 -25 min. The combined 
CBT app  plus virtual treatment will be tested in 28 patients.  
 
Aim 1 : Test feasibility and acceptability of the combined digital CBT plus virtual treatment . 
Examine uptake, patient satisfaction, clinician usability and satisfaction, sustained engagement, 
drop-out rates.  
 
Hypothesis 1a:  We hypothesize that digital CBT plus virtual treatment will be feasible 
(based on uptake, engagement and drop -out rates).  
 
Hypothesis 1b : We hypothesize that digital CBT plus virtual treatment will be deemed 
acceptable both to pati ents and clinicians (based on descriptive statistics of patient 
satisfaction, app use, app feedback, clinician ratings (CGI Ratings) as well as qualitative 
feedback).  
 
Aim 2:  Examine preliminary efficacy  of digital CBT plus virtual treatment for primary ou tcomes 
(i.e., reduction in severity of depressive symptoms) and secondary outcomes (e.g., quality of life 
at post -treatment, social and occupational functioning at post -treatment).  
 
Hypothesis 2a:  We hypothesize that participants receiving digital CBT plus virtual 
treatment will evidence statistically significant reductions in HAM -D scores from 
baseline to post -treatment (week 8).  
 
Hypothesis 2b:  We hypothesize that participants receiving digital CBT plus virtual 
treatment will evidence statistically significant improvement on secondary clinical 
outcome measures (i.e., functional impairment (WSAS) and quality of life (Q -LES-Q)) 
from baseline to post -treatment  (week 8).  
 
II. SUBJECT SELECTION  
 
Overview:  
 
To meet our target o f [ADDRESS_510951] to screen up to about 84 individuals. 
Detailed eligibility criteria are below.  
 
 
3 
  
A. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria:  
 
1. Inclusion criteria  
a. Adults  (at least 18 years of age)  
b. Living in [LOCATION_005]  
c. Current diagnosis of primary DSM -5 MDD, based on MINI  
d. PHQ -9 score ≥ 10, indicating the presence of at least moderately severe 
depressive symptoms  
2. Exclusion criteria  
a. Psychotropic medication changes within [ADDRESS_510952] participation in > 4 sessions of CBT for depression  
c. Current severe substance use disorder  
d. Lifetime bipolar disorder or psychosis  
e. Acute, active suicidal ideation as indicated by [CONTACT_405296]/or a score ≥2 
on the suicidal ideation subscale of the C -SSRS.  
f. Concurrent psychological treatment  
g. Does not own a supported mobile Smartphone with a data plan  
h. Lack of technology literacy that would interfere with ability to engage with 
smartphone treatment  
   
B. Source of Subjects and Recruitment Methods:  
 
We plan to enroll 28 participants. Potential participants may be informed about the study through 
MBTA advertisements, radio advertisements, MG B / Partners  clinician s and research colleagues 
nationally, fliers posted in specialty clinics and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600], coffee shops, restaurant s, laundromats, 
barber shops, churches, daycares, libraries, newspapers, universities, other public locations, 
through our program’s website and a recruitment website we will create for this study, Partners 
Clinical Trials  (Rally) , listservs (e.g., MGH Bro adcast), via social media (e.g., 
Facebook/Instagram ads, our program’s Twitter account) on the Internet, and in online support 
groups. Individuals will also be recruited as part of our clinic’s general recruitment protocol.  
Interested individuals will be referred to the study RA, who will provide more information about 
the research study and assess preliminary eligibility over the telephone. We will also use a 
screening questionnaire hosted on REDCap. The link to access this screener will be embedded 
withi n our recruitment website. This will help identify individuals who are likely to be eligible 
for the study.  
 
III. SUBJECT ENROLLMENT  
 
A.  Method of enrollment, including procedures for patient registration and/or 
randomization  
 
Overview  
 
 
4 
 Potential participants will be preliminarily screened by a trained study staff member (e.g., RA) 
over the phone to establish their likely eligibility. We only ask for the potential participant’s 
name [CONTACT_3669] [CONTACT_405297].  The participants’ contact [CONTACT_405298]. Additionally, during the phone screen 
the RA may ask permission to send eligible and interested participants a Partners/MGH 
Authorization for Release of Protected or Privileged Health Information form, which participants 
may complete with their psychiatrist’s or other healthcare provider’s contact [CONTACT_405299]. If permission is obtained, the study clinician may then contact 
[CONTACT_2299]’s healthcare provider to verify issues surrounding potential eligibility (e.g., if 
there is any question/concern about the anticipated stability of the participan t’s medications), 
based on information collected by [CONTACT_405300]. Screening information of 
individuals who do not meet study criteria will be destroyed. Subjects will be enrolled by [CONTACT_9435]. 
Potential participants will be given as much time as they need to consider participation, prior to 
providing informed consent.  If suicidality is expressed to an RA during the phone screen, the RA 
will notify a licensed clinician member of the study staff immediately. Per our internal 
procedures, RAs will keep the suicidal individual on the phone until a licensed clinician member 
of the study staff arrives to conduct a telephone evaluation. RAs may contact a licensed clinician 
member of the study staff directly via e -mail during the phone call, and/or email other research 
assistants who can then alert a licensed clinician member of the study staff to promptly conduct 
an evaluation over the telephone.  
 
Interested and eligible participants will be invited to complete the baseline assessment with the 
indep endent evaluator ( IE) by [CONTACT_102949], HIPAA -compliant video calling program (Zoom or phone). 
At that time, patients will be informed about the study’s purpose and procedures and advised 
about alternative treatment options.  Before eligibility is assessed, the I E, [CONTACT_405333], [CONTACT_383952], or [CONTACT_405334] will obtain electronic informed consent. The informed consent 
document will be provided to the potential participant electronically through REDCap, a secure 
data capture system, and they will be asked to sele ct an “I agree” button and provide their 
signature [CONTACT_405332] (see more REDCap information below: 
“Monitoring and Quality Assurance”). The participant will be informed that they may download 
and save a copy of the consent form for their records. Self-report measures for the baseline 
assessment will be completed through a secure REDCap link emailed to participants if 
participants consent and are deemed eligible.  
 
C. Procedures for obtaining informed consent (including timing of consent  process)  
 
Before participating in the screening and baseline assessment, patients will be given information 
about the study via phone and initial eligibility will be assessed. After this initial phone call, the 
RA will email interested potential participants a pdf c opy of the informed consent document for 
review, prior to the screening/baseline assessment. Online consent will be used as recruitment  is 
state-wide, prohibiting in -person written consent. The potential participants will be asked to 
abstain from signing t he consent form until study procedures are discussed with the IE, or Drs. 
Wilhelm, Bernstein, or Greenberg, during the baseline screening video call. In cases where 
Zoom is used, before the baseline assessment appointments, the RA will send participants an  
appointment confirmation e -mail with detailed instructions for logging onto the HIPAA -
 
 
[ADDRESS_510953] information will also be collected 
in the demographics form after the baseline interview with the IE  for confirmation . At the start of 
the screening/baseline assessment, before beginning study procedures, the IE, or Drs. Wilhelm, 
Bernst ein, or Greenberg will inform potential participants about the study’s purpose and 
procedures and advise about alternative treatment options.  If the individual wishes to participate 
in the study, the IE or Drs. Wilhelm, Greenberg, or Bernstein will obtain  informed consent 
electronically by [CONTACT_405301] “I agree” button and electronically sign the 
electronic informed consent document sent through REDCap, a secure data capture system. The 
person obtaining informed consent will also verify the participants identity by [CONTACT_405302] 
a form of identification (e.g., government -issued driver’s license). Participants will have the 
ability to download and print the electronic informed consent document, or save the pdf copy to 
their computer f or their records. The research assistant will send participants a signed pdf copy 
of the consent form for their records.  
 
D. Treatment assignment and randomization (if applicable)  
 
N/A for the current study. All participants will receive the same treatment.  
 
STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
Email Correspondence  
All email communications with participants will be sent in accordance with Partners’ Send 
Secure email encryption policy.  
 
A.  Study visits and parameters to be measured  
 
Phone screen:  See section IV, “Subject Enrollment,” above.  
 
Screening/Assessment Calls and Procedures:  The screening visit will take place over the 
phone (or HIPAA -compliant video conference call) and will last approximately 2 -3 hours ( with 
up to  an additional hour on the computer for self -report assessments). Subjects will provide 
electronic informed consent with study staff (e.g., the IE; See Section C, “Procedures for 
obtaining informed consent” for further details). They will then be assessed by [CONTACT_405303], using the below assessment instruments (see Table 1). Participants will complete self -
report questionnaires  online  via REDCap. After the Baseline visit, participants will be notified 
by [CONTACT_464] (see appendix) regarding their eligibility status, and they will be given the 
opportunity to discuss this further with our study staff by [CONTACT_648]. Reasons for ineligibility will be 
documented, and ineligible participants will also be provided with treatment referrals and 
resources. Eligible subjects will be taught to download the app and will receive a brief tutorial in 
using the app -based treatment.  All participants will receive instruction in downloading the Koa 
Health Habits app as well.  Please see the schedule of assessments and measures administered at 
each time point in Table 1. These assessments will require approximately [ADDRESS_510954] been well -
tolerated by [CONTACT_4317]. To avoid dropout, participants will be paid $25  for mid -treatment, end -
of-treatment, and 3 -month follow up assessments.  
 
Downloading the app (s): The IE or RA will assist participants in downloading the app (s) on their 
smartphone. The IE or RA will generate an enrollment code (s) for each study particip ant linked 
to their unique study identifier on the study server. Participants will download the study app (s) 
from the Apple iOS or Google Play stores. When subjects launch the study app (s) for the first 
time they will be prompted for the enrollment code. S tudy content will only be available to 
participants after entering their enrollment code. In this way, the app (s) cannot be accessed by 
[CONTACT_405304] .  
 
Passively Collected Data to be Measu red: Data from sensors in participants’ mobile phones 
may also be collected  through the Mindset and/or Habits apps , to optimize the program through 
personalization and improvement of the app.  Participants will not be required to use the Habits 
app and may opt out of this component. In order for Habits  to continue to run in the background 
of participants’ iPhones across the study period, participants must occasionally interact with the 
app once  every [ADDRESS_510955] time for data collection to occur .  
 
Treatment Format:  Participants will complete app -delivered treatment on their personal 
smartphone s, over the course of approximately 8 weeks (see “The Treatment” section below for 
an outline of the modules that the app includes). Forde et al. (2005) report that 6 -8 therapy 
sessions is the optimal number of sessions for treating mild to modera te depression. Each 
treatment component will be presented through modules on the mobile app, and exercises will be 
logged and practiced through the app on one’s smartphone. An advantage of app -based CBT for 
MDD is that participants can self -direct the freq uency and duration of modules, and they can re -
visit modules as many times as is useful to them.  
 
Additionally, upon initiating the digital CBT treatment, each participant will be assigned a 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_405272]; all the rapi[INVESTIGATOR_405273] a licensed psychologist (see “Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_405274],” below). 
Participants will meet virtually with this therapi[INVESTIGATOR_65585] a total of [ADDRESS_510956] will respond to all in -
app communications within 36 hours on weekdays.  During the follow -up phase of the study (i.e., 
after week 8), participants will continue to have access to the app, but without the therapi[INVESTIGATOR_405275].   
 
 
 
[ADDRESS_510957] Training and Qualifications:  Doctoral -level clinicians (or pre -doctoral interns with 
master’s  degrees) will serve as therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437]. All study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_405276] a licensed psychologist. Previous findings 
from our BDD pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251] (#2017P000293) in which only a BA -level “coach” was available to 
participants in addition to the CBT treatment app, suggest that even a light -touch focused on 
motivation and problem -solving is helpful in supporting treatment, with the app itself serving as 
the primary mode of treatmen t delivery. As such, though the therapi[INVESTIGATOR_405277] -on-one with participants compared 
to our previous trials, the current trial is still structured with the intention of having the C BT app 
serve as the primary treatment modality. Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_405278] 
(e.g., completing relevant MGH Psychiatry Academy CBT training course(s), and will be 
required to pass (>90% correct) the corresponding MGH Psychia try Academy knowledge test to 
demonstrate proficiency). To ensure ongoing high -quality treatment, [CONTACT_405334], or another 
study staff member who is a licensed clinician with expertise in CBT for MDD and related 
conditions will provide weekly supervision to  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437], with additional supervision as needed if 
questions arise. Further, sessions will be audio recorded for review, as 15% of randomly selected 
audiotaped sessions will be rated for competency and treatment adherence, similar to other NIH 
studies w e have conducted.  
 
The Treatment:  
The CBT app includes the following components of CBT for MDD, which the therapi[INVESTIGATOR_405279]: 1) education about a CBT model of MDD; 2) cognitive techniques to 
identify and challenge distorted th oughts related to one’s MDD; 3) enhancing values (e.g., 
behavioral activation); 4) mindfulness (to help patients to learn to balance distressing  emotional 
states with rational thinking and to control their attentional processes); 5) deeper level (core) 
beliefs; and 6) relapse prevention (to teach patients to expect and react effectively to setbacks 
that may occur during times of stress). Additionally, passively collected sensor data (described 
above) will provide information on changes in participants’ mobi lity and sleep patterns. Our 
hope is that, in a future stage, the treatment could be adapted to address changes in sleep and 
mobility patterns (e.g., prompting the participant via a message through the app encouraging him 
or her to engage in the treatment when mobility is notably low).  
 
Measures Descriptions  
 
Diagnostic Measures  
Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.)  (Appendix) : The M.I.N.I.  
(Sheehan et al., 2006) is a semi -structured diagnostic assessment of DSM -5 psychiatric illnesses. 
The M.I.N.I. is efficient, reliable, and well -validated.  
 
Assessment of Depression and Related Symptoms  
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM -D) (Appendix ): The HAM -D (Hamilton, 1960) 
is a is a clinician -administered scale considered to be the “gold -standard” means of assessing 
symptom severity in depressed patients. There are [ADDRESS_510958].  
 
 
 
8 
 Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_67905] – Revised (CE SD-R) (Appendix) : 
The CESD -R (Eaton et al., 2004) is a revised version of the Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_60106] (CES -D; Radloff, 1977). It is a 20 -item self -report symptom severity measure 
of depression. Patients endorse one of the answer  choices ( Not at all or less than 1 day, 1 -2 days, 
3-4 days, 5 -7 days, nearly every day for 2 weeks) for each of the statements that list certain 
behaviors or feelings common to depression (in the past week). For example, items address 
appetite, sleep, wei ght, suicide, self -harm, attention, happi[INVESTIGATOR_008], and interest. Participants will 
complete this form at baseline, midpoint, endpoint, and follow -up timepoints.  
 
 Clinical Global Impression – Improvement Scale (CGI -I) and severity scale (CGI -S) 
(Appendix): The single -item CGI -I, which ranges from 1 (very much improved) to 7 (very much 
worse), is commonly used in clinical trials (Guy, 1976). Participants will complete a CGI -I for 
MDD symptoms (CGI -P MDD) and the clinician will complete a CGI -I for MDD symptoms 
(CGI -MDD) and overall symptoms (CGI -global). The CGI -I ratings will be secondary outcome 
measures and will also be used to determine clinical deterioration of MDD via weekly 
administration through REDCap (link to be sent via email or in -app m essage)  (see Minimizing 
Risks, below). The CGI also has a severity scale (CGI -S) which is rated by [CONTACT_405305]. The CGI -S determines the patient’s overall level 
of symptom severity, in comparison to other patients the clinician has treated or assessed with 
the same diagnosis.   
 
Patient Health Questionnaire -9 (PHQ -9) (Appendix): The PHQ -9 (Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626], Kroenke, & 
Williams, 1999) is a self -report measure of depression severity includes 9 Likert scale items 
rangi ng from 0 ( not at all ) to 3 ( every day ). The PHQ -[ADDRESS_510959]-treatment, and 3 -month follow -up assessments.  
 
Patient Health Question naire -8 (PHQ -8) (Appendix): The PHQ -8 is a revised version of 
the PHQ -9 less item #9 (thoughts of death and self -harm). Research shows that the PHQ -8 is 
highly correlated with the PHQ -9 ( > 99%) and shows highly similar sensitivity and specificity 
(Wu et a l., 2020). It will be re -administered weekly prior to  a patient’s appointment with their 
study clinician.  REDCap link to be sent via email or in -app message.  
  
Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS)  (Appendix): The C -SSRS (Posner et 
al., 2008) is a gold -standard, clinician -administered assessment of suicidal ideation and suicide 
behaviors. The baseline version, which assesses both lifetime and recent time frames, will be 
used to establish eligibility at the baseline/screening visit. The “Update” ve rsion, which assesses 
suicide risk since the last assessment, will be used at subsequent study administrations.  
 
Depression, Anxiety, and Stress Scale (DASS -21): (Appendix). The DASS -21 is a 21 -
iitem self -report questionnaire created from a set of three self -report scales with 7 items each. 
The subscale groups include depression, anxiety, and stress scale (Lovibond & Lovibond, 1995).  
 
Assessment of Functioning and Quality of Life  
 
 
 
9 
 Work and Social Adjustment Scale  (WSAS)  (Appendix): The WSAS is a 5 -item, self -
report measure of impairment in occupational, social, and family domains (Mundt et al., 2002). 
Items are measured on 9 -point Likert scales ranging from 0 (no impairment at all) to 8 (very 
severe impairment).  
 
Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfa ction Questionnaire – Short Form (Q -LES-Q-SF) 
(Appendix). The Q -LES-Q-SF (Endicott, Nee, Harrison, & Blumenthal, 1993) is a 16 -item self -
report measure of subjective quality of life. Higher scores correspond with greater ratings of 
quality of life. The Q -LES-Q-SF has strong psychometric properties (Endicott et al., 1993).   
 
Assessment of Expectancy, Motivation and Satisfaction  
  
Credibility/expectancy questionnaire (CEQ)  (Appendix): This 6 -item, self -report, Likert -
type questionnaire assesses patients’ judgments about the credibility of the treatment rationale 
and treatment expectancy (Borkovec & Nau, 1972). It has good reliability ( =.81-.86), and 
validity is evident in its ability to differentiate between treatment rationales (Devilly & 
Borkovec, 2000).    
 
 The Client Satisfaction Questionnaire  (CSQ)  (Appendix) is an 8 item self -report 
questionnaire which assesses the satisfaction with clinical services receiv ed. It has excellent 
internal consistency and good discriminant validity (Attkisson, 2015).  
 
University of Rhode Island Change Assessment Scale - Psychotherapy Version (URICA)  
(Appendix) is a 32 -item Likert -type questionnaire that assesses how participants feel about 
starting and engaging in therapy (e.g., “I am doing something about the problems that have been 
bothering me.”; McConnaughy, Prochaska, & Velicer,1983 ). 
 
Other Ass essments  
 
Treatment History Medication, Treatment History Psychosocial, Treatment History 
Checklist forms  (Appendix): These forms will be used to assess any medications taken within the 
last 2 months as well as any current or lifetime psychosocial treatmen t.  
 
Lifetime Psychiatric Medication Form  (Appendix) : This self -report form collects 
information about all lifetime psychiatric medications taken and will be administered at the 
baseline screening visit.  
 
Concomitant medication and therapy form:  (Appendix) : This form probes for  any 
changes in psychotropic medication and mental health treatments that the participant has made 
since the prior assessment. Any reported changes in therapy or medication are then logged in the 
CTHER or CMED logs.  
 
 Demographics Form  (Appendix): This sel f-report form collects basic demographic data.  
 
 
 
10 
 App Feedback Questionnaire (Baseline) (Appendix): This 3 -item self -report 
questionnaire asks about participant’s expectations of using the app (e.g., “How frequently do 
you intend to use Mindset?”).  
 
App Fee dback Questionnaire (Midpoint) (Appendix): These multiple choice and open -
ended questions ask participants to describe their ongoing perceptions of the app at midpoint 
(e.g., “How easy are the exercises to understand, overall?”).   
 
App Feedback Questionnai re (Endpoint ) (Appendix): This self -report form collects 
participant feedback via multiple choice and open -ended questions pertaining to the content, 
usability, perceived usefulness, and aesthetics of the app (e.g., “How clear was the layout of the 
app?”).   
 
Mobile Application Rating Scale user version (uMARS)  (Appendix): This self -report form 
collects participant evaluations of mobile health applications. Dimensions include engagement, 
functionality, aesthetics, and information quality.   
  
Treatment Utilization Questionnaire  (TUQ)  (Appendix): This [ADDRESS_510960] Interview Notes  (Appendix): This interview guide asks about 
credibility/expectancy, client satisfaction, and improvements at post -treatment.  
 
Life Events Questionnaire  (Appendix):  This question will be used to assess whether any 
major life events occurred since the prev ious assessment that might have had a psychological 
impact on the subject.  
 
Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_405280] : (Appendix). This self -report form for clinicians 
will assess their satisfaction with using this app treatment approach.  
 
Everyday Discriminati on Scale Short Version : (Appendix). This 5 -item self -report form 
asks about participants’ experiences with discrimination in their daily life (Sternthal, Slopen, & 
Williams, 2011).  
 
Adverse Event Form and Log  (AE Form)  (Appendix). This form probs for any major 
events or concerns (i.e., adverse events) since the last time the form was filled out.  
 
Self Help Questionnaire:  (Appendix) This self -report form collects information about  any 
additional  self-help behaviors that could have impacted their well -being or depression since 
beginning treatment.   
 
IE Training and Qualifications, and Procedures to Ensure Assessment Integrity and 
Interrater Reliability:  Assessments will be conducted by [CONTACT_405306] a Master’s or Doctoral 
degree in clinical psychology or related mental health field. The IE will be otherwise uninvolved 
in study procedures. Training and reliability checks will be done to ensure that IEs conduct 
ratings in a uniform way. IEs will first receive instruction in t he MINI and HAM -D from a gold -
 
 
[ADDRESS_510961] rater. All assessments will be audiotaped 
for reliability ratings. To reduce rater drift, a trained reliability rater meeting the same 
qualifications as the IE will review 15%  of randomly selected audiotaped interviews. If 
reliability falls below .75, we will institute retraining procedures.  
 
Table 1 Assessment Measures by [CONTACT_405307].   
Measure  Baseline  Baseline 
Re-assess  Weekly  
 Mid-
Treatment 
Assess 
(wk 4)  Post-
Treatment 
Assess 
(wk 8)  
 3-month 
Follow -up 
Treatment 
History Checklist  ✔️      
Treatment 
History 
Medication  ✔️      
Treatment 
History 
Psychosocial  ✔️      
Life Events 
Question   ✔️  ✔️ ✔️ ✔️ 
AE Form   ✔️  ✔️ ✔️ ✔️ 
CONCOM Form   ✔️  ✔️ ✔️ ✔️ 
MINI  ✔️      
HAM -D ✔️ ✔️  ✔️ ✔️ ✔️ 
C-SSRS Lifetime  ✔️      
C-SSRS Update   ✔️  ✔️ ✔️ ✔️ 
CGI–S ✔️ ✔️  ✔️ ✔️ ✔️ 
CGI–MDD, CGI -
Global   ✔️  ✔️ ✔️ ✔️ 
Technologist 
Interview Notes       ✔️ 
Demographics  ✔️      
Lifetime 
Psychiatric 
Medication Form  ✔️ 
  
  
 
PHQ -9 ✔️ ✔️  ✔️ ✔️ ✔️ 
CGI-P (MDD)   ✔️ ✔️ ✔️ ✔️ ✔️ 
PHQ -8   ✔️    
CEQ  ✔️   ✔️   
URICA  ✔️      
 
 
12 
 CESD -R ✔️   ✔️ ✔️ ✔️ 
Q-LES-Q-SF ✔️   ✔️ ✔️ ✔️ 
WSAS  ✔️   ✔️ ✔️ ✔️ 
DASS -21 ✔️   ✔️ ✔️ ✔️ 
Everyday 
Discrimination 
Scale  ✔️   ✔️ ✔️ ✔️ 
Self Help 
Questionnaire  ✔️    ✔️ ✔️ 
CSQ     ✔️ ✔️  
Treatment 
Utilization 
Questionnaire     ✔️ ✔️ ✔️ 
App Feedback 
Questionnaire 
(Baseline)  ✔️      
App Feedback 
Questionnaire 
(Midpoint)     ✔️   
App Feedback 
Questionnaire 
(Endpoint)      ✔️  
uMARS      ✔️  
Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_405281]      ✔️  
 
If more than ten days elapse between a patient’s initial baseline screening assessment and the 
start of treatment, the study IE would re -administer select forms, including an additional HAM -D 
form.  
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_405282], we do expect dropouts. Except for subjects who 
withdraw consent to participate, all who are withdrawn or drop out of the study will be asked to 
complete all scheduled assessments and we will provide remuneration for participation in 
assessments.  
 
In addition to the assessment measures in Table 2, de -identified data from sensors in 
participants’ mobile phones will also be collected via the CBT and Habits  apps, to inform design 
and improvement of the app.  
 
B. Drugs to be used  
Not applicab le 
 
 
 
13 
 C. Devices to be used  
Participants will download the CBT for MDD and Habits apps onto their personal 
smartphone devices.  
 
D.  Procedures, surgical interventions, etc.  
Not applicable  
 
E. Data to be collected and when the data will be collected  
See above for the assessment schedules and assessment batteries for each phase.  
 
VI. BIOSTATISTICAL ANALYSES  
The IE and the RAs will play the primary role in data entry. Data will be entered in R EDCap, a 
HIPAA -compliant, Partners -approved platform for electronic data capture that streamlines data 
collection and management, and ensures data integrity, resulting in improved data quality and 
reduced costs. For more information on REDCap, please see s ection IX, “Monitoring and 
Quality Assurance.”  
[CONTACT_405335] will be responsible for data management and analysis. All project staff 
will receive training in data management and data confidentiality procedures. Data checks will 
be done regularly to  assure that all forms are entered and available for analysis. Questions or 
problems will be resolved promptly by [CONTACT_405308]. Data and analysis 
files will be backed up on the lab server and may also be stored in separate locked cabin ets.  
 
To characterize our sample, data will be displayed graphically, and summary statistics (e.g., 
means and frequencies) will be calculated for all variables, including demographic and clinical 
descriptors (e.g., from the MINI).  
 
Prior to data analysis , all major variables will be screened for inconsistent or abnormal values.  
Continuous measures will be assessed for skewness and outliers (based on model residuals), and, 
if needed, will be transformed to better meet modeling assumptions of normality and  
homogeneity of variance. A two -tailed p -value <.05 will be considered evidence of statistical 
significance for the primary and secondary outcomes.  
 
A. Specific data variables being collected for the study (e.g., data collection sheets)  
Specific variables being collected, and their timeline are presented in Table 1, and described in 
the Study Procedures section.  
 
B. Study endpoints  
 
Primary endpoints: Feasibility and acceptability of the combined digital CBT plus virtual 
treatment .  
Hypothesis 1a:  We hypot hesize that digital CBT plus virtual treatment will be feasible 
(based on uptake, engagement and drop -out rates).  
Hypothesis 1b : We hypothesize that digital CBT plus virtual treatment will be deemed 
acceptable both to patients and clinicians (based on descriptive statistics of patient 
 
 
14 
 expectancy and satisfaction, app use, app feedback, clinician ratings, as well as 
qualitative fee dback).  
 
Secondary endpoints: Preliminary efficacy  of digital CBT plus virtual treatment for primary 
outcomes (i.e., reduction in severity of depressive symptoms) and secondary outcomes (e.g., 
quality of life at post -treatment, social and occupational func tioning at post -treatment).  
Hypothesis 2a:  We hypothesize that participants receiving digital CBT plus virtual 
treatment will evidence statistically significant reductions in HAM -D scores from 
baseline to post -treatment (week 8).  
Hypothesis 2b:  We hypothe size that participants receiving digital CBT plus virtual 
treatment will evidence statistically significant improvement on secondary clinical 
outcome measures (i.e., functional impairment (WSAS) and quality of life (Q -LES-Q)) 
from baseline to post -treatmen t (week 8).  
 
C. Statistical methods  
 
Primary endpoints : feasibility and acceptability of the combined digital CBT plus virtual 
treatment.  
Analysis:  
We will examine feasibility (H1a) and acceptability (H1b) by [CONTACT_34055]:  
1. Refusal and dropout rates and reasons  
2. Patient satisfaction, as measured by [CONTACT_68939]  
3. Patient feedback , as measured by [CONTACT_405309]   
4. Patients’ credibility and expectancy ratings for the open -label treatment, as measured 
by [CONTACT_405310]/Expectancy Questionnaire  
5. Treatment utilization, as measured by [CONTACT_405311] : preliminary efficacy  of digital CBT plus virtual treatment for reducing 
severity of depression symptoms, and improving quality of life and functional impairment  
Analysis:  
Intention -to-treat mixed model analyses with repeated measures (baseline, mid -treatment, 
post-treatment) will be used to examine differences between pre - and post -treatment 
depression (HAM -D scores), usin g a two -tailed -level of .05. The pre - to post -treatment 
effect size will be calculated. Similar analyses will also be conducted for change in 
functional impairment (WSAS) and quality of life (Q -LES-Q) over the course of 
treatment. We will not adjust for multiple testing among secondary outcomes based on 
the recommendation of Cook and Farewell (1996), who argue that multiplicity 
adjustments are not necessary if separate test results are interpreted marginally and 
address different aspects of the  patient experience and decision -making process rather 
than alternative assessments of efficacy.  
 
D. Power analysis  
 
With n=28, we will have > 80% power to detect pre - to post -treatment effect sizes of d ≥ 1.37 
(very large effect sizes).  The estimate of the detectable effect size is based on a single degree of 
freedom contrast in a paired means test, implemented in SAS for Wi ndows version 9.4.  The 
 
 
15 
 power model used a two -sided alpha=0.05, a power of 0.80, assumed a pre - to-post-treatment 
correlation of 0.18, and a doubling of the standard deviation from pre - to post -treatment.  The 
pre- to post -treatment correlation estimate w as based on the mean pooled correlation between 
pre-test and post -test HAM -D scores in 14 CBT trials for adult depression (Cuijpers et al., 2016); 
with higher pre -post correlations, smaller effect sizes would be detectable in other secondary 
outcomes.  The  anticipated increase in outcome standard deviation was based on observations 
reported in treatment studies with participants with MDD, which reported pre - to post -treatment 
standard deviation increases in observed HAM -D scores in the range of 161 -191% (Ja rrett et al., 
1999; Elkin et al., 1989; Goldberger et al., 2011). We further assumed no drop -out by [CONTACT_405312], similar to what we observed in pi[INVESTIGATOR_405283] -treatment for body 
dysmorphic disorder (Wilhelm et al., 2020); if drop -out was 20%, we would only be able to 
detect effect sizes of d ≥ 1.55.  For comparison, in a meta -analysis of randomized controlled 
treatment trials that included internet CBT (iCBT) for persons with MDD (Andrews et al., 2018), 
the observed median percentage  of participants randomized who finished the treatment course 
was 66% (50/64 trials) and the interquartile range was 29% (Q1 52%, Q3 80%).  Large pre -to 
post-treatment effect sizes for CBT treatments among patients with MDD are to be expected, 
based on a m eta-analysis by [CONTACT_405313] (2016), which found that the mean pre -post 
standardized mean difference (i.e., effect size) in 14 CBT trials was 1.79, 95% CI: [1.37, 2.21].   
 
VII. RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS  
 
A. Complications of surgical and non -surgica l procedures  
Not applicable  
 
B. Drug side effects and toxicities  
Not applicable  
 
C. Device complications/malfunctions  
If the app or supporting therapi[INVESTIGATOR_405284] a period of 
time,  the patient may be unable to use the app to receive treatment or communicate with their 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541].   Similarly, if the therapi[INVESTIGATOR_405285], the therapi[INVESTIGATOR_405286].   These risks could result in minor harms to users 
such as incon venience or a delay in treatment.  To mitigate risks of a temporary device 
malfunction, participants are given the study staff and investigators’ contact [CONTACT_405314]. Thus, the clinical and study staff can communicate with the partic ipant by 
[CONTACT_405315]. As with in -person therapy, there are times when a therapy 
session gets cancelled and treatment, as well as weekly symptom assessments, are thus 
temporarily delayed. Likewise, in face -to-face therapy, a therap ist may be temporarily out of 
reach at times (e.g., on vacation) and backup lines of communication (e.g., pager coverage by a 
colleague) are put in place in case of emergencies.  Thus, device malfunctions that lead to 
temporary delays in accessing the app functionality are similar to risks associated with temporary 
delays in traditional face -to-face therapy. See also, “Minimizing of Risks and Safety Reporting” 
under “D. Psychosocial (non -medical) risks” for further description of protections in place.  
 
 
16 
  
D. Psychosocial (non -medical) risks  
Participants may feel uncomfortable due to the sensitive nature of the questions they may be 
asked. Likewise, some participants may feel uncomfortable about having assessment sessions 
digitally recorded and reviewed by [CONTACT_405316] (which is necessary for rater supervision as well 
as assessment of the reliability of ratings adherence and competence). Participants could 
experience an increase in symptoms related to the natural waxing and waning of MDD 
symptoms. MDD can be as sociated with other psychiatric symptoms (e.g., anxiety), as well as 
suicidal thoughts and behaviors, which may also change over time. Breach of confidentiality, 
which great care will be taken to prevent, represents a potential risk. As discussed below, we  will 
take precautions to ensure that these potential risks are minimized (see Adequacy of Protection 
Against Risks below).  
 
Privacy and Confidentiality  
 
All information gathered will be kept strictly confidential. We will adhere to the following 
procedure s to protect privacy and confidentiality:  
1) Participants will be assigned a code number. A link between ID number and participant’s 
names will be kept in a separate secure password -protected file, saved on our secure MGH lab 
server and/or Partners Dropbox  Business. Participants’ names or other identifying information 
will not appear on any questionnaires, study documents, digital recordings, computerized data 
files, or published reports. Case records will be reviewed only by [CONTACT_405317], if 
necessar y, by [CONTACT_405318] -assigned regulatory personnel. Research assistants and 
others working on this study (e.g., technologists) will be educated about the importance of 
strictly protecting participants' rights to confidentiality.  
2) All personnel will be trained in research confidentiality procedures and HIPAA, including 
completion of CITI training and Healthstream training. Only the study personnel (or, if 
necessary, institutional or sponsor -assigned regulatory personnel) will have access to the 
identifiable data.  
 
3) Clinical data collected during MGH assessments: Computerized data and digital audio  files 
will be stored de -identified, in password protected files saved on the protected lab server. Data 
within Partners is stored automatically and securely on an MS SQL Server, accessed over 
industry standard SSL [ADDRESS_510962] copy data (paper forms ) will be stored securely in 
locked file cabinets, within locked offices in the MGH  Center for  OCD and Related Disorders.  
 
 
 
17 
 4) Technologist data: Computerized data and digital audio  files collected from feedback 
interviews with technologists will be stored de -identified, in password protected files in the 
Partners Healthcare Dropbox Business folder. The PHS Dropbox Business folder will be set up 
by a listed owner with a Partners email address. Per Partners Research Information Services and 
Computing, “The enterprise rollout of Dropbox Business at Partners HealthCare is an approved 
storage and collaboration solution. This version of Dropbox Business provides unlimited storage, 
fully encrypted data (AES -256 encrypted)  and is compliant with Partners’ poli cies and 
procedures. Dropbox Business allows you to sync, share, and manage your files online” 
(https://rc.partners.org/kb/article/2285 ).  
 
5) Mobile data:  All mobile data will be transmitted from the participant’s mobile device to the 
secure Mindset server ( managed by [CONTACT_405319] ) via an encrypted 
internet connection. The collected data will be linked to the study identifier only. The 
administrative interface to the clinical study server (channels 1 and 7 below) will be password 
protected with access limited to study staff.  
 
6) Habits: The Habits app and platform will be used to collect passive smartphone data. Habits is 
a secure, HIPPA -compliant research platform developed by [CONTACT_405295]. Habits includes (a) a 
database inside the app container to store de -identified data, with nothing in shared storage, (b) a 
participant -facing app, and (c) a data analysis pi[INVESTIGATOR_405287] -processes raw mo bile data into 
daily aggregations. The current version of Habits has passed an internal security audit, and the 
data uploaded to the Koa data lake is stored in the same way as events collected from the 
Mindset app. The data is restricted to be accessed onl y by [CONTACT_405320], HIPAA -compliant Amazon Web 
Services ( AWS ) server. In addition to the assessment measures in Table 2, de -identified data 
from sensors in participants’ mo bile phones will also be collected via the Habits  app, to inform 
design and improvement of the app.  Key features are summarized below:  
• The participant does not need to register as a user. The participant will be provided a 
generated code with a unique stud y prefix and a non -identifiable string of numbers and 
letters after.  
• Participants can only download and use the study’s Habits app if given proper instruction 
from the study investigator (e.g., once fully consented and determined to be eligible).  
• All data are stored with the de -identified user ID. No identifying data such as name [CONTACT_333291] [CONTACT_405321]’ data . The only identifier that will be inputted 
into habits are dates.  
• The app caches information locally (temporarily or if there  is no connectivity). Any data 
stored locally (cache or otherwise) is stored encrypted in a database inside the app 
container.  
• The app will not integrate with other apps on the phone. The app will only integrate with 
Google Fit, which is not an app.  
• The ap p updates automatically as long as the default option of auto update is enabled.  
• All data  stored on the phone are sent to the servicer over an encrypted TLS connection to 
ensure the security of the data transmitted. The data is received by [CONTACT_405322] S3, an industry -standard secure storage platform housed in data centers t hat 
are protected by [CONTACT_405323].  
 
 
18 
 • All data connections to the web service hosting the study are negotiated on industry -
standard SSL/TLS connections, removing the vulnerability of man -in-the-middle attacks 
or packet -sniffing data leaks.  
 
6) All virtual vis its (i.e., assessments with the IE and telehealth sessions with the therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]) will 
be conducted via a Partners IS -approved, secure, and HIPAA compliant system for video calls  
(e.g., Zoom) . 
 
7) Only de -identified data will be shared with the sponsor (Koa H ealth), under the terms of the 
Data Use Agreement (i.e., Statement of Work).  
 
See Figure 1  and 2  in “Independent Monitoring of Source Data” for a detailed diagram and 
description of the secure data flow and storage.  
 
Minimizing of Risks and Safety Reporti ng. 
 
The following procedures will be implemented to protect participants against risks.  
1. Participants with active suicidal ideation at the screening assessment will be excluded  
from participating (see Inclusion/Exclusion criteria). Suicidal ideation at screening is 
captured with the PHQ -9 #9 and the C -SSRS (see Inclusion/Exclusion criteria) ; if a 
potential participant scores ≥[ADDRESS_510963] will assess risk weekly during virtual appointments and refer the 
participant to a higher  level of care if clinically indicated, consistent with routine clinical 
care. If a patient unexpectedly does not attend their weekly session, the clinician, PI, or 
the independent evaluator will follow up with a phone evaluation within 24 hours and 
refer the participant to a higher level of care if clinically indicated.  
 
3. A disclaimer that is accessible from the home page of the digital CBT program will be 
presented. The disclaimer will alert participants that “If you are having thoughts of 
suicide or deat h, please note that this program is not the right treatment for you. You 
should seek professional help without delay. If you feel unsafe, call [ADDRESS_510964] emergency room.” Links to 911 and suicide hotline numbers will be provided 
along with t his disclaimer.  
 
4. A general resources page will be available on the app at all times to participants, which 
will include a suicide hotline number.  
 
5. Participants’ clinical improvement or deterioration will be assessed weekly via a 
participant -rated CGI -MDD  collected before each therapy session . Participants may be 
withdrawn from the study for a significantly deteriorating clinical course, as indicated by 
a score of 6 (much worse) or 7 (very much worse) on the weekly, participant -rated CGI -
MDD, across 3 subsequent weeks and/or PI [INVESTIGATOR_405288]’s best interest. Of note, study clinicians will review weekly CGI scores 
 
 
19 
 and follow -up in session as appropriate. The clinician and/or PI [INVESTIGATOR_405289] a higher level of care if clinically indicated.  
 
6. Participants may also be withdrawn if, in the judgment of the PI, remaining in the study 
poses a substantial risk to the participant or a higher level of care is needed.  
 
7. Treatment through app -based CBT wil l be supplemented with virtual visits with a 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] ( 8 sessions over the course of 8 weeks), who can answer questions and guide 
participants through the treatment as needed. These therapi[INVESTIGATOR_405290], or pre -doctoral interns sup ervised by [CONTACT_68826] -level clinicians, who are experts 
in CBT for MDD and related disorders.  
 
8. The independent evaluator(s) will be highly experienced, highly trained, and closely 
supervised.  
 
9. [CONTACT_405334] will be available, if necessary, to discuss the stud y, alternative treatments, 
or any concerns about the study with participants if requested by [CONTACT_2299], 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541], or rater.  
 
10. Drs. Wilhelm, Greenberg, Bernstein, and the participants’ study clinician will be 
available to answer study questions via th e app or phone. This will be clearly 
communicated orally and in writing to study participants.  
 
11. All participants who fail to respond to treatment or withdraw prematurely will be 
provided with referral resources.  
 
12. The study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_405291]. Participants may skip questions on 
assessments that they are uncomfortable answering.  
 
13. Technologists from Koa Health  who conduct the technology feedback interviews  are 
highly trained professional staff with experience conducting patient interviews and user -
centered design. They have received additional training from our team (MGH Center for 
OCD and Related Disorders) on CBT , MDD,  and issues of confidentiality.  They  have 
completed CITI training.   
 
14. The subject will designate a relative or friend who could be contact[CONTACT_405324], and the investigator has concerns about the subject’s well -being.  
 
 
We anticipate that the above procedures will be effective in protecting study participants against 
potential risks.  
 
Adverse event reporting :  
See below: “Adverse event reporting guidelines”   
 
 
 
[ADDRESS_510965] overall responsibility for study data and participant safety. Please see “Privacy 
and Confidentiality” above for more information about the data collected for the present study 
including (1) Clinical data (formal assessments with the MGH I E, which includes self -report and 
audio recorded clinician -administered assessments completed on paper and via REDCap) (2) 
Mobile data (self -report questions collected electronically within the mobile app, and passively 
collected data through sensors in pa rticipants’ mobile phones). All aspects of the study will be 
conducted in accordance with the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s policy on confidentiality.  
 
Paper research records will be kept de -identified, in a locked file in a locked office at MGH. 
Self-report measures and so me clinician administered measures will be collected using REDCap.  
REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) is a free, secure, HIPAA compliant web -based 
application hosted by [CONTACT_242582], Enterprise Research 
Infrastructure &  Services (ERIS) group. Data collection projects rely on a study -specific data 
dictionary built by [CONTACT_8362]. Once built, participants and study staff can 
enter data directly into REDCap surveys via any computer or tablet with standard w eb access 
and browsers. To ensure confidentiality, data will be identified in the database solely by [CONTACT_41163], mapped patient initials (whereby [CONTACT_405325]), week number, and visit date (i.e., subject s' names will not be entered into the 
database). By [CONTACT_405326], the information can be considered ‘de -
identified’ and therefore compliant with the Standards for Privacy of Individually Identifiable 
Health Information (“Privacy  Rule”) of the Health Insurance Portability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). 
Any data that is transmitted electronically will be encrypted and password protected. IEs will 
enter their clinical assessment data directly into REDCap, except for one form (i.e., MINI) that  
will first be collected as pap er forms or as electronic records in PDF format. The electronic form 
of the MINI assessments will be completed by [CONTACT_405327], where 
the assessment data is entered using a stylus and the PDF rec ord plus data is saved as a new PDF 
file. The completed PDF -copy of the MINI forms are then uploaded into the study -specific 
Partners Healthcare Dropbox Business folder designated for this purpose. One study staff 
 
 
21 
 member (either the IE or a designated, trained RA) will then enter the data from the paper or 
PDF forms  into the designated REDCap forms within 3 -5 business days of the completion of the 
assessment visit, and another staff member (trained RA or undergraduate intern) will enter the 
same forms into double data entry records for data entry comparisons. If discrep ancies are noted, 
the trained staff responsible for data entry will check the source documentation and correct the 
REDCap form as necessary.  Data entry by [CONTACT_405328] -report measures in this electronic 
data capture system precludes the need for subsequent data entry by [CONTACT_3655], thus minimizing 
human error, and resulting in improved data integrity and quality.  Patients will enter survey 
responses into an electronic assessment form on subject -facing REDCap, and the responses will 
then be transmitted and stored in a secured and confidential database. Each participant will only 
have access to his or her own survey, but not the survey data. All users will have defined roles 
and privileges pre -determined by [CONTACT_405329].  Thus, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_405292] a limited number or people have access to sensitive 
study data. To protect patient privacy, when completing REDCap questionnaires, participants 
will be asked to enter their random codes in place  of any identifying information (e.g., name, 
birth date). All identifying information will be stored separately from data in a password -
protected file. Together with the data collected on paper forms or PDF records (i.e., MINI), 
Mindset  app, and the Habits  app (see sections “ Privacy and Confidentiality ” above for details), 
the data entered by [CONTACT_405330].  
 
Figure 1. Data flow and storage chart. “Mindset” refers to the CBT for MDD mobile application.  
 
1. Researchers have accounts on the Mindset  Server (i.e., the CBT app) that allow them to 
create participant accounts (random IDs) that they then give to study participants.  
2. Participants install mobile app on their mobile devices, then enter th e activation code 
provided by [CONTACT_323867] (e.g., c linician , therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] , RA)  and grant access to receive push 
notifications.  
3. The application collects and sends data such as:  
a. progress across the exercises,  
b. information about feature usage (analytics),  
c. answers to  questionnaires.  

 
 
22 
 4. N/A (function that will not be utilized in trial)  
5. N/A (function that will not be utilized in trial)  
6. Researchers collect additional information on subjects using REDCap  
7. Researchers access the data collected via the mobile app, check user pr ogress, 
communicates with the patient through integrated messaging.  
8. Researchers pull data from REDCap  
9. The server sends Push Notifications to notify the user when:   
a. The therapi[INVESTIGATOR_405293] a message  
b. Data sent to  an External Notification Service  includes:  
i. The registration token identifying which device should receive 
notification  
ii. Textual content of the notification (title and body)  
10. Application reaches out to the External Notification Service to:   
a. Register for Push Notifications. When registering the app sen ds a uniquely 
generated identifier that identifies the app installation.  
11. All the info from potential app crashes are stored in mindset servers. Retrieved 
information includes:   
a. Device vendor  
b. Device model  
c. OS version  
d. Error details (stack trace)  
 
Figure 2. da ta flow and storage chart. “Habits” refers to the passive data collection mobile 
application.  
 
1. Researchers have accounts on the Habits  Server that allow them to create participant 
identifier (random IDs) that they then give to study participants.  
2. Participants install Habits mobile app on their mobile devices, then enter the participant 
identifier provided by [CONTACT_405331].  
3. The application collects and sends data such as:  
a. sensing data coming f rom smartphone sensors (such as number of steps)  

 
 
23 
 b. information about feature usage (analytics),  
c. answers to questionnaires . 
4. Researchers access the data collected via the mobile app on the Koa Servers and check 
user data.  
5. (Optional) The user allows the app to send Notifications to notify the user when it is time 
to fill a weekly questionnaire. These are local notifications set up within the app which 
only include and send to the user:  textual content of the notification (title and body)  
6. (Optional) Habits se ts Local notifications logic on when to send the notifications to users 
(e.g., every 2 weeks to fill a specific questionnaire)  
 
We anticipate that the above procedures will ensure the confidentiality and integrity of study 
data.  
 
C. Safety monitoring  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_405294]. Procedures for managing participant safety, including the monitoring of participants 
throughout the trial and response to clinical deterioration (as defi ned above) should it occur, are 
detailed above in “ Minimizing of Risks and Safety Reporting .”  
 
D. Outcomes monitoring  
Adverse events and data completeness will be monitored as described above.  
 
E. Adverse event reporting guidelines  
 
Adverse event reporting : Adverse events will be reported per PHRC guidelines.  
 
X. REFERENCES  
Andersson, G., Cuijpers, P., Carlbring, P., Riper, H., & Hedman, E. (2014). Guided Internet‐
based vs. face‐to‐face cognitive behavior therapy for psychiatric and somatic disord ers: a 
systematic review and meta‐analysis. World Psychiatry, 13 , 288 -295. 
Borkovec, T. D,. & Nau, S. D. (1972). Credibility for analogue therapy rationales. J Behav Ther 
Exp Psychiatry, 3 , 257 -260. 
Cook, R., & Farewell, V. (1996). Multiplicity Considerations in the Design and Analysis of 
Clinical Trials. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A (Statistics in Society), 
159(1), 93 -110. doi:10.2307/2983471  
Cuijpers, P., Berking, M., Andersson, G., Quigley, L., Kleiboer, A., & Dobson, K. S. (2013). A 
meta -analysis of cognitive -behavioural therapy for adult depression, alone and in 
comparison with other treatments. The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 58 , 376 -385. 
DeRubeis, R.J., Webb, C.A., Tang, T.Z., & Beck, A.T. Cognitive therapy. In: Do bson KS, ed. 
Handbook of cognitive -behavioral therapy. 3rd ed. [LOCATION_001]: Guilford, 2010.  
Devilly, G. J., & Borkovec, T. D. (2000). Psychometric properties of the credibility/expectancy 
questionnaire. J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry,  31, 47-55. 
Endicott, J., Ne e, J., Harrison, W., & Blumenthal, R. (1993). Quality of Life Enjoyment and 
Satisfaction Questionnaire: A new measure. Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 29 , 321 -326.  
Ferrari, A.J., Charlson, F.J., Norman, R.E., Patten, S.B., Freedman, G., Murray, C.J., et al. 
(2013). Burden of Depressive Disorders by [CONTACT_195882], Sex, Age, and Year: Findings from 
 
 
24 
 the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. PLoS Med 10: e1001547. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001547  
Goldberger, C., Guelfi, J. D., & Sheehan, D. V. (2011). Assess ment of Anxiety in Clinical Trials 
with Depressed Patients Using the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale. 
Psychopharmacology bulletin, 44(3), 34 –50. 
Guy, W. (1976).  Clinical Global Impressions. In W. Guy (Ed.), ECDEU  Assessment Manual for 
Psychopharmacology ( rev. ed.; DHEW publication [ADM] 76 -338; pp. 217 -222).  
Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, National Institute of 
Mental Health.  
Hamilton, M. (1960). A rating scale for depression. Journal of Neurology, Neu rosurgery, and 
Psychiatry, 23 , 56-62  
Hedman, E., Ljótsson, B., & Lindefors, N. (2012). Cognitive behavior therapy via the Internet: a 
systematic review of applications, clinical efficacy and cost –effectiveness. Expert review 
of pharmacoeconomics & outcome s research, 12 , 745 -764. 
Kroenke, K. & Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626], R.L. (2002). The PHQ -9: A new depression and diagnostic severity 
measure.  Psychiatric  Annals,  32, 509 -521. 
Lovibond, P. F., & Lovibond, S. H. (1995). The structure of negative emotional states: 
Comparison of the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS) with the Beck Depression 
and Anxiety Inventories. Behaviour research and therapy, 33 (3), 335 -343. 
McConnaughy, E.N., Prochaska, J.O., & Velicer, W.F. (1983). Stages of change in 
psychotherapy: Measurement and sample profiles. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and 
Practice, 20, 368 -375.  
McMurtry, S. L. & Hudson, W. W. (2000). The Client Satisfaction Inventory: Result s of an  
initial validation study. Research on Social Work Practice,  10, 644-663. 
Mojtabai, R. (2005). Trends in contacts with mental health professionals and cost barriers to 
mental health care among adults with significant psychological distress in the U nited 
States : 1997 –2002. American Journal of Public Health, 95 , 2009 –2014.  
Mundt, J., Marks, I., Shear, M., & Greist, J. (2002). The Work and Social Adjustment Scale: A 
simple measure of impairment in functioning. British Journal Of Psychiatry, 180 , 461 -
464. 
Posner, K., Brent, D., Lucas, C., Gould, M., Stanley, B., Brown, G., ... & Mann, J. (2008). 
Columbia -suicide severity rating scale (C -SSRS). [LOCATION_001], NY: Columbia University 
Medical Center.  
Rush, A. J., Trivedi, M. H., Ibrahim, H. I., Carmody, T. J., Arnow, B., Klein, D. N., Markowitz, 
J. C., Ninan, P. T., Kornstein, S. G., Manber, R., Thase, M. E., Kocsis, J. H. & Keller, M. 
B. (2003). The 16 -item Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology (QIDS) 
Clinician Rating (QIDS -C) and Self -Report (QIDS -SR): Psychometric evaluation in 
patients with chronic major depression.  
Biological Psychiatry,  54, 573 –583. 
Sareen J, Jagdeo A, Cox BJ, Clara I, ten Have M, Belik  SL, de Graaf R, Stein MB (2007). 
Perceived barriers to mental health service utilization in the [LOCATION_002], Ontario, and 
the Netherlands. Psychiatric Services 58, 357 –364. 
Sheehan, D. V., Lecrubier, Y., Sheehan, K. H., Amorim, P., Janavs, J., Weiller, E. ... Dunbar, G.  
C. (1998). The Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I): The  
development and validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM -IV  
and ICD -10. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 59, 22 -33. 
 
 
25 
 Smith, A. (2017). Record shares of americans now own smartphones, have home broadband. 
Pew Research Center. url: http://www.pewresearch.org/fact -tank/2017/01/12/evolution -
of-technology/  
Sternth al, M. J., Slopen, N., & Williams, D. R. (2011). RACIAL DISPARITIES IN HEALTH: 
How Much Does Stress Really Matter? Du Bois review: social science research on race, 
8(1), 95.  
van Voorhees BW, Fogel J, Houston TK, Cooper LA, Wang NY, Ford DE (2006). Attitude s and 
illness factors associated with low perceived need for depression treatment among young 
adults. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623] 41, 746 –754. 
Webb, C. A., Rosso, I. M., & Rauch, S. L. (2017). Internet -based cognitive -behavioral therapy 
for depression: current progress and future directions. Harvard review of psychiatry, 25, 
114-122. 
Wilhelm S, Weingarden H, Greenberg JL, McCoy TH, Ladis I, Summers BJ, Matic A, Harrison 
O.  Development and pi[INVESTIGATOR_97344] a cognitive -behavioral therapy digital service for 
body dysmorphic disorder.  Behavior Therapy, Jan.  2020, 51(1):15 -26.  Doi: 
10.1016/j.beth.2019.03.007  
Wu, Y., Levis, B., Riehm, K. E., Saadat, N., Levis, A. W., Azar, M., ... & Thombs, B. D. (2020). 
Equivalency of the diagnostic accuracy of the PHQ -8 and PHQ -9: a systematic review 
and indivi dual participant data meta -analysis.  Psychological medicine , 50(8), 1368 -1380.  
 
 