 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clinical Trials Study Protocol  
Examining Transcutaneous Vagal Nerve Stimulation as a Facilitator of Social Bonding 
([STUDY_ID_REMOVED] ) 
 
 
 
 
Version [ADDRESS_754394]  at the University of 
[LOCATION_004], San Francisco (# 23-[ZIP_CODE] ). We conducted a power analysis prior to the data 
collection t o determine the power for the Level -[ADDRESS_754395] ( stimulation condition)  based on 
1,000 simulations using the package simr in R (R Core Team) . Given the nature of our dyad and 
the outcomes (i.e., questions about the same interaction), we assumed a large intraclass 
coefficient (0.5). Following Arend and Schäfer’s (2019) recommendations, the standardized 
Level -[ADDRESS_754396] was set to small ( γstd. = .10) in our power estimation for the Level -[ADDRESS_754397]. 
Our analysis suggested that 70 dyads will provide > 82% power ( α set to .05) to detect a 
medium -to-large standardized Level -[ADDRESS_754398] ( γstd. = .40).  
Data collection for the study took place between February and June 2024. Participants 
were recruited in the San Francisco Bay Area through various community and university 
newsletters and listservs, flyers around the city, Reddit, and word of mouth. We tri ed to reach 
diverse populations by [CONTACT_574768] (e.g., SF LGBT 
Center) and universities in the city (e.g., San Francisco State University, UC Berkeley).  
Eligibility was confirmed using a screening questionnaire. Participants were eligible for 
the study if both they and their partner were between 18 and 35 years old, fluent in English, had 
no major chronic diseases (e.g., cardiovascular disease) or untreate d psychiatric diagnoses, were 
not taking any confounding medications (e.g., antihypertensive medications), and did not have 
unremovable pi[INVESTIGATOR_574760]. We restricted the age range to control for age -related 
differences in physiological responses. As HRV tends to decrease with age, we attempted to 
recruit a more homogenous group on one of our primary outcome variables (HRV level and 
reactivity), so we capped the age range to mid -adulthood.  Participants were also required to have 
been in a relationship with their partner for at least one year and be able to complete the in -
person laboratory visit together.  
Tasks and Measures  
Pre-visit survey. Prior to the lab visit, participants completed pre -visit surveys that 
collected information on basic sociodemographic characteristics, relationship characteristics, and 
physical attributes, including height and weight. Self -reported height and weight were used to 
compute Body Mass Index (BMI ; weight ( lb) ÷ height2 (inches) * 703) , which we used as a 
covariate. Participants also responded to a 5 -item measure of relationship satisfaction (e.g., “I 
feel satisfied with our relationship”; α = .81) and a 7 -item measure of commitment (e.g., “I want 
our relationship to last for a very long time”; α = .79) from the Investment Model Scale (Rusbult 
et al., 1988), which we used to test differences between  participants in the experimental and 
control conditions. Additionally, they rated 24 relationship issues (e.g., communication, family 
and in -laws; adapted from Geiss & O’Leary, 1981) on a scale ranging from 0 ( issues that rarely 
if ever raise conflict or disagreement ) to 10 ( issues that raise frequent or intense conflict or 
disagreement ). Participants’ responses to this scale were used in the conflict interaction described 
below.  
Gratitude interaction. The procedures were based on Algoe and colleagues (2013). 
Couples were told to think about a positive thing their partner did for them recently for which 
they felt grateful. They were given three minutes to prepare, then took turns to express their 
gratitu de for three minutes each. While one partner was speaking, the listening partner was told 
to listen with minimal verbal reactions.  
Conflict interaction. The procedures were based on Levenson and Gottman (1983) and 
previous studies that examined physiological reactivity during conflicts (e.g., Godfrey & 
Babcock, 2020; Raby [CONTACT_2297]., 2015). Couples were told that they would discuss a conflict topic 
relevant to their relationship and try to resolve it. The interaction would involve the following 
steps: 1) couples selecting a topic to discuss together, 2) reflecting on the topic independently for 
three minutes, 3) each partner taking turns expressing t heir thoughts and feelings about the topic 
for one minute (the speaking order was predetermined based on the alphabetical order of their 
first names), and 4) couples engaging in free discussion for six minutes, with the goal of 
resolving the issue.  
 After receiving the instructions, couples were given a list of three topi[INVESTIGATOR_574761]. 
Unknown to the couples, this list was generated using participants’ responses regarding the 
frequent topi[INVESTIGATOR_574762] -visit survey . The three topi[INVESTIGATOR_574763]. If no topi[INVESTIGATOR_574764] 
3, the list included an option of “any topic that recently triggered a conflict or disagreement in 
the relationship.”  
 Following the interaction, participants completed a short questionnaire that included 
measures of positive affect  (“During the conversation, overall, I felt…”; 1: not at all positive, 7: 
extremely positive)  and negative affect (“During the conversation, overall, I felt…”; 1: not at all 
negative, 7: extremely negative).  
tVNS device and stimulation. We used a research edition of an auricular vagus nerve 
stimulator (tVNS  RE, Vagus.net ™, [LOCATION_006]) that sends current -controlled stimulation in symmetric 
biphasic waveforms. The tVNS RE conforms to EU directive 93/42/EEC medical device 
standards and ISO/IEC [ZIP_CODE] -1. This device consists of a handheld stimulator and an electrode 
clip. Following pre vious research (Kraus et al., 2007), couples in the sham stimulation  condition 
had the electrode clip placed on the center of their left earlobe (free of cutaneous vagal 
innervation; Peuker & Filler, 2002) while those in the tVNS  condition h ad the electrodes placed 
on their tragus. While cymba concha has also been used for tVNS, there is no evidence that 
psychophysiological effects of tVNS depend on the stimulation site (Borges et al., 2021). In fact, 
tVNS effects on executive functioning may be larger when stimulati on is applied at the tragus 
rather than cymba concha (Ridgewell et al., 2021). We stimulated the left ear, which has been a 
common practice as the efferent vagal fibers to the heart are located on the right side (Kim et al., 
2022) but note that the side ef fects are considered negligible and studies have also used right -
sided stimulation ( see Kaduk et al., 2023).  
The experimenter  first cleaned the s timulation loci with alcohol cotton swabs to reduce 
skin resistance . To identify the lowest stimulation intensity that participants could perceive, we 
adopted the staircase procedures used in previous research (e.g., Schuerman et al., 2021). 
Specifically, the experimenter placed the electrode clip on the participant’s left e ar (tragus or 
earlobe) and increased the stimulation levels by 0.1mA, starting from zero, until the participant 
reported feeling a tingling sensation.  Experimenters confirmed the threshold twice, and the 
stimulation level was set 0.2mA below each participant’ s perceptual threshold (Schuerman et al., 
2021 ) to allow couples to converse as naturally as possible and to attempt to keep participants 
unaware of their condition assignment. We delivered stimulation at the individually calibrated 
intensity continuously during the interaction, and the default device settings we adopted were as 
follows: frequency = 30Hz, phase duration = 250 μs, interphase interval =  50μs, and max voltage 
= 65V .  
Physiological data acquisition. Participants’ physiological responses were continuously 
recorded during the baseline and all interactions. We collected electrocardiography (ECG) and 
impedance cardiography, which were integrated using an MP150 system (Biopac Systems Inc., 
Goleta, CA). Spo t sensors were placed in a modified lead Ⅱ configuration on the torso (near the 
right clavicle and below the left rib cage) to measure ECG  (Mendes, 2009) . Data were acquired 
using Acqknowledge software at a sampling rate of 1000Hz (Biopac Systems Inc, Goleta, CA, 
[LOCATION_003]). RSA was edited and scored in 30 -second intervals  using the HRV module from Mindware 
Technologies (Gahanna, OH), which identified the R spi[INVESTIGATOR_574765]. 
Although [ADDRESS_754399] been reliably 
used in previous dyadic studies (Caldwell et  al., 2018; Oshri  et al., 2023; Qaiser et al., 2023) and 
may sufficiently capture high -frequency activity especially when the heart rate is elevated (i.e., 
shorter heart period; Quigley et al., 2024), as in conflict settings.  After data collection, trained 
research assistants blind to the condition visually inspected all data for artifacts and edited them 
as needed (e.g., removal of misplaced R -peaks).  
Post-study survey. At the end of the study, before debriefing and being informed of the 
condition they were assigned to, participants answered a few questions about their experience of 
the stimulation and the tVNS device. Specifically, we asked about awareness of the stimulation  
(“How much, if at all, could you feel the tingling sensation during the conversations?”), general 
discomfort  (“How uncomfortable was wearing the tVNS device [i.e., the clip you had on your 
ear] throughout the study?”), perceived inf luence of discomfort on interactions  (“How much, 
if at all, did the discomfort [from wearing the clip] affect your conversations?”), and perceived 
influence of tVNS on interactions  (“How much, if at all, do you think the device changed the 
way you felt or interacted with your partner during the conversations?”). All items were rated on 
a 5-point scale.  
Study Procedure  
Interested participants first completed a screening questionnaire to confirm eligibility. 
Eligible participants were then contact[CONTACT_574769] a lab visit. Two days prior to the 
scheduled visit, participating couples received a link to a consent form and a questionnaire 
assessing sociodemographic information and relationship characteristics. Couples were randomly 
assigned to either tVNS  or sham stimulation  condition when they both completed the pre -visit 
survey. Each couple had an equal chance of being in either group.  
Upon arrival at the lab, partners were escorted to separate rooms where they each 
received a full overview of the study and underwent threshold testing for stimulation. Then 
partners reunited in the same room, were connected to physiological sensors, and s pent five 
minutes, resting in a comfortable seated position (baseline). As shown in Figure 1, they were 
seated at an angle, partially facing each other, with their bodies slightly tilted toward the front 
where a fixed  wall-mounted  camera was positioned. Pa rticipants  were recorded during gratitude  
and conflict interactions. Full study procedure, including the timing of the stimulation is 
illustrated in Figure 2. Following a cool -down period, participants completed a brief 
questionnaire about  their experience with the stimulation and were debriefed. They also signed 
an additional consent form for the use of their recorded videos.  
 
 
Figure 1. Example Positioning of the Couple During the Study  

 
 
 
Figure 2 . Overview of Study Procedure  
Notes . The time next to the lightning icon indicates the duration of the (active or sham) 
stimulation. The time at the bottom represents the duration of each study segment described 
within the rectangles. The survey icon indicates when participants complete sho rt questionnaires.  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan  
All analyses will be  conducted in R (R Core Team, 2022). Multilevel model analyses will 
be conducted using the packages nlme  and lmer. All tests will be  two-tailed, with a significance 
threshold of α = .05.  
Randomization check.  We will first examine whether there are condition differences in 
personal and relational characteristics at baseline, including age, relationship duration, global 
relationship satisfaction, and commitment. To account for the interdependence of the dyadic data, 
we will fit  a series of multilevel models with a random intercept included for participants nested 
within couples and condition included as a fixed effect. Restricted Maximum Likelihood will be  
used to fit the model parameters. Fo r relationship duration, which is a couple -level variable, 
Welch’s t -test will be  conducted.  

Study artifact check.  We will examine  if there are condition differences in participants’ 
experiences related to the stimulation and the tVNS device reported at the end of the study, 
including awareness of the stimulation, general discomfort, perceived influence of discomfort on 
interactions, and perceive d influence of tVNS on interactions. We will run  a parallel set of 
multilevel models as described above.  
tVNS effects on emotional  experience of the conflict.  We will examine  if there are 
condition differences in how couples self -report their experience of the conflict interaction, 
specifically in terms of positive and negative affect during the interaction. We will run  a parallel 
set of multilevel models as described above.  
tVNS effects on physiological reactivity.  As in previous research, we will calculate  
reactivity scores by [CONTACT_574770] [ADDRESS_754400] of 
condition (coded as -0.5 for sham and 0.5 for tVNS) on RSA reactivity with no covariates. As in 
previously described multilevel models, we will include  a random intercept for participants 
nested within couples, and as recommended for p hysiological data, with autoregressive 
covariance structure of the residuals. In our follow -up models, we will control  for sex 
(male/female/other), age, BMI, and relationship duration, which can influence physiological 
reactivity to conflicts. Then, to rule out the possibility that any condition effects are reducible to 
differences in the experience of the stimulation, th e next model  will additionally control for 
stimulation intensity and discomfort reported at the end of the study. We will repeat  these 
analyses using IBI in place of RSA.  
  
References  
Algoe, S. B., Fredrickson, B. L., & Gable, S. L. (2013). The social functions of the emotion of 
gratitude via expression. Emotion, 13 (4), 605 –609. 
Arend, M. G., & Schäfer, T. (2019). Statistical power in two -level models: A tutorial based on 
Monte Carlo simulation. Psychological Methods, 24 (1), 1 -19. 
Borges, U., Laborde, S., & Raab, M. (2019). Influence of transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation 
on cardiac vagal activity: Not different from sham stimulation and no effect of 
stimulation intensity. PloS one, 14 (10), e0223848.  
Caldwell, W., da Estrela, C., MacNeil, S., & Gouin, J. P. (2019). Association between romantic 
partners’ rumination and couples’ conflict is moderated by [CONTACT_15206][INVESTIGATOR_25570]. 
Journal of Family Psychology, 33 (6), 640 -648. 
Geiss, S. K., & O'Leary, K. D. (1981). Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_574766]: Implications for research. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 7 (4), 515 -
520. 
Godfrey, D. A., & Babcock, J. C. (2020). Facial affect recognition moderates the relation 
between autonomic nervous system reactivity and aggression during dyadic 
conflict.  Psychophysiology , 57(9), e13588.  
Kaduk, K., Petrella, A., Müller, S. J., Koenig, J., & Kroemer, N. B. (2023). Non -invasive vagus 
nerve stimulation decreases vagally mediated heart rate variability. bioRxiv , 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.05.30.542695  
Kim, A. Y., Marduy, A., de Melo, P. S., Gianlorenco, A. C., Kim, C. K., Choi, H., Song, J.J., & 
Fregni, F. (2022). Safety of transcutaneous auricular vagus nerve stimulation (taVNS): A 
systematic review and meta -analysis.  Scientific Reports , 12(1), [ZIP_CODE].  
Kraus, T., Hösl, K., Kiess, O., Schanze, A., Kornhuber, J., & Forster, C. B. O. L. D. (2007). 
BOLD fMRI deactivation of limbic and temporal brain structures and mood enhancing 
effect by [CONTACT_574771]. Journal of Neural Transmission, 114 , 
1485 -1493.  
Levenson, R. W., & Gottman, J. M. (1983). Marital interaction: Physiological linkage and 
affective exchange.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 45(3), 587 -597. 
Mendes, W. B. (2009). Assessing autonomic nervous system activity.  In E. Harmon -Jones, & J. 
S. Beer (Eds.), Methods in social neuroscience  (pp. 118 –147). [LOCATION_001], NY: The 
Guilford Press.  
Oshri, A., Liu, S., Suveg , C. M., Caughy, M. O. B., & Huffman, L. G. (2023). Biological 
sensitivity to context as a dyadic construct: An investigation of child –parent RSA 
synchrony among low -SES youth. Development and Psychopathology, 35 (1), 95 -108. 
Peuker, E. T., & Filler, T. J. (2002) The nerve supply of the human auricle. Clinical Anatomy, 
15, 35–37. 
Qaiser, J., Leonhardt, N. D., Le, B. M., Gordon, A. M., Impett, E. A., & Stellar, J. E. (2023). 
Shared hearts and minds: Physiological synchrony during empathy. Affective Science, 
4(4), 711 -721. 
Quigley, K. S., Gianaros, P. J., Norman, G. J., Jennings, J. R., Berntson, G. G., & de Geus, E. J. 
(2024). Publication guidelines for human heart rate and heart rate variability studies in 
psychophysiology —Part 1: Physiological underpi[INVESTIGATOR_574767] s of 
measurement. Psychophysiology , e14604.  
Raby, K. L., Roisman, G. I., Simpson, J. A., Collins, W. A., & Steele, R. D. (2015). Greater 
maternal insensitivity in childhood predicts greater electrodermal reactivity during 
conflict discussions with romantic partners in adulthood. Psychological Science, 26 (3), 
348-353. 
R Core Team (2022). R: A language and environment for statistical    computing. R Foundation 
for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.  https://www.R -project.org/ . 
Ridgewell, C., Heaton, K. J., Hildebrandt, A., Couse, J., Leeder, T., & Neumeier, W. H. (2021). 
The effects of transcutaneous auricular vagal nerve stimulation on cognition in healthy 
individuals: A meta -analysis.  Neuropsychology , 35(4), 352.  
Rusbult, C. E., Martz, J. M., & Agnew, C. R. (1998). The investment model scale: Measuring 
commitment level, satisfaction level, quality of alternatives, and investment size. 
Personal Relationships, 5 (4), [ADDRESS_754401], M. A., Chang, E. F., & Leonard, M. 
K. (2021). Human intracranial recordings reveal distinct cortical activity patterns during 
invasive and non -invasive vagus nerve stimulation. Scientific Reports, 11 (1), [ZIP_CODE].  