Study Protocol  Title of Project: A Chatbot Intervention for Reducing HPV Vaccine Hesitancy NCT #: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] November 16, 2022  
 Page 1 of 4  Revised: 6/30/[ADDRESS_1122120]:    The goal of this project is to test the efficacy of a chatbot intervention for reducing HPV vaccine hesitancy among African American parents. This project has two phases. In phase I, in-depth interviews will be conducted with African American parents to evaluate the feasibility and acceptability of the chatbot intervention. In phase II, an online experiment will be conducted to test the effectiveness of the chatbot intervention with African American parents. Results of this project will inform future communication interventions for reducing vaccine hesitancy among African American parents.   2. Subject Selection:  a. Recruitment: In phase I, we will recruit participants from local pediatric offices. We will recruit by [CONTACT_811172]. We will obtain permission from the practices to recruit at their offices. A copy of the flyer is attached to this application (we will submit an addendum if additional changes need to be made to the flyer before distribution). In phase II, participants will be recruited from online survey panels (e.g., Prolific, YouGov, Lucid, etc.). Eligible participants will be invited via email to participate in the study. There will also be screening questions at the beginning of the survey to screen participants to ensure they meet the eligible criteria.   b. Eligibility Criteria:  Participants must be 18 years or older, self-identify as African American, are custodial parents or caretakers of a child under the age of 18.   c. Rationale: The burden of HPV-associated diseases (e.g., cervical cancer) is disproportionately higher among African Americans compared to other racial groups. Understanding effective methods of communicating to African American parents about the importance of HPV vaccination is therefore critical.  d. Enrollment Numbers: For phase I, we aim to recruit up to 30 participants. For phase II, we aim to recruit up to 600 participants.   e. Rationale for Enrollment Numbers: The enrollment numbers ensure we have adequate statistical power to detect small effects of the intervention.  3. Procedures:  For phase I, we will conduct in-depth interviews with up to [ADDRESS_1122121] approximately 45 minutes. Only anonymized transcription (using Zoom’s transcript function) of the interview will 
Page 2 of 4  Revised: 6/30/2017 be saved for later analysis. Interviews will not be audio- or video-taped. Each participant will receive a $[ADDRESS_1122122] with a chatbot designed to deliver personalized HPV vaccine messages (tailed to the participant’s personality) or a similar chatbot with non-personalized messages. There will also be a control condition where participants receive no HPV vaccine messages. After interacting with the chatbot, participants will answer questions related to their attitudes toward HPV vaccination, intentions to vaccinate their children, as well as other message response measures. Those in the control will answer the same questions without interacting with a chatbot. The survey will take approximately 10 minutes to complete. Participants who complete the survey will be compensated with a small amount of cash paid through the online survey platform ($1-$2).  4. Risks:  There are no known risks associated with this research. Participants may opt to exit the interview or survey if they are not comfortable answering any of the questions.   5. Benefits:  There are no direct benefits to participants. This research will result in an improved understanding of the design of effective educational materials about HPV vaccination.  6. Confidentiality:  Responses of the participants will be confidential. The transcriptions from the interviews will have no identifying information. The transcriptions will not be linked in any way to personally identifiable information. The questionnaires will not contain any questions that ask for information that could be used to identify the participants. Only approved researchers will have access to the data collected. Hard copy materials will be stored in a locked office. Data collected will be stored in a password-protected computer located in a room with limited access. All research data collected from this study will be stored for [ADDRESS_1122123] disks afterwards.  7. Consent Process:  Because this study involves online interviews and an online survey, we request a consent waiver because our research meets the following criteria: (1) this research involves no more than minimal risk to the subjects (no personally identifiable information is collected); (2) the waiver or alteration will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the subjects (participants can stop their participation at any time during the study). The online consent form (see attached) is identical to a written consent form; (3) the research 
Page 3 of 4  Revised: 6/30/2017 could not practicably be carried out without the waiver or alteration (written signatures cannot be collected online). Participants will indicate consent by [CONTACT_18943] a radio button. Online consent will be obtained prior to the study. Participants will be permitted to print/save a copy of the consent form for their records; and (4) the subjects will be provided with additional pertinent information after participation through the debriefing process (see attached).  Participants who agree to participate will indicate consent by [CONTACT_18943] a radio button in an online questionnaire (“I agree to participate”) before the start of the study (for both the online interview and the onine survey). No name [CONTACT_295964]. Because the interviews are one-on-one, investigators will know whether or not a participant agrees to participate by [CONTACT_811173]. There is no deception involved in either study.  The title of the IRB application (Chatbot and Vaccine Acceptance) is different from the title on the consent forms (HPV Vaccine Messaging Study). We want to keep the title on the consent forms general because some of the participants will not interact with a chatbot.  8. Conflict of Interest:   There is no conflict of interest.  9. HIPAA Compliance:  N/A  10. Research Outside of the [LOCATION_002]:  N/A  11. Research Involving Prisoners:  N/A  12. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS  Your Initial Application must include a completed Initial Application Part 1 (On-Line Document), the information required in items 1-11 above, and all relevant supporting documents including: consent forms, letters sent to recruit participants, questionnaires completed by [CONTACT_4317], and any other material that will be presented, viewed or read to human subject participants.   The consent forms in your approved IRBNet PACKAGE must be used.  When creating or editing your consent form, please provide the most recent IRBNet package number at the bottom, right corner of the consent form.  This ensures you are using the most “up-to-date” version of the form.    
Page 4 of 4  Revised: 6/30/[ADDRESS_1122124] title.       