 
KUMC – HRPP - 03/12/2015   Page 1 of 12
  
 University of Kansas Medical Center   
RESEARCH PROTOCOL  INVOLVING HUMAN SUBJECTS   
TEMPLATE  WITH GUIDANCE  
 
Version date:  10-16-2018     
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_70749] S. Bruce, Ph.D.      
Study Title:  Developmental Decision Making Study      
Co- Investigator (s):  Oh-Ryeong Ha, Ph.D.      
  
I. Purpose, Background and Rationale  
A. Aim and Hypotheses  
1.  The proposed research will investigate  food decision -making in youth. Childhood obesity 
is a risk f actor fo r health issues , thus preventing adverse effects of childhood obesity  by 
[CONTACT_70752] . 
Televisio n food commercials advertising calorie -dense and high in salt and sugar foods  
are known to contribute  unhealthy food choices and obesity. Thus t he proposed study will 
examine how the advertising intervention focusing on increasing advertising knowledge 
and changing affective attitudes toward commercials impacts susceptability to 
commer cials and food  decisions  in youth .      
2.   The objective of this proposed study is to examine the advertising intervention’s effect 
on susceptibility to food commercials and food decision -making in children ages 8 to 12. 
Interventions will be narratives to increase cognitive defenses including advertising 
knowledge and skepticism (e.g., "the commercials aren't telling the truth"), and change 
affective responses toward commercials (e.g., "These foods don't make you happy"). 
Susceptibility to com mercials will be measured by [CONTACT_70753]. Only children in intervention group will have four sessions for watching 
food commercials accompanied by [CONTACT_70754] a week. Children in control group 
will have four sessi ons for watching food commercials, ho wever, no intervention will be 
accompanied. This project will accomplish the following: Aim 1. Assess the impact of the 
food advertising interventions on susceptibility to food commercials in children. We 
hypothesize th at the advertising intervention will increase cognitive defenses and 
negative attitudes toward advertised foods in the intervention group. And intervention 
effects will decrease likeness and desire for advertised foods in the intervention 
compared to contr ol group. Aim 2. Examine how the food advertising intervention 
impacts behavioral food decisions. We hypothesize that c hildren in the intervention group 
will demonstrate healthier food choices. Aim 3. Examine how the self -control ability 
influences the foo d intervention effect and behavioral food decisions. We hypothesize that 
higher self -control ability will predict a more successful intervention effect and healthier 
food choices in youth.         
B. Background and Significance  
1. Study Significance:   This study will be the first investigation of food advertising 
interventions on susceptibility to food commercials and behavioral food decisions in 
children. It will also enhance our knowl edge of how children's self -control is involved in 
promoting hea lthier food choices.      
 
KUMC – HRPP - 03/12/[ADDRESS_77146] decade  
(Ogden, Carroll, Kits, & Flegal, 2014).  Examining factors impacting childhood obesity and 
finding effective prevention and intervention  approaches  are crucial for reducing  the 
childfood obesity epi[INVESTIGATOR_901]. Television food commercials  advertising non -nutritious foods 
are known to be one of the fact ors to impact child obesity. The proposed study will 
investigate how the advertising intervention influences susceptibility to food commercials 
and food choices in children. Also this study wi ll examine how children's self -control 
ability impact the interv ention effect and food decision -making.                    
3. Literature Review :   Childhood obesity is a risk factor for health issues such as 
cardiovascular disease and diabetes, and for psychological issues such as low self -esteem 
and negativ e body image (Must & Strauss, 1999). One third of children and adolescents 
are overweight or obese in the U.S. (Ogden, Carroll, Kit, & Flegal, 2014). These 
overweight or obese children are at increased risk of becoming obese adults (Serdula, 
Ivery, Coates,  Freedman, Williamson, & By[CONTACT_3727], 1993). To prevent immediate and long -
term adverse effects of obesity, providing effective childhood obesity interventions is 
important. Television food commerci als are known to be one of factors that impact child 
obesity. Ma ny television food commercials advertise calorie -dense and high in salt and 
sugar foods, so that frequent exposure to them contributes unhealthy food choices and 
obesity (Harris, Bargh, & Brow nell, 2009). Obese children are more likely to be 
susceptible to  priming of food advertising, which results in increased consumption of 
brand name [CONTACT_70770] (Boyland & Halford, 2013; Forman, Halford, Summe, 
MacDougall, & Keller, 2009). Neuroimagi ng findings also suggest that obese children’s 
brains respond di fferently than healthy weight children to food advertising (Bruce et al., 
2013). It is only recently that advertising interventions have been developed to decrease 
advertising effects in child ren. Buijzen (2007) developed advertising interventions 
consisti ng of a factual intervention building cognitive defenses including advertising 
knowledge (i.e., knowledge of persuasive intent of commercials) and advertising 
skepticism (i.e., doubt the truth  of commercials). They also developed an evaluative 
intervention  to change affective responses toward commercials. Children showed reduced 
advertising susceptibility (i.e., intended product requests) after they received advertising 
interventions on toy com mercials.  The proposed study will apply the advertising 
interven tion to food commercials.  Moreover, the proposed study will examine the of self -
control ability in the advertising intervention effect and behavioral food decision -making.  
Neuroimaging findings suggested that obese children were more susceptible to externa l 
food cues such as fast food advertising , and brain activations in cognitive and self -control 
regions were greater in healthy weight children than in obese children (Bruce et al., 
2013). Children’s self -reported inefficiency  in executive functioning predicted greater 
unhealthy food choices (Riggs, Spruijt -Metz, Sakuma, Chou,  & Pentz, 2010 ). And no rmal 
weight children with high self -control showed less weight gain during the transition from 
preadolescence to adolescence (Duckworth, Tsukayama, & Geier, 2010 ). In pediatric 
obesity research, the ability to execute inhibitory control assessed by [CONTACT_70755] (Reyes, Peirano,  Peigneux, Lozoff, & Alga rin, 2015 ). And less effective inhibitory 
control was related to unsuccessful w eight loss among obese children (Bruce, Martin, & 
Savage, 2 011; Nederkoorn, Braet, Van Eijs, Tanghe, & Jansen, 2006 ; Nederkoorn, 
Jansen, Mulkens, & Jansen, 2007 ).     
 
 
KUMC – HRPP - 03/12/2015   Page 3 of 12
  
 C. Rationale  
1.  Buijen (2007)'s findings sugg est that the advertising intervention is effective to change 
susceptibilities to the commercials, thus we expect the food advertising intervention 
would impact children's susceptibilities to food commercials. Research findings sugg est 
that obese children's  high susceptibility to food commercials leads to unhealthier food 
choices. Thus, we expect the reduced susceptibility to food commercials after the 
intervention would be resulted in changes in food choices. Based on findings that 
inefficient self -control involves in greater unhealthy choices and poorer weight control in 
both healthy weight and obese children, we expect the self -control ability would mediate 
the advertising intervention effect and behavioral food choices.      
2.  The proposed pro ject wi ll advance our understanding of how changes in cognition 
(advertising knowledge) and affection (attitudes toward commercials) impact children's  
preference and desire  for the advertised foods, and how this intervention effect  
influences children's he althier food choices. Also this study will examine how children's 
self-control ability influence the intervention effect and food choice process. Based on 
hypothesized findings, we would have better understanding of how food advert ising 
influences overweig ht or obese children's susceptibility to the advertised foods and in -
general food choice patterns.           
3.  If the advertising intervention was effective, we could apply the advertising intervention 
to the treatment  of overweight and obese children to reduce susceptibility to food 
commercials and to enhance healthier food choices. Also if children's self -control ability 
played a role in the intervention effect and food de cision -making, we could develop the 
interventi on focusing on enhancing self-control skills in children with obesity.      
 
II. Research Plan  and Design  
 
 
KUMC – HRPP - 03/12/2015   Page 4 of 12
  
 A. Study Objectives :   This study will investigate how food advertising interventions impact 
susceptibility to food commercials and behavioral food decisions in children. This study will 
also examine the role of s elf-control in food advertising intervention effects and behavioral 
food decisions. Aim 1. Assess the impact of the food advertising interventions on 
susceptibility to food commercials i n children.  Aim 2. Examine how the food advertising 
intervention impac ts behavioral food decisions . Aim 3. Examine how the self -control ability 
influences the food intervention effect and behavioral food decisions.     
B. Study T ype and Design :   This study will be a pre -test and post -test control group study. 
Children will be randomly assigned to either the intervention or the control group. Children in 
the intervention group will have four sessions for watching food commercials accompanied 
by [CONTACT_70756], and children in the control group will ha ve four control 
sessions only watching food commercials. To assess the impact of the food advertising 
interventions, children will be asked to rate susceptibility to food commercials, i. e., their 
desire and preference for the advertised foods. To examine h ow the food advertising 
intervention impacts behavioral food decisions, children will be asked to rate various food 
items (e.g., apple, donut) for food related a ttributes (e.g., health, taste) . Also children will 
make yes/ no choices on various food items t o determine whether children want to eat the 
presented food items . To examine if exposure to food cues increases food consumption in 
child, they  will be given the opportunity to consume snack foods after viewing the 
commercial video clips . To examine how t he self -control ability involves in the food 
intervention effect and food decision -making, children's self -control ability will be measured 
by [CONTACT_70757] -report questionna ires.     
 
C. Sample size , statistical methods,  and power calculation  
1.  Children will be randomly assigned to the intervention and the control groups, and the 
randomization ratio between the intervention and the control groups will be 1:1. The 
statistical methods will be using an Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) and a correlation 
analysis.  All ana lyses will be conducted at the alpha level of .05 (p < .05).     
2.  N/A     
3.  The proposed stu dy will recurit approximately 60  subjec ts. Regarding the aims 1 and 2, 
G*Power's a priori power analysis for an ANOVA test indicate that 80% power with an 
effect size of .25 (medium effect) can be achieved from the total of 24 subjects (12 
subjects in each group). Regarding the aim 3, G*Power's  a priori power analysis for a 
correlation indicted that 80% power wit h an effect size of . 25 (large effect) can be 
achieved from the total of 29 subjects (15 subjects in each group).       
 
D. Subject C riteria (See Vulnerable Populations appendix, if applica ble):   Healthy 
children ages 8 to 12 who speak English as the primary languge will be included.      
1. Inclusion criteria:   Children and preadolescence between  ages [ADDRESS_77147] self -reported 
normal hearing and vision.      
2. Exclusion criteria:   Data from c hildren with history of neurological conditions, clinically 
significant psychopathology or learning disabilities reported by [CONTACT_3654] (e.g., ADHD, 
depression) will be excluded. Due to the food commercials and intervention narratives 
are spoken in English, non -English speakers will be excluded.      
 
KUMC – HRPP - 03/12/2015   Page 5 of 12
  
 3. Withdrawal/Termin ation criteria:  Unless a subject wanting to withdraw from 
participation, it is not expected that the investigators to determine a participation 
termination.      
4.  Subjects may not participate in another research study.      
 
E.  Specific methods and techniques used throughout the study        
 
1. Laboratory tests :  No laboratory tests will be collected. Children's height and weight will 
be measured to calculate the body mass index (BMI).      
2. Study Procedu res:  Upon arrival, parents and children will be asked to r ead and sign an 
informed consent form. The experimenter will explain the study and answer any 
questions at that time. Children  will be randomly assigned to the intervention and control  
groups, and they will have the total of four sessions  during a week per iod. The session 
will be expected to be completed for two to two  and a half hours. Half of the sessions will 
take place at the laboratory and the rest half will take place at home. Chi ldren in the  
intervention group will watch familiar  fast-food commercial s (e.g., McDonald's) 
accomp anied by [CONTACT_70758] (e.g., " These comm ercials are't telling the truth. ") and evaluative 
interventeion narratives (e.g., "These foods don't make you happy. "). Children in the 
intervention group will be encouraged to speak aloud their  current thoughts while 
watching commercials to boost their information processing. Children in the control group 
will watch familiar fast -food commercials, however, no intervention wi ll be followed. 
Children will complete s elf-report questionnaires relate d to eating behaviors , 
susceptibility to commercials,  and other psychological characteristics. Behavioral tasks 
will be administered to children including  food attributes ratings (e.g. , health, taste) , 
food choice tasks, food brand logos ratings (e.g., hea lth, taste), mousetracker food 
choice tasks (i.e., measuring real -time food choice process by [CONTACT_70759]/no choices), and self -control tasks.      
3.  All procedures descri bed in the section E2 will be pe rformed solely  for research 
purposes.      
4.  N/A     
5. Timeline:  Participants will have four sessions during a week period, and they will 
complete self -report questionnaires  and behavioral tasks before or after a session.      
 
F. Risk/benefit asse ssment:         
1. Physical risk   no known risks      
2. Psychological risk    no known risks except for inc onvenience of time spent comple ting 
the study          
3. Social risk    no know n risks          
4. Economic risk    no known risks          
5. Potential benefit of participating in the study   
a.  It may not be direct benefits, but p articipation in this s tudy would  allow 
participated children and parents  to gain a better understanding of the influence 
of food commercials and healthy food choices.      
b.  Children and parents will gain a better understanding of the influence  of food 
commercials and healthy food choices.      
c.  Findin gs from this proposed study will allow researchers to gain a better 
understanding of food decision -making in youth.      
 
KUMC – HRPP - 03/12/2015   Page 6 of 12
  
 G. Location where study will be performed:  The study  will take place  at KUMC rainbow 
campus , Children's Mercy hospi[INVESTIGATOR_70750] . The research sub jects records 
will be kept at the KUMC research laboratory.      
H. Collaboration (with another institution, if applicable         
I. Single IRB Review for a Multi -site study  (if applicable):    
1. For which sites will KUMC serve as the IRB of record ? UMKC  
2. Indicate which study activities will occur at each site . If all study procedures will be 
identical across study sites, state this . All study pro cedures will be identical across study 
sites.   
3. Describe how you will ass ess the capacity of each site to perform the research (e.g., 
expertise, staffing, space, equipment, etc.)   If applicable, i nclude site evaluation tools in 
your IRB submission.  [CONTACT_70772] -Ryeong Ha, Co -I, is an assistant professor in Department 
of Psychology a t UMKC and has expertise in  developmental studies. Her research 
laboratory space will be used for recruitment, enrollment, and testing, and the lab has 
computers for testing. Her resea rch assistants will assist study activities.    
4. Describe how the lead in vestigators will ensure that all participating sites use the IRB-
approved version of the protocol, consent, recruitment materials  and other study 
documents . Lead in vestigators  will hav e training meetings to ensure all sites use the IRB -
approved protocol, c onsent, recruitment materials and other study documents. Also it will 
be assess ed and discussed during regularly -scheduled meetings.   
5. Describe how the lead investigators will communic ate with and disseminate new 
information to other sites (e.g., training meetings, regular ly-scheduled  conference calls, 
notifications, etc.)   Lead investigators and research staffs will have regularly -scheduled 
meeting s and any new information will be comm unicated promptly via email or call.   
6. Describe how the lead investigato r will assess protocol compliance , unanticipated 
problems  and adverse events at other sites. Lead investigators will assess and discuss 
protocol compliance with research staffs at regu larly-scheduled meeting s, and any urgent 
issues will be discussed prompt ly among lead investigators.   
7. Name [CONTACT_70771] [CONTACT_70760] . [CONTACT_70773] will be  the point of 
contact [CONTACT_70761].    
 
J. Community -Based Participatory Research (if applicable)  
1. Participants and the nature of their involvement:       
 
2. Cultural issues       
 
3. Origin of the research question:        
 
4. Risks and Benefits:          
 
5. Study D escription and Process:        
 
6. Return of results:         
 
7. Sustainability:       
 
KUMC – HRPP - 03/12/[ADDRESS_77148] the study, including:  
1. Indicate, b y title, who will be p resent during study procedure(s) :  PI, Co-I, and research 
person nel      
2. Primary responsibility for the following activities , for example :  
a. Determining eligibility:   PI, Co -I, and research person nel      
b. Obtaining informed consent:  PI, Co -I, and research person nel      
c. Providing on -going information to the study sponsor and the IRB:  PI, Co -I, and 
research perso nnel      
d. Maintaining participant's research records:  PI, Co -I, and research perso nnel 
     
e. Completing physical examination:   PI, Co -I, and research person nel      
f. Taking vital signs, height, weight:   PI, Co -I, and research person nel      
g. Drawing / collecting laborato ry specimens:        
h. Performing / conducting tests, procedu res, interventions, questionnaires :  PI, Co -
I, and research person nel      
i. Completing study data forms :  PI, Co -I, and research person nel      
j. Managing stud y database :  PI, Co -I, and research person nel      
 
L. Assess ment of Subject Safety and Development of a Data and Safety Monitoring 
Plan 
 
1. Elements of the plan include:  
a. Persons/groups who will review the data (study team; independent safety 
monit or, data monitoring committee or formal DSMB)        
b. Data/e vents that will be reviewed        
c. Frequency of review        
d. Types of analyses to be performed       
e. Safety -related t riggers that would cause the PI [INVESTIGATOR_60710]        
2.       
3.       
 
 
III. Subject Participation  
 
A. Recruitment : 
1.  Participants  will be recruited from the KU Med's Pediatric Outpatient Clinic  and affiliated 
Prairie Village Cl inic (with flyers) , Center for Children's Healthy Lifestyles & Nutrition , and 
Children's Mercy Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] , University of Missouri - Kansas City, community facilities such 
as local schools , libraries, churches, and community centers  around Kansas City 
metropo litan area.  
2.   Flyers will be posted at and/or emailed to the outpatient pediatric clinic at KUMC and 
affiliated Prairie Village Clinic, the Healthy Hawks obesity  program , Center for Children's 
Healthy Lifestyles & Nutrition, Children's Mercy Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], and University of Missouri - 
 
KUMC – HRPP - 03/12/[ADDRESS_77149] in the study (by e mail or in person) can be approached/contact[CONTACT_70762].  They will be explained that it is a voluntary participation and they are 
able to discontinue participation at any time.  The  study may be explained briefly in the 
waiting area in person .  If potential participant expresses interest, the remainder of the 
interaction will take place in a private room at KUMC rainbow campus , Center for 
Children's Healthy Lifestyles and Nutrition  in Children's Mercy Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] , and UMKC Volker 
campus .     
3.   The email advertisement will be worded as follows:      
          
 Researchers at the University of Kansas Medical Center and the University of 
Missouri - Kansas City are conducting a study investigating food commercials and food 
choices.  The study will require two 2-2.[ADDRESS_77150]:    
      Be between the ages of 8 and 12   
     Speak English as your primary language   
      The pa rticipant will be compensated with $ 50 for 
participation in the stud y. Email today to be part of a research study: 
Bruce.Neuro @gmail.com or call [PHONE_1721].   
4. Potential participants will also be contact[CONTACT_70763]. They will  
be told that study participation is voluntary and they are able to discontinue at any time. 
The contact [CONTACT_70764][INVESTIGATOR_70751] a t KUMC using patient 
names who said they would be willing to be contact[CONTACT_70765]. 
Letter to parents and phone script are attached.  
B. Screening Interview/questionnaire :  N/A     
C. Informed consent process and timing of obtaining of consent  
1  The research personnel at KUMC , at Center for Children's Healt hy Lifestyle s and 
Nutrition  in Children's Mercy Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] , or at UMKC  will give detailed information about the 
study and obtain their written consent, and also answer questions at that time.      
[ADDRESS_77151] day of participation. It will be obtained by [CONTACT_70766] , at Center for Children's  Healthy Lifestyles and Nutrition in Children's Mercy 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] , or at UMKC  through signed, writte n consent. The consent interview will be 
conducted in a private room within the testing location. The door will be closed during 
this interview to provide priv acy. The consent form will be explained fully to the 
participant and parent, and all of the parti cipant and parent's questions will be answered 
before the form is signed. The child will provide written and verbal assent. The 
participant will be informed th at it is a voluntarily participation thus he or she can quit 
the study at any time.      
3   Written informed consent will be obtained from a parent or a legal guardian and written 
assent will be obtained from the child prior t o beginning assess ment.  If children  are able 
to understand, remember, and verbalize the main aspects of the study,  it will be 
 
KUMC – HRPP - 03/12/2015   Page 9 of 12
  
 assumed that they hav e the capacity to consent by a research personnel who will informe 
the consent .     
 
D. Alternatives to Participation :   Participants  may choose not to participate in this study or 
to end participation in  this st udy at any time.  If a participant  choose s to quit th is study it 
will not affect his or her  medical care or your relationship with KU Medical Center in any 
way.     
E. Costs to Subject s:  No clinical care will be required.      
F. How new informati on will be conveyed to the study subject and how it will be 
documented :  A research staff will explain any new information to a participant and pa rent, 
and a written consent will be obtained.          
G. Payment, including a prorated plan for pay ment :  Each participated child will be 
compensated with  $20.[ADDRESS_77152] visit , and with $30.00 after the  second visit . Travel 
costs will no t be reimbursed.      
H. Payment for a research -related injury :  No known risks for phy sical injury are 
expected.      
IV. Data Collection and Protection  
A. Data Management and Security :  
1.  PI, Co -I, and research staff member will have acces s to study data.      
2.    Identifying information will not be associated with the dat a collected.  Each participant 
will be assigned a participant number.  The only identifying information collected will be 
social security numbers for subject p ayment and signed informed consent forms.  This 
information will be stored in a locked cabinet in side a locked office at KUMC.  Once 
payment has been issued, the social security numbers will be destroyed.     
3.  Subjects will be indentifiable th rough  coded information.     
4.   PI, Co -I, and research staff member will  have access to the key to the code.          
5.  The data will be linked to subjects' assigned participant number.      
6.     The electronic study data will be housed at KUMC -supported network drive and 
University -owned laptops  with password protection . Participants' information will be 
stored in a locked cabinet inside a locked office at KUMC .      
7.  University -owned laptop will be used and data will be stored at KUMC -supported 
network drive.      
8.  Only data associated with a participant number will be sent out with security 
protection.      
 
B. Sample / Specimen Collection:  N/A     
C. Tissue Banking Considerations:    N/A     
D. Procedures to protect subject confidentiality :  No known risks for subject 
confidentiality.      
 
KUMC – HRPP - 03/12/2015   Page 10 of 12
  
 E. Quality Assurance / Monitoring  
1.  The research staff will explain the directions and  answer questions before beginning 
of any study -related performances to make sure children unders tand the directions 
accurately.       
2.  N/A     
 
V. Data Analysis and Reporting  
A. Statistical and Data Analysis:   An Analysis of Varianc e (ANOVA) and correlation methods 
will be used for data analysis.      
B. Outcome :  It is expected that children in the intervention group and in the control group 
would show differences in susceptibility to food commercials and behavioral food c hoices. All 
analyses will be conducted at the alpha level of .05 (p < .05).          
C. Study results to participants :  Study results would be given to subjects  after data 
collection is completed and the findings are published on a  peer-reviewed journal by 
[CONTACT_4317]' requests.      
D. Publication Plan :  Research r esults will be planned to be published on a peer -reviewed 
journal.      
 
Bibliography  / References / Literature Cited   
  Boyland, E. J., & Halford , J. C. (2013). Television advertising and branding. Effects on eating 
behaviour and food prefere nces in children. [Review]. Appetite, 62 , 236-241. doi: 
10.1016/j.appet.2012.01.032  
Bruce, A. S., Leppi[INVESTIGATOR_007], R. J., Bruce, J. M., Cherry, J. B., Martin, L. E., D avis, A. M., . . . Savage, C. R. 
(2013). Brain responses to food logos in obese and healthy weigh t children. J Pediatr, 162 (4), 
759-764 e752. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2012.10.003  
Bruce, A. S., Martin, L. E., & Savage, C. R. (2011). Neural correlates of pediatr ic obesity. [Review]. 
Prev Med, [ADDRESS_77153] 1 , S29 -35. doi: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2011.01.018  
Buijzen, M. (2007). Reducing children's susceptibility to commercials: Mechanisms of factual and 
evaluative advertising interventions. Media Psychology, 9 (2), 411 -430.  
Duckworth, A. L., Tsukayama, E., & Geier, A. B. (2010). Self -controlled children stay leaner in the  
transition to adolescence. Appetite, 54 (2), 304 -308. doi: 10.1016/j.appet.2009.11.[ADDRESS_77154], J. C., Summe, H., MacDougall, M., & Keller, K. L. ( 2009). Food branding influences 
ad libitum intake differently in children depending on weight sta tus. Results of a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. 
[Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't]. Appetite, 53 (1), 76 -83. doi: 10.1016/j.appet.2009.05.01 5 
Harris, J. L., Bargh, J. A., & Brownell, K. D. (2009). Priming effects of television food adver tising on 
eating behavior. [Randomized Controlled Trial  
Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't]. Health Psychol, 28 (4), 404 -413. doi: 10.1037/a0014399  
Must, A., & Strauss, R. S. (1999). Risks and consequences of childhood and  adolescent obesity. 
[Review]. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord, [ADDRESS_77155] 2 , S2-11.  
Nederkoorn, C., Braet, C., Van Eijs, Y., Tanghe, A., & Jansen, A. (2006). Why  obese children cannot 
resist food: the role of impulsivity. Eat Behav, 7 (4), 315 -322. doi: 
10.10 16/j.eatbeh.2005.11.005  
Nederkoorn, C., Jansen, E., Mulkens, S., & Jansen, A. (2007). Impulsivity predicts treatment outcome 
in obese children. Behav Res Ther,  45(5), 1071 -1075. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2006.05.009  
Ogden, C. L., Carroll, M. D., Kit, B. K., & Fl egal, K. M. (2014). Prevalence of childhood and adult obesity 
in the [LOCATION_002], 2011 -2012. JAMA, 311 (8), 806 -814. doi: 10.1001/jama.2014.732  
 
KUMC – HRPP - 03/12/2015   Page 11 of 12
  
 Reyes, S., Pei rano, P., Peigneux, P., Lozoff, B., & Algarin, C. (2015). Inhibitory control in otherwise 
healthy  overweight 10 -year-old children. Int J Obes (Lond), 39 (8), 1230 -1235. doi: 
10.1038/ijo.2015.49  
Riggs, N. R., Spruijt -Metz, D., Sakuma, K. L., Chou, C. P., & P entz, M. A. (2010). Executive cognitive 
function and food intake in children. J Nutr Educ Behav, 42(6), 398 -403. doi: 
10.1016/j.jneb.2009.11.003  
Serdula, M. K., Ivery, D., Coates, R. J., Freedman, D. S., Williamson, D. F., & By[CONTACT_3727], T. (1993). Do 
obese chil dren become obese adults? A review of the literature. [Review]. Prev Med, 22 (2), 167 -
177. doi: 10 .1006/pmed.1993.1014      
 
APPENDIX I: VULNERABLE POPULATIONS  
 
I. See below (I -III)     
 
II.     Cognitively or decisionally impaired  individuals :       
 
III.     Children :   Informed consent will be obtained be fore any study related procedures are 
performed on the first day of participation. It will be obtained by [CONTACT_70767] , at Children's  Mercy Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] , or at UMKC  through signed, written consent. The consent 
interview will be conduc ted in a private room within the testing location. The door will be closed 
during this interview to provide privacy. The consent form will be explained fully t o the 
participant and parent, and all of the participant and parent's questions will be answered before 
the form is signed. The child will provide written and verbal assent. The participant will be 
informed that it is a voluntarily participation thus he or  she can quit the study at any time.  
Written informed consent will be obtained from a parent or a legal guardian and written assent 
will be obtained from the child prior to beginning assessment.  If children are able to 
understand, remember, a nd verbalize the main aspects of the study, it will be assumed that 
they have the capacity to con sent by a research personnel who will informe the consent. 
Regarding recruiments, flyers will be posted at and/or emailed to the outpatient pediat ric clinic 
at KUMC and affiliated Prairie Village Clinic, the Healthy Hawks obesity program, Center for 
Children's Healthy Lifestyles & Nutrition, Children's Mercy Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] , UMKC, and local community 
facilities. A nd social media such as Craigslist , Faceboo k, television, radio, and newspaper, and 
word-of-mouth recruitment will be used . Individuals who  express interest in the study (by [CONTACT_70768]) can be approached/contact[CONTACT_70769].  They will be explained that it 
is a voluntary partici pation and they are able to discontinue participation at any time.  The study 
may be explained br iefly in the waiting area in person.  If potential participant expresses 
interest, the remainder of the interaction will take place in a private room at KUMC r ainbow 
campus , the Center for Children's Healthy Lifestyles & Nutrition in Children's Mercy Hospi [INVESTIGATOR_307], or 
UMKC .               
 
IV.     Pregnant women :       
 
V.     Prisoners :       
 
VI.      Students and/or Employees :  
A.       
 
B.       
 
 
KUMC – HRPP - 03/12/2015   Page 12 of 12
  
 C.       