IRB Document Approval D ate: 10/6/2016  
 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
 
Title:  Clinical Outcomes  of deep brain stimulator electrodes placed using intraoperative computed 
tomog raphy and frameless ster eotaxis versus microelectrode recording  and frame -based 
stereotaxis  
 
Principle  Investigator: Matthew Brodsky , M.D.  Department of  Neurolog y         
 
Co-Investigators:  Kim J. Burchiel, M.D., FACS . Department of Neurological Surgery  
   Shannon Donovan, MPAS, P.A.-C Department of Neurology   
   Joanna O’Leary, M.D.   Department of Neurology  
   Marvin Smith, DPT    Department of Neurology  
Kitty Leelaamornvichet, DPT  Department of Neurology  
Mara Seier, M.D.   Department of Neurology  
  
Title:  Clinical Outcomes  of deep brain stimulator electrodes placed using intraoperative computed 
tomog raphy and frameless ster eotaxis versus microelectrode recording  and frame -based 
stereotaxis  
 
Principle  Investigator: Matthew Brodsky , M.D.  Department of  Neurolog y         
 
Co-Investigators:  Kim J. Burchiel, M.D., FACS . Department of Neurological Surgery  
   Shannon Donovan, MPAS, P.A.-C Department of Neurology   
   Joanna O’Leary, M.D.   Department of Neurology  
   Marvin Smith, DPT    Department of Neurology  
Kitty Leelaamornvichet, DPT  Department of Neurology  
Mara Seier, M.D.   Department of Neurology  
     
 
ABSTRACT  
 
Background:  Frame -based stereotaxis and microelectrode recording (MER) with mappi[INVESTIGATOR_763443] (DBS) implantation.  Though supported 
by [CONTACT_763447], no Class I or II evidence exists that MER  adds significant value to the DBS 
implant procedure. With the advent of advanced magnetic resonance imaging (M RI) and computed 
tomography ( CT) imaging, particularly intra -operative imaging, the argument for the continued use of 
MER during DBS implantation  has been substantially weakened.  One rationale for pursuing CT -guided 
intraoperative imaging is due to presumed increase in patient comfort  with this method .  DBS 
implantation with MER requires that the patient remain awake during the entire procedure .  MER with 
frame -based ster eotaxis requires the patient to keep their  head in a fixed position for a  prolonged period 
of time during which time they remain awake , causing significant patient discomfort.  Furthermore, 
Parkinson’s disease patients must withhold  their PD meds for a minimum of 12 hours prior to the 
procedure adding a sometimes significant degree of discomfort and anxiety to the procedure.  
 
Objective:  The goal of this study is to compare the clinical outcomes  of DBS electrodes placed using 
intraop erative CT and frameless stereotaxis with those placed using MER  and frame -based stereotaxis.  
 
Design:  The proposed study will be a prospective  non-interventional data collection study.  
   
Setting and Subjects : Subjects for this study will be idiopathic Pa rkinson’s disease patients identified 
from the Oregon Health & Science University movement disorder clinic as candidates for deep brain 
stimulation therapy .  We will also enroll patients referred  by [CONTACT_763448]’s disease.   These patients will be recruited in the 
OHSU movement disorder clinic during their evaluation for the deep brain stimulation procedure.   
Enrollment will continue until fifty subjects meeting inclusion and exclusion criteria have been 
implanted with electrodes using frameless stereotaxis and intraoperative CT. Data regarding quality of 
life, motor control , and amount of time during the day without levodopa -associated  side effec ts will be 
collected pre -operatively and post -operative ly. This data will be  compared to historical controls who 
have been implanted with DBS electrodes using MER and frame -based stereotaxis . This data will be 
obtained from consulting the Veterans Affairs cooperative study entitled, “Bilateral Deep Brain 
Stimulation vs Best Medical Therapy for Patients with Advanced Parkinson Disease ” published in 
JAMA in 2009 (5). 
 
All surgical procedures will involve only Federal Drug Administration (FDA) approved stereot actic 
equipment , used in the manner for which they have been approved.  All clinic procedures are standard 
of care for movement disorders patients in the deep brain stimulation program.  
 
Intervention:  This study will be a non -interventional data collectio n study.  
 
Measurements: Data regarding patient age, diagnosis, intracranial target, complications , Unified 
Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS ) Part 2 (activities of daily living), UPDRS Part 3 (motor 
examination) , Parkinson’s Disease Quality of life (PDQ-39), 3 day motor diary,  and neuropsychological 
evaluation . 
 
Analysis:    The patients will be examined prior to DBS placement both on and off dopaminergic 
medications.  All patients will receive their initial programming optimization visit approximately  30 
days after electrode implant.  The timing of further clinic visits for continued stimulator optimization 
will be up to the discretion of the DBS neurology provider and the patient.   All patient s will present  for 
a 6 month visit following electrode pla cement. This visit will include the following procedures:   
 UPDRS Part  2 
 UPDRS Part 3  
 PDQ -39 
 Review of motor symptom diary  
 neuropsychiatric evaluation, including:  
· Beck Depression Inventory -II (BDI -II)  
· Mattis Dementia Rating Scale -Second Edition (DRS -2)  
· Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI)  
We will also obtain information regarding adverse events directly related to surgery, falls and length of 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408].  
 
A. Specific Aims  
The objective is to compare the clinical outcomes  of patients who receive  placement of DBS electrodes 
by [CONTACT_763449] -based 
stereotaxis and MER mappi[INVESTIGATOR_763444] t he OFF -levodopa state from pre -operative baseline to [ADDRESS_1046219] therapy for medically intractable Parkinson’s disease , 
Essential Tremor, congenital and acquired dystonias , and is currently b eing investigated in the 
treatment of other common  disorders.  Class I evidence now supports its use in patients with advanced 
Parkinson’s disease , in comparison to best medical therapy (1).   
 
OHSU has been a pi[INVESTIGATOR_763445], and was the first center after Grenoble, 
[LOCATION_009] to perform DBS implantation .  The original FDA Investigational Device Exemption studies 
supporting DBS were conducted at OHSU in [ADDRESS_1046220] a randomized prospective comparison study of subthalamic nucle us (STN) DBS v. globus 
Pallidus pars interna  (GPi) DBS, the results of which have now largely been replicated in a multi -center 
protocol conducted by [CONTACT_763450] (2).   
 
Throughout the history of DBS implant procedures at OHSU, MER and mappi[INVESTIGATOR_763446].  However, it is highly unlikely that any future study  will ever provide Class 
I evidence that MER adds significant value  to the DBS implant procedure (3).  On the other hand, the 
best available evidence would indicate that MER does add risk to the DBS procedure; approximately 
1% chance of hemorrhage per MER pass.   
 
Prior to the routine use of advanced imaging in movement disorder surgery, MER provided the required 
degree of localization and verification of stereotactic target centers for movement disorder surgery.  
With the advent of advanced MRI and CT imag ing, particularly intra -operative imaging, the argument 
for the continued use of MER during DBS implantation has been substantially weakened.  (4) 
 
In addition to the added risk of hemorrhage wi th MER there is also a presumed increase  in discomfort 
for the patients during  this procedure.   With MER, the patient must remain awake for the entire 
procedure, including frame -placement, magnetic resonance imaging, surgical incision and drilling of 
the site of insertion, MER, and closure of the s ite. Patients must also withhold dopaminergic 
medication s for a minimum of twelve hours  prior to the procedure creating a significant degree of 
discomfort and anxiety.    
 
With placement of DBS electrodes by [CONTACT_763451], MRI is 
obtained prior to the procedure.  T he patient is then taken to the operating room for anesthesia, the head 
is placed in a frame, CT scan is obtained, pre -operative MRI and intra -operative CT images are merged, 
the navigation site is determined,  and DBS is placed surgically.   
 
Because the surgical targets have not changed, it is hypothesized that patient outcomes will be 
comparable to those seen using the traditional MER and frame -based surgery. Furthermore, it is 
believed that this procedure wi ll prove to be the preferred technique both from a clinician stand point as 
well as the patient’s as it addresses many concerns patients have regarding deep brain stimulation 
surgery.  
 
 
C. Methods  
1. Subjects  
Fifty  appropriate surgical candidates (Group 2), with Parkinson’s disease implanted using  an 
intraoperative CereTom [ADDRESS_1046221] scanner ( NeuroLogica Corporation,  Danvers, MA ), StealthStation® 
treatment guidance system, (Medtronic Surgical Navigation Technologies Minneapolis, MN) , and using 
the NeXfram e frameless system (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN) will form the study group.   Subjects 
will be identified through clinic visits and review of medical records.  Informed consent will be 
conducted in person or through a recruitment cover letter for telephone c onsent.  For telephone 
consenting, subjects will be given the opportunity to review the consent and discuss the study with the 
study team before they sign the consent or complete any study procedures.   The information collected 
from these patients will be compared to the published data on 121 DBS patients who underwent 
implantation of electrodes via frame based stereotaxis and MER for the treatment of Parkinson’s 
disease (Group 1). We will obtained de -identified data from theVA Cooperative study , “Bilateral  Deep 
Brain Stimulation vs Best Medical Therapy for Patients With Advanced Parkinson Disease.” (5)  No 
medical records, source documents, or case report forms will need to be accessed to obtain the 
necessary values needed to compare the two groups. All procedures will involve only FDA approved 
stereotactic equipment , used in the manner for which they have been approved.  Medtronic lead # 3387 
will be used for all DBS implants.  
 
a. Inclusion criteria   
1. Idiopathic Parkinson’s disease patients identified by [CONTACT_763452]’s disease  
a. Hoehn and Yahr stage 2 or greater while not taking medication  
b. Responsive to levodopa  
c. Persistent disabling symptoms (eg motor fluctuations, dyskinesia) 
despi[INVESTIGATOR_128864]  
d. Experienced 3 or more hours per 24 -hour period with poor motor 
functi on or symptom control  
2. Surgical sites include subthalamic nucleus and globus Pallidus pars interna  
3. Age > [ADDRESS_1046222] undergone implantation of DBS electrodes using MER  and frame -
based stereotaxis  or computed tomography and frameless ster eotaxis  in the treatment of 
other movement disorders.   
3. Other previous surgeries for Parkinson’s disease  
4. Age < 18 years  
5. Surgical target site other than subthalamic nucleus or globus Pallidus pars interna  
6. Subjects who choose to undergo MER and frame -based stereotaxis for the placement of 
electrodes.  
 
2. Study procedures  
As this is a non -interventional data collection study , we will obtain p atient consent.  We will then 
compare the study group of 50 patients with the historical cohorts in the following measures:   UPDRS 
Parts 2, 3 and 4, change in PDQ -39, change in a mount of time patient is experiencing Parkinson’s 
Disease  symptoms and/ or side  effects of treatment, and neuropsychiatric evaluation . 
DBS settings will be optimized 30 (+/ -3) days after electrode implantation.  Further DBS programming 
optimization will be performed at 60 (+/ -3) and 90 (+/ -3) days post -implantation.  
 
Studies  Screening  Baseline  DBS 
Implant  [ADDRESS_1046223]-
implant  6 month 
follow -
up 
Informed consent  X       
Demographics  X       
History & 
Physical   X  X X X X 
UPDRS Part 2   X     X 
UPDRS Part 3 
(ON and OFF)   X     X 
UPDRS Part 4   X     X 
DBS 
programming     X X X  
PDQ -39  X     X 
Motor Diary   X     X 
Neuropsychiatric 
evaluation   X     X 
Adverse Events    X X X X X 
Medications   X X X X X X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D. Data Analysis and Interpretation  
(1) Experimental design.  
The proposed study is a prospective  data analysis to compare the clinical outcomes  of DBS electrode 
placement using intraoperative CT and frameless stereotaxis versus an historical control of DBS 
electrode placement using MER with frame -based stereotaxis (5). 
  
(2) Analysis.  
The primary outcome will be a comparison of change in motor UPDRS (part 3) in the OFF 
medication/ON stimulation state at [ADDRESS_1046224].   
 
Secondary outcomes will be a comparison between groups 1 and 2 in  the change from baseline to 6 
months in ON t ime without dyskinesia, PDQ -39, and UPDRS part  2.  In addition, a comparison will be 
made between groups 1 and 2 in the change from baseline to 6 months in the Beck D epression 
Inventory -II (BDI -II), Mattis Demen tia Rating Scale -Second Edition (DRS -2), and the  Wechsler 
Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI) , using a [ADDRESS_1046225].  The sample size  and power 
calculations are 2 -tailed with an α level of 0.05.   
 
 (3) Sample Size Calculations.  
Data from historical control patients using MER and frame -based stereotaxy  (5) will be compared with 
[ADDRESS_1046226] . 
 
E. Human Subjects  
1. Risks to Subjects :  As this is a non -interventional data collection study, no additional risks will 
be posed to the patients involved in this study.  The patients will be treated using accepted 
surgical techniques , such as planning and surgical execution and all steps will be carried out in 
the usual fashion of performing such procedures in the Department of Neurological S urgery at 
OHSU . All clinical outcome measures are standard of care in the movement disorders center 
for patients in the deep brain stimulation program. Patient confidentiality will be respected 
during information retrieval.  
 
2. Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to the Subjects and Others : This research project 
propose d here aims to drive a paradigm shift, from MER verification of stereotactic targets, to 
an entirely image -based anatomic ta rgeting methodology.  We would  like to demonstrate  non-
inferiority of the image -based anatomic targeting method in terms of treatment of Parkinson’s  
disease symptoms.  
 
The implications of this shift are:  
A. Increased patient comfort  
B. Operative procedures will be faster.  
C. Operative procedures will be easier, absent the requirement for MER equipment, 
macro electrodes and electrophysiologic expertise.   
D. Most operative procedures can be performed entirely under general anesthesia.  
E. If intraoperative imaging is used, a natomic verification of the electrode position can be 
established prior to the patient leaving the operating room.   
F. Intraoperative images are provided to the neurologist which can be used to help guide 
selection of optimal programming configurations.  
 
3. Importance of Knowledge to be Gained : We project that this paradigm shift will simplify and 
enhance the patient experience, which will promote the use of DBS technology for an 
expanding list of indications and applications . Data collected and shared with n eurosurgical 
colleagues will provide increased knowledge regarding accuracy of functional stereotactic 
procedures and help to improve outcome.  
 
F. References  
1. Deuschl G, Schade -Brittinger C, Krack P, et al. A randomized trial of deep -brain stimulation 
for P arkinson’s Disease. N Engl J Med. 355(9):896 -908, 2006  
2. Burchiel KJ, Anderson VC, Favre J, Hammerstad JP. Comparison of pallidal and subthalamic 
nucleus deep brain stimulation for advanced Parkinson’s disease: results of a randomized, 
blinded pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. N eurosurgery. 45(6):1375 -82, 1999.  
3. Burchiel KJ. The future of microelectrode recording. In: Microelectrode Recording in 
Movement Disorder Surgery. Eds: Israel Z and Burchiel KJ. [LOCATION_001]: 2004.  
4. Ostrem et al.  Clinical outcomes of PD patients after bilateral  STN DBS using  high-field 
interventional MR -imaging for lead placement . Movement Disorders.  26 (Suppl 2): S77, [ADDRESS_1046227] medical Therapy for Patients With  
Advanced Parkinson Disease JAMA 2009; 301(1): 63 -73. 