Stanford Accelerated Intelligent Neuromodulation 
Therapy for Treat ment-Resistant Depression 
(SAINT-TRD) 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
September [ADDRESS_839809], [LOCATION_004] [ZIP_CODE] 
January 25 2021   Page 2 of 16  
1. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  
a. Brief Summary  
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) is an established technology as 
therapy for treatment -resistant depre ssion. The approved method for treatment is 10Hz 
stimulation for 40 min utes over the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (L -DLPFC). This 
methodology has been very successful in real world situations. The limitation of this 
approach includes  the duration of  the treatment (approximately 40 minutes  per treatment 
session). Recently, researchers have aggressively pursued modifying the treatment 
parameters to reduce treatment times with some preliminary success. This study intends 
to further modify the parameters  to create a more rapid form of the treatment and look at 
the change in neuroimaging biomarkers.  
 
b. Objectives  
This study would  allow the investigators to understand if protocols developed for 4 -6 
weeks’ worth  of treatment can be compressed over five days . 
 
The primary outcome measure for this study will be change in MADRS score. The 
MADRS is a clinical assessment tool used to rat e a patient's level of depression and is the 
standard scale used for depression research studies.  
 
Secondary measures will include functional connectivity change of the  
subcallosal cingulate to the default mode network and within the  
default mode networ k. 
c. Rationale for Research in Humans  
     All transcranial magnetic stimulation treatment studies must be conducted in humans.  
 
2. STUDY PROCEDURES  
a. Procedures  
We will recruit a total of 60 participants for this trial:  
 
-30 (aged 18 -80yo) receiving: intermittent theta burst (iTBS) over L DLPFC (five days 
10x/day)  
-30 (aged 18 -80yo) receiving identical sham stimulation over L DLPFC with sham iTBS 
(five days 10x/ day)  
 
For this study, we will be using the MagPro double blinded rTMS Research System and 
the randomization occurs within the system such that the control sounds like and utilizes 
the same stimulation parameters as the real TMS.  
 
January [ADDRESS_839810] moderately treatment resistant major depressive disorder as defined 
by a score of >/=20 on the HAMD -17, MADRS and BDI -II scales .   
 
Screening Time -Period:  
 
Patients will undergo a screening time period where their eligibility will be confirmed. 
This may occur any time prior to the baseline time period. Following screening informed 
consent, clinical interviews and behavioral testing wi ll occur at the Stanford Psychiatry 
department. The clinical interview will include a screen for inclusion and exclusion 
criteria, MRI safety, T ASS, medical and psychiatric history, neurological exam, urine tox 
screen, pregnancy test, and motor threshold ( see Motor Threshold section for details 
below).  
 
Diagnosis will be confirmed with the MINI and/or SCID. We will also request medical 
records to confirm information collected during the screening visit. Patients will be 
staged using the Maudsley staging me thod and a trained rater will perform: HAMD -21, 
MADRS, ATHF, YMRS and SSI.  
 
Patients will fill out self -reports including the BDI -II and C- SSRS . 
 
Baseline Time -Period:   
 
Baseline visits will be separate from screening visits to confirm stability of sympt oms 
(stability is defined as a difference in MADRS score below 30% from screening).  
 
Participants will have an MRI scan in the morning .  
 
Baseline clinical measures (MADRS  and HAMD -17) will be performed. In addition, 
patients will fill out the C-SSRS self-report.  
 
Participants will practice using the heart rate monitor that they will be using for the 
remainder of the study.  
 
 
Active Study Time -Period:   
 
iTBS sessions will be scheduled in a 5-day sequence, resulting in a total of 50 sessions 
over 5 days. Participants will receive 10 daily stimulations with active or sham iTBS (see 
double -blinded rTMS system for details below). Each session is separated by a 50-minute  
break. This separation between sessions decreases the risk of associated TMS side effects 
(e.g. irritation from the device, headache).  
 
 
January 25 2021   Page 4 of 16 Follow -up Time -Period :  
 
Patients will have the same clinical assessments as well as MRI scans that were 
completed during the baseline time -period at the immediate post -treatment and 1-month  
post-treatment ma rk. Heart rate will be measured  during these time points .  
 
 
Motor threshold:  
 
Using single pulse TMS, the scalp position of lowest motor threshold for the right first 
dorsal interosseous or abductor pollicis brevis muscles will be determined.  
 
Resting m otor threshold (MT) was defined using the Adaptive Pest online algorithm.  
 
 
Double blinded rTMS system:  
 
For this study, we will be using the MagPro double blinded rTMS Research System and 
the randomization occurs within the system such that the control sounds like and utilizes 
the same stimulation parameters as the real TMS. This allows for the stimulation to be 
blinded to the treater and the participant. A third party not otherwise involved in the study 
will hold the blinding codes for the study. Blindi ng codes will be assigned randomly to 
each patient.  
 
During treatment, the blinding code is entered into the MagPro device and the device 
determines which treatment (Active or sham) to apply. Following the first day of 
treatment, subjects will be asked if  they believe they are receiving active or sham 
treatment. This information will be collected to determine the success of the blinding 
procedure.  
 
Blinded Phase:  
 
A Magventure double blind key will be inputted into the Magventure double blind system 
during the blinded study week.  
 
Participants in the active stimulation group will receive intermittent TBS (intermittent 
TBS-1800 pulses/session). They will receive 1800 stimuli of iTBS to left DLPFC per 
session per session.  
 
Participants in the sham stimula tion group will receive sham intermittent TBS 
(intermittent TBS -1800 pulses/session). They will receive 1800 stimuli of sham iTBS to 
left DLPFC per session.  
 
The L -DLPFC will be targeted utilizing the Localite neuronavigation system if using the 
Magventur e device.  
 
January 25 2021   Page 5 of 16 Stimulation intensity will be standardized at 90% of RMT and adjusted to the skull to 
cortical surface distance (see Nahas 2004). Sessions will be delivered using the MagPro 
stimulator, with  3-pulse 50 -Hz bursts given every 200ms (at 5 Hz). In the intermittent 
TBS, a 2s train of bursts will be given every 10 s for a total of 570s (1800 pulses) over 
the L DLPFC.  
 
 
Heart Rate Monitors:  
 
We will collect heart rate and heart rate variability measurements at all or some of the  
established time poin ts for the active study in order to assess how a iTBS stimulation 
affects heart rate. Some participants may have to shave areas of their chest in order for 
the heart rate monitor  electrodes to stick in place.  
 
Imaging and Biomarkers:  
 
We will acquire MRI scan sequences prior to active study phase, immediately after active 
study phase (1 -3 days following final aTBS stimulation), and at one-month  post- 
stimulation (between 25 -30 days following the final aTBS stimulation). At the acute 
phase, we will acquire structural scans  and functional scans  at the CNI on the Stanford 
campus.  
 
 
Functional Neuroimaging:  
 
First-level models: We will use a canonical hemodynamic response function (HRF) 
convolved event -related model with temporal and dispersion derivatives to model the 
blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) in the context of a generalized linear model. 
Separate regressors (convolved with the HRF) will be created for stimulus events in each 
paradigm. Temporal and dispersion derivatives will be treate d as regressors of no interest.  
A region of interest (ROI) analysis will be performed using our established methods, to 
identify BOLD -dependent signal change in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, subgenual 
cingulate, and default mode network nodes (right,  left). Beta values for each ROI will be 
extracted for each subject for regression analyses.  
 
The subjects will undergo an MRI scan of the brain that will require about [ADDRESS_839811] facilities.  
 
During the scan, subjects will lie on the table in the magnet for 1 hour while the images 
are acquired. Instructions may be given through an auditory system. Subjects will wear 
earplugs and may be fitted for a bite bar  to help them to keep their head still during the 
scans; for studies that enroll older adults, a bite bar will not be used so as to  
accommodate participants with dentures. These procedures have been used previously in 
younger and older adults alike, and do  not cause undue distress in subjects. Brain images 
will be made using conventional MRI imaging (including functional and diffusion tensor 
January 25 2021   Page 6 of 16 imaging).  
 
Patients will undergo a minimum of 3 scans up to a maximum of 6 scans, each 1 hour in 
length.  
 
Acquisiti on and data extraction:  
 
Clinical interview ratings will be made by [CONTACT_7355]. Individual item scores 
will be recorded and then summed according to symptom cluster and scale definitions.  
 
Outcome measures :  
 
The primary outcome measure for this study will be change in MADRS score. The 
MADRS is a clinical assessment tool used to rate a patient's level of depression and is the 
standard scale used for depression research studies.  
 
Secondary measures will include functional connectivity change of the subcallosal 
cingulate to the default mode network and within the default mode network. Primary 
outcome will be assessed as the change between baseline and immediate post -stimulation, 
with secondary measures to include the change between baseline and  immediate post -
stimulation  and [ADDRESS_839812] -stimulation .  
 
Other secondary measures include heart rate/heart rate variability and the clinical 
interview assessments, to be performed according to the timeline above, include:  
 
HAMD -17 (Hamilton Depression Rating Scale 17 -Item)  
C-SSRS (Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale)  
HAMD -6 (Hamilton Depression Rating Scale 6 -Item)   
YMRS (Young Mania Rating Scale)  
MADRS (Montgomery -Asberg Depression Rating Scale)  
 
b. Procedure Risks  
 
These methods are the least risky because the intervals of stimulation have been shown to 
be appropriate for theta burst stimulation in the motor system with no adverse outcomes.  
 
We don’t anticipate any risk from the procedures themselves, aside from those mentioned 
in section 7a i.  
 
c. Use of Deception in the Study  
NA 
d. Use of Audio and Video Recordings  

January [ADDRESS_839813] owned 
laptop. The recordings will be available for training purposes for study personnel only or 
as oth erwise consented to on the consent form. We will not use or distribute the 
recordings to outside personnel or scientific meetings etc. unless directly indicated by [CONTACT_629639] 13  
 
e. Alternative Procedures or Courses of Treatment  
Participants with insurance could alternatively receive traditional rTMS.  
 
f. Will it be possible to continue the more (most) appropriate therapy for the 
participant(s) after the c onclusion of the study?  
 The participants will have the option of pursuing treatment as usual after the 
study (medications, therapy, traditional rTMS).  
 
g. Study Endpoint (s) 
The study will end [ADDRESS_839814] Experimental and/or Clinical Findings  
 
 There is early indication that utilizing theta burst stimulation (TBS), which 
mimics natura l brain rhythms, is an effective stimulation method for modulation 
of human cortex  (Huang, Edwards, Rounis, Bhatia, & Rothwell, 2005). While 
first utilized in the motor cortex, TBS has been since utilized in the limbic and 
cognitive areas with some early s uccess in treating depression  (Chung, Hoy, & 
Fitzgerald, 2015). The benefits of this form of stimulation is that it appears to 
allow for a reduction in the time of treatment while maintaining a similar 
efficacy to traditional 40 min 10Hz rTMS stimulation i n an early comparison 
study  (Bakker et al., 2015).  
 
It is clear that the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and specifically the posterior 
middle frontal gyrus is heavily implicated in the pathophysiology of at least 
some depression endophenotypes. In depress ion, the left DLPFC hypoactivity is 
associated with negative emotional judgment and right DLPFC hyperactivity is 
linked to attentional modulation  (Grimm et al., 2008). Additionally, the DLPFC 
is a component of the cognitive control network (CCN) and the mo dulation of 
this node appears to modulate the CCN. At least four groups have performed 
TBS to the DLPFC where the left DLPFC received  iTBS (excitatory) and the 
right received cTBS (inhibitory)  (Chung et al., 2015).  
January 25 2021   Page 8 of 16  
There is emerging evidence from the mot or system that the spacing (or timing) 
between theta burst trains is important in the LTP/LTD. If the train goes on for 
two long without a necessary time interval, there is a reversal of the initial  
direction (LTP or LTD)  (Gamboa, Antal, Moliadze, & Paulus , 2010). There has 
been a progression in the literature that if there is approximately an hour of 
spacing in between the theta burst trains, there is an EEG resolution and  an 
apparent additive effect of the stimulation towards the desired direction (LTP or  
LTD). There is at least [ADDRESS_839815] stimulation  (Noh, Fuggetta, Manganotti, & Fiaschi, 2012). In a visual 
neglect TBS study, there was a non -linear increase in the duration of stimulation 
effect with the doubling of pulse trains  (Nyffeler, Cazzoli, Hess, & Muri, 2009). 
It appears that it is best to separate the pulse trains by [CONTACT_490602] (Cazzoli et al., 
2012).   
   
 
b. Findings from Past Animal Experiments  
NA 
4. DEVICES  USED IN THE STUDY  
a. Investigational Devices  (Including Commercial Devices Used Off -Label)  
Investigational  Device 1  
Name:  [CONTACT_629649] X100 by [CONTACT_629640]:  Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation Device with theta 
burst stimulation.  
Significant Risk? (Y/N)  No 
Rationale for Non -Significant Risk  The 'traditional 10Hz TMS' is on label and the theta 
burst stimulation is off label. It is the same device for 
both. The Magventure is about to be approved by [CONTACT_629641] 2 weeks. When that happens, 
the 'traditional 10Hz' stimulation will be on label with 
an approved device.The theta burst stimulation is 
minimal risk because the risk of seizure is very low 
(only reported once in literature) and there is no other 
risk other than minimal scalp irritation. We will be 
using an approved device 'off  label' stimulation 
parameters which has a lower risk profile than the on 
label approved parameters.  
   
 
Investigational  Device 2  
Name:  3T UHP MRI  
Description:  MRI  
Significant Risk? (Y/N)  No 
Rationale for Non -Significant Risk  The 3T Ultra -High Performance (UHP) MRI scanner 
from GE is an upgrade to the 3T MR750 which was a 
January 25 2021   Page 9 of 16 commercial FDA -approved system. The UHP system 
utilizes many components from GE's 3T Signa Premier, 
including gradient drivers, power supply, transmit and 
receive system electronics, but uses a higher -
performance gradient coil.  
 
The 3T UHP system is not FDA approved, and is 
subject to the 21 CFR 812 investigational device (IDE) 
regulations as well as 21 CFR 50 and 56. The system 
has been tested by [CONTACT_629642]606001 -1 and 
also for compliance with IEC [ZIP_CODE] -2-33 (ed 3.1) - 
meeting limits and guidelines for peripheral nerve 
stimulation, patient thermal, SAR limit, acoustic noise, 
flammability rating UL94 -5VA for safety covers, 
hydrostatic pressure, electric al hazards, dielectric 
strength and pi[INVESTIGATOR_307284]. The MRI scans in this study 
will also utilize operational parameters within FDA 
guidelines for Nonsignificant Risk thus an 
Investigational Device  
Exemption (IDE) from FDA should not be necessary.  
 
In addit ion, the MR research being conducted requires 
highly specialized software that does not exist in the 
clinical MR market so it is designed and implemented 
by [CONTACT_307296]. Any such software will be 
considered investigational, will function as a no n-
significant risk device, and is subject to the 21 CFR 
812 investigational device(IDE) regulations as well as  
21 CFR 50 and 56. The investigational image 
acquisition software will conform to FDA guidelines 
for MR safety related to heating (SAR), peripher al 
nerve stimulation (dB/dt), and acoustic noise.  
 
 
 
5. DISINFECTION PROCEDURES  FOR MEDICAL EQUIPMENT USED ON  BOTH HUMANS AND 
ANIMALS  
NA 
 
6. PARTICIPANT POPULATION  
a. Planned Enrollment  
 We will recruit [ADDRESS_839816] 
protocol.  
January 25 2021   Page 10 of 16  
b. Age, Gender, and Ethnic Background  
We will recruit 60 participants aged 18 -80, all gender and ethnic background s.  
 
c. Vulnerable Population s 
 
 We will not include children, pregnant women, decision  impaired . We will include 
economically/educationally disadvantaged as well as homeless because this may be a 
way for them to receive rTMS treatment. We will include employees and students 
because while rTMS is approved by [CONTACT_1622], it is not covered by [CONTACT_629643] a way for them to receive treatment. rTMS is a low-risk 
procedure, but we will insure all safety measures are taken for these participants.  
 
We will not include any patients with shrapnel or any ferromagnetic within the head.  
 
d. Rationale for Exclusion of Certain Populations  
 Women and minorities are included. Children are not because they are typi[INVESTIGATOR_629635].  
 
e. Stanford Populations  
 Employees and students may sign up for this study, but we will not include lab 
personnel due to HIPAA.  
 
f. Healthy Volunteers   
             NA 
g. Recruitment Details  
 Patients will be recruited through the outpatient clinic in the P sychiatry 
department at Stanford University, through a database of potential research 
subjects that have consented to contact [CONTACT_629644]. Patients will either 
directly contact t he research team for study participation, or they will give 
consent to the referring physician and the physician will communicate directly 
with the study team.  
 
We will also use the Stanford Research Registry to recruit study participants. 
The research re gistry is a list of individuals who have consented to be contact[CONTACT_629645] 1,000 volunteers.  
 
January 25 2021   Page 11 of 16 Flyers, Facebook, Brochures, audio,  and social media tools will be used to 
advertise the study and recruit partic ipants.  
 
h. Eligibility Criteria  
i. Inclusion Criteria  
• Male or female, 22 to 80 years of age.  
• Able to provide informed consent.  
• Diagnosed with Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) and currently experiencing a 
Major Depressive Epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865] (MDE).  
• Participants may currently be on a stable and adequate dose of SSRI 
antidepressant therapy. Participants may choose to not be on antidepressant 
therapy for the study duration, or to be switched from other classes to a 
medication from the SSRI class.  
• Participants may also h ave a history of intolerance to at least 2 antidepressant 
medications. These patients with the intolerance history will not be required to be 
currently taking an antidepressant medication.  
• Participants must qualify as "Moderately Treatment Refractory" or " High 
Treatment Refractory" using the Maudsley staging method.  
• Meet the threshold on the total HAMD17 score of >/=20 at both screening and 
baseline visits (Day -5/-14 and Day 0).  
• Meet the threshold on the total MADRS score of >/=20 at both screening and 
baseline visits (Day -5/-14 and Day 0).  
• Meet the threshold on the total BDI -II score of >/=20 at both screening and 
baseline visits (Day -5/-14 and Day 0).  
• In good general health, as ascertained by [CONTACT_9870].  
• If female, a status of non -childbearing pote ntial or use of an acceptable form of 
birth control. The form of birth control will be documented at screening and 
baseline.  
• Concurrent hypnotic therapy (e.g., with zolpi[INVESTIGATOR_6730], zaleplon, melatonin, or 
trazodone) will be allowed if the therapy has been stable  for at least 4 weeks prior 
to screening and if it is expected to remain stable.  
 
ii. Exclusion Criteria  
• Female of childbearing potential who is not willing to use one of the specified 
forms of birth control during the stud y. 
• Female that is pregnant or breastfeeding.  
• Female with a positive pregnancy test at participation.  
• Total HAMD17 score of < 20 at the screen or baseline visits.  
• Total MADRS score of < 20 at the screen or baseline visits.  
• Total BDI -II score of < 20 at the screen or baseline visits.  
January 25 2021   Page 12 of 16 • Current diagnosis of a Substance Use Disorder (Abuse or Dependence, as defined 
by [CONTACT_2681] -IV-TR), with the exception of nicotine dependence, at screening or 
within six months prior to screening.  
• Current diagnosis of Axis I disorders other than Dysthymic Disorder, Generalized 
Anxiety Disorder, Social Anxiety Disorder, Panic Disorder, Agoraphobia, or 
Specific Phobia (unless one of these is comorbid and clinically unstable, and/or 
the focus of the participant's treatment for th e past six months or more).  
• History of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorders, or any history of psychotic 
symptoms in the current or previous depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841].  
• Any Axis I or Axis II Disorder, which at screening is clinically predominant to 
their MD D or has been predominant to their MDD at any time within six months 
prior to screening.  
• Considered at significant risk for suicide during the course of the study.  
• Cognitive impairment (as noted by [CONTACT_629646] -including dementia).  
• Has a clinically s ignificant abnormality on the screening examination that might 
affect safety, study participation, or confound interpretation of study results.  
• Participation in any clinical trial with an investigational drug or device within the 
past month or concurrent t o study participation.  
• Any current or past history of any physical condition which in the investigator's 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_629636].  
• History of positive screening urine test for drugs of abuse at sc reening: cocaine, 
amphetamines, barbiturates, opi[INVESTIGATOR_858].  
• Current (or chronic) use of opi[INVESTIGATOR_858].  
• History of epi[INVESTIGATOR_002].  
• History of rTMS exposure.  
• History of any implanted device or psychosurgery for depression.  
• Any history of ECT (greater than 8 sessions) without  meeting responder criteria  
• History of shrapnel or metal in the head or skull.  
• "Low Treatment Refractory" using the Maudsley staging method.  
• History of cardiovascular disease or cardiac event.  
• History of OCD.  
• History of autism spectrum disorder.  
• History of  intractable migraine  
• History of independent sleep disorder.  
i. Screening Procedures  
Patients will undergo a screening time period where their eligibility will be 
confirmed. This may occur any time prior to the baseline time period. Following 
screening informed consent, clinical interviews and behavioral testing will occur 
at the Stanford Psychiatry department. The clinical interview will include a screen 
for inclusion and exclusion criteria, MRI safety, T ASS, medical and psychiatric 
history, neurological exam, urine tox screen, pregnancy test, and motor threshold 
(see Motor Threshold section for details below).  
 
Diagnosis will be confirmed with the MINI and/or SCID. We will also request 
January 25 2021   Page 13 of 16 medical records to confir m information collected during the screening visit. 
Patients will be staged using the Maudsley staging method and a trained rater will 
perform: HAMD -21, MADRS, ATHF, YMRS and SSI.  
 
Patients will fill out self -reports including the BDI -II, QIDS, C -  
SSRS, Life Stressors Questionnaire, Trauma History Questionnaire, and MCMI.  
j. Participation in Multiple Protocols  
We will not enroll participants that are involved in any other treatment trial. We 
will coordinate with any ongoing bioma rker studies to ensure that the treatment 
follows the biomarker study.  
 
k. Payments to Participants  
Payment will be given for participation according to the following schedule and 
amounts (to be paid in full at the end of partici pation in the study):  
 
We will cover parking costs for the screening visit.  
 
$50 Baseline visit  
$[ADDRESS_839817] -treatment visit  
$50 1 month visit  
 
Additional bonuses:  
$100 completion bonus (for not missing any follow -up appointments, completing 
all self -reports, and arriving on time to all study visits)  
 
$125 EEG completion bonus ($25/day for 5 days during blinded treatment week). 
This does not include the optional sleep study EEGs.  
 
Each of the above 3 visits takes ~6 hours to complete (approxim ately $10 per 
hour). Compensation would not place undue pressure to volunteer for the study.  
 
l. Costs to Participants  
None.  
m. Planned Duration  of the Study  
Approximately [ADDRESS_839818] date of  participation.  
7. RISKS 
a. Potential Risks  
i. Investigational devices  
January 25 2021   Page 14 of 16 Mania/hypomania and/or s eizure . 
 
Currently, no known cases of either risk in iTBS according to a review in The 
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease (Rachid 2017).  
 
According to a review published in the International Journal of 
Neuropsychopharmacology, there have been 4 cases of treatment -emergent mania 
induced using rTMS (3 bipolar patients, 1 MDD patient) (Xia et al. 2008).  
 
FDA approved rTMS has a 1:30,000 chan ce of seizure.  
 
Additionally, the following expected AEs were reported in association with TMS 
in a recent publication (Downar et al, 2018): Headache, nausea, dizziness, fatigue, 
insomnia, anxiety or agitation, back or neck pain, vomiting, tinnitus, migra ine 
aura, abnormal sensations, unrelated accidents, and unrelated medical problems 
such as cold and flu.  
 
Citation:  
Downar et al (2018). Effectiveness of theta burst versus high -frequency repetitive 
transcranial magnetic stimulation in patients with depr ession (THREE -D): a 
randomized non -inferiority trial. The Lancet.  
 
ii. Investigational drugs 
NA 
iii. Commercially available drugs, biologics, reagents or chemicals  
NA  
iv. Procedures  
Mania/hypomania and/or seizure.  
 
v. Radioisotopes/radiation -producing machines  
NA 
vi. Physical  well-being  
Participants will have all measures exerted to reduce the chances of seizure and 
discomfort from stimulation.  
 
vii. Psych ological  well-being  
Participants will be placed in a relaxing environment. We do not anticipate that 
there would be any worsening.  
 
January 25 2021   Page 15 of 16 viii. Economic well -being  
Participant's economic well -being may benefit  from the intervention, as they may 
receive an intervention that would normally cost thousands of dollars  in the clinic 
and is not covered by [CONTACT_629647].  
 
ix. Social  well-being  
We would anticipate that particularly the responders that perceived social 
wellbeing would improve. We do not anticipate that there would be any 
worsening.  
 
x. Overall evaluation of risk  
Low  - innocuous procedures such as phlebotomy, urine or stool collection, no 
therapeutic agent, or safe therapeutic agent such as the use of an FDA approved 
drug or device.  
 
b. International Research  Risk Procedures  
NA 
c. Procedures to Minimize Risk  
  We will have a trained rTMS treater in the room at all times monitoring for 
changes in level of consciousness. We will eliminate any offending agents 
that may increase risk of seizure.  
Monitori ng participants depressive symptoms will allow the identification of 
individuals at risk of suicide and therefore the risk of this occurring can be 
minimized. The patient's psychiatrist will be immediately notified if 
participants show signs of suicidal id eation or display depressive symptoms 
which are worse than baseline (by [ADDRESS_839819] Nolan Williams (a psychiatri st) will 
be notified immediately and an emergency consultation between him and the 
participant will be had. If the PI [INVESTIGATOR_629637], the patient will be 
referred for emergency psychiatric treatment.  
 
If any participant displays an increased YMRS score (>/=2 points) on 2 
questions, stimulation will be stopped to prevent any possibility of inducing 
hypomania or mania. If any of the research team or clinical staff believe that 
the participant may be showing signs of hypomania/mania, the YMRS will be 
administered by [CONTACT_629648], the researchers will not wait 
until the daily assessments are conducted.  
 
d. Study Conclusion  

January 25 2021   Page 16 of 16   The experiment will terminate when the final participant has completed their 
treatment and all data has been analyzed.  
 
e. Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMC)  
i. Data and/or events subject to review  
Adverse events, protocol deviatio ns, aggregate data will all be frequently 
reviewed by [CONTACT_235920] (PD).  
 
ii. Person(s) responsible for Data and Safety Monitoring  
The Protocol Director.  
iii. Frequency of DSMB meetings  
NA 
iv. Specific triggers or stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_629638] a large majority of the  participants.  
 
v. DSMB Reporting  
NA 
vi. Will the Protocol Director be the only monitoring entity? (Y/N)  
Yes. 
vii. Will a board, committee, or safety monitor be responsible for study monitoring? 
(Y/N)  
No. 
f. Risks to Special Po pulations  
NA. 
8. BENEFITS  
Participants have a good chance of improvement in their mood symptoms as versions of 
this new type of rTMS treatment has already demonstrated consistent efficacy.  
 
9. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
All participant information  and sp ecimens are  handle d in compliance with the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)  and privacy policies of Stanford 
University, Stanford Health Ca re, and Stanford Children’s Health.  