Oﬃcial Title: Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a Lifestyle Interven3on to Reduce Body Weight for Obese African American Men Living in the Rural South NCT #: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] Date:  12/19/[ADDRESS_503131] in the study, the number who are eligible/ineligible, the length of 3me needed to enroll the desired sample size, aRendance, and aRri3on. Change in weight and weight-related behaviors (physical ac3vity and dietary behaviors) will be secondary outcomes and will be measured at baseline and upon comple3ng the interven3on. Par3cipants who complete the interven3on will be invited to complete a post-interven3on focus group interview to provide feedback on the interven3on (e.g., mo3va3on for par3cipa3ng, program eﬀec3veness and enjoyment, facilitators and barriers to par3cipa3on, recommended improvements). This interview may be held virtually or in-person based on par3cipant preferences. The interview will be audio-recorded and transcribed by a professional transcrip3onist.   Many par3cipants in the qualita3ve study that informed the development of the interven3on noted that safety and convenience were two important considera3ons in program planning. In addi3on, men noted a preference for programs that incorporated physical ac3vity during mee3ng sessions. Based on these considera3ons and the status of the COVID-19 pandemic at the 3me the interven3on was developed, publicly available walking track/outdoor areas were deemed to be a feasible and acceptable loca3on for interven3on delivery. In the event of inclement weather, mee3ng sessions will be held at a local YMCA.   The table below shows a general overview for each of the core 12-week sessions. In brief, par3cipants will be taught core principles of weight loss and behavior change. Par3cipants will be provided with Fitbits and will be asked to self-monitor their physical ac3vity throughout the program. In addi3on, they will be asked to create Fitbit accounts and to support and compete with other men in the program. Par3cipants will also be asked to track their dietary intake using either paper-based tracking forms or a method of their choice (e.g., food tracking app such as MyFitnessPal). A simple kitchen scale will be provided to those needing one to facilitate accurate dietary tracking. Par3cipants will also be highly encouraged to monitor their weight throughout the program using a bathroom scale. A bathroom scale will be provided to those needing one. YMCA memberships will also be oﬀered for the dura3on of the study or ﬁnancial support to cover YMCA memberships will be provided to help par3cipants reach physical ac3vity goals.        
Sample Mee7ng Session Ac7vity Descrip7on Dura7on Welcome & educa3onal session Content addressed by [CONTACT_272976]; facilitated discussion of content 10 minutes Progress reports & social support Par3cipants provide update on weekly progress (e.g., PA, diet, weight) 10 minutes Warmup walk with socializa3on Timed walk around track, ﬁeld, or other PA des3na3on; opportunity for socializa3on with peers and facilitator 10 minutes Compe33ve ac3vity Group-based compe33ve ac3vity (speciﬁc ac3vi3es to be planned with par3cipants but may include receiver drills, 40-yard dash, 2-hand touch football, pushups, etc.) 15 minutes Cooldown walk with socializa3on Timed walk around track, ﬁeld, or other PA des3na3on; opportunity for socializa3on with peers and facilitator 5 minutes Wrap-up and future planning Q/A session about content; next week goal secng 10 minutes   Surveys/Instruments  Anthropometric measures (weight, body mass index, and waist circumference) will be measured during in-person visits at baseline, approximately [ADDRESS_503132] circumference will be measured using anthropometric measuring tape. Blood pressure will be measured in duplicate using a portable automa3c monitor. Moderate-vigorous physical ac3vity (MVPA) will be assessed using Ac3graph accelerometers worn on the wrist. Dietary intake will be assessed at each 3me point using three 24-hour dietary recalls performed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_399151]3on Data System for Research sodware. Several psychosocial factors will be assessed. Social support for exercise will be assessed using a 13-item scale developed by [CONTACT_399152], and self-eﬃcacy for exercise using a 16-item Self-Eﬃcacy for Exercise Ques3onnaire adapted from Garcia and King. Mo3va3on for healthy ea3ng will be assessed using 15 items of the Treatment Self-Regula3on Ques3onnaire (TSRQ), and mo3va3on for physical ac3vity will be assessed using the 24-item Mo3va3on for Exercise Scale. Mo3va3on for weight loss will be assessed using an 8-item weight control mo3va3on scale developed by [CONTACT_399153]. Environmental support for PA will be assessed using the 33-item Rural Ac3ve Living Perceived Environmental Support Scale (RALPESS). Subscales of the Neighborhood Environment Walkability Scale (NEWS) will be used to assess neighborhood surroundings and neighborhood safety. Relatedness to others in physical ac3vity will be assessed using a 6-item scale developed by [CONTACT_399154] & Bengoechea. A standard sociodemographic ques3onnaire will be used to assess various variables of interest including par3cipants’ age, living arrangements, educa3on, income, and 
insurance status. A generic medical history ques3onnaire will be used to assess various acute and/or chronic condi3ons that par3cipants may have.   Upon comple3on of the 12-week program, an acceptability survey will be administered to par3cipants along with the other post-interven3on measures. A focus group interview will be held soon ader program comple3on for par3cipants to provide feedback on the interven3on (e.g., mo3va3on for par3cipa3ng, program eﬀec3veness and enjoyment, facilitators and barriers to par3cipa3on, recommended improvements).   